

CHURCHES NOT TEMPLES.
A SERMON:
PREACHED AT
THE OPENING
OF THE
®o»|wptto»al |||iwwl
HOBART TOWN,
On THURSDAY, 7 th NOVEMBER , 1872.
BY THE REV. GEORGE CLARKE.
temMte:
HOBART TOWN, J. WALCM & SONS ;
LAUNCESTON, WALCH BROTHERS & BIRCHALL.
1872.
f’ZK-lr




SERMON.
>JO?oo
KH ! F SsoS
9
S S 7 7
i Kings viii. 63. — So the King and all the children of Israel
dedicated the house of the Lord .
We have met to dedicate this building to the worship of
Almighty God through Jesus Christ our Lord, not with the
sacrifice of sheep and oxen, but with the spiritual sacrifice of
prayer and praise. We have given thanks to the Father of
Mercies for His loving kindness to us and to all men, and for
the signal benefits which He has bestowed upon ourselves ; and
we have asked that the Divine approval, care, and blessing may
rest upon all the interests which will henceforth gather round
this place. So far, our words have been unto God; it re-
mains that words should be also spoken unto man, such as may
befit the occasion, and may, by God's blessing, be productive of
good.
We have no time now to dwell upon the past which this
service recalls, or upon the special interest with which it is
invested. I would only remind you that we are not to-day
building upon a new foundation. This house of the Lord is
associated in fact as well as in name with the memory of one*’
whose loving ministry was exercised close at hand, and who,
moreover, was the first minister of the Independent com-
munion who preached the gospel in the Australian colonies.
That is a thing to be remembered, at least by us.
There by our side still stands the first sanctuary of
our order in these southern lands. That old chapel
has a history that is written in the lives and characters
of many in this community, and in the destiny of many who
have passed away. Those walls have resounded for forty years
* The late Rev. Frederick Miller.


with the voice of Christian prayer and praise ; there the great
truths of our holy religion have been continuously preached ;
there sinnets have been converted and saints edified; and
there a quiet testimony has been given to those constitutional
principles of the kingdom of Christ which we believe to be in
accordance with the simplicity of the New Testament, and
bound up with the best interests of truth and liberty. We do
not break the continuity of the work by removing to this
edifice, and here we trust it will be carried on in the same
spirit and with like results. May the good Lord fill this place
also with His presence and power !
All this we must now pass oven 1 take the occasion as
suggesting a subject that in these days calls for our grave
consideration. You have built and dedicated this house of the
Lord ; what do you mean by it ? What are our houses of
worship, and how should we regard them ? Are they in very
truth Temples, or are they only Synagogues ? Are we to
transfer to them such associations as gathered round the
Tabernacle, or are we to get our notions of their true character
from the Synagogues of the Apostolic age ? As I have said,
this is a grave question. If I mistake not, it touches the very
heart of our immediate and pressing danger. I mean the danger
of our people coming to clothe the Christian pastor and
preacher with the attributes of the priest—aye, and with such
tremendous functions as were never dreamed of by the house
of Aaron. How rapidly some of us are drifting in that direction
you know, and how seriously the movement imperils our social
and spiritual interests you ought to lay to heart. I take it that
the whole theory of the Christian ministry being an official
priesthood would have very little hold upon the popular mind
if it were not sustained and expressed by the structure and
service of our sanctuaries. The reaction in favour of a sacer-
dotal rendering of the gospel becomes formidable among us
just as we transfer without qualification what is said of the
Temple in the Old Testament to the buildings which we set up
for worship under the New. The Temple, the Synagogue, and


the Church, —let us try to understand their likeness and differ-
ence. I want, in this discourse, to impress upon you the fact,
that our churches are not Temples, but Synagogues.
The true and original Temple was, as you all know, the
Tabernacle of Witness which Moses constructed in the Wilder-
ness, “ according to the pattern which was shown to him in the
Mount.” That “ pattern ” prescribed rigorously, and in every
particular, the material, the plan, the dimensions, and the con-
tents of the sacred Tent, as well as the order and service of its
ministers. The Temple of Solomon—that “house of the Lord”
we read of in the Psalms and the Prophets—was only the repro-.
duction of the Tabernacle in stone. Apart from the spacious
courts and colonnades which he built round the proper Temple,
Solomon constructed the Sanctuary upon the same plan, and in the
same relative proportion, as the Tabernacle of Witness, the only
difference being that he doubled all the original measurements.
The Temple of Herod followed the same “pattern,” though he
surrounded the Sanctuary with still more extensive and mag-
nificent enclosures. In both of them the priesthood and ritual of
the Tabernacle were scrupulously maintained, though with
something of addition and accompaniment. The Temple, you
know, was in one place ; it stood by itself; it allowed no rivals ;
and it sternly centred upon itself the whole priestly and sacri-
ficial worship of the nation. On the other hand the Synagogue
was a comparatively late institution. It cannot be traced back
further than the Babylonian exile. There is no sign of it down
to the close of the Hebrew monarchy. It was not, so far as we
know, the result of a Divine command. It might be built any-
where and in any style. It was to be found at length in all the
cities of the Holy Land, and in all places where the Jews of the
dispersion had settled down among the Gentiles. It was not
after any “ pattern shown in the Mount.” It had no shrine,
no altar, no sacrifice, no priest, and no Divinely-ordered ritual.
Its service belonged to quite a different type from that of the
Temple. The elements of its worship were simply prayer,
praise, and the reading and exposition of Scripture. The


Temple and the Synagogue had this in common—that both
were buildings set apart for the public worship of the God of
Israel, but in all beside this general object they were as un-
like one another as they could well be. Let us pursue the con-
trast into some of its particulars.
i. The Temple was designed for the special, local, and sensible
manifestation of the Divine Presence, the Synagogue was not.
When God commanded His people to make a Sanctuary, it
was that He might dwell among them with the visible and
audible tokens of His presence. It was plainly in the Divine
purpose to give them a vivid impression of the truth that He
was “ a God at hand and not afar off.” We are too prone to
think of Him as One who observes and deals with us from the
heavens, rather than as One who “ compasseth our path and
lying down, and is acquainted with all our ways.” Or we
think of Him as the dread Being with whom we shall have to do in
the hereafter, rather than as Him with whom we have to do in the
present. The people of Israel were not allowed to form such a
conception of their relation to God. They saw the Tent of their
Divine Ruler and Protector standing in the midst of their tents,
and the visible and audible signs of His nearness to them were
pressed on their observation, and taught them the first lesson
which they needed to learn. The very idea of a Temple is that
of an immediate habitation of the Deity. The gods to whom
heathen sanctuaries were consecrated were supposed to
take preternatural possession of them, and to give within
them special manifestations of their presence and power.
That which was a delusion among the heathen was an awful
reality among the Jews. “ Let them make me a Sanctuary,”
was the Divine command, “ that I may dwell among them.”
“ There will I meet with the children of Israel; and the Taber-
nacle shall be sanctified by my glory .... and I will
dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.”
“ Thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark
and there will I meet with thee, and I will commune
with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the


cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony.” “ Thou
that dwellest between the cherubims shine forth.” Now
the vivid impression of God’s nearness was a very needful
lesson, and yet men might learn it badly. They might
so learn it as to “ limit the Holy One of Israel.”’ They
might come to think, as they did think, that to be banished from
the Temple was almost to be cut off from communion with God.
Far from Jerusalem the soul of the exile Was cast down within
him. In the land of Jordan, from the spurs of Hermon, and
from the hill Mizar, he thought of God and of His worship
in the Sanctuary. “My soul thirsteth for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before God ? ” The very
lesson of God’s nearness, I say, which was taught by the pre-
sence in the Temple, might be abused and pushed so far as to
make men feel that banishment from His house was banishment
from Himself. I think that in God’s providence the Synagogue
was destined in due time to be the corrective of this abuse.
When the Israelites were scattered through all lands, when they
were removed far from Mount Zion; when the Temple itself
was only a heap of blackened ruins, the men of the captivity
built their'Synagogues and gathered their families every sabbath
to the devotional worship of prayer and praise. Then they
learnt the further lesson that though no visible Shekinah rested
any longer upon the shrine, and no sacrificial victim smoked
upon the altar, and no cloud of incense filled the place of their
assembly with its fragrance, the God of their fathers was still a
God at hand and communion with Him was yet a blessed reality.
The type of worship established by the Synagogue was a far ad-
vance toward that truth which our Lord declared in its fulness, —
“ The hour cometh when ye shall neither in this mountain nor
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. . . . God is a Spirit,
and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in
truth.” For the local and sensible manifestation of God’s pre-
sence in the Temple, we have in the Synagogue His spiritual
presence to the mind of all who call upon Him in truth.


2. The Temple was restricted to one place , the Synagogue might
be anywhere and everywhere.
“ Unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose
out of all your tribes to put His name there, even unto
His habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come,
and thither shall ye bring your burnt-offerings and your
sacrifices Take heed to thyself that thou offer
not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest, but
in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes,
there shalt thou offer thy burnt offerings, and there thou shalt
do all that I command thee.” Thither at the appointed festivals
the tribes were to go up, “ the tribes of the Lord, unto the testi-
mony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.” No
doubt the tendency of this restriction was to secure the unity
of the nation, which was otherwise in danger of being broken
up by tribal interests. It served also to maintain unity of
worship, and guard the people from that polytheism into which
the multiplication of Temples would surely have seduced them.
Prone as they were to the worship of many gods, perhaps in
the earlier stages of their history even Synagogues would have
been a snare to therm We think of our Sundays, and of our
people in every town and village wending their quiet way to
places of worship on the Lord’s Day, and are very apt to trans-
fer the picture to the cities and sabbaths of ancient Israel.
Nothing can be more unlike the reality. Down to the end of
the monarchy there were no buildings in the various cities of
Palestine answering to our local churches and chapels, and set
apart for social sabbath worship. It may startle some of you
to be told —though you can easily verify the assertion for your-
selves —that there is not a word of command in the whole Law
to observe the sabbath by meetings for worship either in
Jerusalem, or in the numerous cities of the land. Neither is
there anything in the history to show that it was an established
custom to do so. Indeed there w'as no material provision for
it. Synagogues and their sabbath social worship, such as we
have in every town, village, and hamlet of the colony were un-


known to Israel before the captivity. The Jews had only one
legitimate place of worship, namely, the Temple, and it was not
till the Temple had been burnt down, and the people had be-
come wanderers in all lands that the Synagogue rose with its
unpriestly sabbath services of prayer and praise. It multiplied
itself rapidly, even in the midst of the heathen, and at length
we find it wherever there was a sufficient number of Israelites
to make a congregation. The restriction of the national worship
to one Temple and one place stands in striking contrast to the
multiplication of Synagogues, and their establishment in all
lands.
3. Unlike the Synagogue , the Temple was constructed upon the
principle op a graduated sanctity.
That is true, not only of the Temple of Solomon and of
Herod, but the idea was extended to the courts and
colonnades which they built around the Sanctuary. But we see
this principle of gradation best in the original Tabernacle. One
part of the structure was more holy than another. There was
first the roofless enclosure which contained the altar of sacrifice
into which any Israelite but no stranger might enter. Then
secondly there was the outer room of the sacred Tent itself,
“ the holy place/’ into which none might go save the priests
accomplishing the service of God.” Thirdly there was the
veiled and darkened inner recess, called the “ holy of holies,
which had the tables of the law, and the ark of the covenant,”
and “ over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercy-
seat.” There none might penetrate, not even the priests, but
il the high priest alone, once every year, not without blood,
which he offered for himself and for the errors of the people.”
There it is, a graduated sanctity, such as has always attached
to Temples even among the heathen. Given a shrine and a
priesthood it could hardly be otherwise. But such an arrange-
ment is quite foreign to the Synagogue. There may be a faint
approach to it in the reverential customs which have grown
round the chest where the copy of the Law is kept, but it is of
the very faintest character. There were indeed distinctions of


honour but not of sanctity in the seats of the worshippers, but
that is quite another thing. “ Woe unto you Pharisees,” said
our Lord, “ for ye love the uppermost seats in the Synagogues ”
—they loved them, just as they loved to be greeted in the
markets “ Rabbi, Rabbi.”
4. The Temple was not constructed to hold a congregation. A
Synagogue is constructed for nothing else.
This again may seem to you a startling assertion if you
have not looked into the matter, lam speaking of the
Sanctuary proper, which was made “ according to the pattern
shown in the Mount,” and not of the spacious courts
which Solomon and afterwards Herod built around it.
In these undoubtedly vast multitudes of the people were
wont to assemble. Let us turn to the Tabernacle. We
read of the host of Israel being summoned to the front or
door of the Tabernacle, but never of their meeting within the
sacred enclosure. The English reader of the Bible is misled by
the phrase “Tabernacle of the Congregation,” as if it meant
tire place into which the people were gathered. Its real meaning
is quite different. It is the Tabernacle of “ Meeting,” not of the
meeting of men, but of the meeting of God with man. “ There
will I meet with thee.” Indeed you have only to look at the
space occupied by the whole enclosure, and you will see at once
that the Tabernacle was not designed for the exigencies of a
congregation. The whole enclosure, Tabernacle and all,
measured 150 feet long by 75 feet wide. About 50 feet of that
length would be taken up by the Tent itself, so that we have
left a space of 100 feet by 75 for the altar, the laver of
ablution, the priests, and the offerers of sacrifice—loo feet by 75,
very little more than the area of this church. Does that look as if
the Tabernacle and its roofless court were designed for the accom-
modation of an assembly? For the tens of hundreds of thousands
of grown men who constituted the tribes of Israel ?It makes
no appreciable difference to say, that the Sanctuary built by
Solomon covered twice as much ground. Multitudes, as I
have said, did assemble in the courts of the Lord’s house, —


that is, in those great structures which surrounded it, not in
what is properly the house itself. In complete contrast with
all this, what, may I ask, has ever been the chief consideration
in building a Synagogue but to find room for the accommoda-
tion of an assembly ?
5. Once more, and most of all: The distinctive character of
all Temple worship is, that it is mainly Sacrificial, while this
element is altogether shut out from the service of the Synagogue.
I am very much disposed to think that the original worship
of the Tabernacle was nothing but sacrifice. Read the law of
its appointment, and mark how exceedingly minute are the
directions given, and then see whether there is a syllable of
command to join with it, even prayer or praise. We do find
these afterwards, in the courts which were appended to the Lord’s
house ; but we have no hint of any combination of psalmody
and sacrifice in the Court of Offering. How could there be ?
Picture to yourselves the mere physical operations that were
continually going on : the work of slaying, washing, and consum-
ing the victims, and the unavoidable disturbance which all
this would cause. I think that David did introduce the “ service
of song in the house of the Lord,” and the first recorded public
prayer in the Temple is the prayer of dedication offered by
Solomon, but I can find no hint of anything of the kind at
first. However be this as it may,—and you must take my im-
pression for what it is worth, —this is certain, that the predomi-
nant and essential character of the prescribed Temple service was
sacrifice. I note the fact without going into its prophetic
significance as we understand it. A Temple must have a shrine,
must have an altar, must have a sacrifice, must have an appointed
ritual, must have an order of priesthood, and where these are
found in a building you have a real Temple. There never was
Temple worship without these things. They are essential to all
Temples, heathen, Jewish, or Christian. The absence of all
these elements is as characteristic of the Synagogue. The
Synagogue never has had altar, sacrifice, or priest.


To sum up then these points of contrast. The Temple was de-
signed for the special, local, and sensible manifestation of the
Divine Presence—the Synagogue was not. The Temple was
one and restricted to one place—Synagogues were many, and
might be built wherever they were required. The Temple was
constructed upon a principle of graduated sanctity which
increased as you drew nearer to the mysterious seat of Divine
communication, and culminated in the Holy of Holies, —but no
such arrangement obtained in the Synagogue. The Temple was
not built for what we understand by congregational worship,—
while this is the express and ruling design in the construction
of the Synagogue. Lastly, the essential if not the exclusive
character of the Divinely ordered Temple worship was sacrificial,
A real Presence, an altar, a victim, a priesthood, without these
a Temple is no Temple at all, —and without these, or any one of
them, the service of the Synagogue has been practiced for more
than two thousand years.
And now we are prepared, I hope, to answer the question
with which I started. How should we regard our houses of
worship ? Are they real Temples, or are they only Syna-
gogues ? Which furnishes us with the true type of public
Christian worship ? I answer without hesitation the Synagogue.
We acknowledge no Altar but the Cross of Calvary, no Sacrifice
but the Sacrifice which was “ once offered to bear the sins of
many,” no official Priest but the Son of God, who abideth “ a
Priest for ever.” Our churches are not Temples, and we cannot
make them so without falling into grave and mischievous error.
Not that we are therefore debarred from making a devout and
intelligent use of words which in their primary force belonged
to the old dispensation. We may take the language of the
Psalms and the Prophets and appropriate it to our houses
of assembly for worship so long as we do it with a difference,
and charge it with a Christian meaning to ourselves. But when
we apply such expressions without great qualification to our
sacred structures, they may become a snare and a delusion to our


Souls. Our Christian poets may well sing of the house of God
in words taken from the old Hebrew seers and saints, and so
long as we remember that by us the songs of Zion must be ap-
plied in the spirit and not in the letter, we shall by their help
rise and soar upward. But the moment we put the letter for
the spirit, and take over to ourselves what was special to the
ancient Temple worshippers, we misapprehend our true posi-
tion, and falling into a half magical and half material supersti-
tion, we corrupt “the simplicity that is in Christ,” and endanger
the interests of souls.
I have said that the question of the true character of our
Christian sanctuaries touches the pressing danger of the Church
in our times. There is a strong tendency to turn our places of
worship into Temples, and to ignore their proper use as Syna-
gogues ; and it is a tendency upon which no thoughtful man can
look with indifference. Our churches are Temples if we make a
shrine of Divine Presence out of the consecrated elements of
the Holy Supper; they are Temples if they are built on the
principle of a graduated sanctity, and we have separated en-
closures into which it is not lawful for any but a priest to enter ;
above all they are Temples if we make the communion table a
real altar, and the unbloody oblation of the mass a real offering
of the Sacrifice made once for all; and finally they are Temples
if their ministers are official priests, rendering service to their
fellow-men not merely as helpers, but as the authorized negocia-
tors between God and the soul, and the exclusive channels of
sacramental grace to the laity. If Christian ministers are priests,
they are priests of such an order that they virtually by their
words create the shrine, and tie down as it were the real Presence
of Christ to a thing, to the sacramental bread upon the altar.
The men who can do this are infinitely more than the sons of
Aaron, for they are all clothed with a power that you cannot
distinguish from the miraculous. If this theory be the real
gospel of Christ, and the real outcome of the dispensation
of the Spirit, then I say a church is a true Temple,
and should have by right all the local sanctities that


belonged to the Tabernacle of Witness, or to the Sanctuary
at Jerusalem. We are apt to slide insensibly into such views
of our houses of social worship. I will not, upon such an
occasion as this, leave any room to doubt about what I think of it
all. In my soul I believe it to be a perilous delusion, opposed to
the gospel of Christ, and the exact contradiction of the true genius
of Christianity. The danger, I repeat, is the greater, because
the principles which are inseparable from a real priesthood take
form and embodiment in the structure and ritual of our churches,
so much so, that many of us come to think there is little rever-
ence in anything but such accessories. With the New Testament
in our hands we might laugh the sacerdotal theory of the
Christian ministry to scorn, if it were not consolidated in the
buildings, the forms, and the arrangements for public worship.
We feel bound to protest earnestly against all these things; we
deliberately put them from us as a delusion and a peril; and there ;
fore in the name of my brethren here I declare that we regard
this house, and every house of Christian assembly, not at all as
a Temple, but simply as a Christian Synagogue. The only
worship intended to be rendered here is the worship of prayer and
praise, offered through Jesus Christ our Lord, and, associated
with this, the reading and exposition of that Word “ which is
able to make us wise unto salvation,”
“ We rear no altar, —Christ has died ;
We deck no priestly shrine ;
We ask no bright Shekinah cloud
To glorify the place ;
Give, Lord, the substance of that sign—
A plenitude of grace.”
In conclusion, let us bear in mind that Christ will be present
here only as He is present to the living spirits and loving hearts
of those who meet for worship in this house ; and, if these be
wanting, no factitious sanctity can consecrate the place. No
supposed presence in a thing can make this holy ground
to the undevout and unchristian. Are we willing then,


that in this, which is the only true sense, Christ should come
and abide in this tabernacle ? Then hear Him now:
“ Behold, I stand at the door and knock ; if any man
hear my voice, and will open the door, I will come in.”
Ah ! if at this moment and at that entrance we could with our
very ears hear those words, how would it affect us ? Are we
quite sure that we should dare to let Him in ? Could we
endure it? What a solemn joy to some! What shrinking
dread to others ! What searching of heart to us all! Brethren,
let us consecrate this place By consecrating ourselves this day
unto the Lord : “ Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any
man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him,
and will sup with him, and he with me.” “ Amen, even so,
come Lord Jesus.”
“ Oft as they meet for worship here,
God send his people peace.”
> ' t
PRINTED AT THE “ MERCURY ” STEAM PRESS OFFICE, HOBART TOWN,


'vTfvr p
I &L( o
So C v 'M
• \ ''' ' « :r - 1: ’ ‘ ' : // .; ,7 I.) r ', r '., liiiy v; r; -[ ;»<
' 0 ’ • 7 n 3v* oar;:- 1 OO) is l-an tr.-yr.jui c.hlfh/il d
. OV7 Cni milf Jot oJ ov.'y 577 Wt
:hd J . )r>A7f
,/•' * I ! Iff;
• • t-'-b • feial eovfogisi
vn.u li ; i'x»n :! I) ,
•:■■■ ■ o) ni f:.:{/)
■
> .
O ’ qak':o7/ v:n J.j-crt vjiD es ilO u
i ' :j
■ ' v
,i* , ;■
\
»•? *
-M \<»
p i i
'
,
■,7 J ‘‘ :! ' r ' ’ 1 : 3!IJ p , gi J Vf.
ft*
- _
