

CHURCH OF CHRIST
SOUTH YARRA
Victoria.
DECEMBER 1893
to 1943
SlubtlPF QUUhrations


CHURCH OF CHRIST
SOUTH YARRA
Victoria.
DECEMBER 1893 to 1943
The Chapel, Cliff Street, South Yarra.
Melbourne:
The Austral Printing and Publishing Co. Ltd.,
528, 530 Elizabeth St„ Melbourne,
1944.


Historical Record
of the
Church of Christ
SOUTH YARRA
fTHE first minute book of the Church of Christ at South
Yarra records in its beginning the “minutes of meet-
ing held at the house of Bro. John Eaton on Ist Decem-
ber, 1893, to take into consideration the advisability of
establishing a Church of Christ in South Yarra.” There
were present at the meeting Bren. D. A. Lewis, C. Rey-
nolds, R. Drummond, Herbt. C. Tucker, Thos. Hagger,
John Eaton, P. W. Clarey, F. Wickens and Frank Eaton,
and Sisters E. Silk, A. Silk, J. Eaton, Wickens and
Walker, Senr. Bro. D. A. Lewis was appointed Chairman
and Bro. Thos. Hagger Secretary. The meeting decided
unanimously that it was desirable to establish a church
in South Yarra for the convenience of members residing
in that district, and to approach the deacons of the
church at Prahran for their approval and to request
letters for that purpose. After some discussion and
correspondence with Prahran church, the following nine


persons, all members at Prahran, asked for definite letters
of commendation, Bro. Thos. Hagger being authorised to
receive such on their behalf:—
Foundation Members
John Eaton, Jessie Eaton, Emily Wickens, Predk.
Wickens, Ernest Eaton, David A. Lewis, Eliza E. Lewis,
Gertrude A. Hagger, Thos. Hagger. It was decided to
organise the church with these as foundation members,
to hold the first meeting for the breaking of bread on
31st December, 1893, and that the school be commenced
on the afternoon of the same day. The hall at the
corner of Surrey Rd. and Toorak Rd. was hired for Sun-
days for six months at 7/6 per week. The Prahran church
was asked to appoint one of their number to preside
at the first meeting of the new church, and to declare
the church organised. Bro. Thos. Hagger was appointed
Secretary and Bro. D. A. Lewis Treasurer. It was decided
to commence gospel services on Sunday evening, 7th Janu-
ary, 1894. A list of speaking brethren amongst the
churches was prepared, and the Secretary got to work to
fill the platform week by week with their assistance. The
school commenced with twelve scholars, Bro. D. A. Lewis
being appointed Superintendent. The new church quickly
decided to let the district know of its existence, and 1000
handbills and 1000 tracts (to be selected by Bro. Maston,
of the Austral Publishing Coy.) were ordered. It was
decided to hold a week-night meeting for praise,
prayer and Bible study in the homes of members, with
a business meeting afterwards. On the 9th January,
1894, two weeks after commencing, the Treasurer re-
ported a credit balance of 7/6. Amongst the visiting
speakers at this time, one notes frequent reference to
D. A. Ewers. The church soon associated itself with
Conference, and apparently there was a keen desire to act
as delegate and represent the church. There were five
nominations for this position, so a ballot was held to


select a representative. How different from to-day when
it is often difficult to get suitable representation!
In the old minutes and reports of this time there are
frequent references to the church at Bairnsdale.
Mr. Frank [?],
the [?]
a church in South Yarra.
Thos. Hagger Commences
His Ministry
It was apparently found difficult to secure satisfactory
preachers, so at the end of the first quarter Bro. Thos.
Hagger agreed to undertake this responsibility, on condi-
tion, however, that if he found it too much for him he
would be at liberty to give it up. Of course, at this
time in the history of our churches there was no such


thing as an organ or similar instrument to help with
the singing, so in order to improve matters in this regard
a weekly singing practice for all members was arranged
for Thursday evenings. Soon, however, this was found
to be too strenuous, and it was arranged for singing
practice, prayer meeting and business meeting on the
one evening, commencing at 7.30.
During the first quarter of the new church’s existence
4000 tracts were distributed in the neighborhood.
Some of the brethren at the weekly business meeting
were apparently becoming too loquacious, so it was sug-
gested that a business meeting once a month be tried,
but this proposal did not receive much support, and the
practice of weekly business meetings was adhered to, but
chairmen were instructed to be more firm and endeavour
to get the meeting through by 9.30.
Reports at the end of the first quarter showed a credit
balance of £l/3/5, with an average attendance on Sunday
mornings of eighteen and at the evening service thirty-
nine. A Sunday morning school had been started, in
addition to an afternoon school with a total of 61 names
on the roll —a very creditable effort after such a little
time.
The year drew on, and a picnic for Cup Day was ar-
ranged on a site at Caulfield. The first anniversary
was also arranged for 3rd December, when solos, recita-
tions, choruses, with a distribution of prizes were to con-
stitute the programme. Mr. S. H. Pittman trained the
children in their choruses and Miss E. Pittman kindly
consented to play the piano, specially hired for the oc-
casion. The reports indicate that a very happy time was
spent by all, in spite of the fact that the audience had
three addresses inflicted on them. At the Sunday ser-
vices Bro. D. A. Ewers spoke in the morning and Bro.
Maston addressed 110 people at night.


Bro. Hagger presented the first annual report, which
showed that the membership had grown to 45. The
afternoon school had 55 names on the roll, with an
average attendance of forty. At the beginning of the
second year, January, 1895, it was decided to establish a
building fund.
Mr. T. Hagger.
Apparently people were just as fond of back seats in
church as they are to-day, for we find a decision that
In the future the two back seats were to be reserved for
visitors and latecomers, members being requested to take
the front seats. That seems rather like encouraging
people to come late, but perhaps it didn’t work out that
way.
The young church was still very enthusiastic, for we
soon find a Ladies’ Sewing Meeting commenced, and
also a Mutual Improvement Class, with a President, a
Critic, and a Secretary.


In July, 1895, Bro. Hagger resigned the secretaryship, as
he had accepted an engagement with the Victorian Home
Mission Committee to labor in the Echuca district, and
so a young man commenced a service which was to take
him round Australia and even overseas, during which
he would present the “old story” to thousands of listeners.
At the farewell meeting arranged in his honor, six
speakers addressed a crowded meeting.
The picnic for the second year was again held on
Cup Day, this time at Albert Park. The second an-
niversary was arranged with Bro. S. H. Pittman again
training the children, but this time Mrs. Tucker played
the piano. A novel point in the reports at this time
shows that 15,160 stamps given by members and friends
were forwarded to the Denmark mission. In September,
1896, Sister Gertrude Hagger was appointed to lead the
singing, without, of course, the assistance of any musical
instrument, which in those days was considered undesir-
able in church services.
The Visiting Committee reported that five members had
not been attending the worship service. It was therefore
decided to write and ask them for an explanation of their
non-attendance.
A Band of Hope was formed in 1897. In 1898 Bro.
Hagger offered to labor with the church for three months
without payment. There is a note that Bren. P. M.
Ludbrook and Houchins also assisted in the preaching
this year.
At the welcome home to Bro. Hagger ninety sat down
to tea. This function produced 8/10 profit, and this was
set aside as a nucleus for a building fund. The next
picnic was held in conjunction with the St. Hilda church.
G. B. Moysey commenced a series of meetings in 1899,
and the Tract Committee reported that tracts had been
left at every house in the district. Since the commence-
ment of the church, thousands of tracts and handbills
had been distributed.


Bro. and Sister T. Murphy Appear
on the Scene
Bro. Clydesdale took over the preaching for a period,
and now appear on the scene two people who were
destined to play an Important part in the work of this
church. These were Bro. and Sister T. Murphy, two con-
secrated, devoted and energetic workers in their Master’s
service.
Change of Meeting Place
In 1901 a change was made in the meeting place, a
transfer being effected to the A.N.A. hall in Toorak Rd.,
near the railway station. This was much more spacious
and in many ways more advantageous than the small
building previously occupied. An organ was now pur-
chased and used to assist the singing on Sunday evenings
only, the tunes in the morning service being pitched from
the tuning fork; that is when the person announcing the
hymn gave sufficient time for this to be done, but as any
member of the congregation had the privilege of select-
ing and announcing a hymn, it was not always possible
to look up a suitable tune and find the key, etc., so that
sometimes tunes soared to the clouds or at other times
tested the lower register of the congregation. Bro.
Clydesdale was a keen singer and conducted singing classes
on Friday evenings. These were very popular, and the
writer still has vivid memories of happy hours spent in
practising the old Sankey hymns.
At the next anniversary Bro. P. M. Ludbrook gave his
celebrated talk to the children on “Puffing Billy.” About
this time Bro. Wm. McArthur was very helpful and Bro.
W. Giles had charge of the school.
A C.E. Society was started in August, 1902, with eighteen
members.


Bro. T. Murphy was appointed Secretary on 15th Janu-
ary, 1903, a position which he held with great credit to
himself and the church for almost half a lifetime, only
relinquishing it when on retirement from his work in the
Railway Department, he went to live at Chelsea, where
he still resides.
Proposals for Building a Chapel
A committee was appointed at this time to look for a
suitable piece of land on which to build a chapel. In
1903 Harold Knott commenced a period of preaching. A
rally in the Sunday school raised the numbers from 64
to 170 scholars. It was now felt that the time was ripe
for a strong forward move, and accordingly arrangements
were made for a tent mission to be conducted by Bro.
Harward, with Ernest Pittman as song-leader. In March,
1904, E. J. Waters accepted an engagement as full-time
evangelist, and worked so successfully that the attend-
ances rapidly increased “due to the services of so able
and willing a brother.” In this year (1904) the site of
the present chapel was bought at £2/10/- per foot. In the
same year a donation was sent to the Brighton church
for their building fund. Tenders were invited for the
new church building, but were so high that Bro. Ross
informed the church that by doing the building them-
selves at least 15 per cent, could be saved. He was ac-
cordingly commissioned to do the job, and the new build-
ing was opened officially on Friday, 13th January. 1905.
Obviously they were not superstitious in those days.
Opening of the New Building
At the opening service an array of speaking talent was
arranged for, no less than seven in number. There were
Mrs. Pittman, and Messrs. E. J. Waters, Jas. Johnstone,
J. Pittman, J. H. Stevens, Campbell Edwards and P. M.
Ludbrook. The Harward-Pittman tent mission com


menced two days later and ran for five weeks with an
average attendance of 180 persons. Forty-three made
the good confession, but the most outstanding result of
the mission was that Miss Vera Blake was one of the
converts. Little did we realise at that time what an
important part she was to play in the future of overseas
Mr. John Eaton.
missions. The membership of the church was now 118,
with average attendances on Sunday morning and evening
of 76 and 147 respectively. E. J. Waters continued in
the ministry and was the first pastor of the church in
its new home. Shortly afterwards he officiated at the
first wedding in the church, that of Bro. and Sister W.
Lowe, the bride being Miss Clarey, the youngest daughter
of Bro. P. W. Clarey, one of the early pioneers of the
church. On the 28th November, 1905, the Department


of Public Health wrote granting permission for the build-
ing to be opened.
In March, 1906, Wm. Wilson took up the preaching for
a term. The cleaning of the chapel was at this time
apparently giving some trouble, for we read in the
minutes that two young men volunteered to do the work
for the month of May. There is no record of them be-
ing invited to continue.
Cract Distribution
Tract distribution in the district was still a live job,
and the C.E, undertook this work. About this time a
good many very active workers were lost to the West
Australian churches. Some of our pioneers who went
there are still carrying on. The minutes report that in
October, 1906, Bro. Thos. Hagger offered to give his lec-
ture on “The Rise and Progress of the Restoration Move-
ment.” This offer was accepted, and it was decided to
make a charge of 6d. for admission. There were cer-
tainly some optimists in those days! In these days one
would probably have to bribe people to come to such a
function.
Bro. Maston sent along a copy of a booklet dealing with
the evil results of the use of cigarettes, and urged its
distribution amongst the boys of the school. Sixty copies
were ordered.
In October, 1906, the Windsor church held its anni-
versary services in our chapel. A very active visiting
committee was appointed to visit all sick members and
those who failed to attend the services. It was proposed
to hold open-air meetings at this time, but the Town
Clerk of Prahran wrote stating that no open-air meetings
were permitted to be held in the streets of the
municipality.


Bro. and Sister Hughes, parents of Mr. Andrew Hughes,
M.L.A., were active members at this time. Sister Vera
Blake was very active also in all church work, and at
this time was a teacher in the Sunday School with An-
drew Hughes as a scholar.
Mrs. John Eaton.
It Is reported that a harvest thanksgiving service was
held in March, 1907, at which 223 were present. A church
paper was commenced, known as the “Bible Guide.” The
choir, with Sister Murphy as organist, was very active,
and regularly rendered anthems at the Sunday evening
services, much to the pleasure and enjoyment of all.
A watchnight service was introduced for the first
time on 31st December, 1908. Wm. Wilson was still do-
ing the preaching work with much satisfaction to the


church. The church in these years owed much of its
success to four factors:
1. An active consecrated body of young people.
2. A devoted Christian Secretary in Thos. Murphy.
3. A consecrated worker, keen musician and lovely
character in Sister Murphy, and
4. An active committee who visited absent and sick
members.
In 1908 Jas. Holloway commenced a period of service
with the church as week-end preacher. He served seven
and a half months and was greatly appreciated. The
attendance at the gospel services during this period
averaged 145. At the end of 1908 it was found that 356
names had been on the church roll during the fourteen
years of the church’s existence. Fifty-two of these had
come from the Sunday School.
Inquiries were now made for a full-time preacher, but
none was available. However the name of Bro. Nightin-
gale in Queensland came under notice. Negotiations
were entered into and he was engaged for week-ends for
the time being, as he desired to take a course of study
at the College of the Bible. He commenced on 21st Feb-
ruary, 1909, and labored for two years and one month.
Mrs. Nightingale started a mothers’ meeting, but there was
some protest from the fathers who sometimes came home
from work to find that mother had not yet returned
from the meeting. A good choir at this time rendered
excellent service. Some of the singers journeyed to Colac
to help in a tent mission there. A rally for the Sunday
School was proposed but abandoned for lack of room.
The present school was almost too large for the accom-
modation available. Bro. Nightingale was doing a splen-
did work. The membership now was 166, and attend-
ances at Sunday morning and evening services averaged
93 and 177. The church was very active in distributing


literature around the district. A Temperance Society and
Junior Band of Hope was formed and operated very
successfully. The choir was proving so successful that it
was proposed to appoint a Secretary and committee to
whom all aspirants for choir membership should submit
their names. Bro. and Sister T. Murphy continued to
act efficiently as Secretary and Organist respectively, and
their wonderful service was recognised by presentations
made at a largely attended social evening. The Sunday
School anniversary was apparently tending to too much
theatrical display in the opinion of some good brethren,
so it was decided that in future no “elaborate dressing
up” be permitted at such gatherings.
In August, 1910, it was proposed that individual com-
munion cups be used, but the church disapproved. The
building was extended at the back to make room for the
school. It was reported that, at the anniversary con-
ducted this year in August, 350 persons were present.
(The building surely must have had elastic walls!)
The Sunday School picnic was arranged for Cup Day
at Ricketts Point. At the last moment the proprietor
of the vans which had been ordered disappointed us, but
last-minute plans prevented disappointment of the chil-
dren. A three-weeks’ mission conducted in the chapel
by P. M. Ludbrook proved a happy experience, and
much co-operation with local churches was enjoyed. Mrs.
Roy Thompson assisted with her beautiful voice.
In 1911 the membership had increased to 174, with
Sunday attendances averaging 100 and 180 respectively.
C. A. Quick commenced a full-time ministry on the
12th March, 1911. The Secretary records a letter of
thanks from Bro. Jas. Holloway, now Secretary of Mal-
vern-Caulfield church, for the use of the chapel for his
wedding.


Chapman-Alexander Mission
The great Chapman-Alexander mission commenced in
April, 1912, and the Scoville mission of our own churches
a little later. In June, 1912, Miss Vera Blake reported
that she was desirous of becoming a missionary.
Chas. Young commenced a ministry in March, 1913.
The church at this time was at the highwater mark
of success and spiritual experience due largely to—
1. Active visiting of all absentees by a special visit-
ing committee. .
2. An active body of young men and women.
3. A large Bible School which provided recruits to
the church.
At the anniversary this year, one day was set aside
as Cradle Roll day, when mothers with their babies came
along. Chas. Young presided, and in the Secretary’s re-
port it is stated that he seemed to “enjoy himself.”
A. R. Main commenced week-end work on 22nd Feb-
ruary, 1914. Jas. Webb was appointed Superintendent of
the Bible School early in 1914, and in July of that year
he acted as assistant to Bro. Main at a salary of 10/-
per week. In September Bro. Main resigned because he
had accepted the position of Editor of “The Australian
Christian.”
Gifford Gordon, minister at Prahran church, invited
amalgamation with that church with a view to having
one strong church in the district. The Invitation was
declined.
Bro. J. McG. Abercrombie assisted with the preaching
for a while, and S. H. Mudge, of Swan Hill, commenced
full-time work from Ist December, 1914. The church be-
gan to feel the effect of the World War which had
commenced in August, 1914, many of the young men


Mr, and Mrs. D. A. Lewis.


leaving to join the army, some, unfortunately, never to
return, having laid down their lives for King and country.
Individual communion cups were introduced, after
some discussion on the proposal. In May, 1916, Bro.
Mudge resigned and R. K. Whateley assisted for a time.
Vera Blake Takes Up Foreign
Mission Work
Miss Vera Blake gave up her work with the J.C.E. as
she was proceeding to Adelaide for more training before
going on to the Indian mission field. She was fare-
welled at a large public meeting, and a gift of £5/10/- in
gold was made to her.
Although the organ had been used at the Sunday even-
ing and midweek meetings for many years, it had not
up till now been used at worship meeting on Sunday
morning. Its use at these meetings was now proposed,
but a majority of the church decided against such a
revolutionary idea. F. M. Ludbrook assisted for a time.
This was his last public service as he died soon after.
W. H. Hinrichsen commenced a period of service on
4th February, 1916. The Secretary in his annual report
stated that he was a “very fine young man with a good
reputation and a good deal of varied experience.” Bren.
Russell and Ernest Hinrichsen, college students, assisted
in the work. John Searle was the leader of a fine
J.C.E. having a membership of 33 and an average at-
tendance of 21.
In 1917, in the second quarter of the year, the church
was blessed by the addition of eleven from the school.
Miss Vera Blake left for India in September, 1917. Bro.
Thos. Murphy, with fifteen years’ service as Secretary,


asked for some assistance. During W. H. Hinrichsen’s
first year of service forty-eight new members were im-
mersed. The church was now twenty-five years old.
The use of the organ in Sunday morning services was
approved. At the end of 1918 the membership was 201,
with average attendances on Sundays of 86 and 140 re-
spectively. The great influenza epidemic descended on
Australia, and meetings were held in the open air.
Masks were worn by almost everyone, but in spite of all
precautions great numbers were struck down. Special
hospitals were opened by the Government to nurse the
sick.
Miss Florence Hall, now Mrs. W. H. Hinrichsen, was
leader of a young ladies’ club, and they set out to
raise funds for the purchase of a piano for use by the
church.
A great welcome home was arranged for the young
men who had been away to the war. Hon. Geo. Maxwell,
M.H.R., and Bro. Blakemore gave appreciated addresses.
Allan Searle took over charge of the J.C.E.
W. H. Hinrichsen continued to do excellent work as
minister. J. T. Eaton and his wife, two of the pioneers
of the church, transferred to the Glenhuntly (now Bambra
Rd.) church. W. H. Hinrichsen finished his ministry in
October, 1920. He had spent three years and nine
months with the church, a very fine period of active
church work.
Allan J. Wedd commenced a twelve months’ engage-
ment. Business meetings of the church, which had at
first been held weekly, then monthly, and then quarterly,
now changed to an annual event. Hitherto the Sunday
School had been closely associated with the church. All
the school accounts had been paid out of church funds,
and the church appointed the Superintendent. But now
a movement began to separate church and school, to


give the school as it were “Home Rule.” As one good
sister put it, “It was time the child got away from its
mother’s apron strings.” And so in 1921 the school became
a separate organisation. Whether this was a wise step
is open to question. The existence of the church is
Justified only on one ground, and that is the taking of
the “good news” to the people, and all organisations
associated with the church are, or should be, only a
means to that end, hence the closest association possible
seems to be highly necessary. Finance now became a
problem, and A. J. Wedd’s service terminated in Novem-
ber, 1921, and R. W. Payne took up a period of week-
end preaching early in 1922. One of the greatest losses
suffered by the church occurred at this time in the
passing to her reward of Sister Mrs. Murphy. She had
been organist for twenty years—ever since the introduc-
tion of the organ into the church services. Mrs. Murphy
was one of the most beautiful Christian characters ever
met with, cheery and bright even in illness, always will-
ing to help and sacrifice herself for the cause she loved
so well. She was indeed a bright jewel in the Saviour’s
crown, and her passing was a serious loss to the church at
South Yarra. Bro. Thos. Murphy, who had been Secre-
tary for nineteen years, felt compelled, owing to his be-
reavement, to give up that position for a time, and J. G.
Brown was appointed Secretary. A. G. Searle was now
Superintendent of the school and Miss Olive Sear (now
Mrs. Sandells) was doing a fine job with the J.C.E, Mrs.
P. Lee continued to lead the women’s work very success-
fully, and in this year raised over £BO by various means.
Bro. Thos. Murphy resumed the secretaryship in October,
1922.
R. G. Payne finished his term of service with the church
in January, 1923, and Geo. Tease took up the work. In
May, 1923, Miss Vera Blake returned from India on fur-
lough, and was given a most hearty welcome home.


Hinrichsen-Brooker Tent Mission
In April and May E. C. Hinrichsen and Les. Brooker
conducted a splendid and successful tent mission on a fine
site in Chapel St. One hundred and twelve made the
“good confession,” of whom 95 were immersed and re-
ceived into fellowship. Victor Griffin assisted Geo. Tease
in the visiting. The mission cost approximately £2OO.
Preparations were now being made for a mission in the
Prahran Town Hall, to be conducted by Bren. Kellems
and Richards, two noted American missioners, in which
all the churches of the district would participate.
A New and Larger Chapel
is Proposed
The church having now developed to such an extent,
plans werfe discussed to build a larger chapel on a more
suitable site. A block of land belonging to the Railways
Department was favored, but at the auction sale the
price went far beyond what the church was prepared to
pay, and so plans were made to enlarge and improve the
present building, on which there was at this time a debt
of £l6O. Bro. Harry Martin, one of the converts of the
Hinrichsen-Brooker mission, paid this off, and so now
the church was free of debt. The average attendance
on Lord’s day morning was now 126 and 150 in the
evenings, with an average of 69 at the midweek prayer
service. Geo. Tease closed his ministry in November,
1923, and R. G. Cameron commenced the work in 1924.
Victor Griffin, who had been assisting Geo. Tease, also
finished up in December, 1923. His period of service
had been much appreciated. In August, 1924, A. G. Searle
left for U.S.A., and was given a hearty send off. The
Renown Free Kindergarten Hall was secured for the hin-
ders in April, 1925, and this has been of great advantage
to this section of the school. H. G. Rasmussen took up
the preaching for a few months.


Young People’s Clubs Commence
About this time a curious change began to take place.
Boys’ and girls’ clubs were being formed in the churches.
The church building was occupied practically every night
in the week. The first to feel the effect was the choir
which had for many years functioned very successfully
and rendered splendid service to the church, but young
people now found they could not spare time for the choir,
apparently preferring the more active club life, so the
choir gradually faded away. In July, 1925, the American
fleet visited Melbourne, and Reg. Enniss appealed to the
churches for motor cars to enable us to entertain any
of our members with the fleet. At this time our member-
ship could only muster one old model single seater Ford,
but the writer understands that this did its duty. Victor
Griffin commenced another period of service on 6th June,
1925. J.C.E. was still a very active body, and provided
the church with new lino, and carpet for the platform.
The chapel was renovated at a cost of £lOO. The K.S.P.
and Phi Beta Pi clubs were formed and operated with
great success. In March, 1927, Allan G. Searle returned
from America and was given a hearty welcome home. The
duplex envelope system was introduced in 1927, and Robert
Sandells, then a college student, helped with the work.
Fred. N. Lee was doing a fine job just now in getting
the young boys of the school together on Saturday after-
noons to train them for the time when they would be
fit to join the K.S.P. Victor Griffin resigned in Decem-
ber, 1927, as he proposed to leave for America to further
his studies. Allan G. Searle filled in very acceptably
until Bro. Ladbrook commenced his ministry in February,
1928. He threw his energies into the work, although at
the same time he was studying at the University for his
Arts degree. He found that members of the South Yarra
church at this time resided in twelve different suburbs, so
a bicycle was bought to help him in his visiting.


Thos. Murphy, 25 Years Service
as Secretary
Bro. Thos. Murphy, the veteran Secretary of the church,
who had carried the onerous burden of this job since
January, 1903, except for a few months after his wife’s
death, now left (April, 1929) to live with relatives at
Mrs. F. Lee.
Chelsea. For a quarter of a century he had well and
truly served His Master in this .way, and no one will
ever know on this earth how much the church at South
Yarra owes to the faithful, loving and consecrated service
of Thos. Murphy as Secretary, and his late wife as or-
ganist. Miss Blake again returned from India, this time
unfortunately on account of ill-health. Radiators were
provided to warm the chapel in the winter.


25th Anniversary of Opening
of Chapel
In March, 1930, the 25th anniversary of the opening of
the building was celebrated, and Home-coming Day in-
augurated. Electric fans were installed. It is recorded
that in March, 1931, the members of the cricket club
scrubbed out the church building. In March, 1931, Bro.
Ladbrook’s term was extended for a further three years.
It was decided to set an aim of £5OO in the new building
fund by February, 1934. The C.E. Society commenced an
active agitation to secure a suitable launch for Bro. and
Sister Sandells, missionaries at the New Hebrides.
A new club for both boys and girls was formed in
March, 1934, and named Tef toe. In December, 1935, Bro.
Ladbrook closed a very active ministry. Geo. Mathieson,
of Wellington, was invited to take up the work, and until
he could come across, Cliff Taylor and Ernest Sherman
were engaged to fill the pulpit. Geo. Mathieson com-
menced work at the end of May, 1936, but after twelve
months, resigned to take up work at Moreland. Bro.
Candy was offered a three-years’ engagement, and until
he could come from New South Wales, Cliff Taylor carried
on with Arthur Reid as assistant. These two young men
did a fine piece of work, particularly as they were study-
ing at the college at the time.
In November, 1937, Miss Amelia Scarce made the good
confession and joined the church. Bro Candy commenced
his ministry in December, and a manse was purchased
for him. Bro. Candy did a fine work, resulting in in-
creased interest and attendances. In May, 1941, he trans-
ferred to East Kew after three and a half years of active
service. A. W. Connor took up the work, and soon with
his loved wife made for themselves a firm place in the
hearts of members. The manse was disposed of in
October. 1941.


In the midst of his very successful work Bro. Connor
passed away suddenly in January, 1942, much to the deep
regret and sorrow of the whole congregation. R. W.
Payne commenced week-end work until a successor could
be found. Soon afterwards the church suffered a seri-
ous loss owing to A. G. Searle, the energetic and capable
Mr. and Mrs. Fred K. Wic[?].
Secretary of the church, joining the R.A.A.F. All the
young men of the church having joined the Forces, South
Yarra church, like many others, found it difficult to
carry on efficiently. In September, 1942, the church was
fortunate in securing the services of C. Cole as minister,
who, with his energetic and capable wife continued until
the end of 1943, when he resigned to take up work with
the Sudan United Mission.


J. G. Graham, our veteran and well-loved musician and
hard worker, after many years’ activity, went to live at
Bayswater, and the church was deeply sorry to lose his
services.
In February, 1943, the church property was transferred
to the trusteeship of the Church Properties Corporation.
And so ends the record of fifty years’ striving and work-
ing for the Master in this district. One wonders what
the next fifty years will bring forth. Although many
hundreds have found peace and consolation and rich re-
ward in the service of the Master through this church,
one cannot help thinking as one looks over the field, “so
much to do, so little done.”
We cannot close this record without some reference to
those who pioneered the work in this district. Of the
original nine who commenced the work on the last
Lord’s day of 1893, three have passed to their reward,
these being Fred Wickens in Western Australia, and
David A. Lewis and his wife who were in membership at
South Yarra when they finished their labors. Of the
others, John Eaton and his wife now live at Glenhuntly,
Ernest Eaton is in Geraldton, W.A., from which he sends
a greeting which is printed hereunder. Mrs. Emily Wick-
ens, now eighty-seven years of age, enjoys reasonably
good health and is living in Perth. Mrs. Fred. Lee and
her brother, Thos. Hagger, are still very active workers,
and are so well known to all who will read this record
that there is no need for further reference to them. Their
works speak for them. So six of the original nine still
remain. May they be spared for many years yet is our
prayer. Two others of whom we always think with pride
for their share in the work at South Yarra are Vera
Blake, now Mrs. Alan Price, of Maryborough, Queensland,
and Thomas Murphy, now living with relatives at Chelsea
(Victoria). We would have enjoyed their company at


this time, but circumstances make it impracticable for
them to be with us in the flesh.
And so through all the length of days.
Thy goodness faileth never;
Good Shepherd, may I sing Thy praise.
Within Thy house for ever.
Messages from Pioneer Members.
The following messages from Ernest Eaton, one of
our original members, now living in Geraldton, W.A.,
and Vera Blake, now Mrs. Alan Price, of Maryborough,
Qld., are published as they are of special interest.
It is many years since I had the joy of fellowship
with you in worship or Christian service. To-day a rush
Mr. [?].


of blessed memories was stirred as I read a note from
your Secretary, Fred Lewis, telling me of your planning
for special services to commemorate your Jubilee. I pray
our God may make these services a means of spiritual
uplift to you all. My time of association with the church
at South Yarra was filled with many of my life’s happiest
experiences. I should like very much to be with you
during these special meetings, but as I cannot, I just send
you all my sincere wishes that the outcome of your
Jubilee gatherings may be a renewed determination for
each to do all in their power to forward the interests of
Christ’s kingdom. The awful condition of the world
now can only be remedied by the gospel of Christ. Heb.
13: 20. 21.
Yours in the hope of the gospel,
E. H. Eaton.
A longing and a hungering in the heart of a girl in
her teens; a Sunday School teacher who prayed for the
conversion of all her girls; bereavement, followed shortly
after by the tragic loss of a brother, drove home the
thought of the shortness of life for some. The prayer
of an older brother as we gathered together after the
tragedy, that God would use this as a means to draw us
to Himself; and then —was it chance that led us to the
final meeting of the Harward-Pittman mission held prior
to the opening of South Yarra chapel? I think not.
’Twas God’s hand leading me. The invitation hymn,
“Oh, do not let the Word depart,” and especially the lines,
“To-morrow’s sun may never rise
To bless thy long deluded sight,”
came home with such force that I felt impelled to join
the throng that were pressing up to surrender their lives


to Christ. All that happened thirty-eight years ago. I
have never regretted the step. South Yarra church took
me, a babe in Christ, and fed and nurtured me in the
faith.
Mrs. A. Price [?] Miss Yera Blakel
Though many years have elapsed since I was In active
membership at South Yarra, it has always been to me
my church “home.”
Thank God for the witness that has been given, and is
still being given forth, in that little corner of His vine-
yard. May the next half century see even fuller, richer
service than the last.
Vera R. Price.


(Meetings to be held in connection
with the
jubilee Celebrations
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 27,
GREAT HOME-COMING DAY.
Services at 11 a.m., 3 p.m. and 7 p.m,
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, FEBRUARY 29,
LADIES’ MEETING.
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 8 p.m.
SPECIAL THANKSGIVING SERVICE.
THURSDAY, MARCH 2, 6 p.m.,
TEA MEETING.
THURSDAY, MARCH 2, 8 p.m.,
YOUNG PEOPLE’S SERVICE.
SUNDAY. MARCH 5.
PINAL MEETINGS. 11 a.m., 3 p.m., 7 p.m.
Special speakers and singers.
All old members and friends are cordially invited to
attend as many as possible of these meetings.
P. LEWIS.
Acting Secretary.
2 Denham Place, Toorak, 5.E.2.
