





By REV. DAVID ROSS, M.A.
meetings. But I might
mention, generally,
three sorts of fruit
our Council is likely
to bear. It will be a
personal benefit to us
who take part in it.
We cannot meet to-
gether as we do, and
worship God together,
and exchange thoughts
about the things of
His Kingdom, with-
out helping one an-
other, As a rule we
ministers, at least,
have not opportuni-
ties enough of getting
to understand each
other and each other’s
thoughts. Exchange
is the principle of
commerce and wealth.
Here is a market place
where we may add to
our store. Further,
these meetings will
demonstrate our Jun-
damental unity. I re-
Rev. DAVID ROSS, M.A.
Tiprn TTXT IT V was told this, said, “Oh that the members of
Divine Architect of all intended that the
foundation of the Christian communities
should be the same.” We go further than
the Dean and say, the churches do stand all
on the one foundation. We, for our part,
BRETHREN. 1 thank you for the are here to demonstrate it. It is a pity all
honor you have done me in making the churches are not with us yet to demon*
me first President of this Church strate to the world this hidden fact of all
Council. I count it a privilege to be church life—the oneness of our foundation,
identified with the beginning of what, I Again, our Council, slightly organised though
believe, will be a fruitful Institution. Some it be, will be able to do some common work
of the ways in which it is likely to be for the country. Within the last few years
fruitful will be suggested in the course of our we have had not a few illustrations of the
advantage of com-
bining for certain
public objects. In a
country like ours,
with such enormous
material resources to
be developed, legisla-
tors are apt to over-
look other considera-
tions, and work for
only one end. It
is well to have a body
of people banded to-
together to seek first
the Kingdom of God
and His righteousness.
In this we have had
in the past the co-op
eration of other chur-
ches than are with us
to-night. We are
sure they are as alive
as we are to the su-
preme concern of right-
eousness. May that
co-operation widen
into something greater
and better still.
The many folds in
member a good many years ago, the late Mr. which Christians find themselves are a
W. E. Forster, one of the Liberal leaders of confession of weakness and limitation,
the day, told a story of Dean Stanley and The origins of the Churches teach us
himself. He was going with the Dean into this. Take for example the Churches
a cemetery in w’hich there were two chapels, of England and Scotland. John Knox
Non-conformist and Episcopal. There was was a minister of the English Church
just a road between them, and it was intended in the first years of the Reformation. He
they should be thoroughly separate, because took part in making the Prayer Book. He
the church ground had been consecrated by has even left his mark in it in the black
a Bishop and the other had not. Each party rubric at the end of the Communion Service,
wished their chapel to be kept on their own So zealous was he that he was offered a
ground ; but unfortunately this fact came out, bishopric; and it was no scruple as to
though they managed to keep it very quiet, Episcopacy that led him to refuse. But
that °the architect, in order to build these afterwards, in Scotland, he found himself and
chapels, had had to make the foun lations the Reformed Church under different con-
one and the same. Dean Stanley when he ditions. There Episcopacy was too like the


Prelacy which the Crown sought to impose.
Moreover, the Scottish people took up the
cause of the Reformation ; they became the
Reformers, and naturally retained much of
the governing power. But the difference in
church government was, at first, not so much
a matter of conviction as of environment.
It was the same spirit pressed into different
moulds. When churches took their rise in
differences of doctrine it was equally a con-
fession of human limitation. The truth of
Christ is so broad that ao man can grasp the
whole. One man sees it from one side, and
another from another side. To one man a
certain side of truth appeals with special
power. Perhaps the others have neglected
it and have suffered in consequence. To
him it comes as a discovery and is much.
Others who think with him, join him, and
they form a community, distinguished by
certain doctrines, or perhaps only by a
certain emphasis on doctrines, accepted in
their hearts by the others from whom they
have separated. Had men only larger minds
and a clearer vision; had men only purer hearts
and a better charity, many might have kept
together in one fold who divided into several.
Taking their rise in the limitations of
men, yet God has used all churches for His
own ends. He has worked even in the
narrowest. He has used them all to pour
into the world the one true life of men, the
likeness of Himself. Some time ago I was
reading the life of one of our Scottish
Covenanters, and I was amazed at the
bigotry which made him separate himself
from the Church, till at last it seemed to
him, of all the ministers in Scotland, only
himself and another stood as true represen-
tatives of the Lord in that suffering land. I
thought to throw the book away; but as I
read on, and read how he counted nothing
dear to him that he might follow Christ;
how he gave up friends and love and prospects,
how he endured hardness with rapture, and
at last died fighting for what he counted the
cause of God —I felt humbled. God had
taught him till he became a master, at whose
feet one might learn the essence of the
spiritual life, self-forgetfulness, self-surren-
der to God, willingness to suffer the
uttermost in obedience to His will. Yes,
there is no fold, the narrowest and smallest in
which God has not fed some souls for eternity
and the perfect life. And who are we that we
should despise the least of the churches that
name themselves by our Lord Christ ?
But as people are fed of God and possess
His life, their hearts become bigger than
their church. Thus in these days, after
SUPPLEMENT TO THE PRESBYTERIAN.
generations of many folds, inhabited all by
God’s Spirit, there is a notable tendency
towards union of folds. God is educating
His people beyond some of their limitations.
For example, in Scotland we are on the
verge of a union of two of our largest Pres-
byterian Churches, and there are indications
that before very long there will be a union
greater still. In Scotland also, within the
last few years, two distinct Congregational
Churches joined together under a Congrega-
tional Union. A few years ago there was a
union in England of General and Particular
Baptists; and the union of the followers of
Wesley, in Australia, is fresh in our minds.
Also, unions like ours to-night, which come
short of a corporate union, but which were
impossible a generation ago, are becoming
the order of the day. And what they may
lead to in the way of a larger union, who
can prophesy ?
Perhaps to the end there shall always be
some folds; never on earth one only.
Probably, at the best, there shall be a few
folds; each larger than any we see, with
distant fences, and a great multitude of souls.
Some will prefer and need one form of worship,
others another. The nature of one may
meed a certain style of church life to develop
it, a church life in which another nature
might be stunted. I was reading lately the
life and letters of James Smetham, an
English painter, who was all his life a
Wesleyan, and for many years a class leader.
His biographer says of Wesleyanism : “It
suited him. It is specially social in its
economy. It seeks, by bringing souls in
contact with souls, to kindle and maintain
the heavenly fires. It encourages no solitary
brooding, fosters no lonely struggle, but bids
them come out into the light of day for re-
velation and redress if it be possible.” Now
this, which Wesleyanism is said not to
do, is just what Presbyterianism does.
It leaves a man more to himself, to
fight his own secret life battle. Scotland
has consequently produced diaries of the
inmost life, which for introspection and
critical scrutiny of the soul’s moods and
seasons, stand beside Augustine’s “ Con-
fessions,” and Bunyan’s “Grace Abounding.”
The one church has developed one sort of
religious life, the other church another sort.
But what is all this but saying that no one type
of character or religious life is perfect ? At
best we can but show how beautiful certain
sides are, and so set each other a dreaming
about the day when we shall reach the city
with its Tree of Life and its twelve manner
of fruits, which nourish and bring out the


perfect man.
What we are learning is this—that if there
are many folds, and if we may not look forward
to seeing only one fold, yet we are one flock.
Christ says “ Other sheep I have which are
not of this fold ; them also I must bring,
and they shall hear my voice, and they shall
become one flock, one Shepherd.” Ideally,
as Christ looks at them, they are already one
flock, and he says, “ They shall become one
flock,” it shall be manifest to themselves and
others. This is what is coming to pass in
one day. And I see two lines along which
we are being led to it.
First: One of the marks of the time is its
Enthusiasm for Christ. There has been in this
half century a new remembrance of Christ.
Everything that touches Him has acquired a
new interest. Men have explored the land
in which he lived that they might understand
the physical surroundings of His blessed life;
the mountains, the lakes, the rivers, the
towns of that holy land; even the flowers He
plucked, and the trees under which He
sheltered, and the birds that sang to Him,
and the beasts that came to His feet Men
have investigated the conditions of the time,
the political state of the people and their
habits of life and thought, that they might
understand how Jesus lived and among what
sort of people, and what hopes and fears
quickened their souls. Also, we have been
getting back past the accretions of ages, to
the very words of Jesus. This age sits at
the feet of Jesus more literally than any age
since the first. Never was there such an
earnest and widespread anxiety to enter into
the mind of the Master and understand just
what he said and meant us to believe and do.
And if in striving to understand the mind of
the Teacher there has been less made than
should of the work of the Saviour, that will
be remedied. The revival of interest in the
teachings of Jesus is bound to lead to a new
interest in His work. The Spirit which
leads the church into the truth of Christ
will not stop short of the crowning glory of
the Cross. And meantime, what can be
more hopeful than the new awakening on
the part of the Church to the power of the
Risen Lord ? The new prominence given to
the highest ideal of the Christian life, and
the duty and privilege of the least of Chris-
tians to seek it; the new conviction of
Christians that they are living below their
right level, and that there is a power waiting
on them far mightier than they thought—
this, to my mind, is one of the brightest signs
of the times. If the power of Christ’s
resurrection is felt in the Church, no doubt
SUPPLEMENT TO THE PRESBYTERIAN.
soon the world shall feel the power of His
Cross. This all means that the Church has
betaken itself to a new following of the
Shepherd. The Shepherd has been leading
the Church into the rich pastures of His truth.
And beli3vers of many schools, sheep of
many folds, are learning to their surprise and
joy that in the one Shepherd they are one flock.
Second : The life of Christ has teen
influencing His people. He came not to be
ministered unto but to minister, and His
disciples must be like Him. The Church is
learning that the Christian life is a life of
service. Not that that was not known and
practised in past generations. But it is a
fact of history, that in our day the life of
service has acquired a new emphasis as the
common life of every disciple. Within these
fifty years there has been a new awakening
to the duty of the Church to the world. Fol-
lowers of the Master have felt they must
do more for the world perishing in ignorance,
and for men suffering with disease and
poverty. Men have gone out from the folds
to evangelise the world, to tend to the poor,
to teach children, to raise homes for the
fallen and the sick and the dying. Men
and women of all folds have found them-
selves working together for one common
Christlike end. If there has been communion
of saints in the wide pastures of God, so has
there been also in the wild wastes of the
world. And once again the word is coming
true, “ it shall be manifest to them that they
are one flock.”
The discovery and confession of their
fundamental unity in the midst of many
differences, I would call the forward move-
ment of the Churches of the Reformation.
It is forward, because it is the line of the
prophesy of our Lord. If this movement
were only universal through Christendom,
gathering into it all the churches, we should
read with new hope that stupendous word of
the Book “ at the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow.” But another and a counter
movement thrusts itself on our notice—what
I have no hesitation in calling a retrograde
movement —the return to Sacerdotalism,
which we see in at least one Church of the
Reformation.
Ritualism is the other side of Sacerdotalism.
In itself Ritualism is childish and harmless.
Someone i as called it “ the Kindergarten of
the religious life.” Long ago Thomas
a’Kempis said: “To some Jesus appears
sweetly in signs and figures.” And we to-
day dare not say that Ritualism may not
have its uses for some souls. But the growth
of Ritualism is fraught with peril. In the


Book of Numbers, in the account of the
wanderings of Israel in the wilderness, there
is a beautiful passage, “ From thence they
went to Beer, that is the well whereof the
Lord spake unto Moses, ‘ Gather the people
together and I will give them water.’ Then
Israel sang the song, ‘ Spring up, 0 well.’ ”
That is a simple description of the Church
and its function, A church Assembly is a
gathering round a well, in which springs up
the living water. We don’t need many
forms to drink water. There is rather a
danger that many forms will cover the living
water that it cannot spring up freely. A
few miles from my native town there was a
place famous for its mineral water. People
came far and near to drink there. When I
first knew the place there was an open spring
in the ground, and people took their glasses
and drank. Afterwards they built a pavilion
over it. People received the water from
shining brass taps on marble tables, while
around were chairs and tables and papers
for the convenience of visitors. But I was
never sure that the water from those brazen
taps was as pure and wholesome as from
the open spring. Indeed before I left home
there was a rumour that the water was
decreasing, stopped somehow. And certainly
in some places of living springs, the living
water is in danger of being dammed by
temples and sacrifices and a multitude of
forms. Even if the water may trickle
through to some, where is the need for all
this elaboration ? The most elaborate ritual
can’t do more than give men to drink of the
living water ; and very much less ritual
would do that as well, and without the peril.
Ritualism, however, is little more than a
token of a much more serious movement, the
movement back to Sacerdotalism. Let it be
understood we have no quarrel with Epis-
copacy. Episcopacy is a stage in the evolu-
tion of the Church. As a form of government
Episcopacy may be as good as ours, and may
suit better certain natures and certain con-
ditions. Episcopacy we could live with and
work with. But Episcopacy with Sacer-
dotalism leaves us no place in the household
of God. The Anglican priest, on whom but
yesterday the Bishop laid his hands, cuts us
off from the body of Christ —waves us away
from our Father’s house —and with us at
least four-fifths of English-speaking Christen-
dom. It is an attitude sufficiently astounding
to claim the attention of thinking people.
To drive a pledge thus into Christendom,
unless the Word warrants it, is perilously
like Schism, that crime of which Anglican
priests speak with such horror.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE PRESBYTERIAN.
What we object to in our sister church is
neither Episcopacy nor Ritualism, but the
priestly claims of Anglican ministers.
Episcopacy and Ritualism are only outside
the Bible ; priestliness is against it. The
priest claims to come between the sinner and
God. There is no forgiveness, no reconcilia-
tion, no bread of heaven, save through the
priest. The churches which have not an
Episcopally ordained priest to come between
the people and God are no churches ; there is
no salvation in them, no fellowship with
God, no preparation for heaven. A priest
presents himself to the anxious and seeking
soul. “ Through me ye enter in ; confessing
to me, receiving from me absolution and the
body of Christ; through me ye have dealings
with the Most High God.” If wehave learned
anything of the Gospel it is that Christ has
opened the way by which sinners return to
the Father. The gospel of the open way
was what the Apostles preached: “Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be
saved.” This was the gospel of the Reforma-
tion, and has been the Church’s gospel ever
since. He who puts a priest between the
soul and God we are bold to call a traitor to
the Cross of Christ.
It is no wonder that priests make no
attempt to prove their position from the New
Testament. Indeed they have a quarrel
with the Bible. They feel moved to side
with Romanists in denouncing the general
reading of the Bible. A High Churchman
said this, for example: That reading the Bible
without some authorised guide “is not use-
less only, but dangerous to morality and
truth.” And the Church Review, an organ
of the High Church party, said; “Bible
Christianity is an invention of the Devil.”
It comforts us under the scorn of priests that
at least the Word of God is on our side.
So also is experience. No teacher is so
convincing as experience. No man shall
ever argue us into believing that a priest is
in any sense necessary to our best life. Our
experience rebuts every argument. Are we
outside the Church and in the desert of the
world ? At least we have found God in the
desert. We have heard Him speak •we
have walked with Him ; the spring has
bubbled up for us. In the desert we have
still our Beersheeba, where God visits us in
trouble and comforts us ; our Gilgal where
he clothes us for battle ; our Bethel where
we dream of angels and the ascent of God.
And we think of our fathers who never saw
a priest. We remember their rapt faces as
they worshipped ; the purity of their hearts;
their noble self-sacrifice ; and how we learned


by watching them the beauty of the Highest.
Is all this a delusion ? Away with your
pettiness, who would limit the Almighty
within your Church Walls, and would have
us think that the river of His grace is no
broader than the bed between your banks.
But we must not let the arrogance of
priests awaken a corresponding arrogance
in us. The Minister must be a man of wider
sympathy than the priest, and must serve
himself heir to a larger heritage. While
working within certain defined Church rules
and order, we must remind ourselves that
we have a place in the one Catholic and
Universal Church of God. Our sympathy
must be wider than our fold, wider than the
folds that meet together to-night ; wide as
the flock of God. We must live in the wide
world of the Universal Church, of which
God says such glorious things. We must
get the breath of the larger world into our
life. We must represent not only the Church
that is, but the Church that is to be. We
must prove that we belong to the one Church
by making ourselves heirs of the best that is
in all the Churches. The Roman fold, the
Greek fold, the Anglican fold, and the folds
outside of these. Let us claim the right of
Christians to enter them all and be learners
in each ; admiring the one Spirit that works
in many forms, hearing the known voice of
the Master who teaches the truth in different
accents. I use my position to-night to urge
you to beware of the narrowness we deplore
when turned against ourselves. Don’t live
only in your own Church; don’t breathe
only her atmosphere ; don’t eat only her
bread. Roam further. Cultivate a Catholic
soul. In all your folds be prophets of the
day when disciples everywhere shall discover
and confess themselves the flock of Christ the
Shepherd.
One thing this sympathy with all the
Churches impresses upon us—that is the
part of heavenly wisdom to make most of
what is common to them all. We are sure
that what is common is of God. The salt
of the Church, the life of it, that which
makes it possible for us to be refreshed in
every fold that names itself by Christ, is the
Presence of the Lord Himself. “ Where
SUPPLEMENT TO THE PRESBYTERIAN.
two or three are gathered together in My
Name, there am I in the midst of them.”
The one common fact of the Universal
Church is the presence of Christ, His speech
when there is quiet, His power when He is
suffered to work. It is our wisdom to make
much of this eternal fact. Professor Huxley
says: “They who adhere most closely to
facts will be masters of the future.” If our
Churches would possess the future they must
cleave to this supreme fact of the Lord’s
presence in the midst. It must always be
first with us. If we would bind our people
together and make them strong, if we would
win the world for truth and righteousness,
we must throw ourselves on the grace and
might of the King, who is in the midst, and
will work mightily if we give Him His place
and freedom. In these days we try many
things to increase the influence of the
Church. I am persuaded we do not try or
trust our Lord enough. Perfect your music
by all means, for why should the devil have
the best ? But let your music be of Him
and unto Him ; not music for its own sake
(that has its place elsewhere), but music as
the vehicle of our thoughts to heaven, or the
channel through which God may speak to us.
By all means make much of learning and of
all legitimate arts and sorts of speech. Let
all knowledge be laid at His feet. Let every
minister especially offer his best to God, that
which has caused him intensest thought and
constant discipline of his whole nature. But
let it be the conscious aim of every sermon to
reveal Christ, to lift up a corner of the veil
that hides Him who is in the midst of every
worshipping assembly. The future is to the
Church that makes most of Christ, that
throws itself most entirely on His gracious
Presence, and looks with utter self-abandon-
ment for life and fruit to His mighty work-
ing. “ I then,” says Robert Browning,
“ Taking God’s help, have attained to think
My heart does best to receive in meekness
That mode of worship, as most to His mind,
Where earthly aids being cast behind,
His All-in-All appears serene
With the thinnest human veil between ;
Letting the many motions of His Spirit
Pass, as they list, to earth from heaven.”


