

ONE PENNY
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No 26.
Church
Vote
• i
For Sa/e
Australian Statesman & Mining Standard Pty. Ltd.


CHURCH VOTE FOR SALE.
“To the Highest Bidder.”
“ Sydney■ Morning Herald,” July 29 th, 1913.
BATHURST, Monday.
The Rev, M. J. O’Reilly, C.M., president of St. Stanis-
laus’ College, told a large congregation in S.S. Michael and
John’s Cathedral last night that Roman Catholics were too
apologetic. They were supposed to be a people with the
most wonderful organisation. No one had been able to dis-
cover who the organisers were, unless they were the black-
frocked gentlemen referred to in the 12th of July business.
“Some folk,” he added, “believe that the people who came
to the Confessional to the priest, are asked by the latter as
soon as confession is over, ‘Who are you going to vote for?’
After that the priest gave the straight tip, and they backed
the winner every time.
“If people in future say to the Catholics, ‘You have an
organisation,’ they will reply, ‘Yes, old man, and you look
out.’ We are going to have an organisation. It is a great
pity that we did not have it years ago. We deserve any-
thing we have got. The time has come when we are not
going to be patronised by those people, and if there is any
patronage it is we who are going to accord it.
“A great many people, on hearing grievances of Catholics,
say: Tf Australia is not good enough for them, let them
clear out.’ That was said to me about three weeks ago.
We have been putting up with this kind of thing too long.
Now we are going to stop it. We are going to take things
into our hands. We are going to organise and deal with
our opponents in the most effective way—that is, by the
ballot-box.
“It is all very well for Mr. Cleary (president of the
Catholic Federation of New South Wales) to tell me the


Federation is not political. I tell you it is. He is right
when he says we are not going to identify ourselves with
any political party. Members may be Labour, Independent,
or Liberal. We are going to sell ourselves to the highest
bidder. We shall be in the market by and bye.
“I have for a great many years been voting Labour, But
that does not mean that I am for the Labour ticket all the
time. I will vote another ticket to-morrow if it suits me.
I take it that is the motto of the Federation.
“We are not going to be dragged by the heels of any party.
We are going to keep ourselves free from all definite politics,
like the present member for Bathurst, so that no one will be
able to tell of what politics we are.”
SECTARIAN VOTE-SELLING.
"Daily Telegraph ” July 30 th, 1913.
Speaking at the inaugural meeting of the Bathurst
branch of the “Catholic Federation,” on Sunday night,
Father O’Reilly declared that the object of this movement
was to organise the Catholic vote, and offer it for sale
to the political party which bids highest for it. We do
not know how far this gentleman is authorised to speak
for the Roman Catholic section of the community, nor can
we judge the extent of which that section is represented by
the Catholic Federation. Taking Father O’Reilly, however, at
his own apparent valuation in this respect, and interpreting
his utterances in their only practical meaning, it would
appear that the Catholic citizens of this State were about
to attempt to set up a sectarian domination over the rest
of the community, and subordinate all civil politics to
ecclesiastical rule. “We are going to take things into our
hands.” is Father O’Reilly’s way of putting it. According
to his statement of the position, Catholics are to be quite
indifferent as to how the country is governed so long
as the purposes of the Church are accomplished. It does
not matter whether we have Socialism or Liberalism in
power. We may have a party that will squander the re-
sources of the country like water; that will drag its credit


in the dust; that will proceed to any sort of confiscatory
legislation; or a party of reactionary conservatism, under
which humanitarian progress of every kind inust tetop
still. It will be all one as far as the Catholic Federation
is concerned. The party that yields most to the denomi-
national demands of the Church will, irrespective of the
general needs of the country, receive its support. That
is to say, that a member of the organisation can have
no political principles and no ordinary patriotism; the only
use he can make of his franchise will be to buy or extort
sectarian favours. That is the programme of the Catholic
Federation as Father O’Reilly expounds it. Were it to
materialise in that shape and the twenty-five per cent, or
so of the people who are included amongst the adherents
of the Roman Catholic Church, or a similar number be-
longing to any Church or class, to take such an attitude,
representative government would assume a new phase. The
ordinary questions which Governments exist to deal with
would drop into abeyance, and Parliament be transformed
from a work-a-day institution into a futile babel of dog-
matic tongues, in the midst of which the secular affairs
of the country would be left to take care of themselves.
1 hat would be a great day for sectarian bigotry, with all
the out-of-date evils which would return in its train, but a
sorry day for the country whose Parliament was transformed
from a Legislative Assembly into a mere denominational
conclave.
It is to us incredible, however, that any large body of
intelligent Roman Catholics would be prepared to follow the
lead of Father O’Reilly in this matter. Putting considera-
tion of patriotism aside, they must see that twenty-five
per cent, of the people can in no democratic country, no
matter how they organise, govern the remaining seventy-
five per cent. Father O’Reilly assumes two things. First,
that the “Catholic vote” can be consolidated and hawked
about the political market place like an ordinary com-
modity. Next, that bidders could be found for it who
would be willing to sacrifice every national interest in
the country in the recklessness of their competition. Both
of these assumptions are groundless. Roman Catholics have
the same interest in sound civil government as other citizens,
and the days of dragooning people to the ballot-box have


gone. But even if the whole of the members of any Church
stood ready to march to the polling-booth and give a block
vote for a party with whom its ecclesiastical heads were
bargaining for some denominational concession as the price
of that support, the rtieans of enforcing payment would be
absent unless the other party was prepared to negotiate
on similar terms. Ihe Labour party introduced the sup-
port in return for concessions system, and practised it suc-
cessfully for a time, until the inevitable happened. The other
parties, who found that by bidding against each other for
Caucus support they mutually paralysed each other, and
allowed Labour to rule, combined, and the auction ceased.
Were that history to repeat itself, as under sufficient provo-
cation it would, and the result be government on strictly
sectarian lines, it would be a calamity for all parties, and,
therefore, for the State as a State. Hence it may be
trusted that in offering the Catholic vote for sale, as if it
was something that could be delivered in a brown paper
parcel, Father O’Reilly is reckoning without his host. And
his host would act with wisdom in promptly makiner that
fact known.
“VOTE FOR THE HIGHEST BIDDER.”
"Sydney Morning Herald” October 2Sth, 1913.
After church service at St. Clement’s Church, Ashfield, on
Sunday night a meeting of the local branch of the Catholic
hederation was held in the adjoining schoolroom. Father
Gannon presided. It was reported that 270 members had
joined the branch.
At the conclusion of the meeting the Rev. M. J. O’Reilly,
C.M., principal of St. Stanislaus’ College, Bathurst, delivered
the following address;—
""Something Cyclonic ”
Father O Reilly said he hoped it would not be considered
that he had come to Ashfield to create another disturbance.
At Bathurst he was regarded as a storm centre—something
cyclonic. A great deal of water had flown under the bridge
since his celebrated address at Bathurst. The attention


paid to him by the two Sydney dailies had satiated him with
notoriety. He had been favoured with three leading
articles and one cartoon; the latter made him look more
like an Anglican archdeacon than a Catholic priest. The
dailies endeavoured to impress the people of New South
Wales with the idea that he was a very dreadful man. He
was supposed to be what the French called “enfant ter-
rible”—one of those awkward children who were always
blurting out unpleasant remarks. They were told by the
newspapers that it was a dreadful thing for any religious
body to take part in political matters. Catholics could never
expect a fair deal from the Sydney dailies. Daniel O’Con-
nell, when praised by the London “Times,” said that he
examined his conscience to discover in what respect he had
been a traitor to his country. He (Father O’Reilly) had
followed a like course, and had nothing to reproach himself
with.
Catholics Treated Like Pariahs.
A remarkable fact was disclosed in the Federal Parlia-
ment by Senator Higgs, He produced a secret circular,
issued by the Orange lodges, by which people got special
advice as to how to vote at the Queensland elections. Every
candidate was marked off either as desirable or as one to
be black-balled. Voters were told to pocket their political
principles and put Protestantism first. At this action no
articles of protest appeared in the press. Catholics were
labouring under grave disabilities. They were treated as
pariahs and not like fellow citizens, and they would not
stand it any longer Their opponents played the off-side
game and “disqualified the inimy,” as Mr. Dooley put it.
“We,” he went on, “recognise that Orangemen are not to be
regarded seriously. You might as well try to vaccinate a
southerly buster as to get a sensible idea into an Orangeman
in Australia or in Ulster (Laughter.) If the press were
impartial, it would use its weight against Orangemen
as it does against us. Now we are going to take a hand,
but not by secret circulars.”
“For the Highest Bidder .”
It had been said that the Catholic Federation should not
be political. It was not going to be. None of its members
would be asked to vote either Liberal or Labour. Their
electors, when voting, should deal with the men who were
6


persecuting them and hit them as hard as they could. They
should follow Lowell’s advice, “I do not believe in principle,
but I do in interest.”
“We Catholics will deal with each man, so as to know
on what terms he is prepared to deal with us. But we will
be open and aboveboard, and any self-respecting voter will
vote only for the men who will give him the best terms.”
There was a hubbub at Bathurst, he proceeded, when he
said, “We’ll shortly be on the market.” He had voted for
Labour for 11 years, but now he was going to vote for the
men who would give him the most acceptable terms. He
would not apologise for any of his actions. Every voter in
Sydney was going to do just as he was doing, and that was to
weigh the candidates and give his vote to the highest bidder.
The average Australian believed in a fair deal, and he
would not willingly inflict injustice; but he was too often
the yictim of the shibboleth of party cries.
Differential Treatment.
“A train comes into Bathurst and other large towns in
the morning, conveying a lot of school children. Those
going to a Public School pay no fares, but the Catholic
children have not the same treatment. This is persecution,
and we are punished because we teach Christ in our schools.
Recently an order was issued that Public School children
were to be provided with copy books, pens, pencils, and
disinfectants. Catholic schools are neglected in this respect,
because they teach a Christian religion.”
It was the same, he said, with the Catholic hospitals—
St. Vincent’s and Lewisham. Evidence from Protestant
patients testified in laudatory terms to the skill and solici-
tude of the nurses at those hospitals, and yet all they got
from the Government was a beggarly grant of £75. He
would have thrown out the man who brought the money.
Thanks to Sir Henry Parkes.
If ever Catholics should have been delighted it was in
1879, when obloquy was passed on them by Sir Henry
Parkes and men like him. Their action at that time had
consolidated the Catholics, who took a stand which had
benefited them ever since. All other denominations closed
their schools whilst the Catholics kept theirs open. If
Catholics had to fight for 30 or 100 years they would not
close a school from the Tweed to the Murray. (Applause).


S'QQM.
Anglicans complained of empty churches, and put it down
to the love of pleasure. In Bathurst the other Sunday a
census was taken of church attendances. It was found that
Catholics, with only one-fourth of the population, had 200
more churchgoers than the Anglican and all other churches
combined.
“Shake Things Up
“In the coming election we are going to take a hand, and
shake things up. We are going to give some of these
politicians a run for their money. Let them know you are
organised and put aside for a moment your own politics for
the good of your cause.
“Though I am an optimist,” concluded Father O’Reilly.
“I recognise that this question is not going to be settled at
once. We have got one concession—medical examination
of our school children —but that only whets our appetites for
more. This is our first effort, and if we don’t succeed we’ll
try and try again. Enrol your friends as members of the
federation. Be grimly in earnest, and make yourselves
felt,” (Applause).
“ONE-FOURTH OF THE PEOPLE.”
West Maitland, Monday.
A meeting of the East Maitland branch of the Catholic
Federation was held on Sunday afternoon. Father O’Gor-
man commended the policy advocated by Father O’Reilly, of
Bathurst.
“We are not going to identify ourselves with any political
party,” he said. “The federationists may be Labour, Liberal
or Independent. We will support the party most favourable
to us.” That was the policy every party adopted. Why
then was Father O’Reilly so venomously attacked? Because
the metropolitan press had sense enough to see that at
last the Catholics were on the right track.
He counselled them to turn their attention to the neces-
sity for organisation.
“There are 450,000 Catholics in New South Wales,” he
said. “No State can afford to ignore the just demands
of one-fourth of the people if they are properly backed
up.”
Wholy Set-up and Printed In Australia by
Harold Smith, 376 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
8 /
