

CICERO
by
TENNEY FRANK
ANNUAL LECTURE ON A MASTER MIND
HENRIETTE HERTZ TRUST
of the
BRITISH ACADEMY
1932
Price 1s. 6 d. net
FROM THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE
BRITISH ACADEMY. VOLUME XVIII
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
AMEN HOUSE, E.C.




CICERO
By
TENNEY FRANK
ANNUAL LECTURE ON A MASTER MIND
HENRIETTE HERTZ TRUST
of the
BRITISH ACADEMY
1932
FROM THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE
BRITISH ACADEMY. VOLUME XVIII
LONDON:HUMPHREY MILFORD
AMEN HOUSE, E.C.


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


ANNUAL LECTURE ON A MASTER MIND
HENRIETTE HERTZ TRUST
CICERO
By TENNEY FRANK
Headhunt 8, 1932
NEARLY twenty centuries have passed since Cicero was
recognized by his fellow citizens as the saviour of Rome.
The adjustments of twenty centuries of criticism ought, it
would seem, to arrive at some fair estimate of a man’s place
in history. But the first poet of Greece is. perhaps the only
human being who has attained an undisputed place of
honour. Cicero’s fame has varied from century to century,
and there are competent critics living at the present time
who might well question the implications of the title under
which I have been asked to speak to-day.
For half a century after Cicero’s assassination his fellow
citizens preferred not to speak his name in public. Some
hardly dared to. During the next fifty years, although he
was often mentioned with reverence, men still avoided
writing and speaking in his manner. Then they began to
ape his style—but when it was too late to recapture the
spirit that had created it.
During the following centuries the early Christians so
well understood the charm of Cicero’s language that they
feared it would lure converts into apostasy. They had just
cause for fear. When we read St. Ambrose, we discover
how the Church, gradually falling under the Ciceronian
spell, almost accepted his pagan doctrines concerning the
primacy of reason, the freedom of the will, the naturalness
of the good life, the sufficiency of virtue for happiness, and
the superiority of moral activity as compared to faith. Had
Cicero won the battle against St. Augustine, the renaissance
of humanism might have come centuries before it did.
XVIII A 2


Cicero’s defeat in that contest left him for a thousand years
in the humble position of a teacher of diction and gram-
mar, but not for always. When the time was ripe, Petrarch
read beyond the mere language of the text and found in the
neglected essays the freeing doctrine of unshackled reason
and a respect for human nature which proved to him
a ‘spring of living waters’. It was the rediscovery of Cicero
that prepared men to read Aristotle with clear eyes and to
dare to comprehend Plato. Cicero had taught men to pene-
trate beyond the mists of ten centuries.
But his task of regeneration was not yet finished. Men
were thinking, and he now taught them how to write and
speak with dignity and with full mastery of the art of per-
suasion. Then came, during the seventeenth century, the
day of political questioning of the claims of autocracy.
Behind Locke in England and Montesquieu in France were
decades of students assimilating the liberal doctrines of the
Roman Republic through the speeches, letters, and essays
of Cicero. Again it was he who pointed the way and gave
courage to those who aspired to constitutional government.
If I seem to over-estimate what some have called a for-
tuitous service, I may be pardoned for recalling what Cicero
meant to the founders of the Republic that grew out of
your colonies across the Ocean. Long before Cardinal Mai
discovered the manuscript of the De Republica, our statesmen
were studying the fragments of that book which had been
collected by French editors out of imperial writers. Let me
cite one instance out of many to show the abiding power of
his words. In 1786, the year before the American Constitu-
tion was written, John Adams wrote his Preface on Government.
It was a plea for a more closely integrated government than
we then had, and the central argument was that the English
government had demonstrated the practicability of Cicero’s
ideas of a commonwealth. Quoting verbatim the famous
passages in which Cicero insisted that a stable constitution
must contain a right fusion of regal, aristocratic, and
popular functions, he added: ‘As all ages of the world have


not produced a greater statesman and philosopher united
than Cicero, his authority should have great weight.’ We
know, of course, that the example provided us by the Eng-
lish constitution was the most powerful factor of all, but
its force had been weakened by eight years of warfare, and
might well have been nullified but for the authority of Cicero.
The nineteenth century owed less to him directly than the
seventeenth or eighteenth, for by that time men had made
their own the many gifts he had offered them. And now,
in the twentieth century, he is so much a part of our think-
ing that it has become customary to call him obvious.
Indeed, it is now probable that, unless we prove so un-
worthy of our heritage as to let our civilization fail, Cicero
will never again become a teacher of primary importance.
And yet it would be ungracious not to pause now and again
to review his work and estimate its quality.
It is not by reason of any one penetrating idea or of any
one supreme act that Cicero’s name receives attention to-
day. His powerful style, shaped for an aristocratic Senate
that had unlimited time at its disposal, is hardly adapted
to present-day parliaments; the world runs too fast to have
time for it. For his moral philosophy—influential though
it has been—he claimed no originality, even less, in fact,
than it deserved. His rhetorical works, which for centuries
furnished the substance of all text-books on writing, do not
actually suit the spirit of any of the four languages in widest
use to-day. His juridical observations, which were powerful
forces in the days of decaying autocracy, are vital in spirit
rather than in precise precept, while in his political achieve-
ments he frequently failed to establish a dominating position
for good because of the exigencies of his unfortunate time.
It is the breadth and scope of all his work rather than the
depth or height of any one idea that calls for attention.
Perhaps it would be fairer to speak of him as a pervading
force in the world than as a master mind.
The disparagement of Cicero during the last century has,
of course, not been universal. It emanated from central


Europe and arose there for reasons that can be readily
understood and pardoned. After a rapid assimilation of
the first fruits of the Renaissance, Austria and Germany
suffered untold disasters during the wars of the Reforma-
tion and a series of calamities lasting through the Seven
Years’ War. Hence, while Italy, France, Holland, and
England were absorbing the Latin classics, central Europe
had little opportunity to learn what these had to give.
Prosperity and the spread of culture came back to them
only after the scholars of France, England, and Holland
had begun to study the Greek authors assiduously and had
to some extent set the fashion of depreciating the Latin
authors as subordinate. There were parts of Europe that
never learned to know Cicero and Vergil.
This was also the age of the new scientific interests that
unfortunately crept into literary studies where they did not
belong. Scholars forgot that, while the chief aim of science
is the search for new facts, art strives for adequacy and
richness of expression rather than for novelty; they also
forgot that, while the man in the laboratory analyses sub-
stances into their component elements, the shredding of the
sources of poetic plots does not disclose the springs of poetry.
Hence Cicero and Vergil came to be estimated in a balance
appropriate to science, not to art.
Furthermore, Drumann, who dominated historical studies
in the early decades of the century, gave expression to his
monarchical convictions by heaping contempt upon Cicero’s
republicanism; and his brilliant successor, Mommsen, en-
ticed by his devotion to Hegelianism into the worship of
Caesar, employed Cicero merely as an antithesis to his
pedestailed hero. Mommsen’s fascinating volumes probably
went further in shaping historical opinion the world over
than any other book of the century. Among his countrymen
his judgement of Cicero survived longer than elsewhere,
partly no doubt because, in a country where republican
institutions were so long retarded, readers had had in-
adequate first-hand experience of free political oratory, of


the ways of democratic hustings, and of all the machinery
of free politics that must be understood in order to compre-
hend Cicero’s behaviour. Even Eduard Meyer, who strove
so hard to comprehend all of history with objective judge-
ment, never quite gained the insight into republican politics
or the sympathy with its aims to construe wisely the political
conduct of Cicero. The day is now past for such mis-
understandings. These last ten years have been years of
valuable lessons in political psychology everywhere, and it
is quite possible that we shall soon have penetrating studies
of Cicero and the Roman Republic from peoples that have
not had the opportunity to understand their spirit.
The range of Cicero’s interests, his clairvoyant sympathies,
and his intellectual grasp we discover quickly in the 800
letters of his that have survived. Is there any body of corre-
spondence anywhere so rich in observation? They are the
very marrow of Roman cultural history. They show that
Cicero comprehended and could forgive such diverse men
as Caesar, Cato, Pompey, and Brutus. In them apt quota-
tions from all the range of Greek and Roman literature fall
abundantly from a well-stocked memory; comments abound
on the elections, on the dramatic performances, on law
suits, on the deliberations of the Senate, on accent and
metre, on religion and philosophy, on villas, farming and
investments, on education, society, and above all and always
on politics. Through his eyes we see Rome and Italy,
Greece and the provinces. Now he is buying works of art,
now he is enlarging his library and ordering volumes of
Greek literature mentioned by no other extant author.
He corresponds with philosophers, scientists, publishers,
historians, poets, women who affect an understanding of
metaphysics, epicures concerned with dietary innovations,
jurists, professors, slaves, kings and proconsuls, and he is
at ease with all of them. It is a range through which but
few of his readers can follow him. To read through the
volumes with a commentary like that of Tyrrell and Purser
is in itself an education.


Many of these letters disclose every cranny of his mind,
especially those written to Atticus, to whom he could
reveal his passing moods as to a diary destined for lock
and key. Here are a man’s unconscious cerebrations, as it
were, his stream of consciousness caught uncensored on the
blotter. The very unusual revelation of the mental opera-
tions in that package of letters—the thinking aloud, the
disclosure of all the hopes, fears, hesitations, and the
mustering of all the arguments that were finally rejected—
has always affected the biographers’ estimate of Cicero.
Petrarch, when he first found the letters, felt as though he
had lost a hero. After mature reflection, however, he
apologized for his hasty conclusion. Quintilian had had
the same experience long before and had wisely reasoned
that, while most of us disclose only our final decisions that
lead to action, Cicero by accident is often revealed with
some unfairness to us at the inception, not the conclusion,
of his meditation.
Of course, men who make quick decisions will not have
patience with Cicero’s falterings. They will not appreciate
the breadth of his sympathies, the range and loyalty of
his friendships, the intricacy of his comprehension of
motives, the penetrating imagination that sought for the
possible value in every man’s proposal, the power to en-
visage the end of diverse paths. His was the alert, responsive,
imaginative mind of the artist rather than the single-track
mind of the man of affairs.
For this very reason the letters give us the key to his
peculiar successes and failures as a political leader. We
see from them that it was the true comprehension of all
latent consequences which caused him to linger beyond
the striking point in 60 as in 50 b.c.; that it was his deep
brooding over the possible fate of his republic which led
him to ugly vindictiveness against Antony in 43. And it is
also clear that it was this over-sensitiveness, mistaken again
and again for egotism, that sometimes wrecked his influence.
Though natively diffident and unduly appreciative of all


good qualities in others, he was so susceptible to criticism
that he fell into the error of self-laudation by way of defen-
sive apology. It was a mistake into which he was trapped
only when under oblique fire. But for a statesman it is a
serious mistake that always entails payment out of all pro-
portion to its moral rating. This foible cost Cicero many
victories at the very time when Caesar walked unscathed
despite his vices that, though far more grave, seemed less
offensive. At the bottom of Cicero’s defeats lay the very
deep sensitiveness that we see so plainly revealed in his
letters.
Yet this was also the quality that made for much of his
success when he spoke. It gave him the power to compre-
hend his audience whether in the forum,, the law court, or
the senate, to create a medium of communication with
them, to meet them more than half-way, and to lead them
out of themselves and their petty concerns into the region
of visions.
Just one more word about these letters. Scholars have
hunted for every possible source of all that Cicero ever
wrote in his many essays, they have been able to trace many
parallels, and they have drawn the scholar’s customary
conclusion of dependency. But the reader of these letters
will have before him abundant evidence of an active, inde-
pendent, well-disciplined, creative mind that was in the
habit of questioning, weighing, and deciding for itself.
Students of Cicero’s thought who doubt its originality will
do well to read deeply in Cicero’s letters.
Cicero’s political and juristic writings do not compare
favourably with Plato’s Republic either in wealth of new
ideas or in literary appeal. Plato lived among men who
believed in Lycurgus and assumed that durable constitu-
tions might spring from the brain by' parthenic birth;
Cicero worked in a state where the spirit of cautious experi-
ment and patient compromise had warded off revolutionary
mutations and gathered authority for ancestral custom.
Plato wrote his Republic in his study before his mind was
A 3


disturbed by political experiences; Cicero did his thinking
in the senate and before the assembly. Plato wrote for
coming ages; Cicero for his own people.
Not that Cicero was afraid of ideas. He read eagerly, in
the books of Plato, Aristotle, Dichaearchus, Carneades,
Panaetius, Polybius, and of a score of other authorities.
He rejected volumes of what he read because so much did
not fit his needs. He accepted much, all in fact that he
could use, for he cared more for the serviceable conception
than for the credit of inventing. Here, too, scholars have
found parallels for most of his ideas. However, the valued
statesmen of our day have rarely been egoists. They, too,
have adopted any man’s plan that did the required work.
It would be easy, but also futile, to ferret out the first
written expression of our new adventures in statesmanship.
In that field the correct analysis of needs and the compre-
hension of the relative appropriateness of means to ends
are a great part of fruitful invention. When Cicero shamed
an autocrat into reasonableness, when he forced a legal-
minded people to see that equity stood higher than positive
law, when he preached before a powerful aristocracy that
all men were equal before the law, when, despite his suffer-
ing from Clodius, he defended the principle of popular
sovereignty, when he outlined a principate that could serve
as a model for the Augustan regime, when in and out of
season he insisted upon the sacredness of liberty in words
that have inspired democratic aspirations these twenty
centuries, he did not pretend to express new ideas. But he
was saying what was often difficult to say at a time when it
was especially needed. By seizing the occasion he made
himself a creative force.
The central idea of Cicero’s conception of political
origins is the sociological view evolved long before him by
Aristotle. The economic-utilitarian explanation of Car-
neades he vigorously combats, though it was the accepted
doctrine of his own school; the old tradition of divine
origins he treats as a pleasant but futile legend; he shows


but little patience with the then popular notion of social
contract which later played so momentous a role in Euro-
pean thought. His central view, then, while not original,
reveals his acumen in choosing out of the offering of his
day the idea that has best withstood the test of rigid criti-
cism. And he goes somewhat beyond Aristotle in that he
invokes certain qualifications due to his own understanding
of history. Knowing the long story of Roman society, he
was impressed by the similarity between the patriarchal
family and the ancient benevolent kingship, so that he laid
down suggestions which could later be developed into the
patriarchal theory. But his keen insight into politics saved
him from over-emphasizing the analogy. Furthermore, his
knowledge of Rome’s orderly development and growth
gave to his quick mind another advantage which Aristotle,
living in an era of revolution and catastrophes, did not
possess. To Cicero the state, at least the Roman state, was
a living and growing social organism, the fruit of centuries
of striving and thinking. But Cicero did not make the
mistake of some modern sociologists of carrying the bio-
logical analogy too far. ‘The commonwealth’, he says, ‘is
the affair of the people, yet the people is not any assemblage
of men, gathered together in any fashion, but a gathering
of the multitude united together under a common law and
in the enjoyment of a common well-being.’ That definition,
however much coloured by older phraseology, breathes the
spirit of a stable, well-seasoned government such as Aris-
totle had not the fortune to observe. There is also in the
definition of Cicero what may seem at first glance to be
a leaning towards the theory of the social contract in that
he emphasizes the great contributions to Roman adminis-
tration of the statesmen of old Rome. But here again the
real force in his idea is not that of the political philosophy
that imagined one fantastic contractual act. Cicero pic-
tures Rome’s progress as a social evolution directed by a
long series of wise legislators. In this as in the rest of his
De Republica and De Legibus one feels not only that judicious


study is creating a science of comparative politics, but that
a deep comprehension of Rome’s constitution is giving
solidity and reality to untried philosophic maxims already
old. In this respect Cicero proceeds like a modern states-
man.
In his discussion of law and justice he is nearer to the
Stoics than to Aristotle, though he otherwise rejects Stoic
metaphysics. Aristotle, of course, could not have had any
conception of equality. To him justice was a condition in
which each person keeps within his appointed sphere, and
law is a device designed to maintain the social status quo.
The Stoics, coming at a time of political subjection, had
enlarged the definition of justice by emphasizing fraternity
and had called upon law to meet the requirements of
reason which demanded a larger justice. We may be quite
sure that Panaetius, if only for the sake of ameliorating the
conditions of his fellow Greeks, preached that doctrine
vigorously at Rome. It was a doctrine that might well
serve the interests of subject peoples if adopted by the
victorious state. Cicero, though he belongs to the victorious
state which obviously did not profit materially from such
a doctrine, accepted it in full measure {De Republica, iii. 33)
and by constant reiteration made it a commonplace of his
day. It was in no small measure because of his teachings
that the jurists of the Empire were able to accept the theory
of natural law and upon it construct a code that could
serve the needs of a world empire and of new empires yet
to come.
To us it may seem strange that Cicero, who was by no
means friendly to Stoic philosophy, should have accepted
it so enthusiastically in this one respect. To be sure, Roman
court procedure had somewhat prepared the way. Long
before Stoic doctrines were heard of in Latium, Rome had
instituted a peregrine court which was to concern itself
with the needs of foreign traders and of non-citizen subjects
who did not know the civil law and had no standing in the
regular court. However, it required the alert mind, the


penetrating understanding, and the wide sympathies of
Cicero to discover that there was a logical connexion
between Rome’s court procedure and Stoic doctrine, and
to pronounce the conclusion that old Roman statesmen had
felt the superior claims of ius gentium and the need of making
civil law conform to those higher claims. As he says in the
De Officiis (hi. 69): ‘So our forefathers felt . . . that the law
of nations should also become the civil law of Rome.’
There is every reason to believe that this process of assimila-
tion would in time have reshaped the Roman code on
general principles of equity even without the aid of Stoic
doctrine, after Cicero had thus pointed out the ethical
significance of the peregrine court and the influence of its
decisions.
Cicero was led to the same faith in a higher law by his
court practice, which was confined almost entirely to
defensive cases. In several of his early orations, notably
the pro Caecina, the Verrines, and the pro Cluentio, as well as
in some later ones, he had the opportunity and necessity
of attacking some clause of the civil law in the name of
equity, of intention, or of reasonable interpretation. These
orations, which became the models and text-books of all the
youth of Rome, were very effective in teaching jurists and
judges the need of searching for general principles and of
considering the positive law temporary and fluid.
His intuitions and human sympathies led him in the
same direction. Himself a product of the hill country, he
never was in full accord with the dilatory traditions of the
city. It was easy for him to prick the arrogant claims of
the entrenched classes, to assist subject peoples in distress,
and to plead for just government in the provinces. He was
among the first to insist that there should be no distinction
in treatment between slaves and free labour. He strongly
supported autonomy in the provinces and gave an example
of just administration in Cilicia which was cited a century
later as a model. He reminded his brother, when the latter
was governor of Asia, that the welfare of his subjects should


be his chief concern. If the government of Augustus marked
a new epoch in just administration, that was in no small
measure due to Cicero, who had during the age of cruel
exploitation almost alone called attention to the obligation
of a government towards subject peoples. It was, then,
Cicero’s nature, as well as his experience and his reading,
that led him to accept and advance the juristic doctrines
of the Stoics.
Cicero took but small part in legislating and he did not
to any extent serve as jurisconsult, but the jurists of the
Empire followed the course which he and his friend Sulpicius
had popularized. Justinian’s code owes more to him than
it confesses. Later —in the seventeenth century —the doc-
trine of natural law was again borrowed from Cicero and
his successors. Unfortunately it was then shifted into a
corollary of ‘natural rights’ in order to combat entrenched
tyranny, a corollary that has often become a clog upon
legal progress. And the consequent result did much in
modern times to arouse aversion to the ethical principles
advocated by Cicero. We later reverted for a while to the
utilitarian theory of law, long ago rejected by Cicero; we
then tried the sociological theory, which proved to be in-
adequate because the social sciences had failed to discover
an acceptable sanction for legal judgements. In America
many recent jurists have apparently fallen back in despair
upon the simple democratic doctrine that desires expressed
by pluralities should be the plumb line of legislation and of
judicial decision. That doctrine seems to be due to our
home-grown pragmatism enforced by Bergsonian psycho-
logy, for it dispenses with logic and faith in reason. There
are, however, signs that our courts are reverting to a respect
for a ‘natural law’ based not so much upon a Ciceronian
faith as upon a reasoned philosophy of social well-being.
However, if Cicero had adopted the pragmatic doctrine of
law that is so popular to-day, it is quite certain that Roman
law would not have grown into the great code that later
became the text-book of the civilized world. And, whatever


we may think of his originality as a jurist, when we survey
the story of juristic aberrations, we come to see clearly how
much the world owes to his firm idealism, his wide sym-
pathies, and his sound good sense.
In his political career, in which he took some pride,
Cicero often proved ineffective. He was over-sensitive to
criticism and wasted time in apologies, while his more
successful opponents, like good politicians, were mustering
their forces and rewarding their henchmen. It was this
trait that betrayed him into reprehensible weakness when
in 56 Caesar cleverly stripped him of power. Cicero was
also too much of a scholar for political success; he looked
for historical analogies and theoretical arguments, while his
more realistic opponents dealt with men as they found them.
But the old charge that he lacked political consistency is
largely based upon our tendency to read modern conditions
into the history of that epoch. In Drumann’s day the
desertion of the government’s programme could in fact be
criticized as disloyalty to the state. Censure based upon
such conceptions is, of course, not applicable to men of the
Roman Republic. In states where the more modem party
systems have held, it has been customary to point out with
disapproval or with apologies that Cicero wavered between
the democratic and the senatorial groups. But it is well to
keep in mind that there were no party organizations with
definite programmes in his time. In a republic where the
senate was not elective and where every citizen had the
right to participate directly in legislation, there was no
need or adequate motive for parties. Even to-day party
loyalty is looked upon more and more as a mark of political
prudence rather than as a virtue. The question, however,
did not arise in this form at Rome. Men who stood for
high office announced their own programmes and gathered
for the occasion such social or economic groups to their
support as they could.
And this leads to a more serious consideration. The
very non-existence of parties made the political career of a


statesman like Cicero peculiarly difficult when he had un-
scrupulous opponents. There were no party platforms
to bear some part of the onus of political criticism. Cicero
came out with a frank statement of his programme, ready
to stand or fall by it; but Caesar chose not to do so. Caesar
formed his coalition in secret: Pompey, who could control
a large military vote, he bound to himself by certain
promises; Crassus, who was intimate with the publicans,
was brought into the coalition by other pledges; and
Clodius, who stood well with the rabble, was permitted
to whisper still further assurances to his friends. Caesar did
not always weigh the quality of the inducements that he
offered, and he did not have to stand squarely on the openly
announced programme of a party. The scrupulous states-
man was under a serious disadvantage in such a system.
More than once in his life Cicero wrote with regard to
Caesar’s reckless behaviour: T should rather die than even
entertain the possibility of committing such acts.’ The very
fact that history has expected of Cicero a degree of political
integrity never demanded of Caesar, Pompey, or Augustus,
reveals how far he stood above the men of his time.
However, the main point is that Cicero, whether nomi-
nally a democrat or a leader of the nobility, did through
forty years of rapidly shifting party alinements keep his eye
fixed upon one high ultimate goal: a republic as liberal as
considerations of state would permit. From the time when
he alone dared attack Sulla’s powerful favourite, through
his disclosures ofVerres’ crimes, the frustration of Catiline
in 63, the rejection of Caesar’s overtures in 59 and again
in 50, and on to the final contest with Antony that cost him
his life, his chief aim remained the same throughout. His
weapons were not always the same: a general does not
persist in using rifles when his opponent uses machine guns
and tanks. In Sulla’s day and the decade following, when
the chief danger was aristocratic tyranny, Cicero saw salva-
tion in a greater degree of democracy. When senatorial
exploitation of subject peoples led to dishonesty, he advo


cated raising the equestrian nobility to a position of counter-
influence. In Catiline’s day, when the danger lay in un-
scrupulous demagogy, he threw his support to the Senate
and did his best to aline property with it in order to build
a strong party of responsible men. Under Clodius and the
first triumvirate he saw clearly that democracy cleverly
manipulated would end in autocracy, and so he became all
the more an ardent believer in conservative leadership. But
he also had clear enough vision to see that, since the ulti-
mate source of power must be recognized as resting in the
electorate, the direct participation of the people in govern-
ment must not be refused. The remedy that he proposed
against Caesarism was education through the personal
leadership of a high-minded unofficial rector , in other words
through the direction of public opinion. By it he meant not
only that the populace should be educated politically, but,
as he reveals in his speech ‘de Provinciis Consularibus’, that
the political masters like Caesar should be made to feel that
power implied obligation. It is quite clear that Caesar
pondered carefully the purport of these writings, for when
he reached supreme power a few years later he revealed
very unusual sensitiveness to the opinions of Cicero.
After the victory of Caesar, Cicero perceived that his
faith in a system of educating populace and leaders was in
part misplaced. The people had proved to be the tools of
Caesar. If the republican constitution was to be restored
after Caesar’s death, restoration must be accomplished by
means of a strong senate, and, accordingly, in the de Legibus,
Cicero writes like a confirmed aristocrat. Later, also, after
Caesar’s death, when Cicero once more assumes leadership
in the state to save it from tyranny, he relies wholly upon
the old aristocratic machinery of senate and centuriate
assembly. Judged from the point of view of parties, there-
fore, Cicero may seem to have followed a wavering course,
but his ultimate goal, the welfare of the republic, he kept
steadily in view. It was the shifting of parties and the
action of less scrupulous leaders about him, men like Sulla,


Catiline, Clodius, Caesar, Pompey, and Antony, that com-
pelled him again and again to alter his tactics and party
affiliations.
Our philosophic vocabulary is largely a creation of
Cicero’s; yet he was not a philosopher. He did not always
comprehend the more abstruse arguments of metaphysics,
and the subject of ethics interested him not so much in its
genetic and dialectic aspects as in its practical bearing.
And yet, late in life, he undertook to introduce his fellows
into all the problems of these subjects by way of para-
phrased summaries of the main systems. These philo-
sophical essays are, of course, the least original part of
Cicero’s work. A whole volume was frequently produced
in the short period of four or five weeks, and as he wrote
or dictated, he selected what he needed from the Greek
rolls that lay open before him. His own contribution con-
sisted at times only in his exertion of personal judgement,
in selecting or rejecting, and in adding native illustrations.
What is the worth of this work? Cicero places but small
value upon it. He apologizes for his method more than
once, and warns the reader against the mistake of calling
the work new. He even excuses it by saying that he does
it partly in a desire to entice his fellow Romans into the
subject by easy stages, partly in a desire to find a saving
distraction for himself at a time of political disappoint-
ment.
However, we must not underrate Cicero’s share in these
books. He was not completely a tiro when he wrote these
dialogues. He had seriously studied philosophy with the
best masters available more than thirty years before he
composed them, and had in the meantime kept up his
interest in the subject by wide reading. He had entertained
a distinguished philosopher in his house for many years;
he had frequently read in Faustus Sulla’s library, where
many of the unpublished manuscripts of Aristotle and
Theophrastus were kept. He had constant access to the
richly stocked bookshelves of Atticus, Lucullus, Cato, and


Varro, and his own study was well provided with philo-
sophical works. Critics are in danger of making mistakes
who take too literally Cicero’s modest evaluation of these
volumes, or assume errors in them on a priori grounds.
Cicero was himself tricked into some confusion by the text-
books on the subject that were current in his day.
To the thinkers of the Middle Ages and the early renais-
sance, who did not have access to the earlier sources,
Cicero’s philosophical dialogues were full of illumination
and suggestion, and they played a decided role in humaniz-
ing philosophy in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Without them the western world would not have been
ready to comprehend the libraries of Greek thought that
came westward during the renaissance. Even Copernicus
confessed that it was from a citation found in Cicero that
he formed the idea of the earth’s revolutions. Furthermore,
these essays are our only source for much of the lost post-
Aristotelian work. But apart from our gratitude, the works
themselves are of considerable interest because we can dis-
cover from them the spirit in which a cultivated Roman
of the Republic approached the problems they discuss.
For one illustration of this I need only refer to the de
Divinatione.
Cicero lived, of course, in one of those periods—and they
have been many—when philosophy had run into a cul-de-
sac. Plato’s idealism had temporarily lost its persuasiveness
for minds trained to distrust imaginative reason. Aristotle
had revealed the fascination of scientific analysis, but his
successors did not possess the tools with which to demon-
strate that science could reach valid conclusions. Zeno,
‘that petty Phoenician’, as Cicero calls him, took refuge in
a mysticism that did not appeal to the genuine Greek mind.
The sceptics found it easy to disclose the flaws and incon-
clusiveness of all systems. Cicero, sane and objective, after
trying various teachers in his youth, did the very charac-
teristic thing of concluding that no system was final, and,
true to the maxim that each man finds the philosophy


congenial to his temperament, discovered an agreeable
atmosphere in the new Academy. Dubitando ad veritatem
pervenimus. But that was not the usual procedure in his day.
When philosophy and science are stalled in blind alleys,
men usually take refuge not in further search but in a
sedative faith. We have had illustrations enough of that
procedure in the scientists of the last two decades. It took
some fortitude to be a neo-Academic, and Cicero’s course
was not a popular one. Posidonius came from the East
with a new cloak of Oriental mysticism to make Pantheism
more attractive. All the way from Mesopotamia the de-
based pseudo-science of astrology was winning converts.
Neo-Pythagoreanism with its allegory, Orphism and Diony-
siac symbolism, were all rife in the Hellenic world and
invading Rome. Cicero —except for an aberration of a few
weeks when under an unusual emotional strain—stood
quite firm.
The de Divinatione is uninteresting and no longer of service
to us, but it is characteristic of Cicero, and reveals his sanity
of mind and what we may perhaps call his Occidental
spirit. Since he was an augur and valued the office because
of its political implications, it required courage to question
the old institution of divination. He had his own college
against him, the history of his country, and among philo-
sophers the great names of Pythagoras and Socrates, Plato
and Aristotle, and practically all the Stoics, including his
own friend Posidonius. Even a man as scientifically minded
as Caesar did deference to omens. It is somewhat surprising,
therefore, that a man as temperamental as Cicero should
have resisted the attraction of mysticism. But he considered
the matter historically and logically and rejected it. Because
of such devotion to reason, Voltaire could say of him with
enthusiasm; ‘we honour Cicero who taught us how to
think.’
Cicero’s essays on the rhetorical art, written over a period
of more than thirty years, show a wide diversity of content
and of purpose. In his youth Cicero was prone to attribute


his success to the advice of Greek teachers and his diligent
efforts to heed this advice. He also entertained the illusion,
derived from Aristotle, that style could be analysed and
that this analysis could be made into an exact science.
He therefore wrote out in Latin a compendium of the rules
of rhetoric that he had learned from his masters. These
were numerous: the teachers had apparently elaborated
their course of instruction in order to protract the lucrative
period of tuition. It was this compendium, called de Inven-
tione, that made up the substance of so many medieval
books of rhetoric. But Cicero’s style is in no important way
explained by it.
In general he had learned from his teachers, besides
volumes of useless lists of tropes, a pertinent lesson or two;
that an effective speaker may well command more than
one style; that the nature of the theme, the occasion, and
the quality of the audience should in some measure deter-
mine the diction, the weight, the speed, and the degree
of elaboration of his address; and he had also learned to
respect the doctrine that, if the occasion permitted, prose
deserved artistic care as well as verse. Most of what he
learned that was advantageous to him, however, his own
common sense would have suggested, and this his own bril-
liant endowment might well have brought to fruition. For
example, when he was progressing toward the higher offices
of state, the aristocratic senate was still the great debating
centre of legislative activity, and the courts were largely in
the control of senators who respected cultural ideals. His
audiences, therefore, were such as to stimulate his powers
of fulsome and ornate expression. That, rather than formal
doctrine, explains his style.
But presently Caesar put an end to these laboratories of
aristocratic rhetoric. Caesar’s first act in his consulship
was to introduce into the senate-house stenographers who
issued brief abstracts of the speeches delivered, thereby
revealing to the populace the gist of the elaborate harangues
without their adornments. This was Caesar’s way of show


ing that oratory hampered him and must be bridled. Then
Cicero came to the defence of the old style in his three
books de Oratore, published while Caesar was absent in Gaul.
Here he wisely paid less attention to rules and emphasized
rather the needs of a rich culture, based upon wide reading
in history, philosophy, and literature, and the development
of the speaker’s natural endowments. The rules that he
admits are useful chiefly as hints to young men who have
not yet discovered their own capacities. In reading this
work one feels that it is essentially an apologia for his faith
in artistic prose.
But the times were against him. More and more the
commands of Caesar and Pompey decided issues without
regard for persuasive arguments to the contrary. A new
law limited the time of speeches even in the courts. Several
young men, like Calvus and Calidius, conforming to the
exigencies of the times, adopted the concise and plain
delivery of the Atticists. Finally Caesar imposed his dicta-
torship, under which there was no longer any occasion for
debate, for when Caesar had spoken, he invited neither
discussion nor rejoinder. Cicero did not surrender at once.
He now wrote a survey of Roman oratory, which, though
one of our most important documents for Roman cultural
history, is not wholly objective. The introduction, signifi-
cantly addressed to Brutus, complains about the scant
opportunity for prepared speeches under the new regime,
and this gives the clue at least to the mood in which the
book was written. It is not unfair to say that the prime
purpose of the volume was to show how Roman spoken
prose had grown into an effective and artistic instrument,
how, just in so far as the statesmen of Rome had observed
artistic ideals, that prose style deserved study and attention,
and how the Atticistic theory was indolently accepting the
consequences of Caesar’s tyranny and aiding in the destruc-
tion of a great art.
Brutus did not admit that he was convinced. Perhaps the
very fact that he had recently accepted an important office


from Caesar made him hesitate to lend his approval to the
implied criticism of the dictator. At any rate he merely
suggested that Cicero should write a more explicit exposi-
tion of his views on style, and this Cicero did at once in his
Orator. This is not a text-book of rules; it is an enthusiastic
description of what, in his view, the ideal spokesman of
republican statesmanship should be in order to meet all
reasonable occasions in the senate, in the courts, and before
the people, and it particularly attempts to expose the in-
adequacy of the Atticistic method. That is Cicero’s last
considered discussion of the subject. Two years later, after
Caesar’s death, Cicero once more assumed leadership in
the senate, and in his fourteen speeches against the Antonian
party, he employed all the resources of his elaborate art.
But the reader who knows his history cannot but feel that
Cicero here betrays a consciousness of a certain ineffective-
ness. The Senate, accustomed for fifteen years to expert
planning and matter-of-fact address, proved unresponsive.
The ground had been cut from under him. After the death
of the Republic, Ciceronian rhetoric never again found a
suitable palaestra at Rome.
Now when we turn from his rhetorical theories to his
speeches, it would of course be foolish to credit Cicero alone
with the shaping of such prose as we find there. When we
compare them with the indecisive pedestrian ramblings of
the century and a half before his day, we can hardly believe
our ears, but the change is not all due to him. In the inter-
vening time the language itself, harmonious, abounding in
organ notes, malleable and dignified in structure, had been
enriched in a thousand ways. Great statesmen had moulded
it to be their instrument of persuasion in discussing all the
weighty problems of a world state. For both the men and
the matter must be considered in the final account. Nor
may we forget the inspiring spectacle of the Forum itself.
Here was the centre of culture and of power, such as no
other city square has ever been. What a statesman said
there echoed to the four corners of the world. The speaker


knew that the citizens before him expected from him the
decisive word by which they could worthily vote and legis-
late. He even knew that the Latin language was moulded
there in the Forum, and that his speech and the other
speeches delivered from that tribunal were determining the
language of the city and thence of the towns and in time
of the provinces. The Forum in fact was the schoolmaster
of a world empire. The statesmen who spoke there daily
during the last century of the Republic were well aware
of this, and they shaped their speech accordingly. In that
knowledge lay a stimulus to supreme effort, to genuine
creation.
And this is a creative process that operated in Cicero’s
own speeches. In studying his responses to surrounding
influences, we soon comprehend that even his best attempts
to analyse and explain good style fall short of explaining
his own. He frequently breaks his own rules: he seldom
cares whether he arranges the various parts of an oration
according to the regulations sponsored by him, for he adapts
them to the needs of the occasion; vivid imagery occurs
quite as frequently in what he calls examples of the plain
style as in the speeches that he considers elaborate—
naturally because his picture-making power is always alert;
he employs a Greek grammarian to tell him what prose
rhythms should be according to the Greeks, and then,
quite disregarding what he has been told, continues to
use the rhythms that his own sensitive ear had long
before perceived to be natively congenial to Latin quantity
and accent. He also seems only half aware of the fact that
his style does not in any essential detail conform to Greek
rules. The famous orators of Greece had spoken to the
populace of Athens, whereas Cicero spoke before the Senate,
conscious of its responsibilities in governing a world; a very
large number of the Greek speeches dealt with private
cases in law, while Cicero’s were largely of wide political
import; the rules of Greek text-books were drawn up by
Graeculi who taught the young in cities no longer of


importance, but the welfare of the whole civilized world
was concerned when Cicero arose to speak. The Greek
language was versatile as only English has been since, but
Latin could be more sonorous, more stately, and its
rhythms, dependent upon a more exigent interplay of
quantity and accent, were more vibrant.
All this is true, but in weighing Cicero’s style we may
not leave out of account the man himself. We do well to
bear in mind the wide cultural training he had given him-
self—the study of philosophy, history, dramatic poetry, law,
and politics that enriched his mind with principles, ana-
logies, arguments, and the stabilizing wisdom of all the past.
And we must give due weight to his personal endowment:
his quick human sympathy, his generous nature, his capacity
for friendship that called forth immediate response from
his audience, the celerity of his thought, his wit, his pene-
trating imagination that met the listener’s fervour more
than half-way, his ready command of a varied and copious
vocabulary that obeyed not only his intellect but also a
delicate sense of sound and rhythm, and above all his alert
sensitiveness to the deep human instinct for right and
justice.
Cicero’s career ended —so it seemed—in complete failure.
The last great speech ever delivered in the Roman senate-
chamber fell on listless ears. His entreaties for the Republic
were met by a march on Rome. The triumvirs gave no
least thought to his reasoned arguments for a government
of justice based upon the interests of the governed. Greed,
cruelty, and lust for power could not endure the sight of
him, and he was murdered. He had outlived the Republic
and its principles. He was not even accorded the halo of
a martyr when the Stoic patriots of a later day heroized
their favourites, Cato and Brutus. But slowly the new
generations found his books again. In the dark days of the
Neronian tyranny historians began to comprehend what
Cicero had fought to save Rome from. His letters were
ferreted out and published, and his essays and orations


established their worth. Cicero’s work has been a living
force from that time, not because of the accident that he
was murdered for advocating a policy that his world
rejected, but because he had faith in ideals the worth of
which will always be recognized by men of sanity, since
they lie at the very root of human nature.


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD
BY JOHN JOHNSON, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


ANNUAL MASTER-MIND LECTURES
HENRIETTE HERTZ TRUST
Already Published
CERVANTES AND SHAKESPEARE, by J. Fitzmaurice-Kelly. is. net.
BEETHOVEN, by W. H. Hadow. Out of print.
SPINOZA, by W. H. Sorley. Out of print.
LEONARDO DA VINCI, by C. J. Holmes. Out of print.
DANTE, by Prof. E. G. Gardner, is. 6d. net.
ADAM SMITH, by W. R. Scott, is. 6d. net.
ARISTOTLE, by John Burnet, is. net.
ERASMUS’ SERVICES TO LEARNING, by P. S. Allen. Out of
print.
FRANCIS BACON, by Prof. A. E. Taylor, is. 6d. net.
SIR ISAAC NEWTON, by C. D. Broad, ss. net.
PLOTINUS, by the Very Rev. W. R. Inge, C.V.O. is. 6d. net.
ROGER BACON, by A. G. Little, ss. net.
HUGO GROTIUS, by R. W. Lee. js. 6d. net.
VIRGIL, by J. W. Mackail. is. net.
Published for the BRITISH ACADEMY
By HUMPHREY MILFORD, OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON, AMEN HOUSE, E.C.
