

CINDERELLA.
Manual of Political Economy
FOR
By a Member of the Sydney School of Arts.
defeated buj
THOMAS CARLYLE, HENRY GEORGE,
JOHN RUSKIN, V ALFRED WALLACE,
And Add Loyers of Freedom.
FREE MEN,
Stjdnetj:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 490, KENT STREET,
Close to the Cathedral,




CINDERELLA.
Manual of Political Economy
FOE
FREE MEN,
By a Member of the Sydney School of Arts.
Respectfully dedicated by tt|e A L| th or to
THOMAS CAELYLE, HENEY GEOEGfE,
JOHN EUSKIN, V ALEEED WALLACE,
And All Loyees of Eeeedom.
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 490, KENT STREET,
Close to the Cathedral.




CaftU of (foments*
Part I.—DE-STRUOTIVE
1. —Letter to Working Men of all English-Speaking page.
Countries 1
2.—Letter to Professors of the Science of Political
Economy ..... . . 11
3. —Letter to Henry George ...... 27
4. —Letter to the Reader 63
Part lI.—OON-STEUCTIYE,
I.—Political Economy for Free Men .... 73
2.—Letter to the Reader 75
3. —Letter to existing No-Governors .... 83


JOSEPH COOK & CO.,
PRINTERS,
490, KENT STREET, SYDNEY.


* p E p/\G E. *
A Manual of Political Economy for Free Men has never
yet been written.
In this pamphlet I propose to examine the imposing
intellectual structure of English Political Economy.
This structure, shaken by the tornadoes of Carlyle’s divine
wrath, riddled, shattered and dismantled by the artillery of
Euskin’s mighty logic, levered from its foundations by the
pen of Henry George, I propose to take in my hand, for it
is as light as air and as empty as an egg-shell, and to crush
beneath my heel into the mire of eternal infamy and
oblivion, in the sight of all men.
That done, I will write down the Alpha and Omega of the
Art of Government of Free Men by Free Men.
THE AUTHOE.
The ■writer of this booh wishes to ca)l the attention or au
thinking men to the (so-called) Science of Political
Economy.
The author of “Cinderella” strongly dislikes publicity,
hut is willing to face this inconvenience in the discharge of
his duty as a citizen.
He claims to have harmonised the teachings of Henry
George and John buskin, and to show that Rent and Interest
are alike detrimental to the cause of true labour.
Formerly a Cobdenite Freetrader, then a true Freetrader or
Single Taxist, he has proceeded by abstract reasoning to the
most advanced Socialism—meaning by Social! m the exten-
sion of the functions of Government to the department of
daily ndustry.
He is willing to meet anv economic thinker in or out of
Sydney before a limited audience of students of the subject,
and to maintain the two following propositions:
(1.) All Wealth is produced by Labour;
(2.) Tiade (= Production arid Distribution by Laissez-
Faire) is impossible in a State.
In order that it may not be thought that the writer of
f * .Cinderella ” is actuated by pecuniary motives, he begs to
state that his theory of Wages is that a man is entitled to
the wage given in his own trade or profession, but if at any
time he has the misfortune to feel called upon to write a
book, all that is “made” by the sale of the hook is the
printer’s wages. CINDERELLA, care Joseph Cook and Son,
Printers, near Cathedral.




AUTHOR’S NOTE.
It was my original intention to send this book to London for
publication, and I had finished it off with reference to that end.
But on second thoughts and the representation of friends, I have
decided that it would be better to get it into circulation at once. A
judicious friend to whom I showed the manuscript inquired, “ Why
put on so much war-paint 1" My reply was and is that I am a
descendant of the ancient Britons who used that cosmetic. I most
sincerely apologise to every person who thinks that the author of
“ Cinderella ”is unduly bellicose or arrogant. Asa debater that is
my nature. When I argue my brow contracts and my fist descends,
not on the opponent but upon the table. I humbly venture to pre-
dict, however, that when the facts herein revealed by logical analysis
reach the Reader’s mind, no matter how much he may dislike the
writer’s dogmatic style, he will be forced to admit that the language
at once loses its emphatic nature, becoming “ stale flat,” but I hope
not “unprofitable.”
I make no apology however to public men or thinkers who know
that declamation alone soon “ frets and struts ” itself out. Any
Reader who has been brought up on the “ small beer ” of school
political economics (so-called), had better think twice before attempt-
ing to digest the “ strong meat ”of Logic. Logic is a double-edged
sword that either achieves the death of the antagonist or penetrates
the wielder’s hand. It is dangerous to play with edged tools.
The scope of the pamphlet is this :
In the first letter I write down a few plain considerations which
the ordinary wayfaring man may excogitate behind a team of
bullocks. By no verbal magic or magic infernal can any other con-
clusion be arrived at than that if a man does not work for his own
living and yet lives, some one else works for Mm.
In the second letter I take up the current political economy and I
show that there is a manifest absurdity upon the first page. Briefly
my position is this. All economists, from Adam Smith to Henry
George (not excepting Mill, Fawcett and Ruskin), have in arguing
about “ capital,” uniformly assumed that the “ capital ” spoken of is
in the possession of a third person distinct both from the Labourer
and Land-Lord. This fallacy vitiates every paragraph of every
extant political economy of the Adam Smith-Mill-Fawcett School. Of
other political economies I know nothing. The modern socialistic
school I have not had the opportunity of reading.
With the elimination of this imaginary and inconceivable third
person Interest is at once revealed in all its hideous and sinful ugli-
ness. All surmises and uncertainties about the nature and origin of
Commercial Interest are completely and for ever dissipated. If
possible, assurance is made doubly sure in the next letter where
the term “ savings ” as we understand it, is analysed.


In the third letter I investigate the nature of money, under which
term has lurked perhaps all the error which in the text I have
ascribed to the word ‘ capital.’ Taking a definition of Money which
none can dispute, I show that in abstract economy Money cannot by
any conceivability be a “ currency,” Money could be a Credit-Token
but it could not by any device be got to ‘ run ’ in circulation.
‘ Price,’ therefore, or the cost of a commodity as reckoned in Money,
is unattainable, unimaginable, impossible. Trade-through-Money at
once vanishes. I then take Trade-through-Barter and prove that
Trade in this the ultimate sense is impossible in a State, because it is
diametrically opposed to Intelligence and consequently to Freedom.
Next, analysing the competitive and co-operative instincts of man, I
find that Trade as we have it presents a curious phenomenon. It is
an Arrested Growth or Abortion. The historical cause of this arrest
of development is then sought and found both in the Medieval and
Modern English Market. A few current economic topics and terms
are dealt with, and the subjects of ‘ savings ’ and English money are
dealt with together, English Money is shown not to be a ‘ currency,’
nay to fulfil the exactly opposite function of true economic money.
Pacts go to show with overwhelming force that a man’s power over
labour being known, his actual use of the coin of the realm is less as
his known power is greater, and that in the actual amount of the
money-purchase the coins may be said to be least used where money
in the abstract would be most required, namely, in large purchases.
English Money is thus seen to be practically used only among
strangers, that is, between those who do not hnow and therefore dis-
trust one another’s power over labour, A millionaire pays a cabman
a half-sovereign because it is not convenient to the cabman to wait
for a cheque, but the millionaire pays for a house merely by his
signature which re-arranges figures in a bank-book.
Lastly the prevalent idea of money-circulation is shown to be a
confused consciousness of a great current or tide of legal or English
economic force rushing with vast volume and with maximum speed
from the Workers to the Idlers. Thus everything is traced to politi-
cal inequality, which acting through the English economic law (that
is through English Law) of Eent-Interest, creates a perpetual vacuum
(in an approximate sense) in the pockets of the Worker and gives to
the Tokens of the Token-Holders all their force. I then rapidly close
the subject, leaving it so simplified that henceforth every child will
know by the age of seven all that can be known about Industrial
Economy. In fact in the case of more promising children I think
that the subject might not injudiciously be introduced when the
young student is still at the breast.
In my fourth letter I make an appeal that will be heard throughout
all civilised countries. Hysterical people had better omit this chapter.
Coming to the Con-Structive portion of my work, I write down in
a page all that can be known of the Art of Government to the end of
time.
The succeeding letter to the Header deals briefly with the self-
evident propositions of the Manual.
In the next letter, which concludes the series, and is addressed to
all members of all existing Governments or, as I rather disrespectfully
call them, No-Governments, I enter Downing-street and show how
by the wand-wave of Freedom and by initiation of intelligent
Government, all the misery of a country, or of an empire, or of a


world, may be removed in five or six hours ! The peculiar feature of
this Reform is that the Lion of Vested Interests dares not so much as
lash his tail. No man can or will dare to stand up and say, “ I have
a Vested Interest in Human Life.” Nay, so far from lashing his tail,
I am firmly convinced that the Lion of Vested Interests will mag it
with supreme delight at the prospect of being free from all care and
able to co-operate with fellow-citizens for the general good. Then I
throw out a suggestion by which the three most distinguished citizens
of England may form a permanent Committee or Government-
Council, thereby giving to the British Empire what it has not yet
either in whole or in any part— a Constitution.
Finally I wave my hat and cry God Save the Queen and Prosper
the Empire ! Advance Australia along the path in which alone
Advancement is possible for a Nation—the Way of Truth (or Justice)
which alone leads towards (Civil) Life.
Dieu et Mon Droit.


The simple wish to use the bodily powers of
another person as a means of ministering to one’s
own ease or pleasure is doubtless the foundation of
Slavery and as old as human nature.
— Maine's Ancient Lam.


LETTEE—I.
To All Plain Working Men of all English-speaking
Countries.
Fellow Workmen,
I want you to follow me into a few consider-
ations respecting the nature of modern English Society,
meaning by Society, the State or Community in which we
live. Without the assistance of any science of Political
Economy I think we can easily establish the simple propo-
sition that all wealth is produced by labour. I mean this not
as a loose, vague or general form of expression for the
underhung fact but as absolutely the most correct statement
that can be made upon the subject. Even in works on
Political Economy this is not denied. We are told that
there are three factors or requisites in the production of
Wealth—land, labour and capital. But land is plainly a
condition , capital an instrument, and Labour a Human Being.
It is the shocking English in which most of these works
are written that has obscured the truth of this proposition.
"You will admit, then, that all wealth is produced by-
labour.
Let us now look at the structure of Society. I find, first
two great classes—Labourers and Non-Labourers—
Workers and Idlers.
The Idlers are said to live upon their means, but there
are some very inaccurate expressions current in popular
literature that sadly need mending. By no magic of words
or darkening of counselcan any other truth be arrived at than
that the Idlers live not on their means but on the Workers.
Nothing is plainer than that if the Idlers do not work for
their own living, their fellow-citizens work for and serve
them. Consider, next, that for every member of society
who passes from the toil to the leisure side of life there is
not only the loss of a worker, but the dead-weight of a
consumer. To be more explicit, the effect is more than


the mere dead-weight of the idle consumer, if there be any
antecedent co-operation and division of labour. If three
men live together, each supporting himself and completely
satisfying his own wants, given equal wants and equal
powers and like opportunities, the day’s labour will be the
same. Let one withdraw to the leisured class, and the
labour of the others is increased by one-half. Lour hours
work, say, supported each man, now six hours will be the
labourer’s day. The leisured individual’s wants are here
supposed to remain as simple as before, which is a very
unusual and perhaps unjustifiable supposition. If there
be any antecedent co-operation and division of labour,
the organisation is thrown out of gear, and the loss to the
workers is more than two hours’ extra work.
Searching further we find a more extraordinary line of
demarcation dividing the workers themselves into money-
makers and wealth-producers. The money-makers do not
make money as the name would lead us to suppose. The
manufacture of money is a strict Government monopoly
invaded by any one at his peril. ‘ Coiners ’ are regarded
as engaged in a nefarious business and rightly so. But
the economic effect is the same, whether you actually make
the money in a coiner’s den, or whether you ‘ make ’ it on the
Stock Exchange. Money ‘ makers ’ are money-gainers.
Money is a wealth-token. Wealth-tokens are issued by
the State, and each Token is a stamped metal document
demanding labour. This, roughly, is Buskin’s definition.
And much light will be thrown upon our researches if we
remember, too, what Buskin has pointed out, that the
power of a sovereign in one man’s pocket over the labour
of another man depends upon the absence of a sovereign in
the pocket of the latter. This is a most important con-
sideration for it is absolutely immaterial whether you issue
the Tokens solely to one man, or whether by some public
machinery, the Tokens being in circulation, you contrive that
there shall always be a vacuum in the pocket of the other. This
is the pith and marrow, the heart and soul of the economic
question of the day. We find then that of the Workers
a vast number ‘ whom no man can number,’ make it their
daily business to gain or acquire Wealth-Tokens, without
so much as giving a thought to the impropriety of the
action. For it is plain that given a certain number of
Tokens in circulation at a given time, the more one has the
less for the rest. Also if wealth can only be obtained through
Tokens some who cannot get Tokens will actually have to
go without wealth. Also, by our simple proposition, All
wealth is produced by labour—it is plainly most dis-


honourable to spend laborious days in acquiring the
Tokens when the same amount of labour would produce
much wealth. Dishonourable and wasteful I should have
said, dishonourable in that you present Tokens for wealth
produced by others and wasteful of wealth-creating oppor-
tunities.
It is plain now that the ultimate Wealth-producers must
be having a very discouraging time of it. Apart from the
increased difficulty of getting Tokens demanding or com-
manding the wealth produced by themselves, the Wealth-
producers have to support the huge class of Money-makers
in addition to the Idlers pure and simple. Because
Token-acquiring will not feed, clothe or lodge an individual.
Let us come now to the Wealth-producers themselves.
Are they organised and directed so that the supply of so
many empty mouths beside their own becomes a light thing?
By no means. They are neither organised nor directed.
There is a principle called by a French name which means
Go-as-you-Please. The Wealth-producers go as they
please, but before you can fully understand what that
involves I must detain you for a moment to be more
explicit about Wealth. Wealth is the sum of all good
things. Good or valuable things are moral, mental and
material. Of material good things, food takes first place,
then clothing, fuel and houses. Beyond these there is an
infinite number of good things which may be tested as good
by asking “Do they satisfy a right desire?” The
gradation of importance is determined by the standard of
necessity. Things good at one time are no-good at another.
If a ship is sinking, all labour should be at the pumps. A
waxed moustache or a criticism on the Pentateuch or a
spirited foreign policy becomes no-good if it be persisted
in at such a time. The claims of life are paramount.
Mental and moral wealth are easily exemplified. The
teacher imparts Wealth or Wellth to the pupil’s mind, the
clergyman imparts Wellth to the hearer’s soul, the
physician communicates Wellth to the patient’s body. To
return to the producers of Wealth.
We are now so far advanced as to come face to face
with the condition of things which has appalled and
horrified all thinkers. Of this condition, unanimously con-
demned by Carlyle, Buskin and George, though not by all
on the same grounds, Statesmen take no heed. I spoke just
now of the absence of organisation among the Wealth-
producers. There is an apparent organisation of Industry
which has for its object the strict control of Wealth-Tokens,
but such an organisation is plainly against Labour. In early


times Wealth-producers could feed, clothe, lodge and warm
themselves incidentally as it were. But Industry is now
so thoroughly directed in reference to Tokens that the
Wealth-producers must show the Tokens or perish.
Whether the Tokens which a Wealth-producer receives for
a day’s work will ‘ command ’ a fair subsistence is nobody’s
concern. Laissez-faire! Go-as-you-please! Go-as-you-
please !
In this Go-as-you-please there is a law, strange as it
may sound. Just imagine the state of an Astronomer’s mind
if the planets should adopt a policy of Laissez-faire.
Imagine the bewilderment of a Colonel or a Business-
Overseer if those under his control should go-as-they-
please. However this law is called the law of Supply and
Demand, ‘ Demand ’is carefully explained in the Mill-
Faucett books to mean effective demand. You may be a
Wealth-producer or willing to produce Wealth, and your
wife and family may be starving, but your ‘ demand ’ for
food is not effective. ‘ Demand ’is limited then to Token-
Demand. Now surely if there be any law of Token-
Demand it would not amount to much more than the
determining causes of the course of a Token in circulation.
We shall subsequently find the law upon this subject very
simple. Now for the appalling feature of the situation. It
is the mere caprice of the Token-Holders that determines the
channels of industry !
The Token-Holders command and direct the activities of
the Wealth-producers. Thus there can be no gradation
observed in the scale of good things. Tokens must le had
and Wealth-producers must therefore supply the capricious
commands of the Holders of the Tokens. Take an example.
I will admit fine lace, which ruins the eyesight, as among
good things on the supposition that men or women would
undertake the manufacture of that article if free not to
undertake it. Fine lace then is a good thing, for the sake
of argument. If under blind Laissez-Faire a worker be
drafted into the lace manufactory merely to get Tokens in
order to live, by his or her labour thus abstracted from the
main wealth-producing industries (namely the industries
connected with the production of food, house, fuel, clothes),
the cost of those necessaries is raised and consequently the
‘ price,’ which is the cost reckoned in Tokens, is raised also.
Therefore whilst a Labourer is engaged in the manufacture
of an article of luxury or vanity, the purchasing power of
the Tokens or wages received is diminished by the very
blindness of the directing principle. Carry this line of
thought out by imagining a scale of good things beginning


with food and running on through vain or useless things,
mere No-things, into injurious or bad things. The more
Labour is diverted into the production of things low on the
scale, the dearer become the necessaries of life. This to
the Wage-worker whose Tokens are few and far between
is a serious matter. Is any precaution taken in the
interests of the Wealth-producer or Honest Wage-worker ?
None. Laissez-faire! Laissez-faire! To sum up. Under
the fearful odds already enumerated the Wealth-producer is
not merely not directed, he is ?wfsdirected.
So far I have endeavoured to keep to one principle
of classification. There remains a nondescript legion
“ thick as leaves in Vallombrosa ” of Workers and
Non-workers to be distributed over these three classes.
(1.) The Leisured Class may have myriads of dependents
lawful and unlawful from private secretaries to mistresses,
and all these according to their supply of Tokens direct
the labour of the Wealth-producer. (2.) The more
prosperous of the Money-makers sometimes outdo the
Leisured Class in the magnificence of their establishments
and in their baleful influence over Labour. (3.) Worst of
all, side by side with the Wealth-producers or Honest
Wage-Workers, and fiercely competing with them for
Tokens are the Illth-producers or Dishonest Wage-Workers.
The Illth-producers owe their origin and existence to
Gro-as-you-please. They deliberately cater for the worst
passions of men, and offer bad things in order to obtain a
living. Below all these is a residuum of Humanity over
whom the wheels of the Gro-as-you-Please Juggernaut
drive remorselessly crushing them into the mire of beggary,
crime and prostitution.
You can form some idea, now, of the reason why men
stagnate behind counters waiting for trade. You might
as well go out and gaze up at the sun waiting for an
eclipse which the Almanac will show you cannot take
place for three months. The eclipse will occur some time
and a customer may drop in.
This pamphlet is primarily written in the interests of
the Honest Wage-Worker who must either make an
honest living or starve. It is plain that it is quite possible
that there may be at the present moment many starving
would-be wealth-producers. For science is conspicuous
by its absence from Laissez-Faire.
I write also in the interests of the Dishonest Wage-
Workers, firmly believing that they are driven into Illth-
production by NO-Grovernment.


Before closing this letter I will introduce very briefly
three distinguished Wage-Workers. The first is the
Nazarene who spake as never man spake, who went about
doing good, that is, doing good work, who earned his
living honourably and has forever dignified the Wage-
Worker’s position by the immortal saying-—“ The workman
is worthy of his hire.”
The second is St. Paul, who laboured night and day that
he might not be chargeable to any. A command issued
by St. Paul to one of his churches is the absolute be-all
and end-all of good Government. He “ commanded that
if any would not work neither should he eat.” That say-
ing is the foundation-stone of this little book and is the
Alpha and Omega of Political freedom.
The third is the greatest governing mind England ever
produced, Cromwell not excepted. John Wesley thanked
God at the close of his life that when all expenses were
paid there would not be ten pounds left. [I have, since
writing the above statement, been informed by a friend
that Wesley said, “ If I have more than ten pounds left I
shall be in the sight of God a thief and a robber.”] Was
this a subject for legitimate self-congratulation ? In order
to answer this we must consider the question of ‘ savings,’
and that will open up a further issue of the greatest im-
portance. If the position of the Wage-Worker is not
sufficiently vindicated, I may remind you that the Queen
of England is a Wage-Worker, the Prime Minister like-
wise and the Archbishop of Canterbury. I have heard
that Bishop Barry has said since his return to England
that wages were too high in Australia. Did Bishop Barry
get his own wages reduced, and by how much ? But this
by the way. Before passing on to the question of Savings
I should like to ask clergymen who invest in Brewery or
other scrip, to consider the example of those three old-time
Wage-Workers, of some of whom they must surely have
heard. I think that of all the depraved and shocking
sights presented by modern society, the worst without ex-
ception is the speculating parson. When the Exchange-
haunting clergymen have handled “ filthy lucre ” all the
week, how comes it that they appear with “ clean hands ”
on the Sunday ? Will some magic phrase, said backward,
do it, as “ Out, out, damned spot! ” ?
The question of Savings I shall be very brief upon, its
only significance being that it leads up to an issue of
crowning importance. It is plain that whatever Wealth-
Tokens you deposit in the Bank attract other Wealth-
Tokens and thus you at once belong to the disreputable


and dishonourable class of Wealth-Token-acquirers. But
there is a great moral difference though no economic dis-
tinction between hoarding and saving. Why do we save ?
Thrift is a virtue but thrift is not necessarily ‘ saving.’
John Wesley was thrifty but immense sums passed through
his hands and he saved next to nothing. It is only by
great confusion of thought that thrift ever implies saving.
Why do we save ? Because we are virtuous? Nonsense.
We save because we fear. What do we fear? Loss of
employment, beggary, starvation. Below the line separa-
ting the Leisured from the Working Classes there is a
universal dread, not without grave cause as I shall show,
of being “ discovered on the verge of starvation.” It
would seem that there is some huge machinery silent but
awful in its operation by which at any time we may be
thrown into the gulf of penury. I am speaking now of
those who are fortunate enough to get any work to do
under Laissez-Faire. It is in view of this nameless dread
and of the many instances which justify the fear, that I
inquire very seriously—ln what respect are we a Nation ?
If in Australia people willing to work must break shop-
windows to get even a prison-fare is it not time that we
gravely ask ourselves, What advantage have we of our
Citizenship ? There is no defence here made of worthless
men but of worthy and honourable men. The latest
utterance of Mr. Gladstone would seem to show that the
very idea of Nationality has completely vanished. I con-
tend that though Chinese gardeners and Italian singers
may be very excellent people yet they are not Englishmen.
I suppose that the laws of a country are made in the
interests of the inhabitants of that country. How many
hundreds of thousands have left England during the last
ten years to seek a living which should be obtainable in
England! You are an Englishman and you may leave
your country for a foreign shore, go to the Devil in fact, if
you like. Laissez-Faire ! Laissez-Faire ! You are not an
Englishman but bring money-bags and you shall be
received with open arms in England even if you come from
the Devil. Laissez-Faire ! Laissez-Faire!
Even if Go-as-you-Please were a sound principle of
Industrial Economy and all English citizens were able to
make a fair living in time of peace, what precautions are
taken for the emergencies of war ? Should not a nation be
self-supporting? If the operations of war should interrupt
a portion of the food-supplies of England’s population who
would suffer first ? The Wage-Workers. Who would
suffer last ? The Idlers. Is there any provision made for


any contingency of that nature ? Are the English and the
American and the Australian Governments (so-called)
acquainted with the degree of their dependency upon
foreigners for vital necessaries ? Do they in any way guide
or control the activities of commerce with reference to such
chances ? If you cannot drive a cart with your eyes shut,
how can you govern a kingdom by Laissez-Faire ? The
leading characteristic of all Ministries, Cabinets, Congresses
and Parliaments of the present day seems to me to be their
unparalleled ignorance of the first principles of Govern-
ment. How a Downing-Street Cabinet can issue a spirited
foreign policy when the Citizens of the Country beg barefoot
in the streets of the Capital, and a hundred thousand
prostitutes nightly earn all the wages a Laissez-Faire
No-System allows them, baffles me quite. I tell you that
every prostitute is in the sight of Heaven a potential Queen
of Yirtue, and would be an actual Queen of Virtue if it
were not for the No-Government of English Parliaments.
It was considerations of Government in this widest sense
which first led me to the investigation the results of which
I now present to you. To discover a few plain principles
of Government which might reconcile the clashing views
of clamorous politicians sometimes called Statesmen, and the
maudlin efforts of errant philanthropists sometimes called
Christians; to seek some plain and simple way of allaying
the discord and endless jargon which is styled Politics, and
to ascertain once for all whether Government of men is
possible upon the earth —these were the objects which
presented themselves to my mind. Nothing could be done
in this wide sphere until Industrial Economy, a branch, but
a most important branch of Political Economy, had been
simplified. Here a difficulty confronted me. Pent
denounced by Henry George as an infringement of the
liberties of the subject was intelligibly enough explained
in the Mill-Fawcett books. Interest approved by George,
but vehemently denounced by Euskin was not so clear.
No books seemed to throw any light upon it. Even Henry
George was vague. What is Interest ? What is Interest
—I asked myself all day long. Will you believe me,
Fellow Workmen, when I say that when the true nature
of Interest burst upon my astounded imagination scalding
tears of shame coursed down my cheeks, not so much that
I was an Englishman as that I was a man. I am about
to draw aside a curtain and to expose an innermost
iniquity which the intrepid author of “ Progress and
Poverty” has not discovered. I am about to tell a tale
that shall make the ears of Englishmen tingle for genera-


tions. lam about to show a mystery which shall cause
the public conscience of Christian England to rock itself in
uncontrolled and clamorous anguish. I have made slight
reference to a Science of Political Economy. I now propose
to examine this Science.


Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me
with a sword and with a spear and with a shield : but I
come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of
the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied.
And David put his hand in his bag and took thence a
stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead,
that the stone sunk into his forehead ; and he fell upon his
face to the earth. But there was no sword in the hand of
David. Therefore David ran and stood upon the Philistine,
and took Ms sword and drew it out of the sheath thereof and
slew him, and cut off his head therewith.
And the men of Israel and of Judah arose and shouted.


LETTER—II.
To Professors of the Mill-Fa wcett-Balaam Philosophy.
Gentlemen,
I should like to examine thoroughly the ground-
work of your Science. If I can expose a palpable confusion
of thought on your first page it will seriously affect the
remainder of your thesis. I have already drawn attention
to your bad English, but bad as your English undoubtedly
is, it is excellent compared with your Logic. Let us study
together the Science of Bed-production. Fawcett’s Manual
(page 10) deals with the requisites of Wealth-production.
With slight verbal alterations indicated by italics' I find
this passage : —“ Production {of a led) therefore, has mani-
festly two requisites—labour {of a House-maid) and appro-
priate natural agents {ledding) upon which this labour
may work. But there is a third requisite, the necessity of
which will, perhaps, not appear so self-evident. The
casual observer might be very possibly satisfied to accept
as sufficient the two requisites of production we have men-
tioned ; for it might be said, Does not {a) properly trained
House-maid acting upon suitable ledding suffice to produce
the required led? But there is something which is
requisite to the labour itself. The House-maid must be
fed. How can she be fed but by food which has been
previously accumulated ? . . . . The third requisite
of production therefore is Ireakfast .”
That may be all true but I will return to the Science of
Bed-Making again.
Has it never occurred to you, Professors, that if Political
Economy be a Science, or if it be only a body of considera-
tions involving principles too simple to claim the rank and
dignity of Science, yet, whether Science or body of plain
principles, it should be studied in the abstract ? Go with
me in imagination to a township of Free Men. Your
Political Economy written for Englishmen will not, I hope,


fail you among Free Men. It is a small township and the
only one on the planet where it is found. Emigration and
Commerce, you see, gone at one fell swoop from abstract
Industrial Economy. The inhabitants are fairly advanced
in the industrial arts and each Freeman has his own house
and grounds. In the centre of the township is the public
Mart or Market, built by united labour of Freemen and
therefore belonging to all. There is a large Concert-room,
also, built in the same way. Let us enter into the garden
of a Free Gardener, having first asked permission. Woe
betide you if you enter by “force” into a Freeman’s plot
of land, and you cannot remain by force if previously
secreted. For the Law of Property in a Free State
declares that a man's earnings or makings are his own, subject
only to use for public purposes as decreed by the Common
Council of Free Men. This Free Gardener is leaning upon
his spade. His wants are of the simplest nature, let us
suppose. Let us divide the garden-plot into five sections,
whether equal or unequal is no matter, for the five several
ends of obtaining, by exchange in the Mart, fuel, clothing,
house, food and spade-renewal. The fruit and vegetables
grown on the fuel-plot will find their way by free exchange
to the wood-cutter’s household, the product of the clothing-
plot to the tailor’s and clothier’s, that of the house-renewal
plot to the mason’s, that of the food-plot to the butcher’s
and baker’s, and that of the spade-plot to the blacksmith’s.
Let us now test a few Definitions and answer a question or
two. What regulates the size of the Free Labourer’s plot
and the hours of his toil ? They are both determined by
the simple consideration that the end of all intelligent work
is a Comfortable and Honourable Living. Where are his
Savings ? In the spade-plot. What is this Gardener’s
Property ? His Property is of two kinds. His Private
Property is the Wealth produced by his labour in the
garden. His Common Property is his right, in common
with his fellow-citizens, to the use of the Concert-room
which he helped to build not with his own hands but
which he actually built, in an economic sense, by exchange
of labour. The Gardener’s fruit, &c., helped to support
the masons, Free Masons, who were deputed by the Com-
mon Council to build said Concert-room. What is his
Capital ? His Capital is of two kinds. His Private Capi-
tal is the spade on which he is leaning, and the spade-plot
which grows spades (in an economic sense), and is intelli-
gently regulated to grow a spade so as to replace the worn-
out one. So that at any given time he only has one spade.
Exactly as the spade in use wears out the economically-


growing spade develops and comes into use by exchange
exactly when the other becomes useless. His Common
Capital is his right to the use of the Market.
Now most important question of all. What is not this
man’s property ? First, his neighbour’s wealth (His neigh-
bour will see to that.) Secondly, any claim other than an
equal common claim in public Property or Capital (The
Council or Government of Free Men will see to that.) Having
got some clear ideas about our important terms, let us leave
this Free Labourer who is rich, unspeakably rich, in the
enjoyment of a happy home and turn to the English
Labourer as I find him situated in the Mill-Fawcett
treatises. To my great concern I find two men on the
English Labourer’s plot, or rather I find the English
Labourer standing on some one else’s plot. This other
man who owns the plot is called a plot-or land-lord. Now
when I turned first from abstract to English economy I
was much struck with the fact that there were two men
instead of one. The question at once occurred—Who got
there first? As the Lord has “no visible means of sub-
sistence ” being a non-worker, I at once gave the economic
priority to the Labourer. And this inference I find to be
correct, for on page 113 of Fawcett’s manual the origin of
the Lord is clearly stated. “ Lands obtained by force had
to be defended by force ” so that the Lord forced his way
on to the English Labourer’s plot! Now let me quote
from the same page a paragraph affording endless supply
for thought. Any interpolations of my own will be in
brackets.
“As property became secure (whose property ? The
Lord’s or the Labourer’s?) and landlords felt (Have
Labourers no right to feel ?) that the power of the State (the
italics are mine) would protect them (the Lords not the
Labourers) in all the rights (rights ! eh !) of property,
every vestige of these feudal tenures was abolished (except
the tenures !) and the relation between landlord and tenant
has thus become pnrely commercial.” Notice, Professors,
the expression ‘ power of the State ’ which sounds like red-
hot Socialism. I don’t know anything about Socialism,
but venture to guess that the objectionable feature of a
Socialist’s use of the expression “ power of the State ” lies
in the fact that the ‘power ’ is usually claimed on behalf of
the Labourer. But this is only conjecture. Lastly notice,
Professors, how admirably the whole passage would have
suited Australian Bushrangers! Why not protect
Bushrangers and Burglars in all the rights of property ?


There is, however, on page 156 a paragraph which
eclipses the one just quoted. It deals with the same sub-
ject, the origin of Kent or Landlordism, and is simply the
most exquisite passage ever written. The writer is about
to discuss ‘ Profits ’ and is summarizing the previous
dissertation on Pent. This is the passage, Professors, and
I challenge Punch or any other comic paper to show a
parallel for native humour. Mark Twain himself is left
out in the cold. The italics are mine.
‘ ‘ Those who have appropriated land receive a remuneration
in the form of rent when they permit others to use the land
which has been so appropriated.” Ha ! Ha ! Ha!
‘ Receive a remuneration’! This is the richest joke ever
perpetrated in any Scientific manual. I find from the daily
papers that a man who, in a crowd, ‘ appropriates ’ a
handkerchief not belonging previously to him ‘ receives a
remuneration ’of a month’s hard labour. However, to be
serious. I think, Professors, that Henry George has dealt
very mildly and even sweetly with you. But I cannot let
you off so lightly. Your Science must be dealt with as
Science. I have already pointed out that land, capital and
Labour are called ‘ requisites ’ of production. But is not
this term ‘ requisite ’ like so many others, like ‘ appropriate ’
for instance, studiously ambiguous ? Three entirely different
elements are here confounded under one term. Is this
Scientific ? Land is a condition and in your narrow sense
of the term ‘Wealth-production,’ it is an antecedent condi-
tion. Professor Huxley likes Logic, so do I. Capital is a
product of labour, and should therefore in common
accuracy be called an instrument , and thirdly Labour is a
Sentient Being. Yet condition, instrument and Human
Being are one and all calmly dubbed ‘ requisite ’ !
Well, I will admit , land as a requisite but I cannot
by any mental gymnastics admit a landlord as a requisite.
This leap from ‘ land ’ to ‘ landlord ’ is the strangest ever
exhibited in the history of ratiocination and as a blunder
is second to none outside of your own treatises. Would it
not have been a more scientific method of discussing the
position of the landlord in the operation of wealth-produc-
tion to have said that a labourer, a spade, and a plot of
ground were essentials , but that the Lord was a disturbing
element arising from political arrangements not regarded
as unalterable ? He could then have been discussed as a
disturbing element and due allowance could have been
made for his diminution of the general stock of wealth.
Then, if at any time the Polis or State un-created Lords
instead of creating them, the Science would remain as sound


as before. Mind, I venture no opinion here upon the
Lord as a political institution. Let us be careful how we
deal with him for are we not told in Scripture that “ the
earth is the Lord’s and the fullness thereof ” ? I only deal
with him in a Scientific manner and I say that by no stretch
of language can the landlord be claimed as a requisite of
production. If a boy ‘ devours ’ pudding we do not say
“ The boy is making pudding,” on the contrary he is
making pudding disappear! So the landlord is a Leviathan
Devourer of Wealth, upon your own showing, I find that
he “he is anxious to receive the highest rent he can
obtain,” page 113. I find that the rent is determined by
competition. I find that England is pre-eminent for the
activity of its competition. “In England the commercial
spirit is so active that we are liable to forget that in some
countries various transactions are regulated by custom to a
far greater extent than by competition.” (Fawcett, page
111.) So that, briefly, in England, competition is the
custom. I find moreover that every advantage induced
either by progressive invention or increased fertility or
enlarged population ultimately goes to the landlord.
(Eawcett, passim.) This may be very nice for the landlord
and I am sure that he must have done something to deserve
it but it is scarcely advantageous to wealth-production in
the abstract. I find lastly on page 110 that the effects of
competition are beneficial to the labouring classes because “ the
active spirit of competition maintains the capital from
which the wages of the labourer are paid.” The benefit
to Labourers arising from this competition is somewhere
else said to lie in the fact that by it commodities are
cheapened. But is not this a circular argument ? This
very competition lowers wages and if at the same time it
cheapens commodities, whether the purchasing power of
the wages is increased or diminished depends upon the
consideration whether the wages fall slower or faster than
the commodities cheapen. Any child can see this, but only
Omniscience can decide the point.
I think now that we have fairly got the Landlord’s
position. Let us look at the English Labourer’s as decided
by competition. It is strictly Scientific, you know, to trace
the working of one set of causes first and to introduce
others gradually. Clear the decks for Competition!
English Labourer has a homestead like the Free Labourer,
let us suppose. Eents rise by competition of Labourers
anxious not to pay rent but to have the privilege of living.
Give the Lord fuel-plot: English Labourer and family
shiver. Eents still rising (sounds like the Noachian


Deluge) give the Lord clothing-plot, Labourer and family-
in rags, Rents up again. Throw the Wolf house-plot!
Labourer and family cower under wall or in wretched
hovel. Nothing left but spade-plot and food-plot. With-
out the one the Labourer cannot labour and without the
other he must starve. Has it ever gone as far as this ?
Professors, it is for you to answer that question. It is your
law of Pent. How can you assert that it has not ? If I
see a man kneeling upon another man and strangling him,
as I see his fingers tighten and tighten upon the victim’s
throat I should not take the opportunity of predicting that
the victim would never die ! I should think that the exactly
opposite statement, that he would never recover, would be
more to the point. Should not you, Professors ?
Let us then leave the unhoused, shivering and ragged
English Labourer working late and early to cultivate three
sections for his Lord’s use and two for himself. One quo-
tation here from Fawcett’s Manual. Mind this is the
Scientific Manual. No cheap exaggerated stories about
evictions and other landlord-pastimes such as are found in
Wallace’s Land-Nationalization. Ohno! Puskin, Wallace
and George are three irresponsible demagogues talking
about what they do not understand I This passage is from
the acknowledged Scientific Manual which mine of wisdom
you can get for the modest sum of twelve shillings! On
page 192 I find the following passage :
“There are few classes of workmen who, in many
“ respects, are so thoroughly wretched as the English agri-
cultural labourers. They are in many districts so
“miserably poor, that if they were converted into slaves to-
‘l morrow , it would he for the interest of their owners to feed
“them far better than they are fed at the present time.
“ .... Meat cannot be tasted more than once a
“ week, and those who have to exist on this scanty fare are
“more exposed than any others to the inclemency of our
“ trying climate. Such wages will not permit the slightest
“provision to be made either for sickness or the feebleness
“of old age. Throughout large agricultural districts not
“a single agricultural labourer will be found who has
“ saved as much as a week’s wages. A life of toiling and
“incessant industry offers no other prospect than a miser-
“ able old age; for when these labourers are too old to
“ work they will either be paupers in the workhouse, or
“ they must come, as suppliant mendicants, for parish
“relief. But even the physical suffering which is associ-
“ ated with their poverty is not the worst feature of their
“ condition; their ignorance is as complete as it is distress-
ing.”


So far, so bad, Professors. Al] that I have yet written
has been more ably stated again and again by distinguished
writers such as Puskin and George. I am now about to
break new ground. What we are about to discover will
blanch your faces and make your knees knock together !
We have now disposed of Pent, and I say firmly and
clearly that if Rent is not Robbery then the English
language is perfectly useless as a medium of thought.
I have hitherto concealed the fact that there is standing
on the plot of ground which the English Labourer is “ per-
mitted to use ” a third individual! A third and positively
the last! When upon my transition from abstract to
English Economy, I first discovered this person, I said
“ Surely this is the Missing Link !” This man it appears
is a Capitalist or Employer or Parmer, but although he
has three names he is, fortunately for us, not three
“ requisites’' but only one. It appears that he owns the
spade used by the English Labourer. What the Labourer
pays this astonishing person for the use of the spade is
called Interest. Now when I look up Interest and expect
to find a similar story told about this Capitalist to the one
told of the Landlord lam disappointed. I cannot find that
at such and such a time or under such and such political
conditions, the Capitalist or Spade-Owner “appropriated”
the spade and “ receives a remuneration in the form of ”
Interest “ when he permits another to use the spade which
he has appropriated,” No. Can it be that this joke is
worn out and must not be repeated ? I find instead an
obscure explanation of which the gist seems to be that on
a certain occasion James lent John or John lent James a
plane and received back as remuneration a plank, and this
plank is Interest. But jesting apart, what is Interest? I
think that it is plain that our path to a solution of this
mystery must lie in pressing the question—How came the
Capitalist by the Labourer’s spade ? Will Mr. Froude or
Mr. Freeman come to our assistance ? It is manifest that
the spade must have been “appropriated,” for how else
could the Capitalist lend it ? Can you clear this up, your-
selves, Professors ? This Capitalist is a sort of English-
economic Melchisedec, “ without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end
of life.”
My attention was first aroused on the subject of this ex-
traordinary man as I read in your books about the
competition under which rents rose like the lark, and wages
sank like lead. Given a landlord of unlimited rapacity, for
that is my rude way of referring to the landlord’s ‘ anxiety


to secure the highest rent ’ —given a landlord of unlimited
rapacity, and with first say by law, how comes it that any
share of the wealth produced by the Labourer escapes the
Landlord ? And if any does escape the landlord by what
machinery does the Capitalist get it? How does the
Capitalist get the crumbs which fall from the Landlord’s
table ? This is a very important question, for it is from
these crumbs, Professors, as you know, that the Labourer
ultimately gets his daily bread. It would appear that the
Labourer must get crumb-siftings if his daily bread
reaches him by this route. Besides, I had never heard that
Capitalists were a penurious body of men. They were said
to make huge ‘ profits ’ and to carry about with them in the
most self-denying and commendable manner a bag out of
which wages were paid. This bag is the Wage-Fund of
English Economists. If anything happens to this bag our
wages are at stake. Then I tried the definitions. A
Landlord lends land but makes nothing. A Capitalist lends
spades but makes nothing. The Labourer makes every-
thing. You see, Professors, the plot is thickening or
thinning; which is it ?
Could it be? No! Yes! Impossible! John Stewart
Mill the Logician, John Euskin the greater Logician,
Henry George who reduced the Duke of Argyle to
iniquity—All these intellectual giants miss this point!
Am I dreaming ? Are we all mad ? But plain logic is
inflexible. The Laws of Thought can be obeyed even by
an obscure Australian working-man! Presto, then,
Bogus-Employer ! The Bogus-Employer has vanished for
ever, carrying away the Bogus- Wage-Fund and the Labourer
faces the Landlord !
Be quite sure of this, Professors, for the disappearance of
this strange character will work the very mischief with
your philosophy. Let us go over the ground again, care-
fully. Is it possible that amid all this jargon of three
requisites of production, three several people have got in,
only two of whom are conceivable ? By a strange leap of
reasoning, two of your factors land and capital become
Human Beings. You say, in effect, “ Give us three
Factors (capital letter this time), and we will produce
wealth,” and lo ! one of your Factors has wealth in his
pocket all the time ! One of your Factors has a spade up
his sleeve! Surely it is the Ace of Spades !
How much simpler is my abstract economy than your
English economy ! You postulate three men and a spade.
I say, give me a Labourer and he shall make his own spade
and produce wealth. But even that is not the simplest


way in which the matter may be put. Give me a man and
he shall produce Wealth. Being a thinker (‘man’) he
shall discriminate in his production and shall contrive
after satisfying his wants with enjoyable wealth to produce
wealth that shall be serviceable in the further production of
enjoyable wealth. This serviceable wealth is capital (small
letter please), is a spade. We don’t enjoy spades, but we
use them to cultivate potatoes which we enjoy. When
Henry George recently inquired what was Adam’s capital ?
People laughed, thought it was a conundrum ! So it is,
for English Economists who postulate Economic-
Melchisedecs. Professor Huxley has recently given us his
views on Capital, and has said that in “ Progress and
Poverty ” the poverty was more conspicuous, to his mind,
than the progress. I should like to ask the Professor if
he has discovered any Wealth when wading through the
Mill-Fawcett books ?
This is the single Postulate of abstract economics,—Give
me a man and he shall produce wealth. Not even, Give
me a man and the land because, if we are to be so
particular as that, it will be necessary to postulate every
particle of matter throughout the universe and every
molecular change throughout geological aeons. -It is
enough that Labourers, like mankind in general, are
usually found standing on the ground. This Postulate is
the principle established briefly and hurriedly at the
beginning of my first letter—All wealth is produced by
Labour.
This imaginary person whom for brevity’s sake I will
call Mr. Spade was said to have his Interest as the * reward
of abstinence ’ and by this was meant I suppose that ho
was a Total Abstainer from the use of the spade. The
Landlord should have had his Pent on the same grounds
as a Abstainer from work. These two now coincide
and are one, whom we will denominate the Plutocrat or
man ‘ mighty by money.’
Surely a more gigantic error never clouded the reason
of man ! The foremost race of mankind and the foremost
members of the race, hoodwinked by a capital letter !
Write Capitalist, * capitalist ’ and the significance of the
term completely disappears. Any child can follow the
matter now. The ‘ capitalist ’ is, in the land of Freedom,
the free Labourer; but the term is never used there;
‘ capital ’ might be spoken of, but ‘ capitalist ’ never. In
England where the labourer is not free, but competes with
other labourers under penalty of starvation in offering the
highest Tribute to his fellow-citizen, the Lord, the


‘ capital ’ naturally belongs to the Lord. Such an immense
part is played in current literature by Capital that it
requires a positive effort to keep one’s attention to the fact
that capital is a spade and can do nothing. How were the
Pyramids of Egypt built ? By Capital ? Absurd. By
capital? Absurd. By whom then? By co-operating
Labourers of a dusky complexion. Who built the Ware-
houses, Factories, and Wharves of England, America, and
Australia ? Co-operating Labourers of a light complexion.
To whom did the Pyramids belong? To the Masters
of the dark-skinned Toilers. To whom do the Warehouses
of England belong ? To the Lords and Masters of the
light-skinned Labourers. What a strange delusion that a
‘ thing ’ should be thought to do things which a Being was
obviously performing! When Australian Editors warn
Labour-Unionists not to drive capital out of the country
they must mean, Do not depopulate the colony. They must
mean, Bo not go away , Labour-Unionists, and leave us in
the lurch.
Lastly, Professors, let us look at the Science of Bed-
production once more. The third requisite, which the
* casual observer ’ was warned not to overlook, is “ break-
fast.” The ‘ bedding ’is the natural agent by hypothesis.
The breakfast is a finished product ? Who got the break-
fast ? The House-Maid. Who owns the breakfast ? The
owner of the bedding. Why did the owner of the bedding
abstain from eating the House-Maid’s breakfast ? Because
he could not eat two breakfasts. That will do. Stand
down.
Now return with me to the plot which the English
Labourer is permitted to use. Let us hang our heads, for
are we not all Englishmen ? Yonder is the Landlord,
well-dressed, gold-chain, fine old English gentleman,
grasping spade. Claims spade-plot in rent. On Ms hnees
we see the English Labourer begging for mercy. His
ancestors were the stout yeomanry whom Oliver Cromwell
drilled into Ironsides, and by whose valour the fine old
English gentlemen were taught a fine lesson. Landlord
offers spade bach, at a percentage, to the highest bidder. Quotes
law of Supply and Demand. Honestly thinks it is a law
like the Law of Tides, Labourer shakes his head, wails,
retires, driven out by competition (‘ which indirectly benefits
the Labourer ’ according to Mill-Fawcett). The Labourer
who got the spade had a pound more flesh on his bones ;
said he could make half-a-cabbage per diem more Pent.
Or perhaps Labourer No. 2 was unmarried, ‘ without
incumbrances ’ or perhaps he was a Chinaman and could


live on rice or a Hottentot and live on brickdust (let us
suppose) or a Machine and live on next to nothing. For
Laissez-Faire cares not whether an Englishman he a China-
man or not. Exit Labourer No. 1 once happy and pros-
perous. Labourer and sons—tramps, beggars, thieves.
Labourer’s wife and daughters, prostitutes ! Devil’s Halle-
lujah ! Laissez-Faire! Laissez-Faire! The Amen of
Hell!
0 Professors, Shylock has been out Shylocked by the
countrymen of Shakespeare ! The ‘ dreams of Avarice ’
cannot overtake the deeds of Englishmen !
Interest! Commercial Interest! I have thee now ! I
have thee by the throat Thou Damned Dog of Hell, Thou
Bloody Cerberus ! Thou art no friendly bargain between
James and John about planes and planks ! Thou art the
essence of Pent and the quintessence of Iniquity! Thou
art Cumulative Pent! Pent thrice exacted and thrice three
thousand times exacted ! If Pent be the impoverishment
and degradation of Honest Labour then, Interest, thou art
the abomination of desolation sitting in the Holy place of
Labour!
Professors, this is a serious matter. The balance of Pent
which has satisfied every desire of the Landlords and their
legions of Satellites legitimate and illegitimate (I refer to
the desires) —the balance returned as a loan at Compound
Interest! Interest upon Interest upon Pent! Hence
arises the Money-making class next below the Leisured
Lords.
You see now, do you not ? that there is a Petitio
Principii in your very premisses! By competition of
millions of Housemaids (who must have breakfast) for the
privilege of making the bed, each offering to eat less than
the other, the breakfast will scarcely keep soul and body
together, and those House-Maids who cannot find beds to
make become Street-Maids! Laissez-Faire! Laissez-
Faire !
It was, then, this initial Fallacy, this Cross Division of
terms, this Pedundant (not Missing) Link that has caused
your works to present a dismal swamp of Imbecilities !
Giive me a Man with wealth in his pocket and I will pro-
duce wealth ! This, then, was why no sane person could
wade through your vacuous, fatuous, tortuous, flatulent
sophistries, and retain the balance of Peason ! This, then,
was why every dictum of your Mill-Fawcett-Balaam
philosophy contradicted Common Sense as well as made
the flesh of every honourable reader creep and shudder!
Let me quote you a shuddery creepy passage (page 55,


Fawcett.) “ Boys can fasten on the heads of the pins
with as much facility as men ; girls can sort and pack the
pins with great rapidity.” Can you not give the babies
something to do ? Could not their tender lips be removed
from the breast to blow down some telephonic apparatus ?
This is bad enough, but when I reflect that you mean not
all boys and girls, but the Labourer’s boys and girls I could
get up and with hands raised to Heaven curse you with
such volcanic blasphemy that the printer’s devil should
shake in his shoes !
To cut the matter short, Professors, the bottom of your
Philosophy has fallen clean out and your Science is gravi-
tating “ with hideous ruin and combustion down to bottom-
less perdition ” whence it came. Step down with me,
Professors Gladstone, Rogers, Huxley and Argyle, and
allow me to point out to you the Trinity of Hell. They
are plotting. The nearest is Mammon who entered into
Iscariot and induced him to sell his Master for thirty half-
crowns. Let me say, in passing, that when Judas rose up
from the supper table to go into Jerusalem to bargain
with the priests for the money, he was only doing what
many clergymen now rise up from the breakfast table to
do. He went into the city to make money. All ‘ money-
making’ is the price of blood, and the son of man is
betrayed into the hands of his enemies. The nearest is
Mammon “ the least erected (most crooked) spirit that fell
from heaven; for e’en in heaven his looks and thoughts
were always downward bent, admiring more the riches of
heaven’s pavement, trodden gold, than aught divine or
holy.” Why was Mammon continually engaged in study-
ing the floor of heaven ? He was counting up the ground-
rents. How upon an area that should carry one house and
its grounds, he would pile story upon story and fill them
with inhabitants like herrings in a barrel, till the very
likeness of virtue is forgotten. Oh, but the Rent-Roll!
Let me quote Carlyle’s description of Laissez-Faire London.
“That stifled hum of midnight, when Traffic has lain
“ down to rest and the chariot-wheels of Vanity still rolling
“here and there through distant streets are carrying her
“ to Halls roofed-in and lighted to the due pitch for her ;
“ and only Vice and Misery to prowl or to moan like night-
“birds are abroad: that hum, I say, like the stertorous
“unquiet slumber of sick Life, is heard in Heaven ! Oh,
“ under that hideous coverlet of vapours and putrefactions
“and unimaginable gases, what a Fermenting-vat lies
“ simmering and hid ! The joyful and the sorrowful are
“ there: men are dying, men are being born; men are


“ praying—on the other side of a brick partition, men are
“cursing; and around them all is the vast, void Night.
“ The proud Grandee still lingers in his perfumed saloons
“or reposes within damask curtains ; Wretchedness cowers
“into truckle-beds or shivers, hunger-stricken, into its
“ lair of straw : in obscure cellars Eouge-et-Noir languidly
“emits its voice-of-destiny to haggard, hungry villains;
“ while Councillors of State sit plotting, and playing their
“high chess-game, whereof the pawns are Men. . .
“Eiot cries aloud, and staggers and swaggers in his rank
“dens of shame; and the Mother, with streaming hair,
“ kneels over her pallid, dying infant, whose cracked lips
“ only her tears now moisten. All these heaped and
“ huddled together, with nothing but a little carpentry and
“ masonry between them ;—crammed like salted fish in a
“ barrel; —or weltering, shall I say, like an Egyptian pitcher
“ of tamed vipers, each struggling to get its head above the
“others; such work goes on under that smoke-counter-
“ pane!”
Next Mammon I see Belial “ whose sons wander forth
when night darkens the streets. Witness the streets of ”
London and its West-End Sodom-Gomorrah clubs. Belial,
that Goatish Demon, grins for Mammon’s plan will suit his
plans. In the fierce competition upon an unfair basis, the
competition being the fiercest upon earth, and the basis
being the unfairest conceivable, in this awful Maelstrom of
Men trampling one another down in their efforts to escape
being trampled upon, the weakest shall soon be thrown off
their feet! This Go-as-you-Please, this Devil-take-the-
hindmost-and-undermost shall throw defenceless women
and pure girls into the Satyr-like embrace of London
Minotaurs; Maiden-Tribute shall become an English
Industry, and in young Australia women shall be driven
into private bars to earn their living. Meanwhile the bold
Neros shall strut wantonly in broad-cloth in all great cities,
hobnobbing with Bishops and Princes, and heading sub-
scription-lists for the conversion of the immoral Heathen !
In this fierce struggle to escape beggary, or as it is usually
put, ‘to make a living,’ women who cater for these Neros
shall unsex themselves and commit, for wages, crimes
which would have shocked the purity of Messalina!
“ Bravo ! Bravo ! ” says Belial.
The third is Moloch, scowling with cruel hatred.
Destruction of life is the breath of his nostrils. “ Give
me blood, “ Give me blood.” He sees how Mammon’s
scheme shall, in times of peace, afford him victims no
fewer than fall in Bloody War. He sees how this Devil’s


Competition shall stunt the growth of man and, for
generations, disfigure with its iron heel the noble forehead
of Adam Bede. His nostrils lift, in anticipation, as if the
blood of English babies already smoked upon his altar.
Inf anticide-f or-Wages is the latest English Industry. Can
we go any further than Infant-slaughter ? I know not.
We are an inventive race! On, on, with this Dance of
Devils!
These three then are holding Council, Professors.
Belial and Moloch approve “ Good idea, Mammon, but
how father it off ? ” Beelzebub approaches. Ask Beelze-
bub. Good day, Devil. We have here a plan to destroy
the cursed race of Adam and utterly undo the Work of
Calvary ! But we want a good Lie to start with. Are you
in form to-day, Prince of Liars ? Beelzebub listens. Says
that “Land Monopoly” suggested by Mammon is too
barefaced. “ Why not call it Private Property in Land
which is common to all like Air and Water ? That will
vitiate the word ‘Property’ at the root!” The devils
disperse shouting in triumph and punning horridly on
Laissez-Faire on an unfair basis.
Professors, one word more and I have done. Your
Science has a wrong title. Call it not Wealth-Production.
It will be known to posterity as Wealth-Destruction. The
sum of Wealth, the Life, Beauty and Virtue, the Glory and
Happiness that have been extinguished by your Competition
on an unfair basis, the mind of man shall never grasp.
“ And they (the Souls under the altar) cried with a loud
voice, saying ‘ How long, 0 Lord, Holy and True, dost
Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth ? ”
Seek not to criticize this book. You have already wasted
enough time. Common Sense can judge a plain fact as
well as Genius. Though you be the greatest financiers of
modern times, though you can trace the exact development
of a Protoplasm into a Prelate, though you know the price
of Oatmeal every quarter of an hour since the Eoman
occupation of Britain and though you search diligently and
successfully into the Eeign of Law yet Professors Gladstone,
Huxley, Eogers and Argyle you cannot prove that two and
two make five.
If this Balaam-philosophy be spoken of any more among
men, Balaam’s Ass shall cry out and rebuke the madness
of the Sophist.




Among the faithless, faithful only he ;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified,
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal.


LETTER—III.
To Heney Geobge.
My Deae Sie,
It will be manifest to you that, in the preceding
inquiry, the English Economists have been reduced to a
greater degree of iniquity than even your abler pen has
achieved. But now that I have reduced to Iniquity
Laissez-Faire-on-an-unjust-basis, I wish to reduce Laissez-
Faire-on-a-just-basis to Non-Intelligence or Stupidity. Not
that this implies for a moment that I shall reduce you to
Non-Intelligence. By no means. Your position is a sound
one and unassailable. But you are an Industrial Economic
Reformer, I venture to call myself a Political Economist.
I am writing for a larger purpose which includes yours.
Your position, as I said, is impregnable, but whilst you
stand with the mighty Artillery of “Progress and Poverty”
levelled upon the camp of the Salisbury-Gladstonites,
“ Cinderella ” has laid a train and blown them up sky high
before the very mouth of your cannon. Your cannon shall
shoot vacancy, the Salisbury-Gladstonites are no more!
If “ Progress and Poverty,” of which the Honesty and
the Splendid Ability are so conspicuous to all but Professor
Huxley, had been acted upon as men act who hold the Helm of
a Ship, not pooh-poohed by elegant tinders, dilly-dallying
with the Helm of the State in their languid dngers, there
would not, it may be safely asserted, be to-day in America,
England or Australia a pauper, a prostitute, or a felon.
There might be a little “ atavism” to borrow Mr. Bellamy’s
word. And how has your book been received ? By the
common people it is being gladly read, but there is a huge
number of people other than the student-class who read
nothing. Some have no time, others no taste. For such
nothing but some sledge-hammer Logic will avail, some
literary explosion which cannot but be heard. How has
it been answered ? I turn to my scientidc manual (Faw-
cett, page 128) to dnd the “ simple proof of the proposition


that Rent is not an element of the price of agricultural
produce.” This proposition appears to me to be equiva-
lent to the following'. If (as a Free Man) I could cultivate
100 cabbages in a given time which afford me a Living,
then if 85 be taken forcibly as the rent during that time
the price of the remainder (‘ price ’ being ‘ cost ’ as
modified by the higgling of the market and ‘ cost ’ being
the exertion of the Labourer in mastering Nature) will not
be raised! In other words, if 100 cabbages be my Living
it will not cost me any more Labour to make a living out
of the ground which usually yields 15 cabbages. Now
how is the remarkable proposition that “ the whole is not
greater than its part ” proved ? In the middle of this
paragraph, page 128, I find the usual ‘ deus ex machina ’
this heaven-born Employer, this economic Melchisedec.
That is, Sir, how you have been answered. Nothing less
than a god could falsify a self-evident proposition. But the
age of miracles is past, as Professor Huxley well knows.
The difference between our standpoints cannot better be
seen than by considering the question of Wages. With
the disappearance of the Plutocrat the term Wages might
be said to disappear also because there is no one to pay
the Wages. But adapting the meaning of the term to the
new condition of things as equivalent to the sum of Wealth
belonging to the Free Worker I still differ from you on
the subject of Wages. The avowed or tacit aim of the
Single Tax policy is to get back by the least friction and
disturbance of industrial operations to the ‘ natural wages ’
of Adam Smith. Now Ido not propose to go back to
natural wages at all by any route. ‘Natural’ wages are
for men in a natural or wild state. The difference between
our respective views is all the more remarkable or rather
is only remarkable from the fact that a fortnight ago I
was a Single Taxer, and no half-hearted advocate of that
movement. At the present moment 1 could not, if I were
to be hanged to-morrow, raise a cheer or wave a hat for
the Single Tax. Why this extraordinary change ? Is
not the taxation of land values perfectly just ? Perfectly.
If 1 prove here, incidentally, the justice of the Single Tax
I do so of course for the benefit of the general reader of
this epistle. The Single Tax proposes to take from the
individuals who have ‘appropriated’ the ‘unearned in-
crement ’ that measure of common wealth or strictly speak-
ing that leverage-power of appropriating common wealth
which is denoted in the Mill-Fawcett books “ «m-earned
increment ” because it is not earned ly individuals. Now to
take away from a man what he has not earned is not to


take away Ms earnings or property. When a pickpocket
is searched at the Station the property —(how particular
we have to be about this word !) —the property or wealth
found in his pocket is taken away because it is said not to
be legitimately earned by the enterprising owner (‘ owner ’
I mean at the moment of arrival at the Police Station.) If
now I call the rightful owner of the stolen property the
Owner and the thief the Holder, it is manifest that to take
from the Holder that which does not belong to him but to
the Owner is not ‘ spoliation ’ (Fawcett, page 128) but the
exact opposite, namely ‘ restoration.’ Justice requires that
the Earner or Owner should also be the Holder. Now
here comes a curious point, Mr. George, which I did not
expect to crop up here. As ground-values are not Wealth
but only leverage-power in the hands of individuals for
‘ appropriating ’ the wealth of the Community, so while
the Single Taxers violate no precept of Justice, when they
propose to take from Holders that of which they are not
Owners or Earners (‘ Mw-earned increment’) —they propose
to do an impossibility ! The leverage-power vanishes in the
transfer ! It is, in fact, and can. only be, leverage-power
in the hands of individuals. The Community as a whole
cannot blackmail itself as a whole. I did not intend to
reach this conclusion so early; it has quite sprung itself
upon me.
To return to Wages. Do I propose to give a man less
than his natural Wages ? That is absurd because the
Wages or Wealth would be lying about and no Freeman
can or will touch another Freeman’s earnings. Do I pro-
pose to give a man more than his natural Wages? Yes.
As a Political Economist I propose to give him his natural
Wages plus the security of property and guarantee of
prosperity which a Polis or State affords. The term Wages
will then merge into a Free, Equal and Honourable
Living. How did this enthusiasm for a just measure
evaporate ? Because I discovered the nature of Commer-
cial Interest ? No. It vanished earlier than that. It
vanished when I fully understood the nature of money and
postulated Freedom and Equality in its use. Now there is
no better abused word in the English language (excepting
of course, ‘ capital ’) than the word ‘ equality.’ If you so
much as mention Liberty, Equality or Fraternity, you are
mentioned to the Police as a combustible individual liable
at anytime to place dynamite under Parliaments. Now
my use of the word ‘ equality ’ is very simple. I know
that men are not equal in their characters, in stature or
natural parts. But they are all equal in the sacredness of


life, that is, of living. This is always admitted whenever
the issue is placed before us. It is a point of honour with
English Sea Captains to leave the sinking ship last.
Should we not be surprised to see an account in the daily
papers of the foundering of an Australian Liner, in which
it was stated that the Captain cried out “ Now, then, line
up please in the order of your incomes, and I, as the King
of this insular Community, will go first into the boat.”
This is not usually done. Even English Landlords may not
murder an Englishman in an open or obvious manner!
He may evict helpless men and women (Read Wallace’s
hand Nationalisation and blush, Reader, for your Country !
Remember, please, that I do not here speak of eviction for
non-payment of rent, but eviction at the will and pleasure
of the Landlord.) He may hunt them up and down, all
weathers, and ship them to distant shores, in fact send
them to the Devil, and he is assisted in these genial pas-
times by English Law-officers deputed by the Laisser-Eaire
Go-as-you-Please No-Government! I think that the least
a No-Government could have done, ora Talky-Talky-ment
of Popular Representatives, would have been to insist upon
a ‘ close-time ’ for Tenants! This close-season might have
been extended by the English Gentlemen who represent
English Gentlemen to times when Tenants were sick or
dying or in child-bed! (Read Wallace and weep, for the
very Police wept like children !) But this is a digression
on Equality or the equal sacredness of living.
Natural Wages then are for a natural state not for a Poli-
cal state, not for a State. A State or Nation exists for
mutual protection, not mutual impoverishment. A State is
No-State, it is a wild or natural state if there be no bond
of union however slight.
I propose to show that Trade vanishes with the intro-
duction of Government, meaning by that, Central or
complete Government without which an aggregate of men
is a Horde, and No-Nation. Whatever results I have
arrived at in this pamphlet came through the right
understanding of monexj. As a Political Economist looking
down upon the daily industrial life of men which
corresponds to that branch of Domestic Economy named
Household-Support I said “ This must be capable of
simplification. A State is but a collection of Households.
There must be some simple solution of the intricacies of
modern industrial life. A Governor must know what to
do under all possible combinations of circumstances, or he
is no Governor, he is a No-Governor. If I spend a life-
time in looking at this thing 1 will see through it .” I think,


Sir, you will admit, that by eliminating Melchisedee with
the Manna-bag, things are a good deal simplified already.
But I will retrace my steps to and from the beginning, and
give every child in the English-speaking countries the
power of seeing through the question also.
What were men doing every day ? They seemed very
Busy, always going to or returning from Busy-ness.
Interest blocked the way, as I have already stated. To
understand Interest I must understand Money for Interest
was said to be interest on money. Perhaps it was some
confusion of thought between Money and Capital that
obscured (in my mind) the nature of Interest. What then
was Money ? Buskin’s definition and his chapters on
Currency-Holders and Store-Holders were fresh in my
memory. Money—a stamped metal document , State-issued
and constituting a Demand-for-Labour. The metaWom-
ment elucidated matters not a little. It was obvious that
the document was the leading idea. Next how to issue
them? To this there could he but one answer. Among
Free Men a Demand-for-Labour-Token could only be
issued to a man who had rendered labour ! This would be
a fair economic exchange of Free Labour. Coming back
for a moment from abstract to English Economy I faced a
dilemma. Money is State-issued. Englishmen are said to
be free. How does the English Government issue its
Labour-demanding-Tokens ? I had never heard of their
being intelligently issued to people who had rendered
labour. On the contrary, the Idlers seemed to have the
command of them! Here was the Dilemma. Either
English Money was State-issued to the wrong persons ! or
Englishmen were not free ! Either Horn of this Dilemma
was very uncomfortable sitting for an Englishman who
thought he lived in a Free Self-governed-Manhood-sutfrage
Australian Colony. To escape the awkwardness of the
situation I returned to abstract Economy and proceeded to
issue Money myself to an imaginary community. That
English Money was complicated by being a marketable
commodity was nothing to an abstract Economist. My
Tokens were plain bone counters, the documentary force
being in the Issuer’s mind. I went with a ship-load of
about a hundred men intent on Freedom, away from the
old world-centres to some island where I could issue the
money without disturbing elements. We took plenty of
stores of all kinds. You see there is no economic fallacy
about this. It could, conceivably, be done to-morrow.
Now these people were not going in for Socialism, Com-
munism, or any other Ism. They simply wanted Intelli-


gent Government and desired Commercial operations to go
on as usual through Money. We were not going back to
1 barter ’ of which money was said to be the substitute.
One thing we postulated in postulating Freedom. That
was Land Nationalization. (This does not affect the
question of issuing money, but I mention it here on account
of its primary importance.) Land-Nationalization is the
basis of Freedom. Any violation of the principle is a
violation of Liberty. "We postulated that men could live
together without as individuals black-mailing one another’s
industry. ‘Black-mailing’ is one of your words, Mr.
George, and I am much obliged to you for the use of it.
If, when I prepare to place my house on a vacant piece of
ground, a man comes to me and says “That is my ground,”
I reply “It is vacant, there is nothing on it! If, however,
I understand you to mean that you have already made pre-
parations to build here I withdraw and will choose another
site.” If the Intruder replies that he has a house some-
where else and only means by his otvnership that he is
coming round regularly to demand labour-products from
me, I reply, with withering scorn, “Indeed, Mr. Intruder,
does your ownership stop with this, do you not own the
planet generally, the sun, moon and stars which you have
not ‘ ordained ?’ Why not send me in periodically a bill
—(I throw this out as a hint for Plutocrats) —Honest
Worker, Debtor to Dishonest Idler. So many days’ labour-
products for use and enjoyment of the starry wonders of
the Great Bear, the Milky Way, and the Southern Cross,
granted to said Dishonest Idler’s dishonest ancestress who
was a lady friend of Charles the Second. Might not the
Eent-Interest-Beggaring Machinery be strengthened a
little ?
To return. How to issue the Money on the basis of
Freedom ? How many Tokens to issue to each working
man ? It needed no thought how many to issue to each
idling man! “If a man will not work, neither shall he
eat ” where lam Governor. Should I give the Gardener
less or more than the Saddler, and would not the Clergy-
man and the Schoolmaster be offended if I did not give
them more for mental than was given for manual work.
How differentiate the Wages? There was no standard to
go by. Granting that the Archbishop of Canterbury
receives Wages to the amount of £15,000 per annum, and
Hood’s sempstress earns “ a bed of straw —a crust of
bread —and rags,” still, that was nothing to go upon. The
ratio was great but not fixed. So I decided to issue the
Tokens temporarily on the supposition that all Labour was


of the same value, but to apologise to the clergyman and
the schoolmaster, and promise to differentiate as soon as
possible. You may, my dear Sir, suspect me of ironical
jesting, but I assure you that my perplexity was genuine,
and that these difficulties were encountered merely in the
atmosphere of true Freedom. Next, how many Tokens
should I issue to each worker ? Should I give him five,
one for fuel, one for food, three more demanding houses,
clothing and tools ? As industries themselves differentiated
by co-operation of free workmen, each of these Tokens
would have to be supplemented by or converted into many
Tokens. One food-token might be enough if the settle-
ment ate only bread, but when cheese and cabbages were
forthcoming there would have to be two others demanding
cheese and cabbage. Not a little perplexed at the surging
difficulties of my task I assumed that my little community
was satisfied with bread and cabbage. There was no
economic fallacy in this. I would simplify matters until I
could issue the Tokens and see them circulate, in order to
issue them I must get the Price of bread or cabbage or
some other commodity in Tokens. Or, I must assume a
Price-unit and get the Tokens to circulate thereupon in an
orderly and intelligible manner. Here a thought occurred
to me which almost took away my breath. Whilst I was
walking up and down in the midst of the little State,
throughout the economic day, with a Mint of Bone Counters
in my pocket, the thought occurred to me, Suppose the
Bakers should be baking too much bread and wasting good
food! Off I posted to the two Bakers of the settlement,
and found them stationed opposite one another competing
away in true modern fashion, each anxious to outdo the
other. How much have you baked ? Fifty loaves each.
Well, that is enough for the whole settlement. Your day’s
work is done. Here is a central guiding principle dictated
by common sense, which augurs ill for any Laisser-Faire,
Mr. George. Suppose I take, as my unit-Price, the price
of a loaf of bread. A Token shall be the Price-Unit.
One-loaf-and-one-cabbage-per-day is the economic food. I
give the Bakers a hundred Tokens each, and direct that
the bread be now considered public store (see Euskin on
Store-keeping.) If a Baker takes a loaf out of the store
he must put two Tokens in its place for I, the State-officer,
have bought it all. Here a consideration occurs which
threatens to extinguish Price at one stroke. One of the
Bakers is married and has a family, the other is single.
Either, then, some of the Tokens belonging to the
unmarried Baker are useless, or the married Baker’s Tokens


are not enough. Does not this vitiate Price at once ?
However, let us suppose, that all these men are single;
that they spring, in fact, full-grown from one another’s
heads after the Minerva-fashion. They have no father,
mother, nor beginning of days. Melchisedec again! Now
let us see if we can get Price, that is, cost-in-Tokens. Our
Hermaphrodite Bakers must have exactly similar wants,
capacities and powers. Granted. Let us rush off to the
Hermaphrodite Butchers and Gardeners to prevent them
getting too much ready. If in a Household of two, the
cook sends up dinner for seventeen, or one—what would
you call that ? I should call that Laisser-Paire. Upon
inquiry I find that a Butcher can get ready twenty-five
meat-dinners, and I postulate four Butchers to keep the
economic day throughout. I suppose I must give each
Butcher a hundred Tokens which will make the ‘ price ’of
a meat-dinner, four Tokens. The Gardener can grow four
cabbages in an economic day, the price of a cabbage,
therefore, is twenty-five Tokens. Now let us see if we can
get up the circulation. Not to take any more Workers into
account by name, there are ten thousand Tokens (a hundred
per man) ‘ out ’ but not yet in circulation. If they would
only begin to circulate ! The necessity of giving Tokens
to each Tradesman is apparent. If I give them to the
Bakers and wait for them to circulate thence, the Butchers
must wait until the two Bakers come up and leave with one
of them eight Tokens which will not buy a cabbage, to say
nothing of leaving three Butchers without any Tokens at
all. There is a stronger reason however. A State-officer
must be impartial. The Pree Butcher will not wait upon
the convenience of any individual fellow-citizens. Give
them all then a hundred Tokens each. There are twenty-
five Gardeners remember, because each inhabitant requires
an economic cabbage per day. Now if we suppose an
upward scale of cost of production beginning with loaves,
through meat-dinners up to cabbages, it is obvious that, by
beginning at the upper end of the scale, the Gardener’s
Tokens are, many of them, quite useless. If the Baker
requires all his Tokens, the Gardener it is certain cannot
use all his. The Tokens of one Gardener alone would buy
bread for fifty men, but the Tokens of the Baker would
only buy cabbages for four men. The Gardener’s Tokens
command or demand the whole day’s work of a Baker, and
a Baker’s Tokens command the day’s work of a Gardener
which is by supposition twelve and a-half times as hard
(Twenty-five Gardeners to two Bakers.) All Labour is by
hypothesis equally valuable to the State officer who is


postponing differentiation of wages. So that the Tokens
have not the same purchasing power yet, and Price is still
unattainable.
The more limitations we introduce into this imaginary
community the less value attaches to our results as appli-
cable to Human Beings. If Price is unattainable, that is if
the Tokens won’t circulate when we have made our in-
habitants Hermaphrodites, Is it of any use to introduce any
more qualifications ? Redundant Tokens are an absurdity
in a Governed Community, or where Money is state-issued
intelligently, because the Tokens no longer demand labour
in the sense that they command it. They ‘ demand ’
subject to the command of the Issuer. The commanding is
now done by the intelligent Overseer of Industries. If a
Gardener has Tokens that are plainly superfluous, these
Tokens have lost all their baleful power of misdirecting
Labourers. If then a Gardener with several Tokens to
spare, says within himself “ I am a 1 rich man,’ I will pull
down my barns and build greater,” he will find that this
is a great error of judgment. He will find to his great
astonishment, that in a Free Community pulling down
barns and building greater, if they proceed from individual
caprice, require that he, the rich or Token-abounding man,
shall pull down and build up with his own hands, and that
too after his civil day’s work is done ! This will be a
wonderful check upon the capricious activities of the many-
tokened persons. Some devout man has said “ Give me
neither Poverty nor Riches,” but in a State neither of these
is possible of individuals. From hostility of Nature or
Weakness of man a Nation might be Poor collectively and
distributively, or from mastery over Nature a people might
be all Rich, but in the universal or only possible sense the
terms are mutually exclusive. It can be distinctly seen,
Sir, by anyone who can follow a simple abstract argument
that Gold cannot corrupt a Free people. The fascination of
gold lies in its power over the Life and Labour of others
which is the root of Slavery, and this power banishes with
Government.
But if we introduce one other Wage-Worker into our
considerations, Trade-through-Money will be seen to expire.
It is the Worker with the wra-finished product. Let us
suppose that in the economic day, of which I have spoken,
a Saddler can only make half-a-saddle. Now if by any
device the counters can be got to circulate, the Saddler will
have but a poor chance of obtaining Tokens. No one is
likely to come up and say “An un-finished saddle ! The
very thing I have been looking for, all day! ” The term


‘ unfinished ’ requires a unit of time imperatively. Now
I have been making free with the economic day in making
a Gardener grow four cabbages per day, but we must
draw the line somewhere. The Hermaphrodites will be
‘ without end of days ’ otherwise. The Science of the whole
thing clearly vanishes with Immortal Hermaphrodites.
There is an alternative; either the economic subjects under
consideration must be immortal, or the economic objects—
cabbage, loaf, meat-dinner—must be producible at equal
cost or expenditure of labour. The Hermaphrodites must
either be Omnipotent or Immortal. They must, in fact, be
angels or ‘ gods ’ before they can use circulating money or
currency. When able to use money, they require it not,
having ambrosia, nectar, etcetera. Melchisedec with the
manna-' breakfast ’ is clearly superfluous also. The
economic subjects are full-blown Melchisedecs.
Trade-through-money among Human Beings under
State-regulation (so far as money is concerned) is thus
shown to be nugatory and impossible, nay, inconceivable.
In the sequel it will be proved that Money gives place
to Credit in the abstract and Trade as we understand the
term to Co-operation of Industry in both branches of
Supply and Demand,
“ Trade impossible and inconceivable !” the reader may
say. “ Don’t we actually trade now ?” Yes, Reader, some
of us do, but the proposition is to be taken in the widest
sense; it must be universally true to he true. Yes, some of
us do trade now and others of us stagnate behind counters
waiting for the light of the door-way to be ‘ eclipsed ’ by
entrance of stray customer wanting ‘change,’ and others
of us gravitate from behind counters (the eclipses being
few) into Australian private bars and thence on to the
streets. You, yourself, Reader, know that we do not all
trade.
Let us leave this for the present. We may arrive at the
same conclusion by another route. In a State or Governed
community, Price, Circulating Money, and Trade-through
money are inconceivable.
Well, my Wealth-Tokens (made of bone) never got
issued. The Un-finished Product dealt the finishing blow.
You see, Sir, if I had been a Mill-Fawcett-Oapitaiist with
supernatural ‘ breakfast ’ in supernatural bag I could
have fed the saddler until the saddle was completed. I
could thus have bridged that difficulty besides having the
inexpressible pleasure of charging Interest on the magic
‘ breakfast.’


It was plain, then, that by no device under the State-
issue of money could Money be a currency. It declined to
‘run’ in circulation. The Tokens, then, could at best be
a document of credit that Bearer had done so much work
and was entitled to so much fruits-of-work. They might
still be ‘money’ but not ‘currency.’ But this limited use
of money as a Credit-Token was tantamount to Credit in
the abstract. In a small community the tokens would be
unnecessary because of the smallness of the State, the in-
habitants being all personally known to the State-Officer.
In a large community, again, where industries are well-
advanced, the tokens are unnecessary because the organi-
zation of industry is complete and each person is well
known to the nearest Authority who is in communication
with the Head or Central Authority. Organization of
Industry is carried on by De-centralization, of which principle
and its working any prosperous Warehouse furnishes
abundant illustration. Every person in a large factory may
not be known to the Head Guiding or Governing man but
he is known to the Foreman or second-grade Governor,
and if not to the Foreman to the sub-Foreman or third-
grade Governor and so on. In large or small communities
which are governed every individual is personally known
to some one Governor. Therefore Credit-Tokens are
superfluous. Money now vanishes giving place to credit.
Here I may say that when Money vanished under my
eyes before the Unfinished Product I became conscious in
myself of a strange mental experience. I felt like two
persons. My Individuality appeared temporarily to have
given place to Duality. I was a Single Taxer, the very
currents of Single Taxism were no doubt coursing through
my brain and I exclaimed with horror, “By Jove, this is
Socialism!” Mechanically, as a Single Taxer, I looked
round for some commercial land-values to tax but they
were clean gone with Money and Trade ! It was as though
I had walked out expecting familiar meadows, and lo ! a
precipice and yawning beneath—Socialism! But the
peculiarity of the situation was that my faith in Single
Taxism was not impaired. I was certain of both, I was
certain of the one as a political measure and of the other as
a result of thought. In Logic a mental picture (take
Euler’s diagrams for instance) will bring out a result which
words and phrases obscure or bury. Could it be that the
Single Tax was a ‘ means ’ of which the ‘end’ was plainly
depicted before me ? The Single Tax was a ‘ means ’ I
knew; then, this was what the Georgian policy will come
to. Nature abhors a vacuum whether in mind or matter


and this gap must be filled up. I took a small community
of the modern English pattern. I applied the Single Tax
with a vigour which would take away the breath of some
of your followers in the colony where I live. I saw land
held for speculative purposes dropped first, like a hot
brick. This eased the population of congested centres and
with diffusion of population the ground-values came
steadily down. Then the tax rooted out these money-
lenders and money-changers whose business depends
directly or indirectly upon the weakness, the adversity, or
the necessity of men. Down went Interest (of which I
did not then know the nature), for Interest I saw to depend
purely upon the necessitous person. As people spread
upon the land and began to cope with nature in all the
pride of human strength and the glory of natural freedom,
necessitous persons became few and borrowing was as rare
as it is now common. Rents were coming down too at a
terrific pace. I didn’t feel sad at that for Rent was my
Bete Noire. I saw the landlords retiring in upon a
nucleus, as it were, and gradually taking off their coats to
work. Instructive sight! Paul’s remedy for idleness was
bringing these men round! Then every man became a
Worker and Competition on a fair basis produced astonish-
ing results. It was easy enough to make a living now.
Adam Smith’s natural wages attainable now. Meanwhile
co-operation of Labourers by division of labour or rather
division of labour by co-operation of Labourers was going
on. For men are intelligent, Sir, despite the existence of
the Professors ! Wages gradually became equalized, for
wherever a man could get more, thither he went. On went
this fast, furious, but friendly competition. Ground-rents
had yet to disappear, for although they came down at first,
might they not be going up again, production being so
greatly increased ? The Landlords as distinguished from
the Labourers had disappeared, and the term ‘ ground-
rent ’ was superseded by ‘ land-value.’ (Now the nature
of a commercial ground-value is this, Reader. I am a
Baker. Here is a site with shop upon it. I wish my
wages as measured in loaves to be five hundred a day. I
calculate that by the position of the shop relative to popu-
lation there will be a constant demand for six hundred
loaves per day. It will ‘ pay ’ me to start a business and
supply this demand of six hundred. I wish to make five
hundred. I offer one hundred for the site. That amount
the Single Tax diverts to the coffers of the State. That is
a land-value. If we could live without food, grow feathers
for warmth and lodge in or under trees, land-values would


vanish with the development.) These land-values must
vanish, Mr. George. So great has been the organization
of Labour that a population-centre is bread-fed by co-
operative Bakers. Let us consider a population-centre
when the Single Tax has spread prosperity abroad. The
Butchers are co-operating likewise, for the simple reason
that they can ‘ make ’ more by union than disunion, by
competing with than against one another. The latter kind
of competition is well styled Cut-Throat, because it cuts
the throats of some; the former kind fills the mouths of all.
The mYA-competition is capable of raising man to ideal
altitudes, the is visibly lowering him
below the grade of fiends. lam a Baker then or rather I
am the Head Baker in a Bakery. We co-operate on equal
terms, otherwise no co-operation is possible. To get my
wages you take the total out-put of loaves less the Single
Tax or ground-value and divide the remainder by the
number of Bakers. The Butchers next door make about
the same, so many of their meat-dinners being equal to so
many loaves.
Now let us start the work of an economic day in all the
glory of free and friendly competition with fair play. The
result is what might be anticipated. You cannot move
about for loaves, nor see a friend without climbing over
mountains of meat-dinners! Laissez-Baire ! Seventeen
dinners for two ! Your Laissez-Baire, Mr. George! The
Mill-Bawcett Laissez-Baire is one dinner for two, and the
Landlord gets it! The Labourer has to content himself
with the imaginary ‘ breakfast.’ Go easy then Butchers
and Bakers! It is of no use producing more than the
population can eat. Now if our output or gross makings
or takings be reduced, our ground-values must be reduced
for we wish to make the same wages, subject to no waste.
With the order to go easy, Mr. George, I see the Central-
Guidance principle come in. The Butchers and Bakers
and Saddlers confer. “ State-officer, we will in future pay
direct income-tax so that we can intelligently regulate
our wages.” Ground-rents disappear. Nothing left but
the Land Value of which Euskin speaks : that by which
the Land, Earth or Planet avails for life : the value of the
Sun and Stars, Sky and Clouds. Now let me develope the
condition of things a little further. With the order to go
easy, blind Laissez-Baire gave place to Intelligent Central
Guidance (for Co-operation had up to that point been
piece-meal, limited to the various trades, it now becomes
central with reference to all industries.) Natural Wages
give place to Eational Wages, that is, a Living.


Government or Guidance of Industry has now supervened,
and in its train I see Law, as we understand the term,
controlling the Workers. The Bakers cannot now take a
holiday at their caprice, for a population-centre would be
without bread. The Bakers will have no occasion to
‘ strike ’ then, because that would indeed be to strike or
* beat the air.’ Thus Custom of Intelligent Men crystal-
lises into Intelligent Law, and again we are facing—
Socialism. Now I hated Socialism, or to be more exact, I
hated such ideas as I had of Socialism, and at the present
moment I have no trustworthy knowledge upon the sub-
ject. If lin any way misrepresent Socialism, I apologise
universally, I thought that under Socialism I should not
be able to correct my own child, but that some grim State-
Officer would take the child forcibly to some spanking-
establishment, where children are castigated by machinery.
The Officer places ticket upon child stating name of culprit
and nature of offence. Child is then put into an aperture.
Machinery revolves. Child emerges at another aperture
thoroughly spanked, looking grave but dry-eyed. Tears
wiped away by machinery. The Officer then returns
culprit by parcel post with the sore side up. I did not
care about this prospect. It seemed like “ The Coming
Slavery ” of which some 1 thinkers,’ professional thinkers,
write. Then I wrestled with this gaunt spectre of Social-
ism, and made it yield to my investigating and delighted
mind every fruit of Individualism, and I cried aloud “ This
is the Eeign of Freedom ! This is Government of Men ! ”
I now return to Trade. Trade-through-Money vanished,
but there is Trade-through-Barter. I wish to place beyond
all possibility of misconception that Trade cannot exist in a
State. Let it be assumed here, without enlargement, that
a State can only consist of Free Men. We thus get rid of
all Idlers, for Free Men will not support Idlers. The
proposition then becomes : Trade is diametrically opposed to
Intelligence and Freedom. Now where shall we begin?
Let us take a small community of eleven men upon an
island supporting themselves by interchange of labour-
products. Ido not say—Grant me eleven men supporting
themselves by Trade, and let us examine the conditions.
You might be granting an impossibility. Ten of these
men work with their hands, and the eleventh is deputed by
them to work with his head. He regulates the industries
by directing, subject to the General Wish, the When, the
How, and the How much of their activities. They inter-
change by barter under central direction. None of the ten
wishes to get more than a fair average living, the


indulgence of such a wish being clearly antagonistic to the
intelligent co-operation now in force. In our analysis of this
condition of things, let us take the lowest possible ground
that Material Wealth is the highest form of Wealth, and
that therefore Manual Work in this small community is
more dignified and valuable than Mental work. With
reference to this standard the central Guider is looked upon
as an unproductive worker whom the others would gladly
divert to manual work if they could. The support (food,
clothes, etc.) of the Guider is the waste of labour reduced to
a minimum. Each manual worker gets his natural wages
less his share of the support of the Guider, that is, he gets
Rational Wages or a ‘ living.’ If at this stage a manual
worker be added to or taken from the community, the
Wages will be the same, but the working-day will be
shortened or lengthened.
Now introduce Laissez-Faire. What is Laissez-Faire ?
It is purely and simply No-guidance. You cannot ring a
door-bell, but your eye guides your hand. You cannot
drive a cart, but you govern the horse. Post a letter on
the Laissez-Faire plan. First shut your eyes, then your
mind, and then proceed. Send a hopeless lunatic upon an
errand. He has no mind. How much time and energy
will he expend in running here and there ? Will the
errand ever be accomplished ? I cannot say. It is for
advocates of Laissez-Faire to say.
Suppose then that through some strange mental freak
the Manual Workers should come to think that the Guider
is absolutely an unproductive worker, and that it would be
better for the community to have one manual worker the
more and no head-worker. Just as they are on the point
of imparting to him the General Wish, the Guider dies.
No other Guider is appointed. Laissez-Faire ! Laissez-
Faire. Apart from the fact that the necessary waste in
material-wealth production was clearly minimized in the
former condition of things, the hours of labour can be seen
to increase. Instead of giving their orders to one another
through a centre, the workers have now to rush about
taking orders from one another directly. By all this
running about the day’s labour is increased. Moreover
the information thus derived being necessarily scantier and
less trustworthy than the central information (If this is not
clear, multiply your ten by a hundred) the result is that
the general supply of products is not equal to the general
demand. First let it be less. Under the Laissez-Faire
No-System the gardener grows one economic cabbage too
few. Along comes the baker with the loaf ordered by


gardener, and expecting cabbage ordered by himself. But
through inadvertence some customer overlooked under the
new No-System had taken the cabbage ordered by baker.
Stray customer had left horse-shoe which gardener thought
would ‘ come in useful ’ under the new No-System. Baker
wants cabbage: gardener wants loaf. Gardener offers
horse-shoe to baker who shakes his head sadly. “ Don’t
care about horse-shoes for dinner.” Baker retires with
loaf. Why not leave loaf with gardener ? “Oh that is
not business.” The Laissez-Faire No-System now, you
see. Loaf moulders in cupboard of baker who goes with-
out vegetables. Gardener goes without bread and
contemplates horse-shoe rusting. Waste here, plus in-
convenience.
Secondly 1 , let the general supply be greater than the
general demand. This will follow from the first day’s
experience of the new No-system. Gardener grows one or
two economic cabbages to spare. Each tradesman does the
same. No personal inconvenience now, but a margin of
waste-products. Consider this margin of waste-products.
Here to my surprise crops up a strange confirmation of
Buskin’s views on wealth, and a corresponding annihilation
of the Mill-Fawcett views. Limiting our consideration to
Material Wealth we find in the Mill-Fawcett books that
Yaluable Things (of which the sum is Wealth) are material
objects in which utilities are embodied. But here is a
waste-margin of material objects in which utilities are em-
bodied ! Here is a collection of useless useful things!
which is absurd like everything else in the economic-
Melchisedec manuals. “ But won’t they come in useful ? ”
Certainly not, they are useless in a given economic unit of
time, and therefore useless for ever. There is no such thing
as Old Stock in an intelligent community ! Buskin with
his wonderful lucidity shows that for a thing to be Yalu-
able or avail, there must be another element introduced
the Valiant or Strong man—in whose hand only the Thing
can avail for life. He pertinently asks, If an Australian
Digger is drowned with nuggets of gold in his belt dragg-
ing him down, can the Digger be said to have the nuggets,
or the nuggets the Digger ? It is plain that this margin
of waste-produets is a collection of useful things perfectly
useless, because there is no Man to use them in the given
economic time. But this is a digression.
Under the new No-System, the Guider having expired,
the Labourer’s work-day is increased by two amounts ;
first the time occupied in running about under no guid-
ance, secondly the time occupied in the manufacture of


these useless products. The Labourers at once return to
the Central-Guidance System. Why ? Because, by
hypothesis, they are intelligent. This proves the proposi-
tion in so far as it asserts that Trade is diametrically
opposed to Intelligence. The opposition to Freedom at
once follows. Intelligence always tends to keep the
margin of waste-products as closely to zero as it is possible
for finite beings to control Matter. Trade or Non-Intelli-
gent daily industry either produces too much or too little
in the aggregate. No one in a State can have too little,
because the State protects the weak. No one can have
too much, because some members of the State would be
working for the personal aggrandisement of others, which
negatives Freedom. Hence Trade is diametrically opposed
to Intelligence and Freedom. Hence Trade cannot exist
in a State. _ . .
To sum up. Laissez-Faire or Trade, as we know it, is the
negation of Guidance and is ruinous Stupidity. But I think
we can discover worse things of Trade than that it implies
ruinous Stupidity. I have used the terms Competition and
Co-operation more than once. Here will be the place to
investigate the exact relationship between the things
signified by those terms. Competition evidently contains
the more fundamental idea of the two. Individual Com-
petition is the instinct of a man for life ; it is the Law of
Self-Preservation upon which all human activities proceed
and are based. The motto of the Competitive principle is
“Each man for himself — I must live.” It is the primary
instinct of Self-ishness acting directly. If any one should
object (any one, I mean, not belonging to the race that
exacts the maximum of Pent and lends the balance at
Compound Interest) that I am taking too low a view of
human nature in regarding man as Self-ish, I reply thaf I
cannot take a higher ground without introducing religious
considerations with which this book has nothing to do from
first to last. This book is written for and about Honest
Citizens. An honest man is self-ish and we may be quite
sure, too, that whatever additional virtue may be required
to ‘ convert ’ an Honest Man into a Saint, the additional
virtue will not falsify any of our economic results. Witness
the three Wage-Workers of my first letter. It is only
modern Piety that requires Dividends and wishes to beat
down Wages.
To return. The first principle then is clearly understood.
Now by daity association with others some trust or con-
fidence springs up. If a man trusts another he will work
with him, if the fundamental instinct which prompts Com-


petition be not alarmed. But Union is Strength not only
for defence but for productiveness of labour. The second
principle then owes its strength and vitality to the fact
that it tends to the benefit of the individual no less than
the other though less directly. How easily then, how
naturally, how instinctively does the one merge into the
other under fair conditions. Competition and Co-operation
are sometimes supposed to be conflicting principles. No
error could be greater. The Competition which is antago-
nistic to Co-operation is excessive individuality, individu-
ality carried beyond the borders of Eight, the individuality
of the Bushranger. Now this excess of individuality im-
plies enmity; it destroys the bridge of good-will by which
alone the second principle can enter. Or, to be more
exact, it vitiates the atmosphere of mutual confidence in
which alone the primary principle can grow into the second-
ary. For Co-operation is Competition acting as vigorously as
ever under conditions of mutual confidence and good-will.
Just Competition, then, as distinguished from unjust com-
petition or bushranging, has nothing antagonistic to co-
operation. It is good-will and bad-will that are conflicting,
not Competition and Co-operation.
Under fair conditions, then, the one principle ripens into
the other as naturally as a boy becomes a man. How,
then, in a State under Law excluding the bushranger—
development of the primary principle, how can the primary
principle co-exist with the matured form ? Can it be that
though bushranging is illegal yet the conditions are not fair ?
Let us inquire into this, but first I will state the worst that
can be said of Trade, Trade is an i\.bortion. Trade is not
merely monstrous Imbecility, it is an imbecile Monster.
Let us go first into the medieval and then into the
modern market. We may elucidate a few terms, as we go
along, for we are now in the Mill-Fawcett realm. Now we
must first of all look for Co-operation. Are there any
signs of Co-operation ? This principle has two names
according as it is regarded in the abstract or the concrete.
Looked at in the abstract, it is called division of labour;
in the concrete, Co-operation of Labourers. In one phrase,
the action is contemplated; in the other, the Agents. The
two phrases however denote the same principle. Now
Trade is obviously a rudimentary, haphazard, go-as-you-
please form of division of labour. You bring cabbages, I
bring loaves, he brings apples. We rely upon one another
to do this weekly. Co-operation, you see, quite beyond
the embryonic stage. Let us take the simplest market
possible. You and I are two traders. I grow cabbages,


you bake loaves. Our market place is a tree. Wbat is
the cost of a cabbage. The cost of the cabbage is the
amount of labour expended by me in growing it. I have
mastered Nature and made it yield a cabbage. The physi-
cal exhaustion of this struggle is the cost of the cabbage
to me. That is fixed before I reach the tree. What is the
price of the cabbage ? That is arranged after I meet you.
The price is determined by much argument on both sides,
it being my wish to get as many loaves for my cabbages as
possible. This strife of words is called the Higgling of
the Market. Now there may be honest and dis-honest
Higgling. The latter kind is well described in the Book
of Proverbs—“ It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer,
but when he is gone his way then he boasteth.” You and
I, however, Higgle honestly. What is the price of a loaf
or a cabbage when the bargain is concluded ? It is some
approach to the actual cost, the degree of approach being
determined by many causes in this clash of wills, but most
by this consideration that each of us must have a living out
of this transaction. We live on loaves and cabbages.
Now the ‘ living ’ is a fairly-well fixed quantity, affording
at any rate a fixed minimum. Each wishes to avoid
starvation. I have been ill this summer and could only
work five hours where I used to work seven. The cost
being increased or what is the same thing the cabbages
being decreased, the price is increased because the living is
constant. The fewer the cabbages, then, the higher the
price as measured in loaves. A similar set of causes affects
the price you set upon your loaves and a satisfactory result
is arrived at by Higgling. Now if the principle of co-
operation were a little more extended we should co-operate
fully and afford one another an equal ‘ living ’ on loaves
and cabbages. The time of waiting at the tree and of
carrying superfluous loaves and cabbages would be avoided.
Market, Higgling, and Price would all vanish together.
Cost would remain but costs or several costs would merge
into one. Co-operation can only be on even terms, the
day’s work is the same, the cost is the equalised costs and
Price vanishes.
Observe just here that no amount of Higgling whether
honest or dishonest can evade the result that if my
cabbages cost me more they must cost you more. It would
appear then that Nature takes no notice of absurd
divisions of men. Higgling is plainly un-Natural. Nature
herself cries “Co-operate! Co-operate!” and sets the
example.


Now this vanishing 1 of Price prior to Money is manifestly
more valuable as a result than its disappearance through
Money. It would appear then that with slightly increased
intelligence or extended good will, Price and the Market
vanish together! Mr. Rogers knows the price of every
comestible since and including the apple eaten by Eve, the
price of which is sometimes supposed to be known only to
Theologians. He will be greatly astonished to learn that
Price and Stupidity vanish together.
Competition ripens into Co-operation as naturally as corn
ripens and yet the Market remains. Trade remains ! Why
is this ?
Let us now go into a larger medieval market. You and
I are two gardeners who find ourselves in adjoining booths.
By the number of cabbages you have grown and brought
to market in a given economic time, it is plain that you can
grow two cabbages to my one. The Higgling or Hum of
business begins. I shall come out of this Higgling second
best. Your prices can well afford to be half mine. The
customers swarming about buy in the cheapest and sell in
the dearest market. This is quite right and under fair
conditions can have nothing but the best result. (Observe
here that Price becomes a fluctuation about the lowest cost.)
If I cannot ‘ compete ’ with you I shall be driven, not out
of the market, but out of the cabbage-market. This, I
repeat, under fair conditions is quite right and highly
expedient. If I have been an indolent gardener 1 must
work harder. Result beneficial to all. If I have been
choosing bad ground I must choose better. Result as
before. If lam too weak in bodily frame for gardening
I must turn my attention to something else. Result again
beneficial. In the first case the remedy lies with me. My
conscience will be aroused through starvation. Indolence
is only a sluggish conscience. The honest man is ever
active. In the second case if you, who can grow two
cabbages to my one, will give me advice or co-operate with
me to supply the cabbage-market we shall both be
benefitted, for, by exclusion of the first and third cases, I
am plainly worth my salt or rather cabbage. But you,
the stronger man in the medieval market, smile and say
with a shake of the head “No, That is not business .” What
can be the cause of this strange a/rrest of a natural develop-
ment well-begun ? If the gardener and the baker meeting
at the tree, would only carry this principle of mutual trust
a little further the market would be gone. If in the larger
market or mart the cabbage-vendors would co-operate,
there would be one price of cabbages, the loaf-vendors


would be doing the same thing, and there would be one
price for loaves and so on. Then a Central Guider would
be appointed who could, by drafting workers from one
trade where they were superfluous to another where they
were needed, equalize all prices by equalizing all costs,
price would then become cost and vanish. But the Mart
remains ! Why, I ask, will not this stupid Trade vanish ?
The answer is not far to seek. In my imaginary com-
munity of eleven men I had to suppose a ‘ mental freak ’
impelling the Workers to dispense with the services of the
Gruider, but that is out of the question, for they remained
intelligent afterwards. Mental aberration as a primary
cause is out of the question here too, because the sphere of
our studies is a medieval English market. What then can
do this, if mental aberration as a first cause be ruled out ?
Mr. George, you, at least, will not need to be told that the
answer is— moral aberration —Distrust begotten of Violence.
The Bridge of Good-will has been broken down by
Violence, and is held a ruin by Distrust. Look up from
the apple-stall where we are standing in the ‘ good old
days ’ and you shall see towering above the busy market a
huge castle with its ‘ donjon-keep.’ In this castle lives a
Bushranger, Baron or Lord. The shadow cast by the
Bushranger’s Residence falls not only across the market-
place, but into the hearts of the traders. Property is not
secure nor life. Let any of the traders be too bold in his
talk, let two of them get together in the intervals of busi-
ness, and say under their breath, and with glances back
and fore—“ Why are we robbed thus ?”—and a little bird
shall carry it. Let a man, more courageous than the others,
with stronger instincts for Freedom, shake his clenched
fist at the dark towering mass, and the next day he has
lodging in the dungeon. The very instincts that make for
defence of property and life make for industrial organisation by
which waste of property and life is avoided. In actual life the
commanding mind is the commander or guider. The
Central Guider lies in the dungeon. Does not all History
bear me out ? Have we not fought our way up from
Slavery or villeinage, curbing John, executing Charles,
ejecting James? From the Statute of Labourers to the
recent utterance of Bishop Barry—is it not all a gigantic
conspiracy against Labour? Might not Labour be the
blackest of crimes instead of the only Godlike Thing
upon the earth? “Behold the hire of the Labourers,
which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud, crieth.” It is your proud distinction, Sir,
to be the greatest Champion of Labour modern times can


show. To stand by Labour is to stand for what alone is
good or goodly, Godly or Godlike among men, and to
stand against what is anti- Godlike. I leave investing par-
sons to say what is anti-Godlike. I invite all land-grabbing,
money-making followers of John Wesley, in Australia, to
preach from the text —“ Ye cannot serve God and Mam-
mon”—stress to be laid on the ‘cannot.’ But lam
digressing. To return to the market of feudal times. For
the sake of the uninstructed reader I will here quote a
passage from a school-history. The reign of Edward 111.
is being summarised into paragraphs under dark type
headings.
“ The Labourers. Two kinds, both harshly treated:—
(1) Villeins (or serfs ) who worked for a lord without wages,
and were bound to the soil (could not leave their lord) ;
were allowed a little land lor themselves. (2) Free
Labourers, who worked for wages, and were not bound
to the soil. Wages were very low.
The Dlach Death. —Half the people perished; great
demand for labour; labourers asked more wages; land-
lords reduced free labourers to villeinage, and passed
Statute of Labourers, making demand for higher wages
illegal; insurrection of labourers under John Ball.”
1 think that no one will have the temerity to question
my solution of the problem why Trade did not become
Co-operation, why the sightless-orbed monster did not
become a clear-eyed Man. Oppression then hath done
this thing. In my imaginary community I made the
Central Guider die when required. The fact was, he was
hilled by a Bushranger!
In the dungeon of the medieval Castle or Court John
Eliot languishes and dies. Yonder is a Freeman whom they
are trying to drag in, but he falls fighting —John Hamp-
den. Yonder another, renowned in History, the Lion of
the Tribe of English. He has a sword, the like of which
was never wielded before nor since. The gay Bravoes of
the Court fall upon him, but he has Ironsides! The
sword is the sword of Naseby, and he who holds it is the
Lord Protector of the Realm of England. Oh Cromwell,
thy sword never flashed but for Freedom and never did’st
thou cut a man down but the blessing of the God of
Freedom was first asked and obtained upon the transaction !
I say then that medieval Trade clearly remained an
Abortion through Fear.
To establish the same proposition as regards the modern
English market scarcely needs a word. After my letter to
the Professors it cannot well be denied that the Castle of


Plutocracy dominates the Modern market. Here, Fear and
the same fear, fear of beggary, renders Trade an Abortion.
If any proof could he required I should say that Life
Assurance, that most bastard of all bastard Businesses,
proves the point. Life Assurance is Insurance against
Beggary. I will refer to this again.
The proposition is now established for evermore that
Trade is diametrically opposed to Intelligence and Freedom.
Enter Freedom. "Vanish Trade. Vanish Fair-tradism,
Protectionism, Reciprocity, Retaliation, &c. Vanish Free-
Tradism. Vanish Single-Taxism.
I have here mentioned Protectionism for the first and
last time. I may say that I believe in Protection. This
book is written in the interests of Protection, so to speak.
To be more explicit, I write in the interests of those who
should be Protected. Namely the Weak. Here is a
quotation from the same School-history the most sensible
history I have ever seen (S. R. Gardiner—Longman, Green
& Co.) The italics are mine. The passage is from a
paragraph on improvements in spinning-machines. Har-
graves and Arkwright are dealt with, then
“ A further improvement was made by Crompton, who
invented what is known as the mule. Me was a poor weaver;
when his machine was finished, he heard that mobs were
gathering to break all machines. He pulled his to pieces
and hid it away. When quiet was restored he began to
spin. The yarn which he sold was better than any that had
been known before. Manufacturers came round him to find
out how he did it. The manufacturers were as bad as the
workmen had been. They peeped in through the windows
to see what his secret was. Poor Crompton had not money
enough to pay for obtaining a patent, which would have pre-
vented any one from copying bis mule. He therefore told
his secret, on the promise that the manufacturers would
make a subscription to reward him for his improvement.
The whole of the money subscribed by them was less than
£6B. The manufacturers gained thousands of pounds by the
poor man's invention which they had taken from him."
Now/write in the interests of ‘poor Crompton,’ Protec-
tionism is avowedly in the interests of the ‘ Manufacturers.’
Protection for the Strong!—l do not understand this. I
shall therefore never be a Protectionist, in the current
sense of the term, because I cannot grasp their leading principle.
I wish now to stand for a little while in the modern
English market and to study a few points which come
under our observation.


First of all, how easy it is to reduce Laissez-Faire of any
hind or rather Laissez-Faire, for there is only one kind, to
Non-Intelligence or In-Humanity by a direct method which
the simplest reader can follow. I touched upon this point
in my imaginary community where I was to issue the
Money. One Baker was married and the other un-married.
Now under Laissez-Faire or Go-as-you-please, married
workers and un-married compete together on equal terms,
so to speak. Under Mill-Fawcett Laissez-Faire where
‘living’ is more and more difficult to make the weaker
goes to the wall at once. The married man is the weaker
because the living to be made is at least double that of the
bachelor but the strength is on the average the same. It
is absolutely necessary then for the weak or poor married
man to call in the assistance of his wife and daughters to
eke out the living. The children sell papers on the street,
the daughters go out to service, the wife takes in washing;
thus the home is completely broken up. Thus a heavy
penalty is attached to marriage and a high premium set
upon vice. These considerations apply equally to your
Laissez-Faire as Laissez-Faire. If we take an economic
community in which a living is hard to make owing to the
hostility of nature, the result is the same. And observe
this, too, that invalids, lunatics and foundlings absolutely
perish under Laissez-Faire. If they do not perish in England
it is because a set of principles is called into action which
exactly negatives Laissez-Faire. Laissez-Faire produces
the mischief and the conscientious or humane person has
to ‘patch’ it up. We are always relieving beggars, but
we produce them faster than we can relieve them ! A man
willing to work is beggared and then offered alms ! It is
disgraceful, it is shocking !
Let us now stand before two rival establishments as they
may be seen to-day, side by side. Two rival boot-shops,
let us suppose. Each has a large ‘ stock.’ The two
‘ stocks ’ are for the requirements of a given populated
area. Is there any computation made of the size of this
joint stock to the requirements of the district? Certainly
not; these two shop-keepers do not compute with another,
they compete against one another. Suppose that one is
beaten, or ‘ fails ’asit is called. Perhaps he tries again in
another locality and fails again. He gravitates rapidly
towards back slums and alleys, and finally takes to the
Burgling Business where it is all Profits. His instrument or
capital is a ‘jemmy ’ with which he levers wealth out of
other people’s pockets; he becomes a humble Plutocrat, in
fact. Ah ! Burglar, your business is very risky, the only
safe jemmy is an unjust law I


Perhaps, dreadful to say, the beaten competitor in the
modern cut-throat market is a woman ! If lam wrong in
this supposition lam open to correction. Women are on
the average weaker than men. Children are weaker than
women. Perhaps, I say, the beaten competitor is a woman.
She has endeavoured to earn an honest living but has failed.
She gravitates towards the streets ! Oh God, in this great'
Christian community will no one help her ? Laissez-Faire !
Laissez-Faire! Go-as-you-please, good woman! When
you have begun to earn wages upon the streets, some of us,
some maudlin philanthropists with long ears and souls
steeped in hypocrisy will come along and ‘ convert ’ you
from the “ error of your ways ’ —But what wages does she
get upon the street ? Thorald Rogers, out with your
statistics ! What are the ‘ wages of sin ’ ?
Secondly, suppose the weaker competitor not to fail, but
to make a fair living. The stronger is doing twice the
business. He therefore is making two ‘ livings.’ But how
can a man live more than one living at a time ? Let us
investigate this. Why do men ‘ make haste to be rich ’ ?
Why do men put by money, and why do they ‘ make ’ more
money than is required for a fair living ? For one of three
reasons. Some wish to ‘ enjoy life,’ some wish to die rich,
some wish to secure themselves against reverses of trade.
I say advisedly secure themselves because ‘ property ’ is only
secured as a ‘ means,’ the end being ‘ life ’ or themselves.
The first practice is very common. It is most people’s
desire to ‘ make a fortune ’ and enjoy an idle life. But in
abstract economy all that you make above a fair and equal
living is waste labour, the products of that waste-labour
cannot command through Tokens or through any medium,
the labour of others. But you say, reader, we do actually
enjoy ourselves and command the labour of others. Yes I
know that, and you know now that in proportion as you
command (through the political machinery of unjust law)
the labour of others, in exactly the same degree as your
living is above a fair living—someone else is dying!
Starvation and prostitution are not in the least mysterious;
the mystery would be, if under existing conditions, they were
absent!
Before I take the next two classes the ‘ hoarders ’ and
the ‘ savers ’ let me speak of ‘ Old stock.” I have shown
that there cannot be old stock where industry is under
intelligent and central guidance. Abstract economy knows
nothing of old stock. Economy is management, economy
is the negation of waste. Old stock is the ‘ margin of waste-
products’ vastly increased and corresponding in size to the


size of the unguided industrial population. The joint
stock of the two shoe-shops is much greater than can be
got rid of in a given time, because no calculation is made.
Labour, then, of more than one day of the manufacturer’s
‘ hands ’ was crowded into one day, and the ‘ hands ’ paid
a day’s wage. Commodities on the average will not keep,
certainly none are improved by keeping. To supply the
hap-hazard calculations of the competing shoe-makers,
each of whom allows a hap-hazard margin for hap-hazard
customers, the ‘ hands ’ of the manufacturer (who requires
Protection) did more than a fair day’s work (fair=intelli-
gent) and received wage for one day. Trace the result.
Either the ‘ orders ’ from the shopkeepers to the manu-
facturers at the end of the given time are decreased in
amount or tbe over stock becomes at once ‘ old stock ’ in
the current sense. In the first case the manufacturer goes
easy (having previously gone too fast), the ‘ hands ’ work
half-day or no day, some being discharged. Observe the
result on wages. Under this ‘ management ’a ‘ hand ’
loses wages and employment together, on the very day
when he should be paid for and do the work done
previously and Mw-remunerated. However that is neither
here nor there. That is only the poor devil of a wage-
worker, Mr. George. Nobody minds him, except you.
You have gone about the world telling people that Rent
is too high. But you must be mistaken. We are informed
on ecclesiastical authority that tv ages are too high in Aus-
tralia. Rent is the remuneration of idleness, wages that
of work. What is the moral ? The Church says Idle !
Men whose minds are ‘ Poverty ’-stricken say Work !
Henceforth, Mr. George, you can retire into obscurity
taking with you that useless manual which is said to be
“ the secret of England’s greatness,” and in which I find
the words, “ Work, while it is day.”
‘Over-production’ in the commercial sense is here clearly
seen in all its imbecility, fraud and brutality. It is Mis-
Management gone crazed! In The Manual I find that the
“ hire of the labourers which is kept back by fraud, crieth.”
In the same Book I find mentioned as a term of reproach
‘ Hirelings.’ ‘ Hirelings ’ are the exact opposite of Shep-
herds or Bishops of Souls. “ But he that is an hireling
and not the shepherd whose own the sheep are not (he
probably owns land or labour instead) seeth the wolf (the
‘ manufacturer ’) coming and fleeth ; and the wolf catcheth
them (the Cromptons—the poor weavers) and scattereth
the sheep. The hireling fleeth because he is an hireling and
careth not for the sheep.” These are the words of The


Great Wage-Worker. Mr, George, you are in good com-
pany in your advocacy of the honest Wage-Worker. In
the first case, apart from the effect upon the Wage-Worker
and his family , there is waste of products. Anything pro-
duced out of time is, in so much, wasted. The alternative
supposition is that the surplus-stock is sold off as ‘ bar-,
gains ’ and used at once. But there is a curious fallacy
here. When I was at school I studied Algebra to simple
equations and Arithmetic to simple addition. I find these
studies very useful to me now. In the way of business
this over-stock in a first-class business falls into the hands
of enterprising people of the second-hand shops and ‘ old
stock ’ from the second-hand shops is the ‘ stock-in-trade,’
ultimately, of the third-hand shops and so on. Now your
Old Stock is used I admit, Your waste-products are not-
waste, I admit, Assign a sraail positive value to a waste-
product. By whom is the Old Stoclc-ivaste-product used ? By
a second or third or fourth-rate person. Some one whose
life is being wasted under Laissez-Faire. Now your plus
quantity vanishes before this greater negative, “ Is not
the body more than raiment ?”
Before I leave ‘ Old-Stock ’ I should like to draw your
attention to Scientific Old-Stock. Amongst the many curi-
ous things of modern commercial life there is nothing
more remarkable to the intelligent person than Science
devoted to the production of economic ‘ Old-Stock.’ I
refer, as you will at once see, to Tinned-meats and Frozen
Mutton. These things are Hermetically-sealed Abomina-
tions ! lam speaking of course not of the quality of the
things sealed. I sometimes eat and enjoy these Economic
abominations, but I eat and enjoy them under protest. I
need hardly elucidate this point. Tinned-meats are good
or valuable things according to their use or purpose.
This is Euskin over again. Tinned-meats are good if I
wish to go globe-trotting into Central Africa, having nothing
letter to do with my time, or to the North Pole, the same con-
dition being observed. But Tinned-Meats for people , who
would command, under Freedom, butcher’s meat! Why it is
a waste-product, on its way to Nothingness, arrested by
the Hand of Science. But Science should be directed to
the avoidance of waste. Therefore Science is wasting its
time. Let us leave this painful subject of refrigerated
eggs! So much for Old Stock and the man who makes
1 more than a living.’
Hoarders or people who ‘ save ’ for the purpose of dying
rich are very few. They are misers. In so far as this
class of motives partakes of the nature of ostentation, it


comes under the former head. The, ‘ Savers ’ or people
who ‘ save ’ (please observe the inverted commas) are the
widest class of all. The practice of ‘ saving ’ is universal.
Strange as it may appear, the very people who tell you that
your wages should be beaten down advise you to ‘ save the
remnant! Why ? Because, don’t you know, you can get
Interest upon it!
But the true nature of 1 savings ’ will best be seen when
the true nature of English Money and English Credit is
seen. Now I have already proved that money cannot cir-
culate in a Eree Community (where only it can he fairly
issued) and that its functions are merely those of a Credit-
Token which is unnecessary. I now wish to prove that
English Money does not circulate and that it.is only an
English-Oredit-Token. It is admittedly difficult if not im-
possible to prove a negative proposition dealing with
matters of fact. This is what is generally meant when it is
stated that you cannot prove a negative, _ Now in matters
of fact one exception disproves the proposition. The most
that can be done therefore is to take the question of money-
circulation as against the credit-function of money and
leave the whole question in such a position that no one
will have the temerity to take up the affirmative. This I
will do.
Circulation, if it means anything, means that the Tokens
pass from hand to hand. Now the Tokens are, by
definition, State-issued. The Money then of which I
speak (it is always well to know what one is talking about)
are Bank of England Notes or Coins of the Realm or any
other State-issued equivalents. If then we can bring facts
to show that the State-issued documents are as little used
as possible or are treated as equivalent to private-issued
documents, the proposition is established so far as it admits
of establishment.
Now this tendency is universal and universally increas-
ing. To take the first part that State-issued Tokens or
Documents are as little used as possible. The Millionaire
or Lord who purchases most, uses money least in proportion
to his command of money. A cheque-book or private
document is used. “Your signature, my Lord, is suffi-
cient ” says the elegant shop-keeper. Further, the
signature even is not required, the look of the Lord can
do the business. By ‘ look of the Lord ’ I mean his
appearance, his shiny boots and shiner hat. Ultimately
the analysis brings us to this, that the Millionaire or Lord
is known, that is, is known to have power over labour, that is,
over Labourers.


The second part, that private documents are as good as
State documents is well exemplified in Australia. It is as
common to use private-bank-issued notes as State-sover-
eigns. A sovereign and a ‘ note ’ are absolutely inter-
changeable ; they are both, ‘ documents ’ and that is all.
As before, the value of the document whether gold or note.,
is its known or conjectured power over labour.
By the use of cheque-books and private-notes the State-
circulation, taken in the mere sense of passing from hand
to hand, is diminished. The ‘ orbit of a half-crown ’ I
leave for ‘ Professors ’ to determine. It is plain that
English Money is only an English credit-token and that
English Credit is known ‘ power over labour.’
Call English Credit, Dis-Oredit and let us_ com-
pare Dis-Credit with economic Credit. Economic (in-
dustrial) Credit says “John Jones has rendered
a day’s labour. Let John Jones have a day s living.
That is the State-Officer’s intelligent order. Observe that
true or economic Industrial Credit runs or has currency for
one day. The reason of this is that you cannot, under
intelligent management, do one day’s work on a wrong
day. This can only be done under Laissez-Eaire.
This brings us to ‘ Savings ’ for since Money cannot, and
English Money does not circulate it is plain that your
< Savings ’ have no Token to correspond. What then are
our ‘ Savings ’ ? They are ‘ power over labour ’ stored up
to be used in case of emergency. You have a hundred
pounds in the Bank. Deposit Book—John Jones—£loo
with Interest. Interpreted. “I, the Banker, promise to
enslave labour to the extent of £IOO with Interest at the
call of John Jones”—Yery Dis-Oreditable this! Notice
incidentally that the very Banker’s existence depends upon
the fact that he enslaves labour for himself, otherwise he
could not conceivably be ‘ making a living.’ If you were
the only man on an island you could not ‘ make a living ’
by rattling coins together! Notice also that this power of
enslavement of labour grows / This “ growth of a power ”
is the most remarkable thing of modern times except
perhaps the waste-products arrested by the hand of
Science. “ Growth of a power .” I leave this for the
Professors who understand everything from protoplasm to
Capital (with a large letter.) A flower can grow because
it has roots, but a growing ‘ power ’ not embodied in an
individual! This is like the Protection of the strong by
the weak. I cannot understand this.
As Money gives place to Credit, so English Money gives
place to Dis-Oredit, And this is no play on words. They


(the English Tokens) can be seen to be Dis-Credit: they are
only used among strangers. If you are known (to have
power over labour) English Credit is extended to you ; if
you are not known (to have power over labour) No-Credit
is extended to you, that is, Dis-Credit is extended to you,
that is, you must show the Tokens. The case is made out:
English Money is a Token of Dis-Credit.
Strange these discoveries about ‘ Savings ’ and ) credit.’
One point more about English ‘ credit.’ Credit is some-
thing, Dis-Credit must be nothing. John Jones who has
done a good day’s work and receives credit for so doing,
knows that Credit is a very enjoyable something, namely,
Dinner, Home, Wife and Eamily. Now Dis-Credit must
be nothing, because it is the exact negative of ‘something.’
Therefore a Token of Dis-Credit must be intrinsically
nothing, that is, an English sovereign must be nothing.
Euskin has long ago pointed this out. Your Token, my
Eriend, commands nothing : its power or virtue (excuse
the use of this word) lies not in it, but in the enslavement
of labour. Now before X set ‘ labour,’ that is, the
Labourer, free, with the wand-wave of Ereedom, 1 want to
show that an English sovereign is nothing, labour being
still enslaved. Your go out with your sovereign to buy
what usually costs a sovereign but the enslaved labour
which gives the virtue to your Token has under blind
Laissez-Eaire been mis-directed into unusual channels away
from the production of the thing you want and which
usually costs a sovereign. Your sovereign which owes its
power to Laissez-Eaire is under Laissez-Eaire rendered
powerless. Prices have risen. Your sovereign is useless to
buy the thing you want. Your Sovereign is nothing. Q.E.D.
Lastly, what is the idea corresponding to this phrase
< circulation of Money ?’ You may prove that Money does
not and cannot circulate, but I am conscious of some
circulation of something. Yes, there is an idea vaguely
implied in the phrase. I have already referred to it and
now briefly touch it again, Euskin has said that a
sovereign in one man’s pocket owes its power over labour
to the no-sovereign in another man’s pocket. Given three
men with two pounds, one pound and no pound respect-
ively, the no-pound man shall serve or have his labour
commanded by the other two men, of these others the two
pound man has more power over the no-pound man and
some power over the one-pound man. Now the idea
underlying the phrase ‘ circulation of money ’ is really
circulation of power and we can now after reading the
letter to Professors distinctly see the circulation (such as it


is) of power. It act negatively by beggaring men. The
Eent-Interest machinery produces the inequality of power
over labour by transferring (not Tokens but merely)
* power ’ to some and thus weakening others. Thus the
whole thing, in the last analysis, is nothing more nor less
than inequality created and maintained and aggravated by
unjust law. The unjust law is not that individuals have
private property in what should be common (as land) but
that private individuals have private property in what is
private to others, namely, the labour of others. You see,
Mr. George, I am not differing from you but only refining
a little. I like logical accuracy and so does Professor
Huxley. There must be private property in land because
if I live in a house the area on which the house is built is
mine also, and could only be taken from me by taking the
house too. I believe that this is actually done in England
to-day. A house is put up on a certain area, the area
belongs to a certain Lord, therefore at expiration of lease
the house follows the area into possession of said Lord who
made neither. But, Mr. George, we shall discover some
wonderful things as we go along. Things are cleared up
a good deal now. I must hasten to a close.
What then are ‘ savings ’ ? They are this game of
Beggar-my- Neighbour- or- E ello w- Citizen-and-enslave-his-
labour carried into potentialities and futurities. They are
commercial ‘ Grudges ’ put down in black and white. In
order that I may be commercially ‘ saved ’ from ruin and
beggary I must have my hand upon my Neighbours’
throat and say, Pay me that thou dost not owe. _ Because
a man cannot owe labour in advance unless he is a slave.
If a man owes labour in advance for the rest of his life he
is a slave assuredly. The weakest English Labourer who
is a woman or girl (call her Cinderella) is a slave for life,
because no matter what happens in the way of invention
or march of Science, the beggaring-machinery of Eent-
Interest can outstrip anything. ‘ Outstrip ’ did I say ?
It is not that Invention and Science run away from the
Eent-Interest Dragon, they run towards it and down its
Omnivorous Throat!
In order to be commercially ‘ saved ’ then, I must have a
‘ Savings ’-Bank book in which is documentary evidence
that I have at command or at call baleful power over
labour. A man can only have rightful power over his own
labour. All ‘ savings ’ then are insurance against
adversity, against being found ‘ on the verge of starvation.’
To insure oneself against anything is to secure oneself.
Pine method this of insuring ! But why insure or secure


oneself? I thought we lived in a State. Will not the
State secure us ? Wonder of wonders! Horror of
Horrors! Mr. George, it is the State that beggars us!
The Plutocracy could do nothing if the State did not
“ secure them in all the rights of property.”
We ‘save’ or insure against beggary because every-
thing tends towards beggary. Cinderella has the Pluto-
cracy against her (the Pent-Interest-Idlers pure and
simple), she has the Money-makers against her, she has
the Hoarders, the Portune-makers and the Savings-Bank-
Depositors against her. She thus has the community
against her individually and finally she has the State
against her sanctioning all. Poor Cinderella! And yet
Wages are too high !
Furthermore, since in a rush to escape beggary we may
be overtaken by beggary (which seems very nimble) let us
Insure our lives. ‘ Lives ’ mark you! What! will not the
State insure or secure our lives ? Am I dreaming ? What
is a State, if in a State neither property nor life is secured ?
Here comes the Assurance Agent rightly so called. Let us
interview him. Good day, Agent. Explain your business
in as few words as possible. “Well I have come to insure
your life.” Thank you very much. You are a State-
officer I suppose. Admiral of the Navy or Oommander-in-
Chief of the Army, no doubt. —“ Oh no, lam a private
Citizen. You see, life is uncertain; so is trade. We
never know where we may be to-morrow. Life is but a
vapour.”—Well, how do you propose to insure a vapour ?
—“Well, you see, to drop Theology and come to Business,
our reason for Insurance is this. You may have a deposit
at the bank but you never know its purchasing power,
because ‘ prices ’ are so erratic. You must have a Principal
large enough to give an Interest equal to an income or
current living before you can be said to be insured.” —Yes
that is your reason, now for your method. —“ Well, those
who cannot get a foothold among the 1 savers ’ pay
periodical sums called Premiums into a sort of Pool.” —Oh
I see. The one who dies first has the Pool or a certain fraction
of it proportionate to premiums—“ Yes, exactly, or at least
the Widow and Orphans have it.” What! Agent, you do
not say that the State will not give Protection to Widows
and Orphans !—“No, Sir, the State leaves that to private
philanthropic enterprise. You see, Sir, private philan-
thropists would have nothing to do, if it were not for
these “ distressing cases,” Can I insure your life under
Table Z?” No, thank you, I never gamble,_ either on
the turf or on the exchange, much less, directly, with human


lives. Stay a minute, Man of Assurance Unlimited. This
Pool. Does it gather Interest ?—You nod. Q-ood morning,
Sir.
Henry George, I put it to you. Is not this the ghastliest
Fraud ever perpetrated. You insure your life or rather
you insure your wife and family against beggary by a
device which involves the grossest element of gambling and
beggars other wives and families !
I said at the commencement of my letter to you that men
seemed very busy, always engaged in some business or
other. Now, it seems, there are bastard businesses of all
kinds from Advertising or Commercial Lying, though Meat-
Tinning or the supply of Bogus-Economic-Food up to Life
Insurance or Commercial Murder spiced with Fraud.
An end to this. I wave the wand of Freedom. The
Free Labourer works only under intelligent guidance.
Your ‘ Savings ’ vanish. There is and was no such thing as
4 Savings ’ either above the earth or beneath it, either in
time or space. It was only potential dis-credit and dis-
grace.
Let me briefly deal with the terms: capital, cost and
credit.
I venture to assert that ‘ capital ’ (in abstract or in
English economy) is not the result of saving. All evidence
goes to show that a man’s activities are in excess and
greatly in excess of his wants. The primeval savage,
doubtless, in the exuberance of animal vigour and with
dawning intelligence fashioned the first rude instrument (a
sharpened stick or pointed flint) in order to work off
superfluous energy. Capital, therefore, was the result of
expenditure not of saving. The point is not however
worth disputing, and I do not dogmatize where I cannot
prove. Capital, then, is embodied intelligence. It is an
instrument , nothing more nothing less. The surgeon’s
lancet is his instrument or capital or capital instrument.
Free Labourers, our 'savings’ gone, what have we left?
We have the Wealth actually in existence, and we have
the instruments by which to produce more. Our instru-
ments are the warehouses, wharfs, factories, machinery of
England.
All this pother has been about the owner of the instru-
ment. But under Freedom there is only the Free Labourer
in existence. Therefore the instrument is ours. And the
land to whom does that belong? The land or planet
belongs to the Being who owns the rest of the Planetary
System, the sun and galaxy of suns.


Cost. Briefly. A Nation is practically omnipotent over
its means of living, because of the multitude of hands and
of heads. Coals for my fire in a given economic time may
cost more labour than wood for my fire in the same time.
Under central guidance or Industrial Government, workers
may be drafted into the more difficult branches until all
costs are assimilated. One cost now supervenes. What is
cost then ? It is a day’s work. What is credit ? It is a
day’s living.
Let us then, for the present, leave the Free Co-operating
English Labourer leaning upon his capital collective spade.
There is yet one crowning error, as it were, of the Mill-
Fawcett Professors. I find in their boohs that the Science
of Wealth-Production is divided into two parts treated
separately. Creation or Production and Distribution.
These cannot be considered separately because they are
identical in every part. Co-operation is of Supply and
Demand together. The man who drives the baker’s cart,
is he a producer or distributer? Both at once. The
baker? By economic exchange of labour he is both.
Co-operaUon blends the whole thing into perfect harmony,
order and prosperity. The Baker and the Baker’s Man are
Co-operating Freemen. To come from the concrete to the
abstract, Production is work, Distribution is Living. Each
Labourer co-operates to the best of his ability in Produc-
tion and receives, in Distribution, to the most of his
necessity. Life is now worth living.
One last word about these Professors and I take my
leave of you. In “ Work and Wages,” by Thorold
Pogers, popular edition (extracted from a larger work)
page 165, I find the following: (the great Authority on
Prices speaks):—
“While in the United States in 1881, I found that the
reading public was interested and amused (italics mine) by
Mr. George’s work on ‘ Progress and Poverty.’ A clever
man (that’s you, Mr. George) had caught up a few real
facts (I think yom must have unduly neglected oatmeal-
quotations) and a few doubtful theories (etcetera).” “ For
this misery of the present and the future, Mr. George
prescribes a single and in his opinion a complete remedy
(if you had only prescribed oatmeal!) just as the owner of
a patent medicine is ready to assert (etcetera etcetera).”
“ The book was written with great clearness (that’s you,
again). The Americans, always pleased with clever para-
doxes (what about the Bogus-Employer ?) . . . read
the book, not seriously, I conclude and have, I presume,
forgotten it (Isn’t this delicious?) ” “In England it has


run through, numerous editions and is said to he (italics
mine) accepted as a new gospel of labour (etcetera etcetera.”)
May we not, Mr. George, in taking leave of the Profes-
sors (living Professors of course I mean), Professors Hux-
ley, Rogers, Argyle, Gladstone etcetera, may we not
adapt the saying, already quoted from the Fawcett manual
about the English Labourer, to these men and say -that
“ their ignorance is as complete as it is distressing ”?
And now, Sir, I take my leave of you. Allow me in
parting to draw your attention to the extreme simplicity
into which the Industrial branch of the whole subject is
got. We see a Free Labourer with a good (or capital)
spade, doing a day’s work for a day’s living.
Farewell great Defender of the Poor ! —great advocate
of Protection for the Weak ! All the good that your
Single Tax could have brought us is to your Credit , in
Heaven and wheresoever else there is Intelligence.


“ 0 men, with sisters dear 1
0 men, with mothers and wives !
It is not linen you’re wearing out.
But Human Creatures’ lives!
Stitch—stitch—stitch !
In poverty, hunger and dirt ;
Sewing at once, with a double thread,
A shroud as well as a shirt."


LETTER IY.
To the Reader,
Reader, when you have read so far in this little book
you are a Free Man. Stand erect in the silent majesty of
Freedom. Clamour not, be not riotous, behave not
tumultuously. Throw aside for ever the bad practice of
shouting. It is for half-emancipated Englishmen who bray
before the hustings in the hope that they may some day
bray on the hustings. We have on our side, on the side
of Freedom, the public conscience of the English-speaking
race and the Cod of Humanity. Of whom then shall we
be afraid? Nay, there is no man against us. None
shall dare to stand up and say “ Let these things go on.”
Even a Minotaur has a conscience and is a Minotaur only
by reason of Laissez-Faire.
In this letter I purpose to find Cinderella, but I will,
just here, make a personal explanation which I feel called
upon to render. After I had finished my letter to .the
great Californian Economic Reformer and had given a last
parting slash at the Professors of the Mill-Fawcett-Balaam
philosophy, a curious thing happened. In an odd interval
of the day, with a mind full of my subject, I chanced to
take up a copy of the London Graphic and, as I turned it
over, my eye was arrested by the name “ Cinderella.”
No name was more familiar to my mind than that. There
she sat, the despised drudge of the Fairy Tale, the Type of
the despised Labourer in all ages. Her sisters, haughty
dames, would not soil their hands with work ! There she
sat in the kitchen pensive and sad. The furniture consisted
largely of a stool and a kitchen broom. But this Cinderella
was not the Cinderella of my thoughts. She is a Type,
and to paint the Cinderella of each age you must first find
her. To pourtray, as Cinderella, a well-fed though rather
gloomy-looking young woman with good features and
commodious house-room is a moral anachronism. Life is


an Allegory which can only be understood by him who
truly lives. I turned over the pages mechanically and saw
three faces, side by side, a lady between two gentlemen.
Of course I looked at the lady first. It was a bright fresh
young English girl and a pleasing contrast to the sulky
young woman with the broom. Next I noticed in large
print, “ Mathematical Tripos,” which term always fills me
with awesome veneration since, at school, Simple Equations
blocked my further progress. My mind was full of
Cinderella (the true) and I could not help feeling how far
above the dividing social line was this young well-
educated lady; as far above as Cinderella is beneath.
Under the portrait I read the words “Above the Senior
Wrangler” and my interest was heightened. What could
be the name of this astonishing student? “Fawcett”
met my glance. Cinderella and Fawcett —curious coinci-
dence in one number of the Graphic ! Could it be that this
was the daughter of the man whose name I had, as it were,
dragged through the mire of opprobrium ? It was so. I
felt sorry that my use of the name, even in a general sense,
to describe a school of thought, should give pain to any
living being. Let me here say, then, with every expres-
sion of sincerity and earnestness that I have no quarrel
with any man living or dead. With every Englishman I
feel that tie of union which is called Patriotism or Citizen-
ship. I feel unbounded respect for every Englishman as
a man, whom I have castigated in my fierce polemic wrath.
To cross out the name was impossible and besides —was
not the name of Fawcett coupled with that of Mill? I
know no higher praise of John Stuart Mill, who was a
friend trusted and trusty of Thomas Carlyle, than to say
that in an age when the manufacturer-versus-poor-weaver
spirit ruled even more bitterly than now, he was the
Henry George of his generation, I know that the blind
man whose daughter’s face has drawn this willing apology
from my pen was the Champion of the liberties of the
down-trodden in India and was in all his instincts a true
Englishman. For Mr. Gladstone and all others I enter-
tain the sincerest friendship which I hope I may venture
to hope will be reciprocated.
Let me now sum up what our investigations have re-
vealed. I have shown a people beggaring itself at Com-
pound Interest, the principal being the balance of a
maximum Rent, determined by the fiercest competition of
the finest race of men on earth. I say ‘ people ’ advisedly,
for a Nation cannot beggar itself nor owe itself: it can
support and defend itself: it ceases to be a Nation when


Civil War, commercial or military, exists. My results will
stun no one more than they have stunned the writer. The
great Fate-Wheel of the Titanic Beggaring Machinery
hurtles through the gloomy air, filling the minds and
hearts of all with fear and apprehension. Every man
(except the Plutocrat) feels that there is nothing between
him and starvation but his own health or the equally un-
certain good-will of friends all anxious to ‘ make a living.’
In this Gigantic Maelstrom of men trampling one another
down to avoid being thrown down, of men beggaring one
another to avoid being beggared, everyone must join or go
to the wall. Every good instinct of the human mind tend-
ing towards simplicity of life, dress and manners, is per-
verted into an unmixed evil. For a man to be temperate
and control his passions is for him to under-buy-and-sell
some one in this Yanity Fair where ‘ livings ’ are gambled
for with the ferocity of despair. Thrift is a virtue, it is
true Economy , but misled by the maxims of a spurious
economy, a poor sempstress or servant-girl shall put a
shilling into the ‘ Government’-Savings-Bank the Interest
of which is coined from the ‘ sweated ’ labour or the out-
raged virtue of her fellow-citizens or herself! So simple a
matter as the admission to or exclusion from the Australian
Colonies of Chinamen is complicated by industrial con-
siderations of wages with which in abstract economy it has
nothing to do. If Englishmen were free to work, free in
their work, they could not he hampered by the competition
of this lower type of man. A Chinaman can live on the
simplest diet and can therefore offer his services for less
Giving’ than an Englishman. ‘ Livings ’ are beaten down
by ruthless competition cried on by clergymen (who ‘ in-
vest ’ the proceeds of the collection-plate!), until an Eng-
lishman must either live on rice or hope. Permission to
foreigners to reside in a State is a matter of paramount
importance to the Citizens of the State but it has nothing
to do with the Industrial question. I can well imagine a
lower race being admitted into a State to do certain menial
work which the Citizens felt it irksome to discharge. They
would be governed and directed in their work and be
treated like men but not as Citizens. How completely
Laissez-Faire has permeated every function of Govern-
ment, how completely the very idea of a State has vanished
will be shown in the sequel. The armies of England are
hireling armies, the workers of England are hireling
workers —all these are hired to defend and support a few
private individuals, owners of the soil and all that is upon
it, higher in their vast pretensions than the Sovereign


upon the Throne! The issue has been too long obscured.
I write this little book to affirm one thing and only one,
that an Englishman is an English Citizen. It is generally
thought that he may he a foreigner. [As I write I under-
stand that English newspapers advocate the introduction
of Coolie-Labour into Australia. What is a Coolie ? Is it
a machine ?] Under the magnificent Law of England,
magnificent in its suicidal fatuity, the whole soil of Eng-
land might be depopulated and the descendants of the
conquerors at Agincourt, Creey, and Naseby be replaced by
Central African dwarfs with poisoned arrows, degraded
Patagonians and bestial Hottentots and the change would
be unknown to those who ‘ govern ’ by the Mill-Fawcett
manuals ! There are English landlords (by ‘ English ’ I
mean of course English—Scottish—lrish—American
Australian landlords) who would not object, if only Rents
did not fall! Our very merchantmen are manned by
inferior races and no one seems to see the significance of
the fact. lam no bigot who write this. lam no Jingo
wishing to trail the Union Jack and invite ‘ furriners ’ to
tread upon it. lam a Citizen of England. Mr. Gladstone’s
recent utterances on Chinese gardeners and Italian singers
have moved me to the profoundest astonishment. To con-
found a citizen with a commodity ! For if Chinese gardeners
are commodities to be or not to be excluded by tariff, then
an English gardener is a commodity ! Is not this the same
error as the one we have unearthed, —to confound a man
with a spade! ? To admit foreigners indiscriminately
because they come to trade is like giving the pedlar the
run of the house and the use of the best bedroom! In
Australia I sometimes meet with the same idea put in a
coarser way. I hear it said occasionally of some quiet,
conscientious, diligent Honest Australian Citizen—that
“he has no stake in the country! ” By which is meant
that the Citizen in question (being honest) has not devoted
his attention to land grabbing or ‘ speculating ’ or other-
wise swindling his neighbour. Not to have a stake in the
country, is shown, upon analysis, to mean— not to have one’s
hands in other people's pockets. If Jesus of Nazareth,
Wesley of Epworth, and Paul of Tarsus lived in Australia
to-day, they would have no stake in the country. I say
that every citizen has an equal stake with every other
citizen, namely, his life. I will however try and avoid
rushing into the wider department of this inquiry. I say
‘ try ’ because my surprise at finding that the term ‘ English
Citizen ’ had no connotation was the sole cause in impelling
me to seek a solution of the vexed question of the day—


‘ Capital ’ versus Labour. As a Political Economist ap-
proaching the subject it its widest extent nothing that I
have discovered on the subject of Interest and Money has
surprised me so much as the initial cause of wonder —that
the very idea of a Polls was obsolete !
So far then I have been cutting away the mere
excrescencies of the subject of Political Government- or
Economy. I have shown that English Political Economy
is not even a Dismal Science, that it is not even Damned
Science, that it is, in truth, Damned Ignorance. I have
placed the spade of Logic beneath this baleful shrub of
Ne-Bcience and hurled it into the Limbo of Inanities. I
have proved so far as the proposition admits of proof that
Trade is a relic of barbarism; that it is at best a haphazard
and foolish way of supplying the wants of a community ;
that even upon fair conditions the waste of time and energy
involved in blind competition of individuals against one
another is overwhelming and inconceivable ; but that upon
the English conditions , the waste of Life and Virtue (which
is the energy of Life) is inconceivably awful and revolting.
The results of blind competition of Englishmen against
instead of with their fellow-citizens shock the moral sense
no less than the ‘ Science ’ upon which the national com-
mercial conduct is based, violates the Laws of Thought.
I cannot do better than quote here a few passages from
“ How the Poor live ” (G. E. Sims), which will furnish a
text for my concluding remarks. I select a few at random,
not having read the book through. The italics are mine.
“ The ‘ appy dossers ’ are the wretched people who roam
about the street, houseless, and creep in to sleep on the
stairs, in the passages and untenanted cellars of the
lodging houses with the doors open night and day. No
policeman’s lantern is ever turned upon them and they
crowd together in their rags and make a jolly night
of it. Sometimes in among them creeps a starving woman to
die from want and exposure and she dies while the foul
oath and the ribald jests go on. . . . Thus not only
are many of the licensed lodging houses and homes of the
poor breeding-houses in themselves for crime, disease and
filth, but they are for lack of supervision , receptacles for that
which has already been bred elsewhere. . . . The
sanitary inspection of these houses is a farce, and in many
cases the vestrymen who ought to put the law in motion are
themselves the owners of the murder-traps. How foul,
how awful some of these places where the poor have found
their last refuge from Artisans’ Dwelling Acts and
Metropolitan improvements are, I dare not tell you.”
page 43.


It seems, Mr. Sims, that when the law is put in motion
so much the worse for the poor.
“ The presence of a donkey in the apartment of a
costermonger and his family is however by no means rare,
and quite recently a zealous sanitary inspector has dis-
covered a cellar, inhabited ly a man , his wife, three children
and four pigs." p. 68.
“ There are hidden away from general observation,
marvels as great as any of those which the enterprising
Farini imports from the Cannibal Islands. . . for the
amusement and edification of the shilling-paying public.
Missing links abound and monstrosities are plentiful. Some
of the terrible sights which we have seen we have too
much respect for the reader’s feelings to reproduce. Now
and again the revelations of some polic-court send a
shudder through society (That you may expect from a
‘ Science ’ which gives one the shudders, Mr. Sims.)
Children starved and stunted, and ignorant as the lowest leasts
of the forest are unearthed in foul dens, where they have passed
their little lives chained to the wall. . . . Grown women
who have lived naked in underground cellars and long ago
lost their reason are found one tine morning ly the merest
accident (Laissez-Faire Mr. Sims) while their gaolers are
away. The History of Horrible London has yet to be
written (!)
“ The waste of human life (Ha! Ha ! Moloch !) brought
about by the conditions under which the poor are allowed
(by Laissez-Faire) to live, breeds in them a contempt for
the sufferings of others. They become hardened and the
cruelty at which we shudder is their second nature .”
There is some more on page 70 about “the gin-
maddened ruffian, the cry of the trampled wife and the
wail of the terrified child ringing out night and day ” —which
lam too sick to copy out. “Oh men, with sisters dear,
oh men, with mothers and wives ! ”
On page 77, I find Mammon showing his hand rather
openly. “ A big block of buildings, falling into decay,
was for sale. A person officially connected with the
parish drew the attention of the sanitary officers to them
and had them condemned as unfit for habitation. Directly
this was done the parish gentleman, in conjunction with a
firm of speculators, bought the property for a bagatelle—
for old building material, in fact. They gave a coat of
whitewash here and there and let every single room again
directly at increased rentals .”
My only comment upon this, is the oft-quoted and oft-
boasted saying that “ the Bible is the secret of England’s


greatness.” Reader you can get the little book “ How
the Poor live ” for a trifle. Giet it and read it for you now
know how the poor are made poor and how when once
beggared they are for ever beggared. The annals of Hell
pale before the records of England. I, who write this
book as a last appeal to the English race as well as an
unanswerable and overwhelming indictment of English
Cabinets, Presidencies and Parliaments, am a plain man
using plain terms. I call a spade a spade not a man. I
call Slavery Slavery not Freedom. I assert not that all
wage-workers are slaves but that the weakest undoubtedly
are. Cinderella is a slave. I assert that English Society,
that is, the indiscriminate horde of people calling them-
selves a Society or State, may be likened to a huge Oar of
Hell drawn along amid the applause of Lords Spiritual
and Spirituous, amid the approving drivel of semi-damned
Pietists of every persuasion and of every degree of vacuity
and mental dishonesty —driven along, I say, over the
crunching bones of strong men hopelessly enslaved, over
the careworn upturned faces of feeble women hopelessly
beggared and if you will stoop down near the mighty
wheels of this Apollyon Chariot —this Christian Juggernaut
—the warm blood of English babies shall squirt into your
eyes. Infanticide (for Wages) is the latest Laissez-Faire-
fostered, No-Government-Protected English industry !
0 thou great Christian nation, whilst thy church-bells
ring there are deeds perpetrated for a ‘ living ’ that might
make Pandemonium ring its bells. Whilst your droning
God-forsaken cleric drones out the story of Jesus blessing
little children, little English children are being done to
death for wages. Herod is out-Heroded. [Who is bold
enough to say that Medea herself shall not be outdone ?
You can do anything under No-Government if you have
‘power over labour.’] Whilst you listen to the story of
Jesus and the adulterous woman, there are nameless crimes
safely perpetrated under the encouragement of Laissez-Faire,
under the ‘ distinguished patronage ’ of No-Government
by unsexed women who out-Harpy Harpies. These Har-
pies and the Minotaurs for whom they cater can alike stand
up and say to existing No-Governors “ Thou art the manT
This little book will shock Christendom to such a degree
as Christendom hourly shocks Christ. Such a despotism
is herein revealed as shall thrill the world with horror!
The Englishman’s spade—the warehouses, factories, ships
and wharves of England—has gone in Rent and gone
again and gone, gone, gone, again till I suppose that every
plank of every wharf and every stone of every warehouse


is drenched with the blood and tears of English Citizens,
their orphans and their widows.
Despotisms there have been and are, but a Despotism
boasting itself a Freedom is unique. The semi-carbonized
Armenian peasants burnt for non-payment of taxes
“alleged to be due” shall hear of it and say “"What a
Slavery!” The dwellers in the gloomy wastes of Siberia,
fast bound in affliction and iron, clanking their fetters,
shall say, “ We, at least, know that we are not Free.”
Fellow-Citizens, self-governing Englishmen of America,
the British Islands, and Australia, I raise my right hand
to Heaven and adjure you by the name of the great Wage-
Worker, whose betrayer you daily honour, to come out of
this Hell-Carnival. The reek and ruin, the stench, smoke
and steam of this iniquity —the iniquity of English public
life—have gone up into the nose, eyes, ears and mouth of
Him who hath said “ Vengeance is mine.”
Let us seek Cinderella for I, at least, have delivered my soul.
Come with me all No-Governors, No-Economists, and
No-Bishops, and let us go out upon the streets of London
or New York, or any modern town great or small. We
shall see what evil hath been wrought by Scientific False-
hood. Is Cinderella on the streets to-night ? No, she is
not on the streets to-night. Do you see all these poor
girls (between eighty and a hundred thousand in London)
who smile at us ? They are earning their living —all the
living they can get in England. To find Cinderella we
must go into back alleys and tortuous bye-slums, up creak-
ing stairs, and through vile rooms yielding nothing but
misery, nausea, Sin, and—Bent. Come into this room.
The stench will well-nigh choke you. There in the corner,
a mere heap of rags lies Cinderella, “Who is She?”
Never mind who she is, I will first tell you what she
might have keen. ‘‘ Of all sad words of tongue or pen—The
saddest are these, ‘lt might have been.’” If England
were governed with that amount of intelligence which an
ordinary cabman exhibits in earning his daily wage, this
poor girl might have been, and would have been a Queen
of "Virtue, she might have been ‘ above the Senior
Wrangler,’ she might have been a happy wife and mother
in a happy home, she might have been and would have
been a free gay child of Nature, but she is —a dying—
starving —rotting prostitute !
Fellow-Citizens, we are s<?£/’-Governed. The ever present
Nathan of the Human Conscience points the finger of
conviction at you, and at me and utters, the appalling
indictment—“ Thou art the man ! ” Let us weep and turn
over a new leaf.


Part li
CON-STRUCTIVE.


Quod si exemeris ex rerum natura benevolentiae coniunctionem,
nec domus ulla nec urbs stare poterit, ne agri quidem coitus 'per-
manent. Id si minus intellegitur, quanta vis amicitiae concordiaeque
sit, ex dissensionibus atque discordiis percipi potest. Quae enim
domus tam stabilis, quae tarn firma civitas est, quae non odiis et dis-
cidiis funditus possit everti. Ex quo, quantum bonl sit in amicitia,
iudicari potest. Agrigentinum quidem doctum quondam virum car-
minibus Graecis vaticinatum ferunt, quae in rerum natura totoque
mundo constarent quaeque moverentur, ea contrahere amicitiam, dis-
sipare discordiam.
Cicero de Amicitia.


Manual of Political Economy for Free Men.
1. A Polis or State can only be composed of Free Men
and Free Women.
2, The principle upon which a State is based is called
the Law of Freedom.
3. This abstract principle as it is exemplified or con-
creted in the activities of daily life is called Amicitia,
Citizenship, Patriotism or Friendship.
4. The Law of Freedom is instinctive and unwritten.
It is supplemented by a few written or at any rate defi-
nitely known clauses called Political Credit and by one
similar clause called Political Dis-Credit or the Penal
clause.
5. Governors are certain Citizens appointed by their
fellow-Citizens to see that the Law of Freedom is not
infringed by fraud or violence.
6. The daily work of the Governor or Lord is called
Government or Political Economy.
7. Government is personal supervision by a Governor.
8. Government of men in the mass is carried on by
Centralization and De-Centralization.
9. A Governor is morally responsible for everything that
goes wrong in his sphere of Government.
End of Manual of Political Economy.


As an iceberg floating southward from the frozen
North is gradually undermined by warmer seas and,
become at last unstable, churns the sea to yeast
for miles around by the mighty rockings that por-
tend its overturn, so the barbaric industrial and
social system, which has come down to us from
savage antiquity, undermined by the modern
humane spirit, riddled by the criticisms of economic
science, is shaking the world with convulsions that
presage its collapse.
Edward Bellamy.


Eeader,
I know no more about Government of Men than
is stated in the foregoing Manual. There is therein
contained all that ever will be known about Government.
All Government is the same. Heaven groans under Go-
vernment of Angels and England and Hell
rejoice under Laissez-Faire.
Some people can write ten volumes about a thing, and
finally leave a confused impression where ten words would
carry all the information they intend to convey. It is
well-known that lucidity in writing depends upon the
mental lucidity of the writer. That is why English Poli-
tical Economy is so difficult to understand.
My nine propositions will doubtless sound dogmatic
enough. I cannot prove any of them. There are two
reasons why a proposition cannot be proved, that is,
proved true. First because it is false. Example. Wages
are paid out of capital, that is, out of a spade, that is, the
Labourer eats spades. Other examples. A demand for
commodities is not a demand for labour. Two and two do
not make four.
Secondly, because the proposition is self-evident or too
simple for proof. I offer the foregoing nine propositions,
hastily put together, as Axiomatic. I will briefly comment
upon them.
1. A Polis can only he composed of Free Men. Slaves may
at any time rise against their masters. Half-enslaved men,
unconscious of the nature and extent of their bondage, will
be always ‘ striking,’ that is engaging in Industrial Civil
War. Of the enslaved or the half-emancipated no Economy
can be written. 2 and 3 are definitions driven from number
one.
4. Political Credit is an intelligent extension of In-
dustrial Credit to certain members of the State. Industrial
Credit runs only for a day. John Jones has done a day’s


work: let John Jones have a day’s living. Political
Credit extends the living to John Jones’ wife, to John
Jones’ aged father, to John Jones’ family. In England
where it is considered immoral to marry or have aged
parents or young children, the wives, children and aged
count far nothing. Laissez-Faire! Laissez Faire! Hinc
illae lacrimae. Hence the Song of the Shirt, hence bare-
footed children selling papers, hence prostitution, hence
Workhouses. Political Credit should also be extended to
the crippled, the blind, the sick. In England where it is
considered a sin to be crippled, sick or blind, these are all
left to the un-tender mercies of the professional philan-
thropist. In a great Eoyal Nation political credit would,
I should think, be extended to men over sixty and to
children under the age of twenty-one. The rising genera-
tion would be judiciously trained in home, school and
playground for sixteen years, and in the University for,
say, five. Under intelligent central guidance the school
and the university will present a continuous career
accessible to all alike. A fair field and no favour. No vile
mind-stunting-competition-cramming course of no-study,
but intelligent, beautiful, leisured effective training. At
the age of twenty-one Political Credit is extended to Eliza
Eundles to become the wife of John Jones. INo fear of
starvation. Every Civil or Legal Household is on the same
standing as every other. Home life will then be beautiful.
No longer will the daughters of the poor go out to service,
no longer will the homes of the humblest citizens be
broken up. Slavery is no more. Eliza Eundles being a
Free Woman will sensibly decline to change her -name.
Political Credit might at any time be extended to any
genius who has a work on hand which promises well. But
this would not be Political Credit proper because it is
extended for work and ceases with the work. Civil work
or work under State direction only commands Industrial
Credit. Every Worker will be in the Civil Service.
Political Dis-Oredit is a Penal clause. If a man will not
work neither let him eat. An empty stomach is a fine
restoration for a benumbed conscience.
5. Governors of the highest grade are called Lords or
Law-Wards, because they defend the Law of Freedom.
6. Government or Political Economy is a doing. It is
easier to do than to write essays upon doing, easier than to
deliver orations upon the same. The analogy between
Political and Domestic Economy is obscured by the fact that
the relationship of the House-Holder to the House-Hold,
is that of a Senior to Juniors, whereas that of a Governing


Citizen is one of equal to equals. Let us look at Domestic
Economy. The three main duties of a Head-of-Family
are to Support the family, to Defend and to Pule the
family. In a Polis the Citizens Support and Defend them-
selves under proper guidance; the last function alone
remains. The Senior settles the disputes of Juniors and
restrains the activities of one which are exerted at the
expense of another. The Governor’s sole function is to
preserve the Law of Freedom. If a strong Citizen should
lay hold of a weak Citizen and say “ work for me, so that
I need not work,” the Governor would come down upon
him with prompt celerity. No Citizen can be a Slave to
do the bidding of a, private Citizen.
For all practical purposes three Governors are enough.
First the Merchant, or Head Workman, or Minister for
Works, who supervises the Support of the Citizens, that is,
the Industrial Organization or Civil Service. Next above,
the Judge or Minister for Justice to settle disputes, that is,
to practically interpret the Law of Freedom. Thirdly, the
Governor Or Lord who enforces not the Judge’s decision,
but his own. An appeal lies from the Merchant’s ruling
to the Judge’s decision, from both to the Lord’s decision.
A Free Man may in extreme cases appeal to the Overlord,
King or Queen. This is called ‘ appealing unto Csesar.’
Two sub-Governors and a Governor are quite sufficient.
The machinery of Government is very simple. The living
of the Governors is all the expense of Government, or, to
be exact, there is no expense at all. An appeal invariably
lies to the people or mass of Freemen in this way —the
Lord can only enforce his decision by volunteer service.
Police or Home-Soldiers will be very few. Every Citizen
is a special constable sworn in, in the sanctuary of his own
mind for the preservation of Order, that is, of the Law of
Freedom. Fighting will be carried on by the Volunteer
System. Men who now live wretched lives in barracks
will spread out over the country and earn their bread in
the Civil Service. Men who now fight like devils for poor
pay or no pay at all will fight for home, for house and
hearth, for wife and children, like angels, nay, higher
praise still, like Free Men. By the Lord Harry we can
fight, we English. At the call of the oppressed, at the call
of the knouted Women of Siberia, at the call of the roasted
peasants of Armenia fifty million swords of best Old
England and New England steel shall flash in the sunlight.
The Free Englishman shall dominate the world. No fighting
for hire against half savage tribes misled by English rum
but war to the knife against damned Tyrants who knout


women and burn men ! Nay ! no fighting will be required.
The English sword flashing responsive over the British
Islands, North America and Australia shall alone do the
business. But let us set our own house in order first.
7. Government is personal supervision by a Governor.
Only Local Government is possible. You cannot govern
where you are not. You cannot drive a horse and cart
unless you are with the horse and cart.
8. Government of masses of men is carried on by
Centralisation or De-Centralisation. When Government
is extended from part to whole or from one unit of popula-
tion to several this extension is called Centralisation.
Government, extending from units to new or smaller units,
that is, from whole to part, proceeds by De-Centralisation.
The two are, however, the same principle differently
viewed. Before a man can begin to govern he must first
know what he is to govern. You cannot drive a horse and
cart unless you have the horse and cart. This is the General
Unit, the Country or Kingdom. Divide the population
roughly into so many units, determined by the number of
people one Governor can supervise. This depends on the
character of the people including that of the Governor.
This unit is the decentralised unit and requires its three
Governors. One of the greatest blunders a No-Governor
can commit is to imagine that a promiscuous incoming
outgoing piebald horde of traffickers can be Governed or
even No-Governed. Decentralisation, then, is division of
labour in the industry of Governing. Like division of
labour generally it means Co-operation of Labourers.
Decentralisation, therefore, is the Co-operation of Governors.
Decentralisation as a scheme of Government (the only
scheme conceivable) is analogous to the growth of a tree.
Seed, roots, stem or trunk, boughs, branches, leaves,
flowers, fruit. The fruit is vitally connected with the
roots by decentralisation of organic force. So the State
stands like a giant oak with its roots embedded in the Law
of Freedom, the bed-rock of Justice, and every function of
Government is vitally dependent upon the nourishing soil.
Lop a bough off and you have Disintegration, State-
schism, Anarchy. Government is Decentralisation, No-
Government produces Disintegration, State-schism and
Rebellion. Victoria and Queensland are both gone from
the parent-colony by Disintegration, arising from what
alone can cause it —namely, No-Government. People’s
interests are not conflicting because they live on different
sides of an imaginary line !


Ths phraseology of current politics reveals the fact that
No-Government is responsible for Disintegration. A
Local Government Bill is in the air. Cultured and illiterate
politicians, God forbid that I should call them Statesmen,
alike talk mysteriously of Decentralisation as of a new
political manure. You propose, do you not, to give such
and such a place Local Government ? Then it had not
Local Government theretofore ? But Government is Local
or Non-existent therefore your place was not-Governed.
Q,. E. D.
Federation is Bogus-Centralisation on a basis of Disinte-
gration. Politicians from the different colonies meet
together. We have buried Patriotism, let us be Patriotic.
Such a meeting is a Political Undertakers’ Holiday.
Finally, Decentralisation is the only method by which
Government can be carried on among finite beings.
Government (by paragraph 7) is personal supervision of a
Governor; by Decentralisation, Co-operating Governors
co-operate. I will close the discussion of this term by
giving an illustration which is complete in itself and
absolutely the best illustration of Government as carried
on in real life that can be found. Every principle of
Government is exemplified in the management of the
average Citizen’s Household. The Husband and Wife
both work for the good of the household, the one probably
by out-of-doors work, the other by internal domestic
activity. The Wife governs while the Husband is away
and in a limited way when he is at home. Here is Co-
operation of Governors. To the eldest daughter are
deputed certain well-understood duties such as mending
clothes. Even the younger members of the family are
sometimes told off to “mind the Baby” that is to
Govern it. Here is Decentralisation in full swing. If
there be any Science about this, then Political Economy is
a Science ; if not, not.
9. A Governor is morally responsible for everything that
goes wrong. Nothing can go wrong except the Law of
Freedom be infringed. The Governor is there to see the
Law of Freedom preserved. Mr. Gladstone’s crowning
blunder as a No-Governor came under my notice as a
child. He once said that an explosion (the blowing up of
Clerkenwell prison, I think), brought something, some
pointer no-point, into the “range of practical politics.”
Translated into the strictly analogous industry of Naviga-
tion we have the statement: When a ship strikes the rock
it is time for the Captain to steer! No wonder the mighty
and majestic Ship of Old England labours and groans


amid rocks and shallows! Steer for the sea ! the sea of
Freedom!
So much for the Manual, I make no apology for the
somewhat dictatorial tone of these observations. It is
pitiable and awful to see Human Life and Happiness
sacrificed to accursed Greed and Tyrannous instincts work-
ing under No-Government. The principles here laid down
are universally and eternally true. Wherever there is
Government, unless it be carried on at first hand by an
all-pervading Deity, it is conducted upon the principle of
De -Centralization.
Books dealing with the future prospects of the human
race and more especially of the English race are numerous.
Two of these hold the field against all comers, —“ Looking
Backward” by Edward Bellamy, and “Progress and
Poverty ” by Henry George, The Author of Cinderella
comes into this discussion not to suggest or to theorise but
to state definitely in the name of Political Economy what
can and what cannot be done. There is no machinery of
any kind required. A half-sheet of paper will carry all
the instructions for the new Era. The year 1890 will be
known to posterity as the line of demarcation dividing the
Dark from the Light Ages. The period, say two centuries
before this dividing line, will be known to the Historians
of the Future as the Age of Parliaments and Prostitution.
In my next letter, to existing No-Governors, I shall
enter Downing Street and show how by intelligent Govern-
ment the vast chasm of Sin and Misery, Starvation and
Poverty, can be crossed with triumphant stride and joyous
shouting—in Twenty-Four Hours.




Government is not a trade which any man or
body of men has a right to set up and exercise for
his or their own emolument, but is altogether a
trust, m right of those by whom that trust is dele-
gated and by whom it is always resumable.
duties^ 8 ° f itSolf n ° rightS ’ they are alt °o ethcr
Thomas Paine.


111.
To ALL EXISTING No-GoVERNORS.
Respected Fellow-Citizens, respected only as Citizens,
If in the first part of this pamphlet I have thrown
down the gage of battle, I do now, in this second or
con-structive part of my subject, place in the midst of your
Council-Chamber upon the plain pewter of Logic without
adornment of flowers of Rhetoric, the golden Apple of
Concord of which the great Authority on Oatmeal cannot
tell the price.
The Golden Apple of Concord comes from the shores of
Botany Bay. Dread name! How many fiends incarnate
has your No-Government manufactured!
Lord Salisbury and Mr. Gladstone, let me join your
council. We three will form a Committee of Management
to educe Cosmos out of Chaos in a day. What are we
governing ? England—Wales—Scotland—lreland. You,
Citizen Gladstone, will take the office of Minister for
Works. You, Citizen Salisbury, take the Judgeship. I
will temporarily do the work of Over-Lord. We then are
a Committee of Management I say. We are the Royal
Council of England. Let Members of Parliament return
to their constituencies and govern. Let them appoint
temporarily the leading Business-man as. Minister for
Works; some respectable, that is, respected non-investing
clergyman as Judge. Govern, I say! Co-operate!
Organise! Organise!
It is now nine o’clock in the morning. By sunset there
must not be a starving, ill clad man in the realm, that is,
under our Government.
Let the following proclamations run out!
1. Let Credit take the place of Money.
2. Every man not wishing to be a Citizen of England
and to uphold England against all other countries—let him
depart at once! Colonies of foreigners are an abomination.
Every resident must become a Citizen.


3. Let all Citizens occupying posts of trust, such as care
of sick or insane or helpless stand to their posts and
desert them at their peril. Beware of manslaughter !
4. Let all Illth-producers, Money-Gainers and Idlers
enrol themselves for Work, reporting themselves to the
nearest Minister for Works.
5. Let all Wealth-producers continue their work !
6. Of Wealth-producers let those engaged in the pro-
duction of articles of luxury, in anything in fact less
necessary than food, fuel, clothing and houses, ease off for
the present and await instructions from Minister of Works.
7. Let Shop-keepers holding articles of luxury put up
their shutters and await instructions.
Before night-fall every Citizen and Citizeness must have
at least temporary shelter. No man can claim more than
an equal living. There is no Divine right of ownership
by one man in the labour of another. Freedom only is
Divine. Call for volunteers to penetrate the slums and
bring out the poor, the sick and the afflicted. There is
such a hum of happiness as the world has never before
heard! England is now Merry England. Nevermore
shall a Citizen of England starve! Government has begun.
All trains and trams are running free. Let all families
broken up by Laissez-Faire re-unite. Let the trains run
slower, there is no hurry. Do not precipitate Citizens into
the next world who only want to get out at the next
station. Never more shall families be separated. Ah, this
is a glorious day! Every Citizen’s life insured in the
honour of a Great Nation ! Old men shall say, “ Oh, for
another week of life to see this new Era !”
Head-Merchants, draft men into the costlier (mind this
word) branches of labour so as to equalize the day’s work.
Count up whatever you have in stock, it is false economy
to produce too much in a given time. Economy is non-
waste. Political Economy is Common Sense applied to
the daily life of a Nation.
A nation must he self-supporting . Draft workers into the
agricultural branch of industry. We all want ham and
eggs for breakfast. Whatever you want in the way of
imports must be paid for by exports. Let the manufac-
tures to meet imports be carried on in sea-port towns.
This will save carriage.
Co-operate ! Organise! Organise! Co-operate In
twelve month’s time the English Civil day’s work will be
about three hours—ten o’clock to one. This is a guess.
Every invention will shorten the Civil Service day. Let
science be brought to bear upon all arduous pursuits such


as coal mining. Sink a dozen shafts where your niggardly
profit-mongering labour-sweating private company sank
one. Let the doctors, schoolmasters, university professors
and learned men in general organise themselves and
report to nearest Minister of Work. Lawyers are not
required. They can either break stones or teach children.
All these crass thick-skulled young men who go about
wishing to ‘ save ’ us, let them go to work. The Apostle
Paul was chargeable to none. We cannot as a Nation
support block-heads. Let all men, who have something to
say about the next world or the higher life, say it on
Sunday when the Nation rests like one man.
Let our young men and maidens have a full education,
physical no less than mental. Oh it is a beautiful life we
are living ! I see a mighter nation than Milton thought he
saw. I see the bolts and locks and burglars disappear
together. I see queenly modesty of Free Women, and
kingly majesty of Free Men. Upon this basis of National
Freedom every stroke of inventive genius and scientific
advance shall tell for the general good. After the civil
day’s work is done, the Volunteers shall assemble and drill
and drill in free Co-operation. Our Generals will come in
here. I see a mighty Englishman with bright capital
spade, and near at hand a flashing capital sword. I see
such happiness of Home-Life as blurs my writing with
secret tears of joy. A great Nation! A truly great
Nation!
One word more. I find to my inexpressible surprise that
you No-Governors, Gladstone and Salisbury, are no Gover-
nors. I find that you are Bogus-Governors, and that the
real ruler of England is Queen Victoria! God save the
Queen! I shall therefore vacate my chair for the direct
representative of the Sovereign. Poyal Citizen Wales!
you are the Over-Lord. You three: William Ewart
Gladstone, Hatfield House Salisbury, and Albert Edward
Prince of W ales : you three shall govern England as the
Privy Council of Victoria Pegina. Thus shall the Crown,
the Lords and the Commons, be for ever reconciled.
A Bleu.




POSTSCRIPT.
At the risk of making this pamphlet scrappy I will add
a few thoughts which occur to me as it goes through the
press. Scrappiness Ido not dread, this work being written
not for style but for effect. I may here say that a hundred
copies are being printed at my own expense for distribu-
tion to Members of the Cabinet and of Parliament and to
a few leading Citizens. If the public want more copies
they can ‘ higgle ’ with the printer about the ‘ price.’
The Author can have no pecuniary interest in the thing
whatever : the book is written to destroy Pecunia.
It has occurred to me that a few points might be further
elucidated. Pirst the “Lion in the Way” (See Henry
Greorge : Protection or Freetrade: Chapter xxvii.) is not
the lion of vested interests at all. A person’s ‘ property ’
‘means’ and ‘money’ in so far as these are not the
products of Ms own labour are shown to depend entirely
upon enslaved labour. Set labour free, that is, free the
Labourer and this kind of ‘ property ’ vanishes and com-
pensation is thus seen to be impossible and inconceivable.
“ The slothful man saith, there is a lion without, I shall
be slain in the streets.” TMs is the Lion —the lion of a
sluggish conscience or an enslaved mind. In the same
book of Proverbs I find all Political Economy condensed
into one verse, “ Devise not evil against thy neighbour (or
fellow-Citizen) seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.” A
man may be most ‘ secure ’ when he is most un-safe as
every school-boy who can translate the paragraph of Cicero
facing the Manual, well knows. Are we not protected by
English Law, my ‘ secure ’ fellow-Oitizens ?
Secondly. Who is the Capitalist whom we call Capita-
list ? He is either a Wage-Worker merely, or a Landlord
merely, or a Landlord with ‘ working ’ proclivities, or he
has ‘ money ’ which was originally obtained in Pent (that
is from the Wage-Worker by Competition) or directly by
Wage-Working. But capital can no more produce capital
than a spade can beget a spade. Luskin wrong here !
The whole question of “ Capital versus Labour ” is the


Manufacturer versus tlie poor Weaver; that is, the strong
Labourer (strong by unjust laws) versus the weak Labourer
(weakened by unjust laws.)
Thirdly, the basal fallacy of the economic-Melchisedec.
As the ancient Sophists gravely discussed the knotty ques-
tion, How many Souls can dance on the point of a needle ?
—and gravely proved by chop-logic that Motion is
impossible—so these modern Pedants learnedly discuss the
nature of that mysterious substance ‘ capital ’ (which is a
spade) and classify it with burdensome profundity and
Laputan wisdom into circulating and non-circulating spades.
But their definitions having been got through and the
Readers nearly as much mystified as the Professors by the
Professors ’ explanations , the functions of capital are never
again referred to in their works. Henceforth not the
functions of capital, but of Capital that is of a Capitalist or
man are dealt with, and this man is assumed to he distinct
from either Labourer or Landlord which is impossible by
definition. Upon the exposure of this fundamental fallacy
the whole fabric of the reason-baffiing superstructure
comes to the ground with a magnificent crash. The
splendid Manual of scientific nonsense, upon whose
principles we are ‘ governed ’ or Laissez-faired, and our
daily lives affected for infinite evil, thus disappears into
the abyss of nullities and we become suddenly and pain-
fully conscious that we shall be the laughing-stock of all
succeeding generations. But this crash will be a joyful
sound. The care-worn lives of struggling men and women
will be lightened and brightened to a degree of which
History presents no parallel unless it be the deliverance of
the Jews from Babylon—“ We were like them that dream.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue
with singing.”
Fourthly, Suppose some one should object to Euskin’s
definition of Money and say that there is nothing
‘ documentary ’ about it. What would be involved in this ?
I think that Euskin’s view of the documentary force of a
sovereign is not a little supported by the view taken of a
Eoman coin a great many years ago. “ Whose image and
superscription hath it?” asked the Great Doctor of
antiquity whose highest praise is, not that He spake as
never man spake, but that He worked as never man
worked.
But granting that a sovereign with Victoria Eegina and
conquering Hero adorning its faces is not documentary at
all, what is involved in this concession ? First Socialism
comes in like a flood. If gold is only a commodity like


bread why does the State insist upon coining the one and
decline to bake the other ? Again, if a sovereign be not
documentary why all these meddlesome Mint regulations ?
What right have you, No-Grovernors, to put the Sovereign’s
effigy upon a metallic Lie, for with all this jugglery the
coin becomes a mis-informer instead of an informer.
Instead of a Royal Lady and Warrior-Saint should you
not have put a Prostitute and a Felon to indicate England’s
leading manufactures —manufactures which go on, without
ceasing, twenty-four hours out of twenty-four hours, week
in week out, year in year out and never slacken because
of ‘ over-production ’ ?
Fifthly, what is 1 price ’ under the English conditions ?
I buy a hat for half a sovereign. What causes determine
this bargain ? The ‘ price ’ of the hat is evidently the
ratio between the cost of the hat and the cost of the little
coined commodity. The coined commodity is often by con-
fusion of thought which reigns supreme in current litera-
ture, called a ‘ precious ’ metal as if it were really extra
valuable. But this is absurd. Wear a half sovereign on
the top of your head during an Australian summer day,
and Nature herself will pronounce that it is less valuable to
you than a hat. If an earthquake should rend open the
neighbourhood of Hyde Park and discover a cubic mile of
pure gold, only an unintelligent person would put a pick
into it, every sane person well knowing that English
sovereigns would be hopelessly debased, and that a hat-ful
of gold would not buy a hat. It is all a question of the
relative value of labour as the word ‘cost’ would lead us
to suppose. Let gold be easily obtained, and the hat
becomes the ‘ precious ’ commodity. If the beautiful earth
with its fair valleys and purling brooks could be converted
by baleful magic into a hideous yellow golden sphere, we
should be the most wretched of men. “ Our planet for
a loaf of bread or a glass of water! ”
But how is the ratio of the cost of a hat to the cost of
the coin to be determined. Cost is the correlative of
labour. You labour and the vital energy expended is the
cost to you. That, perhaps, is not a distinction at all.
Cost then varies with every individual, and I do not know
of any method by which the ‘ costs ’ of any two individuals
can be equated. They are incommensurable quantities
except to Omniscience. The Mill-Fawcett sophists will find
to their cost that this question brings in a most curious
entity conspicuous by its absence from their works —a
Human Soul. But for the sake of argument, suppose this
gap bridged. What is the cost of the coin. It was


originally in the bowels of the earth. The ore was dug out
by the labour of miners, ground and washed by them, the
gold was carried by merchants to a population-centre, and
labour of the Mint people was then embodied in it. What
is it then ? It is Labour embodied in gold. The hat
likewise, trace it up from the sheep’s back and notice how
at every stage labour is added to it until it is presented
across the counter in exchange for your half sovereign. Will
anyone be bold enough to say that the hat is exactly worth
the coin ? Such a statement is ridiculous upon the face of it
and even Omniscience fails here because the labour in all its
stages which goes to produce the coin, and the hat is emregu-
lated (Laissez-Faire !). All evidence goes to show that Omni-
science works by Laws, not by No-Laws. The Infinite
Deity cannot understand Laissez-Faire ! English ‘ price ’
then is inconceivable even to the Maker of the' Universe
with all its ‘ circulating ’ stars.
It would appear then that all labour of all sons of men
like that of the Son of Man and His modern representa-
tives —the clergy, is “ without money and without price.”
I think that ‘ price ’ may now be dismissed finally.
Sixthly, taking the only standard by which we can even
approximate to the relative values of various kinds of
labour—the standard of necessity—we find curiously
enough that the Agricultural Labourer comes out at the
top ! Awful fact!—the Farmer can do without the rest of
the community (except one class) but the rest of the
community cannot do without the Farmer. In this inquiry,
we come full upon lienry George's blunder ! In the fore-
going discussion I have justified the great Californian
Reformer as a Reformer but as an Economist he cannot be
justified. A Reformer is responsible only for his first
step. Do the just thing! If I had not, in spite of my-
self, been carried by ratiocination beyond Single Taxism I
should be proud for the remainder of my life to avow
myself a follower of the Author of “ Progress and
Poverty.”
Roughly dividing modern industries into Agricultural
(including Mining) and Manufacturing, (with ‘ trade ’ or
‘ carriage ’ distributed over both) we have a serviceable
distinction. The Farmer or Agricultural Labourer deals
with Nature at first hand; touches Nature’s heaving
bosom, to be poetical. The Manufacturer deals with
Nature at a secondary stage and in an indirect manner.
As examples of this primary and secondary relationship to
the forces of Nature (called ‘ land ’ in English economy)
we have the Wood-Cutter and the Carpenter, the Squatter


and the Shearer, the Cow-Herd and the Farmer. The
Miller manipulates the golden tresses severed by the
Eeaper’s sickle from the beautiful head of Autumn.
Now Henry George justifies Interest upon the ground
that in the circle of exchange a plane may exchange for a
calf. A calf grows but a plane has no power of growth.
Now this ‘ theory ’ vanishes when it is remembered that free
labour can only differentiate from Agriculture (the basal
industry) to Manufacture (the derivative industry) upon
the basis of Co-operation ! The Farmer will rough-hew
his own shelves and tables rather than acknowledge that a
Carpenter’s work is more valuable than his own, the
difference to be called Interest. The Manufacturer will
resolve himself into an Agriculturist rather than admit
that rearing a calf is more difficult than making a plane
and requires Interest upon the transaction. How utterly
blind must all men be who cannot see that division of
labour elaborated as we see it to-day not merely implies
but is Co-operation of Labourers, And if Co-operation, Is
it free Co-operation of Free Men or is it compulsory
co-operation of Pyramid-raising labourers? We have now
reached the very heart of the matter. How inflexible is
Logic! lam compelled to say that either the English
Agricultural Labourer is Free and commands the situa-
tion or he is Not-Free and does not command the situation.
If the Farmer comes out at the top, who comes out at the
bottom ? The Stock-Broker. The Stock-Exchange is the
Aceldama of Modern civilisation.
Seventhly, in looking up the subject of Interest in
“ Progress and Poverty,” I find a curious passage which
shows why Henry George did not discover the economic-
Melchisedec. Money is confused with capital. On page
127, I find : “ It is true that if I put away money it will
not increase.”—Henry George surely has no banking
account! Money not increase! What can compare
with money in power and rate of increase ? If the
rabbits of New South Wales could be induced to
inspect the figures upon the banking-ledgers and see
how they ‘multiply,’ they would leave the Colony out
of sheer disgust at being out-done! In a single year
100 becomes 105 (let us say) and at the same rate a million
acquires fifty thousand ! The next year the hundred and
the five grow independently, and the million and the fifty
thousand! The growth of Nature depends upon the
Seasons and the watchful labour of man, but the growth
of money depends upon the pen of the banker, and is
absolutely independent of the weather! Nature requires


cultivation, but by Logarithms you can compass a thousand
years’ of money-growth in five minutes ! Strange too, it
was by all these figures that a country was said to be
opened up, or a canal cut, or a warehouse built! Remove
the iron law of Land Monopoly which hurls Englishmen
into congested town-centres, and keeps them there for the
benefit of owners of ‘ property ’ that is of men, remove this
law and these figures would melt away in the first rays of
the Sun of Freedom, and then stupid Economic Professors
would see with their own owls’-eyes that canals are cut by
Men, that ships are manned by Men, that continents are
opened up by Men, not by ‘ capital ’ or ‘ money,’ or figures
in a ledger! Strange delusion! second to none in the
History of the Human Mind !
Remembering that Interest is Interest upon the balance
or unrequired portion of a maximum Rent, let us conclude
by quoting the words of Bacon—“ The Usurer being at
certainties and others at uncertainties, at the end of the
game most of the money will be in the box, and ever a
State flourisheth where wealth is more equally spread. It
(Usury) is the Canker and Ruin of many men’s estates,
which in process of time breeds a public poverty .”
Some have ventured to distinguish between Interest and
Usury by branding Usury as extortionate Interest, but
what about Compound Interest ?
Eighthly, I find that in my second letter, in discussing the
attitude of the Landlord who takes the spade-plot in Rent,
I have used an expression which is incongruent with the
context and therefore wrong. To offer back the spade “at
a percentage ” has no meaning under the circumstances.
The correct way of denoting the fact arrived at by this
abstract reasoning is this. By unlimited competition ‘which
(very) indirectly benefits the Labourer,’ the spade-plot
follows house-, fuel- and clothing-plots into possession of
Lord. Further competition causes encroachment upon the food-
plot ! and this result is exactly parallel with that of the
Competition of House-Maids in the science of Bed-
production.
Now what is “ the position of William ” ? The position
of William the English Labourer (see Fors Olavigera) is
clearly determined by two laws, one natural, the other
artificial. First the law of Nature by which William is
compelled to live on ‘ land,’ secondly the law of England
by which he is compelled to give up his spade to the
owner of the ‘ land.’ In what respect, then, it may be
asked, does the position of William differ from the position
of a slave? The Scientific Manual shall decide the point.


On page 108 I find
( a .) Slaves do not receive any wages.
(b.) They cannot accumulate wealth.
(c.) They have none of the rights of property.
{d.) Slaves are fed, it is true, hut so are the horses.”
This last remark reaches the very acme of absurdity, but
that is the ordinary level of these extraordinary University
Manuals. To say that a slave is fed, but does not receive
wages is tantamount to saying that he is fed, but does not
receive food! Let us now take the English Labourer as
described by Fawcett, page 192.
(a.) “Such wages are barely sufficient to supply the first
necessaries of life.”
if.) “ Such wages will not permit the slightest provision to
be made either for sickness or the feebleness of old age.”
(c.) “ When these labourers are too old to work they will
either be paupers in the workhouse, or they must come as
suppliant mendicants for parish relief.”
f d.J “If they were converted into slaves to-morrow it
would be for the interest of their owners to feed them far
better than they are fed at the present time.”
The English Labourer versus Slaves and Horses. Slaves
and Horses win easily on every count.
One point more. The line of Rent is now fairly seen
running across the Labourer’s food-plot and he is pronounced
by Scientific testimony worse off than a slave. Can there
be anything worse behind ? Yes there is and when I
discovered it my eye-balls rolled convulsively. It is this.
In English ‘ economics ’ the Labourer has no personality !
The very food (of the food-plot) that goes down his throat
is called “circulating capital”! No wonder he is not
troubled with rights of property ; he is property !
The English Labourer and his Spade now coincide and are
one ! The English Labourer, in the Mill-Fawcett-Rogers
books, is a Machine for the production of Wealth for the
benefit of the only Man or Human Being recognised in
these manuals, namely the Land-Owner or Labour-Owner
that is Labouring-Machine-0 wner. Machines are not
supposed to marry, therefore “Circulating Capital” does
not circulate for the wife and children of the Machine !
Ninthly, with reference to the statement that the Single
Taxers propose to do an impossibility. I don’t know that
this statement is a very valuable one but it is, nevertheless,
true. You cannot transfer a leverage-power from an
individual to the community. Knowledge, I once learnt,
is of two kinds ; Symbolical and Intuitive. You may know
a thing through a symbol as certainly as if you see it, but


there is much greater satisfaction in seeing it. Now when
I made the statement in question I made it upon symbolical
knowledge only. But the meaning of it is this. The
Single Tax cuts its way unerringly to the very heart of all
commercial abuses but so long only as it is Reforming, is
it a tax on ground-rents. The work of Reform done, it is
a direct Income-tax because the Labourer coincides with the
Landlord (and is equal to him). By all requirements of
logical exactness, the term ‘ rent ’ which commonly denotes
a commercial relationship between two individuals should
be superseded by * grownd-valued The taxation-' value ’
say of one hundred loaves upon a total output of six hun-
dred is a direct income or output tax, only we seem to have
our eyes fixed upon the bottom of the loaf-pile instead of
the top ! A Baker would naturally take them from the
top. Industrial Economy cannot begin until all abuses are
removed and then only does the Single Tax become a posi-
tive thing, namely an Income-Tax.
Tenthly, what then is the most valuable of all Labour ?
Undoubtedly, that of the Governor. The Governor first, the
Farmer second. The Governor who looks after the Law
of Freedom will see that no Lord, Bushranger, Pirate or
other Bandit "forces” his way into the Farmer’s fields.
If the Lord once gets in, he will have the impudence to
call the Farmer’s fields his own ‘property,’ and will end
by calling the Farmer his property. After all, does not
the whole debate turn upon this one word ‘ property ’ ?
‘Property ’ with reference to the Ego is “my own.” Is,
then, “ my own ” yours, or is it mine ?
How necessary for us is Government! Without Govern-
ment we perish! Without a Governor to look after the
“ Rights of Man,” Lords who “ obtain lands by force ”
are secured in all the “ rights ” of “ property.”
I will now conclude. Paul, the Tent-maker, has earned
eternal renown as a Political Economist, because he stood
upon his rights as a Citizen. I appeal unto Caesar.
Jesus the Plane-user (not lender) has settled all ques-
tions of State and Church for evermore. Render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto God the things
that are God’s.
Farewell Mammon, Beliah and Moloch ! Ancient and
illustrious Fiends! Have your last fling, for the day of
your final overthrow is at hand. Ye shall be thrown
back, bound hand and foot, into the Torrid Universe on
the day on which Intelligence is introduced into Govern-
ment.


As I began by affirming the proposition that —All
Wealth is produced by Labour—so I close by denying that
any cause other than Labour can produce Wealth. And if
there be any other causal force of Wealth-production in-
conceivable by me, I herewith challenge anyone in the
world to tell the world what in the world it is !
THE author;
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 190, Kent Street, Sydney.






t.:i 'A,'" v,' : “ ' ' ■ : ' X;:.. : : ii V'; /. . 'V, ■ ‘M
sBl # ''mm
■% , - v • . ; ■ * I||
