

'
• . • ,
ONLY.
FOfc OFFICJAL
Crown Copyright Reserved.
[S.S. 412.]
CIRCULAR MEMORANDUM
COURTS MARTIAL
FOR THE USE OF CONVENING
AND STAFF OFFICERS, AND OF
OFFICERS GIVING INSTRUC-
TIONS ON THIS SUBJECT
NOTE. —The information given in this pamphlet is not to be
communicated, either directly or indirectly, to the Press or any
person not holding an official position in His Majesty's Service.
By Authority: Albert J- Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C.16404.


J ■
.
.
; ' '.v ' . ... ; ' : V ; : ■ ■ ;
/ . | " v ■ . >/- .... . . • . ,
V > v • : : ?
: , - . ., • ■ *. . , -
' ■■ .*■ . ' . •'.■*■ . , - 'T
-■"•■ - ■ ' ■■' -X ■ ; *
'
» aw. * ' *


[S.S. 412.] Crown Copyright Reszrved.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIRCULAR MEMORANDUM
COURTS MARTIA
FOR THE USE OF CONVENING
AND STAFF OFFICERS, AND OF
OFFICERS GIVING INSTRUC-
TIONS ON THIS SUBJECT
NOTE. —The information given in this pamphlet is not to be
communicated, either directly or indirectly, to the Press or any
person not holding an official position in His Majesty's Service.
By Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C.16404.


V
.


THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF
H.B.M. GOVERNMENT.
NOTE. —Tlie information given in this pamphlet is
not to he communicated, either directly or indirectly
to the press or any person not holding an official posi-
tion in His Majesty's Service.
The notes and instructions contained in this
pamphlet are in no sense intended to he a substitute
for the Manual of Military Law, hut are meant _to
supply information on points which are not dealt with
in it, or are found in practice to require further
explanation. As far as possible nothing is inserted in
the pamplet which can he learnt from the Manual, and
officers dealing with Courts Martial will continue to
make constant reference to the latter in the course of
their duties.
The contents have been drawn up with regard to
the conditions of warfare which have existed in France
for a long time past and still prevail. The technical
requirements laid down are those which have been
found necessary and suitable in the present circum-
stances. If and when these circumstances change
materially it may he found difficult or even impossible
to comply with many of these requirements. It is not
possible to indicate the modifications which may he-
come necessary in accordance with varying conditions,
but local commanders will have to take the responsi-
bility for any departure from what is laid down, hear-
ing only in mind that these instructions represent the
standard to he kept in view, and that only such devia-
tions are to he made as are dictated by the circum-
stances of the moment.
Under present conditions a large proportion of
officers have little or no knowledge of Military Law,
and it is desirable that every opportunity should he
taken to instruct them in Court Martial duties. Staff
Officers, whose duty it is to deal with Courts Martial,
should therefore endeavour to give lectures or less


formal instructions on the subject as frequently as
possible. It will be found that the pamphlet affords
ample material for the groundwork of such lectures, to
which the lecturer should add such examples and com-
ments as will make the various points more clear to his
audience.
The pamphlet has been drawn up with a view to the
special needs of Armies, but so far as practicable the
same principles will be applied in the cases of other
formations.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Part I.—BEFORE TRIAL.
1. CONVENING OF F.G.C.M. PRELIMINARIES.
2. CHARGES.
(a) (b) (c) Supervision by Staff Captains.
(d) (e) (f) Entries 011 A.E. A.3.
(g) Cowardice.
(h) Offences by Sentries.
(i) Drunkenness and Insubordina-
tion.
(j) Disobedience.
(fc) Violence.
(I) (m) (n) (o) Desertion.
(p) Self-inflicted Wounds.
(g) Failing to appear at the place of
parade.
(r) Looting.
3. MISCELLANEOUS.
(a) Designation of N.C.O.'s.
(b) Insanity.
(c) Mental Deficiency, Shock.
Part lI.—THE TRIAL.
A. BEFORE STARTING THE TRIAL.
B. PROCEDURE AT TRIAL.
(a) —(I) Order of Proceedings,
(m) Completion of A.F. A3.
(n) Adjournment.
(o) Rules of Evidence.


Part lII.—AFTER TRIAL.
1. (a)—(/) CONFIRMATION.
2. DEATH SENTENCES.
(a) Recommendations by Reviewing
Officers.
(b) Constructive Desertion. Informa-
tion required from C.O.
(c) Certificate of Promulgation and
Execution.
3. REVIEW OF PROCEEDINGS AND EXECU-
TION OF SENTENCES OTHER THAN
DEATH SENTENCES.
(a) Detention.
(b) Field Punishment.
(c) Certain Army Forms dispensed
with.
(d) Notification of Remission.
(e) Legal Commutations.
(f) Discharges with Ignominy.
(y) Forms of Variation, &c., hy Re-
viewing Officers.
(h) Alterations on A.F. A3.
(i) Committals to Prison.
(/) Promulgation.
(k) Disposal of Proceedings
(I) Avoidance of Delay.
Part IV.—ARMY (SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES
ACT), 1915.
(a) Objects.
(b) Disposal of Convicted Soldier.
(c) Superior Military Authority.


(d) Powers of Confirming and Re-
viewing Officers.
(e) Recommendations.
(/) Notification of Suspension.
(g) Competent Military Authority.
(h) Reconsideration.
(i) Remission.
(j) Field Punishment and Suspended
Sentences.
(k) Suspended Sentences and Stop-
pages, &c.
(I) Trial of Soldiers under Sus-
pended Sentence.
(m) Committal to Prison.
(n) Commitment Forms.
(o) Suspension of Sentence of Man
Committed to Prison.
(p) Records.
(g) Men Due for Discharge.
Part V.—MISCELLANEOUS.
OF OFFICERS.
TRIAL
(a) Convening of G.C.M.
(b) Detailing of Officers in Con-
vening Order.
(c) Observance of Rules of Pro-
cedure.
(d) Confirmation and Promulgation
of Sentences.
(e) Reference to Higher Authority
before Convening G.C.M.
NOTIFICATIONS TO BASE.
ARREST.
2
3


PAET I
PROCEDURE BEFORE TRIAL.
NOTE.—Rules of Procedure 1-104 do not, in terms,
apply to Field General Courts Martial. Many of the
principles underlying these rules, however, have to he
observed in conducting the proceedings of Courts Martial
of all kinds, and whenever, in the course of these notes,
it is necessary to refer to any principle which is clearly
stated in a Rule, a reference is made to that Rule; not
because of a legal obligation to follow the rule itself,
but for convenience of reference.
I.—CONVENING F.G.C.M.
Composition of Court.
(a) Though, according to the Rules of Procedure, any
Commanding Officer may convene these Courts, a Field
General Court Martial ought not to be considered the
equivalent of a Regimental Court Martial as regards the
composition of the Court (see R.P. 20, Note 1), and,
WHENEVER PRACTICABLE, such Courts should be
convened by Infantry Brigade Commanders, or officers
holding equivalent commands.
Arrest.
(b) In serious cases, if information is received that the
witnesses will not be available for some time, the accused
can be released from arrest, without prejudice to re-
arrest when it becomes possible to proceed with the case.
(c) The accused can always be released from arrest if
his military services are required.
Court Martial Officer.
(d) An Officer is attached to Army Head-Quarters
for the purpose of sitting on Courts Martial in cases of
a difficult, important or complicated nature (usually as
fourth member). His services should invariably be
applied for where the evidence discloses a case of this
nature.


2.—CHARGES.
Responsibility of Staff Captains.
(a) STAFF CAPTAINS of Brigades and officers
holding similar appointments should remember that they
are responsible to Convening Officers that the proper
charges are preferred, that there is evidence to support
them in every detail, and that all inadmissible evidence
is erased.
(b) All complicated cases, all cases of fraud, or cases
where there is doubt whether thei weight of evidence is
sufficient to secure a conviction, should be submitted,
for legal advice, to Army Head-Quarters, or to the
D.J.A.G., as the case may be, prior to the convening
of the Court.
(c) Multiplication of charges should be avoided, and
Convening Officers should bear in mind that when a
soldier is to be arraigned on a serious charge, any minor
offences against him may be dropped.
Number of Cases on A.F. A3.
(d) Too many cases should not be entered on A.F.
A3. The marginal note on the schedule of the form
says six names, but this is seldom desirable and must
depend on the number of charges, &c.
In serious cases, e.g., desertion, sleeping on post,
cowardice, one case- only should be entered on each
A.F. A3. At the same time, it is eminently desirable
that if two or more prisoners, arraigned on serious
charges, are concerned in the same transaction, the
proceedings should be forwarded at the same time.
Election to be Tried.
(e) When a man elects to be tried by F.G.C.M., the
words " Elects trial " should be written prominently on
A.F. A3 and on the charge sheet, if any.


Entering the Charge.
(/) A charge sheet is not essential, and in most cases
it should be possible to enter in the second column of
the schedule, on page 2of A.F. A3, all that is neces-
sary.
In all charges of a, general nature, e.g., an offence
under Section 40 A.A., or an offence against an in-
habitant, full particulars must be given, and if it is
found impracticable to enter these in the schedule, they
may be entered on a separate piece of paper, or a charge
sheet may be attached. The object in view is to let
the accused know, from the charge set out, exactly what
the offence is which the prosecution intends to
prove, e.g.:—
" Offence against person of inhabitant, indecent
assault on
" neglect to the prejudice, self-inflicted wound."
Alternative charges should be marked alternative in
the schedule.
Cowardice, A.A. Section 4 (7).
(g) Charges of cowardice, in the absence of specific
evidence of an exceptional character, can only be
sustained when the occurrence takes place under fire.
The fact of absence is not, by itself, sufficient to sup-
port a charge of cowardice.
Offences by Sentries, A.A., S. 6 (1) (k).
(h) In these offences it must always be proved what
the post was, that the accused was posted, and that he
was still on duty when the offence was committed.
If the accused received permission to leave his post
for a short time but did not return, he cannot be
charged with leaving his post.


If he is found asleep away from his post, he should
not be charged with sleeping on his post, but with
leading it.
See notes 3 and 13 to A.A., S. 6., page 382
A telephone operator is not a "sentinel." For
stablemen see K.R., para. 560.
If there is any doubt as to an offence falling under
S. 6, it should be charged under S. 40.
Drunkenness and Insubordination, p. 22,
Para. 30 and Note c.
(i) In framing charges of Drunkenness together with
other charges, e.g., threatening or insubordinate
language, particular attention is drawn to M.M.L.,
page 22, para. 30 and Note C.
Disobedience, A.A., S. 9 (i) and (2)
(j) A charge under A.A., S. 9 (i), should only be
preferred in cases of so grave a nature that the Court
are likely to award sentence of Death. " Wilful "
defiance must be proved specifically, and it is always
advisable to submit the case to Army Head-Quarters
or to the D.J.A.G., beforehand.
In all other cases the charge will be laid under A.A.
S. (9) (2).
A charge under this section will not lie unless the
accused was given sufficient opportunity to comply.
Paragraph 9, M.M.L., page 17, should be carefully
studied.
Violence, A.A., S. 8 (i) and (2).
(k) Similarly, with regard to section 8, charges
should only be framed under sub-section (i) in cases
where the violence has been committed under excep-
tionally grave circumstances.


DESERTION.
p. 18, para. 13.
M.M.L., p. 18, para. 16.
(I) As difficulty is found in applying the principles
contained in G.R.O. 585, the following notes should be
studied:
The distinction between desertion and absence is
described in para. 13, page 18, and the special
case of shirking some important duty in para. 16. To
constitute this special case of " constructive " desertion,
it is necessary to prove that the accused intended to
shirk it, i.e., evidence must be produced to prove—
(1) That the man knew with reasonable certainty
that he would be required for this special
duty;
(2) That he was absent and thereby avoided the
duty.
To prove (1), the prosecution should show:
(i) That the man was warned, or, failing this —
(ii) That the company as a whole was warned,
if possible on parade at which the roll was
called, and that the accused was pre-
sent, or,
(iii) That, having regard to the usual custom of
reliefs, he must have known that the turn
of his company, etc., was imminent, or —
(An Officer or Senior N.C.O. should give evidence
as to the usual custom of reliefs; and definite
evidence as to the dates of the: special duty
which the accused missed should be given by
these witnesses.)
(iv) That the period of absence was so long that
he must have known for a certainty that
he would miss active operations by such
lengthy absence.
The burden of proof is then shifted, and the man will
have to convince the Court that he did not know that
he would miss the duty in question.


It is to be remembered that desertion involves a ques-
tion of special intention, and that there can be no inten-
tion without knowledge; where, therefore, the accused
has been absent for a short time only, the prosecutor
must be prepared to prove that the offender knew, with
reasonable certainty, that he would be required for
some special duty. If the only evidence is that the man
absented himself, and no evidence whatever is produced
{e.g., special warning, usual routine, length of absence)
to show the probable state of his mind, THE COURT
CANNOT MAKE ANY ASSUMPTION AS TO HIS
INTENTION, and they can convict the accused of
absence only.
It should be noticed that it is necessary to produce
evidence of facts such as those specified above, which
will prove the accused's knowledge. Such statements
a's " The accused knew," " It was common knowledge,"
" The whole company knew," are not evidence at all.
Where desertion or absence is charged it is advisable,
and often necessary to show, with approximate cer-
tainty, the time and the circumstances of the com-
mencement and termination of the period of absence.
As regards the commencement of the period of
absence, the best evidence is usually that of a Non-
Commissioned Officer who called the roll and found
accused absent, and such evidence should always be
produced; if this is impossible owing to casualties or
other causes, evidence can often be given by some Non-
commissioned Officer or man that on or about a certain
date or time accused was present with, and that at a
later period he was absent from his section or platoon.
It is, as a rule, impossible to sustain a charge of
desertion without proof as to the manner in which the
period of absence terminated. It is of no use to call a
Non-Commissioned Officer to say that at such a date
accused was brought back under escort.
It should be borne in mind that unexplained absence
for however short a time is sufficient in law to sustain
a conviction for " absence," as distinguished from
desertion.


Exceptional Cases.
(m) Exceptional and doubtful cases to which the
above rules are difficult to apply, should invariably be
submitted for expert opinion before trial. If this has
not been done, Confirming Officers should remember
that it is possible to send back a finding of desertion for
revision, with a direction to the Court to convict of
absence only. They should therefore withhold con-
firmation in any doubtful case, and obtain expert advice
if necessary.
(ji) In cases where a soldier surrenders himself as an
absentee or deserter into the custody of any portion of
His Majesty's Forces, a certificate under Army Act
Section 163 (j) should be obtained to obviate the
attendance of a witness.
This procedure does not apply where the man has
been arrested.
(o) If accused has been taken into custody in the zone
of operations, evidence, which must be given personally
at the trial, can be obtained through the agency of the
Provost Marshal, whose Staff have full information as
to the apprehension of stragglers. If accused was
arrested in England, A.F. O. 1618 must be obtained
and produced by a witness on oath.
When an accused has been arrested or has surrendered
to the Civil Police in England, and A.F. O 1618 is to
be produced as evidence, the " particulars in the
evidence " on this form should be pasted over so as not
to be seen by the Court, if likely to prejudice the
accused.
Self-inflicted Wounds.
(p) In dealing with these cases the object in view is
to prevent any man who has inflicted a wound upon
himself, either intentionally or accidentally, from being
withdrawn further from the firing line, or for a longer
period than is absolutely necessary.
Special provision for dealing with these cases is made
in each Army, and the circulars issued on the subject
should be studied.


Trial is held at the earliest possible moment, and as
soon as a man whose injuries have been received in the
manner indicated is fit for duty, he returns to his unit
and carries out his sentence. In every case where the
Medical Officer is of opinion that the man will be fit
for duty again in a few weeks, the sentence should be
commuted to Field Punishment. Medical Officers, when
giving their evidence, should be asked as to l the probable
duration of incapacity.
It is usually impossible to obtain a conviction under
Section 18 for " Maiming," as the special " intention "
has to be proved. Consequently, such cases should be
tried under Section 40, " Neglect to the prejudice, &c."
Section 15.
(q) A charge of " Failing to appear at the place of
parade, &c.," should never be preferred on active service.
A charge of absence should be laid instead.
Looting.
/ r \ (j) Any man who is absent from his unit and
found to be in possession of what is obvious plunder,
or is found in a furnished house: which is unoccupied
and where he has no right to be, should be charged
with—
" Leaving his Commanding Officer to go in search of
plunder."
In this case it may be advisable to add an alternative
charge for absence.
(ii) If it cannot be proved that the man was absent
from his unit when arrested, but he is found in an
unoccupied furnished house where a door or window
has been forced by him, hei should be charged with
" Breaking into a house in search of plunder."
(iii) If it cannot be proved that the man was absent
from his unit when found to be in possession of what is
obvious plunder, or if he is found in a furnished house
which is unoccupied and there is no evidence of " break-
ing," he should be charged under Section 40.


3.—MISCELLANEOUS.
Designation of N.C.O.'s, G.R.O. 1025, 22/7/15.
(a) In consequence of difficulties which have arisen in
dealing by Court Martial with offences committed by
Privates and N.C.O.'s holding acting rank, the follow-
ing instructions have been published:
Whenever a Private or N.C.O. holding acting
rank is brought to trial before a Court Martial,
the permanent rank of accused should invariably be
shown, e.g., " Private (Acting Corporal)," or
" Corporal (Acting Sergeant-Major)."
In this manner the permanent rank of accused will be
brought to the notice of the Court, who will, in award-
ing punishment, bear in mind that the permanent rank
only is cognisable in the sentence awarded, and that it
is not competent to award a sentence of reduction except
in regard to the permanent rank held by accused.
The Court must calculate the probability that the
accused will lose his temporary rank as a result of the
trial.
Several sentences have recently been rendered inopera-
tive through N.C.O.'s being wrongly described.
Insanity.
(b) The procedure in the case of insanity is set forth
in Army Act, Section 130.
Where there is ground for supposing that the accused
was insane when he committed the crime, or is insane
at the time of trial, a Medical Board should be held.
(1) If the Board is of opinion that the accused was
insane when the offence was committed, but
is now fit for trial, a Court Martial will be
held and evidence will be> taken to enable the
Court to bring in a finding as indicated in
R.P., 57 (A).
(2) If the Board is of opinion that the accused is
now insane, then, if the offence is trivial, the
accused should be evacuated without trial,
but if it is a serious offence a trial will be
held and evidence taken to enable the Court
to bring in a finding as indicated in R.P.,
57 (A).


PART 11.
PROCEDURE AT TRIAL.
NOTE. —A separate pamphlet (S.S. 391) has been
issued containing notes for the guidance of Presidents
at Field General Courts Martial.
The notes below embody the whole of the contents
of that pamphlet, but they have been revised and
amplified in view of the fact that the pamphlet is
intended to contain only what is absolutely essential
for a President to bear in mind at the trial, whereas
the present notes are intended also for the guidance of
Staff Officers and for instructional purposes.
Entirely new matter has been marked with a black
line.
I.—BEFORE STARTING THE TRIAL
Charge. (See R.P. 108, M.M.L., page 632)
{a) —(i) Read carefully the charge and particulars (if
any), and compare them with the corresponding Section
of the Army Act, to see whether any offence is dis-
closed.
If no offence seems to be disclosed, consult the con-
vening officer. A charge must not be altered in any
way by the court.
(ii) Read the whole of the Section of the Army Act
under which the offence is charged, including any
proviso, and also the notes in the M.M.L. on that
Section.
(b) Split up the offence into its component parts, and
make sure that each part of it is established by the


evidence, e.g., in a charge under the following section,
the following facts would have to he proved:
Section 6 (i), (k).
1. That accused had been posted as a sentry.
2. What his post was.
3. That accused was found asleep.
4. That he was then on his post.
5. That he was then still on duty.
2.—PROCEDURE AT TRIAL
(Have the M.M.L. open at It.P. 105, et seq., and see
that each It.P. is complied with.)
(a) See that the Court is properly constituted accord-
ing to It.P. 106 and 107, M.M.L., pages 631 and 632.
( b) Have all the accused, prosecutors, witnesses, dec.,
in, and read page 1 of the A.F. A3 (Convening
Order).
(c) Give each accused his right of challenge (see It.P.
110). If any accused challenges, and the challenge is
upheld, report the matter immediately to the convening
officer, and, if necessary, adjourn the trial of that
accused.
(d) Swear the Court. A.A., S. 52 and It.P. 109
and 111. (For affirmations, &c., see M.M.L., A.A.,
Section 52 (4) and Note, page 432; R.P. 28, page 588;
It.P. 30, page 589.)
(e) March out everybody except the accused person
{or persons) to be tried first (see R.P. 109), the escort,
the prosecutor and the friend of accused.
An accused charged jointly with another accused has
the right to demand to be tried separately.
(/) Arraign the accused (see R.P. 112), and enter
plea of accused on each charge in column 3 of page 2,
of A.F. A3,


(ff) Flea of Guilty. If accused pleads guilty, see that
the provisions of R.P. 35 (B), M.M.L., page 591, and
R.P. 37, page 593, are complied' with before entering
the plea.
A plea of " guilty " should not be accepted in any
case in which a Death sentence is likely to be awarded.
Where charges are alternative, a plea of " guilty "
cannot be taken on more than one charge.
As a rule, unless the accused pleads " guilty " to the
more serious of alternative charges, pleas of " not
guilty " will be entered on both charges, and the trial
proceeded with. After hearing the evidence the Court
can determine on which charge the accused is " guilty."
Findings of '' guilty '' and of '' not guilty '' should then
be entered in column 4 of page 2 of A.F. A3, corre-
sponding to the pleas.
A plea of " guilty " covers all defects in the evidence,
unless it appears, from the summary, if any, or other-
wise, that the accused has not in fact committed the
offence charged, in which case a plea of " not guilty "
should be entered.
Effect of Statement in Mitigation of Punishment.
A similar course must be followed whenever the
accused makes any statement in mitigation of punish-
ment, or otherwise, which implies that he did not commit
the offence. It is usually advisable to enter a plea of
" not guilty " whenever the accused says anything about
his intentions or alleges ignorance that he was doing
wrong.
(h) —ON PLEA OF GUILTY.
(i) The Summary, or Statement of Evidence, if avail-
able, must be attached to the proceedings.
If there is none, sufficient evidence on oath must be
taken down to enable the Confirming Officer to judge of
the gravity of the offence.


(ii) Statement in Mitigation. In addition the Court
should record any statement in mitigation made by the
accused. Such statements may be on oath. (R.P. 37
(F), page 593, and Note 4 on page 594.)
(iii) Evidence of Character. The procedure is exactly
the same as on conviction after a plea of "Not Guilty."
(iv) Complete A.F. A3. (See para. 11.)
(i)— ON PLEA OF NOT GUILTY.
The case proceeds as laid down in R.P. 114, M.M.L.,
page 633.
The summary must not be used as a record of the
evidence given at the trial, nor is it sufficient to say:
" The witness corroborated his evidence on the sum-
mary," or "corroborated the last witness." A short
note of what the witness actually says at the trial must
be taken, in narrative form.
Where a number of accused persons are tried together
for an offence charged to have been committed by them
collectively, one summary covering all the accused can be
taken; but it is to be remembered that an accused has
the right to claim a separate trial. Where men are
being tried separately the statement of evidence against
each of them must be complete in itself, and such a
statement as: " For further evidence see trial of .
." is improper, as this does not comply with
the requirements of R.P. 114 (c).
Evidence (including cross-examination) need never
be put down as Question and Answer unless the Prosecu-
tion or Defence specially demand it.
For rules of Evidence, see para. (o).
Statements such as " R. 828 complied with," " Wit-
ness withdraws," " The prosecution is closed," &c., are
not necessary.
The following is sufficient:
Trial of (Number, Rank, Name, Unit).


PROSECUTION:
Ist Witness: (Number, Rank, Name, Unit) Sworn,
states: (The witness should state who he is, e.g., " I am
C.S.-M. of B Company, to which accused belongs,"
and his evidence should then begin with time, date, and
place, e.g., " At 4.30 p.m., on the 12th January, 1916,
in the fire trenches " or " About 2 or 3
p.m., on a Thursday (I forget the date), in billets,
) >
Cross-examined
Re-examined.
Not Cross-examined.
Examined by the Court
(A witness may also at any time before the Court is
closed for consideration of the Finding be " Examined
by the Court" to clear up any point either for the
Prosecution or for the Defence. He may be recalled,
if necessary, for the purpose. R.P. 86, M.M.L.,
page 622.)
2nd Witness. (As before.)
DEFENCE:
(It is the duty of the President to inform the accused
at the close of the case for the Prosecution that he (the
accused) can either give evidence as a witness on oath,
in which case he is liable to be cross-examined by the
Prosecution and examined by the Court, OR make, or
hand in, a statement, NOT on oath, in which case he is
not liable to be questioned in any way.
The President should also inform the accused that
the Court will attach more weight to evidence given on
oath than to a statement not on oath.


The President should then ask the accused which
course he wishes to adopt, and whether he has any
witnesses to call in his defence.)
Accused states on oath.
Cross-examined.
Examined by Court.
Accused states [not on oatK\
Accused hands in the written statement attached.
Accused makes no statement
(In each of the three latter cases he CAN NOT BE
cross-examined by the Court or by the Prosecutor.)
2nd Witness (Number, Rank, Name, Regiment, &c.).
(As in evidence for prosecution.)
Accused calls no witnesses.
Evidence as to Character before Finding.
(The accused, if he wishes to do so, may call evidence
of good character before the Finding. He should also
be permitted to produce testimonials, &c., to which the
Court should give such weight as they may think fit.
If accused proposes to give or call evidence of good
character, it should be pointed out to him that this will
entitle the prosecutor to cross-examine and to produce
evidence of bad character. For this purpose the
prosecutor may produce the field conduct sheet with
entries of previous offences.)
WHEN A SOLDIER IN HIS DEFENCE, OR IN MITIGATION
OF PUNISHMENT, URGES A SUBSTANTIAL PLEA
RESTING ON MEDICAL GROUNDS, A MEDICAL WITNESS
SHOULD INVARIABLY BE CALLED TO EITHER SUBSTANTIATE
OR REBUT THIS, BEFORE THE FINDING IF IT IS HIS
DEFENCE, AND AFTER, IF IT IS URGED IN MITIGATION
OF PUNISHMENT.


(j) FINDING.
In the ease of an equality of votes, the Finding is
entered as one of " Not Guilty." Section 58 (8) A.A.,
M.M.L., page 433.
The Finding on each charge is entered in column 4
of page 2 of A.F. A3, simply as " Guilty " or "Not
Guilty."
If the accused pleads " Guilty," a Finding of
" Guilty " is entered as well as the plea of " Guilty."
If in doubt on which of alternative charges to find
accused guilty, find guilty of the simpler offence or
bring in a Special Finding.
Special Findings, &c., It.P. 44, and Note, M.M.L.,
page 598.
The only cases in which an accused can be found
guilty of a lesser offence, or of the same offence with
variations in detail, are given in Section 56 (1) A.A.
In no case can an accused be found guilty of a graver
offence than that charged, nor can he be found guilty
of an entirely different offence, even if there is evidence
of such an offence.
If an accused is found N.G. he will be so informed
and will be released from arrest.
(k) Evidence of Character after Finding. After a
Finding of Guilty (whether after a plea of Guilty or Not
Guilty) the Court should take and record such evidence
of character and particulars of service of the accused
as is available.
As a general rule no evidence of BAD character
should be produced before the Court, except the Field
Conduct Sheet, A.F. 8122, which must be produced by
a witness on oath after the Finding, to guide the Court
as to sentence.
The Field Conduct sheet will not be attached in
original, but either extracts recorded or a certified true
copy attached.
If evidence of character is not available at the trial
a note to this effect MUST be recorded.


ANY evidence of good character is admissible and
will be recorded.
If the accused is under a suspended sentence 01 a
sentence of Field Punishment, the Court will be informed
of this AFTER the Finding, and the fact will be
recorded.
When recording evidence of character it should
always be stated whether it is taken " before finding "
or " after finding."
Finally the accused will be asked if he wishes to say
anything further, either as to character, in mitigation
of punishment or otherwise, and a record will be' made
of his statement.
(I) SENTENCE.
Only one sentence is awarded whether the accused has
been found guilty on one or more charges. This sentence
may, however, where authorized by the Army Act,
consist of more than one punishment, e.g., Reduction to
the Ranks plus £1 stoppages, or 28 days F.P. No. 1,
plus three months' forfeiture of pay.
Sentence is entered in column 4 of page 2, of A.F.
A3, below the findings. It should be entered briefly
e.g., "3 months' F.P. No. 1," "2 years' 1.H.L.,"
" 3 years' P. 5.," " Death," &c.
The maximum punishment which can be awarded
will be found laid down in the Section under which the
charge is laid.
" Such less punishment " can be found by reference
to Section 44, A.A., M.M.L., page 416.
To award Death or P.S. a Court must consist of three
or more officers. Section 49 (i) (d), A.A., M.M.L.,
page 429.
To award Death the opinion of the Court must be
unanimous. Section 49 (2), A.A., M.M.L., page 429.
Other sentences are decided by a majority, the Pres
dent, if necessary, having a casting vote. Section
53 (8), A.A., M.M.L., page 433; also R.P. 69, and
Notes, M.M.L., page 615.


As to Recommendation to Mercy, see M.M.L., chap.
V., para 88, page 51.
The following points should be especially noted:
Imprisonment, with or without Hard Labour, can
NOT be awarded for a term longer than 2 years.
Penal Serviture can NOT be awarded for a term less
than 3 years. Maximum is for life.
Field Punishment can NOT be awarded for a term
longer than 3 months.
It is the rule for any punishment up to three months
to be in terms of Field Punishment, and not imprison-
ment with Hard Labour.
Detention and Discharge with Ignominy are not
usually awarded on active service.
Forfeiture of pay not exceeding three months may be
awarded on active service in addition to or without
other punishment, Section 44 (6), A.A., M.M.L.,
page 417.
As this forfeiture of pay commences on the day ol
award, if Field Punishment is also awarded (for which
pay is ipso facto forfeited, A.A., S. 138 (i) ), the two
forfeitures of pay will run concurrently; consequently,
a sentence of forfeiture of pay, to be effective, must be
awarded for a longer period than' any Field Punishment
awarded. (See footnote to K.R., para. 494, as
amended by Army Order, 209, 1912.)
A Fine not exceeding £ 1 may be awarded in cases of
Drunkenness only, either in addition to or in substitu-
tion for any other punishment. (Section 19, A.A.,
M.M.L., page 398.
Stoppages. To enable a Court Martial to' sentence a
soldier to stoppages of pay, the amount of damage, &c.,
must be stated in the charge and proved in evidence.
A Court Martial has no l power to award C.B. or Re-
primand or Severe Reprimand (except in the case of
Officers).
N.C.O.'s can be awarded the same punishments as
private soldiers, but, before being sentenced to P.S.,
Imprisonment, Detention, or F.P., should be sentenced
to reduction to the ranks.


N.C.O.'s can also be sentenced to forfeiture of
seniority or to reduction to a lower grade or to the
ranks. See Section 44 (h) to 44 (n), A.A.,
page 416; Section 190 (6), A.A., M.M.L., page 555;
R.P. 47, M.M.L., page 602.
N.C.O.'s cannot be sentenced by Court Martial to
Reprimand or Severe Reprimand.
In dealing with N.C.O.'s, care must be taken to ascer-
tain their permanent rank. An acting N.C.O. cannot
be deprived of his acting rank by sentence of Court
Martial. A Court Martial can only deal with him in
his permanent rank.
Thus, a Private (Acting Sergeant) cannot be reduced
by sentence of Court Martial to the rank of Acting
Corporal, nor can he be reduced to the ranks. A
Sergeant (Acting C.S.M.), however, though he cannot
be reduced or reverted to the rank of Sergeant, can be
ordered to forfeit seniority in the rank of Sergeant,
or can be reduced to the rank of Corporal or to the
ranks. Any sentence involving loss of liberty, i.e., of
1 day's F.P. or upwards, will automatically reduce any
N.C.O. " Acting " or otherwise to the ranks.
Acting and Lance ranks can only be dealt with by
the man's C.O.
(m) Completion of A.F. A3. After sentence has
been recorded in column 4 of page 2, of A.F. A3, the
President must sign at the bottom of page 2, and also
the certificate on page 3. Only documents actually used
at the trial must be attached to the A.F. A3. They
should be attached as far as possible in the order of
their production, e.g., Charge Sheet, Record of Evi-
dence, Exhibits, A.F. 8122. Where the accused has
pleaded " Not Guilty," the Summary of Evidence need
not be attached (unless it has been used during the
trial in cross-examination of a witness, to point out
discrepancies in his evidence. See M.M.L., chap. 6,
para. 58, page 71).
Any remark which the Court may wish to make on
the conduct of a> witness or in connexion with the trial
should be attached to the proceedings in a separate
minute to the convening officer.


(n) Adjournment. A Court can always be adjourned,
and, in case of difficulty arising, it is better to adjourn
and consult the convening officer, than to go on and
convict, and eventually have the conviction quashed.
(o) RULES OF EVIDENCE.
The rules of evidence must be strictly applied to the
evidence called for the prosecution. The admission of
hearsay or other inadmissible evidence may invalidate
the whole proceedings.
Great latitude should be given to the defence both in
cross-examination of witnesses for the prosecution and
in the evidence produced by it, e.g., written statements,
letters and hearsay can be considered by the Court, if
tendered for the defence.
(i) Relevancy. Evidence should be excluded which
does not tend, either directly or as circumstantial evi-
dence, to prove the charge. Caution should be exercised
in checking cross-examination by the defence which may
at the moment appear irrelevant but which is intended
to help' in building up a defence to be disclosed later.
(ii) Hearsay and evidence of opinion are not generally
admissible'. For exceptions see M.M.L., Ch. VI.,
paras. 58-71, pages 71-3.
" Hearsay " may be taken to include any statement
made in the absence of the accused, whether it was made
by a third party or by the witness himself.
The man who l originally made the statement should
be called to prove it, so that he can be cross-examined
as to the truth of the statement.
The following are examples of hearsay:
(a) " The Sergeant reported to me that accused was
absent."
(b) "I was told by Sergeant A. that accused had
struck him."
(c) "I spoke to the O.C. Company on the telephone
and told him accused had come back to Battalion Head-
Quarters and had told me lie* had been sent there.
The O.C. Company said accused had had no such
orders." I placed him under arrest.


(d) Accused said he had been in the Field Ambu-
lance. " I made inquiries there, and found he had
never been admitted there."
In the above examples:
(a) The Sergeant must be> called to prove the absence
of accused.
(b) The Sergeant must be called.
(c) The accused did not hear the conversation. The
witness can only state what he did, and not what he
said, i.e., " Accused told me he had been sent back to
Battalion Head-Quarters by the O.C. Company. I
spoke to the O.C. Company on the telephone. I then
placed accused under arrest." The O.C. Company
must be called to prove that he had given no such
order.
(d) This is in effect only repeating an unsworn, un-
cross-examined statement made by somebody at the
Field Ambulance. A witness must, therefore, be called
from the Field Ambulance to swear to the fact, from
his own knowledge that accused had not been admitted.
(iii) Documentary Evidence. (See generally M.M.L.,
chap. VI., paras. 30-40, pages 63-64.)
NOTE. — No document is admissible in evidence for
the Prosecution unless it has been produced by a witness
on oath.
{a) Written statements by absent witnesses must not
be put in by the Prosecution as " documentary evi-
dence," e.g., A report of an A.P.M. as to an arrest,
a certificate of a M.0., a letter dealing with the facts
of the case from some military authority or civilian m
England. These are inadmissible for the Prosecution,
being " hearsay," though they may be considered if pro-
duced by the defence.
Written statements are generally inadmissible in
evidence unless it is proved that they have been written
by the accused.
Certain exceptions to this rule will be found in Sect.
163, A.A., M.M.L., p. 523-4, e.g., a " descriptive re-
turn " in cases of Desertion (Sect. 163(1) (i); the


Finding of a Court of Inquiry on Illegal Absence (S.
163(1) (g) and K.R., para. 1912); a certificate in the
case of a deserter or absentee who has surrendered him-
self into military custody (Sect. 163(1) (j).)
(b) Orders. In any case involving disobedience of
written orders the Prosecution must:
(i) Produce the original orders, if in existence,
and if not, a certified true copy. (Verbal
evidence as to their terms may only be given
when IT IS PROVED that no written copy
is available.)
(ii) Show that the orders reached the accused,
either directly, or by being read out on a
parade that he can be proved to have
attended, or by being posted in a place where
he should in the ordinary way have seen
them, or should, at any rate, have looked
for them.
(iv) As to Admissions and Confessions by an accused,
see M.M.L., Ch. VI., para. 74, p. 74. An admission
made by a soldier to an Officer who is investigating a
case should not, as a rule, be used against the soldier.
(v) Production of Stolen Articles. When a man is
charged with theft, the subject of the charge should
always, where possible, be produced and identified in
Court. If it is not produced evidence must be given
as to what has become of it.
(vi) Identification of Documents , c&c. All documents
and goods, &c., material to the proceedings must be
produced by one of the witnesses and identified by ALL
witnesses who give evidence as to them.


FART 111.
PROCEDURE AFTER TRIAL.
I.—CONFIRMATION.
(a) The Confirming Officer is usually the officer who
convened the Court. As to confirmation generally, see
A.A., Sect. 54, as to Field General Courts Martial, see
R.P. 120, M.M.L., p. 634.
(b) Finding and sentence may be " Confirmed,"
" Reserved," or " Not Confirmed." These words,
entered and initialled, in the case of Field General
Courts Martial, in column 5 of p. 2 of A.F.A. 3, are
sufficient. For effect of Non-confirmation, see Note 2
to A.A., Sect. 157, M.M.L., p. 519, and C.Y. par 5,
p. 36. For variations see M.M.L., p. 698.
(c) In the case of finding and sentence being con-
firmed, Certificate C on p. 3 of A.F.A. 3 must also be
signed.
(d) If there is any doubt about the legality of the
finding or about any other point, a confirming officer
may, before confirming, send proceedings up to Army
Head-Quarters, or to the Deputy Judge Advocate General
direct, and they will be returned direct with a ruling
on the point in doubt.
Many convictions have had to be quashed owing to
defects which could have been cured by sending back
the case to the Court for revision before confirmation.
(e) An acquittal does not require confirmation.
(/) Reference may usefully be made to the following
Rules of Procedure:—Procedure, R.P. 51, M.M.L.,
p. 603; Revision, R.P. 52, p. 604; Mitigation of Sen-
tence on Partial Confirmation, R.P. 54, p. 605; Con-
firmation of finding on alternative charges, R.P. 55,
p. 605; Confirmation notwithstanding informalities, &c.,
R.P. 56, p. 606. Finding of Guilty in spite of imma-
terial variation from the charge, Note 2 to R.P. 44,


p. 599; Referring Confirmation, A.A., S. 54 (5); With-
holding Confirmation, A.A., S. 54 (6), and Not© 10,
M.M.L., p. 437.
2.—DEATH SENTENCES.
A death sentence must not b© promulgated without
the sanction of the Commander-in-Chief, to whom it
will be forwarded through the usual channels. The
Confirming Officer should enter the word " reserved
in the last column of the schedule of A.F.A. 3, and
should sign certificate " C." Neither finding nor
sentence should be confirmed.
Recommendations as to Death Sentences.
(a) In such cases the recommendations of the review-
ing officers must be given as to whether the sentence
should be carried out or commuted, and the reasons for
the recommendation must be given.
Death Sentences for Constructive Desertion.
(b) In particular the fullest information on the
following four points is to be forwarded with the pro-
ceedings in all cases where it is considered that the
extreme penalty should be inflicted for " Constructive
Desertion " (see part 1, 2 (b) ).
(i) The character (from a fighting point of view
as well as from that of behaviour) of the
soldier concerned, his previous conduct in
action, and the period of his service with
the Expeditionary Force.
(ii) The state of discipline of the regiment, bat-
talion, or unit concerned.
(iii) The Commanding Officer's opinion (based on
his personal knowledge, or that of his officers,
of the soldier's characteristics), as to whether
the crime was DELIBERATELY committed
with the sole object of avoiding the particular
service involved.


(iv) The reasons WHY the various reviewing autho-
rities recommend that the extreme penalty-
be inflicted, or otherwise.
This report is only required in cases where the essen-
tial part of the offence is "to avoid a particular duty,"
and where length of time of absence is not very material.
By these reports the Commander-in-Chief hopes to
assure himself that a good fighting man is not shot for
absence arising from, for example, accident or a drunken
spree.
Death Sentence, Certificate regarding.
When a death sentence is carried out, a certificate
that the proceedings have been promulgated and a cer-
tificate that the sentence has been duly executed, giving
date and time, signed by the Assistant Provost Marshal,
are to be indorsed on or attached to the proceedings
a wire is to be sent to Army Head-Quarters, givim*
these particulars as regards the sentence, as soon as it
is carried out.
3.—REVIEW OF PROCEEDINGS AND
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES GENERALLY.
Detention.
(a) With reference to " Field Service Regulations,"
Part 11., Sect. 113 (4), soldiers sentenced to detention
cannot be committed to the Military Prison in the Field,
and such sentences are to be commuted to Field Punish-
ment.
Field Punishment.
(b) If Field Punishment were more rigorously carried
out, it would act as a far greater deterrent to crime
than is often the case.
When a soldier under sentence is not doing duty in
the trenches or employed at work or fatigue, he is to be
treated as though he were undergoing imprisonment
with hard labour, and, whenever possible, he is to be
confined; smoking is to be prohibited, and no rum


ration, win© or beer allowed. 3d© may A® kept in
" irons," i.e., fetters or handcuffs, in such a way as to
prevent his escape; this applies to Field Punishment,
both No. 1 and No. 2.
Further details will be found in the special instruc-
tions issued with regard to this matter.
When awarded Field Punishment No. 1, the prisoner
may be attached for certain periods to fixed objects,
under the conditions laid down in paras. 2(b) and 4 of
the rules with respect to- Field Punishment ( vide p.
721, M.M.L., and Sect, 107, Field Service Regulations,
Part II.).
With regard to para. 5 of the Rules for Field Punish-
ment M.M.L., p. 721, as a rule, Field Punishment is
carried out regimentally.
Unnecessary Documents.
(c) Such Army Forms as B. 116, " Application for
a Court Martial " ; copies of B. 296, " Statement as to
character and particulars of service of accused, and A
49, " Declaration of military exigencies, under Rule of
Procedure 104 " or lists of witnesses are not required.
K.R., 632.
(d) The Brigade or Divisional Commander who remits
any part of a sentence awarded by F.G.C.M. is re-
sponsible that D.A.G. Base is notified of such remis-
sion.
Terms of Commuted Sentences. A.A., Sect. 57 (i).
(e) No punishment can be considered as less punish-
ment within the meaning of Section 57 (i), Army Act,
if the term during which it is to be inflicted is longer
than the term of the original punishment; consequently,
if it is desired to commute a term of imprisonment or
detention to one of Field Punishment No. 1, the latter
must not exceed the amount of imprisonment or deten-
tion awarded by the> Court. Attention is also drawn to
Note 9 to S. 57, on p. 440 of M.M.L.


Discharges with Ignominy.
(/) As a general rule it is not considered desirable to
carry such sentences into effect during the period of the
war.
Variations and Recommendations.
(g) Remissions, commutations or variations of the
sentence of the Court, by any of the reviewing officers,
should be entered and signed in the schedule on page 2
of A.F. A3; and recommendations as to suspension,
&c., should be made on a separate sheet.
Alterations.
(li) Any alteration on page lof A.F. A3, or on the
first and second columns of the schelude must be
initialled by the convening officer.
Commmittals to Prison.
(i) Soldiers sentenced to penal servitude and imprison-
ment will not be committed to the Military Prison in
the Field until these sentences have been reviewed by
the Army Commander: Divisions, &c., will be notified
when such sentences are approved or if they are
suspended.
Para, (c) in A.F. A3 should not, therefore, be
deleted whether the confirming officer recommends com-
mittal to prison or not.
Special instructions are issued on the Lines of Com-
munication.
Promulgation.
( j) Court Martial sentences, except those on officers,
involving death, penal servitude, imprisonment,
cashiering and dismissal, and those on other ranks,
involving death sentences should be promulgated before
the proceedings are forwarded. If sentences are com-
muted, remitted, &c., after promulgation, the proceed-
ings, after being forwarded to higher authority, will
be returned to the unit for a certificate to be entered
thereon that the commutation, &c., has been noted.


Review.
(k) The proceedings of all Courts Martial will be sent
to Army Head-Quarters or to the D.J.A.G., as the case
may be, for review.
Expedition.
(I) Every effort should be made to expedite Court
Martial cases. The whole object of a F.G.C.M. is to
bring an offender to justice vrith, the least possible delay,
and, for this reason, the rules are specially framed to
make the procedure of a more summary character than
that of an ordinary Court Martial. They should,
therefore, be dealt with, with the utmost dispatch,
and minor irregularities, whilst being noted, should be
left for correction until after the case has been reviewed.


PART IV.
ARMY (SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES)
ACT 1915.
Objects of Act.
(a) The objects of the Act are:
(1) To prevent wastage of troops by the withdrawal
from the front of men sentenced to penal
servitude or imprisonment.
(2) To insure that men who deliberately commit
crime in order to avoid duty shall not attain
their object.
(3) To give men who have committed serious mili-
tary offences through exhaustion or tem-
porary loss of nerve an opportunity of
redeeming their character and earning the
remission of their sentence.
Disposal after Sentence.
(b) Except on the Lines of Communication, when any
man is sentenced by a Court Martial to Penal Servi-
tude or Imprisonment he will not be committed to
prison but will be kept under arrest until the directions
of the " Superior Military Authority " under the Act
are received.
Superior Military Authority.
(c) The powers of a " Superior Military Authority "
are exercised by the Commander-in-Chief and by the
Army Commanders.
Powers of Confirming and Reviewing Officers.
{d) The Act does not affect the rights of confirming
and reviewing authorities to commute or remit the sen-
tence of the Court Martial.


Recommendations.
(e) Where such authorities consider that sentences
of Imprisonment or Penal Servitude should he carried
out, they should state this definitely, giving reasons for
their recommendations.
Notification.
(/) When a sentence has been suspended by a Superior
Military Authority, the unit concerned is at once noti-
fied by telegram stating the date of suspension, and the
soldier under sentence is released from arrest. He
thereupon becomes free from any disability in respect
of the sentence which has been suspended. A.F. W3104
is made out in accordance with Army Instructions and
sent to the Competent Military Authority. The date
of the signing of the suspension of sentence by the
Superior Military Authority should be entered in the
Regimental Records and noted in the information sent
to D.A.G., 3rd Echelon.
Competent Military Authority.
(ff) The expression " Competent Military Authority "
means any General or other officer not below the rank
of Field Officer duly authorized by a Superior Military
Authority. The powers are usually delegated to the
Corps Commanders, Divisional Commanders, Brigadier-
Generals Commanding Infantry Brigades, and C.R.A.
of Corps and Divisional Artillery.
Reconsideration of Suspended Sentences.
(h) The Competent Military Authority is responsible
that the sentence is reconsidered at an interval of not
more than three months from the date- of suspension
(Amending Act 1916) and again periodically at inter-
vals of three months or less afterwards. It may, how-
ever, be reconsidered by him at any time if he thinks
that the circumstances make it desirable to do so.


Remission of Suspended Sentences.
(i) A Competent Military Authority has power to
remit the whole of a suspended sentence' at any time.
There can be no partial remission. If a man's conduct
is not sufficiently satisfactory to merit a total remission
of his sentence, the case should be left over for further
reconsideration at a later date. As to what is meant
by conduct to justify remission of the suspended sen-
tence under Section 1 (5) of the Act, it is considered
that, apart from an act of gallantry, the " good con-
duct " expected from a soldier under suspended sentence
means more than a negative abstentation from crime.
The soldier should have shown a consistent devotion to
duty throughout the period under review.
Field Punishment and Suspended Sentences.
For disposal of A.F. WBIOJ/. see below (0. 6).
(j) If a soldier while undergoing field punishment is
sentenced to imprisonment or penal servitude, and such
imprisonment or penal servitude is suspended, the pre-
vious sentence of field punishment will, subject to any
remission that the Competent Military Authority may
think fit to make, continue to be carried out, and will
not affect the duration of the suspended sentence.
But if a sentence of penal servitude or imprisonment is
put into execution any current sentence of field punish-
ment will cease to' take effect.
Suspended Sentences and Stoppages, &c.
(k) Any part of a sentence which would have taken
effect if no part of the sentence had been suspended,
will take effect notwithstanding suspension, e.g., reduc-
tion to the ranks, fines and stoppages for damage or
loss.
But a sentence of forfeiture of pay awarded con-
jointly with a longer term of imprisonment becomes
invalid when the sentence of imprisonment is confirmed,
and cannot, therefore, take effect if the sentence of
imprisonriient is subsequently suspended.


Trial of Soldiers under Suspended Sentence.
(I) A soldier under suspended sentence may be
sentenced to Field Punishment.
If he is sentenced to Imprisonment or Penal Servi-
tude, A.F. W3104 should be forwarded to the Superior
Military Authority with the proceedings of the Court
Martial, Part VII. of the form being filled in and signed
by the Competent Military Authority.
The Superior Military Authority may suspend a
second or any later sentence and will direct whether the
sentences are to run concurrently or consecutively.
The following points as to his powers in this respeci.
should be noted:—
(1) Imprisonment and Penal Servitude, can never
run consecutively and if the first sentence
was imprisonment it is " avoided " when the
sentence of penal servitude is passed.
(2) If a soldier has two sentences of imprisonment
(or of penal servitude) and both are put into
execution, they can only be ordered to run
concurrently. If, however, a second or
further term is suspended, it can be made
to run consecutively on the preceding term.
(3) No soldier may be ordered to serve continuously
or consecutively a period of imprisonment
exceeding two years.
Committal to Prison when under Suspended
Sentence.
(m) If a soldier's conduct, after the suspension of
his sentence, is unsatisfactory, his Commanding Officer
may at any time forward through the usual channels
to the " Superior Military Authority " a recommenda-
tion (giving full reasons) that the man shall be com-
mitted to prison, and the " Superior Military Autho-
rity " may then order that the sentence shall cease to
be suspended. A.F. W3104 and copy of A.F. 8122
must be forwarded to the " Superior Military Autho-
rity " with the recommendation. If the Superior


Military Authority decides that the soldier shall be
committed to prison, he will complete and sign para-
graph VI. of A.F. W3104.
Commitment Forms.. G.R.O. 1202, 14-10-15.
(n) The unit will complete the usual commitment
form for imprisonment, A.F. C 384, for Penal Servitude,
A.F. C 385 to accompany the prisoner. If a soldier is
committed to- prison on more than one sentence,
separate commitment forms will be made out in respect
of each sentence. If a portion of one of these sentences
has already been completed the commitment form for
that sentence will be made out in respect of the unex-
pired portion of it.
When a soldier is committed to prison on more than
one sentence a note must be made on each of the com-
mitment forms stating whether the sentences have been
directed by the Superior Military Authority to run
consecutively or concurrently.
When a suspended sentence is put into execution, the
designation of the Superior Military Authority puttino-
the sentence into execution, and the date of his order,
will invariably be shown on the Commitment Form.
Suspension of Sentence of Man Committed to
Prison.
(o) The power of suspension of sentence after a
soldier has been committed to prison will only be exer-
cised by the Commander-in-Chief. Recommendations
may however be made and are invited from Armies, &c.,
in any particular case where it may be desired that a
soldier in prison be released on suspension.
Records.
(p) 1. When a sentence is suspended or remitted, or
a soldier is committed to prison during suspension, it
is a casualty affecting his service and must be notified
to D.A.C., 3rd Echelon, in the ordinary way.


2. When a sentence is suspended the following re-
cords should be available :
(a) Record at Divisional or Brigade Head-Quarters
(A.F. W3104).
(b) Record at office of D.A.G., 3rd Echelon (A.F.
8213 or 2069).
(c) Record with Unit (Field Conduct Sheet, A.F.
B122).
3. When a soldier under suspended sentence, having
been evacuated to the L. of C. sick or wounded, is sent
to England or permanent duty on the L. of C., D.A.G.,
3rd Echelon, will call for A.F. W3104, and dispose of
it as follows:
(a) If the soldier goes to England, to Officer in
Charge Records.
(b) If he goes to permanent duty on L. of C. to
the I.G.C.
4. When a soldier under suspended sentence is re-
ported missing, the D.A.G., 3rd Echelon, will, after a
reasonable time, call for A.F. W3104.
5. When a soldier under suspended sentence is trans-
ferred or his unit moved to another formation, A.F.
W3104 should be transmitted to the " Competent
Military Authority " concerned. In the case of the
unit being moved, if there is doubt as to who the Com-
petent Military Authority is, the forms should be sent
to Army Head-Quartera.
6. On a suspended sentence being remitted, A.F.
W3104 should after completion be sent to D.J.A.G.
at G.H.Q. through the usual channels.
7. On a soldier under suspended sentence being com-
mitted to prison, A.F. W3104 should be sent after
completion to D.J.A.G., at G.H.Q. The D.A.G., 3rd
Echelon, should be notified in the ordinary way.
Men due for Discharge.
(q) Attention is directed to the instructions issued by
the Adjutant-General (A.G., G.H.Q., B/759, dated
4/8/15) with regard to men under suspension of sentence
who become due for discharge.


In the event of a soldier who has been released under
the Army (Suspension of Sentences) Act 1915, being
due for discharge, as laid down in the first paragraph
of General Routine Order No. 507, dated 3rd January,
1915, he may be permitted to continue in the service
or re-engage in accordance with Army Orders 252/15
and 253/15, in which case his sentence will remain
under suspension. If the soldier does not desire to
continue in the service or re-engage the case will be
submitted for re-consideration so> as to arrive at Army
Head-Quarters at least 22 days before the date of
discharge.


PA RT V.
I.—MISCELLANEOUS.
Trial by Officers.
(a) Officers are to be tried by G.C.M., and these
Courts are usually convened by G.O.C. Divisions.
Whenever it is decided to assemble a G.C.M., a. wire is
sent to " Advocate, G.H.Q.," giving date, time, and
place of trial. In cases of special difficulty the
D.J.A.G. will, if possible, attend at the place of trial,
and can be referred to should the President or Judge
Advocate wish to take his advice.
(b) It is essential either that the names of the mem-
bers of the Court should be inserted in the Convening
Order, or that the Unit (e.g., Battalion, or in the case
of the Royal Artillery, the Brigade) should be specified.
A Convening Order directing officers (unnamed) to be
detailed from such and such an Infantry Brigade is
invalid, and the Court would have no jurisdiction. (See
K.R. para 577 and R.P. 20).
(c) It should be recollected that General Courts
Martial must be conducted strictly in accordance with
the Rules of Procedure. If any of the rules mentioned
in R.P. 104 cannot be observed, a certificate in
accordance with the rule must be attached to the pro-
ceedings.
Sentences on Officers. A.A., S. 44 (f) and (g).
(d) Sentences of "Forfeiture," "Reprimand," and
" Severe Reprimand," may be confirmed by G.O.C.
Divisions, and should then be promulgated. When
the other sentences mentioned in A. A. 5.44 are
awarded, the proceedings can only be confirmed by the
Commander-in-Chief ( vide A.F. A 1 " Warrant for


convening G.C.M."). In such cases all authorities, in
forwarding the proceedings, will make their recommen-
dations upon the case.
Charge Sheet and Summary.
(e) When practicable, before a Court is convened, the
charge sheet and summary of evidence will be forwarded
to Army Head-Quarters for the approval of the Army
Commander, or in the case of an officer belonging to
some other formation to the D.J.A.G. through the head
of the formation.
2.—NOTIFICATIONS TO BASE.
Officers commanding units will take steps to see that
the following particulars relating to men tried by Courts
Martial are forwarded on their Army Form 82069 to
the D.A.G., Base :
Date and place of trial
Charge.
Finding.
Sentence.
Confirmation and authority.
"Remission, if any
Time in confinement awaiting trial.
3.—ARREST.
{a) An accused when under close arrest can only be
called upon to perform such duties or obey such orders
as are necessary for his personal cleanliness and well-
being.
(b) When men are in the trenches, arrest is neither
appropriate nor necessary, except in cases where a man
is behaving in such a way that he would be. dangerous
unless an armed sentry were placed over him. If,
therefore, when a battalion goes into the trenches, or
a battery into action, it is thought desirable, having due
regard to the circumstances of each case, to release


soldiers from arrest for the performance of their respec-
tive duties, this may be done, without prejudice to
re-arrest when the period of duty terminates.
(c) Soldiers who have been sentenced to death are
dealt with under special orders (A 6 (B) 1121 dated
15-3-16).
(d) A man thus released from arrest without preju-
dice " to re-arrest, will only lose pay under Section 138,
A.A., if afterwards convicted, for every day during
which he is actually under arrest. On the other hand,
a man released from arrest pending promulgation of his
sentence, will, if such sentence is ordered to be carried
out, lose pay from the date of award of the sentence,
no cognisance being taken of the fact that he was
released from arrest.
By Authority: ALBERT J. LL UIXETT, Government Printer, Melbourne.


,


1508 00247416 6


;: ■ r.. ,. y;.:v ,
- 4 , , v ? • -» . 4 » f&V
■
v "
;
V , ; ■ ■ ; . , i;,:-
■ i' " ■ •
: ;, '/■ v
■


.
00247416 6
