

SPRING AND THE CIRCUS HAVE COME AGAIN.
SOME OF THE FEATURES OF BARNUM AND BAILEY'S BIG SHOW. NO. 1—ALBENA HINES, WHO IS VERY GOOD. 2-MARION
SILBON, CLEVER AERIALIST, 3-LUPITA PEREA, DARING TRAPEZIST. 4—CHARMING MME. ELLA BRADNA.


SOME MARVELOUS EXPONENTS OF MUSCULAR DEVELOPMENT.
NO. 1—CAROLINE BAUMAN, AMERICA'S STRONGEST WOMAN. 2—FRED SCHMIDT OF SPRINGFIELD, MO. 3-LOUIS MEYNET.
4—“CRAMONDI,” THE AMERICAN SANDOW, ONE OF PROF. ATTILA'S CLEVER PUPILS.


WIRTH’S CIRCUS.
There are circuses and circuses, buc
Wirth’s circus and menagerie is
recognised as the circus, and whenever
they undertake to show in a town, the
residents may rely upon the full
strength of the combination being in
attendance. In this respect Wirth’s
circus and zoo are points ahead of some
that are on the road. The residents
of Rotorua, therefore, may rely on
witnessing, on Monday evening next,
this circus as it appeared in the large
cities of Australia and also in the
cities of New Zealand. The Sydney
Morning Herald , speaking of the
opening in that city, says : —The
was witnessed by a very
,j ge concourse. The menagerie is
rtf a capacious tent, and the main
has two rings, one of the
Matter being used for a numoer of
sensational acts with wild animals,
which form a striking feature of the
•show, the performance being opened
fevith leaping and tumbling feats. In
'addition to a popular tariff the com-
pany provided an excellent programme
which was most varied, and contained
some refreshing novelties, but it was
somewhat of a too liberal kind, and
might with advantage be curtailed.
At any rate there was an abundance
of items presented, and the great
success achieved was well merited, i
Much use is made of the wild animals, I
and therefore there is no lack of sen- |
sationalism. Three large tigers, after |
going some rounds in Indian file, race
over hurdles, jump through a burning
hoop, and two draw a vehicle in which
the third has a ride. The trainer, M.
Ragoul, who was loudly cheered, also
stands on one of the beasts when it is
in a recumbent position. Later on a 1
lion, iprvny, goat, and dog jump hurdles,
and the 'quartette lie down together.
In addition, the trainer, Herr Pagel,
carries the lion on his shouldeis.
There is also a wrestling bear, boxing
ponies, and a performing camel and
elephant. A tiger walks on a narrow
pole, jumps as required from box to
box, and springs on to a cantering
horse. Herr Pagel was cordially re-
welcomed, and he performed seveial
extraordinary feats to show his great
strength, carrying a horse, also holding
a lion down, opening its jaws, and
showing the teeth. Unbounded j
laughter was caused by the diveiting
antics of a muzzled dog, which, from
the time it entered the ring until it
left jumped about continually bounc-
ing’a large ball. The dog cleverly |
leapt, striking with its head the ball
after the manner of a player of British
Association football It was on the
“go ” all the time, and seemed to get .
as much fun as the audience out of the
performance. There are several
equestrian acts, and also acrobatism,
contortion feats by a tiny gir, an
high jumping greyhounds Ihe
Howard Brothers mystified the
audience with their ocult work. Ihe
blindfolded brother never fai.ed to
correctly describe the articles shown
to the other by the spectators. He
gave the name cf a baby as Gwendo-
line and that of a young man s sweet-
heart as Lotty. “ How many matches
there in the box?” was asked,
‘'here are none, it wants filling, was
■he reply. The answering one now
and again raised laughter by advice to
his brother to help himself to cigar-
ettes when they were the objects
exhibited. A novelty in skirt dances
was shown by Miss Phyllis Wirth on
horseback while all the lights were
extinguished. She also m^ t ed
butterfly transformation and floa
over the heads of the audience, the
effect being picturesque.
LEOPARD CLAWS
BAGGAGE AGENT
Jungle Ship Arrives From
Singapore
rpHE liner Nieuw Holland, which
, berthed dt Victoria Dock yester-
day, brought from Singapore one of
the largest consignments of animals
ever imported by Wirth Bros- Circus.
The chattering of 39 monkeys, lang-
ing from pocket-edition marmosettes
to a chimpanzee named Betty, who,
according to the crew, was no lady,
wfs drowned by the snarls and growls |
of three leopards.
A baggage agent who walked
| past the cage had his trousers torn
by a leopard’s paw.
On the voyage, which las + ed three
weeks, the monkey’s were fed on con-
centrated milk and eggs.
DEAL IN TICKETS
INCIDENT AT WIRTH’S CIRCUS
I"
George Leslie Hagen, a young man, was
charged at Lismore Police Court yesterday
with stealing four admission tickets/ tho
property of Wirth Bros.
Constable Beaton deposed that Mr. Wirth
called him at the circus on Saturday night,
and, indicating defendant, said, “I want to
give this man in charge for selling old
tickets outside the tent to-night.” De-
fendant, who was wearing a circus uniform,
replied, “I never did.” A man named Best
then came up and identified defendant a?
the person from whom he had purchased
four tickets for himself and friends. Three
other men named Watts (2) and Duffy were
interviewed, and each recognised defendant
ys the man xvlio sold the tickets. Defend
ant, who said the men had made a mistake,
was arrested, and on the way to the lockup
he said, “There’s a ring in this.” Wit-
ness asked him who'comprised the “ring,’
and he replied, “I’m not going to say. ”
To defendant: When Best was first spok-
en to he did not say, ‘I am not sure if this
is the man; wait till I get my mates.” Best
said he did not want to get any man into
trouble. .
George Anderson, manager ol Wirth s cir-
cus, said defendant was employed as a
labourer, and had no authority to sell
tickets. The tickets produced '•were used
on Friday night, and should, have been de
sfroved then. They were' originally sold
for 5s sel each. The tickets were of no
value only on Friday night, and a person
should not have been admitted on them on
Saturday night. . .
To defendant: You were never m a posi-
Hon to handle tickets, and you could no,
have stolen them from the window. Iher
was nothing on the tickets to show they
were not transferable. You were in uniform
controlling the crowd, and it was tmpoesi <-
for you to have bought tickets for anyone
° Tl to Sergeant McCrea: A person could not
porch ticket on Friday to admit the
fO S wftts, a labourer, deposed that
one of his mates bought four /eke s ’ „
fondant. The tickets produced the
same, and his mate pate s , ive( , a t
Daniel J. Best deposed that no nvn
t? i Valiev and knew defendant.
Dock v anty, ' II,U rWifltd to so to
„0«, and his three hande d him
the ; t th tickets. From somethin;:
money to get oie , keep-
he heard he sau; defendant who w. V
ing the crowd back
Asked 'ltftndant f h sai)l
and after Witness the tickets,
returned and aancit they were
When they preabnted tVm ticket
questioned h d^ (iant man from
wards idtntineei nnwhased.
whom the tickets «« I ?’<>«
To defendant: Fid ted my
straight away, and ecrtain you are
mates to make kts .
the man who sold the other wit-
Sergeant. McCrea sanl b ,
nesses to call, o „; re ady giv‘n-
-«raiiU *. y
n 0 evidence to show t be(m presewni
use,css the
defendant
ou°t of the same
-
Max Serpentini
zeigt
als Contortionist Trick-Tānze
in Unübertroffaner, unerreichts
Vollendungl.
MaxSerpentini
JIRCUS TROUBLES
MORE HARSH RESTRICTIONS.
Our Unneighbourly
Neighbours.
Another instance of the harsh admims-
tratioln of -the laws of New South W ales
against Queensland hlas ibeen supplied m
the case of Wirth Bros.’ Circus. The pro-
prietors came overland, playing at .the
various towns on the way, and desired to
return iby boat to Newcastle. It w T as
pointed out to the N.S.W. Government
that .the circus wtas playing on a piece ot
ground near the 'Oentrad. ‘Station; that tne
horses were groomed, and absolutely free
of ticks; and an inquiry was made by tne
(Stock Department whether they would be
allowed to go by sea to Newcastle. A
reply has been received .that the circus
must go back via Waßangarra, and it is
added that Wirth Bros. were informed
before they left of the conditions under
which they could return.
Messrs. Wirth are very indignant at the
attitude taken up by the New South W ales
authorities. The letter from them indicat-
ing the conditions only reached the firm,
at Tam worth. It was dated 4th May on
which date the circus opened at Maitland,
and was forwarded on to them. At this
time the tour had been arranged, and was
being carried out. Mr. Wirth also sajs
that he understood from the letter that
the authorities believed they desired to re-
turn overland. He added that on each
occasion the circus .had visited Queensland
they had been subjected to a great deal of
.annoyance about permissions to return.
| Horses that shine from the grooming they
I receive are hardly likely to be able to carry
I ticks.
TSI MOtiyPi HUHS.
<*V;ld f-itj mep are- mill gr&ft- muiit-s i.i
.!■ u< they liay§ bail to keep
abreast‘of the time*.. I:. van a big-shaw m
those das4 thad Mrit*; hauled' tlu^ttgh' (jie
country by .30 or 40 horse*, bur cmrus
of to-day calls for its special ivp’.i'i to move
it frbm eehtre (so
‘‘lt would take3#,hofses an&%o tfttggons
to pull our show aiorig the road." said Mr.
Phil Wivlh, of Mirth Broth#, ya&toxtey.-
‘•'There wits a -lime oft
[ ll#^sHie-crid^-lowrfagath and again, ffpt the
people will not stand for it novy. You have
got to bring them all the latest novelties.
Australians will flock to see a good thing,
but they want it' godd. I have done a lot
of travelling in 'search"ofdft'h artists" since
I left here in the Moldavia on December
10. I landed ac‘ Oibraltar and then took
train for Madrid. 1 .hail £d wait seven hours
for a train atya place called Bobadil. The
Bobadil that Mejljoqriie'ifenew P ret * y
t fcpgd the! e halls rather
backward in -class-of entertainment;
still I managed- to engage there three first-
class artipts in 1 the brothers <1 anion. m
Paris, my next place wf’hall, T saw and en-
gaged Les Crottons, Russian strong men,
wrestlers, and acrobats. They.-are open to
wrestle anything in Australia. It was at
Berlin, however, that I secured the men who
will give what I reckon will prove the ‘star
turn’ of the show. They are the Sidney
Brothers, bicyclists, whom I foynd perform-
ing at Buch’s Circus. Their turn ends with
a startling (gat. Ope brother sits on his
bicycle on the lower end of a see-saw beard,
and the other drops 20ft. (with Ms bicycle)
on to the higher end, throwing the first man
20ft. into the air. He turns a somersault
and lands on file ground, bicycle and all.
From Berfin I went to Vienna, where I en-
gaged Ilket and Jennie, French equilibrists.
Frhe finale of their turn is a remarkable ex-
hibition of balancing. Ilket stands on his
hands, balancing with either hand on a 9ft.
ladder, while a bicycle is suspended from a
mouthpiece held in his teeth, and Jennie
performs on the bicycle. My next move
was to London, after I had been to Ham-
burg to purchase a giraffe from Hagenbedi.
The giraffe will cost £l,OOO landed in Aus-
tralia. They have never been able to land
a live giraffe in Australia yet, but I fancy
this one will get through. It is quite do-
mesticated, and will feed out of the hand.
It has had a -four weeks’ voyagf to Ham-
burg, so that it has a good chance oi stand-
ing the voyage to Australia. It should
arrive in Alelbourne by tne s.s. Hosier on
April 18. At the Hippodrome, London I
secured three first-class Italian clowns,:Bebe
and the Pa-store Brothel. Bobe~ is the
finest clown I have seen. I had a good deal
of trouble in securing some of these people.
Must when I reckoned I had everything fixed
[with the ‘clowns, one of the Pa,stores jibbed
on leaving his mother, and I have had to
pay the old lady’s expenses to come out
[with her boy. Counting her in, I have en-
[gaged 15 new artists,in all.
TRAIN AND LORRY
CRASH
Man Killed and Nine
Injured
ADELAIDE, Saturday.—One person
was killed, three are not ex P ected
recover, and six were injured as the
result of a railcar crash Vig ”Jt° a
motor-lorry, at a crossing near the
Balaklava railway station, this morn-
Yictims in the lorry were members of
a circus party, George Ridgway, 60
vears was killed instantly.
y Chirles Ridgway Mrs Ms™?
fwife of Charles Ridgway), and Mai-
die Ridgway, eight years, were mti-
cally injured, and Sydney Hyde, 25
vears Beryl Ridgway, 14 years,
Charles Ridgway, 12 years, Nellie Ridg-
WAV six years. George Ridgway, four
yeZrs aljd Phyllis Ridgway, three
years, received minor injunes.
r ECHO, MONDAY, APHIt
LILLIPUTIANS ARRIVE.
TWENTY MIDGETS COME
TO STOCKPORT.
Station Welcome.
Now I know what it feels like to be a
Camera!
I am only of medium height (writes an
“ Echo ” reporter), bu,t as I stood on
the stage at the Stockport Hippodrome this
morning, surrounded by a party of the
midgets appearing at the theatre this week,
I seemed to be a giant.
The little people, 20 of theiTr, arrived at
Edgeley Station yesterday noon, and were
met by a large crowd of Stockport people.
The ladies waved their hands and the men
Mr Roper and “Lady Godiva."
raised their hats politely as they left the
station, dragging after them suitcases in
which they could have concealed them-
selves with little difficulty.
Mr Fred Roper, their manager, has a
harassing time looking after them. They
are easily lost in crowds, and some of them
are as mischievous as monkeys. Conse-
quently Mr Roper’s lot is a responsible one.
“At * any rate they have no worries—l
have to do all the worrying,” he told me.
They are all English, and the tallest is
a young gentleman of 48 inches. . The
smallest is a little lady of 18. She is 34
inches high and weighs only 294 pounds.
Known as ‘‘ Lady Godiva,” she is a dainty
dancer,
43 INCH BRIDE.
Four other members of the “ Tiny Town
Follies ” are only 35 inches high, and their
ages range from 18 to 31.
There are two married couples. Miss
Winnie Yelland, 24 years of age and 43
inches tall, was married last August to
Jimmy Mac. the comedian, who is nearly
six feet high.
The midgets include comedians, vqcalists,
trick cyclists,' dancers, acrobats, and trapeze
artistes. They all specialise in one form of
entertainment or another, and have
travelled round the world, showing that
they are talented, if abbreviated.
Two of them can speak three languages
fluently, and they have had a host pf ex-
periences in various parts of the world.
If none of then? is mislaid in the mean-
time they are to visit the Stockport Co-
operative Society’s shops in Chestergate to-
morrow afternoon, at four o’clock.
THE MIDGETS AND THE
BIG WEDDING CAKE.
Daring the week-end a large wedding
cake in one of the window's of the Fashion
House of the Stockport Co-opea-ative
Society, Chestergate, has attracted much
attention.
This is the Largest w r eidding cake ever made
by the Confectionery Department of the
Co-operative Society and is well over four
feet six inches in height. It will be pre-
sented to Mr Fred Roper’s midgets at the
Stockport Hippodrome to-night for their
show “The Wedding of the Painted Doll.”
To-morrow afternoon, at 4 o’clock the
midgets will have afternoon tea in the main
window of the 1 ashion House.


JUNE CAPRICE
MISS VERA PEARCE
WANDA RADFORD.
A Sydney girl at present with the
London Film Co. Miss Radford is nine-
teen years of age. The above photo-
graph shows her at fourteen, or at a
time when she was instructress in elo-
cution and acting to the Kaiser’s only
daughter.
MISS MARY ELIZABETH
BILLY REGO.


Cadd Franks
Roy Rene
NAT PHILLIPS
Direction - - BEN. J. FULLER
SADLER and KEARNS
Presents His
Tabloid Musical Comedy Revue Co.
Nat Phillips, Roy Rene and the Panama Six.
A Good Company of Congenial Performers
Playing to Record Business at the
Princess Theatre, Sydney.
Daisy Merritt
Nat Phillips
Another Study of Miss Kellermann.
Kitty
Rayner
and
Mabelle
DOLLY MILLER.


WIRTH BROS. Ltd.
NEW CIRCUS
The Greatest Show on Earth.
NEW ACTS EVERY VISIT
5 FLYING LaMars
2 LADIES— 3 MEN—WORLD’S GREATEST AERIALISTS
[?]opar Pty. Ltd. Print. —10/28 ( SEE OTHER SIDE)
CLAUDIA ALBA
The World’s Famous Feminine Athlete
GRAND OPENING [ 'J AII fl-J. IQ
WIRTHS’ OLYMPIA Millay, UCI. I
PALLENBERG’S
WONDERFUL
PERFORMING BEARS
PALLENBERG’S SKATING BEARS
THE THREE ARCONAS
Balancing Sensation including the
Beautiful BETTY ARCONA the most
Fearless Woman In the World.
Mademoiselle GULNARE HOYER
in a Dare-Devil Dance in a Den of Ferocious Lions, and her celebrated "Dancer
of Thousand Feathers," as performed by her in the Folies Bergeres, Pans


TWO ENGLISH BEAUTIES GRACE THE MUSIC HALL STAGE.
ANNA HANA, CLEVER AND TALENTED, WHO HAS APPEARED
IN MANY SUCCESSFUL MUSICAL PRODUCTIONS.
DOROTHY ROYAL, A DISTINGUISHED PERFORMER, WHO IS
NOTED FOR HER GRACEFUL FIGURE AND SINGING ABILITY.
THIS IS ONLY HALF A BAND!
Four of the instrumentalists in N.S.W. Broadcasting Company’s Dance Band. In the course of their programmes
for the two these bandsmen use no fewer than 21 different instruments.
THE OTHER HALF OF A BAND!
Last week we showed half the dance band of the New South Wales Broadcasting Company that makes melody from the
2FC and 2BL Studios. This photograph shows the other half (or rather three sevenths) of the band They are a versa
tile combination and cap[?] of being split up Into groups musically as well as [?].
NOT INDIA, but North terrace. One of the circus
elephants, which arrived in Adelaide yesterday, pull-
ing a trolley-load of luggage through the streets.
CANSINO BROS. AND STONEBURN, FAMOUS DANCERS
IN "WILDFLOWER."


ANNETTE KELLERMANN
TALENTED SYDNEY GIRLS.
The Three Starrs, who recently did a season in India, and are now on the Fuller
circuit. Above they are seen as they appear in their hoop speciality.
MAUD SARD AND FLETCHER NORTON.
A versatile pair of entertainers on the Tivoli Circuit. Elsewhere on
this page Mr. Norton relates the details of his marriage and divorce
proceedings with Valeska Suratt, the American Film Star, who has been
seen in the Fox Films shown in Australia lately.
OH! FOR THE SURF!
A Study of Molly McGuire, of the
Tivoli Follies touring New Zealand.
EVELYN CUNNINGHAM.
An American Character Comedian of
the Tivoli Circuit.


JACK AND FORIS.
Refined Comedy Acrobats on the
Tivoli Circuit.
CHESTER CONKLIN.
BILLY REGO
GWLADYS SOMAN
AS Jack in a recent English production of the pantomime, "Jack and the Beanstalk.
With her partner, Mr. Dillon, she is now appearing on the Fuller circuit.
Block by Bacon and Co.
A FUTURIST COSTUME.
Worn by Annette Kellermann in The Million Dollar William Fox Annette
Kellermann Photo-play.
VIRGINIA PEARSOSN
A VENTRILOQUIAL TRIO. WITH THEIR DUMMIES.
Sydney James Standing up, with Lawrence Johnston to the front of him and
Carltan Max to the back. Readers will probably be able to discriminate for
themselves between the originals and the dummies. The photograph is by Madeline
Rossiter.


EDNA AND BILLY ST. ALLON
SNAPPED AT COOGEE.
In "So Long, Letty,” the chorus sing “You Don't Have to Behave When You're Under a Wave!” In this photograph
Alfred Frith, life-saver in the musical comedy, and his wife (in the buoy) have just come to the surface. Mrs. Harrald Baker
whose husband, formerly referee at the Stadium, has gone to the front, is the third in the picture. The “snap" was taken
by Paul Plunket, of the “So Long, Letty,” Co. Block Bacon and Co.
FRED READE AND EILEEN WATSON
In the bacchanal dance as given by
them in the early days of the Tivoli
Follies. Mr. Reade left Sydney during
September for the front.
Arthur Martin photograph. Mock by
Bacon and Co.
VARNA STIRLING
BELLE OR BETTY?
The Baliots
VARNA STIRLING,
The American Beauty appearing in
a novel act at the Melbourne
Tivoli Theatre.
The Harmony Four.


JULIAN ELTINGE
ESTELLE RICH and VERA BURT.
VIOLET DALE,
Vaudeville’s New Headliner.
THE FOUR ATHLETAS.
When in Sydney, three years ago, it was "The Three Athletas.” Since then a fourth girl has been added to the
[?]mbination. The act consists of feats of strength and the striking of different poses. The Athletas are at present
[?] Ameriea. Block by Bacon and Co.
MOLLIE McGUIRE,
A pretty member of the Tivoli
Follies.
Les Bretons
French Classical Cyclists
playing the Fuller Circuit.
MLLE NADJE.
A famous Continental Dancer, who arrives in Australia shortly to tout
The Tivoli Circuit.
TOMMY ARMSTRONG AND MAR'S HOWARTH,
In one of the many varied turns in which they are being seen on the Fuller circuit.
Murmann Studio photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.


“Cripes, that was a narrow squeak!"
“Yairs—we were lucky to get out of it."
"For gorsake stop laughin’—this is
serious.”
THE OLDEST MAN—
Zaro Agha, 154 years old,
reputed to be the oldest man in
the world, recently divorced his
eleventh wife, and will soon Wed
his twelfth. The present Mrs.
Zaro is only 90 years old.
Wind Wrecks Circus,
So Show Moves On
T)ORT FAIRY, Tuesday. One per-
formance of Wirths’ Circus was
abandoned tonight when, at 6.40 p.m.,
a violent gust of wind lifted the big
tent top from its stays, and it col-
lapsed.
Much of the Canvas was ripped to
ribbons in the wild animal act enclo-
sure. The covering over the menagerie
also was blown down.
The horses stampeded, but were soon
quietened.
The management surveyed the wreck
and gave orders to pack for Koroit,
the next town on the tour.
SKITTLES is the favourite amusement of this elephant at Wirth's
Circus.


It Isn't a Circus ... It's India
(Underwood & Underwood photo)
This elaborate bus and its colorful equipment are used by native princes in India on important occa-
sions. It will accommodate 40 persons. Sometimes Indian royalty uses it to review native troops. This
picture was taken in Delhi, winter capital of India. (Summer capital is Simla, 7,000 feet up in the hills.)


Playmates: Lion and Dog. Author Wells says puppies make the most suit-
able playmates for lion cubs. They romp together, remain friends after they
grow up. Hunters, however, often use dogs in tracking down wild lions.
Although tame lions and dogs become very fond of each other, lions hate
cats, and cats hate lions —though lion and cat are closely related ... Lions
are great “bluffers” in regions where they have not been hunted.
The Lion Likes to Have His Chin Scratched. Lions are more reliable
than most wild animals, Author Wells believes. Even during mating
periods, Wells’ lions may be freely handled. Natives in South Africa
avoid the lion if possible, but once they overcome their fear they grow
attached to the animals and the animals like them. This boy brushing
the lion carries no weapon.
Lion and Puppy Share a Drink. Pure-bred fox terriers or plain mongrels
make the best companions for lions, Author Wells says. Sometimes they
stalk each other as if hunting. Lions can run fast for short distances, but
seem to lack the dog’s staying power. Wells’ lions have never hurt the
dogs, but the dogs sometimes nip the lions.
Lion and Dog Should Always Be Fed Separately. Otherwise the lion might
grab all the food, causing a quarrel. Cubs are fed cow’s milk and water,
later get a little raw meat and cod-liver oil, then porridge. When grown
they get 12 pounds of meat once a day. They like to spend a long time
over their meals. They often have worms.
Circus.
BURMESE “CIRAFFE—NECKED" WOMEN, tour-
ing England and Scotland with a circus. enjoying a drin.
of beer when they visited a brewery in Edinburgh.


Friends: Lion and Cow. These animals roam together on the South African
estate of Eric F. V. Wells, author of “Lions, Wild and Friendly,” published
by The Viking Press, New York. Wells and his wife have reared 33 lions,
most of them born in the wilds and captured while tiny cubs.
The Lions Have Been Treated and regarded as domestic animals, except
that they are locked up at night. Through their study of their own lions,
Mr. and Mrs. Wells have been able to mix freely with wild lions. When
you know lions you don’t fear them, the author says.
Lion’s Dinner Time. This shows how tame a lion can be. Author Wells says he can interrupt his
lions at their feeding and safely even take their food from them. But never will a lion permit
anyone to take from it any woven article such as a coat or sack. The reason for this is a mystery.
Lions Eat From a Tea Table. Wild lions which must find their own food prefer the heart and liver
of their victims, preferably antelopes or zebras. The lions staff themselves often spend the next
few days sleeping. Adult lions kill only when hungry. Young ones may kill oftener.
A Book Review
l^eiunkinc
The King of Beasts
Mother Lion and Cub. When mating, lions leave
the troop in pairs, spend 10 days or two weeks in
a shady, secluded spot. A lioness may bear as many
as 4 cubs at once, 180 days after mating. Cubs
get their milk teeth within a year.
NIMBLEFOOTED Mayeda Kobe,
Japanese entertainer at Wirth’s cir-
cus, does some intricate juggling with
an umbrella.


Big Lins Are Ubangi Marks of Beauty. Some travelers, however, believe the prac-
tice was originally no beauty treatment, that Ubangi women disfigured themselves
to become undesirable to strange men, thereby escaping capture by enemies.
Lips Like Saucers are not the only disfigurements among equa-
torial African Negroes. Some stretch ear-lobes so they can be worn
like necklaces; others mold babies’ heads to make them long.
Crocodile Mouths
For Women
Women with “crocodile mouths” were first intro-
duced to America by circus sideshows, (tingling
Brothers got them from Central Africa, called them
“Übangis” because they live near the Übangi river.
Eating Must Be Difficult for the Jungle Belle ... Great care is required to produce this crocodile mouth. Small wooden discs are placed m the lips
when Ubangi women are little girls and ever larger discs are inserted as the lips are stretched. The discs are called lip plues
Direct from London Palladium
MORTON FRASER
The Famous Wizard of the Mouth Organ
HOLLY FALLA
POIil/V FALLA
VIRGINIA BACON
BLANCHE LEWIS
Tarred and Feathered by a mob, Herbert Har-
ris (above), labor organizer, was dumped out
of an automobile on a main street of Dallas,
Tex., on Aug. 10, 1937. Harris was addressing
a labor rally when 20 vigilantes rushed his car.
overturned it, and kidnaped him. “Get back
up north!” they warned.


EDITH WARREN, TALENTED MUSICAL COMEDY ARTIST.
FAVORITE ENTERTAINER, AND POPULAR WITH THE PATRONS OF THE BEST BROADWAY THEATRES.


Exit the Tivoli
IRVING SAYLES
NELLIE STEWART
WILKIE BARD
ADA REEVE
LITTLE TICH
HOUDINI
I' | ’’O-DAY Sydney Tivoli doors are barred up
and the old house of joyous and tragic
experience is left to its ghosts, includ-
ing the ghost of the Ghost, who, to judge by
attendances over the past year or so, must
be a light-fingered laddie, given to dipping
into pockets other than his own.
As far as the Tiv. building is concerned
its closing comes through a Theatre Licens-
ing Act; but with its end variety seems to
end also, and the cause of death in that case
is not so clear. Still, the Coroner probably
won’t be far out if lie blames the movies,
with the talkies to help them in the final
round. If that verdict is right, the Tiv. can
be numbered among the tragic figures that
have harbored a snake in the bosom, for
it was one of the first houses in Sydney to
screen movies.
Another explanation might be the degenera-
tion of variety; but whether or not it would
have paid a management to continue forking
out the salaries that induced some of the
figures around this page to keep up the
standard is impossible to say. It might be
I a moot point also whether any salaries could
secure figures like them nowadays—Cinque-
valli, Tich, Irving Sayles, Charlie Pope.
Marie Lloyd, Wilkie Bard, Lee White, Fred
Bluett. Ada Reeve; Iloudini, who made
pretty cold-headed men believe he had the
power to dematerialise himself: and others,
such as Chung Ling Soo, the Scotch-China-
man, who passed out in a theatre fire in
Britain; Carl Hertz, the illusionist: Hack-
enschmidt, the wrestler: Frances Alda; G.
W. Hunter; Lamberti ; Charles Godfrey, tin'
daddy of the Lion Comiques; May Moore
Duprez; Peggy Pryde, at the Tiv. last
week; Maud Fanning, another who saw the
old place out and was making the gods roar
for more at the finish : Julian Rose, of “Lev-
insky at the Wedding”: Chirgwin, the
White-eyed Kaffir; Harry Rickards himself,
who really made the house that made him.
and whose familiar bust five strong men
carried down the dress-circle stairs the other
day in a sack; and dozens of others. It can’t
be decided whether even they would have had
the power to stop the rot; the cold fact is
that the talkies and movies have Avon a
remarkable popularity, and another even
colder is that for a long time variety turns
I have been undistinguished.... Better to
let the ghosts fight out the reasons among
themselves.
Apart from this final tragedy, little bits
of black wrap round the history of the old
house in oddish places. Probably the most
poignant of the lot was the throwing of
pennies on to the stage by an audience that
underestimated the brilliance of Little Tich,
or which, having seen the accomplished little
gentleman’s turn performed indifferently by
sundry stage pirates, thought Tich was
doing'the pirating. That was most tragic
because, ns ,T. B. Booth points out in his
latest book of stage reminiscences, there was
no one more sensitive than Tich to physical
or any other shortcomings. He was a broken-
hearted little man at the end.
Of tragedies of a more violent kind, one
occurred in 1890, when a chap fell over the
railing of the gallery. He wasn’t hurt, but
the man in the stalls upon whom he fell died
a few days later. Earlier, when the Tivoli-
to-be was the Scandinavian Hall, it was
leased for a while by lightweight Johnny
Sullivan and called Sullivan’s Athletic Hall.
There two pugs battered each other to such
I effect that both were removed to hospital—
to die; which must be near a record in
knockouts. Incidentally, during Sullivan’s
brief reign Larry Foley had a great fight
with Miller there. After that a Hebrew,
whose name is not recorded in history,
turned the place into a clothing factory,
though it was not till many years later that
a fire occurred. The unspecified son of
Israel hung on for only a few months ; then
the place was a billiard saloon, after whicn
it became the Victoria Hall,. and as such
provided a platform for W illiam Redmond
and Home Rule in 1882. Next year it bios-
SUNDRY SHOWS.
SYDNEY SHOWS FOR COMING WEEK.
Her Majesty’s “Ifold Everything
P . L , CE “It Pays to Advertise
(Criterion "Lombardi, Ltd. ’
Royal (com. Saturday) Movies and Ta kies
State Movies and Talkies
MELBOURNE SHOWS FOR COMING WEEK.
His Majesty’s "Show Boat
,{ tn A( , “Journey’s End
King’s “Whoopee”
Tivovi waudeville
Hoit’s Movies and Ta kies
State Movies and Talkies
somed for the first time as the Tivoli. The
big fire happened in IS9D and Lliough all
such things as stage props, were lost in it,
the show carried on without losing a night s
performance, by moving to the Palace.
Strangely enough, much the same thing
happens now: a variety-comedy party, led
by Gus Bluett, which was billed as the
Tivoli’s next performance, goes to the Palace,
where, for a while, at any rate, an attempt
will probably be made to keep variety enter-
tainment of sorts going-—the darkie Kentucky
singers, at present at Melbourne r \ ivoli, are
to follow Bluett.
That ancient forerunner the Scandinavian
Hall deserves further mention for the fact,
carefully recorded in the several histories
The Bittxf.tin has looked into, that in it
was performed the great Can-Can dance. It
may have been, for those were dark and
murky days, when the performance didn’t
begin till about 10 o'clock, with admission
free, and the harsh eye of the chairman, a
bibulous M.C., upon those who didn't take
aboard enough booze to warrant their get-
ting a “free” entertainment. Also at the
HARRY RICKARDS.
old spot of many spots the cakewalk is
alleged to have been introduced to Aus-
tralia.
Those things happened long before the
Rickards rule began. Rickards, whose name
was Benjamin Leete (and whose brother
John C. Leete, long its manager, looked
after the house for the final night on Satur-
day), was an interesting personality with
a Cockney way of putting things, especially
repartee. One night,- getting off his chest
a statement regarding the high salaries he
paid, he was interrupted by a voice which
called him bluntly a liar. “So’s yer old
man,” was Harry’s retort. lie used to
make an important business of seeing Mrs.
Rickards out to the carriage waiting in front
of the theatre. Head high, he would escort
her on his arm to the carriage, bow her in,
lift his hat, give the driver the word, and
then get in himself. Passing out one night
as usual through a double line of gaping
spectators, he was greeted with the grudging
comment, ‘‘Gord's truth ! ’Arry Rickards!
I knoo ’im when ’e didn’t ’ave a shirt to ’is
back.” Harry and bis lady passed on. As
usual ho bowed her in. As usual be lifted
his hat. As usual he gave the driver
••Home,” and then be turned. “And as for
vou ” he said dramatically, “you can go
t 0 _L ” (The word he used is forgotten;
but it wasn't “hell.”) He had a great
fancy for adorning himself with diamonds,
and before one court case in which lie was
sued he was advised by his counsel tO f take
the rings off his fingers and uncrust lus
tie. It would never do. counsel told ? him,
to go into court thus adorned. “Aw, said
Hairy, “what’s the use of. havin' 'em if you
don't show ’em?”
That court case recalls that Lite Kullk-
tin. with George Reid defending, enjoyed
a libel action arising out of its comment on
a lady who was appearing at the Tivoli, and
who,' it had been hinted, was uncovered a
trifle more thoroughly than was strictly
necessary, even for summer. The verdict
went against the lady, and. in addition, she
was asked, unsuccessfully, to pay costs.
Otherwise The Bulletin has never had
other than the friendliest dealings with the
Tiv., and it takes this chance of thanking all
the old friends it has had there, including
,T. Donaghue, who goes to the Palace, and
E. Breen, who has looked after one door
and another for 30-odd years—-a figure that
even the management's recent fancy for rig-
ging its staff out like rear-admirals could
not prevent from looking like a gentleman,
and being one.
Mention of old hands must include also
one Stump, who reigned in the uncivilised
days before a chucker-out blossomed into an
attache. Stump wasn’t as popular as he
might have been among the gods, chiefly
because the revellers he heaved out were
often regarded as better entertainment than
that emanating from the stage. Stump had
a nasty habit of following elevated late-
comers and ordering them loudly to “Take
orf yor boots!” It was a provocative order
that usually brought a heated refusal, fol-
lowed by a scuffle and then the spectacle
of Stump’s boot helping the reveller out.
There are sundry old gods still walking the
earth who recall one night when a bush
cove arrived just as a lady on the stage was
• making a more valiant than successful effort
to reach a high note. “Take orf yer boots!”
Stump growled. “Take yours off,” retorted
the bush bloke. Stump approached in
bounds, and the gods felt sorry for the
stranger. Stump got hold of him, scuffled
with him and hustled him out to the exit.
There was a bump-bump-bump as the body
thudded down the stairs. The gods waited
for Stump’s return. Then they rose and
cheered while the bush cove blushed and
went to his seat.
If Stump had happened in when The
Bulletin paid its last compliments on
Saturday night he might have taken off his
own boots and emulated the Arabs. To
speak of the house as packed is the mildest
way of putting it. Stalls, dress-circle, gods
—every floor was crammed with a crowd
that overflowed on to the stairs and stood
iu the so-called “standing room” at the back.
Even the attendants were inside! There
was a fair string of old hands doing their
old turns, cracking the old jokes that prove
the direct descent of variety from the Garden
of Eden —George Deane, Ada Berridge, .Take
Friedman, Jimmy Bain, Maud Fanning,
Bobby Watson, Peggy Pryde (“You should
’ave seen that weddm’ cake! The kids ’ad
been at it. It was like a mangy cat!....
Aw, Gawd’s trousis!”), Bob Driscoll, Addie
Towers, Mannie Aarons, Marcella Day,
Harry Linden. The reception must have
made them think of Paradise.
As far as the stage folk are concerned, the
Tiv. went out of existence with character-
istic obituaries. One example :
First Laddie: “By Jove, you’re quite a
good comedian.”
Second Laddie: “Go on!”
First Laddie: “My word you are. I’ll
keep you on for another week —and you
can help pull the place down.”
FRED BLUETT & MO (Roy Rene)
MARIE
LLOYD
ANNETTE KELLERMAN
CHARIIF POP[?]
PAVL
CINQVEVALLI.
LEE WHITE
LONG TACK SAM
VERA PEARCE
ELLA SHIELDS
THE FAMOUS NEWTOWN BAND.
The Art Union advertised on another page is in aid of the Music, Instrument and Uinform Fund.
JENNY HOWARD and PERCY KING
Jenny has a comedy sense which matches the twinkle in her eye.


EDNA MORGAN.
A BEAUTIFUL AND TALENTED YOUNG WOMAN, WHO HAS, WHAT ARTISTS CALL, A PERFECT FIGURE.


LION WHICH WAS HUNTED IN CHURCHYARD
The lion which after escape from a Birmingham fair was captured in a churchyard, and
the manager and trainer who suffered in the chase.
VERSATILE
HETTY KING
In Pantomime and in
one of her famous
soldier characterisations.
Photo by H. Oliver Newton Abbott.
Reproduced by Permission,
MISS NELL FLEMING, a popular member of the
Moon and Morris Revue Company now appearing
at the Auckland Opera House.
AN INCIDENT IN THE NEW ZEALAND-NEW SOUTH WALES RUGBY UNION MATCH LAST SATURDAY.
Players from left to light are: Baird (N.Z.), McKay (N.S.W.), Walker (N.S.W.), Fox (N.S.W.), Duncan (N.Z.W), Dunn (N.S.W.), Shearer (N.Z.), Watson
(N.S.W.), West (N.Z.), Moffitt (N.Z.), Farquhar (N.S.W), Bond (N.S.W.).
MISS MICHELL


Photo by While.
DORIS LLOYD.


“A-CANOEING WE WILL GO!”
FAD DIVINITY OF THE STAGE ENJOYS A SUMMER DAY ON THE WATER TO HER OWN LIKING.
THE SIX PROVEANIES IN TRICK CYCLING TERN
MISS LILLIAN HELD.
Of Russell and Held. American Musical Comedy Artists, now appearing at the
Tivoli Theatue. Melbourne.


SAWDUST AND SPANGLES.
The magic rumble of red waggons and
ootsteps of circusdom’s spangled bat-
aiions have echoed down the corridors
ox many New Zealand summers. Few
really know, however, the phantom
white city which is a world of saw-
dust and spangles and a geographical
marvel. There is more actual geo-
graphy within its narrow borders than
m any similar space on the face of
the earth for its citizens come from the
shores of the seven seas, their faces
ever turned towards the open road. In
the present age of ultra-realism the
circus is a last frontier, and this fact
seemed to be fully realized by the
large crowd that made its way to the
Showgrounds last evening where
Wirth s talented performers made won-
der wake anew under the big top.
Wirth s circus, which for many years
has been touring Australia and New
Zealand and which landed at Bluff by
the Marama from Melbourne on Mon-
day, is constantly searching the world
for “something different” to thrill its
patrons. Its agents travel the earth in
search of new animals and strange
people to augment an institution al-
ready so large that no one can possibly
see all of it in one visit. This year’s
offering is up to standard, and last j
night’s audience enthusiastically ap- \
plauded the animal acts; the fun-mak- \
ing of the clowns; the Nelson troupe,
who although heavier than the air that
surrounded them, stayed in it for an
extraordinary long period; the tumb-
ling feats of the de Pauls; and Miss El
Star, who tied her beautiful body into
running bowlines and reef knots. Al-
together a wide and diversified pro-
gramme was presented, and from start
to finish the show went with a swing.
After the grand parade of the ani-
mals and the various performers led
by Mr Philip Wirth, the audience was
thrilled by Captain Flyger who put
his performing tigers through their
paces. Extreme patience has to be
exercised in the training of these
beasts, which are considered by circus
folk to be much more dangerous than
lions. Tigers can be trained, but one
can never be certain that they are
tamed. Trainers who have trusted
their jungle charges too far have been
left behind in a horizontal position
when the show train made its way to
the next town. Captain Flyger under-
stands his animals perfectly and last
evening made them perform their
tricks with sympathy and skill. Miss
El Star, contortionist, performed some
remarkable evolutions and was heart-
ily applauded. A jockey act featuring
Miss Nellie Connelly and Mr Philip
Wirth, jun., was very popular. The
horse was well trained and maintained
a never-varying pace in the regulation
ring. Mr Harry Mooney and his four
clever elephants came next on the pro-
gramme. Elephants have amazing in-
telligence and learn intricate tricks,
but they are subject to temperament.
Sometimes it happens that those o #l-
- most tractable become re- ,
calcitrant, refuse to perform, and j
have to be used only for i
general circus work. Mr Mooney’s j
elephants, however, were not subject j
to temperament. They performed with ;
the greatest of understanding and j
obeyed the trainer’s commands explic- ,
itly. Miss Gladys Wirth appeared with !
Duke, a horse renowned for his clev- j
erness. The equestrian made the ani-
mal skip, dance and walk. All the
movements were performed with dig-
nity and grace.
Rhythm accomplished the seemingly
impossible in the act performed by the
Nelson troupe. These amazing acro-
bats launched themselves headlong into
space, and only precise timing kept the
various performers from disaster. This
was perhaps the most thrilling section
of the programme. Two dwarf ele-
phants from Siam, under the charge of
Mr Mooney, provided a pleasant comic
interlude. The animals performed their
tricks in a very droll manner and com-
pletely captivated the audience. Danny
and his accomplished dogs mad 6 a wide
appeal. The humorous antics of some
of the animals left scarcely a dry eye
in the audience.
The de Pauls, pretty girl performers,
revealed themselves as acrobats and
contortionists of ability. Their act was
a popular one. Captain Frohn has
trained his sea lions with very great
skill. “Carbine,” who is said to be the
largest trained sea-lion in the world,
can balance a ball on the tip of his
nose, hold a parasol in position and
climb over a series of steps balancing a
lamp. This animal act of Captain
Frohn’s is one of the best that has
been seen in Invercargill. After half-
a-dozen performing geese had enter-
tained the crowd, Mr Philip Worth, jun.,
introduced his trained ponies and mon-
keys which provided ten minutes of
first-class entertainment. Fredga Zil-
amham presented a thrilling Mexican
cowboy act, and then the seven Hil-
tons brought the programme to a close
with their springboard act. This was
an excellent effort, and the bill came
to a close on a very satisfactory note.
Clowns, known as “Joeys” since the
days of Joseph Grimaldi, whose bio-
graphy, edited by Charles Dickens, out-
sold that author’s “Oliver Twist,” are
one of the prime essentials in every
circus. Last evening three accom-
plished clowns were responsible for
some bright acts, and kept the aud-
ience right throughout in a very merry
mood.
The Invercargill season closes with
this evening’s performance. A matinee
will be held this afternoon.
AN ELEPHANT TRAGEDY.
THE GIRL-MEMBER OF THE McCONNELL-AUSTIN TEAM OF CYCLISTS. WHO ARE NOW BEING SEEN ON THE FULLER CIRCUIT.
Block by Bacon and Co.


UPS AND DOWNS OF HUMAN NATURE
Peter and Puff, who Appear in Wirths’ Circus. Peter is 3 ft. high and Duff
measures 7 ft. 6 in.
SENSATIONAL ATTRACTION
RAHMAN BEY
Next Saturday, April 21st
THE MARVELLOUS MYSTIC MAN FROM THE EAST.
An astounding art that has baffled doctors and scientists
throughout the world.
MIDGETS FOR THE HIPPODROME
THE WORLD'S TINY TOWN ARRIVES IN SYDNEY
Some of the members of Irvings Imperial Midgets-an amazing troupe of perfectly-proportioned little men and
women who are to appear next Saturday at the Hippodrome under the direction of Sir Benjamin Fuller and Mr.
John Fuller. Despite the fact their average height is only 36in they excel as entertainers . They have been
gathered from all parts of Europe, and their remarkable turn is but one of the futures of "the Wonder Show of
the World." In the same programme will be the mystifying magicians, Chefalo and Signorina Palermo.
TIGER CUBS IN THEIR NEW QUARTERS.
Andrew, Susette, and Joan were born and reared at the Zoological Gardens, and they resented the change
of quarters necessitated by their sale to Wirth's Circus. Their trainer Mr. T. W. Lindo, will begin their
education next week.
THE FAMOUS ALL BLACKS, who defeated All England by six points. A sensation was caused by the
referee odering off Brownlie for alleged rough play.


Circus Elephant Gets an Apple
ALICE, a member of the elephant troupe with Wirths’ Circus, is re-
warded with an apple by her attendant after having assisted in the unload-
ing work when the circus train reached Adelaide today. Note that the in-
evitable small boy is well in the picture!
ALICE, WHERE
ART THOU ?
JUMBO’S FAMOUS
CONSORT
Said To Have Been Seen in
Australia Three Years Ago
TRAVELLER ON FOUR
CONTINENTS
Two famous elephants the Zoo has
had, Jumbo and Alice, and both
seem to belong to the past.
But there has come a word from
Australia which seems to foster the
almost unbelievable hope that Alice
may still be in the land of the living.
Mr j. M. Dowsett, lecturing on Per-
forming Animals, said that he saw Alice
in Australia three years ago. Is she there
now, or where is she ?
If she would come back to London and
the Zoo she would be assured of the
warmest of welcome from old fogies.
People who are grandparents now can
remember going for a ride on Alice
when, with Jumbo, she counted as one
of the treats of a visit to Regent’s Park.
Alice was brought to the Zoo just 70
years ago as a consort to Jumbo, and
gave children rides for 20 years.
Jumbo Joins a Circus
For reasons best known to the
managers of the Zoo Jumbo was sold
to Mr Barnum of Barnum and Bailey’s
Circus, in spite of a popular outcry
against the transaction. A music-hall
songj taking a more humorous view of
the sale, ran :
Jumbo said to Alice, I love you,
Alice said to Jumbo, I do,n’t believe
you do.
If you really loved as you say
you do, 7,-
You wouldn’t go to Yankeeland and
leave me in the Zoo.
Poor Jumbo did not long survive as
an American citizen. Four years after
his sale in 1881 he walked into the path
of a train while the circus was on tour
and was killed. So Alice never saw him
again; but in the following year she
was also sold to Barnum and Bailey’s
and travelled with them till, again
changing hands, she became a member
of Wirth’s Circus in Sydney. A very
much-travelled elephant she is, for she
has been on four continents at least.
But she seems to have prospered
in spite of her great travels and
great age. When Mr Dowsett saw her
three; years ago she was in excellent
healt ji and quite her old self in her circus
performances, showing no signs of decay
in eitfher body or mind. If any Austra-
lian -reader of the C N sees this para-
graph we should like to know whether
the (old lady is- alive and where she
carrie s on.
Abyssinian Emperor’s Pet
Lions Escape
KILL MAN, EAT
SHEEP
Australian Associated Press
ADDIS ABABA, Wednesday.
Panic spread through Addis
Ababa when five lions—pets of
the Emperor of Abyssinia (Haile
Selassie) —escaped from their
cages and fatally mauled one
man.
THE lions roamed through the streets
of the capital, and 200 Imperial
guards stalked them. A man who
attempted to corner one of the
beasts was attacked and killed, and the
lions then entered a stable and killed
two Arab horses.
Later, 12 sheep were killed. Terrified
people remained indoors while the big-
game hunt continued, and the Imperial
guards succeeded in rounding up the
lions, which were killed by a fusillade of
bullets.
[Haile Selassie, until recently, used
never to show himself without lions,
because he thought they gave special em-
phasis to his status. Two full-grown
animals always lay across the doorway
of his old study.
Once, according to Ladislas Farago, the
author of “Abyssinia on the Eve,” this
practice led to a diplomatic “incident.” f
The English Minister who had come to j
see the Emperor, on being confronted by j
the wild beasts, drew his revolver and i
shot them down.
Then he went in to see Haile Selassie,
who was highly indignant, but the Minis-
ter told him quietly that the next time he
was received by lions he would again shoot,
and since then they have been kept in the
background and are seldom seen, except
when they stray.
Lion in Library
General Virgin, the Emperor’s Swedish
adviser on foreign affairs, tells a story
of how he met a lion in front of the |
library. |
“At first I was startled,” he said, “but I
then I went cautiously past the beast to 1
the Emperor. I did not say a word to
him about my reception, but I could see'
that he would have been pleased if I had. :
Anyhow, now I never meet a lion when I
go to see him.” |
The Emperor may frequently be seen I
walking in his garden with his two
favourite lion cubs. He is fond, also, of
three “cocker dogs,” as he calls them, I
the gift of the Duke of Abruzzi, an uncle j
of the King of Italy.
The lion is also symbolic of Haile Selas- ;
sie’s title, “The Lion of Judah,” to which, !|
it is stated, he has no real title, although i
the Coptic Church upholds the legend !
that the Royal descent may be traced to I
King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.] I
One of the favourites from the Em-
peror’s “Kennels.”
SWAB LEFT IN BODY.
Operation at Sea.
Evidence of the finding of a swab in
the the body, on which he conducted a
post-mortem examination, was given
by the assistant pathologist at the
Auckland (N.Z.) Hospital at the in-
quest on John Gillies (26), a steward
on the Monowai, who was operated
on for appendicitis on June 9 on the
voyage from Sydney to Auckland, and
who died in the Auckland Hospital on
June 15.
Dr. B»yd, surgeon on the Monowai,
who performed the operation, said
that deceased was suffering from
acute general peritonitis following
chronic appendicitis. During the
operation the patient appeared to be
sinking, and witness had to leave him
to get a hypodermic needle. He laid
a lint swab over the wound while he
went to get the needle. He then com-
pleted the operation. He had heard
that a lint swab was found in the
body, but this would have caused no
immediate harm, as it would be closed
off from the abdominal cavity by ad-
hesions. Witness did not expect de-
ceased to recover.
Dr. Edgar Fowler, assistant phatolo-
glst, said the operation might have
given a chance of recovery, but no
more. The swab might have re-
/ tarded ultimate recovery, but it had
I nothing to do with the actual death.
Witness thought that deceased would
have died in any case. If the peri-
tonitis had been cleared up, the swab
would have been discovered.
The Coroner gave a verdict of death
due to acute peritonitis, adding that
medical evidence showed clearly that
the swab in no way caused or hast-
ened the death of the patient. He
sympathised with Dr. Boyd, who had
to conduct a difficult operation at a
moment’s notice without skilled assist-
ance.
Brave Guests Outdo Damocles
hair diTZl'l s '“" ,g , al °f Dionysius with a naked sword suspended above his head by a single
fmir, did not have such a bad time, after all. That, at least, Was the opinion of the 87 free citizens of Mel
bourne who accepted the hospitality of Mr. Philip Wirth, senior, last night, and dined in a den of lions
the mLZT f dutmgmshed l art y—distinguished by the company which attended it, and distinguished, also, by
.. number of persons of high office who accepted the invitation, but decided to be represented rather than to
dine on the some side of the bars as a party of live lions of regal bearing.
| But the courageous 87 were well
rewarded. They partook of a ban-
quet which would not have shamed
even Dionysius himself. They had
good company, and they heard witty
speeches. They saw the circus after-
ward, and that in itself was a treat. They
had the pleasure of honouring Mr. Philip
Wirth, sen., on the 60th anniversary of
his office as governing director of Wirth
Bros.’ Circus, although Mr. Wirth him-
self was indisposed, and was not able to
be present. They had the distinction of
having assisted at a gathering the like of
which had never been beheld before—for
so it is claimed for the banquet last night
lin the lions’ den. And, not least, after
more than 2,000 years, they had the “low-
down” on Damocles.
It was noticeable that the first guests
entered the huge cage with some trepida-
tion. It was remarked, too, that the
(table reserved for the chief guests was the
j table farthest from the seats where the
lions sat, alternately licking their chops and
yawning—the table nearest to the exit
door. Soon, though, all the seats were
filled—those next to the lions last of all.
Then dinner was served with some pomp.
That was when the Damocles myth was
sxposed. The lions took no more than
polite notice of the tact that the diners
were there, arid, eating. The guests were
-elieved. Damocles must have experienced
,he same feeling of relief when he began
nis soup, and observed that the hair held.
The trainer keeping a wary eye on
one of the lions during the dinner in
the lions’ cage at Wirths’ circus last
night.
After that nothing mattered; the. hair
might have been a rope. And the lions,
might just as well have been a party of
roaring dragons, so long as they acted as
politely as they did. Out of consideration
for the lions, it appears, rather than for
the diners, they were invited to re-enter
their smaller cage before the meat course
was brought on, and a large elephant
sedately hauled them out into the mys-
terious background of the circus, amid
applause.
One coast, other than that of "The
| Kin g>” wa s honoured. The Minister for
Customs (Lieut.-Colonel White), repre-
senting the Prime Minister (Mr. Lyons),
proposed the toast of the health of Mr.
Philip Wirth, sen., and the company
joined with him in expressing sympathy
with him in his illness, and hope for his
speedy recovery. "I gather that the
honour of proposing this toast has fallen
upon me because I am a member of the
Lyons Ministry,” Lieut.-Colonel White
said, amid laughter. “It is a pleasure to
me to be in the lions' den; it is a refuge to
me, as Minister for Customs. (Laughter.)
I hear such a lot of growling in ray official
capacity that it is a pleasure to mingle
with some lions, who have every right to
growl, but don’t. (Renewed laughter.) It!
is a pleasure, too, to honour Mr. Philip j
Wirth, who has created this great insti- j
tution, and who has always been so ready
to place it at the disposal of soldiers’ de-
pendants and soldiers’ children, to their
great enjoyment.” (Applause.)
Mr. Philip Wirth, jun., responded on be-
half of his father.
In addition to the menu cards, taste-
fully and wittily prepared as mementoes
of the occasion, each guest bore away
with him a bronze medal, inscribed with
his name, to commemorate the occasion.
First, however, they remained to see the
first performance of Wirth Bros.’ Circusi
in its jubilee season in Melbourne, and
they all agreed that the performance was
worthy of such a notable occasion.
Hardware As A
Diet
pHE Italian who could not get into his
home in Trieste the other day be-
cause he had swallowed his door key
and whose stomach yielded a quantity
of hardware, including 13 keys, a sar-
dine tin opener, three cigarette holders
and several other articles, may have
outdone the unemployed Serbian who,
about the same time, chewed up and
ate two newspapers for a bet, but he
was a mere novice in the art of swallow-
ing compared with some strange people,
whose cases are chronicled in the
medical records of Great Britain ana
other countries.
One of the champions of last year
was a young English farm laborer who,
having been ill regularly after every
meal for two years, was operated on.
No fewer than 500 articles ("enough to
stock a shop,” in the words of an in-
vestigating doctor) were recovered from
his stomach. The total weight was 3i
lb., and the inventory showed 218 screws
and nails, some up to inches long, 36
staples, five spoons (three broken in
i two), 37 gramophone needles, two
meat hooks, a button hook and an
amazing collection of other items. He
told the doctors his “stomach was too
smooth.”
Another man who was operated on
for the thirteenth time almost
apologised for the trouble he was giv-
ing the doctors, and begged the operat-
ing surgeon to take a written history
j of his life, or how he ‘‘swallowed for
: a living.” It appeared that the man
I could often be seen in public houses
: performing in front of semi-intoxicated
i admirers who urged him on in his swal-
lowing feats.
Dirt Eating
Apart from the accidental swallowing
of small hard objects, very few cases
have been treated at the Adelaide Hos-
pital. At the Children’s Hospital a
number of children who have eaten
sand and eorth have been treated and
have generally responded to dietetic
and other treatment.
It is generally accepted among
medical men that the habit of eating
foreign bodies, which occurs mainly
among adults, is a mental condition
Some objects recovered from patients
in a mental hospital in this State are
Sardine tin openers, nails up to four
inches long, buttons, pieces of card-
board. and berries from cedar trees.
As far as dirt eaters are concerned,
a general practitioner of wide experi-
ence said that the craving could
usually be traced to a form of anaemia
which was often secondary to some-
thing else—hookworm in the tropics,
for example—and occurred largely in
children. Those affected similarly
craved for chalk, hair, starch, and
clay. Worms in children w r ere to some
extent frequently responsible for their
desire to eat sand and dirt and other
unnatural foods. Deficiency in body salt
was the cause of salt-eating habits in
some people.
"The desire in adults is sometimes a
form of insanity and is the result of
a condition of hysteria or chlorosis,” he
said. "In somewhat different circum-
stances, a burglar or malefactor of
pome sort will continue to ooerate in
the same stuped way time after time.
He cannot resist the craving ro do the
same sort of thing.”
The doctor added that proper treat-
ment, including a regulated diet, moral
[suasion and mental diversion, had been
'successfully applied in a number of
[cases.
PHIL WIRTH gave them a good
demonstration of taming lions
on the quarter deck, and there was
a joyous time for a while till a nasty
little swell stole up the estuary. By
this time all the seasoned fishers
were at work, and Gladys Wirth,
who is now Mrs. Erwin Nelson,
squealed with joy as she landed a
“tiddley.” All told there were four
fish caught and 13 crabs.
# * &
tN the excitement of hauling them
aboard, Dawn Lore, at one time well
known with J. C. Williamson’s, who
was just poised on the taffrail tak-
ing a nice photo, fell overboard, all
in her nice expensive fur coat and
all. Immediately tall young Clive
Whitrow sprang to her rescue
without troubling to divest himself
of any clothing. He grabbed the
lady, who, by this time, had lost her
camera, and by the time he came up
gasping for air with her he had
lost a shoe and his gold wristlet
watch. But it was precious little
balm for his wounded feelings and
his lost possessions when the lady
remarked that she could swim, any-
way. Her fur coat by this time
thoroughly drenched, was lying sog-
gily in the ocean and threatening to
pull her under. When she was
hauled aboard Phil Wright gallantly
lent her his leather coat when she
was thawed out, and the party con-
tinued without further mishap.
COMPLICATED
CLOCK
HAS 27 DIALS AND
30,000 PARTS
(B.U.P. Special Service.)
'pHE world’s most complicated
clock is to be seen in the
cathedral at Besancon, France.
It has 30,000 different parts, 27
dials, measures 19 feet in height,
and is 8 feet wide and 3 feet
deep.
I tT cost £72,000, and was constructed
for Cardinal Mathieu in 1857.
The ordinary dial for telling the
time is set at the top, and below it
are other dials indicating the time in
16 parts of the world.
Another set of dials tells the length
of the day, the equation between real
time and mean time, the seasons, the
day of the week, the length of the
night, the signs of the Zodiac, the
planets corresponding to each day of
the week, and the day of the year.
Eight other dials indicate the sec-
onds, the hours of sunrise and sunset,
the Roman year, the cycle of the sun
and two other indications of religious
significance.
Still another dial indicates the
movements of the planetary system.


Photo by "DO YOU LIKE ME-MUCH?"
MABEL WITHEE, ONE OF THE PRETTIEST AIDS TO JOLSON IN "SINBAD," W INTER GARDEN.


THE ALL BLACKS GIVING THEIR “WAR CRY” BEFORE THE MATCH STARTED. THE CRY AND “HAKA” WERE THE SUBJECT OF MUCH CRITICISM, AND WERE
DISCONTINUED.
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE GROUND, SHOWING THE ALL BLACKS PRESSING DEVON AFTER A LINE-OUT, FROM WHICH SVENSON SCORED THE NEW ZEALANDERS ’ FIRST
TRY OF THE MATCH AND THE TOUR.
THE ALL BLACKS’ FIRST MATCH IN ENGLAND: DEVON DEFEATED BY 11 POINTS TO NIL AT DEVONPORT.
The All Blacks played their first match in England on the Rectory Field at Devonport on September 13 against Devon, who were beaten by 11 points to nil. Steady rain fell throughout the second
half, making the ball difficult to handle. Photographs specially taken for “The Weekly Press” by Sport and General Agency.
FLORRIE LE VERE.
[?]e of the many thrilling scenes in "Variety." featuring Emil Jannings, and Lya de Putti. The aerialists, shown in the
[?]tre, are just to make — blindfolded—-a triple somersault n mid-air. The absence of safety nets will be noted. This
subject will shortly be released by Cinema Art Films Ltd.


NEVER
SLACKENS.—
ALL LOADS
ARE THE
SAME, AND
NO JOBS
DIFFERENT
TO OLD
JUMBO.
4 O’CLOCK
WHISTLE,
AND A
GOOD DAY’S
WORK IS
ENDED.
JUMBO
BACK TO
EARTH.
ON THE
JOB.™
JUMBO
READY FOR
A DAY’S
TOIL TO
MOVE THE
CIRCUS
FROM TOWN.
P. T. BARNUM’S FAMOUS "WHAT IS IT”? [?]
[?]usually known. “Zip” is reported from America to
[?]ll. He was always a striking feature of “The Greats
Earth.” In private life the gentleman is Will
Johnson.
CORRIE, PHIL
AGED IS Y[?]
CHAMPION GIRL SUCKJUMR
OF AUSTRALIN
LEOPARD TWINS, an unusual
event in an English Zoo — were born at
Blackpool in midsummer. Their first
view of the World when this photo
gra [?] taken.
Quintilia
... ir .. ■ . «... •-r,
B cf „ o ,» _ r*. r\ •
TWICE NIGHTLY at 6.0 & 8.20.
Managing Director and Licensee : CHARLES GULLIVER
Chief of Staff ; ; : HARRY MASTERS
Manager : ; : : E. Leslie Conroy
CHAS. GULLIVER
MANAGING DIRECTOR
$ The right of refusing admission is reserved. No seats guaranteed unless booked in
/’ advance. Seats may be booked by ’Phone HOLBORN 5367. The Management
reserve the right to dispose of the same if not paid for by 6 and 8. :o p.m. in the Ist
and 2nd Plouse, and on Saturdays by 6 and 6.30 respectively. Seats booked by
Letter should enclose remittance to cover and also stamped addressed envelope.
$ ln accordance with the requirements of the London County Council: a The Public may leave at the end of
•J. the performance by all exit and entrance doors and Such doors must at that time be open, b All gang-
ways, passages and staircases must be kept entirely free from chairs or any other obstructions, c Persons
« must not be permitted to stand or sit in any of the intersecting gangways (and if standing be permitted
ji in the gangways at the sides and rear of the seating, sufficient space must be left for persons to pass easily
to and fro). d The Safety Curtain must be lowered about the middle of the performance, so as to ensure
Si it being in proper working order.
PRICE} TWO-PENCE
FOLIESBERGfiRE
PRO GK^AHHe
mania
-We ur
dejeuner
Matin
BANANIA
toeii/eur
dejeuner
du Matin


-" mu
A. H. HANDFORD & SONS, THE Imts, 30, Pine Street, Clerkenwell.
KENT’S
WEST CENTRAL FLORAL DEPOT
Wedding and Mourning Orders
Promptly Attended to.
Wreaths, Crosses, Harps, Gates
of Heaven, Anchors, Chaplets,
Hearts, Pillows, Cushions, aad
any Floral Design made to Order
Bouquets a Speciality
Fresh Cut Flowers Daily.
NOTE ADDRESS
136, THEOBALD'S RD,, W.C.I
(Facing Fire Station)
ANNA JENSEN
7, LITTLE TURNSTILE
<T© the left of Empire
SPECIALIST IN LADIES’
HAND-EMBROIDERED
UNDERWEAR
AND
BLOUSES
TROUSSEAUX ta ORDER
Florence Ware,
High-Clast Florist
t and Fruiterer, :
aS9&, HIGH HOLBORN
(Three Doors left of Empire),
Flor&i Designs, Wreaths, Crosses
and Presentation Bouquets Made
to Order.
LADIES! —YOUR OWN
Materials made up iate
FASHIONABLE COSTUME
fey High-Class Tailor
f**’ 15/-. No Extras.
Write for Parti*«lars te
L TERRY 1 , 47 - £ h »«p
" »»■*««*» London, N. IS
CLAPSON *co..
BUSINESS TRANSFER
AOTtrS & TRADE VALUERS
HEAD OFFICE :
11, VICTORIA ST., S.f.
faitogfaOMO*: VICTORIA 3281 And
- CROYDOH 20S1 -
Snaaches : Station Hd , Croydsc
and Station Approach. Retihill
s^HYAMS’S
12, RBD LION PASSAGE, HOLBORM.
Best Prices paid for RAGS, METAL and PAPER.
40 Before going elsewhere, send for Price List.
Established 60 Years. %
“THE SUN.**
Proprietress Mrs. US. A. SAUNDERS.
THE PRO’S HOUSE next Stage Door
Always something good to Eat
Drink and Smoke.
Everything el the Beet Quality. Fresh cut Sandwiches, die.
Monday, Sept. 9th, 1918
For SUae Advertisement aes-iy to Advertisings Depart
went, Holbora Erasure OfSaes, W.C.I
Tfee Stage Fiumit-ar* supplied by Messrs, K. D. Wllaou
A Co., ffi. Lutaefield Street. Einecuni Dane. London, W,
1 OVERTURE
Masieal Director—HAßßY J. BAYNTON
2 GARADINI
The Actor Musician
3 DONALD & CARSON
(PETER & GRETA), The Popular Scottish
Comedian and his Bonnie Lassie)
4 SAMMY SHIELDS
Popular Scotch Comedian
Motor-Cycling after the War.
We have a stook of 308 Moter Cycles for disposal, the largest
in Londoa. We sell any machine at i down, balance to salt
easterner, storing free till required. Secure a good machine
from £lO upwards cow. whilst prioes are low. before the end
of the War and the consequent rise in prioes. Lists free.
Aay machine not suitable exchanged within one month of
purehase. War Lean Stook taken. Exchanges.
If yea do not knew RIDER TROWARD'S, ask your motor-
cyclist friend.
RIDER TRO WARD & Co.
31, 40Tb $ 78, HIGH ST.,.HAMPSTEAD
THE .
C&P?Tresents
Restawa^rest
38 iiv prices.
i Minute* fro.,
■* selection
Noted for—.mine old yjh
TABLE Dt;s HES M
Luncheom intaglio 'm
Dinners Rings - %
sllery. Fv
Beads. Wj
RREA/ft 'i6 each. W)
from 830 rOOD
till 9Jop^ on ' W - C - 1
allery bought
OALjL
BEAR
DBVO*88D„ W.O
Prop. KM® f 0„ AMgata)
A Hearty WWgjbora SMSgtlire
WtM'* i
SEIX !|>ER
ro TRS,
CR,
101, GrAf.C.l
i
Before aid afti
£ $ $ nt
LUNCHEONS, lthraty* in Cist.
YOUNGER’S Cthitnd in Bottk
is si a h i sa s ss s
o « Bl”.l ItfiK «a s s
SStoni DiamoKar-set {<j m ond
Half-hoop IS. fidpsy Ring .[Gold
jf2XbjO. £4^,o
P=- <%====3gS==fe,
/ AFTER \ <J£v if
TH Etc THEATRE
CALL AT THE
/COLO NIA L \
RESTAURANT
.146, Southampton Row (.1™,!!«.»)
\ FOR A DAINTY DINNER OR SUPPER. /
\Dnly English Food. Dinner 6to 9.30
" VE 3/" COURSES
0\ N \ open tiU I *-° **•*»•
5 PERCY HONRI
And his Concertina
6 JEAN AYLWIN & CO.
In a Playlet by DION TITHERADGE,
Produced by NORMAN McKINNELL.
The Man WILBUR LENTON
The Maid AMY ELSTOB
The Girl JEAN AYLWIN
Stage Manager. AMY ELSTOB
7 PHIL RAY
The Abbreviating Patterer
8 INTERVAL
Programme Continued over
R. W. THOMAS,
(Late "YE OLDE HOP POLE,” BLACKFRIARS).
RED LION AND BALD,
62 Sr 63, Red Lien Street, High Holbora, W.C. 1
finest Quality Wines ft Spirits, Sparkling Wenleck Beers
TKI SOLDIER'S MATCH-BOX
BRYANT A MAY’S
• SERVICE’ MATCH-BOX COVER
Reg. Design No. 94333?
Keens Matches and Bax dry in an weathers
BcfAnt & May's a ™ *ha enly Hatches naed throng heat the theatre, j
For CHOCOLATES of the
BEST QUALITY, call at
THE HOLBORN
CHOCOLATE HOUSE,
257, HIGH HOIiBOHH
Only a few doors from this
Theatre. Turn to the right.
PURVEYORS TO HtS MUEfT'
THE KWCI
HOOPER BTRWKS
MINERAL WATERS
Supplied to the Ba»,
LIGHTS OF LONDON
GAS MANTLES from 4\d. each
a- UPALE,
ST, Lamb’* Conduit SL Bloomcbwy.
KBYS CUT AND LOCKS REPAIRED
INVISIBLE MENDING.
If you have any Clothes Burnt, Tom or
Moth-eaten —any Pattern *f Cloth im-
material —or Carpets, etc.. v*e can work
them s« that they appear New again.
MADAME LILY,
21, Rathbone Place, Oxford St
FURNISHED ROOMS,
SLOT COOKING GAB,
Prom 88. WEEKLY, and Other*
61, Marohmont Street,
Ruicell Square.
TYPEWRITERS -
fully guaranteed for 13 menths at tew CM
possible prioes ; inspection seedteuy
invited.
J. S. KNIGHT,
12, Sicilian Avenue,
Southampton Row, WX,
Telephone: Musette) 1319
HAVE TOUR
GRAMOPHONE
REPAIRED by
C. S. MOWAT,
MUSIC SELLER,
57, RED LION STREET,
HOLBORN, W.C.
LATEST RECORDS.
| Musical Strings and Fittings,
A. H. HANDFORO & SONS, THE Ihaits, 30, Pine Street, Clerkenwell.


BOOKS BOUGHT. SOLD, LENT & EXCHANGED
SALE
NOW ON
TO BUY OR SELL
PAINTINGS • -
WATER-COLOURS -
SKETCHES, etc., Old
or Modern, at the
ART EXCHANGE
8, NEW OXFORD ST.
MR.
W. C. BROWN
Ophthalmic Optician
42, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
Holborn, W.C. I
Over 20 years experience in eye
sight testing. Advice free.
HAVE YOU A
HEADACHE ?
Mr. BROWN has devoted
special study to Astigma-
tism, which is one of the
most frequent causes of dis-
tressing headaches and the
watering of the eyes.
Many people have been in
the habit of taking drugs to
alleviate headache, but this
is an eye trouble that can
only be releived by the use
of specially ground lenses.
Mr. BROWN is convinced
that the most serious eye
troubles are brought about
by >neglect and that if people
would only, on the first
symptoms have them eyes
examined they would save
themselves endless trouble
and misery.
Mr. BROWN’S consulting
rooms, are at the above
address and can seen
personally daily from 9.30
a.m.to 7.30 p.m. Thursday
9.30 a m. to 1 p.m.
[’Phone: HORNSEY 2257
JOHNSON Bra*-
Specialists in
MOTOR-CAR REPAIRS
OVERHAULS, Etc.
moderate terms
All Communications to
409, SUSSEX ROAD
HOLLOWAY, N. 7
Qamge: Andover Yard,
219. Hos*r»»ey Road
Ttltbhont : 612 RBOBNT,
JOHN J. ROGERS.
AMERICAN DENTISTRY,
1, Oxford Street, W.
(Comer of Charing Croat Rd.)
ST. PANCRAS GARAGE
GARS FOR HIRB.
Moderate GUiargea.
OVERHAULS. ACCESSORIES.
Repairs oi ©very description.
King up MUSEUM 981.
Cam Bought. Sold
or Exchanged.
82 ft 94, JUDD STREET, EUSTON ROAD
Programme Continued
P V
9 GERTIE GITANA
In her Latest Songs and Dances
10 VERNON WATSON
In Clever Impersonations
11 SUTCLIFFE FAMILY
The Cleverest Acrobatic Act in Vaudeville
12 TEE BIOSCOPE
Showing Latest Pictures
NATIONAL ANTHEM
WANTED: 50© LADIES
ftNGi
Fo Learn Motoring.
Foil Coarss oI 24 Lessons, £2 25., or 5/- per hear.
8. i 8. MOTOR Go., Ld. ? 395, Edgw&ra Rd.
Telephone 5-.8888 PADDINGTON,
E. FRESCO
230 Shaftesbury Avenue, Holborn W.C. 2
Specialist in ANTIQUE FRENCH FURNITURE, FRENCH TAPESTRY
and OLD PERSIAN CARPETS AND RUGS.
The Holborn i
Chocolate Housi
For Chocolates, Sweets
Dainty Confections.
Teas, Light Refreshment
before or after the Per
formances.
NOTE ADDRESS-
-257, HIGH HOLBORf
FEED TIL
GUNS wnp
WAR
BONDS
And Help t
End Hie Wa
For STATIONERY,
FANCY GOODS,
ACCOUNT BOOKS
V/holesale and Retail
AT
LOWEST PRICE!
GO TO
G. A. RAVI SOU & CO.
52, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
London, W.C. 1
Established 1858 in Same Street


m .. * 1:) O D
" J 33"??? , ‘ ' ‘ ‘ > '
.5; fr, €31. “ 1}“ ,r “I; h V. ‘ ‘ "”7 I." {‘7‘ ,‘ ~
as: "“\ «x. D ’i‘iD-‘i? ‘ .. .. ; -
‘ 6 o _ no . ‘ O 0 (5°
_ ' . ‘- ° 3K9.29§2.9§2a9~2.-‘m-noo-ozfr§i°
TWICE NIGHTLY at 6.0 & 8.20.
Managing Director and Licensee ; CHARLES GULLIVER
Chief of Staff 2 ! ! HARRY MASTERS
Manager ; f i ' E. Leslie Conroy
CHAS. GULLIVER
MANAGING DIRECTOR
! 1 j| I The right of refusing admission is reserved. No seats guaranteed unless booked in
■ I thSBf # /jP advance. Seats may be booked by ’Phone HOLBORN 5367. ihe Managemen
•1 1 Mi reserve the right to dispose of the same if not paid for ay 6 and 8. a p.m. mie is
\I 1 &L and 2nd blouse, and on Saturdays by 6 and 6.30 respectively. Seats booked by
' 1 I Letter should enclose remittance to cover and also stamped addressed enve ope.
j in accordance with the requirements of the London County Council: a fhe Pubnc mo.y leave at the end of
* the performance by all exit and entrance doors and such doors must at that time be open,
j ways, passages and staircases must be kept entirely free from chairs or any ot; obs rucaons. j
S must not be permitted to stand or sit in any of the intersecting gangways v and stan mg e per _ 1
3 in the gangways at the sides and rear of the seating, sufficient space must be left for persons to pass y
L to and fro), dT he Safety Curtain must be lowered about the middle of the performance, so as to ensure
it being in. proper working order.
PRICE TWO-PENCE


BOOKS BOUGHT, SOLD, LENT A EXCHANGED ■» •** W*
A. H. HANDFORD & SONS, THE Rag k <
KENT’S
WEST CENTRAL FLORAL DEPOT
Wedding and Mourning Orders
Promptly Attended to.
Wreaths, Crosses, Harps, Gates
of Heaven, Anchors, Chaplets,
Hearts, Pillows, Cushions, and
any Floral Design made to Order
Bouquets 3 Speciality
Fresh Cut Flowers Daily,
NOTE ADDRESS
136, THEOBALD'S RD.. W.C.I
(Facing Fire Station)
ANNA JENSEN
7, LITTLE TURNSTILE
(To the left of Empire)
SPECIALIST IN LADIES’
HAND-EMBROIDERED
UNDERWEAR
AND
BLOUSES
TROUSSEAUX to ORDER
Florence Ware,
High-Class Florist
: and Fruiterer, :
5839 a, HIGH HOLBORN
(Three Doors left of Empire),
Floral Designs, Wreaths, Crosses
and Presentation Bouquets Made
to Order.
! LADIES ! YOUR OWN
Materials made up into
| FASHIONABLE COSTUME
by High-Class Tailor
for 15/-. No Extras.
Write for Particulars to
a TORY 1 . 47 ’ Phi,i *» Lano
«' London, N. 1:5
CLAPSON *
BUSINESS TRANSFER
AGENTS & TRADE VALUERS
HEAD OFFICE :
11, fIGTOBM ST., 8,1.
Soßapteoee* 2 VICTORIA 3291 and
CROYDOH 2051
Branches : Station Bel., 0?oydon
and Station Approach. fiedhill
!
12, BED MON PASSAGE, HOLBORN.
Best Prices paid for RAGS, METAL and PAPER.
Before going elsewhere, send for Price List.
Established 60 Years.
i “THE SU'i.”
Proprietress Mr*. Si. A. SAUNDERS.
THE PRO’S HOUSE next Stage Door
Always something good to Eat
Drink and Smoke.
Everything e£ the Best Quality. Fresh cut Sandwiches, &©.
Monday, Sept. 16th, 1918
For Slide AdvartlssmeoSs, apply to Advertising Depart
meal. Holbom Empire OKises. W.C.L
The Stfegs Furniture supplied by Messrs. E, D. Wiisca
A Ce,, 88. Larmefisld Street, Klmcro Lane, London, W
1 OVEHTURE
Musical Director-—HARRY J. BAYNTON
; >
2 COLBERT
Speciality Act
jH ,
3 WYNNE SULME
Contralto, in the following Songs :
" If Only You .published by Reid & Co,
•• little White Home.” the Star Musio Publishing Co.
“ When the Bluebells Bloom ” published by Osborne.
“ When First We Met.” published by Lawrence Wright
" 4 hen Yon Come Home," published by Boosey A Co,
At the Piano, HELEN THOMPSON
Me tor-Cycling after the War.
Weha?6 a stosh of 20C Motor Cycles for disposal, the largest
in London We sell any machine at i down, balance to suit
customer, storing free till required. Secure a good machine
from £lO upwards now, whilst prises are low, before the end
of the War and the consequent rise in prices. Lists free.
Any machine not suitable exchanged within one month of
purchase. War Loan Stock taken. Exchanges,
If yon dc not know RIDER TROWARD'S ask your motor-
cyclist friend.
RIDER TROWARD & Co.
31, 40b & 78. mm ST., HAMPSTEAD
—• THE ——
CAPITOL
Restaurant
38 Ssulteanif tea Sew
S Minot as from this Tbeais®
|
Noted for
TABLE D’HOTE
Luncheons - lIS
Dinners - 1/9
BREAKFASTS
from 8.30 u.m.
SUPPERS
till 9.30 p.m.
CALL, AT
THE g^g
DBITONSHIBM 1®«
Prop HARRY PINCHON
A Hearts Welcome to Old an *
MAKE M
SELL YOUB V*S'
TO THE LEAFS 1
CHAE
101, Gray’s m'
Phone: I>o*
Before and after the S»r*
Is THI ,
Side i*ffc*r
LUNCHEONS, 12 to 3, I* i
YOUNGER'S CELEB AAt 4 J
tto 9Z
Si 2 Diamonds t/Samitux i u
**. l<f f^l
rriitfr" 1
A. H. HANDFORD & SONS. THE Ra. *-


fronts, 30, Pine Street, Cierkenwell.
rntfresents
ORL
toriaterest
[ODE PRICES,
les the it selection ’jijj?
s worlenuine old if
MEO OCHES yfl
AN DIGS . • W
Fine Ae Intaglio gJQ
sst and ;t Rings. wl
laint Oivellery.
yet andal Beads. jrJ
atxon F, 7/6 each. W 2
STAB GOOD $
i !aiiieo rner,” Ci
Kford Sondon, W.G.I
c and Qwellery bought
I. EAR
tofc&BSLB., W.C
Aldgate).
"ioselolbem Bmpirn.
OINEY ll
'E RPER I
ASH BLERS,
us?, I
Rd.,W.C.I |
ir*t
IHP”
Brnpim
indwiche alwft?* in Cut.
ort Draght and in Bottle
haiceic qia&tj at ||
ist pcisibb price. As
1
k M.lfegsXfl.l ill
A7U
*K / AFTER \ % !
TH E'® THEATRE 1
CALL AT THE <^o' f 1
I/COLON I AL\
restaurant I
I 146, Southampton Row U»«K" **) \
\ FOR A DAINTY DINNER I
\Olll5 English Food. Dinner St • 1
I FIVE 3/" COURSES X&'f* ]
1 '<? N. Open till 10.0 p.m. / O j
4 MAY ERNE & ERNE CHESTER j
Modern Vaudeville Entertainers |
I
5 WILSON & WARING
(J. W. and Nellie). Comedy Artistes
6 FYNE & HURLEY
Comedians
!
i
| 7 LITTLE TICH
u The World-Famous Comedian, in all his
| Latest Successes
i —-
1 Programme Continued over
U W. THOMAS,
(Late “YE OLDE HOP POLE,” BLACKFRIARS).
RBSD LION AND BALL,
82 a 63, Bed Lion Street, High Holborn, W.C. 1
gieert Quality Wines & Spirit,. Sparkling genlock Beer, |
TH* SOLDIER’S MATCH-BOX.
; BRYANT A MAY’S
1 1 ci?inyt?lCiF 9 IWT6H-BOX 60VER
Oljfcjfflft ** Iwli Res. Design No. 84223?.
I Keeps Me tehee and Bm dry »" ■» weather*
I Bl ,„« « «*'. .rc.tT^7■«•>«» a™****
For CHOCOLATES of the
BEST QUALITY, call at
THE HOLBORN
CHOCOLATE HOUSE,
257, HIGH HOLBORN
Only a few doors from this
Theatre. Turn to the right.
PURVEYORS TO HlB KME*T V
THE KING
HOOPER STRUWB
lIHERIL IITERB
Supplied to the Baps.
LIGHTS of LONDON
GAS MANTLES from 4hd. «ach
A. UP ALE, aJESj,
ST, Lamb's Conduit St. Kioometomff.
KEYS CUT AND locks repaired
mending.
If you have any Clothes Burnt Torn or
Moth-eaten-any Pattern of Cloth tm-
mntprial or Carpets, etc., we can work
Them so that they appear New again.
MADAME LILY,
21, Rathbone Place, Oxford St.
FURNISHED ROOKS,
SLOT OOOKIKO OJLS,
From Bs. WEEKLY, and Other.
61, Huohmont StMifc.
RttHMll Sq«S**»
Typewriters^
fully guaranteed for 12 months a *
possible prices ; inspection iOHittw
invited.
J. S. KNIGHT,
12, Sicilian Avemag*
Southampton Kow, W.C
Telephone: Museum
hays your
gramophone
KBPAIRBD by
C. S. MOW AT,
MUSIC SELLER,
57, RED LION STREET,
HOLBORN, W.C.
latest records.
Musical Strings and Fittings.
30, Wne-Street, Clerkenwell.


600 KS BOUGHT, SOLO, LENTI& EXCHANGED THE ™% rary,
— _ Its at 76, RED LION ST. f-rm
SALE
NOW ON
TO BUY OR SELL
PAINTINGS - •
WATER-COLOURS -
SKETCHES, etc.. Old
or Modern, at the
ART EXCHANGE
i, NEW OXFORD ST.
MR.
W. C. BROWN
Ophthalmic Optician
42, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
Holborra, W.C. I
Over 20 years experience in eye
sight testing. Advice free.
HAVE YOU A
HEADACHE?
Mr. BROWN has devoted
special study to Astigma-
tism, which is one of the
most frequent causes of dis-
tressing headaches and the
watering of the eyes.
Many people have been in
the habit of taking drugs to
alleviate headache, but this
is an eye trouble that can
only be releived by the use
of specially ground lenses.
Mr. BROWN is convinced
that the most serious eye
troubles are brought about
by.neglect and that if people
would only, on the first
symptoms have their eyes
examined they would save
themselves endless trouble
and misery.
Mr. BROWN’S consulting
rooms, are at the above
address and can be seen
personally daily from 9.30
a.m. to 7.30 p.m. Thursday
9.30 a m. to 1 p.m.
[’Phone: HORNSEY 2257
JOHNSON Bros-
Specialists in
MOTOR-CAR REPAIRS
OVERHAULS, Etc.
MODERATE TERMS
All Communications to
109. SUSSEX ROAD
HOLLOWAY, N. 7
Oarage ■ Andover l Yard,
219. Hornsey Road
Telethon*: 612 REGENT.
JOHN J. ROGERS.
AMERICAN DENTISTRYi
1, Oxford Street, W.
(Corner of Charing Cross RAi
ST. PANCRAS GARAGE
OARS FOR HIRE
lodarato Charges.
OVERHAULS. ACCESSORIES
Repairs oJ every (fescriptiars.
Slog op MUSEUM 884,
Cars Bought, Sold
or Exchanged,
92 ft 94 s dUDD STHEET, EUSTON EOAD
Programme Continued
8 INTERVAL
9 RUBANI TRIO
I* l Distinctive Songs and Dances
10 JA? LAURIER
The Rustic Comedian
11 OMEGA TRIO
Novelty Equilibrists
NATIONAL ANTHEM
WANTED: BQQ LADIES
AMO at^NTI.KMiEN
To Learn Motoring.
Fal Course ©I 21 Lessons, £2 25., or 5/- per hour,
8. ft S. MOTOR Go., Ld., 395, Edfware Rd.
Telephone:—SBSS PADDINGTON.
E. FRESCO
230 Shaftesbury Avenue, Hoiborn W.C. 2
Specialist in ANTIQUE FRENCH FURNITURE, FRENCH TAPESTRY
and OLD PERSIAN CARPETS AND RUGS.
The Hoiborn
Chocolate Hoi
For Chocolates, Sws
Dainty Confection!
Teas, Light Refresh®
before or after the \
formances.
NOTE ADDREi
257, HIGH HOLBI I
FEED Til
GUNS WIH
WAR<
mmm
And Help d
End the War
For STATIONERY
FANCY GOODS,
ACCOUNT BOOK!
Wholesale and Retal
AT
LOWEST PRICES
GO TO
G. A. RAVISOO ft flj
52, Lamb s Condi St,
London, W C. 1-
Established 1858 in Same Street


■ : r\WF- —-^r^vruv a>, 0 °o_sQot2
TWICE NIGHTLY at 6.10 & 0.0
Managing Director and Licensee CHAS. GULLIVER
Chief of Staff HARRY MASTERS
Manager H - * TILLEV
CHAS. GULLIVER
MANAGING DIRECTOR
.•Ilf H I |\ jb^Ls*i:';^Si/55^
'1 Jf J m The right of refusing admission is reserved. ® M© Seats guaranteed unless booked m
iyiß OJe Seats may be booked by Telephone the nuixiber being 5367 HOUBOBN The M<uiageat©es
if 1 Irf 0* jSjt reserve the right to dispose; of the same if they are not paid for by 6 and 8,3® p.u*. »&• &ms-
- | |*»* e Hi sod Second House, and on Saturdays by :6 and 6.30 respectively. Seats booked by L*Mm
: i| j 1 -sfeould enclose remittance to cover and also stamped addressed envelope
ji , ike requirements, of the 'London County Council s « 'The PubSU- saay leave at the end of;** peitermaeiee^-''
if .5 m it and entrance doors and such doors must at that time be open, * All gangways, passages and staircases must be kxm
.'4 iuasdreiv free from chairs, or any other obstructions e Persons must not be permitted to stand or sit in any of the /ntesse^feag
4 vmm ways, and if standing be permitted in the gangways at the sides and rear of the searing sufficient space must: be lefe *
sj n/to naw n Wf» i Tht Safety Curtain must ne lowered about the middle of the performance * ar- ■
it being m proper working ofdafc *


. HANDK SvD & SONS, THE R,
* • : 7
J. BKARUS, Peeekeel tebimahr, Mete. amn i doMlltry pyUBP) 87, LAMB’S OONOUIT ST.,
LARBOABES af the FUTIRE
for ALL.
faaflrt by Certified Bxpaataaead Natives
Uni,**, liver Falling.
Ob&BS or PRIVATE from la. par Hour.
Any Translation Made.
LANGUAGE WORLD,
40 Tottenham Gear! Ed., Oxford St., V.
8. LEVY,
HIGH-CLASS
Ladies’ Tailor,
87, GRAY'S INN RD., W.C.
Costumes to Measure and
Ladies’ own Materials
made up.
REPAIRS A SPECIALITY.
WE BUY
SECOND-HAND
GRAMOPHONES
MODEL, ENGINES &
CINEMATOGRAPHS
CAMERAS, CYCLES
MOTORS, Etc. FOR CASH
F. MILLS,
19, CHALK FARM ROAD,
GARDEN TOWN, N.W.
Mm: 2708 Sutn
ALICE & DOT
WSft h» pleased to me old iriuendk.
Yfi* 3®e bound to have a
wadmmm at
'VMM BROWS BRAB
BIYONSHERI STREET
W*m SOOYHIJIPTON MOW
‘JMtoftg Sfhits a®d Beers of the M
li—r’H Stow* a
tZf&sqm, I—Bat A
ifeneySaM on
J' 7 . MooW
Mraoeod to asry Aaeeoi
4 TbtebaUTs Ri, W.C
CLAPSON & CO.
Ltd.
BUSINESS TRANSFER
AGENTS
ilMisß Rd., West Grojrdoi
IF YOU WISH TO BUY
OR SELL, CONSULT US
•PHONE 2051 CROYDON
HOGGIN & CO.
aft, Southampton Row, W.C.
FRUIT ft VEGETABLE CONTRACTORS
Clubs and Hospitals Supplied Daily
£ Produce Direct from the Growers.
ALSO AT COVENT GARDEN
MUSIC STUDIOS,
447, BTRAND,
(Opposite Charing Cross Station).
Individual Instruction Given in
StmUNG, ELOCLTION, PIANOFORTE, VIOLIN,
VIOLONCELLO, MANDOLIN, BANJO & GUITAR
BUSINESS HOURS 9 to 9.
Great Successes achieved in the Concert World. Musical Comedy
and YavdeviUe. Principal : Hies ROSETTA CUNNINGHAM.
Monday, Feb. sth, 1917
Ladies are raspestfniir reanested lo remove their hall to
to afford greater tomfert to person* seated! behind
Before sad daring Overture Interesting Slide Advertise
nanale will be shown. For psrtioalars. apply to Adves
tMog department. London Theatres of Varieties. Ltd
Helboen Empire, W.C.
1 OVERTURE Selected
Masioal Director—MAßßr J. BAYNTON
* BROOKLYN COMEDY FOUR
Vocalists and Comedians
Z WILL LACEY
Cycling ComNwha*
4 ROSIE LLOYD
The Chin Cnvndaeaifte
§ PERONA
SpeoMkiiy A#.t
JOSEPH SOMALVICO * Co.
ssnouimii hie quaupibd
ir„”zr.ir Sight-Testing
*•* M* •OTSCMANS.
It, OUILIB WL, XJLVTOM 6ABDBK, EC.
“THE SUN.”
Proprietress, Ms*. M. A. SAUNDERS.
The Pro’s House STUB BX DOOB
Always something good to Eat
Drink and Smoke.
Everything of the Beat Quality. Fresh cut Sandwiches, &c
V
The t. 0
-dV* . I
Sy 8
Restaurant!
- 33, - 1
S outhampton Row/
(2 minutes from this Theatre), h
NOTED FOR 1
TABLE D’HOTE 1
LUNCHEONS :: 1/3
DINNERS :: 1/9
SUPPERS AND 8
LIGHT REFRESHMENTS. !
df
OPEN UNTIL.
MIDNIGHT
n vmsr e. dai
StaaoHdDsiier SI, THE0UL1
TEL —2863 H0LB98N.
Money Advanced! fr*in A1G upwards
0OLB, SILVER AND JEWELLERY; Arttfl
Beaghl for CmIi. 2d. to 6d. per Tool
TYPEWRITERf
Over 100 Excellent Machines to se)eeg||
'folly dnarranteed. 12 Months. From 1
each. Typewriters on Hire from l(r
Inspection Cordially Invited |
KNIGHT Sc C|i
THE TYPEWRITER DEAL^
12, Sicilian Avenue Southampti
Phone: MUSEUM 1219 L
WE WILL SEND 1!
little plain commoi
articles of old Gold;
is indeed practical economy#
now you have so many call
refiitered post the market i
ll-ct. 60/-, 15-ct. 50/-, 9-ci
market quotation. Folkaii
Oxford Street (near Bond 9
Silk-work Pictures, Bead Ba
as if you have anything anti
BUST AND DAHP ft
Laminovs Hands and Fiji
Jewelled Movement i
SPLENDID TEMEKEEPKaS. I
TWO YEAfiS 6UAEANTEI *'™(
Sopertor to any Wateh lh« I*
BRAVING
296 ft 298 PENTOIf
King’s Cross'
* And 71 LUDOATB *
A. H. HANDFORD & SONS, THE Ri


;>U* ■art' - ' __
£> ja. -* -■' v T
•ft OLD CAMEOS.
j AtfMIBATfOM OF IHB AHTMTIE.
mi Carnes as aa arilole of JeweUee? I*
tioaof lts &niqae effaol a»4 ibecna
Specimens Bought ft Soli for Cash only
in can see the finest selection in the world
eos, also Artistio and uncommon lewell-
isrprisingly moderate prices,
iao Corner, 1, New Oif#r4 HI.
w minutes from this Hall,
' Mipbiai! Halbafi NCi
IRNER & COOPER
Dacaxaton, Sanitary
| and Eleotriaal Engineer,
CT. TURNSTILE, High Hdkora
I iiMnl Rapilis Md B«lRpli«»ie»*.
HOP ANB OPMSI PITTBRB.
”
10/ to 75/-: —Let us talk a
u. What is the use of any
ag idle in your drawer ? It
ime for useful cash, especially
ncome. We will send you by
ild Gold, 22-ct. 75/- per ounce,
ce. Old Silver, daily paper
oown firm (Estd. 1814), 355,
Jt also purchase old Cut Glass,
d Prints, Oddments, dec. Write
CKEL CASE *’JHI
* i»f *w
JUBKfrZ ssasl7£l«i Wat*
P» IfttitoinMfM
THHE SOLDIER'S MATCH-BOX
BRYANT A VfAV’S
* QFRVIf.E ’ M&TCH-BOK COVER j
iJUII w IVJAJ Dasiga No. 642237.
Kaeps Matches and Box dry in all weathers.
Bryant It May’s are the ealy Matches used throughout the theatre.
COLONIAL RESTAURANT
144, Southampton Row.
RECHERCHE LUNCHEONS
TABLEiDHOTE
DINNERS AND3BUPPERB
OR a AjJLA® CARTE. -
Tables may Si be reserved by 'Phone! Museumtl2W
PARTIES ARRANGED FOR.
J ft
OPEN TILL 12; P.M.
6 NORMAN WHITE
Novelty Musical Act
7 THREE PRODIGIES .
\ (LANGLEY SISTERS). In their refined
Musical Entertainment
8 ELLA SHIELDS
The Ideal of Ideals
9 ERNIE LOTINGA & Cos., Id ; a
JIMMY JOSSER, K.C
Written by HERBERT C. SARGENT.
William Oldfield. King’s Councillor *" C^REVOR
Dick Darrell. Ottaa Boy T - ARROWSMIT
Madam Le Blaaa*. La Parisienae Mile. RIE COSTA
Mr*. Kitts, a Wealthy Widow KATHLEEN
Martin Dr ink water, a Detectire ...FRANK CLIFFORD
Charles Adams, an Dissector ••• - BERT ROPE
BUI ADOLPH LUCK
Jimmy Joistt, the Jobs BRIII LOTII6I
SOCNK s OMfield’a Chambers.
“BLACK & WHITE"
Scotch Whisky of Quality
O«TftIN*BLB IN TMI» THMATRM.
AT LASTr
THE [PLACE FOR A HAPPY HOUR
Pay a Visit to the .
BLUE ROOM
adjoining Tube Station at Highbury.
fimhbt -■» room nr mouth lokpow._
POPULAR PRICES ITO SUIT! -THE’IMULTITUDE'.
aniuu iom. wusic
orn WBBK.DIII Ud mi u
Send us your Launcr
AND SECURE
A GOOD COLOUR
BETTER FINISH
LONGER WEAR
J. VERNIER & Cos.,
" French Laundry, Dyers & Cleaners
■
20, Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square
’Phone : MUSEUM 192
THE LAUNDRY FOR BEAUTIFUL
Mrs. WILKINS
Artistic Florist
1 Sicilian Avenue, Southampton Botv
(One Minute from this Theatre).
Bouquets, Wreaths, &c., made to Urwer
Buttonholes and Sprays a Speowhty.
CUT FLOWERS FRESH EVERY DAY
' MRS. WEST,
145, HIGH HOLBOHN, W.C. (clow »o
Holborn Restaurant),
Ntw & Second-hand B/obmlj
Costumes , Millinery .
Wardrobes Purohased
Fun Repaired and Remodelled.
lUCT nWC Extra Turn before and after
Jvw I Vllit leaving Holborn Empire call a%
“KING’S ARMS”
Chapel St., Lamb’s Conduit St
Wines. Spirits and Beers of the Best Qeattiy,
Luncheons Daily. Snacks at the Bar.
BILLIARD SALOON. Comfortable Sates* Bar
Pleased to see old and new friends
Once a Customer. Always One.
Proprietor, W. H. GEARD
O’REILLY
High-Class Milliner,
S3, Lamb’s Conduit SL,
CIA Few minutes from the Helborn Bmpla#
BBVUB HILTS A BPICHMH
Telephone: Holborn BIDS
QEARD’B STORKS
GENERAL SROOIRI,
Wise. Spirit and Beer Marabout a.
58. Lamb’s Conduit St. a W.G.
(Near Foundling Hospital. Qalldfoad St.)
Delireriet Dally to all parts ef the Dtatctst,
A TRIAL SOLICITKP,
OH DEAR! jSKiSS'IT""
4 A. UDALB, ♦
m fiimu IMMHOMH.
*7, LAMB'S CONDUIT ST..
BLOOMSBURY
All klada ef Keys Cat and Selssara Breen* Bad).
Ml tautest POPUUft SONIS •»
RECORDS
SHEETMUSIC
c. S. MOWAT’S
•ramophonc shop,
C 7 BED LION ST., W.C.
CF ■ 9 Opposite this Empire.
gramophones REPAIRED.
HtyStCAL STRINGS A RtTTWGO,
fir«ARUB. Praotioal (gglith WatohMter. Mata*. «Mb t fcMUa* IMiDIMT ew *’' v •”*K*** fi *** tf - -
Rerchants, 30, Pine Street, Clerkenwel!


' «. s s-rtiu IIRD4JI 13*,' RED MON ST., HOUBOWN, W
,£} Lltlrt JLifilSlifilS A . JibOBIB BOUGHT, SOLD, LBWT AMI
- - - - - Tll ■mi ....infiM.-riwwi'iaiii~ii l ni TrriiflTmflffißlfllili r * imnrfniimirinmiiTn'ir-'w 1 Tnim mihiiim—^am immaama—nmm
Mrs. THOMPSON,
Gray's lia Haberdashery Stores
(Under Entirely New Management),
63, GRAY’S INN ROAD.
HOLBOBN, W.C.
WARDROBES PURCHASED FOR CASH ;
Letters at Postcards reoeive prompt attention.
DISTANCE NO OBJECT.
. - OIIL JLT - •
! 'j; Wli-LtIATT,
147, HIBH HOIiBORN,
FOR NAVAL, MILITARY
ANSI THEATRICAL
- REQUISITES
HATS A SPECIALITY
M. LAWLOH
SPECIALIST IN
s BLOUSES :
ALL LATEST DESIGNS
Special Price at 4/11
LADIES' OWN MATERIALS
MADE TO ORDER
85, Lamb’s Conduit St.
(Close to Holborn Empire)
O.S. BLOUSES A SPECIALITY
ESTD. PHONE
1849 City 8613
W. MANN
PICTURE FRAME
A MAKER d St
11, IT. ST. ANDREW ST.
Shaftesbury Avenue, W.C.
Picture Frames
OF RYEBY DESCRIPTION
Fasoe-partout Work a Speciality
/ Enlargements
FRAi El J Professionals
) Advertisements'
■ l Certificates
SINGLE LENGTHS OF
MOULDINGS SUPPLIED , .
IM Frames Re-gilt equal to New
ST. PANGEAS GAEAGE,
SB A 84, a ODD btphht ; boitoi boid,
CARS FOR HIRE-
MODERATE OHAHOEB
Overliactist.
.^ccesnorlas.
gmi up MUSEUM 084. c Car reund to Theatre In 18 nrioutai.
REPAIRS OS EVERY DRBCPIPTIOH.
CARS 10* SHT, ISOLD OR BXGHAK63D.
PAULINE. 41, Marchmont St.
Kveanni. e joare, w.c.
(ONE MINUTE FROM * USSELL SQUARE TUBE)
MUtnDvyi Costumes, iGe was, Blouses a Speciality
COSTUMES AND GOWNS ALTERED TO FIT.
to SELECTION
11 HARRY BROWN
Comedian
:—! —_— “ 7 ‘ 1
12 JEHBY & C.... BUILDERS?
Presented by GEO. WILLIE, WEST,
& McGINTY
13 THE BIOSCf PE
MATINEE EVERY THURSDAY
AT 2.30. FULL VARIETY PROGRAMME
7,'ff A 10* tic test 4 person*). oxtrai coats
I/. ft-jdL 1/8 : ROYAL FAOTEOUa, 2/- : FAUTROJRS
m 6KAND CIRCLE PAUTEUILS 1/B ; GRAND CIRCLE
I/-: PET STALLS 10.1. & BALCONY 6d. Fantenlls
S Grsnd Circle Fanten*!® are Bookable 3d. extra
SATURDAYS, ROYAL F/JPTEUILS 2/6 (no Booking
Fee'-: FfiUTEUILS A GRAND CIRCLE FAHTEUILS,
Si- (Bookable Sd. extra); GRAND CIRCLE 1/6 ipok-
able 3d. extra); PIT STALLS. tOd.; BALCOjf'Id.
RANK HOLIDAYS A SPECIAL OCCASIONS SPA At,
phizes.
The Government Tax will be added to above Prices.
The £«wqe Fvrmiiwre suppllr Ssy Msssn. E. D. WJLIQ?* & CO
£6. lanesffeid Street. E'ihnrn Lane. London, N.w
WANTED: *OO LADIES
AND QENTLEMEN
To Learn Motor*inis’
VU.U& GOURSR OF S'- LRSSOIIS ; fi2 s S : & aw
per tf> hour.
I, $ $ MOTOR Co., Ltd., 395, Edgware Rd,
Telephone t-SISS PADDINGTON
Telephone : AT* tfej rBIVJi
MUSEUM 2840. Ljllll J.
POUR UN EXCELLENT CAFE
Originator of Temperance Cafe Bars in Ingiand,
Gold Medals London, 1910 and 1911. : : :
i omce 91 Tottenham Court Road
Branches at:- ( ~ji FLEET STREET, E,C
The most delicious cup I 77> NEW OXFORD ST.,
of Coffee far id. , 4^a GOODGE ST., W.
! Open every day, from ™ „ •
7.30a.m. till 12,30 pm. j 54* OLD COMPTON ST.
Butcher jl
aud Sausage
Mauufac- *mw' I
Surer, jf «4, 8
*W' LION )
w.o.
PLEASE NOTE. Tht P
Easiness is absolately a b
ness to itself.
I have served Hoiborn dist
for over 21 fears. I
■'—■■■" ■»■■■■ ■ ■■■■■■."■”'
PURVEYORS TO HIS MAJESTY; THE K
Hooper Struve’sj
Mineral Wate
Supplied to the Baps. >
NOBLE S.
HUTCBINSOI
relephane—MUSEUM ZSOa
Rente and Estate Agent,
7, SOUTHAMPTON ROW, W.
FLATS
un», &o 6 ua*. WESF
ySSfORSIBHKO—to £lOO per Aaaa
SeaiMag Houses A Private Hotels for
mm®, WABEBOUSES. BOOSES AN
offices vo lev.
Collected. Estates Man»
VALfJ ANIONS.
EFFECTED.
Particulars Entered on Registers Fr
' ■ ■
VISIT
Mdme. BERTAUJ
13, Red Lion SI
(3 Minutes from Hoiborn Empir
Specialist in
Ladies’ Blouses
LADIES’ UNDERCLOTHING
Made by Hand, to Order, on tht
Premises
GENTS’ SUITS and
LADIES COSTUMES
Made to Measure by West-End
Tailor ,
GENTS’ HOSIERY, &c.
RAINPROOF COATS
Please Note Address
DO YOU STUDY YOU fa LAUNDRY I IW S °iNSmß MGB J. VERNIER & --V


<P <Evi»^i
if° o_s s« rto o» o „ Q
TWICE NIGHTLY at 6.0 & 8.20.
Managing Director and Licensee a CHARLES GULLIVER
Chief of Staff % S : HARRY MASTERS
Manager : : • ' E. Leslie Conroy
CHAS. GULLIVER
MANAGING DIRECTOR
fl
) The right of refusing admission is reserved^
Wtf U d' S s£ni^le b L-?“of^s c gd 3. »P t?bS V tst
f } e 'endos°“remmfnS weaver andllo stamped addressed envdepe.
ln accordance with the requirements of the London tinrebe open! *6 All Igang-
the performance by all exit and entrance doors and chairs or any other obstructions, c Persons
ways, passages and staircases must be kept enir ersect i ng gangways (and if standing be permitted
must not be permitted to stand or sit in any ox t „ soace must be left for persons to pass easily
in the gangways at the sides and rear of the-seating, su middle of the performance, so as to ensure
to and fro), d The Safety Curtain must be lowered about the miaaie oi mo pc
it being in proper working order. g
price two-pence


A. H. HANDFORD & SONS, THE
KENT’S
WEST CENTRAL FLORAL DEPOT
Wedding and Mourning Orders
Promptly Attended to.
Wreaths, Crosses, Harps, Gates
of Heaven, Anchors, Chaplets,
Hearts, Pillows, Cushions, and
any Floral Design made to Order
Bouquets a Speciality
Fresh Cut Flowers Daily.
NOTE ADDRESS
136, THEOBALD’S RD„ W.C.I
(Facing Fire Station)
ANNA JENSEN
7, LITTLE TURNSTILE
(To the left of Empire)
SPECIALIST IN LADIES'
HAND-EMBROIDERED
UNDERWEAR
AND
BLOUSES
TROUSSEAUX to ORDER
Florence Ware,
High-Class Florist
: and Fruiterer, :
2SOa., HIGH HOLBORN
(Three Doors left of Empire),
Floral Designs, Wrec.ths, Crosses
and Presentation Bouquets Made
to Order.
I LADIES ! YOUR OWN
Materials made up into
FASHIONABLE COSTUME
by High-Class Tailor
for 18/-. No Extras.
Write for Particulars to
L TERRY 1 . 47 » Phil, 'p La «e
1 t " n ’ London, N. t,5
GLAPSON * co..
BUSINESS TRANSFER
AGENTS & TRADE VALUERS
anHnmnaanann
HEAD OFFICE :
11, VICTORIA ST,, B.W.
Telephones: VICTORIA asssi and
CROYDOK 2001 _
Branches : Station Id., CSeoydan
and Station Approach* ledhlfl
rnpo-i n m ii>rr~n«ririawriDirTii¥riffffliiriiTirißiiiTMiß tmmanatxmmmSßmmmm
12, RED JLION PASSAGE, HOLBORN.
Best Prices paid for RAGS, METAL and PAPER.
Before going elsewhere, send for Price List.
Established 60 Years.
“THE SUN. 1 *
FrostriaSress Mrs, 86. A. SABNDEBS.
THE PRO’S HOUSE next Stage Door
Always something good to Eat.
Drink and Smoke.
Everything ©8 the Best Quality. Fresh cut Sandwiches, &©.
Monday, Sept. i6th, 1918
For H!l$« Advertisements, apply to Advertising Depart
msnl. Holbom Emsilre Offices, W.C.I,
The Stage Furniture supplied by Messrs, K, D. Wilson
& Co.. 91. Laneefieli Street, Kiiouro Lane. London. W
1 OVERTURE
Musical Director—HAßßY J. BAYNTON
2 COLBERT
Speciality Act
3 WYNNE HULME
Contralto, in the following Songs :
" If Only You Remember,” published by Reid & Co.
" Little White Home.” the Star Music Publishing Co.
" When the Bluebells Bloom.” published by Osborne.
“ When First We Met.” published by Lawrence Wright
“When You Come Home,” published by Boosey & Co,
At the Piano, HELEN THOMPSON
Motor-Cycling after the War.
We have a stock of 200 Motor Cycles foe disposal, the largest
in London. We sell any machine at 1 down balance to suit
customs?:, storing free t! ’ required. Secure a good machine
from £lO upwards now, whilst prices are low, before the end
of the War and the consequent rise in prices, Lists free,
Any machine not suitable exchanged within one month of
purchase. War Loan Stock takes. Exchanges,
If you do not know RIDER TROWARD'S. ask your motor-
Cyclist friend,
EIDER TROWARD & Co.
31, 40b & 78, HIGH ST., HAMPSTEAD
~- THE <■
CAPIT
Restaur^
IS lOltflitKpttt
3 Minnies from ibis
s
Noted for——^
TABLE D’HG
Luncheon*
i
Dinners
■—■■■■■ <
BREAKFAI
from 8.30 a
SUPPER
till 9.30 p.
CAUL A*
Bi
BJOYOHSHI
Prop HARRY P
A Hearty Waleome
make
SELL Y(#
TO TH#' E 1
CHf
101. Gra ’
p#
Before and after
**TW
I
LUNCHEONS, 121*
YOUNGER'S CEm
1 2 OidJMCTids i/iappliirc
|| Crow owr IS rf-
■‘iii
A. H. HANDFORD & SONS, THE Ri


■ants, 30, Pine Street. Cierkenwell
[Presents
sal
interest
Ve prices.
'0(0
vest selection
ji genuine old jrv
, OOCHES Vjs
‘ INGS . . W
Dlque Intaglio jjPj
I [net Rings. nu
Jewellery. & rQ
’oral Beads. j/J#
7/6 each.
! 4 GOOD
l|Corner,” Cb
London, W.G.I
d Jewellery bought
I EAR
1)B HBm W.c
thrown, Aldgatel.
k to HoSborn Empire.
■■■■■■■
UEY !
[>APER
OUYERS.
:er,
0., W.c.l
1.
du
IP”
>NB,*e® alw»y« tn Cut.
f's fraught and in Bottl «
Irtoo |
at
mble price. J
g# / AFTER X, %
THE®THEATRE N&>
CALL AT THE
/COLO NI A La
restaurant
146, Southampton Row
\ FOR A DAINTY DINNER OF SUPP*- /
English Food, Dinner 6to 9* ‘7^
F,VE 3/- cov * SKS /$f
\ Open till 10.0 p.m. * *
4 MAY ERNE & ERNE CHESTER
Modern Vaudeville Entertainers
5 WILSON & WARING
(j. W. and Nellie). Comedy Artistes
6 FYNE & HURLEY
Comedians
*
,s - *
7 LITTLE TICH
The World-Famous Comedian, in all his
Latest Successes
!
I
| Programme Continued over
fi. W. THOMAS, Win k* h LT I
(Late "YE OLDE HOP POLE,” BLACKFRIARS).
RED lion and ball,
82 a 63, Bed won Street, High Holbom, W.C. 1 |
Finest Quality Bines & Spiritsd Sparkling Wenlocfc Beers |
TH« BQUJIER'B MATOH-BC^-
BRYANT * ?AAY»*
i S CLpDirif F’ * TBH-BOX SOVER
i W Reg. Design No, WM3*.
Eeesß* Matches Bos >ry ss* si! weather*
| ertittwngMnstM
For CHOCOLATES of the
BEST QUALITY, call at
THE HOLBORN
CHOCOLATE HOUSE,
257, HIGH HOLBfl!'" 1
Only a few doors from this
Theatre. Turn to the right.
PURVEYORS TO HIS MAJEST'*
THE KING
HOOPER STRUVE S
IIREBRL WRTERB
Supplied to the Saw.
LIGHTS OF LONDON
GAS MANTLES from 4\d. each
A. UDALE, Ironmonpi
27, Lamb’s Oondult St. Bloomsbury *
KEYS CUT AND LOCKS REPAIRED
INVISIBLE MENDING 7
If you have any Clothes Burnt, Torn
Moth-eaten— any Pattern of C.oth m
material—or Carpet ■ . v* -r-
-them so that tV/;*/
MADAME LILY,
21, Ratbbone Place, Oxford St
FURNISHED ROOMS,
gtof 6OOKINO Oil,
From Ba. WEEKLY, and Other*
61, Hanohmont SfcNife
Bussell Square.
/TYPEWRITERS^
fully guaranteed for 12 months a *
possible prloes : Inspection *or»ww
Invited.
J. S. KNIGHT,
12, Sicilian Avenue,
Southampton Row, W.C.
Telephone; Musousb Wifi l
HAVE YOUR
gramophone
repaired
C. S. MOWft l,
MUSIC SELLER,
57, RED LION STREET,
HOLBORN, W.C.
latest records.
Musical Strings and Fittings.
chants. 30, Pine Street, Clerketweii.


BOOBS BOUGHT. BOLD. LENTift EXCHANGED ™», {ggnjESPaSS.
SALE
NOW ON
TO BOY OR SELL
PAINTINGS ■ -
WATER-COLOURS -
SKETCHES, ete.. Old
or Modern, at the
ART EXCHANGE
S, NEW OXFORD ST.
MR.
W. C. BROWN
Ophthalmic Optician
42, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
Holborn, W.C. I
Over 20 years experience in eye
sight testing. Advice free.
HAVE YOU A
HEADACHE?
Mr. BROWN has devoted
special study to Astigma-
tism, which is one of the
most frequent causes of dis-
tressing headaches and the
watering of the eyes.
Many people bave been in
fh- hab'.t,of taWng d; rtgs to
alleviate neadhcv'lq K v?
is an eye trouble that can
only be releived by the use
of specially ground lenses.
Mr. BROWN is convinced
that the most serious eye
troubles are brought about
by ; negleci and that if people
would only, on the first
symptoms have their eyes
examined they would save
themselves endless trouble
and misery.
Mr. BROWN’S consulting
rooms, are at the above
address and can ba seen
personally daily from 9.30
a.m. to 7.30 p.m. Thursday
9.30 a m. to 1 p.m.
[’Phone: HORNSEY 2257
JOHNSON Rro*'
Specialists in
MOTGR-CAR REPAIRS
OVERHAULS, Etc.
MODERATE TERMS
All Communications to
£OB. SUSSEX ROAD
HOLLOWAY, N. 7
Qasmgo b Andover Yard,
219. Hornsey Road
TttefihoH*: 612 REGENT.
JOHN J. ROGERS.
AMERICAN DENTISTRY i,
1. Oxford. Street, W.
{Corner of Charing Crest Rd l
-
OARS FOR HIRR.
Moderate Ohap^ee.
OVERHAULS. ACCESSORIES.
Repairs ol every description
Ring tup MUSEUM 881.
Cars Bought, Sold
or Exchanged.
82 ft 84, JUDD STREET, EUSTON ROAD
Programme Continued
8 INTERVAL
9 RUBANI TRIO
In Distinctive Songs and Dances
_
10 JAY LAURIER
* «* #*■
j&ust.w
11 OMEGA TRIO .
Novelty Equilibrists
NATIONAL ANTHEM
WANTED: §9€ LADIES
and
To Learn Motoring, j
FnlS Course of 2* Lessons, £2 K., or 5/- per r..our, I
8. iS. MOTOR €©*, Id., M 95 f Edgware Rd, \
telephones—BBBB PADDINGTON*
E. FRESCO
230 Shaftesbury Avenue, Holborn W.C. 2
Specialist in ANTIQUE FRENCH FURNI URE, FRENCH TAPESTRY ]
and OLD PERSIAN CARPE R AND RUCS.
r
The Holborn
Chocolate Hoy
For Chocolates, Swe
Dainty Confection}
Teas, Light Refreshme
before or after the P
formances.
<l
NOTE ADDRESS- <
257, HIGH HOLBORj g
FEED THE
GUNS WITI
w m \
BONDS
I
And Help hi
End the War)
For STATIONERY,
FANCY GOODS,
ACCOUNT BOOKS
Wholesale and Retail
AT
LOWEST PRICES
GO TO
G. A. RAVISOU & CO.
52, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
Loudon, W,C. 1
Established 1858 in Same Street


* ——
« o?3S? O „ O
TWICE NIGHTLY at 6.0 & 8.20
Managing Director and Licensee s CHARLES GULLIVER
Chief of Staff ; ! i HARPY MASTERS
Mana S er : ! : : E. Leslie Conroy
WBMHWWSWWBWm—May «w —————~— 1 —-
CHAS. GULLIVER
MANAGING DIRECTOR
HK! Jw **""™EBi^ >>lMn>aDMnMßl^l>a>laißWn> * n,IR>MiIUaMWMIMaMWWI "l V " > ' "" ""'v . rf-M
j 1 S The right of refusing admission is reserved. No seats guaranteed unless booked in
!£• reserve the right to dispose of the same if not paid for by 6 and 8. ,o p.m. in the ist
I I Letter should enclose remittance to cover and also stamped addressed envelope.
In accordance with the requirements of the London County Council: a The. Public may leave at the end of
the performance by all exit and entrance doors and such doors must at that time be open, b All gang-
ways, passages and staircases must be kept entirely free from chairs or any other obstructions, c Persons
must not be permitted to stand or sit in any of the intersecting gangways (and if standing be permitted
in the gangways at the sides and rear of the seating, sufficient space must be left for persons to pass easily
to and fro), d, The Safety Curtain must be lowered about the middle of the performance, so as to ensure
i it being in proper working order. ■
fIL ■ i
PRICK TWO-PENCE


A. H. HANDFORD & SONS, THE Rn
KENT’S
WEST CENTRAL FLORAL DEPOT
Wedding and Mourning Orders
Promptly Attended to.
Wreaths, Crosses, Harps, Gates
of Heaven, Anchors Chaplets,
Hearts, Pillows, Cushions, and
any Floral Design made to Order
Bouquets a Speciality
Fresh Cut Flowers Daily.
NOTE ADDRESS
136, THEOBALD’S RD., W.C.I
(Facing Fire Station)
ANNA JENSEN
7, LITTLE TURNSTILE
(To the left of Empire)
SPECIALIST IN LADIES’
HAND-EMBROIDERED
UNDERWEAR
AND
BLOUSES -
TROUSSEAUX to ORDER
Florence Ware,
High-Class Florist
.* and Fruiterer , •
239 a, HIGH HOLBORN
'Three Doors left of Empire),
Floral Designs. Wreaths, Crosses
and Presentation Bouquets Made
to Order.
LADIES ! YOUR OWN
Materials made up into
FASHIONABLE COSTUME
by High-Class Tailor
for 15/-. No Extras.
Write for Particulars to
i TEftBY 1 . 47 * Phm p Lan ®
fli f 1.11111 London, N. 15
CLAPSON *«*.
BUSINESS TRANSFER
AGENTS & TRADE VALUERS
HEAD OFFICE :
11, VICTORIA ST., 3.W.
telephone*! VICTORIA 5291 and
CROYDON 20S1 _
Branches : Station Rd , firovdon
and Station Approach, Redhiil
12, RED MON PASSAGE, HOLBORN.
Best Prices paid for RAGS, METAL and PAPER.
Before going elsewhere, send for Price List.
Established 60 Years.
“THE SUi.”
Proprietress Hire. M. A. SAUNDESS.
THE PRO’S HOUSE next Stage Door
Always something good to Eat.
Drink and Smoke.
Everything of the Best Quality. Fresh cut Sandwiches, &©.
Monday, Sept. 23rd 1918
For Slide Advertisements apply to Advertising Depart
mens. Holborn Empire Offices, W.C.J.
The Stage Furniture supplied by Messrs. E, D. Wilson
& Co., 89. Laatefieid Street. Kiioam Lane, London, W
1 OVERTURE
Musical Director—HAßßY J. BAYNTON
2 JACK SMILES
Comedian
3 LILIAN BYRNE
Mezzo-Soprano, in Selections from the following :
“The Heart of a Rose ” (H. Nicholls) ; “ Roses of Picardy,”
(Haydn Wood)-, “The Bells of St. Mary’s” f Emmett
Adams)-, “Sing Me a Restful Song’’ (E. St Quentin)-,
“ God keep thee true ” (Leslie Smith) ; “ Night of Romance ”
(Horatio Nicholls)-, It’s a Wonderful Thing to Me”
(Chas, Wilmot S- Arthur Klein)
4 ALBERT WHELAN
The Popular Australian Entertainer
Motor-Cycling after the War.
We have a stoak of 200 Motor Cycles for disposal, the largest
In London. We sell any machine at i down, balance to suit
customer, storing free till required. Secure a good machine
from £lO upwards now, whilst prices are low, before the end
of the War and the consequent rise in priees, Lists free,
Any machine not suitable exchanged within one month of
purchase. War Loan Stock taken. Exchanges,
if you do oof know RIDER TROWARD'S. ask your motor-
cyclist friend
RIDER TROWARD & Co.
SI, 40b & 78, HIGH ST., HAMPSTEAD
THE —■
capstol;
Restaurant^
13 Soulhamptoa Roe
'A Minnies from this Tbea
he
Noted for -
TABLE D’HOTE NI
Luncheons * J/H
Dinners «lQ
an
BREAKFAST
front 8,30 a.nM
SUPPERS ae .
till 9.30 p.m}
me
CALL AT ■—
thk BR
DEVONSHIRE
Prop. HARRY PIN(&
A Hearty Welcome toOZio
MAKII
SELL TODi I
TO THE I
CHJI
101, Grajd
PhcB£
Before and after t
s TH
ja.
LUNCHEONS, 12 tic)
YOUNGER'S CELhD
1888 1 B | |
IBs3JiJ*j
S Stone Diamond
Half-Hoop 1& Gold
j£ 2.15.0. «
fe.: ■" i H?
A. H. HANDFORD & SONS. THE R<
) { } \ j*.


(xhants, 30, Pine Street, Clerkenweii.
< FOR
fng Presents
)F REAL
l ic Interest
ItERATE PRICES,
t 0C33
-ae largest selection
.rid of genuine old jry
D BROOCHES m
hi id rings . . m
Antique Intaglio wn
id Signet Rings. yfu
Old Jewellery.
"*,nd Coral Beads. IPS
A Rings, 7/6 each, wv
«.RD GOOD $
g|eo Corner,” <****>
3 ilSt. London, W.G.I
id Old Jewellery bought
SBEAR
lKfcj>’S RD m W.C
Crown, Aldgata).
%se to Holborn Empire.
XNEY !
LI PAPER
0 buyers,
3ER,
G|„ W.C.I
91.
id si
HR”
•ONihes always In Cut.
£R’S "fraught and in Bottle
UJe is ■ m is b a
SfSEg::
5-. <?~V.
S
Star-set Diamond
oa P Gipsy Riuq [Set Gold
2.15! jtA.A.O
X AFTER N. M
THE oTHEATRE
CALL AT THE \DAT
/COLO NIA L \
RESTAURANT
146, Southampton Row ( minutes walk)
N. FOR A DAINTY DINNER OR SUPPER /
\Only English Food. Dinner 6 to 9.30
FIVE 3/» courses
N. Open till 10.0 p.m.
5 GEO MOZART
In his’Latest Thumbnail Sketches
*L
6 EMERALD & DUPRE
Present [their Original Comedy
-HE* “ BILLETED ”
7 GINTARO
Japanese Top-Spinner
8 INTERVAL
9 SANDY POWELL
Comedian
Programme Continued over
B. W. THOMAS, "liT*
(Late “YE OLDE HOP POLE,” BLACKFRIARS).
RED LION AND BAUD,
62 & 63, Red Dion Street, High Holborn, W.C. 1
Finest Quality Wines & Spirits. Sparkling Wenlock Beers
THB SOLDIER'S MATCH-BOX.
BRYANT * MAY'S
SERVICF match box cover
Reg. Design No. 64223?.
Keeps Matches and Box dry in all weathers.
BtfasiS ft Mays w th® only WMahm used throughout tbs Theatre.
For CHOCOLATES of the
BEST QUALITY, call at
THE HOLBORN
GHOGOLATE HOUSE,
257, HIGH HOLBORN
Only a few doors from this
Theatre. Turn to the right.
PURVEYORS TO HIS MAJESTY
THE KINS
HOOPER STRUVES
MINERAL SATEBS
Supplied to tft®
UGHTS OF LONDON
GAS MANTLES imm 4%d. each
A- UPAIE, JSSL
27, Lamb 5 * Conduit Bt. Bloonigibury,
KEYS CUT AND LOCKS REPAIRED
"invisible mending.^
if you have any Clothes Burnt, Tom or
Moth-eaten—any Pattern of Cloth im-
material—or Carpets, etc., we can work
them so that they appear New again.
MADAME LILY,
21, Rathbone Place, Oxford St.
FURNISHED ROOMS,
SIiOT COOKING GAS,
From Bs. WEEKLY, and Others
31, Uarohmomt Street,
Ruiaeil Square,
• TYPEWRITERS ■
fully guaranteed for 12 months al lowest
possible prices ; inspection cordially
invited.
J. S. KNIGHT,
12, Sicilian Avenue,
Southampton Row, w.C>
Telephone: Museum ISISS
HAVE YOUR
GRAMOPHONE
REPAIRED by
C. S. MOWAT,
MUSIC SELLER,
57, RED LION STREET,
HOLBORN, W.C.
LATEST RECORDS.
Musical Strings and Fittings,
Eihants, 30, Pine Street, Clerkenwell.


BOOKS BnilfiHT. SOLD. LENT & EXCHANGED THE ,A E °
SALE
NOW ON
TO BUY OR SELL
PAINTINGS • •
WATER-COLOURS -
SKETCHES, eto., Old
or Modern, at the
ART EXCHANGE
I, HEW OXFORD ST.
UtUOm
w. C. BROWN
Ophthalmic Optician
42, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
Holborn, W.C. I
Over 20 years experience in eye
sight testing. Advice free.
headache ?
Mr. BROWN has devoted
special study to Astigma-
tism, which is one of the
most frequent causes of dis-
tressing headaches and the
watering of the eyes.
Many people have been in
the habit of taking drugs to
alleviate headache, but this
is an eye trouble that can
onlv be releived by the use
of specially ground lenses.
Mr ‘BROWN is convinced
that the most serious eye
troubles are brought about
hv neglect and that if people
would only, on the first
symptoms have their eyes
examined they would save
themselves endless trouble
and misery.
Mr. BROWN’S consulting
rooms, are at the above
address and c*n be seen
personally daily from 9.30
a.m. to 7.30 P m - Thursday
9,30 a m. to 1 p.m.
[’Phone : HORNSEY 2257
JOHNSON Bros-
Specialists in
MOTOR-CAR REPAIRS
OVERHAULS, Etc.
MODERATE terms
All Communications to
109, SUSSEX ROAD
HOLLOWAY, NT
oarage t Andover Yard,
219. Hornsey Road
Telethon*: 6 12 RBQBNT,
JOHN J. ROGERS.
AMERICAN DENTISTRY.
I, Oxford Street, W. -
(Corner of Charing Cross Ra >
ST. PANCRAS GARAGE
OIES FOR HIRES-
Moderate Chargee.
OVERHAULS. ACCESSORIES.
Repairs of every description
Ring up MUSEUM 934.
Cars Bought, Sold
or Exchanged.
92 ft 94, JUDD STREET, EUSTON BOAP_
Programme Continued
10 . G. H. CHIRGWIN
The White-Eyed Kamr
11 THE BIOSCOPE
11 i With Latest Films
12 MARY MORAN
And Company, in a Crook Playlet entitled
“ bracelets ”
By SEWELL COLLINS.
4 . ... Mary Moran
SidLe Sa-<e ... Lennard Harris
Sl iJ ” Cvmnes ••• Frank Jowers
L Re « y iJS ... Phillip Fuller
Mr. Hobbett ••• rr rrv Bancroft
Wigmore, Detective ... Harr > tfancrou
j scene ... Drawing Boom of a Suite in the Hotel
3 Riche, London.
j NATIONAL ANTHEM
WANTED: 500 LADIES
and gentlemen
To Learn Motoring.
Full Coops® of 24 Lessons, £2 2s„ op 5/- per &oar.
S. A S. MOTOR Os., Ld., 395, Edgware Rd.
telephone s —BBSS PADDINGTON.
e 7 fresco
230 Shaftesbury Avenue, Holborn W.C. 2
Specialist in ANTIQUE FRENCH FURNITURE, FRENCH TAPESTRY
I and OLD PERSIAN CARPETS AND RUGS.
The Holborn
Chocolate House
For Chocolates, Sweets,
Dainty Confections.
Teas, Light Refreshments
before or after the Per-
formances.
NOTE address-
-257, HIGH HOLBORN.
FEED THE
GUNS WITH
WAR
i
BONDS
And Help to
End the War
For STATIONERY,
FANCY GOODS,
ACCOUNT BOOKS
Wholesale and Retail
AT
LOWEST PRICES
GO TO
G. A. RAVISOU & CO.
52, Lamb’s Conduit St.,
London, W.C. 1
Established 1858 in Same Street


-® FOLIES-BERCtR® ** i
•\ e ,
. entree: I JL* ra \ 81-42 •
32, Rue Richer C t —— ;
DIRECTION 4 #OMINISTR»TION • j
M. Raphael BERETTA, Diredeuf O®® • j
M. Paul DERVAL, Directeur Art [ st^ u .
M. Henry CERF, Directeur /„ Sc ene.
M. THALES, Administrateur General, *
M Laurent HA LET, Chef mULL F,B,
M, Paul LARGY, Secretaire geperal , ■ Mm c:S' rl( t lEL ’
Regisseur general; M SAGOI, hegis , V ggl j a danse,
Maiiresse rle ballet ; Mine fit VSaILL , Chef
Ant. MEUTBNS. Chef Machinate . ir j st .e; M-
glycodont
LE MEILLEUR DES' DENTIFRICES j
EN VENTE dans ies Grands ag a
et dans toutes Bonnes Maison
GLYCODONT*, C‘l
A tellement bianchi mes t dents Q >•
rue , les gens viennenUemjrer M ; chel .
TI,TZ ct du tube nroyei
Envoi du tube grand mode ,yL hl . P .noste adresse
c„» lre lfr.7s»tlfr. 2s .e„^P oDONT
au Laboratoire du UU B ' BGtIIE . m ,
49 rue d’Etighien, PARJS
VILLIOD
detective
flail
enquetes
sur Projets
de Mariages
Sante
Antecedents
Moraltte
Herltiers
Prodigues
divorces
□□□□□oqnQ ODnannflnri
■■■■■■■■■■
9 0 0
' Abus
deConfiance
Vols
Coitirefafons
Ceitres
Anoaymes
Protection
contre
te Chantage
RECHERCHES
SURVEILLANCES
37. Boulevard Malesnerbes PARIS
Cm^n


LA REVUE NOUVELLE
en 2 actes et 25 tableaux, de QUINEL & LEMARCHAND
Mise en scene de THA.LES
Producer JOHN TILLER
FOLIES-BERGERE BATHS, avec M ,les Bremonval,
Serge, Monteille, Follior et Les Girls de
Tiller.
LA DAME EN ROBE CHEMISE, avec M e »« Ch.
Martens, M. Geo Flandre.
LE CONGRES DES SAPHO avec M elle Bremonval,
et MM. Serge, Monteille, Follior.
LES STATES DE TURC DE BARRfcRE, avec
Sarbel et Geo Flandre.
LES GENDARMES FLEURIS, avec M. CARIEL,
M el,es Fioretta, Franchet et Les Gendarm’s
Girls.
■ ■■■
ENTR'ACTE : IS MINUTES
LEI MALL
MURRAY PILCER and liis JAZZ. BAND


LES PRODUITS NATION AUX
avec M elles Monteille, Follior, Nalior,
Doussat, Darcy; MM. Meret, Gesky & Geo Flandre
■ mi ■ ■
L’OISEAU - FEMME
M ELLE NAPIERKOWSKA
M; SERGE et les Oiseaux Girls
■■ ■ ■
CROCK, LE HOI DU EIRE
and Partner, Celebrite Americaine
■ ■■»
Grand Final
avec M. CARIEL, GFSKV - M elle NIXON
■ ■■n
A/AERICAff DAMCE
par les Cow-Boys de TILLER
■■■■
FREEDOM FOR EVER
FOR FRANCE, FOR VICTORY
GRAND FINAL
par tousles Artistes des FOLIES-BERGERE


BANQUE GEKERALE HYPOTHECAIRE
5, RUE CAMBON PARIS
Tel. : CENTRAL 50-44 -o- Metro: CONCORDE
PIIETS ET AVANCES SUR TOUTES GARANTIES
Titres, Imimbles, Successions, Nues-Proprietes , Usufruits
ACHAT DE TITRES. MEME D£PR£ci£S
CONDITIONS SPECIALES AUX OFFIGIERS & MOBILISES FRANQAIS & ALLIES
ENGLISH SPOKEN
Les SUCCES DE MUSIQUE
Anglais et Americains
se trouvent Place de la Madeleine. 31
LE MEILLEUR LAXATIF DEPURATIF
JN SEUL GRAIN
au repas du soir
resultat le lendemain matin
Nettoie l’estomac et l’intestin Chasse la bile - Pnrifie le ang
2^ r Q ' e acon de 50
O U pour 6 mois
ie % flac. de 25 A fr. n /'i
pour 3 mois 1 i\J
IM POT COMPRIS
64, BOULEVARD PORT-ROYAL et toulea Pharmacies


IE COHEBGF DE Ljl rfIRFUMF 0 '
ESTUNC -r, UJS 7
-V „
le Flaocn, le Coffret, e
coutent plus cher qus ledl
Et <?a ne vaut pas plus i
Void... ma cliere !on y "m
quinze sous... dans un Salon ejfl
32. PLACE SAirS
Par to at dans les endroits
Paix, Majestic, Edouard V| j ™
n entend plus parJer que de
Pourquoi ?
que . r ° n y vend de Ia ParM
peut apporter un llacon vide et J
‘ 3 n e f 6 pr^ioQ * on Pemfl
Q “ e,ffues Fleurs”, dn “ ,1
? , F Apr3s I’Ondee”; on y vroul
a bruler, d extraordinaires parfun.s
is dermeres creations connue* J
I , . ,e " rs .; Ie Parfum d’Avril d'vJjP
et Nu, ts d’Orient. Les DesellP
O. AIKE), qui content un prix if
eHmiPit V6nd 3,1 poids ’ sans r 4
etiquette, sans ruban ; on en *
mes on en acbete ce qu on veci
111 3 des P O,l d res mauves P q,
Ocrees pour les Prunes. 1
to de rT USe Crgme Dermil
demander. y ' '
quqi n ri \ UyaU !11 ne f aut pas-
q a pas moyen de sc faii d
T£l6phone : TR P


£l£gantes
POUR LA VILLE
VVi
G’
INC
ROBU
Ie front
■ ktaIMMIMMIIIIIMMIMMIII Hill
-forlcgers du monde entier el chez
|ard & c° i
■Jr, 5 PARIS
OEVAWKZ. SA.,


PROGRAMME
O LYM PI A
ANIA
reilleur
’ dejeuner
lu Matin
BANANIA
/© nteiileur
dejeuner
d u Matin


OLYMPIC
LE PLUS BEAU MUSIC-HALL DE PARIS
Diredeur : M. Raphael BERETTA
Administration : 8, RUE CAUMARTIN
Location : 28, Boulevard des Capucines
Telephone : Central 44-68
Administration \ JirecP. Administrate : M. Henri CERF
( Direct . Artistique; M. Marcel PETIT
PROGRAMME DU 22 AU 28 MARS
PREMIERE PARTIE
1 Orchestre.
2. Orchestre
LE IVIEILLEUR LAXATIF DEPURATIF
•• • •
UN SEUL GRAIN
au repas du soir
• •••
RfeSULTAT LE LENDER/! AIN MATIN
Nettoie l'esiomae et l’intestin Chaise la bile Purifie le sang
2fr. QA le Flacon de 50
O v pour 6 mois
le f |ac de 25 J| fr. *1
pour 3 rnois 1 I
IMPOT COM PR IS
64, BOULEVARD PORT-ROYAL et toutes Pharmacies


BANQUE GENERALE HYPOTHECATE
5, RUE CAMBON PARIS
Tel. : CENTRAL 50-44 -o- M6tro : CONCORDE
PRETS ET A VANCES SUR TOUTES GAR UNTIES
Titres, Immeubles, Successions, Nues-Proprietes, Usuiruits
ACHAT DE TITRES, MEME D£PR£CI£S
CONDITIONS SPECIALES AUX OFFICIERS & MOBILISES FRANQAIS ET ALLIES
ENGLISH SPOKEN
PROGRAMME (suite)
3. ENARDOS B s
Trapezes comiques
4 FRESNAY
Dans, son repertoire,
5. - MONTVILLE,
Dechireur de Cartes.
VERMOUTH
TURIN
CINZANO
7' . /
Garantis dorigine
! ASTI
SPUMANTE


ELEGANTES
POUR LA VILLE
QJUOJI
CADRAN
LUMINEUX
glace
INCASSABLE
PRECISE
ROBUSTE
POUR LE FRONT
En ventc chez tons les bons Horlogers du monde entier el chez
KIRBY, BEARD & C° L D
ooooooaoc 5 > R ue Auber, 5 :: PARIS GOQOQOOOD


PROGRAMME (suite)
6. LES FABIENS
Danseurs mondains.
7 __ ROY DOVE, Jongleurs.
8. - HARRY LICKSONS
Chiens dresses.
E NTR’ ACTE
DEUXIEME PARTIE
9. Orchestre.
10 FLETCHER
Contorsioniste.
11. Suzanne VALROGER
Dans son repertoire.
12. GRENELLO, Jongleur.
is. DALBRET,
Dans son repertoire.


PROGRAMME (suite,)
14. BLANCHE de PAUNAC
La Voyante.
15. ARIZONA TRIO
juggling act.
16. Retrait e.


IE COMMERCE DE LH PfIRFOMERIE
EST UN COMMERCE DEGUISE
le Flaccn, le Coffret, I’Etiquette et Is Ruban
coutent plus cher que le Parfum
Et ga ne vaut pas plus !...
Void... ma chere !on y fait les mains pour
quinze sous... dans un Salon epatant.Si tu voyais ga!
32, PLACE SAINT-GEORGES
Partout dans les endroits* chics ~ Gifto, CHlWfflTir tP
Paix, Majestic, Edouard VII d’A.ngi,eterrk, partout on
n’entend plus parler que de “ SALOME
Pourquoi ?
Paree que l’on y vend de la Parfumerie au detail, on
peut apporter un flacon vide et, apres l’avoir tare sur
une balance de precision, on l’emplit du parfum clioisi ;
soitdu Quelques Fleurs”, du“Jicky”.du “Chypre”,
de “L f Apres I’Ondee” ; on y trouve memo des partums
a bruler, d’extraordinaires parfums a cigarettes et tonics
les dernieres creations connues des plus gr.-mds parfu-
meurs : le Parfum d’Avril de Cartier, l’CEillet Noir
et Nuits d’Orient, Les Desenchantees, (parfum de
Polaire), qui coutent un prix foil avec le flacOn et la
tout s'y vend au poids, Sans colfret, aans chique, -swbs-
etiquette, sans ruban ; on en vend lu grammes, 20 gram-
mes, on en achete ce qu on vent.
II y a des poudres mauves pour les blondes;
Ocrees pour les brunes.
La fameuse Creme Dermi! qui vient de revolutionner
toute l’Amerique cette creme qui dispense de I’emploi
de la poudre il y a tout ce qu une elegante peut
demander.
Un Tuyau ! it ne faut pas y aller de 5 a 6 : pa r ce
qu’il n’y a pas moyen de se fuire servir.
T£l6phone s TRUDAINE 54-24


DE
R.IGAUD
PAR.FIJ M EUR-
-16“, RJUE DE LA PAIX J
PARIS
DEVAMBEZ , SR-, EARI*


Photos by F. W. Tolra.
WEST ST. KILDA LIFE-SAVING CLUB.


Behind
the Scenes
at the Circus
y HERE are glamor and mystery
about every circus which fasci-
nate all children—and their
parents as well. Although modern
circuses are business propositions ,
there is more “behind the scenes' ’
than most people expect.
Strolling round a circus is a fascin-
ating pastime, for one sees so many
details of organisation which have to
be attended to before the act in the
“big top” can be thought of. In the
last three weeks two circuses have come
to town, and the public has shown that
the circus, despite the talkies and their
big stars, can draw full “houses.”
Questions crowd themselves on the
mind. How do these travellers of the
circus live? Is theirs such a terribly
hard life? What time do they get up?
How much does a These and
a hundred others can be answered only
by someone d’ho goes behind the
scenes
The acts in the “big top” are all the
public sees, and few realise that in every
circus there are nearly twice as many
hands as performers.
Circus folk do not live as gipsies
these days, wandering from place to
place as the spirit moves them. The
modern circus proprietor uses the train,
and packs his animals and motor ve-
hicles alike into trucks to go to the next
scheduled “stand.” Whether they are
travelling or. in a city, members of the
circus staff sleep and eat on the train;
though when they are in cities, the
stars of the show are expected to find
their own accommodation.
All hands to the ropes.—Putting up the circus “big top."
pERCUS life seems to be j Ist as hard
as one makes it. It is a*, .lotion that
circus performers and hands are roused
terribly early in the morning, except
in special circumstances, and 8 o'clock
breakfast Is the rule. There is little
doing before 9 o’clock.
Acting as night-watchmen is a job
few like. Those circus hands on this job
sleep in the “big top,” instead of the
comparative comfort of a full-length
“dog-box” carriage seat. Should a wind
rise, it is no easy task for these men
to keep down the tent, though in
stormy weather it is “peaked” as a pre-
caution. Wind and rain are no friends
of the circus people. Wind ruins
their tent if they are not careful, and
rain spoils the “house,” no matter
what they do. Only this week, storm
guys were used. This is an elaborate
system of tying down the tent so that,
if one peg lifts, the tent will not blow
down, and tent hands will be given an
opportunity to put down the weak peg
more firmly.
New circus tents cost as much as
£B5O, without poles, so that the tent
“boss” can afford to take few risks.
If the wind keeps rising, the circus
buries a dead man. This is not nearly
as gruesome as it sounds to the un-
initiated, but simply means that ropes
are connected to the main tent poles
and attached to bags of sand or stone,
w.uch are buried in the ground.
pIRCUS prices arc comparatively
i high, and are likely to remain so. It
costs up to £l5O a day to keer> a flrsfc-
i class circus on the road or rails, and
of this travelling expenses take the
l largest proportion. An average bill pre-
sented dv the railways is £4OO a week.
Maintaining a staff of 100 or more,
and providing food for men and ani-
mals mean big outlays for the circus
proprietor.
Lions are expensive animals to keep;
they eat more than 15 lb. of beef a
day. Small boys whose mothers in-
sist on a weekly dose of medicine will
sympathise with the animals, who arc
given medicine once a week, and are
starved the following day.
Elephants are “one big stomach.”
according to one of their keepers, Mr.
Harry Mooney. They have a tremen-
dous appetite, consuming hay by the
ton, and asking for more. “It is amaz-
ing how a man can bluff these ele-
phants,” said Mr. Mooney, as he or-
dered one of them to go back from
some hay “It is really nothing else.”
He pointed to the fearsome looking
spike—and the end was entirely with-
out point.
VyHEN a circus comes to town,
butchers and bakers canvass per-
sistently for its trade, for there are
orders for hundreds of pounds of meet
and dozens of loaves of bread waiting
for someone. All circuses make it a
policy to buy their requirements in
each town in which they show, so thst
most of the money paid at the door
remains in the town.
A visit to a circus any morning will
show how many little tasks have to
be done. The fence, which has to be
painted red and white for a new act. a
split in the tent, which has to be
mended, a trench which has to be dug
round the inside of the tent to take
the water from the side-walls, are
typical examples which keep circus
hands occupied during the morning.
In the morning, too, the stars re-
hearse, not in tne gaily colored cos-
tiunes and tinsel of the night show,
but In ordinary clothes, or. If they are
acrobats, in old bathing costumes.
Clowns training their dogs seem par-
ticularly matter-of-fact and pains-
taking in the cold light of day.
❖ ❖ ❖ ❖
IN tents away from the main
A entrances to the big top, artists
prepare for the night’s performance.
It is here the clown —an ordinary in-
dividual. by day—puts on his thick
white powder and vivid red nose, to
delight the youngsters with his
patter and jokes.
Until roll-call at 7.30 pun., the circus
stars do not go near the circus, having
their lodgings in boarding houses.
Practices in the morning are. of course,
tile rule for everyone when, in the city,
although each act is not put through
every day.
The whistle blows, the overture
begins, and all must be ready for the
‘ grand parade,” an essential of any
circus.
Attendants at the circus at night, in
their colorful uniforms, can scarcely
be recognised as the hard-working
hands of daytime, who help to erect
the various tents, dig drains, and at-
tend to the animals.
In the daytime, the circus is a hard-
working organisation, but every night
electric light hides the bareness of the
surroundings of the big top, and trans-
forms it into a glamorous place, where
dainty equestriennes, daring acrobats,
and amusing c owns do their best to
make youngsters say, when they grow
older. “How wonderful that circus was.
There has not been one nearly as good
since.”
Childhood impressions of circuses
are the ones which remain.
Step Up, Folks, and See
the Greatest Show
on Earth
BONG! BONG! BONG! thunders the big drum. "Walk up, ladies and
gentlemen! Walk up!" shouts the whale-mouthed spruiker, high on the
platform outside the gaudy "banner front" of the sideshow. "See
Ernestine, the Armless Wonder—she types with her toes! Here we have
Zimba, the Pin-headed Man, last of the Aztecs! Come and crane your necks
at John Aasen, the Human Skyscraper! Tall? He has to stoop to let the
moon pass! See Bush Bully, the African Pigmy, do his jungle Torture Dance.
And right inside we've got Eilsa, Half Man and Half Woman. Walk up!
Walk up! The Greatest Show on Earth!"
Jt'REAKS and fantastics. Blare and
ballyhoo. Super-claims and super-
latives. A titillated crowd surges before
the tent like iron tilings m the clutch of
a magnet.
Those are the externals of the sideshows, and
at the Royal Show you will see the hectic
scene enacted a dozen times a day in
the sideshow zone down by the Hall of Manu-
factures. But let us p'et behind the externals
Mr. Arthur Greenhalgh, sideshow pro-
prietor, world traveller, former jockey,
registered Queensland bookmaker, cor-
respondent for American newspapers.
and lift up the flap on the lives that are lived
behind the gaudy tent fronts. Ladies and
gentlemen! Come on in and meet Mr. Arthur
Greenhalgh, sideshow proprietor at the Show,
and his troupe of human freaks.
★
One of the first things we find is
that Mr. eenhalgh’s freaks ARE human. So
human, in fact, that a romance is brewing be-
tween two of them —Princess Pontes, Queen
of the Amazon Head Hunters, who is Bft. 2in.
and weighs 48 stone, and Ison Thomas, the
African Pigmy Man, 3ft. 3Ln. from top to toe.
This is not ballyhoo. They are genuinely
fond of each other, and their engagement is
expected any day.
Both of them are colored, of course, and
this makes up for the disparity in their
heights. The Pqjmy Man is very strong, and
talented, too. He sticks a hook through his
tongue and lifts a 561 b. weight. He jumps on
broken glass without a murmur. He holds the
flame of a torch against his tongue and lets
you light your pipe with the flame, and he can
chew razor blades.
Dancing Dollita, a third member of the
troupe, is a midget, 28in. high. She was born
of normal-sized parents Hungarians in
Ohio, and speaks French, Italian, Hungarian
and English. She had her 21st birthday while
she was appearing at the Sydney Show re-
cently, and excitedly enjoyed a birthday party
the rest of the troupe gave her.
Because of her youth her parents were very
reluctant to let her make the big journey out
to Australia, but Mr. Greenhalgh’s credentials
—they include an open letter of introduction
from Sir Robert Walder, former Lord Mayor
of Sydney put their minds at rest
Dancing Dollita, who sings and dances, does
• miniature Mae West turn. She lifts her
eyebrow and says, “Come up and see me
sometime and bring a microscope.”
★
And now we will look in on the six
little pigs that belong to Mr. Greenhalgh’s
troupe. They dance, jump hurdles, ring bells
and fire guns at targets. Two of them. Dempsey
and Tunney, fight a three rounds bout in a
little arena, and are fanned with towels and
given a bottle of milk to suck between rounds.
The big surprise about these pigs is that they
are Australian and were quite untrained be-
fore they joined the troupe. Mrs. Marjorie
van Camp, who trains and presents them, never
takes pigs from country to country* She
buys tnem in each country she visits.
Her present pigs were bought from farm-
ers in Queensland, where she opened with
Mr. Greenhalgh’s show. In 10 days she had
them trained up to their present entertaining
skill. The Governor of Queensland (Sir Les-
lie Wilson) found them so good that he
watched them for 20 minutes at the Bumlaberg
Show.
★
Mr. GREENHALGH himself is well
worth a His father was a showunan be-
fore him, and his grandfather before that His
grandfather came from England more than 50
years ago and opened up at the Eastern Mar-
ket with a Punch and Judy show and coconut
shies.
The present Mr. Greenhalgh was trained by
his father in sharpshooting from the time he
could hold a gun. A young sister had the
same training. While she was at St. Joseph’s
Convent, in Penrith (N.S.W.) her father used
to go there after classes were over and teach
her trick shooting. She made her first ap-
pearance as a trick shooter at a convent con-
cert.
For several years after that the family
worked a sharpshooting act all through Aus-
tralia. The highlight of the act took nerve.
The father and the son stood face to face with
a ball of resin between their foreheads. The
daughter, billed as Little Edie, stood a few
yards oil and knocked the resin ball away
with a shot from a .22 rille.
“I wouldn’t do it now for a thousand pounds,”
says Mr. Greenhalgh now.
While the Greenhalghs were working this
act they were also working up a rodeo. After
several years they had nine wagons. 35 horses
and a team of mules. As an interlude for a
couple of years they ran a snake exhibit at
Manly with more than 500 snakes on show
and a couple of snake charmers.
A crowd of 30,000 rolled up to the perform-
ance. The turnstiles couldn’t let them through
fast enough and in the crushing that took
place some of the turnstiles were swept away
and a large part of the crowd got in free.
But in spite of this the receipts were big
enough to put the Greenhalghs back on their
feet.
Mr. Greenhalgh separate.! from his father
some years ago and began his present line
of touring the agricultural shows. His father
went to New Zealand, where he got hold of
a replica of the Rotorua hot springs and toured
the Dominion with it.
He was in New Zealand when his daughter
became ill in Brisbane. Mr. Greenhalgh sent
his father a reassuring cable, which said, “Edie
doing well.” The father read it as, “Edie
dying.” Collapsing with shock he fractured
his skull as he fell, and never recovered. He
died last year.
LIONESS GUARDS
DEAD SISTER
Animal Tragedy At
Circus
Snarling and baring her teeth, with
forefeet spread wide across the carcase
of her sister who died today, Kittie, one
of Wirth Bros.’ oldest lionesses, menaced
circus attendants when efforts were made
to remove the carcase.
Only by forcing the desperate beast
back to one corner of the travelling
cage, and sliding in a wooden partition,
were they able to remove the carcase.
Florrie died in her sleep last night.
She was 21 years old. Her twin sister
Kittie. from whom she had not been
Barted since their birth at Cambridge,
l ew Zealand, on March 17, 1914, is now
not expected to live long.
The twins were two of a litter of six.
As a lioness cannot successfully rear
more than four cubs, these two, the
quietest, were separated and reared by
a bulldog bitch
Even when fully grown, the two lion-
esses treated their diminutive foster-
mother with great respect, and always
allowed her to be fed before them!


M.C.C. ENGLISH CRICKET TEAM, 1924-5
"The Referee" Supplement. Jan 21st 1925.
Back Row: H. HOWELL, R. TYLDESLEY, A. P. F. CHAPMAN, Mr. F. C. TOONE (Manager), M. W. TATE, W. W. WHYSALL, L. J. BRYAN. Second Row: F. E. WOOLLEY, J. W. HEARNE.
J. W. H. T. DOUGLAS (Vice-Caption), A. E. R. GILLIGAN (Captain), J. B. HOBBS, E. HENDREN, H. STRUDWICK. Front Row: R. KILNER, A. P. FREEMAN, H. SUTCLIFFE, H. SANDHAM.
Bernt and Partner
A Revelation of Grace and Art.


MLLE. ROZELL.
AN INCOMPARABLE ORIENTAL DANCER, WHO HAS ACHIEVED A FINE REPUTATION IN BURLESOUE.
Photo.
Gladstone
Adams,
Whitley
Bay.
ELSIE DENHAM


Glamor Of
j Saw dust Ring
nPHE circus has come to town. Really, it
would be more correct to say that the cir-
cuses have come to town, as in the past few
weeks Adelaide has been invaded by two cir-
cuses, each gaily displaying its talent on posters
over town and suburbs.
How strange it is that an institution so tradi-
tional as the circus can remain so young. It
had its origin, as we know it, only 140 years
ago.
In ancient Rome, however, the circus was a
large oblong building adapted for chariot and
horse races, and was also used for the exhibi-
tion of athletic prowess, mock contests, and
conflicts between wild beasts.
It was at the end of the eighteenth century
that the circus possessing some resemblance to
the modern displays first achieved any popu-
larity. This was Astley’s Exhibition, which was
mainly restricted to equestrian feats.
* * *
mention of the word circus brings to
mind the name of Barnum —Phineas Taylor
Barnum, the Mighty Barnum, organiser of “THE
Greatest Show on Earth.” Barnum was born at
Bethel, Connecticut, in 1810. His birthday was
on July 5. a day after the Glorious Fourth.
One of his famous artists was Gen. Tom
Thumb, a dwarf, who was Charles S. Stratton,
of Bridgeport. This was really the beginning
of Barnum’s success.
Although he was practically ruined by a
disastrous fire in 1887, he re-established his
mammoth circus, and when he died in 1891 he
was worth over £1.000,000.
And now for a word about those whom we
pay to see —the artists themselves. Born in the
circus, some of them, trained in the circus, and
playing in the circus, it is the only world they
know, and they cannot live without it. There
was an instance of this where a well-known
performer had a serious accident, and doctors
warned him that his days of acting were done.
He had a nice sum of money put by. which
would have kept him in comfort, but the pass-
ing of a year saw him sweeping out the stables
of a travelling circus. “I just couldn’t live
away from it all.” was his excuse.
* * *
T>ERHAPS the most beloved of all artists of
the circus is the clown. Authors paint
him as one whose laughable exterior hides a
broken heart, his ouips and pranks as a false
cover to prevent his emotions rising to
the surface. “I Pagliacci” and “Laugh. Clown,
are some of the stage and screen plavs
whVh tend to strengthen this contention.
WVnosical Walker, who died towards the end
of 1934. was one of the most famous and
lovable clowns of all time. He retired in 1928,
hut he could not altogether abandon the saw-
dust ring, and everv Christmas he made
Olvrnnia rin<? with laughter.
“I can’t disappoint the children,” was his
excuse for emerging from his retirement. He
died at the age of 84 years, much to the sorrow
of the whole of England.
At one stage, circuses were one-act perform-
ances. Some were emiestrian circuses, others
menageries and acrobatic, hut now the circus
is a combination of all.
4 LIONS IN
SMASH
ELEPHANTS’ AID
SYDNEY, To-day.
Crashing through a fence,
a motor-truck which was
drawing a trailer containing
four caged lions, raced down
a steep embankment and
plunged into the river at the
foot of Fernmount Hill, Bel-
-1 ingen, yesterday.
THE trailer was not drawn
into the water, hut it remained
in a precarious position on the
embankment. The driver of the
truck jumped clear as it plunged
into the water.
The Bellingen postmaster, Mr. J.
McLaren, who happened to be passing,
dashed to Raleigh railway station, where
the rest of Perry Bros, circus, to which
the lions belonged, had entrained.
Two large elephants—one of which
was Jessie, formerly of Taronga Park
Zoo—were taken to the scene of the
mishap, and one of them hauled the
cage of lions up the precipitous incline
foot by foot to the roadway.
Recent rains had made the ground slip-
pery, and the wheels of the vehicle had
to be chocked at each move.
Elephant Hauls Truck
In the meantime, the other elephant had
hauled the truck, only the cab of which
was visible above the water, to the road-
way without any trouble, and as the en-
gine was waterlogged the truck and trailer
had to be drawn by the elephants five miles
to the railway station, where lions and
elephants were safely entrained with the
rest of the circus.
NINE HUSKY MEN
IN A FAT MAN’S WAISTCOAT
The Worlds
Fattest Man
Who Died the
Other Day Was
Only a Pigmy
Lambert Could Have
Given Him 10 Stone
and Beaten Him
Seven men buttoned in one
man’s waistcoat!
Impossible, you’ll say. But
it isn’t.
As a matter of fact we’ll
throw in another two for good
measure.
That makes nine average
men buttoned in inside an-
other man’s waistcoat.
Of course, we’re talking fat
men now; and when we say
fat we mean FAT. Not your mere 15 or 20 stoner, but
something nearer 30 or 40 stone is more in our line.
Many people might be disinclined
, to believe that such a person ever
$ lived were it not that, during the
week. English newspapers announc-
ed the death of Richard Faraday
(or Dick Harrow) at the advanced
: weight of 40st. 91b.
Faraday was a musician at heart and a
barrel at body. For a time be was en-
* gaged as first violinist in a West End
dance band. But, with a body such as lie
was forced to cart about, seated in the
orchestra pit, people just couldn’t con-
i' centrate on dancing or thrill to the ace-
l thetics of music. After all, 40 stone of
massed humanity sitting on one seat isn’t
the least bit heavenly!
Faraday was 7ft. 6in. around the chest,
7ft. around the waist, and the draught
horses about the town used to look at
his collar 'with envy U#id think they were
Shetland ponies! Faraday’s neckwear was
only 26 inches long.
But he isn’t, by any means, the fattest
man of history, although he can give any
local prodigy a few stone and a beating
in the avoirdupois handicap.
PERTH’S BIGGEST MAN
was probably “Drewey” Dyson, who died
about eight years ago. “Drewey” was a
giant among the local pigmies. He was
over 29st. in weight and was as much a
land-mark m the city as- the Town Hall
clock. Many visitors to Perth would pop
into the little second-hand shop in West
Perth, on the pretext of buying some-
thing, really with the idea of seeing,
with their own eyes, what the stories
about “Drewey” had led them to be-
lieve.
But to Daniel Lambert goes the
palm for being the fattest man the
world has ever known. Beside him,
“Drewey” Dyson and Faraday were
mere pocket editions.
Lambert never really worried about his
actual weight; a few stone here or there
was nothing to him: lie could concede
his rivals that much without any bother
and make them
LOOK LIKE LIVING SKELETONS
IHe died, at the age of 36. in 1809. His
weight, at the time of his death, was
50 stone —or 911 b. more than Edward
Bright, the next fattest man in the
world. For years be was incapable of
making practically any movement, even
his food having to be shovelled into him
(his arms not being long enough to get ]
over hiis chest to his mouth).
He used to live and sleep in a half
chair, half couch arrangement, from
which he never moved, and was on ex-1
hibition at 53 Piccadilly from 11 to 5 1
daily. The rest of the time he slept. Lam-
bert died suddenly. He closed his show
for the day in the best of health, hut
by 9 a.m. he was dead. Nature had en-
dured. apparently, all the trespass it
could admit.
His coffin contained 112 su-
perficial feet of timber. It was 6ft.
4in. long. 4ft. 4in. wide, and 3ft.
4in. deep. So immense were his
legs that they necessitated the cof-
fin being made almost a square. It
was built on two axle trees and
four clog wheels, and, on this con-
traction, Lambert’s remains were
rolled to the grave in St, Martin’s
churchyard. Owing to the immense
weioht of the coffin and its con-
tents, a regular descent was made to
the grave by cutting away the
ground gradually.
Faraday’s coffin was lowered with a
portable crane.
Lambert’s nearest rival was Edward
Bright, a merchant and small grocer of
Maldon. Essex. Unlike Lambert, who was
born of particularly small parents, the
whole of Bright’s family were big people.
He himself weighed 44 stone —an immense
weight., even if it does appear a trifle
alongside the bigger man’s 50. But. the
funny part of the story is that Bright
was quite active. He never played cricket
like his more modern counterpart, 19st.
Warwick Armstrong, but he enjoyed
perfect health, married at the age of 22,
and had five children—none of whom
ever tipped the beam at over 10 stone!
His coffin was 3ft. 6in. broad
across the shoulder and over 3ft.
deep. After his death, wagers were
laid that five men, each 30 years of
age. could be buttoned inside his
waistcoat.
Tt was decided at the Black Bull Tnn,
Maldon. when not five, hut seven men
GOT INSIDE THE GIANT’S
WAISTCOAT
and had it buttoned around them. Tf
seven could he buttoned in Bright’s
waistcoat, it is pretty certain that at
least nine could have got in Lambert's
without much trouble.
History tells us that, in 1788, an Eng-
lishman, 7ft. Bin. tall, weighed over 70
stone; but, as liis name is not recorded,
Lambert must hold the masculine belt.
There was, however, a Baltimore woman
who is said to have been 1201 b. heavier
than him. while other feminine giants
were Millie Josephine, an English girl
who, at the age of nine, weighed 2011 b..
and Susannah Tripp, the five-year-old
Worcestershire lass who tinned —or, rath-
er smashed—the beam at 2001 b.
Of course, in the middle ages, obesity
was regarded as a gift from the gods;
hut in these days of slender hips (and
slender incomes) we spend half our time
in the nearest gymnasium doing our ut-
most to fling back the gift (?) in the face
of the donors.
There is a story that "Robert Palmer,
keeper of the Golden Lion Tnn at Bromp-
ton. Kent, a man who weighed just over
35 stone, decided to ulace himself on ex-
hibition and capitalise his avoirdupois.
He was doing pretty well until he readi-
ed London, where he saw the hills ad-
vertising Lambert’s. show. Curiosity
naturally prompted him to part with his
shilling, and
SO BROKEN-HEARTED
was he with the obvious superior gross-
ness of his rival that he died shortly
afterwards.
And we don’t blame him! Tf a man has
to carry about a surplus 20 or 30 stone,
he deserves every brass farthing he gets
for it. After all. it must cost them a
little fortune in food: Lambert, for one,
used to consume 181 b. of meat daily!
It’s a safe bet that, if England
oould have produced either Lambert
or Bright and sat them in front of [
the stand as Warwick Armstrong
led the Australian Eleven on to the
field, the ashes would have been as
good as lost. Warwick would have
looked at his own dwarfed body and
died also of a broken heart.
CIRCUS ON THE MOYE.
A Triumph of Transportation.
Yesterday the circus came to town.
Hours before dawn the long circus
train, laden with elephants, lions, tigers,
monkeys, horses, dogs, geese, women and
men (including a clown), piles of canvas,
poles, boxes and the thousand and one
other things which make the complete
circus, crept into the Perth railway yard.
At 7 o’clock the work of shifting the
animals and gear from the train to the
site on the Esplanade commenced under
the eagle eye of Mr. George Christie, who
has been transport manager for Wirth’s
Circus for the last 34 years.
Last night the “big top” in Perth was
crammed with people. Less than 24
hours before the circus had given a show
at a country town 50 miles away. Such
a quick change of location, involving the
transporting of 521 tons of live and dead
freight, obviously requires great organis-
ing ability. Although he was the busiest
man on the ground yesterday, Mr. Chris-
tie still had time, between answering
questions shouted from all quarters and
shouting orders to others, to talk of
transport methods. In 34 years he has
excluded transport problems from his
ken.
“Our record time for packing up a show
and putting it on a train is 51 minutes,”
he said. “But we must have fine weather
to do that. Last night, at Pinjarra, the
ground was so soft and muddy that we
took just under two hours.” He seemed
to think that two hours was a long time
in which to shift over 500 tons of
animals and equipment. He explained
that as soon as the circus show had
started the hands would at once begin ,
packing up the menagerie and loading
the animal cages on to the train. At 1
11 o’clock the show would end and then
would begin the rush to bring down the
marquee and pack up the seating
benches.
Yesterday morning office-workers rush-
ing to town by car and bus sometimes
found their path along St. George’s-
terrace obstructed by strings of brightly-
painted waggons pulled by elephants
whose slowness was equalled only by their
stubborn refusal to give way to the toot-
ings of impatient motor horns. There
are nine elephants in the circus. Among
them are “Alice,” who has more than
doubled the allotted span of man—she
is known to be over 145 years of age—
and “Princess,” tfhose broad back once
afforded carriage to the late King Ed-
ward VII. Yesterday in the railway yard
they did the heavy work of unloading
and hauling trucks and waggons about.
While they pulled and shoved, gently but
firmly, inquisitive trunks cast about the
ground seeking the luscious tufts of green
grass with which to stay huge appetites.
Practically nothing worries an elephant.
Certainly not the dozens of spectators
who watched with interest the work of
building a circus out of chaos on the
Esplanade. When a lorry laden with 10
tons of material bogged in the soft earth
the hauling elephant ceased work and
waited until another behemoth was
hitched on to the load and the lorry
jerked free. “Mollie” (3 tons) was only
a little upset at Kalgoorlie, Mr. Christie
remarked, when she touched an electric
power line and was felled in her tracks
by the shock. In a few minutes she
stood up again quite unconcerned.
Without hurry, and unhampered by the
dozens of idlers unable to resist the at-
traction of seeing others work, the 56
circus hands went efficiently about their
tasks and amidst shouted orders and the
clanging of mallets and hammers,
wrought order from the disarray. By
afternoon three great marquees had been
erected, and the lighting and seating
equipment installed under the “big top.”
For eieht more days the circus will be
in Perth and then, folding their tents,
they will vanish again into the country
where, for Mr. Christie and his assistants,
life will be a daily move from one coun-
try town to another.
WOOL FROM MILK.


FOOTLIGHT BEAUTIES NOW APPEARING ON BROADWAY.
SOME OF THE FAIREST GIRLS ON THE STAGE, WHO HAVE MUSICAL AND DRAMATIC ABILITY.
WINNIFRED HOLME
R.A.M.
Operatic Contralto and
: Entertainer at Piano :
JACK
PLEASANTS


Photo by Abbe.
YVONNE SHELTON, IN ZIEGFELD’S “MIDNIGHT FROLIC.”
SIS HOPKINS.
C. POST MASON,
Who died in America early in Decem-
ber of pneumonic influenza six days
after contracting the world-devastating
scourge.
Block by Bacon and Co.
RITA STARR,
Principal girl in “The Babes in the
Wood," at the Grand Opera House (Syd-
ney). Miss Starr is one of the well-
known vaudeville combination of that
name. The others, Stella and Vera,
have in the pantomime the parts of
Strongheart and Janie.
Monte Luke ftholograph. Block by
Bacon and Co.
OLGA DORFNER OF PHILADELPHIA.
CHAMPION WOMAN SWIMMER AND HOLDER
OF MANY TITLES WON IN RACES.


Supplement to the "New Zealand Sporting and Dramatic Review,” October IS. 1925.
G. K. Hiembrod. Photo., Auckland.
[Colour plates by N.Z. Sporting and Dramatic Revie."
A REJUVENATING FORECAST OF SUMMER’S ATTRACTIONS ON
PICTURESQUE AUCKLAND BEACHES.
EVELYN
TAYLOR
COLIN
CARLISLE
The Real Vocal Comedian.
An Artiste, not a Tai or's Dummy.
A Smart. Refined and Beautifully Dress
Act,
NOW ON WAR WORK.
Big New Act after the Wai


TWO STUDIES OF ULA
THE CHILD WONDER
PROGRESSIVE
SAXON
THAT NIFTY
LITTLE SINGLE
RETURN ENGAGEMENT
of the
EL REY SISTERS
[?]ting Stars of the NEW YORK HIPPODROME
VERA REMEE
rtyu
4?
tW At
4L
JRil*
JmBF
■p^
%
<k >
%r%
<x%
ix\
\V,
° r\ >
%.
V%«•>
Vv
ip
Ql
\
O
Just Completed—
A Successful Tour
Through South Africa,
Australia, New Zealand,
Java, Philippine Islands,
India, Straits, China, Japan.
First Appearance
in America
Three Consecutive Tours with Moss
and Stoll, London Coliseum,
Syndicate Halls, Gibbons
Tour, United Country Theatres
“The Copper With
a Tanguay Smile”
W. E.
WHITTLE
Ventriloquist
A Big Success on
the LOEW
CIRCUIT
EARLY & LAIGHT
VANDINOFF AND LOUIE.
A couple of painters, whose novel act is one of the features of the
Tivoli Circuit at present.


Mary Anderson and friend.
Is Cleo Ridgely laughing because Myrtle Stedman
found some slivers? If so, why is
la Stedman laughing?
Roll down, Ruth
Roland’s silken
stocking, roll!
Juanita Hansen looking
right across the ocean.
This is Billie, not
Gloria Burke.
This is Ann
Pennington's
favorite gesture
in footlights
or water.
Yes, we like your
bathing skirt,
Doris Kenyon.
Who? Ida
Undine
Schnall
MISS EILY PHILLIPS,
Of the Phillips Sisters
VALENTINE AND BELL
This act has played a very successful season for the U. R. O. and Orpheum Circuits. They
are now playing TWO WEEKS’ engagement at the ORPHEUM THEATRE, SAN FRANCISCO,
where they were booked to play one week, BUT DID SO WELL THAT THEY WERE HELD
OVER FOR THE “SECOND WEEK” TO CLOSE THE SHOW ON A STRONG NINE-ACT BILL.
Direction STOKER & BIERBAUER.
A Striking Study of the Australian Venus about to execute one of her
Many Remarkable Dives.
LIZETTE PARKER.


LOOKING FOR THE WHITE HOPE.
R. L. (“Snowy”) Baker trying-out Dulcie Hall, the girl-boxer and ju-jitsu exponent
now being seen on the Fuller circuit.
Block by Bacon and Co.
THE FREDO BOYS
ROSS AND FALLS,
Comedy acrobats, at high elevation in “Mother Goose.”
J. C. Williamson photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.
Kicking is not always
havingsomething to kick
about; sometimes it’s a
matter of having some-
thing to kick with; so
say the twinkling twins
Myrtle Lind and Maud
Wayne.
The only man in
our flower garden:
Chaplin. The girl?
Edna Purviance.
Why go to the Metropolitan Museum to lamp statuary while
there are any Louise Fazendas left in the world?
Nell Craig,
fully
emancipated
for
swimming.
Here’s Camille
Astor. The two
background
gentlemen who
won’tlookather
couldn’t do any
picking for us!
What does Norma
Talmadge do with
this blamed hai when
a roller hits her?


And here we have the three biggest people in the world with the biggest cake. From left to right, Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford, Charlie
Chaplin. They are trying to decide which is to get first bite at the cake. It was finally ruled, however, that Chaplin and Fairbanks were merely
spectators, and that Miss Pickford, therefore, was entitled to the first bite. Mary “takes the cake,” as we know the expression in the forth-
coming Artcraft productions which will be released throughout Australasia by Feature Films, Ltd. The first production will be “Amarilly, of
Clothesline Alley." Then will follow “How Could You Jean,” “M‘Liss.” Others will shortly be announced.
Clever, Beautiful Wish Wynne.
Miss WISH WYNNE
MISS ELLERA NERI,
A charming Rexona Girl.
(From a photograph).


JOE CHARLES AND EMILE DANI
The Thomas Family.
THE
VIONA QUARTETTE
(The World’s Premier Banioists.)
MARION AND JIM HARKINS.
American Comedy Jugglers at the Tivoli (Sydney).
The most
Refined
Musical Act in
Vaudeville.
Songs
without
Singers.
Voices in
Strings.
Programme
and
Costumes
changed
nightly.
Above—Charlie Chaplin in “Shoul-
der Arms,” his new Million Dollar
Comedy. Below Mrs. Charlie
Chaplin, nee Mildred Harris.
Chaplin's wedding took place a few
weeks ago at a registry office in
California. The wedding was kept
a secret, and only a few of Chaplin’s
intimate friends knew of the cere-
mony. The bride is 17, and, accord-
ing to the books of the registry,
Chaplin’s age is given as 29.
“YES, I’M COMING.”
"GLAD TO MEET YOU"
“DID YOU HEAR THE STORY-[?]
“SEE YOU AGAIN SOON.”
GEORGE GEE.
CHAS. KASRAC.
Conway and Leland
The Merry Monopedes.


MUSETTE,
The Singing and Dancing Violinist on the Tivoli Circuit, and her prettily.
dimpled knees, which were awarded first prize in a sculptor's competition
in New York.
MAMIE GRANT
Bunch of American Acts on the F uller Time at Royal Park, Melbourne, last Sunday.
(Back Row) Eddie Goolman, Geo. Fredo, Brown & King, Sid Russell (Variety).
(Middle Row) Mrs. A. Goolman, Anita Primrose, Helen Barnes, T. Young (of
Vancouver). (Front Row) Jack Barnes, Joe Brown, Bert Gaff.
CHARLES RICHMAN (ON EVENING CLOTHES) IN "THE IDLER."
MINNIE LOVE,
[?]n one of her costumes in “Hello Everybody!” at Her Majesty’s (Sydney).
Monte Luke photoyraph. Block by Bucon and Co.
LEIGHTON AND KENNEDY.
Black-faced Comediant, who have recently won favour on the Rickards
Circuit.
ALSACE & LORRAINE


MISS GWEN DAY BURROUGHS
MARIE
HART
America’s Most
Versatile Artist
in Vaudeville.
GEO. DIXON.
JACK
MARTIN
The
Cowboy Comedian
A STUDY IN GRACE.
The woman-member of the Littlejohn
“double,” jugglers and balancers, at
present playing the Fuller time.
Block by Bacon and Co.
ESTELLE WORDETTE
CHARLIE CHAPLIN, THE IDOL
OF FILM FANS, WHOSE MUTUAL
COMEDIES WILL BE SHOWN IN
AUSTRALIA THIS MONTH.
NOLAN AND NOLAN, the American Jugglers, now scoring an emphatic success at the Tivoli.


A BEN. J. FULLER ATTRACTION.
Some of the girls of the Bletsoe Revue Co. in one of their pose in "The Blonde Ballet."
A RULLER ENGAGEMENT.
The girl-member of Les Legartes,
equilibrists, who will shortly be seen at
the National (Sydney).
Block by Bacon and Co.
QUEEN IE PAUL,
Principal boy In "The Babes In the Wood.” at the Grand Opera House (Sydney)
Murma nn Studio photopraph. Block by Bacon and Co.
FRANK. LANK. AND ALICE,
Who are appearing in a club-swinging and comedy-Jiggling act on the Fuller circuit
Murmann Studio photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.
BETTY BRUCE,
A Clever English Comedienne E[?]
gaged for the Fuller Circuit.
BELLE LICHNER,
Fuller show-girl in whom Is typified the spirit of the pantomime season.
Murmann Studio photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.


MR. PHIL. WIRTH AND HIS HOUSE DUDLEY
Photograph by Muir (Leigh and Co.).
VAUDEVILLE’S GREATEST NOVELTY
THE
MYSTIC
BIRD
PRESENTED BY
MASTER PAUL
THE BOY VIOLINIST
BOOKED SOLID TO 1917
Wowsers Three —on the stage. Charlie Albert, Billy Rego and Hugh
Steyne in “Oh, Yes We Do,” one of the comedy hits in “Bubbly,”
the Revue opening at the Palace on February 8, under the direction
of Mr. Hugh D. Mclntosh.
A PRETTY INCIDENT
In the Act of Stafford and Co. a clever animal act on the Tivoli
Circuit.
MAUDE FANE,
A Capable Comedienne, who is the real hit of Edgar Warwick’s
Burlesquers.
STANLEY AND BURNS
DIO. The dainty Parisian Dancer, who is charming Tivoli Theatre patron
Photo by Talma & Co., Melbourne.


SENSATION OF 1917.
THE
MOST SENSATIONAL
AND
COMEDY - ATHLETIC
PRODUCTION
ever shown in England.
ADDED
ATTRACTION!
EMILE
MUNICI,
ITALY’S
FAMOUS
COMEDIAN.
BEATIE & BABS
S
E
A
S
O
N’
S
G
R
E
E
T
I
N
G
S
TO ALL.
Photo]
[Fieldings, Leeds.
S
E
A
S
O
N’
S
G
R
E
E
T
I
N
G
S
TO ALL.
§ WATCH 1
MISS MABEL
COSTELLO
i M The Human Magnet.” i
• The Queen of Personality, j,
Photo]
[Do bson, Liverpool.
DAINTY
LEAH
VICTORIA
Smart Comcdicnnr
and Dancer


Voice
Violin
Piano
XTSIAS g RSETI'XiqS TO JLL OU\ Fi{l£T\J)S
FROM
The WESTALL
TRIO
INCLUDING . . .
ROY QUENTIN.
A charming combination of Piano,
Violin and a Voice - - - -
Thanks to Managers and Agents who have booked us this year
All corns. - - Roy Qu?ntin, 5, Westhall Gardens, Edinburgh
LENA REGENT & Cc
W. H. ATLAS
presents —
VULCANA
CHAMPION LADY ATHLETE
OF THE WORLD.
Holder of all World’s Records in Feats of
Strength by Women. Founder of the
Modern School of Physical Culture for
Women. Originator and cause of the late
Posing Craze. VULCANA proclaimed by
the leading Artists, Sculptors and Students in
Anatomy to be the most Beautiful, Symme-
trically and Physically, the most Perfect
Woman ever known, whose teaching in
Physical Culture and Demonstrations of
Muscular Control, in the principal cities of
the civilised world, the women of all countries
have so vainly endeavoured to imitate.
Height 5 ft. 4 in.
Head 21 in.
Neck 12* in.
Flexed 14 in.
Upper Arm 1 in.
Flexed 14 in.
Chest 33 in.
Expanded 39 in.
Fore Arm 9j in.
Flexed 1 1 in.
Wrist 5f in.
Waist 25 in.
Hip 38 in.
Thigh 25 in.
Knee 13| in.
Calf 14 in.
Ankle 7f in.
A CHALLENGE to all who lay
claim to Physical Perfection to meet
and compare measurements with
VULCANA. Artists, Sculptors, &
Students of Anatomy especially in-
vited to verify these measurements
of the Only Perfect Woman,
—VULCANA—
Supported by her World-Famed
SOCIETY ATHLETES,
Introducing EVE, the most won-
derful Juvenile Athlete of all
time.
Perm. Address: GOSFORD LODGE
FULHAM.
HARPE AND HARPER
CISSIE NADENE
Popular Versatile
Comedienne and
Soma Boy.
Merry Xmas and Prosperous New Year to all Friends.
“IT’S TRUE.”
Maxwell
CAREW
= Female Impersonator and
= Comedian, in a Refined,
= Original, Comedy Enter-
= :: :: tainment :: ::
Playing “Dame” in Howard
and Wyndham’s Panto.. His
= Majesty’s Theatre. Aberdeen
| FIRST VACANCY—
-1 :: MAY 7, 1917 ::
0. CAVALLOTTI
THE WELL-KNOWN
Italian Instrumentalist.
A UNIQUE PERFORMANCE.


J? JYierry Xmas and s{appy JVew year to all jj
THREE POPPESCU
IN THEIR |
WONDERFUL Combination on |
Seven Horizontal Bars. j
THE ONLY ACT |
OF ITS KIND, # |
Dec. 25th
Hippodrome.
NORWICH.
January Ist. Hippodrome,
IPSWICH.
Pte. FRED HENDERSON.
Northumberland Fusilier. "The Fighting Fifth."
“DOING A LITTLE BIT."
ANDERSON AND NASH
MAGGIE
CLIFTON
AND PARTNER.
In their novel Equilibriatic and
Herculean • Gymnastic . Act,
TWe only Act of tHi« kind on tKe ro«<!,


The Season s Greetings to 1,
Old and New Friends.
EMILY .
TALBOT’S
| 5 Vital Sparks 5
The A cme of Vocalism
and Dancing
Thif Xmas , ROYAL, BEDWORTH
I he Dainty Scot
Daisy
Sloan
• ,T*= '* *
Xmas (Tn-eetinas
Perm. Address, So GRESHAM ROAD,
BRIXTON, S.W.
THE PAGF.T TRIO
JL JL JLJ JL A I Bl#
ON .
London Theatres of Varieties Circuit.
THE FOUR SISTERS EMBERT
SHADES
LADIES' VOCAL QUARTETTE
A revelation in vocalisation-
A phenomenal blend of voices
GRACE
and
MABEL.
In a refined
Vocal and
Dancing Act,
with a style
of our own.
4* 4* 4
SEASON’S
GREETINGS
TO ALL.
ii l llimTilimTiiimimTTminmm THE ORIGINAL 11111111,1
= 2if . s
Brand & Shaw
Present
: A REFINED COMEDY :
ACROBATIC POT-FOLRRI
: : : ACT : : :
The Funny Little Acrobat
with the Eig Baritone Voice.
‘Best Wishes to All.
P.A.,
314, Commercial Rd.,
Portsmouth, Hants.
GAETANO
OLLOMS
With his Concertina.
ORIGINAL MIMIC.
NOVELTY.
ORIGINAL MIMIC.
NOVELTY.
THE TWO ORIGINAL
BELLINIS
Equilibrists & Daring
:: Aerial Gymnasts ::
COMPLIMENTS OF
THE SEASON TO
ALL FRIENDS.
Success Everywhere.


THE INCOMPARABLE
LA RAZCKA
DUO
Sensational 1 Jugglers*
and Equilibrists. « .
In Speciality:
“ON THE
PROMENADE.”
Own Magnificent Scenery, etc.
Cloths,-Wings, Borders, etc.
Well-Dressed, # i Well Staged, and
Well Worked.
LA RAZCKA,
A Neat and Marvellous Juggler.
“ Miles and Miles of Smiles.”
A new idea in Vaudeville.
LILY & MADGE
WILLIAMS
in a character study,
“ BROWN & WHITE.”
WILL PENMAN presents
the
[4 NIBS 4
4 Clever Ladies, Featuring
Acrobatic Tumbling, Bending
and Pyramid Building.
SPECIALITY—OPEN FOR REVUE.
SPECIALITY DANCING.
WILL PENMAN'S 4 NIBS 4
LOUISE CECIL
R.C.M
Operatic Soprano.
- L-——J—ii^jl
THE
KAVANAGHS
Australian Comedy Jugglers,
pre*enting
“THE SPORTS DEPOT.”
STAN KAVANAGH.
JOHNNY I
McELROfI
DAME COMEDIAN. J
THE MAPLES
(FRED and AMY)
Wish you all a
Simple 6 lidppv Xni<]s.
Th e iiHimiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiimiiimm:
TWO FLORIMONDS
In a Marvellous Dental Act .
40 WEEKS BOOKED.
40 WEEKS BOOKED.
VIOLET
LESTER
Gl nigow a Charming and Youthful Principal
Boy in Mr. Harry McKelvie’s *' Babes
in the Wood ” Pantomime.
THE GREAT
RHODE
AND
ROCHE


i hT'ifinTnuiiiTTmijniTfiiiiiuii
Maclean Twins
Dainty Scotch Lassies
Dec. 25
HIP.,
HAMILTON
Jan. 1,
PAV.
AYR.
| Florrie
Gallimore
Address c/o
| JOSIE DELAINE,
Princess’s Theatre,
GLASGOW.
= THE 1
GERBOLAS
In a Novel Italian Acrobatic Act. =
MISS VIVIEN CARTER
INI MARCUS llllllillllllllllllllllllll JOSIE 11111111 l
Stone & Bradly
THE LAUGHING LYRICAL LOVEMAKERS SEND
GREETINGS TO OLD FRIENDS AND NEW
A Musical Comedy Act. A Novelty Setting
in Black and White. Full of “Spirit” and
Homely Fun.
THE
DUMAIS
(IVY and CHESTER ).
BOBBY PEELER
mimetic PQUce^J
A DOG’S LIFE
MANDENO’S DOGS
LEON & TEE
Original
Comedy
Musical
Speciality
“CN THE FARM.”
Full Set Carried.
LAUGHS!
SCREAMS! YELLS!
The Act the Audience
talk about.
Corns, c/o “Performer”
Jack
Cunard
and
I Sister
the last word in
(the Art of Dancing
Wishing all friends
a Merry Xmas and
a Happy New Year
Greetings -
PROM
CAMBO
AND
caStelle.
the BRANDONS
In Their Comedy and Musical Speciality.


The CORNETTIE TRIO
REFINED MUSICAL AND VOCAL ACT
GEORGE S.
YOUNG
THE LITTLE COMEDIAN
BRISK AND BREEZY
BARTON and ASHLEY
Coleiuan-Taylor
Pantomime,
Alhambra Theatre
Joe Charles
and
Emily Dani
DRIVING ACROSS A 35-FOOT CHASM.
Photo]
[Do bson, Liverpool.
The Man of the World.
FRED FOSS
THE POCKET COMEDIAN
I HARRY
CHAMPION
Hearty Greetings
to All.
WORKING
GULLIVER
CIRCUIT[?]


QfISINO DE PARIS
,/J i I G^v
tyui
P ROG RAM M Er.
Managing Director —
CHARLES GULLIVER.


6LTCODOIf F
Savon Dentifrice en tube
EN VENTE
Dans les Grands Magasins et dans tout© bonne mail
ENVOI DU TUBE MOYEN OU GRAND MODELE
Centre d fr. 25 ou f r. 75 en timbres-poste actresses J
LA6ORATOIRES DU GLyCQDONT
49, Ru, d’Enghirn, Parts, - Telephon, , B.rgere a 7 -o
VERMOUTH
I TURING
CINZANO
Gararitis d'oriqine
ASTI
SPUMANTE
AULD REEKIE
O, JFtu© dots Capactaes, LO, IT* A. I< 1
Telephone Central 73-95
BRITISH & AMERICAN TAILORS
PROGRAMME du 8 au 21 Mars 1918
1. ORCHESTRE
2. BIENVENU, Jongleur Comique
3. Azelia WILSON, Gymnaste
4 TSOSVI & ABBINS, Cyclistes comiques
5. Ail he MAGUY SENN, Chant ala Harpe
li. HASSAN Trio, Exercices sur fil de fer
7. BERGERET, Im itateur
8. Anna MARTENS, The Anglo-French Comedienne
9. RAYMOND Bros, Acrobates-Equilibristes
10. The MAYNE STEPPERS, Terpsichorean experts
IKIPERWIEO, BALLONS, GANTS DE BOXE, CHANDAILS
SACS, PATINS ROULETTES
Vendus au detail au prix de gros
ELI MS PIERRE
PABRICANT
10, Faubourg Montmartre BIB 1C
dans la cour I A If Id
Succursale : 162, Avenue Malakoff - Porte Maillot
andant
des
jistilites
0 0 o
le Tarif
Les Dents pour tous
2, Boulevard Beaumarchais (place de la Bastille)
Telephone : Roquette 48-62
Speciality
D’APPAREILSi
DINTAIRES 1
SOIHS SELABOUCaJ
BRID&E WORK |




IMPERMEABLE^
W
46, 48, Rue Turbigo (Metro, Arts-et-Metiers)
Ouvert le Dimanche
PRO GRAMME (Suite)
Les deux derniferes Semaines k Paris
11. The Two TOMBOYS, le Rire force
12. A. TJ C - E 2
dans ion pros succes de fou riie
SATURNIN EST EN PERME
Sketch Comique de Charles BARBAT
LUCY LUDIER
Madame I'arigoul
RABLET MARGY SAUVAL
Farigoul Annette Durondal
|gH||9 Bga m ACHETE AU
nAXIrIA J&jwx ft
HAXI HA Jbitujmted
if AX- A sbjdbsrt «
IIAXINA u
TmMM:\RU£TMBOI/T>r. '[ta V e< H


REVE INCONNU
PARPtI'M QlPflfllT
Li nil, fmwmEm
48, Uue Claude-Vellefaux, 48
DERNIEHE NOUVEA TE :
MILITARY CROSS, HEROS’ PERFUME
PROGRAM ME (Suite)
14. CINEMA, oActualites
La Direction ne repond pas des ,hangements qut peuvent
etr • apportes a I’ordre et a l J ensemble du spectacle.
£’§rchestre est sous la girection de gt, §§§££&§s
Piano de la fflaison A. BORD, 14 bis, Boulevard Polssonnlere, Paris
Tousles Artistes hommes, et Strangers, faisant
partie du present Programme, ont satisfait h leurs obligations
militaires
TELEPHONE 145-42
HARRY ASH
112, Boulevard Hauumann, Paris
ENGLISH & AMERICAN TAILOR
BRITISH I AMERICAN PHARMACY
3, Rue Scribe - PARIS
Telephone : CKIVTRAL 40-43
Corresponding Houses
SAVORY & MOORE
143, New Street Bond Street, London


LA MARQUE FRANQAISE
EN VENTE CHEZ LES SONS HORLOGERS
IES PLUS IKUES rERLES iIIITEES
i U, IjHAUSSfiE D'ANTIN


Leplus grand choix
sr
ROCHET,
21, Avenue de la Rtipublique
CHAPELKER
CANNES
PARAPLUIES
PARIS
CASQUETTES
pour SPORTS
VETEMEHTS EN TOILE HUILEE
lagers et extra-souples
absolument imperm^ablss
POUR LA PUBLICITE DANS LE PROGRAMME DE L’ALHAMBRA
ET DANS TOUS LES THEATRES
ET MUSIC HALLS DE PARIS
S’ADRESSER A
PUIiLICITA H
H. DAUVIN- Directeur
I, RUE DE HIAUBEUGE, PARIS TGlSphone : CEATRAL 20-02
c4ffiches - Affichage - Journaux
et toutes les formes de la ‘Publicite
PMOS A. BORD
!4 bis, Bcu'evard Poissonni^re
Grand choix
de
PIANOS
Neufs et d’Occasion
DE PAIEMENT


esf le
Meilleur des Dejeune r
DU MATIN
i
Ageuce fufciicitas, H. Dauvm Birecleur
i Rue do Maubtuge, Paris - Tej ■ Central 20-02
Rapide, 8, Rue Brouot
’ Gutenberg 55-4?


The Palladium
Managing Director —
CHARLES GULLIVER.




THE PALLADIUM
ARGYLL STREET. OXFORD CIRCUS, W- 1.
Adjoining Oxford Circus Tube Stations, Baker Street and Waterloo, and the Central London Rys.
PROPRIETORS ...... THE CAPITAL SYNDICATE, LTD.
Managing Director and Licensee - - Mr. CHARLES GULLIVER
Chief of Stall - Mr. HARRY MASTERS.
Manager - - - - Mr. C. FOSTER-MARNER.
GRAND YARIETY PROGRAMME.
3 Performances Daily at 2.30 p.m., 6 p.m. & 8.20 pm.
Box Office Open Daily 10 to 10. Seats may be booked
by Post, Telegram or Telephone, or at the usual agents.
'Phone: 1004-6-6-7 GERRARD. Telegrams: PALLADIUM WESDO. LONDON.
THE RIGHT OF ADMISSION IS RESERVED.
order and eompontion of thii Programme it subject to alteration at ttit Management’s ditcretie »,
PROGRAMME,
Week commencing Monday, Sept. 9th, 1918
1. OVERTURE.
March. “ Preciosa.” Weber.
(Musical Director, Horace Sheldon).
2. HARRY THORNTON and PHYLLIS
DELIA, refined entertainers.
3. WHIT CUNLIFFE, the singer of some of
Variety’s greatest song successes.
PRICES OF ADMISSION.
OF ENTER TAINMENT TAX).
Boxes .... £1 Is.. 15/- & 10/8
A few Special Imperial Fauleuils - - - - 7/6
imperial Fauteuhs - - - - - 5/-
Fauteuifs - - - - - 37-
Imperial Grand Circle (all bookable in advance, no booking fee) 3/-
Grand Circle - - ■ - - 2/-
Stalls - (all bookable in advance, id. extra) - S/6
Circle - (bookable in advance, 3d. extra) - - \/~


Zilt Rave
10,000
beautiful
RINGS
for you to
seUct from
5 Specially Selected.
White Diamonds. 18 ct
6.10.0
3 Diamonds mNecq
Design.. IS ct Gold
£ 7. 15.0.
Diamond Ouster Rina
ofDShouyStones IBct
Jf 5.8.0
2 Pure White Diamonds
tf mw Sapphire IS ct Geld .
£8.8.0
I rJFPtWHWii^I
i yi fanufkcturing fJemdkrsß
ntJ *Jl
i jii>iiiini_.mjTju ir imi im<W
4. BEATIE and BABS present Frivolous
Fragments.
5. WILKIE BARD, in his latest Comedy
creations.
6. INTERMISSION,
Entracte. “ Silver Clouds.” Haydn Wood.
7. THE JANSON SISTERS, Dancers.
I i *rr.— — — a— —
ST ( ...act/'.
IS “THE BEST ’OLE.”
LUNCHEONS, TEAS, DINNERS,
OYSTERS, LOBSTERS AND FISH.


SBBHBWWBK
4*V
THamond Tvterchants, £gj|
lliM
mgSQQBj
5 Pune White Lustrous
Diamonds in Half Hoop
<^naio.o
Handsome Double Ouster Ruby
Crossover Ring. 18 a
XIOiOO.
Handsome Diamond and
Sapphire Cluster Ring
<^12.12.0
Cross-over Ring cf Choice
Diamonds 6’SapphLnr ifia
tile. will
s^ndoun
RIN.G
BOOK
i • FREE •
on request
8. MAIDIE SCOTT, just a Comedienne.
9. NEIL KENYON, in Scottish character
studies.
10. THE TWO BOBS (Bob Adams and Bob
Alden), singers of popular songs and
character studies.
MAUD GIBSON’S ACADEMY
music, Singing, elocution and Dancing,
30, West Kensington Gardens. W. 14.
TeleDhone: Principal: MAUD GIBSON,
Hammersmith' 535 Assisted by H. L. SPARKSMAN, A.GS.M.
Classical Dancing', Grace Culture, Rythmic Exercises, Ball-room Dancing, &c.,
MAUD GIBSON. Assisted by W. Valentine.
Maitresse de Ballet PEGGY WIN GROVE.
Violin, Piano, Ear Training, Accompanying, Theory, and Harmony
HILDA L. SPARKSMAN, A.G.S.M.
Assisted by Grace Wood, L.R.A.M.; Enid Hermes, L.R.A.M. ; Nelly Davey,
and Ada Leach.
Singing and Elocution .. .. .. •• MAY VINCENT, A.R.C.M.
Dramatic Class .. .. .. • • • • • • MARION MC CARTH Y.
English Governess .. .. .. • • • • • • •■T* "f • J
French Class .. .. .. •• •• •• Mdlle. E. CHAPMAN.
Students taken for the Stage. Ballets arranged and taught lor the Stage
|amateur and professional).
Special Course after 6 p.m. for War Workers at an inclusive fee.
For particulars apply to the Secretary,
MAUD GIBSON’S ACADEMY, 30, West Kensington Gardens, W. 14-


THE OXFORD STREET
Studios AND Art Galleries
ARB NOW OPFJN.
Introducing NATURAL COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHY
AT REMARKABLE LOW PRICES. ~
155 AND 157. OXFORD STREET.
11. THE YAMAGATA JAPANESE TROUPE
of Acrobats.
12 RUFFELLS BIOSCOPE.
13 GOD SAVE THE KING.
NEXT WEEK, MONDAY, SEPT. 16.
The SIR THOMAS BEBCHAM OPERA BALLET
and CHORUS (70 Performers).
WILKIE BARD. MAX DAREWSKI.
MAIDIE SCOTT. WHIT CUNLIFFE.
VERNON WATSON. TALBOT O FARRELL.
SPESSELL BROS, and MACK.
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS ©f the LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL
(a) The public may leave at the end of the performance by all exits and entrance doors
sad such doors must at that time be open. (b) All gangways, passages and stairways must
fee kept entirely free from chairs or any other obstruction. (c) Persons must not be permitted to
ftUnd or tit la any of the intersecting gangways, and if standing be permitted in the gang we vs at
the sides and rear of the seating, sufficient space must be left for persons to pass easily to and fra
{d) The safety curtain must be lowered about the middle of the performance so as to ensure
Its being in proper working order. >
Printed by W. Teouitob, 10, Goagheq., Fleet~»t., E.C. (Tel. 5661 Central 1




q
qj* 11
f The Finest
WRIST BAG
for
ONE GUINEA
on the Market.
REMARKABLE
VALUE.
Hard
MOR'
fit
PURSE,
WRITING
2
Pos* 1
Colours: —N
Brown am
THE LATEST COME IN ATI'
CIGARETTE and NOTE
Loose Fold for Treasury Noti
Separate Pockets for Cheque F
Cards and Stamps.
The MOST PRACTICAL Case v |
Real Pigskin ... ... 21
Fine Seal ... 3ft
Brown
V ELVET
CALF
MANICURE
Roll.
Lined
MOIRE SILK.
EBO
an
SHEFF
STEI
FITTII
Foldii
Nail Polii
"1
Price .••I
268-270 OXFORD STREET, 1
187 REGENT STREET, V, 1.
177-178 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, W.l. 67 PICCADILLY, j
81-84 Leadenhall Street, LONDON, E.Cj


CRSlfiO DE PARIS
CHAPEAU ET COIFFURE DE LEWIS
GABY DESLYS
PROGRfImmH OppICIEI>
O PR. 75


CASINO DE PARIS
BANANIA
DEJEUNERdu MATIN
ALIMENT COMPLET.
DEUCES DES PETITS OL-.DES GRANDS-
wmmummmmammmmammmammm
REGIME MERVEILLEUX
POUR LEA
ESTOMACS DELI CATS
ESTOMACS FATIGUES
ESTOMACS DELABRES
RECONSTITUANT SAMS EGAL
Enfants
Jeunes Filles
Convalescents
Viei llards
niiiiiiminiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHMiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiitiiimifn
CREMES ET ENTREMETS SAVOUREUX
AVEC SES PUISSANTES
9UALITES NUTRITIVES
BANANIA
A LE GOUT DU MEILLEUR CACAO
ENVOI CRATUIT
v D'UNE BOITE ECHAMTILLON.
ENVENTE PARTOUT
LA BOITE POUR 20 DEJEU-IERS
COURSE VO !E (SEINE)
TneopHiue
R.O g e: ri_


BOUCOT
PAULETTE DARTOIS
CHRISTIANE


ROSE AMY
MARGUERITE LOUVAIN
VANNA


LAISSE LES TOMBER!
CASINO DE PARIS
ML Leon VOLTERRA presente
Revue en 2 Actes et 50 Tableaux
de MM. GEORGES ARNOULD & JACQUES-CHARLES
en collaboration avec M. JACQUES BOUSQUET
Mise en Scene par JACQUES-CHARLES
PREMIER TABLEAU
LA MAIRIE DES NATIONS
de Carrg & Lefol d’apres la maquette
de Canabate
Costumes de Pascaud de.-sinds par Canabate
Les Suisses
Miles Altea Miles Grange
Anthonnucy Leroy
Cottin Pepe Lorette
Dargyl Lorinette
Darsac Nadhia
Delangre Daronville
Dorval Delinval
Ginette Symiane
Le Maire MM. PRE fils
Le Reporter . A. RHEIMS
DEUXIEME TABLEAU
LE ROI DU PINARD
Les Fiancees
Miss Dancie Miss Kendrick
Degrey Hilton
Grey Philips j
Hawkins Sartell
Les Promis
Miss Carlisle Miss Pinner
E. Holland Stephens
Lovet Sylvester
O’Neil Warwick
M. Troquet. . M. GAYTO
Le Valet Mile Maury
TROISIEME TABLEAU
LES DIARIES
La Mariee .... Mile DE RYEUX
Les Demoiselles d’Honneur
Miles Bonrfe Miles Monti
Ferry Altiery
Carmen Vallon
Fischer Zellini
Les Garmons d’Honneur
Miles Cady Miles Madine
Defoing Noble
Dekerval Noelline
Mado Stephens
Le Marie ..... M. MAGNARD
QUATRIEME TABLEAU
LA VIE CHERRE... UN HU
La Buraliste.. Miles LOUVAIN
La Cliente .... ESSLY
Le Bottier .... M. P. FAIVRE
La Commere . Mile DE RYEUX
Le Compere .. M. MAGNARD
CINQUIEME TABLEAU
MADAME X
Ddcor de Dumaine - Robe de Lucile
La Commere . Mile DE RYEUX
Le Reporter .. M. A. RHEIMS
La Perruche
M lle ROSE AMY
: SIXIEME TABLEAU
j ...ET PLUS C’EST LA MEME CHOSE!...
! Costumes ,de Pascaud, dessimSs par Gesmar
! (Ddcors de Canu
|| La Recitante., Mlle VANNA


HARRY PILCER
BLANCHE RITIER
DE RYEUX


CASINO DE PARIS
SEPTIEME TABLEAU
LE PROMENOIR 0 ALEXANDRIE
Mousarion.... Miles BARNY
Thyphera BELCOUR
Seso PIERNY
Bacchis CASSARY
Selene DELSACCO
Rhodis DILZAC
Theano MONTANDON
Myrto STELLYS
La Proxenete . CARLITTA
L’Ephebe .... LHERY
Garcon de cafe CHARLETTE
La Fleuriste.. JEHANNE
M 6 de prog mes .. MONE-HETT E
M e d’eventails. VELDA
M e de bonbons VUILLERMOZ
HUITIEME TABLEAU
LA FRESQUE
NEUVIEME TABLEAU
APHRODITE
Chrysis
Mile PRETTY myrtill
Danse rdglee par Mlle Beauvais
DIXIEME TABLEAU
UNE ARRIVEE SENSATIQHNELLE
M lle Gaby DESLYS
I ,es officiers anglais
Miss Sartell Miss E. Holland
Anderson Moony
Bevil O’Neil
Carlisle Parry
Dancie Philips
Degrey Pinner
Grey Smith
Hawkins Stephens
Lovet Sylvester
Warwick
ONZIEME TABLEAU
LE NOUVEAU VENU
M. Harry PILCER
DOUZIEME TABLEAU
ALLO! NECOUPEZ PAS !
Les Abonnees
Miss Amor Miss M. Crutchley
Cullin Milton
M. Harry PILCER
TREIZIEMEfITABLEAU
LA COMMUNICATION EST ETABLIE
Le Jardin - Ddcor de Canu
M Ue Gaby DESLYS
M. Harry PILCER
QPATORZIEME TABLEAU
L’HOTEL DES VENTES
Decor de Boymond et Duvernet
Robes de Lucile
La Duchesse
M lle ROSE AMY
LaComtesse.. VANNA
La Marquise.. CASSARY
La Baronne... MARJAC
La pt e fe™ 0 nue BARNY
Shylock MM. PRE Fils
Le Com" pris r MAGNARD
Le Chauffeur
M. BOUCOT
QUINZIEME TABLEAU
LAISSE LES TOMBER!
M. MAGNARD
M. BOUCOT
SEIZIEME TABLEAU
IVI lle FLORE, IYIARCHANDE DE FRIVOLITES
Robe de Lucile
BLANCHE RITIER
Le Nenuphar . Miles LOUVAIN
Le Lys. DILZAC
Le Geranium . Gecile CARREY
La Rose STELLYS
L’Orchidee MAC-MAHON
La Paquerette SMITH
La Chrysantheme O. HOLLAND
La Boule de Neige DORVAL
L’CEillet PIERNY
Le Bouion d’Or MARJAC
La Violette ... CHRISTIANE
La Pensee.... VUILLERMOZ
La Tulipe BOSKA
Le Pavot DESCHAMPS
Le Cerisier ... ESSLY
LePommier.. LHERY
Le Pecher MONT AND ON
LES FLEURS MERVEILLEUSES
Robes de Tollman
Lafleur d’amo' Miles SONIA
La fleur deFrance CASSARY
Lafleurdumal DORGYL
La fleur dusouv r DARTOIS
Lafleur d’argent VANNA
La fleur d’or'.. . DELSACCO


Demandez partout
Veuve PAUL BUR & Cie
Edouard AUBE # REIMS
DEMI-SEC - PAVILLON AMERICAIN - BRUT 1906
Le demister an CASINO DE PARIS
Dans tous lea Caf49
CLACQUESIN
veritable Goudron hygienique


CASINO DE PARIS
DIX-SEPTIEME TARLEAU
LES SALONS DE FLORE
L’Arpete
M LLE ROSE AMY
DIX-HUITIEME TABLEAU
LA CHUTE DES FLEURS
Cost jmes de Pascaud dessinds par Canabate
UIX-NEUVIEME TABLEAU
CE QUE LON FAIT AVEC DES FLEURS
TOBTIiME TABLEAP
STARS AND STRIPES
M lle Gaby DESLYS
M. Harry PILCER
VINGT-UWlfelgE TABLEAP
LE SHERBO AMERICAN BAND
Piano de la Maison Gaveau
VINGT-DEUXIEME TABLEAU
LES FLEURS GLORIEUSES
Miles Altieri Miles Dekerval
d Ange Dilzac
d’Armour Dismay
Bonafte Dorange
Carmen Ginette
Ferry Grange
Ficher Guillon
Kett Leroy
Monti Lorinette
Vallon Madine
Zellini Mado
Altea Mannley
Anthonnucy Mercedes
d’Arsac Mone-Hette
Avril Nadia
Barny Noelline
Cady Noble
Charlette D’Or
Cottin Pepe Lorette
Courteille Page
Defoing Stephens
Delangre Stellys
Delareux Tillanne
VINGT-TRQISIEME TABLEAU
LES FLEURS DE LA VIGTQIRE
Miss Amor Miss Lebert
Aude Lovet
Anderson Mac-Mahon
Bevil Milton
Carlisle Moony
J. Chrichton O’Neil
M. Crichton Parry
Crutchley Philips
Cullin Pinner
Dancie Ray
Degrey Sartell
Grey Smith
Hawkins Stephens
E. Holland Stewart
O. Holland Sylvester
Kendrick Verona
King Warwick
EHTR’fICTE
MURRAY PILCER'S
AMERICAN SHERBO BAND
PIANO DE LA MAI SON GAVEAU
VINBT-QPATRIfeME TABLEAU
ILS NOUS ONT LAISSE TOMBED!
La Commere . Mile CHRISTIANE
Le Compere.. M. GAYTO
VINGT-CINQPIEME TABLEAU
SHOOTING STARS DANCE
Manteaux de Pascaud dessines par Gesmar
Miss Carlisle Miss O’Neil
Degrey Parry
Grey Philips
Hawkins Pinner
E. Holland Ray
Kendrick Stephens
Lovet Sylvester
B. Moony Warwick


set)dez pas
J|ijoa£
|*| SANS CONSULTER P»
GesselefF
20 - Rue Daunou - 20
T6l6phone GUTENBERG 53-92
Q U I
A PUFTF PLUS CHER
Auilllllj DE PARIS
DO NOT SKLL.
YOUR JEVELS
WITHOUT INTERWIEWING
GESSELEFF
20, RUE DAUNOU, 20 - Tel.: Gutenberg 53-92
WHO WILL
Bw « w THEM AND PAYS YOU MORE
Y FOR THEM THAN ANYONE
V/ A ELSE IN PARIS


CASINO DE PARIS
VINGT-SIXIEME TABLEAU
LINTOXINEMATOQUEE
d’aprbs le “ DREAM ” c. et a Londres
par
Mile GABY DESLYS
de Rottenstein et Dumaine
d’aprbs la maqu ttede Marc-Henry, de Londres
Ameublement des Galeries Lafayette
Suzette
M lle Gaby DESLYS
Jane Mile MONE-HETTE
Le Japonuis... MM. A. RHEIMS
Judex Pre fils
L’Agent MAREUF
VINGT-SEPTIEME TABLEAU
LA NIARRAINE DE LAUXI
Ddcor de Canu
Costumes de Pascaud par Canabate
Madelon
M LLE ROSE AMY
Robe de Jenny
Le Compare.. M. GAYTO
La Commere . Mile CHRISTIANE
VINQT-HUITIEME TABLEAU
LES FANFANS LA TULIPE
Miles Avril Miles Darry
Courteille Grange
Defoing Lorinette
Delangre D’Or
VINGT-NEUVIEME TABLEAU
LES MADELONS DU TEMPS JADIS
Miles Altiery Miles Fischer
Carmen Vallon
TRENTIEME TABLEAU!
LES TAPINS DE VALIWY
Miles Charlotte Miles Madine
Delareux Mado
Dekerval Mannley
Dismay Noble I
TRENTE-PNIEME TABLEAU
LES MADELONS DE 92
Miles Bonafe Miles Monti
Ferry Zellini
TRENTE-DEUXIEME TABLEAU
LA MADELON D’AUJOURD HUI
TBENTE-TROISIEME TABLEAU
LA RELEVE
Ombres par MM. A. N6vil
& Henri Col
d’apnfs la maquettede M. Henri Dangon
TRENTE-QUATRIEME TABLEAU
LE PARAVENT CHINOIS
de Canu
Costumes de Pascaud dessines par Gesmar
La Recitante.. Mile Vanna
Le Mandarin.. M. E. K. Ray
Le Pecheur... Miles CHARLETTE
LeMusicien.. NOELLINE
Chinois DISMAY
Ghinoise TILLANNE
TRENTE-CINQUIEME TABLEAU
LA CHMIItRE
Mile PRETTY MYRTILL
Danse par Mile Beauvais
TRENTE-SIXIEME TABLEAU
CHINESE EVOCATION
M. Harry PILCER
LES 48 BEAUTIES GIRLS
Et toute la Troupe


| Ma
t /name
A IaAVENWE.
h\ BtsTERNfcS
I PARIS
S£S\MffMM&
s& Kim
GLVCODONT
Li Mbuxbur
BIS BUfIFIIC'IS
Ah! jolies femmes ! prenez done
Four vos belles quenottes, dont
Nous raffolons, du Glycodont !...
L’Email brillant, dont vous fit don
Venus, maman de Cupidon,
En sera si blanc, que, du Don
A la Tamise, de London,
Le lait, le lys. et l'amidon
Paraitront noirs ou corindon !
Et que ? du jeune au celadon,
Tous!... de tout, faisant abandon,
Dans I’attitude du Pardon,
Adoreront vos bouches, dont
Le Grand Pretre est le Glycodont !...
PURSY
t Septembre 1917.
En vente dans les Grands Magasins et dans toutes bonnes maisons
Envoi franco du lube moyen comre 1 fr. 25 et du tube grand modele
contre 1 fr. 75 en timbres-poste adresses aux Laboratoires du GLYCODONT,
49, Rue d’Enghien, Paris.


CASINO BE PARIS
TRENTE-SEPTIEME TABLEAU
LA FOLLE NUIT DE THEODORE
Robes et Manteaux du soir de Tollmann
Costumes d’hommes de Signol’s
LA PLACE EDOUARD VII
Decors de Boymond et Duvernet
Le Kabyle. -.. MM. GAYTO
L’Agent PRE Fils
Theodore
M. BOUCOT
Spectatrices... Miles LOUVAIN
JEHANE
ESSLY
BOSKA
Spectateurs... MM. E. K. RAY
GAYTO
POLJEAN
Miles DESCHAMPS Miss J. CRICHTON
SONIA E. HOLLAND
Miss M. CRICHTON MAC-MAHON
TRENTE-HUITIEME TABLEAU
LE THEATRE EDOUARD VII
Robes et Manteaux du soir de Tollmann
L’Ouvreuse ... Mile P tte DARTOIS
Theodore
M. BOUCOT
Miles LOUVAIN Miss J. CRICHTON
JEHANE M. CRICHTON
ESSLY Miss HOLLAND
BOSKA MAC-MAHON
DESCHAMPS MM. E. K. RAY
SONIA POLJEAN
L’Agent M. PRE Fils -
MiIesANTHONNUCY Miles DEKERVAL
DELANO RE NO EL LINE
Dll .ZAC RAC HEM
TRENTE-NEUVIEME TABLEAU
THE COLD WATER RAG
Decor de Canu et Marc-Henry
Costumes de Pascaud dessinespar Gesmar
M. Harry PILCER
QUARANTIEME TABLEAU
ALLO! V LA DES CLIENTS
QUARANTE-UNIEME TABLEAU
BATONS DE CHAISES
Miss Bevil Lovet
Carlisle Miss Mac-Mahon
Crutchley Moony
Degrey Parry
Grey Philips
Hawkins Pinner
E. Holland Ray
Kendrick Sartell
King Stephens
QUARANTE-DEUXIEME TABLEAU
VOICI GABY
M lle Gaby DESLYS
Miss Amor Miss O. Holland
Aude Lebert
Anderson Milton
J. Ciichton O’Neil
M. Crichton Smith
Cullin Sylvester
Dancie Stewart
Hammond Warwick
QUARANTE-TROISIEME TABLEAU
LES AMIES DE GABY
Robes de Tollmann
Coiffures de Lewis
Miles P. D ARTOIS Miles DORGYL
VANNA CASSARI
ESSLY MONTANDON
LHERY BOSKA
DELSACCO DESCHAMPS
JEHANE SONIA
JEHO
QUARANTE-QUATRIEME TABLEAU
L’HEURE DU METRO
QUARAWTE-CINQUIEME IABLEAP
NOUS LAISSEZ PAS TOMBER!
paries 48 BEAUTIES GIRLS
Et toufe la Troupe


PRETTY MYRTHIL
MAGNARD


CASINO OE PARIS
LE COMMERCE DE LA PARFUMERIE
EST UN COMMERCE D£GUISE
lie plaeon, le Coffret, I’Etiquette et le Ruban
Coutent plus cher que le Parfum
E2t ga ne vaut pas plus!...
Voui. . . ma chfcre! on y fait las mains pour quinze sous. . . dans un Salon
ipatant. Si tu voyais sa!
32 PLACE SAINT-QEORGES
Partout dans les endroits chics ; Giro, Ghatham, 4 La P aix,
Majestic, Edouard YII d’Angleterrh, partout on n’entend plus
parler que de “ SALOME
Pourquoi?
Parce que l’ony vend de la Parfumerie au detail, on peut apportei
an flacon vide et, apres I’avoir tar£ sur une balance de precision,
on l’emplit du parfum choisi; soit du “ Quelques Fleurs ”, di
“ Jicky ”, du “ Chypre ”, de “ L’Apres I’Ondee ” ; on y trouvf
m 6me des parfums a bruler, d’extraordinaires parfums k cigarette:
et toutes les derni£res creations connues des plus grands parfu-
meurs : le Parfum d’Avril de Cartier, l’CEillet Noir et Nuits
d’Orient, Les Desenchantees (parfum de Polaire), qui content
un prix fou avec le flacon, et \k tout s’y vend au poids, sans coflret,
sans sans Etiquette, sans ruban; on en vend 10 grammes,
20 grammes, on en achate ce qu’on veut.
II y a des poudres mauves pour les blondes;
Ocrdes pour les brunes.
La fameuse Creme Dermil qui vient de toute
l’Amdrique cette cr£me qui dispense de Temploi de la poudre
il y a tout ce qu’une peut demander.
Un tuyau ! il ne faut pas y aller de 5 a 6 : parce qu’il n’y a pas
moyen de se faire servir.
T6l6phon© : TRUOAINE 54-24


CASINO BE PARIS
BE.
RIG AU D
EARFUMEUR
k l€, R.UE DE LARADC A
PARI S J
KAPIDE, 8, Hue D.rouot


IDA RE'NITA
The Famous . . . .
SUTCLIFFE FAMILY
ipccip CT A p
■ it*K_ jr * A iCJ JL aJL Whistling Soloist.
THE CANNY WEE SCOT. 1 Sailing for S. Africa Dec. 23.
RETTA HALKET
aSSIE
CAVE
I “ That’s Me.”
E Interesting Comedienne and
Expert Dancer. “An Artiste
in every sense of the word.”
Wisfas All Friends an Enjoyable
Xmas and a Happy New Year.
P.A., 10. St. Thomas Square. Mare Street,
London, N.E.
Piper."
Scotch Comedienne
. and .
Eccentric Dancer.
ROSA HAMEL
BERT LA BLANC AND WINNIE KNIGHT. WHO WERE MARRIED
ON MAY 27.
The DUGARDES
INTRODUCING
MURIEL, the child with the Wonderful Voice.
MADGE - - the Miniature PAVLOVA.
MARIE ■ ■ the Brilliant Young Pianiste.
THE
MONZO
TRIO .


Les VIDEOS
Wonders
on Wheels
including
LEONI
Wish
Proprietors, Managers,
Agents and Friends
A Merry Xmas
. . and a . .
Most Prosperous
New Year.
Time rolls on, and Les VIDEOS
are still rolling.
P. A.: c o The Performer.
LEONI VIDEO.
THE DAUNTON-SHAW TROUPE OF CYCLISTS.
Now starring on the Rickards circuit.
GINO,
Britain’s Premier Boy Instrumentalist
(IS years old November 21st, l!tl(i),
Presenting a REFINED MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT,
Featuring Violin, Cornet, Saxophones, Clarionets, B Flat Trumpet, Post Horn,
Bach Trumpet, Tenor Horn, Oboe, Flute, English Concertinas. &c.
MISS
ZELLA
VONDI
Starring with
New Production.
May 21, Hippo.,
Birmingham.
VACANT
MONDAY NEXT.
JACK KELLINO
9 • • ir> fi • • •
MUSICAL NOVELTY, ,
LITTLE IRENE
(Daughter of W. B. RABY).
SAMMY SHIELDS
SCOTTISH COMEDIAN.
Photo]
[Hana Stuios.
Dainty Child Vocalist
... A SINGER . . .
WITH A WONDERFUL VOICE.
Photo]
[Hana Studios.
Photo]
[Hana.


STANLEY W. WATHON, Manager.
DENISE EDNA W. WATHON.
SISTERS
SPRIGHTLY
RENE RALPH
Leslie
Elliott
CHAS. KASRAC
"AN ACT OF PERFECTION.”
LOIE CONN
Britain’s Premier Female Impersonator,
With a Cornet-Trumpet.
FROM THE
LONDON COLISEUM,
AND
ALHAMBRA,
Leicester Square, W.
BOOKINGS INCLUDE
Mofs Tour until 1919
Stoll Tour 1917 (Return)
Bostock Tour, etc.
The following describes the Act :
“ Exeter Gazette. ”
“ Loie Conn provided quite
a dramatic surprise A lady
of charming attire and a wealth
of dark hair appears and plays
on the cornet-trumpet with a
dexterous mastery which de-
lights the audience. ‘She’
bows her acknowledgment and
the audience burst into an
encore not to be refused. Three
more select ons are given, and
again with grac< ful bows the
‘ lady * acknowledges the re-
ception. The audience are still
regarding her as a fascinating
lady cornet-player—surely the
most skilful lady player of the
cornet-trumpet on the vaude-
ville stage, when ‘ she ’ doffs
the wealth of dark hair, and
Loie Conn, close cropped by
his barber, stands revealed a
mere,man. But a fine instru-
mentalist, one must concede,
despite the irresistible ‘ have ’
he imposes on everyone. This
act is rightly described ‘An
Act of Perfection.' ”
o*o#o*o*
COMS. RE THE
“Greatest of all
Musical Novelties ”
To Permanent Address—
-29, Harrogate Road, Darnall,
Sheffield, or First-class Agents,
AND THE NAME IS
LOIE CONN
Season's Greetings ,
LILIAN
ERROL
Contralto Comedienne.
Panto. —
THEATRE ROYAL, DUBLIN.
Perm. Add.—
82, GROVE RD., VICTORIA PARK,
LONDON, E.
R. GUY.
REEVE
Author of Revues,
Sketches. Songs, &c
75, Urmston Lane
Stretford, Man-
chester.
Tel. : Urmston 125.
THE REAL
McKAYS
ON TOUR-
Francis’ Agency*
Photo Relph & Co., Preston.]
BOBBIE AND BEATIE


THE REAL
McKAYS
PATTI LOFTUS,
Versatile Comdienne and Dancer.
THE CARON TROUPE
LADY GYMNASTS.
The 2 WANDAS
Marvellous Pedestal Equilibrists.
MADAME ANGOT'S CERAMIC NYMPHS
•• You N...f Kiu M. Now."—Published Dr Francis Ik Dm.
VIOLET CARMEN
And ALF. J. LAWRANCE
Featuring their own Original Maori Scena.
“•COME DOWN THE WANGANUI.*
As performed by them for Si years in Australia and New Zealand
NORMAN
FIELD
An act of distinction,
FROCKS, FRILLS & MUSIC.
NOVEL
/
/
i 2 KORTINIS
COENENS
Indian Equi-
librist Act.
May & Ivy Royal
I ,N AN ARTISTIC STUDY of
1 BOY & GIRL DUETS
Vide Press
“ The Royals are worthy
of a West hnd Musical
Comedy/*
Hippo., Putney
“Ivy Royal is the most
unaffected and immacu-
late male we have seen.
May Royal s comic little
mannerisms and sly
asides, put us much in
mind of our famous
Marie Lloyd.
MANEK-
SHAH
Loyal India’s Foremost
Entertainer.


DOROTHY B.
LLOYD.
The Dainty Soubr tte.
Charlie Payne
and his Living Wonder in
STAUNCH PALS,
The Latest & Cleverest in Canine Acts.
EVENING DRESS.
(Discharged from Royal Horse Artillery).
SARA ROSEBURY,
The Lancashire Lassie in Songs and Stones.
GREAT
GEORGE FORMBY
PIERCE and
n/NOT XTSWY
IXI . Y j\l
• •
In a whirl of
u , , „ or
meioay. . .
To P te r * and ,he
We are the Originals of
our Name and Show.
Please do not confound
us with acts of similar
title. A Riotous Suc-
cess Everywhere.
Bus, Rep., the Variety Expert, Mr. Geo. Foster.
Maximilian
the Great
GAUMUND
BROTHERS
Danish Comedy Acrobats
HUNBERIA WU-CHAIG
TROUPE.
THE ORIGINAL AND FIRST CHINESE TROUPE.
Elaborate New Costumes direct from China. Each member of the Troupe is an ardste
dexterous and supple. In addit on to hand and head balancing feats, they display trident
swinging, manipulating bowls of water at either end of a cord as if the contrivance were
gymnastic bars. High somersaults with the arms of the performers clasping as much domestic
crockery as they can hold, all being achievements of surpassing brilliance.
CAMPBELL I
| IS A FUNNY CREATURE, WITH HIS BUMPS HE
I MAKES A FEATURE, AND HIS MOST REDEEMING
| FEATURE IS —A CAMPBELL CAN GO SEVEN
I DAYS WITHOUT A DRINK. BUT WHO
I THE H WANTS TO BE A CAMEL ?
| g.;- Q i
fl IRerrp Christmas and fiappp
Rcip year to Jill friends.
From
“Doc” 1
CAMPBELL
On and after MARCH sth
THE CAMPBELL & BAISDEN ACT
| WILL IN FUTURE BE KNOWN AS
[Photo, Dobson,
Liverpool.]
The Campbells
THE KING OF ALL COMEDY CYCLE ACTS.
Pa P L P ! rSOnS Presents his P °P Phamily
Seven Lucky Little
Lancashire Lasses.
The Girls with the Golden
Clogs and Silvery Voices.
Still the only Seven Real Sisters in the profession, and never had a week out of engagement for over Six years.
Playing 10 Principal Parts in Pantomime. Demon, Fairy, Principal Boy Girl, 2nd Boy and Girl, Dame, Baron and Babes
With the GREAT DANBYS as Ruffians.


Photo
Geo. Pendry, Nottingham.
. / Hap/>\ Xmas and a Brighter
Xnv ) ear to all Friends.
DUNCAN &
GODFREY
LONDON’S FAVOURITE
COCKNEY COUPLE
Presenting their 1916 Sensation
A Soldier, a Girl and
a Jolly Jack Tar.”
ARCHIE MANTLE’S 6 TEENS 6
Photo
Go. Pendry, Nottingham.
McLEAN J*«
• - Dainty - - TWINS
Scotch Lassies * * Y
Wishing a ' oor Friends a Merry Xmas
and a Cuid Nett’ Year.
Dec. 25th : HIPP., HAMILTON. Jan. l.t : PAVILION. AYR.
Many thanks to the following Managers and Agents for Contracts
this year :-!• H. HENSCHEL. Esq.. N. KENYON. J C.
WHITEMAN. NAT DAY. Esq. CORDON'S AGENCY. London.
Mr. CLARKE. ARGYLE BIRKENHEAD. BEN POPPLKWELL.
L. KENDALL. Mr. MARLER, Grimsby. MAX ERaRD,
Perm. Address: 329, HOPE STREET, GLASGOW.
FOUR CLOVELLY GIRLS
THE QUEENS OF THE CLUBS
ALMA
Le DARE
THE CATCHY CHORUS COMEDIENNE.
PANSIE, MAISIE AND MAX
"The youngest trion on the halls. Are and excellent vocal comedy [?]
Genuine balance on real glass bottles.
VB PRfMTBR, f
3SH&ATKJNAL > /!•
cbwjbalakoh# xTv^*^/
K^KCH
CUBAN,
A simultaneous balance on four
candle-sticks and cbairs.
Please note candle-sticks on top table.


MR. VENTOM SWIFT.
Lilian Beaumont and Co. In Smart
Comedy Sketch, “Sally Mine.” Three
artistes, twenty minutes.
A New 1 1
Discovery ,
SYDNEY KIRBY
The REVUE COMEDIAN pari Excellence.
" Two Florimonds,
Wonderful Dental Gymnasts.
This Week :
CITY VARIETIES. LEEDS (Return!
The FIVE GOLDFLAKES
Miss Edith
Cairn’s presents
In an Up-to-date
Vocal & Dancing Act.
Dec. 9. Pavilion Galashiels, N.B.
Dec. 16. Rink Palace, Paisley.
MISS
HETTY KING
SONIA SEAL
SONIA SEAL
1 THOSE ACROBATIC ECCENTRICS.
The BRADSHAWS™
In Humorous Attitudes. (


The TERBYET TRIO
BELLA. JULES.
introducing
An Original \ ocal, Musical
:: and Dancing Speciality.
WAL. LESBY
Photo] [White, Bradford.
THE POPULAR CHARACTER
PATTER COMEDIAN.
COLONEL RAMACIOTTI.
For many years with the firm of J. C.
Williamson. Ltd., and who six months
ago was appointed Commandant of the
New Month Wales Military Forces.
Block by Huron and Co.
dainty
LEAH
VICTORIA
Comodienn*
•nd Dancer.
ON
TOt’K.
THE BOY WONDER.
The “ MULTUM-IN-PARVO
Entertainer*
LITTLE
STANLEY
RUSSELL
A Comedian, Vocaliat, Muaician.
Vantriloquiit^n^Dance^^
THE DELDEES
(BEORGE and ETHEL).
REFINED VOCAL COMEDY INTERLUDE.
Dec. 18. PAV., ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE.
VACANT. Jan. 8. Feb. 12.
The Marvellous
TOM
WONG
TROUPE
Wonderful Chinese
direct from Peking.
A FEATURE ACT-
FRANCO’S
MIDGETS,
Mirth. Marie
and Dancing.
SENOR
Angel Blanco
The Great Spanish Violin Virtuoso


Photo]
[ Fieldings, Leeds.
HARRY M. ALBERT f
Nicol and Martin
The Celebrated Cycle Riders
DAINTY
DORIS
FRED
LLOYD
COMEDIAN.
GWENNIE
MORGAN
1 TITLE-ROLE
CHAS P HILL 4 1
~ m m - 4 PROkk
l§ . fl SEPVIN© „
A SUMMONS
Age 22. weight 45 lbs., height 3ft. 5ins.
Beautiful in appearance, perfect
physique. In her original Serpentine,
Globe and Wire Walking Act, with a
novelty fit-up, different from all others.
The BRANDONS
(FRED and FREDA.)
Mdlle.
CAMEO
GLEF
QUARTETTE.
Virtuoso Musicians,
Vocalists and
Comedy Entertainers.
COMEDY WHIRLIGIGS,
Yty±>f *
_ <A iilft i nfflpn
& L7 c9->*
IN ** TWISTS AND TWIRLS.”
R’s for the RATIONS,
Raw rubber hogs,’
Whale bones and watch springs.
Real Snakes and frogs.
The Great MICHAELOFF
1 RUSSIAN TRIO
In a characteristic Musical and Vocal
Serna,
VI & VIOLA
* - ■> *r.. ■£ w *
* if* f - „ , % w
Dapper Boy and Dainty Girl.
“LITTLE
MARY.”


EMMELYN WALTER
THE CHARMING
YOUNG SINGER,
In selections from her repertoire ; and m Songs
at the Piano.
A GREAT VOCAL SCENA
that holds the Masses and delights the Classes.
roselLe &
CLIFFORD
, Soprano and Tenor
Operatic Duettists.
ALMA LE DARE
VERSATILE COMEDIENNE
[?]
MISS CASHMORE
HAIDEE WALLACE
LEE & KINGSTON
present
“ flirtology
A Pot Pourri of Absurdities, embracing
SINGING, TALKING, BURLESQUE,
SEMI-ACROBATIC DANCING,
novelty rhyming acrostics,
COMIC & UP-TO-DATE SUBJECTS.
BERYL JOYCE
= can wish you. ' % =
The Season’s Greetings from
FLORENCE
FULCHER
BRILLIANT SOPRANO VOCALIST.
Dec, 18th
EMPIRE,
CHISWICK.
Dec. 25th :
HIPPO.,
EXETER.
WATCH
MISS MABEL
COSTELLO
“THE HUMAN MAGNET.”
Miss Rose Costello, an Australian
girl who has recently returned
from a tour of the East. Her
quaint revue costume is quite up
to Mack Sennett standard, and
was made by a Dutch woman in
Batavia.
One Wirth’s Cirrus men had a
nasty accident at, Greytown. He was
assistiuu to hammer in the stakes for |
the tent, and by some means got his j
liand in the way of a fellow workman’s
liaiin . with the result that one of his
fingers was knocked off, and the-whole
hand very much damaged.
ROXY
LA ROCCA
WIZARD
OF THE
HARP


THE ORIGINAL iii!iiimi;iii!iii!i!iiiiiiimmiii<i
3 Dancing MADCAPS
| [(WINNIE, CISSY, and ALICE). =
Arthur R. Carlton
Will Managers, Agents
and Friends when
writing this Christmas,
please address commu-
nications —
“The Pithy
Pattering
Dame”
to avoid confusion with
Mr. ARTHUR I
CARLTON J
The Charming Quick-
change Dancing Specialist.
STEPHANIE
ANDERSON
and assistant.
Corns.: STONE’S AGENCY
or Direct.
GEORGE WHEELER
An American eccentric tramp on the Fuller Tour.
| George Eva
Hirste & Venton
= present
I “THE TRAMP WHO WAITED.”
E The Funniest and Safest Act in Vaudeville
~ First vacant date April 23rd, betwee
Huddersfield and Southampton. KiSSS
MAY
EDOUIN
WIDOW SWANKEE TWANKAY.
S ISTERS SPRIGHTLY
(MAUD and FLORENCE)
Merry Xmas to all Friends
From
ESA
Japanese
Trio . .
Presenting- a wonderful
Act, including SLIDE
FOR LIFE. Also the
sensational feat of
balancing THREE
LADDERS ON ONE
FOOT ::
Perm. Address
33, Rockingham Street,
UXBRIDGE.
Agent —F. HIGHAM
Walter Weems explains the joys of motoring to Billy Rego Whilst
George Welch proves he is of some horse power.
MAFUZIANG
MANCHU
TROUPE.


CLIFF
BERZAC
s
T
A
R
R
I
N
G
S
E
A
S
O
N’
S
G
R
E
E
T
I
N
G
S
TO ALL
FRIENDS.
MISS..
LILLIE
LANGTRY
GRETA
MACK
(Late Harrison Frewin Opera Co.).
SCOTLAND’S SOPRANO.
SCOTCH
KELLY
Panto,, Theatre
Royal, Leeds.
All corns to
Barney Armstrong.
u One of the best Boys we have seen
during this Season.” ?
People , Jan
1 UTY
ROWLANDS
MISS ..
Mabel Osborn
TOM DREW
STARRING
IN
“REVUE”
A Success EVERYWHERE
Photo
Carl
Cloud,
Manchester.
EILEEN
WAYNE
JUST A
COMEDIENNE.
A FULLER PANTOMIME SCENE.
Roy Rene in white as Mo, with Daisy Merrit in the role of a dame, and Nat
Phillips as Stiffly. Miss Merrit is the wife of Mr. Phillips. All three are at present
appearing in “The Babes in the Wood,” at the Grand Opera House (Sydney). Miss
Merrit is the dame. Mr. Phillips and Mr. Rene are the robbers. The pantomime
was written by Mr. Phillips.
Block by Bacon and Co.


Photo by Underwood & Underwood.
CHAMPION FRANCES COWELLS’ RACING STROKE.
WORLD'S RECORD HOLDER SWIMMING ACROSS THE GOLDEN GATE,
SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.—BEAT TWENTY-FIVE COMPETITORS.
Photo by Central News Photo Service.
“TOMMY ATKINS” WELCOMED THE ARMISTICE.
BACK TO "BLIGHTY,” AND MAKING THE BEST OF HIS TIME
UNDER EXCEPTIONALLY PLEASING CONDITIONS.
Photo by Apeda.
MABEL SMITH, LUCILLE ANDERSON AND CLARE FERRY.
TRIO OF ACCOMPLISHED YOUNG WOMEN WHO CONTRIBUTE ONE OF THE DAINTIEST SWIMMING AND DIVING ACTS EVER
WITNESSED BY VAUDEVILLE AUDIENCES-MISS ANDERSON SPECIALIZES IN HIGH DIVING AND HOLDS SEVERAL RECORDS
Photos (C) by International Film Service.
BATHING SUIT PARADE ON CALIFORNIA BEACHES.
PRETTY POSE OF ONE OF THE FAIR CONTESTANTS IN THE
COSTUME THAT GAINED MUCH ADMIRATION.
CALIFORNIA IS NOTED FOR ITS GIRL SWIMMERS.
MISS CATHERINE FLAHERTY, WHO WON A RACE ACROSS SAN
FRANCISCO BAY AND MADE A NEW RECORD.
CO P ELA N DS
7 he Inimitable
Soprano - Tenor - Z)wo. ,-| liSi^k
THE SINGING SUCCESS
OF THE TIMES.
A Jttrrrn Christmas
aitfr a
Wapptr ih'itT |rar
TO ALL.
The . . 111111111111111111111 l
FAMOUS VOCAL ACT
OF THE YEAR,
produced January, 1916, and
fully booked until June, 1917
(80 weeks solid).
THIS, EMPIRE,
SOUTH BANK,
P.A. 95, Warwick Street,
NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.


Photo by Manuel.
RATHER ATTRACTIVE! DON’T YOU THINK?
PRETTY PARISIAN ARTISTE AND MODEL, AT ATLANTIC CITY, PICTURING THE DISTANCE TO GAY PAREE.
MADGE
VELMA
AND HER “RUFFLES.”
THE QUARTETTE OF
LADY VOCALISTS.
CLIFF
RENNIE &
HILDA
ROXBURGH
With their Famous Tin Cans
ZETTA MOR
Photo]
THE BLENDS
[Stafford Johns.


MARRIED
Photo by Paul Thompson.
LAURA BROMWELL.
DIVES OFF 115-FOOT SUSPENSION
BRIDGE, CINCINNATI, O.
Waiter Weems on Marriage.
THE HUMOR OF SPLICING.
THE PROPOSAL.
LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT.
OFF FOR THE HONEYMOON.
GEO. WHEELER,
The Eccentric Musical Tramp, now showing at the National Theatre.
MR. and MRS.
SCOTCH
KELLY
A FAIR CHARMER!
of Mabel and Wolfe on the Fuller
Circuit
THE VERSATILE CHAP.
Jack Birchlej
The original Singing, Dancing
and Talking Contortionist*
I THE S
DIVING BELLES


TALBOT &
PEARCE
EVELYN
MAJOR
ELSIE
PRINCE
First-class Panto-
Offers invited.
ON TOUR.
SEVEN WAYFARERS
MARION SCOn
v-;;
DOLLY
RAFFERTY
In her Unique Singing and Dancing
Act. • 9
ENGLAND’S GREATEST LAD
TRICK PEDESTAL DANCER. \
THE FAMOUS SPORTING XcIIoBATS
Bros. BABUSIO
Undoubtedly the Finest Act of its Kind.
Including the Wonderful Head to Head “ Revolving Trick.”
WYN
GERRARD
AND BILLY I
KRAYj
In Original Duets And |
High " Soeed Dances. 1
CLEF
QUARTETTE.
(You all know the Act and the Figure',
GIBBON and LADY
Novel,
Eccentric Comedy,
Piano,
Burlesque Acrobatic
and
Dancing Act.
Christmas
Greetings
to all.


MAY and IVY ROYAL,
In Song and Duet Creations.
G4s 4 *** HI 45
TWICE .lInIUTLY twice nightly
NELSONi PALACE
f MONDAY. NOV 25th .uni during the Week
,3111113
J> U 077
CAWBO DE LILT
4 LISBONS 4
IN 111 Kilt NoVhLTY SKATING SCENA
LOUIS VICTOR JAUKE | T. HULBERT
• BIOSCOPE IN LATEST PICTURES
PEACE CELEBRATION t Sprubl Eni;.iiymrnt ol the Ev»r Fanoui
ARION CLEE UNION
IN AN eNTIRt.LV Nl W PIIOCRAUMI
Prices L 3 d ! 7 V| 13
lloclodiAg Tail | Karly !>■■■■>« 4d [ 0«l L 3 | 1/7
CELIA
CELESTE
In her delightful
Dance Scena,
"UNDER THREE
FLAGS.”
Corns., 431, High Rd..
Gunnersbury. W.
The MILLER
SUTCLIFFES
Presenting
Highland Sports and Pastimes,
introducing the
Bass Drum King.
111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 III! 1111 111111 11111111111M111111iTTI111 111 111 1111ll111111ifi i 11...
BLE RIOT’S
TRANSFORMATION FOUNTAINS
Hamamura Troupe
Baiilll
§§|
Snapped by]
[Alf Reeves.
THE BORDER LINE MEXICO, U.S A.
Charlie Chaplin has a foot in each country.
THE FIVE ..
HOLLANDERS
Maude Walsh and Barry Ono
THE ORIGINAL
KO TEN ICHI TROUPE
Famed Japanese Conjurers, introducing
their Celebrated Enchanted Fountains.
Gorgeous Japanese full Stage Settings and Costumes, all ol
silk, richly hand-embroidered with gold.
VACANT, Jan. 15, Feb. 5, & from March 12 onwards
All Corns, to
K. YAMAMOTO, 24, Lime St,, Oldham Rd., Ma nchester.
MAKIDO FAMILY
The Most Amazing
Japanese Entertainers
Nellie
Babbie
WARWICK & CISS
(Late THE SAXONES) f
CHAS. ROSS
EMPIRE
* ATI Wl - OH M.%-1 l>Vv v -.t «.
itONDAY. JAM 29th 917
4UHflg
inmm' ,#i fhim ni,|]m s™™ ■
' I ,,, ® UI * T rxaCTiON i j|S|
fcl'nM /( l i Will pull a Local Ed
./I Heavy Four Wheeled IS
' . TM P«TUOl'lOr«.TT QP " IO, *S
[msspinpEi
pawimij
fjlEULIE LANEI
IlMIKJE MKH
Imbmbbbisbni
jL a
I She Kami Everybody • B
fl Sbc’Kno—» Evwythmn • D
Si*""I FVWfryAi of yourfij
1 UMm>> S—uAy "ki-.od Ej
HE EMPIRE BIOSCIPE
|_^__pwtces
111 2jfl | al l 71 ( f 2 t 8g. II
I THE PREMIER THEATRE IN THE VALLEY
Hill
aberaman.
Proprietors Aboraman Workmen s Hall and Institute
General Manager, Mr. ARTHUR HORTON.
MONDAY, JAN. 22nd,
-AND DURING THE WEEK.
tiTmnmnJS
POORS OPtW AT 6.30 «• 8.30.
COLOSSAL AfTRACTION™™ 1 "
FADA
THE MYSTERY MAIDEN.
A My.terlcu. Qlrl i« » My.terlou. Performance.
Occult * Phanooisii. Thotitflu TritMlMtow
■ ■»»«>• Thou,., Brio. Photo. o“
who' UOtou'lri!" P- ClWrT °7»o»«. V.ud.. it I#. The lIUI. Laid; with • wondoMtil *tft
*5O REWARD I
-W l ™‘K“‘>f6»s?‘4v , s:.";,'SSa ■»•*’ »*•• >*p« .ai M
Special Matinee on Thursday at 3 p.m. Ladies only
Not a Picture Hall —but the Premier Theatre in South
Eon^MiXP 11 " ?':*«** (Bottom), HarrJ
(Mntdie) and in spite of opposition having
& , ( ,;L. act .", ( rii befo , re - I’ADA playeu to Record
admission on Friday
£-30 f HIOHTLY. I O jc| g
w I ■«»■««» WOWPMT * Min WESDAT ,■ j I B
MOffHAY FEB. Pth. mij; f
I Prom our Empira — INDIA
4UM0
J3| Y-4IJ> THE FiMDUl H!|D00 SORCERER H
bT * l -*'T' 5ul( of L.„Unl,. B
IFfl O' 'J | l; wia"ein »Tics.: B
mmn %{#U Heavy Fonr-Wheeled 13
W 1 ! ' °* rrlat f 1 ®* hU * yC " I
’V tijj?
[MSS HMCfl WEBEl
Ibibboh 1 g«7>
WELIJE LAWEI
\mmnnm
BOB MORRISl)
rn
THE MUIftT 111 DEI
She Km..- Y«u !
She Kao-, F
siie Know. Ercrythinf '..
>i?rrr?;:r
SpWh
HE . EMPIRE IIBSCm
U dm mncth «l Pr.tf.mm*
J M£1™:. .7~:,. 7d. 4d. »d.
Th. »ho». prtc.« mol»d» um lnuru,nm«nu Ta»
.MM.'pitV, ilUJJ"JSIJ J SIJJJI I 1 *** * »
Winniej
oeaman
Nona Dixie.


Supplement “N.Z. Sporting and Dramatic Review,” April 20. 1933.
DAUGHTERS OF THE DOMINIONS!
JUDY KELLY, of Australia, and MOLLY LAMONT, of South Africa, both B.I.P. debutante stars, after winning beauty competitions. They have
struck up a firm friendship, drawn together by the similarity of the circumstances in which they left home to seek fame in the Mother Country.
JENNIE HARTLEY, HER HUSBAND (JACK M. HART), AND SISTER HETTIE.


VALESKA SURATT, FILM STAR


(C) by Strauss-Peyton Studio.
STRIKINGLY BEAUTIFUL, AND CLEVER, TOO.
LOULE HOLLY. WHO HAS RISEN TO STARDOM ON VAUDEVILLE STAGE OVER KEITH CIRCUIT.
Photos by White.
DOROTHY KOFFE.
HILDA RUECKERT.
MARTHA EHRLICH.


June Roberts, brilliant young American dancer, who will make her Sydne
debut in “The O’Brien Girl” with Hugh J. Ward’s company of comedians
at the Grand Opera House on September 15.
A Group Photograph of the Eight Akabah Arabs
Still Delighting Harry G. Musgrove Vaudeville Audiences
At Healesville, Victoria, Lee White indulges
in her first billy tea.
EDWARD BRANSCOMBE’S WORLD-FAMOUS WESTMINSTER
GLEE SINGERS
WHO BEGIN THEIR AUSTRALIAN SEASON AT THE MELBOURNE TOWN HALL
ON JUNE 4, WITH SYDNEY TO FOLLOW AT THE TOWN HALL ON AUGUST 4


THE SOUTH ISLAND BAND CONTEST HELD RECENTLY AT DUNEDIN. OTAGO: REDFERN MUNICIPAL
BAND OF SYDNEY. NEW SOUTH WALES. WINNERS OF THE BESSON SHIELD FOR THE HIGHEST
AGGREGATE POINTS IN THE TESTS AND QUICKSTEP.
WELLINGTON WATERSIDERS’ BAND: WINNERS OF THE SECOND TEST SELECTION IN TEE A GRADE
AT THE SOUTH ISLAND BAND CONTEST. H. C. Gore, photos.
Tee White find Clay Smith with the baby penguin.
At Middle Harbour. Gene Gerrard shows his Her-
culean strength before Poppy Dale, Harry Musgrove
and Lee White.
At Coombe Cottage. Lady Loughborough, Dame
Nellie Melba, and Lee White.
James C. Bain Studies in Expression in Songs He Used to Sing
"Me, Too!”
"As True As the Stars Above.”
“Biscuits in the Bed.”
“May I Sing a Song?”
“ Sandy Mac.”
"Fitz-Calligan.”
“Silly Tommy.”
As They Are Seen on the Tivoli Circuit
Dave Burt ( Violin ) —Carlton Fay (Piano)
Miss Winnie Trevail


Everest’s Monkey
Sir Benjamin Fuller's Answer to America
[?]n Smith's Royal Jazz Band, comprising:—Linn Smith, piano; Paul Teacle, saxophone; Arthur
Curnick, violin; Sammy Cope, drummer; and Dave Meredith, trombone.
An Eddie and Decima McLean Whir
Marie La Varre, a Comedienne with a personality, who will appear at Fullers’ New Theatre, Sydney,
next Saturday.
JEAN GERARDY
All Blocks by W. T. Baker & Co. Ltd.
[?]ncomparable Belgian ’Cellist, who begins his Australasian
[?] at the Sydney Town Hall on Saturday, April 14th.
Under the direction of E. J. Gravestock, and supported by
John Stewart McManus (Pianist) and Essie Ackland (Contralto),


American Comedienne Ruby Norton
Playing the Musgrove Circuit
"All’s Well That Ends Well!"
The Five Westminster Glee b oys injured in a motor-train collision at Adelaide. They’re now
practically alright again. Reading from left to right:-Edmund Walter, 13 years of age; Leslie
Snow, 13; Henry Collier, 14; Ronald Thompson, 13; and Albert Cooper, 12.
Governor and Mrs. Pollock, of American Samoa, Mr. and Mrs. Frank Albert,
Mrs. H. D. Mclntosh, Miss Nella Webb, and Lee White go cruising round
our beautiful Harbour.
Lounging in combined sunlight and leafy shadow after an al fresco meal,
seems to have spread a “dolce far niente” feeling over most of this group,
but Lee White is as bright as ever.
In the Sea! In the Sea! At La
Corniche, a group containing Lee
White, Rene Maxwell, and
Nathalie Rosenwax.
RemarKable Equilibrists
THE MIRANO BROTHERS.
Photograph. ]
MISS ODETTE MYRTLE
[Foulsham and Banfield
RIDERS IN THE GRAND ENTREE AT WIRTHS’ CIRCUS AT SYDNEY HIPPODROME
“A PICTURE ARE OUR D E EDS —A S TRIDE OUR PRANCING STEEDS”


THE GLOBE OF LIFE
The Sensation of the Century. Direct from Madrid, Spain
The World-Famous Staig Sisters
In their Spine-Chilling Feat of Ultra-Daring
The only Girls in the World Looping the Loop on Motor Cycles.
Australia’s Most Beautiful Girl
Eve Gray needs no introduction to Sydney playgoers. Considered the
most beautiful girl in Australia by eminent critics, she has rapidly
come to the front and has now been given a wonderful opportunity to
prove her ability on the stage by Sir Benjamin Fuller, who firmly
believes she is destined to become one of our most prominent stars.
3
PERCY CRAWFORD.


2. — The Grandma Waltz Timber in " Mary."
As They Danced at the Four Arts Ball in " Yes, Uncle!”
2. —Again in the Same Dance in
“Dick Whittington
1.—A Pose in a Russian Dance
“Dick Whittington.
Off-the-stage Study - Decima
McLean.
Off - the - st ge Study Eddie
McLean.
AS THE AUSTRALIAN DARIOS IN "ALICE IN WONDERLAND"
1.-One of Their Dance Specialities in "SMary.”
3. —The Same Dance in " Mary” as Study No 1.
THE LONG TACK SAM, TROUPE OF CHINESE ACROBATS.
Said to be the finest of its kind in the world. One of this month's attractions at the
Tivoli, Sydney.
Lola and Senia , at Sydtey
ALFRED FRITH, JENNIE HARTLEY, AND WEE GEORGIE WOOD
English Sketch- Artists Pat Nash and Nellie Anderson
Now Playing Australia Under Engagement to the Fullers'
BUCK & WHITE
A GRAND SPIRIT
18 BLACK & WHITE is indeed “ A Grand
Spirit.”
ured for years in Scotland before shipment.
„ PRIDE OF COGNAC.
' Messrs. OTARD DUPUY & CO.’s
IE OLD FRENCH BRANDIES.
ESTABLISHED 1795.
TINY TOWN AND
MIDGET CIRCUS.
Vidal Programme
MANAGERIAL STAFF:
The Australian Entertainments Pty., Ltd.
Secref 8 DlreCtor - BEAUMONT SMITH
iger ... - ... - V.r“s
Doctors Recommend
DRY GIN.
This Celebrated GIN can now be obtained in
HALF-BOTTLES
as well as in the ordinary size.
Obtainable Everywhere.
TUCKER & CO., SYDNEY, SOLE AGENTS.
The Oldest Wine and Spirit Merchants
in Australia.


Mr. Alfonso, of “ Tiny Town,” the Smallest Strong
in the world, 40 inches in height and 30 years of
says :■—
“In my travels I have tried all sorts of invigors
and strengthening food, but the best I have discover.
BREAKFAST D-LIGHT for developing flesh and mu
I was recommended to try it when I arrived in Sydm
February last, and since then I have taken it at e
meal. I would feel lost without it. I recommend it t
the friends I meet.”
SAVE THE
LETTERS contained in each packet F'
CASH PRIZES?
Price !
jdj
Or with Tie
Complete,
1/6, 1 1% 21-
2/6, 3/-
| Sold by all Outfitters |
Briefly, the “OBAN” Patent Tie Attacher does away
with all those double-fold collar troubles, lessens the wear
and trebles the life of both collars and ties, saves both
time and temper, and improves the dressy effect of your
neckwear.
Just a simple linenised attachment, which cannot get
out of order. Once the scarf is tied it can be put on or
taken off in one second.
The “ OBAN ” will save you ten times its cost every
year. Can be used with any style of neckwear.
PROGRAMME.
(Subject to alteration at the discretion of the
Management.)
Part I.—Vaudeville Items.
INTRODUCTION By Mr. Arthur
REVOLVING GLOBE ACT By Miss Honka
HAYATI HASSID, the Continental Comedian, and
undoubtedly the smallest man in the world, in
special items in various languages.
THE OBAN TIE FASTENER.
Small inventions have added not less to the com-
fort and convenience of humanity than great ones,
and amongst recent instances of the former surely
none are more important than the Oban Tie
Fastener. We have all experienced the annoyance,
when hurriedly dressing, of the tie that sticks in
double-fold collars, and the dragging and destroying of the
tie and crumpling of the collar in consequence. Who
would appear all day with the fold of the collar projecting
outside the neck of the vest or lapel of the coat, if he
could avoid it? The Oban Tie Fastener does all this, and
it does more. It saves the wear of both collar and tie, and
makes the life of the latter tenfold greater than it was
before. Further, the knot assumes a neat and regular
appearance, which is impossible of attainment when the
band of the tie encircles the neck, and has to be drawn
tight with considerable pressure. Briefly, the Oban Tie
Attacher is a linenised arrangement, which slips on to the
collar stud, and is held in position by the fold of the
collar. The Mayor of “ Tiny Town ” (“ Haytor Hassid”)
writes:—
“ The Oban Tie Company, Sydney.
“ Dear Sirs, —Your tie fasteners are the best thing of
its kind I have ever seen in all my travels. All my friends
are now using them. Kindly send me another dozen of
the small sizes.”


The Best for Children and I
Grown Folß too. '
DR. SHELDON’S NEW DISCOVERY has won the
confidence of the p rents and the love of the children
by its wonderful curative effect upon the throat, chest*
and lungs. Children are particularly susceptible to
coughs and colds, and the medicine which always cures
and protects them from all dangers is the oce the
mothers recognise as best.
It is a wise mother who prepares for trouble in time of
peace. She places Dr. Sheldon’s New Discovery on th
shelf, and rests secure against all winter dangers, know-
ing well she has the remedy which will protect her
little ones against the vicissitudes of cold weather.
“DR. SHELDON’S NEW DISCOVERY
SAVED MY LITTLE BOY’S LIFE.”
“ My little boy Fred was taken very bad with bronchitis.
It certainly was a bad case, writes Mrs. Eliz. Graham, \
115 Union Street. Spring Hill, Q. “ I'he doctor oidered
him to the hospital, but the doctors there could not
cure him, and we thought we were going to lose him, so
we brought him home again. T\ friend recommended
Dr. Sheldon’s Hew Discovery and that saved my child’s
life. I got a large bottle of Hew Discovery, and before
the bottle was used up he was entirely cured.
D» Sheldon's v&ighs
NewDiscovery\£^ s
Price,
1/6 and 3/•
Obtainable
everywhere.


ASK FOR
A Souvenir of Tiny Town
■j _j
READ THE
“ Tiny Town Times,”
The smallest newspaper in the world.
. * '* ■ ■ </.*■ "... a .
SEE THE BEAUTIFUL
Photos and Post Cards
On sale in this building only.
PROGRAMME.
Part I.—Continued.
JUGGLING ACT By Mr. Fred
MISS HANSI In Quaint Songs and Specialities
DOUBLE ACROBATIC ACT BY CLOWNS
Messrs. Alfonso and Pompeo
HUNGARIAN DANCE By the Austrian Midgets
INTERVAL—TEN MINUTES.
Heights and Ages of Principal Villagers
of Tiny Town.
Miss Hansi Andre, aged 34, 38 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Miss Honka, aged 24, 34 ins. high. Born in Hungary
Mr. Arthur, aged 23, 34 ins. high. Born in Germany.
Mr. Morello, aged 20, 36 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Miss Paola, aged 24, 31 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Mr. Alfonzo, aged 25, 38 ins. high. Born in Germany.
Miss Isabel, aged 26, 33 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Mr. Hayati Hassid, aged 56, 30 ins. high. Born in Turkey.
Mr. Fred, aged 21, 43 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Mr. Pompeo, aged 29, 35 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Miss Anita, aged 26, 30 ins. high. Born in Austria.
Mr. Armstrong, aged 54, 36 inches high. Born in Australia.
Mr. Yonka, aged 29, 40 ins. high. Born in Detroit, U.S.A.
Mr. W. Roberts, 39 ins. high. Born in Australia.


a
TINY TOWN TIT-BITS.
It is said that whilst the Tiny Town picnickers
were rounding Middle Head (Sydney) in last
Sunday’s heavy sea that Tom Thumb offered to
swim ashore with a lady weighing 19 stone.
Herr Arthur Huhle is congratulated by the
editor on his new double-pony act. Huhle is 34
inches high, and just on 24 years old, so he is
not only the very smallest, but one of the very
youngest animal trainers in the world.
Plenty of curiosity in Miss Honka’s coming
marriage.
Constable Armstrong, who is the smallest
Freemason in the world, has been made an
honorary member of the New South Wales
Masonic Club.
Tim Yonka is suffering from the effects of a
mosquito kick.
The Grand Tone of the V
is ail that can be desired
VICTOR PIANO is made spe
of high quality materials, and
remarkable beauty and appear;
exquisite tone pleases the mosti
thusiasm, while its moderate
PIANOS on very easy time pay
W. H. PALING
Branches at
NEWCASTLE, LISMORE, BRISBANE, TOOWOOMBA. <u


9
imperial
WHISKY
PROGRAMME.
Part ll.—The Midget Circus.
HIGH WIRE ACT .. .. By Miss Hansi and Miss Anita
RIDING ACT By Miss Honka
THE MIDGET STRONG MAN Mr. Alfonso
(He challenges any man under 40 inches high.)
TYROLEAN NATIONAL DANCE
By Zeynard’s Midgets
VICTOR PIANO
lesired by those who want a moderately priced instrument. The
ade specially for us, to our own design. It is constructed by experts,
Is,and is guaranteed by us to withstand the Australian climate. The
appearance of the VICTOR PIANO captivate the most critical eye, its
e most delicate sense of hearing, its easy responsive touch creates en-
derate price brings about a resolve to purchase. We sell VICTOR
inpayments. Please write for our descriptive catalogue—it’s post free.
; AND CO., LTD.
338 Georg'e Street, Sydney.


Miss Ivy Schilling
SWEARS BY
REXONA
Miss IVY SCHILLING,
From a Photo.
One of the most
sensational star
items ever seen on
an Australian
stage is "La Danse
tie Champagne,”
given by Miss Ivy
Schilling and that
noted artist and
dancer, Mr. Leslie
Holland, in ‘‘The
Quaker Girl,”
which is proving
such an unpar-
alleled success.
Miss Ivy Schilling was the winner
of Wests’ Pictures Surf Sirens’
Competition in 1911, in which close
on 100,000 votes were recorded.
Her figure is a perfect model of
athletic symmetry and grace. To
preserve its litheness, its vigour and
its strength, she uses REXONA.
This is what the admired acrobatic
actress fays:
Theatre Royal, Sydney,
17th March, 1911.
Manager, Rexona, Sydney.
Dear Sir,—l have much
pleasure in recommending
your Rexona, for I have
been using it constantly
for some time. As a rub-
down after acrobatic
dancing, and as a magical
reviver to strained mus-
cles, 1 have found it ex-
cellent. After surfing, it is
invaluable as a protection
against sunburn and
freckles. It is a wonderful
healer, and I always keep
a tin of it handy.
Yours sincerely,
(Sgd.) IVY SCHILLING.
REXONA is a reliable remedy for all Eruptions and Irritations
of the Skin, Eczema, Pimples, Sores, Chilblains, Chapped
lianas. Sciatica, Cuts, Burns, Bruises, Scalds, Bad Legs, Stings
of Insects, and all kinds of Inflammation. REXONA is sold
only in triangular pots at 1/6, and in larger pots containing
nearly lour times the quantity, at 3/-. All Chemists and Stores
will supply it, or it will be sent post free receipt of the
price upon application to ‘‘REXONA,” Box 974, G.P.0., Sydney,
‘ THE RAPID HER _,
. :35: ‘ .433?» “.22“; E 5-, L , ;:;.;?'.~. ..;.-"“ -"| > i .‘I.
REXONA
Skin and
Facial Soap
Is.
per tablet


DAWSON’S whisky
Has the Largest Sale in the State.
‘Night Cap’ Gin
... Hoppe’s Schnapps
scade Hie hqbhrt thee k|" al < !I
itish Travellers and Experts proclaim CASCADE
Etobe “ The ‘ English 'of Australia. Ship
Aits. hhd.. half-hhds., and bottled, received twice
tveek by the
[ SOLE AGENTS:
I D’AROY CO.
I 474 1/4 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
■PORTERS OF ALL WINES’ AND SPIRITS.
PROGRAMME.
Part ll.—Continued.
\ ' ’
[RTING JOCKEY ACT By Miss Andre
WN ENTREE By Messrs. Fred and Alfonso
1 MIDGET CONTORTIONIST .. .. Mr. Morello
l LIBERTY PONIES .. Introduced by Mr. Arthur
t MIDGET COMEDIAN .. .. Mr. David Armstrong
P-PONY BAREBACK ACT
By Miss Paola and Mr. Pompeo
tillers since 1679
HAIG & HAIG
icots WKisky
Sole Agents :
p. BLAYDES &• CO., 18 Bridge St., Sydney, N.S.W.


Under the distinguished patronage of
TINY TOWN,
The leading members of the Theatrical Professic
visiting American Boxers.
I send work to West Australia, South Aus
Victoria, Queensland, and N.Z.
WHY?
BEC AUSE I have the only custom shop in
tralia where you can get
Real American Tailoring
THE GENUINE ARTICLE.
NO BLUFF.
“Ask the Actors
Dandy silk-lined American overcoats o
suits full of character from £4 up
Paste this address in your hat, anc
when. you want better clothes call oi
write to
VEREY
American Tailor
6 ROWE ST.
SYDNEY


uytr
KISSING COMPETITION.
Eight Little BOYS AND GIRLS
Want A BEAUTY PRIZE
Two attractive little GIDLS
take the Judge’s eyes
One of the selected is a lucky little Dove
Who, when she took the Judge’s kiss.
Said. “ Prize for Prize, my Love,
THEY’RE


Anthony Horderna*
for the
WHITE Sewing Machine]
No. 24V. —White Treadle Sewing Machine, with Vibrating
Shuttle Movement. Oak or walnut woodwork. Drop head
with automatic lift; cabinet front; two drawers, and nickel-
plated fly wheel. Complete, with king steel set of attach-
£s 12s. 6d.
Buy the WHITE.
To turn out more and better sewing with less labor;
For its light running, easy sewing qualities;
For its fine mechanical adjustment;
For its beauty of construction and durability;
For its incomparable labor-saving devices, which are ex-
clusively White—for example, its tension indicator,
For its attachments and improved features, which enable
one to remove a piece of unfinished work, put it back
on again in a month or six months, and get exactly the
same results.
No. 35. —Automatic Lift White.—A handsome, finely-
finished machine, furnished with Rolled Edge Renaissance
design woodwork, in quarter-sawed golden oak, fitted with
automatic lift, nickel-plated fly wheel, beautiful hanging
centre panel, three drawers at each end of table, and a
complete set of the latest style steel attachments, £6 15s.
Packing for the country, 2/6 extra.
Illustrated Price List, post free.
Anthony Hordern & Sons
ONLY UNIVERSAL PROVIDERS,
NEW PALACE EMPORIUM,
BRICKFIELD HILL, SYDNEY.
Printed for Walter A. Price by Carter's Builder Printing Works,
877 Sussex Street, Sydney,


< .' .
x . . ‘ . _ .Z. . ' 5
. x ;. . , . ‘ .;.-_. 'fm .:.. .. 5* . :_- ,‘I/ ' .
, ‘ ‘ ‘ . > «.3, ' ‘- 2.3;;51-1'4‘1‘1'1“ E351» 1. . "V I a -' , .
n ' z :‘ ' V ‘ 353:.» = ' R . :-'. ,1 " :7 .1.
/ " 92' , '. . 2-. . . ' ' "-':‘ ‘11.. - ‘ '1”: '
. .7 -.' . . ‘ . - . . - , -' ~ 4.
A . , ’ _ 1, £5} . 4 , 5‘. - , ~1' . “r”, 9
‘ ' I' ‘ - ' " ‘ ' ‘ Z ' - 3" . ' ’ ‘ . ‘ .. '2. ' .2. 14,: 2.”- :. >
, ' ‘ . ; ' Zr 31:; A v, r. - ‘ .;:=~ q ' ~' ' y. \ 3.; 2.» .f - ,
. ~ » ' v. ‘ ' ‘ .‘.- ' ’1‘. . _ ‘ . '>""'.-‘-‘ ' q‘ > V g-J‘f ‘ J, ' ‘ x
- ' v . $0.9“ . rm. » ‘ ~ - _ ‘ w. _. .355. .
. ’ 0‘5": 952,? ,» A : - - 1‘ -‘ " g , ,_ . \ ‘ - - ' . ‘
: ’, ‘ ‘ . , ~ ' .y. “:7 r. , 7., -. . ~ , .155 .1. _: - . ‘ .
~ ‘ - ‘ ‘ ,. “’65?” ; .. - v ;= .. ' ~ - f:-."‘?>:~.- ‘ -'-"- ‘ " ‘ .1 . -
‘ . . = ‘ pzi’w: ; '--. ,. v .. - : ,__- . 13.5; -: , .. v . _ v ,- . _' .
' , ..z . . ,_ ~ .; ,, ' u“ ._ . ‘ .‘ , ‘ _ ,v...’ , 1-.1 - , , .
‘ i *7“, ' “ Q ' \ ' ‘ '1 ' E; ‘ “kg-V” ' ‘ . . . 5‘ “,H . . ‘ (by: > , . ’ ' .4‘
. ‘ r. , .1 ' ‘ ' . 2.: ,. . . ~: . 1 .3. 1: ~ . t N.
A . . . , . : _‘ “a , , . 1, . - V ‘ , ~ . , .. _;:1_ .. J; '.'- , _' .
‘ . ‘ ‘ . - 1 . ,~ > .-.r . ,r ‘. 11,, .9}. , _ . "l
1 ‘ . 13‘ . , .. .v , 3 . _ , _ . v' 1. > . '. \ . 1:. ‘ . ”$.59 ,_ ,
‘ - .~ "' ~ I ‘ . ~. ‘ ' "if . ‘ V 4 7‘ H " “ ': ,‘.- » '
V ’ . ‘9: ~- ' . . _ ' ‘ ,,
‘ u ' ‘_ . , -. . _ . '
v ' v 11:35 .. ~‘ ‘ -
.. . 4 37.
. h . ,v ._ _
3K. .4" 31+
» . |
. ..
‘ Q . ﬂ
.‘4. H-‘ﬂ. . ’ '
i
PROGRAMME.


GLYCO DON
Savon Dentifrice en tube
E N VEN T E
Dans les Grands Magasins et dans toute bonne ma
ENVOI 13 U T UIIE MOYEN OU GRAND MOJL3ELE
Contre -1 fr. 25 ou 1 fr. 75 en timbres-poste adress6s
LABORATOIRES DU GLyQODONT
49, Run u’Kngiiucn, Paris. Telepuoxk , Hkkgkre 37-c


VERMOUTH
TURIN
CINZANO
Garantis d ongine
ASTI
SPUMANTE
AULD REEKIE
10, Kuo des Capuclnes, 10, PABiy
Telephone Central 73-95
BRITISH & AMERICAN TAILORS
PROGRAMME
Du 8 au 21 Fevrier 1918
! • ORCHESTRE
IVIIIe NADIR et ses Chats
3. BROS DIONNE, Barristes comiques
4. Yvonne GUILLET, dans son Repertoire
5. Les FLORIMONDS, Gymnastes deforce par lesdents
6 HANVARR et LEE
Excentricite, Jongleurs avec Massues
IMPEBDIEO, BALLONS, GANTS DE BOXE, CHANDAILS
SACS, PATHS ROULETTES
Vendus au detail au prix de gros
ELI MS PIERRE
F ABRI CANT
10, Faubourg Montmartre Q| D|C
dans la cour I AH 10
Succursale : 162, Avenue Malakoff - Porte Maillot
'snaant
luree des
•stilites
0 O 0
c le Tarif
Les Dents pour toys
2, Boulevard Beaumarchais (place de la Bastille)
Telephone : Roquette 48-62
Specialite
D’APPAREILS
DENTAIRES
SOINS DELABOUCHE
BRIDGE WORK


IMPERMEABLE^
46, 48, Rue Turbigo iMetro, Arts-et-Metier»)
Ouvert le Dimanche
PROGRAMME (Suite)
7. OLGA MORSELLI
Violoniste ( prix d’honneur du Conservatoire t
8. NIEVES K. ALONSO et see Chlens
9. JIMMY FLETCHER, Contorsionist
GRAND SDCCES
10. TROUPE BOGANNY, Grosse excentricite
Farce de Mitrons
11. La VALINI et DORYS, Danses acrobatiques
12. Gabriel LORD", Mandoliniste
lUXini n
HAXIRi $
RAXIRA fyat '
RAXINA Ate u
Tmm:ißuETAiTßOUT>mb(,e PI


Ibis et raiteaux. - costumes tailleur. - raooELESj
M ME M. PHILLIPS |
3 Rue Duret. PARIS (Dans I’Avenue de la Crande-Armee);
(Suite)
14. Harry LAWIORE
Transformations a surprises - Jantaisies sur fil de fer
15. CINEMA, oActualiies
La Direction ne repond pas des changements qui peuvent
etre apportes a I’ordre et a Vensemble du spectacle.
£’@rchestre est sous la Sirection de ST.
Piano de la Iflaison A. BORO, 14 bis, Boulevard Poissonniere, Paris
Tousles Artistes hommes, Franca? s et etrangers, faisant
partie du present Programme, ont satisfait & leurs obligations
militaires
TELEPHONE 145-42
HARRY ASH
112, Boulevard Hauasmann, Paris
INGUSH & AMERICAN TAILOR
BRITISH I AMERICAN PHARMACY
3, Rue Scribe - PARIS
Telephone : CF.\TRAL 40 IS
Corresponding Houses
SAVORY & MOORE
H 3, New Street Bond Street, Loodon


LA MARQUE FRANQAISE
EM VENTE CHEZ LES BONS HORLOGERS
LES Fills BELLES FERLESIIITEI
11, CHAIJSSEE DANTIN
ft


Uf
rand choix
premieres
MARQUES
ROCHET,
21, Avenue de la R6publique
CHAFELIER
C ANISES
‘PARAPLUIES
PARIS
CASaUETTES
pour SPORTS
VET.EMEKTS EH TOILE HUILEE
16gers et extra-souples
absolument imperm^ablss
OUR LA. PUBLICITfi PANS LE PROGRAMME DE VALHAMBRA
ET DANS TOUS LES THEATRES
ET MUSIC-HALLS DE PARIS
S’ADRESSER A
1 4 » \ PUBLICITAS
H. DAUVIN- Directeur
I, RUE DE MAUBEUGE, PARIS Telephone : CEHTBAL 20-02
c4ffiches - Affichagt - Journaux
et toutes les formes de la *Publicite
PIANOS A. BORO
14 bis, Boulevard Poissonnifere
Grand choix
de
PIANOS
Neufs et d’Occasion
FACILIT&S DE PAi EM ENT


BMAfc.
j ] 1
-w le k
Meilleur m Deleu
DU MATIN
Agence Publicitas. H. tauvin, Directeur
1. Rue de Maubeuge, Paris - Tel. : Central 20-02
Rapide, 8, Rue Dronot
Tel. : Gutenberg


‘ ‘ ' ' W : “' ' ~1 ‘2' ”W a: -» x A, r 4%
g ‘5?” a”? g g; ‘ f H a 7% ‘
a i v . .. ., . I ¥ . . ,; V
’ J} g g; . 3": é 3, B if am am ”V
Please do not purchase
this programme
k it the seal is -~
broken.
f Chmwaami
' of Directors'
OSWALD STOLL


The New
Combination
Coat
r I 'HIS beautiful Model
is the very latest idea
in Coats. It is available
in various combinations
of Fur and Fabric, in-
cluding Grey Squirrel and
Satin; Grey Squirrel and
Velveteen; Mole Skin and
Satin; Seal Musquash and
Satin; Sable, Squirrel and
Satin; or Nutria and Satin
WE INVITE INSPECTION
Peter Robinson’s
OXFORD STREET LONDON Wi
Peter Robinson, Ltd.


THE
Alhambra Theatre
LEICESTER SQUARE, LONDON
MATINEES ON WEDNESDAYS, THURSDAYS AND SATURDAYS AT 2
REDUCED PRICES
BOXES . . . £2 2s. to £4 4s. Tax 6/- to 12/-
RESERVED STALLS 10/6 Tax 1/6 7/6 Tax 1/- 6/- Tax 1/- 5/- Tax 9d.
BOX STALLS 6/- Tax 1/- 5/- Tax 9d. ROVER TICKETS (no seats) 4/- Tax 9d.
BALCONY (Reserved) 3/- Tax 6d. 2/6 Tax 6d. (Unreserved) 2/6 Tax 6d., 2/- Tax4d.
UNRESERVED—AMPHITHEATRE 1/- Tax 3d. GALLERY 6d. Tax 2d.
CHILDREN HALF-PRICE TO RESERVED SEATS AT MATINEES ONLY
Chairman and Managing Director . . OSWALD STOLL
Manager EDWARD FOSTER
Musical Director ....... John Ansell
Assistant Manager ..... Charles Penley
Stage Manager ....... Edward Hyde
Secretary . . . . . . . . D. J. Gayford
NOTICE TO VISITORS. —Patrons are respectfully informed that Seats may be booked
at the Box Office of this Theatre for The London Opera House (Stoll Picture Theatre)
and The London Coliseum.
In Accordance with the Requirements of the London County Council.
(a) The public may leave at the end of the performance by all exit and entrance doors, and such doors must
at that time be open.
(b) All gangways, passages and staircases must be kept entirely free from chairs or any other obstructions.
(c) Persons must not be permitted to stand or sit in any of the intersecting gangways, and if standing b«
permitted in the gangways at the side and rear of the seating sufficient space must be left for persons
to pass easily to and fro.
(of) The safety curtain must be lowered about the middle of the performance so as to ensure it being in proper
working order.
BOX OFFICE OPEN 10 to 10
Telephone No. 5064 Gerrard
EVENING PRICES
PRIVATE BOXES . £2 2s. to £4 4s. ROVER TICKETS (no seats) 5/- Tax 9d.
Tax 6/- to 12/- BOX STALLS 7/6, 6/- „ 1/-
STALLS (Reserved) .
, 10 / R T«i/n BALCONY (Res’d.) 3/-Tax 6d., 4/- ~ 9d.
( ' iax l,b „ (Unreserved) 3/-Tax6d., 2/6 Tax6d.
I 7/6 „ 1/- AMPHITHEATRE (Unreserved) 1/-Tax3d.
i 6/- „ 1/- GALLERY (Unreserved) 6d. „ 2d.
Saturdays and Bank Holidays . AMPHITHEATRE 1/6 Tax4d. GALLERY 1/- Tax 3d.


The
Bing Boys on Broadway
ON
‘HIS MASTER'S VOICE’
RECORDS
EVERYONE who has heard and enjoyed Violet
Loraine in 1 The Bing Boys on Broadway ’ may
hear her again at home upon * His Master's Voice ’
Records. Her delightful voice loses none of its charm
in the recording and no music-lover’s collection is up-to-
date without the Records of this splendid artist who is
delighting the hearts of all London just now. The
wonderful personality which Violet Loraine puts into
every song she sings is fully displayed in her Records.
VIOLET LORAINE
03804 Something Oriental (with chorus) Nat D. Ayer
03605 College Days (with chorus' Nat D. Ayer.
03606 Hello ! New York (with chorus) Nat D. Ayer.
VIOLET LORAINE AND WALTER JEFFERIES
04226 First love, last love, bast love Nat D. Ayer.
04227 Day after Day Nat D. Ayer.
DAN AGAR
C 848 The fact is— Shurr-up ! Nat D. Aye*.
ALHAMBRA ORCHESTRA
(Conducted by Mr. JOHN ANSELL)
Selection containing : —lndian Rag—My Southern Home—Take me back to
C 845 • Bingville—Crinoline days. First love, last love, best love —College days
—Something Oriental—Hello ! New York.
WRITE US
FOR DEALER’S
ADDRESS
NEAREST
YOUR HOME.
THE
GRAMOPHONE
CO. LTD.
HAYES,
MIDDLESEX.


HATCHETT’S RESTAURANT
AND GRILL ROOM, PICCADILLY, W.
(less than three minutes' drive from this Theatre)
LUNCH 3/- | DINNER 4/6
a la Carte at Moderate Prices
HATCHETT’S BUFFET ; ORCHESTRA PLAYS
The Meeting Place of the World. During Lunch and Dinner.
EVERY EVENING AT 7.40. MATINEES AT 2.
Mr. OSWALD STOLL
By arrangement with GEORGE GROSSMITH AND EDWARD LAURILLARD
PRESENTS
“The Bing Boys on Broadway”
Being the Adventures of Lucifer Bing and his cousin Potifer in
America; as told by George Grossmith and Fred Thompson.
Written by FRED THOMPSON and HARRY M. VERNON.
Music by Lyrics by
NAT. D. AYER. CLIFFORD GREY.
The Play produced by HARRY M. VERNON. Staged by GUS SOHLKE.
The entire Colour Scheme and Costumes designed by Comelli.
MATINEES—WEDNESDAYS, THURSDAYS, AND SATURDAYS, at 2.
The Management reserves the right to refuse admission.
COSTUMES, ETC.
MiSS Street t w™” 16 ' 3 Dresses designed b * IIEGGIE de Veulle and executed by Myra Salter, 26, Albemarl#
»1- SS ! ie J de F. 9 .Crinoline P ress hy Jules Poiret : her other Dresses by Myra Salter.
Miss Marjorie Carlisle s Suit designed and executed by Jules Poiret.
The Ladies’ Rustic Dresses, Ist Scene Act 1., by Madam Cecil,’ 43, South Audley Street. The Frolic
Dresses by Idare Wigmore Street. The New York Girls by Isobel, Regent Street. The Clown and
Indian Girls by M. Alias. The Papoose Girls and Chorus Crinoline Dresses by Fisher 26, Bedford
Street The Indian Men’s Costumes by J. B. Simmons& Co., King Street, Covent Garden The
Ladies’ Evening Dress Suits by Burkinnsaw & Knights, 7, Cork Street, W. All the other Costumes and
Uniforms by Morris Angel & Son, Shaftesbury Avenue. ooscumes and
by H. <fc M. Rayne, 49, Charing Cross Road, and Burnet & Co., Ltd., Garrick Street,
Hats and Head-dresses by Maison Lewis, Regent Street W
Wigs by W. Clarkson, 41, Wardour Street, W.
THE ONLY SERVICE STORES OPEN
TO ALL FOR EVERYTHING
Army and Navy Stores , Ltd.
YORK HOUSE, REGENT STREET, LONDON, S.W.


MR. GEORGE ROBEY
nn
WANT BEST HAVE
SEATS! THEM!
miiimiiimmMtHiiimiimiiiiii
Concert and Musical Agency
Variety and Theatrical Dept.
162, NEW BOND STREET, W.
ACTIVE SERVICE
CADETS
WAITING TO BE GAZETTED.
The Recognised House fok
Officers’ Service Dress
Trench Coats, Camp Equipment, Boots, etc.
High land Regiments
Royal Army Medical Corps Uniforms
and Naval Uniforms.
The largest stock in London ready for immediate use,
or MADE TO MEASURE IN 48 HOURs!
MORRIS ANGEL & SON, LTD.
NAVAL AND MILITARY TAILORS
117. SHAFTESBURY AVENUE, LONDON, W.C. 2, England.
TolwjMrieAidreis: “Theatrjdio, London.” Telephone: Gerrard 5181


CRITERION RESTAURANT
POPULAR GRILL ROOMS
Moderate a la Carte Tariff
The Marble Hall Restaurant for Early
Dinners before the Theatre
Table d’Hote Luncheon . . 3/6
fable d’Hote Dinner . . . 5/6
and a la Carte
The Criterion Orchestra performs all day
TABLES SHOULD BE RESERVED IN ADVANCE
Tel. No. Regent 4606
ON SALE AT THIS
THEATRE
CALEY'S
By Appointment
ROYAL TABLE WATERS
BREWED GINGER BEER
A. J. CALEY & SON. Ltd. j
ACT I.
Ist Scone BINGVILLE, MICHIGAN, U.B.A.
C JOHN BILL)
Ezikiel Bing (a “Prominent" Citizen) ... ... Mr. E. JACK CALDWELL
Matilda Bing (his Wife) ... ... ... ... Miss ALICE KNIBBS
Potifer BiDg (their Son) Mr. PETER WISER
Kitty Nolan ... ... ... ... ... ... Miss TOOTS POUNDS
Molly Nolan (her Sister) Miss LORN A POUNDS
“Hop” Williams (a Clever Young Man) ... ... Mr. ARTHUR FINN
Shorty ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mr. DAN AGAR
Tats Tittlerow (the Postmaster) ... ... ... Mr. PIP POWELL
Rube Wilkins Mr. LOU EDWARDS
Silas (a Milkman) ... Mr. JOE MILTON
Miss Perks (the Schoolmistress) ... ... ... Miss FREDA LARGE
Musical Numbers —1. Opening Chorus: “ Haymaking.”
2. Trio (Kitty, Molly & Rube) : “ Take me back to Bingviils ”
2nd Scene THE WHITE STAR DOCK
(JOHN BULL.*
EMMA (Dowager Duchess of Dullwater) ... ... Miss VIOLET LORAINE
Newspaper Reporter ... ... ... ... ... Mr. E. JACK CALDWELL
“ Hop ” Williams Mr. ARTHUR FINN
Shorty Mr. DAN AGAR
“ Diamond ” Gertie Miss KITTY FIELDER
Ottoline (Emma’s Maid) Miss MARJORIE CARLISLE
Ist Customs Officer Mr. JOE MILTON
2nd Customs Officer Mr. GEORGE ROBINSON
LUCIFER BING Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Potifer Bing Mr. PETER WISER
Ist Confidence Man Mr. LOU EDWARDS
2nd Confidence Man Mr. E. JACK CALDWELL
Detective Mr. PIP POWELL
Musical Numbers —l. Opening Chorus. 2. Song (Emma) : “ Hello, New York.”
3. Duet (Emma and Lucifer) : “ The First Love.” 4. Finale.
INTERVAL OF TEN MINUTES.
The musie of “ The Bing Boys on Broadway ” is published by B. Feldman & Co., 2 db 3, Arthur Street. W.C.
and may be obtained, from the attendants.
The attention of Patrons is directed to THE AMERICAN BAR. where all kinds of American drinks are sold,
made by an Expert Bar Tender.
TROCAD ERO.
AFTERNOON TEAS
Daily in the Empire Rooms
LUNCHEONS AND DINNERS
(Table d'hdte or Service d la Carte)
in the Restaurant
FINEST GRILL ROOM IN THE WORLD
J. Lyons & Co., Ltd., Proprietors.
Telegrams: Telephone:
History, Rand, London. Gerhard 53«§
B. J. SIMMONS & CO.
Übeatrical Costumiers
to the Alhambra and other principal
London Theatres.
7&8, King St.,Covent Garden, W.C.


MISS VIOLET LORAINE
PHILIP MORRIS
“BOND STREET”
Cigarettes
THE BEST
Cork Tipped
or
Plain Mouthpiece
ON SALE AT ALL TITE
BARS OF THIS THEATRE
Sole Manujacturers :
PHILIP MORRIS & CO., LTD.,
22, NEW BOND STREET, W.
Also at New York :: Montreal :: Cairo
HHf
WANT BEST HAVE
SEATS! THEM!
iiii;i,iiiii!i!iii;iiiii!Hiii;ii!iiiiih
Concert and Musical Agency
Variety and Theatrical Dept.
162, NEW BOND STREET, W.
The Hall Mark for
Everything Electrical
in connection with
- Motoring =
Motorists are invited to write for par-
ticulars of Lighting and Starting sets
ACTON . LONDON . W.


HATS AND HEAD-DRESSES in the Revue by
MAISON LEWIS
REGENT STREET, W.
Louise & Co., Ltd.
ACT 11.
Ist Scene ... A ROOF GARDEN ON BROADWAY, N.Y.
C BRUCE SMITH)
"‘Poulet " (a Singer?) M. ALBERT BROUETT
Waiter Mr. JOE MILTON
Kitty Nolan Miss TOOTS POUNDS
Molly Nolan (her Sister) ... ... ... ... Miss LORNA POUNDS
" Diamond ” Gertie Miss KITTY FIELDER
Shorty Mr. DAN AGAR
Potifer Mr. PETER WISER
The Manager Mr. FRANK LESTER
EMMA IVliss VIOLET LORAINE
LUCIFER Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Waiters | Mr - G - ROBINSON
(Mr. BERT ROLFE
Elderly Gentleman (Mr. Peter Pucker) ... ... Mr. PIP POWELL
(Mrs. Peter Pucker) Miss FLORENCE FABER
Ist College Boy Mr. LOU EDWARDS
2nd College Boy Mr. FRED RIGG
“ Hop " Williams Mr. ARTHUR FINN
Bell-Boy Miss ALICE KNIBBS
JAZZ BAND. By arrangement with Mr. Jack May, of Murray’s Club.
Musical Numbers —l. Opening Chorus. 2. Song and Dance (Ist College Boy) :
“ I’m tired.” 3. Duet (Kitty and Molly) : “ Melody Man.” 4. Song (Lucifer :
“ Shurr-up ! ” 5. Song (Emma) : ” College Days.” 6. Finale.
(The Evening Gowns in this scene by Myra Salter.)
2nd Scene MOTT STREET, N.Y.
~ (ALFRED TERRAINE)
Habitue Mr. FRED RIGG
Li Song Mr. JOE MILTON
Policeman O’Leary Mr. G. E. ROBINSON
Li Wong Mr. FRANK LESLIE
“ Hop ” Williams Mr. ARTHUR FINN
Shorty Mr. DAN AGAR
“ Diamond ” Gertie Miss KITTY FIELDER
LUCIFER Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Rotifer Mr. PETER WISER
EMMA Miss VIOLET LORAINE
Hew So Mr. E. JACK CALDWELL
Net Long Mr. BERT ROLFE
Kow Loon Mr. FRANK LESTER
Let Wah Mr. ARTHUR COZENS
The Soldier’s Match-Box.
BRYANT & MAY’S
‘SERVICE’
MATCH-BOX COVER
(Reg. Design No. 642237)
Keeps Matches and Box Dry in all Weathers.
Bryant & May’s are the only Matches used
throughout this Theatre.
RENDEZ VOUS DES ARTISTES
THE
Boulogne Restaurant
27, GERRARD STREET
SHAFTESBURY AVENUE, W.
Supper after the Theatre 1/6
Phone Regent 1186. Proprietor :J. Uccelli


WMWQ
“ iumis Up”
CHARM for Luck.
9-ct. Gold ... 15/10
15-ct. „ ... 20/.
15 ' 0t - » aw-
LADY’S WRIST BAG,
“* d T e of Real hard grain MOROCCO, lined
mirror, tablet, and
CAPTIVE PURSE ... 21/6
„ Colours—
Navy, Black, Dark Brown and Purple.
SPLENDID VALUE.
Post Free United Kingdom. Abroad 1/-
extra.
The “ SERVICE"
CAMPAIGN KNIFE,
35/6
Post, Expeditionary Force,
1 /-
Larf y’a
BEST SILK UMBRELLA,
with INLAID SILVER and TOE-
TOISESHKLL Handle, Regimental
GREBT or MONOGRAM 45/6
Inlaid SOLID GOLD ... 85/6
Colours) Bottle Green, Navy,
Blank, Violet and Nigger Brown
9-ct. SOLID GOLD
. nrsfCT
LOCKET,
.
wlth raised Regimental
Orest 35/8
Neck Chain ... 13/6
SILVER “ SERVICE "
WRIST WATCH,
with LUMINOUS hands <fc figures.
SCREW MOVEMENT (DUST-
PROOF). Fitted UNBREAK-
ABLE Glass. Superior Movement.
75/6
Black or White Dials.
268-270, OXFORD ST., W. 1
67, Piccadilly, W. 1 177-178, Tottenham Court Rd., W. 1
187, REGENT STREET, W. 1
81-84, LEADENHALL ST., LONDON, E.C. 3


Oddenino’s Imperial Restaurant
60 & 62, REGENT STREET, W.
LUNCHEONS DINNERS SUPPERS
Special and exclusive engagement of MR. LAVAUN,
the great and sensational Artist, with his “ Ukulele ” in all his latest successes.
AT DINNER ON SUNDAYS.
Telegrams : “ Oddenino, Piccy, London.” Telephones : 3082 & 1032 Gerrard.
3rd Scene . . INTERIOR OF WONG’S, MOTT STREET, N.Y.
(ALFRED TERRAINE)
EMMA Miss VIOLET LORAINE
“ Hop " Williams ... ... ... ... ... Mr. ARTHUR FINN
Shorty ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• Mr. DAN AGAR
"Diamond" Gertie ... ... ... ... ... Miss KITTY FIELDER
LUCIFER Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Potifer Mr. PETER WISER
Li Wong Mr. FRANK LESLIE
Policeman O'Leary ... ... . Mr. G. E. ROBINSON
Policeman Murray ... ... ... ... ... Mr. ARTHUR COZENS
Policeman Daw ... ... ... ... ... ... Mr. LAWRENCE TUCKER
Musical Number —1. Song (Emma) : “ Something Oriental.”
4th Scene .... A STREET IN DETROIT, MICHIGAN
(A. E, CRAVEN)
Poulet Mr. ALBERT BROUETT
Manageress, Sparking Plug Department, Ford Factory Miss FREDA LARGE
LUCIFER Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Potifer Mr. PETER WISER
Musical Numbers —1. Song (Lou Edwards and Chorus) : “A Lovely Game.”
2. Song (Lucifer) : ” The Fact Is.”
sth Scene MOTION CITY
(BRUCE SMITH
The Manager Mr. E. JACK CALDWELL
Shorty Mr. DAN AGAR
“ Hop " Williams Mr. ARTHUR FINN
An Indian ... Mr. PIP POWELL
An Indian Squaw Miss VIOLET LORAINE
An Indian Chief Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Tonka Bean (A Mexican Bandit) ... ... ... Mr LOU EDWARDS
Hollow Tooth, Nasty Weather, Hip Hurrah, Loose End, Woggle Eye of the Tribe of
Wah Wahs
Musical Number —l. Indian Rag (Violet Loraine and Chorus).
The music of " The Bing Boys on Broadway ” is published by B. Feldman & Co., 2 & 3, Arthur Street, W.C.,
and may be obtained from the attendants.
The attention of Patrons is directed to THE AMERICAN BAR, where ail kinds of American drinks are sold.
made by an Expert Bar Tender.
IF YOU HAVE DIFFICULTY
WITH YOUR
PRINTING GENERAL STATIONERY
OFFICE REQUISITES LOOSE LEAF EQUIPMENT
ACCOUNT BOOKS PAPER REQUIREMENTS
DRAWING OFFICE MATERIALS
WRITE OR TELEPHONE
HUDSON & KEARNS, LIMITED,
Hatfield Street Works, Blackfriars, London, S.E. 1. ®# p iuss>
WE ARE STILL ABLE TO OFFER YOU EXCELLENT SERVICE


W^RF.
LAMPS.
OBTAINABLE FROM
ALL ELECTRICIANS,
IRONMONGERS AND
STORES
Wholesale only
The General Electric Co. Ltd.
Oueen Victoria Street
London
SHINING
EXAMPLE
NATIONAL
and
INDIVIDUAL
[ECONOMY
YOU
cannot be
the first to
take to the
4 greys;
but you
should
avoid be-
ing the last
The
GREYS
SILK CUT VIRGINIA.
The Big CIGARETTE with the choice Flavour
20 for 1/4
At all High-Class Tobacconists and Stores
On Sale throughout this Theatre.
EVANS & EVANS
TRADING AS
F ribourg & T reyer
Established at
34, HAYMARKET, S.W.
Over 200 Years.
Our Finest Cigarettes for which
we have a World-Wide Reputation
can he obtained in this Theatre.
Everything that is required by the
discriminating smoker can be
obtained at the above address.
LONDON OXFORD
CAMBRIDGE


ABDULLA & CO., Ltd.
is and always has been an entirely British Firm.
ABDULLA CIGARETTES HAVE BEEN AWARDED FOR EXCELLENCE
Eight Grands Pnx. Three Diplomas of Honour. 20 Gold Medals,
On sale at this Theatre .
6th Scene HERALD SQUARE
(A. E. CRAVEN)
“ Hop " Williams Mr. ARTHUR FINN
"Diamond” Gertie Miss KITTY FIELDER
Shorty Mr DAN AGAR
Potifer Mr. PETER WISER
LUCIFER Mr. GEORGE ROBEV
EMMA Miss VIOLET LORA INE
A " Broadway ” Girl Miss TOOTS POUNDS
A “ Piccadilly ” Swell Miss LORNA POUNDS
The Banjo Player Mr. FRANK LESLIE
Musical Numbers —l. Duet (Lorna and Tooxs Pounds) : “ Southern Home.”
2. Duet (Emma and Lucifer) : “ Day after Day.”
7th Scene .... NEAR WEST POINT ON THE HUDSON
(PHILEIP HOWDEN)
EMMA Miss VIOLET LORAINE
" Hop ” Williams Mr. ARTHUR FINN
LUCIFER Mr. GEORGE ROBEY
Musical Numbers —l. Song and Chorus (Miss Phyllis Barratx) : “ Miss Crinoline.”
2. Ensemble and Finale by the whole Company.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
The music of The Bing Boys on Broadway ”is published by B. Feldman <£; Co., 2& 3, Arthur Street, W.C.
and may be obtained from the attendants.
The attention of Patrons is directed to THE AMERICAN BAR, where all kinds of American drinks are sold.
made by an Expert Bar Tender.
The Paradise of all good gourmets, and
the Cheeriest Restaurant in London is
ROMANO’S
399 STRAND
Table d’Hote Supp er
IDRIS
Brewed Ginger Beer
On Sale at the Bars of this Theatre


LONDON COLISEUM
ST. MARTIN’S LANE, W.C. OVERLOOKING TRAFALGAR SQUARE.
Two Performances Daily
EVERY AFTERNOON AT 2.30
EVERY EVENING AT - 7.45
BRILLIANT VARIETIES
From the Operatic, Theatrical, Variety
and Concert Stages, Circus and Cinema.
PRICES-6d. to £2 2s. Box Office Phone GERRARD 7541 (4 lines).
The STOLL PICTURE THEATRE
(LONDON OPERA HOUSE) KINGSWAY
Continuous Performance
DAILY - - 2 to 10.25
THE WORLD’S BEST PICTURES
and Vocal and Orchestral Selections
PROGRAMME CHANGED
MONDAY, THURSDAY, AND SUNDAY
SUNDAYS - GTO 10.25
IN AID OF THE FUNDS OF
THE WAR SEAL FOUNDATION
for Erecting Homes for Disabled Bailors and Soldiers
PRICES - - 6d. to 2/- 52 PRIVATE BOXES AT 9/-
NOTICE TO VISITORS.
Patrons are respectfully informed that Seats may be booked at the Box Office of
this Theatre for
THE STOLL PICTURE THEATRE and THE LONDON COLISEUM


My My Mm Mm v MW JM? jfBF JSST
NAVAL AND MILITARY TAILORS
Waterproof Coat Specialists for over 50 Years
INFANTRY TRENCH COAT
Only height and chest
measurement required
There is only one AQUASCUTUM
Do not accept inferior
imitations
Infantry - - guineas
Cavalry - 6 guineas
Detachable Fleece Lining,
from 2\ guineas
Sold in all Principal Towns
by our recognised Agents
LADIES’ TRENCH COAT
Guaranteed
Absolutely Waterproof
Lined detachable fleece,
fur, or leather, same as
Officers’ Coats, has
proved a most essential
garment to nurses abroad,
also motor drivers, and for
all war work. For riding,
a regular Cavalry shape
is made.
LADIES’ TRENCH COAT
NAVAL LOCKERBIE
Lined Detachable Fleece Fur
or Leather
AFFICERS ON ACTIVE
SERVICE who have had
the opportunity of testing
many different makes of
Waterproofs are unanimous
in the opinion that the
only coat that has proved
thoroughly reliable is tl e
AQUASCUTUM
Cf/sY/ fsnr A S'/ f f ßy Appointment to His Majesty the King.
100 REGENT STREET lqxoon, W 1


Schwc} ypci
(yincfep Tile
Hudson & Kearns, Ltd., Lon


KING CKARLES II. Who granted Royal-
Patent to Thomas Killigrew
iSwnCflßf
|B|j I Dimitri)
ifljrtnrttjinc) jDirfrfon
j7rfbim (Toffin^


, ra| high-grade I r -'
SECOND - HAND
P URN IT URT
•* I ■ i I i
•ii» n s %
a In these times when the quality of
> new furniture cannot always be relied upon, Jelks’ High-
grade Second-hand Furniture is extraordinarily good value. [_
£50.000 STOCK of HIGH GRADE SECOND-HAND FURNITURE
Only goods of the highest quality and undoubted durability
> are purchased, and many suites and single pieces now
for sale at most moderate prices formerly adorned the
a mansions of the wealthy. I
/' Exhibited'N
/ m |
’ 250,0 00 Sq.Ff
, | of
\ Shoturoom
\ Socce /
—. •• r
Unequalled for Value, Cash,
or Easy Terms.
W rite for Monthly Bargain List.
W JELKS &SONS
263, 265, 267, 269, 271, 273, 275,
HOLLOWAY ROAD, LONDON, N.
REMOVAL ESTIMATES FREE.
Telephones: Telegrams:
North 2598,2599, “ Jel ico. ’Phone. London.”
''Ha'f the\
price and
double the
uuear of
cheap neuu
. qoods /
COLUMBIA
RECORDS OF
By kind permission
of Mr. J. L. SACKS
“SHANGHAI”
BY THE ORIGINAL ARTISTS ARE IN
COURSE OF PREPARATION AND
WILL BE ANNOUNCED SHORTLY
ONLY ON
Columbia
Exclusive Columbia Records by ORIGINAL ARTISTS of THE LILAC
DOMINO—THE MAID OF THE MOUNTAINS—BING BOYS ON
BROADWAY—CHU-CHIN-CHOW, &c., on sale at all Stores and Music-Sellers


“SHANGHAI”
J. L. SACKS, Ltd., by arrangement with ARTHUR COLLINS
present
Ji Spectacular Operette, in Two Acts ,
By ISIDORE WITMARK and WM. CAREY DUNCAN
English adaptation by Lauri Wylie
Music by Isidore Witmark
Production by WILLIAM J. WILSON
The Cast includes:
BLANCHE TOMLIN
Ivy Shilling
Harry Claff
Fred Wright
Ewart Drake
HARRY DEARTH
BERT COOTE
DOROTHY BRUNTON j
and
Paul Jakovleff
Joan Hay
Dennis Hoey
Louie Brooks
ALFRED LESTER
(By permission of C. B. Cochran, Esq.)
J.L. SADKS
W.J. WILSON
A GROUP OF “SHANGHAI” PRINCIPALS
Reading from left to right, top line— FRED WRIGHT and RAY KAY.
Second lin-PAUI J AKO V LEFF , HARRY DEARTH, ALFRED LESTER, HARRY CLAFF and BERT COOTE
Lower line-JOAN HAY, BLANCHE TOMLIN, DOROTHY BRUTON and IVY SHILLING.


EVERY EVENING AT 7.45
Matinees, Monday, Wednesday and Saturday, at 2; 15
/. L. SACKS , Ltd., by arrangement with ARTHUR COLLINS , present
“SHANGHAI”
CAST OF CHARACTERS
The Characters appear in the following order : —
Fo Pah (A Chinese Policeman) Mr. DENNIS HOEY
Fee Finn (A Chinese Herald) Mr. EWART DRAKE
Zu Zu (Sen Sen’s Bridesmaid) Miss LOUIE BROOKS
Constance Keys (An American Authoress) Miss JOAN HAY
Algernon Bay (Of Bay’s Tours) Mr. BERT COOTE
Wong Ho (A Chinese Philosopher ) Mr. HARRY CLAFF
Kin Foo (A Chinese Nobleman) Mr. HARRY DEARTH
Fan Tan (Sen Sen’s Maid) Miss DOROTHY BRUNTON
Hu Du (Just a Hoo Doo) Mr. ALFRED LESTER
(By permission of C. B. Cochran, Esq.)
Ah Sing (Captain of “ Marskee ”) Mr. FRED WRIGHT
Sen Sen (Daughter of Wong Ho) Miss BLANCHE TOMLIN
Premiere Danseuse - - Miss IVY SHILLING
Premier Danseur - - Mr. PAUL JAKOVLEFF
Sing-Song Girls , Tea Girls , Bridesmaids , Populace , Attendants , etc.
SYNOPSIS OF SCENERY
ACT I.
Scene A Street in Shanghai (R. McCleery)
ACT 11.
Scene 1. Aboard the Junk “Marskee” (Bruce Smith)
Scene 2. The Buddha on the Hill (Telbin)
Scene 3, A Secret Passage to the Temple (Bruce Smith)
Scene 4. The Temple of the Green Jade God (R. McCleery)
SYNOPSIS.
Wong Ho is a Chinese philosopher whose daughter, Sen Sen, is about to marry
a Chinese noble named Kin Foo. Now Kin Foo is one who is possessed of much
wealth, and who has led a life of ease and luxury.
Wong Ho contends that a person who has never known trouble can never
appreciate the happiness which marriage with Sen Sen should bring him. Wong
Ho therefore seeks some means by which he can bring trouble upon Kin Foo. and
falls in with a poor tramp named Hu Du. Hu Du is a Jonah —a Hoo Doo, or unlucky
man, always on the tramp, always out of a job. Wong Ho conceives the idea of
attaching Hu Du to his future son-in-law as body-servant, and so give Kin Foo a
taste of unhappiness before his marriage, with what results we shall see.


SYNOPSIS OF MUSICAL NUMBERS
Additional Lyrics by Adrian Ross
Additional Numbers by Howard Carr
ACT I.
1. “A Shanghai Street” . ... ... ... ••• (Chorus)
2. Song and Chorus “ Maidens, in your youth and beauty ”
(Zu Zu and Girls)
3. Recitative and Song “The Wise Wong-ho” (Music by Howard Carr)
( Wong Ho and Coolies)
4. Song “ Here’s to your health in tea ” ... ... (Kin Foo and Chorus)
5. Musical Monologue “I’ve a hankering”
(Words by Oscar Asche ; Music by Grace Torrens) (Hu Du)
6. Duet “In Shanghai” ... ... ... ... (Hu Du and Fan Tan)
7. Duet “ Wiggle Waddle” (Music by Howard Carr)
(Constance and Algernon)
8. Entrance and Recitative ... ... ... (Sen Sen and Kin Foo)
9. Song “Just for you” ... ... ... ... ... (Sen Sen >
10. Wedding March and Chinese Dance (Music by Howard Carr)
11. Finale .. ... ... ... ... ... (Ensemble)
ACT 11.
1. Chorus ... ... .. ... ... ... (Sailors)
2. Song “ Chinese Sailor Man ” ... ... ... (Ah Sing and Chorus)
3. Song “ When you hear that home, sweet heme ” (Wong Ho and Chorus)
4. Song “ Love's Lullaby ” .. ... ... ... (Sen Sen)
5. Duet “ I’m in love with all the world ” ... ... (Sen Sen and Kin Foo)
6. Song ... ... ... ... (Hu Du)
7. Song “The Goblins’ Glide” (Music by Howard Carr) ... (Fan Tan)
8. The Ballet of the Green Jade God (Music by Howard Carr)
The Worshipper .. .. .. Paul Jakovleff
The Spirit of the Green Jade God ... Ivy Shilling'
9. Finale ... ... ... ... ... (Ensemble)
Orchestra under the Direction of Mr. MAURICE JACOBI.
All the Costumes specially designed and supervised by Comelli.
Dresses by Lucille, Lt B. J. Simmons, Miss Fisher, Madame Sad e, W. Clarkson,
Johns & Bonham, J. & H. Ellis. Wardroie Mistress, Mrs. Hannam.
Shoes by H. & M. Rayne. Hosiery by B. Burnett & Co-, Ltd. Wigs by Cla kson
Properties by J. Jones. Electrician, H. Mather.
Machinists, F. Boorer and R. Williams. Artificial Flowers by Killingback.
Chappell’s Pianos used in this Theatre.
Toilet Table Appointments throughout the Theatre by Hinde’s Ltd. London and Birmingham
The Management would esteem it a favour if all ladies would remove their hats as it is
obvious that the enjoyment of many is entirely spoilt by the view being obstructed by
Ladies’ Hats.
The Management desires to draw attention to the fact that a special feature is being
made of Afternoon Tea , which can be obtained at the Bars or of the Attendants during
the Interval at Matinees. Price eighfence.
The Refreshment Bars are open as usual during the Performance; but owing to the new
regulations no Alcoholic Liquors can be served after Half-past Nine.
Business Manager )
Secretary L
Stage Manager j
For
Theatre Royal,
Drury Lane, "Ltd.
( CHAS. F. TAYLOR
\ R. H. LINDO
( ERNEST D’AUBAN
Treasurer - C. H. THOMAS Private Secretary - J. A. MYER
Manager )
Stage Manager J
(For J. L. SACKS, Ltd.)
f H. I. COHEN
1 ERIC HOWARD
The Safety Curtain is Lowered during the Intervals at each Performance at this Theatre


HE^RY
80:100 : Oxford
'
r ‘ e “Savory”
Cigarettes
By Special Warrant of Appointment
To His Majesty The King
Turkish Egyptian
American
Ihese Cigarettes exclusively supplied to
this 1 heat re
Sole Manufacturers —
H. L. SAVORY & CO.
47, Piccadilly, London, "W.
famous tor upwards of a Century
s **°o
* M V -
Q ?
Importers of and Dealers in
Tea, Coffee, Cocoa and Colonial Produce
NUMBER ONE, LONDON
All Tea and Coffee used in this Theatre
suoplied by DAKIN & Co. Ltd.
Daily Deliveries by our own Dans
within a rudius of 25 miles
Send jor Samples of Dakin s Dainty
Teas
HINDE’S
Drapers, Stores, Hairdressers,
Everywhere. 6d. & 1/- the Box
Hair Wavers
fYt Lswwft
C Cantrell tf Cochrane’s)
Ginger 'Ale
The merit of its exquisite flavour accounts for
its world-wide popularity and for the fact that
all who drink it once drink it again.
OBTAINABLE AT ALL THE
BARS IN THIS THEATRE.
_‘C. & C.” is the real Ginger Ale—the true, fine
flavoured beverage that has given Ginger Ale
its world-wide reputation. It quenches
theatre thirst. Say C. & C.”
FOR
AFTERNOON TEA
THE
WALDORF
HOTEL
is most conveniently situated
ONE MINUTE FROM THIS THEATRE.
L-'ght Dinners a Speciality.
by appointment
ochweppes
The Table Waters of Kings
Always ask for “SCOTCH & SCHWEPPE ’


IfSfKj
Artistic. Aurrierj
Distinctive advance
Models in Jurs and
Jur Garments lor
all occasions nov?
ready'
PERFECT QUALITIES
FAULTLESS WORKMANSHIP
EXCLUSIVE DESIGNS
j senf on \
f approval fo\
■any address*
\ in
\ or> /
\ Country i
r /Z
//lus fated Catalogue
(28 Pages) Post dree on
request.
Only Address:
163 M 65 REGENT STREET,W.i.


'toWPcuud 4 . c
LADY’S FAILLE SILK BAG
Inner division, fixed mirror
Colours: Navy, Brown, Grey, Green
and Black. 21/6 Post Free.
POST ORDERS
receive
Careful and Prompt Attention
INEST SHEFFIELD STEEL
“ SERVICE" KNIFE. 39/6
THE “UNITED SERVICES”
CIGARETTE CASE
To carry 30. Separate Note Fold for
Treasury Notes.
Pigskin or Velvet Calf, 25'6
Post Free. Expeditionary Force, 6d.
The BEST Wrist Bag for
ONE GUINEA
in London. Made of Real Morocco,
three fittings.
Colours: Navy, Green, Brown, Purple
and Black. Postage 6d.
Lady’s BEST Su_K $
with INLAID SILT -.5
TOISESTIELL Har I
aJ CREST or MOW J
Inlaid SOLID C.OL
Colours—Bottle GreenJ
Violet and Niggrf,
ACTUAL
l
LEATHE.
THE “SERVICE" •
WATCH
Extra Strong Case, Ra
and Figures, 52/6 ai'j
288-270, OXFORD STREET, Wf
187, Regent Street, W 67, Piccadilly,
177-178, Tottenham Court Rd., W.
81-84, LEADEN HALL STREET, LONDON, EC*
.'Miles & Co. Lid.. ‘Printers to His Maiesiy the King. 68-70. Wcrdoui St. London W. 6-9-18


Lessees;
AFRICAN THEATRES,
CAPETOWN.
Manager
MOSS ALEXANDER.


SPECIAL TEA FOR
INVALIDS.
MACLEAN BROS.
Tea and - -
Coffee Experts,
22,
Shortmarket St.
Opposite National Bank.
Only High
Grades of
Tea & Coffee
Stocked.
O.T.
Special Blend,
2/6 per lb.
USE
HYCOL
DISINFECTANT
Phone 5471.
P.O. Box 1257.
HOLLAND CIGAR HOUSE
29, Castle Street.
LARGEST VARIETY OF HOLLAND
CIGARS KEPT IN SOUTH AFRICA.
BEST" r AND CHEAPEST HOUSE
FOR? IMPORTED;CIGARS."^ 8
P,P. means
Proipt Printiig
P,P. means
T.T.&S.
Loop and St. George’s Streets, Cape Town
P.O. Box 49 Phone 64
BEDFORD NURSERIES,
CLAREMONT.
BOUQUETS, PRESENTATION
BASKETS, WREATHS, ETC.
Made to order on the shortest notice
T—nniwwwiTT i— n » w. wan-ninir~i r —n xir— ——T— — l
GARDEN REQUISITES,
FLOWER & GARDEN SEkDS.
Phone 171, Claremont
Tel. 139 Central. The Bvonlav Advertising Serviee. P.O. Box 1732.


USE HYCOL DISINFECTANT.
Let Stuttafords Clean It
A real war-time
economy can be
effected by
having that
comfy old suit
or the costume
you like so much
treated by our
special cleaning
process.
Our works are
equipped with
the latest mach-
inery, and by
taking out Spots
Stains, Dust,
Dirt, Creases,
etc., your gar-
ments are made
to look and serve
you as well as
new.
The charg9 for
the complete
work is next to
nothing—a very
different matter
from the cost of
new clothing.
TRY IT!
And
PRACTISE
TRUE
ECONOMY
Vieu of Stuttafords’ Clean-
ing and Dyeing Works at
—— Woodstock ——
Phone 2000 for
Van to Call
Or Send Post-Card
to P.O. Box 69,
Capetown.
Ask vonr Confectioner
«/
FOR
FIL6DES’
CARAMELS
AND OTHER
CHOICE SWEETS.
TOWELLING
BATH GOWNS.
New Styles at 19/6,
25/6, 29/6 each,
CREPE
BATH GOWNS.
Bold Designs and
Colours.
10/6 to 25/6 each.
Smart Bathing Attire
In Stockinette,
9/11, 11/9, 13/6 the suit.
All Wool Cashmere,
22/9, 25/6, 29/6 the suit.
We also stock the famous “Pesco 5 ’
Bathing suits in shades of Navy,
Brown, Saxe and Vieux Rose.
MIDDLEMOST
& CO,, LTD.,
32, ST. GEORGES STREET,
next Woodhead, Plant Ltd.
Ask the Attendant for this week’s “ STAGE & CINEMA.”


Pi M F
LLLUIiL
Qualified Opticians,
23, ADDERLEY ST.
REPAIRS AND OVERHAULS.
MUSSETT & BRIGHT
TAXI AND TOURING HIRE CARS.
DAY and NIGHT Staffs at your service with TAXIS,
TYRES, TUBES, PETROL and LUBRICANTS.
GARAGE:
Corner of Somerset Rd. & Chiappini St., Capetown
ALWAYS OPEN. PHONE 2969
Be Very Careful g
Clocks, Silver and Electro-plated War<
far below
OLD DIAMOND JEWELLERY PUR
If you cannot spare the
AMERICAN SWISS
25, Parliament St., ( L
FREE:GIFTS.-~To all purchasers to t
gratis a Solid Gold Brooch, a Solid Gol
LAWLEYS LTD.
The Best Men’s Clothiers
LONGMARKET ST., CAPETOWN.
INTERVAL NOTICE.
For Choice Confectionery and Light Refresh-
ments Daintily Served,
TURN TO THE RIGHT
Two Doors from Plein Street),
Crystal Palace Cafe,
33, DARLING STREET.
s)e
Aristocrat
°5
ar
reties
You
can
get
them
in
the
Jar.
Week Commencing 29th November, 1918.
PROGRAMME.
(Subject to Alteration without Notice)
1. Overture... ... The Tivoli Orchestra
(J. Lowndes, Conductor).
2. CINEMA ... ... Selected jp
' !
FIRST WEEK.
3. HARRY GEALE, The Brilliant Tenor.
SECOND WEEK.
4. THE TOSSING TESTROS, joyful and
Dexterous Jugglers.
5. CINEMA ... Latest African Mirror
INTERVAL.
This Theatre is Hycolized.
If you want money, call on ——■
If you want any article of Jeweller
Where you can select from ar. enoi
PLEDGES at less than HAL]
Diamond Rings, Gold Watcl
Necklets, Silverware, also
Surveyor’s Instruments
ENGAGEMENT AND~WEDDI
Only address: — A SURE SAYING O'.
J\i lll# Unredeemed Pie
- 10,
JOSEPH STELLA Repairer of Automatic Machines.
ESTABLISHED 1900 A.ny Mechanical Work done. Best Work Guaranteed.
184, LONG ST., CAPETOWN.
THIS WEEK > S ~C A,


Ensign ??E2
ELCONE,
23. ADDERLEY ST.
decide to Buy elsewhere before you
fle inspected our Tremendous Stock of
mond and Gold Jewellery, Watches,
ll etc., which we are offering at prices
holesale cost.
iHASED BEST PRICE GIVEN
cash, we will trust you.
WATCH CO , Ltd.,
«S”Li) Capetown.
ie value of£2 and upwards we present
Ring or an article of similar value.
The High Cost of Living will not affect you if
you take your Meals and Refreshments at the
ADDERLEY CAFE, T™
c/o Longmarket & Adderley Streets (U J“™ E
PRE-WAR VALUE AT PRE-WAR PRICES.
Coffee de Luxe and Tea of the best. Grills at all Hours.
Boarders. 8 Meals Daily, £4 ; 2 Meals, *3. (Closed Sundays
and Holidays.) Books of 24 1/6 M«al Tickets, available for any
meal at any time, 30/-, g-Course Luncheons and Dinners, 1/6
ORCHESTRAL MUSIC EVERY EVENING.
6 Selection... ... The Tivoli Orchestra
7. CINEMA ... ... Selected
SECOND WEEK.
8. BLUFFO, in Fun Fantastique.
| FIRST WEEK.
' *9. ARTHUR CROXON, Comedian and En-
tertainer, in Selections from his
Repertoire.
FIRST WEEK,
10. ERNESTO and YERNON, Gentlemen
Atheletes.
11. CINEMA ... Latest Pathe Gazette
GOD SAVE THE KING.
FOR YOUR TOILET REQUISITES
Try W, J. H. THOMAS,
CHEMIST & DRUGGIST,
2, SHORTMARKET STREET,
A Large and Up-to-date Assortment at
Moderate Prices.
No WAR PROFITS
Ask for MISDORP’S
TIPPERARY
MIXTURE.
1 /- per i-lb tin.
“SOME” SMOKE!
There’s Something Nice
ABOUT THE CHOCOLATES
YOU GET FROM
G. W. JOHNSTON, Ltd.
Church Square & Railway Kiosk.
iorae and consult J. KAY
;usamount of UNREDEEMED
HEIR ORIGINAL COST.
, Gold Chains, Pendants,
'ameras, Field Glasses,
ewing Machines, etc.
} RINGS A" SPECIALITY.
1 PER CENT. ON ALL PURCHASES
e Shop,
iRLIAMENT STREET.
MUSIC,
PIANOS,
ORGANS,
Terms Arranged
Catalogues Free
and all other kinds of MUSICAL IN-
STRUMENTS are procurable at prices
lower than you would pay elsewhere!
YOU SAVE MONEY at
R. MULLER,
91—93, Waterkant Street, CAPETOWN.
P 0 Box 133. Phone 180.
For High-class Refreshments of all descriptions, Choice Confectionery, &c
Tp y THE TIVOLI REFRESHMENT ROOMS
Just round the corner in PLEIN STREET, Matinee Teas and Cakes a Speciality,
rO ON OV ERLEAF


USE HYCOL DISINFECTANT.
5 DOORS TO THE RIGHT
from this THEATRE finds the
CORONATION CAFE
W here the Choicest Light
Refreshments served with
the best attention are to
be obtained—
Cool Drinks in Season.
LATE SUPPERS A SPECIALITY
Oil XMAS & HEW YEAR Oil
Alj" HAMPERS. £l|
The following well-known Wines and Brandies
consisting of—
-3 Bottles Old Port.
2 ~ Van der Stel Club Sherry.
2 ~ Claret.
1 ~ Hock.
2 ~ Golden Sherry.
1 ~ Picardie Brandy.
1 ~ 5 Star Brandy.
the above is ex bottles.
SATISFACTION GUARANTEED. Book early
and avoid disappointment.
ONL. jDDBEss, DembOVSky, Bottle Store,
164, Sir Lowry Road, Capetown.
PHONE »65fi CENTRAL.
New Acts for friday, Pec. 6Hi. 1918.
WELCOME RE-APPEARANCE OF
LAUR3 GUERITE,
The Great American Comedienne and World s Star.
The Original Singer of “ Get Out and Get Under ” and all her songs.
ZOE FORD,
THE GLORIOUS CONTRALTO VOCALIST.
Your Week-end Provisions!
An order placed with us brings
satisfaction in
PRICE, QUALITY & VALUE
THY IT.
I. CHAMES & CO.,
PORE FOOD GROCERS,
95. Plein St., Phone 185
Altree Bakeries, Ltd.,
Rafter* cmi» ©onfejctionev*.
HEAD OFFICE ’Phone No- 1729.
Victoria Road, WOODSTOCK
(NEAR TOLL GATE).
Wedding and Birthday Cakes a Speciality,
We supply the staff ot life.
Ask the Attendant for this week's “ STAGE & CINEMA.”


COLLISON’S fflQ
CARTOONS
No. 5.
A Study in C’s.
Made with Perfect
Whisky Machinery
and Methods.
CAPE
GLGNY’S
HOICEST
Obtainable from
all Leading Hotels
and Bottle Stores.
Commando Brandy.
Tei. 139 Central." The Byopiay Advertising 1 Service. P.O. Box 1732.


BI11?1VI H.N!l<»=Ttfs£l
THK LEADING JEWELLERS
E *mtmT- The Noted House Throughout South Africa.
Fine 5 Stone Diamond
Crossover Rings,
£7/10/0 to £B5/0/0
ENGAGEMENT
RINGS.
Fine 3 Stone Diamoni
Crossover Rings.
S’GNET RINGS
9 ct. and 18 ct. Signe
Rings, all weights, from
22/6 to £5.
WRIST
WATCHES
WITH GOLD
EXPANDING
BRACELETS
handsome Single-Stone
Diamond Rings,
£l5 to £l5O.
A Visit of
/ nspection
Cordially Invited.
F-ne Geld Pentants and Chains, set with
v irious Gems,
Gold Brooches, set with various Stones,
GEM BROOCHES.
Solid Silvei WrSsflet Watches, fitted with fine
Jewelled Lever Movements, fully guaranteed
i price 35/-. Also Sin Gold, from 90/ to £2O.
Fine Gold Eroochcs, set with various Stones,
INSPECT OUR WINDOWS.
Fashionable D >•*
Giusle- Rii ;
£l5 t;
ENGAG
RINGS.
Fine Diamond Rings
Platinum Settings, ,
latest fashions,
SIGNET RINGS.
Solid Gold Signet K.nff
m.9et. and 18 < t., latest
shapes.
WRIST
WATCHES
WITH
LEATHER
STRAPS.
Ladies’ Solid Gold Signet
Rings, in 9 ct. and 18 ct.
fine designs?.
“ Many other
Designs in Stock.
CATALOGUE FREE. CATALOGUE FREE.
ss^gpggj- H fy:. s Jssi capbtowlC!
T /■>«*»/.-*^rj '<snr| Qn aernci 11.


SOUVENIR of MARTIN 81 RODGERS’ European
WONDER SHOW
VAUDEVILLE CIRCUS
“'E WOULDN’T BITE ME."
Mr. John Decar and his Donkey, Tomato—The Ass with the College Education.
TWICE DAILY, at WIDTHS HIPPODROME
ANDERSON Ik SONS, PRINTERS, MELB




THE WONDER SHOW
JOSEPH BANNISTER as Humpsti-Bumpsti
CLOWNING in FIVE LANGUAGES
A CIRCUS CLOWN’S Travels.
Mr. JOSEPH BANNISTER is well known to the children of five
countries. He has been chief clown at the biggest circuses in the world, and
he is a master of five languages. In Germany —the home of great circuses—
he is known to every child throughout the length and breadth of the country,
and he is equally fit home whilst fooling in either English, Italian, French or
Russian.
JOSEPH BANNISTER, or “ Little Joe ” as he is more familiarly
called, is a trainer of animals with geese as his especial hobby.
“I have trained geese in every country,” he says ‘‘and I find that they
understand every language I can speak.
This Curious World.
A GIANT GIRL FOUND ON FARM.
‘ 1 Wonders will never cease. ’ ’ That is
the opinion of both heads of the Mai-
tin and Rodgers Wonder Show. It is
doubtful whether there ever were two
Australians with a more comprehensive
knowledge of the curious things in ex-
istence, and both are saturated with
learning \ regarding the world s most
phenomenal people and animals. A.
E. Martin, fresh from six months’
haunting of Europe and America, tells
of roller skating bears, aeroplane mon-
keys, airships which travel around cir-
cus rings without human aid, india-rub-
ber balls that hang miraculously sus-
pended on blackboards, and write what-
ever the audience whispers, speaking
cats, writing dogs, and a thousand and
one curious and bewildering novelties.
It is apparent that one has to look and
look hard for the novelties. Greta Mar-
siana, the biggest little girl in the
world, was discovered by Mr.. Martin on
a farm in North Germany, where she
was rapidly (on account of her height)
becoming a trouble about the place.
Imagine a young lady of 15 attaining
a height' of 8 feet, to the consterna-
tion of the cows she was expected to
milk. When Greta was asked how she
would like to go to Australia, she said,
“The further the better.” She is a
typical German child, quite unsophis-
ticated, and possessing at times a man-
ner babyish enough to be incongruous
in one so tall. At 7 ft. she still played
with dolls, and still has a quiet han-
kering after childish pursuits. Her
delight when she was introduced to
Smaun Singh Hpoo, another ama/.ing
member of the Wonder Exhibition, was
unbounded. Never before had this
giant farm girl seen any one so small as
this 30-in. black man, and when, at the
end of their meeting in Berlin, the phe-
nomenal little athlete attempted to help
the ‘ ‘ eight-feet ’ ’ girl on with her coat,
she was convulsed with mirth, in which
merriment she was heartily joined by
Mr. Egan Cannon, the famous seven-
hundred-weight man, who was present
with Mr. Peter Erven, whom he is pleas-
ed to call his ‘ ‘ little brother. ’ ’ Mr. Er-
ven, who acts as Cannon’s manager, is,
by-the-way, about 20st. in weight —not a
great deal more than one-third the
‘weight of his brother.


THE WONDER SHOW SOUVENIR
The Landing of a 7 cwt. man
CANNON LANDED-HUGE GERMAN TOO BIG FOR RAILWAY CARRIAGE DOOR—
TRAVELS IN BRAKE-WHEELED ON TRUCK BY PORTERS
THE MAIL . Saturday, February 16th
“Had the harbour regulations pre-
vented our vessel from coming along-
side the wharf,” said an officer on the
Aledina, “I don’t know how on earth
we would have landed the man. ’ ’
The man in question was Egan Can-
non, the weightiest human being on
earth, who in 30 years has amassed
enough flesh to bring down the scales
at the seven-hundred-weight mark.
Twenty Dogs Act in a Play at the Wonder Show. There are three scenes—
The Villain Dog murders the Landlady Dog—ls arrested by the Policeman
Dog—Tried by Dogs—Makes his peace with a Chaplain Dog, and is
guillotined by an Executioner Dog.
Cannon, who comes from Berlin to take
part in the Wonder Show, is a pleasant-
featured German, whose knowledge of
English is limited. He is admittedly the
heaviest man known to history, but
judging by the interest—and active in-
terest —he was taking in his own affairs
on the arrival of the mailboat he finds
his huge bulk not nearly so great a
burden as one might readily imagine it
to be. He acknowledged that he had
gained 18 lbs., on the journey out—a
fact due not so much to his appetite as
to the fresh sea air.
Cannon’s cabin on the Medina was
specially constructed for him. The low-
ei berth had to be doubled in width,
and specially supported. The top
berth, had, of course, to be removed
altogether, and the bottom one lowered
in order that he might get to bed with
comparative ease. The door of the cab-
in was taken out, and the woodwork cut
away in order that he might pass in
and out without holding his breath or
contracting his muscles. For all these
little privileges the huge German paid
Smaun Singh
Hypoo,
One year older
than the 7 cwt.
man, but he
weighs only
22lbs.
the P. and 0. Company the only
company which would contract to carry
him on his long journey-—an extra
fare.
The difficulties of landing a man of
Egan Cannon ’s bulk and of Egan Can-
non’s peculiarities were soon made
manifest after he had met Mr. W. Rod-
gers, one of the Wonder Show. Can-
non refused emphatically to walk over
a gangway on to the wharf. He pointed
out with neat, that gangways were not
constructed for people of his size, and
that even the shortest fall on the part
of a person of his bulk would severely
jeopardise his health. No amount of ar-
gument or persuasion would alter Can-
non’s opinion of the instability of the
gangway, and the captain was approach-
ed by the big man’s sister-in-law (who
accompanies him) with a view of hav-
ing him lowered over the side in his
special chair by means of a crane.
Captain Notley refused to take the re-
sponsibility of landing Cannon this
way. However he agreed to erect a
special staging amidships, and when the
tide was sufficiently low to enable Can-
non to walk over a gangway that didn’t
slope the big man consented to walk
across, escorted by the ship’s,officers.
The next trouble occurred when the
party reached the railway station. A
special first-class carriage had been re-
served, but it proved unequal to Can-
non ’s width. Here there was no time
lo raise the point of cutting away doors
and altering seats. A hurried consulta-
tion between Air. Rodgers (who by this
time was looking a very much worried
man ) and the railway authorities result-
ed in a hasty telephoning to the Ade-
laide office, and a sigh of relief escaped
the Wonder Show director a little later
when an engine brought along a brake
van, into which, stepping with the ut-
most caution, passed Egan Cannon, sink-
ing quite contentedly into his huge
deck chair. Director Rodgers, weary
and faint, jumped into a carriage, the
whistle sounded and the seven-hundred-
weight man was on his way to Adelaide.
Here Cannon’s peculiarities had been
foreseen to a Considerable extent, as, for
two days past, Graves, Hill, and Co. had
been altering and strengthening a spe-
cial open carriage of the Victoria type.
This is the only kind of vehicle Can-
non will consent to risk his weight in.
He finds four-wheelers difficult to get
into, and some have broken under
him. He informed a “Mail” man that


THE WONDER SHOW SOUVENIR
tie still recollects with disgust how he
was sued by a Berlin cabman whose
vehicle collapsed under his weight.
There was only room for Cannon in
the Victoria, and even then, the horse
looked anxious, though the animal pos-
sibly felt relieved when the big German
gave instructions that he was to be
driven very slowly to his hotel Messrs
Graves, Hill and Co. notiiied the Won-
der Show directors that they would take
no responsibility for the stability of
the vehicle, whilst it was being used
by Cannon. It might be mentioned
that on alighting from the train the
heavy man was placed on a truck and
wheeled to his carriage by six porters.
Koppenik,
Carl Prinz’s
Famous
Shooting
Monkey
FUN for the CHILDREN
in the
ANIMAL CIRCUS
“ Every Day and Twice
a Day,
The Animals Come
out to Play,”
in the ANIMAL CIRCUS.


OFF TO THE RACES
The Tumbling Decars and the Illustrious
Donkey Tomato.
The Human Picture
Gallery.
One of the marvels in the Wonder Show
most interesting to women is the Dutch
girl, Wallona Aritta, who is so beauti-
fully tattooed that she becomes a veri-
table human picture gallery. The mark-
ing on her back and limbs is so delicate-
ly done that it resembles nothing so
much as the most beautiful colored lace.
TRAINING A
DONKEY.
It took Mr. J. Decar
over five years to
train Tomato, the
amazing ass with
the Wonder Show.
Throughout that
time he wore a
thick leather suit
to save himself
from bites. Despite
that fact Tomato
sent his school-
master into the
hospital no less
than three times.
UNHAPPY AUGUST in the Vaudeville Circus.


THE WONDER SHOW SOUVENIR
Next to the black panther, the shyest animal in existence, the most difficult of
all animals to train is the ordinary monkey. The wonderful patience a trainer
must possess to bring monkeys to a point of perfection hitherto unattained is well
demonstrated by Carl Prinz of the Wonder Show who has taught an ape to shoot.
Herr Carl Prinz’s Trapeze Apes.
The great difficulty in training monkeys is to make them keep still. HERE
CARL PRINZ, the famous trainer at the Wonder Shows Vaudeville Circusffias
succeeded not only in making them keep still, but in teaching them to do
a wonderful simultaneous trapeze act.


THE WONDER SHOW SOUVENIR
The Biggest Little Girl in the World.
THE GIANTESS.
Greta Marziana is 15
years old, and did not
give up playing with
dolls till she was 7 feet
high.
GRETA, the Growing Giant Girl (15 years old)
THE GIANT.
The Giant, Brun, was
born on the border of
Russia and Germany.
He was by far the
biggest soldier in Europe
during his time of service
WIIAT YOU SEE AT THE WONDER SHOW
(Other Attractions are added on occasions and Programmes vary slightly)
SMAUN SINGH HPOO
The Marvellous Ring Artist, 221bs. in
weight; 30 in. high; 29 years old.
FRITZ VON LISTON
The Alan With the Lion’s Voice.
The most amazing animal mimic in
existence.
THE THREE DECARS
Lightning Tumblers and Strong Men
Comedians.
THE TRAPEZE APES.
Carl Prinz’s Wonderful Animal Act.
WALLONA ARITTA
The Beautiful Human Picture Gallery.
EGAN GANNON,
The 7 cwt. man; height, 6 feet; circum-
ference 7ft. 6 in.; collar, 40 inches; age,
28 years.
MADAM MARVELLE,
And her 20 wonderful Comedy
Cockatoos.
TOMATO THE ASS,
The Donkey with the College Education.
Free Rides for the Kiddies.
HUMPSTI & BUMPSTI,
.Table Acrobats and Parlor Prankists.
LITTLE JOE,
Famous Continental Clown.
GRETA MARZIANA,
The biggest little girl. Height, approach-
ing 8 feet, and still growing, at 15
years.
MIKKO THE MYSTERIOUS.
The Baffling Mind-reading Dog.
KOPPENIK,
The Sharpshooting Monkey Hitting
Most Difficult Targets.
CORNELIUS BRUN,
The Cossack Giant.
ADBY’S MELODRAMA DOGS,
i
In the Tragedy, “Burglar Bill.”


THE WONDER SHOW SOUVENIR
The £ s. d. of Trained Animals
WHAT A SHARPSHOOTING
MONKEY IS WORTH.
There is nothing more striking than
the increase in the value of an animal
before and after it has been trained.
Four untrained chimpanzees, valued at
£5O a piece before training, would in-
crease in worth to £2,000 each under
the mentorship of a master like the
late Frank Rostock.
Charles Prinz, of the Wonder Show,
valued the 27 lions which appeared in
his show at the London Hippodrome, at
£lO,OOO. When disease suddenly stalk-
ed into their midst and 18 of the for-
est monarchs collapsed Prinz philoso-
phically turned his attention to anoth-
er branch of animal training.
He evolved the idea of a sharp-shoot-
ing monkey, and Koppenik is the result
of two years’ continuous hard work.
Monkeys, in Mr. Prinz's opinion, are
much more difficult to train than wild
beasts. They are restless. They can
scratch and bite, and, unless an ape
speedily shows himself amenable to rea-
son, the wise trainer will sell him to a
zoological gardens.
Koppenik was purchased by Mr.
Prinz for £5. He is an ordinary every-
day monkey to gaze upon, but his notori-
ety and learning has now advanced his
value to several thousands. In fact, it
is doubtful whether he could be pur-
chased. He carries an insurance of
£5,000.
Just what an insurance of this
amount means is shown by the figures
asked by Lloyd’s and other companies.
The usual premium on an ordinary
monkey is 20 guineas per cent., and
on chimpanzees, which are very deli ('ate,
50 guineas per cent. Risks on chimpan-
zees are nowadays constantly refused.
Regarding the risks on other animals
the Wonder Show management pays
15 guineas per cent, on the cockatoos,
10 guineas per cent, on the melodrama
dogs, a big special rate on Mikko (the
wonderful mind-reading Pomeranian),
and 12 guineas per cent, on the remark-
able donkey, Tomato.
The amount of money involved and
the risk undertaken in giving the*pub-
lic a big show from over the seas that
will please both the children and the
adults is little realised by the public.
The Human Picture Gallery
WALLONA ARITTA at the Wonder Show.
The most beautifully Tattooed Woman in the World.
The 30-in. Man of the Wonder Show.
Smaun Singh Hpoo, ‘ ‘that little
black man/' who is the big contrast
to Egan Cannon, the seven-hundred-
weight man in the Wonder Show, does
not confine his accomplishments to ath-
letic work, at which he is a marvel.
He is a linguist, speaking, besides his
native Burmese, French, German, and
English.
His appetite, despite his weight of
22 lbs., is normal. He can eat as much
as an ordinary man, but does not care
for potatoes or any vegetables. Smaun
can easily lift four times his own
weight —a test that astonished Eugene
Saiidow, and caused the iat,e Professor
Virchow, to pronounce him the most per-
fect specimen of miniature man that
had ever existed.


THE WONDER SHOW SOUVENIR
the man who travels in brake vans
EGAN CANNON
CIRCUMFERENCE, T ft. 6 in.
The 30 in. Man of the Wonder Show
Among Singh Hpoo’s treasured gifts
is a gold bracelet, slightly larger than a
wedding ring, which he wears round his
little brown wrist. It is a present from
the famous dancer, Loie Fuller. Smaun
also has gifts from Edison, Sandow, the
Kaiser, and M. A. Noble, the Australian
cricketer, whom he met in England,
Bmaun was a consistent supporter of the
Australians, and became immensely
popular with the whole team.
His most recent gift came from 250
ballet girls at the Circus Busch, Berlin,
where he starred last December. He
came to Australia on the same boat as
Greta Marsiana who is half his age.
aiTl ... _ . . n , . , , „
VV klle Smaun has cached a height of
inches, or so in 30 years, Greta has
touched the eight-foot mark in 15.
J. L. ANDERSON i SONS, PRINTERS, MELS.


MINERVA COVERDALE.
Photo by F. E. Price, Courtesy of the Brooklyn Eagle.
CHAMPIONS AND FAMOUS BOXERS LEARN BAYONET FIGHTING AT CAMP GORDON, GA.
FRONT ROW: WERNZ, ORRISON. JOHNNY COULON. JOHNNY KILBANE, KENNY LEONARD, CHARLEY LEONARD, JIMMY BARRY, ARMSTRONG.
SECOND ROW: TOMMY RYAN, FRED DYER, TOM GIBBONS, D. SCANLON, FIRST LT. A. ALBANESE, BAYONET ANID PHYSICAL
IRTRICTOR; JOHNNY GRIFFITHS, BREWER, JEFF SMITH, GEORGE COHAN. BACK ROW: G. BLARE. F. WYATT, JACK (TWIN)
SULLIVAN, BULL RODEN BACH, PACKEY M'FARLAND, BILL SANDOW, EDDIE HANLON, IKE WILLIAMS. CIRCLE: MIKE GIBBONS.


Supplement “N.Z. Sporting and Dramatic Review," March 16, 1933.
FLORENCE DESMOND.
HELLO, NEW ZEALAND! THIS VIVACIOUS ENGLISH ACTRESS HAS DELIGHTED MILLIONS OF LISTENERS OVER THE RADIO WITH HER IMPERSONATIONS OF FAMOUS FILM STARS,
AND IS BEING PRESENTED IN PERSON IN A BRITISH INTERNATIONAL PICTURE, WITH THE RADIO AS ITS THEME.


Supplement “N.Z. Sporting and Dramatic Review,” February 20, 1936.
JESSIE MATTHEWS
VIVACIOUS ENGLISH MUSICAL COMEDY STAR, WHO IS IN THE FOREFRONT OF SCREENDOM WITH HER VERSATILE TALENT.


Photo by Apda.]
BEAUTY REIGNS SUPREME ON BROADWAY.
LOTTA MORSE, MARY GRAY AND DELORES MENDZ IN “THE PASSING SHOW” AT THE N. Y. WINTER GARDEN.
DAN THOMAS AND THE EMPIRE FOLLIES,
Who made their first appearance at the Empire, Johannesburg, on the night of Monday, November 11. (Left to right) : Bottom
row : Bertie Kellaway, Olive Handley, Basil Scott, Linda Mavis, Daisy Fern, Vic. Roberts, Dolly Lee, Jack Sprightly. Second row:
Jean Howard, W. M. Bissett, Vivien Talleur, Dan Thomas (producer and principal comedian), Naomi MeQuoin, Carlton Chase,
“Rabbit" Howard, Cecil Kellaway. Third row: W. Jubb, Garfield Barrett (acting musical director, Empire), Dulcie Baillie, Nelson
Hancock (lent by the London Gaiety Company), Gilbert E. Fletcher (manager, Empire), George Taylor, Doris Brown, Johnny
Isaacs (asistant manager, Empire). Back row : Vic. Stanley, Mossy Wallace, Alda Campbell, V. Berry, M. Barling, C. Barrietos.
A. Waite, Bert Harvey, Dot Fay. Several other members of the company were not present when the group was taken.
Photo for “ Stage, Cinema and S.A. Pictorial ” by Thos. O'Byrne.
RAY DE VERE


LIEUT. A. F. WINSLOW MET A HERO'S DEATH.
FIRST AMERICAN “ACE,” WHO DISTINGUISHED HIMSELF BY DARING
AERIAL ACHIEVEMENTS, REPORTED TO HAVE BEEN KILLED.
Photo by Paul Thompson.
"HUMAN FLY” GARDNER HELPS RED CROSS DRIVE.
DARE-DEVIL ATHLETE SHOWN CLOMBING TO THE TOP OF
ONE OF NEW YORK CITY’S BIG SKYSCRAPERS.
(C) by International Film Service.
RALPH DE PALMA SMASHES AUTO RECORDS.
DARE-DEVIL DRIVER ECLIPSES ALL PREVIOUS PERFORMANCES
IN BEATING RIVALS AT SHEEPHEAD BAY SPEEDWAY.
(C) by Underwood & Underwood.
"O N THE BEACH AT CONEY ISLE ON A SUMMER’S DAY.”
(5 ARTISTES)
including THE ORIGINAL SOLO GIRLS in a Musical Comedy


Maggie Dickinson, an Australian Dancer.
IN SOME OF HER POSES IN J. C. WILLIAMSON’S “CINDERELLA” PANTOMIME.
A PRETTY AND GRACEFUL BALLET IN J. C. WILLIAMSON’S “MOTHER GOOSE” PANTOMIME.
J. C. Williamson photograph. Block hy Bacon and Co.


Smart French maids in “The Better
’Ole” at the Sydney Tivoli. The
group includes Clarice Hardwicke,
Vickey Miller, Pip Colan, Fiffe
Russell, and Audrey Worth.
Eddy Montrose, a clever comedian
with Harry Lauder’s Company at
the Melbourne Kings.
ihe Nibio-Cohan Sydney Dinner.
Autographs
ONE OF THE MENU PAGES.
1. JOSEPIIINE COIIAN-NIBLO
2. GEORGE S. TITHERADGE
3. FRED NIBLO.
4. WALTER BAKER.
5. FRANCES ROSS.
6. LAWR ENCE CAMPBELL
> ■— E. -T. TAIT.
8. GEO. L. GOODMAN.
9. GERALD MARR THOMPSON
10. —LESTER BROWN.
11. EDWARD IT. MAJOR.
12. —MONTY GROVER.
!3.—CLAUDE E. F. McKAY
14. DOROTHY BRUNTON.
15. BILLY RAWLINS.
16. M. E. McINTOSH.
17. GEORGE WILLOUGHBY.
18. HUGH J. WARD.
19. -HOP” (“Bulletin”)
20. MARIAN MARCUS CLARKE.
21. LILY FULLER.
22. EDWIN LESTER.
23. —WALTER BENTLEY
24. ADAM McCAY.
25. REG'. L. (“SNOWY”) BAKER
26. HUGH D. McINTOSH.
27. — JULIUS KNIGHT.
-8. IRENE BROWNE (Sign it, and
look pleasant).
29. LILI AN HERRICK-IvNO WLE S
30. ROCK PHILLIPS.
31. DOROTHY CUMMING'.
32. GERTRUDE GLYN.
33. ETHEL BAKER.
A STRIKING STUDY OF ANNETTE KELLERMANN.
MLLE. D’HERLYS.


MISS STELLA WIRTH,
The premier equestrienne at Wirth’s Circus, now performing in Adelaide.
FALVEY GIRLS.
Fuller Time
Captain Bruce Bairnsfather, author of “The Better ’Ole,” the world-
famous comedy at the Sydney Tivoli.
THE FIVE PETLEYS.
Who are now appearing on the Pickards' circuit.
Nellie Fallon, a young Australian dancer, due to start a tour of
the world in South Africa shortly. Miss Fallon will be assisted in
her act by a bevy of young Australian beauties, all of whom go
round the world with her.
Fred Hutchings
MISS MINNIE KAUFMANN.


MISS VIOLET BLACK,
Appearing at the National Amphitheatre in the sketch, “The Half-Breed.”
THE RONDAS TRIO.
Who are now appearing on the Fuller-Brennan circuit.
MISS VIOLET LORRAINE
THE SIX BROWN BROTHERS


MAJOR GORDON W. LILLIE
"PAWNEE BILL"
THE MOS^CEALISTIC EXHIBITION
wU THE WORLD
PAWNEE* BILL’S
LWILDPWEST*
OVER 1000 PEOPLE
AND HORSES
PERMANENT ADDRESS: —•
WIRTHS' PARK. MELBOURNE
Show on Earth
6ENERAL OFFICES an o WINTERQUARTERS
I Jr BRIDGEPORT, CONN.
• SEASON 1912.
ROUTE
DATE TOWN STATE R.R. MILES
Mon. July 22 Lima Ohio Pennsylvania Lines 86
Tue. “ 23 Fort Wayne Indiana “ 65
Wed. “ 24 Elkhart “ L.S.&M.S.Ry. 02
Thu. “ 25 Rankakee Illinois n’f and
T „ . i C.I.S.R.Rs. 116
\ ri - '* 26 La Salle j “ IllinoisCent’l R.R. 104
27 Moline “ Rock Island Lines 80
SUNDAY
Mon. July 29 Kansas City Missouri Rock Island Lines 338
Tue. “ 30 (Manhattan ! Kansas “ “ ] 121
Wed. “ 31 j Norton i “ “ “ j 178
Thu. Aug. 1 Colorado Springs i Colorado I “ “ 325
Fri. “ 2 Denver “ Santa Fe Route 74
Sat. “ 3 Greeley “ Union Pacific R.R. 52
SUNDAY
Mon. Aug. 5 Sheridan Wyoming Q 639
Tue. “ 6 Billings Montana j C.B.’&Q.R.R. 144
Wed. “ 7 Great Falls “ Great North’nßy. 234
Thu. “ 8 Helena “ “ “ 90
Fri. “ 0 Butte “ . “ “ j 73
Sat. “ 10 Missoula “ Nortli'nPacificßy. 126
SUNDAY
Mon. Aug. 12 Spokane Washington North’nPacific Ry. 257
Pue “ 13 Wenatchee “ I Great North’nlßy. 174
Wed. 14 Everett “ | “ “ 132
Thu. *• 15 Centralia “ North’n Pacific Ry. 137
Sat. “ 17 [ Portland Oregon “ y 94
PERMANENT ADDRESS AND WINTER QUARTERS, BRIDGEPORT, CONN.
LOUIE OSCAR
COUNSELL & MILLS,
PRESENTING THEIR
Musical Comedy Sketches and Melodramatic Burlesque.
AN EMPHATIC SUCCESS AT THE LONDON COLISEUM.
Miss LOUIE COUNSELL.
Acknowledged by Press, Public and Management to be one of the Smartest Refined
and Amusing Acts before the Public. ’ Kenned
FRED LESLIE AND IVY SCHILLING


"PASKA." THE MAN-EATER.


BILLY SUTTON AND JESSIE BARLEE-"SKETCHING" WITH THE FULLE
Murmann Studio photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.
PRINCIPAL BOY AND GIRL.
Lilian de Venny (Colin) and Maud Fane (Jin) In J. C. Williamsons Mother G[?]
pantomime.
J. C. Williamson photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.
OH!
Photographic study of Billie Dougall by Grace Bros., Sydney.
VICTOR PRINCE
Miss Window loves simplicity in
dress—off the stage!
Ernie
Walker


PRESSY PRESTON,
" CHEYENNE AL.” M’DOWELL.
COWBOY OF NATION-WIDE REPUTE, NOW
APPEARING IN THE “MOVIES."
SOME OF THE FOLLIES.
(1) Miss Naomi McQuion (McQuion and Taylor). (2) Dan Thomas, producer and principal comedian. (3) George Taylor (McQuoin
and Taylor). (4) Lari ton Chase and the Scotch ballet. (5) Miss Vivien Talleur, with Jack Sprightly and Bertie Kellaway.
(6) The Sisters Howard. (7) W. M. Bissett and Dan Thomas.
Photos for “ Stage, Cinema and S.A. Pictorial," by H. Goldstein.
Lady Members of the Marvellous Flying Jordans
The Condona Family, Marvellous Flying Trapeze Artists
The Adelia Frio, Direct from New York Hippodrome


ACTS ON THE FULLER CIRCUIT.
1. —The Jeunets. 2. —A member of the King-Brown team. Each of the two men
in it has only one leg. 3. —Lew Hoffman, comedy juggler.
Block by Bacon and Co.
ELMA LOVE,
One of the Amazonian show-girls in the Fullers' "Babes in the Wood” pantomime.
Murmann Studio photograph. Bloch by Bacon and Co.
(C) by American Press Association.
JACK ATKINSON AND HELEN HILDRETH IN THE RING.
CHRLS. HOLT, "The Digger Mannequin." The beautiful costume he
is wearing is the gift of an Indian Rajah. It is heavily embroidered in
silver by hand on thick white crepe-de-chine, with ermine trimmings.
The headdress alone is valued at £200.
LLEW.
EDWARDS
EDDIE
WALLACE


DOT O'DEA,
Representing the Pipes of Pan in the wood-nymphs’ ballet in “The Babes in the Wood."
Murmann Studio photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.
NELLIE KENNY, CHAMPION SWIMMER, OF SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA.
The Only Woman who Ever Swam From the Battery to Sandy Hook—One of
the Most Marvelous Performances on Record.
HORACE GOLDIN.
The Gifted Illusionist appearing successfully at the Tivoli
Theatre, Sydney.
(C) by American Press Association.
“MAY I GIVE YOU A LIGHT, SIR?”
Ada Reeve, One of England’s Favorite Actresses, Entertains a Convalescent
Australian Hero Back from the Dardanelles.


Arncld Bell, "Old Bill," of “ The Better ’Ol e ,” at the Tivoli, with and without his “make-up.”
(C) by American Press Association.
DARING AVIATRIX “LOOPS THE LOOP."
CATHERINE STINSON PERFORMS THRILLING STUNTS IN HER
AEROPLANE, AND RACES REST A IN HIS AUTOMOBILE.
Photo by Press Illustrating
[?] RUTH LAW RACES MOTOR CAR.
[?] ABOVE THE TRACK IS
[?] ONT.
KITTY FIELDER, CLEVER ENGLISH COMEDIENNE.
Eccentric Costume Which She Wears in Her Specialty Act Burlesquing the Prevlent
Craze Among Women for Wearing Trouserettes.
Photo by Balboa Producing Co.
RUTH ROLAND IN “THE RED CIRCLE.”


WHICH IS FRED WALTON?
The Toy Soldiers in “Goody Two Shoes,” the
J. C. Williamson Pantomime.
Photo by Talma Studios.
The Cevine Troupe, “Six Maniacs of the Wire.”
Valeric Beraere
EXTENDS
.. CHRISTMAS GREETINGS..
G. M. ANDERSON
(ESSANAY)
LUCILLE SAVOY,
Billed as “The Singing Venus," and appearing on the Rickards’ circuit.
Photograph by Rutledge .
LALIE BROOKE.
Fashion-plate Girl” appearing on the Ful
circuit.


A SOMETIMES DISPUTED POINT PHOTOGRAPHICALLY SETTLED.
"If there is any douht as to who can claim priority of right to use the black-and-white pierrot costume,” remarks Sydney James, "the above photograph should dispel
it. This was taken at Searborough (England) in the summer season of 1894 .” The little boy to the left in the Eton suit is Charles Weston, who is now Mr. James’
genoral manage r. Mr. James himself is clearly recognisable. Next to him is Tom Carriek. The third pierrot is Claude West. Block by Bacon and Co.
FROM the left-hand cor-
ner to the right and
then down : —Queenie Fen-
ton, Mary Macfarlane,
Vera Passmore, Clare Gil-
lies, Phyllis Foldi, and
Pauline Bindley. The com-
pany left Sydney on Oc
toiler' 11. The opening per-
formance is to he given at
Calcutta, icith a lour of
India to follow. Thence
Egypt, Burma, the Malay
States, China, and Japan.
Miss Macfarlane is again
acting as Mr. Shipman's
business manager.
Off to America next Wednesday.
The above illustration shows ‘ ‘ Casey ' ’
and “Biz,” the wonderful chimpanzees,
with their trainer, Tom Pox, the man who
has brought both animals to such a high
state of perfection. “Casey” is one of
the greatest attractions that’ has ever ap-
peared on an Australian show ground, and
has earned more money for his owner than
any other individual attraction. “Biz”
also, is a onto chimp, of five years of age,
and he is a most intelligent animal. Act-
ing on the advice of several showmne, Mr.
Pox is taking both animals to America,
where he will leave for on the 31st, by the
‘ ‘ Ventura. ’ ’
MISS ZOE DE LAMA,
The equestrienne with Wirth’s Circus
at the Haymarket Hippodrome


CORP. H. FULLFORD
ERNIE
PRIOR
Verna Bain, Australia’s wonder
dancer, shortly to appear in a big
production in Melbourne.
LOLA HUNT,
A much-admired performer with the Walter Johnson Revue Co. at the Grand Oper
House. (Sydney).
Murmann Studio Photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.
Annette Kellermann in a Woodland Grove.
SAHARY DJELI.
As she is appearing in one of her sensational dances in “A World of Pleasures,” at the Winter Garden, New York.
Block by Bacon and Co.
Fred Walton and the Toy Soldiers
In the J. C. Williamson pantomime. “Goody Two Shoes."
VERA SPAULL,
Appearing with the Walter Johnson Revue Co., at the Grand Opera House (Sydney)
Murmann Studio photograph. Block by Bacon and Co.


Violet Collinson as Princess Bountiful.
Moon and Morris, speciality dancers.
Joe Brennan and William Hassan.
Gertie Latchford as Fantime.
Virginia Roche and Dorothy Leigh.
Folk cheering the hearts of Sydney playgoers in the J. & N. Tait-B ailey and Grant pantomime being staged at the Sydney Palace
THE ELMARS, Clever Athletes
GYROPLANE IN LUNA PARK, CONEY ISLAND. THE MONEY-GETTING FEATURE OF 1912.


Nellie Kolle
Lola Hunt
Essie Jennings
(C) by Underwood & Underwood.
CIRCUS MIDGETS WED IN THE RING.
ELSIE REINEKING BECOMES THE BRIDE OF LITTLE JOE SHORT,
WITH A GIANT AND GIANTESS TO ATTEND THEM.
DELIGHTFUL NELLIE FALLON
Who, with her Dancing Girls and a Male Partner,
left for South Africa this week


One of the most beautiful ballets ever introduced on the Australian stage is the Kirchner ballet —an outstanding feature of this
year’s Williamson pantomime “Goody Two Shoes.” The above photographs give a good idea of the resemblance between the
actual pictures by Kirchner and the stage 1 portraiture in the pantomime. The girls have caught the spirit of the thing admirably.
The central figure is Maggie Dickenson, who is directly under Kelso Henderson, with whom she dances.
MAGGIE DICKINSON AND A PRETTY GROUP OF PANTOMIME GIRLS IN “MOTHER GOOSE.”
GRACE PALOTTA.


4 Flexible Shoulder Muscles permit this.
The head is drawn downward and inward.
5 Chinese Straps Displaced, the straight-jacket
can be drawn over the head. The first stage.
6 Hands Can Then Be Brought to the front, per-
mitting straps to be dislodged from across back.
7 straight Jacket Straps are then undone, and first stage of escape com-
pleted. Hank’s other accomplishments include rope spinning, which he
Learned in Australia, trick shooting, knife-throwing, stockwhip work and
playing on Spanish guitar. He is always planning new and sensational acts.
8 The Chinese Straps are easily removed, then ankle straps He descends the
rone ladder gallops away. His horse, Pedro, was a stockhorse called Bob, at
Bowral Hank’ is now training him for show work and expects him to make good.


MUSSOLINI
OBJECTED
TO THIS FILM
jPEARS by Mussolini and Franco that the
1 picture “Blockade” a story of new
Spain and the revolution—showed Fascism
in a bad light, recently threatened a serious
diplomatic cleavage. Hollywood has thus
been responsible for another international
controversy, and while the picture, which
has been withheld for some months, will be
released shortly in Australia by United
Artists, it is probable that it will not be
shown in EuroDe irenerallv. The bictures on
ONE HOLDS 19-STONE IN HIS TEETH
Boy Climbs Ladder. Nabek Mayeda, “World's
Greatest Oriental Balancer,” with Wirth’s Circus, bal-
ances a triple-ladder on his feet. Fifteen-year-old Masa
Mayeda climbs up the ladder, stands on its top.
“Dental Gymnasts” is how the Leotards, performing with Wirth’s Circus in Syd-
ney, describe themselves. Adelio on the top trapeze holds in his teeth Lisa
(9 stone) and Guiseppe (10 stone); while from Lisa’s teeth hangs Guiseppe.


"Undes-Ihe Big Tog. — ja
They Mid-Ail
Aerial Trapezists from America are the Flying De Vards, here
swinging high over the heads of the audience at Wirth's Circus
in Sydney ... For PIX to secure this picture, Wirth's hauled
the cameraman up in a bos’n’s-chair to the highest point under
the tent ton. His shot shows the girl leaving the grip of the trapezist
on the right to catch the trapeze from which the somersaultist at
ton has just swung. As the girl swings clear, the man on the right
will catch the somersaultist by the ankles. It needs perfect timing.
~ * jmnnvtancp are often rough and unpaved • . • Inside Peking
vith to many open spaces wide streets, and magnificent palaces, unpaved road
surfaces with their pools of stagnant water and nf anv svstem of
drainage, led, ■ within recent years to serious o
P I X
Page Eleven


Girl Floats On Air
1 Varying The Classic Hindu levitation trick, the Great Lester,
famous stage magician, makes Miss Phyllis Means, who looks like
Myrna Loy, float on air. First, he places her on a stool, which, in turn,
stands on a table, with the heads of two broomsticks under her arms.
2 “Hypnotised,” Phyllis becomes tense and rigid and Lester removes the stool from
under her feet, leaving her suspended between the two brooms. Next, he removes one
of the brooms and she remains upright supported by the other broom. Then he places
her in this position, and passes his hand around to show that there are no wires.
The Climax to the trick comes when, at Lester’s command, Phyllis raises herself
to a horizontal position, with her shoulder apparently resting lightly on the
broom ... Lester will not explain the methods by which he accomplishes this
trick, but it has been suggested that the girl’s pyjamas, which conceal her legs
to the ankles, might hide a steel bar, connecting with a vertical support running
through the broomhead ... Apparently there is little pressure on the b[?]


Lying on a Bed of Nails, the Atom supports his family, including his wife,
his ten children and their families, on a platform across his chest. The plat-
form has hinged ramps leading to the floor on either side, and weighs 400
pounds. The combined weight of the people on the platform is about 1,600
pounds, making a total weight of one ton, of which he actually supports
about one-half. Greenstein performed in vaudeville in the United States
for 20 years and has appeared in most of the leading cities of Europe. He
now gives health lectures and sells an herb compound.
He Is Pressed Into a Bed of Nails ... With This Result
For Fifteen Minutes, Greenstein lies on his
bed of nails while the platform is adjusted
across his chest and members of the family
take their places on it. He claims “intense
mental concentration” enables him to per-
form this feat by overcoming pain. He eats
but two meals a day, broiled meat twice a
week, and raw vegetables.
Greenstein’s Back, after performing his unusual feat. The
nails have penetrated the skin to a depth of nearly one-
quarter inch, but there is no blood. His body is unusually
tough and does not bruise under heavy pressure or blows.
(Harold Monoson photos)


He Drives a Nail With His Hands ... He Pulls It With His Teeth
The World’s Biggest Little Man is 55-year-old Joseph
Greenstein of Houston, Tex. He weighs but 148 pounds and
is only 5 feet 4½ inches tall, and yet he can drive a spike
through 10 layers of sheet metal and then through a two-
inch plank. He wraps a piece of cloth around the head of the
spike in the palm of his hand. He strikes and then ...
He Pulls the Spike Out with his teeth. He
was born in Suwalki, Poland, and was a
weak, sickly child. He suffered from a head
injury until he was 7 years old. Greenstein
claims that his strength came with his cure,
effected when his dying father placed his
hand upon his head. As a youth he became
a professional wrestler and strong man.
Today he can break a heavy chain with his
chest, and pull a 12-ton transport plane
with chains fastened to his hair. In fact,
his hair cannot be pulled out.
THE MIGHTY ATOM
Little Man Performs Big Feats of Strength
He Bites a Chain in Two ... Here Is the Bitten Link
Even His Teeth Are Strong. He chews through iron chains. His wis-
dom teeth never developed but he has the rest of them, although
some are chipped as a result of trying to bite through a piece of tem-
pered steel, which a stranger challenged him to chew.
Chain Link Chewed Through by Greenstein with pieces of metal torn off by his
teeth. The chain is of soft steel and the links are about one-eighth inch thick.
He bites through them with a grinding motion in less than one minute. Green-
stein frequently donates his blood to hospital patients requiring transfusions.


Beds Break Under
Her 54 Stone
THOUSANDS at Sydney’s Easter Show are visiting
the tent in Side-Show Alley which advertises “The
Mexican Rose —Fattest Girl in the World,” but PIX
visited Miss Rose Nanez, one of the guests at a Flinders
Street (Sydney) residential, and there secured these
private views. “Mexican Rose” Nanez weighs 54 stone.
Wash-day Revelation, Fifty-four stone is six times the weight of
the average woman, needs six times the accommodation.
One-third of a Ton comes down stairs. And the stairway's barely
wide enough for Rose. Climbing stairs is very difficult for her;
she has to have ground-floor rooms, outside cabins on ships.
No Sleeper. Rose Nanez has broken many beds, the latest
[?] a Maitland (N.S.W.) hotel. A specially enlarged bed was re-
[?]airedon the ship from America. Fattest of all the Fattest Ladies
on Earth, Rose is feet “around the equator.” Rose Nanez is keen-
witted and by temperament, jolly, doesn’t worry about her size,
laughs and grows fatter. Her hobby is amateur photography.


PRIVATE LIFE Of The
FAT LADY
“When a girl is 23 and still gaining on 54 stone she has to keep her
strength up ..." Not over-eating but over-working of her pituitary
gland is responsible for Rose’s size, says her manager. At Top: In
show costume of Mexico where she was born, a normal baby.
Back View ... “I wouldn’t trust just one chair, even if it was wide
enough for me to sit on.” So Rose takes two.
Not Getting Into a Car ... In America, Rose Nanez has her own speci-
ally-built Nash sedan. Too wide to travel by train, she is transported
in the back of a big 7-seater Buick while in Australia.
APRIL 23. 1938.


Aerial Trapezists from America are the Flying De Vards, here
swinging high over the heads of the audience at Wirth's Circus
in Sydney ... For PIX to secure this picture, Wirth's hauled
the cameraman up in a bos’n’s-chair to the highest point under
the tent top. His shot shows the girl leaving the grip of the trapezist
on the right to catch the trapeze from which the somersaultist at
top has just swung. As the girl swings clear, the man on the right
will catch the somersaultist by the ankles. It needs perfect timing.
TJftder TheßigTopJ
They Pass In Mid-Ail:
APRIL 23. 1938.
P I X
Page Fourteen


Walking Down Martin Place, Sydney, with international
showman Arthur Greenhalgh (No. 2) are (1) Betty
Broadbent, America’s Tattooed Venus, (3) Tam Tam,
the Leopard Man, Chang the Pin-Head Chinese, and
Anna-John Budd, the man woman. They are being ex-
hibited at the Royal Easter Show, Sydney.
Tam Tam, The Leopard Man, at the Sydney Show, had
an Ethiopian father, a half-white mother, but he is
black and white in patches due to loss of pigmentation,
which began on his arms when he was 35. Tam Tam is
62, has perfect health. His real name is W. H. Johnson.
Group. —Showman Greenhalgh with the Tattooed
Venus, the Chinese Pinhead, and the Leopard Man.
Tattooed girl (see cover) has 465 designs on her body.
A FREAK BOD'S 1
IS A LIVING
TO THEM
• If portions of your body changed color, or you su
denly showed bodily symptoms of the other sex—or if
the age of 22, you were only about two feet high, v<
would find it difficult to fit into ordinary society. Bi
provided that you shed a sense of embarrassment, y
could always earn a living in Sideshow Alley at Sydn
Show.
Man-Woman
Anna-John Budd,
born a weakling girl,
matured at 12, then
began to develop as
a man on one side
of her body. She
grew hair on her
chest, her right arm
and leg became as
large and strong as a
man’s.
Chang, The Pin-Head Chinese, pictured with Anna
John Budd, comes from North China, is aged 22
APRIL 23, int


A Skilled Bolo Player. Idea is to keep [?]
prevent them falling. It achieved greatest
Sporting
Manchurian Girls Playing the American vol
also to Australia. The medicine-ball must be
"TATTOOED VENUS"
These Biceps measure 13
inches... Ivy has no
time for boy friends,
concentrates on in-
creasing her strength.
Handy to have about the house... Ivy Russell is a
domestic servant, likes cooking and sewing.


ANIMALS ARE TRAINED
FOR MOVIE PARTS
Training animals for pictures and circus acts is a profitable busi-
ness in America. Young animals can be bought cheaply and sold
for several times their original cost when they are trained.
Animal training is carried on as a profitable hobby by several
people in America. One of the leading amateurs is Professor
George Keller, of the Pennsylvania State Teachers’ College . . .
The trainer who made these pictures works near the big film
studios at Hollywood, which use animals, particularly dogs and
lions frequently . . . Professor Keller, who has trained lions,
cougars, bears and dogs gives the prize for intelligence to the
dogs . . . Members of the dog family work best when there is
affection between them and their trainer.
Yawning cavernously in the warm sunlight this lion shows cruel-looking
teeth ... Trainers say lions are not as brave as their reputation suggests.
One Bite, and the trainer’s hand would fall off ... Lions, and other mem-
bers of the cat family are said, by this trainer, to respond only to fear.
Wire-Walking demands patient teaching. The animal’s impulse, when it feels
the wire swaying beneath it, is to leap at the nearest conspicuous object.
Babies make a universal appeal ... The trainer says that this one, with its
amusing tricks will be a popular favorite. She cost £20, will be worth £70.


Their Pituitary Glands did this. Major Mite, famous circus
midget, swings at Jack Earl, 27st. giant from Texas (U.S.A.).
Jack Glicken, 38-inch, 58-pound midget, kisses his future
wife, Mildred Lonti, a 400-pounder, after securing a mar-
riage licence at New York. They are show people.
All Sorts Make A World
Condition and activity of the front lobe of the pituitary gland—a small, red-
dish, vascular body at the base of the skull—is responsible for great individual
departures from the average human height of sft. sins. The ancients held that
the first men were towering creatures, others tried to prove they were dwarfish.
Modern “giantism” is caused by excessive pituitary development, and has pro-
duced such famous figures as Chang (Chinese) and Machnow (Russian) each
9£ft. From wrist to end of his middle finger, Machnow measured 2ft. Elizabeth
Lyska (Russian) had reached 6ft. Bins. at the age of 12. Pituitary abnormality
may also produce dwarfs.
Sixteen-feet Around The Hips is Miss Norah Spicer, at the age of 20. She comes from
Brighton, is England’s fattest girl. She measures 7ft. 2ins. around the shoulders, weighs
38 stone. A profitable circus career is open to her as one of the famed “fat ladies.”


California’s Big Day, when 50 of the state’s plumpest competed in a fat women’s
beauty contest at Ocean Park. The finalists included (left to right):—Eva
Tweed (21 stone), Ruth Johnstone (22 stone), Marguerita Nielson (18 stone),
Stella Jack (14 stone) and Jolly Lee Harvey (24 stone). Thousands attended.
One Case In Which Siamese Twins Each Married, Lugio Godino (right) be-
came seriously ill in New York, necessitating a spell in bed also for his twin,
Simplicio. Their wives, each beside her husband visited them. Lucio has a
high fever, but Simplicio’s temperature is normal. They are 28 years old.
Social Note—Albert Cox and Beatrice Green,
after marriage at Yorkshire. Each is a midget.
Age 2 Years, Weight 7 Stone. Leslie, son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald Bowls, of Lowestoft, is the largest baby in the word.
Said Mohamed Ghazi, an Egyptian
(9ft. 8ins.) so tall he can hardly stand


So This Is London! Two hundred men worked two months building this
miniature city at an estimated cost of $200,000 for “The Sky Hawk,” a pic-
ture in which Zeppelins bombed London. As in all movie miniatures, all
construction was to an exact scale, with every detail authentic. The scale
is usually a half-inch to a foot, the miniature of a 50-foot building thus
being 25 inches. Ralph Hammeras, 20th Century-Fox miniature department
chief, is sitting on one of the buildings. In the movie a tiny Zeppelin and
planes fought above this city. Miniatures also were used for some of the
most spectacular earthquake shots in “San Francisco,” enabling the di-
rector to achieve thrills which could be obtained in no other way.
What Surrea
“OURREAUSM ” a French ted
ing to English art authoril
a book about it. Its foundation]
psychology. He ties it up wit]
It is a form of art which allow]
even the sub-conscious idea; i]
tastic by relating it to real obj]
or painting skill, though some
paint uncannily well. In short
Famous "Rainy" Taxi outside the
sit inside with water pouring over
cal thought of rain inside the car.


IT TAKES ALL SORTS OF MARRIAGES . .
One Minute After Midnight, in an air-liner high over Los Angeles, air-hostess Dorothy Koke
became the bride of a Kansas City business man. Wedding March was broadcast from radio
station in Hollywood. Four air-hostesses acted as bridesmaids.
. . To Make
a Divorce
Court
THE development of marriage is
1 an interesting sociological
study. Customs change in this
matter of domestic intimacy ac-
cording to social necessity. It is not
commonly known that in England, prior
to the Council of Trent in 1565, mutual
agreement was sufficient to constitute
marriage; no civil or religious cere-
mony was necessary.
At the present time, in the United
States, marriage laws are not uniform.
Individual states make separate laws.
The legal age for marriage varies con-
siderably. The recent child-marriage
of a girl of 9 to a bridegroom aged 22
in Tennessee, U.S.A., shocked public
morality. But the contract was legal.
In the southern states marriage be-
tween whites and negroes is prohibited.
In most American states weddings can
be performed at any time and place.
This flexibility accounts for some
eccentric weddings here presented.
The Girl’s “Catty” Friends said that the lions’ den was
very appropriate, but that did not deter Miss Wood, of
New Jersey, U.S.A., being married to Mr. Van Der Linde
in these strange surroundings.
Leaving The Church On An Elephant was nothing in the life of Miss Rosaires,
24-year-old elephant trainer. She left the church as Mrs. Shufflebottom, wife
of a cowboy performer in an English circus.


Nudists’ Garen of Eden
As It Was In The Beginning. Miss Wise, the brunette hidden be-
hind the bouquet becomes Mrs. James Goodman in a South Carolina
nudist camp. The groom is second from the right, and the officiating
clergyman has his back to the camera. The blonde bridesmaid seems
moved by the romantic setting. It is not known if divorce is car-
ried out under the same conditions.
Two Members Of The Horsey set celebrated their marriage in familiar
surroundings when Miss Wallace and Mr. Van Horn, of Virginia, U.S.A.,
were married on horseback.
Marriage Eccentricities are not confined to any particular coun-
try. This French couple were married on a motor cycle built
for the occasion, to the delight of onlookers.


“Boots”—A Real Live Rocking Horst
Freakish Nature provided “Boots,” this horse owned by Mr. Ernie Walker, of
Coogee, Sydney, with rockers instead of hooves. As a result Boots does not
trot or gallop like ordinary horses; he just rocks along ... His h
instead of stopping short in sharp-edged ovals, grew like sled-runne[?]
He Skids at the word “Whoa!” ... Boots’ freak hooves were not meant
for Sudden, safety stops. They run over the ground instead of gripping it.
Isn't He Funny when he walks? ... His comical hooves, strongly suggest
of clumsy boots impart a Chaplinesque ungainliness to every movement.


“SAWING A WOMAN IN HALF”
1 “Victim.” Miss Phyllis Means disrobes to show the aud-
ience that she is wearing no protective harness or coverings.
2 She Is Hypnotised. At least the magician, the Great Lester, makes hypnotising motions
over the girl, whose body stiffens. Now she is ready to be ripped in half by the circular saw.
3 Every Muscle Rigid, the girl is lifted on to the saw bench ... Dummy legs have been used
in versions of this illusion, but these legs are real, so is the rest of the girl’s body.
4 The Saw with its jagged edge of cruel teeth, is lowered over the motionless figure strapped down to the bench


Sawing a Woman in Half
Can You Tell How It’s Done? The photographer could not find out, although
he was as close to the Subject as you are to the picture, during a performance
by The Great Lester, stage magician. To the audience, it appears that the
w hirling saw actually cuts right through the woman’s body. This illusion,
one of the most amazing ever created for the stage, dates back to an English
stunt of the eighteeth century. Its modern version was invented by Horace
Goldin, famous American magician, who at one time had six companies
perfoming it on tour and paying royalties to him.


1 The Subject Is Hypnotized before being strapped into a frame
beneath the saw. At least, the magician goes through the motions
of hypnotizing, and her body becomes rigid. The trick was first per-
formed with the aid of fake legs. These are real.
2 The Whirling Blade Cuts through her body—or so it appears
to the audience. Women spectators frequently scream with
horror at this point, but the same subject goes through the ordeal
night after night without any apparent damage.
3 The Saw Is Emerging on the other side, and the woman has not moved.
Horace Goldin patented this trick soon after he invented it, and it was the
high point of many vaudeville shows; In 1933, Goldin’s method of doing it was
exposed in an advertisement of the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., which Goldin
sued for $50,000. The company offered the defense that, in patenting is process,
Goldin had made it public property. The suit has not yet been settled.


The
WORLD’S
STRONGEST
WOMAN
Only 9 Stone, and sft. bins, in height,
Miss Ivy Russell is “Lady Weight-lift-
ing Champion of the World,” able
catch-as-catch-can wrestler and jujitsu
expert. She is proud of the collection
of trophies she has won.
Challenging the world. Ivy Russell, will meet any other strong wom
Weight-Lifting is the pastime Ivy Russell likes best. She took it up
She Was Delicate Chile
development comparable only witl
that of strong men, has been achieved by Misi
Ivy Russell. She was a delicate child, weighed onb
two pounds at birth, failed to develop in earb
adolescence. Measurements now are : Bust 3/
inches, hips 374, waist 28, calf 14, neck 15, ankle 9


Hollywood Stunt Cirl
King oi Beasts
Catches Queen oi Stunts
1 Running From a Lion. lone Reed, Hollywood stunt girl, has a
feeling that the lion, Jackie, Jr., is too close for safety in this
picture, taken at Zoo Park in Los Angeles.
2 And She's Right. Miss Reed’s expression shows plainly that Jackie is f[?]
getting his manners. Jackie weighs more than 300 pounds, has sharp cla[?]
and teeth. A single blow from his paw could break her neck.
3 Jackie's Trainer Conies to the Rescue.
As the lion threatens to claw Miss Reed,
he is driven off by Melvin Koontz, his trainer.


THE HINDU
ROPE TRICK
OF all feats of magic, the Hindu rope trick has caused
most controversy. Legends of the trick originated
in China 600 years ago. Leading investigators of the
occult arts have sought exhibitions, without success. Many
including Houdini and Thurston, have declared it impos-
sible. After roaming India in an unsuccessful search for
performers of the trick. Mr. J. Briggs, an Englishman
now in Australia, invented the method demonstrated by
tthe Great Chandu in this series of pictures.
At The Command of the magician the girl commences to
climb, hand over hand. Rope continues to stand upright.
Supported In Mid-Air, as though by an invisible force,
the girl and the rope remain suspended. And then ...
As Though Charmed by the incantations of the magician, the rope climbs;
swaying snake-like, into the air and remains apparently unsupported.
The Girl Disappears in an instant ... rope falls back ... How? ... Few
magicians have been able to master the intricacies of this illusion.


A Wounded Tiger Attacks an Elephant
A Tiger and an Indian Elephant, fierce natural enemies, are trying to kill
each other in this remarkable picture from India. The tiger, wounded by a
printer on another elephant, has sprung at this screaming elephant, which
[?] trying to crush the enraged jungle cat. To avoid the claws of the tiger's
[?]ont feet, the elephant curves its sensitive trunk out of reach, but its
belly is scratched by the wounded beast’s hind claws. A minute after this
picture was taken, the tiger was slain by a second shot from the hunter.
Wounded tigers will attack men as well as elephants. Edison Marshall,
famous big game hunter, says some men have the “shakes” for an hour
after killing a tiger, so great is the thrill they experience.


“But I'd Rather Have A Bottle Of Beer!”
"Milk might be all right for marmosets but
beer's the stuff that keeps hair on your
chest," glugs Wirth’s orang-utan, Harold.


*ndu Hope Trick
Page 11
How Does He Do It?
... Magicians Don’t Believe It Can Be Done!
1. Hindu uses ordinary rope to perform trick
for German children, lets them examine it.
2. As the rope uncoils, the Hindu repeats sup-
posedly magic words, rapidly.
3. An instant later the rope becomes rigid as if
it had been hypnotized.
It’s An Argument
Famous magicians Houdini and Thurston de-
clared this trick impossible. Both spent months
in India trying to learn it.
Neither found a person who had ever seen the
trick! (The fellow pictured—where was he?)
V
The rope trick legend originated in China, has
been told for 600 years.
The legendary rope trick is most complicated.
After the rope is up, a little boy climbs it, dis-
appears. The magician follows, brandishing a
sharp sword, disappears, too.
Bloody pieces of the boy’s body drop from the
clouds.
The magician climbs down the rope, wiping off
his bloody sword. He taps the rope, it falls.
Then he picks up the pieces of the boy, fits
them together, and the boy lives again.
Magicians think the story of Jack and the Bean-
stalk comes from this legend.
V
Physicians and psychologists point out that the
people of India are easy subjects for hypnotists.
They suggest that the performer’s hocus-pocus
puts his audience into a trance in which they
‘see” whatever he tells them to.
V
$25,000 has been offered by the British Magic
Circle, and $lO,OOO by American magicians to
anyone who will perform the rope trick before
them successfully. No one has claimed the prizes.
4. He permits a child to climb it. At the finish
the rope falls at his feet.


The World's Largest Gorilla
This Fellow Weighed 600 Pounds when shot with his family in Africa by
the George Vanderbilt expedition two years ago. The expedition gave his
skin to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia where it is preserved
like this ... Though heavier and stronger gorillas are abouts
height as men, have the same number of teeth, travel in families
ity, they contract pneumonia, rickets, grippe and other human
CIRCUS
EARTH !
U ' V E EVER KNOWN !
LOVE THIS CIRCUS!


A rubbing- tree used by deer in Ross-shire,
and (below) a stag wallow, consisting of wet
peat churned up in spring and autumn.
2,000,000
CIRCULATION
Published
Every-other-T uesday


Just
A
Jolly
Romp
These remarkable pictures show Harry Piel, a Continental film actor, with a tiger of which he has made such a friend
that he can afford to trust himself fearlessly to its jaws and claws. Nothing but genuine understanding and kindness could
have made possible this extraordinary confidence between man and the normally savage cat. Sahib the tiger, besides
appearing with Mr. Piel in films, when they enact their hair-raising rough-and-tumbles lives at the actor’ s home with
very little restraint. Therefore if you call on Harry Piel, be prepared for an introduction to Shib. In the picture above
the pan are at work in a film scene. Photos: Tobis-Europa.
A tiger’s kiss
presses fearsome
fangs against
the man’s face.
In wrestling
matches like
this, Harry Piel
bets his life that
the tiger will re-
member to
remain friend and
playmate.
How a Camera Catches Sally’s Dance. Sally, who sometimes addresses
advertising clubs on “The Value of White Space,” says she is looking for-
ward to a future where a fan means only something to keep cool with in
summer. “I have been successful and I am grateful,” she once wrote.
She Has Her Problems, however, such as the [?]ced to [?]
Max Baer “a big bum.” She told him, on the [?]ase hims
around Central park, then added, “If that guy [?] smack [?]
with a hairbrush. He’s a nuisance. A constant no[?] uosettin


After a stren-
uous tussle, tiger
[?]d man relax
each other’s
arms.
JACKIE, a Hoolywood lion, has beeb
trained to look dangerous for the films,
but the girl with whom he is seen
[?]ere knows that in reality he likes
[?]aving his photograph taken.
"LOS VELASQUEZ”


[?]s Burmese Beauty Three Native Women from Burma whose beauty consists of elongated necks. It is the practice to stretch the
of female children from birth. Brass rings are added as the neck stretches for this strange conception of be [?]
whirling Saw begins to cut through the girl at the hips.
6 With A Sickening Screech it rips its way across her form.
Through to the other side screeches the saw.
8 No Worse for her ordeal, Miss Means smiles at the magician.
He’s as Strong as a Horse. In fact, Baumann, Germany's champion strong
man , is stronger than a horse. He is pictured demonstrating his might by
preventing two teams of horses from pulling him apart as they strain in
opposite directions. The pull, of course, tended to balance bu[?]
didn’t budge, despite the horsepower. By crossing his arms, he[?]
every muscle to exert its maximum pull against the horses.


Some characteristic studies of Old Bill, “The Walrus,” Bert, and Alf., the principal characters in Hugh D. Mclntosh’s production of “The Better
’Ole,” to be staged in Sydney shortly. Our photographs depict Arnold Bell as Old Bill, David Hallam as Alf., and Percy Cahill as Bert.
FLO
and
MACK
"The Quaint Two”
Comedy •
Eccentric Act
B /ißerrs £mas
to an
Idle Jim fir 5 Lord Ded-
hrokewith W. Pardoe’s
Dick Whittington
Panto —fifth season
AGNES YORK
THE EMINENT
CONTRALTO.
Fairy Queen, Pantomime 1916-17,
PRINCES THEATRE, BRADFORD.
Corns. - - EDELSTEN & BURNS, Ltd.


Meredith
: : and ::
Adnil
“ Just Athletes”
Wish all their Friends in and out
of the Profession,
The Best of Luck for 1916
Playing at the Tivoli, Brisbane,
Direction Hugh D. Mclntosh.
George Sharratt’s own Song, entitled "The Best Two-Step I’ve Two-Stepped
To, is the Two-Step I’m Stepping To Now,” is secured by Dan Thomas.
Sharratt
and
Lang
.. Everybody Knows Us ..
Wish the Compliments of
the Season to ALL.
Photo by International Film Service.
AN ATTRACTIVE POEM IN BLACK AND WHITE.
Art Smith
Marjorie Stinson
Ruth Bancroft Law
Charles Niles
Katherine Stinson
(In center)
“After seeing me in the Pollies, unkind go home and
drink in the bathroom, and repose in the sink. To gratify those who
imagine me in such a role, I have posed their thoghts for a photograph,
so that they can really see how I would look if their imagination is
not vivid enough to picture the scene.
The Lady Guard.
The Tramway Inspector
MONICA DALY
FRANK MARR
A DISTINCTLY DIFFERENT DUO.
JOE AND VERA WHITE.
JIMMY CLARKE. Light Comedian


[?]rtis, 3½-foot midget, and his bride, formerly Lois De Pee, shortly after they had
[?]ied at Miama Beach, Florida (U.S. A.). Miss De Fee weighs 190 pounds, is 6
[?]s. Mrs. Curtis was once a night club “bouncer” who is reputed to have ejected
[?]o Camera from a Broadway night club. “It’s the real thing” said the bride
[?]arriage.




PGODFREY
Assisted by MISS VEDO.
Presenting Magic and Patter
in a Novel Manner ::
v r STAGE SET CARRIED .
25, HIPPO.. HAMILTON (Return).
I, PRINCES, EDINBURGH (Return'.
esentatives, Edelsten & Burns. Ltd.
Carnell. Geo.
LITTLE VERNA.
"My chief delight is gardening —in my make up—in my dreams.”
Photo. by A. Mar
“I am fond of boating.”
—Photo.
GEORGE WELCH.
"At a performance recently, I heard a lady remark that I was
the image of a ‘drunk’ she had seen motoring, before she came into the
show. I can imagine I must have looked like the above, in my flying
bedstead—I mean—My Fraud.”


MAY BRILLIANT,
Who after playing Australia with the Fullers left for England via the East
Block by Bacon and Co.
LUCILLE CAVANAGH
PERFECTION!
Albert Chevalier in the speciality he
has made world-famous, “A Fallen
Star"
Block by Bacon and Co.
Moon and Morris as Mutt and Jeff
Christmas Greetings
to Friends at Home
. . and Overseas . .
from
“ THE
WORLD’S
WORST.”
WALTON
««> LESTER
WHOSE LATEST CREATION,
“THE BROTHERS DUFF,”
IS SOME LAUGH LIFTER.
THE CAST WHEN FIRST STAGED AT THE PALACE (SYDNEY) IN MAY, 1912.
Standing (top row): Lily, Lilias Adeson; Mrs. White, Queenie Sefton; Maloney, Ned Duggan; Sandy.
Guy Hastings; Billy Bearup, Alfred Harford. Sitting (middle row): Dave, Fred Macdonald; Mum, Alfreda
Bevan; Dad, Bert Bailey; Kate Rudd, Mary Marlowe. Bottom row: Joe, Arthur Bertram; Sarah, Laura
Roberts; and Uncle, Willie Driscoll.
Block by Bacon and Co.
Herbert
Morris
and
J. Mat.
Meeker
FRANK MEEKER’S ALL-AMERICAN CONCERT BAND


LEFT THE SPARKLE of the stage for love: Phyllis Lorna Yates
LOS 4 Day-wills
ORIGNAL EXCZENTRIC CUBANOS.
ELEPHANTS AT FOOTBALL
Big Circus Stars Cut Loose
When Alice and Mollie, Wirths’
elephants, were back in Newcastle,
N.S.W., with their other seven
* sisters, they were situated near a
football ground close to the care-
taker’s cottage.
In the early hours of the morning
the pair of mischiefmakers got loose
and went through two gates into the
fowl yard at the side of the care-
taker’s home and then on to the lawn,
where a clothes basket had been left.
The caretaker and his wife were
amazed when they looked out of the
window and saw the elephants kick-
ing the basket about. Wirths’ were
notified and the elephants collected —
but the damage had to be paid for.
Another time one of the elephants
was missing at night and when
located she was having a great time
with her trunk outstretched, blowing
chickens from their perches. Wirths’
elephants delight in making hay while
the sun shines —or, we should say,
while the keeper is away. Alice and
i Mollie are real mischiefmakers and on
i numerous occasions their escapades
have cost the show a good few r pounds.
They love to get away unwatched
Ijy their keepers and have a
gambol about.
"Alice is the starter of it all, accord-
ing to Mr. arry Mooney, who has
charge of vWThs’ elephants and who
has travelled the world with circuses
over a period of 40 years. At the first
opportunity, Alice will work herself
free, and Mollie, too. and away they
will go. While in Queensland, Alice
got out in the early hours of the morn-
ing, but she went away without
Mollie; in fact, it was a case where
she could not get her mate out; the
unloading of the train had commenced
a.nd the animals were. still in their
Alice got the bottom door of
>ier truck open, but she could not get
s he top. But this did not stop her, as
she squeezed through the space which
i.s half her size, and her first port of
call was the police station. Two 2000-
gallon tanks stood out on their own
a,nd they contained water, one was
pushed right over by Alice and the
ether lost its bottom when she
attempted to push it over too.
In South Africa, Alice was missing
when loading commenced, Mollie
: trumpted and Alice answered from a
* paddock some distance away, where
! she was having a great time chasing
■ rattle about. The elephant is just
like a child in mind. It is obedient
when the keeper is at it all the time,
but delights in misehief.
Wirth Bros. migirSTcircus completes
the South-Western portion of their
Western Australian tour at Pinjarra
fl.n Monday night and will arrive. in
Perth at an early hour on Tuesday
morning for the grand gala opening
' at. 8 o’clock that night.
t This year’s Wirths’ is claimed by
Mr. Philip Wirth, sen., to be the
most gigantic and costliest circus
that Wirth Bros, have ever pre-
sented to the public. The box plan
is open at Nicholson’s and the
location is the Esplanade at the
foot of Victoria-street.
Married Her , Then
Stood His Trial
WEDDING TEMPORARILY BROKE
UP ACROBATIC ACT
Young Man Acquitted
JHE magic and glamor of the footlights was not the initial
magnet in the life of Phyllis Lorna Hodson, 1 7-year-old
member of **The Four Sylvesters, acrobats and hand
balancers, who have gripped the imagination of Wirths*
Circus patrons for two years or more.
I? ACED with the question of domestic bliss or “going on with the
show,” Phyllis chose the former. The attractive Miss and a
young Petersham mechanic, Leslie Ernest Yates, were the
principals in a romantic setting on February 26 last, when
they said “I will” in St. John’s Church of England, Glebe.
THEY decided to face the future
* hand in hand, but had no
idea what the Fates held in store
*or them. Then
The young husband was ar-
ested and charged with having
married Phyllis Lorna Hodson,
a girl under the age of 21 years,
without the consent in writing of
her father.
He appeared before Judge Curiewis
and a jury at the Sydney Quarter
Sessions last week, and after a brief
hearing was acquitted by the jury and
discharged.
And when the court proceedings were
over the story of their happiness was
told to “Truth” in a special interview.
Standing together, the young couple
aughingly replied to questions.
Despite the worry of the case, both
Phyllis and Leslie claim that they have
not had one moment’s regret.
“I NEVER DID LIKE TIIE ACT
VERY MUCH,” SAID MRS.
YATES, REFERRING TO THE
ACT, OF WHICH SHE WAS A
MEMBER WITH ANOTHER SIS-
TER AND TWO BROTHERS.
“FOR THE OTHERS IT WAS ALL
RIGHT—THEY LIKED IT, BUT
AFTER LES CAME INTO MY
LIFE I REALISED THAT I
COULD NOT CONTINUE.”
“We grew to love each other, and,
well—when Les asked me my age I
put it on. I knew if I told him the
cruth, that it was the end, that my
father would never consent, so I did
what I said at the court.”
The girl-wife had been called by Mr.
L. J. McKean, K.C. (Senior Crown
Prosecutor) as the first witness for
;he Crown
Shyly, she told judge and jury that
she has only known her husband fox
about five months, and as she gave her
evidence her eyes rested lovingly on
the youthful figure in the dock.
She said that she was a member of
an acrobatic troupe, and during
January last, she, with other members
of the troupe, went to fulfil an en-
gagement at the Melbourne “Tivoli."
Her husband drove them down.
Mr. McKean: Did you ever tell
accused how old you were?—l said
I was 22 years of age.
To Mr. J. J. B. Kinkead (in-
structed by Messrs. Mervyn Finlay
and Jennings), who appeared for
Yates, Phyllis said that her mar-
riage temporarily broke up the act.
She denied that her mother haa
3ver told Les. Yates that she (witness!
was only seventeen.
The officiating clergyman at the
wedding ceremony, the Reverend Dry
den, said that the girl appeared to him
to be 22 years on the day of the mat
riage, and added that she told him
that was her age.
The mother of Mrs. Yates, Mrs. Mar-
garet Hodson, said that accused dreve
her and other members of her family
to Melbourne during January last.
Two days after their arrival in Mei-
oourne, the whole party were swim-
ming at St. Kilda when she noticed
Phyllis wearing Yates’ coat. She told
Yates, she said, that Phyllis was only
17 years of age, and too young to have
a boy friend.
ANOTHER MEMBER OF “THE
FOUR SYLVESTERS,” MISS NEL-
LIE HODSON, ALSO CLAIMED
THAT SHE TOLD YATES THAT
HER SISTER WAS ONLY SEVEN-
TEEN.
Francis Sylvester Xavia Hodson, the
father of Mrs. Yates, said he had never
given consent to his daughter’s mar-
riage to Yates.
Without hearing the defence the jury-
stopped the case.
THE YOUTHFUL HUSBAND:
Leslie Ernest Yates.
Nudist Club Likely
In Launceston
LAUNCESTON, Tuesday.—Laun-
ceston may possess a nudist club
this summer. Circulars bearing
the signature of a woman and a
Launceston street address have been
sent to possible members.
An outline of the objects and
rules of the club explains that a
secluded swimming pool will be
available as well as suitable
grounds.
It is laid down that members
during the first three months of
membership will not be allowed
to separate in couples. The in-
troduction of a camera will be
regarded as a serious offence.
JAMUNA LOSES HER MATE
Rajah, the male elephant at the Auckland Zoo, has been destroyed owing
to his bad-tempered disposition. In this photograph Rajah (left) and
Jamuna are seen together.
Banquet In
Lions' Cage
. 'JJEARLY 100 Melbourne men—
politicians, city councillors, and
business men—have accepted the in-
vitation of the governing director
of Wirths’ Circus (Mr. Philip •
Wirth) to attend a dinner on Caul-
field Cup eve in a cage round which
lions will be allowed to wander.
Mr. Wirth’s guests will dine in the
lions’ cage. They will not eat
with the lions, but in the presence
of three or four of them. The lions
will parade outside the inner cage
while the diners eat exotic dishes
and drink Australian wines.
The dinner Is to celebrate the six- j
tieth year of Mr. Wirth in the cir-
cus business. The menus for the
dinner have been printed on
clowns’ hats, and there will be only
two short speeches. The banquet
will be filmed by Cinesound. Pro-
ceedings will be broadcast, and an j
attempt will be made to rebroad-
cast them to England. ,
y i ms Ml-A# jMaw
ON THE BOUNCE


THE INTERIOR of the Exhibition Building
has been transformed into a fairyland of coloured
lights for the All-Electrical Exhibition.
NOT SO DOCILE as he may seem in this photograph—Prince, a
Bengal tiger at Wirth Bros. Ltd.’s circus, with his trainer, Mr. Eric
Flyger, whom he attacked and mauled yesterday.
ORPHANAGE CHILDREN WITH THE CIRCUS ELEPHANTS.
A party of children from the Abbotsford Orphanage spent a happy afternoon at Wirths
Circus yesterday through the generosity of members of Tattersall’s Club. They were parti-
cularly interested in the animals and some of them are shown making friends with Gyp
and Lena, the two young elephants at the Circus.
Novel Method Used to Bring Charity Ball Before Public
NINE ELEPHANTS FROM WIRTHS CIRCUS assisted charity today when they were paraded through the city
streets during the lunch hour to advertise the Miss Centenary ball, to be held in the Palais Royal on Wednesday
night.
IN BALANCING FEATS, no ac-
countant or State Treasurer can
equal the feats of this performing
seal, shown yesterday rehearsing
one of its acts for this season's
circus at Wirth’s Park.


ALEX. CHRISTIE, the Murrumbeena
Presbyterian left-hander who secured
[?]57 and made 36 and 26 against Glen-
deair ⅞ Grove. In 1933-4 Christie won
the association batting aggregate with
555 runs. Last year, he won the third
[?]
Elephant Gives
Tailor Good Fit
* iY CE ’ foe pet elephant at Wirth’s
j Circus, knows a thing or two about
tai. u-ing. She knows that if a garment
has a loose hang somewhere it has
either to be taken in or filled out from
1 mderneath. Yesterday she tried the
latter, but. having used the garment
to provide the filling, she found she
had not the garment to fill—which is
all very puzzling.
This may explain it:
| U Many years ago when the Sydney
Hippodrome was at its zenith, Mr.
■fillip Wirth imported many yards of
ed velvet to drape the boxes. The
elvet was the best money could buy
jnd, hung with golden tassels and
SJeco rated with gold braid, it gave
color to the theatre.
Times changed, and the velvet came
Jo Melbourne. Someone had the bright
idea of using it for new drapings for
the nine elephants. Two theatre drap-
uigs, each 20ft. by 10ft., with trimmings, 1
ivent to each tailor-made suit for the I
jriepnants but two of them were sent»
pack for alterations. |
( Altered, they were put on the two!
pefifijints again yesterday. The tailor
diked the fit and went off to get some-
one to confirm his impressions.
Alice, however, did not like her fit.
When the tailor returned, it was he
vho had the fit. He was just in time
to rescue two or three of the tassels, i
jihee had devoured the rest of the two
fcapings to fill out her ageing sides!
Horse in Taxi With
Space to Spare
/ v HORSE was taken in a taxi-cab to
*- a steamship office in London re-
tently, there to ascend in a passenger
Sit to be introduced to the manager
iind staff and to book his passage to
Australia.
L The horse is Wee Jimmy, said to be
le smallest of racehorse stock in the
•orld. He came originally from
;aenos Aires, and is jnow on his way to
,rlelaide in the Aberdeen and Com-
:tiwealth liner Jervis Bay.
:iHe weighs 371 b., and stands 23Un.
i height, although his sire (Siccory)
;>pd !6 hansd and his dam (Augment ;
,;) stood 15 i hands.
fPure silver has been used for W’ee I
,;inmy s shoes, which are the size of =
jlf-a-crown. . His owner, Mr. David I
jirence Meekin, is bringing him to!
[listraha for exhibition at agricultural §
pIRTHS’ enjpus AND ZOO-
Y ~H-
|C'.IIILLIP PARK, -STREET.
1 For This Wegk OfiJy,
The Brilliant Equestrian Spectacle
°JCK TURPIN’S RIDE TO YORK.
Howards, Page!,
. ‘ Ra«;c 11], £ lonsollf,
t And others of our World-famed Artists
oifT—3s, Zs, ana Is. Boxes, £l.. Plan a£ Palinsr’s
BEHIND THE GREASEPAINT AND
OUT OF THE SAWDUST RING
A League of
Nations That are
a Pack of Happy
Troupers
**• • . And now Laaaadies
and geeentlemen, on behalf of
Wirth Brothers, we have much
pleasure in . . .
Somebody drops the flap of
the dressing tept, and the ro-
mance of the ring is behind us.
We are seeing circus life with
the lid off.
The elephants, lions, tigers
and gaudy costumes that thrill
the gaping mouthed audiences
are simply “the show.” Behind
those trappings are the wheels
that the whole business runs
on—a group of hard working
stars who love every minute
of the lives they lead.
Talk to a circus star of leaving
the sawdust ring. He will laugh at
you. For the men who play their
Separate parts, as well as the thou-
sands who love to see them do it.
there Is a lure about a circus that
holds them hard and fast from the
moment they join up.
As tbe flap of the tent drops we are
among a League of Nations who need no-
thing in the nature of round table eon-
ferenees; this group of troupers are *
pack of real friends.
“Eeky! Ecky!—that suit,” yells kme-
body. The wardrobe man appears from
somewhere with a gold-braided velvet suit
in his hands. “Can I have my trousers?”
“Those old braces, Eck!” “Someone
chuck us a cigarette.” and half a dozen
packets are produced. , “Coming over!”
“Made a good job of the bracket,” says
a conscientous linesman. “Yeah,” answers
the clown, rot a hit interested, “See
Palmer’s liav.ng another crack at II:ae v-
bloom.”
An so if goes on. Every r jrAity
chatting on every subject under the run.
The elephant trainer, one of the veter-
ans of the show, is sorting his long whips.
“Like the life?” we asked him, rather
stupidly it sounds.
“Like it! It’s the only ore I know.
I’ve got to like it. Yes, lad, itk a great
life. Good boss, good job, cash waiting
for me every Saturday night. Woiudn’t
you like it?” I had a look around the
wierdly painted, laughing crowd, and de-
cided that I would.
Street clothes, clowns’ costumes, jug-
glers’ togs, acrobats’, togs, animal train-
ers’ togs are appearing as if by magic.
How so many people and ©o many clothes
can get in one tent is a mystery. And
yet the place is tidy. From a kerosene
tin of water by the flap the clowns
SWILL THE GREASEPAINTS
from their faces between acts. In the
centre of the tent are four huge clubs.
Every man has his private trunk; and
on one of them the diminutive tent mas-
cot —a thumbnail pup—sits wagging his
tail at each newcomer. Belts, bandages,
coat hangers, huge whips, cane chairs and
sombreros are packed in tidy leaps or
hung on rope lines.
Little Danny, the stiff-shirted
clown, Is sitting quietly on a trunk,
with his greased hair and his long
tails, puffing contentedly at a cigar-
ette, as though hfs thoughts were
miles away from his two and a half
hour job.
“Been a long time with the show,
Danny?” I asked him, recalling having
seen him, years ago, putting a group of
I performing dogs through their paces
I “Yes, a fair while,” he nods. “You
| don’t throw off these shows like you would
|an old coat.” “Like it? Isn’t it pretty
| bard trying to be funny all tbe time?”
|“I don’t know about that. Never thought
3 it that way,” he says through a smoke
[ ring. “The people like it; the kids like
| it; and I suppose, because of that, I like
I it. You get used to people expecting you
\ to be funny, you know.”
I /TTm,” I nodded. Danny didn’t seem a
bit funny to me at that moment. As a
matter of fact, he reminded me of the
old, old story, of tbe clown who had to
laugh while his heart was breaking. But
two minutes later in the sawdust ring,
throwing himself around like an india-
rubber . ball, he looked anything but a
man with a breaking heart. Danny is
JUST A TYPICAL CLOWN:
funny what he has to be, when he knows
Lis bread and butter are dependant on it;
( serious when the glare of the ring >3 be-
hind him and his life, for a short while,
at least, is his own again.
Danny was about to become confidential
when a raucous voice cut in: “Mind your
own business” (not talking to ns, mind
you). “Here, put these on.” “Who put
that there?” “Thanks, Jack, throw over
those sandals, will you?” And before I
could get tinder the clown’s greasepaint
It is call had come.
On a trunk in the corner sat a
dlm|mitive cowboy, a mere slip of
a kid. I put the old questions to
him. ‘How old are you?” “Fif-
teen,” he answered. “Fifteen, eh?
Been with the show long?” “Oh, a
couple of years. I’m an acrobat—
(and was he proud of it!)—answered
rn advertisement in the paper, and
got a job.” “Father here,” I sun-
Costed. “No, on my own, and l’ir
not going to leave it.” “I see,” I
said, “you’re the one who turns those
treble somersaults in the air, aren’t
you scared?” “Scared, no” (he made
me feel positively ashamed of my
own funk). “Nothing to be scared
of. Look at them, they catch me.”
And he pointed to a group of splen-
didly proportioned, huge-chested men
smoking quietly In another corner
Suddenly there was a shout. Two of
the performing dogs were in holts. Jr.l-
ousy, of course; Danny had patted one
and not the other, and the snubbed hound
got a grip of his rival’s throat lhac he
refused to relinquish. It took all the efforts
of the clown and one of the tent hands
to separate them; and then they
were led apart until they quietened down
again.
Suddenly the flap lifted and Capt. Eric
Flyger walked in. He is the man with
the job that
LITTLE BOYS DREAM OF,
the man in charge of the Bengal tigers.
We got chatting as he brushed his boots
preparatory to having a look around the
city. Hie act was finished. “Pretty dan-
gerous job,” I suggested. “Not so bad,”
he said casually. I treat them a'.i as
though they were kids; get their confid-
ence, as you would a child’s, and then
they begin to look forward to seeing
you.”
“Ever had any trouble with them?”
CIRCUS
THRILLS
AGAIN
I JpERFORMING tigers and trained ele-
phants, clowns and daring riders are
occupying the arena once more at Wirth’s
Olympia, and the 1935 Circus pro-
gramme to which they contribute has
just as many thrills and excitements
and just as much glamor as those that
have preceded it.
1 A highlight of the show is the ap-
j pearance of the Seven Hiltons in acro-
| batic work from a springboard. The
j climax to the act is when one member
the troupe springs off the board
into a triple somersault and lands safely
in an armchair held on the shoulders of
his companions.
The seven girl acrobats, contortion-
ists and pyramidists who make up the
de Paul troupe provide excellent enter-
tainment in their fast-moving act.
One of the most appealing interludes
is the appearance of Miss Doris Wirth
with Duke, “the golden horse,”
The animal acts are excellent. The
midget elephants who can waltz, roll
drums, sit down demurely or play
skittles with equal aplomb, were great
favorites with the first night audience
on Saturday, but the performing geese
of Danny D’Alma. the clown, scored per-
haps the biggest hit.
The last item among the 25 numbers,
“The Great Pribyl” in the human
cannon ball act, is billed as the greatest
sensation of the programme. And it is.
The young man who has entered the
“canon” mouth looking so debonair in a
French sailor’s suit.
The same young man is one of the
stars of the show. His cannon ball act
is the sequel to two other appearances.
#
ALICE TAKES TO EVIL PRACTICES
AT STAID AGE OF 80
Caught In Act Following Mystery Thefts
From Stall At Circus
'JHNS of condensed milk and health
food, coupled with an occasional
quantity of fruit, which vanished
mysteriously from the sweets stall, gave
"Wirth’s Circus management cause for
seme deep thinking during the past few
diys. Some elusive, light-fingered
fdlow was at work, the management
decided.
Meanwhile, the monkeys wrung their
tals in anguish, for the missing tins
c«ntained their special nourishment.
However, all doubts were dispelled
yesterday by the discovery of the cul-
prit red-handed —or more appro-
priately, red-trunked.
Alice, a youngster of 80 and just
under four tons, was seen to enter the
stall and deftly remove a tin of con-
densed milk from the shelf. Breaking
it open by squashing it with her fore-
foot, the job was completed with a
sudden intake of air. The milk van-
ished up her trunk.
Nonchalantly, the empty container
was tossed over a fence. Prompt inves-
tigations revealed that it was one of
many there.
Considering that Alice does all the
heavy transport work for Wirth’s, it
may be judicious to store the tins else-
where, for Alice, if denied her beauty
diet by locks and bolts, may throw the
stall over the fence, too.
An elephant never forgets!
Horse Drops Dead at Sight of
Elephant.
COHUNA, Sunday.—A horse in a jin*
ker belonging to Mr. A. Rowe, of Cohuna,
dropped dead on Saturday on seeing a
big elephant belonging to a circus, which
was being paraded in the street.
Circus Life With
the Lid off:: “The
Mirror ’ ’ Has a
Look Around
I asked. “Nothing to mention,” he said,
as he packed away his boot brushes. “Bit
of a tussle last September. Slipped off
the see-saw during the act, and Prince,
the big fellow, took a flying leap at me.
Got me down bad, too; but Mr. George
Wirth slipped into the cage with a pitch-
fork and managed to keep them off.”
“And it’s not a dangerous job!” I asked
again. “Not with tigers so much, or bon«
for that matter. But the bears, the polar
bears, they’d take a fish out of your rand
with one paw and
RIP YOUR THROAT
with the other. You never know whew i
you’ve got them, so don’t give then, any j
chances.”
“No, sir, I won’t,” I assured him, men-
tally measuring the distance between me !
and the bear cages. “I WON’T!”
While the artists dart in and out
the tent to answer their calls, a
Mexican motor cyclist sits quietly on
a box in the corner. A fine stamp
of a man, he has not spoken a
word since I entered the tent. He
and a little Japanese, who Is seated
at a table in the middle of the tom
playing patience, seem more content
to watch the workings of the crowd
than join in the doings. Now and
again one of them allows a hsfl
smile at some wisecrack from one o#
the troupers then Japan turns again
to the cards and Mexico to draw-
ing figures In the sawdust with the
toe of his shoe.
The “father” of the show is A.
Christie, ringman and trainer of peiform- j
ing horses. For about 20 years he has }
watched the changing fortunes of the |
tent show. Now, as the time draws near, I
he sloughs his old suit and products a I
Aussies Laugh—Maybe the
Joke’s On Us
Australians have been enjoying a
great old chuckle because a couple
of German prize winners at the
Olympic Games have been promot-
ed. A policeman, for instance, was
made an inspector on the spot.
But haven’t Australians ever
heard of champion footballers being
found good jobs just because they
were champion footballers?
boiled shirt and white tie. In his band
is a whip with an eight feet lash. But
it s all make believe. It’s
SUGAR AND NOT THE LASH
that gets the veteran ringman his extra-
ordinary results. As he takes hold of
the bridle to lead a vest pocket edition
pony into the ring, his hand dips into his
pocket and the little Shetland noses for
the sugar, lump he knows Is there. There
is a greater understanding and friendship
between that man and his animals than
there is between many human beings.
And the sawdust ring shows the results.
Now there is a consistent stream from
the dressing tent to the ring. Ladies in
tights, ladies on horseback, Chinese ladies,
German ladies, red-nosed clowns, big-
chested acrobats, tight-rope walkers and
prancing ponies.
There is no time to talk shop any
longer. The lights are up. The
music is playing. The elephants are
trumpeting, and the ponies pranc-
ing ready for their part.
HE'D BEEN SEASICK-AND
ELEPHANTS NEVER FORGET
It took nearly two hours of persuasion, threats and pushing
to get Tommy, the only hull elephant in Australia, aboard the
Bass Strait‘freighter Tambar yesterday.
r pOMMY recently celebrated his four-
teenth birthday, after having been
with Perry Brothers’ travelling circus
since he was bought from the Sydney
Zoo 13 years ago.
The four other elephants attached to
the show boarded the ship with decorum,
and should have set Tommy a good
example, but he knows the sea too well.
It seems that he was seasick while
travelling across the Bight in the Wes-
tralia not long ago when the circus was
coming to Victoria. And an elephant
never forgets!
j After the efforts of his trainer and
three or four other men failed to shift
! Tommy’s four-ton mass more than a few
| feet towards the narrow gang plank, it
jwas decided to sling him aboard,
j But Tommy’s elephantine blood was;
| up, and he deftly shook the slings to the!
j ground just when his trainer had sue-|
Iceeded in looping them around his mas-!
sive legs. i
j The last resort—the Tam bar s steam
capstan—proved more than a match for
Tommy, whose front legs were hobbled
ami fastened to the winch cable.
The steam was turned on, and slowly
but surely his legs were pulled nearer
to the ship. Bellowing with fear and
™ger Tommy still fought, and his
j shack led forelimbs crashed on to the light
wooden roof of the monkeys’ cage caus-
ing a flurry of chattering inside
Then steam conquered, and Tommy
was swung neatly aboard, landing lightly
—for an elephant—on the straw -covered
deck. The other elephants who had been
contentedly stowing away trunkfuls of
straw, eyed him with scorn.
Tommy himself felt sorry for the
,trouble he had caused, and" waved his
| trunk apologetically through the bars
.of his pen to the crowd on the South
j Wharf as the Tambar turned and headed!
i seawards down the river, two hours late


Supplement “N.Z. Sporting and Dramatic Review/- February 27, 1936.
ASTRID ALLWYN,
THE GLAMOROUS BLONDE SCREEN STAR, WHO APPEARS UNDER THE FOX BANNER.


The English Rugby League Touring Team now in New Zealand
Glen Broughton, Photo., Sydney.
BACK ROW (FROM LEFT): J. WRIGHT, J. FEETHAM, J. LOWE, L. WHITE, J. THOMPSON, W. A. WILLIAMS, G. ROBINSON.
THIRD ROW: N. SILCOCK, M. HODGSON, A. ELLABY, W. HORTON, F. A. BUTTERS, N. FENDER, A. J. RIZMAN, A. ATKINSON.
SEATED: A. E. FILDES, B. HUDSON, B. EVANS, MR. R. F. ANDERTON (Business Manager), J. SULLIVAN (Captain), MR. G. F. HUTCHINS (Team Manager), E. POLLARD, J. T. WOODS, W. DINGSDALE.
IN FRONT: S. BROGDEN, L. ADAMS, I. DAVIES, S. SMITH.
Supplement “N,Z. Sporting and Dramatic Review,” July 28, 1932.


The Blind Woman
Who Dives on Horseback
1 Sonora Carver Is the Rider. Red Lips is the horse. They thrill crowds
by making a 50-foot dive together into a tank of water. The act is made
more daring by the fact that Mrs. Carver is blind.
2 Ready to Dive. Red Lips was trained by the blind diver’s husband,
Al Carver, who supervises the act, originated by his father in 1892.
Twelve horses have been used. It takes six months to train one.
3 In Mid-Air. Mrs. Carver rides bareback, trusts to the eyes of the horse.
She dived for eight years without a mishap, then was blinded by an
accident. She has continued the act in spite of blindness for six years.
4 Red Lips Swims to Shore after the dive with his blind rider. This
daring act has been staged in every state in the union, in Canada,
Mexico and Cuba. The Carvers and the horse live in a trailer.
Siamese Twins, Viofet and Daisy Hilton,
[?]
JACK STEVENS, also known as Jack Drummit, circus employee with the
circus elephant which ran amok at Parkes on Tuesday, and trampled him to
death.


The Hindu
Rope Trick
. . . Sensation of
German Vaudeville
These Pictures of a man performing the Hindu
rope trick appeared in the March Look. The
pictures, which have been widely circulated,
are believed to be the first taken of this trick.
1 The Same Young Man has worked to
perfect the trick, and is now the sen-
sation of a German vaudeville show. Here
he starts the trick on the stage.
2 Up Goes the Rope! The back drop shows
a scene in tropical India, where some
travelers claim they have seen the trick per-
formed by Hindu fakirs (holy men).
3 The Rope Now looks like a stiff pole,
far different from the coil shown in pic-
ture No. 1. The young man holds it while
a little girl climbs up, up, up!
4 Success, and She Waves to the audience. Of course,
this young man doesn’t tell how he does his trick’
but an American man who claimed to perform it was
found to be using wires to pull the rope into the air.
Charlotte Ayres.
Forsyth, Seamon and Farrell
RUTH
CRAVEN
That Delightful
American
Broadcasting
Star.


SAHITA, PARISIAN MUSICAL COMEDY CELEBRITY.


Coff’s Harbor terrorised
by escaped circus lions
Wirth’s Circus
lion Pasha, one;
of five which ;
escaped and ter-
rorised Coffs
Harbor residents;
last night.
The lions were in
a cage being towed
by Rill, an elephant,
when a shunting
train overturned
the cage, releasing
the lions and in-
juring the elephant.
Pasha was found on
the front doorstep of a
house.
He had killed 32
fowls, eaten one, and
then fallen asleep.
• See Story Page 5.


Jions Coop Up^Bmlies
For 12 Hours
r COFFS HARBOUR, Tuesday. - Terri-
field women and children remained in their
Homes for twelve hours, behind locked doors
when five lions and an elephant escaped
from their cages at Coffs Harbour last
night.
The families remained indoors until the
last of the escaped animals was rounded
up this morning.
The escape occurred when
a shunting locomotive hit a
Wirth’s Brothers’ circus
truck last night.
When the truck over-
turned the lions escaped
through the twisted bars of
their cages, and ran roaring
to freedom.
With the whole district
alerted on the escape, the
radio repeated warnings for
residents to remain indoors.
Armed hunters stalked the
beasts, and Captain Wun-
derlich, of the 13th Militia
Battalion, recalled members '
from a local ball. They were
armed with rifles and sent
to join the hunt.
Dancers in formal even-
ing dress locked themselves
in the hall for several
hours.
Pol ice And Tamers
Police reinforcements
were rushed from Grafton,
and three liontamers left by
plane for Coffs Harbour to
join in the hunt.
i Two of the lions were
quickly recaptured, but the
I others were at liberty fpr
112 hours. Until the news got
I round that the beasts had
■ all been caught, Coffs Har-
I bour was deserted. No one
I ventured abroad.
I When the crash occurred
the elephant, Rill, was badly
(injured. He charged away
desperately and was at large
until he was rounded up on
the beach this morning.
One of the lions, Pasha,
killed 32 fowls and then
slept beneath the window of
the owners, Mr. and Mrs. S.
Wiseley.
Mr. and Mrs. Wiseley
were later horrified to find
Pasha asleep on their front
doorstep. Armed hunters
arrived, and Pasha was soon
recaged.
A circus attendant, Dennis
Phillpot (30), was injured
when one of the recaptured
lions sprang at a cage and
knocked part of the steel
framework on his leg. The
lion was again recaptured
with a net.
One .lion, found on the
jetty, was lured by armed
searchers back into a cage.
They placed the cage near
him, and he had either to
jump into the water or
choose the cage.
He selected the cage.
Cornered On Beach
Greatest danger for the
hunters came when they
cornered two other lions on
the beach.
A huge circular cage was
heaved over one lion, but
the other broke through the
cordon and raced away.
It was finally secured in
a steel cage, while police
and residents stood tensely
by with rifles and revolvers
at the ready. The lion/snarl-
ing viciously, tried to spring
out again, but found the
closed on him.
One of the circus man- ■
agers, Mr. S. Tunks, said it
Was fortunate that the lions
had been fed before the
crash.
TRADER AGROUND
PORT VILA (New Heb-
rides), Tues. — The 150-ton
island trader, El Retiro, is
aground on Million Dollar
Point, near Santo.
El Retiro, which recently
returned from a trip to Syd-
ney, was engaged in salvag-
ing war material from the
sea off Million Dollar Point.
She touched a reef and was
holed while at anchor.
Most Exciting Night In The
History Of Coffs Harbour
(BY OUR COFFS CORRESPONDENT)
~ P^ FI \ S HARBOUR, Tuesaay After one of tMmost exciti/ig nights in
Lofts Harbours history all five lions w hieh escaped from Wirth’s Circus were
recaptured shortly after 9 a.m. to-day.
The first entered the cage
quietly about midnight. The
second was enclosed by nets
under a cattle truck where
it had taken refuge.
For over four hours cir-
cus attendants and police
endeavoured to drive this
animal into a waiting cage.
Metal panels from the
lion’s performing cage were
rigged up to guide the beast
into the cage.
Broke His Leg
l At about 3 a.m. a circus
employee, Denis Philpott,
30, was injured when the
lion lunged against one of
the guiding panels.
The heavy panel fell on
top of Philpott.
A doctor was called and
it was found that his right
leg had been fractured. He
was taken to hospital.
The doctor was asked to
try to administer some form
of drug to the lion.
Tablets were placed in a
piece of steak, but the lion
refused to eat it.
Eventually, after Empire
Hay crackers had been
-- se d, the lion was caged.
Attention was then trans-
ferred . to the third lion
which had established itself
midway along the jetty in
the harbour.
Just as day broke the lion
was caged in a similar man-
ner to that adopted with the
previous two.
Polrol With Rifles
- During the whole night
Coffs Harbour police, militia
men and civilians armed
with .303 rifles had kept a
close watch and had en-
deavoured to ensure that the
remaining two lions were
confined to the beach area.
Shortly after daybreak,
the animals were found on
the sand dunes north of the
Jetty.
The lions had been seen a
short time previously by
Mr. and Mrs. S. Wiseley,
whose home is situated on
the beach, side of the rail-
way line.
Mr. Wiseley saidxx. at his
wife heard a commciion in
the fowlyard shortly before
daybreak.
On investigation she found
the wire netting smashed
down and dead fowls
strewn all over the yard.
She walked to the gate of
the fowlyard, screamed
loudly and raced inside.
She shouted to her hus-
band: “The fowls are dead
and there’s a lion in the
fowlyard.”
Incredulously Mr. Wiseley
went to investigate, and as
he said later, “I took one
look and raced inside and
locked the door.’’
A count later revealed
that all but four of Mr.
Wiseley’s 32 hens had been
killed and partially eaten.
In the meantime the army
party had been augmented
by five police officers from
Grafton.
At about 8 a.m. circus
employees rigged up the
larger performing cage used
in the lion’s act in the
.circus.
Long nets were extended
in V shape to the opening
in thk side of the cage and
the circus liontamer. assist-
ed b yj attendants, eventually
drov« the larger of the two
beasts into the cage.
A f similar procedure was
adapted with the second
lion and both were trans-
ferred to a small cage
shortly after 9 a.m.
Lion In Tent
Another unusual feature
of the night’s excitement
was related by an aborigine
woman, Mrs. H. Murphy,
who lives with her husfefond
in a tent on the sand dunes.
She said that round about
midnight she was asleep,
but was awakened by a
noise at the door of the tent.
She thought it was her
husband making a late re-
turn home and spoke to him.
When she received no reply
she sat up in bed and look-
ed towards the door.
Just inside the door of the
tent she saw the larger of
the two lions. J
Fortunately for her the
fabric in the tent was not
strong. Because, as she said
later, “I backed out through
the back wall and ran for
my life.”
Thought It Hoax
One of the Coffs Harbour
police officers attended a
meeting of the newly-form-
ed Lions Club at Coffs Har-
bour last nighty where he
was initiated as a hew mem-
ber.
Later he commenced his
duty at the police station.
The first call he l received
was from the railway station
informing him that the rail-
way goods yards was full of
lions.
Naturally the police officer
took some convincing that
the telephone call was not a
hoax.
This morning three lion
trainers, Mr. and Mrs.
Schultz and Mr. V/islong,
flew from Sydney in an
A.N.A. aircraft which was
diverted from its Sydney-
Brisbane run to offload them
at Coffs Harbour.
They arrived after ffi e
lions had been recapturec.
Animals Cause
Fun And Thrills
(BY A SPECIAL CORRESPO^DEIfr)
Amusing incidents abounded during the
excitement of the escape of the lions at
Coffs Harbour.
Sergt. W. Hobbs, of
j South Grafton, who aecom-
! panied a police squad to
| Coffs Harbour to assist in
protecting; the public and
round-up the lions, told the
tale or a young lad whose
hair stood on end.
“While we were on the
sandhills where the lions
had' been - located and pre-
parations were being made
for their capture a small
boy, apparently not fully
aware of what was going
on, came on to the scene,”
he said.
/‘He ran across the sand-
hi Is until a sharp whistle
slipped him in his tracks.”
‘The lad was looking in
o» direction while running
the opposite way,” he said.
“Suddenly the lad looked
in front of him and saw a
lion not 10 yards away.’’
“I can tell you that lad
lost no time in making his
way to safety,” he said,
describing how the lad
scampered, at speed across
in* sandhills, to the safety
of a knot of onlookers.
Sergt. Hobbs and Sergt.
J. T. Parkinson of Grafton,
were accompanied by Sen-
ior Constable C. H. Swan,
Constable F. Head, and Con-
stable A. W. Dahl. They ar-
rived in Coffs Harbour at
about 5 a.m.
They proceeded to the
sandhills where the two
Hons still at large had been
located by Coffs Harbour
police and helpers.
! Action was taken to keep
the lions penned in the
locality until such time as
circus employees could get
the beasts under lock and
key.
Pen Built In Sands
Sergt. Hobbs said the
circus people transported
the steel and pig vvire en-
closure on to the sandhills
where it was erected, leav-
ing one end open. At the
other side was placed the
cage. ■
By a concerted movement
the lions were coaxed one
;at a time towards it and
into the enclosure.
When the first beast was
inside a circus : attendant
entered and forced the
beast through, the enclosure;
J into the cage beyond; docking
| the. door. ■ ;T k.' r ,
The manoeuvre was ret
pea ted with the remaining
beast.
Sergt. Hobbs. .said the
ice squad took rifles with;
them in case of emergency,
but they were not needed;
He said the lions did not
appear to be in a savage
mood, lying quietly o n the
sand or,grass tussocks which
dotted the sandhills.
, While the animals were
at liberty JjilttiikgcL broken
into a foJ|
sandhills.®
meal of a«
mg large 9
bodies. ®
Crowds <M
the sandhi®
erations. fl
In their cl
miss anythiJ
became sonj
ageous a.Jflj
place Uufl
of dangcßH
shown aJB
Used
-it M
being jl
M
y
u '9
they m^PJj
movements towards any 6f
the onlookers,” Sergt. Hobbs
said.
“In fact they appeared to
be glad to get back into
their cages where they
quickly settled down in a
contented manner,’’ he
said.
Sergt. Parkinson said he
saw many scared womenfolk
but generally, residents took
the presence of the animals
calmly and awaited their
recapture in safety.
He said that such wa s not ■
the case in regard to the
'children who seemed to
have no fear of the ,beasts.
Some children were re-
strained only just in time
from attempting to insert
their hands into the cages
with the idea of patting
the beasts after they had
been secured.
In Sheep Von
The re-captured lions be-
longing to Wirths circus
made the trip to Grafton
this morning in a sheep van.
This course was necessary
as their specially-built
transport cage was irrepar-
ably smashed.
A South Grafton railway
official _ said yesterday that
the animals would travel
comfortably and safely in
the sheep van.
Another travelling cage
was being rushed from the
Melbourne headquarters of
the circus to Grafton.
The circus, which is
about 24 hours behind
schedule on account ! of the
accident and escape of the
lions, was due to arrive at I
South Grafton at 1.35 a.m.
to-day in readiness for to-
night’s performance.
Last night’s performance
at Grafton had to be aban-
doned.
Sleep Not Broken
Mr. Don Watt, of Coffs
Harbour, said last night
that he had slept peacefully
through the whole affair of
the escaping lions.
He was not aWare of the
excitment until informed by
his daughter, who attended
the Convent Ball.
His daughter said that the
first the dancers knew that
something was amiss was
when members of the local
militia were asked to return
to the drill hall for their
rifles to assist in the search
for the lions. ■,
She stated that the in-
formant tried to> lull the |
fears of the womenfolk by I
stating that the lions were
quiet, although they were
warned not to take undue
risks on leaving the hall.
Many of the dancers de-
clnied to leave the hall un-
til they could get transport
to their homes.
Mr. Watt said that he
heard that a local, resident,
on seeing a squad of police- |
men taking rifles into the
oolice station yesterday
morning, jumped to the con-
clusion that a well-known
criminal had escaped from
Grafton gaol.
Jumped From Jetty
Mr. K. D. Dudfield, of
Coffs Jetty, said that a story
was going. ,th&'rounds of the
ownship that two members
« a cr. a vessel-in the
harbour were maki. .
way along-the jetty t<. lhe \ r
ship when they Game face to
face with one of the lions.
In an instant they separ-
ated, jumped from the jetty
to the sand below and' fled
to safety.
'viay '27 1953 2
M
Bolts
Could NotliP
The Circus
A small Grafton boy
attracted by the age-old
hire of the circus, visited
Grafton showground yes-
terday afternoon expect-
m to find Wirth’s
Circus established there
ready for last night’s per-
formance.
v The, little chap dis-
covered to his dismay
that there was no sign of
the circus.
He rang thg *T>aily
Examiner” seeking the
answer to the problem.
When advised that the
circus would not be ar-
riving .until this morning
he remarked: “I suppose
its because the lions and
are not feel-
ing too well.?’
He intends trying again
to-night. , ....
Rill, the elephant, injured on Monday
night, suddenly bolted towards the residen-
tial section of Coffs Harbour last night.
The animal disappeared
towards the beach with cir-
cus attendants, a veterinary
surgeon and some residents
in pursuit.
The elephant left the
beach and veered towards
the residential quarter, dis-
appearing over an overhead
bridge a quarter of a mile
from its starting point.
Yesterday, Mr. James, a
veterinary surgeon from
Queensland, was flown in to
attend the animal, which
was believed to have a bone j
broken in cqe leg, and two j
toes badly nTjyred on an- i
other foot, with .cuts and
abrasions on the rump to-
wards the tail where it
apparently struck the level
crossing gate when hit bv
the train.
This morning, after re-
ceiving attention at the
nands of the veterinary
' urgeon, the animal was be-
ing attended by two men
and one woman circus em-
ployee.
The elephant appeared to
be in severe pain, and was
making sobbing sounds as
though weeping.
The woman attendant
was noted wiping the ani-
mal’s eyes with Ter hand-
kerchief as she attempted to
pacify it.
RECOVERED.
Later: About half an hour
after its escape. Rill was
found standing quietly
about half a mile from the
railwaj' station and obvious-
ly very much distressed.
She was brought back
CjUietly and was loaded on
to the train without further
trouble.
The train left for CP of ton
at 10.35 p.m.


The Coffs Harbour Advocate
Circulating throughout Eastern Dorrigo, Raleigh, Bonville, Sawtell, Boambee, Korora, Karangi, Coramba, Nana Glen, Upper Orara, Bucca
Creek, Glenreagh and Woolgoolga Districts
Vol. XLVI
No. 3864
COFFS HARBOUR, TUESDAY, MAY 26, 1953
Registered at the General Post O ffice, Sydney
lor transmission by post as a Newspaper.
Price 4d
FIVE LIONS ESCAPE WHEN CIRCUS WWRECKED
MANY ARMED CITIZENS JOIN IN SEARCH
ALL ANIMALS CAPTURED BEFORE NINE O’CLOCK THIS MORNING
When a circus van containing five lions was being towed i
by an elephant across the railway line at the Coffs Harbour
Jetty goods yards last night, the van was wrecked in a collision
with a train and the elephant and lions escaped.
Coffs Harbour police organised a search
party in collaboration with employees of Wirths Cir-
cus and enlisted the aid of citizens and members of
the 13th Battalion, armed with rifles. All the animals
were captured before nine o'clock this morning. ,
Bie first intimation that the
animals were at large was re-
ceived by Goffs Harbour police...
last night when they received a
message from the Assistant
Stationmaster informing them
of the collision and escape.
MILITIA CALLED
They immediately organised a
search party and members of
the 13 Bn. who were present at
the Convent Ball were asked to
report to Captain Wunderlich.
They were later told to secure
their rifles and report to the Jetty.
In the meantime two of the
lions were sighted and were
quickly secured.
The third was found, on the
jetty and later placed in a cage.
The other two, however, were
roaming the sandhills on the
north side of the Jetty and resi-
dents in the vicinity spent an
anxious period.
This morning employees of the
circus erected a large wire en-
closure on the sand and en-
deavours were then made to cap-
ture the remaining lions. One
was secured near the plymill and
was taken to the enclosure in
a cage.
The other, after destroying
some fowls, the property of Mr.
Sam Wisely, was surrounded and
gradually worked into the cage
where she joined her companion.
‘ELEPHANT INJURED
The elephant, which was bad-
ly injured in the smash, was
round on the beach and returned
to his keeper. \
the Jetty area this morning
was crowded with residents, all
anxious to witness t fie capture
of the beasts. They were beauti-
ful Specimens and well cared for.
It was fortunate the captures
were not delayed as a circus
spokesman said hunger may
have made the lions savage,
with probable serious conse-
quences.
Re-inforcements of police from
Grafton were on duty at the
Jetty this morning and assisted
"in the capture.
Members of Coffs Harbour
police worked throughout the
night and, with the civilian and
army helpers, rendered the town
a fine Service.
The circus was due to leave
lor Grafton at an early hour this
morning, but its departure was
delayed.
The van in which the lions
were travelling was completely
wrecked and presented a sorry
sight as it lay, smashed beyond
repair, at the Tevel crossing
gates.
Many Coffs Harbour residents,
'who were absent from their
homes would not return while
the animals were loose.
Car owners at the Convent
Ball took many of the patrons
home, as they were frightened
to leave on foot.
During the time the lions were at
liberty the searcn party had an anxious time
as the animals were on the Jetty Beach and
the surrounding sand dunes. Two were cap-
tured soon after the escape and one was
caught on the jetty. The remaining two were
caught this morning. ■ -


THE-feSUN
No. 13,507 SYDNEY: TUESDAY, MAY 28. 1953. (Tele. Editorial 80333) Price 4d.
Registered at the GPO, Sydney, for transmission by post as a newspaper. 8W8724. Advertising: BWBOIS, Circulation
TOWN’S ORDEAL OF TERROR
UNTIL LIONS ARE TRAPPED
LIONS AT LARGE. The pictures above and- be-
low are not scenes from Africa, but from Coffs
Harbor today. One of the escaped circus lions lies
in a clump of grass near a beach, and another roams
the countryside, while a man stands at a respectful
distance armed with a big stick. Picture on the
left shows one of the Hons being moved from a
large circular cage which had been erected on the
beach into a small mobile cage.
Afrtqr a nerve-racking night in which terrified townspeople
'ved shuttered in their homes, three escaped lions were re-
ared at Coffs Harbor today.
When the lions escaped, roaring, last night parents locked children in
vcdrooms, barricaded gates, and locked all doors and windows
Five lions escaped, but
two were quickly recap-
tured.
The other three were
loose for 12 hours.
Until news spread that
the beasts had been re-
captured, Coffs Harbor
today was a “deserted”
town, and nothing stirred
in +’->€ empty streets.
Two lions were
caught near the railway
station last night, and
the others on a beach
and jetty today.
The lions and a 45-
year-old female elephant
broke out of cages just
before 10 o’clock last
night when a goods train
crashed inrc a Wirth’s
Circus animal caravan.
The elephant was tow-
ing the steel lion cages
across the railway lines to
Coffs Harbor goods yards
when the collision occur-
red.
The badly injured ele-
phant stampeded and,
trumpeting loudly,
charged madly from the
area.
Then the lions broke
free, roaring, and raced
through the wreckage.
These events followed:
• Radio warnings alert-
ed the town, and in a mat-
ter of minutes every street
was deserted
• Homes were locked
immediately.
• An SOS was sent out
for searchers, and soldiers
left a ball to arm them-
selves with .303 rifles.
• Police, armed with
service revolvers, and
about 50 residents joined
in the hunt
• Police left their beds
at Grafton, 52 miles
away, in a frantic dawn
rush by car to aid in the
round-up. They carried
.303 rifles.
At the height of the
uproar at the railway
yards last night, a mad-
dened lion charged a
cage, which crashed
under the beast’s im-
pact on to the circus
announcer, whose leg is
feared broken.
At dawn today two of
the lions invaded a back-
yard and swiftly con-
sumed 32 fowls for
breakfast.
The lions, all male and
between 4-5 years old,
are among those which
attacked their trainer,
Captain S. Sulson. in Mel-
bourne recently.
Soon after the smash
occurred, one of the lions
crawled under a cage.
Lion chose cage instead of water
A net was thrown
around this lion, which
then was caged. Another
lion found nearby, re-
mained quiet until it had
been secured.
Then the search began
for the other three lions.
Today two of the lions
were found lying on a
sandhill near the jetty.
The fifth lion was
found on the jetty.
About 7.30 am today,
while residents waited
anxiously for news, a
group of armed men went
in a truck to the jetty.
They placed a large
steel cage near the lion,
which had either to jump
into the water or go into
the cage.
it chose the cage.
Then the searchers
laced their greatest dan-
ger when the other two
lions were cornered on
the beach.
The hunters called tor
a huge cage, about 40ft-
50ft long.
The cage, with a door
open, was placed on tht
beach and then the hun-
ters moved in a on
the lions, driving them
toward the cage.
As the circrc* tightened,
circus employees used
poles and whips, in an
effort to make the
snarling beasts enter the
cage.
One lion finally
entered it but the
other, with a tremen-
dous roar, broke
through the human cor-
don and raced along
the beach.
Again it was sur-
rounded by the plucky
hunters and gradually
forced toward the cage
Eventually it entered
the cage and then turn-
ed, and snarling vicious-
ly, tried to bound out
again.
But the cage door
snapped shut, just as the
springing beast hurled
itself toward the aper-
ture.
The man who lost his
fowls is Mr. S. Wisley, a
Coffs Harbor fisherman.
He said, “About dawn
the wife and I heard a
terrific noise in the back-*
yard.-
“My wife went out to
feed the fowls and next
I heard a terrific
scream.
“She came racing back
into the house.
“She shouted. ‘All the
fowls are dead and
there are two lions in the
yard.’
“I raced outside, had
one look, raced back and
locked the door.”
A cow and a calf, last
seen near the spot where
the lions were trapped,
are now missing.
The escaped elephant
later was found wander-
ing on a beach.
One of the circus
managers. Mr. S.
Tunks, said it was for-
tunate that the lions
had been fed before the
crash.
He said. “The lions
were about to go to sleep
when the smash happen-
ed. The lions are dan-
gerous when they get ex-
cited’.’
The circus will not per-
form at Grafton tonight
as planned, but the show
will go on tomorrow.


Five Lions At Large
At Coffs Harbour
COFFS HARBOUR, Monday. Coffs
Harbour residents spent a restless time late
last night and are destined to spend the
balance of it with both eyes wide open as a
result of the escape in their midst of at least
five lions from Wirf h # $ circus.
Shortly before 11 pan.
as a result of an accident
near the railway loading
yards a cage returning from
Wirth’s circus containing a
number of lions broke open
and the animals escaped.
It was not definite at
11.3,0 p.m. how many ani-
mals were at large, but
there were believed to be
four lions and a tiger roam-
ing the area.
Coffs Harbour police were
assisting the circus hands
at a late hour to find the
lions.
One was found wandering
near the railway line close
to the station and attempts
were being made to net it
at that time.
Police Warnings
Police were warning
motor traffic aproaching
the danger area and divert-
ing vehicles to safer streets.
Near midnight it was
thought the lions would
probably remain close to the
railway station, but police
officers said they would
take no risks.
Record Escape
District residents said that
they had never heard of an
escape of such magnitude
before in Australia. Occa-
sional reports of an odd
animal getting loose ‘and
roaming the streets hac
sent a chilling thrill through
many spines.
But with five animals a
liberty in an otherwise
quiet country town in th
pitch of night made histc>y
as well as for a very rea'
danger.
The possibilities of the
animals escaping to the
surrounding bush and be-
coming a danger to isolated
homesteads made the posi-
tion extremely dangerous.
The circus was due to
open in Grafton at the
showground to-night when
the performing lions were
advertised as a main feature
in the “Big Top” show
Also the New Zoo containing
a wider selection of wile
animals has bee n a star at-
traction on the Circus tour
Telephones Busy
A telephone attendant at
Coffs iH ! arbour said that
when the news of the es-
caped lions got abroad, calls
began to come in from all
directions seeking details of
the happening.
. The exchange became so
busy he was at his wits end
to cope with the rush of
business which included
calls from as far afield as
Brisbane, Grafton, Sydney
and many other centres.
Early Morning Report.
Two Lions Recaptured
COFFS HARBOUR, Tues.
—At 1 a.m. this morning two
of the lions had been * re-
captured.
Sergt. W. Stcinhauer, who ;
is in charge of the police i
squad, said that the lions |
were shepherded into a cor-
ner of the railway yards
and were captured in nets.
He said the other three
lions had been located and
were still in the vicinity of
the railway yards.
At that time everyone in
the vicinity had been warn-
ed and the circus hands
were carefully approaching
the locality in which the
other three lions had been
found.
By that time it had been
established that no tigers
had escaped.
Late homecomers in the
vicinity of Coffs Harbour
Jetty were extremely alarm-
ed at the situation. Many
who were out visiting re-
mained with their hosts
after midnight.
They declined to take the.
risk of proceeding through
the streets while- the lions
were at large.
Many of them who had
locked themselves in refused
to open their doors under
any circumstances.
At 1.30 this morning one
of the lions had been caged, !
and a second was under a
truck in the railway yards.
The truck had been sur-
rounded with net.
A third lion had wan*
dered out on to the jetty*
and was in sole possession
of the jetty.
A fourth lion was under a
railway carriage, and the
fifth shortly before one
o’clock was seen making oil
in a northerly direction,
and is believed to be hiding
in lantana on the sandhills.
Police armed with .303
rifles were patrolling the
area and standing guard
over circus assistants en-
deavouring to recapture the
lions under the railway car-
riage and the other under
the truck in the railway
yards.
Circus attendants said
the animals were not
normally savage, but the
conditions of their escape
might have frightened
them.
When the train crashed
into the truck carrying the
lions the elephant pushing
it ran off into the lantana
and has not been seen since.
It is thought that the
1 lions still at large will not
be captured until daylight.
KNEW NOTHING.
Mr. .Jack Jefferies, who
resides at’the Jetty over-
looking the railway yards,
said the first news he had
of the escape was when the
telephone rang and the at-
tendant acquainted him of
the fact that the “Daily Ex-
aminer” wanted him.
Mr. Jefferies went outs ; de
his residence and said that
he could see considerable !
activity at the railway cross-
ing. He could see one man
running down the street in
that direction.
Mrs. S. C. Aroney, of
Coffs .Tot.tv said she was not
I aware that any lions had
; escaped.
“Lions,” she said, “what
lions? I know nothing about
escaped lions.”
It was explained to her
that some of the animals due
at Grafton at 2 a.m. on
Tuesday had escaped from
the train.
“Oh! My goodness!’’ she
exclaimed.
RESIDENTS
FLED
IN TERROR
(By A Special Correspondent)
CCiFFS HARBOUR, Mon.
—Five circus lions escaped
from their eagre after a
train collision at Coffs Har-
bour tc-night.
Residents fled in terror as
the lions ran through the
streets.
Police armed with revol-
vers and circus employees
with nets are hunting * the
lions to recapture them.
Coffs Harbour people
have locked themselves in
their homes while the hunt
continues.
Wirth’s circus, which per-
formed at Coffs Harbour
to-night, own the lions.
The lions were locked in
a cage on a stationary train
in the railway yards at
Coffs Harbour Jetty.
OVERTURNED
About 11.15 p.m. a goods
train crashed into the sta-
tionary train. The truck
containing the cage of lions
overturned. The cage was
smashed and the lions es-
caped.
The lions leaped the rail-
way yard fence and ran into
the street.
Hundreds of people were
returning home from the
circus and a ball when the
lions escaped.
FEED INTO SHOPS
The people fled into shops
or to their homes.
The wife of Constable
Adamas, of Coffs Harbour,
said to-night: “My husband
and four other police have
just left the police station
to hunt the lions.
are all armed with
revolvers i n case the lions
attack them.
“There were hundreds of
people about the streets a
few minutes ago.
“The circus and the ball
had just come out.
“Now there is not a person
to be seen.’’


Circus Escapees In Grafton
Although apparently res
covered from their short-
lived experience of free-
dom at Coffs Harbour,
the stars of that memor-
able occasion missed last
night’s circus performance
at Lismore.
These pictures show
Rill, the 40 -years-old ele-
phant injured in the
mishap „ and two of the
lions.
The lions, George and
Phillip, are waiting for
their meal in the sheep
van used as a cage until
the smashed cage is re-
placed.
Both pictures were taken
in Grafton when the
animals arrived from Coffs
Harbour. The circus left
for Lismore early yester-
day morning.
Fine Work
At Sch^fl


Grim beach ‘battle’
ends hunt
for lions
COFFS HARBOR, Tues.—This quiet
New South Woles North Coast town
of 5000 people can breathe freely
again today.
The five Wirth’s Circus lions and an ele-
phant which escaped last night are back
in captivity but only after:—
An all-night armed search for three of the
lions and the elephant.
*
A dawn raid on a backyard poultry run by
one of the lions which killed 32 fowls.
An ANA plane had been diverted from the
Sydney-Brisbane run to land three lion-
tamers for the search.
An early morning “battle” on the beach
to catch the last of the escaped animals.
All night, homes were
locked and women and
children stayed indoors
while armed police, soldiers
and civilians helped circus
employes search for the
animals.
The three lions escaped,
with two others, last night
when a goods train
crashed into a Wirth’s
Circus animal caravan.
The elephant which was
towing the lions' cages
stampeded as soon as the!
cages were smashed.
Savaged tamer
The lions were among
' those that had attacked
their tamer. Captain S.
Sulson, in Melbourne some
time ago.
As soon as the animals
escaped warnings were
broadcast and the town’s
streets were deserted.
Soldiers left a ball,
armed themselves with
1 .303 rifles, and joined
armed police and 50 resi-
dents to hunt them.
Two of the lions were re-
captured immediately!
The first crawled under
a cage, lashed out as men
tried to entice it to a cage,
and then sprang at the
cage.
tVlan injured >
Part of the steel frame-
work was knocked on to
Denis Phillpot, 30, a cir-
cus announcer, whose leg
was badly injured.
The lion was netted and
caged soon afterwards.
A little later the second
lion was caught auietly.
The next lion was not
caught until 7.30 a.m.,
when tired, sleepless
searchers trapped it on
the harbor jetty, with
pistols and guns drawn.
Scared residents watch-
ed from windows and
housetops as the men
forced it into a cage which
hao been trundled to the
jetty.
The searchers’ greatest
danger came on the desert-1
ed harbor bench, half an
hour later.
Greatest danger
.The hunters called for a
circular steel cage, 40 ft
long and 12 ft. high.
They heaved it over one
oi the last two lions and it
charged at, the steel frame-
work, but was caught.
The other broke through
the cordon of men and
raced along the beach, but
was later surrounded and
caged while police and re-
sidents stood with rifles
and revolvers ready.
The elephant was caught
quietly as it was wandering
along the beach with one
of its legs badly cut.
One resident said he
heard the elephant moan-
ing as it favored its in-
jured leg.
Heard scream
The man who lost 32
fowls, Mr S. Wisley, a
fisherman, said:
“My wife went out to feed
the fowls about dawn.
"Next thing I heard was a
scream.
"She came racing back to
the house.
‘"All the fowls are dead
and two lions are in the
yard,” she cried.
"I raced outside, had one
ook. raced back and
locked the door.”
After the search, the cir-
Jcus manager, Mr S. Tunks,
said it was fortunate the
nPJhf , la ? be !P fed last
night before the crash
Coffs Harbor is 378 miles
north of Svdnev
One of Wirth’s Circus lions.




Father, Mother and Daughter. Anyone capable of
becoming a parent may beget a midget—but the
odds are a million to one against it ... Midgets
marry, usually have children, which are normal.
Midget mothers commonly undergo Caesarean op-
erations ... Above is a midget mother, her 6-foot
husband and their normal daughter, 2.
Pygmies—Not Midgets. Midgets and pygmies
differ. Midgets are usually children of normal
parents and beget normal children ... Pygmies,
such as these Africans shown above, beget pyg-
mies. Pygmies are found from the tropics to
the Arctic (Lapps in Norway and Russia, Ainus
(EYE-news) in Japan’s northern islands. Aver-
age pygmy size is 4 feet, 11¾ inches.
What Is A Midget?
Their Parents Are
Normal... So Are
Their Children
When Midgets Married. Most famous midget was
Tom Thumb, pictured here at his marriage in 1863.
Although it was a real love match, P. T. Barnum,
circus man who had made Tom famous and
wealthy, “managed” the ceremony itself, issuing in-
vitations where they would count most from a pub-
licity standpint. The bride had a three-pound girl
about a year later. It weighed only 7¾ pounds
when a year old, died soon afterwards of inflamma-
tion of the brain. Tom died in 1883, aged 51. His
widow lived 37 years longer and married another
midget. All spent their lives in the show business
Midget and Financial Giant. A midget made
news on June 1, 1933, when Margaret Furth-
man, traveling with a circus, sat on J. P.
Morgan’s lap. Morgan was in Washington, D.
C., as a witness before a Senate committed.
Margaret told Morgan she was 21 inches
high, 20 years old ... Faulty growth glands
cause midgets. Usually normal at birth, mid-
gets may stop growing at four or five years.
Falls, Reading and Royce Just Different


Are These the World's Biggest Families?
“The Good Lord Will Provide,” is the motto of the Onezime Masse family
of Huron County, Ontario, Canada, and so far although they have known
hard times, the 10 boys and 11 girls have not known actual hunger.
“All 21 are alive,” says the father, “and there is not a bad leg or a crooked
eye in the whole bunch.” This, it is claimed, is a record for the American
continent. Equalling, but not beating it, is the record of an another Canadian
family of 21 living children. Both families live on a farm and both are
French Canadians like the family of the Dionne quintuplets.
How to Feed 18 Children on $30 a month was the problem of Edward
Schultz, unemployed paper hanger, when this picture was taken in 1935.
Having been without work for two years, Schultz had only his relief check
to support his large family. The Schultz home is in Beecher, Ill.... In 1930,
U. S. families averaged about two children apiece. This is slightly less than
the 1920 average. Among the different racial groups in the U. S., yellow
skinned peoples have the largest families. Next come negroes, then foreign
born whites, and finally native born whites.
ROY
ROGERS
A neat and comely appearance is a
matter of pride with these troupers.
The Giants will work in any costume desired.


Knives Don’t Cut Koringa. She hangs in midair, sus-
pended upon a razor-sharp sword beneath her chin. She
danced barefoot up to the stand upon a ladder of blades
and never once was cut. Koringa has been baffling
European audiences for years, says she uses the mystical
knowledge of the Orient in her feats.
She Grinds Glass With Her Back. Koringa lies upon
a pile of broken glass, lets two full-grown men trample
upon her chest until the sharp-edged pieces of glass are
ground to little bits. Then she arises after this remark-
able performance and shows her back unscratched. She
has been performing such tricks since she was 6.
Mystery
Girl
She Can't
Be Killed
Snakes Hold No Terror for Koringa. She charms them as easily as she dances on sharp steel.
She has a way with crocodiles, too (see cover). Her power has never been explained. Daughter
of a Hindu fakir and a Frenchwoman, she claims her father taught her his secrets when she was
a child. She wears a spot on her forehead, denoting membership in a high Hindu caste.
She Supports a 300-Pound Rock on Her Chest while her body rests upon two thin edges of
glass. But the glass does not cut her. Koringa also pierces her body with daggers, which draw
no blood ... Self-hypnosis is one explanation for Koringa. Since friction rather than pressure
causes cuts, hypnotists claim cuts can be prevented by holding one’s self absolutely motionless.
Angus Watson.
THE 3 VALESCO'S
“TFMPEST”
THE ONLY TIGHT ROPE
WALKING ELEPHANT.


Nos. 1,2, 3 and 4 Photos by Moffett, Chicago, No. 5 (C) by Evans. LA.
SOME CHICA GO MOVIE STARS.
NO. 1-IRENE WYLIE, BROWNE'S 20th CENTURY REVUE." 2-ALICE MAISON, MACK SENNETT FAVORITE. 3-MOLLIE M'GWAN,
A MACK SENNETT ATTRACTION. 4-MARION AYE, BOTHWELL'S "REVUE." 5-VERA STEDMAN, A MACK SENNETT BEAUTY.


(C) by Evans, L. A.
SNOW AND SLEET DOES NOT BOTHER THEM.
THE WEA TH E R I S NOTHING IN THE YOUNG LIVES OF THE MACK SENNETT BATHING GIRLS, WHO ARE MORE POPULAR NOW
THE DURING THE SUMMER. 1-ALI CE MAISON. 2-MARIE PREVOST. 3 HARRIETT HAMMOND, 4-MISS ROBERTS AND
LILLIAN LANGSTON. 5—JUANITA HANSEN AND MARIE PREVOST GIVE MARY THURMAN A LIFT.


Photo by Stagg.
BETTY NATHAN.
(C) by Evans, L. A.
TWO POPULAR GROUPS IN FILM COMEDIES.
ABOVE: THE L-KO GIRLS, WHO ARE A BIG ATTRACTION AMONG PATRONS OF THE
MOVIES—BELOW: A GROUP OF THE FAMOUS MACK SENNETT BATHING BEAUTIES.
MOLLIE M’GOWAN.
WHO IS ONE OF THE CHIEF FUNMAKERS
WITH MACK SENNETT BATHING GIRLS.


Photo by Stagg.
LILLIAN BIRON.
How ya gonna keep ’em down on the farm, when they can see these beautiful Mack Sennett girls at the Movie theatres any afternoon in every City
of the Commonwealth.


(C) by Evans. L. A.
ALONE WITH THE UNFRIENDLY WAVES.
PRETTY CLAIRE ANDERSON, WHO IS WELL KNOWN THROUGH HER APPEARANCES IN FIL.
ALBERTA FLAHEY
The Brilliant Violinist, \
AND HER TENOR
(ALEXANDER WEBSTER, a.r.aW
Daisy Jerome as she gav[?]
“The Press, The Pulpit, an[?]
the Petticoat."
Wish Wynne in the number,
“They'll Be Sorry When I'm
Dead.”
FLORADORAS
TOM WELBY


ZOO <z/fnimah
Nobody’s Been Hurt—Yet. Dogs and tigers are natural enemies, since the tiger be-
longs to the cat family. Nevertheless, these two tiger cubs from a Detroit zoo are a
dog’s playmates. Such odd friendships are possible when the animals are brought
up together from babyhood and learn to trust each other. Dogs and lions also have
become friends. Lions, however, are more sociable than tigers.
Pals .. . A Dog and a Tiger
Ready to Dance The smell of this tiger, no matter how young
or friendly the beast might be, would terrify most horses. Horses
also have an instinctive hatred of camels.
A Pair of Meat Eaters. Both these animals are carnivores, or
meat eaters. All carnivores have long, sharp eye teeth, called
fangs, such as the dog and tiger are showing here.
Time to Dodge ... In the jungle the tiger might kill the dog by springing on it and breaking its neck with an upward jerk of the paw. sometimes wild
tigers bite a large victim's big leg muscles first, to prevent ist escape. Such big carnivares as the tiger prefer their meat freshly killed by themselves.
Both lions and tigers begin eating at the tail end, and often leave head and hoofs for jackals and hyenas to eat.
Wide World
As the season opens, wrestlers of each rank meet for practice. Pictured above is
a workout of one of the groups in a Tokyo gym before the winter tournament.
A well-known athlete of the Metropolitan Police Force who has hart
his broad chest indelibly punctured with his wife’s portrait.


Cheetahs are of both sexes and were captured fully grown. They
answer readily to their own names, race with extreme grace both on the
flat and over hurdles.
And Now
CHEETAH
Off goes the cheetah —cheetahs have been timed over laps to do
42 m.p.h. The fastest greyhounds do, as a rule, between 36 and
38 m.p.h.
Below, Mr. K. C. Gandar Dower, athlete,
big-game hunter and airman, who brought the
cheetahs to this country from Kenya.
Racing]
A YEAR ago K. C. Gandar
Dower, described as “the
most remarkable ball games
player of the present day,” was
ordered by his doctor to take a rest
from sport. He was ranked as a
lawn tennis player, one of the four
best squash players in the country,
could teach billiards stars a thing
or two, and beat the best of fives
and “real” tennis players at their
own game.
Gandar Dower’s idea of a rest
was to go to Kenya, which he had
visited before in search of spotted
lions. He came back with 10
cheetahs—the fastest four-legged
creatures in the world—eight of
which are now being trained at
Harringay for racing. They out-
distance the greyhounds, which
have to be given 40 yards start in
a 440 yard race.
Amazingly fast over a short distance, the cheetah has no second
wind, and over a longer course the greyhound would probably out-
strip him. Cheetahs are "boxed” regularly at Harringay without
trouble, follow the ordinary electric hare with a piece of rabbit on it.


THE MAN WHO
SPITS FIRE
NADJ ALL who hails from Egypt,
would make a bad gas station at-
tendant. A puzzle to the country's
leading medical men, he has com-
plete control over his stomach
muscles and can swallow, store,
and then eject anything from gaso-
line to cloth and unshelled nuts
without injury. Most spectacular
of his accomplishments is swallow-
ing 100 glasses of water and then
a quart of gasoline. First he starts
a fire by spitting out the t?as, then
quenches it with a geyser of water.
The biggest puzzle is how he keeps
the two liquids separate.
African (left) and Indian elephant.
Happy animal marriage—so it is pos-
sible, you see. These tigers used to
play around together till quite old.


Knife Thrower
Knife throwing is an ancient art, in which many early Ameri-
can frontiersmen were adept, using it in Indian battles. Now-
adays, knife throwing is mainly confined to the stage and
screen. A world famous Hollywood expert is pictured here.
1 Steve Clemento, professional
knife thrower, shows how he cuts
a piece of paper in half.
2 He Misses Purposely. The two
axes near the girl were thrown
there to thrill the audience.
3 Clemento Throws after staring
at an object intently. He has fine
muscular co-ordination.
4 And He Hits! The axe can be
seen here a split second before
striking the paper target.
5 The Girl Has Confidence ... Movie stars have confidence in
Clemento, too. The movies have made him rich. He gets $250
for throwing an object at a well known star, $151 for one not so
famous. For $100 a day, he throws anything, but not at people.


Though most of the mat men run more to weight than height, they are taller than
the average Japanese, Occasionally, however, the sport produces giants. Note
the huge fellow in the center.
Constant practice is necessary in a sport as complicated as Sumo. Here the boys
demonstrate one of the forty-eight traditional holds used to drop the opponent on
the sanded floor or toss him out of the ring.
Keystone
Billy
been mar %T
-foot 4 vncn e
* eet -va v Prtr“
forcu>W ,
about tbetr
International
More time is devoted to the push-pull system than in western wrestling. The gentlemen at the left
demonstrate this method in a practice period in somebody's backyard, somewhere in Nippon.
This is what they’re all headed for, the great Wrestling stadium in Tokyo. The first match of the spring season is about
to start and the wrestlers are about to have their fling before eight thousand pairs of admiring eyes.
TOURED WORLD
AS "SNAKE MAN"
James H. Aitken Was Billed As A Snake Or
Crocodile man before the war. He dressed
as a serpent, and performed with slow, eerie
movements. He retired shortly after the war, and taught “bending” for years.
The first essential to skill as a contortionist is supple back, long hours of
practice. Physical strength is needed to twist the body into the difficult poses.


THE
RECHERCHE
LOUNGE
to the Picture
Pavilion, where
acquaintance s
meet amidst tie
artistic surround?,
dr where lip It
refreshments can
be obtained within
hearing of the
delightful music
discoursed from
the theatre.
PALACE PICTURE PAVILION MAGNIFICENT.
A SUPER CINEMA in the veritable sense of the word, apart from the fact that the most famous films featuring the
world's leading players are first presented here to the accompaniment of an orchestra that is regarded as one of the
finest Cinema Theatre Orchestras in the Country.
PALACL
ITALIAN
LOUNGE.
The
Enchanting*
Annexe.
•Annexe to
the Ballroom is
the artistic
Italian Lounge.
A delightful
Ladies’Orchest ra
plays enchanting
music.
PALACE BALLROOM. A N ILLUMINATED FLOOR ON A THOUSAND SPRINGS.
THE Palace Ballroom has won an enviable reputation. The floor is perfect, design admirable, and decorations in good taste.
In all sorts of weather you may glide the hours away in healthy exercise to the strains of a superb Syncopated Orchestra, under
the direction of an entertaining and happy Leader.
GRAND
THEATRE
FOYER.
INTERIOR OF THE GRAND THEATRE. ENTERTAINMENT DE LUXE.
A GLANCE at the auditorium of this charming Theatre reveals how suitable and how appropriate are the decorations of the design.
The Theatre is well equipped with all the appointments of a palatial establishment, Its reputation for the production of all the leading
musical comedies phys is second to none.


TOWER CIRCUS—
THE
CHILDREN’S PARADISE.
QNE of the most attractive
of the enchanting sec-
tions of the Tower is the
unique Aquatic and Variety
Circus. Here all that is best
in the equine, gymnastic,
and entertaining world may
be seen. Thousands of
visitors have yearly been
amazed, whilst they have
enjoyed the wondrous sights
to be seen in the majestic
ring. The Arena, by a
wonderful device, can be
transformed into a lake in a
few minutes, allowing water
spectacles of uncommon
beauty to be given. Nor
are the Kings of Sawdust
Fun forgotten, and many
famous clowns have made
the.Circus a veritable Mill of
Mirth.
THE
PALACE
THEATRE
Where
the
“ Stars ”
Always
Shine,
The brightest
luminaries of the
vaudeville stage
here shed their
shimmering lustre.
Under the most
comfortable con-
ditions the brilli-
ance of its variety
entertainment can
be enjoyed to the
full.
The performances
are twice nightly.
“ARE YOU FROM DIXIE?”
Miss Hartley was the first to sing in London the song of that
name. This she did in a vaudeville turn at the Palladium, the
Victoria Palace, and the Coliseum. Above she is seen in the costume
which the gave it
STANLEY KIRKBY
and HARRY HUDSON
Miss La Varre and Miss Waters fly. while Messrs. Jackson and
Crawford endeavour to keep the crowd back.


HELLO! OVER THERE.
THE NEW ZEALAND RUGBY UNION FOOTBALL TEAM IN AUSTRALIA.
Back row: C. McLean (Buller), J. G. Donald (Wairarapa), H. Jacobs (Horowhenua), D. L. Baird (Southland), J. E. Moffitt (Wellington), E. A. Beiliss
(Wanganui). Third row: J. G. O’Brien (Auckland), C. Brown (Taranaki), E. W. Hasell (Canterbury), J. D. Shearer (Wellington), V. W. Wilson (Auck-
land), J. Steel (West Coast), A. H. West (Taranaki). Second row: C. Fletcher (Auckland), P. W. Storey (South Canterbury), A. Carroll (Mana-
watu), Captain T. H Jones (manager), J. T. Tilyard (capt., Wellington), E. Roberts (Wellington), B. Algar (Wellington). Front row: C. E. O. Badeley
(Auckland), W. D. Duncan (Otago).


TOWER ROOF GARDENS. A DELIGHTFUL RETREAT.
UNDER a capacious crystal canopy are the Tower Roof Gardens, the design of a master
mind. They present to the visitor a most alluring vista with their graceful Tropical
plants, their feathery palms and rich flowers. Here you will find that serenity we all
occasionally desire, sweetened by the song of hundreds of small birds who occupy cages in
the sun in this delightful retreat.
TOWER ORIENTAL VILLAGE AND TEA HOUSES.
YOU may easily imagine yourself in some sequestered nook of a sun-kissed Eastern
country when you visit the Oriental Village and Old China Tea Houses. This
attractive spot is situate in close proximity to the great Elevator, where you embark for a
bird’s-eye view of Blackpool.
TOWER AQUARIUM. A NEVER FAILING CENTRE OF INTEREST.
THE design of this alluring section of the Tower is unique both in style and treatment,
and resembles a stalactite cave. There are thousands of fish, drawn from every part
of the globe, which are shown under conditions enabling the visitors to see all classes of
the piscatorial species in their native element.
TOWER MENAGERIE AND MONKEY HOUSES. “ EVER POPULAR."
THERE is no greater source of delight to the young holiday-maker than to study fierce
Nature at. close, but safe, Quarters. The denizens of the cages, ranging from the noble
lion to the mischievous monkey, are housed under perfect sanitary conditions. The hour
when the animals are fed is particularly popular with the people.
LOUISE FAZENDA.
*
NEW SOUTH WALES RUGBY UNION TEAM DEFEATED BY NEW ZEALAND LAST SATURDAY.
Back row: Dr. W. F. Matthews (selector), T. H. Bosward (selector and referee), A. Walker (Eastern Suburbs), G. R. McKay (Newtown), I. W. L. Ormis-
ton (Gunnedah), R. L. Raymond (University), R. Elliott (Glebe-Balmain), V. A. Dunn (Junee), C. Fox (North Sydney), F. Eyre (Manly), R R. Baird
(selector). Second row: R. Chambers (Manly), Dr. B. M. Beith (Eastern Suburbs), W. T. Watson (capt., Glebe-Balmain), T. Davis (Western Suburbs)
R. Marrott (Eastern Suburbs), L. W. Wogan (Western Suburbs). Front row: A. V. Mayne (Glebe-Balmain), O. Humphreys (North Sydney), T Law-
ton (University), J. Bond (Glebe-Balmain).


Photo by Moffett, Chicago.
LOUISE MAYORGA.
ONE OF THE FEATURED PLAYERS IN SHUBERT'S MUSICAL REVUE, “PASSING SHOW OF 1919," WINTER GARDEN, N. Y.
LE MOUNIER
NORA BURKE.
FRANK SIDNEY


(C) by Underwood & Underwood.
AS GOOD AS THE WORLD’S BEST.
THREE MACK SENNETT BEAUTIES ANXIOUS TO KNOW WHOSE LEGS ARE PRETTIER THAN THEIRS.
Will Hastings
A Man of Many Parts, Versatile in all Branches
»
Including “ One of Fighting/’ Just returned after
. a strenuous Bout in France.
ORPHEA.


(C) by Underwood & Underwood.
GERTRUDE ARTELT.
HOLDER OF THE NEW WORLD'S RECORD FOR BACK-STROK
SWIMMING; SHE SWAM 160 YARDS IN 27 3-5 SECONDS.
(C) by Inernational.
“ FOLLIES” GIRLS OF TO-DAY.
VANDA HOFF GOING OVER THE TOP OF PAULINE FAY IN
FAIRMONT "FOLLIES” OF SAN FRANCISCO.
BARBETTE, the most sensational and most talked about vaudeville ac
ever presented.
“The Orlandos"
A remarkable dance trio who have caused a sensation throughout
Australia.
BERT ERROL as "Good Queen Bess."
Leon ik. Lucette
THRILLING, DARING, PICTURESQUE AND BEAUTIFUL.
The Passing Leap
(The Codonas)
CHAPIN AND POPPY
IRMONT HOTEL.


SUMMER AND WINTER.
GERTRUDE ROWLAND AND ALBERTA TURNER, TWO PRETTY MISSES WHO ARE POPULAR IN MUSICAL COMEDY.
TILLY and DORIS
Wezzin's Troupe of Bedouin Arabs.


Photo by Stagg.
A LETTER FROM HOME.
PRETTY CLARINE SEYMOUR, A FAMILIAR FIGURE ON THE SCREEN IN PRODUCTIONS OF D. W. GRIFFITH.
Ruth and Eleanor Smiths.
INTERNATIONAL.
sixteen-year-old Twin Mermaids of Brooklyn (N. Y.) Who Will Compete for
United States at the Olympic Games at Antwerp this Summer.
Photo by International.
MISS MARION GOEBEL.
14-YEAR-OLD GIRL SWAM SIX MILES WITH
HANDS TIED BEHIND HER.
Photo by International.
TAKING A SUN-BATH.
PRETTY BATHER OUTSIDE HER HOUSE AT
LONG BEACH, CAL.


Photo by Stagg.
HARRIETT HAMMOND.
PHIL AND GEORGE WIRTH, MAY MARTIN WIRTH AND HER HUSBAND, TOGETHER WITH HER MOTHER AND SISTER.
Atop in the centre-piece is Phil, with George beneath. Phil has been resting
since last October. In Sydney in February he underwent an operation, performed
by Sir Hebert Maitland, and is now at Moree (N.S.W.) daily regaining his
accustomed good health. The first group shows Frank White, a theatrical agent
who in New York recently became the husband of May Wirth, seen directly below
him —with her sister Stella on her right, and her mother (Mrs. Martin) on her
left. May is now twenty-three years of age. Her mother is a sister of the Wirths.
J. D. Williams was at Madison Square Gardens (New York) the night May opened
there with Barnum. Later he was present when she made her Australian
re-appearance with Wirths’ Circus in Melbourne. His comment in Melbourne to
George Wirth respecting her reception there was: —“Great God! Here is a girl
who in America became world-famous in one night, and-in her own country she
goes off without a hand!” May in her early days was a much admired contortionist.
Above she is seen as a child in a backward balancing pose.
MISS BILLEE SEATON,
The American Comedienne as the Tivoli Theatre,
Melbourne.


Perfect Paramount Peaches appearing in Mack-Sennett film Comedies released in Australia by Paramount Pictures. Left to Right: Marie
Prevost. Phyliss Haver and Harnett Ham[?]
Five of our Australian Beauty Girls
WARD and SHERMAN
PRINCESS MYSTERIA
THE THREE FISHERS
GOODHUE and OLIVER
GUEST and NEWLYN
OSRO GOODHUE


DOT O’DEA
MISS AVIL MAYNE.
Upper Left: Lois Boyd. Upper Right: Myrtle Lind. Centre: Marie Prevost. Lower Left: Phyliss Haver. Lower Right: Annette De
Gandis. Popular Mack Sennett girls who help to make Paramount comedies the most popular in Australia as well as everywhere else.
IVY DAVIDSON, appearing in the Alhambra
lolanthe Hardinge, of Perth well known in skating circles throughout the
Commonwealth. Miss Hardinge specialises in fancy skating and trick
skating. At the moment she is, in company with a male partn
rehearsing an act for vaudeville.


CIRCUS SIDELIGHTS
Wirths’ Wonderful Show
DUE PERTH THIS MONTH
Smiling out of this article is a man
who should bear the most worried look
in the world, yet on the contrary he is
Mr. G. Petersen
one of the most
quizically humorous
fellows you could
imagine. He is a
psycho logist, a
hypnotist and a
tactician, and car-
ries on his shoul-
ders the responsi-
bilities of seeing
that everything
works with the
precision of well-
regulated machi-
nery in such a
show as Wirths’
Circus.
He is Mr. George
Peterson, who for
thirty years has piloted Wirths’
Circus throughout the length
and breadth of Australia, New Zealand,
India and other parts of the world.
Thirty years before the public as Wirths’
advance manager and front of the house
manager when the circus in in Mel-
bourne and Sydney is a record of which
Mr. Peterson is justly proud.
The experiences he has had and the
stories that he tells would fill a book.
,What he doesn’t know about lions, tigers,
elephants, monkeys, horses, and men and
women is not worth knowing. Yet he
doesn’t look as if he had one sleepless
night in his life. Tact, and oceans of it,
is required in his negotiations for hire
of show grounds, supplies of foodstuffs
and accommodation for the 160 men and
women who comprise the circus staff. It
costs £lOOO a week for day-to-day ex-
penses. Just imagine the task of keep-
ing a close watch on an expenditure of
£52,000 a year.
FEEDING THE CIRCUS
According to Mr. Peterson every mem-
ber of the circus, from the tiniest mon-
key to the leading “star,” knows how to
eat- This is the daily menu that re-
quires attention. Food supplies for ICO
people, upwards of a quarter of a ton of
meat for the lions and tigers. In some
-places Mr. Peterson has had to pay as
high as 8d per lb. for this meat. j
A ton of oaten hay a day for the ele- I
phants, chaff, bran, oats and carrots for |
the horses and donkeys, condensed milk, j
vegetables for monkeys and bears, doz- j
ens of loaves of bread, and a hundred- |
and-one other things. People who con- I
sider that a circus takes a lot of money ]
out of a town will perhaps understand ]
now that it also leaves a lot behind it.
Wirths’ have eleven elephants in the j
circus which is now working towards
Perth in two special trains. When
asked if he had secured a white ele-
phant since visiting Perth two years ago j
Mr. Peterson laughed heartily. “We had j
one in New Zealand for a few days,” he
said, “but he disappeared.” “It hap-
pened this way. One night in Welling-
ton an old elephant wandered away and
got into the rear portion of a chemist’s
shop. He broke open a barrel a plaster-
of-paris, and becoming annoyed scettered
the stuff all over himself. The night
was rainy and the plaster stuck like
glue.
On another occasion, about ten years
ago, at Katanning in this State, an ele-
phant investigated a cask of phosphate
in the Katanning railway yards. He
turned up his toes next day. Two ani-
mals went lor a swim in Hobart Harbor
five years ago, and their escapade cost'
the circus £5O. While at large they
smashed up a rival showman’s exhibition
of wax figures.
Mr. Peterson has a pet lion in the
show named “Prince” who caused a lot:
of trouble in Melbourne five years ago.
As a cub Prince was a weakling and was
left behind wfoen the circus went to
New Zealand. A friend of Mr. Peter-
son’s took the young lion home, and it
became so domesticated that it ran
about the house and backyard like an
ordinary cat. Prince even performed
such jobs as carrying in the wood. When
che authorities heard of it they “came
down on Mr. Peterson like a ton of
bricks,” and Prince went back to the cir-
cus. He is the “show” lion nowadays. '
NEW OVERSEAS ACTS
Mr. George Wirth recently imported*
five European and American “star” turns
which will be shown in Perth for the
first time. They include “the Flying
Lamars.” a troupe of five American sen '
sationalists. In this act it will be re-
. mernbered a girl was killed in Melbourne
some months ago. Then there are “the
I Six Liars,” who do all manner of im-
* possible acrobatics. One of this troupe
an Arab, is considered the most wonder
iul whirlwind tumbler in the wnrlH
‘‘The Pour Palamars” are jugglers 0
extraordinary ability, and Clm.Sa Lbr
s the world’s strongest woman. sir
holds a real cannon in her teeth as she
hangs from a trapeze. The cannon i«
hen fired. A Swedish girl dancer per-
forms in a den of lions, while five nev
| clowns provide the laughs.
A new figure to Perth people will h-
; Master Phillip Wirth, who is following
m his father’s footsteps, and some dav
will be ringmaster. He trains the horse^
■md n 0 m°s. pn,, r --n~vt o P „ Pst ,., OV|nos
are all members of the Wirth family.
The menagerie consists of a number of i
new animals, notable among which are j
two black Indian panthers, the first
ever shown in Australia.
~u, Oi a nursery or kmderg'-
Len at present.” observed Mr. Peterson,
“as we have a litter of two baby leo-
pards, and three little baby mnokeys.”
Mother leopard became annoyed one day
a few weeks ago and devoured one of her
offspring. This is one of the peculiarities
of the cat tribe and makes the rearing
of cubs in the noisy everyday life of the
circus a very difficult matter.
From Perth the circus will proceed to
Geraldton, and then leaves for Mel-
bourne, opening there in October on
Caulfield Cup night.
THE SUN
A CIRCUS PREPARES
Everybody Works, Including
The Elephants
PETS IN MENAGERIE TENT
To sit around the ring and
i watch a circus performance going
J on is one thing; to stroll through
the menagerie section of a circus
when the show is open to the
public also is one thing; but to
tour the circus ground while the
big tent is being erected, while
elephants are roaming about at
their work, while lions and tigers
air their fretful opinions, is an-
other thing altogether.
For the people of Wirth Bros.’
Circus, which arrived in Christchurch
by train last evening, and was busily
taking occupation of its ground in
Moorhouse Avenu# this morning, every
activity was a commonplace. Not one
of their doings, however, was a com-
monplace to the unlearned investiga-
tor.
When the Wirth Circus travels, 535
tons of wagons, canvas, poles, spikes,
apparatus and equipment, and ele-
phants, wild animals, horses, andj
people, _ have to be moved! And, when
the Wirth Circus arrives at each des-»
tination, this quantity of material and
flesh-and-blood has to be unloaded, in
a space of a few hours.
■ The work is cut-and-dried, of course.
There are over 100 people with the
i circus, and of these 56 arC workmen, j
burly fellows, each having his parti-
cular job to do.
While some rushed up the menagerie
tent, and put in their places therein the j
wheeled cages containing the wild
beasts, _ others tackled the erection of
the main tent this morning. First the
two poles, each 55ft high, were raised.
On the ground around, the canvas sea
of the laid-out tent extended. This
tent, when erected, measures 110 ft by
80ft, and seats 2500 people.
Suddenly, there was a huge tent,;
where before there was no tent. The 1
canvas was hoisted bodily, till the top
of the “bg top” stood taut above a wide :
area of ground. Next slanting poles, j
additional supports for the roof inside,
were man-handled into place, while
some men whipped the separate sides
of the tent into position.
Behind the main tent, horses were
being attended to. There are 38 horses
in the circus, ranging from pocket-sized
ponies to the white, sleek beasts that
carry the riders in the ring.
There are seven elephants, too. It is
impossible to overlook the elephants.
They have the same effect on the in-'
experienced human, at close quarters,
as they had on the dray horse in Moor-
house Avenue, which, seeing the ele- :
phants walking toward him after their
morning drink to-day, tried to stand on'
his head. !
These elephants work. How they'
work! Mr Philip Wirth, the Veteran
showman, considers that his seven
elephants are worth 500 men! In pub-,
lie life, the eiepnants life tidmirecl by
a wide-eyed public, and carry children
for rides on their backs. In private
working life, they tow around big vans
and circus floats heavily laden. It is
necessary to remember, when one of
them walks by only a yard away, that
they obey the slightest word of their
trainers. . . .
Here comes Alice, an enormous beast,
carrying with lightness her large bur-
den of j'ears. Alice, front view. A wav-
ing trunk. Mr Philip Wirth the younger
is saying something excessively inter-
esting about how the big top is erected.
Alice comes nearer. Behind her lum-
bers a wagon with a six-ton load of iron
slakes and oddments. Thus must the
Germans have felt when they were first
introduced to tanks in warfare. But
I the man in charge gabbles something,
and Alice, winking, swerves to the
| right, and passes by.
The Undertaker comes along. He
| grins. He has been with the circus for
j some ‘2O years, and they call him The
! Undertaker because his features have a
certain cast of gloom, and he always
wears a bowler hat. This bowler hat
and The Undertaker’s working overalls
form an effective combination. The
Undertaker grins because he is used to
elephants.
Alice, it is said, has been known
to push a 365-ton load of equip-
ment on railway trucks —push, not
pull. Elephants are much more
powerful pushers, head down to the
job, than they are pullers. They at-
tend to the shunting of the circus
train’s trucks in the railway yards.
The oldest of the Wirth elephants is
147, the youngest 15. The oldest one
came from the great Bostock circus.
Alice is the boss of the lot. Now and
again, the grey beasts become mls-
ichievous. At least, the circus folk
call it “mischievous.” For instance,
Alice recently ate a brand-n#w hat be-
longing to a circus man, and a waist-
coat belonging to another, a waistcoat
carrying with it silver money, a watch-
and-chain. and a razoix
In a Western Australian town, one
of Alice’s companions, walking down the
street, mischievously reached out her
trunk and ripped up one of the posts of
a new shop veranda. Just playfully.
Now for the menagerie tent. Meet
Lizzie, the African hippo, brunette, fat,
two and a-half years old, and weighing
a mere ton and a-half. She is having
her daily bath. Along trots Lizzie’s
valet, with a bucketful of water. He
sloshes the water over Lizzie, and
fetches some more. She is washed for
half-an-hour in this manner, each day.
She drinks 14 to 16 gallons of water a
day, too, sucking it up in the same way
that a horse drinks.
Monkeys, now, a cageful, 28 Javanese
monkeys shrieking for their morning
rations, scampering about, pushing each
other in the face. The greediest have
seized upon green peas and peanuts,
and have stuffed their cheek-pouches,
till they appear to be suffering from
an all-round toothache.
A leopard next. One of the circus
pets. Quite. When Mr Philip Wirth
junior approaches, the leopard rolls
over on her hack, like a friendly
kitten —almost. Bred and born in the
circus.
Not so her next-door neighbour, a big
black panther. Even the circus people
respect this beast, and tell you not to
stand too close to the cage. One
wouldn’t, anyway, one certainly wouldn’t.
The panther’s eyes glitter as he lies,
he mutters cusswords in his throat.
[ The woodwork of the shutter which
i covers the bars of his cage at night, is
ripped by his claws, as though chisels
had been at work.
1 And the four performing lionesses,
the brown bear, the African baboon and
other monkeys, the two polar hears,
pacing their retreats, the two tigers.
And the Nubian lion, anpther pet of the
circus. He was hand-reared, the only
survivor of a family.
The half-sheep, half-goat, obtrudes
itself upon the notice. It. obtrudes it-
self hv galloping the full length of its
mooring-rope, with the earnest object
of impacting on the nether regions of
the unsuspecting visitor. Mr Wirth
seizes the beast by the horns, after a
brisk wrestle, and points out its com-
bination of peculiar features. “See for
yourself—there is goat's hair among
the wool.” “Yes, yes—extremely inter-
esting,” one replies hastily. Even Alice,
Doll, and their battleship companions
are better company than the half-sheep,
half-goat, which has brutal instincts.
The escort remarks that Alice has a
habit of undoing the shackle of hci
leg-chain, and then undoing the shackles
of the leg-chains on other elephants.
Breathing hard, one suggests that time
presses.
Moorhouse Avenue—liow spaeious,
how open, liow free! Of course, there
is no danger in the menagerie tent,
really. The cages are strong, the at-
tendants know their job, the animals
I iptohaply would not know what to 4»
with themselves_ even ff they did get|
loose. But feeding-time lends a pecu-l
liarly earnest atmosphere to place* like!
i»*njtge;ri* Watt
WHEN JUMBO SWISHED
HIS TAIL
I Sroke Bystander’s False Teeth: He
Trod on Two Bicycles
C-ESSNOCK, Friday, Playful
things, elephants! They mean no
harm, but their weight is against
them when they try to be gentle.
A circus elephant on the way to the
station to catch a train last night, ac-
companied by other elephants and
keepers, forgot about his weight as he
went on his placid way.
He stepped on a bicycle, and the
Dicycle became scrap-iron. There was
the same devastating effect when he
trod on another bicycle.
The elephant swished his tail, pro-
bably to explain that he was sorry. His
tail struck David Brock, of Cessnoclr,
in the mouth, and broke his false
teeth.
But elephants mean no harm; they
are gentle creatures at heart.
t ii
Music for Diggers
Touched by the stor v in yester-
day’s “Sunday Sun” of the Digger
naiients at Graythwaite, Mr. Philip
Wirth visited the institution to-day
and entertained the inmates with
some popular records on his port-
able gramophone, and with selections
on the tin whistle on which he is a
particularly able performer.
APSEIPNTS.
WikTH’S emeus. jT^
On Thursday next, the 9th instant?
there opens on the Esplanade, Wil-
liam-street, what promises to be ab-
solutely the* most “splendiferous" and
gorgeous circus and menagerie that
has ever visited this Par West, viz.,
birth Bros/ mammoth show. This
.irm for once correctly carries
the title 8r05.," for it is solely run
by two brothers, Phillip and George
nth, both natives of Australia, who
-rom a small beginning have gradually
got together their present unique and
magnificent collection, which include,„
many strange and curious “beastios,"
marvellously; sagacious and well-
trained horses, dogs, lions, elephant-,
tigers in fact, the cream of every-
tlnng obtainable in their particular
3me. Special notice must be taker) of
the menagerie and travelling y,, 0 .
which has been... instrumental in open-
ing the eyes of many a back-blocks
swaggy as to the wonders there are
on the fact of this ear..-.a, which to
misapply and mis-quote a well-known
quotation, “dwelt not in his philo-
sophy." They give some faint idea of
what the inhabitants of the far-off
jungles look like. This, mater and
pater families must take into con-
sideration, that a visit to Wirttrs
show is an education in itself, whilst
at the same time it combines instruc
tion with a huge amount of pleasure.
r I o give even a brief resume ot\ the
huge programme provided for the de-
lectation of both young and old alik-
would too severely tax the space of
this column, much as it is tempted to
do so. But two or three of the item
on tfie programme cannot be omitted.
The first and most daringly fascinat
ing that strikes the eye is that of
Kitty, the Blondin tigress, who will
career wildly round the ring on horse-
back, taking; occasional leaps into
space, safely- alighting, however, on
the back of her gallant and unconcer-
ned steed. Another tiger display bil-
led is that of three tigers, who play-
fully jndulge in see-saw, etc., and con-
clude with a grand finale by furiously
driving a chariot round the ring. We
are also promised that an ancient pro-
phecy shall be fulfilled in our midst,
with the exception that a goat is sub-
stituted for the proverbial lamb, for
the king oi beasts, a goat, and a dog
lie down together, and have long- nyo
agreed to form a happy family Seve-
ral elephants are in the show, and are
trained to a very high state of do-
cility. The animals are backed by a
huge crowd of specialty artistes. acro-
bats, jugglers, dancers,equestrians and
equestriennes, skirt dancers, and a
hundred others too numerous to re-
member
ACCIDENTS AND FATALITIES
BOY’S TRAGIC DEATH
FOUND HANGED IN OUTHOUSE.
nan ] Arthu r George Shaw was
found hanged in an outhouse at hi! W
in MeJbourne street on Saturday aftw-
surroundingHhi the circu mstance
surrounding his death was held by M
Sg and ° n morn
h!ngig a b^t 6 t h° “ ph^ a '”«ultfng from
£lf - ™ MS- o‘
paSww'T tendered by the boy’
I thetilnfv 6 7 a ® ln * ood health at
b g , abou f his demeanour to suggest
that he contemplated taking his life H
St t re " nl,y
interested n tOWn ’ and , had been greatly
one nf 3 r fipeclal turn in which
height with a P M«e m r™ n 'dT£ e neck° m T he
fi°m his work on a milk round
m Saturday at lunch time and after a
r e°a°d m La e W t nt ° Ut J>“ to SW to
eacl. Eater he was found dead There
no apparent reason for his action
Ihe coroner after hearing the evidence
lartv rentS ’, “ pe *ghbour, and Dr
bove returned the verdict outlined
LEG CUT OFF
Truck Over Points
Y ABRAM, Wednesday. While
" shunting the second division of
Wirth’s Circus train at 5.40 a.m.
today, Mr. J. J. McCarthy, sta-
tionmasthr, was run over.
A_ truck jumped the points, and
when the guard went to inspect he
found McCarthy lying by the rails.
The truck had passed over his
leg. The guard rendered first i
aid, and telephoned for a doctor,
•who amputated the crushed limb
above the knee.
Mr. McCarthy has been stationed
here for three months.
A HUMAN EVEREST.—Clif
Thompson, of Los Angeles, California
claims a human altitude record with
feet 9¾ inches. He gives the credit
“MOOCHES’
ON
Death of “Tht
Bloke”
By TE PA.nN
rile Sentimental Bloke” h«
mooched on, for Walter Corno?A
the first actor to play the role'on
the Australian stage, is dead.
( I ORNOCK, in his conception of the
character, gave a true representation
or the type which frequents Railvav
Square, Sydney, and its environs
. !f ld me once that he modelled his
moke on a barrowman, who was a wl-
known character in the Sydney markets,
and the hat he wore in the original once
belonged to a “Rabbit ’o” of Redfern.
He copied his slang and, in particular,
his mooching gait,” from Sydney Park
frequenters, and no Australian actor Iss
ever leaned against a lamp-post on the
stage quite so true to life as Cornodr
and no actor could utter “Blimey” as he
could.
Still Remember ed
His delineation of “The Bloke” stti
stands as a masterly piece of work in ’aj
annals of Australian stage history.
In late years, Cornock worked undtl
many legitimate managements, and hi
most recent appearance in Melbourne will
with the Nellie Bramlcy Company at tt J
Palace Theatre. He also played seasoii,
with Sir Benjamin Puller’s “stool!
dramatic organisations.
At 42 Cornock found that “the worl
had got him snouted just a treat,” an'
he was m ill-health for some time befon
the end. ”
“Keep to the Left! ! !
A two-year-old circus tiger out for a
stroll with his trainer in the streets of
London. Onlooker, kept at a respeet-
ful distance!


TRUCKS DERAILED
CIRCUS TRAIN MISHAP
ELEPHANT WAGGON CAPSIZES
animals assist workmen
An elephant bored with railway
travelling is thought to be a possible
cause of three waggons of a special
circus train being derailed at Waikino,
near Waihi, yesterday morning. The
train, which was going from Thames
to Tauranga, was about to enter the
Waikino station at 5.15 a.m. when a
truck, containing a large elephant, cap-
sized and the wheels of two adjoining
waggons, containing smaller elephants,
left the rails.
None of the animals was hurt, and
they shoAved their indifference to the
mishap by helping a gang of railway
workers from Waikino to drag the cap-
sized waggon clear of the track and to
replace the other two on the lines. The
waggon which fell over was damaged
and Avas replaced with another. The
track Avas not damaged and only an
hour’s delay was caused. The only other
traffic affected was the first train from
Paeroa to Tauranga, which leaves at
6.25 a.m. It was held up for about an
hour.
Six years ago a waggon with an ele-
phant in it was derailed near the same
place. It was decided in that case that
the elephant had set up a swaying
motion in the waggon, causing it to
leave the lines, which proceed over this
part of the route on .an upgrade and
in a series of fairly sharp curves. It
is thought possible that the same thing
has happened again, for elephants are
knoAvn to be restless traA r ellers, with a
curious habit of “marking time” and
throwing their AA T eight from one foot
to another. One elephant traAelling on
the New Zealand railways entertained
itself by unscrewing a certain nut in
its Avaggon, although it was tightened
repeatedly. In the end the nut had to
be made a fixture.
Although the large elephant left Wai-
kino after the accident in another truck
it was not taken right on to Tauranga
Avith the rest of the circus, but was
left temporarily at Waihi. In the after-
noon a breakdown train Avith a crane
left Frankton to replace the capsized
waggon on the rails and an official went
from Auckland to inspect the scene.
Armless Man’s Novel
Defence Fails
Sun World Cables
T ONDON, Friday. Alfred Myers
was fined 10/ at Lichfield for hav-
ing made a false statement in an
application for a motor driving
licence. , ,
He had a novel defence. Myers,
.who was born armless, answered ‘No
ito the police questionnaire whether
he had lost any limbs, as he said he
could not lose what he never had.
He is an expert mechanic. He drives
and does everything with his toes. He
performed in a circus in a ricie known
as the wall of death.
CHILDREN FROM THE HOSPITAL VISIT THE CIRCUS.
Small patients from the Children’s Hospital were entertained at Wirths’ Circus on Saturday afternoon. Pictured here are
some of the children having fun with “Denny,” the clown, and “Harold,” a two-year-old orang-outang.
CIRCUS ELEPHANTS ABOARD SHIP AT VICTORIA DOCK.
Tethered only by leg chains, these elephants belonging to Wirth's cireus
were able to take quite an interest in Melbourne and their visitors yester-
day after a journey from Java. A picture taken on board the Merkur which
docked early yesterday.
MADAME
SARAH REES
fresco og fans
Bagagemand Camillo.
Optræder Kl. 23.
A party of children from the Abbotsford Orphanage spent a happy afternoon at Wirths’
Circus yesterday through the generosity of members of Tattersall's Club. They were parti-
cularly interested in the animals and some of them are shown making friends with Gyp
and Lena, the two young elephants at the Circus.


CAPSTONE, the human sea Ron from Wirth’s circus, who received the “freedom of the cit y” from the mayor
this morning, is here seen about to glance at the day’s news.
Modem Freaks As Big As Famous
Big Men Of The Past
"|*HE Berlin Olympic Games brought tog ether the world’s most powerful giants.
lallest of them ah was Willard Schmidt, the basketball player. He weighs
14] st. and is 6 ft. in.
Another basketball player, Joseph Sortenberry, is 6 ft. 8 in., while there is an
American policeman, Jack Torrence, who makes up in weight what he “lacks” in
height. Even he is 6 ft. 3 in., but he weighs 22 st. 12 lb.! His specialty is shot putting.
Among the discus throwers is a giant Swede, Gunnar Berg, who stands 6 ft. 5| in.
The extraordinary physique of
j these enormous athletes contrasts
sharply with the comparative
I weakness of the freak giants—men
land women of 8 ft. and 9 ft. in
height.
, Legends have persisted, since the
[ beginning of the world, of extinct
[ races of giants inhabiting the
f earth. “There were giants in the
[earth in those days,” says the
ißook of Genesis, and the Old Tes-
tament abounds in references to
men of godlike stature.
Goliath may well have been as
tall as these, but like most excep-
; ionally tall men he was probably
weakling, no match for the sturdy
'and resourceful David.
Famous Goliaths
Nearly all the giants of whom we
•Mve any detailed records have
loeen weak and timid. The eight-
eenth century Irish giant, Patrick
[potter O’Brien, for instance, who
T va »s well over 8 ft. in height, could
,:vaik only by leaning on the shoul-
ders of two tall men and was un-
able to rise from a sitting position
without placing his hands in the
small of his back, groaning with
Ghe effort, have been physically
pveak. timid, and helpless men.
one’s self against them was a modish
pastime (Pepys records going to see one
at Charing Cross in 1664, “under whose
arm,” he wrote, “I went with my hat
on”), and their managers usually made
a fortune.
The giants of today are as tall as
ever they were in legendary days, and
the taller of the two German sisters,
Else and Brunhilde Droysen, is prob-
ably the largest giantess on record. She
is 8 ft. 4 in., and proportionately stouL
and heavy. ,r
9 ft.!
There are several American giants,
one of whom, Robert Wadlow, is only
eighteen and the same height as Else
Droysen. Like nearly all giants, he
is the child of normal parents, with
normal brothers and sisters. At four-
teen he was head and shoulders taller
than Camera.
And mention of Camera again brings
to mind the young Roumanian boxer,
Gogea Mitu. He stands 7 ft. 6 in.,
and has great ambitions of success in
the ring.
Some years ago a young Dutchman
called Van Albert, who was actually
over 9 ft., was photographed in Down-
ing street with Mr. Ramsay MacDonald.
How did giants, even in the days be-
fore history, acquire a reputation for
ferocity, for devouring boye and girls
for growling “Fe fi fo fum” when they
smelt human blood, and possessing
other bloodthirsty characteristics’ Only,
illogically enough, by reason of their
size. There has never been any scien-
tific evidence to show that there were
ever giants who were not gentle and
harmless.
The abnormal behavior of their
pituitary gland, which is the gland
, governing growth, exhausts all the
natural resources of physical
energy. An 8 ft. giant is often in-
capable of lifting a 3 ft. child.
From the beginning of history,
royalty has always shown a weak-
[ ness for giants, often dressing the
| gentle creatures in ferious uni-
! forms to form a personal guard.
Haile Selassie possessed a huge
drum major called Balahu, who was
executed for espionage. At 7 st. 5 in.
he was reckoned the tallest man in
Abyssinia.
George IV. when Regent had a giant
porter, Sam MacDonald, whom he
employed to keep the gate at Carlton
House, and who used to amaze visitors
by looking at them over the top in-
stead of opening the gate.
King’s Famous Guards
Robert Hales, the Norfolk giant, who
measured 71 ft., was presented in the
year of the Great Exhibition to Queen
Victoria and Prince Albert at Buck-
ingham Palace.
Both Charles I. and James I. had
men of freakish height as porters, and
even Cromwell was not above the
affectation. Queen Elizabeth had a 71
ft. giant imported from the Low Coun-
tries, and increased the fierceness of
his aspect by dressing his as a
Spaniard.
But the most famous example in his-
tory of a royal taste in giants is Fred-
erick William I. of Prussia’s famous
giant Guards. The tallest of them was
71 ft. high, and they were recruited
sometimes at enormous cost, from all
over Europe.
EDUCATED SEA LION.
FROLICS IN STREET
“ FREEDOM OF CITY ”
Dunedin’s sea lion lias a rival.
This morning the streets of Dunedi
were invaded by one of the most edi
cated members of the sea lion specie
known to mankind.
This was Carbine, the sea lion an
star ot the troupe that is associate
with Wirth’s Circus, which is at pre
sent appearing in Dunedin. Whereve
Carbine appeared in company with hi
trainer, Herr Frohn, he was the centr
of muen interest,and, while he muncheij
the fish t(hat a sympathetic attendani
provided for him or performed trick;
for the amusement of the crowd, hi
did it all in the most nonchalant man
ner.
The sea lion which has graced th«
beach at St. Clair is comparatively un
aware as yet of all the courtesies as-
sociated with life in a big city, buf
Carbine is quite a polished gentleman.
He viewed quite calmly the crowd ih
front of the Town Hall steps this morn-
ing as he was introduced to the mayor
(Rev. E. T. Cox), who laughingly
shook ” with Carbine and granted
him the “ freedom of the city.”
Carbine received the honour in the
most dignified way, but somewhat upset
the gravity of those present by rolling
iver on his back and applauding vigor-
ously. He did some balancing feats
vith a ball for the entertainment of]
mose present, and appeared to join:
vith other tourists in admiring ‘the
>eauties of the city.
His morning’s work was not com-
peted with the mayoral reception that
cas tendered to him, for he later pro-!
eeded down Stuart street to the
®tar Office, where he was again ad-
aired by a large crowd. Photographed
•erusing a copy of the paper, he sub-
equently visited the office, and gruveiy
Landed to one of the clerks the ad-
erti.sement for to-night’s performance
'hen, after another frolic with a bounc-
ig ball and another meal of fish he
roceeded on his way—a real aristocrat
t ius kind.
’WARE TIGER
CIRCUS ESCAPEE IN
EXCITING SCENE .
Dashing: against a section of a cage \
during training operations at Wirth’
Circus, Goulburn-street, a swung tiger
escaped into the big ring.
It was finally lassooed by a Mexican
rider, a member of the trouDe.
Rehearsals were in full swyig in
the big ring when Captain Flyger,.
the lion-tamer, started to train tWW
young, but wild, tiger? that had only!
acauired by the circus.
»Acrobats were swinging from their
trapezes and turning somersaults oni
the mat. Other performers weref
going through their paces.
The lion-tamer had one tiger back
in its cage, when the other one made]
a dash against a section of the train 4
ing cage. 1
Cry of Terror
The cage gave under the impact
and there was a cry of terror as thd
tiger escaned into the big tent. ~
A number of children who ha?
been watching the rehearsals
diately scattered.
The tiger dashed around the
trying to find an opening. J£
It ran under the seats and tg*
lion-tamer endeavored to coax it ba~*
into the cage. Suddenly it saw SBF
opening underneath the tent afi
raced for it.
Its body was half-out of the te;
when one of the circus hands rat;.
at it with an iron pole and hitting >3 v
over the head forced it back ageT ‘
gL*
No More Training
The Mexican rider, Fred Gaz|§
ham, had been endeavoring to c®l
it. Finally ne got it in a corner »»
lassoed it.
Fighting, clawing and biting, ■' 1
tiger was dragged back into its c M
Then the rehearsal went on. Aero if £
swung from their trapezes or turner
somersaults on the mat. The circi
settled down again to business.
But there was no more tiger-tam
ing that day.
CIRCUS TIGER MAULS
HIS TRAINER
• '-.4-
Pinned beneath a clawing tiger he was "breaking in" at
the circus grounds, Wirth's Park, today, Clifton Eric Flyger
animal-trainer, was aved from serious injury by his presence of
mind and the action of Mr G. Wirth, who came to his aid with
an iron bar.
IJLYGER’S left arm was severely
clawed. He was given first-aid at
the circus.
Flyger and two Bengal tigers, Prince
and Pasha, which, the circus states,
j have never appeared in a circus, were
rehearsing a see-saw “act” in a circu-
lar open-air roofless cage when Flyger,
who carried a small whip and a fork
as protection, slipped in a muddy patch
and fell against Prince, who was bal-
ancing Pasha on the see-saw.
[ Prince immediately sprang on Flyger,
I clawing fiercely.
“1 put up my arm to protect my
face, and this probably saved me from
worse injury,” Flyger said after his arm
had been bandaged. “1 kept talking, as
we do during the act, and called for
assistance.
Kept at Bay
“Pasha was coming for me, too, whenf
Mr Wirth entered the cage, drove them
both back with the iron bar, and kept
them at bay by rattling the iron bars
long enough for me to regain my feet,
pick up the whip and fork, and gain
control a"ain —still talking for all I was
worth.”
Flyger has had several narrow escapes [
with his wild charges in his 15 years’ ex-1
perience, but says that today’s was his
worst experience. |
At Springvale on Caulfield Cup night, I
four years ago, he tracked an escaped |
lion into the scrub and cornered it. |
Throughout the night he kept the animal |
there, and in the morning dug a hole|
beneath the fence of a fowl house andj
drove the lion into it. Later the animal l!
was driven into a cage.
The King delighted to go out every
day himself with a sergeant’s <mne and
review his freakish regiment, who for-
tunately were never, so far as anyone
knows, called upon to fight-
“ These giants,” wrote Voltaire, were
the King’s “greatest delight, and the
things for which he went to
the heaviest expense. The men who
stood in the first rank in this regi-
ment were none of them less than 7 ft.,
high, and he sent to purchase them
from the farest parts of Europe to the
borders of Asia.”
It gives one an idea of the gigantic
stature of these men to think that
Camera would have missed being in
the front ranks by nearly half a foot.
Mammoth Sisters
The eighteenth century seems to
have abounded in giants, and there are
contemporary accounts of many of
them.
They were usually to be seen for the
sum of sixpence or a shilling at Che
back of a barber’s or tobacconist’s shop,
and might also be hired for private
entertainments. Going to see them,
comparing their heights, and measuring
The tiger that maulec its keeper.
THE GREATEST
CIRCUS OF ALL
IS STILL IN TOWN
KING’S THEATRE
MATINEE EVERY DAY
Twice Daily, 2.30 and 8
PHIL WIRTH, JUNR.
MAMMOTH
INDOOR CIRCUS
Performing Lions, Tigers, Ele-
phants, Ponies, Horses, Dogs,
Complete Circus Ring on Stage,
POPULAR PRICES
3/-,2/-,1/-
CHILDREN’ HALF FRICE
EXCEPT 1/ SEATS
(Res. Seats 1/ Extra)
All prices plus lax.
Plans Allan’s, Theatre.
Phone Cent. 4875 for Reservations.


Sea Lions Enjoy Luxurious Trip
A TEAM OF PERFORMING SEA LIONS today arrived in the Stassfurt from Germany with their trainer, Mr Karl Frohn.
The seals were housed in combination cage, wheeled carriage and tank, in which they were taken ashore. They will
appear in Melbourne shortly.
Roaring and trumpeting in their com-
bined cage and swimming pool, four per-
forming sea lions who have eaten £B5
fvorth of fish since they left Hamburg
P days ago, reached Melbourne in the
Stassfurt today with their trainer, Mr
Karl Frohn, who under contract to
Sfirth’s Circus.
llTheir cage, in which they have splash-
fl their way all over the world—from
slo to Dunkirk and from Lisbon to Rio
tip Janairo—is probably the most luxur-
ious in existence.
*|At one end is the cage proper, which
a ';ds from a diving platform to the
is imming pool. Above the pool are
: fir electric light fittings of a fashion-
able pattern, and near the ceiling is an
electric fan. The water in the pool is
changed three times daily, and the gen-
eral arrangements are all that an up-
to-date sea lion could desire.
They are of the Californian species,
which Mr Frohn says are the only ones
that can be trained. Charlie, the eldest,
is eight years old and weighs 700 pounds.
There are two other adults, Bonzo and
Neptune, and the baby of the troupe is
Quick, who weighs 150 pounds and is 12
months old.
All of them understand German, the
language in which Mr Frohn speaks to
them, but none of them has any time
ONARCH OF THE TIGHT WIRE, this four-year-old African lion
the only one of his kind able to perform a tight-rope act. His
ner and trainer, Mr R. Matthews, of Venice, California, reared him
since he was a cub.
for English. Melbourne shipping men
who addressed them today in English
were answered in every case with a roar
of disgust.
Quick, the bad boy of the party, one
morning qn the voyage fell out of a cage
door which had been left open. For
three-quarters of an hour he scampered
up and down the decks at a speed which
surprised even Mr Frohn.
The entire ship's company joined in
the chase, while Charlie, Bonzo and Nep-
tune roared their encouragement from
the cage.
Mr Frohn, who is accompanied by
Miss Freda Frohn, has arranged for a
j daily supply of more than 1301 b. of
! "small, oily fish,” of which the sea-
lions are particularly fond.
Mr Frohn has been used to sea lions
since his childhood, as both his father
and grandfather were sea lion trainers
before him.
The Stassfurt also brought two
zebras for the Sydney Zoo from the
famous German animal breeder and
trainer, Carl Hagenbeck, of Hamburg.
Four hooded monkeys, also from
Hagenbeck’s, were landed at Adelaide.
MOTHER AND DAUGHTER.
Boo- Boo, the chimpanzee in the
London Zoo, and her daughter ,
Jubilee , Zoo at six months, has six
teeth.
'TS GROUND. TO-NIGHT AT 8. SPORTS GROUND.
E THRILLS. FUN.
!. THRILLS. FUN.
THRILLS. FUN.
IVAN BROS.’ INTERNATIONAL
CIRCUS. CIRCUS. CIRCUS.
CIRCUS. CIRCUS. CIRCUS.
A DAZZLING ARRAY OF CIRCUS TALENT INCLUDING:—
jigi DUTTONS, America’s Most Beautiful and Daring Equestrians —7 DEMNATI ARABS in
icribatic Posturing and Tumbling Feats —NAIDA AND ERNESTO PEREZ. Extraordinary
foulibrists —THE AERIAL SILVERLAKES in a Thrilling Aerial Trapeze Exhibition—JOHN
;„d : MILLICENT VALESQUEZ Equestrians of Agility and Grace —THE TRENTON SISTERS,
and Fearless Girls—THE FLYING DELCOS, featuring Rose Campbell In “Flying
gp’-r-THE MARlNETTlS—Sensational Risley and Trapeze Artists.
fIRILLS AND LOTS OF FUI FOR GROWN-UPS AND CHILDREN ALIKE.
ji)S may be booked at Paling’s. Nieholson’s, Hotel Australia, and Usher’s. Plans now open.
0&L TRAMS FROM CIRCULAR QUAY AND CENTRAL RAILWAY STATION,
COMMENCING AT 6.30 P.M.
Scene: Gore street, Bluff. Time:
Sunday evening. Characters: A bevy
of Bluff’s best and loveliest young lad-
ies on the pavement, quietly strolling
homewards. Upon the scene appears
Wirth’s Menagerie, elephants, horses,
etc—one of the animals becomes frac-
tious. A stentoriam voice from the
rear roars out, "Catch Queenie, Jack.”
The young ladies fled at the stern or-
Ider, and are still wondering whether
| the keeper meant Jack to catch
-1 Wirth Bros. "Queenie” or our own
"Queenie.”
Wirth Bros. Circus has experienced
a most unpleasant initiation into the
vagaries of our climate for the com-
mencement of their New Zealand tour.
Bain, wind and sometimes hail have
been the prevailing conditions for the
past 24 hours. Coming from Australia
to such weather as at present obtains
is very trying. One shivering mortal
on the working staff, enquired of a
vvatersider, "Do you always have
weather like this here?’' and for reply
was consoled with the answer, "Well
your getting your share of it, aren’t
you.” An unfortunate incident occur-
red at 7.30 on Monday morning. Some
of the passengers from the Manuka
were briskly promenading on the wharf,
for the purpose of keeping their blood
in circulation —when one of their num-
ber slipped on the wet planking and
sustained a nasty fall. Being unable
to walk unaided, a stretcher was pro-
cured and t"he injured man conveyed
on board to receive medical attention.
Owing to rain and high winds Wirth
Bros., Circus did not show at Bluff, to
the keen disappointment of young and
old.
COSSACKS WILL THRILL SHOW CROWDS I
SPECTACULAR FEATS OF HORSEMANSHIP by Cossacks will be one of
the chief attractions in the Showgrounds arena. These acts—vaulting across
the horse’s back, and picking up a message at the gallop—were performed
during a practice display today.
Back from a tour
of Singapore and
the East with
Wirths' Circus,
Alice, Who is
still young at 115,
arrived in Mel-
bourne on the
Merkur yester-
day.
SAW THE ClRCUS.—Members of the S.S.W. and M. Associa-
tion were the guests yesterday afternoon of Wirth Bros., who gave the
performance free. From right to left: Miss Elaine and Master Somer-
set De Chair, children of the Governor of N.S.W., and Mr Philip
Wirth.


Vera Wooton
“THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE”—A SOME-STYLE PARTY.
"The feelin" that she put into that song
’Ud melt the 'eart-strings of a chiner doll.”
Lottie Lyell (Standing) and Arthur Tauchert (sitting, in the foreground) as
[?]oreen and "The Bloke” in the filmatisatian of the C. J. Dennis verse-story.
[?]rodueed by R. Longford for Southern Feature Films, Ltd. Releasing rights held
[?]
KITTY POOLE
A Popular Soubre
Top-(C) by International Butom—Photo by Underwood & Underwood.
IT IS ALWAYS SUNSHINE HERE.
UPPER: L. TO R.-MISSES DE COURCY, SHELLEBY, BLACKWELL AND WINKLER AT VENICE,
CAL. LOWER: FANCHON AND MARCO GIRLS ON CAPTURED^GERMAN CANNON.
Mr. Jim Gerald as Dame Dolly Dimples in
“Red Riding Hood” —Newtown Majestic.


Amy Rochelle, playing Prince Charming
"Cinderella"-Grand Opera House.
[?]rauss Peyton, K. C.
A RAY OF SUNSHINE.
[?]MA HAIG, WHO IS A DANCING STAR IN
[?]AUDEVILLE OVER THE KEITH CIRCUIT.
Photo by White,
SOUTHERN BEAUTY.
ELSIE LAWSON, IN “TUMBLE IN,”
NOW ON TOUR.
Photo by Campbell.
READY TO SPIN.
KLAIRE EL-REY, NOW SCORING A SUCCESS
IN KEITH VAUDEVILLE.
THE YAMAMOTO AND
MISS KOYOSHI troupe
Selebrated Japanese Equilibrists and Entertainers,
JniQue in their kind. Unrivalled gorgeous Japanese full
itage Settings and Costumes. Change of Costumes everj"
night. Certainty or Shares.
Permanent Address • 30, Rue d Orsel, Paris.
VACANT, Dec. 25, and from Juu. 8 on-
Address— 24, Lime Street, Oldham Rd„ Manchester,
Photo by Hartsook.
VERA SABINA.
CLEVER DANCER WINNING POPULAR FAVOR
MAE MURRAY.
TALENTED VAUDEVILLE ARTISTE,
[?]R.
A FORM UNSURPASSED.
ANNETTE KELLERMAN, STARRING AGAIN
IN VAUDEVILLE, OVER KEITH CIRCUIT.
Horizontal bar experts have been incidentals of almost every vaude-
ville programme submitted in Australia since the days when gas-jets
and candles were used as footlights. But there has hardly been a com-
bination of bar comiques to equal Gardner (left) and Dunham, at Syd-
ney Tivoli. They are performing some most thrilling stunts.
CLIFFORD
& GREY


OEAVIA DE ANGUILLAR.
ASPIRANTS FOR THE A GRADE BAND CHAMPIONSHIP.
The contests annually held by the Band Association of New South Wales take
plaee this year at the Sydney Sports Ground from january 21 to 26. Above is the
Lidcombe Borough Band, conducted by E. P. Kerry. Under his leadership Lidcombe
won the C grade in 1918; and last year, besides securing the B grade, were third in
the A grade. This year they hope to pull off the A grade. Their success is largely
due to Mr. Kerry, who as a bandsman has a most distinguished career. He took
up this class of music in England at an early age. There in so lo competitions-
open to all brass Instruments —bis euphonium-playing was such that he won twenty
six in succession. The result of being undefeatable was that he was then barred
Mr. Kerry came to Australia with the Besses o’ the Barn, and has here been
prominently identified with brass-band music ever since. Record entries have been
received tor the forthcoming competitions. They likwise promise in the way of
interest and attendance to far surpass the results of any previous year.
Block by W. T. Baker and Co.
Photos by Underwood & Underwood.
NONE BETTER.
GLORIA TEVIS, WHO IS PRONOUNCED A
"PERFECT THIRTY-SIX"
A PLEASANT PAINTING JOB.
THE STOCKINGLESS FAD MAY BE NEW, BUT STILL THE GIRLS CAN SHOW
NEW DESIGNS. L. TO R.: MILDRED OWENS AND MARIE MAYO.
Minnie Love as a sly co
“Tails Up.”
