



My dear Friends,
As it is hardly probable I shall have any very distant
travelling experiences to give you this year, and as local
subjects of interest are always cropping up from week to
week and month to month, I thought it better to com-
mence my circular letter for 1899 in the form of a diary,
and jot down at the time any little incidents that I judged
would be either amusing or instructive to my readers.
*** * *
New Year 1899 to Easter.
Owing to two very valid reasons—one being that a
rather troublesome cough made it imprudent to spend my
week’s vacation in the cold draughty rooms of a Japanese
country hotel, and the other being that my teeth had been
for some time requiring the attention of a dentist, I found
myself, for the first time for many years, spending both
last Christmas day and New Year’s day in Yokohama,
and a short word picture of how those days are spent here
may not be uninteresting to you.
Christmas Day on the Bluff,
is quite a representative day for illustrating the habits
of the foreign residents of Yokohama. For two or three
days before, every one is busily engaged sending and
receiving presents from their intimate friends and con-
gratulatory cards from their more distant acquaintances —
and I may say this practice goes on without intermission
from about the 23rd of December until after the New
Year. I was fairly tired with signing chits for the receipt of
tokens of good will from all who know me. From one’s
friends and intimate acquaintance come pretty little Japan-
ese curios of all kinds, each having some speciality of
work manship or design, until one can hardly find room
for them amongst the knicknacks in one’s drawing-room.
From one’s more distant acquaintance come Christmas and
New Year cards, and from all the Japanese with whom
one has had anything to do during the year, come simple
and inexpensive presents, but always so artistically made
up that they are quite pleasant to look upon. From one’s
Japanese trades people arrive gifts pertaining to their busi-
ness—from the grocer a box of square lump sugar or a
cake —from the milkman two delicate little pats of fresh
butter —from Japanese in the country are sent boxes of fresh
eggs or a brace of wild-fowl—even one’s humble jinrikisha
men bring a box of preserved persimmons or an open
wicker-work basket of oranges, so prettily and tastefully
arranged that it seems a pity ever to disturb them ; until
really one looks at the things and wonders how they can
142 A Bluff, Yokohama.
ever be eaten! and in my case, the majority go to the
servants, for it is impossible to consume them myself.
My servants are all made happy by the present of an
additional month’s wages for their Christmas box, which
enables the poor creatures to have little extra comforts in
the way of food and clothing that' they could not other-
wise afford, and their children get stuff for a new dress
each. I cannot say that it is the custom in every house-
hold to do this, but I know several besides myself who
do it, and they get their reward in increase of good service
during the coming year.
For the church-going people of the different nation-
alities there are services on Christmas eve and day, the
singing in the English Church on both occasions being, I
am told, really fine, with the advantage of having a real
Mus: Doc: as organist, a young man the son of an old
resident, who having developed a great taste for music
when a boy, was sent home for a musical education,
with the result that he has had his musical degree for
some time. His parents, who have kept the leading
draper’s shop here for-;mariy years, are retiring from
business, and, greatly against his inclination, have per-
suaded him to go into it, so that he has not much leisure
to practice his favorite art, but he is a valuable addition
to the already strong staff of musical amateurs in Yoko-
hama, and of course contributes his services on all special
occasions. The soloists at the choral services were ladies
whose voices and style would command attention in any
part of the world. Yokohama is especially strong in
amateur musical talent of the highest class, no place in the
East more so, and I may mention en passant, that at the
beginning of the winter • season the Yokohama Choral
Society secured the professional services of a German
violinist and conductor of high repute, in order to produce
four concerts, in which all the male and female vocal and
instrumental amateurs in the place assist. There has been
a choir formed of 80 voices, and an orchestra of about 35,
and they are all working with a will to make the season
a success. Two grand concerts have already been given.
This is a very fair per-centage in a community of only
about 3000 foreign men, women, and children, and is good
evidence of plenty of musical talent.
To return to my subject.—The first visible sign of the
near approach of Christmas is afforded by the Japanese
gardeners of the Bluff residents, who may be seen busily
ornamenting the entrance gates to every house, so that by
the time Christmas day is at hand, when driving along


the Bluff road, one passes a succession of arches more or less
elaborate, formed of ever-greens interspersed with mist-
letoe and clusters of a bright red berry which in Japan
does duty for holly, and in many cases quaint devices
made in small oranges, in addition to a large display of
the flags of all nations, the British Ensign, Stars and
Stripes and the Rising Sun predominating.
Also in passing along the road on these days one
meets the servant-men from every family, going to and
fro with presents from house to house, or frequently
carrying on trays large sugared and ornamented Christ-
mas cakes. I had one of these sent me, with as many tiers
as a wedding-cake, from the Japanese printing firm that
does all my printing, these circular letters included;
besides a plum-pudding and a dish of mince pies from a
kind friend who never omits sending these to me, because
she says she knows I would never trouble to get these
things for myself, in which she is quite right.
Most of the Bluff families spend Christmas day at
home, and consequently the time is a perfect saturnalia
for the children, the parents devoting themselves to them
entirely, and Christmas week is just one round of Christ-
mas Trees, dances, juvenile Fancy Balls etc: at one house
or another, which the youngsters of the different “ sets ”
attend.
The English, American, German, and French residents
all celebrate the season in their own national manner.
Those who do not remain in town, make up parties to one
or other of the country resorts, and there indulge in dances
every night with each other, and any globe-trotters who
may chance to be around at; the time.
It is truly a festive season. Big dinner-parties for the
elders, after the childrens’ earlier socialities are over, and
I dare say in many cases, much more money is spent
than peoples’ purses can afford; but every one must do
what every one else does, if they are in “ the swim ” here.
Feeling always more lonely amidst social gatherings at
this period of the year than when alone, I declined several
hospitable invitations to make one of the family on Christ-
mas Day, and went with my servant to a secluded spot
reached from one of the suburban stations between here
and Tokyo, where there is an ancient Temple, a couple of
tea-houses, and an old grave marking the resting-place of
a pair of ill-fated lovers whose story is well known to all
Japanese, altho’ they lived and died between two and
three hundred years ago. Two moss-grown and lichen
covered stone tablets in tire deep shadow of a grove of
feathery bamboos and huge cryptomeria trees, are all that
remain to tell of their sad fate, but before the stones
incense is always burning, and many are the wooden
tablets that have been left there by sentimental pilgrims.
The loneliness of the place was intense—it lies far out
of the track of ordinary sight-seers, and on asking the tea-
house girl who led us to the grave, whether it was much
visited by strangers ? she replied that many Japanese came,
and'some foreign gentlemen, but she had never seen a
foreign lady there before. Unless one had read up Japan-
ese history and legend as I have done, it is hardly, likely
that the existence of such a spot would be known to
foreigners, but these are the places I love to visit, tor
there is nothing like them in Australia.
On the way, which led circuitously through many
rice-fields, we came upon several places where large stone
tanks had been built for the making of ice during the
winter months, and we saw the ice being cut out of
the tanks in blocks of about eighteen inches square and
four inches deep, to be carried away in bullock carts and
stored in go-downs specially constructed for the purpose.
Before leaving the subject of Christmas in Yokohama, I
must give you a specimen of a circular sent round by a
Japanese trades-man who deals in . large quantities of
mechanical toys, dressed dolls, and imported jimcracks of
all description “ made in Germany.”
*** * *
Santa Clausville near North Pole.
“ Dear Papas and Mamas and All Friends,
I am still though begginning to feel my age, but not
so badly as to forget my dear little friends in Japan.
Santa Claus is Growing feeble, but he don’t forget one
of his little ones. But I hear you are having so much
warm weather this fall and you know that I cannot endure
heat, so fearing with my poor health, that I might not be
able to come down your way. I hasten to recommend to
you all, my dear friend. Mr. Y. Omiya, Sakaicho.
He kindly offers to assists me, and opens his store
for your inspection of Christmas Gifts on the 21st of
November. You will find him so pleasant, that you will
think, it is myself. There you will find all kinds of
suitable gifts for both old and young.
Don’t forget one of my dear little folks. Tell them,
Santa Claus wants to see them all and hopes they will
have the best Christmas they have ever had.
Poor Santa Claus is growing old, so your kind
parents must help me.
With much love
Santa Claus.
P. S. Don’t forget the time and place and tell the little
ones to write me, if their parents, don’t try to help me.”
*** * *
What Christmas Day is to the Foreigner, New Year’s
Day is to the Japanese; They too, must spend for more
than they can well afford, and certainly the incomes of the
servant class are hampered for months to come with debts
incurred at this time for clothes and presents, for it is a
point of etiquette, and matter of necessity, that every
Japanese man, woman, or child, must wear new clothes on
New Year’s Day, (even of they are carried to the pawn-shop
within a week, as is too often the case) —presents, how-
ever humble, must be exchanged, and receptions held in
the servants’ quarters for New Year visitors, who have
to be regaled with little dishes of special condiments only
partaken of at this season.
On New Year’s morning, my cook brought me a small
tray filled with these delicacies, which she had prepared
in anticipation of visitors. They consisted of a little tea-
pot of s alee (Japanese rice spirit) of a kind only used for


New Year ceremonies, which was not half bad 1 A little
dish of tiny salted fish about an inch long, another of
preserved sea-weed, another of pickled plums, and another
of shredded daikon (the strong-smelling staple vegetable
of the middle and lower classes). Notwithstanding the
simplicity and cheapness of the materials, their appearance
was such that they would have been an ornament to any
supper-table. As for taste —well Ito the foreigner’s palate
all Japanese food is pretty much alike —for with one’s eyes
shut, it is dilficult to discriminate between pickled sea-weed
and salted plums, especially if the latter were stoned, as
were these.
Then the clothes! What an anxious time for the
elders to manage new clothes for the children without too
great an out-lay I For it is an unwritten law in Japan that
every article of merchandise, and all out-standing debts,
must be paid for and settled up by the 31st of December.
Any one failing in this, is disgraced for ever. This is an
excellent custom, which might be followed with advantage
by all foreigners.
And now that everything has become so dear —the
wooden clogs, the bifurcated socks, the cotton stuffs, being
all nearly double what they were a few years ago—the
increase in wages is not commensurate with the rise in
prices, so that it is very difficult to adjust matters satis-
factorily.
I am certain the greater part of the bonuses given by
me to my servants was laid out in new clothes; for on
New Year’s morning while I was yet dressing, thejinrikisha
man and all his family walked into my bedroom, and with
deep reverential bows (even from the baby who can only
just stand upright, but yet can bend her back with the best
of them in the orthodox Japanese fashion) thanking me
for the new garments in which my donations had enabled
them to appear.
My “ house boy ” has aspirations —his new clothes must
be of silk, no less! tho he came to me just a year ago with
nothing but the one cotton suit he stood up in—he now
sports his two garments of really handsome silk, also a
silk-lined great-coat—the latter a present from me. For as
in the'old days silk was unattainable to the lower classes,
who were condemned from birth to death to wear nothing
but cotton, in order to distinguish them from the “samurai”
or gentry, who wore silk clothes, —now under the new
rigime, any one can wear silk if he likes to spend his money
in doing so. Therefore of course it is the ambition of every
young man to dress like a gentleman 1 This is no more
than we see in our own country, where the servants wear six-
button gloves and picture-hats, because their mistresses do 1
The Japanese estimate their own social grades greatly by the
clothes they wear, and all classes and both sexes, without
exception, invariably put on the very best clothes they
possess when travelling by train or steamer, so that in a
second-class railway carriage you hear nothing but the
rustling of the mens’ silken kimonos. They cannot under-
stand why foreigners do not do the same 1 My boy is quite
distressed when I travel in a woollen costume in winter
and a cotton print in summer, and remonstrates with me as
follows.—“ Why Okusan put on cotton clothes when have
“ got silk at home ? The master of every Japanese hotel will
“ think Okusan very poor woman! ” And my explanation
that the English, as a rule, save their worst clothes for
train or steamer, is quite incomprehensible to him. So
that when he swaggers into an hotel in his silken garments
Jack certainly looks better than his master 1
It is also a sine-gm-non in Japanese clothing that the
linings of the garments be of a better quality than the out-
side. Here is another instance of “ Topsy-turvy-dom ” 1
The most beautiful designs in landscapes etc: are printed
on white or delicately tinted silk for the linings of their
kimonos or “kauris” (the latter being an over-garment
shorter than the kimono, on which, if the wearer be of
sufficiently good family to own a “ crest ’’ that family
badge is printed on back, breast, and sleeves, in white on
a black silk ground.)
My “boy’s” overcoat is of the ordinary poncho cut
which has become quite naturalized amongst the Japanese,
because the immense bat-like sleeves, made without arm-
holes, so exactly suit the large square sleeves of the kimono;
and it is most amusing to see how, in walking, he throws back
these sleeves as widely as possible, as tho’ they were blown
aside by the wind, in order to display to the fullest, not
only their silken linings, but also the silken sleeves of his
kimono —for, as he says, “ If every one see silk clothes,
they think I gentleman 1” When to this is added a brown
or black felt hat, of the Tyrolean shape, white cotton tahis
(cotton socks with division for the great toe) —brand-new
wooden clogs, warm woollen gloves, a cigarette in hishand,
and a white silk handkerchief tied lightly around his
throat, this youth thinks he is “ got up to kill ” and he
is a type of thousands of the young men of “New Japan ”
His next'upward move will be to blossom forth in a suit of
European clothes and then he will regard his present
Japanese costume, with contempt, even tho’ they be of silk.
And so the world goes on 1
**» * »
New Year’s Day In Tokyo.
I spent all my New Year’s Day driving about different
parts of Tokyo; going to many places where the thousands
of holiday folks mostly congregate, and amongst the vast
crowds I was the only foreigner—l neither saw a foreign
face, nor heard a foreign voice, the whole day.
A stranger, visiting Tokyo for the first time on New
Year’s Day, would come to the conclusion that there were
no poor people in Japan, for on this day at least, every one
seen in the streets looks well-to-do, according to his station
in life. Even the jinrikishamen had on new coats and
hats, or they would have got no fares to engage them!
The crowds of well-dressed men and women, and gaily-
attired children, were immense. They were mostly all of
the middle or lower class, and yet during the whole day,
I never saw an unseemly act, or a man the worse for liquor 1
The dear brightly dressed children, looking so demure
and sedate, the little girls with powdered faces, beautifully
arranged hair, and gorgeous butterfly-like sashes, being
led or carried by their parents, made a pretty picture, and


the toy-shops and open, stalls for toys in the neighbour-
hood of the temples, were marvels of color and ingenuity—
Every child either had in his or her hand, or the father or
mother was carrying for him, some fantastic toy made of
brightly colored paper and indescribable design, pendant
from a, bamboo stick.
Our jinrikisha men cautioned us to beware of
“ robbers ” in the crowd (by which they meant “ pick-
pockets ”) who generally reap a good harvest on these
occasions, but my “ boy ” informed me that the chances of
having one’s pocket picked were minimized by the police
having taken the precaution of securing the persons of the
most notorious of the pocket-picking fraternity and keep-
ing them under lock and key until the New Year festival
was over! I give this piece of information for the benefit
of the Australian police. What would be said to such a
course of action in any country under English law where
the liberty of the subject (if sane) is never interfered with
for precautionary measures —where a man must either have
actually committed a theft, or lie under strong suspicion
of having done so, to get locked up for several days? But
here it would appear that he can be incarcerated during
holiday time, for the protection of the public generally 1
A full account of all I saw on that New Year’s Day
would almost fill a volume, instead of a portion of a letter,
could I spare time and space to describe it in detail. First
I drove to the Castle, to see the equipages of the nobles
passing and re-passing the bridge leading to the palace
on their way to pay their New Year’s respects to the
Emperor and Empress. It was barely 10 a.m. when I
reached the spot and I saw so many carriages returning,
that I wondered whenever the ceremony had commenced,
and my “ boy ” said the visits had begun at 7.30 a.m. It is
to be hoped the poor Emperor had not to receive all there
congratulatory visits in person, or he would he pretty well
tired out by raid-day ! The carriages were all pair-horsed
closed laudaus or broughams, and each one had two run-
ning footmen besides the coachman, clearing a way through
the crowd. They were not remarkable in any way for
their appearance, both horses and carriages seeming to be
of the good useful kind, but the continuous stream, of
vehicles gave one a startling conception of the number of
Japanese nobility in Tokyo. Generals, admirals, and high
civil officials, seemed more to affect jinrikishas, and were
all resplendent in gold lace, and wore large cocked hats
trimmed with white or black feathers.
From this quarter I drove, to the Kudan, a large
Shinto Temple specially devoted.to soldiers, and saw a
Shinto service being performed by priests in white, green,
and yellow silk robes, with the high old Japanese head-
dress made familiar to us by the opera of the “ Mikado,”
who were bringing dishes of sacred cakes from an adjacent
building to the temple, when they were handed along from
priest to priest until deposited at the altar, each one only
carrying them' a few paces. Every priest that handled the
dishes had his nose and mouth carefully tied up with a
shield of pure white paper, lest the contamination of his
breath should defile the cakes.'
Worshippers of all kinds came and went while this
procession of cakes was going on.' LA.II said a hasty prayer,
threw a small copper coin into the money box at the
entrance to the temple and went on their way. At
this and every other temple I visited, crowds were collect-
ed round the stone lavatory near the gate, awaiting their
turn to rinse their mouths from little bamboo dippers, and
wash their , hands before making their devotions. ■ This
universal custom pertaining to their religion, seems a part
and parcel of the excessive personal cleanliness of the
Japanese nation, the very lowest and poorest of whom
never perform any necessary act without immediately after-
wards scrupulously washing the hands.
From the Kudan I went a long distance to Uyeno
Park, which although leafless at this time of year (except
for the cryptomerias) still had its crowds •of holiday-
makers. From thence I went on to Asakusa Temple, the
great temple for the lower classes of Tokyo, and there
the crowd was so great that it was almost impossible to
move. This is the focus of all the cheap theatres, side-
shows, booths, games, toy and sweet-stuff stands, for this
vast city population of a million and a half, and the signs
on the fluttering flags, the drum-beating, music and singing,
the Cheap-Jacks vociferating the virtues of their wares —the
color—the noise—the crowd —ever shifting, kaleidoscope-
like, made up a scene impossible to bring before you either
by pen or pencil—it must be seen to be understood.
In all the streets on the way to these different localities,
were little boys flying brightly painted square kites, and
bigger boys and gaily dressed young girls of all ages play-
ing battle-dore and shuttle-cock, regardless of,the press of
trams, omnibuses, jinrikishas, bicycles, and foot-passengers
crowding from all directions.: This is one of the national
customs of Japan that I, think will never die out as long
as there are young people to keep It up. Not a kite or
battledore is to be seen before New Year’s morning, and.
then it seems as if it had rained both from, the sky, so
suddenly do they make their appearance! The battledores
are gaily decorated spats of wood, with painted full-length
portraits of,celebrated actors or.geishas on the back;—the
shuttle-cocks are very small compared to ours, the feathers
being stuck into a round seed about the size of a marble,
and as hard as wood ; and amongst all the, din of the
streets, the sound of the little shuttle-cocks upon the
wooden battledores kept up a never-ending accompaniment
heard distinctly above all other noises.
Every street looked like a bamboo avenue, so closely
were the cut branches of these beautiful plants ranged on
either side. There was a pair at every door, and connecting
these were continuous fringes of new hemp, mixed with flut-
tering white papers. The devices above the shops, which
were of course entirely Japanese, were in many cases formed
of small oranges on a back ground of pine leaves, displaying
in Japanese characters the name of the proprietor, or the
business. The oranges were only about the size of a walnut,
but when massed thickly together, the bright golden color
of the characters standing boldly out from the dark green
back-ground had a very beautiful and unique effect.


In the course of that day’s circuitous ride, I read the
following curious signs above shops in quarters where they
cater for the wants of foreigners; so if one could go over
the whole of Tokyo city in search of them, one would
doubtless find many more equally amusing.
THE WINE OP EUROPE AND JAPAN.
A TOBACCO—NIST.
A SOLE MANUFACTURER OF BREAD, BIS-
CUIT, AND THE CONFECTION.
MY GOOD IS THE VARY CHEAP, AND DI-
LIGENCE TO COUSTOMER.
A SHOES—MAKER. MANUFAKATAERY.
WATCHES OF EVERY LAND AND MAKE.
SPORTING GUN ANA REVOLVER, SHOTGUNS
ANA ALL AMMUNITIONS.
BOOT AND BHOES-SHOP MANUFACTORY.
PROVISIONS. GUICKI SOLE, SMALI PROTIT.
(In case this should be unintelligible to my readers I
may translate it as intended for “ Quick Sale, mall profits.”
In the neighbourhood of Yokohama I have also
observed the following notices.—
SHIP AND FAMILY WASHING AT VERA RE-
ASON.
SHOES—MAN. THE SHOE TOMAKE AND TO
FORM.
SATO. GARDENER. SALE AND LENT. NOSE
GAY, THE PLANTS, AND TRES IN THE POT.
My washerman’s printed list of articles is also in its
way a Japanese curio, for amongst the items are —
“ Pett’ Coats ’’—petticoats.
“ Blawce ” — blouse.
“ Counter —Pans— counterpanes.
“ Branket ’’—blanket.
“ Masquit Cartain ” —Mosquito curtain.
“ Pillow —Shames ” pillow shams.
“ Shirts, Unqorished ” —Shirts unpolished.
“ Shirts, Corrugated ” —What a “ corrugated ” shirt is
I must leave for my male readers to explain, for it passes
my comprehension.
A friend has also contributed the following:—
BARBER. YOU ARE SHAVED WHILE YOU
WAIT.
Y. OGURA. HE MAKES THE BOOTS WITH
AN IRON MIND.
FOREIGN LIQUOL SHOP. INTOXICATED
LIQUORS AND CIGARS, AND MAN OF WAR BEER.
HERE ARE SOLD EXTRACT OF FOWL, SANI-
TARY CAKE, IMPROVED MILK.
THE NEWS—A SECOND OF BOOKS AND
BIBLICAL SHOP.
ONE PRICE SHOP. DO NOT BE CHEAPEN,
NO TAKE.
Instead of “ MANGLING LONE HEBE”—vie have.
THE MACHINE OF SMOOTHING THE WRINK-
LES OF THE TROUSERS.
Different tailors’ signs run as follows
MANUFACTORY OF WESTERN GARMENTS.
THE SHIRTS'TAIRORINS SHOP.
CALLERS, CAFFS STACKED SHIRTS,
CLOTHING OF WOMAN TAILOR.
LADIES FURNISHED IN THE UPPER-
STOREY.
DEALER OF UNDRELLA BLANKET AND MAT-
Shops of various kinds have:— 1
GENERAL SPECTACLE AND MEDICINES.
THE UNDERSIGNED REQUESTS OF PAIN-
TING THE PORTRAIT.
ORDER IS/ SPEEDILY ATTENDED ON SEND-
ING ITS PHOTOGRAPH.
On the label of a certain patent medecine is the
following remarkable effusion: —
“ All the medecines of our company used to sell are
“ not only manufactured of the pure and good materials)
“ but also, unless the article are inspected by the superint-
endent, they not sealed. It is true that their quarity
“is best. If there was suspection about it, trust on the
“ official examination. If even in the slightest neglect
“ the result is not good, our company should he respon
“ sible for it. Be ware the trade mark sealing wax and
“ wrapper of our Company.”
*** * *
A few days after the New Year, when taking a short
drive through the narrow hedge-bordered lanes of a large
fishing village on the coast not far from my house, I wit-
nessed a scene that will be as novel to you as it was to
me. It was a Fire-mans’ Demonstration consisting of half-
a-dozen companies of men, about a dozen or fifteen to
each company, dressed in new dark blue cotton clothes,
with red and white devices on them that would have made
very original fancy ball costumes, blue and white cotton
handkerchiefs bound round their heads, and in their hands
the peculiar iron hook with long wooden handle which
they use at fires to tear down buildings, captained by a
man in black European clothes, wearing a shining brass
fire man’s helmet of American pattern. They were clustered
round two of their party who carried an immense bamboo
ladder, and entering the front yard ofevery house which
had a well-to-do appearance, they set up the ladder on end,
holding it in position by means of the iron hooks, whilst
one of the group, running quickly and lightly to the top,
balanced himself in various clever acrobatic attitudes on
it.-* Then sliding down with great rapidity, the ladder
was quickly shouldered again, and the group moved on
to repeat the same feat at the next house. Within my
radius of vision I could see four companies performing at
the same time, and as I drove on I met several more. It
was a picturesque, and at the same time a somewhat grotes-
que sight to witness, amongst the camellia-hedged lanes
and the brown thatched roofs, and one not likely to be
witnessed by the “carriage” folks of the Bluff, these
winding lanes being only wide enough for a jinrikisha to
pass along, and it was a novelty even to me, after a ten
year’s residence, for altho’ I had seen firemens’ processions
• Since writing the above,. I have come across some Japanese note-
paper and envelopes, with this very scene depicted on them, so I here-
with enclose one of each.


passing along the streets, this performance seemed quite
a bit of Old Japan {save for the one individual in foreign
clothes) brought unexpectedly before me. Of course the
object was to levy a slight contribution from every house-
holder. It was during this same drive that —passing some
fields of barley, bordered with a single row of beans or
peas, my jinrikisha-man—whose knowledge of English is
very limited —stopped, and pointing to the plants, while
naming them in Japanese, gave me to understand he
wished me to tell him their English names, and after
repeating after me several times “ barley,” “ beans,” “peas”
he, with a polite bow, and a “ Thank you very much ”
(which every jinrikisha-man can say) rested the handle
of the jinrikisha on his leg, while he drew from his pocket
a piece of paper and a pencil, and carefully noted down,
phonetically, in Japanese characters, the sound of the
words as nearly as he could catch it. As one can never
quite divest ones-eelf qf the feeling when riding in a jinriki-
sha, that the puller is as much quadruped as biped, it gave
me a funny sensation to witness my “ horse ” thus trying
to educate himself 1 This shows how anxious and eager are
all, even the lowest classes, for improvement, particularly in
the English language. They never lose a chance that they
can avail themselves of, to add a word or two to their stock
of foreign words. It struck me as quite pathetic when I
learnt afterwards from my house-boy, that this poor jinriki-
sha-man, out of his monthly pittance of $ 12 a month (about
£ 1. 2. 0) by which he has to keep himself, wife, and two
young children, was paying 60 cents (about a shilling) a
month to go every evening after his work for me was done,
to a night-school for learning English, and though a man
between forty andfifty years of age, was plodding laboriously
through the initiatory mysteries of “ 6 a ba,” “ ab ib ”/
While on the subject of language, foreigners have had
it so deeply impressed upon them that one cause of the
almost, insurmountable difficulty of acquiring the Japanese
colloquial, is the fact that besides having different modes
of addressing an inferior, an equal, and a superior, all of
which should be rigidly observed, the difficulty is further
increased by there being also a childrens' language, a langu-
age for men, and another for women. This sounds so alarm-
ing, that it has deterred many like myself, from ever taking
the first step towards conversing in Japanese. But perhaps
it has never occurred to an English speaking person that
with us also, our childrens’, mens’, and womens’ talk differs
quite sufficiently to mystefy foreigners as much as we are
scared by Japanese.
Putting aside childrens’ talk; and dealing only with
mens’ and womens’ colloquial, I never had the distinction
between the two last so forcibly brought under my notice,
until I had about me Japanese men-servants who commenced
their acquisition of the English language through living
with me.
The first instance that struck my attention was once
when Hand was with me, and he came in to tell me that
a new bath I had ordered had come home, and when I
asked him if it was all right, he replied “ Oh Yes, M a
beautiful bath/” Now no Englishman would have used
that adjective in connection with a bath, and it struck my
ear as being so essentially fenimne, that I could not help
smiling.
And my present house-boy, when I tell him anything
that astonishes him, invariably exclaims “ Good Gracious I”
which is entirely a feminine exclamation of surprise 1 Had
these men picked up their first knowledge of English in a
bachelor’s establishment, the chances are that the “ beauti-
ful ” bath would have been a “ stunning ” bath, and instead
of “ Good Gracious ” the exclamation of wonder would in
all probability have been “By Jove,” or “By Jingo 1 ”
both of which would sound rather startling emanating
from female lips!. So who can deny that we also have
a “ womens’ talk ” and a “ mens’ talk ” ?
And truly, the more I endeavor to make a Japanese
understand English, the more convinced am I that it must
be, to a foreigner, the most difficult of all languages; and
as it is undoubtedly becoming more and more every year
the universal language of the East, it is a thousand pities
that its many anomalies and contradictions of spelling and
pronunciation, could not have undergone a thorough
reform before being adopted by Eastern races. A study
of that old-fashioned and now out-of-date but useful book
“ Butter’s Spelling ” is alone sufficient to show the urgent
need of re-construction, in these days when saving of time
is becoming an urgent necessity.
It is also a great pity that the majority of the Japanese
are getting their first lessons in English from Japanese
teachers, who are themselves often greatly at fault. One
of my servants asked me one day if I would have some
“fru-it” (pronounced as two syllables) and when after
some difficulty I realized that he meant “ fruit ” and cor-
rected him, he replied “ But ray Japanese teacher always
told me to say “ fru-it ” —giving me clearly infer by his
manner, that it was I who was in the wrong.
And even when there is a foreigner to teach English
in the Higher Schools, it does not always follow that he is
an Englishman; Germans, Swiss, and Americans being
equally engaged as teachers of the English language, with
the result as far as the American teachers are concerned,
of embuing their pupils with a strong flavor of American
idioms and Yankee drawl. This is also the result with
many Japanese who went to America to study, and return-
ed quite American in speech and accent, as well as in habits
at table etc: which deviate considerably from our English
standards.
An amusing story was told me of an English teacher
who was removed from a High School in one part of Japan
to another where his predecessor had been an American,
and the prevalence of Yankeeisms among the young men
was so apparent that he could not help remarking to one
of the students “It is easy to see you have had an
American teaching you English,” to which the Japanese
youth naively replied, with a strong nasal drawl, “ I guess
you’re about right, insist I ”
When we first came to Japan, we made the acquaint-
ance of a very interesting young Japanese (since dead of
consumption) who had been for some time clerk in an


American curio store, but afterwards became correspond-
ing clerk in an English mercantile firm. He had acquired
his pronunciation of English from his first American
employer, and amongst many differences of speech, always
spoke of a “ vase ” as though it rhymed with “ gaze ” as all
Americans (the Bostonians excepted) do. He also used to
say “ I really kaan’t ” for “ can’t ” and “in haaf an hour,”
for “ ha!/,” and when we chaffed him and called him a
Japanese Yankee, he would say “ What is a poor Japanese
to do 7 First he is told to say “ vase ” and then he is told to
say “ vase.” Then he is told to say “ haaf," and then he is
told to say “half.” After which he'would pause and sigh
deeply, ending with—“ It is very difficult for a Japanese 1 ”
Some Japanese speak and write French splendidly,
and know not a word of English. Many Japanese phy-
sicians also, who have studied and taken their degree in
Germany, only understand that language—others again
can only speak Russian. This depends greatly upon what
occupation they purpose following in after life.
*»« * *
In many petty ways the Japanese are certainly irritat-
ing to the last degree to the impatient and irascible foreig-
ner. The Japanese Post office in Yokohama is one of the
chronic grievances of the treaty-port resident. If you have
to send a money-order for 10 shillings to a friend in
England, Australia, or America, you may calculate to a
certainty on having to cool your heels on the flag-stones at
the money-order window for an hour at least, with the
thermometer at freezing point, altho’ yon may be the only
applicant, and it is truly exasperating when you look
through the window-pane to see how your order is pro-
gressing, to behold the clerks to all appearance serenely
unconscious of your existence, manipulating their little
tea-pots and sipping their tea in the most unconcerned
manner, when they should be calculating your exchange 1
I once formed one of a crowd pressing round the small
single window-pane for foreign mails on a day when the
mail was on the point of closing, and a score of people
were handing in letters, newspapers, packets etc. over each
others’ heads all at once, which the single clerk in attend-
ance calmly took one by one in his left hand, his right hand
being monopolized by the cigarette he was smoking, which
he never relinquished, the urgency of the occasion being
quite immaterial to him I
I was one day lately exercising my patience and keep-
ing' my temper as well as I could, after handing in a
money-order form for Australia, when the window was
abruptly closed in my face. In about twenty minutes it
was re-opened, I\of course expecting to receive my memo:
of rate of exchange, and my receipt. And this is what
happened. —The clerk in attendance asked me “ Do you
speak Japanese 7—“ Not a word ” —“ Then I will write my
question”—Of course I thought it would be on some
matter referring to the money-order, but after writing for
about five minutes he handed me a paper upon which
were these words:—“ I believe in your country (meaning
“ Australia) one hundred years ago, you had no post or tele-
“ graphs 7 ” —Being pretty well exasperated I replied—“ I
“ believe in your country thirty years ago, you had no post or
“ telegraphs ” —which fine sarcasm was apparently lost upon
him, for he continued. “ And you have now 7 ” —“ Oh 1
“ yes, we have now ” —“ The same as Japan 7 ” “ Yes, the
“ same as Japan! ” He then said. “ Thank you very
“much ” —closed the window again, and the next time it
was opened, it was to hand me my receipt.
A gentleman resident on the Bluff assured me that
some years ago he sent for a policenan to give in charge a
servant who had committed some petty theft. Out came
the inevitable pocket-book and pencil, and after noting
down the gentleman’s name and number, occupation and
age, he was put through the following catechism. “Are
“ you married 7 Have you offspring 7 How many 7 What
“ are their ages and sexes 7 ” But when it came to desiring
him to state whether or no his parents were alive, and if
he had an elder or younger brother, he said he fervently
wished he had let the thief get off scot-free.
There is a network of red-tapeisra so entwined round
every branch'of Japanese official-dom, that it is impossible
to escape from its- entanglements without utter loss of
temper.
Then the way in which they all persist in thinking for
you, is intolerable I—You order an article to be made, you
give a sample of what you require, impressing upon the
workman that it is to be made exactly according to sample,
and you also take the precaution to see that he writes
down all your instructions in Japanese. You also give him
clearly to understand that you have urgent need for the
article by a certain day, and that if it is not then forth-
coming, you will not take it at all. 'About a month after
date, when the special occasion for which you required the
article has long passed, it is brought you with a pleasant
smile and bow, and “ Please excuse the delay, I am very
sorry 1 ” You then find that it is quite different from the
sample provided, and you lay the two articles side by
side, pointing out the deviations. The individual regards
them as though he then saw them for the first time, with
his head first on one side, then on the other, and at last
with a polite suction of the breath, admits that they are'
not alike, but says “He thought you would prefer them a little
different / ”
Then you feel as if yon could cheerfully consign the
whole Japanese race indiscriminately to a much warmer
climate than its own 1 And if even the most friendly
disposed towards Japan and its people are often driven
to feel thus, it can be easily understood how these ever-
recurring incidents tend to aggravate and keep alive the
bad feeling already existing in the minds of those who set
out with a predisposition to despise and under-rate every-
thing Japanesel
*** * *
One day in January, when the snow was on tbe ground,
I read the following paragraph translated from a ver-
nacular newspaper.
“In view of the probability of the Hokkaido passen-
ger trains being blocked up in consequence of the great
depth of the recent snowfalls, the Government has issued


orders for each train to take a supply of cold boiled rice and
salted plums.”
What a'lively refreshment for the poor snowed-np
passangers! and what a conception it gives of the frugal
living of the Japanese! No doubt such a course of action
on the part of the government was considered both generous
and considerate I But I doubt whether we English would
feel particularly grateful to any railway Company that
would take the same precautions to save us from possible
death by starvation under similar circumstances!
*** * *
In one of the foreign newspapers I read af the begin-
ning of the year that the disbursements for charitable do-
nations by the Imperial Household during the past year
1898 (which means charitable contributions from the
private purses of the Emperor and Empress,) amounted to
the sum of $500,000 —Or in English money £50,000. Now
we do not hear very; much about Queen Victoria’s private
disbursements towards charities, but judging from the
munificent (?) donation made by her of £ 500 towards the
Indian Famine fund—afterwards supplemented by a second
£ 500, I very much doubt whether her charitable do-
nations ever reach the respectable sum of -£50,000 per
anmini. To the wealthy Indians themselves—many of
whom donated lacs and lacs of rupees towards the relief
of their suffering country-people, the Queen’s contribution
seemed mean and niggardly in the extreme, considering
the enormous revenue she and England extract from the
country, and have done for so many years, and that she
bears the proud title of Empress of India—l heard opinions
of this sort expressed by all the educated Indians here
with whom I came in contact at the time.
And when it is borne in mind that to a poor country
like Japan, dollars bear as much relative value in the way
of giving, as do pounds in England, the donations of the
Emperor 'and Empress to alleviate the sufferings of their
country is relatively tantamount to £soo,ooo.—There is a
saying that “comparisons are odious” but one cannot help
contrasting the two. I have noticed throghout a long life
time of observation, that whenever a great calamity has
befallen any of the British people, as for instance the
terrible accidents in mines when'frequently two or three
hundred: families have been deprived of their bread-win-
ners, the Queen has been very prompt in making known,
by letter, through her private secretary, “ her sincere sym-
pathy with the sufferers ” —but I have not noticed that the
letter has been accompanied by a substantial donation. ' Of
course we are told that the Queen’s private charities are
very large, and we read in the accounts of her life at
Balmoral, of yearly distributions of red shawls and flannel
petticoats to favored old Scotchwomen in the neighbor-
hood. But compared : with the incessant drain upon the
limited incomes of the Emperor and Empress of Japan,
such accounts dwindle into insignificance by comparison,
for not only are large-hearted contributions freely made
on all occasions of flood, earthquake, fire, or famine, but
at the: death of' every Japanese of note who has served
his country well, the Emperor forwards a suitable present
of money to the surviving relatives. So that to any one
who observes these facts, it' is easily understood that the
amount of $500,000 is yearly disbursed. No wonder then,
at the deep and unselfish devotion of. the whole nation to
their Emperor—and so long as he, and those who will
come after him, adopt the same policy of living simply,
and giving generously, there is no danger of the monarchy
• ever losing its hold upon the affections of the people. • 1 It
was doubtless in consideration of the above facts that
the House of Representatives recently voted that the sum
of $20,000,000 (the last instalment of the Chinese war - ira-
demnity fund) should be awarded to the expenses of the
Imperial House hold, a motion which did not meet a dis-
sentient voice from the whole nation.
*** * *
Lest I sbould be thought by my readers to have been
too severe in some;of my letters upon the: conduct of
foreigners in Japan, and too certain of their evil influence
upon the Japanese character,; I have made some extracts
from unquestionable authorities who have dealt with the
same subject, in order to let you see that those best able to
judge the question, hold the same opinions as myself, hot-
with standing what the malcontent handful of foreigners
at the Treaty Ports may say to the contrary.
The first quotation I . shall make is from ■ “ The
Mikado’s Empire ” a standard work on Japan, by the Rev.
W. E. Griffis A.M. whose experience of the Japanese dates
as far. back as from 1870 to 1886.- In Chapter 111 of
Book 11, page 377, after describing a murderous attack
made upon two foreign instructors-in Japanese schools
(Americans or Englishmen), who in the Year 1872,. were
severely stabbed whilst walking .in the'streets of Tokyo
without! a-guard,- causing a scare amongst ■ the foreign
residents, who concluded that a wholesale massacre of
Europeans would ensue,'Mr. Griffis writes as follows:
“Amid the panic of fear caused by this; occurrence)
two .mild and gentle countrymen of 1 mine—one ■ a mis-
sionary, who had lived in Japan and among the people
seven years, and another who. for months had gone among
them day and night unarmed —opened my eyes. I soon
put away my revolver, and began the study of facts relating
to the many cases of, “assassination” of foreigners in
Japan. .In every since the. restoration of peace
after the troubles of the civil war,’ it was a story of over-
bearing insolence , cruelty, insult,' the jealousy of paramours,
native women, or avarice, or the effect of causes which neither fair
play nor honor could justify.
■“ During my stay of nearly four years at this time in
Japan; several Europeans were attacked or killed; but in.
no case was there a genuine, assassination, or unprovoked assault, i
I was led to see the horrible injustice of the so-called indemnities,
the bombardment of cities, the slaughter of Japanese people,
and the savage vengeance wreaked for fancied injuries
against foreigners. There is no blacker page in history than
the exactions and' cruelties practised against Japan by the di-
plomatic representatives of the nations called “ Christian”—in
the sense of having the heaviest arlUlery I
“ In their financial and war-like operations in Japan,


the foreign ministers seem to have acted as though there
was no day of judgment.
“ Of the Japanese servants kicked and beaten, or frightened
to death, by foreign masters ; of peaceable citizens knocked down
by foreign fists, or ridden over by horses; of Japanese homes
desolated, and innocent men and woman, as well as soldiers, tom
by shells, and murdered by unjust bombardments, what reparation
has been made t What indemnity paid f What measures
of amelioration taken for terrible excess of bloody revenge at
Kagoshima and Shimonoseki t What apology rendered f For a
land impoverished and tom, for the miseries of a people compelled
by foreigners, for the sake of their cursed dollars, to open their
country, what sympathy t For their cholera and vile diseases,
their defiling immorality, their brutal violence, their rum, nhat
benefits in return f Of real encouragement, of cheer to Japan in
her mighty struggle to regenerate her national life, what wotd t
Only the answer of the horse-leech—for blood, blood ; and at all
limes, gold, gold, gold. They ask all, and give next to nothing.
For their murders and oppressions, they make no reparation. Is
Heaven always on the side of the heaviest artillery ? ”
“ As for ” Japanese wives “ they were in many houses,
and this the native authorities never suspected was wrong,
or different from foreign custom. In America there was
read to me a paper on the subject and I innocently
marvelled at the high tone of Japanese morality. I found
out afterwards that the clause meant that the foreign
teachers engaged by the Government must not change
mistresses too often. One American in Tokyo enjoyed a
harem of ten native beauties.”
“ From the people, officers, and students, I have
received kindness and attentions both unexpected and
undeserved. I find in them most of the tenderest feelings
that soften and adorn human, nature., Confidence, sym-
pathy, respect, even affection from my students, have been
lavishly bestowed. I have never had a quarrel with any
one, nor have I been injured or insulted in any way.”
“Verily, it is delightful to meet unspoiled Japanese,
who have neder encountered civilization or drunken sailors."
*** * *
Hear what says Miss Scidmore in her charming book—
“ Jinrikisha days in Japan.” Miss Scidmore has lived for
years off and on, in Yokohama, and has had ample opport-
unity of forming correct conclusions as to the treatment
of the Japanese by foreigners:—
“This special—this unparalleled effort of a people
to lay aside what they were born to reverence and follow,
because alien customs seemed to promise a greater good to
a greater number, —this spectacle, which should have
challenged the admiration, the sympathy, and the generous
aid of western nations —has been met almost by their
opposition. A weaker people groping towards the light,
learning by the saddest experiences, has been'hampered,
bound, and forced from its chosen way by the Christian
nations, who have taken every shameful advantage of superior
strength and astuteness. Unjust treaties were forced upon the
Japanese at a time when they could not protest, and when
they could neither understand nor foresee the workings
of them. Backed by a display of naval strength, these
treaties were pressed upon the little nation, and by the
bully’s one argument, a revision of these unjust agreements
has been denied them for these thirty years; although the
Japan of to-day, its conditions and institutions, are in no
one particular, what they were at the time of the first
negociations. : Pathetic have been the struggles of citizens
and statemen, while the most high-spirited of races has
been forced to submit to political outrages or face the
consequences of war —the imposition of yet harder terms
by their oppressors. Limited in its revenues by these very
treaties, Japan can the less consider war with unscrupulous
Western powers. The Government, in its efforts to secure
foreign training for its people, has been fleeced, imposed
upon, and hood-winked, through its ignorance of foreign ways.
Reluctantly admitting the perfidy of one people, the
Japanese have turned to another. In consequence, they are
be-rated for their fickleness and love of change and taunt-
ed with the fact that American, English, and German
influences successively, have been upper-most at court, and
their language and customs successively fashionable. The
Germans, to our shame be it said, have dealt with them
more honorably than any other people, and the' present
triumph of German interests has been well deserved.
“ The ambition, the courage, and persistency of this
small nation, in the face of such hindrances, is wonderful;
and their struggle with strange tongues, 1 strange customs,
and strange dress, all at once, were heroic. . Indifferent
critics ascribe this peaceful revolution to a love of novelty
and an idle craze for foreign fashions. They claim that it
is but a phase, a fleeting fancy, a bit of masquerading, to be
abandoned when the people weary of it, or; attain their
ends. But fickleness is not the characteristic of thousands
of persons of one race, pursuing the same objects for thirty
years; nor could a nation of such taste and intelligence
adopt and adhere to strange customs for the mere sake of
novelty. Prophecies of retrogression discredit themselves,
now that a whole generation has grown up to whom the
new is the established order. Japanese youths, educated
and trained abroad, have returned home of fill the places
of foreign instructors and managers. Each year fewer and
fewer foreigners are needed in Government departments
and institutions.—“ Japan for the Japanese” is a familiar
cry. The desire for enlightenment and the impulse to-
wards progress were the result of forces already acting
from within long before Commodore Perry’s “ black ships ”
came to anchor in Missisippi May, and are still potent as
then.”.
And after enumerating many ways in which foreign
contact and influence has had a deteriorating effect upon
Japanese art, good taste, and domestic habits, Miss
Scidmore thus concludes: —
“ Nor in other ways has contact with foreigners
wrought good to these people. Conservative families
have been mortified and humiliated by what seems to them
the roughness and vulgarity of the manners of their sons
and daughters who had been educated abroad. Many
gentlemen, even in Tokio, long refused their daughters a


foreign education for this reason. Among the lower classes
the decay of courtesy, under foreign influences, was rapid.
The bold, impertinent, ill-mannered coolies and waitresses
of the treaty ports are as unlike as possible to the same
people in the interior or remoter towns.
“If the people are to lose their art, the fine finish of
their manners, the simplicity of living, all the exquisite
charm of their homes, Commodore Perry should be rated
as their worst enemy I ’’
*** * *
In a delightful book entitled “ Lotus-time in Japan ”
the author, Henry T. Finck, writes as follows—“ To take
only one instance, as summed up by Professor Wigmore :
“ The murder of Richardson, and the British retaliatory
expedition to Kagoshima, which bombarded and destroyed
an innocent city of 100,000 people, in revenge for the well-
provoked killing pf a single insolent brute, and then demanded
and obtained s3,ooo,ooo from a poor nation, in payment (grossly
excessive) of the expenses of the raid. Like other Eastern
nations, the Japanese have long ago found out that, as
Professor Chamberlain remarks, “Our Christian and
humanitarian professions are really nothing but bunkum.
The history of Turkey, of Egypt, of India, is no secret to
them. More familiar still is the sweet reasonableness of
California’s treatment of the Chinese.”
“ And what can the Japanese say of our “ Christian ”
treatment of the Indians when they read Mrs. Jackson’s
volume “ A Century of Dishonor” which tells a tale too
monstrous to believe—a tale which Bishop Whipple of
Minnesota characterizes as a “sad revelation of broken
“faith, of violated treaties, and of inhuman deeds of
“ violence which will bring a blush of shame to the cheeks
“of those who love their country ” —a tale based on official
documents—the commission appointed by President Grant
in 1869, having reported that “ in our Indian wars, almost
without exception, the first aggressions have been made by the
white ntan ” —a verdict true of nineteen out of twenty cases of
murder of foreigners in Japan !
What can the Japanese say when they read that
American slavery, which John Wesley called “ the vilest
that ever saw the sun ” with its cruel separation of families
and abrogation of the marriage institution, teas not abolished
till 1865, or thirteen years after our “ civilization ” was supposed
to have been introduced in Japan by Perry’s gunboats f Budd-
hist Japan never had any slavery, while Christian America has
only just abolished hers; yet we are always throwing stones at
Japan !
“ There are two charges in particular, that are con-
stantly flung in the face of Japanese by foreign merchants
and missionaries the imputation of commercial and
sexual immorality.—No doubt Japanese merchants are not
always models of honesty and reliability; but are our
merchants ? Foreigners at Yokohama tell you that the
native traders are apt not to keep their promises “ if the
market goes against them; ” but can you blame a guileless
native for trying to get out of a trap which may have
been laid for him by sharp “ Wall Street ” practices by
foreigners who expect to buy in Japan for ten cents and
sell in New York or London for a dollar ?
“ Adulteration of food is another form of commercial
dishonesty for which the Japanese have been censured.
Blit I doubt very, very much if Japan could match the re-
port of Special Agent A. J. Widderburn of the United States
Agricultural Department, which reveals the horrible fact
•that the amount of food adulteration ” reaches the immense
sum of $1,014,000,000 annually !
“ Sexual immorality is no doubt a most prevalent vice
in Japan—as it is in all other countries. But there is
nothing in Japan to compare with the horrible prevalence
of incest in the London slums—nothing to compare with
the rate of illigitimacy in Vienna, and the Japan Mail
of May 21st, 1892 says “The unfortunate truth is that
the most flagrantly immoral parts of Japan at present
are the slums and neighbourhood of the open ports.”—
“ Before they opened any port to foreign trade ” —says the
Rev. Mr. Griffis,” the Japanese built two places for the
foreigner—a custom-house and a brothel. For the for-
eigners, they supposed it a necessary good; for themselves
a necessary protection against ships’ crews suddenly set free
on land ; they counted it a necessary evil—they believed
the foreigners to be far worse than themselves. How far
were they vrrong f ” Horn far indeed ! The New York Medical
journal of June 9th, 1894 contains an article showing on the
concurrent testimony of the Hon. Elbridge T. Gerry and
Superintendent Byrnes of the Police Department, that the
number of prostitutes in New York is “at least 40,000,
and that ” the yearly expenditure of dissolute men in New
York upon prostitutes would aggregate over $40,000,000.”
“Is it not about time to protest against the constant
references to Japanese immorality in missionary reports?
“ Wliy beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s
eye, but not the beam in thine own ? ”
* * * * «
The Rev. W. Gray Dixon, in his fascinating book
“ The Land of the Morning ” while giving his experiences
of this country from 1876 to 1882, says:—
“ No where in Japan have I met with more thorough
hospitality than in the Hokurokudo. One or two in-
stances of old-time courtesy more especially live in my
memory. . Indeed in this region more than in any other,
were there impressed upon me the courtesy, the honor-
ableness, and thorough amiability of the Japanese in his
natural simplicity, unaffected by the corruptions of that Christ-
less civilization which works such havoc in and around the open
ports.”
In his position as Professor of English Literature in the
Tokyo University, Mr. Dixon thus sums up his experience
of Japanese young men of the student class, after describ-
ing the eager respect with which his instruction was
received —“ When such consideration is being shown for
his teaching, it behoves the teacher to take heed to his
every word. How different this from similar work of at,home I
No energy toasted in preserving order, full opportunity to use
every talent in the work of instruction, and even stiraula


tion to this in the eager and ingenuous countenances before
one. Such teaching is not a task, but a delight I * * #
Gratitude towards teachers is a cardinal virtue in the
moral code of Japan, and the constant manifestation of it
is one of the encouragements which make teaching in that
country such a pleasure ” —Mr. Dixon goes on to relate
confirmatory instances bearing on this statement, and then
asks “ Are facts like these consistent with the theory that
the Japanese are wanting in gratitude ? ” And he ends by
saying—“ The general impression left on my mind by the
upwards of two hundred students with whom I came into
more immediate contact, was that they were in the main
very free from dissipation, and that the great majority
were incapable of doing anything mean, however they
might err in other respects. * * When it is remember,
ed—(to take one discreditable fact out of many) that the
Japanese head of one of the Government schools had on
one occasion to remonstrate with certain of his foreign
staff on account of their immorality, we can only feel shame
that Christian nations should have been so represented ” He
closes by expressing hope that Japan may succeed in re-
generating herself, “ notwithstanding the sadly false impres-
sions of practical Christianity which the lives of nominal
Christians from the West too often convey.”
The same author, speaking of the treatment of ser-
vants by foreigners, says —“ As far as my own experience
went, it seemed to me that if one treated a Japanese
servant well—not laxly, but well —one was well treated in
return. The most satisfactory “ boy ” I had, was one who
ever showed a desire to please me, and whom I felt quite
sorry to leave, had by a former master, a German I believe,
been beaten with a stick for the most trivial offences.
It is thus that some of the barbarians of Europe show the Japan-
ese how Christian civilization has humanized them ! ”
*** * *
Lafcadio Hearn, in his book “ Unfamiliar Japan”
Vol. II page 661, also remarks on the same subject “ The
Japanese servants at first acted in foreign employ precisely
as they would have acted in the service of distinguished
Japanese; and this innocent mistake provoked a good deal
of abuse and cruelty. Finally the discovery was made
that to treat Japanese like West Indian negroes might be
very dangerous. A certain number of foreigners were
killed, with good moral consequences. It should be under-
stood that the poorest and humblest Japanese is rarely
submissive under injustice. His apparent docility is due
chiefly to his moral sense. The foreigner who strikes a
native for sport may have reason to find that he has made
a serious mistake. The Japanese are not be to trifled
with; and brutal attempts to trifle with them have cost
several worthless lives.”
The writer goes on to tell a pathetic story of a
foreigner who had in his service an old man who had once
been a “samurai” (one of the ancient military gentry
of Japan under the old regime, many of whom were
reduced to such poverty after the Eestoration, as to be
forced to take service under foreign masters). For some
trifling offence he one day received a blow from his master,
and the same evening he committed suicide by “hari-
kiri” (the honorable death by sword) leaving a letter
behind him saying that he could now no longer live with
honor I
The same author writes thus of the Japanese students
to whom he had been foreign instructor for three years in
a remote town on the south-eastern coast of Japan.
■ “ And now, as I look at all these pleasant faces about
me, I cannot but ask myself the question: “ Could Ihave
lived in the exercise of the same profession for the same length of
time in any other eaantry, and have enjoyed a similarly unbroken
experience of human goodness f”—From each and all these
I have received only kindness and courtesy. No one has
ever, even through inadvertence, addressed to me a single
ungenerous word. As a teacher of more than five hundred
boys and men, I have never had my patience tried I I wonder
if such an experience is possible only in Japan I—And yet
the cry of the foreigner in Japan now is that the student
and servant classes are becoming intolerable! If they are,
whose influence and example have made them so ?
Other Extracts from Mr. Hearns’ “ Unfamiliar Japan ”
run as'follows:—“More than a hundred and sixty years
ago Kaempfer wrote of the Japanese:—“ In the practice
of virtue, in purity of life and outward devotion, they far
out-do the Christians."—And except where native morals have
suffered by foreign contamination, as in the open ports, these words
are true of the Japanese to-day. My own conviction, and that
of many impartial and more experienced observers of Japa-
nese life, is that Japan has nothing whatever to gain by
conversion to Christianity, either morally or otherwise,
but very much to lose.”— * ** “ Well, I have been fourteen
months in Izumo; and I have not yet heard voices raised
in anger, or witnessed a quarrel; never have I seen one
man strike another, or a woman bullied, or a child slapped.
Indeed I have never seen any real roughness any where
that I have been in Japan, except at the open ports, where the
poorer classes seem, through contact with Europeans, to lose their
natural politeness, their native morals —even their capacity for
simple happiness.”
In the same delightful book, Mr. Hearn speaks of
“ the change of civilization forced upon Japan by Christian bay-
onets,for the holy motive of gain," thus emphasizing, in almost
the same words, the opinions of writers previously quoted.
And in one of his earlier works “ Out of the East ” He
writes on page 223—Within the memory of men not yet
old, Japan has developed her military power to a par with
that of more them one country of Europe; —industrially she
is fast becoming a competitor of Europe in the markets of
the East; —educationally she has placed herself also in the
front rank of progress, having established a system of
schools less costly but scarcely less efficient than those of
any Western country. And she has done this in spite of being
steadily robbed each year by unjust treaties, in spite of enormous
losses by floods and earthquakes, in spite of political troubles
at home, in spile of the efforts of foreign proselytisers to sap the
national spirit, and in spite of the extraordinary poverty of
her people.”
Now what all these impartial and far-thinking


writers on Japan say of the Japanese, and of the past and
present attitude of foreigners towards them, is far more
likely to be reliable than the howling’of a few ignorant or
malcontent individuals. I have invariably noticed that it
is from the most narrow-minded, upstart, vulgar, and ill-
educated portion of the foreign community—those whose
antecedents, before they came to the country, were palp-
ably of the very commonest, that statements to the dis-
paragement of the Japanese chiefly emanate—but that
amongst the higher and more cultivated class, one seldom
hears such opinions—their views, being with few excep-
tions, similar to those of the authors quoted—and to my
own. Were other testimony needed, I could furnish much
more of the same nature as that expressed in the two
following extracts from private letters received from
friends who have now quitted Japan, after many years’
residence—one of whom says:—
“ I endorse what you say in connection with the rela-
“ tionship between Japanese and foreigners. The foreigner
“ becomes over-bearing towards an Eastern race, and 75
“ per cent of any trouble is produced by his own conduct-
“ I lived many years in Japan, and left the country with
“ every good wish towards the people.”
And ray other correspondent—a lady—remarks—in
reference to the obstacles of all kinds thrown by Western
nations and individuals in the way of the noble efl'orts of
the Japanese to raise themselves and their beloved country
to the level of European nations—“ When we stand by
“ watching Japan’s struggle with mighty difficulties, it is
“as if we were watching the heroes of Thermopylae I ”
And yet the vulgar-minded portion of the foreign re-
sidents see nothing in all this but subject for sneering,
ridicule, and contempt 1 They foolishly imagine that by
hounding down the Japanese upon every possible occasion,
they thereby advertise indirectly their own importance
and superiority, when in truth they are only proclaiming
their mean origin, which their (to them) fortunate transfer
from their own country to Japan has enabled them as they
imagine, to conceal, but which is patent to all observers 1
I often feel degraded when I ask myself what the courte-
ous and high-minded Japanese must think of foreigners,
of whom they can only judge from the samples presented
to them at the treaty ports 1 How we must all suffer from
the inability of the untravelled Japanese to discriminate
between one class of foreigners, and another I
How can it be otherwise than that the memory of the
injustice and insults that have been heaped upon the nation
and individuals for the last thirty-five years, have been
handed down from father to son, and rankled in the
minds of their descendants, until the smouldering ill-feeling
of years engendered by them has now broken out into
open expression, as shown by the present unmistakeable
attitude of the lower classes at the treaty parts towards
the foreigners 7 From the unjust treaties of 1868 affect-
ing the whole nation, to individual cases of injustice and
brutality, all foreigners, no matter how well disposed
toward the Japanese, are now reaping the effects, as I
always say, when asked—“ Are you not afraid of being
stoned or otherwise insulted when you travel in the
interior ? ”
An instance of this is cited by Lafcadio Hearn, who
was once refused admission to a Japanese hotel in the
interior, because some ill-mannered brute of a foreigner
before him had insisted on entering with his boots on,
spite of the remonstrances of the land-lord. And to make
.one last quotation from the same writer, I find in his
chapter on Osaka in his book “ Gleanings from Buddha
Fields ” a description almost exactly identical with mine
in my circular letter of 1898, of the long, patient, and
uncomplaining service of the young Japanese apprentices
to the various trades, especially the drapers’ and clothiers’
shops,—(or as Hearn calls them—using an Americanism—
the “ dry-goods stores ”)—an apprentice-ship lasting often
for ten or twelve years without pay or leisure time, and
on the coarsest of food and clothing. He relates that he
remarked to a Japanese friend—“ Japanese clerks in a
foreign store are much better off” We do not think
so,” answered my friend very positively. “Some who
speak English well, and have learned the foreign way
of doing business may get fifty or sixty dollars (£5 or £6)
a month for seven or eight hours’ work a day. But they
are not treated the same way as in a Japanese house.
Clever men do not like to work under foreigners. For-
eigners used to be very cruel to their Japanese clerks
and servants.”
“But not now?” I queried.—“ Perhaps not often.
They have found out that it is dangerous. Hut they used to
beat and kick them. Japanese think it shameful to speak even
unkindly to detchi (apprentices) or servants. In a house
like this there is no unkindness. The owners and the
superintendents never speak roughly. You see how very
hard all these men and boys are working without pay.
No foreigner could get Japanese to work like that, even
for big wages. I have worked in foreign houses, and I know.”
* ♦ * * *
The 3rd of March is the ftte-day of the year for
Japanese girls, as is probably known to all readers of the
manners and customs of Japan, and on that day I had a
little experience that may be interesting to you. Just
opposite to my house live two of my young girl pupils,
French Eurasians, the father being one of the wealthiest
foreigners in Yokohama He has a large importing busi-
ness both here and in Osaka, for clocks, watches, jewellery,
and expensive French and Swiss articles of virtu. The
children are aged twelve and fourteen, their mother has
been dead nearly twelve years, and they have been brought
up by an old Japanese woman who holds the position of
manager in the household and who has been twenty-five
years in the establishment. Each girl has her own maid,
the one who attends on the elder sister having been twelve
years in the situation, the other nine years.
To give you some idea of the number of servants kept
in an establishment of this kind in Yokohama (which
would about compare from a business point of view with
“Kilpatricks” in Melbourne), I may tell you that besides
the above-mentioned domestics, there are also an upper


and under cook, a female house-servant, a gardener, a
coolie, a gate-keeper and his wife, making ten in all, and
yet they live most unostentatiously.
I had never been in their house until this present 3rd
of March, when the little girls sent to ask me to come and
see their exhibition of dolls and dolls’ furniture. They
had a number of their school-mates spending the afternoon
—pupils of mine also —and on this occasion they were all
exquisitely dressed in Japanese costume, though they
wear European clothes every day; and it made quite
a transformation in their appearance, as they seemed
to have put on with their kimonos and obis, the thousand
indescribable little graces of movement which seem in-
separable from the Japanese female dress. Their kimonos
were of the gayest flowered cr6pe, and their obis (sashes)
of gorgeous silk of Kioto make, stiff with gold thread
glinting through the designs.
It required a very fair-sized room for the display I
had come to inspect.' On receding shelves covered and
backed with red cloth, all along one side of the room,
reaching from the height of a table nearly to the ceiling,
were dolls of all sizes, dressed in the quaint costumes of
old Japan, representing Emperors, Empresses, Court ladies,
dancers, singers, and musicians of the olden time, and in
front of them were tiny models of all things requisite for a
Japanese lady’s use; —small metal mirrors on easels, lac-
quered stands for hanging dresses, boxes of toilette requi-
sites, as powder, paint, brushes, tweezers etc., also miniature
lacquer and gold tables, on which were all the lacquered
cups, dishes, and chop-sticks required for a dolls’ dinner —
other tables set out with the sweet meats especially sold
for this occasion—models of Japanese lamps, screens, in
short, everything one would see in a Japanese house. On
the opposite side of the room were two compartments, one
reserved for modern Japanese boy and girl dolls (for in
Japan I may mention the dolls are of different sexes) from
the size of real Japanese babies down to the smallest; the
boys with their shaven heads, the girls with their hair
dressed in various styles, and the remaining compartment
was filled with European dolls of every size and make
(these children being semi-foreign) —(China dinner and
tea-services, bed-room services, dolls’ wardrobes, Saratoga
trunks, and everything that a modern European doll
could possibly require. These last were not, as were the
Japanese dolls, carefully put away in white wooden boxes
for the whole year, after being let out for five days only—
for that is the limit of the festival, when each day the little
girls either receive their friends, or visit other houses—so
that there is doubtless great rivalry as to who can make
the greatest display. In some of the old families of the
Japanese nobility, where the dolls have been accumulating
for many generations (each girl in a family taking with
her at her marriage, her own dolls, which descend to her
own daughters), the collection must indeed lie unique—but
that is a sight attainable only to a very few foreigners, as
it is next to impossible to see the inner life of the high-class
Japanese. Such having been the custom of the country
from time immemorial, the little girls do not feel the de-
privation of their dolls and toys during the whole year,
but thoroughly enjoy their possession during the five
days’ display; and consequently they are never worn
out or broken as with European children. Though it was
mentioned to me as a significant fact by the old house
keeper, that the old dolls kept in much better preserva-
tion than the later ones, those purchased only five or six
•years ago not being found in nearly as good repair when un-
packed each succeeding year, as those of older manufacture.
This is another proof of the rapid deterioration of work
turned out by the Japanese handicrafts-man, caused by
the increasing difficulties of the labor question, with which
this country is now being cursed in common with the rest
of the manufacturing world.
* * * * *
On the sth of May, the boys have their display also,
which in the house takes the form of models of historical
characters and heroes of the olden time, warriors in ancient
armour, gaily caparisoned white horses, standards of flags
and banners, miniature spears, bows and arrows, etc., etc.,
and out of doors the huge paper carp which are set floating
from bamboo poles at each house where there are boys,
give an indescribably quaint and picturesque effect to
every town and village during the first week of May. As
the carp is a fish which swims up stream against the cur-
rent, it has been chosen as a model to set before Japanese
boys to stimulate them in over coming all difficulties and
obstacles in their after career. This has been told in nearly
every travellers’ book on Japan, but as it may perhaps be
new to some of my readers I may be pardoned for men-
tioning it here.
*** * ' *
To give you a glimpse of only one of the many
cheap luxuries and elegancies of life that may be daily
enjoyed in fair Japan, I will look around my room and
table as I pen this, and enumerate the floral beauties only
that they contain. Close to my elbow is an square dish
about eight inches long by six wide, and about two inches
deep, in which is a magnificent root of double jonquils
about fifteen inches high in full blossom, growing like
hyacinths, in water only, with a few small river stones
artistically disposed around the root; These double flowers
are a speciality of China, and are imported from thence.
In front of me is a large flower-jar with one of the dwarfed
weepiug plum-trees covered with white blossom, which with
two others with deep pink flowers, have been returned to
me in full bloom, by the gardener with whom they have
been boarded out since this time last year (as described in
ray last letter) at a cost of 50 cent each (one shilling) for
the twelve months. On a side table is a huge branch,
almost large enough to be called a tree, of the wild camellia,
its glossy leaves studded with bright crimson buds. All
these were obtained at a cost of only a few pence, for in
my monthly house hold accounts, I find ray “ house-boy ”
has rendered amongst the other items, “ Flowers for Home
35 sen ” which means about nine pence for the month of
February, (the worst month of the year for flowers, ex-
cept January) fur house-decoration. Besides the plants


above enumerated, which are in my dining-room, there
are sufficient also for the drawing-room, class-room, and
hall, included in this purchase money—and several
jars full of the deliciously perfumed waxy daphne now in
full bloom in ray own garden... So that as soon as the last
snow has disappeared, the years’ round of flowers begins,
and from this time each month brings with it its own
distinctive blossom, amongst many others. During March
will appear the exquisite double peach blossom, of every
shade from deepest crimson to palest pink, on dwarfed
trees twisted into ■ every conceivable shape, and next
month the lovely lilac and white westeria, which will
completely cover the bamboo archway under which you
see me standing in last year’s photo, while a beautiful tree
of the copper maple iff the garden beyond the archway,
will be catching golden and bronze reflections from the
sun on every one of its deep crimson leaves. In their
distribution of maple trees about a garden, the ■ Japanese
gardeners display the most refined good taste, and truest
appreciation of color contrast, for wherever they have one
of these beautiful copper maples, with their fairy-like
leaves on the delicate drooping branches, you see beside
forming a back-ground to it, another taller maple of
entirely different variety, the leaves large and of a bril-
liant shade of apple-green. 1 The street flower-hawkers
are also to be now seen all along the Bluff road with their
trays full of early primroses and violets, and directly they
will add to these, pots of beautiful double spirea, pansies,
and all the spring flowers. So I might go on from month
to month enumerating an endless succession of floral wealth
from now to December, did space permit, but I have Said
enough to bring before you one of the cheap pleasures of
Japan, which makes living in this country after forty
years of life in Australia, such a charming contrast to one
whose eyes had always wearied of “ tongours gum-tree .”
jfc jfc . jfc $ - $
Easter to Mid-summer, 1899.
My Easter vacation was spent in re-visiting, with the
same pleasant travelling companion I have before men-
tioned, many, favorite spots in the Inland Sea that I had
seen before, with some others visited for the first time.
In several remote towns and villages lying miles off
the railway lines, we were objects of great curiosity to the
simple inhabitants. We were dressed in ordinary dark
serge jacket costumes with black straw hats, and more than
once my lady friend, who understand. Japanese well, said
she heard doubts expressed as to whether we were men or
women, and on two occasions we were taken for Chinamen I
We went a long day’s journey to the verge of a moun-
tain where are to be seen the oldest cherry trees in Japan,
the originals having been brought there many hundreds of
years ago, and were told that there was one spot where we
could see “ a thousand cherry trees out of each eye.” Unfort-
unately a heavy storm and limited time prevented our
putting this statement to the proof on that occasion, but
the locality was so delightfully and entirely Japanese that
I determined to give myself time to revisit it next spring,
and in the meantime to cultivate some sort of out-ward
squint with both eyes, to enable me to focus the “ thousand
cherry-trees at once” with each 1
The contrast between the demeanor of the Japanese
at the sea-ports and in the mountains, was very noticeable
on this trip. At the sea-ports, the small crowds that col-
lected around us, were rude to the verge of insult, and
once or twice almost threatening, while in the mountain
villages they were gentle, and though curious, perfectly,
well-mannered.'
We could only account for the contrast by the fact
that at the sea-port towns were many youths and men who
are in the habit of visiting the Treaty Ports in their junks,
and had thereby acquired the fashion of acting rudely and
offensively to foreign women.
Of course during my fortnight’s holiday, I re-visited
beautiful Kioto, and spent} a few days strolling about its
gay streets and lovely temple grounds, endeavouring, with
but partial success I regret to say, to carry myself back
ten years to the time I first saw that unique city of Japan,
when all was delightful novelty and glamour in ray eyes.
No matter how one may try to keep one’s first impressions
of Japan fresh and unaltered, I think all who have gone
through the same experience will agree with me that it is
one of those sensations that can only be felt once in a life-
time. Even a tinge of more than ordinary melancholy
was communicated to my mind this time by viejving the
remains of the beautiful Yaa-mi Hotel, so associated with
my first acquaintance! with Kioto, it having been ac-
cidentally burnt to the ground a few days before my
arrival.
I went through the usual round of the Gion Temple
night testival, the Miyako-Odori (Cherry-Dance) and. once
more gazed with • admiring eyes at the , wonderful old
cherry-tree, the pride of Kioto, certified to be at least 300
years • old, 1 which stands on a green where many: roads
meet that lead to the temples, the city, and to Yaa-mi, and
saw again, with ever fresh astonishment, the huge old
trunk supported on all sides; by stout wooden props,
yet bearing branches loaded with such delicate and fairy-
like blossoms as one would imagine could only spring
from a' young and hearty tree. The Kioto people are
justly proud of this beautiful relic, and care for it with a
reverence almost approaching worship.
I gave myself one fresh sensation at Kioto this year,
which limited time on previous visits had prevented me
from indulging in. This was a trip from Otsn on Lake
Biwa to Kioto by the celebrated Biwa Canal, on which
one travels by a water-way tunnel in ■ boats specially con-
structed for the purpose. The time one is in the tunnel is
about forty minutes - during which period one is in pitchly
darkness, with the exception of a couple of lanterns swinging
from the low roof of the boat, which is sufficiently guided
by one man, as you are carried on at a rapid pace by the"
force of the water alone—the level of the Lake from which
the canal is made, being considerably higher than Kioto,
so that on the down ward passage a man is only needed to
steer or to signal when a boat is approaching the other


way; but on the upward passage the boat has to be pulled
up tediously by hand, by a chain attached to the wall of
the tunnel. The tunnel itself is built of brick and forms a
complete tube, the upper half being the roof, and the lower
half being filled with the water. It is a strange experience
being shot along at a rapid pace into utter blackness, and
strange also to catch the first little glimmer of light from
the lanterns of a hoat coming from the opposite direction,
which ghost-like, emerges for a moment from the darkness,
and, is passed and swallowed up again by the blackness
behind. • But the latter half of the passage, lasting about
another forty minutes, is delightfully unique, for the canal
winds round the sides of hills, crossing from the side of one
range to that of another by bridges, just like an ordinary
mountain road —and when one is rounding one range one
can see another part of the canal on the opposite range at
a gentle decline, but still always far above the fields and
farms below it. It was getting towards evening as we
made this part of the passage, and it was beautiful to see
the glimmer of the lights in the farm houses below us as
we glided noiselessly over the level of their roofs. The
water was exquisitely clear and apparently only about two
feet deep. We could see the bricks and stone-work of the
tunnel quite distinctly through the water. Occasionally
the cana/ widened out into large basins where the water
was as clear and still as a mirror, and where there were
water-gates for irrigating when necessary, the country
through which it passes.
At my second visit to Kioto in the spring of 1890, in
poor Gwennie’s life-time, this canal was opened with great
state and ceremony hy the Emperor and Empress, and I
never shall forget the splendid appearance of the city at
that festival 1 every street was a blaze of lanterns, flags,
and floral decorations.
The history of the origin of the tunnel is as interest-
ing, and unique as the tunnel itself. To quote from
“ Murratfs Ouule-book ” “ the idea of it originated with a
“ young student of the College of Engineering in Tokyoi
“ who, having propounded it in his graduation essay,
“ obtained permission to put it into practice himself, and
“ thus, though a mere youth, and though deprived of the
“ use of his right hand —all his drawings having been
“ beautifully executed with his left—rose immediately to
“ the position of one of the leading engineers in the country.
“ His name is Tanabe Sakuro.” The canal was made at a
cost of million yen, and has proved a complete success,
both for the purposes for which it was constructed, and
financially.
* * * *
After Easter came the Spring Race meeting at Yoko-
hama, and in view of the near approach of “ mixed
residence ” (the all-absorbing topic of the day) the foreign
merchants of the port got up a demonstration to receive
the Emperor, who nearly always attends the Yokohama
races. On previous occasions he has only been received as
a private gentleman, such being his expressed wish, but on
this occasion they obtained his consent to a public recep-
tion, and the result was that a road of nearly a mile long
was made into a most fairy-like archway of pines, bamboos,
flags and lanterns, and on that day all Yokohama was
“en fete.” Every one obtained a good view of the Em-
peror from some point of observation or other, and I was
especially fortunate in being well placed for seeing him,
both at his approach and on his return. He was dressed
in what appeared most to resemble a French military
costume. He looked stouter in the face than when I last
saw him some years ago, with a monstache and short thin
straggling beard. He glanced each side at the streets lined
with his subjects, who stood in profound silence as is their
custom, but he did not bow or make any sort of salute as
our own Queen does, altho’ he looked keenly from side
to side. It was said however that he acknowledged very
courteously and affably, the salutations of the foreigners
who greeted him on his arrival at the course. His face
has the inscrutable look that seems to belong to most
Eastern potentates, as if there was something in his life
beyond the power of a European to fathom, at least, so it
struck me.
* * * * *
It is five years ago this summer, that, spending my
vacation in Hakodate in the north of Japan—and re-
ceiving the daily papers from Yokohama, which were then
filled with the all-engrossing subject of “Treaty Revision,”
and indignant protests from the foreign residents against
the so-called sacrifice of their petty interests by an indif-
ferent and callous British policy, and of direful prognos-
tications of the fearful state of affairs that must infallibly
ensue if the in iquitous conduct of England in agreeing to
the Revision demanded by the Japanese Government was
suffered to come into operation—l being then considerably
on the wrong side of sixty, remarked to my servant Kane,
that I hoped I would live another five years until July Ist
1899 (the period fixed for the Revised Treaties to come
into force) so that I might be an eye-witness to the tremen-
dous “ boule versement” —(nothing less than a social and
commercial earthquake), that, according to the prophesying
of the foreigners and their mouth-piece the foreign press,
must inevitably come to pass. And now, lo I and behold,
the Ist July 1899 has come and gone, and up to date things
appear to be going on as if nothing particular had happen-
ed, altho’ without doubt, the merchants will have the
enormous profits which they secured to themselves thirty
years ago by binding down the Japanese Customs to ini-
quitously low customs duties, considerably reduced now
that the tariff is raised from 5 per cent, all round to an
average varying from 15 to 40 per cent; and “ par conse-
quence ” their wives and families may find that they will
have to reduce the establishments which by low prices have
hitherto enabled them to ape the style of living indulged
in hy the aristocracy of England, or the millionaires of the
United States. This must come in the near future, althongh
to all outward appearance, things are going on at present
as if no such subject as Treaty Revision had ever been heard
of, but as water always finds its level, so doubtless will
these people after a while, when Japan will be no longer
a country where foreigners can live luxuriously through the


hood-winking of the natives. The Japanese are now be-
coming fully awake to the prices, habits, and customs of
the countries from which foreigners resident amongst them
have come, and already ask, /‘Why do they come to
Japan, and expect to live so differently to what they did
at home ? ”
One fact that has been a source of some amusement, is
the extreme anxiety that many of them (especially the
members of the foreign press) have shown respecting the
state of Japanese prisons, and the treatment likely to be
accorded to foreigners who may require to be incarcerated
in them. So many foreigners have visited the jails, and
inspected their accommodation, that it has been jocosely
said it looks as if they all expected to be provided with
quarters there at some future time.
One already good effect of the near appoach of Japanese
Jurisdiction is that it has caused a great modification in
the tone of the foreign journals towards the Japanese
people —which from being scurrilous in the extreme, has
toned down considerably. The Japanese Government is
acting in a quiet and dignified manner with regard to the
question, and seems to be doing every thing in its power
to make the change as little irksome or unpleasant as
possible to the, foreigners, who have been anticipating
everything that was disagreeable, and it has urged on the
people throughout Japan, to be have with politeness and
civility to the foreigner, and to do nothing that would be
conducive to bad feeling. I do not see that any govern-
ment could do more. Whether the manifestos will have
the desired effect remains to be seen, but in any case, the
insolent superiority of attitude with which the average
foreigner has hitherto held himself towards the natives of
the country, will have to be subdued and held more in
subjection than it has been when living under Consular
Jurisdiction, for they will be now made amenable to the
laws of Japan.
Although July Ist was nominally the day fixed for
Treaty Revision to come into operation, the actual date
was deferred until the 17th of the same month, and on the
Ist appeared the following Imperial Rescript etc. which
when published in the foreign newspapers, gave great
satisfaction to all classes of foreign residents, as it was not
only a proof of the friendly interest His Majesty evinced
in this important event to his country, but it is also a
guarantee to those who are well aware of the immense
influence of a personal expression of his wishes from their
Sovereign to the Japanese people, that matters will be
placed on an amicable footing for all parties, and it has
tended more than anything that could have been done by
the Government to inspire confidence in the minds of all. :
Following the Imperial Rescript came a Notification
from the American Minister to all United States citizens
in Japan, and as both documents cannot fail of being
interesting to my readers, I give them in full below:
IMPERIAL RESCRIPT ON THE OPERATION OF
THE REVISED TREATIES.
The following Imperial Rescript was promulgated by
the Official Gazette of Saturday:—
“ Assisted by the surviving influence of the virtues of
Our Ancestors, it has been Our good fortune te uphold the
rein of sovereign, rule and disseminate the benefits of
orderly administration, resulting at home in the increased
prosperty of the nation, and abroad in the strengthening
of the relations with foreign Powers. As to the revision
of Treaties, Our long cherished aspiration, exhaustive plans
and repeated negotiations have at last been crowned with
a satisfactory settlement with the treaty Powers. Now
that the date assigned for the operation of the revised
Treaties is drawing near, it is a matter for heartfelt joy
and satisfaction, that, while, on the one hand the :re-
sponsibilities devolving upon the country cannot but
increase, the friendship with the treaty Powers has been
placed on a foundation stronger than ever.
We expect that bur loyal subjects, ever ready faith-
fully to discharge public duties will, in obedience to our
wishes, conform to the national polity of enlightenment and
progress, and be united to one man in treating the people
from far offlands with cordiality and in thereby endeavour-
ing to uphold the character of this nation and enhance the
glory of the Empire.
Further we command our Ministers of State to under-
take the responsibility of putting the revised Treaties into
operation, in such - a manner that, by means- of proper
supervision over their'subordinates and-the exercise of
prudence and discretion, both our born subjects and
strangers may be enabled equally to participate in the
benefits accruing from the new system and that-the
friendly relations with the treaty Powers may be per-’
manently cemented.
[His Imperial Majesty’s Sign Manual.]
[Privy Seal.]
The 30th day of the sixth month of the 32nd year of
Meiji (June 30th, 1899.)
( Countersigned).
Marquis Aritomo Yamagata, Minister President of
Count Masayoshi MatsukatA, Minister of Finance.
Marquis Tsukumichi Saigo, Minister of the Interior.
Viscount Taro Katsura, Minister of War.
Count Sukenori Kabayama, Minister of Educattion.
Viscount Snuzo Aoki, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Viscount Akimasa Yoshikawa, Minister of Com-
munications.
Gombei Yamamoto, Minister of the Navy.
Keigo Kiyoura, Minister of Justice.
Arasuke Sone, Minister of Agriculture and Com-
* * * * *
OFFICIAL INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING THE
OPERATION OF REVISED TREATIES.
Regarding the Imperial Rescript about the operation
of revised Treaties, the Cabinet and the Department of
Education have issued instructions as follows:


Instruction from the Cabinet.
“ The work of the revision of Treaties has been an
affair that has incessantly and deeply occupied the August
mind of H. M. the Emperor since the Restoration and a
subject of most earnest aspiration by the whole nation.
More than twenty years have elapsed since the Special
Embassy was dispatched in the 4th year of Meiji (1871) to
Europe and America in order to open negotiations with
treaty Powers for the revision of the Treaties. Since that
time negotiations and conferences had been repeatedly
entered into and renewed with these Powers, until in the
27th year (1894) the revision for the first time was effected
with Great Britain, to be followed by similar consum-
mations, with the rest of the Powers, and we are about to see
the enforcement of the revised Treaties realized on July
the 17th and August the 4th of this year.
Now the conclusion of Treaties on the footing of
equality with the Western Powers by revising those now
in force has its origin in a profound polity in pursuance of
which the Restoration was effected and the principle of
progress and enlightenment adopted, and it admits of no
doubt that the achievement will add to the glory of the
Empire and promote the welfare of the people. Should,
however, errors be committed in the method of operating
these Treaties not only would the primary object of the
work of the revision be frustrated, but it is to be feared, that
circumstance may even lead to the loss of confidence in us on
the part of friendly nations and of our prestige in the eyes
of the world. The rights, which the nation will be entitled
to as the result of the revision of Treaty, ought, it is need-
less to state, to be firmly maintained and availed of; but
at the same time it must not be forgotten that it is the
obligation devolving upon the Imperial Government and
the responsibility which the nation ought to share, to
safeguard the rights of aliens so that they may reside
in contentment and pursue their occupations in peace
within the dominion of the Empire. The Authorities are
therefore enjoined to bear deeply to their heart the
Emperor’s wish in this affair and to exercise strict
circumspection.’
July, Ist, 1899.
Marquis Aritomo Yamagata,
Minister President of State.
Instruction No. 10 of the Department of Educa-,
tion Addressed to Local Offices.
Having been impressed with a grave anxiety regarding
the condition of schools in general from the moment of my
instalation in the present post, when in April of this year
the Local Governor’s council was convoked, I availed
myself of that opportunity in calling those Governors
attention to the necessity of upholding school discipline
and of strict enforcement of rules. ■
The date for the coming into force of the revised
Treaties leaving only a few weeks between, His Majesty
the Emperor has issued an Imperial Rescript on the
subject. It being probable that foreigners will in the
future reside in the interior in an ever increasing number
school children and students should be strictly warned
from any acts of lax discipline. For should they be
suffered to grow in narrow arrogance, disdaining rules of
courtesy or purposely vulgarising their conduct and to feel
glorified over doings of shallow conceit, not only would
the consequence be highly mischievous to the cause of
education, but the evil might even result in impairing the
prestige of the nation and staining its dignity.
Hence in strict and respectful obedience to the
Emperor’s wish, School Directors and teachers should at
this juncture be aroused to the 1 gravity of their : re-
sponsibilities and be exhorted to property discharge their
duties, so that they may not commit errors in the training
of those in their charge.
* * * * ♦
NOTIFICATION TO UNITED STATES CITIZENS
IN JAPAN.
In view of the coming into operation of the New
Treaty between the United States and Japan on the 17th
day of the present month, it seems fitting and proper, not
only to announce to the Citizens of the United States in
Japan that fact but also to call their attention to the
changed conditions and to the obligations that will rest
upon them in their New Relations to Japanese Laws and
Regulations to which'tney will be amenable equally with
Japanese Subjects, in all that relates to their individnal
rights and privileges.
On the 16th instant, Jurisdiction of United States
Consular Courts in Japan will end and “ all the exceptional
privileges, exemptions and immunities now enjoyed by
Citizens of the United States as a part of, or appurtenant
to, such jurisdiction ” will “ absolutely cease and determine
and thereafter all such jurisdiction will be assumed and
exercised by Japanese Courts.”
The Rescript of His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor,
as also the several notifications by His Excellency, the :
Minister President 1 of State, and Their Excellencies the
heads of Departments of the Government, already publish-
ed, enjoining, as they do, upon all Japanese Subjects their,
duties in respect to Foreigners, have been read with much
satisfaction by me as they will be by all United States
Citizens, not only in Japan, but in America as well. In
like spirit attention is called to the duty which, I trust,'
will be the pleasure of all citizens of the United States,
under no circumstances to give any cause of complaint
either to Government officials or other Japanese subjects.
In their relations with the people of this country they
should show at all times, by their demeanor and by their
every act, such sentiments of regard for those with whom
they will necessarily be associated and for all laws, re-
gulations and customs, as will demonstrate that reciprocal
friendship reasonably expected of them in response to the
kind, considerate and just treatment enjoined on all
Japanese subjects by His Imperial Majesty and by the
high officials of the Government.
The United States was the first of all the Powers to
enter into “ a Treaty of Peace, Amity and Commerce,”


with Japan. From that time the bonds of friendship uniting
the two countries have become stronger and stronger with
passing years, and it is the duty of all citizens of the Unit-
ed States in this country to see to it that nothing on their
part is done to cause reflection upon the people of their
nationality.
Given under my hand and seal this tenth day of July,
1899
Alfred E. Buck,
United States Minister.
Sc * * * *
To myself personally, the most important event of the
half year was the ninth Childrens’ Tonic Sol-fa concert,
which came off after many difficulties and drawbacks, on
June 14th, and was universally pronounced the most
completely successful one ever given. The Public Hall
was crammed to its utmost capacity; every available extra
seat was carried in to accommodate the audience, and even
then a great many were left standing. These entertain-
ments of mine have now become quite a recognized institu-
tion in Yokohama, and the foreign community feels itself
under an obligation to support them. They are not got
up without a great deal of additional work and anxiety on
my part, and when each year, the time for the annual
concert has come and gone, I feel pretty well un-strung,
and ready for my long holiday, which however I cannot ’
ever take till the end of July.
This year the proceeds of the concert went to aug-
ment the funds of the Society, which are devoted, after all
necessary expenses, towards relieving by subscription any
national or individual cases of suffering amongst the Japa-
nese that may be brought before the public from time to
time. But as there happened fortunately to be nothing just
then to require any special call upon the Society’s funds, I
thought it would be a suitable opportunity to bring under
the notice of the children the following interesting article,
which had appeared in one of the foreign newspapers a
week previous to the concert.
,Ak Exemplary Boy.
In its last session of the General Convention of the
Union Educationalists throughout Japan proper held a
few weeks ago in Tokyo, a resolution was passed, among
others, as reported by us on the occasion, that it was not
advisable to encourage the savings habit among school
children, chiefly on the ground that in our country, in
strong contrast to those of America and elsewhere, they
do not posses means of earning money ,by their own
diligence . and labour. Even this Union, so jealous in
preserving the old samurai spirit of disinterestedness, will
make exception in favour of Hitoshi Ito, a boy of twelve
years old, who is now a pupil of the Kinkwa Common
School, Kanda. He is the idol of the moment in the
school. Not only is he a delight in the eyes of his
teachers and the principal, but all his fellow pupils and
even his neighbours are proud of him. His excellent
conduct in the school and superior proficiency are in
themselves enough to entitle him to the high respect that
he commands, for he has been guilty of tardiness only
once during the last four years of his school life, and that
on a stormy day three years ago, and he. has always
occupied the formost place in his class, having been
honoured with four certificates for diligence in a like
period of time. But what especially claims respect in the
eyes of his admirers is the fact that he is a selfreliant, self-
supporting boy. His father is engaged in farming in the
distant Hokkaido, and the boy lives with his grand-
parents, who, , with the decline of years, have lost their
former independence, and are now able only to eke out
their living by keeping a poor booth for sundry little
articles. Several years ago the boy took into his head an
idea to earn his school expenses, and at the same time
give some help to the old couple, and this he promptly
put to practice. No one at the school, however, knew of
the boy’s worthy resolution and worthier conduct in
carrying it out, until on that very day when he surprised
his teacher, with his tardiness. The teacher’s repeated
questioning on the cause of the unusual event for him
compelled the boy to mutter out an excuse that he was
detained at a whole-sale house. The strange explanation
in a boy barely in the teens aroused the curiosity of the
teacher, and further questionings disclosed a pitiful story,
that drew tears on every side, and made his restless class
mates stop their habitual noisiness to listen in wonder.
Early every morning the boy would leave his home in
Awajicho, Kanda and go as far as Shinhana-cho, in Hongo,
where he would invest 20 sen in 20 packages of natto, beans
boiled and made stale purposely and sold in rice straw
packages, and sell them in streets on his way home. The
process would net him 20, sen daily. He would return
home in time for breakfast and then attend school, never
failing to be punctual to the minute. On that stormy day,
however the shop where he takes in his daily stock was
unusually crowded, and his detention there proved to the
good of his school in disclosing the worthy story of self-
support. ; Further the principal of his school succeeded in
forcing him to tell, that of the six yen that he earns in
a month, he would spend yen 1.30 in his school necessities,
and give half the remainder to his grandparents as a part
of their living expenses, and, what is more remarkable, the
boy saves the rest in the post office saving banks. For his
pocket money he is content with a single sen* that his
grandparents give him every day. When the boy passed
through the Ordinary Course Department of his school on
the 23rd March this year, he was rewarded by the Chief
of Kanda ward with all the books and stationery, enough
to last ■ him all through the first year in the Higher
Department, and also with a number of books by the
president of the educational society of the ward, Mr.
Hosokawa.- The boy has not given up his natto trade, but
still keeps on his humble routine of daily peddling, for
which praiseworthy spirit of self-help he is gaining a large
number of sympathetic customers.
* * * $
~ On my suggestion that such a plucky little boy as the
hero of the above paragraph had proved himself, would be
* Lqm than a half-penny I


a fitting subject for a donation from the youthful members,
a unanimous vote of $20., (In English money j£2.), a very
small amount to us, but a very handsome sum to a poor
boy in. Japan, whose earnings were a fraction over four,
pence-half-penny a day—(that being the English equivalent
of the 20 sens stated in the newspaper article) was proposed
to be sent nim through the medium of the following letter
written by myself.
* * * * *
Yokohama, 142-a Bluff) June 21st.
Mr. R. Mubata.
Head Master Kinkwa Common School Kanda.
Dear Sib, —A small juvenile, Musical Society com-
posed of the children of some of the foreign residents of
Yokohama, having read with much interest the account
of your pupil Hitoshi Ito, which was translated a few days
ago into the Japan Times, felt great admiration for his
conduct in school, and also for his brave efforts to earn
money to assist his old grandparents; and wishing to show
their approval of his character in some practical way they
voted him, at a meeting held on Monday last, the 19th
inst, the sum of $2O, of which they beg his acceptance as a
little gift from some young foreign boys and girls to a
young Japanese boy.
It is their hope that this money should be expended
during his long summer vacation, in giving him not less
than a month’s excursion ' to some pleasant part of the
country, because they feel sure that a little boy of only
twelve years of age who has been working incessantly for
four years with his brain at school, and also with his body
in earning money for his relations, ought to have a good
rest both of mind arid body before commencing another,
school year. To this sum of $2O lam adding another $5
to make a little provision for his old grandparents, so tha
they may not be the losers while he is getting his holiday
As the newspapers say you take a very great interest
in your young scholar, will you kindly take charge of the
above-mentioned sum, if sent to you in a money-order, and
see that it is used for the purpose intended by the
children,' and they will be greatly obliged to you.
As I cannot write to you in'Japanese, I must ask you
to get this translated, and if you will .address your
reply to my head servant Yasui Seiji, he will translate
it for me.
I am dear Sir, Yours obediently,
Emily S. Patton.
President arid Musical Directress of the Yokohama
Juvenile Tonic-Solfa Choral Society.
To this we of course received most grateful answers
from both the school-master and the boy, the boy’s reply
being beautifully written in Chinese characters, saying
that he would now study harder than ever, in order to
show his deep sense of gratitude for’ the present. So that
one little heart has been made happy this summer by
means of the Childrens’ Concert.
By condensing my work during the month of July,
I was enabled to get away every week from Thursday till
Sunday evening to different localities not exceeding at
most four hours’ journey from Yokohama, which gave me
the double advantage of visiting places I had never yet
seen, combined with rest and change of air, which I much
needed.
At one place I visited, a little way in the country
along the Tokaido line, there were six large waterfalls
in the hotel grounds, sufficiently near to my bedroom to
lull me to sleep with the noise of their falling spray.
During my daily sfrolls at this place I gathered great hands-
ful of two varieties of the gorgeous Japanese lilies now in
full bloom, which were growing there in wild profusion.
The next week I stayed at a sea-side hotel where the
rollers break upon the beach straight from the Pacific
ocean. It is a place little known to foreigners, but many
Japanese families were staying there, it being a favorite
locality from the Prince Imperial having a summer resi-
dence near the spot.
Here I daily watched the fishermen going out and
coming in, occasionally taking a sail with them, and
in my evening strolls, I and my “ boy ” amused ourselves
by catching fireflies, myriads of which were hovering over
the rice-fields on either side of the narrow country road.
The mode adopted by him for catching them was by
adroitly hitting them lightly with a fan as they flew across
the path, and then shaking them from the fan into thin
paper bags, through which they glowed as tho’ the bags
were living balls of phosphorus.
Mrs. Hugh Fraser, the widow of the British Minister
who died in Tokyo a few years ago, in her charming and
fascinating book just published entitled “ A JHplomatist’s
Wife in Japan ” relates such a very pretty account of her
first introduction to the Japanese firefly, that I am sure
I need make no apology for giving it you in her own
words;—
“ I went to a night fair two or three evenings ago, a
humble show where little more than cakes and sweet-
meats and straw sandals were sold. But there was one
stall full of winged lights, tiny stars of green fire clustering
all over it. The keeper of the strange stall at the fair
(and I could hardly see it for the darkness), had captured
scores of the winged lights,, and sold them by ones and
twos in a dainty cage two inches long, with a green leaf for
provisions, for two rin, a sum so small that we have no
equivalent for it. I stood for a minute before the firefly
stall, and then told the interpreter to say that I must have
all the fireflies in all the cages. People gathered round in
crowds, and one curious face after another pushed itself
forward into the dim circle of light, staring at the reckless
foreign woman who spent money in this mad way 1 But
the foreign woman knew exactly what she wanted. I
carried them all home in the horsehair box; and when
everybody had gone to bed, I crept out into the balmy
darkness of my garden, opened the box, and set all the
lovely creatures free. This way and that they flew, their
radiant lamps glowing and paling like jewels seen through
water, some clinging to my hair and my hands, as if afraid
to plunge into the garden’s unknown ways. I felt like a
white witch who had called the stars down to play with


her. Some of our people thought the same, I fancy; for I
suddenly became aware of a string of dark figures hurrying
across the shadowed lawns in a terrified rush for the
servants’ quarters, and I noticed the next day that I was
approached with awe amounting to panic.”
I can match Mrs. Fraser’s delightful word-picture with
an equally quaint little experience of my own. On return-
ing to the hotel with our paper bags filled with fireflies
my “ boy” suggested that when I retired for the night he
should let them all loose inside my mosquito-curtains,
which in Japan are made of coarse dark-green leno, and
nearly of the size of the room, to the four corners of
which they are suspended with cords, while the bed is laid
in the centre of the matted floor. He did so, and when
the lights were put out, I lay as in a bower illuminated by
these beautiful creatures flying all around me, and fre-
quently alighting on the bed-clothes and even on my
hands. It was long before I slept, the situation was so
novel and so pretty —and I may also say, so romantic, the
only incongruous feature being that the principal actor
in the scene was an old woman of nearly seventy years of
age, instead of, as she should have been according to the
fitness of things, a young and lovely girl of seventeen! But
alas 1 these experiences often come to us too late in life!
One curious custom in connection with Japanese hotels
I have always omitted to mention, which is, that if you
want to be well served while staying in one, you must
ahcays fee the servants on arriving / This is a very difficult
maxim for foreigners to bring themselves to realize, know-
ing, as we do by experience, that the attention we get from
hotel servants in our own country is based upon the hope
of a handsome fee on leaving, and we should expect (and
probably get) very little service if we gave the vail first.
But with Japanese hotel servants it is quite a code of
honor that the guest who gives his donceur on entering,
shall receive the most obsequious attention from that time
until his departure; while the traveller who in ignorance
of this custom, neglects its observance, is liable to be
slightingly served. This is another instance of the many
ways in which Japanese customs are so entirely at
variance with our own, often causing unpleasantnesses on-
both sides, with the result that each nationality blames
the other undeservedly, such friction having arisen solely
from ignorance, not design.
I wish I could bring before the eyes of my Australian
friends a true picture of a thoroughly representa-
tive Japanese hotel I A most amusing article could be
written upon the subject—every thing is so completely
“topsey-turvy” according to our notions. The first thing
that meets the eye on entering being the kitchen, with all
the business appertaining thereto. Thence up short
stairways alternating with interminable narrow winding
passages, one comes suddenly and unexepectedly upon the
tops of trees growing in a well-like garden or a pond
spanned by a rustic bridge in mid-air, in places where
one might more reasonably expect to find' a bedroom! Of
course the best rooms are invariably in the rear of the
building, each suite of apartments having its own private
conventional Japanese garden, if space permit.
The bathrooms and lavatories alone, that I have come
across in my travels, would form not the least amusing
part of the description, to say nothing of the arrangements
made for the foreigners’ morning ablutions, which invari-
ably consist of a shallow brass basin and tooth dish filled
with hot water, placed in the most conspicuous part of the
verandah, where the ceremony of washing face and hands,
and cleaning teeth, must be performed in full view’ of every
one, fellow-travellers, servants, and very frequently, of
the street-passengers also. The Japanese bath being
always taken over-night, it is only considered necessary
to do as much matutinal cleansing as above-described.
The above remarks only apply to the washing arrange-
ments for female foreigners; foreign men conform to the
custom of the natives, which is amusingly and graphically
described in a little book by an English traveller in the
interior of Japan, who writes as follows: —
“ Doing as the Japanese do! This meant going to a
marvellously mal-adorous corner of the house —that is
more mal- adorous than the rest of it —for none of the
apartments were over pervaded with the scent of myrrh
aloes, and cassia, —and there, dipping my fingers into an
extremely shallow bowl of limited circumference, and
smearing my countenance with a very small and fusty
damp blue rag, beguile my insulted body into an idea that
it had been refreshed by an early'tub! This was to
attempt to clean my teeth with a piece of stick, which left
immovable filaments of wood between them, and exas-
perated my gums even to the shedding of blood. Doing
as the Japanese do I”
Nevertheless, Mr. Traveller, the Japanese are the
cleanest people, and have the whitest teeth, of any nation
in the world 1
* * * * *
The first public event that occurred after the in-
troduction of* Treaty Kevision and mixed residence,
afforded by an unfortunate coincidence, indubitable proof
of the truthfulness of the quotations made by me in pages
8 to 12 of this letter, regarding the conduct of foreigners
in Japan, and of the correctness of the deductions I drew
therefrom, for Ml the very first hour of the new order of
things coming into operation—viz: between 12 midnight
of the I6th and 1 a.m. of the 17th July, in a quarter Of the
Settlement spoken of politely as “ Goreville,” but better
known for its character in past years as “Bloodtown”
from the evil repute it has borne ever since the formation
of Yokohama, for violent assaults and brutal murders in
which foreigners have always been more or less concerned,
a diabolical murder was committed by an American on
two Japanese women and a man of his own nationality.
So that the very first criminal case that will be tried in
Japanese courts after Europeans have passed under Japan-
ese jurisdiction, will be that of a murder by a foreigner, of
two Japanese women, and this before the ink on the
manifesto of the American minister to his fellow-country-
men, (given on page 17) has hardly had time to dry!


And before the first week had expired, a male brute of
Dutch nationality was fined for wantonly kicking a Japan-
ese ! How many kicks on Japanese by foreigners have
hitherto gone unpunished from the difficulty of one of the
lower orders—(who would usually have been the recipient
of the kick) —of bringing his assaulter before his Consular
court, it would be impossible to count! Truly we “ Christian
people” have not much to be proud of!
The 4th of August was set apart by the Japanese
Government as a day of national rejoicing upon their
ardent desire for Treaty revision having become an
accomplished fact, spite of the many impediments placed in
its way by the opposition of the foreign powers, and
great banquets were held in Tokyo arid Yokohama to
which all the leading foreigners were invited, and many
speeches were made which on the part of the Japanese
evinced much excusable national pride, combined with
undeniably polite and apparently sincere aspirations that
their future relations with foreigners would assume and
retain an amicable footing. These wishes were responded
to with equal politeness in the speeches of the various
Consuls and others, altho’ in several it was pretty plainly
hinted that the foreigners could not be expected to be as
jubilant over the rejoicings as the Japanese—thus betray-
ing the soreness that undoubtedly exists on their being
now subject to Japanese jurisdiction, and which I con-
fidently predict will surely break out through their organ
the foreign press, as soon as opportunities arise as they are
pretty certain to do, for real or assumed grievances; for,
as I have often remarked, if even a Japanese fly presumes
to settle for a moment on a foreigner’s nose, that foreigner
immediately rushes into print, and the pathetic recital of
his particular grievance then forms the text for a lead-
ing article on the subject, in which it is conclusively
proved that the grievance thus ventilated consists entirely
in the fact of the insect having been a Japanese fly, and the
injury having been inflicted in Japan ; —had the fly been
of European or American nationality, and the event taken
place in either of those parts of the world, the public
would have about it. Well I I am for my
part, pretty well weary of the subject of foreigners’
grievances in Japan, and will therefore change it.
* * * * *
In a paper sent me a few months ago from X. S. W.
called the “Burwood Courier” containing the obituary
notice of oue of my oldest friends—a friendship dating
from the year 1853, —my eye was caught by the following
paragraph: “Mikado for Japan is about the most pro-
fitable business up to date. For simply sitting on his
golden throne and doing nothing in particular, he has
been voted by an appreciative Parliament a present of no
less than three and a'third million sterling! The Mika-
does in the Australian bush would be glad if voted 3|d in
addition to an annual blanket.”
I immediately penned a few lines to the Editor in
reply, in which, after stating that the term “ Mikado ”
was now entirely obsolete, being never used in connection
with the present Emperor of Japan, and assuring the
Editor that so far from “ sitting on a golden throne and
doing nothing in-particular,” it was a well-known fact
that no reigning sovereign was more assiduous in person-
ally attending to all the duties of his high position, I
went on to state nearly the same facts that I have already
penned on page Bof this letter. In due course I received
from the Editor, acopy of the “Burwood Courier” in which
my letter was inserted. This I sent to the “ Japan Times ”
a foreign newspaper published in Tokyo, and run by Japan-
ese. This paper published my letter in full, stating that
it would be read with interest by their Japanese readers,
and a few days after I received from Osaka (300 miles
distant) the following letter from a Japanese gentleman of
whom of course I knew nothing, hut into those hands the
newspaper containing my letter had evidently fallen—
15 Osaka, Japan, 21st July, 1899
Mrs. E. S. Patton, Yokohama.
Dear Madam:—
Permit me to take liberty of initiating myself into
your acquaintance without proper introduction.
In columns of the “Japan Times” of the 16th inst., I
happened to read, to my great rapture, the reproduc-
tion of your most laudable letter from the “Australian
Courier ” of April 15 last, in which you had kindly con-
descended to take pains to correct a misrepresenting state-
ment by the “ Courier ” respecting the mode of daily life
of our Emperor and Empress, and go so far as to explain and
testify to the true benevolent acts of our Imperial house-
hold. Certainly we believe that it was not only your
love of truth, but your good will toward our country that
prompted you to this act of generosity.
Please accept my sincere thanks for the honour you
have kindly extended to our country in this very noble
act, which our fellow-countrymen, I assure you, will fully
appreciate and be thankful for.
With best wishes for family,
I am, dear Madam,
Most sincerely yours,
U. S Kaneua.
I only place this letter before you, as another instance ,
if it were needed, of the intense patriotism of every in-
dividual Japanese, and of their gratitude to any one, even
a stranger, who does common justice to their country or
their Emperor. In all human probability, the writer of
that letter and I will never meet, but still it will remain a
pleasing incident in my every-day experience.
* * * * *
In no other country in the would are there so many
suicides of lovers as in Japan. Not a day passes but are to
be read translations from the vernacular papers similar to
the one given below. The orthodox method of double
suicide is for the man first to kill the girl and then himself
This is termed “shinju” but if he fails to kill himself
after having killed her, he is for ever disgraced in the
opinion of all who know him. When a pair of ill-fated
lovers do not make an end of themselves with knives or
swords (the usual way) they tie themselves tightly


together, binding their arms with their obis (sashes) and
jump into a river or the sea.
THE USUAL STORY.
About half past 4 o’clock this morning a man named
Kushida Katsusaburo aged 26, living in Furocho Sanchome
and employed by a certain foreign firm, attempted to com-
mit shinju at a house in the Yoshiwara, with a woman
named Sarashino aged 25. The attempt took place in a
room on the third story, but was detected by the other
inmates, who rushed into the room as the lovers lay half-
dead badly wounded in the throat, in a pool of blood.
The police were at once sent for, and arrived with two
surgeons. An hour later, both the man and the woman
were removed to the Juzen Hospital.—The same old story
of infatuation, debt, and despair.
*' * * * *
The following are short cuttings from the translations
from Tokyo newspapers which call for no special remarks
from me, but which I have from time to time collected,
because they afford glimpses good and bad of the Japanese
national character, many curious phases of which may be
gathered from newspaper reports that would not other-
wise come under the observation of foreigners.
* * * * *
A HOMELY TRAGEDY.
A few days ago, the dead bodies of a man and a
woman seemingly 40 and 30 years of age respectively were
discovered in a small hut thatched with the branches of
trees on a hill in a suburb of Nagano-ken. They had
apparently committed suicide by shooting themselves, and
from letters found in their futokoro it appears that the
man, who belonged to a province 200 miles distant, and
had been suffering from consumption for a long time,
despairing of recovery, resolved to die together with his
wife, who in her letter, addressed to the owner of the
hill, enclosed 10 sen (about two-pence half-penny) in
payment for the trouble entailed by the removal of their
dead bodies.
St * ■ St St St
FALLEN GREATNESS.
Late on Tuesday afternoon last, an old man attempted
to commit suicide by throwing himself into the river at
Shin-o-hashi Tokyo, but fortunately (?) he was picked up
by a fisherman who handed him over to the Fukagawa
police, According to the vernacular press the old man,
whose name is Sekine Mankiehi, and who is now 61 years
old, was some forty years ago, one of the wealthy merchants
of Yokohama, but lost all means of livelihood through a
failure in business consequent upon a fall in the rate of
exchange. He was reduced to such straits that he was
compelled to work as a coolie to earn his daily bread.
* >je * j|c
A tragic aflair is reported from Kobe. A man named
Takenouchi, his six year old daughter, his old mother
and her grandchild aged three, attempted suicide by
drowning. The two latter died, the others being
rescued. Extreme poverty is said to have' been the
motive. —Asahi Shimbun.
* * * %
HOUSES FOR FOREIGNERS.
Anticipating mixed residence and the possibility of a
foreign migration into the native quarter, several Japanese
speculators are preparing to build houses suitable to
foreigners. It is to be hoped that these Japanese
speculators know more about the plan of a foreign house
than the Japanese builder of a new house on the Bluff,
the interior of which is the most extraordinary we
have seen for many moons. The house in question has a
most imposing exterior —that we freely admit, but its
internal economy is weird in the extreme. The staircase
is so narrow that a man of average size would be almost
obliged to slice himself into longitudinal sections and
ascend a section at a time if ever he wanted to go nikkai
(upstairs). The bath room is almost inaccessible, and
after having reached the same, impossible. The verandahs
are lovely, but the rooms are destitute of both fire-grates
or provision for the use of stoves. Then there is an
isolated room somewhere which can only be reached by
means of a most break-neck iron ladder, which might
appeal to a sailor, but would fill the boldest land-lubber
with awe. No, the native conception of foreign require-
ments must be modified in some respects before it can be
depended on.
j|c jjs * s|e ?|c
AN ABOMINABLE OUTRAGE.
The “Nagasaki Press” commenting on a letter re-
ferring to the hideous advertisement by which the side
of Inasa-yama (the name of a mountain) has recently
been defaced, says it earnestly hopes that both Japanese
and foreign residents of that port will combine in a
serious agitation against the desecration. One of the
principal attractions of Nagasaki is its beauty, and the
community should not complacently tolerate the des-
truction of this beauty by the erection of glaring advertise-
ments on every hill-side, calling attention to Brown’s
Mineral Water, Jones’s Cigarettes, and Robinson’s Pills
Men who can plan such outrages on public feeling as the
advertisement at Shimonoseki Straits and this new horror
at Inasa-yama, are usually entirely devoid of taste and
sensibility, and it would be useless to appeal to finer
feelings that evidently do not exist; but those who, for a
few miserable dollars have rented their land for such in-
famous purposes are perhaps not unamenable to the social
pressure that a wisely directed agitation might exercise.
The evil is yet young in Japan, there are no large vested
interests to deal with; and this country is one of the
world’s pleasure-grounds, visited annually by thousands
who come to enjoy her natural beauties.


AN ECCENTRIC ADV:
An extraordinary advertisement appears in to-day’s
issue of the “ Tokyo Asahi,” of which the following is a
translation.
* * ■* * *
“ Inasmuch as Inari-Sama (the God of Rice) to whom
“ I prayed at Haneda-raura, Yebara Gori, Tokyo pre-
“ fecture, heard my prayer and granted it, I am unable to
“ restrain my feelings of joy and thankfulness, and here-
“ with advertise the remarkable benificence of the Deity.
“ Sagamiya Kojiro, No. 12 Minami-konya-cho, Kyo-
“ bashi-ku, Tokyo.”
* * * * *
A HUMAN LIFE FOR SALE CHEAP.
The under-signed, a soshi who values his life at yen
10,000, is still young, being a little over 30, but through
misfortune has been reduced to - indigence. He has there-
fore made up his mind to give up the ghost, and travel to
Hades. Nevertheless he cannot immediately give up the
world and the flesh,’ sympathizing as he does with the
demon Honda, who during his last moments said “ I loathe
to die.” The undersigned accordingly offers himself for
sale, for a term of five years, during which he will do any"
thing demanded by his purchaser. Anybody desirous of
accepting his offer is invited to send a cheque to the Taipeh
branch the Bank of Japan. Kira Byokichi, Taipeh,
Formosa.
* * * * *
GROSS SUPERSTITION IN IZUMI PROVINCE.
A GIRL SUFFOCATED.
A disgusting exhibition of dangerous superstition is
reported from Minato-mura in Izumi Province, which
ended fatally for the unhappy victim. Araki Tome, aged
20, the daughter of a wealthy former of that village, was
apparently suffering from hypochondria. The father;
being an ignorant man, instead of calling in a qualified
doctor, was persuaded by a friend to consult Kusumoto
Hisakichi, a local prayer-healer, who visited the house on
the following day. This sage declared that the girl was
possessed by a badger, which would have to be smoked
out. The father, another relative, and a third man, all
members of the village assembly, assisted at the ensuing
ceremony. A large quantity of sulphur and incense was
thrown on a brazier, and the unhappy patient exposed to
the fumes, until, after excruciating torture, she expired.
The quack was both astonished and alarmed at this result,
and left the house somewhat hurriedly, declaring how-
ever, that the patient was now free from the badger’s
curse. The police were soon on his track, and he was
arrested a day later.
* * * * *
I will close this “ chapter of extracts “ as it may be
appropriately termed, with one too distinctively charac-
teristic of a Japanese national trait to be omitted. Per-
haps those who had my last circular letter of 1898 may
remember some quotations I made from the book of Cap-
tain St. John, a British Naval Captain who visited Japan
in 1868; one of those extracts referred to the grave of one
of his officers, and the following paragraphs from a Kobe
newspaper of this year give further interesting particulars
of the incident:
B. I. P.
The Japan Daily MaU, March, 1899.
An incident worth notice has been brought to our
attention. In 1868,. an officer of H.B.M.S. Sylvin was
taken seriously ill and landed on the island of Hiroshima,
where he died and was buried. Naturally the grave,
being situated in a place very seldom visited by English-
men, received no attention at the hands of the dead man’s
countrymen. But the Japanese villagers seem to have
considered that some duty of hospitality devolved on
them in connexion with the event. They erected a
tomb-stone over the remains of the unknown stranger,
and tended the grave so carefully that it attracted the
attention of Captain Conner, of the Nippon Yusen Kaisha,
who had occasional opportunities of landing on Hiroshima
during the course of his voyages to and from Shanghai.
He mentioned the matter to Mr. T. B. Glover, who spoke
of it to H.B.M.’s Consul in Kobe, and the latter, having
addressed the Governor of Hiroshima Prefecture on the
subject, received the following reply:—
[translation.]
February 18th, 1899.
Sir, —Your letter of June 22nd, 1898, addressed to
the Governor of Hiroshima Ken, requesting that an
enquiry might be made regarding the grave of an officer of
H.M.S. Sylvia, was' referred to me, as no record was said
to me, as no record was said to exist in that Prefecture -
Taking it upon myself to reply to your letter I have the
honour to inform you that investigations have been made
witji the result given below, the position of the grave the
tombstone, ete.. being shown on the enclosed plans.
I have, etc.,
Yoshiwaha Saburo, [ET]
Governor of Kagawa Prefecture >
J. C. Hall, Esquire,
H.B.M. Consul, Kobe.
In the Ist year of Meiji. corresponding to a.d. 1868,
H.B.M.S. Sylvia was proceeding on a voyage through the
Inland Sea when an officer on board, named Lake, fell ill.
He was landed on .the island of Hiroshima, Hiroshima-
mura, Naka-gori, in the province of Sanuki, Kagawa Pre-
fecture, while the Sylvia proceeded along the coast of
Hiroshima and cast anchor in Enoura Bay to await the
officer’s recovery. In a few days, however, he died; and
Captain St. John buried his remains in ground belonging
to the temple of Ikwoji above Enoura shrine, and, having
set up a wooden cross to mark the grave, departed.
Several years afterwards, when this monument had
almost decayed from the effects of wind and rain, frost and
snow, Awaburi Tokwan, Superior of Ikwoji, and others
said: “ Truly it would be too sad if the grave of our


solitary guest from afar, who has bebome a spirit in a
strange land, were suffered to pass out of all knowledge.”
Thereupon Terawaki Kaemon, head of a village company,
and other sympathizers such as Oka Byohaku, set on foot
a scheme for the erection of & stone monument, and - , the
shore-folk all with one accord tending their help, the
work was finally brought to completion. This was on the
7th day of the 11th month of the 4th year of Meiji, that
is, 1871. Since then nearly thirty winters have passed,
during which time the islanders have not neglected to
take good care of the tomb. In particular, from the 10th
to the 16th day of the 7th month, old style, there are
still persons found who every year clean and sweep the
grave, and, offering up flowers and incense, mourn for and
console the spirit of the dead.
* * * * *
AN ENGLISHMAN’S GRAVE IN THE
INLAND SEA.
The Kobe Chronicle, Ist March, 1899.
While coming up from Miyajima in the Snowflalx
Mr. Sim and Mr. Baggallay visited Inoura, a village
situated on a small island in the Inland Sea named
Hiroshima of Kagawa prefecture (which must not be con-
founded with the well-known Hiroshima near Ujina),
where there exists the tomb of a British officer who was
buried there more than thirty years ago. On casting
anchor at Inoura, which is situated on the shores of a
beautiful land-locked bay, an old fisherman in a sampan
close by was asked whether he knew of a foreigner’s grave
in the neighbourhood. He replied in the affirmative, and
at once took Messrs. Sim and Baggallay ashore and con-
ducted them to the spot, which is situated somewhat apart
from the Japanese cemetery, and is evidently very care-
fully tended. It seems that in 1368 an officer named Lake
belonging to H.B.M.S. Sylvia was taken ill while the vessel
was passing through the Inland Sea, and, according to one
account, was taken on shore with the hope of recovery,
but died and was buried there, the vessel waiting mean-
while at Inoura. The fisherman, however, says that the
officer was accidentally drowned, and that the vessel
remained in the neighbourhood until the body was
recovered, which seems more probable, for if the officer
had been taken ill on board and ultimately died, his body
would most likely have been conveyed either to Nagasaki
or Kobe for interment. However that may be, the officer
was interred at Inoura, and the grave marked by a
wooden cross. In course of time the cross decayed, and
the villagers, with the object of preventing the grave of
the stranger from falling into oblivion, subscribed suffi-
cient funds to mark the place by a jmall stone monument,
which was erected in 1871. These facts were elicited by a
letter addressed to the Governor of Hiroshima prefecture
(and sent on to the Governor of Kagawa prefecture) by
Mr. Hall, the British Consul at this port, who heard of
the existence of the lonely grave in this out-of-the-way
place from Mr. T. B. Glover, aud the incident is evidence
of the kindly disposition exhibited by the people towards
the strangers from over-sea who at that time had so
recently come among them. The grave is still kept in
good order and preservation, the greatest care evidently
being devoted to it. Mr. Sim states that on his visit
flowers had been laid upon the grave quite recently, and
the old fisherman accompaying the visitors, who was a lad
of eighteen or nineteen when the body of the officer was
interred, said that twice a year special services were held
on behalf of the stranger and the grave put in good order
and repair. A small sum was contributed towards the
expenses of upkeep by the two visitors before they left
the spot. Such an incident, entirely spontaneous in
character as it was, and which has been almost thirty
years coming to the knowledge of foreigners, says not a
little for the good-heartedness and sympathetic kindness
of the people of this little village, and deserves recognition
and acknowledgement by foreigners in general.
* * * * *
The above extracts were sent me by a lady friend now
in Kobe, a former resident of Yokohama, who is aware of
my predilection for anecdotes illustrative of the innate
good feeling of the Japanese when left entirely to their
own intuitions. She forwarded them to me with the
accompanying remarks:
“Enclosed are two articles which please read and
return, as I would like to put them in my serap-book.
“ Sunday last I went to church, and as usnal was dis-
appointed. The minister said in his prayer ‘ Thank Ood
that we are not like the Japanese in worshipping idols of wood
and stone, and that we know the true Ood.’ —Surely if he, or
any one of us, really knew the true God as we ought, there
would be less fault-finding in his work, and as for bowing,
we all bow doun to idols, even of wood and stone. . We
like five houses both of stone and wood, and surely those
that can afford them will wear as many precious stones as
their purses will permit. But the greatest idol is our own
dear self. How we pickout the tit-bits for it and decorate
it I How our whole life is given up to supplying its
wants I If the ministers would spend more of their time
in God worship, they would learn better how to interpret
the Bible.
“I believe the commandment “Thou shalt not bow
down to idols ” really means not to make a God of anything
—use what we need, but no more. —Thankful we are not like
the Japanese I’ What a foolish thing to be thankful for I
They really are the most devoted worshippers. Where
will we find among our most religions Christians, one who
would pet up at four o’clock in the morning, winter and
summer, and pour a bucket of cold water over themselves,
and after, pray for an hour or more ? One of the old
women living in our village used to do this every day.
Surely if there is a merciful God, he will welcome her
long before he does these Christians who go from house to
house crushing whom they can! There is a poor little
woman here whom these “good ” people cross the street
rather than meet her. Why ? Simply because she left


the Church ! These are the things I have always wondered
at —think of a minister who is making his living out of
these Japanese (and a good living too) getting up in what
is supposed to be a holy house and talking of God’s people
in this way 1
“ After leaving the “ holy ” edifice we went to one of
the “ heathen ” stores. The “ heathen ” politely invited us
to look at his wares, and afterwards offered us a dainty
cup of tea with pretty little cakes made of chestnuts and
sugar in the shape of cherry-blossoms and leaves. Tn
offering them he said “ These are made for this time of
the year to remind us of the beautiful flowers that are
around us ’’—and in the next breath he said “ We are very
fond of the foreigners! ” —I thought if he had been in
our holy Church that morning, he would have said
differently I ”
The above remarks will acquire an additional interest
when I tell my readers that they were written to me on
the type-writer by a blind lady who lost her sight about
twelve years ago, after she had been long resident in
Japan and had had many opportunities of observing the
Japanese, and forning her own opinion as them.
* * * * *
The last thing I did before leaving Yokohama for the
summer was to visit the exhibition of morning glories at
Tokyo, which from one cause or another, I had never
before been able to see. It is a sight that is a perfect
revelation to one who witnesses it for the first time, and I
felt well repaid for the long journey made for the express
purpose in the heat of a summer’s day.
It is not strictly an Exhibition, but many gardens
where these plants are specially cultivated are thrown open
to the public, when thousands of flowers all in pots, are
on view for sale, at prices ranging from 10 to 35 sen per
pot (from three pence to nine pence English money).
Little trellises of fantastic shapes made of thin slips of
white wood, on which the plants can climb, are arranged
in each pot. If I were not quite sure yon would acquit
me of exaggerating, I should hesitate to tell you the size
of many of the flowers, but truly by rough measurement
allowing an inch from the end of my thumb to the knuckle,
I measured many that were fully three inches and a half
in diameter ! . And the colors were simply indiscribable !
Not only was there every shade of every color common
to the convolvulus family, but there was every other color
that one might suppose impossible for that flower to as-
sume 1 Shades of fawn, grey, mouse-color, and every tint
of brown were to be seen. Others gorgeous in deep crimson
or royal purple, were either striped or edged with bands
of white. The shapes were as eccentric as the colors.
Many were double, others as tho’ frilled, and yet more
were completely spiral, cork-screwing from the outer circle
to the centre in a succession of graduated convolutions.
As acres upon acres of ground were completely cover-
ed with these pot plants in full bloom, you can imagine
the bewilderment of choice before me when I desired to
purchase one to carry away to a sick friend I In sheer
desperation, I was compelled at last to leave the decision
to my “ boy ” —for as I have said before, in the matter of
taste and judgment where flowers are concerned, one can
never err in trusting to one’s Japanese dervant. His
selection fell on a plant (price 30 sen) with only -one spiral
blossom unfolded, but which the gardener assured us
would soon be covered with flowers. This purchase was
made towards the latter end of July, and the prediction
was fully verified, for on September 7th following, my
invalid friend wrote as follows, after having informed me
that the plant had daily been putting forth from twelve
to fourteen fine flowers:
“EXTRA ‘MORNING GLORY’ BULLETIN.
Tokyo September? 7th 1899
Total number of blossoms this a.m. 27.
„ „ „ leaves on plant 21.
Hear Mrs. Patton,
I thought the Morning Glory had reached its limit of
brilliancy when nineteen flowers appeared a few days ago;
but this morning, in a burst of noble ambition, it shone
out with twenty-seven blossoms.—six more than there are
green leaves on the plant 1
This seems to me a remarkable demonstration. I
don’t believe this record can be surpassed, but if ever a
larger number comes to view, I shall take 'pleasure in
letting you know.
Very sincerely yours.
E. H. H.
And all this contained in a pot certainly not more than
seven inches in diameter at the very utmost.
* * * * *
Midsummer Vacation to October Ist.
The first place I visited in my summer holidays was a
celebrated hot spring resort about a day’s journey from
Yokohama, much frequented by Japanese of the better'
class on account of its medicinal waters and mountain air,
but to which foreigners seldom pay more than a flying
visit, because it has no objects of special interest to them,
for as I have said before, foreigners in Japan are gregarious
animals, and as a rule prefer to flock together in localities
where their tastes are specially catered for.
The one street of this mountain village is simply a
continuous flight of steep stone steps, on either side, of
which the shops and hotels give one the impression that
they are slipping down the mountain side. The waters
for which it is famous have been known from pre-historic
times, and the family to whom the hotel belongs where I
stayed has a record of over six hundred years? residence in
this one spot! Think of that, you Australians, few of
whom can say where your progenitors were, even one
hundred years ago!
The mineral waters of this place leave a sediment
which will dye one’s pocket-handkerchief a deep buff - color
in an hour or two, and so the principal articles for sale in
the shops (exclusive of the wooden-ware knicknacks
manufactured by the villagers when snowed up during the
long winter months) are cotton cloths of various designs


in buff and white, for Japanese kimonos, but which alas 1
for the probity of commerce, are not the veritable dyes of
the hot-springs, but are manufactured expressly for sale in
this village at a town a considerable distance away 1
Higher yet by 800 feet —and this little Ikao is itself
contact with the carrying pole which prevents your hold-
ing yourself upright in a sitting posture. But by relieving
my aching limbs and back by walking down most of the
descents, I managed to get through each day’s stage with-
out much more fatigue than was caused by the summer heat.
2,700 feet above sea level—is a lovely lake, formed like all ,My cavalcade consisted of three men for the kago,
the mountain lakes in Japan, of an extinct volcano to
which the young and active can climb in two hours by a
steep and rugged path, but to which elderly people like
myself are carried in chairs by four coolies. On the day
I made the trip, my “ boy,” walking beside my chair,
gathered twenty-six different varieties of wild flowers,
making a gorgeous bouquet of brilliant colors varying from
deep orange to palest yellow, from dark - purple to pale
blue, through all the different shades of pink, scarlet, and •
crimson, to white; amongst them were the magnificent
white Japanese lily with dark red spots, and the smaller
orange-colored turk’s-cap variety, which served to adorn
ray pretty Japanese rooms on the top story of the hotel
during the remainder of my stay.
From this lake down a deep descent, in.the midst of
apparently impassable ravines and gorges, is a temple so
old that its origin is unknown, yet many of the unpainted
wooden carvings are still in excellent preservation. Tradi-
tion says that on this site were once more than three
hundred .flourishing temples and monasteries, and the
enormous stone foundations yet remaining, altho’ now
covered deep in moss and lichen, bear witness to the fact-
Bat one can only wonder what the old priests and abbots
of those days did with themselves and the time on their
hands, at such a remote age, and in a spot that is even now,
almost inaccessible!
* sj< sjc
I next made preparations for a four days’ journey
across country, in order to reach my little Japanese house
in the valley of Kos6, fully described in my circular letter
of 1896, which I proposed to make my head-quarters for
the summer. As the mountain roads over which I should
have to travel were impassable even for a jinrikisha
with two men, and I had a lively recollection ■ of what
riding on a Japanese was like when I tried it
across country three years ago, my means of locomotion
were narrowed down to a kago, altho’ truly, in point of
discomfort, there is little difference between the two. The
kago is only a delusion and a snare to' the foreigner, for
when you see a Japanese seated in one, airily swinging
between two bearers, it looks the very ideal conveyance
for mountain roads. But the lower limbs of foreigners
not being constructed after Japanese models, it is simply
impossible to know how to dispose them with any degree
of comfort. You must either sit upon your legs, when they
very soon become completely benumbed —or you must sit
cross-legged d la Turque and get the cramp —or you must
hang them over the side of the kago, when they scrape
the ground, or stick them out in front, where they impede
the locomotion of your front bearer. Added to which
your head is constantly getting bumped by' coming into
who relieved each other in the following manner. Two
men shouldered the pole on their left shoulders, having
nothing between the hard wood and their bare skin but a
pad formed of a small folded towel, which soon became so
saturated with perspiration that they had to wring it
out at every halting-place. After about a minute or two,
according to the greater or less difficulty of the road, at a
given signal the men shift the pad and pole to the right
shoulder, and at the next shift the front man falls out on
the left side, and his place is taken by the third man, who
has been walking beside the kago on the right. The hind-
most man is then relieved in the same manner by the man
who was in front. 'When the passenger is a light Japan-
ese, I have no doubt the work is comparatively easy for
mountaineers who are used to it; but in my case, where
there was a solid weight of 163 lbs to trot along with, I
really pitied the poor men.
(I may here that I find it
extremely hard, as an Englishwoman, to speak of a
person’s weight by lbs: instead of st: as it is always done
here. This fashion is taken I imagine, with many others,
from the Americans, as I observe they always calculate a
person’s weight by lbs: which certainly, to any one
educated on the English system, does not immediately
convey the same mental idea of weight as st:)
I also had a pack-horse and man to lead it, to carry
my luggage, consisting not only of clothing, but sufficient
bread and tinned food for the journey, which horse my
servant mounted when tired of walking beside me. And
so we travelled on, meeting only occasional Japanese men,
women, and children on pack-horses. In the case of two
children, they were slung on either side of the horse in
basket paniers, and looked both comfortable and secure.
The first night we spent at a little mountain village of
only 32 houses, exactly like a Swiss chalet, the houses so
huddled together on the mountain side, that when viewing
from the hotel verandah on the upper floor, their roofs
weighted with heavy stones, it seemed as tho’ I could
easily leap from one to the other till I had touched all the
roofs in the village.
The next evening I reached Kusatsu, the most cele-
brated hot-spring in Japan, a place as curious as it is unique.
Tradition says that it was discovered during the reign of
Yoritomo, the first Shogun, about the year 1160, through
the singular incident of a wounded deer having been
observed to visit regularly and bathe itself in the sul-
phurous waters of the spring, where-upon the Shogun
ordered baths to be erected in the locality; and from that
time to the present,’ Kusatsu has stood first as a curative
resort for all persons suffering from gout, rheumatism, and
all the many forms of skin disease. There is also a
quarter allotted to leper patients, who are treated with


more or less success according to the severity of the disease.
I cannot give you a better idea of the singular scenes to be
witnessed at Kusatsu, than by quoting the following
account from Murray’s Guidebook, which describes exactly
what was going on all the time of ray stay of two days and
nights:
“The chief constituents of the Kusatsu springs are
mineral acids, sulplur, and arsenic. Their temperature is
exceedingly high, ranging from 113° to 113°. Fahrenheit,
according to the spring. Even the Japanese, inured as
they are to hot baths, find their courage fail them; and
the native invalids are therefore taken to bathe in squads
under a semi-military discipline to which they voluntarily
submit. Most curious is the sort of choric chant which
take's place between the bathers and their leader on enter-
ing and while sitting in the bath, a trial, which though
lasting only from 3J to 4 minutes, seems an eternity to
their festering agonized bodies. First of all, the bathers
are made to pour hot water over their heads many times,
to avoid the risk of congestion. After the lapse of about
one minute, the leader cries out, and all the others respond
in unison. After a little he cries out, “Three minutes
have passed I”—“ Three minutes!” re-echoes the chorus.
After another half-minute or so, —“Two minutes more!”
—then—“ One minute more!” the chorus answering each
time with an inarticulate murmur. At last the leader
cries—“ Finished !” —whereupon the whole mass of naked
bodies leap out of the water with an alacrity which he
who has witnessed their slow painful entry into the place
of torture would scarcely have credited. Indeed, the
effect of the waters at first is to bring out new sores more
plentiful than the old—the usual plan being, after a course
of the Kusatsu baths, to go for the after-cure to several
milder springs in the neighbourhood, where the waters
have a softening effect on the skin and quickly alleviate
the terrible irritation which the acids contained in the
Kusatsu waters produce.”
Of course I did not witness all the above performances,
which are gone through in the bath-houses with closed
doors from early dawn till night, but from my hotel
verandah I-heard all day the choric chant being sung, and
was nearly suffocated at times with the fumes of sulphur
from the springs in the middle of the street, over which
the bath-houses are built. I was also able to get some
photos: illustrative of the above description. Altogether,
Jt was certainly the most singular place I have seen in
Japan.
* * J(e j|c >Jc
From Kusatsu I visited the volcano of “ Moto Shirane-
San,” which was the scene of a great eruption fourteen
years ago, and of a second slighter one only two years
since. It was a climb of 3000 feet to the top of the crater,
Kusatsu itself being nearly 4000 feet above sea level, and it
was the first, and in all probability will be the last time I
shall ever find myself 7000 feet nearer Heaven than I
usually am. The effects of the last eruption were as fresh as
tho’ it had only happened yesterday. For miles around, a
pine forest stood leafless and blasted yet with every branch
and twig perfect, and whitened as if heated to a white heat.
Amongst these were huge blocks of stone, many as large as
an average house, which had crashed through the forest
at the eruption, splintering many of the trees as tho’ they
had been struck by lightning. Many of these blocks, be-
sides being half embedded in the earth by the force of the
impact when ejected from the crater, were rent or split in
two from the force of the concussion. They were so
numerous that it was difficult to walk through them.
Some buildings at the foot of the mountain where sulphur
works had been in operation between the first and second
eruption, were thrown down as if by an earthquake, and
the large iron vats used in the works were lying about
- shattered into pieces by the stones that had fallen. A
small tramway from the works to the summit, used for
carrying the sulphur, had been partly buried by the
lighter debris of the eruption, but we managed to use it as
a guide to the crater, tho’ in many places we had to jump
over deep cracks and fissures. The summit was weird in
the extreme. The bare jagged walls of the crater were
rent into the most appallingly fantastic shapes, only
wanting some demon forms disposed here and there to
realize Gustav Bore’s illustrations of the Inferno. Far
below, a small lake of liquid s’ulphur lay motionless and
unruffled by the wind, which was so strong that we had
much ado to keep our feet. Pieces of rock thrown into it
did not fall as into water, making a widening circle, but
sank with a dull thud as into liquid mud. It was
dangerous to venture near the edge of the walls, the
cinders being so loose that we sank over our boots at
every step, and they ’ and our staffs, were coated for days
after with sulphur stains. It was the most uncanny scene
I was ever in, and a queer lonely feeling came Over me as
I stood there and looked around with only two mounta-
ineers and my “ boy ” as companions, and no one to whom
I could express my sensations,. At the base of the
mountain we crossed several dry beds of streams which
we were told had been rivers of pure sulphur long after
the eruption, and it was a curious fact that altho’ there
were no sulphur fumes issuing from any part of the,
mountain, several silver ornaments I was wearing were
completely tarnished during my short stay.
This experience quite satisfied my curiosity regarding
active volcanoes, tho’ I am now penning this description
almost under the shadow of another, for after two more
days’ travelling over magnificent mountain passes, I arrived
at my little country house only to learn that a few
evenings before my arrival a shower of stones and ashes
had been thrown out from Asama-yama, an active volcano
about five miles distant as the crow flies, which for about
fifteen minutes had rattled on the shingle roof like hail-
stones. The stones, of which I have many, varied in size
from a pea to that of a small plum. I have also a packet
of the white ash which fell at the same time, covering the
leaves of all trees, shrubs, and ferns for miles around my
house. Every leaf had just the effect of being coated with
white dust from a road-side, and it remained on until
washed away by repeated mountain showers. The forces


within the mountain must have been powerful indeed, to
send such small stones and fine ash to such a distance.
Altho’the mountain (was rolling out columns of smoke
daily, nothing else, accurred during my stay, but I confess
to having felt rather nervous at nights when heavy rain-
drops pattered on the roof, thinking they mighPbe stones
again.
The last great eruption of this volcano was in 1783,
and was terrific in its effects. Streams of lava completely
filled up a valley many miles in extent, destroying a
primeval forest and many populous villages, over which
is now a bridle road, the ground beneath the horses’ ( hoofs
still giving out a hollow sound suggestive of what is buried
below. The lava in this region is now amalgamated with
a surface soil, altho’ protruding at every step, and stunted
pinetrees and other vegetation have had time for growth.
After traversing this district, which is known as the.
“ lava beds,” for about three or four • miles, a far more
awful sight presents itself, where, at the time of the great
eruption, a stream of red-hot lava rolled from the crater
like a mighty, 'river, and spreading itself fanlike from
the summit of the mountain to its base, covered the
country to the extent of fifteen miles in length, and about
seven and a half in width. The depth of this stream of
lava none can estimate, its rifts being unfathomable. It
is both difficult and dangerous to endeavor to climb even
on the outer edge of this vast wall, as all the huge masses
of lava are loose and friable,' and give way: to the touch,
so that every step one takes must be tested before putting
the weight on it. The lava is of a blackish red, or
reddish black tint, and it is awful to look around and see
nothing as far as the eye can reach but these enormous
waves of molten stone! The imagination fails when one
even tries to picture what the scene must have been when
this vast mass was rolling out red-hot I —This place is
about twelve miles from the little valley of Kose, where
my house is, but I had never visited it until the present
time.
I made several excursions on horse-back to other
points of interest on the mountain, and found that I could
ride from twenty to twenty-five miles a day without
undue fatigue. On one of these riding expeditions to a
curious cascade about fifteen hundred feet up the mountain
side, I stayed for an hour at a most interesting old
Japanese hostelry in a village at the foot of the mountain,
on a road called the Nakasendo which had formerly been
one of the ancient highways through which the Daimyos
used to pass in procession with their retainers, on their
annual visit to Yeddo, but which has now fallen into
obscurity and dis-use in consequence of the railways having
diverted the traffic from it. This old inn had been built
for the special accommodation of such guests, and we were
taken all over it. All its interior wood work was black
with age, and shone as th o’ french-polished. The mysterious
corridors, passages, and stair-ways leading to the suites of
rooms occupied by. the Daimyos, and to the quarters for
their retainers —the vast kitchen with all its quaint old-
time appliances— not omitting the lofty shrine occupying
one side of the wall devoted to the house-hold gods,—the
wood carvings of old crests of the nobles doubtless who
had patronised the house, the large old carved gateway,
(now closed) the pretty, Japanese gardens in the rear, .were
all there, but imagination had to people the deserted
rooms with the nobles and their servants, for now the
only inmates seemed to be a very old man wbo v was
crouching over the vast kitchen fire-place, a sickly woman,
a little girl, and one or two coolies—and the only guests
they would probably .have to entertain might be some
modem Japanese commercial traveller. The woman in-
vited us very earnestly; to spend a night there, and but
that our failing to return home would have caused alarm,
I was much tempted to do so. We were offered one of
the beautiful suites of rooms at a very cheap rent, if we
liked to take it for the season. The contrast between the
interior of the. house and the squalid appearance of the
little village street made np of the poorest huts, was very
saddening. How I longed to be able to transport the
whole building, just as I saw .it, to Australia, where it
would indeed be a true Japanese curio! There must be
many such old hostelries scattered through the remoter
parts of Japan, but I had never before come across one.
Tasked the woman if she was not afraid to live so
near the mountain in its present active state, but she said
no, for the eruptions always took place on the other side—
(that is my side) —but in riding np the mountain after-
wards, I observed that the entire road was paved with
lava, which was also jutting out of the grass on every side,
so that I think the chances are if there should be a bad
eruption, she would get her share of it as well as myself.
* * * * *
We also made an excursion as far as the present
railway terminus leading from Tokyo to the East coast of
Japan, the station nearest to our valley being situated
about half-way. Niigata the chief city on the north-
eastern coat of Japan, was our destination. It is a quaint
old Japanese city, with nothing modern about it save the
public buildings the most prominent being a very large
prison evidently built on the latest European models, but
of which we only saw the outer wall of brick.
I must here explain that the pronoun “we” used
above, refers to myself and the same lady friend who has
been my companion in several of the trips already des-
cribed. She is the wife of the editor of one of the Yoko-
hama foreign daily newspapers, and the second morning
we were at Niigata, we were much amused by my servant,
coming in and telling us that he had just read in the local
morning Japanese paper, a notice informing the public
that, “Two foreign gentlemen, Mr. Emily S. Patton
“Principal of the Yokohama School of Music, and Mr.
“ Jessie K. Hay, Editor of the “ Japan Gazette,” arrived
“ in this city yesterday from Tokyo, and are staying at
“ the Kado-ya Hotel, being the first foreigners who have
“visited Niigata since the revised Treaties came into
operation.” Evidently foreign women were not often seen
in this far-away East coast town, for we again heard doubts
expressed as to our sex, as we had at last Easter in the


Inland Sea, altho’ we were dressed in perfectly orthodox
feminine garb.
At the gate of the very pretty Public Gardens of this
town was a notice board in Japanese characters, with the
following translation in English beside it, which we
thought quite good enough to copy for the the amusement
of our friends
PROHIBITION.
No bodies are allowed to bring horses, carriages in
or pick flowers and trees or take fruits, muds,
stones, fishes and birds from this park,
Niigata Kencho.
In this garden were two large lotus-ponds, with the
beautiful flowers in full bloom. In one pond they were
all pink, in the other of the purest waxy-white. The
enormous leaves reminded me of the leaves of the Victoria
Regia in the glass-house in the Botanical Gardens Mel-
bourne, only that instead of floating on the surface of the
water, they grow on huge stalks about two feet above it.
I saw some children belonging to the caretakers using
them as sun-shades, and they seemed to answer the pur-
pose admirably. The roots of the lotus are much used by
the Japanese as a vegetable, and we found that the seeds
which Rad just formed, were very delicate eating, having
the flavor of a young green filbert. ; i ■
In these ponds were also the largest and most pugna-
cious gold and silver carp I had ever seen in Japan—when
cakes were thrown to them, they fairly leapt over each
other like porpoises, and fought for them in their eager-
ness, which afforded us much amusement.
The City of Niigata is approached from the present
railway terminus by a wooden bridge a quarter of a mile
long, over a low-banked river., I thought bur jinrikishas
would never arrive at the other end of' it. Japan has
some very remarkable bridges in different parts of the
country, and I have often thought a very interesting
illustrated volume could be made of. them. During my
descent from the mountain pass I traversed this summer,
I crossed a river over a bridge of boats, which was most
pictureque. I counted thirty-five large boats of the build
used by fishermen on, the sea-coast, closely moored
together with their bows facing up-stream, over which
was laid a plank road-way wide enough for wheeled
vehicles. The graceful curves made by this floating
bridge would have looked lovely in a picture.
The country through , which our railway journey lay
was varied and interesting. Where the line skirted the
coast, the bold head-lands were traversed by some of the
longest tunnels I had ever been through, and where it left
the coast, it ran over plains covered as far as the eye
could reach with waving fields of rice just beginning to
ripen, which altho’ somewhat monotonous, were yet beauti-
ful when the fields were gently suffled by the breeze.
When the railway left the plains and entered mountainous
districts where rice cannot be grown, we observed fields of
tobacco, potatoes, French beans, and buck-wheat (from
which the Japanese make their macaroni) in full blossom,
the delicate white flowers looking so pretty amongst the
green of the other cultivations.
We stayed three days at a hot-spring village far up
on the slope of Myoko-san, the highest mountain in those
parts, where the water, brought in wooden shoots from
its source five miles away, was just as hot as we could bear
it by the time it reached the baths. It was strongly im-
pregnated with sulphur, and the fumes rising from the
water were almost like smoke. The public baths were
built down the middle of the village street, and there we
saw men women and children bathing indiscriminately all
day long. My friend and I had much difficulty in dodg-
ing the male Japanese guests at the hotel, who could not be
made to comprehend why foreigners require privacy when
using the bath; but eventually the polite landlord was
obliging enough to hang up a white calico screen at the
entrance while we were in occupation, which acted as a
gentle hint to the Japanese, though doubtless we were
considered by them to be unreasonably fastidious on the
subject.
Wo stopped at a station on our return journey to
visit an old monastery lying far back amongst the hills, at
such a height that at the end of our climb we almost felt
as tho’ up in a balloon, where the temples and shrines were
literally built into the rocks. The place was the very
realization of religions calm and seclusion, and was only
inhabited by an old priest and his wife, son, and
daughter, the latter an interesting modest girl of eighteen,
who told us she had been born at the spot.- I could not
help thinking what a different experience of life was hers,
to that of an ordinary European girl of the same age !
We had here an interesting proof of the sagacity of a
dog. On first arriving at this lovely spot, we had noticed
a beautiful brown retriever of foreign breed, and remark-
ed upon its being an unusual kind to find in a Japanese
home. We had brought up a tiffin basket with us such as
all foreigners use when travelling in Japan, for the purpose
of lunching at the temple, and directly the sagacious
creature saw my “boy” handle the basket previous to
opening it, he gave the most unmistakeable signs of delight,
accompanying them with the short sharp sound, half bark
half yelp, that a dog always gives to attract attention when
he. expects a share of any eatables that are about. My
friend, who speaks Japanese fluently, remarked to the
priest’s daughter on the singularity of her dog appearing
so familiar with the appearance and use of a tiffin basket,
and she replied that many foreign ladies and gentlemen
came there like ourselves with tiffin baskets, and always
gave him something, so that he knew the intention of one
quite well 1 Needless to say the pretty intelligent creature
got his full share of the contents of ours I
I dreamed away a delightful summer at my little
country house, doing literally nothing beyond what I have
here recorded, and writing out a fair copy of this letter to
put into the printer’s hands on my return to town.
My last act, previous to leaving Kos6, was at the
request of the owner of the valley, to present the little Fox-
shrine on the hill with a new Torii (or gate way) to replace


the one that was washed away last summer by a big typhoon
that caused the little stream to over-flow its banks and
sweep away all before it, the temple gate included. The
raising of the new Torii was a subject of great interest,
and I was glad to be able to make the simple inhabitants
happy at the trifling expenditure of four dollars (eighj
shillings) which covered the cost of carpenters’ labor, and
the coolies pay who cut and carried the logs from the
pine forest, as well as a bottle of sakd to drink “ good
luck ”to the erection, Nothing would serve but that my
name must be written in both Japanese and English on a
notice board beside the Torii, as is the custom whenever a
donation is made to a temple—and I only trust the
recording angel will not set down aught against my name
for having made this small contribution to a simple
Japanese Shinto shrine. Before leaving I made the little
sketch of the gate-way, hill and temple that is on the first
page of this letter.
It may be interesting to note the difference of tem-
perature on the same day between the mountains and the
seaboard. On Sept. 23rd the thermometer at Kos6 stood
at 48° at 8 a.m. and on arrival at Yokohama at 5 p.m. after
9 hours railway travelling, it was 74° 1
During my stay in the country I read with much in-
terest the three latest published works on Japan—namely,
“ A Diplomatists. Wife in Japan.” By Mrs. Hugh Fraser
(widow of the late British Minister in Tokyo), “ The
New Far East ” by Arthur Diosy, Secretary of the Japan
Society London, and “Japan in Transition” by Stafford
Eansome, recently Special correspondent of the “Morning
Post” in the Far East etc: ete: and I can confidently
recommend all three works to my Australian friends.
The first and last wrote, each from their own point of
view, from personal experience, and altho’ Mr. Diosy’s
book was written before he ever visited Japan, he must
have had a wonderful intuition regarding Japan and her
people. The treaty port residents do not admire any of
these writers—doubtless because it is the first time they
have really had the truth put plainly in print before them,
but their relations with the Japanese have been laid open
to the public truthfully, as I who have been a not un-
observant bystander for the last ten years, can personally
testify.
Sc * * St *
About a month before my return to town, Yokohama
was the scene of the most awful conflagration that has
ever occurred since the city was built. It commenced on
a Saturday evening in a shed behind a bathhouse, where
some men in a quarrel caused by gambling, upset a kero-
sene lamp.
The city water was turned off owing to some repairs
to the water-works, a strong gale was blowing, and the
fire spread and raged from 8 p.m. till next day.
If you can imagine a district as large as the whole of
Carlton, Fitzroy, and Collingwood combined, totally an-
nihilated, you can form some idea of the extent of the
natality. The flames were only arrested at various points
by the wide canals that intersect the city. Even a month
afterwards when I visited the scene, it was pitiable to con-
template the complete ruin of so many streets, amongst
others, the celebrated representative one known to all globe-
trotters as “ Theatre Street,” the locality where strangers
could see all the quaintest scenes of Japanese street life, and
where all the theatres and side-shows were located. It is
truly heartrending to see the shop-keepers who once owned
fine shops with large displays of goods, recommencing
business in little temporary shanties erected on the sites of
their former dwellings. Thousands of people have lost all
they possessed, for very little personal property is insured
in Japan.
In a very short time upwards of $60,000 was subscribed
for the sufferers, and the foreign residents contributed
handsomely (the Childrens’ Tonic Sol-fa Choral Society
giving $lOO from the proceeds of their late concert) but
large as the amount subscribed was, it only gave about $3
per head to the sufferers. Fortunately, the loss of life
was comparatively 'small, only eleven persons having
perished, but it will be many a long day before Yoko-
hama recovers from the disaster.
Those who witnessed the scene from the Bluff heights
said it was too awful for language to describe. One lady
said she was sure it must have resembled the Great Fire
of London, which is not unlikely, as London was mostly
built of wood at that time, and the majority of houses in
Japan can never be built of anything else, on account of
the frequency of earthquakes.
Poor Japan! she no sooner rebounds from one cala-
mity, than she is over-taken by another I The Emperor
and Empress, as is their custom, contributed handsomely
towards the relief of their unfortunate subjects.
On my return to Yokohama I had to suffer the loss of
my dear friend and old pupil Ada Bloxham, who left with
her mother for South Africa the very day I returned totown.
She had practised her profession for six years in Yoko-
hama with great success, deservedly reaping both money
and reputation, besides gaining a host of private friends,
but at the expense of health. The climate of Japan never
suited her, and had she remained she would soon have
broken down altogether. Professionally it will be hard
for the community to replace her, and personally I shall
miss her dreadfully, for she was the only link in Japan
that bound me to the old days in Melbourne, when she
and my poor children were playmates. But at my time of
life when one has little left to experience but partings,
one following fast upon another, the only way is to fall
back upon one’s philosophy, and meditate upon the
mutability of all things mundane.
* * * * *
Wishing all to whom I send this, the usual compliments
of the approaching season, and begging those to whom I
have been unable to address a personal letter, kindly to
accept this in its stead,
I am, YoUr very sincere old friend,
Emily S. Patton.


I add a post-cript to say that up to the present time,
tixo only difference living under Japanese jurisdiction has
made to me, is that I have to pay taxes for two jinrikishas,
—a city rate tax twice a year amounting to about a dollar,
and a small fee for obtaining a “permit” to teach “polite
accomplishments " —namely, music and dancing! The permit
consists of a small card with cabalistic characters on it,
which I think I shall wear round myneck like a locket.
Eather funny, considering I have been teaching in
Japan for over ten years without a permit at all 1
There will also be an income tax of I b lieve, ten
per cent, per annum, but I have had no notice of this
as yet.
Also the “Bluff" is now to be re-named “ Yamate-cho"
Please note this.
&
sc
se
2 H
i I e
* ra
■ + .
r —■
+ > »
A */ . .
Permit to teach “ Polite Accomplishments."
