

[Circular]
WATSON, FERGUSON & CO. LIMITED
Printers and Publishers
BRISBANE
Dear Sir,
We have pleasure in announcing that we have been entrusted with the printing and
publishing of two new books which we desire to bring under your notice. These works are
entitled—
“MEMOIRS OF THE
Hon. Sir ROBERT PHILP, k.c.m.g.”
AND
“PIONEERING” The Life of the Hon. R. M. COLLINS, m.l.c
We enclose herewith pamphlets in which are printed the Introduction, and also the Chapter
Headings, which will show at a glance the absorbing nature of each of these works. The splendid
men whose lives are recounted were both too well known to need introduction to any Queens-
lander. We feel sure that everyone will wish to possess and to read the records of their achieve-
ments.
The author of these works is Mr. Harry C. Perry, who has, for upwards of a quarter
century, in Queensland journalism. Himself an enthusiastic student
land history, Mr. Perry enjoyed the close personal friendship of both Sir Robert Philp and Mr.
Collins. The material for the Memoirs was gathered in the course of many pleasant evenings
spent together, and much of the story is told in Sir Robert Philp’s own words.
In the case of Mr. Collins the author was accorded the privilege of dipping deep into family
records and quoting at length from a priceless collection of journals, diaries, and letters written
by the pioneer pastoralist and his relatives, to which have been added the personal recollections
of members of the family and old retainers. Infinite pains have been taken to keep the incidents
in chronological order, to verify dates, etc.
We believe that these books will be accepted as the most valuable contribution yet made to
the biographical and historical literature of Queensland. The literary treatment of the subject
in each case is excellent, and there is so much of historical interest interwoven that they will
be found of inestimable value for reference purposes.
Though the books are quite distinct and separate, it has been deemed advisable to make
them uniform in style. Each will consist of approximately 400 pages, printed in bold and pleasing
type upon Old Style Anticpie paper, Demy Bvo. 8| x sf, handsomely bound in Full Brown Cloth,
Board Covers, with the title blocked in gold on back and front, and containing 9 full page half
tone illustrations. We believe that they will be found to set a new standard in Queensland
publications and that they will be worthy of a place in the shelves of all book lovers.
The publication of these works has been undertaken in each case as a memorial to the
men whose splendid work for Queensland is therein placed on record. Though it is confidently
anticipated that the returns will suffice to cover expenses, neither book is being issued as a
commercial proposition. The number of copies will therefore be strictly limited. Those who
desire to possess either or both of them will be well advised to fill in the attached Order Forms
and forward them at once, with cash or credit order, to —
WATSON, FERGUSON & CO. LTD.,
Printers and Publishers,
BRISBANE.
