

CITY COUNCIL OF BALLAARAT.
THE
MAYOR'S SPECIAL REPORT,
TWENRY-FIFIH ANNIVERSARY, 1881.


CITY COUNCIL OF BALLAARAT.
THE
MAYOR'S SPECIAL REPORT,
TWENRY-FIFIH ANNIVERSARY, 1881.




City of ballaart.
MAYOR’S SPECIAL REPORT, JANUARY 17, 1881.
Gentlemen.—
I have the honor to remind yon that this day is the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the first
meeting of the Municipal Council of Ballaarat.
I propose to address you on the subject in the hope of affording an interesting reminder of old
times, and assisting to prevent any obscurity falling over our early history, by collecting, within short
compass, the leading Municipal events of the intervening period.
Happily, we started at a time when unusual facilities of communication and increasing activity
of the Press made the auspices so far favorable that the accumulated experience of other and older
Communities was fully at command ; Legislation that had grown slowly through long time to its
maturity ; the method of conducting Public business ; the most approved construction of Public Works,
were all matters available for adaptation to such extent as they could be made to suit local conditions
and requirements. Having a young and enterprising population, with the recollection of the Towns
and Cities of Europe still fresh on their minds, we were able to start almost full fledged into Municipal
life, the one notable exception being that, inheriting only the advantages above stated, we had to make
our own City as well as govern it.
The flood of immigration that poured into the Colony upon the discovery of gold presented so
many problems for solution by the Government of the time that it was not able to give much considera-
tion toward improving the conditions of life on the Gold Fields. It was not until late in 1854 that the
necessity was recognised for legislation, to enable the masses of population thus fortuitously brought
together to manage purely local affairs, and generally to do for themselves that which the Central
Government could not hope to do with any measure of success. Accordingly, Captain (now Sir
Andrew) Clarke, the Surveyor General, introduced a Bill “ For the establishment of Municipal Institu-
tions in Victoria.” This measure speedily became Law, and may be said to have been the first step
toward Municipal Government in the Colony ; for, although Melbourne and Geelong had enjoyed self-
government from earlier dates, they had each a Special Act, whose authority did not extend beyond the
respective boundaries. There had been no national legislation under which the rapidly-forming Com-
munities could obtain Incorporation. The author’s labors were not limited to the passage of the
original Bill; its operation was assiduously watched, and wherever a weak point was disclosed, amend-
ing measures were promptly introduced to meet the difficulty, and make it, for the time, as efficient as
possible. To Captain Clarke, then, belongs the credit of having initiated amongst us what is now
generally known as Local Government, and the tribute of praise must be freely accorded.


The Act was passed on the 29th of December, 1854, and during the next year a movement was
afoot to have its provisions applied to Ballaarat. A Petition signed by Two hundred and ninety-two
householders was presented to the Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, after due publication of which
Ballaarat was proclaimed a Municipal District on the 18th of December, 1855 ; on the 14th of the
following month, a Public Meeting was held at the “ Golden Fleece,” under the presidency of Mr. J.
A. Douglass, to take the initiatory steps prescribed by the Act for electing a Council; and on the 17th
of January, 1856, twenty-five years ago, the first Municipal Council of Ballaarat met for the despatch
of business, when Mr. James Oddie was elected Chairman.
The Gold Field was situate a few miles from Buninyong, which had been previously recognised
as a sort of official centre of the Western District, but the force of circumstances soon caused the newer
Community to assume the lead, and as early as 1851 the inconvenience of all judicial and other pro-
ceedings having to be carried on at Buninyong had been so felt that the survey of a new Township
nearer to the bulk of the population was commenced in the latter part of that year. The site was
selected by Mr. W. S. Urquhart, then Senior Assistant Surveyor, by whom also the plan of the Town
Reserve was originated, and the survey of the first four blocks was completed on the 26th of December,
1851. The Yarrowee was made the boundary on the East, because Mr. Urquhart states he ‘had no
intention of marking out Lands for sale on the East side, but to keep the high ground on the West
side of the Creek’! It is reported that Mr. C. J. Latrobe, Lieutenant, Governor of the Colony at that
period, made frequent visits to the Ballaarat Gold Field as early as 1852.
The area of the new “District” (as it was then termed) was contained between Macarthur
Street for the Northern boundary; the Yarrowee, Havelock and Grenville Streets on the East (as
at present) ; Sebastopol Street on the South ; and Drummond Street on the West. The growth of the
place was so rapid that before it had been incorporated twelve months an extension became necessary.
Under the first proclamation, that important area now known as “Lake and Gardens” was excluded,
but its value met with early recognition, and in August, 1856, the boundaries of the “ District” were
made to include it by a Western extension toward Gillies Street, thence to Gregory Street.
A very pertinent enquiry may be put: Why, upon incorporation, the “ District” was not made
to include the whole of the ground then occupied as the Gold Field of Ballaarat? the portion East of
the Yarrowee, which at that period really contained the major part of the population, being omitted.
At the time of the discovery of gold, the land had not been alienated, but the Authorities selected a
site for a Township and caused it to be laid out, and in due time the allotments were put up for sale.
It appears at that time a regulation was in force prohibiting the occupation of Crown Lands for
Commercial purposes within one mile of the boundary of any Township that had been surveyed and
sold. It so happened that the busiest portion of the population was then established East of the
Yarrowee, and being outside the ground selected and sold for a Township, was excluded from the
benefit of incorporation, and the trading community became liable to expulsion under the Regulation.
It was then considered necessary for Storekeepers to be in close proximity with their customers, the
Miners; and it was not to be borne that a man who had established an extensive business and was
creating a value for the ground he occupied, should be called upon to buy other ground and remove his
business to a locality arbitrarily selected by Government, however suitable the selection might ultimately
prove to be. The Regulation was accordingly defied, and ultimately the occupants very properly
obtained the freehold of their ground, and were afterwards incorporated separately as “Ballaarat East.”
The Municipality of which I am writing was then distinctively known as “ The Township.”
I do not propose to encumber the body of this report with facts and figures that could be made
to tell their tale much more efficiently in tabulated form ; they will be found conveniently arranged in
the Appendices ; but it may be interesting to note that the Government gave the newly-created Muni-
cipality a fair start, for the first printed Half-yearly Statement of Revenue appears to have been: —
Government Grant ... .... ... ... £3750 0 0
Fines at Police Court ... ... ... .... 40 0 6
Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... 44 18 0
£3834 18 6
Time was needed to develop other sources of Revenue, and they were not slow in coming, as will be
seen by the appendix.


The Council soon settled down to work. Necessary Officers were appointed ; Chambers were
erected to do interim duty as a Town Hall; and the formation of Streets began. The principal lines
of traffic, as then developed, may be inferred from the fact that the first contracts entered into were for
making Lydiard and Armstrong Streets, with the corresponding portions of Mair and Dana Streets.
It was in no small spirit that this first Council viewed its sphere of usefulness. The necessity for
water supply and means of popular recreation were soon recognised, to provide for which extension of the
Municipal Area above mentioned was obtained ; a By-law was made to prevent the pollution of what
was then known as “ Ynille’s Swamp,” and a scheme was submitted to convey the water to the Con-
sumers ; sites for Markets, Quarries, and a Mechanics’ Institute were obtained; application was made
for Botanic Gardens ; and Sturt Street being then on a main line of road, the Government was called
upon to make it throughout the Municipality. By-laws were rapidly considered and passed, as the
needs of the growing population demanded ; and the work to be done attained such magnitude that in
the first year of its existence the Council boldly applied to the Central Government for “Thirty
thousand pounds to form the leading Streets throughout the Township and Municipal District.”
Settlement in the land of the Township was very rapid, so much so that prior to the close of 1858
Public Works already extended as far as Drummond Street, Wendouree Parade, Soldiers Hill, and the
White Flat; embracing also intervening Streets. The same year saw the commencement of our
Botanical Gardens, necessarily on a small scale, and very much dependent on Government aid. In its
report of January, 1859, the Council expressed the hope that the Gardens would “become a source of
attraction and enjoyment to the inhabitants of Ballaarat.” We, in the present day, know how that
hope has been cherished throughout, and are conscious how abundantly it has been realised, not alone
for the inhabitants of Ballaarat, but as a common centre of attraction for the population of an exten-
sive radius of surrounding country.
Some rather rough work fell to the hands of Councillors of early days, owing mainly to those
who had flourished under the old regime being unable or unwilling to admit the claims of the new-
coming Mining Communities. Time would not permit of these little difficulties being settled by the
slow process of legislation, so vigorous self-assertion was needed to enforce the law of necessity ; thus
we find that a neighbouring Squatter, relying on his rights of occupation, solemnly proposed to sell the
water of Yuille’s Swamp (now Wendouree) to the thousands of miners who were already creating a
previously unheard of value for his land and his flocks and herds. His claims and his attempted
negotiation, of course, came to nought. Another trouble arose out of the occupation of unsold land
within the Township for residence purposes, which has not even yet attained its ultimate issue. A
beneficent Law, first suggested, I believe, by the old Local Court, and adopted by the Mining Statute
of 1855, authorised the occupation of a certain extent of Crown Land by miners and others as
“Residence Area.” This was so utterly opposed to all traditions of land tenure that the holdings
were systematically ignored in all but the Mining Courts. In course of time these areas became
improved, and their occupants contributed largely toward the rapid growth of the Township; many
sought to obtain the fee simple, but found they had to compete for the purchase at auction
on equal terms with outsiders, because, having held their ground under a Department alien to that
regulating the survey and sale of Crown Lands, they were not allowed valuation for their improve-
ments. The Council, therefore, took up the case, and succeeded, after some trouble, in obtaining the
desired valuation under which the occupant generally succeeded in obtaining his Freehold at the upset
price. Another, and equally important, step has still to be gained to complete the safety of tenure of
the Residence Area. It has been ruled that the Mining Laws gave the right of occupation only, and it
aptly illustrates the fallacy of applying a law quite stationary in its intent to people whose habits and
conditions of life were very far from being stationary. Under the present title, the owner cannot let his area
to a tenant without incurring a great risk and being quite dependent upon the latter’s honesty ; his
property is of doubtful value unless he can be personally in occupation. Much valuable estate has been
accumulated under the Residence Area title and the time has surely arrived when the Law could be
made to authorise ordinary transactions under that title the same as Freehold.
In the early part of 1858, Ballaarat had the honor of receiving His Excellency Sir Henry
Barkly; in those times, when a Governor came, he stayed a few days to look about him, and in this
instance the benefit of the visit was felt in the greater attention to our requirements by Government
and Officials thenceforward. _ _ . ~


The Streets were lit by gas for the first time in 1858, a Private Company having been established
during tue previous year. The commencement consisted of twenty lamps only, but whenever the
Company extended its mains the Council followed with the erection of lamps, and arranged for their
being lit. The first lamp-posts were made of six-inch hardwood encased in pine ; they did good service
until 1865, when they were replaced by the present iron pillars, the first supply having been obtained
from Collingwood; it was not until 1868 that local enterprise had expanded into supplying such wants.
The first charge for gas was 40s. per 1000 feet, but the opening of the railway from Geelong made a
material change in that as in many other things.
The Ballaarat City Fire Brigade dates from 1859. There had been a previous attempt to organise
a Brigade, but there having been a want of concert with the Council as to the extent of Municipal support,
it fell through for a time ; however, owing to the alarming frequency and extent of conflagrations, the subject
was revived, and the Brigade came into existence. The terms of support were : That the Council should
erect an engine house, provide an engine, with all other necessary apparatus, and devote £2OO per
annum toward the working expenses. The first stone of the building was laid by Mr. (now Major) W.
C. Smith, the Chairman of the Council, on the 15th January, 1860. It reads almost like the ‘ Irony
of Fate’ that the record relating the formation of the Brigade concludes with the announcement that
the Council Chambers were destroyed by fire on the 24th day of September, 1859 ; also, that the
Brigade has no records of its proceedings prior to 1862, they having all been burnt. From the time
of its formation until now, the Brigade has done good service, and has always enjoyed public confidence.
Fortunately, the burning of the old Council Chambers involved the destruction of loose papers only ;
all the books were preserved.
The re-construction of a building for the accommodation of the Council was soon started,
and, this time, it was to be a permanent Town Hall. The selected design was prepared by Mr.
C. D. Cuthbert; the cost was estimated at £lB,OOO. The foundation stone was laid on the
16th of August, 1860 ; but a portion only, comprising the Police Court and necessary Offices for
the Council’s business, was then erected. During 1869 the Council disapproved of further expenditure
to complete Mr. Cuthbert’s design, and invited other competitive designs for a new Town Hall.
Nothing will illustrate the rapid growth of Ballaarat, and the remarkable contrast in the mode
of life between 1855 and the present time, so well as the history of its Water Supply. At the former
period, the Population was wholly dependent upon the rainfall collected in the natural basin of Yuille’s
Swamp, and in shallow wells formed on low-lying ground by abandoned shafts ; the only means of
distribution was by water carts, or barrels mounted on wheels ; the best available storage was found in
Zinc-lined Packing Cases. The consumer of to-day may reflect with advantage that at one time a
Pound Sterling was gratefully paid for a load of water (say 50 gallons) for domestic use. No wonder
then that from its earliest sittings the Council considered how to improve and ensure the Water Supply.
One of its first measures was, as before stated, to protect the Swamp from pollution, speedily followed by
another—securing the contents of “ Yuille’s Swamp,” for domestic, sanitary and other purposes. In
the latter part of 1856, Government was appealed to for a Grant to improve the means of conservation
and distribution. After the formation of Ballaarat East into a Municipality, a conference of
the Councils was held to arrange, if possible, for the supply in the Swamp being made available for
both Municipalities ; but the elder Council viewed with alarm the prospect of such a slender resource
being taxed beyond its capacity, and no joint arrangement was agreed to. The Legislature inter-
vened and recognised the rights of the general population to share in such supply as there was, an Act
being passed to authorise the East to lay service pipes from the Swamp along the Streets of the older
Municipality. This led to the two Communities working together in the matter. Service and stand
pipes had already been laid in the latter part of 1858, whereby the distribution was very much facili-
tated, and the price lowered for the consumers. The cost of the services was adjusted between the
Councils ; they proceeded jointly to extend the catch-water area by a system of drainage, and constructed
filter beds at the Service outlet of the Swamp. However, the supply soon threatened to fall short of the
draught; in 1860, notwithstanding a yet further enlargement of the drainage area by the purchase of
some private land, it was nearly exhausted. A Municipal Conference was then sitting at Melbourne ;
the Ballarat Delegates introduced the subject of “Water Supply for the Gold Fields of the Colony.”


It was well worked up! a Public Meeting was held at Melbourne, whereat it was demonstrated how
the prosperity of the goldfields depended upon an abundant water supply ; a Central Committee was
appointed ; the Ballaarat Council took the lead in collecting necessary statistics ; an elaborate report
was drawn up, and the Government was at length awakened to the exigency.
A motion was tabled in the Legislative Assembly for a vote of half-a-million sterling toward
water supply for the Gold Fields, but it was not pressed. The Vote was not passed until 1861. Early
in the following year, the first important advance was made toward the improvement of our own supply.
The Representatives of the District obtained out of the Vote £3OOO for the purchase of Kirk’s Dam,
and £lO,OOO for the purpose of raising its embankment 20 feet and effecting necessary improvements;
the conditions being that within two years of the £lO,OOO being absorbed, the Councils of the two
Municipalities should expend £15,000 of local funds to complete the works. Prior to this, the
business had been managed by the two Councils acting in concert, but greater work was now on hand,
and a Water Supply Committee was formed consisting of the Members for the time being of the two
Councils, having its own staff of Officers, thenceforward commonly known as the Water Commission.
Although from that time Water Supply ceased to be a subject at the Council Board, it was still
essentially a Municipal question, and, therefore, fittingly continues to hold a place in this report.
The new Committee, under the Chairmanship of Mr. Andrew Anderson, began its labors with a
full appreciation of the importance of the work that had come to its hand. An 18-inch main had been
laid from “Kirk’s” through the two Municipalities ; but, already, it was felt that an interim advance
only had been made, and that the time had come for a comprehensive scheme for the future water
supply of the rapidly-growing community. Surveys were extended further afield. Mr. Palmer, subse-
quently Engineer of the Committee, recommended the occupation of the country surrounding the
“ Black Swamp,”—an area containing numerous springs, about 12 miles distant—as being eminently
suitable for the purposes of a gathering ground. He also selected and surveyed a site for a local
Reservoir. His surveys were adopted, and in 1863, what is now known as Beale’s Dam was commenced.
Attention was next turned to securing the ground necessary for the Watershed and Reservoirs.
Although “ Kirk’s” had been purchased in 1862, it was not until four years later that proper reserva-
tion of the ground was obtained from the Government ; thenceforward, as the works advanced, until
1869, reservations of ground were obtained from time to time, extending from the “ Gong Gong ” to
beyond “ Beale’s,” and covering about 4300 acres ; some portions having been subsequently excised,
the Reserves ■were reduced to the present area of about 3000 acres. Application was made to Govern-
ment in 1868 for a Grant of these Reserves, but without success.
The Committee promptly set about fencing and improving the land thus placed in its charge.
Extensive Plantations were laid out; Aqueducts were constructed from the upper to the lower
Reservoirs ; and Bailiffs appointed for the proper conservation of the Estate ; with the result that so
much waste land has been converted into one of the most pleasant resorts around Ballaarat.
As early as 1860 the necessity for a Reservoir of great capacity was forseen, and a site on the
Gong Gong Creek, near the Felmongers, was indicated by Mr. S. Baird. The spot met with general
approval, and the idea was steadfastly nursed; but opinions subsequently differed, and although the
Reservoir was ultimately constructed, it was on a site somewhat higher up the Creek. In 1867, an
intermediate storage of water was provided for at Pincott’s, between Kirk’s and Beale’s, notwithstand-
ing which, there was the constant dread of water becoming scarce ; at length, in 1870, Yuille’s Swamp,
the original source of supply, became dry, and the construction of the Gong Gong was resolved on.
To carry out the works, and to comply with the condition that the before-mentioned Government
Grant should be supplemented by local money, the two Municipal Councils of Ballaarat each issued
Debentures of £lO,OOO in aid of the Water Supply ; they were paid at maturity by the Committee, but
the Revenue was unequal to the strain, and, with constantly increasing works on hand, the Committee
had been compelled, in 1868, to appeal to the Government for further assistance, when a loan of
£75,000 was obtained. The Gong Gong having been resolved on, extensive financial arrangements
became necessary to provide for existing engagements and the cost of the intended great work.
Accordingly, the Government undertook to make the necessary advances, to secure which the whole of
the Property of the Committee was to be mortgaged to the Board of Land and Works.


In order to give the Committee a proper legal status in the transaction, it was incorporated, in
1872, under the title of the “Ballaarat and Ballaarat East Water Commissioners,” and, in 1874,
the first sod of the Upper Gong Gong Embankment was turned by the Chairman, Mr. James
McDowall ; the work was designed by, and executed under the superintendence of, Mr. C. H. 0.
Bagge, C.E. The details relating to this great operation would be more properly found in the records
of the Commissioners, but it may be permitted here to summarise the results of the labors of those who
from time to time have directed the great and enduring work of our Water Supply. The total cost of
the works may be stated as being £860,000 ; the City and Town are supplied by two mains of 18
and 24 inches respectively; there are upwards of 120 miles of reticulation pipes; and the Annual
Revenue derived from the Water Supply is £15,000. Before leaving the subject it is right to remark
that, compared with other large Communities of the Colony, Ballaarat enjoys an exceptional position
in regard to its Water Supply. Of the above outlay, at least £lOO,OOO was provided by Local and
Municipal Funds, the balance being on loan from the Government; with the exception of the first
Grant for purchase and improvement of “ Kirk’s,” Ballaarat has not participated in the benefit of the
National system of Supply.
Of Municipal Improvements, the happiest, in appreciated results, has undoubtedly been the
conversion of Yuille’s Swamp into Lake Wendouree. From the earliest time of the Goldfield this
locality had attractions for everybody. Apart from its being temporarily a Water Supply, its
capabilities seemed to be tacitly admitted by the popular mind. “ Round the Swamp” was the
favorite Sunday walk. The possibility and cost of clearing away the rushes and vegetation was a
common subject of conversation ; but in those days people had other matters on hand, and it was not
until 1864 that any practical efforts were made toward the popular desire. Although the great result
has been attained under Municipal direction, it was private enterprise that led the way. In the year
mentioned, the Ballarat Rowing Club, finding Burrumbeet and Learmonth too distant for its purpose,
its leading spirits proceeded to clear a track across the Swamp for rowing purposes. The credit of
this first effort is due to four well-known pioneers, viz., Messrs. Robt. McLaren, Robt. Davidson,
Edward Williams, and W. Clark. Their energy met with unqualified success, and the inhabitants of
Ballarat were, as if by magic, provided with a new recreation, of which swift advantage was taken. The
Rowing Club prospered as it deserved. Private enterprise in boats soon followed, and before the lapse
of one year the yet limited clearing swarmed with craft. The outlay on the first clearing was provided
by public subscription, but it was kept open by the personal labor of the members of the Rowing
Club, who turned out to clear the course whenever a match was to take place, This continued until
1869—70 —a season of drought—during which the Swamp became dry, and the boats useless. The
stoppage was felt to be but temporary ; and the Council, rightly estimating the boon that had been
conferred, undertook the work of future improvement. The first outlay was made in burning off the
dried vegetation. It had been suggested that an embankment should be made to divide the area, so
that the water could he collected by a syphon into one portion only, and thus tide over any future
drought. It appeared feasible, and was carried out. It is remarkable that both of these works
failed in the anticipated results. The basin soon filled again, and with the water came a crop of
rushes, whose growth had evidently been stimulated by the temporary fallow. When the base of the
embankment felt the returning water it settled down until it became submerged, and consequently
useless. There was nothing for it but attention to the catchwater drains, and cutting the rushes.
Although known in pastoral times as the “ Black Swamp,” and later on as “ Yuille’s Swamp,” the
name “Wendouree” was also in use as early as 1859. After the dry year it became generally
accepted, and thenceforward Lake Wendouree was the acknowledged title. Prior to the drought some
enterprising parties had built a steamer to ply across the Lake : but owing to several causes it was not
a success. An attempt was made to utilise it for cutting the rushes, but it failed also at that; and
hand labor having been found most effective, the Council persevered, at first by contracts, afterwards by
the aid of prison labor, until, ultimately, the southern half of the Lake, and a wide channel around the
other half, were cleared and made navigable. The temporary stoppage seemed to act as a stimulus to
the future use of the Lake as a place of recreation. When it was re-filled, boats increased in number,
Sailing-boats appeared on the scene, and at Easter 1874, the first successful attempt at steam
navigation was achieved by Mr. Thomas Gill, with his steamer “Wendouree,” soon to be followed by
Mr. Ivey, with his “ Queen” and “ Princess,” and later on by Mr. Hennah’s “ Ballarat.” Several
screw steamers were also built for private use.


It is impossible to keep strictly within the bounds of Municipal doings, and yet to write
completely on the subject of the Lake. Its marvellous value as a fishery should not be passed over.
The Council had but little to do with that; and it may not be out of place to recite the events that led
up to the remarkable fact. I am not aware if the circumstances relating to the introduction of
English fish into the waters of this district have been anywhere recorded ; I therefore take the liberty
of mentioning them, as they are cognate with my subject. In the year 1868, Messrs. Matthew,
Presley, and A. T. Seal obtained six English perch from Tasmania, and placed them in Kirk’s.
How they throve, and how, during several subsequent years, that was the favorite resort of anglers,
are matters of history. Many who caught perch at Kirk’s contrived to convey some alive to
Wendouree, and about 1872 it was noticed that the Lake was not only stocked, but actually
teeming with fish. The reservoirs in the Forest were at once superseded as Fisheries. The Messrs.
Seal continued their beneficent labors, and at various times obtained carp and tench for the
Lake. The former are known to have flourished, being numerous and of large size. The ova of English
trout were obtained, but that being too costly an experiment for individuals, the Ballarat Fish
Acclimatisation Society was formed in 1870, and by its successful labors several thousands of trout were
reared, and distributed in all waters within a radius of thirty miles. The Council aided the Society by the
grant of a site for a breeding pond at the Gardens, and contributed £5O toward its construction.
Besides the Messrs. Seal, Drs. King and Whitcombe, and Mr. F. Ive, did good service, and
contributed largely to the successful operations of the Society. Messrs. Shoppee and Bailey, at
considerable personal trouble, and aided by a public subscription, obtained a large number of the
Murray perch, carp and bream. Two consignments of the Murray lobster were forwarded by Mr. F.
Ive. The Lake was the centre of these efforts ; and the unparalleled success that was attained,
together with the general distribution of fish which has since followed in all directions, must be
placed to the credit of the enterprising Citizens of Ballarat. Be it recorded, also, that it has all
been achieved without one shilling of Government money !
Not a little of the picturesque appearance oi the Lake is due to a large extent of foreshore
having a frontage to the Botanic Gardens ; indeed, in that respect the advantage acts both ways. The
Lake and Gardens are co-ordinate, and, if separated, one half the charm of each would be gone.
The site for the Botanic Gardens was granted in 1858, and comprised 102 acres. The art of
laying out a garden is not an ordinary accomplishment, and so it was felt by the Council of that time.
It was therefore wisely resolved to invite a number of experts to form a committee, and take the
direction of operations at the Gardens. The work at first was slow and costly. To convert a
hundred acres of forest land into a Park and Garden would not be a light task at any time, but by
degrees it was accomplished. Year by year liberal appropriations have been made by the Council
for that object, aided, of course, by a share of the annual Government subsidy. Money, time, and
skill have done their work, and brought the Gardens to their present state. The large shelter-house was
commenced in 1878, and in the following year a fund was instituted for the ultimate erection of a
Conservatory.
Some effort has been made toward a Zoological collection, but so far without attaining
much success. A considerable number of blackbirds and thrushes were liberated in 1879, in the
hope of stocking our Gardens and plantations with songbirds.
In 1875 the Acclimatisation Society of Victoria presented us with two deer —a buck and doe
(the only contribution we have ever received from that Society, which absorbs all the State aid for
acclimatisation purposes). They have thriven well, and with their progeny now muster Seven.
One attempt at acclimatisation appears to have attained a large success, but it is doubtful if it has
enjoyed a proportionate amount of public favor. In 1865 twenty-eight sparrows were obtained, and
liberated at the Botanic Gardens with much rejoicing.
If our Gardens cannot boast of their Fauna, they can assuredly rely upon their Flora for
achieved success. Within a radius of many miles they stand alone in their excellence. Although
established for the recreation of Ballarat folk, they are in effect national property; holiday-makers,
from far and near, being accustomed to assemble there for Picnic of Fete, which it has always been
the policy of the Council to encourage.


Little may be said on the subject of Street Plantation; it is sufficiently prominent to plead for
itself, and needs no advocacy. It early commended itself to the community—so much so, that the
suggestion appeared simultaneously from several quarters, and was ably and persistently advocated by
the Ballarat Star. As before mentioned, Sturt Street was a main line of road, and consequently, in
that day, chargeable for making and maintenance to the Government. When the Road Engineer
proceeded to form it, he proposed to do there as elsewhere —occupy the middle of the Street by one
road of ordinary width. The double road was suggested by Mr. S. Baird, but the Government
Officers had no authority to make more than one. After some trouble, a compromise was
effected ; the double road, with Reserve between, was obtained —the Government making one side
and the Council the other. The first Street-Planting was done in this Reserve in 1860, and included
the blocks between Doveton and Drummond Streets. The planting of Lydiard Street north took
place in 1863, followed by Dawson Street in 1864, and Doveton Street and Creswick Road in 1865.
In many instances private residents planted trees in the Street fronting their homes, prior to the
operation of the Council. It was working in the right direction, and was therefore approved. But
after lapse of time it has given to the plantation of many Streets a patchy and irregular appearance,
which, however, may be remedied in course of time. The extent of Street Plantation at present
may be stated at two thousand trees.
The Gentlemen who attended the Conference in 1860 appear to have taken a more far-
sighted view of the future necessities of Municipal Finance than was held by the Government of
the time ; and had their advice been followed, the Premier and Treasurer of to-day would have
been spared a most troublesome and lasting problem, or, at least, it would have been deprived of
much of its difficulty. The proposition was that Municipalities should be permanently endowed
with grants of land, whereby the necessity for Government subsidies would be superseded.
Nothing could have been more reasonable, more promising in results, or so easily carried out.
The Corporations could then have shared the benefit of the improved value of the lands, which was
increasing very rapidly as one of the results of their own labors. It was a trifle for the Govern-
ment to do, because the amount realised from the sale of such lands was then comparatively
small, in many instances not so much as the present annual value. The Corporations were all
new ; everything had to be made; the hardship of straining Municipal resources (then only in
the germ), to create as well as maintain their works, was forcibly urged. The alternative presented was
that they would need to have recourse to Loans or to Government; and if to the former, there should
be some improving security to offer. But the Government would not be persuaded. The results of the
mistake were not long in being felt. As the Municipalities increased rapidly in number the
amount of subsidy became proportionally smaller for each ; and as early as 1862 complaints
were made of the diminution of Government support. Two years later the proceeds of Wine and
Spirit licenses were allowed to be retained by the Municipalities. It was not until 1865 that tolls
were collected.
It is thus seen how utterly dependent were the Corporations on Government until their
own revenue had time for development, and that the omission to make provision, when it could
have been done without cost, for the gradual cessation of State-aid, has gone far toward causing
the necessity for its continuance during many years to come.
It might have been easily foreseen that the wants of a rapidly growing and active com-
munity would soon outstrip the ordinary resources at the disposal of the Council, and that sooner
or later a debt would be inevitable, or that public works should be regulated more by the Financial
resources than by public wants. The Government grants diminished as the Revenue improved,
but with the latter came also a corresponding increase in requirements. The expenditure exceeded
the receipts so early as the second year, and, with one or two exceptions, the overdraft continued
steadily to increase, until it first assumed serious proportions in 1867, when at the close of the
financial year it stood at £10,140. In the following year a loan was effected by the issue of
Debentures amounting to £35,000. During that year the various public works constructed out of
the proceeds of the loan were extensive. Outlay was further increased in 1870 by the commence-
ment of the new Town Hall, and the advance of £5,000 to the Shire of Bungaree ; so that, at the
conclusion of that year, the loan had been absorbed, and there remained an overdraft on the
Bank account of nearly £30,000, which increased by 1874 to over £44,500, which, with unredeemed
Debentures, made up a debt of £65,500.


The advance to Bungareeshire was made in the hope of cheapening the produce of the Shire
to the Town consumers. We were then dependent on Bungaree and adjoining country for
mining timber and fuel. Hitherto, there had been but one line of communication, and that one
unequal to the traffic. The Shire could not construct another out of its own resources, so the
advance was made to enable it to open a road to Ballaarat through Dead Horse Range. The road
was made, but the transaction was not finally settled until 1875, and then not without considerable
trouble.
The rapid increase of the indebtedness was not alone caused by demand for expenditure.
The Borrowing Clause of the Act of 1863, required that one tenth of the Loan should be paid off
every year, which proved too heavy a charge. The Act of 1869 permitted one-twentieth as Annual
Redemption, but that afforded no relief because we were bound by the provisions of the Older
Act. Under the powers conferred by the Local Government Act 1874, we were enabled to
negotiate another Loan amounting to £47,500, extending over 28 years, leaving the unredeemed
balance of the Old Loan to be worked out in due course by aid of the Special Rate; the New
Loan to be secured by a Sinking Fund.
The principle of the Sinking Fund had been affirmed by the earliest of the Municipal Acts.
In that case the conditions of investment were wisely left open to any Government Securities ;
but under the latest Act, an arbritrary clause was inserted, limiting the power of investing the
Sinking Fund to one particular Government stock that paid only 4 per cent, per annum, while the
Debentures had to be issued at interest in accord with the market rates, thus involving a serious
loss to the Borrowing Municipality; but many of them were in such financial straits that they
were constrained to accept the terms. The growth of the Corporations had outstripped Legislation,
and when the latter tardily came to the rescue, the former were too glad of relief to contest the
obnoxious provision. The one benefit of the Act was the long term of the Loan, and under that a
marked improvement took place in our Finances. The Old Loan has been liquidated in due
course, and the Sinking Fund has already attained the amount of £5846, thus reducing our in-
debtedness to £41,654. Under the pressure of financial expediency, many of the Public Works,
especially of drainage, were executed in a manner that at best could be considered but temporary ;
the major part have since been permanently replaced. During several years Public Works have
all been constructed for endurance.
Always bearing in mind that we began absolutely without Public Works of any
kind, and that we have now a well ordered City, replete with all the conveniences of life within
the power of Municipal Management to provide; and reviewing the efforts of the past twenty-five
years, during many of which I have had the honor of contributing my mite of assistance ; I must in
conscience confess that, so far from regarding the present amount of the Loan as an incumbrance,
I am only surprised it is so small.
A few words on the course of Municipal Legislation may not be out of place. The first
Measure, as I have said, was passed in 1854 ; under it numerous Corporations were established,
and soon grew into wants for which the Act was not sufficiently expansive. In 1863 a New Measure
was passed ; a sort of double-barrelled Act, which in one part provided for Country Municipalities
under the title of Road Districts or Shires, and in the other, centres of population became designated
“ Boroughs,” the Chairman being raised to the dignity of Mayor.
During 1869 another Act came into operation, whereby Boroughs of a certain financial
standing could be promoted into Towns or Cities as the case might be. Besides the extension of
time for repayment of Loans, as before mentioned, an important change in the appointment of
Auditors came also ; they had been previously elected by the Council, now they were to be elected
by the Ratepayers.
In 1874, after the laborious sittings of a Municipal Conference, the present Local
Government Act came into force, whereby all Municipal Corporations, whether Cities, Towns,
Boroughs, or Shires, came under its authority. The time for repayment of loans was extended
over thirty years. This time the Government claimed the power of appointing one auditor. An
important clause also gave power to the Council to enter into possession of lands upon which
rates remain unpaid during five years, and to grant leases of same.


Latterly the Legislature has been accustomed to pass enactments having no apparent
relation to Municipal law, and in some obscure clauses to impose some duty or responsibility upon
Councils or their officers not previously contemplated. Upon several occasions this practice has
caused some trouble; and if it continues, Corporations will be under the necessity of appointing
an agency to watch over their interests.
Some anxiety has been caused at different periods by mining being carried on in populated
quarters. When the deep alluvial leads were first explored under the Basaltic Plateau the
ground was but thinly occupied, traffic could choose its own tracks regardless of the surveyed
thoroughfares, and the formation of streets had not then become sufficiently extensive to cause any
fear of damage to Public Property, so that early mining operations were conducted without any
considerations for possible surface damage ; but the case was far different when later auriferous
discoveries led to resumption of Mining. The place had a more numerous and more settled popula-
tion, traffic became confined to the proper channels, street levels had been fixed ; surface damage
then involved several serious considerations, and the relations between the Miners and the
Authorities had to be settled on some basis of mutual respect for the interests at stake. The
authority of the Council over the Streets, and its responsibility if the Streets became unsafe for
traffic, were clearly defined. On the other hand, any resident could allow mining on his Freehold,
and unsold lands were at all times open for occupation under the Mining Regulations ; thus one
Party was made responsible for the protection of public property, and another Party was authorised
to do that which sooner or later might injure that property, but when the Parties came into
conflict, the then state of the Law provided no adequate remedy. The position was surrounded by
difficulties. To throw obstacles in the way of successful mining would have been suicidal to the
Public interest, yet there were Public responsibilities that needed immediate protection. The diffi-
culty, in course of time, found a fitting solution. The Council declared its policy to be that of non-in-
terference, so far as could be made consistent with its responsibilities ; it was a policy of toleration
reserving the right of interference where necessity for it should arise. Fortunately, local circum-
stances had placed a controlling power in the hands of the Municipal Authorities, by the judicious
use of which the Public interests could be protected. Formerly, the miners had been dependent
upon the elements or upon subterranean sources for water necessary to their operations ; the
improved Water Supply had changed the nature of their dependence; the service water became a
necessity, at least for boiler purposes, and could be supplied or withheld at the will of the authorities,
and that was made to depend on the maintenance of accord between the Miners and the Council.
In all cases, therefore, where damage was to be feared, the Water Supply was granted to miners
only upon condition of their previously indemnifying the Council against injury to public
property.
I have dwelt on several subjects without regard to the sequence of dates, because their special
importance seemed to demand prominence; what follows will be but a chronicle of events of more
or less interest.
In 1860 the Council became Trustees by a Deed of Grant of the Land upon which the
Mechanics’ Institute was subsequently erected, and contributed £250 towards the Building Fund;
although that useful Institution thenceforward prospered on its own resources, its slight connection
with the Municipality is worthy of record.
Ballarat was placed in Railway communication with the seabord in 1862, and the occasion
was duly celebrated by another visit from the Governor, Sir Henry Barkly, amid great festivity.
Municipal life was at this period in full activity. The tide of population was setting steadily
Westward, but nothing of exceptional interest occurred; it is somewhat unfortunate that from
1864 to 1867 inclusive no periodical reports were issued with the Financial Statements;
it was not until 1868 that the then retiring Mayor (Cr. Davey), commenced the system of reporting
to the Council on the events of the Mayoralty; but, it must be confessed, on that occasion he had
something to leave on record. The Duke of Edinburgh had visited Ballarat during the previous
year, and had been entertained jointly by the Municipalities under circumstances of great eclat;
plans for a new Town Hall were in preparation; and, although the Revenue showed a marked increase
in all Departments, the demand for Public Works was also increasing to an extent that strained the
resources of the Council to the utmost.


The foundation stone of the new Town Hall was laid by the Mayor, Mr. Thomas Cowan, on
the 14th of January, 1870 ; the same year saw Ballaarat raised to the status of a City, and some
effort was made to remove it from the ordinary run of Municipal life by obtaining a separate
Charter of Incorporation, but it came to nothing.
Another Vice-Regal Visit was paid to Ballaarat during 1870, and the Admiral and Officers
of the “ Flying Squadron ” also came.
In 1871, Mr. Joseph Comb, who had ably filled the Office of Town Clerk since the incorpora-
tion, retired from the service, and was replaced by Mr. Bichard Ford. The year was further
marked by some events of interest. The sale of the Frontages to the Corporation Reserve in Mair
and Lydiard Streets took place with a good valuation in favor of the Council; this ground had
originally been a Reserve for Public purposes, but having, by combination of circumstances, attained
a central position, and, consequently, a good Commercial value, it became occupied in spite of the
Reservation, and as the occupants could not well be moved, they were allowed to become Lease-
holders under the Council, and, subsequently, obtained the Freeholds, the Council being allowed a
valuation in compensation for the costly local improvements that had helped to make its value.
The present Town Hall was completed in 1871, and the Alfred Memorial Bells were hung
in the Tower ; the cost of these Bells was £l3OO, although originally intended that it should be
defrayed by Public Subscription, the voluntary contributions did not exceed two-thirds of the
required amount; the balance was provided by the Council. The Bells were first rung on the
morning of Christmas Day, 1871.
The year 1873 was signalised by the first visit of Sir G. F. Bowen and family, who sojourned
amongst us for four days. Subsequently we were visited by the Duke of Genoa. The
experiment was tried during this year of employing a constable, at the direction and in the pay of
the Council, for the better government of the public streets. It is left on record by Mr. Claxton,
the Mayor of that year, that it resulted very beneficially ; but, unfortunately, financial reasons
led to its discontinuance. The want has since been severely felt, and an effort has has been made
to resume the practice, but as yet the Police Department has not consented.
In 1874 a great stride was made in Railway matters in this district. Communication was
then opened with Creswick and Beaufort, to be speedily followed by extension in different
directions toward Castlemaine, Horsham, and Hamilton. The effect was soon remarked.
Communities previously somewhat isolated by the difficulties of communication extended their
intercourse with each other, and commercial transactions, hitherto restricted, attained
proportionate expansion. In this year the latest legislation on Municipal matters was passed, as
recorded elsewhere.
A new and valuable institution was established for the first time at Ballaarat in 1876.
Previously the Agricultural and Pastoral Society had limited their Annual Shows to matters
agricultural only ; it was time to recognise the Pastoral interest. Accordingly a Ram Show was
suggested, its advantages were urged, public sympathy was enlisted, £250 was contributed toward
it by the City Council, and the idea was fostered with so much energy that it enjoyed a very
marked success at the first attempt. Councillor George Smith played a very prominent part in
establishing the Ram Show ; its early success, and its subsequently becoming an Annual fixture
were largely due to that gentleman’s exertions. About this time the experiment of Tarred
Footpaths had been tried, and they met with such general approval that their extension, at every
possible opportunity, was resolved on.
In 1877 Mr. Richard Ford retired from the Town Clerkship, and proceeded to Melbourne
to assume the more onerous duties of Secretary to the newly created Harbor Trust Commissioners.
Mr. Ford’s services had proved of exceptional value to the Municipality. He took a leading part
in the Conference which sat for a long time in Melbourne considering the provisions of the new
Local Government Act 1874; and upon him, as City Treasurer, devolved the responsibility of
adjusting the City Finances, in accord with the powers conferred by that Act. Upon entering on
his new sphere of duty he carried with him the cordial goodwill of the Councillors and Citizens.
Mr. George Perry was appointed Town Clerk on the 17th of May, 1877.


The following year should be well remembered here by the happy result of a novel idea of
holding a Juvenile Industrial Exhibition. The Council was, of course, appealed to for support,
and contributed £lOO toward the preliminary cost. The great success as an Exhibition, the
abundant evidences it gave of the industrial ability of the Colonial youth, and the vast numbers
of people that visited Ballaarat during that year, are matters fresh in the minds of all. I trust
the memory of it will long survive, as an instance of Ballaarat enterprise.
The Marquis of Normanby having assumed the Governorship of the colony in 1879, took
an early opportunity of paying his official visit to Ballaarat.
The records of 1880, although ample, do not present anything of prominent interest. They
are chiefly remarkable for the activity on urgent Public Improvements, that had become possible
through the financial relief afforded by the final liquidation of the old loan ; several important
sanitary works that had long been in abeyance having been carried to completion.
Twenty-five years ago, amid a vast area of country, Ballaarat alone enjoyed incorporation
and local self-government. The growth of Municipal life, in the interim, has' been such that
to-day there is very little of Victoria that is not included ; and on all sides we are in
immediate contact with Town, Borough, or Shire. Between governing bodies, whose boundaries
are conterminous, there will always arise questions differently affecting their interests. I
am happy to say that no serious misunderstanding has yet arisen between the City and any
neighboring Corporation. Whenever questions of joint affairs have been presented there has
never been any difficulty in a settlement mutually satisfactory. Beyond the respective limits of
jurisdiction Ballaarat East and Sebastopol have always been considered as essentially integral parts
of “ Ballaarat.” On most occasions of entertaining distinguished visitors, Ballaarat East has
joined in the arrangements and outlay. There has never been any trouble over joint works or regula-
tions ; and I view the past with the grateful reflection that, while on many occasions each
Municipality has had to uphold its own views on questions affecting its interest, there has never
yet occurred any breach of friendly relations.
I hope I have nowhere implied that the Council has made the City. The governing body
enjoys prominence only because of its powers and responsibilities ; but after all it is but a fraction
of the healthy public life that has never been deficient in this community. The future of a new
settlement will necessarily depend much upon the tone imparted by early inhabitants. Ballaarat
has been built by the Citizens ; the Council has but caught the spirit of the people, and kept pace
with Public Works as well as circumstances have permitted. Another element should not be
overlooked —all undertakings of a public or social character need some managing Body. The
beneficent, unobtrusive working of our numerous charities is well known. The means of recreation
have never been without the support of well-organised Clubs : never has a public want been
without some one to advocate it; and there have always been many ready to devote their time and
experience to these worthy objects. They have all separate channels of making known their
proceedings ; but this record would be wanting without a passing tribute to the value of their
services.
Time has made its mark on the list of those who at different periods have given their
services at the Council Board of this Corporation. Some have gone to their Best, others are
scattered in distant localities, whither the varying fortunes of life have directed their steps. But
I rejoice that the majority of them remain to see the result of labors in which they have borne so
worthy a part.
Gentlemen—l am unable to express how highly I appreciate the honor of again being
placed in the civic chair at this most auspicious period of Colonial progress; and I fully recognise
the fitness of things that the seats at the Council are all occupied by old pioneers of Ballaarat.
Within the recollection of many living, the ground we now occupy was a forest. Strangers who
now visit us can see what has been done. Whether as Councillors or citizens, we all have reason
to be proud of our City.
I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen,
Tour obedient servant,
ROBERT LEWIS
Mayob.


APPENDICES.
Copy of Petition of Householders of Ballaarat, praying for
incorporation under the “Act for the Establishment of
Municipal Institutions in Victoria,” presented to His
Excellency Sir Charles Hotham, &c.
To His Excellency Sir Charles Hotham, Knight of the most Honorable Military Order of
the Bath ■ Captain General and Governor-in-Chief of the Colony of Victoria , and Vice-Admiral of
the same, Sfc ., Sfc., Sfc.
The humble Petition of the undersigned householders resident in the Township of Ballaarat,
in the Colony of Victoria , Sheweth—
That your Petitioners are resident within the Township of Ballaarat, in the Colony of Victoria.
That such township contains a population of more than Three hundred householders.
That the area of the township of Ballaarat does not exceed nine square miles, and that no one
point in any such area is distant more than six miles from any other point.
That your Petitioners are desirous of availing themselves of the operations of the Act of Council
18th Viet., No. 15, entitled “ An Act for the establishment of Municipal Institutions in
Victoria,” and they are desirous that the township of Ballaarat may be proclaimed in due
course of law a Municipal District by the name of the Municipality of Ballaarat; and
also that the boundaries of the said Municipal District may be regulated in accordance
with the provisions of the said Act of Council.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Excellency may be pleased to cause the said
township of Ballaarat to be proclaimed in due form a Municipal District, and also that the bound-
aries of the said Municipal District may be regulated pursuant to the provisions of the said Act of
Council. And your Petitioners :
Wm. Henry Surplice, householder
Muir Brothers & Co., householders
Adam Loftus Lynn, householder
Thomas Comb, householder
Alex. McLaren, householder
Wm. Tulloch, householder
W. E. Pierce, landowner
John T. F. Bowker, householder
William Craven, householder
James Bourchier, householder
Thomas Jones, householder
Joseph Dixie, householder
Thos. P. Genard, householder
Davies & Son, householders
Thomas. Brown, householder
William Brown, householder
Charles Potts, householder
G. F. Potts, householder
R. Potts & Co., householders
Thos. Randall Solicitor, householder
J. H. Harris Solicitor, householder
J. £. M. Wigley, Solicitor, householder
Henry Harris, householder
Samuel Irwin, landowner
John Gibbs, householder
H. J. McMillan, householder
Alex. Fraser, householder
George Redman, householder
J. H. F. Spanhake, householder
George Roberts, landholder
A. B. Ranken, house and landowner
J. W. T. Cairns, house and landowner


Francis Herring, house and landowner
George Howe, hotel-keeper
Geo. H. Gibson, surgeon
Thomas Cowan, householder
James W. R. Pringle, householder
Wm. Richards, householder
M. H. Cobea, house and landowner
Fred. Hitchins, landowner
H. L. Wortle, householder
Charles Brazier, householder
Joseph Southward, householder
George Anderson, publican
Craser & Co., house and landowners
H. M. Morris, householder
John Stewart, householder
Robert Dent, householder
Silas E. Craine, householder
Hauer Jusmond, householder
Thomas Lang, householder
Edward John Lewis, Solicitor, householder
Richard Clark, householder and Solicitor
Thomas Bath, householder and landowner
J. H. Alley, householder and landowner
H. George Wm. Cooper, householder and
landowner
Moore & Dunn, householders and landowners
John Allen, householder and landowner
George Hunt, householder and landowner
Charles R. Williams, householder and landowner
Thomas White
S. C. Fraser
James R. H. Thackeray, M.A., P.L.D., house-
holder and landowner
Augustus Dimock, M.D.
Benjamin Brokenshire, householder & landowner
Helpling & Greig, householders and landowners
Wm. Gibson, for self and partners (King, Gibson
& Brown), storekeeper
Edward Hillson, householder
Lawrence Gibson
J. H. Bruce
Francis Brophy
H. Seekamp, householder and landowner
William Wills, householder and landowner
John Campbell, householder
Frederick D. Reed, householder
James Tappin, householder and landowner
Robert Reeves, merchant, Mair-st.
Benjamin Ward, Pimlico Store
Fletcher & Evans, printers
Arthur Crisp, householder
Jeremiah Blade, butcher
Wright & Evans, Auctioneers
C. Tarrant, householder
C. Simpson, householder
Crossley & Co.,
Robinson & Cole, Chemists, etc.
Biggs & Shoppee, storekeepers
John Watts
Williamson & Hart, storekeepers
Gibson & Stewart, storekeepers
T. and J. Bray, storekeepers
Gerrard & Co., storekeepers
J. W. Isaacs, Q.P.S., householder
Henry Paul Leman, surgeon, etc., householder
Oliver Brothers, householders
J. R. Grundy & Co., householders
Williams & May, householders
Joseph Willis, householder
Andrew McEmison, householder
A. E. & R. Alexander, merchants, householders
C. Stewart, householder
Robert Dickson, householder
Robert McNiece, timber merchant, householder
Henry Col, householder
Wm. Robertson, Manager Bank of Victoria,
Ballarat
W. B. Chilwell, Manager Bank N. S. W.
Daniel Sweeney, auctioneer and landowner
M. Elliot, Manager Bank of Australasia, Ballarat
James Gray, householder
Hermand Berged, chemist
Gougon & Herring, storekeeper
Wm. McNee, Crow Dining Rooms
James Cummins, timber merchant
B. Bibanfold, storekeeper
Reynolds & English, storekeepers
E. Peril, storekeeper
Wm. Walker, storekeeper
Bradshaw & Salmon, storekeepers
Eyres Bros. & Newman, storekeepers
S. Solman
James D. Macartney, watchmaker
Chambers Brothers & Co., storekeepers
H. V. Freestone, storekeeper
H. Levinson, watchmaker
W. M. Letcher, gold broker
Alfred D’Bracy Brook, apothecary
Charles King, storekeeper
Adolph Pohl, merchant
James Mulholland, Innkeeper
William Wright, billiard-tablekeeper
Robert Walsh, Barrister-at-Law
W. C. Smith, auctioneer
Henry Thurston Evans, gold broker
B. J. Harris, householder
A. P. Bowes, auctioneer
W. Hood, landholder
William Bradshaw, landholder
Adam Beveridge, landholder
Edward Agar Wynne, landholder
Emil Pohl, wine merchant
Edward Hancock, Professor of Music
F. Lewers, landholder


Samuel Walford, householder
R. A. Burton, solicitor
Joseph Tait, householder
Alfred A. Surplice, householder
William Surplice, householder
William Duncan, householder
James A. Douglas, householder
William Jackson, house and landholder
G. Butchart, Manager London Chartered Bank
J. W. Wilis, merchant, Ballarat
T. Conks
E. G. Emery
Robert Smith, house and landowner
George Heather, builder
A. & H. B. Chalmers, storekeeper
James Stewart, M.D.
Symons Oasey, land and householder
William Bramwell Robinson, chemist
Samuel M. Walker, householder
Charles Brown
Hilfling & Greig
Wm. Morrison, Township, merchant
John Allen, merchant
John Wilson, Township
Thomas Patti, Township, publican
Peter D. Murphy, Main Road, storekeeper
J. P. Jamieson, Main Road, merchant
Spencer Wilson & Co., Main Road, storekeepers
J. F. Grayling, Main Road, storekeeper
E. S. Woodin, Main Road, storekeeper
Hemmingway & Jones, Main Road, storekeepers
Morris Colman, Main Road, storekeeper
Thos. W. Brammer, Main Road, storekeeper
Swan & Co., Main Road, storekeepers
John Moore, Main Road, storekeeper
M. Walker, Main Road, storekeeper
George Fields, Bakery Hill, storekeeper
Reuben Marks, Bakery Hill, storekeeper
Edward Galastin, Bakery Hill, storekeeper
Robert McLister, Ballarat, storekeeper
Ansen P. Morris, Ballarat, storekeeper
Alex. Eraser, Black Hill, Union Hotel
Mr. F. Tyree, Ballarat, His Lordship Larder
G. B. Evans, Ballarat, labor mart
John C. McMamny, Golden Point, storekeeper
John English, Golden Point, storekeeper
Joseph Furlong, Golden Point, storekeeper
James Meagher, Golden Point, storekeeper
John Wildredge, Poverty Point, storekeeper
John Mildridge, Main Road, storekeeper
Henry Thos. Holyooke, Mechanics’ Institute,
storekeeper
Andrew Morrison, Red Streak, storekeeper
Brunery & Gillott, Red Streak, storekeeper
John Campbell, Main Road, “Age” Agent
Pole & Co., Main Road, storekeepers
Jeremiah Blann, Main Road, butcher
Hogg & Norris, Main Road, storekeepers
Peter Humble, Main Road, butcher
Charles Spencer, Main Road, storekeeper
Wicks & Herring, Main Road, storekeeper
J. R. Grundy & Co., Main Road, storekeepers
S. Braham, Main Road, storekeeper
E. Dight, storekeeper, Ballarat
M. E. Cooney, Main Road, storekeeper
W. Fletcher, Main Road, gold broker
J. H. Walters, Main Road, butcher
John Moon, thistle store, Main Road
Howell & Sherlock, caps tin shop, Main Road
Kean & Neilson, auctioneers, Main Road
Hyman Levinson, watchmaker, Main Road
Arthur H. Bayley, agent, Main Road
Henry Carpenter, ironmonger, Main Road
Joseph Whiat, storekeeper, Main Road
J. W. Green, “ Argus” Agent
L. Sutton, musicial instrument repairer, Bakery
Hill
George MTntosh, baker, Bakery Hill
P. Philp, Gravel Pit Flat
Thos. E. Young, storekeeper, Bakery Hill
Joseph Hull, bootmaker, Bakery Hill
Alexander Keens, watchmaker, Bakery Hill
Robert Bucten, storekeeper, Bakery Hill
Geo. Copley, coachmaker, Bakery Hill
T. H. Butler, physician, Red Hill
Chas. Wright, digger, Bakery Hill
David Alledsen, Milbugett
J. O. Veauzery, carpenter, Bakery Hill
John Harris, butcher, Bakery Hill
Augustus Beyer, blacksmith, Bakery Hill
R. A. Morrison, storekeeper, Bakery Hill
Mitchison Bros, auctioneers, Bakery Hill
Campbell & Davidson, bakers, Bakery Hill
A. Aussell, storekeeper, Bakery Hill
Hermansons, storekeeper, Bakery Hill
P. Cullen, Surgeon, Bakery Hill
D. Weigert, tobacconist, Bakery Hill
James Davis, druggist, Golden Point
Smith & Linklater, storekeepers, White Flat
C. W. Thompson, druggist, Golden Point
George Wilson, butcher, Golden Point
Thos. Michel, butcher, Golden Point
J. Kane, butcher, Golden Point
Herman, & Co., chemists, &c., Old Post Office
Hill
Wilson & Co., storekeepers, Red Hill
B. D. McGill, jeweller, Red Hill
John Godfrey, watchmaker, &c., Red Hill Flat
William Gvland, watchmaker, &c., Main Road,
Ballarat
S. & M. Joel, gold brokers, Red Hill Flat
Hobson & Warner, surgeons, &c., Main Road
S, Bielefeld, merchant, Ballarat Flat
H. Block & Co., storekeepers, Red Hill Flat


W. B. Rodier, storekeeper, Red Hill Flat
D. W. Callum, storekeeper, Specimen Hill
H. Boulter & Co., storekeeper, Specimen Hill
Wm. S. M. Fox, miner, Black Hill Flat
William McCullough, tailor, Township
H. P. R. Nicholls, miner, Township
C. F. Nicholls, miner, Township
Wm. S. Madden, miner, Bakery Hill
Alfred C. Hadral, miner, Gum Tree Flat
E. G. Tyree, builder, Gum Tree Flat
Robert Dunn, Township, merchant
Dixie & Partlin, Township, gold brokers
W. Surplice & Sons, Township, gold brokers
W. B. Ochiltree, Township, Manager Bank of
New South Wales
T. Jones, Township, bootmaker
G. Roberts, Township, grocer
David McCallum, Township, storekeeper
Howe & Herring, Township, storekeepers
Davis & Son, Township, saddlers, &c.
Thos. & Wm. Brown, Township, stationers
William Dunkin, Township, blacksmith
H. H. McMillan, Township, Commission Agent
Edward Owpun, Main Road, mechanic
Alfred Lester, Free Trade Hotel, Eureka
Thomas Horne, Township, baker
Samuel C. Fraser, Township, merchant
John G. Strachan, Suburbs
Issachau Marks, Main Road, storekeeper
Tryree Green & Co., Main Road, auctioneers
Henry Jackson, Main Road, butcher
William Wasley, Red Hill, butcher
Binney & Gillott, Golden Point, storekeeper
Charles Evans, Ballarat, printer
Charles Norman, Main Road, pastry cook
Charles Wood, Golden Point, storekeeper
William Cameron, Golden Point, storekeeper
Fred. Young, Golden Point, chemist & druggist
Neill & Lang, Golden Point, bakers
James Wright, Golden Point, baker
William Fryer, Golden Point, householder


COUNCILLORS.
1856 — Jas. Oddie, Chairman
R. Muir
Dr. Stewart
W. Tulloch
A. B. Rankin, retired; Davies, elected;
retired; W. C. Smith, elected
J. S. Carver, retired; M. J. Cummins,
elected
P. Bolger, retired ; R. Smith, elected
1857 Jas. Oddie, Chairman
R. Muir, retired; R. McNiece, elected ;
retired; M. H. Baird, elected
R. Smith
W. Tulloch
W. C. Smith
Dr. Stewart
M. J. Cummins
1858— Dr. Stewart, Chairman
W. C. Smith
Jas. Oddie
R. Smith
W. Tulloch
M. H. Baird
M. J. Cummins, retired; R. Lewis,
elected
1859 Dr. Stewart, Chairman
W. C. Smith
R. Smith, retired ; H. R. Caselli, elected
Jas. Oddie, retired; B. S. Hassell,elected
W Tulloch
R. Lewis
M. H. Baird, retired; M. Campbell,
elected
1860 — W. C. Smith, Chairman
Dr. Stewart
"W". Tulloch
B. S. Hassell
R. Lewis
M. Campbell
H. R. Caselli
1861 — W. C. Smith, Chairman
H. R. Caselli
R. Lewis
W. Tulloch
M. Campbell
Dr. Stewart
B. S. Hassell
1862 — R. Lewis, Chairman
"W. Tulloch, retired; Q-. Duncan, elected
M. Campbell
W. C. Smith
B. S. Hassell
H. R. Caselli, retired; W. Craig, elected
Dr. Stewart, retired; J. A. Doane,
elected
1863 — R. Lewis, Chairman (subsequently
Mayor)
Q-. Duncan
J. A. Doane
W. C. Smith
M. Campbell
B. S. Hassell, retired; R. Dunn, elected
W. Craig, retired; J. McDowall, elected
Under new Act Mayor had to be elected in Novem-
ber in each year, and, accordingly, Cr. M. Campbell was
elected Mayor in that month.
1863-4 —M. Campbell, Mayor, retired 29th
February ; B. Hepburn, elected
W. C. Smith, retired ; T. Davey, elected
J. A. Doane, elected Mayor Ist March
G-. Duncan
R. Dunn
J. McDowall
R. Lewis, retired; C. Lister, elected
F. M. Claxton
G-. Lovitt
Number increased from 7 to 9 under “ Municipal
Corporation Act 1863,” and Municipal Council became
Borough Council.


1864- —J. A. Doane, Mayor
G-. Duncan
F. M. Claxton
T. Davey
E. Dunn,retired; D. Bobertson, elected
J. McDowall
B. Hepburn
Gh Lovitt
C. Lister, retired; T. Cowan, elected
1865- —Gh Duncan, Mayor
J. A. Doane
T. Davey
T. Cowan
F. M. Claxton, retired; J. Hunt, elected
Gh Lovitt
J. McDowall
B. Hepburn, retired; C. D Cuthbert,
elected
D. Bobertson
1866- —T. Davey, Mayor
J. A. Doane
C. D. Cuthbert
G-. Duncan
J. McDowall
D. Bobertson
T. Cowan
J. Hunt
Gh Lovitt
1867- —T. Davey, Mayor
J. A. Doane
Gh Duncan
C. D. Cuthbert
GL Lovitt
J. Hunt
T. Cowan
J. McDowall
D. Bobertson, retired; H. B. Chalmers,
elected
1868- —J. McDowall, Mayor
T. Davey
J. Hunt, retired; B. Lewis, elected
C. D. Cuthbert
Gh Duncan
H. B. Chalmers
J. A. Doane
G-.Lovitt, retired; J. H. Williams,elected
T. Cowan
1869- —T. Cowan, Mayor
Gh Duncan, retired; W. C. Smith,
elected
J. A. Doane, retired ; Jas. Fry, elected
T. Davey, retired; F. M. Claxton, elected
J. McDowall
H. B. Chalmers
C. D. Cuthbert, retired ; H. D. Cane,
elected
B. Lewis
J. H. Williams
1870- —H. B. Chalmers, Mayor, retired;
F. Everingham, elected
J. McDowall
F. M. Claxton
T. Cowan
Jas. Fry
B. Lewis, elected Mayor on resignation
of Cr. Chalmers
W. C. Smith
J. H. Williams
H. D. Cane
1871- —B. Lewis, Mayor
T. Cowan
F. M. Claxton
J. H. Williams
Jas. Fry
H. D. Cane
F. Everingham
J. McDowall
W. C. Smith
1972-3—F. M. Claxton, Mayor
J. McDowall
J. H. Williams
B. Lewis
Jas. Fry, retired; J. A. Doane, elected
H. D Cane
T. Cowan, retired ; D. Brophy, elected
W. C. Smith
F. Everingham
1873-4 —J. H. Williams, Mayor
J. A. Doane
B. Lewis
H. D. Cane retired ; G-. Smith, elected
F. Everingham, retired; J. P. Howard,
elected
J. McDowall
W. C. Smith
D. Brophy
F. M. Claxton


1874- W. C. Smith, Mayor
J. H. Williams
J. McDowall, retired; H. Leggo, elected
F. M. Claxton
J P. Howard
J. A. Doane, retired; J. W. Gray,
elected
G. Smith
D. Brophy
It. Lewis
Under Local Government Act Mayor to be elected in
August instead of November.
1875- —D. Brophy, Mayor
F. M. Claxton
H. Leggo
W. C. Smith
J. P. Howard, retired; A. T. Morrison,
elected
J. W. Gray
J. H. Williams
G. Smith
It. Lewis
1876- —F. M. Claxton, Mayor
It. Lewis
H. Leggo
D. Brophy
W. C. Smith
J. H. Williams
A. T. Morrison
J. W. Gray
G. Smith, retired ; J. N. Wilson, elected
1877- —J. W. Gray, Mayor
D. Brophy
F. M. Claxton
1877- —J. EL "Williams, retired; J. Hickman,
elected
H. Leggo
J. N. Wilson
A. T. Morrison
It. Lewis
W. C. Smith
1878- —H. Leggo, Mayor
D. Brophy
F. M. Claxton
B. Lewis
W. C. Smith
A, T. Morrison
J. Hickman
J. W. Gray
J. N. Wilson
1879- —A. T. Morrison, Mayor
W. C. Smith
J. Hickman
F. M. Claxton
D. Brophy
It. Lewis
J. W. Gray
J. N. Wilson
H. Leggo
1880- —lt. Lewis, Mayor
F. M. Claxton
I). Brophy
A. T. Morrison
W. C. Smith
J. Hickman
J. W. Gray
J. N. Wilson
H. Leggo


REVENUE FROM CHIEF LOCAL SOURCES.
Teas.
Valuation.
Eates.
Licenses.
Hat Market.
Cattle Yards.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1856
40,060
0
0
1797
11
0
19
6
0
13
13
0
1857
2053
4
1
103
15
0
113
7
0
1858
44,015
15
0
2283
7
10
155
2
6
164
0
0
1859
2965
14
9
78
12
6
443
15
6
1860
58,967 17
6
4577
9
9
85
10
0
568
18
0
8
6
8
1861
4669
8
8
85
10
0
797
1
0
4
3
4
1862
82,721
10
0
4789
10
1
101
15
0
820
19
0
2
0
0
1863
102,434
11
0
3754
0
1
60
15
0
661
18
6
14
13
4
(9 months.)
1864
95,686
0
0
11,710
18
9
4665
16
0
1221
15
0
424
18
2
1865
98,172
0
0
5855
17
6
3747
11
0
1226
16
0
915
8
5
1866
112,580
0
0
7590
8
5
4035
15
0
1296
19
6
1654
7
3
1867
114,757
0
0
8720
14
5
4738
5
0
1612
17
0
2132
5
9
1868
132,538
0
0
7872
19
8
5254
16
6
1506
8
0
2462
19
6
1869
148,522
0
0
9116
7
10
6012
18
6
1835
19
0
3094
9
2
1870
178,040
0
0
10,124
6
11
5982
19
9
1980
17
6
3278
5
2
1871
153,869
0
0
13,413
11
4
5361
9
8
1635
18
0
1792
1
11
1872
135,098
0
0
10,636
6
2
5018
18
7
1781
6
0
2075
19
4
1873
128,735
15
0
10,261
12
5
4915
0
10
1634
13
0
2625
17
5
1874
122,195
0
0
9718
5
9
4610
13
3
1587
0
0
2599
5
9
1875
108,665
0
0
10,652
11
6
4260
9
6
1501
17
0
2605
9
11
1876
102,825
0
0
10,165
2
3
4212
16
11
1454
6
6
3600
19
5
1877
103,688
0
0
9329
7
1
4067
8
3
1721
9
0
3085
3
1
1878
103,586
0
0
9965
9
7
4006
9
0
1593
6
0
2691
1
10
1879
102,957
0
0
10,190
14
6
3887
7
6
1598
19
6
2655
8
3
1880
104,361
0
0
9862
3
6
3957
13
1
1788
9
6
2737
2
4


MAEKETS.
HAY MARKET RETURNS.
Yeab.
Oats.
Wheat.
BABLET,
Hat.
Steaw.
Potatoes.
BUSHELS.
BUSHELS.
BUSHELS.
TONS.
TONS.
TONS.
1861
118,750
—
—
6,853
_
1862
91,410
—
—
5,844
2,000
1,000
1863
143,308
—
—
5,844
1,451
600
1864
265,577
—
—
8,395
1,251
1,000
1865
189,788
—
—
7,328
3,503
1866
205,209
—
—
7,285
3,610
_
1867
348,030
—
—
9,878
1,328
- -
1868
202,650
—
—
8,255
3,356
_
1869
178,430
—
—
9,442
5,515
1870
316,570
164,776
58,321
10,415
2,210
2,500
1871
218,838
108,233
21,734
7,633
2,585
4,355
1872
215,620
174,436
37,318
5,361
3,598
4,208
1873
126,438
172,260
35,551
5,584
2,954
5,955
1874
95,214
191,239
35,676
5,846
3,400
4,379
1875
137,164
145,676
51,187
6,178
2,850
4,692
1876
154,443
86,160
55,994
7,839
2,686
5,255
1877
140,775
114,719
40,485
9,846
3,528
10,030
1878
122,791
105,674
24,737
11,165
2,320
7,332
1879
102,306
79,202
27,402
10,708
3,502
5,969
1880
198,765
83,505
70,000
13,712
1,631
7,492
CATTLE YARDS.— Return of Stock Passed Through
Yards Since February, 1864.
Yeab
Ending.
Cattle.
Calyes.
Sheep.
Lambs.
Pigs.
30th September, 1864
9,362
561
35,572
574
123
99
„ 1865
28,198
1,222
114,163
2,679
21
99
„ 1866
23,034
3,397
259,716
17,547
41
99
„ 1867
11,348
1,712
232,662
29,380
242
99
„ 1868
27,856
3,187
355,351
22,058
—
99
„ 1869
28,198
2,860
467,512
51,784
—
99
„ 1870
26,589
1,704
650,646
42,367
—
99
„ 1871
23,882
1,519
538,034
32,653
—
99
„ 1872
25,804
2,039
541,576
40,421
—
99
„ 1873
23,652
1,885
435,044
36,874
. —
99
„ 1874
22,037
1,647
402,670
40,577
—
99
„ 1875
19,135
1,358
440,977
46,398
—
„ 1876
18,369
1,150
685,306
41,250
—
99
„ 1877
17,428
930
593,418
32,518
—
99
„ 1878
19,070
913
476,275
26,699
—
99
„ 1879
19,473
938
495,278
35,198
—
99
„ 1880
19,599
1,207
445,427
31,628
—


FISH ACCLIMATISATION.
On Sunday July 19th, 1868, the Messrs. Seal placed six English Perch in Kirk’s
Reservoir.
About the end of 1870, Mr. Seal and Dr. Whitcombe caught thirteen Perch at Kirk’s,
and placed eight of them alive in the quarry hole at what is now know as View Point. It is
believed these were the first fish placed in the Lake. It was dry at that period, but there was
plenty of water in the deep quarry holes.
On October 21st of same year, Dr. Whitcombe, with Messrs. H. D. Cane and P. Ive,
caught fourteen Perch at Kirk’s and placed all of them in the Lake.
The above were the first Perch placed in the Lake.
In December 1871, Mr. M. Seal placed a few English Trout in the Lake.
During 1870-71, Perch taken at Kirk’s were largely distributed in various waters of the district.
Angling at Kirk’s, having become a general recreation, hardly a week was passed without
some Perch being taken from Kirks to the Lake. Mr. E. M. Claxton is known to have been one
of the earliest and most assiduous in thus stocking the Lake.
Perch ova was first seen in the Lake in 1871, and was also distributed.
Angling took place on the Lake for the first time in 1872.
The Ballarat Eish Acclimatisation Society was formed in 1870, the chief object in view
having been the importation of the ova of English Trout from Tasmania, the hatching and
distribution of them in the district waters.
The first importations of ova were sent to the Ercildoun waters for hatching under the care
of the Messrs Learmonth. Subsequent consignments were artificially hatched in an apparatus
under the care first of Mr. Matthew Seal, and afterwards Dr. Whitcombe and Mr. A. White. By
the unobtrusive efforts of this Society many thousands of Trout Ery have been distributed ; not a
water of any consequence within 30 miles of Ballarat has been overlooked, and they are known
to have thriven at Ercildoun, Learmonth, Burrumbeet, Bacchus’ Creek, Werribee, Moorabool,
Wendouree, and the Ballarat Water Reserve.
In 1872 some Prussian Carp were obtained from Mount Macedon by the Society and placed
in Wendouree. In the following year seven dozen of the same fish were obtained and divided
between Wendouree and Burrumbeet.
Carp and Tench. —A supply of the latter was obtained in 1866 by Mr. A. T. Seal, but
owing to drought that lot are believed to have perished. Subsequently in 1877, a larger quantity,
together with some Carp, were imported by the Brothers Seal, and distributed in various waters ;
recent evidence has shown that they have thriven at Wendouree.
Murray Eish. —ln 1876 Messrs. Shoppee and Bailey, aided by a public subscription,
obtained a considerable quantity of fish in several varieties (except Cod) from the Murray, and
placed them in the Lake.
Crustacea. —Murray Lobsters were placed in Wendouree at various periods by Dr. King
and Mr. E. Ive.


AUTHORITIES.
An Act for the establishment of Municipal
Institutions in Victoria.
Adamson's Acts of Council, December 29th,
1854, page 1062.
Petition.
Government Gazette, September, 4th, 1855,
page 2242.
Proclamation of Municipal District, December
18th, 1855.
Government Gazette, December 18 th, 1855,
page 3275.
Public Meeting to elect, January 14th, 1856.
Notice of — Gazette, December 28th, 1855,
page 3337. Proceedings Eeported —
Gazette, January 22nd, 1856, page 136.
Council met first.
See Minute Book.
Survey of New Township, 1851.
See letters ~W. S. Urquhart, December 27th
and 29th, 1880, and A. J. Skene,
December 17 th, 1880.
Area of Municipal District, 1854.
Government Gazette, February 21st, 1854,
page 512.
Extension of Municipal District, 1856.
Government Gazette, July 22nd, 1856, page
1395.
Extension, 1863.
Government Gazette, June sth, 1863, page
1251.
Eegulation prohibiting business within one
mile of Surveyed Township.
The origin and date of this Eegulation are
obscure, but it led up to the successful
agitation for survey and sale of what were
then known as “ Main Eoad Frontages.”
Incorporation of Ballaarat East, May Ist,
1857.
Government Gazette , May Ist, 1857, page 734.
First Streets made.
See First Half-yearly Eeport.
Eesidence Areas.
Yaluation Allowed Occupant on Sale of Land.
See memo. D. Christy, Mining Eegistrar, re
action of Local Court, November 10th,
1857. See also Gold-Fields Act, 1857.
See letter Jas. Oddie, February 4th, 1881.
Ballaarat first lit by Gas,
June, 1858.
See letter Secretary Gas Company.


Water Supply Conference of Council for joint
supply from Swamp.
See Third Half-yearly Beport, July 18th,
1857.
Adjustment of Cost of Main.
See Eighth Half-yearly Beport, January 16th,
1860.
Extension of Drains.
See Beport, July 16th, 1860.
For other matters relating to Water Supply,
See Beports of Water Commission.
First Clearing of Lake.
Statement of Edward Williams.
First Bowing Match at Lake, November,
1864
Statement of Edward Williams.
Botanic Garden Committee appointed.
See Beport, July 16th, 1860. The Committee
consisted of Messrs. Gl-eo. Smith, Wm.
Elliott, and Wm. Appleby.
Deer and Sparrows.
Subsequently to the Beport being printed and
circulated it was ascertained that of the
Deer first obtained the doe died, and
the Acclimatisation Society of Victoria
presented another in her place. The
Sparrows were also sent by the same
Society.
Street Planting.
See note by Mr. Longley, also by Mr. C.
Saunders.
Municipal Conference, 1860, and Endowment.
See Beport, January 16th, 1861.
Indebtedness.
See Financial Statements of respective dates.
Bungaree Loan.
For details of settlement, see City Treasurer’s
Beport, 1875.
Bailway Extension.
Opened from GTeelong, April 10th, 1862 ; to
Ararat, April 7th, 1875; Maryborough,
February 3rd, 1875.
Ballaarat became a City, 1870.
¥ *
Government Gazette , September 9th, 1870,
page 1328.




