

P(£rTH
CIVILIZATION
CIVILIZATION
WITHOUT
WITHOUT
DELUSION.
&o* Sr
CONTENTS.
CONTENTS. .
L Civilization without Delusion, by Marcus Clarke.— Victorian Review ,
November, 1879,
2. — Civilization without Delusion : a Reply, by the Right Rev, the Bishop
of Melbourne.— Victorian Review , December, 1879.
3-—A Letter to His Lordship the Anglican Bishop of Melbourne
(by favour of the Melbourne Review), by Marcus Clarke.— Melbourne
Review, January, 1880. (SUPPRESSED BY THE PUBLISHER.)
WITH .A. PREFACE.
MELBOURNE: F. F. BAILLIERE, COLLINS STREET EAST.
„ 1880.
Price is.


TO AUTHORS.
Mr. BAILLIERE is prepared to undertake the Publishing and general
business arrangements in connection with the publication of Books,
Pamphlets, &c., &c., upon Moderate and Equitable Terms.
Mr. B. having Agents in all the neighbouring Colonies, as well as
throughout Europe and America, is enabled to give every facility to
the speedy distribution and disposal of any works placed in his charge.
Estimates of Printing, Binding, &c.,
Forwarded on Application.


CI V I LIZ ATI ON
WITHOUT
DELUSION.
WITH .A. PEEFACE.
Reprinted from the “ Victorian Review ” and “ Melbourne Review.'*
©Melbourne:
F. F. BAILLIERE, COLLINS STREET EAST,
1880.


MELBOURNE :
FBINTEI) BY WALKEB, MAY, AN’I) CO.,
9 MACK.II I.ol' BTKKET.


PREFACE.
I have reprinted the following articles for these reasons:
I contributed to the first number of the Victorian Review— published
on the xst November, 1879-a paper entitled “Civilization without
Delusion.”
In the second number published on the xst December, 1579 the
Anglican Bishop of Melbourne (Dr. James Moorhouse) at the earnest
request of the editor, traversed my statements in an article entitled
“ Civilization without Delusion: a Reply;” and in that reply he made
assertions which I desired to correct.
I requested the Editor of the Victorian Review to permit me to defend
myself in his columns, but he declined.
I then wrote for the Melbourne published on the xst January,
1880—a defence of my opinions, entitled “A Letter to his Lordship the
Anglican Bishop of Melbourne.” This defence excited much adverse
comment, and the firm employed by the proprietors of the journal to
publish it, refused to issue copies to the public. I think fit, therefore,
to reprint the matter at my own cost.
In order that the whole question may be considered by the reader, I
have also reprinted (with the kind permission of the Editor of the Victorian
Review) my first paper and the Bishop’s reply to it.
MARCUS CLARKE.
Melbourne, Victoria, 24th February , 1880.




CIVILIZATION WITHOUT DELUSION.
(From the “Victorian Review,” for November, iBjg.)
“You who have escaped from these religions in the high-and-dry light of the
understanding may deride them ; but in so doing you deride accidents of form merely,
and fail to touch the immovable basis of the religious sentiment in the emotional nature
of man. To yield this sentiment reasonable satisfaction is the problem of problems at
the present hour.”— Tyndall.
Sincere believers in the doctrines of Christianity must be seriously
troubled at the increasing number of persons who, if not frankly hostile to
the dominant creed of the civilized world, are at least indifferent to its
teachings.
Setting aside those men who openly exclaim against the churches, and
call aloud for the establishment of some form of philosophic teaching
which may replace a formula which they hold to be outworn, we cannot
open a newspaper or a review without being made painfully aware that the
solemn reverence with which the sacred mysteries of religion were once
treated has disappeared, that periphrases innumerable are resorted to in
order that writers may avoid admitting the possibility of miraculous
occurrences, or of seeming to acquiesce in a belief in the supernatural.
Among the best intellects of our time, how few are there who freely accept
the dogmas of the priesthood; and among the priesthood itself how many
are there who sadly seek to believe at once in fact and fable, and to
reconcile the revelations of religion with the revelations of science. For
this class, the struggle between science and religion is fraught with terrible
interest. They would fain believe, despite their reason ; they are com-
pelled to reason, despite their belief. Seeing around them the foundations
upon which they had built their hopes of happiness, fading into unsubstan-
tialities ; hearing day by day that some cherished and beautiful illusion has
been taken from them, never to return; placed between furious bigotry on
the one hand and sneering infidelity on the other—the earnest minded
upholders of the religion.of Jesus suffer a martyrdom more terrible than
that which sanctified the first preachings of his disciples in the streets of
imperial Rome. To die in the service of a Prince, powerful to reward,
who holds out promises of a splendid future to the heroes of his army, is
really a death to be desired and envied. To feel that the heralds of the
great Prince’s power—themselves deceived—have spoken of palaces which
are but cloud-built, and fertile lands of peace which have no existence—
this is to suffer indeed, to taste all the agonies of martyrdom, and to die
without having grasped the crown.
Much has been said concerning the “world-smart,” the weariness of
life, the melancholy of modern thinkers. The melancholy of the age
arises from this growing conviction, that the Religion of old time is
insufficient for present needs, that the tender time of trustfulness in the
supernatural is well-nigh over, and that the faith of our fathers is passing
away from us. The reflections which passed through the mind of
Fronde’s muser among the ruins of the old abbey, are now too familiar to
the minds of most of us. “ Look at me,” the old ruin seemed to say.


u Centuries have rolled away, the young conqueror is decrepit now, dying:
as the old faith died, in the scenes where that faith first died, and lingering
where it lingered. The same sad, sw r eet scene is acting over once again,
’Twas the college of the priests, and they are gone, and I am but a dead
ruin where the dead bury their dead. The village church is out-living me
for a few more generations ; there still ring Sunday after Sunday its old
reverend bells, and there come still the simple peasants in their simple
dresses —pastor and flock —still with the old belief; there beneath its walls
and ruins they gather down into the dust, fathers and children sleeping
there together waiting for immortality, wives and husbands, nestling side
by side, in the fond hope that they shall wake and link again the love-
chain which death has broken. So simple, so reverend, so beautiful! Yet,
is that, too, all passing away beyond recall? The old monks are dead, the
hermit-saints and hallowed relics are dust and ashes now. The fairies
dance no more round the charmed forest ring. They are gone, gone even
here. The creed seems to stand, but the creed is dead in the thoughts of
mankind, its roots are cut away, down where alone it can gather strength
for life, and other forms are rising there; and once again, and more and
more as day passes after day, the aged faith of aged centuries will be
exiled, as was the old, to the simple inhabitants of these simple places.
Once for all, if you would save your heart from breaking, learn this lesson;
once for all you must cease in this world to believe in the eternity of any
creed or form at all. Whatever grows in time is a child of time, and is
born, and lives and dies at its appointed day like ourselves.” The writer
of these words was expelled from his college-fellowship less than thirty
years ago for writing them. Alas ! what college would expel him now ?
The predicted change has begun, and on all sides are warning notes—
“ancestral voices prophesying war”—of coming ruin. The seasons run
their course ; the gentle spring of Christianity, its fierce summer, its liberal
autumn, are ended, and louder in the ears of the pious believer in the
stability of the rock-founded creed of Christendom, sounds the prophetic
dirge of doom. The struggle of the reason and the emotions will tear in
pieces the “ well-built nest ” of Faith :
Its passions will rock thee,
As the storms rock the ravens on high,
Bright reason shall mock thee
Like the sun in a wintry sky.
From thy nest every rafter
Shall rot, and thine eagle home
Leave thee naked to laughter
When leaves fall and cold winds come.
The leaves are fast falling, and the cold winds are blowing. Where
shall the human heart next build its sanctuary ?
The primary reason for the revolution which is occurring in the moral
world is the abandonment of belief in the Miraculous. Science having for
the first time in the world’s history succeeded in getting it generally
understood that all the operations of nature are conducted upon certain
fixed principles which no amount of spiritual exercise can affect, the
comforting but delusive theory that God interferes to aid those who
venerate him, and punish those who venerate him not, disappears. With
admission of the argument that miracles have been, and are, impossible,
the claims of all religions founded upon miraculous performances fall to the
ground. In the eyes of unbelievers, the miracles of Moses, Christ, and
Mohammed a»e of no more value than the miracles of Ulysses or of Mr.
Home, and the claims of Moses, Christ, and Mohammed to be more than-
human teachers fall to the ground likewise. Eut the infidelity ot the age.-


goes further. A man can only believe that which is possible for him to
believe, and a mind once convinced that God has been made out of ideas,
and that it is as foolish to worship a God made out of ideas as it is to
worship a God made out of wood, is brought face to face with the con-
clusion that prayers and praises are valueless, that no good deeds can
avert misfortune and no sins call down the vengeance of Heaven, that
threats of future punishment and hopes of future reward are both made
without reasonable foundation, and that there is no absolute certainty of
any other life but this.
Save, therefore, that violation of the laws of society, and violation of the
laws of physical and moral health, bring generally, but not necessarily,
certain well-known punishments, a bad man may live as happily as a good
man, and a good man die a death as wretched as any formerly imagined to
be the peculiar lot of the sinner. This, stripped naked, is the creed of the
nineteenth century ; nor is it confined to the little world of Christendom.
The increased facilities for the spread of information which have made
this century so wonderful in the annals of the world, have placed the
educated of all nations upon an equality of knowledge. The missionaries
of rebellion are abroad, and almost simultaneously the educated Mussulman
is informed that his paradise is a dream, the Brahmin that his self-denial
is a folly, and the Buddhist that his hopes in Nirwana are as unreasonable
as the fears of purgatorial fires, or the expectation of the musical glories of
the orthodox Christian heaven.
The condition of a world thus deprived of the restraints of supernatural
terrors appears very distressful. But the destruction of a set of religious
beliefs does not necessarily mean the destruction of religion, in no way
means the withdrawal of moral restraint. To love virtue because the
lovers of vice will be eternally tormented, is but a poor sacrifice to the
welfare of mankind. A man who performs acts of benevolence only to
save his own soul, is a mean, selfish being. The Christian, Buddhist, or
Brahmin who leads a moral life in this world merely to go to heaven in
the next, is no further to be commended than the shopkeeper who is
industrious and frugal in order to purchase the ease and retirement of a
private villa. But the strong-souled man, who lives uprightly because he
feels that selfishness and sin injure the welfare of his fellow-man, who does
that which is his duty, that which he and all other free souls know to be
their duty, without hope of present fee or future reward, that man needs
the ministrations of no priests, and demands not the “ consolations ” of
religion. But while honest men admit the moral grandeur of such a
nature, they—being believers in a church of one sort—-regretfully assert
that outside the pale of that church there is no future salvation, or —being
believers in a church of another sort —that the mass of mankind will not be
governed by pure morality, and that the innate viciousness of human
nature can only be controlled by forcing men to believe in matters their
reason rejects, and by threatening them with unbearable torments. To
the believer who roundly protests that his miracles are true and that his
church will last for ever, nothing can be said. He has surrendered his
judgment, and put himself outside the pale of reason. But the doubter,
the earnest pietist, the dinger to old forms, the sorrowful tribe of augurs
who sigh, not smile, when they meet each other, may be asked to consider
if humanity will really lose or gain by the extinction of a belief in the
Supernatural. Religion can never die, for religion is a political necessity.
It was political necessity which created it and nourished it, and which has
moulded and will ever mould its outward forms to suit the requirements of
the times.
There are at present five great supernatural religions—Buddhism,


Judaism, Brahminism, Mohammedanism, and Christianity. Each of these
is the result of the growth of the political life of the nation in which it
first appeared. The manufacture of the religious feeling by the human
intellect in various parts of the world is a curious study, but its course and
result are always alike. When the developed man began to communicate
subjective ideas, he constructed a theology of the elements —he worshipped
the Wind and the Fire. Soon he grew more intelligent, and finding that
some of his tribe could bend wind and fire to their bidding, he turned his
reverence in that direction. Then began Ghost-worship—the phantoms of
departed warriors were invoked, and soon it came to be understood that
the sky was peopled with these vanished great ones, who were as gods.
The old men—the sages of the tribe—were the natural mediators between
those whom they were so soon to join and the young men but newly
entered upon life. Hence the Priesthood, the holy men alone fitted to
speak of the mysteries of spirit-land. There was now established a
spiritual kingdom, for the god is nothing but a heavenly spiritual despot,
religion a form of spiritual government, and priests but spiritual magistrates
who are paid to exercise their functions.
The earliest of these spiritual kingdoms was that of Brahma. Its
religion was originally but a worship of the elements. The invention of
“ caste ” and a complicated ceremonial, established and enriched a
powerful priesthood who taught the doctrine of metempsychosis, and
recognized a future state of rewards and punishments. Buddhism was a
revolt against the galling yoke of the Brahminical church. Its founder was
the son of a king. He gave up worldly honours, and devoted himself to
the cause of humanity. There is not a reference to God in the teachings
of Buddhism. To live without pride, envy, or fear—to practice benevolence
and patience—is the duty of man. According to man’s life in this world
will be his life in the next. Perfect happiness is Nothingness. The
struggle between Brahminism and Buddhism was long, but the priests were
finally compelled to modify their pretensions; and, as contact with
surrounding nations increases, the attribution of a sacred character to
“caste” is being gradually withdrawn. The customary fictions were told
concerning Buddha. The memory of the young prince is now venerated
by five hundred millions of people, who keep establishments of monks
and nuns, and, having invented a theory of incarnation, worship the
reformer as a god.
A somewhat similar form of worship to that of the early Brahmins
existed in Egypt, but a more material civilization consolidated a more
splendid form of religion. The priesthood held in its hand the whole of
the intellectual life of the nation. Priests were physicians, lawyers,
manufacturers, artists, musicians, and astronomers. They received into
their hands the new-born babe, they travelled with him step by step
through life, they nourished his manhood, they cheered his old age, and
at his deathbed gave him a passport to paradise. A Bedouin sheik,
named Abraham, had a great grandson who was sold by his brothers as a
slave to the Egyptians. The boy rose, married the daughter of a priest,
became the favourite of Pharaoh. The family of his father still survived,
and, forgiving the injury which proved his salvation, Joseph sent for the
Arab clan and established them in the land which had fed him so
bountifully. We are familiar with the misfortunes of the tribe. We know
how Moses—again the fortunate favourite of another king—led the nation
out of the country which had grown hostile to them, and precipitated them
upon the fertile land of Canaan. But the slavery of Egypt had unmanned
them. They were driven back, and wandered in the wilderness until a
new generation had arisen among them, sons of the desert, bold and fierce,


who made short work with the peaceful Canaanites. But Moses, not
daring to make himself king of this people, saw the political necessity of
establishing a religion. Drawing inspiration from his Egyptian lessons,
he issued a series of laws and commands. Avowing himself to be in
personal communication with God, he declared that God would bargain
with the Arab tribe, that, in return for certain ceremonies and payments,
success in war and plenteous harvests should be theirs. A priestly order
—called Levites—was established, and the religion known as Judaism
began its wondrous progress. It boots not to track the history of the
descendants of Abraham. There came a time when they in their turn
were driven out of their country, when, later still, another religion was
brought into contact with theirs. In the lovely land of Greece, and by the
shores of Roman Tiber, the same religious history had repeated itself.
The rude savages worshipping the sea, the stars, the air, had learnt to
worship abstract forms of beauty. The elders had established a priest-
hood, and censers swung and psalms resounded in praise of fair Venus, or
ot Mars the war-god. The philosophic few smiled, as they always smile,
at the vagaries of the vulgar, but the priesthood was powerful, and the
people raved, as they ever rave, around their images and temples. The
Jews refused to worship at the Roman shrines, and for some years a series
of religious conflicts secured them a brief period of independence,
terminated by another bondage. But the Jews themselves were on the eve
of a religious revolution.
Ihe nation had been already dispersed. Judaism had never recovered
the first captivity. The Jews of Judea were still “Hebrews of the
Hebrews ; ” they believed that the world was made for them, and that on
their account alone did God create empires and destroy them. The Jews
of exile were to be found in the most enlightened cities of the civilized
world. Their business was commerce, and they sat in the porches of
philosophers and the palaces of kings. The savage shackles of the Mosaic
law were slipping from these travellers. Preserving the doctrine of the
Unity of God, they mingled the philosophy of Plato with the theology of
their fathers. An age of science had begun, and belief in the Miraculous
was beginning to lose ground. In Jerusalem itself there were two parties :
the Sadducees and the Pharisees. The Sadducees clung to the Law, and
refused to believe in hell because there was nothing about such a place in
the writings of Moses. The Pharisees were the zealots of the Jewish
church. Minute in forms and ceremonies, they had adopted the Persian
theory of the resurrection of the body and of the rivalry of an evil God.
The Persians believed also that the evil God would one day be vanquished'
and that a general deliverance from suffering and sorrow would take place!
It had long been a prediction of Jewish prophets that some one of the
descendants of King David would arise and re-establish the kingdom • in
fact, numerous persons headed rebellions with this cry. Ultimately such
a “ Messiah” rose in the person of Jesus of Nazareth, who claimed to be the
son of the “ Most High/’ “ spake as never man spake,” and declared that
hereafter his disciples should see him coming in the clouds of heaven to
judge the earth. Jesus of Nazareth had long been obnoxious to the
zealots of Jerusalem; He had called them opprobrious names, scoffed
at their ceremonies, and reviled their customs. They did not miss the
opportunity now afforded them. Jesus of Nazareth was accused of treason
and executed by the civil power, while his disciples separated in trembling
to wait for his second advent. But among the doctrines which the
enthusiast preached was one which was politically necessary at that period
—the doctrine of the equality of all men in the eyes of God.
The civilized world, at the time of the death of Jesus, groaned under


the intolerable despotism of the law of Might. There was no liberty.
Tyrants tortured and killed the loveliest and the wisest, for caprice or greed.
Philosophy was powerless to save, for philosophy cannot inspirit a nation
of slaves by its cold and lofty teachings. Tut the Jews of Alexanuria, of
Antioch, and of Rome, found in the utterances of the Seer of Nazareth
the wherewithal to comfort themselves. Another enthusiast, Saul of
Tarsus, took up the story, and claimed that the whole Gentile world
should’hear the tidings of democratic freedom. The costly ceremonies of
the law were dispensed with, the humble virtues of benevolence and
patience preached by Sakya Muni were preached once again, to a world
that laughed with Lucian at its own theology. Christianity, to use the
majestic words of Gibbon, “ offered itself, armed with the strength of the
Mosaic law and delivered from the weight of its fetters.”
But human nature had not altered since the days of Egypt. Established
as a State religion, Christianity soon had its priests, its praying-temples,
and its holy shrines. Far inferior in intelligence to the priests of On, the
bishops and monks of the Christian chuiches devoted themselves to
inventing monstrous fables concerning themselves and their brethren, and
murdering each other for believing in them. 1 hey quarrelled about the
most wonderful matters—about the possibility of three being one and one
three, of the indivisible being divided and not divided, of bread being flesh
and wine being blood. The theological wars of Arius and Nestor laid
waste the world, and the religion for which, in its simplicity, so many
martyrs had died, abandoned the East to its fate and fled to Europe.
But the East was to have yet another reformer. The Bedouins yet
preserved the simple faith of Abraham. They worshipped the One God,
the Unknown; but the idolaters who usurped the religion of Jesus had
intruded even to Mecca their superstitious emblems. Six hundred years
after the death of Jesus, the Caaba saw upon its walls a picture of him as
a chi Id-God, seated in the arms of his virgin-mother Mary. One
Mohammed, a commercial traveller, who had married a rich widow,
denounced this departure from the simple faith. Ihe man was subject to
epileptic fits, and imagined that he was possessed with a spirit, his disease
culminating ’in his declaring himself the special messenger of God sent to
restore the original faith of Abraham. By slow degrees he won the faith of
his people. He conquered'the surrounding tribes. He gave laws like
Buddha, and composed a sacred book like Moses. His religion overspread
the birthplaces of the Christian faith. A new religious war began, and for
years the furious bigotry of dervishes and priests retarded the march of
civilization. . , ,
The establishment of the teachings of the humble carpenters son
-resulted in fact in the establishment of that extraordinary period of luxury,
misery, heroism, and bloodshed, which we call the Middle Ages. The
sublime teachings of the philosophers were forgotten. Ignorance was
formally declared to be the mother of devotion, and amid plagues, war, and
famine, Christianity focussed into the all-powerful, priest-elected bishop,
who sat enthroned at Rome, on the site of the old pagan capital, ruled
supreme. Kings and emperors bowed before the successor to the fisher-
man of Gennesaret. At his nod a nation could be disenfranchised of its
right to participate in the joys of heaven, at his command a murderer
•could be plucked from the torments of hell. It is true that he had hurled
mankind into a deeper slavery than the world had yet known, but it is true
that his servants ministered to the wounded and the pool, as no men had ever
ministered before. A frightful desire to bring the whole universe under
the heel of priestly authority drove missionnrics over land and sea. New
countries—a New World—was opened to the wondering gnze of nations.


Merchants and travellers voyaged hither and thither, and the luxuries, the
literature, and the arts of the world flowed into Europe.
Political necessity now shaped anew the ancient faith. Luther and his
schoolmen attacked the supreme authority of the pontiff. It was asserted
that every man had a right to interpret the sacred writings for himself, that
no divinity streamed from the finger-ends, that it was possible that Arius,
who said that a father must exist before his son, was right, and that Nestor
could find among the physicians some authority for his obstetrical assertions.
At last the head of the priesthood was openly defied, and told that he was
not, and should no more be, superior to kings. Political necessity
demanded a Reformed Church, and triumphed as a matter of course. But
soon kings themselves heard rough speech. In America, and in France,
the people thought that monarchy had existed too long. A republic is the
natural home of men of science ; and the new school of philosophy, which
teaches that what is contrary to reason is not to be believed, sprang into
being on both sides of the Atlantic. From the teachings of that school
come the heretical books which so alarm the worshipper at the old fane.
But the mere admission that the teachings of the priesthood are fallible
has sealed its doom. The old Church still loudly asserts that she holds
the keys of heaven and hell, that she is eternal, and will never die. Brave
old Church 1 gallant defenders! faithful servants! But it is useless ; the
political necessity which created and sustained you has passed. March
with marching civilization and you will live. Oppose it, and your shrines
will be with those of Osiris, and your temples with those of Egypt. The
age of the Miraculous is over. The belief in sacred incarnations, in
heavenly interpositions, in personal relations with the awful Spirit of the
Universe, is dead. The temples are still full of worshippers, the offerings
still tinkle in the plates, the confessionals are still thronged with breast-
beating penitents, and the bed-sides of the dying still cheered by the sweet
delusions poured into too willing ears. But go out into the world. Where
is your religion then? Does it inspire the politician, assist the man of
science, or aid the physician? No, it embarrasses them all. Do its teach-
ings lighten the heart of the philosopher, or assist the efforts of the philan-
thropist ? Read the literature of the day—sip the life-blood of the running-
age —and answer.
The position claimed by the new teachers —the teachers which tell us
how to use the telegraph, the photograph, the graphotype, and the tele-
phone—has been explained by the writer whose words, already planted for
years deep in the mind-soil of English-speaking men, I have quoted as an
introduct to this essay. “ All religious theories, schemes, and systems which
embrace notions of cosmogony, or which otherwise reach into its domain
must, in so far as they do this, submit to the control of science, and relin-
quish all thought of controlling it. Acting otherwise proved disastrous in
the past, and is simply fatuous to-day. Every system which would escape
the late of an organism too rigid to adjust itself to its environment, must be
plastic to the extent that the growth of knowledge demands,” The measure i
of the people’s knowledge is the measure of the people’s religion. Educate
your children to understand the discoveries of Tyndall, Huxley, and Darwin, '
and you will find them pleasantly laughing at the old fables of 100311,’
Balaam, and Lazarus. Mankind, freed from the terrors of future torments’
and comprehending that by no amount of prayers can they secure eternal
happiness for their souls, will bestow upon humanity the fervour which they
have hitherto wasted in sighs and hymns. The creed which teaches that
the intellect should be distrusted will fade away. The interests now felt in
churchmen’s disputations will be transferred to discoveries of science. The
progress of the world will be the sole care of its inhabitants; and the


elevation of the race, the only religion of mankind. And this consumma-
tion of civilization is nearer at hand than many think. “ The demonstrably
false,” says a writer in the North American Review , “now exists in
occasional and limited survivals,” and if the process of popular enlightenment
continues in the future as in the present, “ a twentieth century will see for
the first time in the history of mankind a civilization without an active and
general delusion,”
Marcus Clarke.


CIVILIZATION WITHOUT DELUSION
A REPLY.
(From the “ Victorian Review, "for December, iSjg.)
In attempting an answer to the paper of Mr. Marcus Clarke, entitled
u Civilization without Delusion,” I am met by several inconvenient
peculiarities of treatment. First, the author has not stated his positions
in any logical order. Secondly, he has scarcely thought it worth his while
to support them by argument. And thirdly, the positions he takes are so
extreme that, except by a very small school of atheistic materialists, they
are not likely to be defended.
It is not easy, therefore, to throw my answer into a logical form; nor,
even were this possible, would any reply to Mr. Clarke be accepted as a
sufficient reply to the latest form of sceptical objection. In order to
diminish these inconveniences as far as possible, I shall, first, endeavour to
state Mr. Clarke’s principal positions; and secondly, instead of confining
myself to answering his objections, I shall endeavour to reply to those
existing phases of unbelief from which they have been hastily, and I fear
I must say, carelessly, derived. Mr. Clarke’s principal contentions are
these :
(1) Supernatural religion is moribund; and the battle against it as
good as over.
(2) This is so, because “ with the admission of the argument that
miracles have been and are impossible, the claims of all religions
founded upon miraculous performances fall to the ground.”
,(3) All supernatural religions have had a natural origin. Each of
them “is the result of the growth of the political life of the
nation in which it first appeared.”
It may be observed with respect to (1), that ever since the critical
attack of the author of “ Supernatural Religion ” was hurled back so rudely
by the present Bishop of Durham, sceptics have been beating about for a
safer mode of approach. The historical method is too tedious. Since the
acceptance by sceptical critics of the greater part of St. Paul’s Epistles, it
gives too great an advantage to the defenders of the faith. It is necessary
to find “ a short and ready method ” with the supernatural.
And what so easy, in these circumstances, as to make-believe that the
discussion is over; that Christianity is an exploded superstition; that the
Church is an interesting, but melancholy survival; and that what remains is
to put it out of its pain with as little violence as possible, to give it decent
burial, and to pronounce over its grave an eloge so tenderly poetical that
it shall soothe the feelings of any possible mourners. This of course can
easily be done on the supposition that the Church is dead. For l£ De.
mortuis nil nisi bonum .”
But what if the Church refuses to be buried? What if by a thousand
streams of influence, and ten thousand works of beneficence, she proves
that she is alive—and the most potent living thing, moreover, in this world
and century ? She may resist interment—and what is to be done with her


then? Clearly, in that case, seeing that the age is past in which the-
burial of the living was tolerated—you must at least kill her, before you
put her in the tomb. But how then ?—with what weapon ? What is the
short and easy method of despatch ?
Oh ! since she is built upon miracles, deny that a miracle is possible,
and so at a single stroke you get rid of her and her story. This is accord-
ingly what Mr. Clarke has done. But then, unfortunately for him, this has
become by this time a somewhat stale device, and one, moreover, which
has been already abandoned by the craftiest combatants on our author’s
own side ; because they have clearly perceived that no man can prove a
miracle to be impossible. For, what do we mean by a miracle? We mean
simply an occurrence within the realm of nature, which transcends the
power of man, and cannot be accounted for by any of the laws of nature
with which we are acquainted. To say, as Hume does, that such an
occurrence is “a violation of the laws of nature,” is to assume that we are
acquainted with all the rules of natural action, and can pronounce magis-
terially that the fact in question can be ranged under none of them—an
assumption which is clearly fallacious. The utmost that can be said is,
that when a given occurrence is the product of mechanical forces, we are
led by the analogy of nature to suppose that those forces operated
according to some law. Introduce, however, the action of human volition,
and even this modest statement must consent to submit to further
limitation. As J. S. Mill puts it, “ human volition is constantly modifying
natural phenomena, not by \iclating their laws, but by using their laws.”
It is related, for instance, by Mr. Whymper, that when he reached the
summit of the Matterhorn, on the occasion of its first ascent, he saw a
party, led by Professor Tyndall, returning from an unsuccessful attempt to
scale the same summit. Being determined that they should be aware of
his good fortune, he took up large fragments of rock, and sent them
thundering down the mountain, among the snows of which they gathered
small avalanches, finally coming to rest, with their snowy burden, in places
which they never could have reached but for the interference of human
volition. Here is an illustration of the use of natural laws. It was-
muscular contraction which gave the stones their direction and initial
velocity; it was the force of gravity which sped them on their way; and
it was the resistance of impact and friction which brought them to rest.
But what was the force which called all these natural energies into play,,
employing them to produce a result different from that which would have
been produced in the ordinary course of nature ? It was the volition of
Mr. Whymper. As Professor Noah Porter has shown, the effort of
Tyndall to reduce volition to a mere step in a chain of physical
sequences has been an entire failure. Professor Tyndall imagines a
merchant thrown into a state of intense alarm and activity by a disquieting
telegram. He then asks, “ What caused the merchant to spring out of
his chair? The contraction of his muscles. What made his muscles
contract? An impulse of nerves, which lifted the proper latch and
liberated the muscularpporer.w r er. Whence this impulse? From the centre of
the nervous system. But how did it originate there ? This is the critical
question.”
It is indeed; and how does Professor Tyndall answer it? By assuming
that the action was caused by the impact of the undulating light upon the
retina, “ which in its turn imparts another impact to something causing
terror, which in its turn, by another stroke, is transformed into hope, till at
last the latch is lifted and the muscular power is set free.” Who can see
anything approaching to an explanation in a set of gratuitous assumptions
like these ? What is there in the blow of a wave upon a material substance


to create a state of consciousness The two things have no common
term or state to connect them.
All that Professor Tyndall can suggest is, that the effect of the wave-
stroke on the retina operates on something which transmutes it into the
state of consciousness we call fear. But of what nature is that something ?
and how is the effect of a blow transformed into a state of consciousness?
The explanation explains nothing, except the hopelessness of reducing
mental phenomena to the links in a chain of mere physical sequences.
Such attempts will always be wrecked against the common experience of
mankind. Our consciousness affirms with a confidence which nothing
can shake, that the “ Ego ” which remembers, thinks, feels, and deter-
mines, is something more than the nervous battery which it uses. With
the admirable candour which distinguishes him, Professor Tyndall, no
longer ago than last autumn, recognized in the Nineteenth Century the
grave difficulty which beset his theory. “When we endeavour to pass/'
says he, “ from the phenomena of physics to those of thought, we meet a
problem which transcends any conceivable expansion of the powers which
we now possess.”
But this being so —human volition being something more than a form
of physical force, and having the power to produce effects outside the
series of mere physical sequences —why are we forbidden to suppose that,,
when fitting occasion arises, the Divine will may intervene, to produce, in
accordance with natural laws, effects which transcend the power of man,
and could not be evolved in the ordinary course of nature ? It does not
help the sceptic to urge that will is always determined by motive, for the
origin of motive is at least as obscure as that of will. Besides, as that
pre-eminently calm and fair reasoner, J. S. Mill, has admitted, if you think
by the union of will and motive to bring human volition under the dominion
of law, you must admit that the exertion of the Divine volition is consistent
with the existence of law, “ since we cannot but suppose the Deity in
every one of His acts to be determined by motives.”
If, then, there be a God, his extraordinary interference at critical
periods of human history cannot be said to be impossible. Mr. Mill
concedes this, almost in so many words. “ Once admit a God,” says he,
“ and the production by his direct volition of an effect which in any case
owed its origin to his creative will . . . must be reckoned with as
a serious possibility.” As Mr. Clarke, however, thinks that there is no God
but one “ made out of ideas,” whom it is “ foolish to worship,” in our
further examination of his principal position that “ miracles are impossible,”
we must inquire whether (x) in Nature and (2) in man we find unequivocal
intimations of the existence of a God.
In considering the first division ofthisquestion, we must be careful neither
to fall into the ambiguity of Paley, nor into the fallacy of Hume. Paley,
at great length, and with admirable lucidity of statement and illustration,
proves that there are marks of what he calls design in nature, arguing
thence that since design implies a designer, there must have been a
Designer of Nature. It has been fairly objected to this argument that, in
using the word “ design,” he begs the whole question, for the very word
design implies already some conceiving mind. Let us then state tie
argument in a form which shall be unexceptionable.
Whenever the human mind discovers a combination or collocation of
phenomena, which by their united action tend towards a definite result, it
intuitively pronounces that such a combination is the work of intelligence.
Seeing, then, that in nature we find innumerable instances of such combina-
tions, we conclude instinctively and inevitably that natural phenomena are
the work of intelligence. In this argument Hume would have objected to


the use of the word “intuitively.” He urged that while we rightly-
inferred purpose from marks of adaptation in objects which we knew from
experience to be the works of man, we had no warrant for drawing the
same inference in respect to objects of the origin of which we had no
expedience. The fallacy of this objection consists in the assumption that
our inference of purpose from marks of adaptation is only justified by
experience. As a matter of fact, it does not arise from experience at all,
but is an intuitive conclusion of the mind. As Dr. Thompson has well
put it “In the gravel beds of the Somme were picked up at first a few
Hint stones bearing rude marks of having been shaped for use. No human
remains were associated with them. The beds in which they lay were
hitherto supposed to antedate the appearance of man. Yet those shapen
flints produced in every observer the instantaneous conviction that man
was there at the period of this formation.” There was no need of such
experience as Hume requires; no need of any knowledge that human
beings had ever formed such implements. There were marks upon the
flmts of adaptation to some use ; therefore they had been shaped by
intelligent purpose. The marks were not such as could be accounted for by
any natural process, or by the action of any inferior animal; therefore the
intelligence which had shaped them was human.
lake, again, the marks of adaptation to be found in the works of the
ant or the bee. We have no experience in this case of the nature of what
used to be roughly called the instinct from which such works proceeded,
but we must all remember how in earlier days our intuitive inference
of intelligence from adaptation struggled against an arbitrary theory of the
nature of animals ; while now we see that the struggle has been successful,
and that by most instructed persons intelligence is conceded to creatures
which are capable of such works. No doubt the uniformity of the design
in such work, and the absence in it of any sign of improvement in successive
generations, betoken a low order of intelligence ; but intelligence it still
certainly is.
If, therefore, the conclusion that adaptation means intelligent purpose
be as clearly intuitive as that other conclusion “ every change implies a
cause,” then it is not less applicable to the works of nature than to the
works of man. Who, indeed, can examine such combinations of means as
those employed to secure the circulation of the blood, or to produce the
vision of external objects, without perceiving at once the marks of adap-
tation to a definite end ? Were one of those means absent, or combined
with the others in the way of a less delicate and perfect co-operation, the
end would not be reached. It is impossible for a healthy mind to contem-
plate such adaptations without instinctively assuming that they are the
product of an intelligent purpose.
is Professor lyndall himself obliged to speak of that triple
complexity, by which, through the constitution of light, the molecular
structure of bodies, and the peculiar organization of the human eye and
brain, we get our sensation of light and colour? “Whence,” he asks,
“ this triple complexity ? If what are called material purposes were the
only end to be served, a much simpler mechanism would be sufficient.
But, instead of simplicity, we have prodigality of relation and adaptation ,
and this apparently for the sole purpose of enabling us to see things robed
in the splendour of colour. Would it not seem that nature harboured the
intuition of educating us for other enjoyments than those derivable from
meat and drink ?”
Now, what is it here which “adapts,” which cherishes a “purpose,”
which “harbours an intention ?” That Professor Tyndall conceives of an
intelligent something behind these phenomena is plain. He calls the some-


thing, nature. But this is clearly a mere verbal symbol, a kind of algebraical
x, standing for the unknown. 13oes he mean, by nature, the whole mass of
matter and force which constitutes the universe ? If so, what ground have
we, even of analogy, for attributing purpose or design to an aggregation of
force and material which is itself the subject of the adaptations which we
observe ? Purpose, so far as we know it, can only be conceived by an
intelligent individual, animal or human; and we measure the power of the
individual intelligence which conceived such purpose, by the variety and
progression of adaptation exhibited in its products.
Following, then, the inevitable suggestions of our own thought, we are
impelled to the conclusion that the marks of purpose exhibited in nature
denote the action of an individual intelligence, indefinitely wiser and more
powerful than man.
It is at this point that science helps us so greatly to clear and enlarge
our perceptions of the attributes of the Great Author of Nature. Think
first of the increasing richness of variety in natural adaptation, which is
being disclosed by the researches of physiologists; think next of the vastly
enlarging chain of progression and improvement in natural type, revealed
by the long geological succession of vital forms, from the lowest zoophyte
up to man.
If we measure the degree of an animal’s intelligence by the variety of
its products, and its capacity for improvement, what shall we say of the
intelligence which linked sun to planet, which sped the light-waves on their
way, which bathed the earth with creative warmth and radiance, and which
led forth in long succession, and endless exuberance of variety, the vast
procession of terrestrial life ? That it is one and indivisible, is already
suggested by the unity of purpose which runs through all the ages ; and
still more strikingly by that grandest generalization of science, the correla-
tion of forces. Once men thought that in heat they beheld one force, in
light another, in electricity another, and others still in chemical and
cosmical attractions. But now, as Wallace has strikingly put it —“ Light,
heat, electricity, magnetism, and probably vitality and gravitation, are
Believed to be but ‘modes of motion’ of a space-filling ether; and there is
not a single manifestation of force, or development of beauty, but is derived
from one or other of these,” It is one force which is thrilling into form
throughout all the diversities of natural beauty, one force which complicates
itself into the most delicate contrivance of organic structure, and which
breaks in glory unspeakable across the splendours of the sunset or the
/flushing snows of the Alps. One force ! —Let it throb, and the heaven is
filled with worlds, and the earth with life. Let it cease, and all space is a
■desert; worlds are not, life is not, phenomenal existence is at an end.
What is this force ? We stand here on the outermost edge of the
phenomenal; we can almost see through the attenuated veil of sense,
we can almost discern the Almighty Hand of that Great Intelligence,
■which we have already recognized in the million-fold adaptations of the
•world.
The theory of evolution appears to be about to undergo important
’modifications; but the case, it may be observed, is in no wise altered, if we
-assume that many of these natural adaptations were brought about by the
•commonly interpreted method of evolution. For, then, instead of
supposing a special exertion of intelligent power at the creation of each
species, we have to entertain the majestic conception of the one force of
the cosmos operating continuously, by a rule of adaptations, from the
beginning of the creation. And this is, if possible, a more wonderful
illustration of intelligent purpose than any we have yet reviewed. We
observe, for instance, in the history of terrestrial life, a tendency of advance


in the direction of higher intelligence. Had the advance been in the-
direction of bodily strength, we might have looked for the permanence of
the huge forms of the extinct Saurians, Mastodons, and Mammoths. Had
it been in that of bodily beauty, again, we should hardly have expected the
survival of many existing organisms. The purpose of nature is obviously
an advance in intelligence. Think, then, what, on the hypothesis of
evolution, was necessary to the attainment of that purpose.
The vital force in distinct species must be so constituted that it tended
to produce its like. Again, definite types having been developed, those
types must be preserved in their purity in spite of the aberrations of
instinct. Nature must forbid the perpetuation of hybrids. Once more,
this law of conservation having been established, vital forms must be
endowed with a power of minute variation, which, while not interfering
with the integrity of type, might, in the course of long ages, produce
important deviations of being. And, lastly, the environments of life must
be in such sort adapted to its changes, that, among all the varieties which
might arise, they would favour and preserve those especially which tended
to an advance in intelligence. To the attainment of this obvious purpose
of nature, every one of these conditions is necessary. Omit one of them,
and the purpose had failed. But if this be so, we have here again, on
the hypothesis of evolution, precisely that adaptation of various conditions
to the attainment of a definite result, in which we have recognized the
marks of intelligent purpose.
We come now to the consideration of another important question —
What is the moral character of that All-wise and Almighty Intelligence
which reveals itself to us in the adaptations of nature ? Since man is the
only moral being with whom we are acquainted, we must seek the answer
to this question in the further inquiry, what is the moral character, and.
what are the moral environments, of man ?
In the first place, then, we are disposed to conclude, I think, that the
Intelligent Purpose behind phenomena is good, by an examination of our
own nature. We find enthroned, at the centre of our being, a magisterial,,
even royal authority, which we call conscience. No matter how the faculty
came into existence, it demonstrably exists. That, again, moral judgments
have differed in different ages, and among various races, is no reason for
calling in question the existence of a moral sense. When the question
before our mind is, whether a particular act be just or pure, education and
public opinion may greatly help to determine the answer. But when once
that answer has been given ; when once it is agreed that a particular action
is pure or just, then we are conscious of a peremptory voice within,
affirming that it ought to be done ; that such a line of action is not merely
expedient, but obligatory; and that to follow any other course is not merely
foolish, but wrong. Whence do we get this power of perceiving a moral
quality in actions ? Whence do we derive the power to say, you “ ought/’
if you do not you will be “guilty”? To endeavour to resolve this moral
imperative into a mere opinion of expediency, is to contradict the universal
consciousness of man.
Utilitarian morality, whether in the earlier and baser forms of
Penthamism, or in the later and more refined modification of Hartley and
Mill, reposes on the fundamental doctrine that the only effective motive of
action is a man’s regard to his own pleasure. If he consents so far to
limit his desires as to seek the greatest happiness of the greatest number, this
is only because such a course will, on the whole, bring him more pleasure
than if he set himself in opposition to mankind. If, again, through the
habit of following certain courses of action, such as benevolence or
purity, he comes to feel pleasure in those actions themselves, still the


formation of the habit was only justifiable (on utilitarian principles),,
because, on the whole, it would bring him more pleasure than the opposite
habit.
Such is utilitarian morality ; and it is manifestly opposed to the universal
consciousness of mankind. Tell a man that you have pursued a certain
course of conduct only because you thought that, on the whole, it
would yield most pleasure to yourself, and he will determine at once,
without a shadow of doubt, that your action was without merit. The more
of selfishness that there is in it, the less of merit. To say, then, that duty
is based on what excludes it, that merit is identical with what contradicts
it, is nothing better than a foolish paradox. So it seemed even to Hume.
“ The final sentence,” he says, “ which pronounces characters and actions
amiable or odious, praiseworthy or blameworthy . . . depends, it is
probable, on some internal sense or feeling which nature has made universal
in the whole species.” And no better proof could be afforded of the
unselfishness of this instinct, than the fact, testified by Cicero, “ that no
Epicursean could avow before a popular audience that the one end of his life
was the pursuit ( of his own happiness, without provoking an outburst of
indignation and contempt.”
But if there be a faculty in man which affirms that goodness is a duty,
and that we are guilty and contemptible in proportion as we refuse to
recognize this obligation, then, assuredly, we must conclude that the
intelligent purpose which lies behind the phenomenon man, impressed that
law on his being; or, in other words, that the Divine Will which con-
stituted the only moral being whom we know, revealed its own nature by
compelling conscience to affirm that moral beings are bound to be
righteous. As Lecky has said, “ Our knowledge of the Supreme Excel-
lence, our best evidence even of the existence of the Creator, is derived,
not from the material universe, but from our own moral nature. _ It is not
of reason, but of faith. In other words, it springs from that instinctive or
moral nature which is as truly a part of our being as is our reason, which
teaches us what reason never could teach, the supreme and transcendent
excellence of moral good ; which, rising dissatisfied above this world of
sense, proves itself by the very intensity of its aspiration to be adapted for
another sphere, and which constitutes at once the evidence of a divine
element within us, and the augury of the future that is before us.” Nothing
can be more weighty than these words ; and yet I cannot deny myself the
pleasure of quoting the following from Dr. Carpenter, the veteran phy-
siologist ; “ The perception of right,” he says_, “ leads us to the Absolute-
Lawgiver who implanted it in our constitution, and, as has been well
remarked, ‘ all the appeals of innocence against unrighteous force are
appeals to the Eternal Justice, and all the visions of moral purity are
glimpses of the Infinite Excellence.’ ” “To Frederick,” says Carlyle, “ as,
to all of us, it was flatly inconceivable that intellect, moral emotion, could
have been put into him by an entity that had none of its own.” Such
is the evidence upon the character of God afforded by our moral nature.
Nor is that a whit less convincing which is derived from our moral
environment. Mr. Clarke informs us that it is one of the articles in “ the
creed of the nineteenth century stripped naked,” that “ no good deeds can
avert misfortune, and no sins call down the vengeance of Heaven ; ” and
that, save in certain cases, when “generally, though not necessarily,”
unpleasant results may occur, “ a bad man may live as happily as a good
man,” Alas, poor century ! If it have no clearer lights than these,
wherein is it better than the France before the revolution, or to what better
end can it be expected to come? Let its prophets study now and then
Carlyle’s “ French Revolution,” and specially let them ponder that prime


article of the Chelsea prophet’s creed—“ The first of all gospels is this,
that a lie cannot endure for ever.”
And if further it be asked, wherefore? let inquiry be made of Mr.
Matthew Arnold, who, taking the lesson from an ancient book, held in
sovereign contempt by the prophets of the nineteenth century, will explain
that “ there is visible in history, and in human life, a power, not ourselves,
incessantly making for righteousness. What is this force? It is not
human, for no human power can overrule or escape it. It is not physical,
for it has regard to moral ends, of which in the physical there is no sign.
If then it be not human, be not physical, what shall ‘we call it ? ” “Ha !”
exclaims Carlyle, “why do I not name thee God ?” “Oh, heavens! is
it in very deed He then that ever speaks through thee ; that lives and loves
in thee; that lives and loves in me ? ” What else can it be, when we find
that God’s voice within us, bidding us do the right, is echoed by God’s
voice without us, proclaiming penalty to the wicked and prosperity to the
just? This correspondence between the instinctive decisions of the
human conscience, and those cosmical relations which, by their general
tendency, ratify them, is as strong a proof as can be afforded that the
Author of Nature made man what he is, and made him after His own
image, to approve that which is righteous.
No doubt it is precisely in this sphere of moral action that human life
presents its most formidable difficulties. For while we see in nature a
paramount tendency to favour that righteousness which the human con-
science demands, it seems to us, at times, that the ascendancy of righteous-
ness ought to be more quickly and decisively established. We are
impatient with the liberty allowed to evil wills', with the ignorance that is
permitted to helpless generations. How, we are tempted to ask, can these
difficulties be overcome? It must be obvious at a glance that we are
contemplating an order of things which is incomplete and unfinished; an
order, therefore, which it is peculiarly difficult to understand. It is here, if
anywhere, that Divine help and light are needed ; help for man’s weak will,
and light for man’s puzzled understanding. How welcome were such help
and light, if only they might be had. Is it inconceivable that they should
be given?
We have now reached the point at which this question can be put
with understanding. You will remember Mr. Mill’s concession, “ once
■ admit a God,” and the allegation of miracle “ must be reckoned with as
a serious possibility.” I submit that good reason has been shown, not
only for the existence of a God, but of a God of infinite power, wisdom,
and righteousness ; of a God, who, having ordered all things to favour
righteousness, may be expected to come in aid of man’s weakness and
ignorance, when the interests of righteousness require it. Instead, there-
fore, of concluding with Mr. Clarke that miracles are impossible, we are
compelled to infer, not only with Mr, Mill that they are possible, but more,
that they are probable ; and that thus, whatever historical evidence we
have for such a miracle as our Lord’s Resurrection, must be regarded as
evidence for a fact already probable.
Here my answer to Mr. Clarke’s essay might suitably come to an end ;
for, indeed, the only allegation of that essay which needs serious considera-
tion, is that which has been already submitted to examination. It is true
that he proceeds further to maintain that each of the supernatural religions
resulted “from the growth of the political life of the nation in which it
first appeared,” but the only argument which he advances in support of
this extraordinary affirmation, must be sought in the kind of historical
sketch with which his essay concludes. It would be to flatter that sketch
to call it inaccurate. So far, indeed, as it deals with the faiths which are
of Semitic origin, it would be truer to say that it rarely coincides with fact.


Mohammedanism is declared to have been a reform, occasioned by
Christian idolatry; and nearly every statement made in support of this
position is imaginary. “ The Bedouins,” it is said, “ yet preserved the
simple faith of Abraham.” The fact is, that they had fallen into a degrading
idolatry, which, although, as Muir says, “it had been gently rippled by
the feeble efforts of Christianity,” and more profoundly moved by the
“deeper and more troubled current of Judaism,” still remained in
substance what it was before those faiths came into contact with it; a
Sabaeanism which had filled its temples with idolatrous representations of
the heavenly bodies, ahd a Fetishism—the worship of actual stocks and
stones —which bowed dowm before “ the grim array of 360 idols in the
Kaaba.” It was no idolatrous Christianity, but the indigenous idolatry of
Arabia, which Mohammed opposed, calling in first the Jews, and then the
Christians to his help, at critical moments of the struggle. So far, again,
was Mohammedanism from being an outgrowth of the political life of
Arabia, that it came into violent collision with all the habits, opinions, and
beliefs of the Arabian people, and was only established at length by the
marvellous personal ascendancy of Mohammed. This is the conclusion,
equally of Carlyle, who holds Mohammed to have been a true prophet,
and of Muir, who deems him nothing better than a strong-spirited schemer.
“ The fabric of Islam,” says Muir, “no more grew out of the state of
Arabia, than a gorgeous texture from the slender meshes of silken filament.
. . . It w r as Mahomet that formed Islam; it was not Islam, or any
pre-existing Moslem spirit, that moulded Mahomet.” No doubt, in this
case, as in all others (though less perhaps in this case than in almost any
other), there was silent preparation, of a sporadic kind, for Reform,
before the Reformer came. But so far was “ political necessity ” from
constituting a factor of that preparation, that it is as clear as historical
testimony can make it, that the religious reform begat the “ political
necessity.”
Again, Mr. Clarke is not a whit more accurate in his sketch of the rise
ofMosaism. “Moses,” he says, “not daring to make himself a king,
. . saw the political necessity of establishing a religion.” Where, we
are disposed to ask, did Mr. Clarke get his information ? Only one
account of these transactions is extant, and that account shows us that,
whatever ambitious dreams Moses might have cherished in his youth, when
the decisive moment came, so far from desiring to make himself a king, he
shrank with a reluctance almost amounting to cowardice from the call to
undertake his people’s deliverance. Again, Mr. Clarke imagines that
Moses “ drew his inspiration from his Egyptian lessons.” Undoubtedly,
in the smaller matters of custom and ritual, certain superficial resemblances
may be discovered between the religion of Egypt and that of Israel. But
in the things of prime importance, what strikes us most is not the
resemblance, but the opposition between the two systems. In the
Egyptian “ Book of the Dead,” for instance, a writing “ supposed to be
the oldest in the world,” and long anterior to the time of Moses, we find
the development of an elaborate doctrine of immortality and future
judgment. Moses, who was “ learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,”
must certainly have been acquainted with these doctrines. How comes
it, then, if he “ drew his inspiration from Egypt,” that he never once in
the Pentateuch makes reference to either? If he drew his inspiration
from the God of Israel, we can understand it; for a doctrine of immortality,
unless it be sustained and interpreted by purely spiritual conceptions of
God and of man’s duty, is likely to do more moral harm than good. How
injurious, for instance, must it be to the Mohammedan, to be perpetually
dwelling, in thought, on the bliss of his sensual paradise.
Mr. Clarke should have been ashamed to write the following sentence -


—'‘He declared that God would bargain with the Arab tribe, that, in
•return for certain ceremonies and payments, success in war and plenteous
harvests should be theirs.” It is not denied that much is made in the
Pentateuch of the temporal rewards of righteousness. And Moses was
•justified in making much of them. First, because, speaking broadly,
temporal prosperity is the ordinary reward of righteousness. If there exist
in a people the spiritual qualities of patient perseverance, hopeful enter-
prise, and respect for the rights of others, it will follow (in spite of
irregularities due to famines and the like) that on the whole their land
will be fruitful, and they will be prosperous, as happens now among the
nations of Europe. On the other hand, if they be without these qualities,
it will happen to them, as it has befallen to the Mussulman Turks, that
their land, though the fairest and richest upon earth, will be turned into a
barren wilderness. This is the fact, and the Biblical writers, instead of
•stating it in the dry abstract manner of Western moralists, expand it,
.according to the genius of their Eastern thought and tongue, into the
richest concrete descriptions.
Again, this is not only a fact, but it was a fact which, in the immaturity
of Israel’s moral development, it was necessary to put forward with
unmistakable prominence. It would be the better for us if more were
made of it in Victoria. Intoxicated with the thought that the people can
do as they like, we are too prone to forget that, having done so, we cannot
choose the consequences. We can alarm capital, but if we do so we
cannot keep it. We can discourage religious training, but then we cannot
secure godly citizens. This is the kind of teaching of which the Jews
stood greatly in need, and which, therefore, appears unmistakably in every
part of their sacred scriptures.
But to forget that the heart of their inspired teaching was moral, that,
in short, their law may be fairly described as consisting of the ten great
precepts of Sinai, applied to their special social and moral needs by the
Levitical laws and ceremonies, is to forget what distinguished them from
all other peoples. To describe their religion as consisting essentially of
the coarse bargain suggested by Mr. Clarke, is to make their history and
moral influence incomprehensible. Grant that there was much which
appears to us puerile in the Levitical adaptations, what then ? Are the
playthings of childhood contemptible when applied to their proper use?
The prophets affirmed boldly that God gave to their fathers laws which
were “ not good ; ” that is, not good for all times ; and our Saviour said of
certain of the Levitical precepts, that they were given for the hardness of
the people’s hearts. Still, such a state of heart being supposed, the very
imperfection, of such precepts constituted their fitness to translate the
ideal into the practicable, and to prepare the way for a larger truth and a
higher life.
How, again, does Mr. Clarke endeavour to establish his allegation that
Christianity was a political outgrowth of the Judaism of the first century?
It is notorious that, at the beginning of the Christian era, the Jewish nation
consisted in its higher classes of the rationalistic Sadducees, who believed
in neither spirit nor resurrection. Certainly Christianity did not proceed
from them. Again, the faith of the masses was moulded by the fanatical
Pharisees, who taught them to expect a warlike Messiah ; an anointed of
God, who should drive the Romans across the Noithern mountains. And
in the Pharisees the new faith had to encounter its bitterest enemies.
“Jesus,” Mr. Clarke says, “was executed by the civil power,” but he
forgets to add, against its will, to content the murderous bigotry of an
infuriated people. Neither before nor after the death of Jesus did the
Jewish nation, as a whole, accept the doctrines of the new faith ; and how,
then, can those doctrines be said to have been a product of its political


necessities ? Plainly, the position is a desperate one ; and there is little
wonder that Mr. Clarke tacitly abandons, while professing to illustrate it;
contenting himself with the irrelevant remark that “ among the doctrines
which the enthusiast preached was one which was politically necessary at
that period,” not which grew out of the political necessities of that
nation, but which was politically necessary to that age —“ The doctrine of
the equality of all men in the eyes of God.”
The “ enthusiast,” it would seem, then, invented the doctrine contrary
to Mr. Clarke’s theory. But even if we were to allow -this inconsequence
to pass, how can anyone see, in the doctrine mentioned by the essayist, an
adequate account of the success of Christianity ? What is there in the
mere sense of equality to regenerate a vicious people ? The individuals of
the most squalid tribe upon earth may feel themselves to be equal before
God, just as the vilest scum of Paris did in the rebellion of the Commune;
but what is there in such a feeling as that, taken alone, to make any man
better ? The truth is, that the sense of equality is never a cause, but
always a consequence. It may be produced either by the common
possession of some glorious prerogative, or by the common loss of every-
thing worth having ; by a common poverty, and a common brutality. The
critical question is, how was the sense of equality attained ? In the case
of Christianity, it was by the inheritance, in Jesus Christ, of a faith, an
example, a life, so spiritual, lofty, and precious, that beside this —the
common possession of every slave and every barbarian who believed in
Christ —all the treasures of time seemed dim and worthless. Not, then,
by the mere fact of telling men that they were equal (stoicism did that and
did it fruitlessly), but by bestowing upon them a life so rich in moral
power and beauty that it made the meanest who had it greater than the
greatest who was without it, did the gospel of Jesus Christ change the
heart and fortunes of the world.
Of Mr. Clarke’s account of the secret of St. Paul’s influence, it is
difficult to speak so gravely. “ Another enthusiast, Saul of Tarsus . . .
-claimed that the whole world should hear the tidings of democratic freedom.”
I have given a good deal of attention lately to the writings of St. Paul,
and although I have read much of shaking off the slavery of sin, and of
the mere precepts of a law, in order to break forth into the freedom of a
loving service to God ; and though I have read something of obedience to
the powers that be, even when these were represented by a Nero ; of
democratic freedom, I have read never a word. What can Mr. Clarke
possibly mean by the word “ democratic ” in this connection ? Can he
mean no more than is commonly claimed by popular leaders in our modern
democracies ? Can he mean that the secret of St. Paul's success was a
kind of American spread-eagleism, the affirmation by each man that he was
as good as his neighbour and a great deal better? Whatever he may
mean, it is quite clear that in talking about democratic freedom in connec-
tion with St. Paul, he has perpetrated a monstrous anachronism and is as
far from having discovered the secret of the great Apostle’s influence as if
he had never read a word of his writings, or studied an act of his life.
It appears to me that Mr. Clarke’s attempt to account historically for
the origin of the supernatural religions is even a greater failure than his
■effort to discredit them by affirming that a miracle was impossible.
When, again, he drops the critical, and takes to the constructive role,
he gives us nothing that I can see but vague and vacant generalities.
“ Religion,” he says, “ can never die, because it is a political necessity.”
But when we ask him what he means by religion, he tells us that “ the
•elevation of the race will be the sole religion of mankind,” What is this
but merely to trifle with the meaning of words ? How can there be a
religion when there is no God, and no worship, and no hope of a future ?


A man, we are told, is to do his “ duty "—whatever that may be—and he
is to labour for “ the elevation of mankind ; ” or, in other words, to try
to dispose other people to do their duty. And this we are to call religion.
But why, I would ask? This has hitherto been called “ morality.”/ Why,
without rhyme or reason, are we to christen it “ religion ?” Is it because
Professor Tyndall has said that you must in some way content the religious
instinct ? Is it the philosophical way of satisfying our puerile religiosity ?
Are we to conceive of our philosophical superiors as patting us on the back
and bidding us dismiss our alarms, because, in order to please us, they are
going to give morality a new name—to call it religion, and even to make-
believe that it is religion, till we have learnt to be satisfied without so
childish a plaything ? Such a proceeding, however philosophical, can
hardly be called “ civilization without delusion.”
Mr, Clarke professes to think that religion, as we understand it, has
lost its utility, asking us—“ Does it inspire the politician, assist the man of
science, or aid the physician ? ”
Unhesitatingly, I answer it does. It is the life and inspiration of
every one of the greatest statesmen of England ; of Gladstone, and Bright,
and Forster, of Beaconsfield, and Salisbury, and Cross. It sits upon the
woolsack in the persons of some of our greatest chancellors, Lords Cairns,
Selborne, and Hatherley. It labours in the forefront of scientific discovery
, in the efforts of Stokes, and Thompson, and Beale, of Tait and Stewart, of
Carpenter and Mivart, of Max Muller and Monier Williams. It wrought
the only fiction of our time that will live, in the pens of Dickens and
Thackeray. It sings the grandest songs of the age, in the poetry of
Tennyson and Browning, having no ostensible opponent in this sphere
save in the lays of one, whose language is so coarsely filthy that it is unfit
to be glanced at by a child or a woman. Finally, it watches over the bed
of the sick and dying in Paget and Acland, in Humphrey and Burrows,
and a whole host of godly and believing physicians. Such a question as.
this could only be asked by one either totally ignorant of the existing life
of England, or so engrossed with the writings of one small unbelieving,
school of able men, that he has no eyes for anything else.
In bringing these observations to a close, I must be permitted to
remark, that such serious questions as those stirred in Mr. Clarke’s essay
are not to be disposed of by confident statement and arrogant assumption.
You cannot kill a living thing by saying it is dead. You cannot answer
sound arguments by assuming that they do not exist. Least of all can you
loosen the hold of deep spiritual principles by pretending that there are
no such principles, and that they have no such hold. Further, it should
be remembered that such statements as these in respect of the most
precious possessions of mankind cannot be made without grave respon-
sibility. They do nothing but harm. While deceiving none but the
ignorant, they exasperate bigotry, and create violent prejudices against that
science, in the name, but without the authority of which they are written.
Serious subjects should be approached in a serious manner, not as affording
a mere playground for wanton criticism, a mere clothes-block for literary
tailoring. _ If not only the Church of Christ, but also the fundamental
social institutions of property and marriage are openly attacked, if the fear
be not altogether imaginary that “ as the Grasco-Roman civilization was
ruined through the invasion of barbarians from without, so existing
civilization may be destroyed by an eruption of barbarians from below;”
then, assuredly, this is not the time when the professed friends of an
enlightened civilization should attack without necessity the fundamental
beliefs on which it rests.
J. Melbourne.


£, Reprinted , by permission of the proprietors, from the suppressed “Melbourne
Review” for January, /S£o.]
A LETTER TO HIS LORDSHIP
THE ANGLICAN BISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
(By favour of the Melbourne Review.)
My Lord,
I had hoped to have had the pleasure of acknowledging your lordship’s
unexpected comment upon my article Civilization without Delusion, in the
journal which contained that article and your reply. The conductor of the
Victorian Review , however, did not desire that the subject should.be again
dealt with in his paper, and I am indebted to the kindness of the editor of
this journal for the opportunity of at once thanking your lordship for the
courtesy—quite unchristian in the temperance of its expression—with which
you have treated my remarks upon popular theology, and of setting myself
right with your lordship upon one or two points where you seem to
misunderstand me.
It may be well to briefly recapitulate the tenor of the dispute. I asserted
■that belief in the miraculous was practically dead, that belief in all religions
founded on the miraculous was therefore dying, and that faith in the
Christian religion as taught in the churches is growing weaker. Your
lordship seemed to think my statements of sufficient importance to be
denied. You set yourself to attack my article. You denied the truth of
my historical references. You proclaimed that miracles were not merely
possible, but probable. You asseverated that the argument of such men
-as Tyndall w’as an “ entire failure,” that the church was the “most potent
thing in the world and century but that, notwithstanding this, it was also
in such danger that this was “ not the time when the professed friends of
an enlightened civilization should attack without necessity the fundamental
beliefs on which it rests.”
In this somewhat contradictory mood of mingled defiance and remon-
strance, you proceed, my lord, to vindicate the truth j and you begin by an
assumption which has no foundation in fact. You assert, my lord, that I
am an Atheist; that I deny the existence of God. lam willing to believe,
my lord, that this assumption arose merely from the fact that you neglected
to carefully read the article which you honoured me by criticising.
I said :—“ The belief in sacred incarnations, in heavenly interpositions,
in personal relations with the awful Spirit of the Universe, is dead.”
This statement, my lord, is no profession of Atheism, but a direct
.assertion of belief in God. 1 believe in God, my lord ; but if you ask me
-“What is God?” I reply that I do not know. God is unknown and
-unknowable. As Herbert Spencer says —“The Power which the universe
manifests to us is absolutely inscrutable.” All attempts to define the
Creator seem to me to bring us only to ridiculous conclusions. God is not
a Mind, but something higher than a mind; not a Force, but something


nigher than a force; not a Being, but something greater than a being. Our
conception of God is according to the measure of our intelligence. Every
man makes his God out of his own ideas, and according to the quality of
his ideas so is the quality of his God. But to pray or to praise this creature of
our own mind is useless. To say that God is All-wise, and to then implore
him with tears and cries to change the condition of human affairs, is foolish.
To pay priests to praise him is clear waste of money ; and to tell women
and children that they will be burned for ever and ever if they do not SO'
pray, praise, and pay, is to display both ignorance and cruelty.
Your lordship, however, having assumed that I deny God, is good
enough to attempt to logically prove his existence. I fear, my lord, that
your argument lands you in a conclusion which, to any of your lordship’s
congregation who have subscribed to the TLhirty-Nine Articles of your
lordship’s Religion, will be rather startling. After citing Mr. Whymper,
who was good enough to illustrate the use of natural laws by throwing
stones down a mountain, Professor Noah Porter, who “ has shown that the
effort of Tyndall to reduce volition to a mere step in a chain of physical
consequences has been an entire failure,” and good Dr. Paley, who compared
the Creator to a watchmaker, your lordship sums up as follows “ But.
now, as Wallace strikingly puts it, ‘ Light, heat, electricity, magnetism, and
probably vitality and gravitation, are believed to be but “ modes of motion
of a space-filling ether; and there is not a single manifestation of force or
development of beauty, but is derived from one or other of these. It is
one force which is thrilling into form throughout all the diversities of natural
beauty—one force which complicates itself into the most delicate contriv-
ance of organic structure, and which breaks in glory unspeakable across
the splendours of the sunset, or the flushing snows of the Alps. One force
—let it throb, and the heaven is filled with worlds and the earth with life.
Let it cease, and all space is a desert. Worlds are not—life is not —
phenomenal existence is at an end. What is this force ? We stand here
on the outermost edge of the phenomenal —we can almost see through the
attenuated veil of sense —we can almost discern the Almighty hand of that
Great Intelligence which we have already recognized in the million-fold
adaptations of the world.’ ”
Now, the Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol—who, so far from agreeing
with your lordship that the Church is the most potent thing in the world
and century, established a society for the purpose of “ meeting in fair
argument the scepticism and unbelief which have for the last few years
been distinctly traceable in all classes of society ” —has published a lecture
by the Rev. Dr. Rigg, Principal of Westminster Training College, in
which I find the following : — 1
“ Various as are the appearances of Nature and the modes in which the
laws of Nature operate, it may yet be set forth by the pantheist as his belief—
a belief, he will say, which the modern advance of science tends continually
to establish as the true theory of the Universe—that all force is ultimately
one; that the different forces of Nature are mutually convertible and
equivalent; that one energy of nature Protean, universal, of infinite plasticity
and power of variation and adaptation pervades and actuates all things.
It may be called gravitation or electricity or light or heat or vital force,
but ultimately and eventually it is one and the same.”
Why, these are almost your lordship’s own words. Are you then a
Pantheist, my lord ? Dr. Rigg says—“ Pantheism is but veiled Atheism.
Strip Pantheism of all involutions of thought, and all investitures of
language, and in its naked truth it stands forth as mere Atheism.” I see
1 Pantheism —a lecture delivered at the request of the Christian Evidence Society.


that I must forgive your lordship for calling vjc an Atheist, for the word as-
used by clergymen seems capable of many applications.
Your lordship accepts my statement that if a religion is founded on a
belief in miracles, the refusal to believe in the .miraculous allows that
particular religion to fall to the ground; and you proceed to argue that
miracles are possible and probable. Your argument is that inasmuch as
we do not know all natural laws, we cannot say that a miracle is not in
accordance with some law with which we are not yet acquainted. But
this is clearly fallacious. Our only knowledge of a natural law is gained
by human experience ; and when an event occurs which is in direct
opposition to those previous experiences, which have given us our
knowledge, we are shown that our knowledge is imperfect, and that our
statement regarding the natural law must be corrected. If the law of
gravitation be true, the swimming of iron, the flight of Elijah, and the
ascension of Jesus, are untrue. If these events be true, then human expe-
rience is at fault concerning the law of gravitation, and the statement
regarding it must be amended.
But your lordship’s assertion that the miraculous is not only possible
but probable, places you in a position of strange inconsistency. If miracles
are possible and probable, and their existence is simply a matter of the
credibility of witnesses, why does your lordship refuse to believe miracles
which we are told are daily occurring ? Only the other day the Virgin
Mary appeared to a crowd of men and women in the South of France;
and there are hundreds of people who declare that they saw Mr. Home,
the “ medium,” floating about the room. The witnesses to the truth of
the apparition of Jesus after his burial, and his levitation from earth to
heaven, are all dead, and we have only the record (a disputed record,
remember, my lord) of their presence at the scene. But this story of the
Lady of Lourdes is attested by numerous living Christian clergymen ; and
there are five hundred persons of rank and repute in England who will come
forward to-morrow and depose on oath that they saw Mr. Home ascend
in defiance of the known laws of gravity. If you admit the miracle in the
one case, you are logically bound to admit it in the other. But the fact
is, my lord, that logic is eliminated from the arguments of theologians.
These gentlemen refuse to believe that Mr. Home can work miracles-
because they say that he is not God. But they believe that Jesus worked
miracles because he was God. And they believe that Jesus was God
because he worked miracles ! Argument on such premises is surely
futile.
Finally, my lord, you use the honoured name of John Stuart Mill to
support your position that miracles are evidences of Christianity. Your
lordship, however, has only quoted those portions of Mr. Mill’s argument
which suit the requirements of your own. Why did you not give his
conclusion, my lord? It is very clear and simple :—“The conclusion I
draw is, that miracles have no claim whatever to the character of historical
facts, and are wholly invalid as evidences of any revelation,’’ 1
Your lordship says that my account of the growth of supernatural
religions is inaccurate. My account is at best but a mere sketch, and
would doubtless bear revision and amplification. But if it was inaccurate
in every particular, the inaccuracy would not affect the argument concerning
the infidelity of the present hour. A false estimate of the character of
Mahomet does not make invalid a statement concerning Huxley, Herbert
Spencer, or the late Professor Clifford. From the moment of its inception
to the present hour, Christianity has been regarded with indifference by
the clearest thinkers. In its earliest dawn, when, if ever, its doctrines-
1 Three Essays on Religion. —J. S. Mill.


flowed pure from the lips of its teachers, it was received coldly by those
best fitted to judge of its qualities. Gibbon writes:— 1 “ The names of
Seneca, of the elder and younger Pliny, of Tacitus, of Plutarch, of Galen,
of the slave Epictetus, and of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, adorn the
age in which they flourished, and exalt the dignity of human nature. They
.filled with glory their respective stations either in active or contemplative
life; their excellent understandings were improved by study; philosophy
had purified their minds from the prejudices of the popular superstition ;
and their days were spent in the pursuit of truth and the practice of virtue.
Yet all these sages (it is no less an object of surprise than concern)
overlooked or rejected the perfection of the Christian system. Their
language or their silence equally discover their contempt for the growing
sect which, in their time, had diffused itself over the Roman empire.
Those among them who condescend to mention the Christians, consider
them only as obstinate and perverse enthusiasts, who exacted an implicit
submission to their mysterious doctrines, without being able to produce a
single argument that could engage the attention of men of sense and
learning.”
It is true that, so soon as it became the religion of the State, Christianity
was outwardly prosperous. From the time of Constantine to that of
Calvin, people found it inconvenient not to “believe,” for the guardians
of the faith got rid of unbelievers by the simple process of putting them to
death. But even in those unhappy days human reason was perpetually
breaking- bonds. Despite flame and faggot, new points of departure were
reached; and now, my lord, the time has arrived when men say openly
that they will no longer accept the gospel of .the miraculous, for, as your
lordship advises them, they have indeed “ pondered deeply ” that prime
article of the Chelsea prophet’s creed —“ The first of all gospels is this, that
a lie cannot endure for ever.”
I said, in reference to the condition of affairs in the modern world:—
“ The temples are still full of worshippers, the offerings still tinkle in the
plates, the confessionals are still thronged with breast-beating penitents,
and the bed-sides of the. dying still cheered by the sweet delusions poured
into too willing ears. But go out into the vrorld : where is your religion
then ? Does it inspire the politician, assist the man of science, or aid the
physician? No; it embarrasses them all. Do its teachings lighten the
heart of the philosopher, or assist the efforts of the philanthropist ? Read
the literature of the day—sip the life-blood of the running age, and
answer.”
Your lordship answers by saying that any man who could make such
an assertion concerning modern society must be very little acquainted with
England, or blinded by too strict attention to the teachings of a small
school of sceptics. I admit, my lord, that I have been for fifteen years
absent from England; but I venture to think that a person living in
Melbourne, who makes himself acquainted with the news of the w'orld by
means of newspapers, and who takes every opportunity to diligently read
all notable books upon the current questions of the day, may not be less
familiar with the state of modern thought than a country clergyman or the
hardworking minister of a provincial town. But, my lord, my opinions
upon the infidelity of the age are repeated, even in stronger terms than I
cared to use, by one who has passed his whole life in the observance of
the changes of religious thought in England, who is himself a vigorous
fighter in the arena of. religious discussion, and whose faith in spiritual
supremacy is so absolute that it constrained him to quit your church, as
I Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , chap. 15.


being insufficient for his needs, and placed him an earnest penitent at the
feet of the Holy Father. John Henry Newman, my lord, in his address
delivered at Rome on the occasion of his elevation to the Cardinalate,.
thus speaks of the present condition of religion in England :—“ Hitherto
the Civil power has been Christian, Even in countries separated from the
Church, as in my own, the dictum was in force, when I was young, that
Christianity was the law of the land. Now, everywhere that goodly frame-
work of society, which is the creation of Christianity, is throwing off
Christianity, The dictum to which I have referred, with a hundred others
which followed upon it, is gone, or is going, everywhere ; and by the end of
the century, unless the Almighty interferes, it will be forgotten
Your lordship attempts to support your argument by giving a list of
names of physicians, poets, and others, who profess Christianity, It would
be easy to reply by a list of men who profess infidelity. If you may point
to Beale, Dickens, Tennyson, and Paget, I may point to Tyndall, George
Eliot, Shelley, and Maudsley. Names go for nothing. But, my lord, are
you sure that these men are Christians? Do you think that Tennyson,
Beaconsfield, and Carpenter believe in a Christian Hell? Nay, is the
description which your lordship has given of God the description of the
God of the Christians?
In your description, my lord, there is—let your reverend brother deem
it pantheistic or atheistic if he will —nothing which can offend justice or
shock imagination. But, my lord, the Christian God, the God of your
Church, is no Force, no Almighty Fland, no Great Intelligence, He is
nothing so vague as any of these, but very personal and material, defined
very clearly by the Christian Scriptures and the Articles of Christian Faith.
He made the world in five days. And on the sixth he made a sinless man
whom he allowed to be tempted to disobedience, to the curse of him and
his posteiity. During four thousand years God watched the progress of
the race he had doomed to suffering. He once sent a flood, which
destroyed all save one family, who, with two of every created creature, went
into an ark, and floated on the water. He frequently interfered personally in
human affairs, to assist his clients, or to injure their enemies. He stopped
the movement of the planets, in order that a tribe of Bedouins might be
more effectually slaughtered. He caused a whale to swallow a “ prophet,’’
and, after a hundred and forty-four hours, to vomit him forth again alive.
At last he put in practice a scheme for benefiting the unhappy race he had
tormented so long. He caused, by means of a Spirit, which was himself,
the maiden wife of a Jewish carpenter to have a son, who was himself
also. Under the name of Jesus Christ, God lived thirty years on earth,
turning water into wine, healing the sick, and raising the dead. At last he
was killed in a civic tumult, was buried, went down into hell, rose again,
and “ took his body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the
perfection of man’s nature,” wherewith he ascended into the skies, and sits
there to judge all men at the last day ; and if men believe this they will be
saved, and if they believe it not they will be damned. There is no escape,
no place of repentance, no hope of mercy. Neither good deeds, nor
charity, nor love can save us. Your “ Christianity,” my lord, is absolute
on this point. The 18th article of your faith says:—“ They also are to be
had accursed that presume to say that every man shall be saved by the
Law or Sect which he professeth, so that he be diligent to frame his life
according to that Law and the light of Nature. For holy Scripture doth
set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be
saved.” And what is this damnation with which your God threatens us ?
It is confinement in a bottomless pit of fire and brimstone, a place of outer
darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth ; and


this confinement lasts for ever—through all eternity—in the sight of God,
who will not suffer so much as a drop of water to cool the burning tongues
•of the tormented ! This a God !—in verity, my lord, if there be a Devil,
I think this is he.
But do men believe this, my lord ? Ido not think so. Even in your
own eloquent specification of the deity, you say nothing about this revived
corpse sitting in heaven, with “ flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to
the perfection of man’s nature.” 1 And when a Christian Bishop, in
explaining his religion, forgets to mention Christ, it is not unreasonable to
suppose that laymen do not always remember him.
But, admitting all you say, my lord; granting you that Christ is God,
and that unless we obey his commands we shall go to a place of everlasting
torment, I say, fearlessly, that if it be so, there are few people who think it.
Belief is an attitude of mind, and displays itself in actions, not professions.
If a man believed that the roof of a house was about to fall on him and
crush him, he would escape from it. If men believed that they would be
burned in hell unless they obeyed Christ’s orders, they would rush from
the world and its enjoyments to practise those methods of salvation which
he taught. But they do not. When the young man came to Christ and
said, “ What shall I do to be saved ? ” Christ replied, “ Sell all thou hast,
and follow me.” This advice, my lord, is seldom taken, even by the
sincerest “ believers.”
But your lordship will reply that many of the sayings of Jesus were
“ allegorical,” that it is impossible in these days to give our clothes to
robbers, and to turn our cheeks to the sraiter. Very good—then
Christianity, as Christ taught it, is, as I say, dead. The religion that your
lordship is sworn to preach and practice, may be that approved by the
Anglican Church at the Convocation held in London in the year 1562;
but it is not Christianity.
Then what is Christianity ? your lordship may not improperly ask. I
find it difficult to decide.
The Rev. Henry Blunt, in his Dictionary of Sects, gives the following
list of existing varieties of Christians ; —“ Christians, Free Gospel
Christians, Free-thinking Christians, New Christians, Original Christians,
Primitive Christians, Protestant Christians, United Christians, Christian
Association, Christian Brethren, Christian Disciples, Christian Israelites,
Christadelphians,Roman Catholics, Independents, Baptists, Quakers, Presby-
terians, Unitarian Baptists, Unitarians, Huntingdon Connection Moravians,
New Connection General Baptists, Swedenborgians, Wesleyan Methodists,
New Connection Methodists, Primitive Methodists, Bryanites, Plymouth
Brethren, Irvingites, United Methodist Free Church, Seventh Day Baptists,
Muggletonians, Southcottians, Calvinistic Methodists, Jumpers, Shakers,
Socinians, Universalists, Bourneans, Coglers, Peculiar People, Scottish
Kirk, Cameroniails, Secession Kirk, Burghers, Anti-Burghers, Old Light
Burghers, New Light Burghers, New Light Anti-Burghers, Relief Synod,
Protesters, Free Kirk, United Presbyterians, Sweet Singers, Non-Jurors,
Moderates, Buchanites, Scottish Baptists, Marrow Men, Campbellites,
Sandemanians.” And some fifty more, such as the Hard Shell Baptists,
the Jerkers, the Barkers, the Tumblers, and the Free Lovers, whom I
have not patience to enumerate.
Here, my lord, we have the edifying spectacle of more than one
hundred classes of persons each strongly asserting that every other but
itself will be damned. In your lordship’s eyes, I am a spiritually lost
man. You deem me an infidel and a heretic, and are bound by your
I IV. Articles of Religion.


.articles of belief to think that infidels and heretics will be damned to all
eternity. Alas, my lord, Dr. Goold, an Archbishop of the Roman
Catholic Church, who claims to be ordained by one of the immediate
•successors of the apostles, thinks just the same of your lordship.
Your lordship concludes by saying that my speculation concerning
the condition of the world without an “ active and general delusion ”
in other words, without supernatural religion—is a “vague and vacant
generality.” I wrote r—'“ Mankind, freed from the terrors of future
torments, and comprehending that by no amount of prayers can they
secure eternal happiness for their souls, will bestow upon humanity the
fervour they have hitherto wasted in sighs and hymns. The creed which
teaches that the intellect should be distrusted will fade away. The
interest now felt in churchmen’s disputations will be transferred to
discoveries of science. The progress of the world will be the sole care of
its inhabitants, and the elevation of the race the only religion of mankind.”
This is not a “ vague generality,” but a series of particular definitions ;
and is admirably expanded by Cardinal Newman, who believes that the
Almighty will shortly especially interfere to prevent the spread of purely
secular education. He says Hitherto, it has been considered that
religion alone, with its supernatural sanctions, was strong enough to secure
the submission of the mass of the population to law and order. Now,
philosophers and politicians are bent on satisfying this problem without
the aid of Christianity. Instead of the churches’ authority and teaching,
they would substitute, first of all, a universal and a thoroughly secular
■education, calculated to bring home to every individual that to be orderly,
industrious, and sober is his personal interest. Then, for the great
working principles to take the place of religion for the use of the masses
thus carefully educated, they provide the broad fundamental ethical truths
of justice, benevolence, veracity, and the like, proved experience, and
those natural laws which exist and act spontaneously in society and
social matters, whether physical or psychological—for instance, in
government, trade, finance, sanitary experiments, the intercourse of
nations.”
In this condition of affairs, it is true that there would be no more
church-going, but it does not follow that men would throw off all moral
restraint because they had found their “ religion ” insufficient for them. As
I said— “ A strong-souled man, who lives uprightly because he feels that
selfishness and sin injure the welfare of his fellow-man, who does that
which is his duty, that which he and all other free souls know to be their
duty, without hope of present fee or reward—that man needs the
ministrations of no priests, and demands not the ‘ consolations ’ of
religion.”
Your lordship thinks that there can be no knowledge of duty without
priestly instruction. You ask, What is the meaning of duty ? “A man,
we are told, is to do his ‘ duty,’ whatever that may be” Ah, my lord, has
a life’s practice of Christianity not yet taught you that ? Yes, your lordship
defines it. You say : —“ We find enthroned at the centre of our being a
magisterial, even royal, authority, which we call Conscience. No matter
how that faculty came into existence—it demonstrably exists. That, again,
moral judgments have differed in different ages, and among various races!
is no reason for calling in question the existence of a moral sense. When
the question before our minds is whether a particular act be just or pure,
education and public opinion may greatly help to determine the answer!
But when once that answer has been given, when once it is agreed that a
particular action is pure or just, then we are conscious of a peremptory
voice within affirming that it ought to be done, that such a line of action


is not merely expedient, but obligatory, and that to follow any other
course is not merely foolish, but wrong.”
But your lordship says that the man who lives by this rule of conduct
follows not the rules of religion, but the rules of morality. I accept the
conclusion. We have long had Religion without Morality; let us try,
then, Morality without Religion.
I am, my lord,
Your lordship’s most obedient, humble servant,
Marcus Clarke.


3 1508 02236787
One Vol., Post Bvo, Cloth, 4s.
HISTORY
OF THE
CONTINENT OF AUSTRALIA
AND THE ISLAND OF TASMANIA,
FROM 1787 TO 1870.
COMPILED BY
MARCUS CLARKE.
Published for the Use of Schools, under the authority of the
Minister for Public Instruction in Victoria.
3J 1 . IF 1 . BAILLIEEE,
PUBLISHER IN ORDINARY to the VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT.


BAILLIBRB’S
WELL-KNOWN SERIES OF
Australian Gazetteers and Road Guides,
AND OFFICIAL POST-OFFICE DIRECTORIES.
Bail lie re’s NEW SOUTH WALES Gazetteer and Road Guide,
one vol., Bvo, with map, cloth ... ... £2 2s.
VICTORIAN Gazetteer and Road Guide, 1879, one vol.,
Bvo, cloth, plain map, 215.; half-bound, coloured
map ... ••• ••• ••• 31s. 6d.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN Gazetteer and Road Guide,
one vol., Bvo, with map, cloth ... £1 Is.
QUEENSLAND Official Gazetteer and Road Guide, and
Squatting Directory, 1876, one vol., Bvo, cloth, plain
map, 215.; half-bound, coloured map ... 31s. 6d.
. TASMANIAN Gazetteer and Road Guide, 1877,
one vol., Bvo, cloth, plain map, 215.; half-bound,
coloured map ... ••• ••• 31s. 6d.
NEW SOUTH WALES Official Post Office Directory,
corrected up to 1868, 1,100 pages, one vol., Bvo,
cloth ls.
QUEENSLAND Official Post Office Directory (Profes-
sional, Squatting, and Trade), 1874, one vol., Bvo,
cloth ... ••• ••• £1 I s -
VICTORIA Official Post Office (Commercial, Professional,
Trades, Farming, and Squatting) Directory, royal
Bvo, International Exhibition Edition, 1880,
cloth ... ••• ••• £% ? s '
ALSO,
Bailliere’s County Atlas of Victoria
Containing Plioto-Litho copy of Raised Plan of the Colony,
Map of entire Colony, showing the whole of the Mining Districts
and Divisions, and separate Map for each of the 19 counties,
drawn to a scale of 2 miles to the inch.
TWENTY-ONE M-A-IPS.
1 Vol, folio, handsomely half-hound, published at £3 10s. ; reduced to 30s.
O IN' SALE.
MICROSCOPES & FITTINGS BY THE BEST MAKERS.
AR TICULA TED SKELETONS.
F. F. BAILLIERE, 104 COLLINS-ST. EAST,
isdiEXjßOTJ^isrE.
