

PS
mm
m






THE TM O/'OSSJJ £>£.V/#T'/or/ &Y TOMT H C&CC/* F/ZO* W T"(J tj;
< Lrtr'£lY f< ESc/M V£Y£F£> WOO/.& /YU-L&S O/* /O CMS C(//< V/SS f tf W£>
/5 £Sr/M 0 r&0 TO COST &o V7~ f 000 AlOrtS Te/fiH 0y Cf+tS,
UTEER /? GO ,


CIVIL SERVICE
POLITICAL INFLUENCES,
&c., &c.
By “CORVUS.”
COMPLETE EXDITXO3ST.
WITH MAP.
Reprinted (by consent of the Proprietors) from the
“Sydney Mail” and “Echo,” in which they
appeared from September to
December, 1883.
Turner and Henderson, Hunter, Street. Sydney


CIVIL SERVICE.
PART ONE.


tfj uSSrF 8 T/7
K-S-V
THE CIVIL SERVICE
BY CORVUS.
A vast subject truly.
Vast in its importance to us all by virtue of its present huge dimensions, and
which huge as they now be are growing as steadily and increasingly as the most
luxuriant and thriving upas tree that has ever yet reared its deadly umbrage, and
capable of very vast deadliness indeed towards all other healthful social life if its
present rate of growth remains unchecked.
Vast, too, in its mere commercial aspect when it is remembered that already
in this youthful colony whose hundredth anniversary is still uncounted, our
Civil Service numbers in its ranks of officers, sous-officers, and full privates, some
9000 of persons. .
Think of it. One in every eighty of the population of the colony is a Civil
servant, or still more accurately to gauge the dimensions of this great political
machine, social evil, or human upas tree, whichever be its best cognomen, say,
omitting women and children from the count, that about one person of every
thirty of our adult male population is a" Civil servant,” or in the employment
of the State.
“ But,” says an objector, “ surely here be errors ; the Blue Book contains
the names of not more than 5000 persons. V here are the other 4000 of whom
you speak ?”
The Blue Book would indeed be even much more of a very blue book to
peruse than it now is if all the persons in the employment of the State were
enumerated in its pages, and probably scarcely more than half of our “ Civil
servants ” are known to such fame as is conferred by a record in the “ major s
big roll call, otherwise known as the Blue Book ; that interesting volume which,
by the way, is usually one year and a half old when it is born.*
A comparison of the Blue Book for 1862 with those for the years 1872 and
1881 (the latest yet published) will show that in 1862 there were some 2000 names
therein ;in 1872 about 3000, and in 1881 some 4600. Pretty sturdy growth this.
In using the upas tree as a comparison in this description of our Civil service,
it is but fair to the long misunderstood and much maligned Antiaris toxicaria to
admit at once that it has been proved beyond doubt that its assumed poisonous
shadow was almost purely an imaginary evil. It is sincerely to be regretted that
a similar retraction of evil reputation cannot truthfully be made with respect to
the Civil service.
That this monstrous growth already exercises a very deadly influence indeed
upon our body, political and social, will be the onusprobandi of these papers.
Is there not in the one fact already alluded to, viz.: that scarcely more than a
moiety of the persons actually employed by the State are known to the employer
—the public—as being in its service :is there not in that circumstance alone a
great deal to excite astonishment and justify inquiry and comment ?
It might be urged in reply : “No, there is nothing strange in this ; not more
strange than that a large contracting or other mercantile firm should have in its
employ thousands of labourers whose names are unknown to the heads of the
firm. ” .
* For instance, the Blue Book for the year 1883 will make its appearance in the usual course
of such events in A.D. 1884 J.


But, let it be remembered that the firm is in the position to ascertain for an
absolute certainty that its thousands of unknown employees are all workers ; the
work is there to prove that so many pairs of hands have been working ; not
merely that so_ many names are on the weekly paysheet, but that an absolute
result of work is being paid for.
And if the public of the colony could possibly obtain similar surety that the
work for which in most cases it pays liberally is being performed, there would be
at least one very great need the less for pursuing the subject in these papers or
. that exactly what the public cannot do ; and until a new order of
things prevails, it is exactly what it will never be able to do. Not only this ;we
shall never be able to withdraw from the Civil Service the stigma implied in our
upas tree comparison until such time as it can be made clear to the public that
its employees are really employed, and not merely being paid for employment
the extent and nature whereof are doubtful. Until in fact the public service is
regulated and controlled in such fashion as would satisfy a commercial firm—no
matter whether a soft goods, an iron master’s, or a newspaper proprietor’s—the
fashion which demands that money paid for labour shall be actually earned ; and
that the holiest of all decorative orders, the order of merit, shall be as sure of
i ecognition and bestowal in the public service as it ordinarily is in the larger and
infinitely more healthful atmosphere breathed by those whose labours are
performed outside of and beyond that which surrounds the Civil Service.
~l * i s scarcely possible to exaggerate the largeness and importance of this
Civil Service question.
Jake, for example, its influence upon the morals and character of the
hundreds of young lads and men who enter the service, or who are destined to
enter it. And let us think of what a terribly damning influence it is which is
inflicted by such experiences as must accrue to a very large percentage of those
youths who choose the service as their future career in life.
As that service now exists, a much worse “start in life ” could not well be
given to a well-trained, honest, and well-intentioned youngster than bv placing
him therein. J * *
Say that he has been well looked after and educated ; that he has worked
his way upwards from one form or class to the next, and from school to University,
b y (llllt of fair work in shoulder-to-shoulder competition with his fellows ;
and that he has, till now, learned that good marks, approval, and rewards, were
the sure lesult of diligence, application, and perserverance. The future career
has now to be chosen ; and, smitten by the charms of the “ highly respectable ”
brand, so largely, and so lamentably, believed to be conferred on those who obtain
a Government appointment,” he selects the public service for his start in life.
His appointment, as such matters now mostly are, will have to be obtained
not by competition with his fellows and as the result of his proved superiority to’
other applicants, but by the influence of some friendly member of Parliament or
Minister, or may be through the good offices of some Civil servant of position
and the good offices of even a Government messenger have, by the way, been
more effectual ere now in such matters than a dpzen certificates of’either
scholarship or ability, if these were unendorsed by “ influence.”
Here is the first demoralising tendency—the newly-fledged “highly-respec-
table commences with the fact thoroughly well imprinted in his memory that he
has entered upon a career wherein influence, not merit, is the open sesame to at
least the first portals of the service. And as time goes on, if he has not the spirit
and pluck to desire something better, and to quit the service in search of it he
will most assuredly daily and hourly gather fresh proofs that, so far as promotion
and advancement are concerned, a very little “influence” is infinitely more
potent than hard work, conscientious discharge of duty, or earnest effort
He will remember that it was influence which put him where he is; he will
know that the same influence can be depended upon to keep him there unless he
is very active-minded indeed in wrongdoing ; and great activity of mind not being
now required of him he will keep straight enough to avoid giving absolute cause
or complaint against him ; and he will equally surely drift into that calmly


philosophical condition of mind, or mindlessness, essential to the career of a
Civil servant whose influence is to be his sheet anchor, and a sheet anchor it is
surely enough, but its anchorage is in a very “Dead Sea” itself of hopelessly
wasted and lost, and yet most priceless, youthful spirit and energy.
How can it be otherwise ? What is there in the Civil Service—answer it, ye
gray-haired veterans, if ye will—to call forth in a high-spirited honourable-
minded lad the qualities which shall presently make him recognised as made of
such stuff as the successful mercantile man, the manufacturer, the anti-civil
service professional man, are made of ? Where is the call in the service for
zeal, emulation, or individual excellence ? Will not influence suffice, and serve
him better than any or all of these ? Answer it, ye experienced ones.
Or, as I intend and hope, the answer to that, and to many another and
perhaps more important interrogatory concerning our Civil Service, shall be found
in these papers clearly enough ere the topmost branch of the great upas-tree shall
have been reached in our exploration of it,- —an exploration which will reveal
some remarkably curious conditions under which the tree has become what it is,
under the skilful care of its political gardeners.
With so big a fortress to storm, or, to continue the arboraceous comparison
wherewith we started in these papers, with so huge a monster of the forest as our
upas tree to climb, and to thoroughly explore ’ere we take counsel and thought as
to the means to be devised for checking its unhealthful growth, or to reduce its
ungainly bulk to reasonable limits, a very careful reconnaissance s necessary.
Confusion, dissatisfaction, and discordant conditions prevail so largely in the
service itself as to form a sort of official maelstrom, or a Civil Service Niagara
whirlpool, in which, if he be not more wary than the bold champion whose life so
recently paid the penalty of his own recklessness in his duel with the veritable
Niagara, the man who seeks to do battle with it may haply find himself in such
rapids of troubled waters as shall make him dangerously near to becoming lost
therein. But comparisons, as the proverbs tell us, being odious, let us be satisfied
to deal with as few as possible, and having adopted the upas tree as our symbolic
equivalent for the service, let us adhere to it.
And surely the trunk of our giant upas may be fairly considered to be well
and truly represented by our Lands Department. *
A very huge trunk, and a very ugly giant still, notwithstanding the compara-
tively recent and critical scrutiny to which it was subjected, and which unques-
tionably resulted in a very considerable and wholesome check and restriction being
placed upon some of the giant’s most dangerous and objectionable tendencies.
And yet what was effected as compared with what remains to be done ? The
mere stripping off of a few parasitical climbers upon the main trunk, so to speak,
rather than the lopping of any of the limbs of the great trunk itself, or of checking
the flow of sap which leaves it still as vigorous, big, black, and ugly as of old ;
and still growing.
Let us probe this great solid-looking trunk ; with no gentle touch as of one
who fears to destroy a tree of benignant shade and blessing, but with a big strong
auger, and with a determination to know every inch of its diameter as well as its
girth, and to learn exactly how much of sound timber there may be which may
yet be turned to good honest uses; how much of rottenness at the heart, and how
much of the life-killing, shadow making, wide spreading head and branches may
safely and satisfactorily be cut away, and be never again permitted to stand
between us and the clear sunlight of usefulness and general good.
To say at once and unmistakably that the existence of this huge trunk is due
wholly and solely to the present land laws of the colony, is to say nothing more
absolute fact, and very demonstrable fact too. To say, also, as the auger pene-
trates the trunk in its quest, that it at once encounters unsoundness and rotten-
ness where only soundness should be, is no less true.


If but these papers could be illustrated with maps and diagrams faithfully
compiled from truthful data, what an insight into the correctness and truth of
these assertions would, almost at a glance, be disclosed to even the most casual
observer thereof. Let us, however, picture in our mind’s eye what some of those
illustrations might show to us. Take a sample map, and observe that amongst
the names now published for the first time to the eyes of a credulous and confiding
public are to be found those of scores of patriots whose voices have been ever
crudest in denouncing the pestilential race of land sharks, and that highest develop-
ment thereof, the political land shark, most especially.
Acres by the thousands and tens of thousands selected, dummyed, sold ;
hemmed in, too, by such an elaborate system of skilfully devised “reserves ”
reserves for the public good be it always remembered, but withal such goodly
public reserves, forsooth, that they practically form an impregnable cordon
around tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands of acres of land which are
in these faithfully compiled charts of ours, shown to be in the sole and exclusive
possession of . . , . . , , , .
Well of some of the many pure patriots whose voices have ever been loudest,
on hustings and off them, in condemnation of jobbery, corruption and plunder;
and especially against all the deadly sins of the land sharks, and of political
land sharks particularly. , . ... J
That would be a sort of sample map to be found amongst our illustrations ;
and which should surely shed such a startingly clear light upon the upas tree
shade as to rob it for ever of any future chances of further evil-doing.
And supposing, too, that the mysteries now smugly and snugly hidden away
in the archives of the Lands Office were to be equally faithfully overhauled, and
their contents interpreted by experts—or those who have “ been there ” —what a
list of well-known names should we find in association with, oh ! what marvel-
lously queer pieces of business; land shark business ; what a chorus of shocked
denials would rise up—“’Tis not I,’tis not I.” _
Why, the reminiscenses of the most illustrious dead, the autobiographies of
the most ’famous or infamous of men or women, would pale, for a nine days’
wonder at least, before the interest aroused by these documents.
And if it were possible to empanel a grand jury of the country, and to call
before it and place upon oath some of those thousands of Lands Office employees,
and they were to speak the truth and the whole truth, what revelations should
we have ; what tales of the daily and protracted visits of this political sharkist
and that’; of the hours spent in this branch and that of the great upas tree ; free
selecting—with a vengeance, believe it,—on this limb; “reserving” (for the
public good, always be it remembered) on that one, and turning over these leaves
and those with the absolute freedom and impunity born of legislative training
and long familiarity with, if not of long experience of, its potential influence.
But surely this is fiction.
Not a bit of it; real solid fact ; and to understand somewhat, and in the
absence of that grand jury panel, how it can happen that a great public depart-
ment, such as is our Crown Lands Department, can possibly be such as it is here
described, viz., something very nearly resembling a close cover for those queer,
but not rare birds of prey—the land sharks (this sounds Irish, but every one
knows that land sharks are very queer birds, and very peccant ones too), it is
necessary to remember the extent to which influence and political patronage and
power have been, and are, exercised in filling the public departments with Civil
servants. .... . .
And surely, whatever be their other sms of omission or commission, the
public would not wish, or at any rate under these circumstances it would not
expect, that those patronage nominees should prove ungrateful to their patrons ;
and would it not be the basest of ingratitude to these were the nominees or
appointees to object or to refuse to give them all information and assistance in
their power whensoever it be demanded ; and especially when, as is so
thoroughly understood by both the patrons and the patronised, it is all done
strictly and entirely for the public good.


If any one doubts whether it is necessary to have such imformation or
assistance in order to get almost all and every piece of business transacted which
may be desired at the Crown Lands Department, let him try it.
He’ll very rapidly discover that the only satisfactory way of threading that
maze is under the guidance of one of those forest rangers which many of our con-
stituencies so thoughtfully send into Parliament, apparently for the express and
benignant purposes of guarding our upas tree, and to undertake, for various
considerations, mostly substantial ones, the pleasant and useful task of
transacting their own and other people’s land business.
No patriotic citizen or colonist who looks at those lordly nobly proportioned
architectural piles of buildings, our Crown Lands Offices and our Public Works
Offices, but must admit their beauty and feel proud of it; and he will most
naturally hug to himself the complacent thought, that his adopted land, or native
land, whiche’er it be, has made such strides, such substantial progress as to be
warranted in erecting monumental evidences such as these of its prosperity.
And yet to those who have the opportunity of knowing thoroughly, not only
the inner life and secrets of those great human bee hives—wait though, I don’t
want to malign the excellent apis mellijica, so I will recur to the upas simile—it
is subject for grave thought and for much uneasiness when he compares the vast-
ness of such public offices and departments as these to the smallness of the
population of the colony; and when he bethinks him of how much, how
terribly much of the absolute capital of the colony (its fee simple of lands) has
been dealt with as though it were the mere increment or usufruct of its invest-
ments.
And such an observer will be prone to regard these palatial and noble structures
rather in the character of monster screens or blinds erected to bar the eyes of the
general public from correctly and truly estimating the actual condition of its
affairs, and from discovering all those myriad very busy, very profitable( to them-
selves) visits of those political and other forest rangers to the great upas tree.
This may be considered as digressive from the subject heading of these papers;
but it is far from being so; for it is absolutely certain that this huge upas tree has
been fostered and cultivated mainly as the means to an end; a most fatally
dangerous end, be it also asserted, as regards public interests.
Without its aid, without its vast dark shadow to conceal those who, as
already indicated, have so untiringly and so mischievously devoted their time and
energies, influence and position, to work their objects, those objects could never
have been effected.
Surely the great mass of the public of this colony, notwithstanding its
boasted intelligence, its freedom from old world bonds and chains, is marvellously
supine, or indifferent to some of the evils which beset it, and which are increasing
day by day.
In this fair Australia we have rejoiced ere now at the thought that here, at
least, are no hugely endowed landed aristocrats and hereditary monopolists of
lands once public, but which for centuries have been held as real estate by men,
who, in these days, are regarded as little better than usurpers of public rights.
And yet, day by day, there is growing up a class of land monopolists in our midst
whose grip upon the public estate is already a very formidable public wrong.
That public goes into spasms of almost ludicrous violence now and again over
protection to native industry, or some such matter that might very safely be left
to work its own proper results in due season. But it appears to be blind as a
mole and apathetic as a jellyfish to the actions of many of our patriots and other
members of the body politic ; and yet that apathy means nothing less than pro-
tection to the native industry of laudsharks. The public cannot assuredly have
any proper conception of the extent to which it is beguiled, beguiled, and
despoiled through the medium of some of those who it fondly imagines are simply


following the ordinary, if not very noble, methods of serving their constituencies—
the getting this bridge built, that courthouse on to the Estimates, or this little
axe ground. *
If nothing worse than these things were chargeable at their door, the country
would get its representatives very cheaply. But very much greater evils than
these are being perpetrated, and all, or mostly so, under cover of that grand tree
of ours.
The signs thereof are plentiful and conspicuous enough if we will but observe
them. Let it be noticed that, w'hereas even ten years ago, there was scarcely a
commercial corporation or firm outside of the banks which made any special claim
to doing business in land speculation only, to-day there are dozens of such insti-
tutions in Sydney, with branches and agencies scattered throughout the country.
And let it be noticed too, that the business of land agency is now in so very
many cases conducted by members of Parliament, and that there are scores of
land agents here in Sydney for ever busily engaged in various explorations
amongst the upas tree's many branches. Let it be noted too, that, of the tens of
millions of acres which even ten years since still public lands, to-day it is
a difficult thing to find, in almost any part of the colony, any compact large
areas of useful unalienated land ; while in the most richly endowed portions of
the colony—the coal country, the timber districts, and the mineral lands- -it is
absolutely impossible now to obtain any considerable quantity of unalienated land.
Sold, syndicated, leased, gone ! Absolutely and for ever in most cases.
Millions and millions of acres in all; tens of thousands of rich mineral and coal
lands, gone ; and into the possession of how many thousands of that same great,
and greatly blind public. How many of the working men of this colony are
landowners ?
Why, the holders of these vast estates, which have been thus almost
imperceptibly permitted to pass away, do not number many hundreds ;
comparatively a handful of men are to-day great holders of land than were ever
the whole of the landed aristocrats of England combined ; not only greater as
regards the extent of their holdings, that is of course, but as the possessors of
even greater wealth.
And who are these great landed proprietors we have permitted thus to enrich
themselves ? Public benefactors ? Patriots ? Men who have earned such rich
rewards ? If such they be, their good deeds have been done very secretly, and
have even yet to be disclosed to us. And yet the public of this colony permits
itself to be thus despoiled, and blindly returns some of the most active of the
despoilers as representatives of public requirements, and as blindly provides
the ways and means—the ever-and-ever increasing ways and means—for main-
taining in a perfect state of fitness for the work of spoliation that great Civil
Service tree, without the aid of which the despoilers could effect but little
mischief. _ .
There is ample reason for believing that there exists in this city and colony
of ours, land rings and conspiracies, landsharks and conspirators, as strongly
developed and organized as any that have ever existed in that hotbed of the
genus, New York city. Where the carcase is there also are the vultures ; and
no fairer or fatter carcase was ever more completely at the mercy of the vultures,
no richer picking was ever enjoyed by the American ring men, than that afforded
to our local experts by fair New South Wales,
And all done so quietly too.
No loud talk on Change of this great swindle and that splendid haul ; of
that smart piece of finessing, and this brilliant bit of public plundering ; not a
bit of it.
Smug, go-to-meeting-like calmness and outward respectability have prevailed
the while the rifling, the sharp bit of business, the picking of the carcase, has
gone on ; as completely and expertly as it was ever done by the most clamorous
ring ever heard on New York ’Change or in London or Paris Bourse.
True, now and again we have seen greyhaired patriots hold up shocked
hands in indignation, and lift loud voices in detestation of a Milburn Creek patu
de finesse ; but what a sham, what a farce, what utter and complete bunkum,


when scarce a week that has passed these many years, but that far greater
wrongs have been inflicted upon that unfortunate public ; and all, or mostly all,
beneath the carefully fostered shade of the great tree !
I will indicate an instance of how it is thus utilized and of how much wrong
and mischief is wrought thereby.
The first knowledge of the state of its exchequer, and of its balance, of its invest-
ments and securities, and possessions surely belongs to the investor or possessor ;
in the present case the public of the colony. And yet it is in an every-day experi-
ence that if one of that body (unaccompanied by a “forest ranger” remember)
seeks to obtain either at our Crown Lands Department, or at any one of its infinite
branches throughout the colony, accurate information such as shall enable him to
purchase a portion of land, or to select a homestead, that he shall nine times out
of ten find himself plunged into a very thicket of doubt and confusion. A land
agent at once becomes a necessity.
And if, like a wise man, he recognises that fact and accepts the inevitable,
nines times out of ten he shall find that his non-official land agent is in possession of
accurately charted maps, in which all information is posted up to date as carefully
and completely and as clearly as are the ledgers of a bank or of a counting house.
Now, how is it that an unofficial land agent’s maps are such splendidly com-
plete intelligencers, whilst those which are accessible to the public in its own
departments are so splendidly incomplete and deficient of information ? It is not
to the pubiic interest that it should be so, assuredly, or that Mr. Sharkist, the
land agent, should be possession of data which one of the public cannot at once
obtain on application at the Government departments. And yet such is, I assert,
very much the case indeed.
How does the land agent manage this ? Whence does he get this first tip—
this proof copy, or print before letter, of the public maps ? True, the agent is in
all probability either an M.L.A. or a “ forestranger he is, very possibly indeed,
also a patron to many an appointee in the upas branches ; he is assuredly a very
constant visitor there, either in person or by deputy, and knows his way about it
even better than most of those who are employed therein ; and it may, of course,
happen that as he is very much interested, indeed, in getting the first tidings and
information for himself, his clients, or constituents, that it is thus he succeeds in
obtaining it.
On the other hand, the great trunk itself has no such ardent desire or interest
on behalf of the public ; and, so far as the public appears to be concerned, it also
is quite indifferent to the uses and abuses to which so valuable information may be
turned in the hands of Mr. Sharkist.
So much for at least some of the outward and most visible signs of the evils
being worked in connection with, almost in conjunction within in some instances,
our Civil Service ; and now let me remark to my readers that with respect to the
mere administrative part of the Crown Lands Department's failings and shortcom-
ings, and those matters more intimately connected with the inner life thereof, I
do not at this present time propose to speak or write. That will form the subject
of future comment and description when I am treating with the question of internal
administration as affecting all our public departments in common, and though
these are matters which doubtless by many of the readers of these papers will be
esteemed as of first importance, I am chiefly desirous in the first place to arouse
general public interest and attention by indicating as broadly and strongly as pos-
sible the magnitude, as well as the precise nature of the evils arising from the
present condition of the service to the public itself in the widest sense of the
question.
The misrule, the disorganisation, the dissatisfaction, and the wrongs being
wrought alike to Civil Servants and the public will be fully dealt with hereafter ;
but I purpose in my next paper to take my readers on an exploration of another
great branch of the upas tree, the Public Works Department, and set forth a few
discoveries which, I feel sure, will have very considerable interest for them.
And in acknowledging some communications which have already reached me
in reply to my invitation conveyed in the first of these papers, I beg to inform
certain correspondents that it is quite out of the question that I should either dis-


close my name to them, or hold personal interviews. As I previously stated, all
bona fide communications will be regarded as strictly confidential, and it may
satisfy some of my correspondents to know that actual experiences have enabled
me to deal with the subject matter of these papers.
I have not hesitated in the previous papers to assert that from the fatal
facilities which the Crown Lands Department, as it now is and has so long been,
has afforded to parliamentary and other land agents, an immense amount of
almost irremediable wrong has been worked, and continues to be perpetrated
against the public interests of this colony.
My next endeavour shall be to show how another great branch of the service
has been made to participate in and be the means of extending the wrong.
No need to remind my readers that the generic term “ Public Works Depart-
ment ” covers several large branches of the Civil Service—the railways, the
harbours and rivers, the Colonial Architect’s, the water and sewage and the roads.
Nor need I remind them that in the same magnificent pile of buildings, which
contains certain portions of the above public departments, the Colonial Secretary’s
Department also finds a place.
There is something significant though in this latter conjunction of the
Executive Council’s meeting or mustering chamber, with the various administrative
department of works. Convenient enough for the transaction of public business
perhaps ; but also a little too convenient as regards the facilities afforded for
those anti-public interests represented by the haunters of our public departments
—land agents, parliamentary and otherwise.
So far as the larger public abuses are concerned—and it is with these we will
now deal—pre-eminence must be given to the position occupied by our Railway
Department.
As regards their internal economy, unsatisfactory administrative conditions,
and share in contributing to the prevailing state of misrule and mischief, the
other branches of the Works Department are, of course, “in it,” in common
with, if not to the same extent as, the Lands and the Railways Departments.
But none of those other branches afford the same great opportunities or scope for
the fullest, I might almost say final, development of the tricks and wiles of the
land sharkists, political or private, afforded by the various railway departmental
branches.
At the risk of a little tediousness I may here explain that the Railway
Department consists of the following branches, viz.:—Firstly, the Commissioner
for Railways (£l2OO per'annum), who controls the whole clerical and administra-
tive branches of the department, and also the “ existing lines’ ” branch, with an
engineer at its head (£lOOO per annum), the “construction” of tramways, and
the locomotive engineers’ branch (£1000) ; secondly, the Engineer-in-Chief for
Railways (construction branch) £lBOO per annum, under whose direct control is
also the Trial Survey Branch, with an assistant engineer at its head (£700).
Now, the above appointments and branches form a very lively melange. Let
me indicate it.
The highest paid officer is the so-called “Engineer-in-Chief,” who submits
his plans and proposals, whether for new trial surveys or for works of construc-
tion for lines authorised by Parliament, to the Secretary for Public Works only.
The Commissioner, who is thus of course only nominally head of the depart-
ment, has no voice whatever in these matters, unless he can obtain mb rosa
opportunities of using that voice.
The Engineer-in-Ohief’s position and platform appear to be this : he claims
that as chief professional adviser of the colony, he is not to be required to submit
his professional and skilled work to the criticism of a non-professional and


unskilled officer of a lower actual grade in the service than that occupied by
himself, and one too, who, however admittedly high his talents, has but recently,
comparatively, occupied even that position.
On the other hand, the Commissioner’s standpoint seems to be this : “ Never
mind what my grade in the service is as indicated by my salary, never mind
what I was the other day, or what lam to-day, professionally considered. lam
Commissioner, and I am the real and supreme head, not only of the whole clerical
and administrative portions of the department, but also of a professional depart-
ment—the existing lines —a department of more real importance than that of the
Engineer-in-Chief, for I can spend more money, a great deal more, than he can,
and I do too, upon my own responsibility, and with the consent only of the
Minister ; and I have many hundreds of appointments at my gift or disposal; so
now Mr. Engineer-in-Chief, who is the real head of this department ? ”
Who indeed ? But herein is a pretty kettle of fish, believe me.
This is the sort of fish in that kettle, for instance : the so-called Engineer-in-
Chief’s department is known also as the Construction Branch; and the other profes-
sional department, that under the Commissioner’s direct control as explained, has
been named to me (during my enquiries on behalf of these papers), as the
“Destruction” Branch, it being thus called by its facetious godfather, from the
manner in which, so it is alleged, it is the practice therein to worry up complaints
and discoveries against the works executed by the other Branch—the Engineer-
in-Chief’s—and pull such works to pieces.
Now, it is not, I need scarcely assure my readers, my intention or desire to
impart to these papers the smallest essence even of partisanship; I shall state
facts only ; but already, surely, in the conflicting situation I have above partly
described, the public cannot fail to see how very seriously undesirable a state of
things is indicated thereby, and that there are some very troubled waters indeed
in the public service.
I shall presently give some very strong, because very costly, instances of the
way in which this Railway Department portion of the maelstrom affects the
public both as regards its exchequer and the morale of the public service.
In using the expression “ so-called ” to the appointment held by the Engineer-
in-Chief for Railways, it is not necessary perhaps that I should say that no dis-
courtesy is intended, but merely to indicate that although that officer is termed
“ chief ” railway engineer, and is paid the highest salary drawn by any of our
profession Civil-Servants, it curiously and anomalously appears that he is only
Chief Engineer in name ; and that immensely large sums of public money are
expended in other branches of the Railway Department upon railway works, not
only without any reference to his chieftaincy whatever, but also under professional
officers of much lower grade in the service, and by the/lirection of, arid controlled
only by, the Commissioner for Railways, a non-professional officer.
But before enlarging upon these administrative details let us follow for the
present that fuller development of which I spoke of the land sharkist business
through the medium of this railway branch of the service ; not in imagination, let
it be remembered, but from actual “spoors,” or tracks, which on their previous
excursions the skarkists have left in evidence.
Through such evidence it is made very clear indeed to such as will take the
trouble to heed the signs closely that in very many instances of the railway exten-
sions of this colony, the wire-pulling necessary to set the agitators, or agitation,
going has been done by the same men, or by their principals and constituents—by
the same active, alert, and peccant gentry, whose operations have been described
at the Lands Department, the Parliamentary and other land agents.
And that long and long before Messrs. Dick, Tom, and Harry, poor fellows,
and their numerous confreres, the pioneers and settlers upon our lands, had any
conception or thought about the need of a railway in their district, some of the
great body of sharkists had become very kindly and deeply intei’ested indeed,
directly and indirectly, but especially directly, in this and that district ; that
these men have been the main agitators for this and that railway, and the main
gainers by them. Such gainers, Messrs. Honest Selectors, believe it, as ye have
small conception of. Why the gains of a single successful operation of a member


of the sharkist tribe are larger—far and away larger sometimes—than the gains
realised in a life-time of hard brow-sweating labour and deprivation by even a
fairly successful free selector or settler.
Why should it be so ? Why should a few hundred expert scientific sharkists
be gorged with the fatness of the land ?—for, believe it, it is the real fatness
thereof which is now their portion, and the great bulk of the people of this colony
be used as their stepping-stones or ladders ; —and the colony’s Civil Service be
made mainly the instrument by which so great a distortion of the commonwealth
—extortion is scarcely too strong a term —is perpetrated.
How is it worked ?
Sometimes, oftener than many'people imagine, in such wise as this : when the
first sharkist movement is to be made for a new railway extension, the popular
voice must appear, at any rate, to require it; and what more natural, or even
more pi’oper, than that a few hundred struggling, hardworking settlers and farmers
in the district concerned should “ go for it ” to a man ; or that they should hug
Mr. M.L A. Sharkist to their bosoms with wild delight and feed him, drink him,
testimonial him, for his noble conception of a public man’s duties to his con-
stituents in initiating and in using his every effort to get the railway both
successfully into and out of Parliament.
And such conduct would even call forth admiration and praise from the writer
of these papers but for the fact, alas ! but for the fact that the spoors have shown
him that often and often, long before Messrs. Tom, Dick, and Harry were pulled
at by those wires, polled and rolled up as petitioners for the proposed railway ex-
tension, that long before all this the excellent Messrs. M.L.A., Sharkist and Co.
had made very sure of their ample reward for their patriotism by scooping r up
every acre of land possible to be obtained by these means and those, and by very
mean means indeed, some of them ; and that the first and last to reap the benefit
and the golden harvest produced by railway extension are those expert wirepullers.
But let us follow out the process indicated by the spoors. The agitation
having been thoroughly well started and kept going, the next step is the depu-
tation business. One of those decorously-attired and influential bodies termed
deputationists, which it has been my delight to observe and admire, waits upon the
Minister, and—but there, every reader of the newspapers knows all about that:
how the deputation is courteously received, how deeply impressed the Minister is
with the views put before him as to the desirability of so important, so rich, and
so lovely a district having its railway—(rather! the humorous fellow! why, we
have heard of a Minister, of the Crown colony of Utopia be it carefully noted,
who owned half such a district at the very minute he spoke to such a deputation,
or he and Messrs. Utopia Sharkist’s did between) —that he will consult with his
colleagues, and hopes that, indeed he feels sure nearly, that they will agree with
him that a “trial survey” shall be made.
Now, a “trial survey” in these days is as good as a railway pledged; the
spoors show that the game is practically won. Once the surveyor’s pegs go in for
even a trial line, and it will not be long before the railway extension itself is
under way.
And in one of my next papers I will proceed to show how very useful and im-
portant a part the Railway Branch of the service is made to perform in subserving
and completing the industrious pursuits of the experts who understand how to use
it. And just as there are none like living models for an artist or sculptor to copy
Nature’s works from, and nothing like actual examples to point a moral with or
adorn a tale, I will give some particulars which as spoors will, I am satisfied,
thoroughly bear out what I have asserted. I will give a chapter or two of the his-
tory of the well-known, but not nearly so well-known as it should be, Sydney and
Wollongong and Kiama railway extension.
And I will show that even away from Utopia the Civil service is made the
means of very queer pieces of business indeed.


In the last paper I traced a supposititious railway extension agitation from
its inception to the fructifying period when the trial survey becomes a certainty—
the period in fact when the forest rangers and those associated with them have
made a good goal or bull’s-eye.
In order to complete each picture as far as possible before limning a fresh one,
let me here say that even after the trial survey is promised that thereare some golden
opportunities for father skill and success on the part of some member or another
of the sharkish tribe,,; there is the chance afforded, for instance, by the deter-
mining on paper, or the county maps, the route of the proposed trial line, and
the arranging as to which property shall be ruined and sacrificed to the public
good by having the projected railway taken through it.
For it is a strange circumstance but an absolutely true thing, that owners
of lands through which railways are taken invariably declare themselves to be
seriously, sometimes ruinously, injured thereby; and these sufferers, poor fellows,
are also invariably paid large sums of public moneys in compensation ; and, by
the way, the “land valuation” and “compensation” branch of the Railway
Department will in its turn also afford some features of interest to the reader of
these papers.
Well, the general direction it is desired that the trial line shall be taken
having been roughly, but with considerable skill despite its roughness, indicated
on the maps, the opportunity occurs for more expertness, and it has happened
before now that land-sharkists have also occupied the position of actual employees
in the public service. Very wrong, is it not? but then who are the exemplars?
Who and what are those in high places who by their own actions show the way
to
“ Deeds that are dark and tricks that are vain ”
and who practically both initiate and co-operate with some of our Civil servants
in turning their opportunities for oblique operations against the public interest to
a profitable account ?
It would be easy enough here to name names and cite an abundance of actual
instances in answer to this suggestive question. But prudence, that prudence
which comes of some recent rough teachings—so rough that they jarred against
the opinions of ninety-nine men of a hundred-—these have taught us that the
columns of a newspaper must not expose in plain straight language public abuses,
saving under such penalties as must at any rate be in the present case avoided.
It may quite possibly happen though that some#of these truths which, for
these reasons, may not now be told here in their nakedness, shall yet be uttered
by the writer hereof in that safer place which is adorned by the presence of so
many of our expertest politicians, and where some of them will be afforded the
opportunity which should be so satisfactory to them of disproving their connec-
tion with political land-sharking and with public abuses in conjunction with the
Civil Service.
Suffice it in general terms, then, to say that the example set by land-sharkists
in high places has proved very contagious, and that some of the public employees
have proved as venal in that respect as their masters.
“ Engineering difficulties,” it is quite certain, frequently play a very useful
part in both determining as to what private properties are to be ruined, as afore-
said, and in enabling those who “ discover ” the difficulties to have a finger in the
pie ; and the professional finger comes out of that pie a very nice little finger
indeed sometimes ; very much like little Jack Horner’s thumb ;in fact.
It pulls out a plum:—
many plums.
“ And why not,” asks Mr. Professional Finger, “don’t they all do it? Do
not members of Parliament (Utopia, please) swarm round us from first peg to
last—from first pencil-mark on maps up in that big council-chamber out to the
first camping-ground of the survey party ? Do not many of them, they or their
agents, kindly haunt our camps and point out this route and that by which this
property and that may be avoided, so that it shall not be ruined by the rail-


way line ? Are not theirs the keen eyes which often are the first to discover
‘ engineering difficulties,’ such as.compel the line to be taken, much against their
wishes, patriotic fellows, through their lands ? ” And surely Mr. Professional is
justified herein ; and just as surely his finger pulls out some of those plums ; and
as for the public, who cares for it; and how much care does the public show for
itself and its affairs in such matters ?
It has been remarked to me, since I commenced these papers, that if I hoped
to arouse any public feeling, or to excite public attention to the extent of induc-
ing it to take any action to suppress abuses, either against itself directly or in the
public service, that I should find myself in a far more Quixotic condition at the
end than was even the excellent Don himself after his famous tilt at the wind-
mills. This may even be so ; but the public shall at least be afforded an
opportunity of reading between the lines such as is not usually available to it ;
and I have faith that the public intelligence is not so hopelessly and callously
indifferent to public abuses as is so generally assumed by those who trade most
largely therein and thereon.
It was urged by more than one politician when a debate on this or that rail-
way proposal (especially I recollect, in the case of the Wollongong line, of which
I am presently to write) that if the Government did not support the proposal it
should at least allow a public company to carry out or construct the line ; and it
would have been a marvellously good and profitable thing if some of our railway
extensions had never been sanctioned, excepting as company or private lines ; the
public interests would then have been less like the candle which is rapidly consumed
by being lighted at both ends simultaneously. And several sources of publicplunder
which are now wide open to the experts, would not then be at their disposal.
Let me ask what railway company in the world, or company projecting a line
of railway (unless as a political conspiracy it were, in fact, master of the public
purse, as happens we know sometimes in America), what other company would
permit its professional engineering servants to become purchasers of land on the
route of the proposed line ; and what company would hope to get its railway ap-
proved by its directors even, to say nothing of the controlling Parliament, if in
order to run through and benefit its engineers’ and certain of its directors’ landed
interests it permitted those engineers to run the line this way and that, covte qui
covte, and regardless of the general interests of the whole district to be pre-
sumably benefited by the railway ?
And what public but an American ring-cursed public, or an apathetic
Australian public, would permit a number of its representatives to become the
owners at a pepper-corn value of vast tracts of its richest coal-lands —lands worth
in themselves to any company a hundred times, aye, a thousand times, the price
paid to a supine public for them, and then, forsooth, also allow these men in their
representative capacity to complete their already most excellent bargains by de-
lusory railway projects having for their real aim the development, simply and
mainly, of those very lands and of their owners’ interests.
What public, I ask, save as aforesaid, would also allow its public servants
to be tampered with and made subservient to the evolution of the schemes of
such representative experts, and suffer the public candle to be thus so mercilessly
consumed at both ends.
We have just heard of a certain jubilant political picnic, and it caused me
keenly to desire that a public holiday could be ordained and a great picnic, to
which latter should be invited a few thousands of our apathetic fellow-colonists,
who should be taken over a certain surveyed line of railway, and who should be
shown some very clear and unmistakeable evidences of the manner in which they
suffer themselves to be made the victims of some of their expertest and most
admired representatives.
We will, however, failing the power to convene this social gathering, content
ourselves with an explanation on paper —and over a largely representative instance
of the railway extension business to which I have referred.
The Wollongong line, unless I am much mistaken, is destined to be yet again
the subject of a good deal of Parliamentary and public discussion, even as it has
been already in the past; and assuredly if the public only knew it, there is not


one of our extensions which it is better worth its while knowing all about ; only-
on the grounds that such things may not be repeated even if it be too late now
to undo the present mischief; and because, too, it has been through the facilities
which the Civil Service has afforded—or by some of its branches which are
practically under the direct control of interested parliamentary personages, that
very much of the mischief to public interests has been perpetrated.
From its very inception a dozen or so years ago this Wollongong line was,
as described by a Parliamentary debater the subject of “acrimonious debate,”
and until 1881 the line was thrown out each time it was brought forward ; in its
earliests days the line was put down to cost only some £750,000, but the amount
voted for it eventually was £1,020,000.
I must, I fear, little order to put the whole thing clearly before my
readers, and I ask their patient attention on the grounds that, having asserted
that the Civil Service is in a most undesirable condition, it is useless that I should
only show this crack and that flaw in its superstructure ; and that it is necessary
to go to the very foundations themselves for the cause of the failures.
In 1876, during the Robertson-Foster-Stuart-Garrett and Lackey Ministry,
Mr. Lackey quoted a certain telegram which went to prove that in 1872
Mr. Sutherland, then Minister for Works in the Parkes Ministry, had directed
that the sum of £300,000 should be placed on his estimates for this line of
railway, but which was hotly repudiated both by Mr. Sutherland and “Mr.”
Parkes ; it having also happened that at the same time those two gentlemen had
become largely interested in—buyers in fact of—some four our five thousands of
acres of coal-lands at Jervis Bay, as Mr. Lackey informed the House on that
occasion.
However, for reasons known to'himself (but which were stated in Parliament
to be because Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. Sutherland were then trying to get a
company to construct a line of railway from the coast to their Jervis Bay pro-
perty, and did not then want the Wollongong line constructed), Sir Henry Parkes
(then Mr.) in 1876 moved the omission of the money for this line, and his motion
was carried. Mr. Sutherland, during the same debate, remarking—“ Did he
come to that House to get £7OOO or £BOOO paid in order that every pound’s worth
of that land should be worth £lOOO ? ” And so he, too, voted against the line.
Projects are, it is already known, formulated for some dozens of further
railway extensions to the extent of some 2500 miles; similar tactics are in
operation by the experts ; and already, too, the lands are spotted,” and being
rapidly “scooped” (slang seems wonderfully appropriate to these matters), and
so let these facts be my excuse for recapitulating just a few choice items of the
past history of the Wollongong line before describing its present condition.
During those “ acrimonious debates ” in 1876 and 1881 the following
statements were made :
1. Mr. Alexander Stuart assured the House that the “assumption of honorable
gentlemen that it would cost £16,000 a mile was wrong. . . . After crossing
the George’s River the cost would be much less.” Again; “Did honorable
gentlemen know that the part of the country which would be benefitted by
this line milked upwards of 5000 cows daily ? . . Private parties had even
offered to construct this line.”
2. Sir John Robertson said, amongst other things, “ that the district was
rich in agricultural resources, and timber was abundant, and on Government
land. ”
3. Mr. T. Garrett defended Sir H. Parkes’ change of opinion (i.e., in 1881),
and -said also . . “ There were the two large public reserves, tha Loddon
water reserve and the National Park ; the water reserve will be for sale soon,
and from the sale thereof a large portion of the expenditure on this line will be
recouped.”


4. Sir Henry Parkes admitted that he had in 1876 been “ opposed to the line ;
he had now changed his opinions. . . . Atone time he had been against
bridging the harbour ; now ” ~ ■ ,
Well now, as we of course remember, the honorable gentleman was in
favour very much in favour, of bridging the harbour by a certain Garbett
Bridge’; and it is curious, and not a little suggestive, that his change of opinion
as to the merits of the Illawarra line was of concurrent date.
In traversing and challenging some of the above statements, I will state that
a careful personal examination of every mile of this surveyed line has preceded my
criticism thereof, and I am fully prepared to substantiate my assertions.
Firstly, then, honorable gentlemen were by no means wrong when they
assumed that the line will cost £16,000 a mile ; and in lieu of that portion of it
beyond George’s River costing, as they were assured it would, very much less per
mile than the preceding portion, they may safely now assert in turn, that the 14
miles or so of the line between, say, Bottle Forest and Coal Clift will cost from
£20,000 to £24,000 a mile, or about one half more per mile than the Zig-zag and
heaviest portions of the Great Western Railway. _
The latter line opened up the immense Western district ; these 14 miles or so
to Coal Cliff will open up well, seeing that this part of the line runs for nearly
all that distance through the coal and timber lands secured by one or two persons,
and that all the other lands around are closely reserved, the term “ opening up ’
can scarcely be applied to it, so far at least as the public estate is concerned {vide
Map attached to this pamphlet). . _ ,
Unless the country traversed,by this part of the line were inspected, its rugged,
steep, and unstable nature could scarcely be understood ; it has been pronounced
bv an eminent engineering authority as worse than the Blue Mountains for railway
engineering ; a great deal worse too, because these Port Hacking hills and gullies,
whilst being most precipitous, are of such rotten disturbed formation that they
resemble quicksands almost in places. And yet in order that this line of railway
should tap at certain doors it has been carried thereto in the face nearly of all
obstacles. .
I will give an instance or two in proof of this.
In June of 1882 tenders were invited for the first section of the line from
Macdonaldtown to Coal Cliff, 32± miles. A few days before the tenders were to
come in the discovery was made that some miles of the line between Bottle Forest
and Coal Cliff were impracticable, i.e., that it would be absolutely impossible to
construct a line of railway on some portions of the surveyed route, especially on
about some two miles thereof where the line had been taken along the face of the
Bulgo Cliff, and the result of which discovery w r as that the first section of the
line was then re-advertised to terminate at Bottle Forest, the condemned portion
of the line havingPo be abandoned and a re-survey made, which even at this present
time is far from being satisfactorily completed. .
I am strongly tempted to here describe a few very illustrative facts which will
show what sort of treatment falls to the lot of Civil servants under some circum-
stances ; how “influence ” shields one, and the want of it places another in a false
and improper position. This very “ discovery ” to which I have alluded has fur-
nished me with certain particulars which, when touching on administrative
matters connected with the service, I shall again refer to.
To return for the moment to the surveyed line. Even as it is now re-surveyed
from Bottle Forest to Coal Cliff, and thence along the very edge almost of the
seaboard to Bulli and Wollongong, it is in reality separated by a natural chain of
precipitous hills some 700 feet in height from the lest of the district; hills which
practically wall in this costal part of the line for some 30 or 35 miles, and where
it can never be reached by branches from the main district (the Loddon water
reserve country, &c.). This line will, however, certainly serve very materially
the interests of a few successful land monopolists who have secured all the land
on its route. , ,
But what happened even a few week s since ? Instructions were issued tor a
new survey of a deviation of another part of this George’s River to Coal Cliff
portion of the line.


Not a deviation to avoid those condemned miles—nor yet a deviation such as
should bring the line away from and out of those miles of private coal and timber
lands and gullies, and into such a position that it might possibly, some day or
another, have been of use in opening up that great Woronoa district referred to
by Mr. Garrett.
Not such a deviation at all, but one which would have taken the line still
more completely through these private lands, and still farther away from the
land which, “ when sold, would recoup a large portion of the expenditure on the
line.”
Now this very “ deviation ” by Port Hacking Creek was carefully surveyed
very many years ago, but it was reported as impracticable ; and now that it has
been re-surveyed, its practicability could only be obtained at a further expenditure,
so it is stated to me, not much short of £150,000 over and above the cost of the
original route, or about £9OOO per mile extra ! It is satisfactory, of course, now
to know that this deviation has been precipitately abandoned ; but why should
the expense of this re-survey have been incurred, seeing that it had already been
surveyed and condemned ?
An honorable gentleman told us, we remember, that Illawarra was essentially
a dairy district. “ Hid honorable members know that the part of the country
which would be benefitted by this line milked upwards of 5000 cows daily ? ”
How would a paraphrase suit the occasion ? Do the people of the colony
know that the portion of the country which will be benefitted by this line (i.e.,
those miles of private timber and coal lands) will milk the colony to the tune of
about a million of money? The railway works, &c., on those 14 miles, even by
the original route, will cost about £350,000 ; add to this the value of, say 6000
acres of coal lands, purchased at a nominal price, but worth at even £lOO an acre
(or one-fifth of the value assigned thereto by the expert, Captain Charles), half a
million ; or, say in all, nearly one million sterling.
Do the people of this colony consider that they have received, or ever will
receive, a fair quid pro quo for such a noble endowment as this?
Or do they consider it right that some of our professional Civil servants
should be compelled to receive and execute instructions to the extent even of en-
dangering their own characters for professional ability and probity? And with the
certain conviction and knowledge in their minds too that the interests of the
colony are being sacrificed.
It happens most fortunately indeed for this colony that some of its most
trusted Civil servants in high position are worthy of their trust; were it otherwise
(and it is almost a wonder that it is not otherwise more frequently, considering
some of the circumstances in which such men find themselves occasionally placed),
the colony’s largest interests, which are often absolutely at the mercy of such
officers, might be very grossly injured indeed.
As I write these words quite a number of instances of this sort of thing occur
to me; and I should like to confide to the public a few cases in point; look, how'-
ever, at the one I have but just indicated; given a venal, or a careless, an in-
competent, or a personally interested Civil servant in such a position as that it
should rest upon his sole word and verdict whether such a “deviation” as that
above referred to should be carried out or not; and a sum of £150,000 be trembling
in the balance. It does not need a prophet to tell us what would be the result of
such a position of affairs.
And amongst the conclusions which are to be drawn from such a possibility
as this occurring, I assuredly and clearly assert is the one which tells us that the
time is at hand—has arrived indeed—wdien the interests of the colony demand
that it should be placed beyond the power of Parliamentary personal influences to
put into operation and control in such dangerous fashion any branch of the Civil
.Service.
As to some of those other cases in point.
Out of regard to the sensitiveness of some of our laws or of their interpreters,
it will be better perhaps that we content ourselves once more with ascertaining
how such things are managed in that admirable country, Utopia.


In Utopia, then, I find it happened not so very long since that a certain
citizen laid a claim to be paid a very large sum of money out of the public coffers
for sundry and divers odd jobs, which he scheduled out to the tune of some forty
or fifty thousands of pounds ; the claim was at once rejected in torn by the
Utopian public officer, upon whose shoulders rested the responsibility of certify-
ing to this account. Thereupon the citizen enlisted the sympathies of a certain
Utopian Minister of the Crown, who took the case up, and requested a recon-
sideration of it by that officer, but the objection was sturdily maintained ; then
came in a new scheduled claim, reduced to one-half the original amount ; again
that stubborn officer declined to recognise one item of it; another pause, and
then another claim, this time for a paltry ten or twelve “ thou.” ; stubbornness
still, and thereupon the further consideration of the claim was transferred by the
Utopian Crown Minister to the “ consideration ” and decision of another of the
Utopian Civil servants.
The “wire ” which connects me with my Utopian correspondent being down
just at this moment I cannot at present tell my readers the final history of this
Utopian Civil service episode.
But are we not fortunate that such things occur only in such out of the way
places as Utopia.
In my next paper I will narrate a few more items of somewhat similar
nature, which have at least a reflective and reflected interest for us.
VII.
Here is another little bit of Utopian Civil Service wire-pulling.
A certain line of railway in that country having been surveyed, permanently
laid out, and duly sanctioned by the Utopian Parliament, it occurred to certain
patriotic persons who happened to be possesssed of an old abandoned and worn-
out “coal line” of railway, that it would be a splendid thing for the country
(always pro patrid) that a deviation from the surveyed line of railway should be
made so as to follow this old line of theirs, now no longer of any use to them,
and which they would in the most generous fashion turn over to the country for
that purpose. But with this trifling “ condition ” hanging to the proposal, that
they should receive, in consideration thereof (and as compensation for the taking
over of that which was now useless to the owners) a trifle of some £12,000.
In order to place matters upon a perfectly legitimate footing, so that no bias
should attach to this patriotic proposal, those Utopian partiots enlisted the
services of a remarkably clever and well-known member of the Utopian Parlia-
ment—a man, as they declare in Utopia, even better known than trusted.
With the quiet, stealthy skill which distinguished him as being a past master
in such delicate and patriotic transactions, he accepted this brief for the owners
of this moribund coal-line ; and it only fair to say that he worked his hardest and
cutest to get those £12,000 for his clients.
It is with a tinge of regret I have to state that so much talent was in this
particular instance exerted to no purpose. An obstinate and unpatriotic Utopian
official reported dead against the taking over of the defunct line, showed
conclusively it would be a particularly good thing for no one but the owners
thereof, and in fact sat so heavily upon that proposition and flattened it out so
completely that it is doubtful if even that expert Utopian member of Parliament
can bolster it up into anything like shape any more.
Another item : Cockleshells.
This requires explaining. Utopian history always does. Once upon a time
—quite new time, too—certain custodians of Utopian public lands were possessed
of one or two “cockleshells,” or much used and dilapidated canoes. Some of
Utopia’s surveyors engaged on explorations used these cockleshells ; and, lo ! a
bill was sent in to a Utopian public department “ for use, wear and tear, and
damage done to cockleshells, say £2OO. ”


Claim indignantly scouted by Utopian official. “But, my dear boy, it’s all
right,” quoth the cockleshell proprietor ; the Minister (of Utopia) knows all
about it. You’ve only to pass the account. Fact is, we want to buy a new
cockleshell with a smoke-jack in it. (A small steamer, I expect, was meant from
what I know of Utopian language.)
That little bubble was pricked, too.
I could trot out quite a budget of instances where, in Utopia, similar Parlia-
mentary influences have been exerted in the public interests ; but repetition is
always tedious. Let us try a change of subject.
And whilst quitting the piquant pickings afforded by an insight into some of
the larger influences at work in the railway and other branches of the Civil
Service of our own colony as well as of Utopia, let me add just a few words of
comment upon the effects of political engineering as applied (and described) to
the Wollongong line.
That line presents unquestionably the worst case of the kind, because the
costliest; but it has congeners in others of our lines ; in the Mudgee line largely ;
in the Homebush to Waratah line also largely ; and also in the case of the Iron-
barks and Orange line ; and I warn the public that the evil is full of vitality, and
is well started on other railway schemes not yet stamped with Parliamentary
authority.
I am aware there are those who hold it as an axiom that Civil Service engineers
should give no opinions as to the routes which railways should follow ; that such
important matters as these are essentially of a political nature, and are for the
body politic to determine.
The Wollongong line is essentially a sample of the nature and costliness of
political railway engineering ; the other two lines named by me are also largely
representive political engineering lines ; and I venture to assert that the colony,
rich as are its resources, cannotaflbrd (however delightful and profitable the occupa-
tion of political engineering is to its representative men) to construct any more
Wollongong lines of railway ; and that such political engineering means much to
the public exchequer.
And now as to some of the administrative matters which are disclosed by a
careful enquiry into the subject as obtaining in this railway department of ours.
Before starting afresh on this quest I will remark that by a series of curious
coincidences it has happened since these papers were commenced, some seven
weeks ago, that quite a different phase is observable in connection with sundry
matters touched on therein. Attention was drawn in one paper, for instance, to
the fact that enormous powers were being uncontrolled) by one
particular officer of the service. Now an edict has gone forth which has largely
limited that state of things. .
In another paper was allusion to coming trouble anent a certain line of railway
deviation. Pop ! bang ! that is declared to be over. ...
The wholesale alienation of our coal and mineral lands and their falling into
the hands of a few persons was perhaps rather strongly deprecated in an earlier
paper, and lo ! it is proposed now to stop all such alienations ; a remedy just a
trifle too strong for the disease, and a remedy likely to be joyfully hailed by those
lucky fellows who are already possessed of such lands, for does it not mean pro-
tection to vested interests ? _
'j’Jig country needs only to see that it gets fair value for its coal and mineral
lands and that they are not permitted to fall, in huge estates, into a few privileged
hands and at a thousandth part of their value.
Now, then, for some of those administrative affairs.
It will be recollected that I used the phrase, the homely but still significant
one in a previous paper, that in the discord discoverable in the railway branch of
the*Civil Service, that there was a “pretty kettle of fish.” I displayed a fish or
two, and I undertook to give some striking and costly examples of the mischief
resulting alike to public interests and to the Civil Service therefrom.
This particular department has for a very long time past being playing a sort
of expansive, and expensive, game of battledore and shuttlecock; needless to say
that the public interests are represented by the latter.


On the one hand, we have seen that there is a nominal Engineer-in-Chief for
Eailways, who has charge of trial surveys, and who carries out all the works of
construction upon authorised extensions. Works, including of course all neces-
sary station buildings, &c., for opening and working the line; and that then this
“chief” engineer ceases suddenly to be further identified with these works, and they
are transferred to and thenceforward are under the supreme control and direction
of the Commissioner for Railways, and of his officers the Engineer for Existing
Lines and his assistants.
Careful enquiry undoubtedly establishes the fact that from that moment,
under the conditions which as I have said have long unfortunately prevailed in
the department, the game of shuttlecock commences.
The Commissioner, perhaps, makes some genuine discoveries that the works
so transferred to him are not in accordance with his views of the requirements
for working the lines. At any rate, history shews clearly that large numbers of
station-yards, station buildings, and other engineering works thus transferred by
the Engineer-in-Chiefs “Construction” branch, are speedily discovered in the
other branch to require either extensive modifications or additions, and money
begins to be spent thereon freely ; and without, of course, any reference to that
nominal “chief” from whose charge these works have passed.
One of these two, either “Montagu” chief or “Capulet” commissioner, must
evidently be at fault herein, and it cannot possibly be a good sort of game at all,
this shuttlecock ; so far, I mean, as the public interests are concerned.
Look at it in another way. Enquiry has also enabled me to ascertain that
one of the parties to this game holds it as a complaint and impropriety that
certain erstwhile subordinate officers of his who have left his department for
various reasons, should not only be welcomed and appointed to that other battle-
dore branch, but that they should also be permitted, if not even directed, to
constitute themselves inquisitioners upon the works executed by and transferred
to their charge by the other branch. ,
The shuttlecock, as the result of this, looks considerably battered after the
game has been played a bit.
The Montagus hand over, as aforesaid, their constructions to the Capulets.
Amongst other items, say perhaps a dozen or two large structures which have cost
a couple of millions or so of money —structures bearing the respectable and reputable
endorsement of names of world-wide fame and associated intimately with the repu-
tations of men of high position.
Some of the Capulets (the Sampsons and Gregorys of this adaptation) forth-
with bite their thumbs at the Montagus, and then the fun begins ; such fun for
the public interests as the frogs enjoyed so much !
This sort of fun, and without even inviting an umpire to be present at the
game to be played !
“ Says a Capulet to a sturdy henchman ; ‘ Get thee to those millions’ worth
of Montagu structures ; arm thee with good trusty hammer, and see if there be
flaws to be found such as may avail a Capulet against a Montagu. ’ ”
Now, a big man with a big hammer can make a big impression on lots of
things ; and even strong structures, such as railway bridges, &c., are not insensible
to such Capulet attentions as these. To put the matter into still plainer
words, I will state at once that amongst the discordant conditions ascer-
tained in my enquiries are such items as these. That highly costly
engineering structures which have been constructed under one branch of our
Railway Department, have been pronounced by another branch thereof to be
defective in design, of faulty construction, and requiring huge “repairing.”
That (whether justified or not in doing so I do not presume to say), on such
decision being arrived at, such structures have forthwith been taken in hand and
dealt with by the Capulets without any reference to, or consultation with, the
Montagus. Whereat and wherefrom, much wrath amongst the battledores; and a
very rough time, indeed, for that poor shuttlecock, public interests,
Such a condition of “ official hammer and tongs ” as is disclosed by the above
description is not, unfortunately, merely one of those family jars which occur in
all large business concerns, and which may be satisfactorily settled by a little


vigorous inquiry and swift judgment. When our departmental quarrels assume
such a phase that they also involve reflections upon men of high character and
repute in England (the fountain head of our own reputation and commercial
position, and the source upon which we rely for our loans for public works), it
becomes a very serious matter indeed, and one quite beyond the power of any
local board of inquiry here in Sydney to satisfactorily deal -with.
Reputations, commercial and professional, are yet held of too much value
in England to admit of their owners allowing them to be impeached with
impunity ; and, unless the impeachments are justified, those who make them will
assuredly not only bring injury upon themselves, but indirectly also upon the
credit of the colony in whose employment they may be.
There are many other and somewhat similar items to my hand to those
described, if space could be afforded in these papers to record them. But, failing
this, let us look at another source of trouble —another bit of broken water.
Any one who has ever watched an expert, skilful tradesman or handicrafts-
man at his work, no matter what his trade or occupation, must have noticed
what a lot of material he will quietly work up, or what a splendid bit of work-
manship he will turn out from a mere hole and corner of a shop, or from a nook
on some rough bench ; and any one who has also seen a novice at his trade
labouring away will also have observed what an awful lot of space that young
man wants for his tools and materials, how he spreads himself out, what a litter
and a dust he’ll make, and what a terrible lot of chips he’ll scatter round
Close observation of facts as they have presented themselves to me warrant my
saying that there appear to be a good many such young men about in some
branches of the great public works department —a great deal of waste of one sort
or another, a deal more spreading out than is necessary, and lots of quite
unnecessary chips. Chips, too, from that old block, public interests.*
* These Papers are being continued as usual in the Sydney Mail and Echo, and may be published
in collected form subsequently.—COßVUS.




THE CIVIL SERVICE
BY CORVUS.
IP.A.'R.T TWO
As predicted in No. 5 of these papers, the Wollongong line has again become
the subject of “acrimonious debate” in Parliament, and of much comment
outside thereof.
Mr. M‘Elhone’s method of introducing the subject is to be regretted. To
commence, as he did, to address the jury, i.e., the House, against the Premier,
before having called any evidence in support of his charges, and without having
afforded the “ other side ” an opportunity of being heard, was both unjust and
unwise, and naturally at once seriously weakened the cause he espoused.
It is also to be regretted that lion, gentlemen never read the newspapers ;
but that such is the case has been too frequently proclaimed by members of
Parliament themselves to leave any doubt of the fact in any one’s mind. In this
very matter now again brought before the House, had Mr. M‘Elhone happened to
have carefully noted the statements which have appeared in these Civil Service
papers, he might have modified his own words, and with advantage to the cause
of truth.
There is a very great deal more to be told about this Wollongong line, and
about these “ deviations,” than is compassed by Mr. M‘£lhone’s questions. That
other “ deviation ” and abandonment of a surveyed and advertised portion of the
line some 15 months since, and which has not even yet been satisfactorily dealt
with, would be well worth the public notice and particular attention.
So far as the latest proposed deviation is concerned, that by Port Hacking
Creek, I again state distinctly that this re-survey is to all intents and purposes
over the same line originally surveyed some 10 years since by Mr. Stephens, and
that then, as now, it was shown to be impracticable, save at an enormous extra
cost, for which there would be no compensating advantage to the public.
That a section of this trial line of Mr. Stephens’s was and is still in
existence at the time this re-survey was made recently, and a comparison of that
old section with the one obtained by the re-survey, and which is now to be placed
before the House (in compliance with Mr. M'Elhone’s motion), will show that
there are none of those advantages of gradients or works claimed so strongly for
it ; but quite the contrary.
That, in addition to the expense of this resurvey and of the loss of time in-
curred in pushing on with the part of the works of the contract already let (i.e.,
Mr. Millar’s contract to Bottle Forest), there may be a considerable further
expense incurred by way of compensation to the contractor thus delayed. This
item may not appear in his bill of costs as “ compensation but I can explain, if
necessary, how it could be paid, and it would be a nice little item too *
I here inform my readers that the Engineer-in-Chief in February, 1874,
forwarded a minute to the Secretary for Works recommending that all lands
passed through by the survey of this line should be reserved between Glebe
Island and Wollongong. Why was that reservation not made?
* The contractor, Mr. Millar, has since claimed some £22,000 for compensation for the interrup-
tion to his contract, and as a solution to the difficulty a portion of his contract has been cancelled !


Whatever else may result from this revived discussion anent the Wollongong
line, there are one or two very prominent matters in connection with it which are
not likely to be soon lost sight of by the public.
Firstly. That it is a typical political engineering line.
Secondly. That it will be well worth while carefully noting by-and-by, and
when the real total cost of the line can be accurately ascertained and it is open
to traffic, how such lines pay.
Especially if, in estimating this last part of the question, care is taken by
the auditors to separate the receipts of the first 10 miles of the line (i.e ., the
large profitable passenger returns up to the George’s River portion thereof) from
the receipts of the other portion of the line.
In a future paper I will give some particulars of the way in which our rail-
way votes are dealt with, and show that some very curious items are charged to
“capital” account, which, if placed to working expenses, would have the effect
of putting the returns or earnings of our railways in a far less cheerful light than
we have been accustomed to see them in.
In my last paper I drew some comparisons between expert craftsmen and
tyros, and I will now proceed to explain how this parable appears to fit certain
prevailing conditions in the railway branch of the Civil Service.
The economising of valuable space and of elbow, room in connection with
the working of systems or lines of railways has, in England, America, and other
countries, reached a highly advanced position. It is, in fact, almost a science in
itself. In the railway termini of such places, the amount of work done, i.e., the
numbers of trains starting from and arriving in little, mean-looking, (but very
profitably worked) station-yards, is almost marvellous ; in crowded London and
in various English towns especially so ; and it shows very clearly, indeed, that
there is something else required for success in such matters than mere profusion
of lines of railway or multiplicity of sidings.
That, in fact, long experience and high training enable the expert railway
manager to obtain the maximum of utility from the minimum of means and
material ; i.e., permanent way and rolling stock, in this case, just as the expert
handicraftsman in any trade contrives to do so much work with so few chips,
waste or litter.
Again, in another matter, such as accommodation for workshops, railway
sheds of various descriptions, and passenger stations, in those older and more
experienced communities there is a wonderful attention displayed to economy of
design and material, as well as of suitability to the purposes for which the various
buildings are required. No wasteful ornamentation to or costliness in the con-
struction of passenger stations or platform sheds ; no elaborate and costly designs
for roofs to cover buildings, for instance, like that extraordinary Eveleigh running
shed roof, where such are inappropriate and mere money thrown away.
Plainness, simplicity, stability, and utility are demanded and supplied.
It is true, certainly, that in England they would not tolerate as a terminus
for a great national system of railways a disconnected and patchwork—very
costly patchwork, too ! —building such as is our Eedfern terminus of to-day : nor,
it is quite certain, such a profusion of lines, such a lot of elbow-room, as seem
to be indispensable at certain of our stations and yards.
And no railway company in England or America or on the Continent, would
build such expensively designed buildings as are so many of our stations, nor
would it indulge in constant revisions, additions, or rebuilding as are so constantly
going on under our own departments. And very assuredly no company, hoping
to earn dividends for its shareholders, would tolerate for a moment that their
property should be shuttlecocked by two or three conflicting powers such as our
Civil Service railway Montagus and Capulets.
I take it that these facts bear interpreting somewhat in this fashion :
Firstly, that the professional charge of our railways and their works should
remain under the same direction and control from first to last; i.e., the officers or
department first responsible for the design, construction, and stability of the
works should be continued in their responsibility and custody throughout. No
second battledore allowed, in fact.


Secondly, that another important'professional branch of the railway service,
known as the Locomotive Department, should be an affiliated branch of the first
or chief professional department; and for this, amongst other reasons, that it is
in the power of an inexpert, a facile, or a careless officer in charge of a locomotive
department, if he be independent of the head professional branch, or if he be
under the direction, say, of a Capulet officer antagonistic to a Montagu, to do a
great deal of mischief to public interests; to use unnecessarily expensive and un-
duly heavy rolling stock and locomotives; to greatly shorten the period of useful-
ness of railway structures, by subjecting them without occasion to what is known
to professionals as “fatigue,” and in many other ways. _
And as a Civil Service item, we may remember how much discord is known
to have occurred only recently in our Railway Department between a locomotive
engineer, imported 'from England, and the Commissioner’s departments and
officers. ' And there was a rare bit of the shuttlecock game involved therein.
It is surely most vitally necessary and obviously desirable that a speedy and
proper separation and well-defined distinction of professional from administrative
functions and duties should be provided for in pur present and future railway
management. When this is effected—but certainly not before then we may
fairly expect that the Montagu and Capulet business will be at an end, and that
the battledores will be no longer “in it. ,: !
We may now, in the face of aU that has been disclosed recently, and from tne
probabilities which are furnished by the appointment of that royal commission
about to commence its duties, further conclude that the time has actually
arrived when it is imperatively demanded that this branch of the Civil Service
should be completely reconstructed.
The mere creation of an additional or distinct Ministerial department for the
railways, however far that may go in the right direction, will scarcely suffice to
meet all that is required. A railway commissioner’s board, responsible to and
presided over by a Minister for Railways, should perhaps effect for us a recon-
ciliation of the present conflicting elements, and provide for the satisfactory
future administration of this almost premier branch (so far as its pecuniary aspect
is concerned) of our Civil Service. .
I have before me a copy of the bill introduced into the \ ictorian Pai liament
on 21st August last, entitled, “ An Act to make better provision for the construc-
tion, maintenance, and management of State railways.” I do not say that this
measure is such as to commend itself to us for adoption here 5 I &t once admit
that in this colony our railway management—with all its mismanagement has
always been far ahead of ,the Victorian system ; ahead in every respect nearly,
and as much a larger and more enlightened system as our free trade policy is a
larger and nobler policy than that of protection.
But I find in this Victorian bill several admirable clauses which 1 will take
some other occasion than is afforded to me by these Civil Service papers to direct
public attention to it. ~, , , f
One or two clauses of this Victorian Railway Bill I will, however, here refer
to as they will lead us back to the topic of maladministration, as it has so long
prevailed in our Civil Service—a subject which I intend in my next papers almost
exclusively to deal with. , , ,
Clause No. 13 provides that commissioners shall not be personally interested
or concerned in any bargain or contract made on behalf of the commission in its
corporate character. , „ , , , , ,
Clause No. 28 provides that all appointments shall be made to the lowest
grade in each of the various branches, &c., and that no new appointment whatever
shall be made until commissioners have first ascertained that there is no person
in the railway service fit and qualified for promotion.
Clause No. 79 provides that commissioners are to prepare estimated costs of
proposed new lines, and of the traffic and other returns likely to be derived there-
from ; same to be laid before Assembly before second reading t of bill authorising
construction of line. . „ ,
I may also tell my Civil Service readers that I have carefully read over the
new Public Service Bill at present under consideration by the Victorian Parlia-
ment ; and I propose in a later paper to direct their attention to a few salient items


thereof, which they will probably consider far from desirable as a model for their
own long-promised and much-desired Act.
But to further help along the immediate matter I intend now to refer to—viz.,
the administration obtaining in the service at present—l will quote this clause of
the new Victorian Public Service Bill :
Clause No. 78—“ No person who is proved to the satisfaction of the board to
be habitually using intoxicating beverages to excess shall be appointed or retained
in the public service.”
These few clauses from the two \ ictorian Bills will be worth remembering in
connection with certain of our own Civil Service administrative details.
That those details will convince most persons that there is an immense extent
of misgovernment and misuse of power displayed in the service I am confident;
that very much of the evil is remediable I believe ; but as the chief source of it
will be discoverable as almost entirely of political origin, it will be necessary, in
any measure or Civil Service Bill brought forward to deal therewith by Parliament,
that honorable members be prepared for a good deal of self-sacrifice, and to accept
and to apply that ancient and admirable exhortation,
Physician, heal thyself.
I hysician, heal thyself ” was the watchword which in the last of these
papers members of Parliament and Ministers of the Crown were graciously
requested to be prepared to accept and adopt in any efforts which may presently
be made by them in their legislative capacity to deal with the disorganisation of
our Civil Service and with its re-adjustment and construction.
We have heard from time to time for many years past too many admissions
from the lips of members of Parliament themselves, as to the gross extent to
which political influences are exercised in crowding the public service with
undesirable and unnecessary officers, to leave any doubts in our minds upon the
subject, even though there were no other means of arriving at an opinion thereon.
Upon his first entrance into Parliament, the .Honourable the present Minister
for education was particularly prominent in proclaiming the prevalence of
political patronage in the service, and in denouncing the evils resulting therefrom
to a large number of the public servants as well as to the public. Later still we
have had post-prandial and other speeches 'from the present Premier, full of
similar sentiments, and we have heard in opening speeches of a coming Civil
Service Bill. Some other Ministers and ex-Ministers of the Crown and members
of Parliament have also denounced in not-to-be-mistaken terms, and from their
own experiences, the extent to which political influences have been exercised •
and with the knowledge which is before me of the tremendous extent to which
some of these honourable gentlemen have themselves contributed their share in
working out this mischievous and often very cruel system, 1 have no hesitation in
assuring my readers that such speeches were indeed, in almost every case, the
utterances of experts ; the confessions, in fact, of those who had been themselves
sinners after the usual manner of men to whom such dangerous power has
hitherto been given.
With the highest possible respect for the abilities of certain politicians who
have experienced the immense advantage at hustings and on similar occasions of
being believed in and supported by the Civil Service, upon the faith and hope
that such honourable gentlemen would unquestionably be found losing no time or
opportunity for removing, or endeavouring to remove, the evils existing in the
service I cannot resist here suggesting to my Civil Service readers that their
interests would probably have sooner received consideration at the hands of the
I arliament, and their wrongs have been long ere this at least on the highway to
be remedied, if it had happened that they, the Civil Servants, should have sent
into Parliament a man pledged to do that work above all other of his legislative
work. °


And I also suggest that the fittest man for such representative work as that
should be, not merely a man fairly qualified by education, training, and ambition
for political life, but, above all other requirements, a man who has himself borne
the burden and heat of the trial; a man who, of his own years of experiences in
the public service, has learned the innermost gecrets of the nature of the wrongs
perpetrated there ; who has, haply in his own experience too, gathered the bitter
knowledge and the humiliation of seeing himself and scores of other good men
and true in the service passed over and supplanted ; their long years of honestly
fulfilled and often arduous and highly responsible duties of no avail to them what-
ever in the balance against political influence.
Political influence exerted too, very frequently indeed, in the most scandalous
fashion ;so scandalous that to merely repeat it in the columns of a newspaper
would be to subject the writer, although but the mere exponent of truths, to the
penalties of an action for libel. And yet there is no law at present to control
or prevent a repetition of such things in the public service. Nor will there be
such a law until the Civil servants themselves insist upon their rights being no
longer made the subject of silken promises from the lips of men who, having
never themselves had practical and personal acquaintance with the suffering
entailed by this political corruption, are, to all intents, in the position of him
who cries, “ Let the galled jade wince ; my withers are unwrung.”
A Civil Service Bill is once again dangling as a possibility of the present
session. If the Civil servants do not bestir themselves, “ dangling ” will continue
to be the condition of that measure for many a generation of Parliaments to
come. For let us remember that, although invited to be prepared to sacrifice
themselves (as honorable members have been, for instance, in these papers), it is
almost too much to expect from human nature that they should readily or cheer-
fully respond to this request, or to earnestly set about the work of reformation
when that work means the depriving themselves of perhaps the most attractive
and often the most lucrative adjuncts of their position as members.
But, on the other hand, if the interests of the public servants were repre-
sented in the House in such manner as I have endeavoured to describe, by one not
seeking “the bubble reputation” at the mouth of that terrible noisy cannon
“the House,” for his own purposes, vanity, or ambition, but solely that he should
be the instrument of carrying, of forcing if necessary, this greatly to-be-desired
measure of reform—a man who should be in the position, of his own knowledge
and experience, to stand in that House and utter those truths, those many cruel
and shameful truths, which if uttered there could neither be assailed as libels nor
calmly ignored ; such a man, I say, should have it in his power to purge the
country of this great scandal upon its character, and to render more service to
the cause than will ever be rendered by half a score even of intelligent, educated,
but utterly unmoved, because inexperienced, members whose only knowledge of
the evils has been of a vicarious nature ; whose own positions in the service, if
they were in it, were amongst the rose leaves thereof, and whose views are neces-
sarily largely affected and modified (and not to the advantage of the public service
reforms it is quite certain) by their subsequent enjoyment of political power and
place.
Nearly a score of years of acquaintance with these matters has put into my
possession a store of information which, if it dared be here published, would
convince the general and the Civil Service reader thereof alike that it is very
improbable that those things will be told by any member now in the House, and
that yet the telling thereof should be potent for good, and that he who seeks to
utter these truths assuredly desires the good of the public service and of the
public interests.
I will endeavour now to justify what I have above written by giving a few
instances of the sort of things which are meant as requiring and demanding to be
taken into account in connection with a Civil Service Reform Bill.
I must, however, generalise my statements, still out of respect to our libel
laws; for every shadow, however, which is cast in these papers, I undertake, if
opportunity should afford me, of producing the substance which that shadow
represents. These shadows have been collected from various branches of the
service; the Works Department has contributed largely thereto, but there is no


branch of the service which has not added to the collection of facts at my disposal.
But for present purposes we will again resort to Utopia for the instances which
bear most closely upon the question before us.
In Utopia then, be it said, honorable Ministers of the Crown and Members of
Parliament have evidently always regarded the public service as a sort of big
political nursery garden, wherein were to be freely planted out slips from this
Ministerial stock, cuttings from that political bush, and shoots and sprouts in-
numerable from various sources affected by those who thus fill the Utopian Civil
Service with their relatives and friends.
Undoubtedly it happens now and again that some of these carefully looked-
after political plantlings turn out very respectable and very satisfactory public
servants; but the ugly part of the business is (so say the Utopians), that in so
many cases they are either planted in positions where they are not needed at all,
or where, by their being so placed, they interfere with the growth and prospects
in life of other plantlings over whose interests there is no one to watch, but who
were perhaps doing fairly enough before they were thus improperly supplanted or
crowded out.
Nepotism, favouritism, influence. Three very ugly words and three very ugly
charges to be brought against Utopia’s politicians. But, lam assured, it would
be a very startling record if, in addition to giving names and dates of appoint-
ments to the service, our own Blue Book also indicated the means which had
been exerted to obtain for some very large numbers of our Civil servants their
appointments.
Who, for instance, were the patrons and patronesses? What was the con-
nection existing between such patrons and their protbges ?
Now Utopia’s Blue Book furnishes just such particulars as these; and
amongst other matters its pages disclose that one Utopian Minister of the Crown,
who regarded himself too as a very modest sort of specimen of the “patron”
politician compared with others, had still planted out, or in, that nursery garden
we are writing of a couple of sons, four sons-in-law, and quite a big nursery bed-
ful of strikings, cuttings, and slips of the less closely-connected family and
friendly circles of this Utopian self-abnegating Minister.
I referred to patronesses as well as patrons. And I must, in the interests of
truth, state that in Utopia too the universally-admired mother of the god Cupid
is accredited with having exerted her generally very irresistible influence on behalf
of quite a number of fortunate appointees to the Utopian public service. Now,
no man, not even a personally interested public officer, is likely to be ungallant
enough to assert or assume that such appointees are likely to be one whit worse or
more objectionable than those others whose influence is of the Ministerial or male
political sort. No one in these days, be he in or out of the Civil Service here or
in Utopia, is likely to begrudge to the fairest and best half of creation a fair
exercise of privileges and influences. But for all that is it not passing rough on
poor Alpha Beta Brown, of the Utopian Upas-tree-branch, that Gamma Delta
Smith (aged anything from short teens to senile sixties) should be pitchforked in,
or even quietly dibbled into A. B. Brown’s particular section of the nursery
garden ; and so deftly placed therein, and so sedulously looked after by his
political planter, that in the course of a few months Gamma Delta Smith has
achieved a higher position, and a larger growth than poor Alpha Beta Brown has
attained after, perhaps ten, or even a score of years of close attention to his work,
and satisfactory performance of duties ?
And-that Gemma Delta should owe this rapid development in that 'nursery,
not to his own superiority, either of endowments, abilities, or deserts ; but
because the excellent goddess aforesaid is his patroness ; or because he (has a
marriageable sister, a manoeuvring mamma, or an influential possb of cousins and
aunts, or a clever wife ?
Surely under such conditions it is hardly likely that, with all his inherent
manly admiration for the fair sex, that poor Alpha Beta Brown should entertain
other than a decided and pronounced conviction that woman’s benign influence is
entirely misplaced, when such are its results. Even Gemma Delta can scarcely be
expected to prove a very desirable or energetic Civil servant in the character
imposed upon him of a supplanter and crowder out of better men. Whilst it is


plainly unlikely in the extreme that this sort of means of advancement in its
public service is to the advantage of the public or of the service.
To show how much this kind of thing is appreciated by some of the Utopian
Civil servants, I will say that my attention was lately directed by one of them (a
long suffering one, and a supplanted or crowded-out one, I strongly suspect) to a
female statue which adorns a niche in one of the Utopian public service buildings,
and which statue, he gravely assured me, was the fitting and typical representa-
tive of an influence which was largely exerted in the service. And he added,
“I’ve known, sir, a fellow to be shoved in (men don’t speak poetically when
they’re angered) to the shop here at a salary of £l5O a year ; and in less than a
couple of years he’s been put over the heads of lots of older officers, and into a
salary of £4OO a year ; just because he had a clever woman’s influence to help
him in certain political quarters.” .
Now I happen to know this to be a true Utopian incident, as well as some
other circumstances, which must wait their turn in the next paper.
At this time the great disturbance whiclfannually recurs in those troubled
waters compassed by the term “ The Civil Service ”is at its height : the time
when entries are being made in the various departments for the great carnival
whose principal event may well be designated the “Estimates Cup a big event,
in which some 10,000 Civil Servants are entered to run for a great public purse,
provided for by the Appropriation Act,
Such a race it is too ; such handicappmgs ; such awfully long odds against
some thoroughly good but badly treated goers ; -such a queer field, and one which
would bear a lot of “ scratching such dodges and maneuvering ; and all this,
too for a race which is in reality a foregone conclusion for those fortunate entries
whose colours are those of that potentate, that great and well-known character,
“ Influence,” political and otherwise.
Just as the “ Ring” is the virtual controller and despotic master of the turf
events of these days%o is “ Influence ” the arbiter of the fate and fortunes of
those thousands of entries for the Civil Service Cup. So thoroughly has the
become an institution of the time that it is now largely regarded not
only as inevitable, but as something to be cherished —the sait without which the
turf would be but an insipid affair. And so thoroughly has “Influence ” the
whiphand in our public service at this time, that it is to be feared there are
thousands of men in that service (as well as their backers in and out of it) who
would prefer that the present state of things should.continue.
But it shall now be my endeavour to prove that this condition of things
should not be permitted to continue ; and I will try to show as clearly as is
possible, without quoting actual instances, the way m which much wrong and
injustice is perpetuated thereunder.
I should perhaps, however, first point out to the general reader that in our
Civil Service there is at present no broad principle established of classification of
officers; in some of the departments, as the Surveyor General’s and the Public
Instruction Department, there is a partial application of the principle, but it is not
uniformly established throughout the service. ~ , .
This defect is in itself responsible for a very great deal of the trouble and mis-
chief I shall refer to ; for it affords in reality the door or avenue by which influence
of one sort and another enters and takes possession of the service.
Some 20 years ago a great deal of discontent existed in the imperial Civil
Service Political influence was responsible for very much of that trouble, and it
took a great amount of very intelligent and very determined resistance on the part
of both the Imperial Civil Servants and of the Parliament to bring about a healthier


and better state of affairs. It was accomplished, however, and there is at this
time no more honorable calling for a man fthan to be a member of the Imperial
Civil Service.
There is no longer in his case the fear, on the one hand, that he shall be either
regarded as a “ Tite Barnacle ” upon the public State ship ; or that, on the other
hand, he shall labour in the vineyard all the days of his life to small avail, if he
has not influence at his back to push him forward.
In an able paper which was read in London at the time I mention, by an
earnest advocate of the cause of the Civil Service, I find this sentence, having
reference to the class of men known in Prussia as “ placemen “An army of
men who are bound to give, and who do give, in return for salaries, not only their
allotted quotas of work, but also a moral—or an immoral—support. The giving of
that support is incompatible with independence on the part of the Civil servant.”
Now that is put very mildly ; if it had fallen to the lot of that lecturer to
have served in a certain Civil Service we know of, he would have been justified in
drawing a much more vivid picture, both of the impropriety of “placemen’s”
appointments and of the immoral support obtained therefrom.
Then on the great question—great, at any rate, in the eyes of those thousands
of men to whom the matter means success in life or the reverse—of promotion in
the service, I found’these views expressed : “ Let it become the rule that no man
shall be promoted who is not fit for the duties of the higher position. ,
No one should press for the promotion of men by simple seniority ; but if a man
be fit to perform the duties of a class to which he has risen by length of service,
he is entitled to the promotion by all equity.”
As to the broader questions of how classification should be applied, and what
should be the general system adopted for providing for the equitable promotion
of the professional and clerical sections of the service respectively, I shall in a
subsequent paper venture to set forth my views, and they will, I trust, be found
to commend themselves to those officers of the Civil Service who earnestly desire
to see the iniquities of the present system of handicapping for the “Estimates
Cup ” abolished.
Before describing this Cup Race, however, let me pourtray the sort of
prospects in life which are those of men who do battle with the world for position
and success ontside of that smaller world the Civil Service, so that such picture
may be used in contrast with the “ race ” pictures I shall then proceed to draw.
Take any familiar instance—a large mercantile firm, a banking institution, a
great newspaper office, a lawyer’s, an engineer’s office, or a manufacturer’s
establishment. In almost any or either of these the employer and the employed
are in constant direct association —that is to say, that, although the principal may
not in every case know every one of his employees individually, he can do so at
any moment if necessary ; and an employee, however humble even his position
may be, has 3'et the power, if occasion should arise, of placing himself in
direct communication with the employer whose money he is earning, and to whom
he looks for recognition of good service.
A merchant perchance has amongst his clerks one who, by extra smartness
and expertness, gets through twice or three times the amount of work done by
either of his brother clerks ; or perhaps he is the means of a more than usually
good bit of business being done by his firm. The reward of such a one is pretty
generally assured, for if in return he were badly treated he would speedily and
successfully betake himself elsewhere.
Or, in the case of a bank, a sharp, honourable, and vigilant employee is
fortunately enabled by the exercise of his abilities —perhaps, say, even by some
risk to his own person or life—to save the bank from being plundered to a serious
extent. It is no Utopian dream to assert that such an employee would also
assuredly receive substantial reward and recognition.
In a newspaper office it may happen that amongst the writers of articles and
sub-articles is some one or another whose abilities are at once conspicuous, and
who may, no matter how small his place may at one time have been in the
establishment, safely depend upon that ability being readily recognised, and as
readily bringing to him his just reward. He, too, can take his talents elsewhere
jf he be not thus justly dealt with ; but as there is nothing to prevent his being


known to his employer for the valuable servant he is, there is in his case also no
doubt as to the success which must be his.
There is, I am fully aware, nothing very exciting in the way of reading, nor
very much to arouse the sympathies of, and, unfortunately, still less to amuse,
the readers of these papers in such prosaic pictures as those now drawn.
But they at least reflect faithfully, I think, the general healthy condition of
affairs affecting the prospects in life of men engaged in pursuits outside of the
Civil Service. And I will now essay a few sketches to show how unhealthy is
the position of such affairs for those who are within that service.
Take, for a first example, the case of a professional subordinate employee in
any one of the upas-tree Work branches, but remembering carefully that he is
not handicapped comfortably so as to ensure his being a winner by that arch-
runner, “Political Influence.”
He is simply a man relying upon his knowledge of his work, his industry,
and honest desire to perform his duty. He obtains employment in a large
department; enters at a low salary; works for years at professional work of a
high character; sees his own ideas and designs adopted for works costing large
sums of money—such sums of money, indeed, that a fraction of the mere per-
centage usually paid to his brother professionals outside of the service, if paid to
him upon the works of which he is the actual designer, would make him a rich
man in a very few years.
But, you see, his ideas (which are often real good “leading articles” so to
speak) are never acknowledged as being his. They are filtered through Mr. D.,
Mr. C., or Mr. 8., and up to Mr. A., the immediate professional head of the
department—a man perhaps whose many duties prevent his even knowing all the
men who are under him in the department, or the work they are engaged upon.
Still the credit, whatever it may be worth —and it should be worth a good deal
sometimes, if fair play prevailed—goes in this fashion away from the right man
and to the wrong man.
Notwithstanding that this is not a satisfactory state to contemplate, there
are plenty of worse ones; for it undoubtedly happens sometimes that Mr. A. (the
chief of a department as aforesaid) is an honorable, well-meaning man, and he will
be aware of the merits of that politically unknown and “ uninfluenced ” employee
of his ; and when the “ Estimates Cup” Race is on, he will haply make an entry
of that employee’s name and “place” him for an increase of salary.
Well, then occurs the sort of thing which makes honest, faithful Civil ser-
vants sick and disgusted with the service, and which places “ Political Influence’s ’
many nominations to the Cup Race at such a shameful advantage therein.
The chief of a department whose recommendation or nominations have been
sent forward to be placed on the Estimates may, unfortunately, not be popular
nor a favourite with the presiding Ministerial deity pro. tew.; the god’s corns may
have been trodden upon, or some intermediate meddler, with Influence of various
character, may exert it with the deity, to the detriment of, or in opposition to,
those nominations.
And they are forthwith scratched.
Scratched too, although maybe the unfortunate nominees are thus deprived
of a justly earned reward for which they have striven for years. That is
disheartening enough surely. But to intensify the wrong, at the very same
moment scores or hundreds of “ Political Influence’s ” entries for that race are
not only not scratched, but when the flag goes up, and the Appropriation Act is
passed, are found to be “in it ” to a man.
Yes, “in it,” unquestionably, but by very shady means indeed frequently ;
unfair riding, jostling, dishonest handicapping, and many of those evil dodges
which are well known to all turfites. The touts, too, are as actively engaged in
this ‘‘ Estimates Race” as in any of its prototypes of the turf proper.
Men hunting round for this member’s influence to see that their “ entry ”
isn’t scratched at the last moment; mean and contemptible, and therefore, of
course, unmanly and demoralizing, means have to be adopted by many men in
the service, almost as a matter of self-preservation—that not to be denied great
first principle of our nature—to get their just expectations and claims to
advancement or promotion sustained against the hostile attacks of jealous and


influential brother officers, or against the cruel misuse, perhaps, of influence on
the part of some other officer’s political friends ; or, maybe, against the influence
of some political enemy.
In this way it frequently happens—yes, every time the Estimates Cup is run
for—that the anomaly, the cruel and galling anomaly, is witnessed of large
numbers of recommendations made by heads of departments, honestly conscious
of the merits and deservings of the men whom they thus nominate for advance-
ment, being systematically wiped out or “ scratched.”
On all sorts of pretexts ; no increases to be passed this year ; the Minister
unfavourable, on principle, to higher salaries being paid than are now voted, &c ,
&c.; and yet the Estimates shall be found to bristle with increases notwithstanding,
and some fine fat ones too, for those favoured by the god or goddess, “ Influence.”
I have knowledge of some startling instances of the sort of blocking and
shunting appliances which are freely used in some branches of the service, to
the prejudice and injury of officers who are without such influence ; and in my
next paper some of them shall be described,
In a previous paper (No. 8) 1 undertook to give some instances of the
manner in which our railway votes are dealt with, and I proposed to show that it
was mainly due, perhaps, to the peculiar method in which our railway accounts
have been kept that our railways are made to appear to be paying a satisfactory
return upon the loans raised for their construction.
Having before me now some of the necessary information upon which I relied
in putting forward that proposition, I purpose to defer for the moment those
further particulars of administrative anomalies and defects of our Civil Service,
such as were partly described in the last paper, and to place before my readers
the following by no means unimportant nor uninteresting items in connection
with the expenditure of our railway votes by the respective Civil Service
departments controlling the same.
In doing so it is accepted as an axiom by the writer that these railway loan
votes were intended to cover the cost only of the construction of our railway
lines, and the providing the necessary working appliances, station yards, buildings,
bridges, rolling-stock, &c.; and that if there were any surplus from such loans
after the railways were thus made and equipped (and their time, so to speak,
fully matured for earning their own living), that such surplus should assuredly
not be treated as being legitimately available for maintaining the lines, or the
stations, bridges, or other works, in proper repair ; or even for meeting the
increased requirements thereof in perpetuity, or for so long as such surplus holds
out.
In fact, that the “ capital account ” should be closed directly the railway
commences to earn money.
In no other place in the world, I imagine, is there in operation such a peculiar
system as is this of our own ; a system under which charges are placed against
capital, or votes, for expenses incidental to the use, wear and tear, and renewal
of the stock-in-trade. And under no other system in the world are such enormous
and uncontrolled powers centred in the hands of one individual, whether be be a
Civil servant administrator, or chairman of a railway company, as we see in the
case of our own system.
Where else, for instance, shall we find a case of an almost uncontrolled and
irresponsible individual officer having at his command “ capital votes,” in the
course of a couple of years or so, amounting to a sum of £700,000, for alterations
and additions to station buildings, permanent way, &c.; and where, too, the same
officer has practically supreme control over all the votes of Parliament, whether
“ loan ” votes for construction, or votes for ‘ working expenses.”


If properly managed there can be no doubt at all but that our railways should
pay well, seeing that, with one or two notable exceptions of politically-engineered
lines, they have been constructed at a reasonable outlay. But when we bear in
mind the enormous powers which are in the hands of one uncontrolled officer of
the Civil Service for adjusting and apportioning the working expenses and charges
of the railways to “ capital votes,” surely the wonder is that our railways do
not appear to be paying even more handsomely than is claimed for them.
In the case of a railway company, the “ capital account” is closed when the
line is opened ; and thereafter is written off from the earnings of the line each
year (or each quarter or half-year), a certain amount for wear and tear, or a
reserve fund is created from the earnings to provide for works of renewal, or for
the extension of the working accommodation and other necessities of an increasing
traffic upon the line ; and it is certain that no chairman or railway board would
have the temerity, or be permitted, to charge such working expenses to capital
account.
And yet under our system this anomalous practice prevails very largely indeed,
as will be readily ascertained by referring to the printed returns, for instance,
(showing the expenditure on railway stations, sidings, &c., &c.) laid on the table
of the Legislative Assembly in August, 1882.
There is another glaring anomaly about this business too —viz., that whilst
the votes for railway extensions are rigidly scrutinised by Parliament, and subse-
quently by the Auditor-General’s Department, when the moneys are being
expended upon the authorised works of construction, and whilst the fullest
information has to be afforded in connection with all outlay up to the time that
such railway extensions are completed, and transferred to the Commissioner’s
control (and that of the existing lines branch) that thenceforward there has been
practically no parliamentary or other control than that of the Commissioner him-
self over the expenditure of the large sums voted for “ working expenses,” and
over the surplus or balances of the original “capital ” or loan votes.
There is, as I before stated, very serious reason indeed for thinking that our
railways would be discovered to be paying far less handsomely than is now
supposed, if these votes for additions and improvements (practically “ working
expenses”) were to be discontinued; and if too no “capital vote” whatever
should be permitted to be charged with any such items. And if that marvellous
mystery under which our railways are at present worked, and known as
“ differential rates,” were also to be closely scrutinised, adjusted, or pared down,
and rubbed out of our railway management, there are very strong grounds indeed
for apprehending that our railways would be found to be paying less than 3 per
cent.
Just a word before quitting this subject about those chameleon-like differen-
tial rates, and remembering, too, that this is professedly a free-trade colony.
The rates charged to a certain local ironworks company in 1882 are shown in
the printed returns to be at the rate of Id. per ton per mile for distances not
exceeding 150 miles ; the rates charged to the Railway Construction Branch (loan
or capital account) for carriage of imported rails was for the same distance.
Then, for the item cast-iron pipes, for same distance (i. e., 150 miles), the carriage
charged for Colonial-made pipes was Id. per ton per mile ; for imported pipes, l^d.
I have known too (but this was in Utopia) a firm of local manufacturers to
be requested to put in a tender for certain articles required by the Utopian
Government department at a price which the manufacturers urged was unremu-
nerative ; but, albeit that Utopia’s policy is that of free-trade, those manufacturers
were requested to tender at the price named, and they did, upon its being
represented to them that “it must be done to suit a political purpose.” Pretty
good that for free-trade Utopia !
It is worth our while recollecting that the total revenue received in 1882 for
carriage of goods on our railways amounted to £1,107,635 ; but that some 10 per
cent, of this amount, thanks to those “differentials” and our peculiar way of
doing things, amounted to £115,000 for the carriage of permanent way materials.
Apologising to my readers for the above somewhat digressive interpolation in
the administrative portion of these Civil Service papers, we will now return
thereto, and to avoid the future admixture of statistical with descriptive matter


I find then that, in addition to the 9000 persons (approximately) accounted
for (but not all named) in the “ Blue Book” for 1882, there are also some 20,900
persons employed upon the Government and public works of this colonv, viz. :—
On railway works, in workshops, under existing lines branch,
&c.
(day labourers and others)
... 7,000
Railway Construction Department (contracts, &c.)
... 6,100
Roads Department (contracts, &c.) ...
... 6,000
Harbours and Rivers Department (contracts, &c.) ..
800
Colonial Architect’s Department (contracts, &c.) .
... 1,000
20,900
Add “ Blue Book list ...
... 9,000
Total '...
. 29,900
therein I beg here to put before the public the following fuller particulars of the
vastness of our Civil Service ramifications.
Or nearly 30,000 persons employed in the public service of this colony.
In m - last paper a description was given of some of the unsatisfactory
conditions prevailing in the service in connection with promotion and increases of
salaries, &c., and reference was made in the last paragraph of that article to some
startling instances of the means employed at times in the service to block or
shunt the legitimate claims and prospects of those Civil servants who are without
political friends to shepherd their interests.
Not only does it happen that, in consequence of the want of influence on the
part of the head of a branch or department with the Minister or Cabinet pro tern.,
the recommendations of such an officer are ignored or set aside, but, for want of
that system of classification and organisation before referred to, it occurs over
and over again that, whilst one officer of the service who happens to be in constant
and close communication with the Minister of his department shall succeed in
obtaining substantial increases of pay and promotion for himself and his friends,
another officer shall have the mortification of seeing his hardly fought for and
honestly deserved promotion, or advancement, systematically blocked year after
year through the intermeddling, jealousy, or hostility of that more fortunate
brother officer of his who happens to be in the position to do this wrong.
This is no imaginary case, although it is not permitted to me to here cite an
actual instance. I have, however, evidence before me which proves clearly that
such influences as that described have been and are still constantly at work in the
service, to the detriment and predjudice of many honourable Civil servants, and
it is at once both a wrong and a dangerous system under which men who have it
in their power to cause large losses to the public revenues should be almost goaded
and provoked into carelessness and indifference to their trust by being subjected to
persistent illtreatment and to actual loss, through the personal jealousy of brother
officers or of complaisant, pliant, but injudicious and injurious Ministerial
acquiescence therein.
There is, unfortunately, a rich abundance of evidence obtainable of the
prevalence of such improprieties in the administration of the service—plenty of
instances where the recommendations of heads of departments have been
“boycotted” or pigeon-holed, yes, even locked up and withheld from ever
reaching the Minister or Cabinet by some other Civil Service official; and it has
happened before now that the recommended promotions of a lot of officers in a
department have been retarded, blocked, or shunted by some nepot to enable him
to plant out in those nursery-beds we heard of, and in favorable positions for them-
selves, his own relatives.
Take this sort of incident as affording another insight into the maladminis-
tration of the service : An officer (with powerful political and other influence to
support him, be it said) is responsible for having committed what we will in deli-
cacy of feeling term grave errors of judgment—errors calculated, nevertheless, to
cause great loss to the colony ; influence pulls him through, and he escapes all the
consequences which should justly pertain to his failure in duty and ability.
Another officer is entrusted with the custody, say, of very costly and important
public works ; is responsible for, and is practically the only check upon both the


quality of the work performed, and the value thereof ; but in the cheerful
idiosyncrasy of his nature, this officer prefers the winecup to hard and responsible
work, and gives rein to his preferences. Under existing conditions, such a man
shall yet be found to hold better position and pay and possess all round a better
time of it in the service (thanks to his political influence) than scores of honester
and truer public servants.
And as a contrast to these indices take this one : like unto the banker’s
clerk, I referred to in the last paper, who happens by dint of vigilance or personal
risk to save the bank from some robbery or loss, it has happened ere now in the
service that a public officer has been instrumental in saving the public itself from
large pecuniary loss, and his particular department from disrepute. Well, here
the parallel between the banker’s employee and the public employee ceases, for
the former is forthwith assured of reward and recognition for his services to his
employer ; whilst the latter —the public servant, who has simply saved so many
thousands or hundreds of thousands of public money —who cares for him or his
services ?
Not his brother officers assuredly ; not the Ministerial head of his department
equally assuredly ; especially, of course, if that employee’s zeal and vigilance
should have happened unfortunately, as sometimes has occurred, to have been
antagonistic to the views or interests of some one or more of those hundreds of
political and other influential persons who, one way and another, are practically
the despotic masters and controllers of our Civil Service.
So far, the majority of the instances quoted in these papers of the adminis-
trative defects and abuses of the Civil Service have been mainly gathered from
the Public Works branch of the great Upas tree. Before finally leaving this
department, and which may fairly claim to have afforded a very full quota of
important and at the same time unsatisfactory evidences of the unsoundness,
corruption, and mischief prevailing therein, it is necessary in fulfilment of a
previous reference made thereto that a little further attention should be directed
to an affiliated branch of the Railways Department, i e., the Land Valuation
branch.
From the picture drawn of the internecine warfare which is even yet
vigorously raging in the department between the Montagus and Capulets, or
otherwise between the “Construction” and the “Commissioner’s” branches,
there can be little doubt probably as to the necessity existing for prompt measures
being taken to have this Railway Department reconstructed and re-organised as
speedily as possible, and in such event it will of course follow that all the
existing anomalies of divided control and responsibility, and of independent and
therefore necessarily conflicting action on the part of the heads of the different
branches of the department, will be discontinued.
And under such re-organisation provision will doubtless also be made for
bringing the railway land valuation branch under the same general control,
whether that control takes the form of a Railway Commissioner’s Board or of a
separate Ministerial Railway Department.
That the land valuation branch should be so included and supervised seems
very apparent ; not because, perhaps, there is any direct reason for supposing
that as at present managed this land valuation business is conducted in an
unsatisfactory, or an unduly extravagant manner, but rather because of the
enormous expansion of our railway extensions. We have already some 1300
miles of railways opened, 501 miles in course of construction, and some 2500
miles of proposed new “ light” and other lines ; and these figures in themselves
surely afford pretty strong evidence that it is no longer desirable that such a
largely accumulating responsibility as is involved in and required by the land
valuation connected with such railways should be placed upon the shoulders of
one or two officers of the Civil Service.


The questions to be determined under this land valuation business are
frequently of complex nature, and require both experienced training in land
valuation, and in cognate professional matters (i.e., engineering and surveying) ;
and, above all, it is also of the utmost importance that political and other
influences should be effectively debarred therefrom ; and it is only rational to
suppose that these desirable conditions are more likely to be obtained under the
controlling influences of a board of commissioners, directly responsible to the
public for all matters connected with the railway management, than is to be
expected if the present overgrown individual irresponsibility is continued.
The history of some of the claims for compensation which have been dealt
with and which are put forward from time to time would be well worth describing
in these papers if space permitted ; many ludicrously absurd, but at the same
time strongly supported and “backed-up” claims have unquestionably been
scouted and properly dealt with by the officers who are responsible for this work ;
but until that good time comes which has been indicated, when all such claims
will be dealt with by a corporate body inaccessible alike to influence, and made
directly responsible to the public for all its acts, there will continue to be reason
to fear that the public exchequer is often made to shell out more freely for lands
resumed and for works of compensation of one sort and another, than is right
or reasonable.
In the first of these papers I wrote deprecatingly of the Civil Service as it
is now constituted as a career for the youth or young man to enter upon, and I
cannot but feel some confidence that the description subsequently given of the
demoralisation existing therein through the perniciousness and magnitude of the
political influence rampant throughout the service is more than sufficient warrantry
for the disparagement referred to.
Does not Parliament itself, and the press of the colony alike, constantly
utter similar disparagement ? Is it not frequently used as a term of reproach,
this same Civil Service? Are not many hardworking and honourable men whose
misfortune it is to be in the service, constantly subject to the humiliation of
hearing their occupation cited as the equivalent for much that is contemptible
and unmanly ? Do not honorable members who have themselves exercised their
evil influences in the most profuse manner possible in crowding friends and.
relatives into that service, do not they almost in the same breath speak insultingly
and mockingly of it. Of course this is all too well known to be denied. And
until the curse is removed, or the power of inflicting the curse is taken away
from those who thus exercise it, and it shall be no longer possible for “ Influence”
to crowd the Civil Service with totally unfit and, three times out of four, with
totally unnecessary officers, this disparagement of the Civil Service will be both
continued and merited ; and at the same time a stigma will continue to be
undeservedly attached to many honest men therein.
In this “Works” branch of the tree, which we are about to quit, I would
point out there is one especial feature in connection with the introduction therein
of influential proteges which should not be lost sight of when that “Civil Service
B ll” (which may one day see the light and life of existence) is being framed.
It is this: At the present time some of the professional branches of the service
receive a constant supply of cadets—youngsters many of them whose relatives
could light well afford to pay for these “cadets” being properly trained and
educated in the profession they are placed in. But, notwithstanding which
circumstance, such cadets are planted into these professional departmental nursery
beds, are “enriched” therein (to use an elegant equivalent for the manuring
operation of nurserymen) by the payment of a salary, to commence with, of some
£SO a year, and there learn their profession.
But how'?—well, in other words, these mostly well-to-do youngsters are
practically there taught their work by the skilled and trained professional men
engaged in the department (often at very inadequate salaries indeed); and who
are thus almost compelled to becomes the professional wetnurses of such cadets,
and without receiving one shilling in fee or reward therefor.
Now, let it not be imagined that this description is put forward in a mean or
carping spirit. Not at all is this so; many of these cadets are young fellows
towards whom no one could feel any but the kindliest interest, But, at the same


time, it is palpably aiul certainly neither fair play nor proper that this advantage
should be taken of the professional and trained men in any public department,
whose own training has cost them—or their parents—large premiums; premiums
ranging from £3OO to £IOOO, according to the reputation or standing of the men
with whom “articles of pupilage” were served. And yet these officers have to
submit to being thus constituted into a sort of free training class of an unlimited
number of politically (or otherwise) nominated cadets to the departments.
It must be remembered that these cadets, who are thus paid by the State
from the date of their entry into the service, and who reap this unfair advantage
at the expense of the professional officers thereof, are in the course of two or three
years mostly translated into full-blown professional men’s positions and pay in
the service ; and, under political influence, not unfrequently into even better
positions than those occupied by the very men whose brains —to use a familiar if
inelegant phrase—they have sucked ; and, as before said, without having paid a
cent to their professional nourishers.
In the case alone of one professional officer of high position in the service, it
happens that fully a score of such young learners as above indicated owe their
present knowledge and position to the teaching imparted to them by (or, as it is
here put, improperly obtained from) such officer.
By all means let our new Civil Service Bill provide for the entry of cadets, or
learners, into these departments, and let the State continue, if it will, to pay them
during their curriculum ; but let it also be provided that the professional officers
in the service shall be paid either by the relatives or by the public, for the
training of those who practically are placed there to learn the way of stepping
into the shoes, or over the heads, of their masters. That seems but a fair thing
to stipulate for, surely ?
And now it is proposed to return, ’ere bringing these papers to a conclusion,
to the great main trunk of the Upas tree—the vast Crown Lands Department.
And after having performed which excursion, it is here notified to my readers that
the concluding papers will be devoted to the consideration of what, to the writer,
appear to be the primary requirements towards eradicating the majority, at any
rate, of the pregnant evils existing in the service. And also some of the funda-
mental necessities of a Civil Service Bill such as to make it alike acceptable to the
public and a just measure to the service itself.
I indicated in the first of these papers how difficult, and, so to speak, how dan-
gerous was the task I had undertaken in attempting to describe the service as it now
is ; and yet probably no one in Sydney, and this is said with no egotistical feeling,
has had much fuller opportunity of knowing the nature and extent of the evil
connected w ith that service than myself. But although I dare not put those evils
forward in so many plain words in the vexatiously hampered columns of a news-
paper, I cannot avoid fancying that many of my utterances have been plain
enough to expose some very great and notorious phases of wrong doing. I frankly
admit, however, that large as my own knowledge and experience are, I am fully
aware, for a sure fact, that there are numbers of honorable members of Parliament
whose acquaintance with the many scandals and wrongs perpetrated in and by
means of the service is fully as complete as my own.
Which I am afraid is by no means a satisfactory confession for the public to
hear, if it will only consider what it implies.
The Crown Lands Department has admittedly been purged of a tremendous
amount of the evil renown which a few short years since was so unenviably its
very own particular and peculiar characteristic. But nothing short of a sweeping
“ Land Reform Bill ’’—such as may haply be provided before we are a much older
people—and which shall put the public into direct access and communication to
and with all information concerning the public estate (instead of, as at present,
plunging that public into the most unmerciful and pernicious clutches of the
political and other land sharkist agencies), nothing short of this, will ever produce
the radical improvement which is needed in the administration of the Crown
Lands Department.
Such a sweeping measure, for instance, as shall (by means of properly
equipped district land offices, &c.) wipe out the pretext even for the employment
of the innumerable branches and sub-branches of this department now scattered


broadcast throughout this city of Sydney, and ominously enough, cheek by jowl,
as so many of these branches and. sub-branches are with public-houses and
“ hotels.”
A kind little bird whispered to me soon after these papers were commenced,
“ Corvus is floundering ; he doesn’t know much about the Lands Department,
nor much about the service.” Now, some of the subsequent papers brought some
other very noisy birds about my ears, and they said, “ Confound that Corvus,
what does he mean by trotting out that little business, and this little game,”
In my next paper, then, I intend to enable the reader to make acquaintance
with some few, at any rate, of the Lands Department administrative maladies,
though limited space will preclude my saying very much thereon ; but what I
must leave unsaid about such matters in these columns, and yet what I thoroughly
well know about them, would fill a very considerable sized book, and would be
well worth the telling.
Like unto all truly serious diseases, the greatest of our Civil Service evils
have attained their present pestilential proportions most insidiously. Those
pertaining more particularly to the Upas tree trunk, our Crown Lands Department,
have grown with the growth of the mischief which has resulted from our abortive
land laws during the past score of years ; and even though the evil is now well
recognised, it will require a deal of patient watching and some very skilful use of
the pruning knife to reduce the tangled overgrowth of this branch of the service
in particular to reasonable and satisfactory dimensions.
I was naturally a little anxious to discover how some of the descriptions of
this Department contained in the earliest of these papers were regarded by
certain gentlemen who were well qualified to form an opinion worth having.
Said one of these experts : “I wonder if ‘Corvus’ really believes that such
things as he describes about the department, and about land agents and political
sharkists, actually occur 1 ” and the smile which accompanied that remark was as
childlike and bland as such a smile should be; but “ Corvus ” was not to be
outrivalled in such simplicity as this, and he, too, smiled aud replied, “As if you
didn’t know and the combination smiles which followed were blander than ever.
Seriously speaking, however, I claim that in describing the enormous evils
and wrongs perpetrated during the life of the present Land Bill, under cover of
this Crown Lands Department of ours, I in no degree exaggerated matters. So
completely has the control of the public estate passed from the public into the
hands of land monopolists, syndicates, and land agencies, that at the present
time the very measure of land reform itself, which is yet in the balance, is
essentially at the mercy of these bodies. The number of really independent
members in the Assembly (i.e., members having no interest either as principals
or agents in the enormous land alienations which have already been made, and
which will continue, as I consider, to take place on an expanded scale should
some of the provisions of the proposed bill pass unrevised) is not probably more
than a score; and this being so, the prospect of speedy improvement in
connection with the administrative defects of the Lands Department is not very
promising.
As an abstract speculative question, I would here ask, have we any sti-ong
reason for supposing at this time there is a large body of bona-fide would-be
selectors anxious for greater facilities and inducement to select than the present
law provides ? Is not all the eagerness which is displayed for freer and enlarged
means of selection before survey on the part of those very gentry who have
already done so remarkably well under the fatal facilities of the old Act. My own
conviction is that the bona-fide would-be selectors are indeed so few in number
that survey before selection would be but a very trifling inconvenience compara-


tively, and that it would virtually assist to reduce the innumerable departmental
administrative evils which are so largely indentical with the operations of the
present Land Act.
And now as to the administrative aspect of the Crown, Lands Department’s
affairs.
Much in the same fashion as the Capulet and Montagu free fight which we
noted as raning in the Works Department, we know also that in the Crown Lands
Department an internecine brawl is in vigorous and continual existence. The
battle is not waged on quite similar lines of course, but'the results and effects upon
public interests (that least regarded of items in these embroilments amongst our
officials) are disastrous enough to entitle them to consideration, and to such atten-
tion as shall result in their curtailment or cessation,
its; The trouble is “ various” in the extreme.
But, as the head and front of the actual cause of these battles between the
chief professional head of the Grown Lands Department { i.e , the Surveyor-
General) and the Under-Secretary for Lands, it would appear that it is very
desirable and even imperative, now that the business of the department has
expanded to its present colossal proportions, that hard and fast lines should be
established, by which shall be defined, beyond the power of individual caprice or
jealousy to disturb, the relative administrative functions to be employed and
enjoyed by the chief professional and the chief administrative officers respectively.
One might suppose that this should be an easy thing enough for these officers
to decide amongst themselves, but it seems to be otherwise ; and that there are
c mstant “ bitings of thumbs ” and interchanges of defiances between them, and
that the chief administrative officer holds it as a serious complaint against that
other chief that he will not confine himself to professional charge and affairs
purely and simply, but that he persists in constantly trespassing on that most
delicate territory —the “ Tom Tiddler’s ” ground, which should properly be
covered by the control of the Administrative Chief.
Now where there is so much that is abundantly required from both of these
officers—for who will deny that in neither of their branches is much satisfaction
now obtainable by the general public—it is a pity time should be spent—as it
must be—in brawling.
The example is infectious, be assured, and if the “ boss cookies ” of a depart-
ment get by the ears, the followers, retainers, or subs, are sure to follow suit, and
nothing can be more disastrous for public interests, which, as we all feel, are none
too much regarded at the best of times.
How much better would it be, for instance, if in lieu of these “ strained
relationships ” between the professional and that other chief, the former were to
bite that thumb no longer, but set about with hearty earnestness to direct the
compilation of a “ land map ” of this Colony worthy the name ; a map which
should, by the way, have been the foundation-stone or back-bone of that reformed
structure, a new Land Bill ? Of course such a map cannot be compiled in a few
weeks ; but then the Crown Lands Department is of pretty mature years now.
With so much wisdom at our command in the councils of the country, it
would be presumptuous for a mere scribe in the columns of a newspaper to venture
to suggest how these “ strained relations ” should be removed, and those “ Tom
Tiddler ” ground raids and riots suppressed; but what difficulty ought a Minister
of the Crown to experience in laying down such distinct lines for the respective
“ boss cockies ” as should at once deprive them of the smallest reason for doubt
upon the question of meuvn and tuum in matters pertaining to their duties to the
public ?
I said before, however, the troubles are very “ various ” in this Crown Lands
Department turmoil.
First of all comes the enormous amount of unnecessary and very undesirable
political and other land agency business, which the crassness and mischievousness
of the Land Act have called into existence. Unnecessary, that is to say from a
public interest standpoint, and only necessary as a means to the end of employing
shoals of such land agents, and of still larger shoals of employees, temporary
and others, in the innumerable branches of the Upas-tree, denominated the
Crown Lands Department.


branches and sub-branches here, there, and everywhere, all over the city ‘
invaluable documents scattered about in most dangerous depositories ; nursery
beds by the score for those political plantlings we have heard of in reference to
other departments of the Civil Service. And, believe it, there is indeed a terrible
profusion of such “ plants ” to be found therein, and, unfortunately, so many of
them not only very undesirable plants at almost any price, or on any terms, but
plants which exercise a pernicious influence by both example and precept upon
others, and especially upon the junior officers in the service.
Said a learned ornament of the bench but lately to a Civil servant, who was
reading his newspaper in the tramcar, on his way to the office,—“ Sir, why don’t
you keep that to read in the office ? ” and the speaker then good-humouredly
explained that this was but an ancient London Punch Civil Service joke revived.
The conversation then turned upon the old, old story, the evil reputation attaching
to our Civil Service, and this was the moral to that little talk contributed by the
Civil servant to whom the remarks had been addressed.
“ Permit me to observe, gentlemen, that the Civil Service is just what the
people of the country through their accredited agents and representatives in
Parliament choose to make it; and so long as political influence is exercised to
crowd the service with unnecessary officers and to appoint three men whereonly
one is required, just so long will the country have a Civil Service which is at
once a dishonour to the honest men therein, and a monstrous injustice to the
people whose money is thus squandered in maintaining an army of drones in the
Civil Service hives.”
Now that seems to my mind, to fit this business just about as neatly as a
well fitting glove. . .
And unquestionably there is no other branch of the service wherein the
iniquity and scandal of political influence have been so largely practised as in
that same Crown Lands Department.
It would be a disappointment, perhaps, to some of my readers if I failed to
indicate some actual experiences or knowledge of the sort evils which I have
asserted prevail (and of old so much more largely prevailed) in the department.
And so, and without committing any breach of confidence let me remark, I may
tell such readers that not even honorable members of the Legislature have had
better opportunities than I have had for ascertaining some of those “various”
administrative troubles.
Pages could well be here written descriptive of a marvellous variety of
very scandalous proceedings on the part of employees in this branch and that;
but for reasons which have had to prevail throughout with the writer, he has to
trust somewhat largely to the perceptive powers of the reader. It would be easy
enough here to tell how unsatisfactory is the performance of duty by many a
one, and how, as a consequence, “overtime” work grows as an apparent
necessity ; how, too, the few good men in an office or branch really perform the
work, and that many others (political plants as aforesaid) shirk their duty, skulk,
and idle, and are to be found at all hours of the day in hotels and public houses.
Said one veteran of a branch to me one day, “I wouldn’t mind if they d
stop at the pubs altogether, even if they drew their pay all the same; but it
plays the mischief with the discipline of an office, this sort of authorised or
countenanced loafing and defiance of authority ; and whilst it throws, of course,
all the work upon the shoulders of other men in the office, we have the credit of
having a very large staff, and should be able to do a correspondingly large
amount of work ; I wish, sir, a clean sweep-out could be made, and only such
numbers and such sort of men appointed as are reported to be required by the
heads of branches and departments ; but then, bless us, what would become of
political influence !” .
In another branch I wot of, an energetic, honest sort of young man obtained
an appointment, and, being naturally anxious to show his zeal and aptitude, he
“wired in” to the work allotted to him by the sub-“ boss cockie,” and in an
hour or two had completed it; he handed it over to the superior referred to, who
turned pale, and looked alarmed at first; then he smiled softly and encouragingly
at the novice, and said, “ My dear boy, this will never do ; if we were all to go
on like that there’d soon be no work left to do.”


“ Now, the other day,” said the boss-cockie, “ I noticed in one of the streets
of the city a big navvy fellow pegging away in famous style at some blue-metal
roadmaking work together with a lot of other workmen ; this fellow was a new
chum arrival, and doing the ordinary navvy stroke he had learned in England ;
well, one of the other workmen came up to him and said, 1 Look here, mate,
dy’e know what the penalty is for having a wet shirt from working too hard ?
A fine of half-a-crown the first time, and your walking ticket next time, mate,’
Not bad, was it 1” asked the boss-cockie of that novice, and the chances are that
by this time he thinks it a capital joke indeed.
But still, that’s one sort of the “ various ” troubles of our Civil Service, it is
to be feared, hard work isn’t always the sure road to reward and approval that it
should be ; and there are doubtless plenty of good men therein who, like the
admirable Jack Tar we have heard of,
Whose ’eart was true to Poll,
and who are really true enough in their desire to do fair work for fair wage, but
are yet seduced from such admirable and honourable allegiance by observing how
much more beautiful and profitable a thing it is to have an ounce of political
influence at your back, than to exert ever so many million foot—tons of energy
and hard work in the Civil Service.
It will, I hope, be considered that even in the little I have now written upon
these Public Works and Crown Lands Administrative matters, that the reader has
been thereby enabled to diagnose for himself, with a considerable degree of
accuracy, the condition of the Civil Service.
In the cause of impartiality I ought, perhaps, before concluding this branch
of the subject, to invade the sanctity of some other departments of the service,
the Telegraph Department, for instance, or the “Mines,” the “Law” Depart-
ment, &c. But in good sooth therein we should but find the reflex of the evils
shown in these papers to be so largely prevalent in the greater and main branches
of the service.
And but the one chief cause as the basis thereof, there and the
Civil Service—political influence.
In my next and concluding paper, therefore, I shall place before the reader
some suggestions in connection with Civil Service Reform, and the restriction, at
least, of the troubles therein and thereof.
As to the reform of the Civil Service.
From what has been described in these papers, incomplete as that description
admittedly is, in consequence of the restrictions placed upon plain speaking, and
for want of fuller space, it has perhaps been made abundantly evident to the
readers thereof that we have much reason to be dissatisfied with, and much
ground for apprehension about the present condition of the service.
With evil examples set in the highest of places, and by the highest of per-
sonages, in connection with the appointments made, whether in the larger and
purely “civil” or the lesser “military” branches of the service; and with so
strongly established a system of political influence for ever actively engaged in
increasing the mischief, the thought suggests itself that nothing short of a “ black
Wednesday,” or a blacker day still, perhaps, will suffice to stem this evil if it is
permitted much longer insidiously, but still very palpably, to develop itself at
the rate it has assumed during the past few years.
The time seems approaching pretty rapidly, however, when, from a very
irresistible cause, financial necessity, and the disappearance from our Budget
statements of a fat rosy “ surplus,” and the appearance in lieu thereof of a
more or less vigorous “taxation,” that the “break” will have to be put very
hard down on this Civil Service expansion business, as well as upon our lavish
and dangerous public works expenditure.


And should this view of our affairs be presently proved to be correct, a large
amount of suffering will naturally result to those employed in the Civil Service,
and unfortunately, such suffering will mainly fall upon those who have least
deserved it, and who can least endure it; i.e., upon the men who, however
faithful their services as public officers, are without political influence to see them
safely through the visitation which attaches to such reformatory measures as are
implied by, and as we know by the experience of our Victorian neighbours, are
included in a Black Wednesday business.
So far as one great branch of the service is concerned, the passing of a
new Land Reform Bill must necessarily affect the question of the future adminis-
trative requirements of the department ; whilst as regards most of the other
public departments there is little reason indeed for thinking that there is any
necessity for increasing the present large staffs of officers employed therein.
And that, therefore, neither public interests nor the requirements of the service
furnish any pretext for, or invitation to, the further exercise of political influence
in maintaining the present and inordinate supply of new additions to the ranks
of the service. And that it will be quite sufficient, and infinitely more bene-
ficial to public interests, if political influence in this direction be at once
extinguished ; and only such additions be henceforth made to the Civil Service
departments as are demanded and recommended by the administrative chiefs
thereof.
And now, on general matters as well as that contemplated, but highly
important item of Civil Servic reform, “ classification,” I beg to offer the follow-
ing suggestions :
1. That the service should consist of two main divisions, the “ administra-
tive ” (including therein the clerical), and the “ professional.” Such divisions to
be subdivided to suit the requirements of the various departments, i.e., the
Surveyor-General’s (as at present), the Colonial Architect’s, the Railways, the
Roads, the Harbours and Rivers, the Telegraphs, &c.
2. That every class in such sub-division (except the “ first ” class, or chief
administrative and professional offices, respectively) shall have minimum and
maximum rates of salary attached thereto, the maximum to be attained by
annual increment upon the minimum' salary attached to each class.
3. That all officers now in the service shall be classified into such sub-
divisions ; the classification to be entrusted to a caucus or board of classifiers,
composed of the chiefs of the various departments or branches.
4. That in the case of all officers, professional or otherwise, now in the
service on the permanent staff thereof, competitive examination shall not be
required ; but that their classification shall be determined by the chiefs of their
respective departments, and upon their recommendations (based upon their
knowledge of the nature of the duties which have been performed by such
officers during their past service). This proposal is put forward, let me state, in
consequence of the experience gained of the unfairness and evils produced by
«• classification,” based upon “competitive examination” only, as essayed in the
Civil Service reforms of the parent country ; and whereby it was speedily ascer-
tained that experienced men of perhaps 20 or more years of service, and possessed
of technical and practical departmental knowledge of invaluable nature, were yet
ignominiously floored by mere school-boys, who were, of course, experts and
“ dons ” in the theoretical branches of the highest mathematics, but equally, of
course, lamentable failures as designers of works, or as administrative officers of
departments.
5. That in the event of additional professional assistance being required in
any department, of a class higher than the lowest, or entry class, that no new
appointment shall be made until it has been first ascertained that there is no
officer in any professional branch of the service (below that class wherein such
additional assistance is required) who is eligible for such appointment. Under
this provision it may be here explained that the present practice would be wiped
out by which men on the temporary staff or men outside of the service are,
under political influence, pitchforked into the service, and oftentimes over the
heads of Civil Servants whose claims are in this wise “jumped.”
6. That in the event of there being no officer in the departments eligible
for any new appointment proposed or required to be so made, then that any


applicant, outside of the service, for such appointment shall submit to an
examination qualification, to be conducted by the “Classification Board” before
referred to, who shall determine upon his fitness for the appointment, and upon
whose recommendation he shall be eligible therefor.
7. That habitual drunkenness, negligence, or ignorance of duties on the
part of any officer in the service shall be sufficient warrantry for his immediate
dismissal therefrom, such dismissal to be at the discretion, and in the hands of,
the said “ Classification Board,” and that any officer so dismissed the service
shall forfeit all claim to compensation, superannuation or other allowances.
8. That leave of absence or furlough shall be upon some fixed or uniform
system throughout the service, and be cumulative, at the option of the
respective officers thereof.
9. That if from the financial necessities of the colony it becomes necessary
at any time to reduce the permanent staff of classified officers, that such officers
shall be entitled to, and shall receive, upon their services being so dispensed with,
one month’s pay for each completed year’s service as compensation.
10. That if it shall at any time be similarly necessary to reduce the salaries
of the permanent staff officers, that such reduced salaries shall be subsequently
restored to their original amount, and the reductions repaid when the improved
financial position of the colony shall permit.
11. That from the salary of every officer in the service shall be deducted an
amount being not less than 5 per cent, per annum on salaries up to £6OO per
annum, and of 10 per cent per annum on all salaries above that amount ; and
that such deductions shall become the nucleus of a retiring allowance, or super-
annuation fund (to be subsidised to the necessary extent by parliamentary votes
during the first 10 years of its creation), wherefrom all officers of the service
shall be entitled to receive a retiring or superannuation allowance upon attaining
the age of 60 years, or after having served continuously for 30 years in
the service. Such retirement to be made compulsory upon all officers at the age
named. And the retiring allowances to be calculated at or based upon the scale
adopted by and prevailing in the Imperial Civil Service.
12. That such Superannuation Fund shall not be endangered or swamped
and brought to grief (as has happened in the experience of our Civil Service), by
the improperly foisting upon it of politically influenced and compulsory “retire-
ments ”at abnormal and improperly estimated allowances. And that such fund,
being, as it will assuredly be after a very few years, entirely supplied by the con-
tributions of the Civil servants themselves, shall not be liable to repudiation
through any such misapplication of political influence.
13. That, in the event of the death of any officer in the Civil Service (after
the passing of the Civil Service Act, under which it is here assumed that the
above conditions are to be brought into operation) before he has arrived at the
period for retirement, there shall be paid to his widow or children, or to the sur-
viving parents, if any, but to no other relatives or heirs, an allowance equal to
one month’s pay for each completed year of service by the deceased officer. Such
allowance to be payable from the said Superannuation Fund. This fund being to
all intents the equivalent of a life assurance provision, it would be manifestly
both cruel and unjust that the widow and children of a deceased contributing
officer should be deprived of the benefit of his contribution to such fund.
14. That all cadets or learners admitted to the professional branches of the
service shall, by themselves or their parents, be required to fee (the amount
whereof to be determined by the “Classification Board”) for their term of
pupilage in the department; such term to extend over three years, after which
time they shall be eligible, upon the recommendation of the board, for appoint-
ment to the fourth, or lowest, class of the professional service. That the moneys
so paid by the cadets for pupilage shall be apportioned amongst such of the
professional officers of the branch receiving the cadets as may be decided by the
board, .... .
15. That all foreigners or aliens who enteFthe Civil Service shall be required
to become naturalised British subjects.
The above few clauses, of course, but represent the skeleton or framework of
such a Civil Service Bill as, it is sincerely to be hoped, will shortly be introduced
and called into existence in this colony.


Tbe evidence of some of the ab'est actuaries in the world is available to us
in proof that such a superannuation fund as is above indicated can be made
completely self-supporting, if it is only carefully guarded and nurtured—perhaps
even assisted in its first youth—and honestly administered subsequently. And
this being the case, there is not the smallest particle of reason why there should
be, on the one hand, any hostility on the part of the public to the establishment
of this most form of insurance for its public servants ; nor, on the
other hand, will the Civil Servant then have any reason to dread that in his old
age he may be turned adrift to pauperdom, or, as an alternative, have to cling to
his position and pay long after he is capable of honestly performing the duties
required, and when his holding of office is at once a wrong and a stumbling-block
to the junior officer, who has to do the work of the no longer competent officer,
who yet continues to “ scoop ” the pay.
If no such provision as this is sanctioned and encouraged—nay, demanded—
by the public of this colony, and a Civil Service Bill is passed which stops short
of providing for and settling definitely for all time this question of retiring
allowance, depend upon it the colony will continue to pay through the nose very
lamentably indeed for its shortsightedness; and “political influence” will
continue to cost the country, in a spasmodic and unsatisfactory manner, large
sums of money for individual cases of “ compensation ” or gratuities. There
have been so many precedents established now, that such “influence” will
assuredly continue to successfully assert itself ; and in lieu of the Civil Servants
being compelled, as they should be, by their contribution to a State-controlled
fund to provide for their own retiring allowances, the country will be “ bled ”
afresh whenever one of its officers is either compelled to “ retire ” or departs
this life.
_ As regards the reduction of the present huge dimensions of our “ Upas tree,’’
it is earnestly to be desired that before many more years are added to our history
as a people decentralisation will have become the conspicuous attribute of our
social and political life as regards the public works and the surveys of the colony.
When that healthful condition prevails, and when county or shire councils, or
their equivalent, control and are responsible for their own works and require-
ments throughout the colony, depend upon it there will be a voluntary and a
very wholesome exodus of at least the professional members of the Civil Service
from the by no means generally esteemed bondage thereof. And the present
plethoric and very unsatisfactory concentration and curtailment of individual
talent and energy in the crowded branches of the Upas tree will largely vanish.
There are doubtless hundreds of professional men now in the public service
who would gladly welcome such a change, and the increased opportunities for
individual and personal distinction and reputation which such a
state of open competition would afford them, and who would heartily rejoice
to see the extinction of the present system whereunder “political influence”
goes for so much, and talent and energy for so little—a system whereby, whether
in the “ Civil Service ” or “ municipal ’* arena, it is within the experi-
ence of the expert and veteran professional officer that “ political influence ”
shall enable the cadet or beardless “ pupil ” of but yesterday to step into a good
fat municipal or Government billet of £6OO or £BOO a year—into such a “billet,”
indeed, as should properly reward the years of toil and perseverance of the
veteran himself—the very man, perhaps, whose brains have been pillaged by
that same stripling. This is the sort of thing, amongst others, which decentralisa-
tion and the opening out and “ bursting up ” of our present plethoric concen-
trativeness and the pruning down of our Civil Service Upas tree will go to remedy.
A most desirable reform, too, unquestionably.
In taking leave of my readers they will perhaps permit me to remind them
of what sort of a person my prototype, the “ Corvus ” of the classics, is reputed
to have been. He is accredited with having undertaken to slay, in single combat,
a very enormous and malevolent giant. And he found he had his work cut out
with a vengeance; and but for the curious and extremely useful assistance
rendered to him, so it is fabled, by certain ravens in plucking out the eyes of
the giant, “Corvus” the First wouldn’t have accomplished his task.
Now, I beg to record it here, that in this respect he was more lucky than
myself, for, in tackling our giant, I have essentially “gone it alone and such


of the ravens of this period, whose attention has been directed to this battle,
have evinced more desire to “ go for” my eyes than for those of my adversary I
Such, alas, is the penalty one has to pay for living in an ex-classical age,
and amongst a less chivalrous race of ravens than those of the days of the
original “ Corvus the croaking has been very loud in my ears at times ; but, to
tell the truth, the louder it was the more I think I enjoyed it.
In conclusion, however, let me state that I have been most heartily desirous
of both exposing the fundamental causes of the evils which are presented by our
Civil Service, and of seeking to uphold the good fame and interests of those
hundreds—aye, thousands —of honest and upright men, whose bane and mis-
fortune it is that “ political influence ” has so smirched the reputation of the
Civil Service. Time may have it in store for me to be of yet more practical
usefulness to the service in the political arena; and I dare to indulge the
hope that I should not in that case find that my efforts through the medium
of these papers on its behalf have been misinterpreted, or without effect, but
that I should find a goodly record of Civil Service “ ayes ” in my favour.
I should be ungrateful in the extreme if I did not here express my great
indebtedness to two or three gentlemen in that service who have afforded me
some extremely valuable data and information during the currency of these
papers, and I very heartily tender them my cordial thanks. It is no less a duty,
perhaps, that I should also state that the assistance thus acknowledged is excep-
tional, and that whilst I have received several communications from Civil servants
and other persons (some from Victoria, and one, many pages long, from distant
Northern Queensland) encouraging and praising my efforts on behalf of the
service, the discreetest silence has been observed by the officers thereof generally
on the subject of its scandals.
In endeavouring to fulfil the onerous duty which the production of these
papers has thrown upon me, it is not without a grain of confidence I venture the
assertion that the narrative therein contained of various matters which have
come within my own knowledge has proved of sufficient importance to the
public interests to justify its having been placed before that public ; and that
the publication thereof has been already productive of some practical good, as in
the case of certain very much politically influenced matters connected with that
Public Works Department of ours, and of which even more will, perhaps,
presently be heard.
Conclusion.
Turner & Hendbrson, Hunter Street.


