

- ■ - . ■ ' ■
' -' - ■
■ - ■ ■ '
. * ■ - ' . ■
- ' « ' . .
' - “
- ' , . ' . ■' ' • • -
' ' ; -' ‘ ' ' ' ' '
- ' ' •; • ■
■ / ■ - ■ - ■ ..
■ ■ ' - .
■
.
Qj ' ‘ ■ ' '
: sr — r; -w-
- - " *
- _nr- L-su*. . cr -
-
-
- •


IISL,
Collection?®
|i[ Rational Library ||l
Canberra jjj




■


*


» Jt '
i
«<^ , "5 e # "'\ -♦


CLARENCE AND THE GOBLINS;
UNDER THE EARTH.
HENRY MACKENZIE GREEN.
(Eleven years of age.)
With Portrait of the Author, and Photograph
of Illustration drawn by him.
Sydney:


Public Library Press.


By way of preface to this little book 1 think it
necessary to state that Henry Mackenzie Green,
who is my grandson, was born on 2nd May, 1881 ;
and that, while he was staying in my house, he
one evening, of his own accord, in my presence,
and without the slightest help, wrote the story
now published and drew the picture of which a
photograph is given.
The only assistance which he had from me or
anyone else was in part of the punctuation, the
division of the story into paragraphs, and a sug-
gestion that a line shewing the surface of the
water should be drawn as it appears in the
picture.
Ecclesbourne,
11 July, 1892.


■


CLARENCE AND THE GOBLINS.
CHAPTER I.
One day Clarence Whitmore, son of Colonel Whitmore who
had retired on a small pension, was walking beside his
tricycle, from which he had just dismounted in order to
drag it up a hill.
His father had gone to the Vicarage (a distance of five
miles from their home) to dinner; so young Clarence
thought he would take his dinner and his tricycle out for
the day. He meant to go to a place known as “ The
Rocks,” which was noted for its beautiful scenery, and
there play about all day.
As he was walking about the rocks he saw a large flat
one which, when he stamped upon it, sounded hollow. He
cut a stick with his knife and probed it under the stone,
and then lifted it up. To his surprise, he saw underneath
it a hole and some steps dug out of the earth going down it!


The steps were very little and had tiny footsteps on
them; besides which there were marks as of a very little
pick along the sides of the hole ! The hole was very small,
but he squeezed through and crawled down the steps a long
way ; but after a while he thought that he had better get a
light, so he went back again to the top, took some of the fat
off the meat for his dinner, and greased and lighted some
sticks. Then he took them and his dinner and crept down
the hole again.
After he had come down about a hundred yards the steps
came to an end and a path began: then he walked on for
about ten minutes (for the path was large enough for him
to stand up in, and gradually became larger) and he came
to a little room which had, strange to say, no outlet except
the path he had come by.
He hunted all over the room to see if there was any way
of getting out; at last, as he could not find any, he leaned
against the wall to think what he had better do next.
The wall was very smooth and he ran his hand over it.
Then, just as he felt a small knob and pushed it, some door
opened and he fell through ! Down, down, he went, till
splash ! he fell into some water. His feet just reached the
bottom, but his lighted stick fell into the water and was
put out, and the other ones got wet so that he could not
light them.


*


' A
\V
I \ {
i \ l
‘ \ \
f
1 - .
‘ / '
V
M ! 1
111
1 \ | i’ ! 1
' ! '
r v '
> ' 1 \ , v V
&lu\ '
\\
\ '■ \ \ A\
\ \ • v - \ ' v ‘
•


Then he heard a great hissing sound as of some great
monster spouting like a whale, and some water dropped on
him from above.
As he swam about he struck against something hard; it
was a rock. He climbed up and sat on it. Then he felt in
his pocket for his matches; the box was watertight, so they
were dry.
He opened the box and lit a match, and then by its light
he saw that he was in an underground river, and in the
middle, about ten yards off, was a vast head and neck like
that of a snake, which, as soon as it saw the glare of the
match, looked towards him and opened its mouth and
darted its tongue at him.
Clarence was at first very much frightened, but he soon
recovered himself again, drew out his pocket knife and
opened it, jumped into the water to get near to the monster,
and flung his knife at it.
The knife struck it full on the neck, and Clarence could
see drops of blood fall from the knife (it went quite through
the serpent); then the match went out. After a little
while the water got quite calm again, so that Clarence
knew that the Sea-serpent was gone.
Clarence swam on for a while, now and then resting on a
rock, and then in the distance he saw a speck of light. It


was quite still. He swam up to it and saw that it came
from a small stone, fixed in a cap on the head of a little
man about a foot long.
Beside him were lying something like a pair of bat’s
wings, so arranged that they would fit on his shoulders.
Clarence took hold of him, but the little Imp woke up and
wriggled out of his hand. Clarence put the wings in the
breast of his coat and followed him.
The Goblin (for such he was) took to the water and swam
for his life, Clarence following him by the light in his cap.
After a long swim Clarence caught him up and made signs
that he would not hurt him. Then he made the Goblin
understand that he was to lead him to where he and the
other Goblins lived, so (Clarence keeping close to him so
that he could not escape) they swam on.
In a little while they came to some steps going up from
the water’s edge. The Goblin led Clarence up these till
they got high above the river ; then they came to a tunnel
about six feet high. Master Hobgoblin wanted his wings,
but Clarence would not give them to him, wisely thinking
that he might fly away.
Soon the tunnel widened out into a large cave ; numbers
of Goblins were flying about with the same sort of thin
leather wings as Clarence’s guide. They all seemed sur-
prised and frightened at the sight of such a tall person as
Clarence. He was three times their size.


CLARENCE AND THE GOBLINS. 0
One of the Goblins brought Clarence some food ; it looked
like a half starved rat. He declined it with thanks.
Another Goblin brought something like a potato; he tasted
it first to shew that it was not poisoned. Then Clarence,
being very hungry, ate it.
After he had done he patted the heads of several of the
Goblins to shew that he was friends with them. Then some
of them shewed him a little cave, near the big one, of which
the bottom was covered with a sort of soft bark and dry
grass, and a slab of stone to prop against the opening or
doorway, with a prop to fix it up. Clarence fixed up the
stone and went to sleep.


CHAPTER 11.
Is ext morning, or rather after he had woke up (for there is
no difference of light or darkness in Goblin-land) some
messengers came to bring him to the great Hall of Council.
There he found some grave men, scholars apparently, who
were to teach him the language. He soon knew enough to
talk to people, going to the Kham, or Hall of Council, every
day for an hour or so.
The King made him a Karhl (a title something like an
Earl would be in England) and gave him some land for
digging caves in, for in Goblin-land, when rich Goblins have
land, they dig caves in it and let it to poor Goblins.
How they generally dug the caves roughly, but Clarence
had his done neatly, and cut into different shapes, conse-
quently Clarence’s caves were in great demand, and he
became rich.
As soon as some of his caves had tenants, and he had
some money, he went to a shop and bought a pair of the
very best Goblin wings. Then he sought out the Goblin
from whom he had taken the wings (and afterwards broken
them, they being spoiled by the wet) on the night of his
entry into Goblin-land, and gave them to him. He was
very much pleased with them.


Then Clarence had a large pair of wings made for him-
self, and though at first he could not fly at all, by practising
every day he could soon fly a little bit.
Now Clarence was a great favorite with Rangol, the King
of the Goblins, and consequently several of the great Lords
were jealous of him, especially Lord Nasta, who, before
Clarence had come, had been the greatest Lord in the
kingdom.
Clarence suspected that there was a plot against him, and
as he was taking a walk one day he saw some Goblins fly in
haste from the Hall of Council. He thought something
was up, and so he got his wings and followed them. “ Most
likely,” he thought, “ they are messengers from the King to
Lord Nasta for some more Goblins so that they may kill
me,” so he hurried on.
After they had gone on some way the messengers found
out who was after them. They immediately quickened
their pace and soon went at their utmost speed, Clarence
trying to catch them up. Just as he was gaining fast the
path became much narrower, and Clarence with his large
# O
wings could fly no further. He bound his wings on his
back and began to run.
Then he observed a hesitation among the messengers, and
they stopped for a minute. There was no doubt about it,


they were lost! Clarence stood aghast; he knew that
there were hundreds of Goblin paths, made centuries ago.
And how could anybody, even a Goblin, find his way out of
them? But he soon started on again, and so did the
Goblins, for they did not want him to catch them. On
they went till they turned a corner, and he lost sight of
them.
He blundered on for a long while, but he seemed to be
ascending. Up, up, he went till the passage became so
small that he had to crawl along, and even then he could
hardly squeeze through it, but at last he saw a speck of
light ; he crawled up to it and through, and then, to his
delight, he found himself in a grassy meadow by the side of
a deep bubbling stream.
He followed it up for some miles till he came to some
houses, where he saw a notice printed up. It had on it, —
“£5OO reward for the recovery of a small boy, 12 years of
age, named Clarence Whitmore.”
“ It must have been put up by father,” thought Clarence,
and, as he now knew the country, he ran on. Soon he came
to his father’s house, where he received a warm welcome,
and there let us say good-bye to him and his father for the
present.
Finis.










urn.
I NATIONAL ■■■I
I BKAK> or AUS I RAl I A.


