

■ >
BY
FRANCES TYRRELL GILL.
VALKER, MAY and CO., PRINTERS, MACKILLOP STREET.
1892.


■


CLEOPATRA.
WHEN we name Cleopatra we symbolize the incalculable
woman! It is wonderful to think that all the dazzling
women who have played their public parts upon the
world’s stage have found the prototype of their special
form of enchantment in Cleopatra.
Mary, Queen of Scots, because of that very element of variousness
in her which defies definition, is the nearest of the psychical
descendants of the far-famed enchantress of Egypt; and yet how
much even she lacks of Cleopatra’s “ infinite variety ” —of her power
to affect the imagination. And all those that have gone before, or
followed Mary of Scotland —queens upon the throne, or queens of
the court, the salon, or the stage —have still no spell to sway the
hearts and to influence the actions of men that did not once belong
to her who ruled the destinies of the imperial Antony, and even
kindled into flame the mighty, but cold and self-contained, Csesar.
But when we try to get near to the secret of Cleopatra’s inexhaust-
ible power to charm, we find that she is as elusive as Isis herself,
that mysterious goddess whom it was her daring delight to personify.
No analysis of her characteristics, no synthetical grouping of her
actions, will suffice to explain the hold she has upon the mind, even
when morally we have declared against her.
In each one of the many plays, poems, histories, of which she
has been the theme, she only appears in parts. Plutarch has given
much of her, and Shakespeare both more and less than Plutarch.
There is more of tenderness, more of winsomeness even, in Plutarch’s
unvarnished narrative, and more gorgeousnes of nature, more rap-
turousness of passion, in Shakespeare’s splendid portraiture.
When Plutarch tells of her, as she makes her last oblations to
Antony, that she moans : —“Nothing could part us while we lived ;
but in death we are to be divided. Thou, though a Roman, best
buried in Egypt ; and I, an Egyptian, must be interred in Italy; the
only favour I shall receive from thy country.” And, again, what
could exceed in piteousness her cry —“ No ! hide me, hide me in the
grave with thee ; for life, since thou hast left it, has been misery to
me.” There is in such a prayer more the ring of the Hebrew
mourner, Ruth, than of the Egyptian siren, Cleopatra ; yet the one
phase is as natural to her as the other, and all the phases of her
nature are in harmony together.
Is there any epithet, complete in itself, that could describe a being
whose emotions are so varied, whose powers are so diverse ?
Heine, when descanting upon her copriciousness, her fickleness,


her feverish love of conquest, observes ; —“ As in the character, so in
the surroundings of Cleopatra, there is a strange irony. . . .
This goddess of life flutters and rules over Egypt, the silent story-
land.”
But is Cleopatra really out of keeping with that silent story-land ?
Is she not herself as great an enigma as any that Egypt holds?
And are there not depths in her nature as mysterious as those
“ Moon Mountains of Ethiopia, in whose bosoms the sources of the
Nile are hid?” Or could we, taking into account her richly-
coloured, bewildering nature, in which, by the force of two race-
streams, were so perfectly blended the exquisitive clearness of
perception of the Greek with the mystery that belongs to the climes
of the East, imagine her playing her part as triumphantly on any
other stage ?
Antony himself is subject to the spell of her environment; for
though he had, in a moment of desperate courage, fled from the
region of her enchantment, and had endeavoured, as the husband of
Octavia, to live for duty and for the good of Rome, he no sooner
approaches her magic dominions than he feels the force of the old
influence reassert itself. In the words of Plutarch:—“Upon his
approach to Syria, the love of Cleopatra, which had been so long
dormant in his heart, and which belter counsels seemed totally to
have suppressed, revived again, and took possession of his soul;”
and after this he was never again able to free himself from the fatal
charm !
That picture of Cleopatra which, for the delight of Agrippa and
Maecenas, Enobarbus paints—
“ The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne
Burnt on the water ; the poop was beaten gold,
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were love-sick ; with them the oars were silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water, which they beat, to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggar’d all description ; she did lie
In her pavilion (cloth of gold, of tissue),
O’er-picturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outworth Nature ; on each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-coloured fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i’ the eyes,
And made their bends adornings ; at the helm
A seeming mermaid steers ; the silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast


Her people out upon her ; and Antony,
Enthroned in the market place, did sit alone,
Whistling to the air ; which, but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in Nature ! ”
—that picture had been lying even in the background of Antony’s
soul through all his enforced separation from Syria; and at the
first glimpse of the glowing eastern land, with its depths of blue and
balmy air, its waving palms and gorgeous colours, it leaps into
throbbing life again, and once more his heart is on fire within him
to behold his “ enchanting queen.”
And here it may be said that Heine, in that very phrase “ the
goddess of life,” offers something like an approximate solution of the
mystery of the influence of Cleopatra. An intoxicating sense of
triumphant life is, so to speak, the key-note of the whole relation
between herself and Antony ; for life was to Cleopatra an element
in which she bathed and by which she was ever renewed.
In Shakespeare’s representation of these immortalized lovers, again
and again we hear the resounding notes of this glorified strain. In
the first scene between them Antony exclaims, as Cleopatra half
mockingly urges him to hear the messengers from Rome—
“ Let Rome in Tibur melt, and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall ! Here is my space !”
And to her plea—
“ Antony
Will be himself again,”
He replies—
“ But stirred by Cleopatra !
Now, for the love of Love, and her soft hours,
Let’s not confound the time with conference harsh :
There’s not a minute of our hours should stretch
Without some pleasure now ! What sport to-night ?”
Although victorious warrior, he is conscious of a more excellent
sense of existence in Cleopatra’s presence than in the most brilliant
prospect of battle; and when, at length, yielding to outward pressure,
he has torn himself away, Cleopatra, in kindred spirit, calls for
mandragora, “ that she may sleep out the great gap of time till his
return,” so colourless does existence seem without him. And so on,
until the whole diapason is reached in that last wild scene of festival,
when Antony, coming in victorious from the battle, exclaims, as
Cleopatra enters,
“ O ! thou day o’ the world !
Chain mine armed neck ; leap thou attire and all
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing !”
Professor Dowden, the eminent Shakespearean critic, avers that
Antony, in Shakespeare’s play, has been to Cleopatra “ her supreme


sensation.” But, surely, is he not more than this ? Is he not the
very complement of her soul ?
“ Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so ?”
she asks, in rapturous tenderness ; and she goes on to assert that, in
the days when Caesar and Pompey were her lovers, she did not
know what love meant. Were she only the supreme actress —the
one who has all the arts of dissembling at command, and who “ uses
them with consummate dexterity to gain her ends,” that Professor
Dowden finds her to be—she never could have maintained so com-
plete a rule over the heart of Antony. He would somewhere have
discovered the flaw in her seeming. Twice in the course of the
history of their lives together he suspects her; but this is because of
the tyranny of circumstance. He thinks that it would be more to her
advantage to side with Csesar; never because he thinks that she is
playing a part to gain his own love, either out of her passion for
power or in pursuit of pastime. The inexhaustibleness of her
resources makes her, on the surface, appear to be playing a part.'
But all her arts are inborn—the effect of nature working in her.
Remark the difference of her method of treatment of Antony all
through and of the victorious Caesar at the end of the play. With
the former all her swift changes of mood, all her charming pretences
of voice, look, and manner, are the spontaneous outcome of the
impulses of her soul. Antony himself feels all the force of their
naturalness when he says—
“Fie, wrangling queen !
Whom everything becomes to chide, to laugh,
To weep !”
But her quick-wittedness instantly directs her how to use those in-
born arts of dissembling when dissembling is necessary to gain her
ends. See how, by exercise of them, she effects her own purpose,
and completely frustrates Caesar’s, in the last act of her life, the
manner of her death in the monument. As Plutarch quaintly says
in his account of her last meeting with the victorious Emperor—
“ After this, he (Caesar) took his leave, in confidence that he had
brought her to his purpose ; but she deceived him.”
But even Professor Dowden tacitly admits that he finds it
impossible to deal exhaustively with Cleopatra. He says : —“ But it
is an error to view Cleopatra as representative of an epoch, a
class, or an influence. She is Cleopatra, and that is enough :an
individual who herself constitutes a whole species : an Eastern star,
with none other like it, and ruling the destinies of the lords of the
earth.” In other words, he admits that Cleopatra is beyond his
powers of interpretation.
But when Swinburne, because he at times is possessed with a sort
of fervor of intuition that goes straight to the mark, says of
Cleopatra that “ she is the true and everlasting woman,” he,
perhaps, comes nearer than any other to reading her truly. For


with his rapid discernment he sees in her all the permanent and
elementary forces of woman. Say that her whole course was a
perverted one ! Still, in respect of her power to charm, to appeal,
to hold, it makes no difference. It is not possible that Antony felt
her to be the equal of Octavia in virtue ; but he does not the less
surrender himself to the power of her intense naturalness, of her
magnificent daring. Fearfulness, indeed, was a thing unknown to
her. Not impossibly the moralist may reply, because of her capacity
for wickedness. But I think it will have to be conceded that to be
great in wickedness proves the possession of soul. Voltaire has
said “ that it is the misfortune of worthy people that they are
always cowards.” And that feeling which makes people the cowards
of their beliefs—social, religious, political, or what not —makes
them afraid to be themselves, lest any such expression should clash
with the dogmas under which they have enlisted, would not have
been understandable to Cleopatra. She is splendidly inconsistent,
because she is always unafraid ; and so that whole bewildering life
of diverse actions produces the effect of unity. Perhaps, too, it
may be said that to the pagan ideal the one unforgivable falling
away was the being ineffective. If to Dante, who views the
question from the standpoint of the Christian conscience, those
. . . . “ Whose life was spent
With neither shame nor fame,”
is so abhorrent that he can only assign them to the antechamber of
even the infernal regions—could say
“ The world is sick of them, and their disgrace.
Mercy and justice alike scorn their name.
Speak not of them, but look and pass the place,”
how much more so must namelessness have appeared to that point
of view which looked upon life as an intellectual process.
May it not then be said, as an approximate explanation of the
power of Cleopatra, that she is soul —the irradiating life-force ?
From her emanate an intensity and a vividness that affect like light
and warmth. Were she but a beautiful voluptuary her vices would
disgust. Were she but the supreme intellectual schemer, however
much we might admire her genius for administration we should
never feel her charm as a woman. But coming to us as she does, as
the embodiment of the great intellectual forces, the subtle graces,
and of the almost genius for wickedness of her gifted race, she is in
a certain sense spiritualized. It is an insufficient definition of
Cleopatra to call her a magnificent animal, and as such to speak of
her magnetic powers of attraction ; for the animal in her is always
vivified by soul. And this force of soul she projects through every
manifestation of herself. For the indescribable charm of Cleopatra
does not exhale from her beauty alone. We may well believe that
her beauty both of line and colour was perfect—and that quite apart
from her other endowments it inspired the worship of men. But
with it all is the individual, indwelling spirit that makes the witchery


of her presence—she, in short, speaks to the imagination; and
speaking in such wise, she haunts and possesses the soul that has
fallen under her spell. Emerson, with his insight into all complex
questions, with his power to cast their meaning into speaking words,
says : — 1 “ But the sovereign attribute remains to be noted. Things
are pretty, graceful, rich, elegant, handsome ; but, until they speak
to the imagination, not yet beautiful. This is the reason why beauty
is still escaping out of all analysis. It is not yet possessed, it can-
not be handled ; or, quoting from Proclus, “it swims on the light of
forms.” Or this, even more telling, from Emerson :—“ When the
delicious beauty of lineaments loses its power, it is because a more
delicious beauty has appeared—that an interior and durable form
has been disclosed.” Observe that with all her luxuriance of vice
Cleopatra does not become brutalized. When Caesar visits her
after her resplendent but fatal course is run, although she is now
emaciated with the physical suffering she has inflicted upon herself,
and worn out with the passion of her grief for Antony, still the
charm of her wonderful individuality, her nicer grace of being, have
such fascination for her enemy that he yields to all her wishes, and
setting out to conquer is himself conquered instead.
It is probably as much because of his overpowering sense of
incompleteness without her, as because that he feels that she is the
destined counterpart of his soul, that Antony after his reunion makes
no effort to escape from the witchery of her presence. He is closely
kin to her in the richness and expansiveness of his nature, but still
there is that lack of something which she alone can supply. He is
forever giving utterance to his acknowledgment of her supremacy
over his life. When, after the fatal flight from the battle at sea,
Cleopatra cries—
“ Forgive my fearful sails ! I little thought
You would have followed,’ 5
He mournfully replies—
“ Egypt, thou knowest too well
My heart was to thy rudder tied by the strings,
And thou should’st tow me after. O’er my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knewest, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.”
And when Cleopatra is helping to equip him for his last fight he
says—
“Ah ! let be ! —let be ! Thou art
The armourer of my heart.”
How perfectly is this sense of incompleteness without her realized
when he thinks that she is dead. All other considerations—fame,
loss of honour, kingdom, wealth—vanish in a moment.
“ The long day’s task is done!”
Most wonderful words, accentuated as they are by contrast with all
his gay, light-hearted course. According to his historian, his soul is


vanquished within him at the thought of life without her.
“Antony, why dost thou delay?” he cries to himself. “What is
life to thee when it is taken from her for whom alone thou could’st
wish to live ?”
On Cleopatra’s side, equally, we hear the falling note of the strain.
After his death she asks—
“ Shall I abide
In this dull world?”
And further she adds—
“And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.”
1
That Cleopatra, with all her changefulness, could love deeply and
passionately—love to the death—is shown by the change that comes
over her victorious spirit when she wakes to consciousness from the
swoon that overtakes her as she sees Antony die. In response to
Iras’s imploring cry of “ Empress!” she, looking slowly around her,
says—
“No more, but e’en a woman ; and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chars. It were for me
To throw my sceptre at the imperious gods—
To tell them this world did equal theirs
Till they had stolen our jewel. All’s but naught;
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that’s mad. Then is it sin
To rush into the secret hours of Death
Ere Death dare come to us ? How do you, women ?
What, what ? Good cheer ! Why, how now, Charmian ?
My noble girls ! Ah ! women ! women ! Look !
Our lamp is spent ! It’s out!
We’ll bury him ; and then what’s brave, what’s noble,
Let’s do it after the high Roman fashion,
And make Death proud to take us. Come away !
This corse of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah ! women ! women ! come, we have no friend
But resolution and the briefest end.”
Here we have the old delightful high-spiritedness turned from the
engrossments of life to the matters of death. But not even this, or
that wailing sigh of Antony’s,
“ I am dying, Egypt !—dying !”
can, I think, exceed in pathos that simple picture of Plutarch’s, how,
when Caesar’s messengers arrived, “ they found her quite dead’
lying on her golden bed, and dressed in all her royal ornaments.
Her two favourite women die beside her. They want no life which
she who made the charm of life cannot share.”
Antony and Cleopatra had, as Plutarch tells us, in their glowing
imaginativeness, instituted an order called the Companions in Death ;
gnd across the brain of Antony there sweeps, even in his moment of


terrible dole, an ecstatic vision of the part they are still to play
together in the world beyond the grave.
“ We’ll hand in hand
And with our spritely port make the ghosts gaze ! ”
How quietly does Tennyson, sympathetic to this belief, in his “ Dream
of Fair Women,” represent Cleopatra in the realm of spirits still
revelling in the memories of those Egyptian days with her imperial
Antony :
“ The man, my lover, with whom I rode sublime
On Fortune’s neck ; we sat as god by god.
The Nilus would have risen before his "time,
And flooded at our nod.
We drank the Lybian sun to sleep, and lit
Lamps which outburned Canopus ! Omy life
In Egypt ! O the dalliance and the wit !
The flattery and the strife.
And the close—
I died a queen ! The Roman soldier found
Me lying dead, my crown about my brows.
A name for ever ! lying robed and crowned
Worthy a Roman spouse.”
These people are surely immortal! so varied, so vivid, so illimitable
is their belief in—their feeling of life. Their souls are never
conquered! Fate seems to have conquered them—she has only
conquered the circumstance-feeling leaps up again triumphantly.
As Dante in the “ Divina Comedia ” always deals tenderly with his
lovers because of their love, no matter what their political crimes or
infractions of social law r , conceding to them in the realm of spirits that
they shall never be parted, so the poetic imagination will always deal
tenderly with Antony and Cleopatra.
For Cleopatra, she was a light and a revelation. And in the quality
of the one, and with the force of the other, she will always remain to
enthrall the hearts, and captivate the minds of men ! For, as
Enobarbus says in the oft-quoted lines,
“ Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety.”
Or, as he says in reply to Antony’s regret that he had ever seen her—
“ O sir ! you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work,”
FRANCES TYRRELL GILL




terrible dole, an ecstatic vision of the part they are still to play
together in the world beyond the grave.
“ We’ll hand in hand
And with our spritely port make the ghosts gaze !”
How quietly does Tennyson, sympathetic to this belief, in his “ Dream
of Fair Women,” represent Cleopatra in the realm of spirits still
revelling in the memories of those Egyptian days with her imperial
Antony :
“ The man, my lover, with whom I rode sublime
On Fortune’s neck : we sat as god by god.
The Nilus would have risen before his time,
And flooded at our nod.
We drank the Lybian sun to sleep, and lit
Lamps which outburned Canopus ! Omy life
In Egypt ! O the dalliance and the wit !
The flattery and the strife.
ERRATA.
On page i, line 2, for “incalculable woman” read “incalculable in
woman.” In line 23, for “appears in parts’ read “appears in
part.”
On page 3, line 6, for “lying even in the background” read “lying ever
in the background.”
On page 6, line 18, for “ her nicer grace of being” read “her inner grace
of being.”
On page 7,line 20, for “does the meanest chars” read “does the meanest
chares.”
On page 8, line 5, for “ How quietly docs Tennyson” read “How finely
does Tennyson.”
Enobarbus says in the oft-quoted lines,
“ Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety.”
Or, as he says in reply to Antony’s regret that he had ever seen her—
“ O sir ! you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work.”
FRANCES TYRRELL GILL,
Walker, May & Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.




