

V '
\ ( f, fyV> \
E. Gertrude Hart


mm
% HsSli f-'.'
qSRiMm,
:
3rali5 [* S :W0^
wO / ■
2-i? ’ 1 ffe p-'V-f ~. V' ■■. ■•;■•
w&W&iL ®
\ «Vv 899 a *S v
fifc , x^s9ESB 1 {5k‘ 'f'
iS iwli'it
j4pv
:: j^rgrew-: v^//' Ww
». .-''v.'iEr ■. ■* •; • * jrwr > . , •*■.''. .S,


j.- } */i' , < {5> * r y£.-* jfy, Cyon J
k , *M
• - */. A*
’_ ■ V 5 '-*-- . , j *' ’ ’>'. • / S/ 5 /> / *r ,vj58f y
Jj J> ’ . v* y VA* ij T’TSMjp^fc
wkj ■"■%?> «■ ■ y.. *K V. " rf'Ty ’’ * • / , y"»f\SK* H '* vJyy - >(
\'"^. r ,' * ■ , .-*■■* <* “ •*• T& r • - ji
' • J .,.- K£ X*. &t. : ~‘
'■ $ v v */* jrf Vw ■-■ /»y4 '*?' f mk yrf
■ r ff /s&l* * % Vj r* ./> *■ ,■>* ■ "•■*- . / ■ * A-, •■'- f >v/>
r v f* Jr*


✓


.
' i ■ .


- .nVKir ?i 1
JgaSi ■ Bfegfer M Ww;<« i **
dCMBBEH^«9 m| jS~ w »• - ft y
v ▼ jp* * fi /• { i •,"&**' -_
v \
-■» $K°*x fijp' rf %^|
MHHBBB'Sv 1?” .
■ 1 m '^*SVC*
Ja\ k tJB
3
■B jf *
• 4 00**- r ~ .r^‘« , H
.. -** :v --■- lHfe& t ¥ flB
— . '( Wa Ip
jy
UK ’-rtKT.AT* >?r£5 * M- ’
“ SHE STOOD THERE IN THE OPEN DOORWAY, HER EYES
RADIANT AS STARS ”
[/■ 80


CLOUDS THAT PASS
E. GERTRUDE HART
‘ 1 Look yonder at that cloud, which, through the sky,
Sailing alone, doth cross in her career
The rolling moon ! I watched it as it came,
And deemed the deep opaque would blot her beams ;
But, melting like a wreath of snow, it hangs
In folds of wavy silver round, and clothes
The orb with richer beauties than her own,
Then, passing, leaves her in her light serene.”
Southey,
LONDON
S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.
8 & 9 PATERNOSTER ROW
1898


DEDICATED BY PERMISSION
LADY BEASSEY.
Sick, and ye visited me."


CONTENTS.
I. “FINALLY, MUIR—COME,” .... 7
11. OVER THE TEA CUPS, . . . .16
111. “I AM MONA LEIGH,” , . . .24
IV. REX GWYNNE, M.A., . . . . . 33
V. “THERE IS CERTAINLY HOPE.” . . .43
VI. “I AM NOT SURE OF HIM YET,” . . .55
VII. DICK NORRIS—BANK CLERK, . . .63
VIII. “ I THINK HE’S ODIOUS,” , . . .75
ix, “are we members, rex?” . . .86
X. “YOU HAVE a GOOD SCENT, DI, —CATS, BOY, CATS,” 96
XI. “ I ONLY INVITE MY FRIENDS THERE,” . . 108
XII. “IT’S NOT THAT, HAL.” .... 117
XIII. “ NOT MY OWN DAME DURDEN,” . . . 129
XIV. “WHEREAS I WAS BLIND,” .... 141
XV. ‘ ‘ WHAT THEN ? ” . . . . . 153
XVI. WITHIN HOSPITAL WALLS, .... 166
xvii. nurse Leigh’s “ day off,” . . . 176
XVIII. “ AND YET —HE CONQUERED,” . . . 185
xix. “after the first,” .... 192
XX. “ YOUR SISTER IS DOWNSTAIRS,” . . . 206
XXI. “ it’s all right, girlie,” . . . 217


XXII. “IT WAS MADNESS, JACK,” .... 227
XXIII. TEDDIE “ THE 2ND,” .... 234
XXIY. NURSE TUG, ...... 242
XXV. “ AND THE WATER BETWEEN IS SO CALM,” . 255
XXVI. “ GOOD-NIGHT, REX,” .... 266
XXVII. “ I MEAN JUST THAT,” .... 273
XXVIII. ON NIGHT DUTY, ..... 279
XXIX. “ I’VE NO OBJECTIONS,” .... 292
XXX. “ —SIMPLY ELSIE,” ..... 299
XXXI. “NOT THEN, MONA,” .... 307
XXXII, “KNIT TWO TOGETHER AND REPEAT,” . 316


CLOUDS THAT PASS.
CHAPTER I.
“ FINALLY, MUIR—COME.”
“ Strange to me now are the forms I meet
When I visit the dear old town ;
But the native air is pure and sweet,
And the trees that o’er shadow each well-known street,
As they balance up and down,
Are singing the beautiful song,
Are sighing and whispering still:
A boy’s will is the wind’s will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts.”
Longfellow,
“ Hurlstone.
“ Dear Old Chap,
“ I got home—and found Aunt Jean knitting, as I
said I should!
“ But there I go, starting at the end instead of the
beginning, which is pretty Irish for an Australian, and
a Victorian into the bargain. What say you ?
“For details of the voyage out, please consult any
globe-trotter you may meet with; they can all describe


such things, and I can’t; my memory up to the time
of touching Australian soil is a blank. lam not a
born sailor.
“To begin. We landed early, and I had time to
visit a few of the old haunts before I caught a train
for home. And of all the trains ! It was slow, of
course—Australian locomotion generally is,—but we
managed to get up a little excitement in the shape of
a collision; and the upshot was that we were stranded
in a lonely place for hours, with nothing to do but
look pleasant.
“Easy to do? Well—perhaps; and only perhaps. No
one was hurt, no broken bones to set for a diversion,
but everybody was' cross, and the amount of abuse
that was showered on Railway Commissioners in
general, and Victorian ones in particular, would have
made a volume decidedly more entertaining than
Hansard. And could one say more ? I alone preserved
my equilibrium, and sauntered round with praise-
worthy cheerfulness, offering whole cartloads of advice ;
but everyone seemed to take it as a personal injury,
and one old gentleman asked me ‘if I laboured
under the delusion that I had taken out a contract
to make myself agreeable,’ and was altogether so
surly that I determined to shift my policy. There-
upon I condoled with everyone, and it took, my boy,
it took. Old ladies attached themselves to me, and,
with a pertinacity worthy of their sex, so plied me
with questions as to when we were going to ‘ move on,’


that at last I really began to feel as if I were running
the whole concern.
“ Don’t shake your head, my grave father confessor.
I was very good, I assure you.
“ At last we started, and in an hour or two neared
the old place. And then, would you believe it ? such a
cowardly shrinking came over me, and I wanted to rush
back, away from everything familiar that I had known
and loved as a boy. You see I had been reckoning on
taking up life here just at the place I left it off, for-
getting what had come between—and it rushed over
me till I felt a perfect baby.
“The very station seemed altered, and there were
strange faces everywhere; but at last I caught sight
of someone I knew. * How are you, Roberts ?’ I said,
darting forward to a jolly-looking chap in a guard’s
cap. ‘ You don’t mean to say you’ve forgotten Jack
Cranston ? ’ You should have seen his surprise.
‘ Master Jack! I beg your pardon, sir, you’ve grown
out of all knowledge. And have you come back a
doctor, as you said you would ? Well, well! ’
“ I left the old fellow with my blessing, and trotted
down the street into the ‘ auld hoose.’
“ And, as I said before, I found Aunt Jean knitting !
“ Una was on the sofa, and I just put my head
inside the door, and remarked, carelessly, ‘ This is a fine
welcome for a fellow after all these months, and I told
you, Aunt Jean, that you wouldn’t have finished that
quilt by the time I got back,’ but, bless your life, they


weren’t listening. I began to feel, then, that I was
really home.
“ The next few weeks were memorable, —chiefly on
account of the packing. You see I wanted to get into
harness at once, and, after a few family councils, we
finally pitched on Hurlstone as the scene of my future
greatness. But to get here we had to pack, and thereby
hangs a tale. Now, you know, if I had had the doing
of it, a day or two, at most, would have fixed every-
thing up. A word in your ean—l’d have sold all the
house contained. But if ever I offered my humble ser-
vices, it was, ‘ What do men know about such matters ?
Now, Jack, do get out of the way; I’ll never get done
if you bother me,’ from Aunt Jean, and she made
my life hideous by cramming up passages and door-
ways, till I hadn’t rest for the sole of my foot. But I
had my revenge, for she was continually hammering
her nails and cutting her fingers, and while I plastered
up her wounds, I lectured, and rebuked, and took malig-
nant delight, when any fresh mishap occurred, in using
that most cutting of woman’s arguments,‘l told you so.’
“ Wkat do folk want with packing, anyway ? Of
course I’m only a man, and not supposed to know
about such things—still, a fellow occasionally !
“At anyrate, we got here, and are fairly settled;
though I believe the women folk still talk wistfully of
vases and other gimcracks, without which a house
cannot be complete, or ready for the stern gaze of
visitors.


“ These last named have come in shoals; from which
I conclude that the folk hereabout are sociably
inclined.
“ As for me ? Well, my dear sir, I have blossomed out
in gorgeous style; and the brass plate which I used to
dream of fondly in the long-ago is at this minute
on the gate, announcing to the folk of Hurlstone that
‘ J. N. Cranston, M.D.,
May be consulted from 11 to 1
•/
and „ 5 „ 7.’
“My surgery is a thing of beauty. I have arranged
my surgical instruments in a case that would fill your
heart with admiration. These, with a few Grinning
3 O O
skulls disposed carelessly about; a desk with plenty of
pigeon holes—which I keep well stocked with papers,
to impress patients with the idea that I have hundreds
of cases on hand ; my beloved medical works with the
most imposing titles well to the front, —go to make up
a whole which, to the most dispassionate observer,
appears picturesque, and at the same time strictly
professional.
“ I merely wait patients !
“ I haven’t engaged anyone to pull my surgery bell
for so many hours each night, as yet, —but I may have
to come to even that, and I have my eye on a likely
boy. Nor does my ‘Buttons’ rush frantically into
church just as service is starting,—but that, again, I
have under consideration. Poor old Sawyer! Do you
remember how we laughed over Pickwick, in that


shabby room of mine in the old country ? And every-
one thinks you such a grave old party. I often wished
that some whom you awed by your great, sad eyes
could have seen those same orbs flashing over a rare
bit of Sam Weller’s. You are a fraud, my friend!
“ Now, about Una. I found her, in some respects,
worse than I had feared; she looks so much of an
invalid that Ido not know what to think. She has
never walked since her accident, and suffers much at
times. Still, I do not, and will not, give up hope,
though the different doctors Aunt Jean has called in
all say the same thing—that her back is diseased, and
that she will never bear her weight upon her feet
again. Think of it, Muir; and when I left her to go to
England she was a strong, beautiful girl. She seems
all along to have clung to the belief that I should be
able to cure her. With God’s help, I will try!
“ And that brings me to what we talked over so
often, you and I. Are you still in the same mind
about coming out, old man ? Because, if you are, I
believe there is a niche for you to step into in this
very town. Dr Reid, who has a very large practice, is
leaving here for Germany in three or four months’
time, and, so far, no one has come to the front to fill
his place. I will take a run round when I have
written this, and see the old chappie, and enclose all
the particulars you will need. If you can see your
way clear to come to Hurlstone, why, then, I’ll be
a bit glad.


“ Finally, Muir—come—and I will receive you with
open arms. —Yours, as ever, Jack N. Craxston.
“ F.S. —for there must be a postscript to such a
regular lady’s epistle—come at once; immediately, if
not sooner.—J. N. C.”
Alan Muir folded the letter up slowly, and leant
back in his chair, thinking long and earnestly.
Should he go ?
They had often talked it over, more in jest than
earnest, and the prospect looked tempting.
The old, sweet friendship to be renewed—and he had
no other near friend—the new land, and the new life
—yes, it was inviting!
It sometimes happens that the most important steps
in our lives are decided almost hurriedly; in Dr Muir’s
case there were no strong ties to hold him back, no
one to consult, and his heart said, Go!
The way seemed already clear, the terms were
satisfactory, the practice evidently a flourishing one;
and it might be that his skill would benefit the suffer-
ing little sister Jack had so often spoken of. For
Alan Muir held a high position in his profession;
and folk had begun to realise that the grandly moulded
head contained a brain far above the ordinary.
Yet, I shall have to confess that when the news
crept out that he had disposed of his practice, and
was intending to sail for Australia, the fact created
very little stir in the town that was to know him no


more. The local journals barely noticed it, and the
commercial world went on as if nothing had happened.
Strangest of all, no one was roused to the necessity
of having a little friendly gathering, and making it the
occasion to air their powers of oratory, in an attempt
to impress the departing guest with a due sense of his
importance—and their own !
It’s astonishing what little bits of pathos creep out
at such gatherings! Everyone discovers that there
never was such an out-and-out man as “ our honoured
guest ” ; and never will be again.
Shall I whisper a warning in your ear, you important
individual, without whom the machinery of that little
circle you moved in cannot go on ? Go back to that
same place a week later; you will lind your niche well
filled!
To be sure, this particular member of society had
done nothing worthy of publicity in that town!
Only lived a blameless life in the sight of God and
man, biinging back from the shadow of death many
who had no means of repaying him, save with then-
undying gratitude; doing all the good that lay in his
power, and none of the evil.
But such are not the banqueted ones, as a general
rule; and I do not fancy, somehow, that they would
wish to be.
One goodbye, hardest of all to say, was said in the
room where, for many months, his big, rough boys had
gathered—homeless, ragged waifs he had discovered from


time to time, and to whom he had devoted many of
his hardly spared hours.
And I think the gruff, broken words and rough
promises were more to him than the finest speeches
ever made.
There were sad faces in many poor homes, and
sadder hearts on the day the Austral sailed.


CHAPTER 11.
OVER THE TEA CUPS.
“ Only a little, spiteful word,
A scarcely noted sneer,
Finding a sunny, joyous heart,
Leaving behind—a tear.”
Anon.
Mrs Vaughn was seriously put out!
The afternoon, which had begun so well, had belied
its promise ; and one fussy little fly had spoiled the
ointment. And Mrs Vaughn intended to catch that
fly, and singe its wings!
She stood at the open door, waving a graceful adieu
to the “big folk” from the “Harrow” station, who had
done her the honour to call upon her, and who had
been so very gracious until and there the trouble
began.
For that odious little Mrs Hunter, who wasn’t even
“received” in society, had picked this day of all
others to poke herself where she wasn’t wanted, and
the “ Harrow ’ people—aristocrats to their fino-er tips
16 °


—had cut their visit short, and gone away so politely,
icily cold, that Mrs Vaughn foresaw that their first
call would also be their last.
She rejoined her remaining guests to all appearance
her own easy self, but one in the room saw “ rocks
ahead.” And that one was not Mrs Hunter; she,
airily unconscious of the havoc she had created,
was drinking tea, and eating cake, and talking shrilly
and persistently,—which last she always did, under
all circumstances.
One glance the lady of the house cast in her direc-
tion, one only, then sank languidly into her chair;
but her white, dimpled hand lost its studied grace as
she encountered Mona Leigh’s eyes, and saw that they
held quiet amusement, and something more.
And Mona Leigh was the one person in Hurlstone
of whom Mrs Vaughn stood in awe. Not that she was
at all formidable, this tall, dark-haired girl, whose
merry brown eyes looked out so fearlessly from under
the daintily arched eyebrows. Still, the fact remained !
Mrs Vaughn’s voice was even sweeter than usual
as she said, while she crumbled a piece of rich cake
and lifted another block of sugar into her tea—
“So you have tired of hospital life, Miss Leigh ?
Do you know, I never expected you to persevere when
once you had seen the sort of work the nurses are
expected to do. Quite menial, isn’t it ? ”
“ 1 should have supposed that you would consider
such work the very thing for me, Mrs Vaughn, and


I was under the impression that everyone knew the
reason that brought me home.”
“ Yes, of course,” with a glance at the pale little
lady by Mona’s side, “ how very thoughtless of me.
You are looking very frail even now, Mrs Leigh ; you
don’t at all do credit to your daughter’s nursing. Mrs
Hunter, I see you have Dora back again from Mel-
bourne. I suppose we shall soon hear of her
marriage ? She can’t have returned this time without
a spoil, she is so generally admired, isn’t she ? ” —this
last with the low, soft laugh that was always so full
of meaning.
And the poor little fly was so taken by storm that
she could only gasp.
“ It must,” continued Mrs Yaughn, dreamily, “ be
perfectly dreadful to have unmarried daughters. I’m
quite sure my hair will turn grey when Trixie grows
up. There’s really no one eligible in Hurlstone just
now, and Melbourne trips cost money. Mrs Derrick,
let me give you another cup of tea ; I think you have
a sweet tooth, like myself. Mr Yaughn is for ever
telling me that I shall ruin my teeth with sweets, but I
never know what it is to have toothache,” and here she
parted her lips, to disclose two gleaming rows of pearl.
“ I never expect to reach that state of bliss till I
order a set from the dentist,” Miss Leigh said, naively;
and nobody could understand the sudden flush that
dyed them hostess’ face.
“ But you know,” she continued, “ it’s quite a rare


thiug to find an Australian with good teeth ; and it’s
such a drawback to anyone’s appearance to have bad
teeth, isn’t it ? ”
“ My girls have all good teeth,” said Mrs Hunter, a
little acidly.
“ What a blessing. Nature always compensates,
doesn’t she ? What does your husband think about
Dr Cranston, Mrs Derrick ? ”
“ He has only met him once or twice, Mrs Vaughn.”
“He will have to look to his laurels, though,
Everyone speaks most highly of Dr Cranston’s skill.”
“ New brooms, as a rule, sweep clean. I was telling
the doctor what you said about Docie Ellis, Mrs
Vaughn, and he says you are quite wrong. It is
not typhoid fever.”
“ Indeed! Of course I must be wrong if ‘ the
doctor,’ ” with malicious emphasis, “ says so. You
shouldn’t repeat my little fancies to him, Mrs Derrick.
Docie is not so well again, they say. Does Dr Derrick
intend to consult with another physician ? It might
be as well. I hear that Dr Cranston is singularly
successful with his fever cases.”
Then, while she watched the slow, dusky colour
rise in her victim’s cheek, she turned to Mrs Lendl.
O
“ You have hardly said anything this afternoon. I
suppose you have called on Mrs Barret ? ”
“ Not as yet, Mrs Vaughn. I have scarcely been
anywhere since my illness.”
“ Oh. but you should; almost everyone has called.


She is quite a character, and Dr Cranston is per-
fectly fascinating, but did you hear about his sister ? ”
“ I wasn’t aware he had one,” said Mrs Derrick,
stiffly.
“ Eeally ! Oh, it’s quite town talk now. There
was a most delicious air of mystery about her at first,
for no one had ever seen her. Everybody knew there
was an invalid, but some fancied she was his wife.
It was worth a good many patients to him, for, of
course, people wanted to know; no doubt that was all
studied. Folk do such things in the way of advertise-
ment. Mr Vaughn asked him right out, and he said
she was his sister. The poor thing,” continued Mrs
Vaughn, impressively, “is a perfect cripple, and I
fancy must be terribly disfigured. They say she was
such a beautiful girl before her accident. Miss Leigh
should try and see her. It would be quite romantic.”
“ In what way, may I ask ? ”
“ I can’t show you, unless you will see for yourself ;
but I can picture quite a little romance, and then you
know the hospital training would come in splendidly!
But the difficulty will be to see her. Her aunt and
brother guard her most jealously from everybody. I
told Mrs Barret that I thought it was a great mistake,
but she didn’t take the hint. Still, if you called, Miss
Leigh ”
“ I intend to do so, Mrs Vaughn.”
Eeally ? You are so courageous, aren’t you 1 and,
really, Hurlstone is frightfully dull just now ; almost


anything serves for a diversion. And talking of
diversions, I called upon Mrs Eoss the other day, the
lawyer’s wife, you know. I heard that Sydney Eoss
had married a rather peculiar lady, and I naturally
felt a little bit curious. But I found the half had
not been told. Just imagine—she brought in large
breakfast cups, and a plate of buns, and that was our
afternoon tea ! I had Trixie with me, and I was
positively ashamed, for the dreadful child ate up
every bun on the plate. But just imagine the shock-
ing ignorance ! I feel quite sorry for poor Sydney.”
“ I don’t think you need,” Mona said, drily. “ I
know Mrs Eoss to be a very nice girl, and consider
she is the one to be pitied.”
Mrs Vaughn raised her eyebrows.
“ Because he has been a bit wild ? Oh, men will be
men, you know.”
“ Some men,” corrected the girl, carelessly.
“ I expect she had meant the buns for tea. I felt
quite guilty when I surveyed the empty plate.
Children are dreadfully embarrassing at times.”
“ Australian children are, certainly,” said Mrs
Derrick, grimly. “ I don’t know how it is, I’m sure ;
in my young days they were never taken out calling.”
“ That is so long ago, though, isn’t it ? And every-
thing is so proper in England; still, I will own
the old style has its advantages. Trixie quite dis-
tinguished herself that day, and finished up by break-
ing one of those huge cups. It was very awkward,”


continued Mrs Vaughn, with a low laugh, “ because,
you see, I could hardly offer to repay the damage.”
“ I expect Mrs Eoss found it awkward,” tittered
Mrs Hunter.
“ I expect she did; hut, you know, people of her
stamp shouldn’t expect to move in polite society.
I’m quite hoping she won’t return my call, but I am
afraid she will; such folk are always pushing. She
doesn’t even know the time for a formal visit, for,
when I got up to go, she pressed me to stay.”
“ That,” said Mona, mournfully, “ was, I should
think, an unpardonable sin.”
She rose as she spoke, obeying a quiet signal from
her mother.
“ Now, you are not going already ? ”
“You must not press us to stay, Mrs Vaughn, it is
bad form,” said Mona, demurely.
And Mrs Vaughn’s laugh rippled out once more.
“ I’m more than half afraid of you, Miss Leigh,” she
said, lazily. “ Now, don’t forget, you are going to
beard the lion in his den ? ”
“ Meaning that mother and I are going to call on
Miss Cranston ? We certainly will, Mrs Vaughn.”
And then they were gone.
“ I feel,” said Mona, as they turned in at their own
gate, “as if I can’t breathe freely near that woman.
And, my dear little lady, do you know that you only
uttered one single sentence the whole time we were
there? I’ve made two resolutions to-day.”


“ Well ? ” said Mrs Leigh.
“ The first is, that I’ve paid my last visit to Mrs
Vaughn for some time to come; and the second is,
that you and I will go and see that poor girl to-
morrow.”
“Am I to have no voice in the matter, you impul-
sive lassie ? ”
“ None at all; you always do right, and this is right,”
said Mona, decisively.
And that settled it.


CHAPTER 111.
“ I AM MONA LEIGH.”
“A man’s growth is seen in the successive choice of his friends,
For every friend whom he loses for truth, he gains a better.”
Emerson.
“ Her hair
Was dark, and she was rather tall: And this
Was all in which most people would agree.
Not always sigh for sigh or smile for smile
She gave ; for now and then fine tact of heart
Suggests an opposite as best response,
Completing by contrasting, like a scarlet flower
With soft, green leaves.”
F. R. H.
Autumn was dying in regal splendour, and Hurlstone
in autumn was a place to be remembered. Then
the far away hills took on a deeper purple, and
the vines shot their leaves with vivid stains of
orange, and crimson, and saffron. Yes, the quaint
mining town was looking its very best.
Hr Cranston, fresh from a brisk drive through the
keen air, ran up the garden path in a style more like
the boy he was than the professional man he appeared ;


and a few strides brought him to the dining-room door,
which he opened without ceremony.
“ Cosy, upon my word ! ” he said, looking first at the
glowing fire and then at the two near it. “ Aunt
Jean, you are going to have another interruption to
your work.”
“Visitors?” said Una, quickly; “and we were
hoping that we should have this afternoon free. Who
is it, Jack ? ”
“ Couldn’t say, my dear,” he said, seating himself on
the edge of a chair, and smiling saucily at the placid
old lady opposite. “ They look, —well, not like anyone
we have seen as yet.”
“ That’s rather vague. How do you know they’re
coming here ? ”
“ How do I know ? The best of reasons; I heard
them say so. Auntie, how goes the quilt ? ”
“ I’m trying a new pattern, my dear.”
“ A jolly pretty one, too,” he said, with ponderous
gravity, as she laid her needles down, and smoothed it
out for him to see. “ There’s one great advantage
about knitting, now ”
And just then the door bell rang, and Mrs Barret
hurried away.
“ I wonder whether there ever was a better woman ? ”
Jack said, musingly, “ barring the knitting craze. Una,
do you suppose she will ever finish this ? As far back
as I can remember she was at it—and what it will be
like when it is finished ! ”


And then Una’s laugh rang merrily out.
“ I think,” she said, with her eyes full of mischief,
“ that the first thins: Aunt Jean will ask for when she
o
gets to heaven will be her knitting.”
“ She’s a trump, anyhow. Una, I don’t see why we
should be out in the cold. I have a whole hour to
spare, and we’ll have afternoon tea, my child. I’ll get
it ready myself.”
“ Like old times, isn’t it ? ” he said, delightedly, when,
after a somewhat prolonged visit to the kitchen, he set
the tray down on the gipsy table near the invalid’s
couch, and started proceedings by sending a great
brown splash of tea over the dainty tray cloth. “Do
you remember the teas we used to get up in the
summer-house at Iredale ? and how I used to spill the
jam on the cloth, and calmly put my plate over the
mark ? ”
“ Rather, and how that horrid Bob Crawford
invariably found it out, and told.”
“ Bob always told,” he said, gravely. “ I wonder
if he still keeps that interesting little habit up, or
whether they knocked it out of him at college ? ” and
•/ o
just then Mrs Barret entered, full of importance.
“I’m going to bring someone in to see you, Una,”
she said, briskly, “ someone you will like.”
“ There speaks my dismissal, I suppose,” Dr Cranston
said, ruefully, gazing after his aunt’s retreating form a
little curiously. “ Perhaps, Una—perhaps it may turn
out to be a friend for you ; I would trust Aunt Jean’s


judgment, and this is the very first visitor she has
allowed to see you.”
He smiled brightly at her as he sprang up to go, and
gave her hand a reassuring pat, then went, and a
moment later, two merry brown eyes met hers. Aunt
Jean had left Miss Leigh to introduce herself, which
she did in her own way.
“ I am Mona Leigh, and I do hope you are not sorry
to see me, Miss Cranston ; ” and Una, looking up into
the frank face, held out her hand in welcome. Mona
bent, with a little impulsive movement very unusual
with her, and kissed the white forehead.
“ I wonder if we are going to be more than mere
acquaintances, you and I ? ” she said, gravely ; “ because
I haven’t a single girl friend in Hurlstone, and I would
like one very much.”
“ Would you ? ” answered Una, wistfully.
“ I would ; I think we must make a compact. I
am sure to disappoint you, but if I could come here
now and again, and tell you how naughty I had been
—you to lecture me, you know, —I think I might be a
better girl. Do you feel as if it would be worth trying ? ”
“ I believe,” said Una, softly, “ that I have found
something to-day that I have wanted very badly.”
“ Meaning me ? but I’m not a thing, you know.”
said Mona, reproachfully. And then they both laughed.
“ Now, for a start, suppose I tell you all about every-
one here ? It is just as well to know the kind of people
you are amongst, and I consider myself thoroughly up in


Hurlstone society. First and foremost there are the
Vaughns, and, by the way, you owe my presence here
to-day to the lady who bears that name. Do I like
her ? Now, Miss Cranston, that’s a very awkward
question to answer. I think she can be very fascinat-
ing, and she certainly dresses beautifully, and—she is
rich. What more could anyone wish ? ”
“ I can see you don’t care for her.”
Mona shook her head reprovingly.
“ Don’t form hasty conclusions, Miss Cranston,” she
said, gaily ; “ ask your aunt her opinion of Mrs Vaughn.
Of course you have heard of Mrs Derrick.”
“ The name sounds familiar, certainly; who is she ? ”
“The doctor’s wife—capital letter for each word.
She talks incessantly about ‘ the doctor,’ trots out his
opinions and his cases on every occasion, and makes
one wish that her better half had any letters but M.D.
after his name. Mrs Eoss you would like; though,
if you are fashionable, she would shock you. Miss
Cranston, could you pardon anyone for bringing out
big cups for afternoon tea ? ”
“ If you will look on the table just beside you,” said
Una, merrily, “you will see very big cups, and my
brother and I had just finished afternoon tea when
you came in.”
“ You are sure you had finished ? Well, that is
another point of mutual agreement. I never think
tea tastes like tea in those idiotic apologies for cups.
But you mustn’t tell Mrs Vaughn so. Now I haven’t


exhausted Hurlstone society yet, but there is no one
else very interesting, except Mrs Hunter, who is not
in society, you understand, but hovers on the verge of
it, and occasionally pokes in. Did you ever read the
description of the redoubtable Mrs Pryce in Ingoldsby
Legends ? Well, there you have Mrs H. to aT. ‘A face
like a ferret betowkened her spirit/ and especially the
‘ very short legs ’ and the ‘ very long tongue.’ She is a
‘ lone, lorn widdy,’ and her daughters are the ‘ three old
maids of Lee/ with the trifling exception of the ‘ lovers
three times three.’ Do you think so much laughing is
good for you ? ”
“ I think you have done me more good than a dose
of medicine.”
“ Harold says I am like quinine—invigorating, but
extremely hard to take. Harold is my brother, you
know; a small boy as regards age, but very precocious.
He is to be a doctor some day, and mother and I—
there are only the three of us—are going to move to
Melbourne when he is ready to study at the university.
We hope that will be in a few months’ time.”
“ He is not a little boy, then ? ”
“Oh no, he feels very much grown up, still; he is
younger than I, and of course I consider it my duty
to keep him down. We are quite a medical family
altogether, for I was being trained for a hospital nurse
when my mother’s serious illness brought me home.
Now I think I have given abundant reason why you
and I should be friends ; what say you ? ”


“ I agree to my part of the contract,” said Una, with
shining eyes.
“Meaning the lecturing ? Very good.”
“ But are you quite sure you won’t find it
dull?”
“ Quite. I’ve enjoyed myself immensely already.
Some day I’ll bring my dog to see you; he’s such a
beauty. Of course you are fond of dogs ? ”
“ I love animals.”
“ That’s right; all good people do, and Leo is superb,
though very much in evidence at times. You’ve seen
a St Bernard, of course ? Xo ? Well, you have something
to live for. They’re terribly hard to suit in the wav of
kennels, though; Leo has smashed three already. I
went out one day without his lordship, and he pranced,
and beat away at the roof of his habitation till it fell
right in. Some day, when I’m rich, I mean to have a
regular little house for him, where he won’t feel ashamed
to see visitors. Xow' I must really go. Mother and
your aunt will be wondering whatever has become of
me. May I kiss my friend ? ”
With a sudden impulse, she said “ You are going to
be quite better some day, you know. lam sure your
brother will cure you; everyone says he is wonderfully
clever. So also,” she added, merrily, “is Xurse Mona.”
Then she vanished, but the glow she had brought with
her remained in Una’s heart.
“ And so, little woman,” said Dr Cranston, later that
evening, “ you liked your visitor ? ”


The thin, white face was tinted with a faint pink,
and the deep blue eyes were bright and happy.
“ I think everyone is too good to me,” she said, softly.
“ Jack, isn’t it splendid of her; she has promised to
come and see me quite often.”
“ Indeed, and what if I should forbid her, by reason
of all this excitement ? ” he said, saucily. “ You are
sure she hasn’t talked you into a fever ? ”
“Perfectly certain. Jack, there are a great many
different kinds of people in the world ”
“ True, 0 king! ”
“ I w’as thinking, when you came in a little while
ago, of the time just after my accident. I was so bitter
in those days, Jack; I don’t fancy there are many
who would have felt as rebellious as I did. And one
afternoon someone came to see me. She was a good
woman, I suppose, but she did not understand. She
talked a great deal about submission, and said that
God had afflicted me in order to subdue me.”
“ I know the sort, my child.”
“ And she told me that it was fearfully wicked to
feel as I did, and that I should ‘ rejoice in tribulation ’ ;
that God would make me suffer more if I did not
yield. And I felt so hard all the time, it made every-
thing seem worse. Well, she went, and I was very
naughty. I said and felt dreadful things ; but that
very day someone else came, such a sweet girl. 1 have
often wished since that I could see her. She stayed only
a few minutes, but she left me some beautiful flowers,


with a tiny slip of paper tied round the stems. And
on the paper she had written these words, ‘ Touched by
the feeling of their infirmities,’ and it just came over
me that God wasn’t torturing me deliberately; that He
understood, and felt sorry for me. Jack, I think—
He does.”
“ I am sure of it, my darling,” he answered, reverently;
“ and, Una, I have a piece of good news for you. Mun-
is coming here to take Dr Eeid’s practice. I had a letter
from him this afternoon. He will be here in a month.”
“Dr Muir coining ? Oh, Jack ! ”
He knew then, by the exclamation, and the sudden
rush of colour that tinged her cheek, just what this
meant to her. He had told her of his friend’s skill
so often, that a wistful desire to see him had lately
grown into great longing—but how eager she was for
recovery, even her brother did not know.
“ What a wonderful day this has been.” She said it
dreamily, and just then Mrs Barret came in, and the
news was repeated to her.
“ Bless the child, she’ll be cured before ever he gets
here. Eyes like stars and cheeks like roses; this
wonderful doctor will want to know where his
patient is.”
“And this doctor is hopelessly offended,” Jack
declared, as an imperious ring at the surgery bell
announced the fact that he was wanted there.
But Una knew that wasn’t so.


CHAPTEE IV.
REX GWYNNE, M.A.
“ The Master called a little child,
And set it in their midst, to show
The clearest mirror men could know
In which the face of Faith e’er smiled.
A little child with eye unworn,
Whose heart goes straightway for the light,
Like buds that put forth all their might
To start up heavenward soon as born.
A little child, that even in play
The nearest path to heaven walks
And in its innocent brightness talks
M ith God in the old wondrous way.”
Gerald Massey.
“ colonial! ” said Harold Leigh, under his breath,
and then he pushed his chair back noisily, and,
leaving his breakfast unfinished a sign of very
unusual emotion with him—cleared at a bound the
flight of steps which led to the kitchen, where Mrs
Leigh and Mona were washing dishes.
Hunt wait to knock,” was the latter’s greeting;
is it indignation, or rapture, or ?”
33 c


“ A little of all, if you like. Something is going to
happen! ”
‘ Doubtless.”
‘ Something important! ”
‘ Yes ? ”
‘Women are never curious, of course.”
‘ Never,” said Mona, calmly.
Do you want to know, or do you not ? ”
“ You want to tell us, I suppose, or you wouldn’t
have left your breakfast.”
“ You know the old market ? ”
“ Having seen it a few hundred times, I suppose
I may say yes.”
“And you remember hearing some talk about a
college being started in Hurlstone ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ Well, someone is going to start a college in that
venerable building, and Hurlstone is elated.”
“ Did you get that from the Echo ? ”
“Not all, but he has got no end of an advertise-
ment in.”
“ Who is the ‘ he ’ ?
“ Eex Gwynne, M.A. especially the M.A., —I
should judge by the par. in the general news.”
“Eex Gwynne,” said Mona, thoughtfully; “ it sounds
like a penny novelette name, Hal ? ”
“ That’s nothing to his assistant’s name. What do
you think of Adolphus Hearne ? ”
“ Better still; is he an M.A. too ? ”


“ No, only a 8.A.; but if half what they say about
this Mr Gwynne is true, he must be a clever fellow.”
“ He might coach you for the university examina-
tion, my boy,” Mrs Leigh said, with a fond look into
the bright, young face.
“ Yes,” said Harold, not too eagerly. “ Here, mother,
hand over that towel. I’ll wipe up these things in
no time. When my ship comes in ”
“ When it comes in,” said Mona.
“Allow me to remark that you’re getting into a
very rude habit of interrupting,” said Harold, gran-
diloquently. “ Fish out some more cups, Mona ; you’re
very slow for a young woman. Well, as I was about
to say when my friend on the left put in her oar—
when my ship comes in, mother shall have a silk dress
that will stand by itself, and a Jersey cow, and the
best fowls that can be bought for money, and a
phaeton, and ”
“ And when do you intend to fulfil these promises,
young man ? ”
“ When I’m M.D., M.R.C.S., and all the rest of it,
and have an extensive Collins Street practice. Where
are you off to, mother ? ”
“ I had forgotten my fowls till you spoke, dear; 1
must go now and feed them.”
The washing-up proceeded more slowly, and on
Harold’s face an unusually serious look had gathered.
“ You agree with the mater , I suppose ? ”
“ I do, Harold.”


“Won’t it be time enough when we go to
Melbourne ? ”
“My dear boy, you have hardly had any definite
study since you passed Matric. You will find yourself
terribly behind the others unless you are prepared a
little, and we want you to take all before you.”
“ H’m! ”
“ You will see it as we do, soon. You know you
learn so quickly, and we want to be so proud of you.
You won’t fail us, dear ? ”
Harold Leigh had arrived at that time in a boy’s
life when to be called “ dear,” and by a woman, is the
most exasperating thing in existence; but Mona was
his only sister, and she very rarely indulged in endear-
ments, also—there was no one in sight, so he bent
and gave her a boyish kiss.
“ I have been a lazy beggar, Mona, but I’ll turn
over a whole chapter of leaves, and grind like mad.
And if Mr Gwynne will coach me, well—he shall have
that privilege.”
“ You’re a brick,” said Mona, heartily ; “ perhaps, one
of these fine days, I may be nurse and you doctor at
the same hospital.”
“ And how I’d order you about! ”
But Mona’s smile died away.
“ Harold, I have wondered so often if you are really
in earnest about this ; it is such a noble profession, and
such a hard one. Tell me, old boy, it’s not all romance
with you ? ”


“No, Mona,” he said, more quietly than he had yet
spoken, “it is not all romance. I have thought a
sreat deal about this, and I mean to do my best.”
O' “
There was so much resolution in his face and voice,
that she felt proud, indeed, of him then.
“By the way, when is this Dr Muir to arrive ? ” he
asked, as, together, they hurried down the garden to
where Leo waited for his morning meal.
“ They are half expecting him this afternoon, Una
said; the boat was in yesterday.”
“He must be pretty clever. I wonder if Miss
Cranston really will get better.”
“ Of course ” said Mona, stoutly
“ It will take time,” Harold said, in a strictly pro-
fessional tone.
“ That is Dr Leigh’s opinion, is it ? ” said Mona,
mischievously; “ perhaps Dr Muir will consult with
you as to the best treatment to adopt.”
“Don’t be too crushing. What’s the matter with
your tucker, small dog ? ” for Leo had withdrawn his
head from the bucket, and was licking Mona’s hand.
“ He’s only thankiug me, he always does that.”
“ Oh, steady, Mona ! ”
“ But he does, Hal; see, he’s quite contented now.
What do you think he did the other day ? ”
“ Couldn’t say.”
“ I took him up an extra nice tea, and he actually
let the hens take a good deal of it before he touched
it himself.”


He wasn’t hungry, then.”
Wasn’t he ? He just devoured what was left.”
“ Snakes! ” said Harold, softly, and just then Leo
sustained his reputation for intelligence by making a
sudden spring, and planting his huge paws on the hoy’s
broad shoulder.
It was some hours after this that a long train
steamed out of Spencer Street Station, en route for
Hurlstone.
In one of the first-class compartments, looking
moodily out of the window, sat Eex Gwynne, M.A.,
master in prospect of the “ Hurlstone College,” and by
his side a quaint little figure in a dark sailor suit, a
small, pale child, whose great, earnest eyes sparkled and
shone with repressed excitement.
The day longed for so eagerly, looked forward to for
so long, had come at last, and it seemed to Eric as if
the golden gates of fairyland had been flung open to
him, and through its portals he and Rex were to pass
to the wonderful land that lay beyond.
Then there would be the mines !
He leant against his brother’s shoulder, watching in
childish awe the strange objects that seemed to rush
madly by ; spelling over the never ending advertise-
ments that stood out in strong relief, now on some
hoarding, painted in gay colours, now tarred on a
rough fence, the posts breaking up the words in a
fantastic manner.
On they hurried, passing some crowded suburb, with


its closely packed houses rising above each other like
upheaved boxes; here a subway, the bridge of which
commanded a vista of shops and neat brick villas.
Then the last suggestions of the big city faded into
distance, the masts of the ships in the bay dwindled
and shrank into misty haze, and Eric gave a sigh of
relief, and felt that he was in the country.
Yes, Melbourne lay far behind! And to Mr
Gwynne it was the grave of all his hopes. Every
mile of distance seemed to clasp fetters tighter
around him, and Eric’s sigh was echoed heavily,
bitterly.
He had meant to carve out a brilliant future for
himself in the busy metropolis, now—he was going to
teach —in Hurlstone !
He had chosen for himself such a different life. He
had meant to shine in the world of law—and he had
found himself clouded by another’s disgrace, bound by
debts not his own, but which he must strain every
nerve to meet, that innocent lives might not be
darkened by his father’s sin.
Yes, it had been hard when the blow had fallen, and
the gentle mother had faded under it; hard when he
had realised the crippling yoke that would henceforth
weigh him down, together with the charge that meant
so much—much more to him than Eric should ever
be allowed to know.
But I don’t think he had known quite what it would
be till he sat in the swiftly moving train, that was


bearing him to work utterly distasteful; and the
conviction was forced upon him that, from henceforth,
his restless, eager aspirations would be bounded by a
quiet mining town.
If only
Ah, but that made all the difference!
That he had lost the boy’s unquestioning trust in
the superior knowledge of manhood was not his fault
but his misfortune, he told himself often. For he had
reached the point where he had lost faith in God, and
faith in himself!
People who knew—or thought they knew— Mr
Gwynne, wondered at the blind, trusting faith with
which Eric regarded him: some, who had deeper
principles at stake, pitied the fair, young life that was
to be guided by such unfit hands. Perhaps they were
right, and yet, was it not more than possible that Eric
saw further than anyone did, past the outer, into the
man s inner self, that so few ever gained a glimpse of ?
I tell you a child’s clear eyes sometimes see much
further than we discerning, older folk who know so
much can—because they are unclouded with the mists
of doubt and distrust—because the pure child heart is
nearer to God, who has “hidden from the wise and
prudent and revealed it unto babes.”
And the nearer we get to Him, the more we trust
our fellow-men. So it was well for Mr Gwynne that
he had this hold on a better life ; a little child trusted
him!


True that, as far as vice went, he was singularly free,
but, after all, that is rather little to be able to say of a
man whom the Creator had endowed with gifts far
above the ordinary, and who might have made a
striking difference in the part of the world in which
he was placed.
He had not done much that was absolutely wrong,
“had kept the commandments from his youth up,”
except—yes, there was that short, simple one, that so
many break in idle thoughtlessness, that the world does
not read aright:—“ Thou shalt not steal! ”
And in the eyes of God he had broken that many a
time, for he had taken that which rightly belonged to
another.
Hot as some do
Yet judge!
Ho was in the habit, occasionally, not often, of
gambling with cards —bits of things that seem to have
a magic power in them, a spell that few who have
touched can resist.
Not games of skill—they had not even that to
recommend them; but games played simply for the
fierce excitement of the hour and the golden con-
sequences that follow; that bring strange gleams into
calm eyes, and quicken heart beats, and frenzied
talk. Games that mean someone must lose for the
pleasure of another, while the friend who has, without
any remorse, emptied his pocket, can walk away with
a great deal more than he brought with him.


And when Mr Gwynne did play, he played to just
that extent. But only very slight, as yet.
Strong-willed, clear-headed, and of grand intellect,
who was safe from the gambling mania, if not he ?
The train sped on through busy towns and long,
level stretches of pasture land; on, through bracken
and scrub, till dark hills rose around, and low, white
mounds broke the monotony of tree and bush.
And now they were nearing Hurlstone !


CHAPTER V.
“ THERE IS CERTAINLY HOPE/’
‘ ‘ Where’er my paths
On earth shall lead, I’ll keep a nesting bough
For Hope —the song bird ; and with cheerful step
Hold on my pilgrimage ; remembering where
Flowers have no autumn-languor, Eden’s gate
No flaming sword to guard the tree of life.”
Mbs Sigoubney.
A chain of dark, rocky hills standing sharply out
against the sky; further away, and fainter, though
richly purple, a solemn stretch of mountains; a distant
glimpse of housetops, and the dim outline of poppet
heads.
“Wake up, old chap,” Mr Gwynne said, as the
heavy eyelids unclosed languidly; “we are nearly
there.”
The gentleman opposite, who had been so silent all
the way, put down his Argus, and leant forward.
“ Is this Hurlstone ? ” he asked, pleasantly, and Rex
answered briefly, “ Yes.”
He secretly approved of his travelling companion,


whose quiet reserve had allowed him to think his own
bitter thoughts without interruption ; and after that
first short rejoinder, he unbent a little, and pointed out
one or two objects of interest.
\ou are visiting Hurlstoue, I presume.”
I hope to make it my home,” the stranger replied.
“ Indee d ? Strangely enough, lam here for the same
purpose,” Eex said, with a smile that he felt was forced,
but after that they chatted freely enough, till the train
rounded a curve, and a shrill whistle announced the
fact that they were nearing the station.
Then the swiftly moving wheels were still, the
carriage doors were being banged by the ticket
collectors, and one or two newsboys ran along the
platform with shrill cries of “ Age, sir ? ” “ Argus ? ”
that very closely resembled the efforts put forth by
the fraternity in far off Melbourne.
It was the work of a minute to gather together their
few belongings, and Eex and Eric were standing on the
station platform as a tall, bright-faced young fellow
came swinging along, and greeted their late companion
in a style that drew the attention of more than one
passer-by.
But Dr Cranston never studied appearances.
Alan, old man, how are you ? ” he said, wringing
the outstretched hand almost unmercifully, and then
the two moved away, and Mr Gwynne found himself
gazing after them a little enviously, for there was none
to bid him welcome !


He roused himself with an effort, and lifted Eric into
a cab; then they were off, rattling over the hilly streets.
A little later, in the pleasant room they were to share,
the tired child nestled down in the great, comfortable
bed, and smiled into the grave face that bent so
anxiously over him.
“ You are not tired now, laddie ? ’
“ Not a bit, Rex.”
What a wonderful place it was to Eric, with his
brother sitting beside him, and picking out tempting
morsels of ham, and bread and butter, from the nicely
prepared tray that had been sent in soon after their
arrival—feeding him like a little bird, Rex had laughingly
said, and the sound of the batteries in his ears—yes, it
was as good as fairyland! Then the sun streamed
inwards in a perfect glory about him, and through the
open window 1 came the subtle fragrance of mignonette
and violets; and in the midst of a golden haze of sky,
and happiness, Eric fell asleep.
For a long time Mr Gwynne sat motionless, fearing
to disturb the small sleeper, biit at length, as evening
deepened into dusk, he crossed over to the window and
looked out into the night.
The treacherous warmth of the autumn day had
departed, and the wind that moved the curtains with a
fitful movement was chilly and cutting.
He drew the window dowm cautiously, then took the
easy chair that stood near it, and sat looking out.
What a day it had been !


The hours that had constituted it might have been
years, cutting him adrift from the dreams that might,
that should —he told himself, have grown into
reality!
Once or twice, as a stray beam of moonlight fell
across the fragile face of the little sleeper, he felt an
odd grip at his heart.
They had told him—the doctors in the city—that
Eric’s life might be a short one, that it would always
be, to some extent, a suffering one, and this reflection
—truth, he knew—brought other thoughts, crowding
on each other in painful intensity.
He saw again that solemn, deathbed scene, and the
pleading eyes of the frail mother, as she had given
into his keeping the child she had sheltered so tenderly:
again he heard the low, broken words—" My boy, it is
a very sacred trust; you cannot keep it in your own
strength.”
o
A sacred trust ? Yes, it was,—just that! And he
was unfit!
He steadied his hot head with a scarcely cooler
hand. It must be the strange, new surroundings that
made him feel so utterly alone; what else should
it be ?
But that thought clung !
O’
And then came into his heart a passionate delight
that the little life belonged to him ; no one could claim
it from him; no one part them.
Death ?


Clasped in his strong arms, the tyrant would be held
at bay. They would laugh at it, Eric and he!
*And that night, Eex Gwynne registered a vow that
he would shield his treasure from the slightest breath
of sorrow, and dared to think that alone, and in his
own strength, he could fulfil that resolve.
In the cosy room where most of her waking hours
were spent, Una lay and waited.
In a very short time now she would see the
physician on whose coming she had built such eager
hopes.
Yet it had not come about as she had dreamed.
She had meant to be so bright that he would see
at once that there was hope; she had begged, with
feverish haste, that as soon as he came, and the first
long chat was over, he might be brought in to her—
but Dr Muir had been in Hurlstone a whole week, and
she had scarcely known it, so near had her feet been
to the “ valley of the shadow.”
Perhaps the wild hope had been too much for the
weak, overwrought frame—but, after hours of suffering
and delirium, there had come a time when she had
wakened to consciousness, and realised her danger.
Her loving watchers had scarcely left her, and Dr
Muir, with a grave face, waited in his friend’s surgery
for the tidings that varied so little.
For the present they agreed he must not be admitted.


lest the excitement of seeing the strange face should
prove too much for the invalid’s frail strength.
And, as the days went by, Dr Cranston’s face grew
more hopeless.
There came a time when all hope deserted him—
when she had looked pleadingly into his face, and
begged him to hold her, for she was falling!
“Una,” he said, with a break in his voice, “I have
tried every remedy in vain. We are strangely power-
less at tunes, but I feel sure that where I have failed
Jesus Christ could heal. Suppose I were to tell you
that the Master Himself were in this room, waiting to
take away the pain, waiting till you asked Him to take
it away. Una!”
For she had folded her weak hands together like a
child, and her dry lips were moving.
Was it a miracle ?
Xot suddenly, with a rush from acute suffering to
absolute freedom from pain, but as the wind lulls
itself to rest on a summer night, the throbbing nerves
quieted, and she lay in perfect ease.
“Jack,” she whispered, “it is all gone, and I would
like to be alone for a little while. I think I shall sleep.”
But he knew that she wanted to thank the God who
had taken away her pain.
Well, it was no fighting her way to Him now through
doubts and fears; she was face to face with the loving
&
Father, the gentle Physician, who stood waiting—for
what ?


Ah, she saw it now.
And she just crept to His feet and told Him all the
bitterness —so unheeded by others—that had throbbed
with every heart beat, the wild rebellion and aching
distrust.
It was a strange verse to come into her mind, that
one that to Una will always be above others—“Oh
Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself, but in Me is thine
help.”
And in the beautiful hush of the evening, as she
lay with that new peace overshadowing her, she
heard a strange voice, and a minute later looked up
at the face that she had pictured so differently.
For she had fancied that Jack’s friend was perhaps
an old, certainly a middle-aged man !
This face, so grave, so pitiful, was almost young.
Once, as he questioned her, his eyes met her brother’s,
and she tried in vain to determine what that long,
steady gaze meant.
Then they left the room, and she heard them talking
in the surgery.
And what Dr Muir had said, as soon as he had
turned to meet his companion’s anxious glance, was
this;—
“ There is certainly hope, Jack. More, I dare not
say, as yet.”
So the winter came, with its driving rain and bitter
cold, but it began to be whispered about Hurlstone
that Dr Cranston’s invalid sister was recovering.


Mrs Vaughn heard it first, and determined to go and
see for herself, but just how to accomplish it she did
not know; on the two occasions on which she had
hinted a wish to see the sick girl, she had been put ofi
t
very gently, but still firmly.
But Mrs Vaughn generally gained, in the long run,
and it came to pass one afternoon, as Una and her
aunt were chatting in the dining-room, a sharp rap at
the door which opened on to the verandah startled
them.
“ I must apologise for intruding,” the visitor said,
with a low laugh, “ but I was knocking a long time at
the front door, and, hearing voices, I came this way.
I am so pleased to see you, Miss Cranston, and to find
you looking so well; you are an object of interest in
Hurlstoue, you know. You are quite an invalid, are
you not ? Anything wrong with the back is so dis-
tressing. I always think it means distortion in some
way ; I expect you are dreadfully sensitive, aren’t
you ? ”
A wave of crimson swept over the pale face. What
did she look like ?
It was the first time the thought of possibly being
disfigured had entered her head, and her voice trembled
as she answered.
“ But you know your face looks splendid ; one would
never imagine you suffered at all. Do you think she
gets exercise enough, Mrs Barret ? ”
Aunt Jean gazed at her in astonishment. “My


dear,” she said, in her placid way, “ I don’t think you
understand.”
“No ? I have had very little to do with sick people,
but you know I knew of a case quite similar to your
niece’s; the poor girl had entirely lost the use of her
limbs, and she went from one doctor to another, till, at
last, one more discerning than the rest discovered it to
be a case of pure hysteria. I fancy the treatment was
an application of cold water thrown dowm the spine!
I suppose Dr Muir knows what he is about. Still, of
course, one never has the same confidence in a
homoeopathist.”
“ And why not, Mrs Vaughn ? ” Mrs Barret said, with
a shrewd glance at the richly dressed lady before her.
Oh, I don t know, but, really, I wonder how any
sensible person can believe in those idiotic little doses.”
“ Is it an uncommon thing for anyone to put faith
in a treatment that is curing them ? ” Una said, with a
sudden flash of scorn.
“ Oh! if you ascribe it all to Dr Mum, of course that
alters matters, but isn’t that rather hard on your
brother? And then, you know, the doctor is well,
not an old man, and people will talk. I heard only
yesterday that you were engaged, and my answer was :
I am sure Miss Cranston would not dream of such a
thing, it is such a terrible mistake for a physician to
have a delicate wife ’; and then, you know, the young
lad} in England would have something to say.”
Una opened her lips, then shut them again, and Mrs


Vaughn went on smoothly, “ Mr Gwynue seems to be
getting on with his college, but, do you know, I don’t
think he is at all suited for his position*.”
“No ? ” Mrs Barret said, quietly; “he seems a very
talented young man. My nephew considers him so, I
know.”
“ Oh yes,” with a faint smile, “ I wasn’t thinking of
his ability ; that is undeniable. I was referring to his
moral character; he is quite a sceptic, and a very
dangerous one, I should say, for one cannot help
admiring him. I considered it my duty to warn my
husband ; he is so trustful, and devoted to the church.
Still, of course, he may exert a good influence, and Mr
Gwynne is a thorough gentleman, if he is a bit inclined
to be too fond of cards and wine. lam not as strait-
laced as some people; I believe a man can take his
champagne, or play a game of whist, without being any
the worse for it. I think ” —and here she allowed a
tinge of sadness to appear in her voice—“ that if one
chaws the line too abruptly in them home they are
tempted to go elsewhere.”
“You must have a very low estimate of a man’s
moral nature,” Aunt Jean said, bluntly, and Mrs
Vaughn darted a strange, quick glance at her.
“ Well, I must he off,” she said, brightly. “ I’m very
pleased to have met you, Miss Cranston, and I think
if you were to rouse yourself a little and then
quick steps were heard in the passage, and Mrs Barret
admitted—Dr Mum.


“How are yon, doctor ?” Mrs Vaughn said, smiling
up into his grave face; “ are you going to lecture me for
tiring your patient ? ” Then she was gone.
“ I don’t think you are strong enough to bear
visitors yet,” he said, abruptly. Then, with a quick,
searching glance—“ You have been fretting about
something: what is it ? ”
Well, it was hard to tell, but a little of the fear that
had been unknown till an hour ago somehow crept
out, and a look of deep pain flashed into his eyes.
“So it was that? Poor child!”
That was all he said, and the terrible dread at her
heart grew strong —so strong.
“It is foolish to mind, I suppose,” she faltered ;
“ when I get better, as you said I should, do you think
I shall be—as she said ? ”
“ I—do not think so.”
“ When that day comes,” she said, wistfully, “ I will
ask you again. Will you answer me quite frankly,
even if you have to pain me by what you have to
say ? ”
“ When that day comes,” he said, lingering over the
words as though he liked to say them, “ I will ”
And it was then that Aunt Jean came back.
“Jack,” said Una, that evening, as the trio were
discussing the events of the day, “ what kind of a man
is Mr Vaughn ? ”
“ What kind ? A difficult question to answer, my
dear.”


“ His wife spoke of him as devoted to the church,
and ” But Dr Cranston had thrown back his
head, and was laughing immoderately.
“In the first place, Una, he is a broker, and from
what I hear, and from my own observation, I should
say he resembles our beloved friend Mr Carker.
Devoted to the church ? Perhaps he is, my child.
But I have my doubts.”


CHAPTER VI.
“I AM NOT SURE OF HIM YET.”
“ Gineral C. is a dreffle smart man ;
He’s ben on all sides thet gives places or pelf;
But consistency still wuz a part of his plan,—
He’s ben true to one party, —an’ thet is himself.”
Lowell.
‘ ‘ They saw no stain upon it,
It was such a snowy hand.”
Stoddard.
“ I saw Dick Norris yesterday, Percy.”
Mr Vaughn’s head was lifted abstractedly from the
morning paper.
“ What did you say, my dear ? ”
Mrs Vaughn replied with her soft laugh.
“ There used to be a time when even a newspaper
failed to engross you if I were near. I’m afraid you
are going; backward, and I shall soon degenerate into a
sad-faced female, with a heartless husband’s short-
comings to parade before the world. Is there anything
special in that rag ? ”
“ Very special.”


“ Peally ? I’m getting quite curious.”
“ The ‘ Eureka ’ is looking up.”
“ You don’t say so ? ”
“ Shares steadily rising.”
Mr Vaughn looked along the table as he said this,
and their eyes met.
There was one person in the world who understood
Mr Vaughn as he understood himself—and she was
the little lady at the head of the table, the proud
possessor of his name, and the trifling accompaniment
of several thousands a year. She laughed meaningly
now.
“ You will sell out, of course ? ”
“ Of course ! ”
“ And will advise your clients to keep on ? ”
“Exactly. I am naturally more mindful of then-
interests than my own. And here you can help me,
Sylvia. Mrs Leigh has a pretty big interest in that
claim.”
Again that meaning laugh.
“ How long is it since you have called on them ? ”
“ Do you wish me to go, Percy ? ”
“It would be only polite, would it not ? And it
would be a fine chance to exercise the large share of
tact you possess. Surely in half-an-hour you would
be able to make some impression ? ”
“Oh, I never time myself when calling on the
Leighs: they’re so unconventional. Yes, of course I
will go.”


“ And succeed, as you always do; you have a
wonderful head for business, Sylvia.”
He looked at her with lazy admiration as he spoke,
then glanced around the luxurious room, appreciating
to the full each subtle touch of elegance.
Then, when he lounged against the marble mantel-
piece, with its rare bronzes and gold-encrusted time-
piece, the door opened slowly, a lovely, laughing face
peeped in, and the daintily dressed fairy, with her
shower of sun-kissed curls, ran up to him and lifted
her face for the morning kiss.
Oh, it was such a beautiful home —the kind of home
that so many long and strive for, toiling early and
late, for loved ones just as dear to them as this man’s
loved ones were, and the hand that prevented them
was—his !
Knowingly prevented them ! Wilfully prevented
them !
The lips that met the innocent child ones in such
clinging kisses were tainted ones ; stained with false-
hood and sin, occasionally with profanity !
The smooth, white hand, with its carefully trimmed
nails, had, figuratively, if not actually, pushed many
to ruin.
But you see it was soft and white, and delicate, and
Mr Vaughn was the richest man in Hurlstone !
Ten o’clock chimed out, and the master of the house
rose from his indolent attitude, and pushed from him
the little, coaxing arms.


“ Run away, my darling, papa is going,” lie said,
with a farewell caress, and the child bounded outside
to some fresh amusement.
You’ll not forget, Sylvia ? ”
Certainly not; I will go to-day.”
Capital.”
And if I fail ? ”
I’ll trust you, my dear.”
“ I can get over Mrs Leigh very easily ; her daughter
is different.”
“ How you pretty women hate each other. Do
your best. Now I must be off; there will be a big
excitement on in town to-day; and, Sylvia—l was
nearly forgetting,—l shall not be home to lunch, but I
shall bring young Gwynne to dinner at the usual time.
lam not sure of him yet; he is pretty shrewd, and I
shall advise him to realise on his shares; a little
success at first ! ”
Ah, Mr Vaughn, what a pity your dupes could not
see you with that smile upon your face and that light
in your eyes ! There would be fewer sad hearts in
Hurlstone to-day!
But they never did see it.
“ By all means bring Mr Gwynne ; Dick will be here
too; it’s quite fortunate.”
“ Dick Norris ? ”
“ Yes; I was going to tell you this morning when
you stopped me.”
“ I suppose he is as gay as ever ? ”


“ Irrepressible. Who would dream of him being a
minister’s son ? He is a shockingly naughty boy.”
“ The old story, my dear ; keep the string too tight
at home, and the usual thing happens. Now, I really
must go.”
What a day it was for Hurlstone ! The excitement
increased as the hours went on, and little knots of
men congregated at street corners, the one subject on
all lips, the old, mad fever, that had ebbed and lulled
so often, in every eye.
They talked of the good old days, and still better
times to come, and some of the most interested hurried
up the hill, and clustered round the mine that was to
make or mar their fortunes.
“ It just means everything to us ! ”
It was Mona who said it, in strangely excited tones,
as the Leighs lingered over an unusually merry dinner.
And if Mrs Vaughn had heard her, she would have
saved herself a fruitless visit.
She was just an hour or two too late !
“ ‘ Eureka ’ for ever ! ” Harold said, with a flourish.
“ You see here, friends, Dr Leigh, etc., etc., and I see
myself on the high road to fortune already; also a
Jersey cow and phaeton, and a brass plate, and all
the rest of it. I’ll take a Collins Street practice, and
Mona can get herself up in a fetching nurse’s costume,
and usher my patients into a grand waiting-room,
and I’ll have all sorts of books for them to read while
they are waiting to receive the great doctor’s verdict.”


But it wasn’t all fun that danced over the handsome
face, and for once in his life the deep grey eyes were
suspiciously misty.
They talked about it after he had gone to his
studies, these two who planned and hoped about his
future, with such an odd mixture of pride and fear;
and many were the dreams that circled round the
bright, boyish head.
Oh, it has happened so often before, and it is
happening round us every day—but a hand is ever
ready to strike away the dream’s fulfilment.
They were still chatting about it, when a peculiar
rap at the front door made Mona utter a sudden
exclamation of dismay.
“ That is Mrs Vaughn, mother, and it is just
two ! ”
“My dear, it can’t be; she knows this is not our
day at home.”
“ It is, though ; I should know her knock anywhere.
By the way, I don’t believe we have a scrap of cake
in the house. That wretched boy, ” and then
they both laughed.
“ Don’t keep her ladyship waiting, mother; close
the drawing-room door as soon as you get her in, and
I’ll slip on my hat, and run out to the baker’s. I
have,” concluded Mona, rapturously, “ a perfectly
splendid idea.”
Mrs Vaughn was very much given to criticising
other people’s belongings, as a rule, but for once she


forgot to notice the arrangement of the furniture, and
felt—for her—almost ill at ease.
Then came Mona, with her quiet assurance, turning
with masterly skill every vein of thought which
threatened to lead, however faintly, to the object in
view ; and the visitor, for probably the first time in
her life, was completely baffled.
But the climax of her discomfort was reached when
afternoon tea was brought in, and Mrs Leigh’s cool
young daughter stood before her with a plate of
great shiny buns.
She answered her mother’s look of remonstrance
with an expression of almost saintly sweetness, and a
demure “ Mrs Vaughn knows what unfashionable
people we are, you and I. She has proved that by
honouring us with such a very early call. As for the
buns—l remember her speaking most particularly
about some she had tasted when she called upon Mrs
Boss. And Mr Earle assured me that they were not
long out of the oven.”
Well, what was to be done after that, but to take
the obnoxious thing in her delicate, kid glove, and
smile sweetly the while!
But if ever revenge was in anyone’s heart it was
in Mrs Vaughn’s that afternoon. She would wait her
chance, and then !
But Mona had reserved the hitter bit till the very
It was when, after a call of unconscionable length,


Mrs Vaughn had risen to take her leave, that that
young lady remarked, carelessly:
“ You haven’t congratulated us yet on our improved
fortunes, Mrs Vaughn. "We have sold all of our
shares in the ‘ Eureka,’ and are feeling quite rich.”
Then, as she accompanied her to the door, “ I suppose
we are not to consider this a formal call ? We are
at home every Friday afternoon, and being preimrcd ,
are able to receive our guests as others do.”
“ But, Mona,” expostulated her mother that even-
ing, “ it was—rude, wasn’t it ? ”
“Not at all; her coming as she did was the only
rude part of the proceeding—and you know, mother,”
this last with a brilliant smile, “ those buns were
perfectly delicious.”


CHAPTER VII.
DICK NORRIS —BANK CLERK.
“ A grasp
Having the warmth and muscle of the heart,
A childly way with children, and a laugh
Ringing like proven golden coinage true.”
Tennyson.
“ Mr G Wynne— Mr Norris.”
“Commonly known as Dick,” laughed the fair-
haired young fellow whom Mr Vaughn was intro-
ducing to Rex that evening.
Mr Gwynne bowed a little coldly, but the dancing,
blue eyes opposite him lost none of their saucy
laughter as the owner thereof extended his hand in
impulsive greeting.
“Please don’t be stiff with me,” he implored,
audaciously ; “ nobody ever stands on ceremony where
I’m concerned, and I have seen you often enough, if
I’ve never met you before. I was standing quite close
to you this afternoon at the match. I suppose you’re
a real out-and-out cricketer ? ”


“ I’m afraid I never get beyond the looking on, Mr
Norris. I understand the rules fairly well, I believe,
but I do not play.”
“ You don’t ? That’s an awful pity. I’m not much
at it myself, but I take a bat now and then.”
“ Indeed! ” said Eex, carelessly, and his eye took in
at a glance the slight, boyish figure in its foppish, black
suit, the usual “bank clerk” stamp upon the high
“ masher ” collar and broad expanse of shirt cuff.
Then he smiled, as people generally did when they
looked at Dick Norris.
“You do yourself an injustice, Dick.” It was Mr
Vaughn’s smooth voice that broke in. “ One who gets
into double figures as often as you do has no need to
complain, and then, you know’.—what should you think
if I were to tell you that this young gentleman was
our crack billiard player, Mr Gwynne ? ”
And just then Mrs Vaughn entered the room, and
greeted her guests effusively, turning to the younger a
little reproachfully. .
“ You have come, then,” she said, shaking her head
at him ; “ I began to be really afraid that one other of
your numerous engagements would have prevented
your fulfilling this one.”
He reddened at the tone, and began, half apologeti-
cally, “ I have only been back a few days, you know,
Mrs Vaughn, and we have been busy balancing at the
‘ London Chartered.’ ”
“Oh yes, I know,” she returned, lazily; “ also, that


a certain young gentleman has been home, and some
mothers are apt to be a bit strict. Yon always keep
away from us awhile after these holidays; it looks
suspicious. I look upon Mr Norris quite as a brother,
Mr Gwynne. I am very good to you, am I not,
Dick?”
But a cloud rested on the sunny face, though he
said, gaily, “Very. Mrs Vaughn, where is Trixie ?”
She laughed good-naturedly. “ What a hoy you are.
Are you fond of children, Mr Gwynne ? Will it disturb
you if I humour Dick ? ”
“Not at all,” was the reply, perhaps as much to the
first question as to the last.
A few minutes later, the child had wriggled away
from the rough romping with her favourite, and crept
up to Bex’s side, laying a plump hand confidingly in his.
And when the long dinner was over, and she had
been plied with dainties from Dick’s hand, she stole
round to her new friend’s chair, and climbed on to his
knee, resting her head against his shoulder, till the
bright eyes closed sleepily, and the nurse appeared to
carry the little lady off to bed.
Then he felt himself again, and ready to enter with
keen zest into the game of billiards his host proposed.
Dick was at his gayest that night, and the time
sped rapidly, but Bex felt a vague uneasiness at the
vivid colour which had mounted into the smooth,
boyish face, and the deep brilliance of the frank,
blue eyes.


He felt relieved when they joined their hostess in
the drawing-room, and the conversation became de-
sultory.
“ How did you find them at home, Dick ? ” Mrs
Vaughn asked, as she paused for a moment on her
way to the low, luxurious chair she always favoured.
Again that quick rush of sensitive colour. Eex
found himself listening almost eagerly for the answer
that came so slowly.
“They have had a pretty sick house—influenza, I
fancy.”
“ Did you tell them what a naughty boy you had
been ? ”
The voice was decidedly annoyed now. “ I don’t
quite catch your meaning, Mrs Vaughn.”
“I expect not. I wonder what the Eev. Lester
Norris, Wesleyan minister, would say if he knew that
his son never went near his own church, but regularly
attended St Patrick’s ? ”
A gay laugh answered her.
“ Mrs Vaughn, I’ve been just exactly half a dozen
times, and on each occasion I saw you there.”
“ Ah, but I go to hear the music; it is quite a
religion without anything else. Which denomination
do you favour, Mr Gwynne ? ”
“ All, and none,” he said, carelessly. “I am afraid
regular attendance at church is not one of my strong
points.”
“I am afraid I ought to lecture you both,” she


said, plaintively, and Dick threw back his head and
laughed.
“ Mrs Vaughn has only one text to ring the changes
on,” he said, audaciously, “ and that is ”
WeH ? ”
“ ‘Do as I say, not as I do ’ ” ; and then the young
sinner laughed again.
“ I suppose you have quite given up going to the
Leighs, Dick ? ”
“ Why so, Mrs Vaughn ? ”
“ I should think they are far too good to have
anything to do with you ; they’re dreadfully uncom-
fortable people. Now, Dick, you must find them so.”
“ Strange to say, I don’t.”
“ Miss Leigh and Dr Cranston’s sister are very thick
just now ; but of course that is too transparent.”
“ You think so ? ”
“Now, Dick, don’t be aggravating. I shall begin to
fancy you in love with that girl yet.”
“Dr Cranston’s sister ? Mrs Vaughn, I have not
even met her.”
“Ah, you would have no chance there; poor Dr
Muir is caught in that trap. I really wonder at it,
for he seems sensible enough about other matters, but
I suppose he considers that she will be a good adver-
tisement”—this last with that low laugh that most
people found so trying. Mr Gwynne rose somewhat
abruptly, and, crossing over to where Mr Vaughn sat,
with that ever-ready smile of his parting his lips every


now and then, the two chatted, till the sound of music
broke up a somewhat idle conversation. It was still
quite early when Eex rose to go, and Dick, as if
relieved to find an excuse, made his adieux also.
“You are in a hurry to-night,” Mrs Vaughn said
as he bade her good-bye.
“ Yes, I have a letter to write, that I had forgotten.”
“ To ‘ mother. ’ ”
For a moment the bright head drooped, then was
lifted proudly, and the voice that answered was firm
and quiet.
“Yes—to mother. Any message I can send for
you, Mrs Vaughn ? ”
Then the two walked away together. Dick broke a
rather constrained silence.
“Mrs Vaughn asked you to take your little brother
there sometimes, didn’t she ? ”
She did.”
‘ If I were you I wouldn’t.
‘ May I ask why ? ”
“There, I’ve offended you right off. If you can’t
see for yourself, Mr Gwynne, I can’t tell you; but I
know, if I had a brother like that little chap, I’d never
let him cross Vaughn’s doorway.”
Silence again: then Dick Norris ventured another
remark:
“ I’ve got the best people in the world, but I’m such
a weak-willed beggar. Now, you know, I don’t want
to play cards, or anything of that sort, but when I


get with that sort of folk, it seems as if I haven’t
strength of mind to resist. It’s an awful pity, isn’t it ? ”
“ If it is against your convictions—yes,”
“I like Mrs Vaughn’s musical evenings immensely ;
she plays well, doesn’t she ?—not much soul, of course,
but plenty of dash. She knows most of the musical
people about, too. I suppose you are inclined that
way, aren’t you ? ”
Not at all! ”
“Fancy! Now I should have thought you would
be. You are fond of music, though ? ”
“ Yes,” Mr Gwynne admitted, “ there are many
things I care for less.”
“ I am glad of that. I’m passionately fond of it
myself ; that is where they got their first hold on me.”
“ They —being ? ”
“The Vaughns, you know. Do you mind taking a
stroll with me before you go in ? ”
Mr Gwynne hesitated.
“ I suppose the little chap is waiting up for you;
bring him with us ; he’d enjoy it.”
“ Father late, is it not ? ”
“Not a bit; he isn’t a girl, you know,” —which last
argument being indisputable, it proved conclusive, and
a few minutes later the three walked away together,
Eric wide-eyed and delighted at this unexpected
treat, with his hand tightly held by his new friend,
his little feet striving manfully to keep up with the
longer strides of his companions.


His brother was rapidly thawing.
There was something about this boy—for he seemed
scarcely more—so charmingly frank, that it appealed
to him strangely, and Dick, delighted to find a sym-
pathetic listener, dashed on, without pause or breathing
space.
“ You mustn’t take any notice of what Mrs V. said
about the Leighs. Of course you know Harold, but
perhaps you’ve met the others ? ”
“No, I have seen them, of course; beyond that I
am open to any impression you may give me. Is Miss
Leigh such a very remarkable young lady ? ”
Dick failed to see the irony in the tone.
“ She’s just a grand girl, Gwynne; she happens to
be clever enough to see through my lady, and occa-
sionally take her down a peg, and that doesn’t suit.”
“ Naturally.”
“ The Leighs were awfully good to me when I first
came to Hurlstone.”
“ And they are not now ? ”
“Well, you see, it is just this way,” Mr Norris
began, with some confusion. “ I used to be a good boy
then, went to church regularly, and all that, and they
let me run in and out of their place as if it were my
own home. Then I got in with Vaughn, and somehow
—well, the long and the short of it was I dropped
going. My lady knows that, and brings it up when
she wants to vex me, or make me look small, as she
did to-night. I don’t know what has made me tell


you this ; I’m not often taken this way, though I’m
fool enough for anything at times. I expect the
moonlight has made me sentimental. Look here, Mr
Gwynne. I promised my mother, when I left home
three years ago, that I would say my prayers and all
that sort of thing, you know, and I have dropped even
that. Can you understand it ? ”
“ Perfectly ; ” and something in the tone told Dick
that there was no help to be got from this quarter.
“ It’s all in a lifetime, I suppose,” he said, with a
yawn. “ Well, Eric, have you found any gold ?
This region looks weird at night, doesn’t it, Mr
Gwynne ? It is only safe for one who knows it very
well to come here in the darkness; there are so many
unprotected shafts. Keep close beside me, small chap,
and we’ll throw a stone down this fellow.”
He took up a piece of quartz as he spoke, and,
removing a plank, threw the stone down the yawning
opening. Through the darkness it cut, cleaving the
air sharply, and a minute later they heard a hollow
splash.
“Most of these old claims have water in them,”
continued Dick, musingly; “ this one has a history.
They say that a miner, who had been away from
Hurlstone for some years, came back to the old spot
one dark night. He was down on his luck, and desper-
ate, either that or—he fell. They found him quite by
accident, and recognised the body by an addressed
envelope which was in his pocket. I remember, too,


■” but Mr Gwynne laid a restraining hand on his
arm.
“ I think we had better make for home,” he said,
quietly, and Dick’s rapid glance at Eric took in his
meaning-.
o
But from that night a strange friendship sprang up
between the two. Something that neither could under-
stand drew them together, and it came to pass that,
though Eex Gwynne’s acquaintances were many, one
only in the town he counted friend; and that one,
easy going, easily led, Dick Norris.
He would drop in after banking hours, and carry
Eric off for a long, enchanting ramble, most often to
the old spot among the deserted mines, with their tall,
shaky poppet legs, and here they would search for
mundic in the great mullock heaps, or watch the ascent
of the water tank in some flooded claim.
Once, on a never-to-be-forgotten day, Eex had joined
them, and they had stepped into a queer looking iron
cage, and been lowered swiftly through the darkness and
the dense, hot air. Here, too, Dick would conjure up, for
the benefit of his worshipping listener, quaint stories
of goblin and elf, combining the past and the present,
with a genius which always made the child regard it
as a sacred spot, peopled at night-time by fantastic
shapes and weird figures, and he would catch his
breath and gaze in rapt attention into the narrator's
face, where something in its fresh fairness and dancing
eyes would reassure him.


Then at night, when he and Eex were bending over
the simple lessons —the only study the elder brother
would allow his frail charge,—a sharp rap at their door
would herald the gay “ Stewing again ? My word, Eric,
that head of yours is bulging out too much,” and the
visitor would throw off his hat and make himself at
home.
“ You may thank your lucky stars your landlady is
deaf, and a widow to boot,” he would say, with a deep
sigh. “ A room all to yourself, and no one to disturb
you; no grown-up daughters to strum on the piano or
sing sentimental songs. You don’t half appreciate your
privileges, Eex Gwynne. ‘ Our eldest girl ’ has come to
gladden our hearts at the ‘ Grand ’; home from college,
you know; ‘ finished,’ my dear sir. She finishes me
often enough. I can bear her patiently till it comes
to the singing, but she makes night hideous by howling,
in a touching contralto, ‘ Come to my heart,’ and
‘Waiting,’ and a few other high-class ditties. I press
her to warble every evening—we are expected to, you
know, — but, Christopher Columbus ! how I suffer.
Shall I show you how she ‘waits,’ Eric?”
Whereupon he would sit down to the piano, strike
a few wild chords, and, with head thrown back and
fingers elevated, treat them to a decidedly clever, if
somewhat overdrawn, imitation of “ our daughter’s
latest.”
But, as a rule, he strayed into dreamy preludes and
quaint sonatas, his fingers pressing out, with rare power


and expression, the music he loved so well. It was
then that the boyish face grew grave and thoughtful,
his eyes lost their gay brightness, and took on a fuller,
deeper lustre, and Mr Gwynne would cease to wonder
what had attracted him to the careless, mercurial nature.
When the music was ended there was always some-
thing fresh to talk about, a letter from his folks, or a
portrait that he did not care to show anyone else.
Hex began to feel as if he almost knew that happy
home circle —the younger sister, Ida, who had earnest
grey eyes, and who possessed such faith in the absent
brother, and the small boys, with their boisterous affec-
tion for the wee, blind girlie, who had never seen their
chubby faces.
He generally spoke of her when Eric crept up beside
him, and laid his small, thin hand in his.
But w T hen the child was asleep, and the light lowered,
some strange, unrecognised restraint seemed to have
withdrawn its influence, and the two friends would join
the group in the billiard room at the “ Grand Hotel,”
the most absorbed of any there.


CHAPTER VIII.
“ I THINK HE’S ODIOUS.”
“ How beautiful is nigbt!
A dewy freshness fills the silent air,
No mist obscures ; no cloud, nor speck, nor stain
Breaks the serene of heaven.
In full-orbed glory yonder moon divine
Rolls through the dark-blue depths !
Beneath her steady ray
The desert circle spreads
Like the round ocean girded with the sky.
How beautiful is night! ”
Southey.
It had been a wonderful cure !
“ They ” said so, and who should know better ?
Hurlstone had awakened to the fact that it had a
clever physician in its midst, and decided that, whether
it was electricity or homeopathy that had cured Dr
Cranston’s sister, Dr Mum should have the fullest
credit.
But it had not been always so ; dear me, no ! I shall
have to confess to a deplorable bit of weakness on the
part of the Hurlstonians. You wouldn’t have supposed


it, of course; people are much wiser nowadays, and
consent to see when anything is thrust under their
eyes.
But homeopathy is just one of the things which
nobody will take on trust. One may prove its
efficacy a hundred times—to unenlightened eyes it
is all chance!
And so, at first, the new doctor had had a struoffie
OCS *
It was absurd to think that such minute doses as
he prescribed could have any effect, and what in the
world does one go to a physician for, if not for
medicine ?
And dear old Dr Eeid had been such a favourite.
It was trying, of course—public opinion generally is,
if it goes against one—but Alan Muir had this one
advantage, which brought many others in its train—he
believed thoroughly in his system, and he intended to
make others believe in it.
And at length the tide turned.
Folk began to whisper that, of course, he “ hadn’t got
all those letters after his name for nothing,” and, on
top of that, the invalid whom everyone had supposed
incurable, began to recover.
Nor was this all.
Old Mr Arden, the owner of “ Darrow,” the largest
and richest station for many a mile around, who had
blue blood in his veins—a fact abundantly proved by
his lepeated attacks of gout,—had been heard, on more
than one occasion, to remark that “ Muir was the only


doctor he had ever seen who understood a case with-
out asking a hundred questions,” and what was most
potent, sealed his approval by appointing the object of
his commendation family physician !
What could Hurlstone do, after this, but come off its
“ rail ” as gracefully as circumstances would permit ?
They saw it all now; they could understand the
principle!
And “ they had never liked those odious drugs poor
Dr Eeid had been in the habit of prescribing! ”
So it was, and so it ever will be.
In some respects it had been an anxious time to the
one most concerned ; lately, especially, for a new, sweet
hope had come into Alan Muir’s life, and brought
added reason why he should make good his ground in
the little mining township. But of this no one knew,
least of all Una herself.
There were those who said that Dr Muir never
looked as thoroughly at home anywhere as in his
surgery, and felt that the deep gravity of the grey
eyes was quite in keeping with his surroundings—
“ thoroughly professional, you know.”
He was so delightfully in earnest!
Has it ever been your fortune to be personally
interested in a room of this kind ? To wait trembling
and nervous for the verdict to issue from the
physician’s lips, that means so much ? To think of
the sad hearts that have been gladdened,—or those that
have been crushed and torn by despair, just here, where


you are sitting, waiting to hear the words that are
perhaps to make such a change in your life ?
Then you know just what it looked like: the peculiar
air of gravity that pervaded it, the feeling that here,
at least, no careless words ever fell, and the terribly
suggestive look about everything.
You remember exactly how that large, hanging glass
case, with its velvet lining, and rows of gleaming
instruments, sent a vague shudder through you; how
you eyed with awe the delicate, inexplicable machinery
that seemed so incomprehensible to your unenlightened
heart, but which was somehow associated with pain ;
the stethoscope, staring you in the face with painful
distinctness; the great man himself, who, with his
back turned to you, leisurely drew towards him pen
and paper, whereon your numerous sufferings were to
be set down in regular and concise form.
You also remember the way your heart thumped
while he quietly and pleasantly talked of ordinary
matters, to give those obstinate nerves a chance to
return to their normal condition; how that unruly
centre of life, after threatening to beat open your
chest, suddenly took an alarming jump into your throat,
as the revolving chair gently eased round, and you
became conscious of a searching scrutiny, as the
doctor said, in a tone calculated at once to soothe
and bring matters to a point, “Now, let me see the
tongue, please.”
This particular room differed very slightly from


others of a like character; to Dr Muir it was hallowed
by the dream that had grown so strong.
Often, after the day’s weary round, he had entered
it, and, kneeling quietly there in the darkness, had
pleaded for the life that had become so dear.
Yes, if walls could have spoken, what they might
have told —of heartache bravely subdued that others
might be helped, of the strength of a great love that
was all self-renouncing.
The day had been an unusually trying one, and as
noon wore on, Dr Muir began to feel strangely tired.
Patient after patient—the same sad tale upon most
lips, though told in such different ways—had come and
gone, and a short, much-needed spell had arrived.
Time to think a little about his own needs; time to
read the note lying on his desk, that contained such
unexpected news—unexpected, for he had been in
Melbourne for a few days on business, and had not
seen the patient since his return.
And, quick as her recovery had been, Jack’s news
was startling;—
“ I may not have time to see you to-day, and I want
to specially engage you for this evening. The ‘ Great
Powers ’ —meaning Aunt Jean, Miss Leigh, and yours
truly—have decided that it is quite time that Una
should have a change of scene, and we are going to
convey her ladyship (by what means of locomotion
you will discover when you come) to the lounge on
the verandah. Now, if you start off immediately on


receipt of this, and upset our arrangements, I shall
take it as an insult directed at my professional skill;
furthermore, if you come before eight you will not he
admitted. Jack.”
He was still musing over that little slip of paper
when a sharp ring at the bell warned him that, for
the present, his brief rest was over.
Doctors are only human, after all, subject to the
same weariness of body and mind that the rest of the
race grumble about, yet, hour after hour, the brain must
be kept clear, the senses keen and alert, the face
guarded and sympathetic, all the energy bent on this
particular case for the time being, though the patient be
querulous and exacting, apt to overrate trivial symptoms
—the doctor must be bright and cheerful—go through
his work with the regularity of a machine, without any
of its mechanical action, till the last; and then
What else is he for, I should like to know ?
But the evening came at length, a calm, beautiful
night, with floods of glorious moonlight; and his last
professional call had been paid.
He walked up the path he had passed over so often,
almost slowly, and Jack came out to meet him.
“ Come along, old fellow,” he said, in his bright,
boyish way, “ eight to the minute, and the procession
about to start. Why, Alan ? ”
For Dr Muir had turned curiously pale.
She stood there in the open doorway, her beautiful
eyes, radiant as stars, lifted to his; stood on the feet


that so long had been powerless to support their light
weight, and took two steps towards him.
From the dark passage came Mona’s merry voice :
“ This independent young woman has walked, without
any help, from the dining-room! Dr Muir, I hope
you’ll give me a first-class reference when I apply for
admission to the Homeopathic Hospital, for I intend
to take all the credit of this case upon my own
shoulders.”
And that seemed to restore everyone to their senses.
They got settled at last upon the broad, green-
embowered verandah, and Aunt Jean was prevailed
upon to leave the beloved knitting for once, and join
the merry group.
“ About that reference, Dr Muir ? ”
“ I shall certainly give it you, Miss Leigh; indeed,
I have already recommended you, though you don’t
deserve quite all the credit you seem inclined to take,”
he replied, with a touch of mischief in face and voice.
“ You really saw the matron while you were in
town, then ? ”
“ I really did.”
“ That was very kind of you. Do you think I stand
any chance ? ”
“ I do ; I had a long talk with Miss Thorpe, and
she gave me a form for you to fill up, and a copy of
the rules. I have them here with me.”
He produced some folded papers, which Mona began
to examine, in spite of the fact that the moonlight,


though brilliant, did not render the words intelligible.
Dr Cranston came to the rescue with praiseworthy-
promptitude, and struck a succession of matches,
while the girl, with bent head, rapidly ran through
the items.
“ ‘ Applications must be made to the Secretary, in
the handwriting of the applicant, who must not be
less than eighteen nor more than thirty years of age.
Copies of testimonials to accompany the application.’
That’s all right, so far.”
“ With the exception of the age,” asserted Dr
Cranston, with ponderous gravity. “ I will certainly
not swear to your being over eighteen.”
“ The last rule is :— ‘ Whilst on duty, pupils, pro-
bationers, qualified and head nurses, must wear the
uniform of the Hospital, two complete suits of which
will be provided by the Hospital yearly.’ ”
“ It’s a good cause,” Jack said, in a resigned tone,
“ and I’m the most patient mortal in existence; but
are you aware of the fact that I have burned half a
box of matches, Miss Leigh, not to mention fingers.”
“ Oh, I beg your pardon,” she said, humbly. “I am
truly sorry; but how many fingers go to a box, Dr
Cranston ? ”
“My mind is occupied at the present with a far
more serious problem,” he said, ruefully.
“ And that is ? ”
“How many burns go to a finger. You are
heartless enough for a nurse, Miss Leigh ? ”


“ And more you couldn’t say. Dame Durden, what
a very silent child it is to-night.”
“That’s adding insult to injury,” Una laughed.
“ Well, I have been talking a good deal,” said Mona,
repentantly. “Mrs Barret, you had better give me
something to do! ”
“ Knitting,” suggested her nephew, solemnly, “ but
that’s not quiet work, either.”
“ No?”
“No,you wouldn’t be at it long before we should be
favoured with a running accompaniment of ‘knit 1,
slip 2, knit 2 together, pass the slipped stitch over ’
—oh, I know all about it, auntie ; now, I’ll wager
her tongue will keep pace with every click of her
needles.”
“Jack, you’re a dreadful boy,” said Aunt Jean,
reprovingly ; “ but there, you Australians are all alike ;
no reverence in any one of you.”
“ And yet you like us, you know.”
“ You say so, my dear; ” and just then they were
interrupted by a loud click at the gate, and hurried
footsteps.
“ Gwyune, by all that’s wonderful! ” Jack said, as
he sprang to his feet.
Mona looked up curiously, as the new comer
advanced, to where a bright shaft of moonlight fell
across his face, and showed it very pale, while the
clean-shaved, cynical mouth was twitching nervously.
He had scarcely a passing glance for anyone, as the


introductions were made, but when he caught sight of
Dr Muir he seemed intensely relieved.
A few hurried words, then Alan rose. “ I must go
with Mr Gwynne,” he said, looking a little wistfully
in Una’s direction, “his brother is illthen the two
walked swiftly away.
“ It must be a sudden illness,” Mona said, thought-
fully, as a little silence fell upon the group. “ Una,
he is such a dear, wee lad, so different from his
brother.”
“ I thought you didn’t know Mr Gwynne.”
“ Neither I do. I’ve seen him dozens of times, but
beyond that, personally, I don’t know him at all.
Still, one forms opinions from merely seeing folk.”
“ A dangerous practice.”
“ I don’t know about that; my first impressions are
never wrong. But at home I stand alone in my
opinion of Mr Gwynne. Harold says ”
“ Who is taking my name in vain ? ” came in a
merry voice, and a moment later Harold’s bright
face came into view.
“ Bless the boy, I quite forgot that I told him to
call for me. Una, this is my small brother, the
prospective M.D. I didn’t hear the gate, Hal.”
“ You were too much engrossed. Who were you
alking about ? ”
“ The amiable Mr Gwynne.”
“ Take care, Dr Cranston, you are treading on
someone’s corns,” laughed Mona.


Indeed! I thought you didn’t admire him.”
Not I. I told you that I didn’t even know him.”
Which is, of course, his loss,” very gravely.
“Which is, of course, his loss, as you remark. I
have a small brother, however, who thinks Mr
Gwynne about the only man in the world.”
“ Just so,” said Harold, “ present company always
excepted.”
“ But I say, and will continue to say,” proceeded his
sister, calmly, “ that he is conceited, and odious, and I
never shall like him.”
Harold whistled.
“ He was introduced to Dora Hunter the other day.
I don’t say she isn’t silly; but that was no excuse for
rudeness. She told me that he eyed her as coolly as
if she were a specimen of some sort when she asked
him if he liked Hurlstone, and said, in a lofty,
patronising way, that ‘ on the whole, it wasn’t at all
disagreeable for such an unpretending little place, but
he hadn’t been impressed either with its appearance
or its inhabitants.’ That’s Mr Gwynne for you.”
“If he teaches as he speaks, he must be a pretty
good master,” Dr Cranston said, with owlish solemnity ;
wasn’t*’ and ‘ hadn’t,’ for one sentence, isn’t had.”
Mona was musing.


CHAPTER IX.
“ ARE WE MEMBERS, REX ? ”
“Is it possible disdain should die, while she hath such meet food
to feed it as Signior Benedick ? Courtesy itself must convert to
disdain, if you come in her presence.”
Much Ado About Nothing.
Morxing service was just over.
Dr Cranston had joined Mona, and they walked
slowly along the hot pavement, when she suddenly
quickened her steps, with a petulant—“ Dr Cranston,
please hurry; Mr Gwynne is just behind us, and if I
saw him this morning 1 should certainly quarrel
with him.”
“Would you, though? I’ve half a mind to try the
experiment.”
“ You’ll repent it, if you do ! Be merciful—to Mr
Gwynne, I mean.”
But he only smiled provokingly, and sauntered
lazily on. “ It’s too hot to walk quickly,” he said,
mischievously. “ I wonder you have the heart to sug-
gest such a thing. Oh—good morning, Mr Gwynne ! ”


as that gentleman caught up to, and was about to pass
them. “ I think you were introduced to Miss Leigh
at our house some weeks ago.”
Rex raised his hat politely.
“ I had forgotten—l have a wretched memory for
faces.”
“ How is the boy ? ” Jack asked, as they walked on
together, Mona preserving an ominous silence that
boded ill for someone.
“ Better, decidedly, thank you. I should not have
left him this morning but for that. Besides, one has
to keep up appearances,” and a smile not exactly
pleasant flitted over his face.
“Of course,” said Mona, quietly; “it would go
terribly against your prospects if you stayed away
from church altogether. People are apt to notice
such things.”
He eyed her very keenly; then the amused smile
returned to his lips.
“ You exactly interpret my meaning,” he said,
courteously.
Dr Cranston interposed, to prevent further warfare.
“ You are beginning to feel quite at home among us,
now, I hope ? ”
“ Oh, as to that,” he replied, with an indifference that
bordered on weariness, “as much at home as I should
feel anywhere, I expect. I’m not a sociable being at
the best of times ; there is a bit of the hermit consti-
tution about me, I fancy.”


“ That is a pity,” Mona said, drily; “ for yourself,
I mean.”
“ You think so ? May I ask why ? ”
“ The Hurlstone folk are very kind-hearted,” she
answered, with her eyes flashing stormily ; “ they are
apt to resent anything like patronage.”
“ Are hermits patronising, as a rule ? ”
“By action, yes; they consider themselves better
than anyone else, I believe.”
“ Then I hasten to disclaim kinship, considering
that I make no profession whatever.”
“ And you are ready to own that Hurlstone is an
exceedingly nice place. Come now, Mr Gwynne
interposed Jack, with an imploring glance at the cause
of the discomfort.
Eex looked too, a little curiously, at the pale face
with its scornful, brown eyes, the soft, crimson lips, so
firm and decided in them curves: she despised him
already ? Well, why not ?
Then he answered the question.
“ I think Hurlstone is a very pretty place, indeed ;
you must forgive me for adding that, to me, it seems a
trifle dull.”
“Nevertheless, we have our diversions,” flashed out
Mona, without giving Dr Cranston a chance to reply.
“ Something for every night in the week. Perhaps
you would like a list ? ”
“ If you will favour me.”
“ Monday evening, prayer meeting a good many


parents attend that.” Then, as she saw him wince, she
went on, recklessly, “ Tuesday —some kind of service, I
believe, Dr Cranston ? Wednesday—mutual improve-
ment —a truly delightful association. Thursday —Bible
class. Friday—musical union for the unmusical—for, of
course, in such a sleepy hollow as this, talent of any
kind must, of necessity, be at a discount; and, on
Saturday evening, those who care to, shop, hear the
latest mining news, and return home. There is plenty
of variety, Mr Gwynne.”
“ The most exacting could not ask for more,” he said,
with profound gravity. And a few minutes later they
parted company.
Harold and Mrs Leigh had been sitting at the din-
ner table some minutes before Mona made her appear-
ance, in a studiedly sombre dress, at sight of which
her brother lifted his eyebrows in an expressive manner.
Mona was in an unusually combative mood, and he
knew the symptoms.
“ Dick Norris is going the way of all bank clerks; ”
she began, as she put down a pile of plates with no
gentle hand ; “it is sickening the way he is going on;
keeping away from church, and dancing attendance on
Mr Gwynne. He’ll get no good from him.”
H,arold fired up at that.
“ know such a lot about Mr Gwynne,” he said,
with the nearest approach to a sneer she had ever
heard from him ; “ and as for church-going, it doesn’t
seem to do some people much good.”


Mona’s eyes flashed dangerously.
“Of course you’ll stand up for him,” she retorted;
“ anyone that is a friend of Mr Gwynne’s cannot fail
to be perfect.”
“My dear,” expostulated Mrs Leigh, “ you must
remember he is Harold’s teacher.”
“ And a jolly clever one, too.”
“ Oh, I don’t dispute his brains. What Ido say is
that he is conceited and odious, and any respect he
may show to religion is merely for the sake of his
college—a cheap advertisement.”
“ Mona! ”
“He owned as much himself. I’m very sorry he ever
came here; he is leading Dick into all sorts of things.”
“ And Dick needs such a lot of leading! ”
Harold was becoming hot.
“ Don’t try to defend him, Hal; he ought to be
ashamed of himself,” she continued, petulantly, and
then, almost fiercely, she pushed away her dinner, and
clattered through the dishes, refusing any help.
But it was in a strangely subdued mood that she
joined Una on the shady verandah.
“ I’ve quarrelled with everyone at home,” she
announced, as soon as she had greeted her friend ;
“ teased Hal till he got as mad as a March hare, and
actually brought tears into the mother’s eyes. Una, I
believe I’m the very worst girl in the world. No, don’t
be sympathetic; scold me, for indeed I deserve it.”
It was late when she went home after the evening


service, and finding Harold—who hadn’t been to church
alone and moody, went up to him with a sweet, earnest
look he long remembered.
“ Wasn’t I horrible this morning, Hal ? ” she said,
uncertainly. “ Will you forgive and forget, old boy ?
And, Hal—l’m a very funny sort of a Christian, I
know, but I am trying to follow Christ, and I have
an awful temper to fight against. I wish you would
help me.”
He bent his head.
“ Don’t, Mona; I reckon I was more to blame than
you ; anyway, no apologies required,” and he laughed in
rather a forced manner.
But he thought a little about it that night, and even
made a boyish resolve to help her in the way she had
asked—a resolve he meant to keep; that he would
have kept. But, you see, Mr Gwynne happened to
be in Hurlstone that year!
Eric crept back to health slowly, and by laborious
stages, and his brother began to breathe more freely ;
the shadow once removed, he chose to forget that it
had ever been there.
Not that he neglected his charge. Ah, no, Eric could
have told a very different story—of tender care such
as falls to the lot of very few, of constant, unwearied
attention, of unwavering gentleness—this was what
the child knew of Rex Gwynne!
But that Sunday evening he took a quaint fancy
into his head.


They were alone, as usual, in the sitting-room that
was regarded as exclusively theirs. A sudden thunder-
storm had dispelled the sultriness of the morning, and,
outside, a cold, steady rain was falling.
A fire cracked and blazed in the grate, and Eric
looked luxuriously comfortable in the depths of the
great, pillowed chair that his brother had drawn into
the warm glow.
“We don’t often go to church now, do we ? ” he said,
rubbing his thin hands together; “ are we members,
Eex?”
Not very ardent ones, I’m afraid, Eric.”
“ I thought not. Of course I’ve been ill, and couldn’t
go, but I wanted you to.”
I’m afraid the will was wanting, little chap.”
“ Mr Norris said he liked going for walks best, but
Miss Leigh says that is wrong. Eex, couldn’t we have
church ourselves ? ”
Mr Gwynne started. What did the child mean ?
Eric hastened to explain. “In the evenings, you
know, you could sing, and pray, and read a sermon ;
and I would be the congregation.”
“ A fair division of labour, certainly. Perhaps you
would like me to preach a sermon of my own.”
But the child shook his head very decidedly at that.
“ Mrs Bell has a book of Spurgeon’s sermons, and she
says they are ‘ most improving,’ ” he said, with his eyes
very wide open, indeed; his mouth so absurdly like
their landlady’s when she was uttering any words


calculated to impress, that Rex threw back his head
and laughed.
“You shouldn’t laugh in church,” reproved the
small mentor.
“ Oh, we have started, have we ? Well, what is the
first proceeding ? ”
“ A voluntary,” promptly responded the self-imposed
director; “ only we have no organ.”
“ Perhaps we may overcome that difficulty, and do
with the piano.”
“ I guess so; ” and a look of deep content stole into
his eyes, as, after a soft, dreamy prelude, the player
wandered into one of the “ songs without words.”
Then his fingers touched the keys idly.
“ A hymn now, I suppose, laddie ? Which is it to
be?”
“ ‘ Just as I am.’ All the verses, please, Rex
How could he sing it!
Passers-by stopped to listen to the ringing tenor
voice, as he sang so tenderly—for it was for Eric’s sake
—the beautiful hymn.
Yet, even before the last notes died away, it rushed
over him what bitter mockery it all was ; what a sin to
take those words on his lips while his heart refused
to follow them.
Was he a hypocrite, too ?
“ Let us pray,” said Eric, solemnly.
An awful silence ensued —then the sweet, childish
voice broke it, and Rex knelt and covered his face with


his hands, reverently, as if he felt the unseen presence
of the One to whom Eric was talking so naturally.
And as he listened the strong heart quivered, touched
by almost uncontrollable agony.
Oh, for the old childlike trust!
But now Eric was slowly repeating the Lord’s
Prayer.
“ Amen,” came from a gay voice at the door, but as
Dick Norris came forward into the light, Bex saw that
his eyes were suspiciously misty.
And, though the sermon was postponed, the con-
versation never drifted away from grave subjects.
When Dick was gone the boy crept on to his
brother’s knee, and they sat for a long time in silence.
Then Mr Gwynne nerved himself for a great effort.
He had felt for a long time that in some way Eric
should know of the distance between them, but how ?
Not all—that he had cut adrift altogether from his
mother’s God, that he had left the good for the
pleasant, the right for the wrong—not enough to
shake the child’s faith, but just enough to excuse him-
self for any action he might wish to take at any time,
—to free him from embarrassing situations such as
to-night’s. And, with one hand lingering caressingly
on the soft hair, he brought himself to his hard
task.
Oh, I can’t tell you how he did it. I can only say
that Eric did not even dimly understand it, and that
his wistful question was answered by a husky “ do as


mother told you, lad ; Rex needs all your prayers.”
And that was all.
But he stayed up long after the child was quietly
sleeping; he felt a little conscience-stricken.
He even gave a whole hour trying to determine
whether it would be worth while to live such a life in
the world as would entitle him to reward hereafter;
a whole hour to deciding where he intended to spend
eternity!
He was an unwearying student of books, never
leaving an abstruse question till he had conquered it;
never sparing time or brain till all was mastered
thoroughly ; yet, for this most vital of all subjects—the
final examination on which such fearful odds depend—
he deemed but a passing glance necessary, a careless
scrutiny that he would not have insulted the least
important branch of learning with—and he never once
referred to the text book !
And, as the days passed, they brought him plenty to
think about. His college was prosperous, his specula-
tions turned to gold at a touch. He had been singularly
successful from the first.
“ All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
down and worship me ! ”


CHAPTER X.
“ YOU HAVE A GOOD SCENT, DI, —CATS, BOY, CATS.”
“Those who do not succeed in building, avenge themselves by
demolishing.” Comtesse De Gaspakin.
COMTESSE De GaSPAKIN.
“You have such a February face—so full of frost, of storm, and
cloudiness.” Much Ado About Nothinq,
Much Ado About Nothing.
“ And this,” said Mona, a little breathlessly, “ is the
very strong man Kwasind. Una, if I had had the
faintest idea of the dance this terrible dog would lead
me when I brought him out this afternoon, ”
and then she sat down, with glowing cheeks and
sparkling eyes.
The big St Bernard lumbered forward, keeping time
to his movements with a solemn flourish of his tail,
regarded Una with gravity for a full minute, and then
advanced a huge paw, on friendly mission intent.
But Mona looked reproachfully at him.
“ He looks quiet enough now, but he exhausted his
surplus energy coming along; he fought every dog
we met, Una. Once I had to go the whole length of


a street to get him away from Mr Carter’s big New-
foundland, and he wound up by positively refusing to
let ‘ Dolly ’ —Mr Adolphus Hearne, you know—walk
beside me; he flew at the poor little fellow quite
ferociously.”
“ When two young ladies get together, what is the
natural consequence ? ” and Dr Cranston sauntered
in, with his hands in his pockets.
“ Can’t imagine,” replied Mona, demurely ; “ unless
it is that a gentleman invariably makes his appear-
ance. Now, Dr Cranston, how long have you been
outside that door ? ”
“ Ah, that’s just it,” he said; and sinking into a
chair by the fire, he seized the poker and sent a
shower of sparks up the chimney.
“ When a man gets by the fire,” said Una, saucily,
“ what is the invariable consequence ? ”
“ The lire profits by it, certainly. What a cold day
it is, too; one would almost imagine we were in the
depth of winter,” he said, lazily, though his eyes were
singularly wide awake.
“ And instead of that, we are in spring; they say
the wattles are looking lovely in the bush. How the
time is flying; a few more months and we shall have
to say good-bye to dear old Hurlstone.”
“ And, of course, you are sorry.”
“ Yes ; I don’t suppose any home will ever be to us
what this has been.”
“ Going to take Leo with you ? ”


“ As if we should leave him behind.”
“ He’s far more penetrating than his mistress, Miss
Leigh ; he never barks at me.”
“And I do?”
But Jack was busily engaged with the tawny dog
at his feet.
“ He wants a bone, Miss Leigh.”
“ Dr Cranston ! ”
“ What scathing sarcasm, scathing even for you.
It’s bad enough to starve the dog, if it weren’t for
all this fur—what a rug he’d make, wouldn’t he ?
Now, please, Miss Leigh, I’m really frightened when
you look at me like that. What were you saying
about ‘ Dolly,’ as I came in ? ”
“ You did hear, then ? ”
“ I did; nevertheless, I was not listening at the
door, as you so delicately hinted some time ago.”
“ No ? ”
“ You and I, Leo,” he said, musingly, bending back
the great dog’s silky ears, “ were born to be misunder-
stood. Now, I know at this moment your mind is
fixed longingly on a large gristly bone, but I daren’t
even hint at it before your mistress.”
“ If I felt that way about it,” said Una, laughing,
“ I’d get him one.”
“ The very idea,” he returned, rising with alacrity.
“ Come on, old man.”
Leo winked his bright eyes at him, and yawned
languidly.


“ You are invoking some spell, Miss Leigh ; never-
theless, he shall have it. Leo ! ”
The dog rose lazily and followed his lead, returning
in triumph with the coveted morsel in his jaws.
“ Naughty fellow,” his mistress said, reproachfully ;
and Leo dropped his treasure and his eyes at the
same time.
“ What a monster of cruelty you are, Miss Leigh.”
“ Any one would imagine that dog was never fed.”
“ That’s irrelevant; dogs like eating between meals
as well as human beings. Pick it up, boy.”
But the “ boy ” was offended, and retreated to some
distance, eyeing them resentfully. It was only when
Mona spoke to him that he came to her, wagging his
tail solemnly, and closed his teeth on the bone.
“That being concluded satisfactorily,” the doctor
said, “ how about afternoon tea ? ”
I ! hopght gentlemen seldom took afternoon tea—
doctors, never! ”
“ It’s astonishing, Miss Leigh, as you go through
life, how many old rooted beliefs are uptorn. Una,
what an insult; as if I haven’t got it ready several
times since Aunt Jean has been away ! ”
He disappeared, but came back in a few minutes
with a tray, which he set down on the table with
quite a practised hand.
“Bread and butter, cake, cups and saucers—you
don’t have plates, do you ; is it ‘ the thing ’ ?—teapot,
hot-water kettle, cream jug, sugar basin, spoons; there,


I haven’t forgotten anything. Miss Leigh will pour
out: two spoonfuls of sugar, if yon please; like Mrs
Vaughn, I have a sweet tooth.”
“ Jack, did Eose make the tea for you ?
No,” he said, anxiously. “ I
“ I thought so,” she said, resignedly. “ I expect
you’ve poisoned us.”
“ It does look strange,” he admitted.
It did; being of an unwholesome creamy colour,
with numerous flakes floating on the surface.
His face grew blanker. “ I’m sure I made it right;
one spoonful for each, and one—ought it to have
been two, though —for the pot ? ” as an appalling
thought struck him.
“ The tea was right,” Mona assured him, with a
little ripple of merriment, “ but I rather suspect the
water was not.”
“ Oh,” he said, blankly, and then regained his
spirits, “ I assure you, Miss Leigh, the water was
quite hot.”
And then they all laughed.
They were still chatting merrily, when a rap—an
unmistakable rap—came at the front door, and it
would be hard to say which face looked the longest.
Dr Cranston got up hurriedly.
“ Eecollected a pressing engagement ? ” queried
Una, mischievously.
“ Twenty, my child; my sendees were never more
required than at this moment; strange I didn’t think


of it before. Take my blessing, both of you, and
survive it if you can ; if you cant, send me a telegram.”
Then he vanished, and a moment later the servant
grimly ushered the visitor in.
Mrs Vaughn was unusually demonstrative.
“ I heard only yesterday, Miss Cranston, that your
aunt was away, and I made up my mind to come and
cheer your solitude; Miss Leigh is, I see, bound on
the same charitable errand. You are looking very
well, Miss Cranston, only shockingly thin. If I w T ere
your physician, I would put you on stout for a few
months, or, better still, porter ; it would work wonders
for you. I was ordered to take it three times a day
some time ago, and the effect was marvellous.”
“ And lasting ? ” Mona asked, with a quick glance
at the speaker’s more than comfortable proportions.
“ And lasting,” Mrs Vaughn assented, though her
eyes looked anything but soft now. Then she took a
rapid survey of the table, with its evidences of a
merry little meal, in the careless arrangement of the
different articles.
“ I am so glad you have finished tea,” she said,
lazily. “ I have had it at three houses already, and
couldn’t positively take a drop more. But I see I
am wrong in supposing that Mrs Barret is away,”
with a meaning look at the third cup, which Jack had
only half emptied, and put down so unceremoniously.
“ No, you are right,” Una said, quietly; “my aunt
has been away for nearly a fortnight-”


“ Oh, indeed. Miss Leigh, is that your dog ? He
looks quite dangerous.”
Leo had risen to his feet, a decidedly imposing figure,
and now drew the corners of his mouth away from
the strong white teeth, emitting the while sundry low
growls.
Mona slipped her hand through his collar, but he
still kept his eyes, in which a yellow light glowed,
full on Mm Vaughn’s face.
“ I can’t stand dogs,” she said, in her slow, insolent
way. “Mr Vaughn has quite a collection, but I never
go near them. You should have a muzzle for your
pet, Miss Leigh; he looks very savage.”
“ He is always quiet with people he likes,” was the
cool reply.
“ Miss Cranston, I came prepared to be dreadfully
unconventional to-day, and brought some fancy work
with me. Do you do drawn thread work at all ? Yes,
it is pretty, but frightfully tedious. I only manage
a very little at a time.” Then, with a soft laugh,
“ Percy declares I must follow Penelope’s example,
and pull out at night what I do in the day.”
“ That being the case, the work would progress very
rapidly. The more one pulled out, the sooner it
would be finished, I should imagine.”
Of course it was Mona who said it, in her dry un-
concerned manner ; but Una, watching closely, saw a
look of almost hatred darken Mrs Vaughn’s blue
eyes.


“ You are terribly discerning, aren’t you ? ” she
drawled with more than usual sweetness. “Do you
know, you quite frighten me at times ? ”
“ Incredible ! ”
Mrs Vaughn was musing.
“ What a terrible pity it is that Dr Muir is so
exclusive; it must take from his popularity to a great
extent.”
“ I am not aware that it has had that effect so far,”
said Una, coldly.
“No ? Of course, I hear a great deal in my wander-
ings, and I know he has offended some of our best
people here by refusing their invitations. Mr Vaughn
is sick of asking him to favour us with his presence ;
but then, of course, he’s good, and it’s natural he
should look down on such sinners as we are.”
The swift rebellious blood tinged the pale face with
vivid carmine, but she answered steadily, “ I am sure
he would not look down on any one, Mrs Vaughn ; you
know, he has very little time to himself.”
“ That, of course, Miss Cranston, you must know
much better than I; you are in his confidence, are you
not ? But he can hardly be so much occupied as all
that. For my part, I hate a busy doctor; one who
looks reproachfully at you if you venture on a
commonplace remark, instead of keeping strictly to
the professional. Now, Dr Eeid was different. When
my husband was ill with fever, he would come three
times a day, and have a glass of wine and a chat with me;


he was always so bright, and full of fun. But Dr Muir
eyes you so keenly—l think someone must have told
him how very piercing those dark eyes of his are. It’s
the tiick of the trade, doubtless, but rather absurd
for a comparatively young man ; don’t you agree with
me, Miss Leigh ? ”
“ That Dr Muir’s eyes are piercing ? Yes, I certainly
do; that they see even more than they seem to, also.”
The colour on Lna s face deepened ■ she wondered
what was coming next—wondered and dreaded.
But her visitor s face was unclouded. She leant back
gracefully in her chair, snipping thread after thread,
and drawing it daintily out with her jewelled fingers.
“ Ive done more already,” she announced, with a
bright smile, “ than I generally do in a week. Miss
Leigh always invigorates one; she reminds me of a
brisk, fresh breeze.”
“ Or a cold shower bath.”
The pretty bps parted over the white teeth.
That s too bad \ you always misconstrue my words.
Do you know that Mr Gwynne considers you a most
unapproachable young lady ? ”
“Mr Gwynne has seen so much of me that his
opinion must he valuable.”
“ That could easily be remedied ; but I suppose you
are afraid of his influence over your brother, and, in
that respect, I fear you are right.”
The brave, brown eyes never flinched, never ceased
their steady gaze; and Mona said, meaningly, “Mr


Gwynne’s influence is not the only one we dread for
Harold, Mrs Vaughn.”
“ I hope that is not a hit at me. If I had known
that your views were so very rigid, I would not have
offered your brother wine in my house ; and you know,
Miss Leigh, billiards is a very harmless game, if he
never indulges in anything worse.”
“ Pardon me, I entirely disagree with you.”
The giiTs voice was hard and cold, giving no out-
ward sign of the numb pain at her heart.
“ Oh, of course, everyone has a right to their own
opinion, but I must say I consider such extreme views
exceedingly strait-laced.”
“ As you say, it is purely a matter of opinion.”
“ Mr Vaughn and I both agree in thinking that if
the home life were made brighter, there would be less
temptation for young people to indulge in question-
able amusements.”
“ And, therefore, you provide them in your own
home for other people’s young folks. Mrs Vaughn, we
had better drop this subject; I can’t feel quiet about it.”
“No ; you are terribly in earnest about everything,
aren’t you ? I’m afraid I’m even wickeder than I
thought,” with a look of childlike innocence. “ I have
had scruples about Mr Gwynne at times; hut, you
know, gambling seems his second nature, and he
can’t keep away from cards in any shape or form.
But when we indulge, it is only in a very mild way,
and for stakes so trifling as not to be reckoned. Oh,


I’m terribly concerned about young Gwynne, I assure
you. I often lie awake at nights wondering what I
can do in the matter, but he’s always so lucky; he
augments his income considerably by his winnings,
and when that is the case it takes a great deal to
stop anyone. Then, you know, one always fears with
his father ” Mrs Vaughn paused here to duly
impress her hearers.
But if she had expected to be questioned she was
disappointed. There was nothing for it but to go on.
“ I don’t think any one knows about it; but Mr
Gwynne’s father, if right were right, would be serving
a term in Pentridge.”
Had she startled them ?
She went on pathetically. “ Sad, isn’t it ? I think
it has embittered his son’s life ; he escaped justice by
leaving the colony, and the blow was the cause of the
mother’s death. That is why he has the child here
with him.”
But, Mrs Vaughn—” began Una, indignantly.
“ Ah, I know what you are going to say, that I
should not have told you, but I knew it would go no
further; Ido not wish to cloud Mr Gwynne’s pros-
pects in any way. That his father proved himself
unworthy of trust, where money is concerned, has
nothing whatever to do with him, of course.”
“ Nothing whatever.”
“ Still one fears. Your brother w’ill soon be going
to the University, I suppose, Miss Leigh ? ”


“In a few months’ time,” said Mona, briefly and
haughtily.
“ I think his choice of a profession so unfortunate.”
“ Indeed ? ”
“ Oh, yes. We are really overstocked with doctors
at present; and he is so bright and full of mischief,
not at all the kind of boy to develop into a solemn-
eyed, sepulchral man of medicine. He would make
his fortune on the stage.”
“ Mrs Vaughn ! ”
“ How sensitive you are. It is to be hoped he
doesn’t take it into his head to choose for himself
Perhaps Mona, in her agitation, had loosed her hold
on Leo’s collar; certain it is that the great dog had
for some time been disturbed.
A low, deep growl startled all; the next moment
Leo made a spring, and Mrs Vaughn, pale, and really
frightened, sprang too, and took refuge behind her chair.
Dr Cranston coming in at tills opportune moment,
peace was restored ; but the unwelcome visitor took
her feave soon after, without her accustomed grace,
leaving behind what she always left unrest and
vague disquiet.
And Mona’s parting words lingered long in her
friend’s ear. “ Oh, Una, I am terribly afraid about
Harold.”
What Dr Cranston said as he patted Leo’s sleek
head, was this ; “ You have a good scent, Di— cats,
hoy, cats! ”


CHAPTEE XL
“l ONLY INVITE MY FEIENDS THERE.”
“ The blue of summer sky,
The hush of summer air, will yet return
When the heart’s transient tempest passes by.
The stars, swept from their firmament, once more
Will shower down lustre from their silent thrones ;
The gentle hand of time will yet unbar
The iron grating, and invite the sun
To flood the darkened corridors.”
Wells of Baca,
Sorrow seems sent for our instruction, as we darken the cages of
birds when we would teach them to sing.”
Kichtee.
And so the summer came—came with its golden touch
on ripening grain, its fierce sun rays blazing down
and wilting the flowers that had bloomed so bravely
in the soft spring days.
Here and there, from green, velvety lawns, glowed
bright patches of colour, flashing gems in the cool
setting; but in most of the gardens the relentless sun
had done its work, and left only withered stems and
drooping leaves.
Heat, that was hard to bear where every power that


wealth could command, softened its effect; —that was
unbearable in the tiny, close rooms, where, as the
season advanced, many lay tossing with fever, gasping
in the stifling atmosphere.
Then came the bush fires; round about the town
they circled, beaten back only to gain strength in some
new quarter, and the furious, hot winds swept across
the burning country, and carried on their baleful
breaths clouds of smoke, heavy with the pungent
odour of eucalyptus.
Ah, it was a sad time for Hurlstone, for, in addition
to the heat and the sickness, there was poverty. The
mines had been steadily on the decline for some time
past; the rich reef in the “ Eureka ” had come to a
sudden end, and many of the miners were out of work.
Yes, it had happened many times before, but the
blow had come none the less keenly, for not a few
had risked their all in the mine that had promised so
handsomely.
There were hints—vague as yet—that another start
would be made, that another reef had been sighted,
and some believed the rumour.
For so said the brokers.
But, in the meantime, the men hung about the town,
smoking and chatting idly, and the women laboured
with sad hearts in their tiny, crowded homes.
With the summer, Eric’s strength flagged strangely,
and he seemed more shadowy than ever.
Mona saw the change with a growing pain, for, from


the first, the child had fairly crept into her heart, and
taken it by storm.
He had made friends with every one in the town,
but he devoted himself to her with all the warmth of
his loving nature, and scarcely an evening passed
without him finding his way to where they were
generally gathered, on the broad, shady verandah.
Here his brother would come for him sometimes—
oftener lately—and in Mrs Leigh’s presence he was
almost gentle. It was only when he and Mona were
alone together that the sarcastic tone would creep
back to his voice, and her heart would throb with a
numb pain, though her words were cool and steady.
Always there seemed some hidden antagonism between
them, that would make itself felt, by trick of tone
or expression of eye, keenly recognised, and secretly
winced over by Mr Gwynne himself. For he wasn’t
used to that sort of thing.
O
The boys in his College quoted their principal on
all subjects, and, of late, Harold Leigh had chosen
him mentor, standing up for his opinions with
unswerving fidelity, and, alas, following his lead in
more ways than one—a dangerous lead for any boy,
but especially so for bright, clever Harold.
For the love of gambling was deeply rooted in Piex
Gwynne, and he did not attempt to disguise the fact
from even himself now.
It was rather astonishing that the Leigh’s quiet home
should have any attraction for him, astonishing to no one


more than himself, and he tried in vain to determine the
motive that drew him thither one hot, still evening.
Mona met him at the door, a little flash of humour
in her dark eyes.
Eric, I suppose ? ” she said, as they shook hands.
Why should it be ? ”
It always has been.”
“ Not always, and not altogether. Still, I suppose
he is here. May I come in ? ”
“If you do not mind being treated without
ceremony, and will make yourself at home in the
dining-room.”
“And is there any reason to prevent my doing
that ? ” he asked, a trifle wistfully.
“ I only invite my friends there.”
A sudden flash of pain in the keen eyes looking at
her so earnestly; did she see it ?
“ That being the case, I suppose I must say good-
night,” he said, in a stiff, hurt tone.
But she was already leading the way, and he
thanked her simply.
At the door she paused half nervously. “I am afraid
you will find the evening very dull, Mr Gwynne. I
am going to make some jam to-morrow, and Eric was
helping me to cut up the oranges.”
“So much the better. I used to be a good hand at
cutting up oranges for—marmalade you call it, don’t
you ? Good evening, Mrs Leigh, I have come to offer
my sendees.”


Eric looked up, and nodded excitedly as his brother
took the chair at his side, and insisted on beincf
supplied with a knife and plate, to aid in the task
that was being gone on with so merrily.
Often afterwards the quiet scene recurred to his
mind—the cool, pleasant room, sweet with the perfume
of flowers ; the piles of fragrant rind and pulp that
Mona heaped on the scales every now and then;
Mona, with her brown eyes radiant, the rare, wild-
rose tint in her usually colourless face coming and
going at word or look, her voice gentle and merry.
Ah! he might well remember it; it was the last
time he saw her so for many a month.
She looked at him curiously now and then, as if
seeing him in an entirely new light—no hint of
cynicism or sarcasm hardening the pale, strong face,
only in his manner a quiet, courteous deference, as if
he felt grateful for being admitted into the immed-
iate home circle.
“You have half-a-dozen pips in that plate, Miss
Leigh,” he said, looking up suddenly, as she was about
to tip a tempting pile into the large jar standing
near; “that must be your work. I’ll warrant mine
absolutely free from imperfections of any kind. How
many cases of oranges go to one lot of jam ? ”
“ Hot more than a dozen, certainly.”
“Ho ? Like Eosa Dartle, I merely asked for infor-
mation.”
“ You read Dickens, then ? ”


“ Miss Leigh! was that a premeditated insult ? Of
course I read Dickens.”
“ And admire him ? ”
“ Yet another insult. That also goes without
saying.”
“ Mr Hearne—
“ Dolly,” corrected Eex, without a smile.
“Mr Hearne,” said Mona, with added emphasis,
“ advised me the other day to read ‘ Lothair ’; is it
good ? ”
“ Advice to those about to read it—don’t.”
“ Why ? it’s very celebrated, is it not ? ”
“It’s the expressed essence of vapidity, in my
opinion.”
“ I shall read it," she said, with a little wilful
gesture.
“Of course you will; I knew that when I told you,”
he said, folding a piece of peel with great deliberation ;
“ girls are always obstinate, are they not ? ”
“ I believe they do enjoy that reputation; but that
isn’t my reason.”
“ No ? may I ask what is ? ”
“ I always judge for myself—never take anyone
else s opinion. Of course, you are fond of poetry, Mr
Gwynne.”
“ That depends on what you call poetry. The
Hurlstone poet’s effusions, for example ? ”
“ And I know you don’t care for music.”
Eric s eyes opened very wide, and he was about to


break in very innocently, when his brother intercepted
him.
“ I don’t rave about it, but I make as good a
listener as most, I fancy; suppose you try me ? I was
just going to ask you whether you would sing for us;
the last orange has ceased to be, and I hope you will
give us that pleasure, if not for my asking, for Eric’s,”
he added, slily.
“ Certainly, if it is a pleasure. Come, Eric, we
will go and find some strawberries first; your brother
deserves some reward for helping us.”
“ I have already had that,” he said, as he held open
the door for her.
“ Indeed, may I ask what it was ? ”
His eyes told her, with their new expression of
humbled softness, meeting hers frankly and gently;
and it needed not the quietly spoken, “ The happiest
evening I have spent in my life,” to bring the swift
colour to her face.
A little later they were all in the drawing-room, and
she sat before the piano, her hands resting lightly
on the keys.
“ Grave or gay ? ” she said, turning with a bright smile.
“ According to your own fancy ; you will be sure to
please us then.”
“ Eric will turn over for me, thank you,” as he came
to her side; “he is used to my erratic ways.”
“ Eric be it, then. I always enjoy music better if I
can listen without any distractions.”


That he did enjoy the simple ballads she rendered
so exquisitely with her rich contralto voice was evident
by the grateful thanks which came so naturally from
his lips.
“Do you know, he said once, when Eric had slipped
across the room to where Mrs Leigh sat resting in her
basket chair, and Mona’s slim fingers were wandering
idly over the keys, “ I am supposed to be at Mrs
Vaughn’s to-night.”
All! now the cold expression he knew so well came
back to her eyes.
“ Indeed ? ” she said, frigidly, “ you had better fulfil
your engagement at once. It is not too late for them,
is it ? ”
He staited as if stung, and somehow the harmony
of the evening seemed broken.
“ No, it is ‘ Liberty Hall,’ certainly; but I do not
intend to go.”
“ No ? ”
“ You speak as if you think I ought to ! ”
“Hoi? I am afraid you are not at home in the
character of interpreter.”
“I am afraid lam only too correct; your face spoke
volumes. You do not like Mrs Vaughn, I know.”
“ May I ask to whom you are indebted for that piece
of information ? ”
“ Your face again,” he said, daringly.
“ What else does it tell you ? ”
“ Just now that you are vexed. Generally


“WeH?”
“ What a very poor opinion you have of a certain
person called Gwynne.”
She rose abruptly, and made her way to her
mother’s side.
“ You two look out in the cold,” she said, with rather
a forced attempt at brightness. “Mr Gwynne was
just giving me a lecture on physiognomy.”
“And my pupil was refractory,” he said, with a
brief flitting smile.
He took his leave soon afterward, and, when Eric
was safely in bed, joined Dick Norris for the nightly
walk they had taken since the warm weather had
set in.
“ Dick,” he said, as they parted an hour afterward,
“ what a fool you were to cut the Leighs for the
Vaughns.”
“ Just so,” said Dick, humbly ; “ don’t you go and do
ditto, old man.”
But for weeks after that Mr Gwynne kept away
from the home where he would fain have been a con-
stant guest, and Dick knew it, and knew the reason.
Ah, that long, trying summer! what it brought to
one heart in Hurlstone !
Just as fleet footed as ever, just as ready to forget
herself in the sorrows of others, only a quiet pain at
her heart that no one but God knew anything about, a
white, still face whose merry brown eyes looked sadly
at the world. Alas, Mona!


CHAPTER XII.
“it’s NOT THAT, HAL.”
‘ * Her lot is on you ! —silent tears to weep ;
A patient smile to wear through suffering’s hour ;
And sumless riches, from affection’s deep,
To pour on broken reeds a wasted shower;
And to make idols, and to find them clay,
And to bewail that worship ; —therefore pray ! ”
W hat a hot, hot night it was!
The sun had set blood red in a smoke-hazed hank of
dull-grey clouds, barred, and straight, as if ruled with
perfect precision; set solemnly, no quivering ray of
light, or brief flashing of tender rose, and opal, gorgeous
crimson, or soft purple ; only a steady, lurid glare, with
seemingly no motion, no rapid change of colour or form
in the sullen west, a slow fading from deep, sad orange
to faint primrose, and a fitful play of summer light-
ning over the distant hills.
And so the twilight had come on!
The Hurlstone College was enjoying a longer recess
than usual—for it yet wanted some weeks till Christ-


Mas—owing to the fever now raging in the town; and
the boys, as well as their teachers, hailed the freedom
from study, and had thrown books and care to the
wind, till “ taking up ” day should come again.
Either the weather or something was trying Mr
Gwynne, and his thin, white face excited much pity
from those who even knew the cause.
For there were very few indeed who did not know
that he was gambling pretty freely, and speculating
with a recklessness which bade fair to either ruin or
put him beyond the reach of having to toil for his
daily bread.
But none of them knew of the debts that still
weighed him down so heavily; that sucked up greedily
his honest earnings, and his dishonest ones.
Once free of them
So Eric wondered and wondered over the piles of
paper which kept his brother at them often into the
small hours of the morning.
But he never knew.
There were many things not easy to understand —the
curious, throbbing pain in his hip, the slight limp at
times, the queer, faint sensation that lately had seized
him so suddenly; but he accepted all as a matter of
course in his sweet, childish way, and never spoke of it,
except to Mona, in a burst of unusual confidence.
But his brother was far from blind. He saw with
a keen pang the small face growing whiter and thinner,
the big, dark eyes more softly radiant, and, when the


fear was strong, he would study to please the child in
every possible whim.
Twilight deepened into dusk as he stepped on to the
verandah, his eyes anxiously piercing the gloom, till
they rested on the languid figure leaning against one
of the posts.
“ Watching for the storm, laddie ? ” he said, cheerily,
as the hot, throbbing hand insinuated itself into his.
“ I thought you were going to see Miss Leigh.”
“ Not to-night, Rex.”
He started at the listless tone.
“ I must see Dr Muir about a tonic for you,” he said,
shortly. “ This wretched weather is making all of us
feel bad. Would you like me to take you ? ”
“ No, thank you,” drearily; “do you think it will be
cooler soon ? ”
“No doubt of it; come, it’s not good for you to mope
out here; we will go inside and finish that game of
Halma which Mr Norris interrupted us in last night.
Spring up, and I’ll carry you.”
He bent his head once, and pressed his lips to the
thick, bright hair, and Eric threw his arms round his
neck and kissed him excitedly.
It was quite two hours later that he laid the weary
head upon the pillows, and asked the child to say a
prayer for him.
The big eyes opened wide.
“ I always do, Rex. I tell God all about you.”
A strange smile flickered round the cynical mouth


“ I’m afraid, lad, He knows more about me than you
can tell him.”
And then he took his hat and strode outside,
opening the gate with an angry click, and walking
fiercely, to drown the thoughts that would press
upon him.
And in the darkness Eric folded his weak hands
together and prayed. Such faint, broken words ; but
they reached right up beyond the gloom, and He, from
the land where “ there is no night,” listening, smiled ;
for He loves the children’s prayers.
Mr Gwynne walked on, street after street, anywhere
to drown the rushing tide of sorrow and sickening
remorse that would assert itself; oh! the dark,
dark night, and the darker, restless soul, accusing
itself with passionate vehemence of all that had
passed, the wasted life, that might have been—ah,
none knew better—lived for God, and right, and
noble purpose.
It was his Maker’s hour with him, and the fight
that was going on would mean everything in the days
to come.
Would the right prevail ?
All of good that he had ever known came to him
now, and the legions of evil spirits trembled and
waited. . . He had disappointed all whose 'opinion
he. cared about.
And Mona ?
In his better moments he had thought sometimes


that if he had made himself worthy of her, he might
have had a bright future.
But that was all over now.
Ah, it was pitiful; the man’s whole better self warr-
ing with the results of years spent without God, and
only the strength of his weak moral nature to aid him.
He saw it all now, as indeed each of us must at some
part of our lives—that it was an impossibility to set a
line of boundary, and say to evil tendencies, “ Thus
far shalt thou go and no farther.” Yes, he saw all
very clearly!
More—that having reached this point, it was beyond
his power to turn back ! What a close, intensely hot
night it was. The air seemed stifling, crushing down
on him, making breathing almost painful.
On and on, till he reached the outskirts of the
town, and felt that he was on rising ground.
Mechanically he realised that he was among the
mines, almost at the very spot where Dick had told
Eric and himself of the unfortunate miner, who, on a
dark night such as this, had met his end, and—the
afterward!
Just such a night, for it was now dark indeed; a
cloudy sky, perchance, for low growls of thunder
muttered threateningly in the distance, and the weird-
ness of the spot, and its utter loneliness, seemed but in
keeping with his present mood.
He threw himself down wearily on a pile of stones,
enshrouded with gloom, close to the tall poppet legs of


some deserted shaft, and looked out at the soft, blurred
lights of the town, dimly tracing the outlines of the
streets.
In the unfamiliar look it had from this point, he
tried to pick out places he knew, and wondered
whether in that shady verandah, with its thick
creepers, the heat found its way as oppressively as
it did here. For she would most likely be there, on
her favourite low seat, beside her mother’s chair.
Not twenty yards distant from him, one of the lamps
flickered and sputtered, marking out the turn in the
road; and by its light he saw two figures come slowly
towards him, their heads bent as if talking softly.
He thought very little about it at first, judging them
to be mere passers by, till they came too near for him
to beat a retreat, and then he bit his lip in vexation.
Pass them he could not, without being seen, and he
particularly wanted to be unobserved.
The principal of Hurlstone College had a position to
keep up, and must not be discovered mooning in a
romantic spot like a lovesick girl!
So he only shrank back cautiously further into the
darkness, trusting to chance not to hear any conversa-
tion that might take place.
The lamp burnt up more brightly, and threw a soft
glimmer of light on the head of the girl, enveloping her
in faint radiance. And he knew only too well the
pale, proud face, with its dark, luminous eyes.
The next few minutes were absolute torture to him.


Far, far better have risked anything than have
heard what he did, so clearly that it might have been
uttered in his ear.
“ Are you quite decided, Hal ? ”
“ Well, you see,” in rather a shamefaced way, “ it
wouldn’t be right to go on, unless I could throw my-
self thoroughly into it; now, would it ? ”
“Oh, I don’t know. What has changed you so
completely ? ”
“ I’ve only done as many do, changed my mind;
there are other good professions as well as the medical
one.”
“ I know it, old boy.”
“Then what makes you so queer over it? it’s a
disappointment, of course.”
“ Oh, Hal, it’s not only that.
“ Then what is it ? ”
“ I think you know,” she said, sadly; and a silence
fell between them.
He broke it at length a little awkwardly. “You
fear I am unsettled, and think it shows weakness of
character ? Are you afraid I shall develop into a second
Eichard Carstone ? Come now, Mona, Ido think that’s
a bit hard, and I’m sure you’re comparing me with
him at this very moment. What has got hold of you
lately ?”
She answered in such a dreary tone that Harold
looked up quickly.
“ I don’t know, I’m sure. I suppose we were wrong—


mother and I—planning for you as we did; but
we trusted you so. It seemed wrapped up in every-
thing we did, and then—that money. I have thought
sometimes, since the shares went down so, that it
would bring no good with it—now, I feel sure.”
“ Eubbish, Mona.”
“ All our bright dreams for your future shattered.
All, Hal, surely you see how hard it is ? ”
“ I know, and I’m awfully sorry; but the life is in
every way distasteful to me.”
“ And a little while ago you were eager for it.”
“ A little while ago,” he said, moodily. “ Mona, you
are very unreasonable. Is it unnatural that, as I grow
older, my wishes should alter ? ”
“ Perhaps not; but I long for my brother as he
used to be, Harold. Have you thought of anything
else ? ”
“ Oh, I don’t know; there is plenty of time yet to
decide.”
“We certainly have a great deal to thank Mr
Gwynne for.”
“ Of course, it all comes back to him.”
“ You know it must, Hal”
“ I know nothing of the kind. I learn more from
him in a month than I should from any one else in a
year.”
“ I am very much afraid you do.”
“ You needn’t be afraid at all,” he said, impatiently ;
‘ you are very unjust to me.”


“Am I? I don’t mean to be, but I cannot help
seeing what is under my very eyes ; to shut them would
be utter folly. You have not been like the same since
Mr Gwynne came.”
“Much obliged, I’m sure.”
“ Is it possible you don’t see it yourself, old boy ? ”
“ Once again, I must remind you that I am growing
older, Mona.”
“Which means that you must find amusements
outside your home, and neglect mother for the sake
of people who would not care if you were to die to-
morrow. Harold, if she were like some, I would not
care so much. I tell you, solemnly, she is breaking
her heart, the little mother that you and I were going
to look after all our lives, and we can’t do without
her—that would be too cruel.”
“ I think you are very hard on me.”
“Am I, Hal ? I think sometimes that you must
forget—about father. And if so, Harold, I shall find
it hard to keep from wishing that Mr Gwynne had
never come to Hurlstone.”
Had he deserved it ?
Truly, he was paying dearly for what he had done.
Harold—Mona’s brother.
He saw by the faint light the agitation in her poor,
white face, the troubled eyes—yes, surely ? wet


with tears, the red lips quivering like a sorrowful
child’s.
Ah, what had he done ?
Presently the low, tremulous voice went on.
“It has been hard to say this, Harold, how hard you
will never know, but I would do much more to warn
you against him ”
“ Come now, Mona, what are you driving at.”
“ Only the gambling and the scepticism Mr Gwynne
indulges in. Very trifling, is it not ? ”
“ Everyone is not of your opinion that card playing
is such an enormous crime, you know.”
What a cry came from the gild’s lips then.
“ Hal, Hal, you haven’t learned to play, too ? Don’t
tell me that! ”
The awful silence that ensued was broken by a
sudden peal of thunder, that crashed, and ceased to
be, in a single minute of time.
Mona got up wearily.
“ The storm is coming,” she said, in a stifled voice.
“We must go, Harold ; mother will be anxious.”
They passed near him, so near that he could have
touched her hand, the little nerveless band that was
so cold and trembling.
Then he was alone once more.
When the echo of their footsteps died away, he
sprang to his feet and paced up and down restlessly.


And above, the storm gathered; heavily, steadily.
Far in the distance the thunder muttered angrily,
nearer now, till the dark sky was shot with fire, and
the deep crashes followed each other in rapid succession.
The heaving clouds were torn apart by jagged plays
of lightning, now fork, now sheet, till for a brief space
everything was lit up with the weird, unnatural
light, only to give way to the blackness of the black
night.
And still the clouds kept back their rain, hanging
pendulous and dark, veiling the calm blue dome with
its radiance of stars, and the clear, silvery moon ; not
a ray of which pierced the gloom.
The whole atmosphere was tremulous with electricity,
and the yawning shafts, rendered hideous by the brief,
pale illumination that played so uncertainly over their
mouths, possessed a horrible fascination for the one
solitary man in the storm’s fury. He felt his senses
reeling, and sank down exhausted at the foot of a tree.
Then, at last, the loud rumbling gathered its full
force, and swelled into one terrific clap, in the midst
of which, a glare lit up the whole scene, followed
by a blinding chain of light.
A crash, a tearing sound as of loosening earth!
Mr Gwynne sprang to his feet, and strode forward.
And where he had been a minute before, the tree
lay outstretched!
It was long afterwards that he thought with a
shudder of what might have lain beneath it!


Now, he could only shade his dazed eyes, and wonder
if sight would ever come into them again.
The rain pelted down in large, cool drops that
fell unheeded on his face and hands, and still he
paced up and down, covering his hot eyes with his
fingers, living a lifetime, feeling nothing but the
raging storm within his heart.
Then—homeward.
Oh, I would like to be able to tell you that that
night was the turning point in his life, that he left the
black past with One who would so willingly have
blotted it all out.
But I cannot.


CHAPTER XIII.
“NOT MY OWN, DAME DURDEN.”
‘ 1 Where is another sweet as my sweet,
Fine of the fine and shy of the shy ?
Fine little hands, fine little feet—
J Dewy blue eye.
Shall I write to her ? shall I go ?
Ask her to marry me by and by ?
Somebody said that she’d say no ;
Somebody knows that she’ll say ay ! ”
Tennyson.
Turning a corner hurriedly, some one tapped him on
the arm, and he started to find himself face to face
with Dick Norris.
“ Here you are at last! I’ve been all over the town
for you. What a storm, and we haven’t had the last
of it yet, by a long way. They say that a tree by one
of the old shafts has been struck, splintered to atoms.
Do you feel inclined to go and have a look at it ? ”
“I ? oh, no. Did you want me, Dick ? ”
“Of course I want you. You seem half dazed,
man ; don’t you intend to turn up to-night ? ”
129 I


“No,” Bex answered, almost fiercely. “I’m more
inclined for bed.”
“ What nonsense ! Just listen to that thunder, and
how it rains ! Some of the chaps are predicting a flood.
Come, they are expecting you.”
“ Suppose I should say that I won’t come.”
“ Suppose nothing of the kind, or I shall begin to
think you are suffering from religious mania, or some-
thing of the sort, too absurd to be connected with
Mr Gwynne! Are you coming ? ”
“ Oh, I suppose so, but only for a while; my head
is stupid, and I’ll not stay as long as I did last
night."
o
“ Oh, no; we all overdid it. I’m getting stumped up,
pumped dry, sir. I told Nolan to-day that if my luck
didn’t turn soon, there’d be a sensational case of
embezzlement at the ‘London Chartered,’ and I
wouldn’t be taken alive! ”
“ Don’t, Dick ; I hate that sort of talk.”
“ It’s all very well to say ‘ Don’t, Dick.’ I haven’t
paid a bill for six months, hoping, Micawber-like, for
‘something to turn up.’ That last fraud of friend
Vaughn’s cleared me out, and he takes care he gets
paid, whoever goes without. It costs something to
keep those champagne suppers going, and my lady’s
silk dresses, and diamond rings, and the like.”
“ You are bitter, old man.”
«Am I ? God knows I have cause. I was right
enough before I fell into their hands. Bitter ? Yes, I


feel bitter enough at times, I can assure you,” with a
sad recklessness that went straight to his friend’s
heart. “I was brought up with notions of honesty,
and like to pay my way with any man. And yet,
what is a fellow to do ? We get wretched screws, we
bank clerks, wretched enough to make us envy a
despised ‘ counter jumper ’; and we must dress as if
we had plenty of money, and live in a certain way—
and the long and short of it is, we can’t.”
“ Cut it, Dick.” And Dick knew what the it
“ I can’t,” he said, with passionate earnestness. “ I
tell you it’s not ordinary fascination with me. I know
it’s wrong—and yet I go night after night! You
heard Vaughn say that I was the best billiard player
in Hurlstone ? he might have said, too, as cunning a
hand at whist, and euchre, as the oldest here; and it
would have been truth. Give it up ?—never! ”
Oh, Dick, Dick, such a boy; such a pure young
face, and such utter despair! How many hundreds
from sheltered Christian homes are so terribly like.
“ After this, do you expect me to go with you
to-night, Norris?”
I would go if you didn’t. There is always the
chance, you know.”
“ Is there no other way, Dick, boy—at present, I
mean ? ”
A red flush crept into the pale face, and he drew
himself up proudly.


“ I’m not quite as bad as that yet. Oh no, I can
accept no loan from even my friend; if I win to-night
—that is different. If I were free as you are,
perhaps ”
“Free ? ”
Mr Gwynne uttered the word so harshly that he
started.
“Dick, lam fettered as you can never be. You
have never heard me mention my father s name—it is
because he ruined my faith in goodness, ruined my
prospects, disgraced me. He was such a clever rogue
that he escaped punishment, and, but for his ability,
would be living now at the cost of the Government.
That is how free I am, trembling to hear each day
that his retreat will be discovered, working by day,
and speculating by night, to wipe off some of the debts
he has left me as a legacy —do you wonder I am hard ?
I have had to give up ambition, everything, and I
don’t care now what becomes of my life. I’d give
worlds to help you, but I am afraid my friendship has
done you more harm than I can ever undo. ’
He was terribly agitated, and Dick caught his
breath sharply.
“Don’t talk bunkum,” he said, huskily. “I value
your friendship more than anything I possess, and it’s
awfully good of you to have told me what you have.
I think, somehow, we’d better go right on home.”
But Kex shook his head impatiently.
»If I went now, I should go mad, I think; I want


to forget for a few hours. Come, Dick.” And so
they went!
Was it an hour or two, or a lifetime, that had
passed, when he once more stood in the street, with
the cool breeze fanning his flushed face ? His brain was
throbbing with fierce excitement, but his conscience
no longer accused him. His heart was dead, he told
himself, drearily. And now he must go home to
Eric.
The sweet, fresh air, with a fragrance as of crushed
flowers in its breath, blew in gentle gusts, and he
threw back his hat to let it play against his temples.
And above, in the clear, storm-spent sky, the stars
glistened coldly, brightly.
Once he hurried his steps as a buggy dashed past,
and by the light of a street lamp he recognised Dr
Cranston.
A hot wave of colour rushed over his face as he
saw that other, so pale and tired, the frank, true eyes
weary as from a long vigil, and realised the difference.
A bright, merry life, spent for others! And
his 1
“ It is hard to keep from wishing that Mr Gwynue
had never come to Hurlstoue.”
Should they go away from it all, he and Eric ?
He had stopped at his lodgings now, and, applying
his latch-key, let himself in, walking with quiet,


stealthy steps into the room where he had left his
weary boy—still with that noiseless tread.
A low, bitter cry—and the little trembling figure
perched on the window-sill turned its big, terrified
eyes to his.
“ Eric, lad, what is it ? ”
He lit the candle, and its light showed him the
white face blanched with horror, the dark lashes wet
with tears.
Ah, yes, he knew now.
The child suffered agonies of terror at every
lightning flash, grew pale and agitated with each
thunder-clap—and he had left him alone for hours to
endure the awful storm— alone —and in the darkness !
This is what it will do, this harmless card-playing
This, and much, much more !
Ah, Eex, vows are easily made—nothing could
induce you to neglect Eric—nothing!
He sickened now at the thought of what those long
hours nmst have held, and bit his lips to keep back
the groan that came choking up from his very heart,
as he lifted the light burden into his arms, and felt it
cling to him, and shake with heavy sobs.
With a woman’s gentleness he rested the weak head
on his shoulder, and wrapped the warm bed quilt
around the cold, trembling limbs.
“ Little chap,” he said, soothingly, “ Eex has you;
come, lad, it’s all over now.”
And until the morning dawned he sat on with the


child —sleeping now —one thin arm stretched up and
tightly clasping his neck, a pitiful, quivering sigh
parting the red lips now and then, as if, even
in dreams, the fears of the night were lived over
again.
“It should never happen again,” he told himself,
fiercely; “ never ! ”
“ And so, Dame Durden, you are going to lose your
friend.”
It was a week after that all memorable night, and
in that time much had happened.
Dr Cranston, leaning back in his chair, with the
cool, evening breeze playing with his thick, bright hair,
looked, Una thought, unusually tired and grave almost
to sadness.
“ Yes,” she said, soberly, “ her application has been
accepted, and there will be a vacancy in about three
months.”
“ And so they are going quite soon ? We shall miss
them, little woman.”
“ Can you imagine Mona as a hospital nurse, Jack ? ”
“ Quite easily.”
“ I thought at first, with Harold being sc unsettled,
that it might alter their plans, but Mona says he will
study for his B.A degree, and by that time he may
have made up his mind.”
“To be sure. And I fancy they hope that if he


gets away from influences here that have harmed
him, things may be different. Are you going inside,
Jack ? ”
“No, my dear, I thought I heard Aunt Jean
coming.”
“ She is dozing in the dining-room.”
He reseated himself with a little sigh that didn’t
escape her notice, but smiled brightly as she looked
inquiringly in his direction.
“ When is the conference to begin ? I thought I
was invited to a very confidential discussion to-night,
and here I am, no patients to distract, tired enough to
be as sentimental as you desire, and ready to listen.
Fire ahead, Una ! ”
“ I’ve been thinking,” she began, and then stopped.
“ Honour bright ? ” he said, quizzically.
“ Auntie was speaking quite seriously to me this
morning about going back to Scotland.”
“ Just so.”
“ It seems that Cousin Douglas is very anxious that
she should make her home with him. And fancy,
Jack, she has known of this for a long time, but
would not speak of it till I got quite strong.”
“ Bless her old heart,” said Jack, emphatically.
“ And now that that time has come, she thinks it
will be better for her to go.”
“ Well, Una ? ”
“ Of course, we shall miss her dreadfully, hut I think
it would be selfish to wish to keep her.”


“ I am sure of it.”
“And all these changes made me think of—of
something’ else, and I wanted to ask you a very plain
question.”
“ Trot ahead, little lady.”
But the question seemed hard to ask. She leaned
a little forward, her beautiful eyes looking pleadingly
into his.
“ I have thought sometimes lately that a time might
come, when—you would want a home of your own.”
“ My dear child, what an idea ! ”
“ And I wanted you to promise me, that if ever that
time did come, if it had come, Jack, that you would
not let me stand in your way. I should never forgive
myself if any misunderstanding ” And then she
broke down in a little confusion.
He had flushed almost painfully, and then paled,
and the brave eyes took on a look of quiet sadness.
“ See here, my child, you are tangling all sorts of
ideas in that sunny head of yours. I have no desire
to change my sister for a wife. And beside,” he said,
with a gay laugh, “ no one would put up with me, you
have spoiled me so terribly. Now it is my mind to
cross-examine, and prevaricate if you dare.”
Something in the shy, confused face brought an
amused smile to his lips, and he said, mischievously;
“We have left one thing out of our calculations
altogether, and that a very important item. Is there
a fear of my little charge running away from me ? ”


“ Oh no, Jack.”
“ I’m not so sure of that,
“Jack! ”
“What a whole army of indignant exclamation
points. Firstly: Do you think you are treating
Muir fairly?”
“I—l don’t understand, Jack. I haven’t even seen
him for a long time.”
“-Do you know why ? ”
“Jack, there is no need for linn to come now, of
course.”
“ Begging the question, my lady; answer me this
now. Did you ever fancy he cared for any one ? ”
“ I thought once he cared for Mona; then, again,
that I was mistaken.”
“ You were mistaken.”
“ And besides, Jack—there was the young lady in
England.”
“ Whoever told you that ? Poor, unfortunate Muir !
No, it is not a young lady in England, it is a young
lady in Australia.”
Here he made a telling pause, and waited the effect
of his words.
“ Does she care for him ? ”
“ I think she does; he is afraid not, but I hope he is
mistaken. Una, I told you before I felt sentimental;
do you feel inclined to hear a love story ? not my own,
Dame Durden, but Alan’s. She was a poor, suffering,
little thing when he first knew her, and at one time


he feared she would always be so. He spent every
minute of his hard-worked time to study her case ;
gave unwearying attention and constant care, denying
himself sleep and rest in order to leave no remedy
untried. He did this, Una, because he had given her
the whole love of his big, true heart, his first and
only love. He would have borne any pain cheerfully
that she might have ease, and by and by God blessed
his skill, and answered his prayers more fully than
he had ever dared to hope. She got better, Una, but
she lost her old gentle manner, and became cold and
distant; it was hard, wasn’t it ? ”
The bright head sank, till it rested upon two
trembling little hands.
“ Perhaps, Jack, it was hard for her too.
“ Perhaps so. Perhaps in her foolish little heart
she has taken a great deal of notice of what people
say—because she knows that though strength has
come, there may be many times when she will need
the tender care he longs to give her; but if he wants
to do that, I think she ought to let him, don’t you ? ”
“I think—she will, Jack.”
“ And I think the story will be finished to-night,”
he said, as quick, light steps sounded on the gravel
path, “ though by another narrator.”
He had greeted his friend laughingly, then dis-
appeared, and Dr Muir stood, looking very tall and
ill at ease, in the moonlight.
It was Una who broke the silence.


“ I think Jack fancies that—that you have thought
me ungrateful,” she began, falteringly ; but he stopped
her in a quick, pained way.
“ Don’t speak of gratitude,” he said, his face paling ;
“ whatever I have done, I have done because I loved
you. I can’t tell you in words how dear you are to
me, but I think I could show you if you would let me
try. All, Una, if you only could.”
She lifted her eyes to his with an almost childlike
trust.
“ You have shown me already,” she said, gently. “ I
owe you my life, and, if you care to have it, you may.”
“ And your heart, dear ?
“ I am afraid,” she said, quaintly, “ that you have
had that all along.”
O
“ So the story is finished,” said Jack, a few minutes
later, “ and happily. Una, what do you think I heard
as I came inside ? I considered it most auspicious.
The dining-room was in darkness, and, as I trod care-
fully in, a voice came from the gloom, murmuring
softly, Knit two together. And I couldn’t persuade
Aunt Jean that she had been asleep.”


CHAPTER XIY.
“WHEREAS I WAS BLIND.
“Then she took up her burden of life again, saying only, ‘ It might
have been.’” Whittiee.
“ Your life lies out before you like a field
Wherein you have but paced a little way :
What matter if you stumbled ? stand upright,
Pass by the grave where you have wept enough,
Pass it and leave your tender thoughts upon it,
Your faithful memories, your gracious flowers ;
But not your hopes, but not your living self!
Go on to better joys.” Miss Smedley.
“ Welcome to these ancestral halls for the last time,
said Mona, with a flourish ; “ inside you’ll find con-
fusion worse confounded. Come, Dame Dm den, I
want to have a good long talk.
They went slowly up the path together, in at the
open door, and Una looked round at the dismantled
room with a little sigh.
“It looks pretty bad, doesn’t it ? ruminated Mona,
with her head very much on one side.
“ It looks like—going,” said Una, slowly.


“ Forbidden ground, my lady. No tear is to be shed
this afternoon, not an allusion to the ‘ flitting ’ that is
to create such a stir in Hurlstone. And, after all, we
are not leaving for a fortnight. Try this chair; in a
few days it will be going, going, gone! Comfortable ? ”
“ Very.”
“That’s right, but you shouldn’t have said it so
soberly. Let our last long afternoon be a real merry
one ; one that we can look back to for years to come.
Now, my dear!” for Una’s eyes were full of tears.
“ Mona, I can’t feel glad about it.”
“ I don’t want you to.”
She had brought a low stool to her friend’s side, and
now looked up brightly.
“You know, Melbourne is not such a long way off.
I shall often see you, and my first holidays shall be
spent with Mrs Alan Muir, if she will invite me.
Bless the child, what roses ! ”
“ Were you very much surprised, Mona ? ”
“ Not a bit.”
“ I used to think, that—that the happiness which
came to other girls would never be mine; such a poor
little creature I was in those days. I always pictured
a bright future for you.”
Oh, the dreariness of the face that was turned to hers.
“ That will never be, my dear.”
Una bent, and touched the dark head with her lips.
“ Don’t you think it would make it easier if you told
Una all aboutTt ? ” she said, gently.


“ Easier ? Oh, Dame Durden, it is so hard.”
“ I know.”
“ Perhaps if I had been like other girls, I might have
told you; it was no want of trust, Una.”
“ I am quite sure of that.”
“ You know his life—such a wasted one.”
“ He cares for you, Mona ? ”
“If words mean anything—yes. If actions, no.
Ah, Una, it’s a very poor kind of love.”
“ Poor indeed.”
“ And I mean to be very happy in my hospital life,
so you mustn’t be sorry for me.”
“ And you are really going to be at the Homeopathic
Hospital ? lam so glad.”
“Of course you are; you are an out and out homeo-
pathist these days. I expect you to turn into a second
Mrs Derrick, and be quoting ‘ the doctor ’ on all
occasions. Don’t shake your head so wisely, Una ; you
will. Only, in this case, there is excuse ; you certainly
have somebody to be proud of.”
Well, it was a merry afternoon after all, despite its
sombre beginning ; and when Harold came in from the
cricket ground, looking boyishly handsome in his
cricketing flannels, the fun began in earnest.
“We beat the‘lmps’ all to smithereens,” he said,
tossing off his cap, and mopping his flushed face; “ they
did look small; they brought up a lot of beggars
to see their victory, and we beat them by 180
runs.”


“We ? How many did you contribute, master
Harold ? ”
“ Thirty,” he returned, promptly. “ Kent was bowl-
ing—their crack bowler—he’s a perfect beast for hard
balls. Any letters this afternoon ? ”
“ One from mother. She is coming back the day
after to-morrow. She has seen a house in Prahran
that she thinks will suit us.”
“ Bravo for her ! ”
“ What have you done to your hand ? ”
“Only a scratch,” he said, looking carelessly at
one of his fingers; “ there’s no need to apply the
tourniquet.”
“So I perceive; but how did you manage it ? it’s a
nasty cut.”
“ Tried to bat with my hand instead of the willow.
Mona, you mightn’t believe it, but I’m hungry.”
“It is hard to credit,” she said, mournfully; “ your
appetite has fallen off sadly of late, my poor boy.
Come along, and make yourself useful by building up
a good fire in the stove.”
“ Oh, of course, you’ve let it go out while you were
gossiping here! Oh, you girls! ”
“ If you don’t fly round I won’t make any pancakes
for tea.”
“ Pancakes ! Why didn’t you tell me before ? I’d
have had the fire in a roar by this time.”
“ Hurry up then. Una, the kitchen is positively the
only furnished room in the house ; most of the things


are packed; shall we be very improper, and have tea
there ? ”
“ Of course we will,” said Harold, springing up and
leading the way ; “ tea in the kitchen! What would
Mrs Vaughn say ? ”
The fire was soon crackling and glowing in the stove
box, and Mona moved quickly about, beating up eggs,
and milk, and flour, till the whole presented a yellow,
creamy appearance.
“ JTist right,” she pronounced at last.
“ Harold, stop offering useless suggestions, and stir
yourself a little.”
“ And so, as I was saying, Una,” he went on, com-
posedly, “they disdained my humble sendees, and
insisted on sending for your brother, who reduced the
fracture—which was, as I pronounced it, a compound,
comminuted one.”
“ Good gracious, Harold, what are you talking
about ?”
“ And—you’re very rude to interrupt, Mona—com-
plimented me on the temporary splint I had used.”
“Do you mean to say there was an accident at that
wretched match to-day ? ”
“ Am I not just telling you as fast as I can ? ”
“ Who was it ? ”
“Who was what? Your interrogations are decidedly
vague, my dear.”
“ Who was hurt, of course ? ”
“Ho of course at all. Norris had a bit of a smash up.”


“ Dick ? Was he hurt badly ? ”
“Fractured humerus, and a slight contusion.”
“ Come now, little boy, you’ve said your lesson very
nicely; don’t get beyond your depth.”
The “little boy” favoured her with a withering
glance of scorn, and they all sat down to tea.
No, they weren’t a bit prim ; I am quite sure the
cups were not the best china, and the family silver—l
have Mona’s authority for this—was packed ; but you
wouldn’t believe how they enjoyed themselves, or how
delicious those terribly unfashionable pancakes tasted !
Harold passed his plate for a fourth helping, and
remarked, carelessly—
-7 o
“ I’ve got a piece of news for you.’
“ Well ? ”
“After mature deliberation, I’ve decided that I’ll
make an ordinarily good ‘sawbones,’ and that the
Collins Street practice is looming in the distance.”
“ Harold! ”
“ Fact, my dear ! ”
Then there was an embarrassing silence. Harold
broke it, rather nervously.
“ Don’t overwhelm me; if anyone is to be thanked,
it’s Mr Gwynne.”
“ Mr Gwynne ? ”
“ I knew you’d look like that; but it’s the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth.”
“ But I don’t understand,” began Mona, slowly.
“ Oh, there is not much to be understood; we had a


yarn to-day, and he talked like a father to me. Had
fancied sometimes that things he had said had
unsettled me, and that whatever he might say, he
regarded a doctor with a good deal more reverence
than he did a minister, which last he hoped I’d never
be. And he thought, on the whole, I ought to go in
for it in dead earnest. So, the long and short of it is,
I’m more than half pleased. But you ought to have
seen his face when I told him you were going to the
Homeo.”
“It does not matter in the least to me what he
looked like.”
“ There you go again,” he said, airily ; “ talk about a
‘ red rag to a bull.’ However, it’s a good thing you feel
like that, for he expressed his opinions very decidedly.”
“ That was like him,” she said, coldly, though her
eyes were blazing.
“ He doesn’t approve of ladies taking up that sort of
work at all”
“ Such disapproval would be proudly gained by one
‘ lady ’ I know.”
“ Oh, I knew you would feel like that; shall I tell
you what he said ? ”
“ As you please,” she answered, indifferently.
“ That—and you know the way his lip curls, Mona
—he thought Miss Leigh was above the romantic
sentimentalism which induced girls to leave comfort-
able homes, to don a picturesque uniform, and adorn
a hospital ward.”


“You may tell him,” she said, scornfully, “that I
will wear my uniform proudly, and that it will matter
very little what strangers say or think as long as I do
nothing to make me unworthy of it.”
“ I think,” said Harold, with an elaborate whistle,
“well adjourn, and take a little fresh air on the
verandah. I believe, if Mr Jarndyce were here he
would discover an ‘ east wind.’ ”
The night was very still, scarcely a breath stirred,
and the footsteps of the passers by sounded sharply
and clearly on the asphalt.
Harold had left them together, and was chatting
over the gate with an acquaintance ; and in the un-
certain light, Una could see Mona’s face, so pale, so
full of suffering.
o
She turned suddenly.
“ 1 Eomantic sentimentalism ’! Una, I’m proud, and
it hurts. I don’t think,” with a pitiful little quiver in
her voice, “ I could have borne it much longer.”
' O
“No; it is much better that you are going away.
Mona—in time—isn’t it possible, that if some one
worthy ”
“ How oddly you hesitate, little lady. Una, I will tell
you something. There is someone more than worthy ;
noble and good, as far above me as the stars are above
this beautiful cruel world, and I have had to pain him
to make him suffer as I suffer. I think he is one of
the best men I have ever met, and I have done this.
If it could be otherwise, I should be very happy, but


it can never, never, be; my dear, you understand
now."
“ I understand,” said Una, slowly.
“ I think I have realised for the first time to-night
that we are really going.”
“ You will feel it, Mona ?
“ Yes,” she said, steadily. “ I love the old place dearly,
Listen, Una, whatever are all those whistles blow-
ing for ? ”
A sudden shrill sound had pierced the tranquil air;
a whistle, clear and loud, that was joined by others in
a deafening chorus, sharp and distinct, with the
ominous jump in them that told to the initiated the
dread tale of an accident at the mines.
As if by magic the streets filled with hurrying feet,
the listless saunterers joined in the excited run, as the
crowd surged up the hill and circled round one point, \
Mona’s face was very pale, but she spoke reassuringly.
“Don’t be frightened, Una, there can’t be anything
wrong ; the folk here go mad with excitement at times.
At most it will be a fire, and we shall soon hear the
bell tolling. I will get Hal to run and see what is
wrong.” But Harold had gone.
The hot night grew hotter and stiller, the moon rose
copper red, and the shadows, cast by the trees, lay dark
and motionless across the street.
God help the widowed hearts for whom night was
just beginning!
The crowd was surging back now, and little knots


of twos and threes broke off here and there, talking, for
the most part, in low, awed tones.
At last Harold came, and with him Dr Cranston;
and Una, looking into her brother’s pale, agitated face,
felt that something terrible had occurred to move
him so.
But she did not know till the morning of the
appalling catastrophe in the mine which had sent
three stalwart men into eternity, and fatally injured
another.
A tiny cottage, with small, close rooms, the lights
burning brightly, though it was past midnight; the
front door thrown wide open to catch the faintest
breeze. She had waited for him so, many a time ! But
the heavy steps would never come up the gravel
path again.
The flowers in the garden were disordered, crushed
under the feet that had carried their burden in some
hours ago, and the bruised fragrance crept through the
window, and died in the heated air.
Inside, everything was in confusion, things tossed
carelessly about, in a hurried search for something; the
painful air of agitation reflected in the white face and
wide, bright eyes of a sick girl, who could only lie and
suffer, while others did. An unspoken horror was in
her face, her senses on the alert for any sound that
might come from the room opposite, her lips trembling
to shape the eager question, “ Any better ? ” when


one of the watchers chanced to leave the miner’s
side.
Once Dr Muir stole out, with a quiet, compassionate
face, and a steady touch on the shaking hand.
“ Try not to fret,” he said, with a great pity in his
%
voice.
Then, in answer to the piteous entreaty, “ Oh, he
suffers much less, he is resting quite quietly.”
“ If I could only see him just for a minute.
“ Poor child ! ”
Then with noiseless step he passed through the door,
and bent over the figure on the bed with his finger on
the feeble wrist.
Ah, it was far, far better she couldn’t see that poor
mutilated form, with its scarred face, and bandaged,
sightless eyes. The most vivid imagination could
paint nothing like this!
“ He’s begging for water,” the poor wife said, looking
appealingly into the grave young face that she had tried
to read so often that terrible evening ; and she watched,
with hungry eagerness, the hands that did their work
so skilfully. “Do you think it will hurt him ? ”
His pitiful eyes told her that he was past being
hurt with anything now ; but her shaking arms steadied
themselves to carry the coveted drink, and her poor
lips shaped themselves into a brave smile, as she passed
her cripple girl’s couch.
And now the man was speaking in a weak, gasping
voice.


“ You mustn’t fret,Emmy,you nor the girl; it’s better
—than being blind.”
“Oh, far better, John; I’m—l’m not fretting, dear.”
“ I knowed at once I was done for—you’ll let me
speak, doctor—it —won’t be much ? ”
“ Yes, my poor fellow ; there, that is easier, is it not?”
Ah, how tender were the hands that lifted the
injured head.
“ If I’d lived blind, I shouldn’t have been much good ;
now, some one will look after you and the child.
You’re sure I’ll see—there—doctor ? ”
“ Quite sure.”
“ I haven’t done anything to deserve it, but I think
it will be all right; ‘ gifts for the rebellious also,’ you
said ? and—l didn’t catch that other verse.”
“ ‘ "Whereas I was blind, now I see.
“ Yes, that’s it, and—its worth—going.”
Dr Muir beckoned the wife to come nearer, and she
knelt quietly down, and laid her head against his
weak hand. And so they waited waited till a
wondering smile parted the dry lips ; a wondering,
radiant smile.
“ Why, Emmy ! Whereas I was—blind—now I
And saying so, he saw !


CHAPTER XV.
“ WHAT THEN?”
‘ ‘ Perhaps in some long twilight hour,
Like those we have known of old,
"When past shadows gather round you,
And your present friends grow cold ;
“ You may stretch'your hands out towards me, —
Ah ! you will —I know not when—
I shall nurse my love, and keep it
Faithfully for you till then.”
Adelaide Anne Procter,
“ The world’s turning upside down,” quoth Dick
Morris, as he sauntered into Mr Gwynne’s sitting-
room one close evening.
“ That’s original, certainly. How’s the arm ? ”
“As comfortable as broken arms are generally, I
suppose. How hot you are in here !”
“ You’re blue, Dick.”
“ Brilliant ultramarine, deeply, darkly, desperately
blue.”
“ And the cause ? ”
“Is there ever a cause ? I’ve got a presentiment.”


Moonshine, my dear fellow ! ”
I’ve got to shift my diggings, Eex.”
You don’t mean that, surely ? ”
I do, though.”
When and where ? ”
“ Melbourne ; and as soon as my arm lets me.”
He had seated himself on the extreme edge of the
table, dangling his legs moodily, and rapping with his
uninjured hand the pile of papers his friend was
bending over.
“ Why don’t you leave the wretched things alone ? ”
he asked, almost testily. “ I thought you were
supposed to be having holidays ? ”
“From school yes; but I am coaching Harry
Lester for the University exam., and these are some
exercises he has sent me.”
“ Put them away, and come for a stroll; we shan’t
have many more together.”
“ Don’t get sentimental, Dick.”
“ It’s enough to make any one sentimental,” he
grumbled ; “ like that immortal namesake of mine, Dick
Swiveller, ‘ ’Twas ever thus from childhood’s hour ’”
“ Spare us the rest.”
“ Gwynne, you haven’t said once that you are sorry
I am going.”
“ Do you think there is any need to say it, Dick ? ”
“No; I believe you’ll miss me a bit. Of course, it
means promotion, but I don’t like leaving old Hurl-
stone.”


“ And I would give everything I possess to turn my
back on it for ever.”
“ Hope on, old man, something will turn up.”
“ In ten years’ time, perhaps.”
“ You’re the blue one now. I met Dolly just
now. What a fool the fellow is; I’m morally certain
he is going to propose to Mona to-night.”
“ Rubbish.”
“ Don’t you make too sure; he’s going to see her,
any way. I’d like to hear the fun, and see his royal
highness after he gets his conge!'
“ Suppose he doesn’t get it.”
“What? Mona Leigh take that empty headed
idiot? Not much!” declared Dick, with withering
scorn. “ You don’t know her as well as I do.”
“ Possibly not; certainly not well enough to answer
for any action she might take.”
“ Sits the wind in that quarter ? ” mused Dick to
himself. Then aloud, “ Did you hear Mrs Vaughn’s
latest about Mona ? ”
No.” The word seemed shot from Mr Gwynne’s
“ It was so preposterous that I felt inclined to tell
her she was lying.”
“ What a pity you didn’t, Dick.”
“ It was just a hint—she never does more than
insinuate anything—that it did look strange that the
Leighs should decide to leave Hurlstone so hurriedly
right on top of Dr Muir’s engagement being made


public—what’s the matter, are you ill ? ” For the
face opposite him was white to the lips, and the eyes
w r ere blazing.
“ 111 ? no. On second thoughts, Dick, I’ll come for
a stroll; this room is fairly stifling.”
“ Where’s the little chap ? ”
“ Asleep.”
Then he took his hat, and they went out together.
“Did you know that Vaughn had sent a twenty
pound note anonymously to the accident relief fund ? ”
This Dick Norris said as they strode along.
“ I believe I saw something about it in the paper
this morning.”
“ That’s just it; it’s hard to say how the right hand
finds out, isn’t it ? Vaughn’s right member is a pretty
’cute one.”
“ I can cap your quotation with a better,” Rex said,
bitterly. “ ‘ And men will praise thee, when thou
doest well to thyself.’ ”
“ So you do read the Bible occasionally, my friend ? ”
“ Not at all,” was the curt reply; “ that was a lesson
well inculcated by an affectionate father, and never
forgotten.”
“ I can quite imagine that. * Rex, I had a letter from
home this morning, and it made me feel a brute.”
“Not an unusual sensation with me.”
“ And yet,” mused Dick, innocently, “ you are such
a strong willed beggar. I often wonder you don’t turn
over a new leaf; you could, you know.”


Mr Gwynne started as if stung.
“Father used to say,” went on Dick, “ that in some
respects it was well for any one to realise the weakness
of their will, for then they relied more upon God.
That is, of course ” —confusedly—“ fellows who want to
be good, and all the rest of it; it doesn’t seem to work
with me.”
“Dick, I believe you’d be a ‘good fellow,’ as you
call it, but for me; you may get on better when we
are separated.”
“ Shut up that now ! ” answered poor Dick, fiercely;
“ goodness knows what I’ll drift to in town; I don’t.”
Eex sighed heavily.
“ But for Eric’s sake—you won’t think I am trying
to preach, will you ? Of course, he will grow up some-
time, and—and—oh, confound it, you don’t want him
to turn out like us—mg, anyway,” he finished, in great
confusion.
“ That will never be.
“ I don’t know, I’m sure; he thinks the world of
you, and ”
“ Oh, Dick, Eric will be away from me long before
that time.”
An odd lump rose in the boy’s throat.
“ Dr Muir spoke very frankly to me the other day.
In addition to fearful constitutional weakness, there
is a threatening of hip disease.”
“ Bosh ! ” said Dick, gruffly; “ doctors are the biggest
croakers unhung. I wouldn’t believe a word of it.”


“ But if I have to ? ”
“Time enough then. Take my word for it, there
is no such thing as ‘ preparing for the worst ’; all the
fretting in the world doesn’t prepare you, and you’ve
had the getting ready for nothing. Youngsters are
often delicate; they thought I was too frail to bud
into a flower, and look at me now—a bank clerk with
—not a wooden leg, certainly—but what’s equivalent,
a broken arm. Poor old Silas Wegg. I say,” stopping
short, suddenly, “ I’ve had a thought.”
“ Well ? ”
“ I more than half promised Harold Leigh to drop
in for a few minutes this evening to say good-bye;
you know, they’re off in a day or two.”
Mr Gwynne paused irresolutely.
“‘ He who hesitates is lost,’ ” said Dick, gaily; “ let’s
go and hear Dolly’s fate. Come, we shan’t have
many more chances.”
And so they went.
“ But you know, Mr Hearne, all Australians don’t
talk slang.”
Yes, it had ended that way; poor “ Dolly’s ” castle
had tumbled about his ears, and his elaborately pre-
pared “declaration” had been quietly put aside for
a discussion on the relative merits of England and
Australia.
I find I have said very little about Adolphus


Hearne, 8.A., simply because there is so very little
indeed that could be said.
He dressed most expensively, and had those two
magical letters after his name; what more could any-
one desire ?
Nevertheless, he had enough in him to have fallen
very genuinely in love with Mona Leigh, and had
called upon her that evening to acquaint her with the
fact.
“ Rarely ” he began, in answer to Mona’s
assertion, and then stopped short.
“Excuse me, Mr Hearne, if you hadn’t been so
scathing in your criticisms on our small peculiarities,
I would not have ventured to mention it; but are you
aware of the fact that you invariably say rarely for
really ? Is it English ? or have you contracted the
habit out here ? ”
“Rarely ” began her victim again; but she
broke out into a merry peal of laughter.
He eyed her gloomily.
“ There is a great difference, of course. lam sure the
cultured Australians compare favourably with ”
“With any other natives,” she said, with dancing
eyes. “ Don’t be afraid to speak plainly, Mr Hearne;
but, as I said before, we don’t all say ‘ tike ’ for take,
or a few other of the elegancies of expression or pro-
nunciation we are credited with.”
And just then the gate clicked, and two figures
came up the path together. It was light enough to


see their faces, and Mona uttered an exclamation of
pleasure.
“ Dick! lam glad to see you,” she said, warmly; “ this
does bring back old times. Mother, here is Dick.”
But she only vouchsafed his companion a cold,
trembling hand, and a brief, troubled glance.
“Am I to have no welcome ? ” he said, with sudden
bitterness, as Dick, catching sight of Mrs Leigh, had
bounded forward to meet her.
“It was good of you to come,” she said, simply; and
so they joined the others. In truth, it would have
been a very silent group but for Dick, who, in his
pleasure at being received again on his old familiar
footing, rattled away merrily enough, teasing Mr
Hearne till he was well-nigh distracted, and making
himself decidedly at home in his own easy manner.
“ And, you know,” he broke in, gaily, once, “ I mean
to haimt you in town; it will be quite refreshing to
know the same city holds us both. Glorious place,
Melbourne; isn’t it, Hearne ? beats London all to fits.”
Poor “ Dolly ” fairly gasped at the irreverence, and
floundered about for a withering retort, when Mona
came to the rescue.
“ You must -moderate your enthusiasm, Dick,” she
said, mischievously; “if you get Mr Hearne to allow
that they are equal, it is as much as you can expect.”
“ Do they allow followers at the Homeo., Mona ? ”
Adolphus gasped again.
But Dick went on, nothing daunted.


“I’ll look you up sometimes on your ‘day off’;”
which last was too much for the English gentleman’s
composure.
“Do you mean to say,” he said, sitting bolt upright,
and roused for once into something like strong feeling,
“ that you will have ‘ days off,’ as Norris puts it ? ”
“ Very much off,” said Dick, under his breath.
“ Many of them, I hope,” said smiling Mona.
“ Like —like a common servant girl; no, rarely, Miss
Leigh, you are joking.”
“ Perhaps you are unaware of the fact,” she said,
honestly indignant now, “ that the majority of nurses
are gentle folk, both by birth and education ; some of
the truest ladies I have ever known have been hospital
nurses, and I think their noble work alone entitles
them to be spoken of with reverence and respect by
all true gentlemen.”
“ Hear, hear,” said Dick; “ consider yourself silenced,
Mr Hearne. And I congratulate you, Nurse Leigh,
both on the calling you have embraced—or is it pro-
fession ? I’m rather hazy on these nice points of
distinction—and also on the hospital you have chosen.”
What a pity the moonlight was not bright enough
to reveal the pink colour in her face, as her old boyish
favourite gave her her new title.
She answered him merrily:
“ Why so ? ”
“ I went to see a friend of mine once who was in
there with a broken leg; he said he’d had quite a jolly


time, and the ward was a perfect picture. I nearly
came a cropper on the floor though; it’s as smooth as
glass.”
“ Ah, my friend, it takes a good amount of elbow
grease to arrive at that state of polish and slipperi-
ness; the waxing is one of the hardest parts of a
nurse’s work.”
“ But you will not have to do that ? ” Strong
disgust was again visible in Mr Hearue’s voice.
“ Indeed I shall; why not ? ”
“ Preposterous! ”
Mona’s eyes twinkled wickedly.
Mr Gwynne had drawn apart a little, and was
talking quietly with Mrs Leigh, but not a word
escaped him.
Dick ventured a query.
“ Did you ever see the Homeo., Hearne ? ”
“ The—what ? ”
“ The Homeo.—Homeopathic Hospital, you know ;
everyone calls it that.”
“ Homeopathic Hospital ? ” he said, stiffly ; “ I wasn’t
aware there was such an institution in Melbourne.”
“Xo ? What deplorable ignorance! ”
“ Are the doctors attending it legally qualified men ? ”
“ Oh, Mr Hearne! Why, some of the cleverest
physicians in Melbourne are its honorary doctors, not
to mention those resident; legally qualified, indeed! ”
“ Deal gently with him,” said irrepressible Dick
“ like Eosa Dartle, he merely ‘ asks for information.’ ”


But Mr Hearne’s next query, to use a hackneyed
expression, “ brought down the house.”
“ I suppose,” he ventured with supreme contempt,
“ they treat only very simple cases; never have broken
limbs or the like ? ”
And then they all laughed so merrily that he
became suddenly aware that he had made an exceed-
ingly silly remark.
Sadly, and with a visible diminution of the pompous
dignity which he considered it necessary to affect at
all times, he made early excuse for taking his leave, a
fact, I am bound to say, which gave great satisfaction
to those remaining.
Mona, standing at the end of the verandah, looking
a little wistfully across the shadowy scene, so soon
to be only a memory, started, as a voice sounded in
her ear.
“ I suppose, Miss Leigh, you have wondered why I
have never said anything about this quixotic move of
yours ? ”
Her eyes darkened angrily.
“ I do not know that you have hitherto considered
it necessary to show special interest in my concerns.”
“ Have I not ? ” he said, very gently; “ I thought I
had.”
“ That, I think, Mr GWynne, was never to be
referred to again.”
He started, and replied frigidly
“You need not fear that I shall offend you again.


I had my answer and accepted it. As you say, that is
a subject best dropped.”
“ And in reference to the other, this ‘ quixotic move ’
of mine, it is possible that I do know what you think
about it.”
“ Possible, but hardly likely.”
You see he had forgotten those few carelessly spoken
words to Harold, so little a part of himself had they
been.
“ Nevertheless, I am perfectly acquainted with your
expressed words on this subject.”
“Pardon me, Miss Leigh, I really do not com-
prehend.”
“No? That is singular. I believe I could almost
repeat your words.”
“ Kindly do so,” he returned, briefly and haughtily.
“‘ I thought Miss Leigh was above the romantic
sentimentalism which induces girls to leave comfort-
able homes, to don a becoming uniform and adorn
a hospital ward.’ You see I have a very correct
memory.”
“ You have indeed,” he said, bitterly.
“It hurt me at the time cruelly, for the work is
very dear to me.”
“ And now ? ”
“We are going away, and I want to leave the place
we have lived in so many years without any hard
feeling towards—”
“ Even me ? ”


No answer, but he saw the white hands clasp and
unclasp nervously. A sudden wistful expression crept
into his eyes.
“ That is more than I deserve, and I thank you for
it. I think it would have been better if you and I
had never met.”
“Far, far better.”
“We have never been friends —I have done nothing
to merit such friendship as yours, and yet I covet it.
Miss Leigh, you blame me justly for Harold; but
believe me, I would give all I have to undo what I
have done. Do you forgive me for this ? ”
“ Freely.”
“ That is like you. Think less hardly of me, think
a little of my lonely life, when you go to your own
useful, loved one; you have many who care for you—
I—only one in the whole world.”
“Net only one,” she said, with a little break in her
voice.
“ You mean Dick ? lam losing him too.”
But she wasn’t thinking of Dick.
“ If we should meet again—it is likely, I suppose—
and I should come to you, and say that I was more
worthy of your friendship—what then ? ”
“ It would be yours.”


CHAPTER XVI.
WITHIN HOSPITAL WALLS.
“Not all
Remains a tangled maze and mystery
A blurred and blotted page of hieroglyphs,
Unread and uninterpreted. Go, hush
The plaint of anguished sick-bed ; gather round
His gracious Founts of comfort. Leave the clouds
That mope and lour upon the mountain-heights ;
And, in the valley, whither by His hand
Thou hast been led, repair from pool to pool.
Faith and submission are bright angels, sent
With golden pitchers, to assist in fetching
Up from the depths the promised solaces.
With joy draw water from these Wells of life ! ”
Wells of Baca.
A long, lofty room, in shape somewhat like an L; for
partly up one side ran the private wards ; stopping
just where a small passage led on to the front
balcony.
In front of these rooms, a dark strip of hall lino-
leum—polished to an almost dangerous degree of
slipperiness—covered the shining, oak-stained floor,


and sent forth a pleasant scent of turpentine and
beeswax.
Woe betide the unfortunate speck of dust which
found its way here—it must he small indeed to escape
Nurse Blythe’s keen eyes.
Everything was in the most exquisite ordei, as
indeed was always the case, and the sun that streamed
his floods of yellow glory through the great, long
windows, found no dusty corners to illuminate, and
so occupied himself with laughing all over the bright
floor, lighting up the cheerful looking screens till they
were a blaze of crimson, dancing over the burnished
rods that depended from the ceiling, then with a
softened, mellow touch, coaxing out gleams of gold,
and auburn, and bronze, in the quiet heads that rested
on the soft, white pillows.
Here, at the broadest part of the ward, was a
veritable cosy corner ; with great basket chairs, the
table where stood the doctor’s books and stethoscope,
the fire-place, where blocks of coal glowed and sent
out a pleasant warmth, especially comforting to the
occupants of the beds nearest it—the white table against
the wall, with its bottles innumerable, instruments,
and fleecy piles of cotton wool, and the chair with
Nurse Blythe’s own particular basket of dressings on it.
Last, but not least, the one solitary cot in the ward,
with its delicate colouring, wherein many baby faces
had lain since it had been placed there by the “ Ladies
Aid Society.”


Here and there on the walls daintily lettered texts
were hung, and the ventilators throughout the ward
showed the loving handiwork of girlish fingers in
cleverly executed flowers and landscapes.
Ah, if it hadn’t been for the suffering, the sun
would have lighted up few brighter pictures that
evening. But that w T as the one thing always insepar-
able from it.
So about all was a quiet sanctity that was reflected
in the faces of the nurses as they passed to and fro,
hands and brain fully occupied, and every sense on
the alert.
And their hearts ?
Why, everyone knows that a hospital nurse dis-
penses with that unnecessary part of her being as
quickly as possible.
How could the work be done if any feeling were
brought into it ?
It is the absence of that, doubtless, which makes
the trained hand so gentle, —it must be so,
indeed.
They tell us that the Australian character is
shallow, flippant, pleasure-loving; hut I tell you
that in quiet homes, in sacred hospitals walls,
noble lives are being lived, aching hearts are being
forgotten, in unselfish ministry to others ; lives
that the world hears little of, but that God watches
over in tenderness, whose reward will be that of
much forgiveness, because they loved much, and


upon whose tired ears will fall: “Well done, good
and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord.”
And that joy, who can tell ?
Ah, no; it is nothing, day after day, to school
heart and mind into patience, to do commonplace,
repulsive tasks bravely and cheerfully.
Thank God, He knows !
Anri you know, or perhaps you don’t know, the
strangely trying characters which come together in an
institution of this kind.
Mrs Whyne, for instance, two beds from the lower
end of the ward, engaged at the present moment
in seeing how far half a slice of bread will go, when
crumbled over the floor.
All things made together against Mrs Whyne; she
was a poor, misunderstood creature, who was never
done justice to by anyone, and the perpetual brooding
over this fact had reduced her to a state of feeble
melancholy, useless to combat, and uncommonly de-
pressing to those who had to be about her.
Why she had been born she didn’t know, unless
it were for people to “ put upon ” her, and why she
had had the misfortune to come to the Homeopathic
Hospital was a riddle she had long given up. It was
just her fate, she supposed.
With her, the head nurse was perpetually waging
war, and there was nothing Mrs Whyne dreaded more
than to have those shrewd eyes looking through her,


even to the miserable fossilised region she called her
heart.
Next to her, Mrs Grumbul; a mother tincture of
her near neighbour.
While Mrs Whyne rebelled feebly against her
destiny, Mrs Grumbul, being of a more vigorous con-
stitution, denounced it and everybody in most open
terms ; regarding the doctors especially as her natural
enemies, created for the express purpose of torturing
her. As she made no secret of her somewhat strong
opinions, it is needless to say she was not a general
favourite.
But, fortunately for human nature, also for the
nurses in this particular ward, there were many in
it very different, and the suffering faces were mostly
patient ones.
Tea was over, and above the bustle of clearing; awav,
'O y '
and preparations for the doctor’s visit, rose the ring-
ing notes of a canary, who sang as if sickness and
death were unknown here : twitter and chirp, chirp
and twitter, till the air seemed alive with his
warbling, and tremulously full of the music he carolled
so joyously.
Seven o’clock !
At the last stroke, a large, handsome cat, who had
been stretching his great lazy limbs in front of the
fire, rose, and with a languid glance around, as if to
say, “ I suppose it’s time for me to be off,” daintily
picked his way down the slippery floor.


For Teddie had a decided objection to doctors, and
knew the time for their rounds as well as anyone
there.
“Mrs Grmnbul is to be put on new medicine,”
Nurse Mayne said, as she passed the table where
Mona was cutting strips of lint. “ I hope it’s some-
thing to stop her screaming ; it’s fairly sickening the
way that creature goes on.”
“ This is part of the romantic portion of hospital
life,” Mona said, laughingly; “ nursing in theory is—
beautiful; in reality ! ”
“ That’s the way you feel about it already, Leigh;
wait till you’ve been here a year. Bless my soul, if
she isn’t at it again,” as a frenzied cry for “ Nuss ”
rang through the ward. “ Well, upon my word ! ”
You should have heard Nurse Mayne pronounce
that “ upon my word ”; she had a way of saying it
peculiarly her own, and her big, grey eyes twinkled
so irresistibly, that one found it extremely hard to
look at her without smiling.
Yes, they were very nice, these homeopathic nurses;
Mona felt quite at home with them already.
No one could resist Nurse Mayne’s cheeriness, it was
so unfailing.
Nurse West came up just then, and stood resting
her hands lightly on the heavy broom she had been
using a minute before ; a slight, sweet-faced girl, with
deep violet eyes, and a halo of golden hair.
And on her Mona’s eyes rested lovingly; there


was something about her that brought hack Hurl-
stone and Una.
“ What’s the matter with our amiable friend down
there, West ? ”
And just then the doctors came round the corner,
and Mona hurried down the ward, in answer to the
head nurse’s call.
Shall I tell you what she was like, this Nurse
Blythe ?
A face at once shrewd and kindly, the eyes bright
and keen, a broad, clever brow, and a figure erect,
alert, and energetic.
And this was the head nurse of the surgical
ward.
“ You will come round and help me to-night, Nurse ;
to-morrow I wish you to undertake Mrs Grumbul;
if you can reduce her vocal powers, so much the
better.”
“ A task that angels might despair over,” murmured
Dr Bird; but his companion only shrugged his
shoulders.
They were so unlike, these two; Dr Cameron, the
senior resident surgeon, so grave, so studiously ab-
sorbed, and the younger man, who shouldered his tall
figure up the ward in a slow, almost lazy fashion,
trying to subdue a pair of exceptionally merry eyes to
the orthodox professional gaze, and only half succeed-
ing in the attempt.
If the patients stood a little in awe of Dr Cameron,


they generally approved of Dr Bird s boyish ways, and
he was a universal favourite, with two exceptions.
If Mrs Whyne’s attractive countenance could be
rendered more amiable, it became so when this irre-
verent youth, instead of showing the proper amount
of sympathy, treated her long list of complaints with
saucy indifference ; and Mrs Grumbul had never for-
given the significant smile with which he had sug-
gested the expedient of a couple of hare-lip pins for
a wound which her determined tossings about had
rendered tardy in healing. At his approach, there-
fore, she set up a piercing shriek, and was only re-
duced to silence when he remarked carelessly “ that
the hare-lip pins were still handy, and that if she did
not control her feelings !
“ You’ll get Mrs Whyne up for a few horn's to-
morrow, Nurse,” Dr Cameron said, as he turned
abruptly from the voice of her complainings. “ Weak ?
of course you feel weak ; lying in bed wont cure that.
Nurse Leigh, a moment, please.”
What a busy hour- it was, even after the doctors
had gone! There were poultices to be made, dressings
to be applied, medicines, “ Murdock’s ” food to be
given round, and the thousand-and-oue little—or big
—attentions, that every patient claims as her right,
when she can exact it, from the veriest slave that
ever walked this earth—the long-suffering hospital
nurse.
What else is she there for ?


If she is not a mere machine, exempt from the
ordinary ills of life, why, then, she ought to be.
“ And so Mrs Grumbul is to be your first special ? ’
This Nurse Mayne said, as they washed up some
dishes in the pantry that adjoined the ward.
“ She is.”
“ I pity you. West, is Nurse Blythe calling ?
“ She wants Nurse Leigh.”
o
Mona ran lightly down the ward.
“ I didn’t hear you, Nurse; I hope I haven’t kept
you waiting.”
“ You forgot Mrs Whyne’s ‘ Murdock ’ to-night.”
“ Did she say so, Nurse Blythe ? I certainly gave
it her.”
The shrewd eyes twinkled good - humouredly.
“ Fight it out between yourselves, then. And, Nurse,
when you have finished there, I want you to come to
the operating room; I wish to explain to you the
different instruments. West and Mayne will come
too.”
The lights in the ward were lowered, and the night
nurse came in to take possession, as the three girls
assembled in the room, and waited for the little lecture
that was delivered in Nurse Blythe’s own bright way.
Yes, they were fair, true faces the gaslight illu-
mined, womanly and sweet, though in such different
ways, and the quaint, pretty uniform invested them
with a quiet dignity no other dress could produce.
Mona thought of that as she glanced at her com-


panions, the head nurse, with her splendid head and
capable manner—big, jolly Nurse Mayne—and the
tired, flower-like face of little Nurse West.
Then she thought of Mr Hearne, and her lip curled.
“ You are getting on well, Nurse,” Nurse Blythe
said, as she bade her good-night; “ very well, indeed.
You are not quite up to Tug yet,” with a roguish
smile, “ but she’s exceptional.”
“ Nurse Tug ! ” said Mona, as the three girls climbed
the steps together, “ who is she ? ”
But Nurse Mayne only laughed.


CHAPTER VII.
nurse leigh’s “day off.”
“ Men who seek for Fate abroad
Are not so near His heart as they who dare
Frankly to face her where she faces them,
On their own threshold where their souls are strong
To grapple with and throw her. ”
Lowell.
“Just fancy, Jack! It is exactly two years to-day
since Mona first came to see me.”
Dr Cranston turned from the window, through
which he had been surveying the darkening landscape,
with his bright smile.
“Two years, little woman! What changes they
have brought! ”
He took the easy chair at her side, and stirred the
fire to greater activity.
“ You haven’t to go out just yet ? ”
“ No ; I have a whole hour to place at your disposal.
Shall I light the lamp ? ”
“No, don’t; there’s nothing so nice as firelight.”
“ Auntie out ? ”


“She went to the concert with Mrs Eoss. Jack, I
had such a long letter from Mona to-day, giving me a
full account of the life there, and how they dress, and
all that. It is such a pretty uniform—a kind of pale
lilac, with a stripe ; big white apron, collar, and cuffs,
and a spotted muslin cap, with two long streamers
behind—white, of course. Won’t she look lovely ? ”
“ Was that all she told you ?” he asked, comically ;
“ just how they dress, and ”
“Of course not. Fancy, Jack, they call each other
by their surnames; wouldn’t it sound quaint ? She
likes the matron immensely, and the head nurse of
her ward is a perfect disciplinarian, very strict, and
yet a perfect cure. One of the nurses is very full of
fun, and one—and she seems to like her best—is
rather delicate and very pretty. And she has had
suph a sad story. Mona says she fancied that she
had had a lot of trouble in her life, and one evening
she told her all about it. Some one pretended to
care for her for years—and she found out that he had
been untrue to her from first to last, simply amusing
himself at her expense all that time. She told Mona
that he had one of those quiet, steadfast faces that one
would instinctively trust, and was besides a ‘ perfect
gentleman.’ He told her at first that he wasn’t in
a position to bind her in any way, but that he cared
for her more than anyone else in the world. And—
she loved him. That was hard, old boy ! ”
“ Hard enough, Una.”


“ And Mona says she is so gentle and good to the
patients, but that she looks very sad sometimes. It’s
a strange world, isn’t it.”
There was no answer, and she leant forward, till
the ruddy firelight played all over her golden hair.
“ You’re not asleep, Jack ? ”
“ Asleep ? what made you think that ? ”
“ You were so quiet. Do you know, you are often
quiet now. You haven’t any trouble or worry you
are keeping from me ? ”
“‘Grandmamma, what big eyes you’ve got,’’ he
quoted, merrily.
“ I used to have an odd little dream once,” she said,
half nervously; then stopped.
Was it a reflection from the fire, or a wave of
crimson that swept over his face, leaving it so white
and still ?
“ I had a dream too,” he said, gently, “ but I have
been awakened. Una, don’t, my dear ; the awakening
came in time.”
“ Oh, Jack! ”
“ Little woman, what a tender heart you have! Do
you think I have less courage and endurance than
that poor child she has told you about ? Dame
Durden, God does help in these matters, if we will let
Him, and I can think of her as my sister’s dear friend,
and mine too, I trust. And, by the way, I had a
note from Harold to-day in regard to our four-footed
friend out there.”


“ Does he want us to send him ? ”
“ Yes, the day after to-morrow. Miss Leigh will be
home, and they would like him to be there. We shall
quite miss the old chap.”
“We shall indeed. Mona said in this letter that
they have a nice big yard for him to roam about in,
but she didn’t know that they were settled enough for
him to come.”
No; Harold wanted to surprise her.”
“ She says they have a pretty house, quite near to
some very old friends of Mrs Leigh’s.”
“ I’m glad of that.”
“ Yes; it would have been lonely for the dear little
woman. Mona says she has missed Leo terribly.” •
“ I don’t doubt it; he’s a splendid old dog.”
“ And so discerning; I have always had a great
respect for him since the day he tried to bite Mrs
Yaughu. You remember ? ”
“ I remember, and am properly shocked at you, you
young savage. Isn’t that somebody’s knock ? Eun
and open the door, my dear; I have a little to do in
the surgery.”
But he didn’t go straight there.
As he passed Leo’s kennel, the great dog thrust a
friendly paw into his hand, and he stopped and patted
his tawny head.
*
“ Oh, Leo, good, faithful Leo ; you love her too.”


Such a morning it had been in the Homeopathic
Hospital.
To begin with, it was “waxing” day, a fact which
to the uninitiated speaks little, to the nurse—much.
Not the ordinary daily polishing and “brooming;”
dear me, no, though this is hard enough to suit the
most energetic. But waxing is !
Well, try it!
Nurse Blythe had been down with the earliest, taking
upon herself the lion’s share of the work ; and when
the beds had been freshened up, the lockers scoured
with bathbrick, and each window sill wiped over
with a wet cloth, you should just have seen that
ward.
The patients were unusually querulous, and when
breakfast time arrived, and Mona went from one to
another, many were the complaints poured into her
ears.
Nothing was quite right; the porridge was cold, or
the eggs boiled too hard—but Nurse Leigh was getting
used to this now, and she looked so merrily at them,
that some of the discontents forgot to murmur, and
settled down to business in earnest.
In the course of the morning an accident case was
brought in—a wee, golden-haired girl, who had been
terribly burned, and Mona, with the head nurse,
attended to her injuries.
She had found it very trying, and more than once
her heart failed her, but she went bravely through,


and earned a warm word of praise from her superior
for her deftness and gentleness.
And towards lunch time the child, soothed by the
soft swathing, sank into a quiet sleep.
Then for the nurses came a brief, much needed
spell, and a bright chat over the refreshing cup of tea
in the pantry; for Nurse Blythe always insisted on
leaving ward worries entirely behind them, and kept
everyone alive with her droll stories and quaint,
humorous ways.
And here Teddie generally found his way, to he
petted and made much of by his mistress and the
nurses. But I fear the real magnet was to be found
in the saucer full of milk, which always awaited his
lordship. Teddie, big and sentimental as he was, had
a keen eye for business.
In the ward, the patients were sipping their savoury
beef-tea, and Mrs Whyne looked on and glowered;
the reason for which lay in the last direction that
Nurse Blythe had given as she went out of the room
to her lunch.
“ Don’t forget, West, that Mrs Whyne does not want
any beef-tea this morning; by to-morrow, she may
have learned to put it in the right place, and not on
the bed clothes.”
The lamb-like look on the victim’s face had given
way to a sullen wrath, and Mrs Grumbul raised her-
self on her elbow, and glared after the head nurse’s
retreating figure.


“ She’s a hard ’un,” she said, gruffly; “ but they’re all
the same for that.”
“Nurses are always bard hearted,” sighed Mrs
Whyne, in a feeble, resigned way, that was supposed
by her to be exceedingly impressive; “ one had need
keep out of a hospital.”
“ What a pity you didn’t think of that before you
came here! ” said Mona drily, as she passed, with her
hands full of mugs.
But Mrs Whyne only sighed, and shook her head
deprecatingly.
“ Hard as nails,” repeated Mrs Grumbul; but she
waited till Nurse Leigh was out of hearing.
So the morning sped on ; and then dinner time
came.
“ The sun always favours you, Leigh,” Nurse Mayne
said, as she set some dishes down on a locker; “ you
are going to have a lovely day again; the rain waits
for my turn. Where are you going ? ”
“ Home,” said Mona briefly, with a bright smile.
“ Lucky gild to be so near it. I wish I was in your
shoes. What are you looking for, West ?”
“Nurse Blythe wants Teddie.”
“ There he is; Leigh will take him down; I want
you to help me here.”
Teddie looked up lazily from his warm corner by
the fire, blinked his eyes, and then in his own con-
descending way allowed Mona to raise and bear him —
no light weight—to his mistress, and the dinner,


which he received as regularly as any inmate of the
hospital.
An hour later, Nurse Leigh, transformed into the
old Mona, was being borne swiftly along in a St Kilda
tramcar.
What a glorious day it was, to be sure! She
surrendered herself to the full delight of being in
the open air, and the very freedom from restraint
and discipline brought its own charm.
A short, smart walk from the tram-line, then she
opened a gate, and throwing dignity to the winds,
made a frantic rush to the door, where stood the
slight figure in grey waiting to welcome her.
“You’re the dearest little woman that ever was,”
she cried, impetuously-; “ I feel as if I had been bottled
up for a week. Oh, mother, mother, what a splendid
institution home is ! ”
Then as she danced inside, “ Why are you taking
me into the drawing-room ? I won’t see any visitors
to-day, so I warn you.”
She tossed off her hat and sank into a chair, and
then ensued a commotion, for heavy feet floundered
along the hall, and the next moment she was on the
hearthrug, and Leo was making vigorous attempts to
lick her face.
“ I never intended this,” said Mrs Leigh, one gentle
hand stroking the soft head ; “ he has just arrived, the
dear fellow; and I engaged to keep you in the front,
while Harold fixed him up in style.”


“ Naughty doggie,” said his mistress, lovingly; “ come,
and we’ll inspect your new habitation.”
“I m so glad Hal is at home,” she continued,
slipping her hand through her mother’s arm; “has
he got anyone with him ? I fancied I heard voices.
Why, Dick! How in the world did you get here ? ”
“On my ‘bike,’” responded that youth, blithely.
But hang it! I expected you’d be dressed in
costume ! ”


CHAPTER XVIII.
“ AND YET —HE CONQUERED.
“ Oh, Thou that watchest beside the Gate,
Had I come to Thee in the days gone by
Thou had’st received me ; but now too late
I lay me down on Thy threshold to die :
“ I have fought and finished an evil fight,
I have earned the deadly wages of sin ;
It is hard to die in the snow to-night,
But no man is willing to take me in.”
The sun was low in the changing West,
The shadows were heavy from hill and tree
As the Watchman opened the Gate of rest, —
“ I am willing, with all My heart,” said He.
Ezekiel and other Poems.
“ Dick, I wonder what your mother w T ould say ? ”
They walked in silence for a few moments after
that, and then Mr Norris laughed, a little carelessly.
“ What a tragic tone, Nurse Leigh ! ”
“It is perfectly disgraceful,” she said, hotly.
“ Granted that it is—what then ? ”
She saw by a light they were passing that there


was no trace of mirth in his moody face, and her voice
took a gentler tone. “ Dick, lam so sorry for yon.”
The white, nervous hand resting on the bicycle
shook a little.
“That does me more good than scorn. Mona, do
you suppose for one instant that I don’t realise the
extent of my wrongdoing ? ”
“ I am afraid you do.”
“Afraid?”
“Yes, for the knowledge doesn’t make you better;
only reckless and unhappy.”
“ I’m not unhappy.”
“ Are you not ? Your face tells a very different tale.”
“Seeing you to-day has brought back old times
rather vividly, and I would rather not think of them.”
In the face of what is now, I suppose not.”
Do you think that sort of thing lasts ? ”
Oh, Dick, I know it does.”
“You always used to lecture me even then, if I
didn’t turn up at church, or missed prayer-meeting
—and yet, Mona, you were not an out-and-out Christian
yourself in those days.”
She interrupted him eagerly.
“ I was not a Christian at all then, Dick; perhaps
if I had been ”
“ Yes, you had a tremendous influence over me
always. Still, I don’t know—if lamto be ‘ saved,’ as
they call it, I suppose I shall be, and if not, I shan’t.”
“ You used not to talk such rubbish.”


“ AND YET—HE CONQUERED .” 187
“It’s a mighty handy doctrine, Mona, believe
“And such a noble, manly one,” she said, her lip
curling with indignation. “It is certainly a beautiful
idea, to go through life turning your back on all
that’s good and right, and then expect the Heaven
that martyrs have died to win.”
“ Perhaps I don’t expect it.”
“ Don’t, Dick ! ” she implored, her face growing white
as death. “ I can’t bear to hear you talk like that.”
“ It is far worse to feel like that,” he said, quietly.
“ Dick, do you realise what you are saying ? ”
“Only too well. How those lights sparkle, don’t
they?”
Before them lay the city, and the brilliant glow
from thousands of gas jets seemed to mingle in
a soft, luminous brightness that lit up the sky and
penetrated its night.
Lights of ruby, glowing redly, dull yellow, and
the pallid, opal blue of the electric light and the
sinuous trains, gliding about like threads of fiie in
the semi-gloom; repeated in so many tints, so many
varying forms, and yet
She thought of the night of sorrow and suffering
that lay behind it all, of the hearts fevered with
anguish and heavy with despair, the burden of the
poor, to whom the brightness around was as bitter
mockery.
Was Dick thinking of that too, as he said in that


light, reckless tone of his: “Beautiful, isn’t it? nil
sparkle on the surface, and underneath ”
Ah, yes, Dick —underneath !
don t you ask me how often I go to church,”
he continued, as they walked on again.
“ Do you go at all ? ”
“ Wh 7> 110 ; not often. ‘ Not to put too fine a point
on it,’ as Mr Snagsby would say, I may have been
twice since I have been down. Is that one of the
unpardonable sins ? ”
“ How do you spend your Sundays ? ” she said, drily.
He laughed a little nervously.
ell, you see my Sunday is not a very long one.
I generally put in the morning in bed, till about
eleven; have my dinner, and then go for a spin
on my bike, to stretch my muscles after the con-
finement of the week. And at night ”
“ Yes—at night ? ”
I go occasionally to a seance; it’s no end of fun.
Oh, there’s always something up on Sunday evening.”
“ So I should imagine.”
“ At any rate, you can’t say I haven’t been frank.”
“ Ho, you have certainly been that.”
He looked up quickly, and something in her face
made a lump rise in his throat
“ What is the use of your troubling about me ? ”
he said, gently; “ mine would be a worthless life at
the best. I m worse than most, for I’ve known what
it is to be a Christian.”


She started at the vehement words, but he went
on passionately; “ Mona, I d give an} thing to go
back to those old Hurlstone days. I’ve had my
chance, and I’ve lost it. I feel as sure that Heaven’s
gates are shut for me, as I know that all I love will
be behind them ! ”
One little shudder— then she turned eagerly.
“ Dick, to believe that is to believe God cruel and
false to His own promises ; you don’t, you can’t mean
that.”
“ I mean that for me there is no hope now.”
“ If you would only try
“Try!” he repeated; “have I not tried? Oh,
Mona, I am sick of my life, sick of everything. If
I could hear of one who stood in just the position
I stand, and who—conquered, I might.
“If you could hear of one?” she said, in a dull
voice. “Dick, I could tell you of one”—and then
there was a painful pause.
“ Don’t,” he urged, gently ; “ it is trying you.
“Yes,” she said, sadly, “for I have never told
anyone yet; it has been a long secret with mother
and me. It was before we came to Hurlstone,
and I was only a child, but I remember it only too
well. He—my father—was—a gambler, Dick—now
you know why we dreaded it so for —Harold! He
cared for nothing so long as he could play, he was
clever and highly strung, and it got a terrible hold.
And yet—he conquered ! ”


Slow tears gathered in the boy’s eyes, and he
brushed them away angrily.
is ot in his own strength j that would have been
impossible. He told us afterward that he fairly
gripped God s Hand and held on. He wasn’t spared
to us more than a year after that, but oh, that year,
Hick, it undid to us at least what had gone before;
twelve full, rich months of work for God, then
Heaven. Ah, it is worth struggling for.”
“ Yes,” he said, huskily, “it is worth it! ”
So they walked along in silence, till they came to
the hospital gates.
“I suppose,” he said, bending his head a little,
“ that some in there are suffering awfully, even now ? ”
She answered sadly, “ Many.”
“ Poor creatures,” he said, wearily. “ Mona, I heard
from Gwynne to-day. You remember that accident ”
“ Yes, Hick.”
“Naughton—the fellow that was blinded, you know.”
“ I know.”
He has left a wife and one daughter, a lame girl,
and Muir has been awfully good to her. He has found
out that it is her hip that is affected, and he says that
quite a simple operation will cure her. He told two
or three that the best thing would be for her to come
here, that she would have splendid nursing, and the
best advice. And the end of it was they got up a
concert to defray expense. Gwynne says that Hr
Muir has been just wonderful, and he intends to


bring her down himself. I thought youd have
known. Isn’t it grand of him ?
It is, indeed.”
The little chap has been ill again.
“ Eric, Dick ? ”
“Yes, Eex says he is missing yon terribly, quite
fretting, and that if I saw you I was to give you
‘ Eric’s best love,’ and to tell Mona that he likes
Melbourne best, now that she is there; see, the
poor little beggar wrote this bit of a note to you,
every second word with a capital letter, and the
smudges look very much like what tears would
produce. Are you in a hurry ?
“ lam afraid lam late,” she said, in a muffled voice.
“ And, Dick—for the sake of the old days—go to see
mother as often as you can; she is lonely sometimes
now.
Then she looked into his face with earnest, pleading
eyes.
“You won’t forget how willing God is to do His
part, and you will pray to Him sometimes ?
“ I will,” said poor Dick, brokenly.
Then she walked rapidly along the short winding
path into the hall, and up the stairs to the nurse’s
quarters. But the old Mona was very sti ong in
Nurse Leigh to-night t


CHAPTER XIX.
“AFTER THE FIRST.”
“ The night
Is meant for sleep ; we ought to sleep in it
And leave the clouds to God. Not every cloud
That climbeth heavenward overwhelms the earth ;
And if God wills, ’tis better that He wills ;
What He takes from us never can be lost.”
George Macdonald.
“ It is not the deed we do,
Though the deed be never so fair,
But the love, that the dear Lord looketh for,
Hidden with lowly care
In the heart of the deed so fair.”
Christina G. Rossetti.
Mrs Whyne was sulky!
Xow I do not mean to assert that this was by any
means an uncommon occurrence. Nurse Blythe had
been wont to say that she must have been born
sighing, but on one or two rare occasions she had
been known to be almost cheerful.
The first time this extraordinary state of mind came
about, the head nurse was unsuspicious, and the second,


but the third was fatal to Mrs Whyne. For Nurse
Blythe’s keen eyes had discovered the fact that, on
a certain visiting day, a certain visitor came to cheer
up the amiable invalid with a friendly chat and an
unsightly parcel, which always stayed behind. And
there the root of the matter lay!
Added to this the coincidence that a bilious attack
invariably followed the advent of the parcel, and the
fact that Dr Cameron had a very inquiring mind, and
the result mav be imagined.
%j O
“See here, Leigh,” Nurse Blythe said as she came
into the pantry where Mona was washing up dishes,
“ a dozen stale tarts, and smelling bad enough to kill
at a dozen yards,” and then her disgust vanished in
merriment, and she laughed.
“ Well, upon my word !” Nurse Mayne said, putting
her head in at the door; “ she’ll be thinking you’re
going to eat them yourself, Nurse Blythe; it was very
hard-hearted to take them away from her.”
“ I shall make her turn out her locker this morning,”
the head nurse replied, with manifest enjoyment; “it
will need a perfect fumigation. And then I intend to
move Mrs Grumbul up to the other end of the ward ;
that combination is overwhelming.”
“Thank goodness, Mrs Whyne will soon be off!”
laughed Nurse Mayne.
“ Don’t be too sure, Nurse ; she’s laying herself out
for a relapse,” Nurse Blythe answered, with a wicked
twinkle in her eyes. “ She doesn’t want to leave us,


though we are so cruel to her. Leigh, I want you to
scrub out the private ward, then get everything ready
there for the new patient. Miss Desmond was here
yesterday, and her sister will come in some time this
morning.”
So the end of it had been that the two trusty
growlers were parted ; and Mrs Grumbul placed up at
the other end of the ward beside little Mrs Walters,
in whose slight, deformed body a beautiful soul had
its being. And at one stroke, Mrs Whyne lost her
confidante and her tarts.
No more whispered conferences, no more plans
hatched for mutiny, no more shared spoils, for her neigh-
bom- now was a new-comer, a brown haired girl whose
pinched, white face was fast losing its sharp outline.
And Jessie Naughton, the miner’s daughter from
Hurlstone, was foolish enough to be grateful for the
care and attention she received ! The w T orld she looked
out upon,—the suffering world of a hospital ward, —the
nurses with their bright faces, and their pretty uniform,
made up a picture she never tired of watching.
She couldn’t understand what made them all so
kind to her, and sometimes at night, when the others
were asleep, she would bury her face in the soft, white
pillows and cry softly for very joy. Now and then
Nurse Blythe would bring her parrot and set his cage
down on the locker beside her, and who could whistle
so prettily as Jessie ?
Joey would listen with his head very much on one


side, and then with great solemnity follow her lead
through the inspiring melody of “ Merrily danced the
Quaker’s wife,” the first line of which he accomplished
entirely to his own satisfaction. But the second was
another matter. A sharp ear had Joey, not true
enough to help him to get the notes right, but at least
he knew when he was wrong, which is more than
many more pretentious songsters do. The cheerful
patience with which he would repeat, over and over
again, notes flat and notes sharp, was a lesson for the
most captious; and there was on record an assertion
that on one occasion he had rendered the whole
correctly, and screamed himself hoarse with delight
and triumph afterward.
It was just after lunch had been disposed of, and
Mrs Whyne had surrendered her mug with a dejected
hint that the “ beef-tea might have been a little hotter,”
that a slight commotion in the ward announced the
fact that the new patient had arrived.
Mona, coming in from the front balcony with her
broom, came swiftly forward at Nurse Blythe’s
summons ; then waited, as the head nurse sat down
at the table, and, drawing pen and ink towards her,
prepared to take “ the particulars.”
Almost a child, with big, sad, brown eyes, which
looked out wearily at the strange, unfamiliar scene, a
face deathlike in its pallor, and small, nervous hands
that trembled as they fingered the crutches lying
against her chair.


“ If you should be very ill, who would you like sent
for?”
A sudden quiver, and Nurse Blythe was obliged
to repeat her question. She did so kindly, with a
reassuring smile. The answer came slowly.
•' My sister.”
And her address ? ”
‘ St Helen’s, East St Kilda.”
‘ Anyone else ? ”
“That will do, then. Leigh, will you help this
young lady on to her crutches, and make her cosy by
the fire 1 West, I want your help a minute,”
Mona pushed a basket chair' into the warm glow
and settled the slight figure comfortably in it.
“ You feel dreadfully strange, don’t you ? Never
mind, you’ll soon get to know us all, and feel at home.”
The sad eyes looked wistfully into her face.
“ Will you be my nurse ? ”
Mona shook her head.
“Nurse Blythe will have charge of you first.”
“ The head nurse ? I like her.”
She said it in such a thoughtful tone that Mona
smiled.
What an odd, old-fashioned little thing she was, to
be sure!
“ You will find her very good to you. Shall I bring
you a book to read ? ”
“ No, thank you, I would rather think.”


It was so drearily said, that Nurse Leigh’s merry
eyes lost their sparkle and became misty.
“ You must try not to think of to-morrow, you
know.”
“ I know —for Marion’s sake.”
“ And your own too, dear.”
“ I am not troubling for myself, Nurse,” with a
momentary faltering over the title so new and strange
to her; “I am quite used to suffering.”
“ Poor little woman ; would you like me to get you
anything ? ”
“No, thank you.”
Then her head drooped listlessly on to one thin
supporting hand, and her eyes followed wistfully every
movement, as Mona bent over the little cot in the
corner.
So she sat, watching with dread the pale, pain-
drawn faces around her, the strange un-homelike
surroundings; listening with shrinking senses to the
low moans that came from some of the beds, her eyes
dilating with horror now and then, as a louder cry
reached her unaccustomed ears, a terrible loneliness
settling on her heart, and a dumb terror of the to-
morrow that perhaps would bring death to her, that
certainly would bring agony, such as she had never
before even faintly imagined.
If death—she knew that God would take her
home, and that meant—health. But it might not
be that!


And just now she seemed able to realise nothing
but what lay before her, the terrible, unknown region
that she was to tread. The region that no human
foot could tread with her—that was for her alone. The
most tender sympathy could only go with her a
certain length.
O
It was just as her thoughts had reached this point
that the great black cat, who had been eyeing her for
some time with fixed attention, gave a sudden bound,
and settled himself comfortably in her lap.
“Teddie is making friends with you,” said Nurse
Blythe’s kind voice ; “ that is most unusual for him.”
“He must have known that I was feeling sad,”
the girl answered simply; “ what a handsome fellow
he is! ”
And Nurse Blythe’s heart was won at once.
“There’s one thing very certain,” she said, as she
stood carving the joints for dinner, a little later, “ that
cat is a perfect old dear, and what isn’t brain in him,
is heart.”
Dinner time was generally a cheery one at the
hospital. Everything was served beautifully hot, and
those who could not take meat and vegetables had
fish provided for them.
Nurse Blythe put a temptingly browned plate of fish
before the new-comer, with a bright, “ Try and eat this,
like a good girl. You can’t ? Well, I expect you don’t
feel much like eating to-day.” Then as the weary eyes
met hers she turned hastily away.


With two o’clock came many visitors, for it was
Wednesday, and the ward was soon gay with flowers,
great bimches of violets and glowing leaves, sweet-
scented daphne and the subtle perfume of bouvardia.
The pale little patient in the basket chair looked
wistfully on, but presently Nurse Leigh came up the
ward, and with her a graceful, sunny-faced girl, who
stepped quickly forward, and laid a tender hand on
the shining golden head.
“ Well, my birdie,” she said, fondly. “ Isn t she a wee
thing, Nurse, to be here amongst these poor creatures ? ’
and then she looked at her, in the brave, protecting
way that showed Mona that these two had been more
than most sisters to each other.
A little of the sad story she had heard from Marion
Desmond’s lips—how, long years ago, the frail charge
had been given her by the delicate, fading mother, who
had lived such a short, suffering life. And how disease
had fastened its relentless grip on the slender frame,
till the operation, that had first been talked of as a
means of alleviating pain, had now become a necessity
to save life itself. And it might not do even
that.
“ I have never had her out of my sight before, but I
can trust her here. Nurse Leigh, you look as if you
know what sorrow means. Will you take a special
interest in my girlie ? ”
“ I will indeed.”
And Mona kept her word.


During the afternoon many pitying glances were
directed toward the two who seemed so engrossed in
each other, and one fair-faced girl came right up to the
basket chair with a spray of flowers for its occupant.
She took it with a low “ Thank you ” ; and only
Marion saw the tears in the brown eyes.
“They have adopted you already, you see, Dulcie.”
“Yes.”
“ I saw Dr Stuart after I had left you here this
morning, and he is so hopeful”
“How lonely you will be to-night, Marion." The
brave eyes suddenly darkened with intense pain.
“ It will soon be over, Dulcie ? ”
“ Oh, yes.”
“ Ynd then what glorious times we’ll have, as soon
as you have laid aside those old crutches. Think, my
dear.”
“ You won’t fret about me, Marion ? ”
“ Ok, no, I’ll come to see you very often—every dav,
Nurse Blythe says.”
“ After the first.”
Marion turned away with a shudder.
“After the first, of course; but it won’t be at all
long before I shall be allowed to see you.”
“And you’ll try to be happy? I shan’t mind the
suffering one bit.”
o
How the sad eyes tried to brighten! Marion
Desmond felt as if this parting would be indeed as
the bitterness of death.


At this time to-morrow it might even be that!
“ Are you cold, Marion ? ”
“No, my dear, warm as toast.”
“ I thought you shivered. You see that girl in the
bed at the other end of the ward ? ”
“ I do.”
“Nurse Leigh was telling me all about her. She
comes from a mining town a long way from Melbourne ;
her father was killed in an accident at the mine, and
the people got up a concert to pay for her to come
here. Wasn’t it nice of them ? Some doctor whom
Nurse Leigh knows said that a simple operation would
cure her, and they are going to perform it to-morrow.
That is her mother with her; she is braver than I am,
Marion, she looks quite bright.”
And now the little knots around the beds broke
up, in answer to Nurse Blythe’s imperative —“Four
o’clock, visitors! ” and Dulcie’s face grew white to the
lips.
“ Must you go, Marion ? ”
“ Not yet; the head nurse wishes to see me.”
She came up just then with a cheery smile. “ Has
your sister a dressing-gown, Miss Desmond ? Well,
we’ll just slip it on, and get her a pair of slippers, and
she will feel more comfortable ; just follow me.”
Face and voice were very kind, but Dulcie felt faint
and homesick as she followed on her crutches into a
lofty room off the main ward, where her small port-
manteau had been placed in readiness.


A room bright and clean, but curtainless, carpetless,
distinctively hospital.
She felt as if she could not stay, and Marion had to
turn from the piteously appealing face.
“ Come, that’s better, little girl. Leigh, you had
better let Dr Cameron know that we are ready; he
wants to see this young lady.”
He came in soon after, and his somewhat stern face
softened as he met the big, childish eyes that looked at
him in such a pitiful entreaty.
A short examination, then he turned away, stetho-
scope in hand, and Nurse Blythe and he remained for
some time outside the door, speaking in low tones.
Presently she came back.
“ We will put what your sister will be likely to need
at first into this locker, Miss Desmond; I will then
strap her valise, and take it to the cloakroom with
her hat and jacket; it can be brought back when she
needs it.”
Slowly Marion bent over the few articles her loving
hands had delighted in making so dainty.
They would not be needed, —just at first!
Perhaps never again!
And so the last minutes came, and the last words.
“ You’ll try to be happy, Marion ? ”
“ Yes, girlie, and you ? ”
“ Don’t think about me—l have asked God to keep
me brave.”
“You are ahvays that, my darling”


But a very misty smile answered her. “I ve had
you, you know.”
And it was just as well that Nurse Blythe came up
then.
Marion bent over the thin face, a long, long kiss, a
whispered “ God bless you, my darling,” and she was
gone.
Soon the gas was lit, and a fresh supply of coal
brought in, and Nurse Mayne raked the fire, and
proceeded to toast some bread, exchanging merry jests
with the other nurses and some of the patients, with
whom she seemed to be a great favourite.
Then Nurse Leigh came up the ward with a tray
full of cups, and tea began in earnest.
“We are going to put you 011 slops to-night, she
said as she passed Dulcie’s chair; “ Nurse West is
bringing you some sop, and you will try to take it,
won't you ? ”
But she didn’t say anything when she returned for
the cup and found its contents scarcely touched, only
laid her hand on the bright hair with as caressing a
touch as Marion’s would have been.
And so the night came.
The tea things had been cleared away, and Mona
came again to the girl’s side.
“I am going to put you to bed now. Suppose you try
to imagine me your sister for awhile; would that be
very hard ? ” with her old merry smile.
Then as the big, solemn eyes met hers so wistfully


“ You are going to sleep to-night in this ward next
to little Jessie Naughton. I think she must be about
your age.”
Long after the white face rested on the pillows,
Mona lingered, doing many trivial services for the new
patient’s comfort, rewarded by the brief flitting smile
that was almost painful to see.
Dr Bird’s bright, boyish face was unusually
thoughtful as he came to her side, and his low, “ Are
you feeling pretty comfortable ? ” had a sympathetic
ring about it that went straight to the girl’s lonely
heart.
Then he was gone, and there was a temporary lull.
Mona, passing down the ward for the last time, came
swiftly to Guide’s bedside, and bending, left a warm
kiss on the sad lips.
“Good-night, little sister,” she said, and the thin
hand clung to hers.
Night,—in a surgical ward !
Ah, there are not many who know all it means
In the daytime the sun lights up the ward as
graciously as if it were some vast, magnificent cathedral;
shining on the Lord’s suffering ones as generously as
it illuminates God’s sweet, free air in town and
country.
In the daytime, too, come bright, cheery faces and
brisk footsteps, and numberless excitements to break
the monotony, and the tiny bird in his cage-home fills
the air with trills and ripples of melody.


But with night comes silence, awed silence; the
nurses, wearied out with the long hours of labour, move
about more softly, and the polished boards creak with
their cautious tread.
One by one, their various duties accomplished, they
slip away, and the night nurse takes their place for her
long, trying vigil.
The very clock on the mantelpiece seems to take
colouring from its surroundings, and swings its heavy
pendulum with a more measured, deliberate beat; and
the fire sinks into a great, glowing mass in the grate.
Now the lights are lowered, until a dim, semi-golden
gloom prevails, and strange shadows flicker on the
walls and ceiling.
Night and suffering reign supreme; and such
suffering!
For this is pain’s opportunity.
The slight exertion of the day must be paid for now
in quivering nerves and throbs of pain, and fever
rises in strong, steady surges, forcing low moans from
hot, dry lips; creating that torture of the pain-racked
—thirst!


CHAPTER XX.
“YOUR SISTER IS DOWNSTAIRS.”
“ Half my life is full of sorrow,
Half of joy still fresh and new ;
One of these lives is a fancy,
But the other one is true.
Which, you ask me, is the real life ?
Which the dream—the joy, or woe ?
Hush, friend ! it is little matter,
And, indeed —I never know.”
Adelaide Procter.
Midnight in the city r
The last stroke of twelve rang out from the town
clock, and the long rumble of the trams died away
into the stillness of the night.
Along the St Kilda Road a few cabs and hansoms
lattled, their occupants, for the most part, heavy-eyed
travellers from late trains, wearily indifferent to any-
thing save a sudden jolt or abrupt halt, their heads
seeking a resting-place, and seeking in vain, against the
stiff, upright support these vehicles generally afford.


The lights in the surgical ward were low and faint,
O O
but the fire sent out a warm glow as the night nurse
in her numberless journeyings threw on a fresh supply
of coal, or stirred it to greater activity.
To and fro she moved, in answer to the somewhat
fretful cries, speaking always in low, firm tones, giving
a piece of ice, raising a pillow, straightening tossed
bed-clothes, seldom losing sight of the wide open,
feverishly bright eyes which followed wistfully every
movement she made.
No sleep had come with its blessed forgetfulness!
She wondered if it would be possible to lose con-
sciousness again.
In the next bed to her the miner’s daughter slept
peacefully, and dreamed of the far away home and the
mountains.
But Dulcie lay longing for—dreading the day, the
last earth dawn she might ever see.
And the hours dragged on.
A strange smile flickered round her mouth as the
thought came that before another night the crippled
limbs might be strong and free in God’s own heaven.
Only—poor Marion !
Away in the heart of the city the busy doctor,
whose name many loved and reverenced, slept as
quietly as a little child, to waken strong for the day’s
work with his God given and God blessed skill.
Everyone knew the secret underlying Dr Stuart’s


wonderful success—that he never undertook a case
without giving it entirely into the hands of the Great
Physician, for whom his patient life was spent.
But within the hospital walls there were many
wakeful ones.
Mona had turned and tossed, hour after hour,
staring with hot, tired eyes into the darkness.
Sleep she must, if she were to discharge her duties
properly; so she reasoned, and trying one after another
of the known methods to induce slumber, at last grew
desperate, and giving up all mechanical effort, allowed
the busy brain to assert itself in a flood of bitter
recollections. Oh, she was brave, but even to her
came times when her heart ached to bursting with its
own heavy sorrow, when she cried out, almost
rebelliously, that she craved a little of the happiness
that other girls accepted so composedly—and that
chance word of Marion Desmond’s had stirred the old
wound roughly.
“ You look as if you know what sorrow means.”
Ah, did she not!
If she had been able to think of him as one thinks
of a loved one whom God has taken to perfect happi-
ness, it would have been easier.
No tears came to relieve the over-burdened heart—
they were always far from Mona’s eyes—but a dull,
aching loneliness that shut out all else.
O
She did not see what others saw—that the suffering
had made her strong—but it was so.


In her simple, earnest way, a way which brought
her religion into the most commonplace affairs of life,
she was as sweet and wholesome an example of the
Christianity she professed as it would be possible to
meet.
She had entered upon the stern realities of her new
life with unshrinking courage and a tenderness for
suffering that had brought a new beauty into the
merry brown eyes.
Never one to selfishly nurse any grief, rather to look
it steadily in the face, to fully comprehend its depth,
then live it down, bravely and patiently. But there
are long, unended griefs which are ever fresh!
Then she thought of the two sufferers in the ward
beneath, and what awaited them; the girl who came
from a home of luxury, and the other from the poor
little cottage in Hurlstone. And now came a species
of unconsciousness that was not sleep, but on its
borderland.
She fancied herself lying in her own pretty room in
Hurlstone, and strained her ears to catch the sound of
the batteries, the monotonous stamp, that many a time
had been her lullaby.
Half dazed and completely carried away from present
surroundings, she slipped out of bed, with the intention
of pushing her window up that she might listen more
intently.
As one aroused from sleep by horror of fire or
dden noise, she made her way blindly in


the direction she wanted to take—and it seemed to her
that every object in the room had changed its position !
Groping about in the dark, the chill of the night
made her shiver violently; still the half-formed
purpose asserted itself, and she stumbled on, till a
sudden something loomed out of the gloom, and she
put her hands out wildly to ascertain its substance.
“ Oh, good gracious! ” said Nurse Mayne as she
sprang up hastily. “Is anything wrong ? ”
“ I beg your pardon,” Mona replied, now thoroughly
alive to her environments—and then they both laughed.
“ Well, upon my word! ” her victim groaned rue-
fully, rubbing her nose; “ I thought the end of the
world had come, and I was just eating cocoanut ice.
Leigh, you hard-hearted beggar, what made you wake
me just then ? not to mention the injury done to my
beautiful nose! I’d advise you to get into bed as
quickly as possible, and calm yourself with the reflection
that it’s operation day to-morrow.”
“ To-morrow ? it’s a good deal past midnight. I’m
very sorry I disturbed yoir Shall I bandage your nose,
or put it in splints ? ”
“ Don’t add insult to injury, Leigh, I’m just—dead—
sleepy.”
Back to bed again; and at last into a brief slumber.
Then the solemn dawn purpled the eastern sky, and
the bell rang out its imperative summons.
Breakfast was hurried through, and the head nurse
and Mona entered the ward, where much work awaited


them. From her bed Dulcie watched mechanically
the preparations that were being made in the private
ward, as the nurses passed back and forward with in-
struments. sponges and basins, finally hanging over the
doorway a sheet that had been dipped in carbolic acid.
She even noticed that Nurse Blythe looked anxious,
and once or twice she was sure that the shrewd eyes
softened and moistened as they glanced in her
direction.
She lay quietly waiting, calm and ready; her
beautiful golden hair gathered into two close, thick
plaits, that fell far down her back, and her eyes looked
earnest and rapt.
Mona saw at a glance that she was trusting herself
to the care of the Unfailing One.
And then footsteps sounded on the stairs.
Bound the corner they came, the two house surgeons,
and a third.
A grave, dark man, with singularly luminous eyes,
and a face that any child would look at and trust.
They passed into the room ; a few low, hurried
sentences, and then Nurse Blythe came out, put her
strong arms round the trembling girl, and so carried
her in.
It stood there—the grim operation table—and her
face went a little paler. That was all.
Dr Stuart took a step forward, laid a kind hand on
her shoulder, and said with all his heart in his
beautiful eyes—


“ Your sister is downstairs—and the Father is above.’
And she thanked him mutely.
And beneath in the board room Marion waited!
Leaning her head upon her hands she tried to pray,
but no words would come, only the terrible fear at her
heart strengthened and deepened, as the long minutes
dragged slowly by.
Minutes ?
Why, they w T ere whole lifetimes.
Now and then voices would startle her, and she
would stand wringing her hands dumbly, her lips
refusing to shape the pitiful entreaty that trembled
on them: but the sounds died away again, and she
would sink down with a voiceless moan.
Would the time ever pass ?
Did she want it to pass, when it might mean— that!
Footsteps
But it was only a nurse who wanted something in
the room, and who knew nothing that could change
dread into hope or —despair.
Marion started, as a book fell and struck the ground
with a loud clatter, and a little cry came from her lips.
“ I will speak to her myself, Nurse.” Dr Stuart
pushed open the door, and his great, pitiful heart
throbbed with compassion as the entreating eyes met
his.


“ I suppose,” she faltered, “ you have come to tell
me the worst ? I will try to be brave.”
“ The worst ? Nonsense !” he said, cheerily; “ all has
gone very well, very well indeed.”
The colour flooded the poor white face at that, and
she took one step forward, but the doctor gently
seated her.
“ Rest for a few minutes,” he said, soothingly; “if
you are here at half-past eleven I may see you again.”
And then he hurried away, to minister to the wants
of those who already wearied for his coming in his
city waiting room.
Eleven o’clock.
Mona stole into the room where the little sufferer
had awakened to life and pain.
Nurse Blythe was just removing the hot-water
bottles from the bed, and straightening the clothes
over the cradle, and her face looked tired and anxious.
“ I could take my cup of tea now, Nurse; I will have
it in here.”
“Is she suffering much ? ”
“ Awfully, poor lassie. Leigh, bring some more ice
with you, she is very sick.”
“Yes, Nurse.”
She closed the door softly, but the memory of the
still face on the pillow haunted her for many days.
So the hours wore on; the surgeons came again, and
when they left there were crimson screens round Jessie
Naughton’s bed.


No, they do not mean in the Homeo what they
mean in most hospitals—they hold no awful signifi-
cance in their bright folds ; but shut off so from the
other occupants of the ward, there is more comfort and
quiet for the invalid.
It had not been a dangerous operation, and had been
skilfully performed. As her senses regained sway,
Jessie had smiled into the kind faces around her,
and shortly after sank into a tranquil slumber.
But in the room almost opposite a desperate fight
for life was being fought. Evening came, and still
Nurse Blythe moved about with noiseless step.
Tired ? Oh, I can’t tell you how tired she was; but
there was need for her, and that was enough for the
head nurse of the surgical ward.
Sometimes she had almost wished that the struggle
OO
would cease in the long sleep that should have no
earthly waking; but these thoughts came only from
her kind, pitiful heart, and no one looking at her face
would have guessed their existence. In nursing
matters she never let her feelings interfere with her
firm professional demeanour, or unfit her clever brain
for the work it had to do.
Ah, how good she was!
Dulcie watched every action wistfully; once—it was
growing dusk—as Nurse Blythe bent over her, she
raised her lips for a kiss, and it was given her.
Night!
The doctor had been in, and had stayed a long while,


an undisguised anxiety in his face; then the sounds in
the outer ward became fewer, and still the head nurse
kept her tireless watch, resting now in a basket chair
beside the bed.
Dulcie had wondered at first why she did not lie
down and sleep, and then could wonder at nothing, for
a species of delirium took possession of her, in which
she realised only the awful torturing pain that never
left her for an instant.
From her bed she saw the operation table stretching
out, and felt the cruel knife cutting—cutting ! Now
she was in some foreign place, with dark, horrid faces
mocking her, stretched upon racks which seemed to
tear her from limb to limb, escaping from one trap to
fall into another—then the doctor’s face close to hers
brought her partially back to her surroundings.
“ Has she slept at all, Nurse ? ”
“ No, doctor.”
“ Have you taken her temperature lately ? ”
“ An hour ago.”
“ I will take it now.”
She was so weak that he had to raise her arm, place
the thermometer imder it, then lay it down.
He did so very gently, and she thanked him.
“ Is the pain very bad ? ” he asked her.
“ Almost unbearable.”
“ I am sure it is,” and he turned hurriedly
away.
Then he came to her side again.


“ I will help you with the dressings before I go back,
Nurse.”
And Dulcie set her lips that no cry might escape
her.
The trams rumbled heavily past in the street below,
with scarcely an interval, till she longed for quiet and
silence, with an eager intensity pitiful to see.
“ 1 think,” she said, weakly, “ I shall be able to sleep
when they stop. Do you think they will be much
longer, Dr Cameron ? ”
“ It is nearly midnight,” he answered, gently, but he
knew that for many w r eary hours no sleep would close
the brilliant eyes.
I m sorry I m so much trouble,” she whispered.
“ Nurse looks tired out.”
“Dont worry yourself about me,” was the cheery
response. “ I’m not done for yet, lassie.”
Dr Cameron beckoned her to the further end of the
room, and Dulcie could see his anxious face as he
glanced in her direction.
And low’ as their voices were, she somehow under-
stood how very bad the doctor considered her; she
heard him mutter something about “ No stamina,” and
then wmndered at herself for feeling so calm about it
all. It even brought a quiet, restful happiness, the
thought that the agony might soon be over for ever.
And Marion’s wistful face never disturbed the
dream.


CHAPTER XXL
“ it’s all right, girlie.”
“ It is not hard to die,’’
She said, with that fair smile, ‘ ‘ for God’s sweet will
Makes bitter things most sweet. In my bright youth
He calls me to His side. It is not hard
To go to Him.”
“If God had willed,
I would have gladly stayed ; but we are His,
And it is sweet to do a little thing
For Him who loves us so.”
B. M.
The stir in the outer ward had commenced.
The nurses were busily waxing the floor, scouring
the lockers, and otherwise engaged in tidying up beds,
while the night nurse, pale after her long vigil, sat
down at the table and finished writing her report.
Mona came in from the balcony which she had been
sweeping, to be met with half a dozen instructions,
good-humouredly grumbled out by Nurse Mayne, who
took a head nurse’s responsibility when her superior
was absent, or looking after a special case.


“ I’ve got twenty things to do at once,” she said,
dolefully; “do see what Mrs Grumbul wants; she’s
driving me mad”
“ Did you wish me to attend to her dressings,
Nurse ? ”
“ Yes ; and I wish you joy of your job,” as a piercing
shriek rent the air.
Just then the door of the private ward opened, and
Nurse Blythe came out.
“ I can’t have this noise,” she said, firmly; “my
patient is in great danger, and I will not have her
disturbed”
The old woman glared at her for a moment, some-
thing in the quiet face making her subside ; but she
broke out querulously as the head nurse disappeared.
“ I won’t be touched,” she yelled, as Mona came to
the bedside with her basket, and proceeded to cut lint
and strips of sticking plaster. “ I’ll tell the doctor.”
“ I didn’t know you had such a high opinion of the
doctor, Mrs Grumbul. Now, if you keep still, it will
not hurt you at all.”
But keep still she wouldn’t, and for the next few
moments entertained herself and others with : “ Oh,
Nuss, Nuss, you’re killing me, I will scream.”
And scream she did, till the deft fingers had done
their work; then she lay back, glowering resentfully.
Mona was packing the empty bottles in the basket
for Nurse West to take down to the dispensary, when
Nurse Mayne joined her.


“ Leigh, did you take Mrs Grumbul’s temperature?”
“ Yes, Nurse.”
“ Did you tell her it was 104 ? ”
“I ? What an idea.”
And then Nurse Mayne laughed.
“ She coaxed me to tell her what it was, and then
said Nurse Leigh had told her; she’s a hard case, is
Mrs Grumbul.”
“ That’s an old craze of hers, I fancy; she told Dr
Cameron last night that her temperature was very
high.”
“ What did he say ? ”
“ Looked at her very severely, asked me if she had
been lightheaded, and then shrugged his shoulders.
You know his way.”
“ Oh, he sees through her. What was she saying to
you the last time she called you ? ”
“ She wanted cocoa for breakfast.”
“ Well, I’m sure ! Here comes West with the cups ;
look at Mrs Whyne turning up her nose at the por-
ridge. Leigh, if anyone wanted to study human nature
they couldn’t do better than go to a hospital for six
months. Well, I’ll be off; keep things going till I
come back.”
When her own breakfast had been taken, and Nurse
West and she had prepared everything for the
surgeon’s visit, Mona felt as if she were finishing a
hard day’s work instead of beginning it.
She experienced an almost cowardly shrinking when,


after the physicians had gone into the private ward,
Nurse Blythe sent for her to come and assist.
That there was very little hope she read in every
face.
Now the ordeal was over, and Dulcie clung to her
hand as Dr Cameron moved to the other end of the
room and made some entries in a book, then stood
talking to the head nurse in low, guarded tones. Dr
Bird turned abruptly on his heel and went into the
outer ward.
Mona bent and stroked the soft hair.
“ Poor little woman,” she said, gently.
The big, radiant eyes filled with tears.
“ How good you all are.”
“ You are such a patient, wee lady, you see.”
The fever flush burned redly in the white cheeks.
“Am I ? You’ll tell Marion that, when ”
“ Dear little girl, you’ll tell her yourself, I hope.”
And then Nurse Blythe came back, and gave the
tiny hand lying so quietly on the quilt a loving pat.
“Leigh, I’m going to get an hour's rest, and I’ll
leave you in charge; you have simply to give her
medicine and ice when she needs it. If Dr Stuart
should come, you’ll send for me at once.”
Then she bent, and though Nurse Leigh was there,
gave the drawn bps a long motherly kiss, and looking
half-ashamed for having been betrayed into anything
like emotion, hurried away, and they heard her calling
to her canary and parrot as she passed.


Ah, that hour, will Mona ever forget it ?
The thin, death-like face with its halo of golden hair,
the painful stillness, save when the convulsive rush of
sickness shook the wasted frame.
“I don’t think it will last much longer,” Dulcie
would say, as the perspiration started in beads on her
forehead. “ I didn’t think chloroform made one so
sick.”
“ It can’t last much longer,” Mona said, laying her
cool, firm hand on the hot brow ; “ the ice relieves you,
doesn’t it ? ”
“ Oh, yes.”
Within the hour Nurse Blythe was back, and soon
after the house doctors came with Dr Stuart, and a
fourth, a tall, bearded man, with bright, twinkling eyes,
and a brisk, cheery manner.
“ You won’t remember me, little girl ? You were
unconscious the last time I saw you. The stetho-
scope, please, Nurse.”
They were all very kind, Dulcie thought, but her
gaze never wandered from her old friend, as he came
to the other side of the bed.
Somehow, with those great, pitiful eyes looking so
intently at her, the pain seemed easier to bear, and
she smiled as he took her hand and felt the feeble,
rapid pulse.
“ Temperature, Nurse ? Ah ! I’ll be here this after-
noon, but if I’m needed, telephone for me. You’re
doing all you can to check the sickness, of course ? ”


“ Yes, doctor.”
“ Try a little boiling water if the ice doesn’t answer ;
that must be stopped as speedily as possible. Good-
bye—the pain won’t last much longer.”
And then he was gone.
But as he descended the hospital steps and saw the
imploring face in the hall, his heart failed him.
“No worse, certainly,” he said, gently. But Marion
saw the effort it cost him.
There came a morning, a solemn, quiet morning,
when Nurse Blythe, coming out of the room after the
doctors had been in, called Mona, and telling her
briefly that the little life was ebbing fast, asked her to
break it to the poor heart-broken sister, who had been
waiting in awful suspense for several hours.
“ She may see her now,” she said, with an odd
break in her voice; “ she is too far gone for it to hurt.”
And then she stole back into the room, and pulled
down the blinds that the wasted face on the pillow
might be softened into a little of what it had been.
There was no need to “ break the news ” —Marion
knew at once, after a brief, longing glance into Mona’s
face.
Ah, how skilful she had become in reading faces
lately !
“Don’t try to tell me,” she implored, “only—l
may see her ? ”
And then swiftly, silently, the two girls went up
together.


Into the darkened room, steadily, the brave face
never quivering.
“ It’s all right, girlie,” she said, taking the golden
head on to her arm ; “ you want to tell me that you’re
very happy, don’t you ? ”
“ I shall be quite well there, Marion.”
She caught the weak whisper, and—poor bleeding
heart—smiled.
“ Don’t trouble to leave us, Nurse,” as Nurse Blythe,
with a delicate thoughtfulness, was about to withdraw ;
“ they have told me all about your goodness, and I’m
sure she loves you.”
Dr Cameron looked in once, then turned away
abruptly.
In the outer ward an unusual silence prevailed, and
the painful throbs of Marion’s heart seemed to keep
time with the heavy tick of the clock.
The brown eyes, clear and radiant, never left her
face ; but the head lay heavily, heavily, on her arm.
“ Marion—l would have lived if I could.”
“ I know it, dear.”
“ I’m glad it’s morning. I was afraid it would be
night—when ”
“No night there, my darling.”
“ No, but—l think I should have been frightened.
You’re sure you’re not crying, Marion.”
“ Quite sure.”
And then Nurse Blythe stole softly out.


An hour later, as no sign came from the inner room,
she opened the door quietly and looked in.
Marion was in the same position, and the quiet face
that lay on her arm was still and peaceful, the long
lashes lying on the white cheek.
So they had thought the end might come.
Marion looked up drearily.
“ I suppose it will be this way ? ” she faltered. “ I
ought to be glad, I know, but I cannot.”
Nurse Blythe was looking intently at the sleeping
girl.
When next she spoke, her voice was brisk and
business-like.
“ Could you stay like that for another hour, in that
position ? ”
The tone roused a wild hope.
“ Do you mean—do you think
“ I think nothing beyond the fact that this is the
first natural sleep she has had. If it lasts, and no
change comes, there might—mind, I only say might—
be a ray of hope. Either that, or she will quietly
sink into unconsciousness. Can you hold out ? ”
The bright face was answer enough, and the head
nurse left them once more.
“If it lasts, and no change comes :
The words kept singing themselves over and over
again in her heart, and in the long minutes that
followed she felt that this slumber would have an
earthly waking.


Nor was she wrong.
Just as the strain of the tension was rendering her
almost helpless, Dulcie opened her eyes, and moved
her head a little.
“ I’ve had a lovely sleep,” she said, weakly, “ and,
Marion, I’m going to get better ! ”
Then almost before her sister could stoop and give
her a long kiss, she was off into a deep, refreshing
sleep.
It was night when she woke, and the gaslight was
shaded from her face by a screen.
“ Well, little one,” said a kind, cheerful voice, and
Dr Bright’s tall figure came into view, “ you’ve cheated
us all this time.”
He sat down beside her, and stroked the heavy
golden rings of hair that clustered about her forehead,
his dark bearded face beaming with kindness, and his
eyes twinkling with more than usual vigour.
And then Dr Stuart came forward with his rare
smile.
“ Come, this is good,” he said, as he felt the quiet,
even pulse. “ Nurse, you may try a little strong broth
now, a little at a time, and very often.”
And when they were both gone, Dulcie was
conscious of a strange face in the room, a sweet, strong
face, and a soft hand that touched hers so gently.
And this was Miss Thorpe, the Matron, Nurse
Blythe told her.
Then everything grew uncertain again, and when


next she woke the head nurse came forward with a
cup in which was something that smelt delicious.
Will she ever forget that first spoonful of broth ?
“ It’s lovely,” she said, as Nurse Blythe put her
head gently back on the pillow. “I’ve never tasted
anything so nice.”
“ It’s the first thing you have taken, you see, lassie.”
But Dulcie was sure that wasn’t the reason.
Then Teddie must needs come in, and jump on the
locker, just where the girl’s weak hand could reach
him, and purr and rub his big, handsome head against
her with a stately joy very pleasing to behold.
Now the lights were lowered, and a night nurse
took Nurse Blythe’s place.
Dulcie closed her eyes, and knew nothing more till
the faint winter dawn roused the inmates of the hos-
pital to activity.
And when the head nurse came in in the morning,
Dulcie raised her arms a little, and clasped her round
the neck.
“I do love you,” she whispered. “ I believe you have
saved my life.”


CHAPTER XXII.
“IT WAS MADNESS, JACK.”
“ In his eye
There was a quepchless energy,
A spirit that could dare
The deadliest form that death could take.”
L. E. L.
It was over.
The simplest wedding ceremony that had ever been
performed in Hurls tone!
Mrs Vaughn gave it as her opinion that it was
“really hardly sacred, you know. Actually in the
house, and not even a bridesmaid! ”
But Una thought differently.
The old white-haired minister who had laid his
hands on her baby head so many years before, and
given her her name, had come from a great distance
to have her take the new name, and bid her God-
speed in the life which lay before her.
I am quite sure one would have had to search far
indeed to find a lovelier bride, though her simple dress


was not of the regulation silk, and her bouquet a cluster
of white roses, which Jack had picked from the garden
only a few minutes before.
And I think the vows uttered that beautiful morning
were felt to be just as solemn as though they had been
spoken in a crowded chinch, in the hearing of a large
assemblage of people.
There were two guests, two only.
“ I think Mona would like it, Alan,” Una had said
when they had talked it over. And he had answered,
“ Be it so, little woman.''’
Three hours later, Mr Gwynne uttered the last fare-
well at the railway station.
“ I know you’ll be happy,” he said, wringing the
doctor’s hand. “It w'as like you, but I am utterly
unworthy of the honour you paid me to-day.”
“ Make yourself worthy,” was the kind grave answer,
“ not of that, but of her.”
They were sitting by the fire that evening, and Eric’s
soft hand had slipped itself into his.
“ Eex, when you get married
“ When I get married !
“ Oh, you will some day, won’t you ? Most people do
you know.”
“Yes, lad, most.”-
“ When you do, it would be nice to have a wedding
like Dr Muir’s. And I think it had better be soon,
Eex.”
Oh, the strange radiance of the big, dark eyes. Eex


turned abruptly from their clear gaze, and his heart
stirred wildly. But no shadow crossed the childish
face.
“ Perhaps,” he said, musingly, “ God might let me
come even if I was in heaven. Do you think He
would ? ”
Perhaps—He might, little chap.”
There would have to be a bride, wouldn’t there ? ”
I fancy so, Eric.”
And you would have to pick one for yourself ? ”
I believe that would be necessary too.”
“ Because, Bex, I don’t think it would do for you to
marry anyone but Mona.” Then with an eager plead-
ing in his voice, “ Don’t marry anyone else, Bex; I think
—it would make Mona sorry.”
“ Make yourself worthy, not of that, but of her.”
Had he guessed too ?
But the days that followed were dark ones. For a
terrible sickness had come into the town, had come
unexpectedly, and over many homes the Angel of
Death hovered.
Jack coming in one afternoon, weary and dejected,
found an urgent summons waiting him—a frenzied
appeal from Mrs Vaughn to come at once to her little
daughter, and the symptoms she enumerated brought
a grave look into his face.
“ Diphtheria,” he said quietly to himself, and then
went.
He found everything in wild confusion, the child


lying in a state of stupor, the face deeply flushed, the
breathing gasping, ominous.
“For pity’s sake do something, doctor,” Mrs Vaughn
had said almost fiercely. “Dr Derrick has acted like
a fool.”
He came swiftly to the bedside and bent down.
Then his face grew graver. There was no time to be
o o
lost; it might even now be too late for Tracheotomy to
avail, but it must be tried.
They watched breathlessly, but the fever flush
deepened, the child was struggling desperately for
her breath.
Mrs Vaughn threw herself down beside the bed. “Dr
Cranston, she is dying. Is there nothing you can do ?”
His face had become deadly pale; yes, there was
something.
Ah, Jack—if you had thought!
But he thought of nothing, save that a life was going.
He stooped, and applying his lips to the tube inserted
in the throat sucked from it the membrane that was
fast blocking up the air tubes ! Then he staggered back.
An hour later went clicking along the wires the
telegram which cut short Dr Muir’s holiday, and
brought a wild fear to his heart.
“ A message from Mrs Vaughn, Una. Ido not quite
understand, but w T e must go back to Hurlstone to-night,
if it is possible. I fancy we can catch a luggage train if
we go at once.”


Then he told her as gently as possible that Jack
was ill.
“ It may be nothing serious, little lady, but he will
be all alone, and we know what he is for neglecting
himself;’
So they started out on that anxious journey, know-
ing so little, fearing so much.
That the telegram should have come from the one it
did was the strangest part of all.
Hurlstone at last, after weary hours of suspense, and
waiting for them Mrs Vaughn’s carriage.
She met them with a face in which anxiety blended
with relief.
“Mr Vaughn wanted to meet you, but I thought I
could explain better—drive straight to Dr Muir’s,
John—l was hoping you would catch this train, there
is no time to be lost indeed; I got your address from
Dr Cranston at once, for I didn’t know what your
locum tenons might be like, and I shrank from the
responsibility.”
But Dr Muir cut her short with a stern
“ Kindly tell us what is wrong, Mrs Vaughn ; you
must remember we know nothing.”
“ He was attending my little girl for diphtheria—you
must not blame me, for I think it was a most fool-
hardy action, one a homeopathist would not have done,
of course. We were terribly anxious, and I suppose
we agitated him. He put the tube in her throat, you
know, and then drew the membrane away with his lips


—such a dreadfully dangerous thing to do. Of course
we are very grateful to him, but at the same time Mr
Vaughn and I both felt the responsibility too much,
and sent for a nurse to the Homeopathic Hospital this
afternoon, as I wish you to undertake Trixie’s case.”
But he wasn’t listening;.
O
The buggy had stopped, and he lifted Una out.
“We will talk of that again, Mrs Vaughn. Come,
my darling.”
He drew her trembling hand through his arm.
“Oh Una, what madness I Don’t, my dear; I feel
sure that I am here in time.”
But even as he spoke, his heart died within him.
They often looked back to it afterwards with a
shudder, for the fear grew as the days sped.
“I would like to know the very worst,” Una had
pleaded, and her husband had answered her gravely,—
“ I will not deceive you, dear. If he had given himself
time to think, it would never have been done ; he knows
as I know, that in almost every case it has but one
ending.”
“ If—it should come—you will let me see him ? ’
“ Dear, I cannot—l have promised him.”
But he came back to them a quieter, graver Jack ;
and one evening when his old ways were being resumed,
and he was strong enough to walk from room to room,
they had a long, earnest talk.


“ It was wrong, Alan.”
“It was madness, Jack. I know your motive, brave
old fellow, but see here—a doctor’s life should be sacred,
guarded most carefully from every danger, for on him
depend others. It is never right for a medical man to
throw away his valuable life on the chance of saving
one with no responsibilities.”
“ I had been out of sorts, a little morbid perhaps,
and I felt as if I must do it at all costs.”
“Yes, it was impulse, no doubt. There—don’t let
us talk of it any more.”
“ And it seemed as if my life were worth very little.”
Alan Muir’s eyes suddenly filled with tears. Grave
and undemonstrative as he was, he turned, and laid his
hand on his friend’s shoulder, his face full of feeling.
“You didn’t know, old chap, that to Una and me
there is no one like Jack ; if you had died !—ah, well,
you didn’t.”


CHAPTER XXIII.
TEDDIE “THE SECOND.”
Her eye—it seems a chemic test,
And drops upon you like an acid;
It bites you with unconscious zest,
So clear and bright, so coldly placid.
Lowell.
“ I suppose I must introduce myself, as West’s wits
are wool gathering—l am Nurse Sharp, and represent
Nurse Blythe till she is free from her special case.”
Mona bowed quietly.
She had entered the ward prepared to see a strange
face, for the night before Nurse Mayne had been
called out to nurse a case in one of the suburbs, and
her last words had been, “ Keep your eyes about you,
Leigh ; if Sharp is put on in my place, she’s specially
down on probationers.”
And she had supposed herself forewarned, and
forearmed ; but imagination had fallen short of reality,
High metallic voice, dictatorial manner, thin, pointed
features, clear, cold eyes— sharp, in short.
Never did a name suit anyone so perfectly.


With those light eyes searching her face, her cap,
her whole figure, she felt almost as if she were
being subjected to examination under a microscope,
and she raised her dark, proud eyes steadily and un-
flinchingly.
Nurse Sharp turned away with an amused smile,
but a very ordinary observer would have foreseen “ war
to the knife ” between these two.
The patients were all looking subdued; even Mrs
Grumbul was reduced to an extraordinary state of
meekness.
Nurse Sharp had a way of quelling the most unruly
spirits, a way quite her own, and one you wouldn’t have
coveted probably.
Mona was quietly going about her usual work when
the disturbing voice broke upon her ear.
“ I was really under the impression that you were
a pupil, Leigh; and as such should have waited for
my orders.”
There was a visible titter from one of the beds, and
Mona’s face flushed a little.
“ This is my ordinary work, Nurse Sharp, appointed
me by the head nurse,” with a dry emphasis that
stung, while it exasperated. “Do you wish me to do
anything else ? ”
“ Do you understand how to make beds ? ”
“ I believe so ” —very demurely.
“ Let me see you make this one.”
A naughty little smile played round Nurse Leigh’s


lips, but she gravely went through her task with
elaborate care, then stood back, with much the air of
a child who has been given twenty lines to write.
“Would you like me to take it to pieces and
make it again, Nurse Sharp ? ” she asked, with pro-
found innocence, though her eyes were dancing. And
Nurse Sharp turned on her heel.
“ Lou can make up the cot in the corner—there’s a
new patient coming in this morning; then collect the
empty bottles and take them down to the dispensary.
Good gracious, West! are you going to be all day with
that basket ? ”
Poor little Nurse West, she looked almost frightened
as the shrill voice rang through the ward, and Mona’s
lips opened, then shut again.
The patients noticed that Nurse Leigh held her
head a little more proudly than usual, and that her
face was very pale, but few guessed at the turmoil
that throbbed below the surface.
The cot was soon prepared for its occupant, and
she thought of the baby girl who had come in suffering
so terribly from her burns, and gone out in such laugh-
ing delight.
She lingered a little, smoothing the soft bedclothes,
then went down to the dispensary.
When she came back she found plenty of work
waiting her. Never had she felt so awkward, so
utterly incompetent. Her usual duties were quietly
apportioned to Nurse West, and it seemed to her


that the newcomer took delight in degrading her in
the eyes of the patients, setting her to trivial tasks
such as any child could accomplish; she grew, too,
to dread the loud voice and the sneering remarks.
Once a question had been asked, and answered with
a contemptuous—“ Oh, ask Leigh; she’s one of the
oldest nurses here.” And do what she could Mona
couldn’t prevent the crimson glow deepening in her
face.
Oh, I can’t tell you one half of the petty vexations
she had to endure that morning. One never minds
a good storm, which, when it has done, stops; it
is the incessant, thundery weather that tries both
mind and body. And Nurse Sharp’s sharpness was
perennial.
Everyone felt the influence of the disturbed atmos-
phere, and never had the sick folk been so exacting,
Mona thought, as she wearily trudged from one to
another, and listened to the endless complaints.
Two only retained their equanimity—little Mrs
Walters, who, in spite of her constant suffering, and the
plaster of Paris jacket that supported her weak, bent
back, managed to somehow keep cheerful with it all;
and Jessie Naughton, who was well enough now to
resume Joey’s whistling lessons, and to smile brightly
and vividly each time Mona passed her.
At about eleven a slight commotion occurred, and
Nurse Hope, the tall, merry-faced head nurse of one
of the other wards, entered with a screaming, kicking


bundle in her arms, which, on being deposited on a
chair, turned out to be a wee, old-fashioned looking
boy, with a face flushed by crying, and two tiny,
grubby feet sticking out from the large shawl which
enveloped him.
Nurse Hope surveyed him comically, her face
dimpling all over with sunny laughter.
“ Plenty of dirt,” she said, drolly,“ also tears. You’ll
find a good deal of trouble in reducing the latter, I
fancy, Nurse Leigh.”
“Go away,” announced the small atom of humanity
from his chair. “ I don’t like you”
“ Complimentary, isn’t it ? You’re frank, at any rate,
“I’m not Frank, I’m Teddie.”
“ Oh, I think not; that’s our cat’s name.”
Teddie “ the second ” opened his eyes wide.
“You don’t have cats here,” he said, nodding his
head sagely.
“ Don’t we ? you’ll see. I’m afraid, Nurse,” she added
brightly, as Nurse Blythe opened the door of the inner
ward, and came towards them, “ Teddie ‘ the second ’
will keep you alive.”
“ I’m inclined to believe you,” the head nurse said
grimly, as she eyed the culprit, glancing up at her with
dark, impish face. “ Sharp, I wish Leigh to undertake
this case entirely.”
“ Certainly, Nurse.”
“And I think the first thing to be done, Leigh,”


with a twinkle in her eyes, “ will be to get rid of some
of that superfluous dirt.”
Teddie stuck out the offending feet and eyed them
fondly.
“ Them ain’t dirty,” he said, with a mild surprise at
their fastidiousness.
“No, I should put it more strongly,” said Mona
merrily, stooping over him, but he pushed her away,
and announced loudly, and with great determination,
that “ he would not be washed.”
“You’ve got a case there, Leigh,” Nurse Blythe said,
as she disappeared.
“ I won’t be washed! ” Teddie reiterated, but
apparently changed his mind, for under a vigorous
application of soap and water, the black, unwholesome
exterior gave way, and two tiny pink feet came into
view.
There, said Mona; “ that wasn’t so bad. was it ? ”
What’s your name ? ” he demanded.
Nurse Leigh.”
I like you, but I dont like Acr,”.and -the finger was
unmistakably pointed straight at Nurse Sharp.
“ You must not say that.”
“ Why not ? ”
Then in a shrill, raised voice, “|She’s got a nasty,
cross face, and I don’t like her. I’m not going to bed,”
as Mona turned down the clothes, and prepared to lift
him m. “I want my crutches, I expect she’s hid
them.”


“If you say that again,” said Nurse Sharp, sternly,
shaking her fist at him as she passed. “ I'll get the
straps and strap you down.”
It was an idle threat, but it terrified Teddie.
“ I’ll be good,” he sobbed, clinging to Mona, and she
lifted him tenderly into the pretty cot, and tucked the
clothes round the tiny limbs, so wasted, so shrunken.
“ m tell the doctor you’re very nice,” he said, with
gracious condescension, April smiles chasing away the
tears. “ I daresay you know Dr Bright ? ” with an odd
assumption that made Mona laugh. “ He’s my very
own doctor.”
“ Is he, indeed ? ”
“ Yes, he doesn’t hurt me much, not very much, but
I’d like to see my crutches,” and he started up in bed
and looked sharply roimd.
“Never mind the crutches, little man.”
“ But I’m sure to want them this afternoon; I’m
going home then.”
O O
Poor little mite, many weary afternoons before you
go home!
“Would you like something to play with ?”
“Eh ! oh, toys do you mean ? I’ve got lots at home
—nicer ones than you’ve got.”
“ Oh, I don’t know about that; you haven’t seen
what we’ve got yet.”
“ You can bring some, if you like,” with an unchild-
like air of indifference ; “ only don’t go away. I’ll cry
if you do.”


Nurse West stole up, and smiled at the odd face
on the pillow. “Is he ready, Nurse? I fancy Dr
Cameron is coming to him now.”
Teddie puckered up his face as the doctor came to
the cot. Well he knew, poor baby, that it meant
more pain, and he began to sob softly to himself.
But the hands that touched him were very gentle,
and he soon checked his tears, only drawing a long
breath occasionally, as the heavy weights were attached
to the deformed, withered limb, and swung outside
the cot.
Hip joint disease, and a very bad case of it, Dr
Cameron said.
In the afternoon the mother came, a poor young
thing, scarcely more than a girl, shabby, and untidy,
with a thin face that lit up at sight of her boy’s
comfortable surroundings, and to her Teddie talked
excitedly, offering his opinion pretty freely about
everything and everybody.
And when she went, the tears broke out afresh, till
Mona coaxed him to listen to the most wonderful
fairy tale that was ever invented.
Then Teddie “ the first ” came to make his namesake’s
acquaintance; and the two swore eternal friendship.


CHAPTEK XXIV.
NURSE TUG.
“ Would you listen to his boasting,
Would you only give him credence,
No one ever shot an arrow
Half so far and high as he had ;
Ever caught so many fishes,
Ever killed so many reindeer,
Ever trapped so many beaver !
None could run so fast as he could,
None could dive so deep as he could,
None had made so many journeys,
None had seen so many wonders,
As this wonderful lagoo,
As this marvellous story-teller ! "
Hiawatha.
They had reached Melbourne just as the shades of
evening darkened over the city,—Eric and he.
He had thought much of that other journey taken
so long ago, when he had told himself that life in the
quiet mining town would be mere existence, stagnation !
And now ? He found himself looking back shudder-
ingly. It had been so terribly full! And the cruellest
wrench of all was to come.


He looked at the sleeping child beside him, and his
face paled.
He could never deceive himself again—a time would
come—very soon now—when he would long in vain
for the warm pressure of clinging arms and the eager,
shining love in the beautiful dark eyes, when he would
stretch out his hands longingly and draw them back
empty.
But until then there should not be the slightest wish
unrealised that he could fulfil; he would let everything
go for Eric!
So they had come to Melbourne, into the thick
of the lights and the bustle. Mr Gwynne roused
his boy gently, and a minute later stood on the
Spencer Street Station, answering Dick Norris’s
eager greeting.
“Well, this is jolly,” Dick said, talking fast that
he might lose the memory of the pallid face Eric had
turned to him. “ I got your note yesterday, and after
banking hours, took a spin down to St Kilda on my
bike and looked up diggings for you. There’s a kind
of forty-seventh cousin of mine who keeps lodgers
there, a real good old party, who’ll look after Eric like
a mother, and feed him up like a prize turkey. You’ll
tram it, I suppose ? ”
“ Shall we go in the tram, little chap ? ”
Eric nodded.
“Thats the style. If you grab the Gladstone, Eex,
I’ll perch this youngster.”


The thin face was lit up with vivid colour. He
would soon see Mona now !
So they took their places, and, changing cars at
Princes’ Bridge, were soon being borne swiftly along
the St Kilda Eoad.
Once Mr Gwynne bent to Eric, and whispering,
seemed to point out some place. And Dick, looking
out, noticed that they were passing the hospital
Eric sprang up and peered out through the window,
perhaps with a fancy that Mona must know he was
there and see him, and the glow in his face deepened.
Long after they had passed he leant so, looking out.
At that moment, had they but known it, she was
leaving the dimly lighted ward and climbing with
weary feet the stairs to the nurses’ quarters ; listening
half mechanically to the rumble of the tram car.
And that night, when Eric was in a sound, tranquil
sleep, and Dick’s estimable relation kept delighted
guard over him, the two friends walked into town, and
talked of Hurlstone and old times.
But when Piex returned alone and repassed the
hospital gates, he lingered for a minute or two, look-
ing in; and then he turned away, his face work-
ing painfully. The gulf that separated them was
unbridgable—perhaps it was better that he should
know it!
Next morning Mona wakened to the duties that lay
before her with a light-heartedness she always ex-
perienced on her “ day off.”


She even received a snub from Nurse Sharp at
breakfast with smiling indifference, much to that lady’s
secret annoyance.
Teddie “ the second ” was singing as she entered the
ward, an occupation he was generally engaged in when
he was not crying.
Now Teddie’s singing was like everything else he
did, decidedly emphatic, pronounced, and singularly
penetrating; consisting for the most part of a dismally
nasal drawling of such popular street airs as he had
from time to time picked up, and embellished with
variations as original as they were striking.
His repertoire was not extensive; but he more than
overcame the deficiency in this direction by the cheer-
ful patience with which he would go over and over again
the same tunes, never stopping till he was literally out
of breath, or frightened into silence by a threat from
Nurse Sharp.
He finished an exquisite rendering of “ The Cows are
in the Corn,” doing full justice to the echo, and wound
up with a high note worthy of a trained singer, then
looked at Nurse Leigh with a perfectly bewitching
smile.
“ I’ve sung it ten times,” he said, dreamily; “ that’s
better than crying, isn’t it ? ”
Mona’s mouth twitched rebelliously.
“ Nurse, cant you stop that child ?” came in a
querulous voice from one of the beds; “ there’s no
peace with him.”


Teddie looked hurt.
“ Doesn’t she like it ? ” he asked, incredulously.
“ I think, Teddie, if you could keep quite quiet for a
while, it would be an improvement,” she said, merrily ;
“ try it for an hour.”
“Not sing for a whole hour ?”
“ You try. See, I’m going to toss up your bed, and
wash your face and hands, then you’ll feel as fresh as
a daisy.”
“ And then can I sing ? ”
“ Perhaps; I’ll see. What have you got under your
pillow ? ”
“ Her scissors; she left them on the chair and I
boned them.”
“ Oh, Teddie!
His lip quivered, but in his eye a naughty light
sparkled.
“ She slapped me last night, hard. Are you going
to tell me some more about the goblin ? ”
“ I am afraid I can’t,” said Mona, mournfully, watch-
ing to see the effect; “ I said, if you were good.”
“I’ll take her handkerchief next time.”
No answer. Mona went quietly on with her work,
drying the small, mischievous hands with her customary
gentleness, but Teddie knew what her silence meant,
and at last something bright left the big eyes, not
mischief this time! Then the we u , soapy face was
rubbed coaxingly against hers, and two weak, thin arms
closed about her neck.


“You can tell her I took them,” he gulped; “I
won’t do it never again. Now will you tell me about
the goblin ? ”
Things had resumed their old footing since Nurse
Blythe had come back to the ward, and Nurse Sharp
grew decidedly meeker ; but occasionally a bone of con-
tention arose, and who could pick more fiercely than
“Snarleyas Teddie “the second” invariably called
her, —when she was out of hearing ?
So the morning passed, then for Mona came—home.
And there Eric was waiting for her, with frantic
demonstrations of delight; and they had a long, happy
time together.
When the first flush had died away, and the child
lay back, white and exhausted, in the big, easy chair,
something in his listless attitude thrilled her with
pain.
“I think, my dearie,” her mother said later, “we
had better wait tea for Mr Gwynne; he spoke of being
back early for Eric.”
But he had not come when Mona set out for the
hospital, with Harold walking moodily by her side.
“He was getting on pretty well; of course it was
awful grinding. Yes, he supposed he should do right
enough.”
But on Mona’s brave heart the old shadow had
fallen, and the quiet sorrow she had thought almost
subdued lately, was stirred into throbbing grief.
And it seemed a little hard, when, as she was dressing


Jessie Naughton the next morning for her daily “ sitting
up ” in the chair by the fire, the girl told her of “ the
kind gentleman from Hurlstone, who had been to see
her and brought her some fruit.”
It was good of him, of course, very; but had he
wished to miss her ? Had he picked that time to
visit the hospital because he knew she would be
away ?
“He told me,” Jessie said, gratefully, “ that there
were ever so many in Hurlstone who were glad I was
getting better, and when I told him how good the
nurses had been to me, he asked me which one I liked
best.”
“ And you said ? ” Mona asked it merrily, with
a pretty pink flush on her cheeks.
“ That I liked them all, but that I loved Nurse
Leigh, for I do,” continued Jessie, with an earnest look
into the bright face so near hers; “ and he seemed
quite pleased.”
“ I think, Jessie, you are a little flatterer; come, are
you ready ? ”
It had been late one cheerless afternoon when Mrs
Vaughn’s telegram was received, and at noon next day
Nurse V est started on her journey to care for Trixie
Vaughn through her dangerous illness.
“ Don’t let her crush you altogether, little girl,” was
Mona’s last injunction. And you know who the
“ her ” referred to.
In the private ward Dulcie still lay, very weak and


quiet as yet, a thin, shadowy creature, Marion would
tell her merrily, but the drawn face was smooth now,
and the sad eyes had learnt their old trick of smiling.
Every day Nurse Blythe grew more satisfied with
her patient, and many were the schemes she invented
for making the time pass more quickly. I don’t think
anyone but the girl herself could understand how
kindly, tenderly, thoughtful she was, or how lovingly
her eyes would smile at the “ lassie,” whom her own
great skill and care had done much to bring back from
the “ valley of the shadow.”
But Dulcie never forgot!
Marion came every day, and I don’t think I need
tell you the plans these two formed, the castles they
built, the bright, beautiful dreams, so abundantly to
be realised “ when Dulcie got better.” Many a merry
laugh rang out, and Nurse Blythe would smile well
pleased.
She believed in laughing, perhaps a little more than
she believed in medicine—and of course that is saying
a great deal.
And when Nurse Tug came the merriment was
incessant.
For Nurse Tug was
Well, suppose I tell you what she was like !
No, it’s not a nickname, though the head nurse often
declared that she was “tug” by nature as well as
name, and that never was a person so appropriately
named.


She was very small—but many truly great people
have been like her in this particular—with a diminu-
tive face of somewhat irregular contour and faded
colouring. As if —to quote Nurse Blythe again—it
had been soaked in soda, and hung out on the line all
night.
The size—or lack of size—was atoned for by the
biggest, roundest, blue eyes that were ever set in
human face.
Nurse Blythe was wont to say of these orbs, that
they had originally been an ordinary size, but had
expanded with an everlasting wonder, at a world that
never did assign to her the particular niche in life
she felt qualified to adorn.
Be that as it may, the eyes were big, and why they
were big does not concern us very much.
Nature—always impartial—had planted just between
them, and of course a trifle under, a nose “ tip-tilted
like the petal of a flower,” and immediately under this
again, the wee-est, oddest mouth that ever closed itself
O > 7
over teeth.
These latter—no, I don’t think I’d better tell you
about them; we Australians keep quiet on the subject
of teeth, and try to learn the art of smiling with our
lips shut; unless we happen to be the fortunate
possessors of a twelve guinea set—in which case we
flash two brilliant rows of ivories, and envy no one!
Nurse Tug looked up condescendingly as the head
nurse introduced Mona to her notice —it is as easy to


look condescendingly up as down, if only one has
sufficient assurance—and remarked genially, “ How do
you do, Leigh, I’m very glad to meet you.”
“ Tug has just pulled through a case that the doctors
had given up,” Nurse Blythe said wickedly; “ she
should have been head nurse long ago, only I happened
to be in the way. She’s waiting for me to die ; aren’t
you, Tug ? ”
“Now, Nurse Blythe,” expostulated the genius,
feebly.
“ It’s your modesty that keeps you from owning it;
that will always go against you, Nurse. Well, the
matron wants me. Leigh, if you want to know any-
thing, just ask Tug; she knows everything,” and then
Nurse Blythe went off, a marvel of sweet gravity.
Mona’s eyes twinkled.
But the big, azure orbs meeting hers never altered
their solemnity.
“You’re doing very well, Nurse Blythe says,” their
owner said, graciously ; “ she is very pleased with you.
She’s awfully strict though, isn’t she ? ”
“Not altogether overwhelming,” laughed Mona.
“ The worst of it is,” said her new companion, con-
fidentially, “you can’t feel quite sure whether she
isn’t laughing at you occasionally.”
“ There’s that disadvantage, certainly,” Mona allowed.
“I’ve been nursing a case for Dr Scott,” Nurse Tug
said, puffing down the ward at a tremendous rate.
“ He’s such a dear; do you know him ? ”


“Dr Scott ? No, he never comes to the hospital,
does he ? ”
“ Oh, no, but I know him very well. I’ve pulled
through a lot of his cases, and he always sends for me
when he wants a nurse. I’ve given him a number
of hints.”
“Indeed ?”
“ Now Dr Cameron is different; he won’t take a
word from a nurse—thinks he knows everything. I
suppose you’ve found that out ? ”
Mona fancied an answer to this was expected, but
her voluble companion chatted on.
“ How do you like Dr Bird ? Aren’t his eyes just
wicked ? I’ll help you with those dishes.”
How she talked!
The history of the hospital since she had appeared
on the scene of their existence—for, of course, it had
no history before—the cases she had pulled through,
the advice she had given to the matron, what she had
said to the doctors, and what the doctors had said to
her—all poured out in a never-ending stream, without
stop or pause.
Yes, Nurse Tug certainly made an immense change
in the ward.
She was so charmingly unconscious of any short-
comings of her own, so firm a believer in her own
skill, and so delightfully simple.
Occasionally she made a mistake which brought
down a sharp reproof on her head, but the blue eyes


would look so astonished, that Nurse Blythe would
relent, and often end by laughing at her.
Then the tales she would tell as they sat for a brief
rest over their cups of tea.
“ The irrepressible,” Nurse Blythe called her, but
Mona found a better name.
One evening as the head nurse was in the nurses’
sitting-room, she found a book of Longfellow’s poems
slipped into her hand, open at a certain page, and
marked.
“ Does it remind you of anyone ? ” said Nurse Leigh,
merrily.
And Nurse Blythe read :
“ Very boastful was lagoo ;
Never heard he an adventure
But himself had met a greater ;
Never any deed of daring
But himself had done a holder ;
Never any marvellous story
But himself could tell a stranger.
None had made so many journeys,
None had seen so many wonders,
As this wonderful lagoo,
As this marvellous story-teller !
Thus his name became a by-word
And a jest, among the people ;
And whene’er a boastful hunter,
Praised his own address too highly,
Or a warrior home returning,
Talked too much of his achievements,
All his hearers cried, ‘ lagoo !
Here’s lagoo come amongst us ! ’ ”


So from that time forward, Nurse Tug was desig-
nated “lagoo, the great boaster”; and laughed as
heartily over the idea as anyone did.
And I think they all had a warm corner in their
hearts for her, she was so constantly cheerful and good-
humoured.
“Taking her on the whole,” Nurse Blythe would
say, “ Tug is a very comfortable person to live with.”
And in this busy work-a-day world such people are
not without their advantage.


CHAPTER XXV.
“ AND THE WATER BETWEEN IS SO CALM.
“ He did but float a little way
Adown tbe stream of time,
Witb dreamy eyes watching the ripples play,
Or listening their fairy chime ;
His slender sail
Ne’er felt the gale ;
He did but float a little way,
And, putting to the shore
While yet ’twas early day,
Went calmly on his way,
To dwell with us no more.”
Lowell.
Operation day was slowly drawing to its close.
An unusually busy day it had been, and some of the
surgeons were still in the operating room, though in
the surgical ward nurses and patients alike were
bemnning to think about tea.
o o
Nurse Tug was the centre of a group round the fire,
where the convalescents generally first “ sat up ” in the
big, comfortable basket chairs, and to judge by the soft
laughter that came from that quarter was amusing the


company with a diverting account of some exploit, in
which she had played chief part.
Mrs Whyne, limper and more dejected than ever,
looked on with resignation, hut unsmiling.
On the morrow the hospital would know her no more.
The doctor’s fiat had gone forth, and from hence-
forward the voice of her complaining would be raised
in her own home.
Hence the gentle melancholy.
“ Grumble at a thing while you have it, and when
you have lost it make all around miserable because
you’ve lost it,” was her life motto, and nobly she lived
up to it.
“Won’t you be glad to get home?” little Mrs
Walters asked, and she gave a short sigh. She longed
so sorely for a peep of her own wee nest, and the
children, and “Jim.”
But Mrs Whyne only shook her head.
“ I’m that weak,” she said, in a “ dying-duck-in-a-
thunderstorm ” sort of voice.
“But Dr Cameron said you would gain strength
more rapidly with the change.”
“ Oh, it’s nothing to him if we all die, as long as he
gets his money.” It was Mrs Grumbul’s deep voice
that rolled this out, and she raised herself in bed to
say it.
Jessie Naughton eyed her indignantly.
“ You would not have said that if Nurse Blythe had
been here, Mrs Grumbul.”


“ No,” said the old woman, fiercely, “ but she’s as bad
as he is, every bit.”
“ I think they’re all just wonderfully kind,” replied
Jessie.
“ Kind ? wnll what should hinder it; they’re paid
for it, aren’t they ? ”
Oh, yes, Mrs Grumbul, they are paid .for attending
all day, and every day, to you, and others like you—
such tremendous salaries too that it is unreasonable
to expect gratitude to swell the sum total!
It was just as well that Nurse Tug had gone out of
hearing; easy going as she was, she was quickly roused
when anything touched the honour of her calling, or
the dear old hospital.
Tea tune was generally the very cosiest time in all
the day. The confidences that were exchanged, the
O '
harmless gossip indulged in, as those big chairs were
drawn nearer the fire!
One or two of the stronger set the table opposite,
and brought out various dainties, in readiness for the
evening meal.
M ith most of the patients there was a generous
spirit of share and share alike; and you should have
seen the turning out of lockers near tea time, especially
after visiting day ! But this was one of Mrs Whyne’s
grievances. True, she never saw fit to divide any
“ extra ’ she might possess, but she had a longing eye
for everything good, and would dearly have loved
sitting at the table with the others, and devouring


their provisions. And it was particularly provoking
to be marched off to bed, there to get the ordinary
hospital meal.
To-night it was harder than usual!
Full well she knew that Mrs Walters had a beauti-
fully boiled fowl, and that Mrs Walters was liberal
almost to prodigality ! Oh, it was no wonder she was
sore in spirit; what say you ?
In the private ward, Dulcie Desmond was sitting
up in bed for the first time, an event which made
Marion’s eyes very bright and wistful, as she hovered
about her, and occasionally gave her a feverish
caress.
Here too was Mona, busily pulling out some cotton
wool and rolling up the white, fleecy masses into soft
bundles, slipping out now and then as an imperious
call for “ Nurse Leigh ” came from Teddie “ the
second’s ” corner.
In the outer ward Nurse Tug was particularly busy ;
fussing over her particular charges, or puffing along on
some important mission of her own.
Work that other people accomplished easily and
quietly, Nurse Tug laboured over; she did it, but she
did it noisily, and let everyone know she was doing it
—a not uncommon characteristic, by the way, of a
good many folk one meets with nowadays!
She had just towed Mrs Whyne off to bed—that
fascinating individual going along with the air of a
lamb about to be slaughtered, and casting many a


“longing, lingering look behind ” —and was administer-
ing a lecture to Mrs Grumbul, when Nurse Blythe
came in, looking anxious and worried.
“ Tug, tell Leigh to get ready at once the bed in the
room next to Miss Desmond’s, as quickly as ever she
can do it,” and Nurse Tug, staring open mouthed, found
that the head nurse had disappeared again.
Mona asked no questions, simply did her work with
all haste, and stood waiting.
7 O
What poor creature were they going to bring in.
She was not quite so used to it yet but that her
heart beat more quickly, and her face paled. A
moment later she turned sick and faint.
He had often begged his brother to bring him to the
hospital
Now he had come !
One moment only she looked at the motionless
figure, then her eyes met such a white, agonized face
that her mouth quivered, and she turned her head away.
Such dull, heavy despair she had never seen before !
Quietly, steadily they worked, and at last Mr
Gwynne turned nervously at Dr Stuart’s touch.
“ Is it—death ? ” he asked, hoarsely.
The doctor shook his head pityingly. It was not
t licit
“He is coming round; and I do not think he will
suffer at all,” he said, gently.
But Bex walked almost abruptly to the window and
looked out.


Nurse Blythe beckoned to Mona, and they went
into the outer ward.
“ Just a minute, Nurse—Mr Gwynne says the child
is fond of you \ you would like to look after him
altogether I expect? Unfortunately there is very
little to be done.”
“ Oh, Nurse Blythe, what is it ? ”
“ Failure of the heart; he had a fright in some way,
and fainted. Dr Stuart happened to be passing,
fortunately, and seeing there was something seriously
wrong, he advised his being brought here at once.
You had better go back now; he will have to stay here,
the men’s wards are full. Tug must see after the tea;
Sharp is in the operating room, and will help me.’"
Dr Stuart passed out as she went in, with a grave
“ There is nothing to do but give him this when he
comes to, Nurse; he is partially round now.”
But the white eyelids still lay heavily on the thin
cheek, and only a fluttering breath, faint and weak,
parted the pallid lips.
Mr Gwynne looked at her intently as she came to
the bedside, the tall, graceful girl in her lilac uniform,
the pale face so beautiful in its pity and trouble, the
dark waves of hair beneath the dainty muslin cap—
looked and compressed his lips.
“ Are you to nurse him ? ”
“ Yes. You —do not mind ? ”
“ Don’t make it harder,” he said, quietly; “it is
almost unbearable now.”


She bent over the child, and her lips trembled.
“ I suppose,” he continued in a dull, hard voice that
thrilled her painfully, “ there comes a point after
which no added trouble can hurt ? ”
“ Oh, I don’t know.”
“It seems natural. I don’t think anything could
touch me after this. You do not know, how should
you? You have others to love you. When I lose
him, I lose all.”
“ It will not be losing him.”
“ It will be just that.”
“ Hush,” she said, “ he is waking.”
The beautiful eyes opened slowly, and a look of
vivid pleasure crept into them as he tried to reach
out his poor little arms to Mona.
“Is this the hospital ? Am I going to stay with
you ? ” the joy in his voice growing into ecstasy.
“ Yes, old boy; will you like that ? ”
“ Oh, yes. Mona, I like you in that dress.”
She smiled at him and stroked his head.
“ Did you carry me here, Eex ? ”
Mr Gwynne started and came a little nearer, for the
weak voice was very low and faint.
“ Yes, laddie, we carried you here.”
“ I didn’t remember walking. I’m very tired, Eex—
I don’t think I can go home to-night.”
“We won’t try, lad.”
“ I’m not ill, you know, but I wonder what has made
me so tired.”


“It is almost time for you to feel that way, little
chap ; it will soon be dark.”
“ I expect that’s it.”
In the outer ward the patients were having tea, and
the two who had been in the operation room were
back in bed. Mona lit the gas, and then Nurse Blythe
sent her off to tea, remaining herself for some time by
Eric’s bedside.
It was quite late when Mr G-wynne trod softly down
the hospital stairs, out into the night and the crowded
streets. And his face was as one in a dream.
It was such a tranquil week. He was singularly free
from pain, and Nurse Blythe in her kind thoughtful-
ness spared Mona from many duties that she might
be as much as possible with her little patient. And
even Teddie “ the second ” tried his hardest to be
patient and good without Nurse Leigh. At first he
was inclined to be dreadfully jealous, but one day he
so far relented as to send his most treasured toy in to
the “ little gentleman,” as he persisted in calling Eric,
and after that he never forgot to inquire for him, and
send all sorts of boyish messages.
He held quite a little court at times. Dick would
come often, poor Dick, with a white, troubled face, but
always a merry jest, and Eric’s eyes would grow radiant
with delight as his old favourite put his head round
the door with a gay greeting.


Now and then Marion Desmond would slip in with
«
flowers or fruit to tempt the fickle appetite, and once, as
she was sitting beside the bed, Dick Norris had made
his appearance, and Eric had quaintly introduced them
to each other.
Everyone in the hospital seemed to take a special
interest in him, and his face would glow with vivid
colour as Nurse Blythe recounted some instance of
Teddies intelligence, or brought Joey in to sing
to him.
And when the matron came in—as she did so often
—he had always ready for her some of his choicest
flowers.
Mr Gwynne saw all in a mute, mechanical way, and
sometimes he would try to thank them for their kind-
ness to his boy.
But he spoke very little now, except to Eric.
And the child, looking into the pale, worn face, saw
nothing of its pain and longing, only the quick light
of love that was always there for him, always.
I think it was perhaps then that the listless wish
grew into something more, a quiet resolve to rise to
what he might be, whatever the struggle—without any
hope of possible reward.
And the half formed purpose remained steadfast;
shaken many a time, but there!
So one quiet, waning afternoon, they realised that
gently, almost imperceptibly, Eric was leaving them.
They had all been in to see him that day—Dick, and


Mrs Leigh, and Harold, —and as the hour's passed on,
the big, dark eyes grew brighter in the tiny, wasted face.
He remembered with satisfaction that he had said
goodbye to all the doctors, that he had taken an
unusually long farewell of the parrot and Teddie, and
that Nurse Blythe had spent a full half hour at his
bedside.
“I’m glad I’ve seen them all,” he said more than
once, and Mona could not trust herself to ask why.
And in the outer ward, Nurse Blythe’s canary was
trilling his evensong.
o o
Eric lay quiet and happy, his head resting against
his brother’s arm, his eyes fixed and radiant.
“No pain anywhere, lad ?”
“ Oh no, but I think you’d better hold me tight—
* o
I’m slipping.”
Mr Gwynne put his arm round the slight figure, his
face ashy pale.
“ W ill it be this way ? ” his mute gaze implored, and
Mona bent and took the child’s cold hand.
“ Eric," she said in a low, clear voice, “ listen, dear.
I want you to remember what I told you last night.
You can’t slip, my darling. He won’t let you slip.”
“ He is frightened,” Eex said, hoarsely.
“ Oh no,” she said gladly, “ see ! ”
For the child had sprung up with eager, outstretched
arms, the beautiful eyes shining as if some lovely
picture were before him.
“ Come too, Eex.”


“ Oh, child, if I could ! ”
“ You will some day, won’t you ? ”
The sunset light came in in a full tide of glory, red,
and primrose, and purple, staining the sky with ever
changing brilliance, ever varying form.
But Eric saw beyond !
“ It’s like the picture in Pilgrim’s Progress ” he said,
feebly ; “ don’t you see it, Rex ? ”
“ The sunset, little chap.”
“No, I think—it must be Heaven—and the water
between is so calm.”
Were his feet even now T touching that dark river,
the tiny baby feet that had walked their short life
journey so weakly ?
“ Eric, dear lad, you’re not frightened.”
The little arms went up around his neck, in the old
fond, clinging way.
“Oh no, Rex—l think you had better kiss me now,
and let me go.”
The soft sunset lights had faded, calmly, lingeringly.
Above, in the clear, far dome, flashed a million
quivering stars, “ the forget-me-nots of the angels.”


CHAPTEE XXVI.
“GOOD-NIGHT, REX.”
“For thy dear sake I will lay hold
Of all good aims, and consecrate to thee,
In worthy deeds, each moment that is told,
While thou, beloved one, art far from me.”
Fanny Kemble.
There was a faint, subtle perfume of flowers as he
entered his room, the flowers that had lain that day
upon the tiny white coffin; and his grey face grew a
little greyer.
He had lived through it as most do, realising
nothing—knowing only that God had taken from him
his all; and that soon he would understand just what
it meant.
Outside, the dim twilight deepened into dusk, hut
he sat on, his head buried in his hands, thinking, —
thinking.
No bitter, longing cry could reach his boy now, yet
his heart uttered it again and yet again.
“ Eric—little chap”


But the darkness and the silence beat it back.
What a silence!
Then the stoical calm of years was broken, and a
great sob came choking up and shook his strong frame
with the force of its emotion.
The hours wore on, but no sleep soothed into brief
forgetfulness, and the thoughts that crowded in upon
him were too cruel to be borne.
He lit the gas, and half mechanically drew a book
towards him. And in the quaint beauty of The
Bertram Family, for a time he was carried beyond
his own crushing grief.
Now and then he came across a thought which
fairly electrified him:
“ But sorrow, real sorrow, is not life ; it is death.”
“ The Bible calls it fire. And whatever the fire may
do for us in the end, while we are in it, it burns, burns
us. And people {we, until we know) have all kinds of
instructive illustrations about the metal and the dross,
and gold'being purified in the fire ; and they come to the
furnace door and ask us how we are feeling ; they hope
we are sustained, and say it is sure to be purifying us.
“ Sustained ? We, we are being burned. Purified ?
We feel as if we were having all the evil in us vivified,
and all the good searched and found corruptible.
“He is love. He loves us. lam sure of it. But
what I feel is not the love but the fire.
“He knows what is really good for us. lam sure He
is doing right, has made no mistake, although it seems


on this earthly side entirely wrong for us all and for
me above all.”
He turned the pages eagerly, rapidly, as if every
word were going freshly and vividly to his heart, as
if every word had been written for him, and for him
alone.
Someone had stood just where he stood, and knew.
“ What I feel is not the love but the fire.”
The dawn came creeping in with its tints of pearl
and rose, and the fair light quivering over the face
and head of a quiet, kneeling figure. For Eex Gwynne
had come forth from the struggle of doubt and
unbelief more than conqueror !
It was late the next afternoon when, as she was
giving round medicines, Mona, happening to look
down the ward, saw him coming forward to meet her.
“ It was hard for you to come,” she said, sorrowfully,
with a swift glance at his pale face.
“ I had something I wanted to tell you, but I think
■you’ll be home to-morrow, will you not ? ”
:t Yes,” she said, gently.
‘ May I see you there ? ”
‘ Oh, yes.”
“Thank you. Nurse Leigh, may I see the room
once more—l would like to ”
It was very little changed. He looked mutely
round, at the pretty pansy study standing on an easel


on the duchess table, at every familiar object his boy
had lain and watched. Then slowly, lingeringly, his
eyes rested on the white, empty bed, and he turned
abruptly, composure almost forsaking him.
“ x think I will go,” he said in a strained, unnatural
voice. “ I came to try and thank you all, but I cannot,
you will tell them ? ”
“ I will,” she replied, the quick tears rising. “Mr
Gwynne, I loved him too.” He raised his face with a
quiet patience she had never seen there before.
“ I am sure you did.”
Then, with a last long look around, as if he were
trying to impress each detail upon his memory, he
bade her good-bye, and went.
They had walked for some tune in silence along
the brightly lighted street, then he turned to her
gratefully.
“ It was very good of you to let me accompany you
to-night. You can have no idea how hard it is to
always walk alone now.”
“ I think I can understand.”
“ I thought perhaps you would let me tell you of
my plans, as if —you were my sister.”
“ I should be so glad if you would.”
“ I am going to leave Hurlstone—at anyrate for
the present. Ido not think I could live there now.”
“ I had thought of that,” she said, gently.


“ Yon will find it hard to believe, but—l mean by
God’s help to lead a better life; ah, I knew I should
startle you! ” for a little cry had come from her lips.
“ I am not going to talk about the past—that you
know well, and He knows, and yet has forgiven me. I
w r anted to tell you first; I knew you would be glad.”
Her face was very pale, but her eyes were shining.
The world was beautiful for her once more. Then
she thought of Dick.
She looked up into the pale, resolute face, and saw
there the earnestness of a great purpose.
“ I think this has come just in time to save Dick,”
she said, her voice trembling a little; “ a long while
ago we had a talk together, and he almost frightened
me. He said if he could hear of anyone who had
been—as he was—and yet had conquered, he might
have hope. I told him of one, but what you can tell
him ”
“ Yes,” with a sudden bright smile. “ Dick will find
the way back very easily, Miss Leigh; he has been
there before, you know. How strange it seems that
you and I should be talking about these things! ”
“ Yes,” she said, unsteadily.
“ I am going up to Hurlstone to-morrow, to arrange
matters. I am then coming back to Melbourne to
study law, and between studying hours I must teach.
Tilings are not as they were with me, and I shall have
to start again. 1 am a poor man now, Miss Leigh—
I heard from Vaughri this morning to the effect that


the ‘ North Extended ’ has come down with a crash,
and Ido not intend to speculate in the future. For
some it may be safe, for me it is—fatal.”
His face had clouded, as if a shadow from the past
were very near, but even Mona did not quite know
what bitter memories crowded about his heart, as he
spoke of the man whom so many had cause to dread.
He had it in his pocket now, the letter that had
come that morning, with its flavour of hypocritical
cant and conventional sympathy in his bereavement.
The very writing had chilled him, so beautifully
perfect was it in every particular; so coldly elegant.
He had reminded him that “in the midst of life
we are in death,” and had then gone on to say that he
was the bearer of ill tidings, hesitated to mention it
at such a time —but business was business! One
must keep believing, and hope for better times.
And then he thought of that other note, just a few
lines, so little said, so much meant.
“ We loved the little fellow too, Una and I.”
His eyes softened, and the hard lines about his
mouth relaxed.
“ I wonder if I shall ever be able to thank everyone
enough for their goodness to me ? Do you know,
when I saw you so gentle with my boy, the thought
of what I had said was very bitter to me.”
“ Ah, don’t think of that,” she said, eagerly; “ you
didn’t mean it even then.”
“ No, you are right, I did not. Perhaps, if I had


known what I know now, it would never have been
said. God knows how I honour a nurse for her brave,
unselfish life. Your mother was telling me that you
are going on night duty after to-morrow ; it will be
very trying, will it not ? ”
But she answered him brightly, “ I think the sleepi-
ness will be the worst part for the first few nights;
they say one never really gets used to sleeping in the
day.”
“ You do not dread it, then ?”
“Oh no, it is part of my work, and I couldn’t give
that up now.”
They had come to the hospital gates, and he
looked at her wistfully.
“ It will be so hard now never to hear my Christian
name from anyone. As we are to say goodbye, just
once, Mona.”
She lifted her brave brown eyes to his frankly.
“ Good-night, Eex,” she said simply, and then she
hurried up the path, and he saw her for a moment in
the lighted hall.
But he felt no longer alone.


CHAPTER XXVII.
“I MEAN JUST THAT.”
“ Sorrows are thorns and stunted plants, that spring
From out the rock their rugged roots have riven,
Building for thee, if to their stems thou cling,
A Jacob’s ladder, mounting up to heaven.
“ Lay hold of them, though hands and feet be torn,
For could’st thou see aright, each sharp-toothed thorn
Would seem an angel’s hand along the road,
To drag thee in thine own despite to God.”
Authoress of Schonberg Cotta Family.
His room was in total darkness as he entered it, and
he was searching for a light when a voice came from
the gloom.
“ Is that you, Gwynne ? ”
“ Dick ! ’ he exclaimed; “ poor old Dick, it was
good of you to come.”
But the gaslight fell upon such a strange Dick, so
hollow-eyed and haggard, that he started in alarm.
“ Are you ill ?”
“ I wish I were. Oh, Gwynne, if I were ill enough
to die, I should be glad.”
*73 s


He was terribly agitated, and his eyes were brilliant
with excitement and some strong, hidden feeling.
“ In trouble, Dick ? ”
The kind hand rested gently on his shoulder, and
he looked up and tried to smile. But it was a pitiful
attempt, and ended in something like a sob.
“ It’s more than trouble, Eex.”
A terrible fear fastened on his friend’s heart.
“ Tell me,” he said, quietly; “ I will help you.”
“No one can do that,” with passionate earnestness.
“ I wonder I haven’t taken my life. I waited by the
river for hours, and then was too cowardly to do it.
I wonder you don’t shrink from me ; you will when
you know. I am almost a thief—a thief, do you
hear! ”
But the eyes watching him so intently held pity;
nothing more.
“ Come, you must tell me all about it, as you would
have done in old times. Do you mean you have been
tempted to—what you spoke of once before in
Hurlstone ? ”
“ I mean just that,” he replied, brokenly.
“ You haven’t—yet, Dick ? ”
“ No, not yet; but I will to-morrow, if my courage
doesn’t fail me. I must, Gwynne. He has me in his
power completely.”
“ Who do you mean ? ”
“That smiling hypocrite, Vaughn; he has got his
foot on me at last. Oh, Eex ! what shall Ido ? ”


“ Try to tell me quietly, old man.”
“He has had a hold on me ever since I knew him.
He lent me some money one night to gamble with,
and I lost it. It was a large sum, and I have never
been able to repay it. He persuaded me to invest in
the ‘ North Extended,’ and I put all I had in it. This
morning I got a letter from him, telling of the crash,
and demanding what I owe him. If Ido not send it
within a fortnight, he says he will institute proceed-
ings.”
“And you have nothing to meet it ?”
“ Nothing till to-morrow ! ” with a shudder.
“ Gwynne, it would kill my people—they haven’t any
idea. He says, in his cool way, that I should find an
exposure of that kind rather trying. My luck has
failed me down here, and I lose every time I play.
1 I don’t seem to he able to think clearly at
times.”
Eex laid a caressing hand on the fair head, and felt
the veins throbbing fiercely beneath his touch.
“I’m so glad you came to me at once, old chap,
because it happens that I can clear all up very quickly.
Tell me just what is owing; I am going to Hurlstone
to-morrow, and will see Mr Vaughn.”
“ Rex, I can’t allow
“ Not a word, Dick, or I will not believe in your
friendship.”
“ But you must have lost, too.”
“ Not as you have.”


And then he stopped and hesitated, his face growing
strangely pale.
How should he tell Dick of the struggle of the
night before, and the victory ? Of the something
that had come into his life to alter it so completely.
He told it brokenly, awkwardly; but a rested look
came into the young, worn face, and Dick sprang up
and grasped his hand. And when Bex said earnestly,
“ Dick, old chap, it’s the only right way, let us help
each other,” there was a moment of painful silence,
but the recording angel entered another name in the
Book of Life.
The journey to Hurlstone —how did he live through
it ? hack to the old familiar places, each turn bringing
up more vividly remembrances of his boy.
Up the street where they had passed together so
often, his heart failed him, and his step faltered.
Mr Vaughn looked at the quiet, stern face as it
presented itself in his office, and his bland smile died
away.
But the words that passed between them were very
few, and he sat biting his nails for a full ten minutes
when he was once more alone.
“ That card was not skilfully played, Percy Vaughn,”
he said to himself with a snarl; “you showed your
hand too soon, and it wasn’t wise ! ”
They talked about it long afterwards, those boys of


GWynne’s, of how, coming in unexpectedly, he had bid-
den them good-bye, and how white his face had grown,
as he had begged them to forget what a life he had
led amongst them.
They had wondered, at the time, at the strong
agitation visible in every movement; wondered, and
been touched, for they had all loved Eric. And when
it was over, and he had turned almost beseechingly to
them, with a painful sense of failure at his heart,
there was a long, awkward silence.
Eyes, dreamy, merry, and grave, were fixed steadily
on their books; they did not care to let either their
master or their companions see how much his poor
little farewell speech had moved them.
But, as he came forward to bid them good-bye, one
of the boys at the back shifted uneasily, and at last
got up, blushing furiously, as everyone glanced in his
direction.
“ Three cheers for Mr Gwynne,” he cried; “ we’re
awfully sorry he’s going; and we won’t forget what
he’s said, will we, boys ? ”
A short talk with Mr Hearne, the necessary
arrangements made, and he w T as turning in the
direction of his lodgings, wiien Dr Cranston crossed
the street and held out his hand.
“ You will come home and have tea with us, won’t
you ? Come, my sister is expecting you.”
And so together they went.
It was late wiien he parted from them, and walked


slowly and with bent head along the path he had so
often taken.
Into the rooms teeming with memories of his boy,
the little treasured possessions lying about just as he
had left them!
He drew a sharp breath of agony.
No, he could never have stayed. The loneliness
would have been unendurable.
Then, with a painful effort of will, he turned from
bitter recollections of the past, and thought of that
far away hospital ward, where, for the first time,
Mona would be “on night duty.”


CHAPTER XXVIII.
ON NIGHT DUTY.
“ The right to wake while others sleep.”
Anon.
“ She hath not shrunk from evils of this life,
But hath gone calmly forth into the strife,
And all its sins and sorrows hath withstood
With lofty strength of patient womanhood.’
Lowell.
Fob the first time !
Yes, perhaps that explained her painfully apparent
nervousness, as she stood at the lower end of the ward
receiving the head nurse’s last instructions.
“ Give the new patient a drink of hot milk at nine,
another at twelve, nothing after. You will attend to
Airs Marsh’s dressings every three hours, and give
her a little broth in the middle of the night, the rest
as usual; you know pretty well what is needed.
Don’t look so pale, child, you will manage splendidly ;
here is Teddie laughing at you,” and Nurse Blythe
caught up her favourite, and patted his sleek fur.
Then, with a kind good-night, she went away, and


Mona stood listening to her retreating footsteps with
a strange new feeling of utter incompetence for the
work which lay before her.
One moment she stood, with some half-defined
purpose of calling Nurse Blythe back, if only to see
her cheery face again; then rallying all her resolution,
she turned and walked towards the fire.
Mrs Walters was watching for her coming with ill-
O O
concealed eagerness, and Mona came to her side at
once.
“ I’ve got something to show you, Nurse ; look, it was
my birthday to-day, and what do you think Jim sent
me ? He had a portrait of the children taken, and I
got it to-night.”
How the thin face glowed with pride as she pro-
duced the photo; and Nurse Leigh admired the bright
faces—all the woman’s suffering was forgotten in the
joy this little peep of home had brought.
And Mona couldn’t help thinking that there was a
delicate thoughtfulness in the far away husband’s gift
to his sick wife that might have been missing in one
o o
of far more culture and learning.
“He’s such a good fellow, Nurse Leigh; he’d do
anything to save my back. I’ve known him cook the
dinner, and dress the children for school, many a
time,” she said, as she carefully drew down the veil of
tissue paper, and smoothed it over the portrait. “ I’d
have liked fine to get better, for his sake.”
Mona’s eyes grew misty.


She knew —they all knew now —that there would
be no “getting better” in this case.
“ And so you’re going home next week ? Why,
there will be a welcome awaiting you.”
“ Yes, indeed; I used to think, when Mrs Whyne
was grumbling about going, I only wished I had her
chance, but perhaps her husband isn’t like my Jim,”
finished Mrs Walters, with a proud little smile.
And just then came an imperative summons from
Teddie “ the second’s ” corner.
“ Not asleep yet ? ” queried Mona, with lifted eye-
brows.
“That Nurse Tug’s a stupid; she said you weren’t
coming any more, because I was naughty.”
“ What have you been naughty about ?
But Teddie was deaf on occasion.
“ Why haven’t you got your cap on ? ” for Mona’s
rich, dark waves of hair were guiltless of any covering.
“That isn’t an answer,” she said, trying to look
severe; “ were you rude to Nurse Sharp ? ”
“No; and I didn’t cry once, because I knew it
would disturb the little gentleman. Is he going to
get better soon ? ”
o
He wondered why Nurse Leigh’s face was turned
away from him, and why her voice trembled as she
answered him.
“He is quite better, little man. They took him
away from us some days ago.”
“ Mean things; I’ll bet that Nurse Sharp had some-


thing to do with it. Are you going to stay here all
night ? ”
“ Yes.
“Till the morning? Oh, that’s jolly. You can-just
sit on that chair, and every time I wake I’ll see you.”
“ That’s a splendid arrangement. I am to attend
to you all night, am I ? I’m afraid the others would
have something to say to that, master Ted. Now, you
must shut your eyes, like a good, wee hoy; it’s getting
late.”
Teddie fidgeted about uneasily, then proffered a
bashful request.
“ I’ll say that prayer you taught me, if you kiss me
good-night; ” and as she bent down merrily, he clasped
his hands round her neck and gave her a frantic hug.
“ I like you best without your cap,” he declared;
“ what makes that woman squeal,” with a contemptu-
ous finger pointed in Mrs Grumbul’s direction. “Dr
Bird was laughing like fun at her to-night; I heard
him say she was as good as a ding- something, ding-
dingo ; that was it.”
“ Very possibly. Now Teddie, you must go to sleep,
and I must leave you.”
“Very well,” with a resigned sigh.
Half-past nine.
She was on her way to the pantry, when a small,
odd figure beckoned to her from the corridor.
“ I’ve got some scones for you,” puffed Nurse Tug.
“Is the coast clear ? Nurse Blythe would give it


to me if she caught me here after hours. I went into
town to-night with a gentleman friend of mine, and
as we were passing a baker’s shop I thought I’d get
some scones; they’ll be nicer than toast, and you’ll be
terribly hungry before morning.”
“ How very kind of you.”
“ Hot at all. I brought a big cloud for you, too; it
gets freezing after midnight. Bless your life, I know
all about night work; when I was on duty I did give
the doctors a time, I can tell you. Old Cameron gets
as mad as a hatter if he is called up, and I used to
get him out almost every night; ” and Nurse Tug went
off into one of her hilarious fits of laughter.
Mona joined her. Well she knew that her companion,
with all her self-confidence, was one of the most timid
nurses in creation, who, when she had to solicit a
physician’s service at an unexpected hour, crept to his
door with fear and trembling, and shook in her shoes,
till the cheery “ All right, Nurse, I’ll be there in a
moment,” answered her from within.
But all this knowledge only added pith to the
narrative, spun out as it was with many a wise shake
of the head and purse of the lip.
And, after all, what a kind soul dwelt in the small,
consequential body!
So Mona listened quietly, as she always did, though
with an occasional twitch of her mouth that betrayed
inward merriment.
“ You have a new patient to-night; my word, she’s


a caution, too,” ruminated Nurse Tug, as she came
to the end of a diverting account of some course of
treatment she had suggested to Dr Cameron, and he
had complimented her on. “ She was watching a
funeral procession from the balcony this afternoon,
fairly gloating over it, Blythe says,”—Nurse Tug in-
variably said “ Blythe ” when the head nurse was not
there to hear her. “ She says she is quite certain she
won’t get better, and even if she does, she’s sure to
have a relapse. Mrs Grumbul was on the war-path
to-day, too; spilt her tea all over the quilt, and then
tipped her dinner on to the floor. Blythe did let her
have it.”
“ I should think so.”
“ She complained to Dr Bright that we didn’t attend
to her properly, and he told her that everyone would
be glad when she went out; that she had been nothing
but a nuisance from first to last. She did look glum.
Well, I must be off; you look half asleep already.”
And with that parting consolation, she took her
departure.
The ward looked weird and strange as Mona re-
entered it, and the floor creaked loudly as she stepped
along in slippered feet. It always seemed to creak
most at night.
o
Every footstep woke an echo, tread as lightly as she
would, and again the sense of loneliness came over her,
to an alarming extent, as she looked round at the
quiet figures, and realised nervously that they all


depended on her for the long, long hours until morning
should come.
She felt heavy, almost drowsy, for she had slept
little in the day, and this roused a fear that chilled
and numbed her with its dreadful possibility.
If she should go to sleep !
At present there seemed no danger, most of her
charges were awake, and inclined to be fretful; there
were drinks to be got, and medicine to be administered,
and they all needed so much attention that her feet
began to tire and her face to pale long before mid-
night.
Three or four times she had gone the length of the
ward to be recalled by a fretful cry for “ Nuss ” from
Mrs Grumbul’s corner, that amiable creature being in
one of her most trying moods.
She wouldn’t sleep herself, and she wouldn’t let
others sleep; and at last Mona had to speak very
firmly to her.
At length came a lull, and she walked to the fire
and threw on fresh coal, for the night was- growing
chill; then she sat down at the table to record some
temperatures.
The last tram for the night had passed; she could
hear the faint, far away reverberation, and only a
stray cab or hansom rattled along the St Kilda
Road.
While the traffic had lasted, it had been almost
company; now it seemed as if all the rest of the world


were sleeping, and she were left to watch, the only
wakeful one in the city.
She looked around the ward with its twilight dim
and uncertain, save where the fire threw out a ruddy
glow, and the big bottles on the table opposite caught
the reflection, and repeated it in broken, fitful light,
paler, more fleeting.
There was a not very subdued sound of snoring
proceeding from Mrs Grumbul’s bed, and it was
echoed on all sides, till it swelled out into a perfect
chorus, a melody hardly enlivening, to say the least
of it.
She trod lightly over to Teddies cot, and stood
there for a moment.
He was lying in a tranquil sleep, his small, thin face
more childlike and winning than it ever was in wakinar
hours, looking as God meant it to look, free from care,
and innocent, the red lips that could utter such sharp,
shrewd words curving in babyish lines, and the dark
lashes lying heavily on his cheek.
Slipping into the pantry she lit the gas under the
small kettle, and heated some broth for one of the
patients, before she indulged in a much needed cup of
tea.
Nurse Blythe’s canary was asleep in his cage, but he
gave a drowsy “ cheep ” as she passed him, and Teddie
arched his back, and finally jumped into her lap,
thrumming lustily as she broke off bits of scone and
placed them at his disposal.


Then he followed her into the ward, and, selecting a
hassock at the fire, curled himself into a round ball,
and was at peace with the whole world.
He didn’t know how Mona longed for his privilege,
how wearily she wished she might creep away and let
her eyes close, if only for one brief, delicious hour, how
her brain reeled dizzily occasionally, and how stiff and
heavy her eyelids felt, as if they would drop, and shut
out all but dreams —so he just curled himself up more
tightly in the sleepy warmth of the space before the
fire, the picture of elegant ease.
Once she leaned her head on her hand, and felt a
soft languor stealing over her ; then she roused herself
with a start, a wild fear seizing her heart.
For someone had called.
Had she really slept, had she
But it was only Mrs Walters.
“ How dreadfully tired you look, Nurse ; couldn’t you
sit down ? ”
Mona shook her head, and the colour returned to
her cheeks.
“ I daren’t, Mrs Walters; I feel terribly sleepy as it
is; had you been speaking to me long ?’’
“ Oh, no, Nurse. I wish you could rest a bit.”
“ Oh, I need no rest; I must attend to Mrs Marsh
now, I see she is awake.”
A moment later, she had dressed her patient’s
terrible burns with a skill that brought a low “ Thank-
you ” from the sufferer’s lips.


And, some of the others waking, she found her hands
pretty full for the next hour or so.
I can’t tell you how beautiful she looked as she
moved about, a veritable ministering angel; her great,
dark eyes shining like stars in the sweet, tired face,
the rich waves of hair falling heavily upon her fore-
head, and resting in a big, soft coil against the lilac of
her uniform. Several times she had stolen into
Dulcie’s room, but always to find her in a sweet,
tranquil sleep.
The thin face was beginning to take on rounder
curves, and a pink colour, soft and delicate, was tinge-
ing her cheeks.
But best of all, one crutch had already been thrown
aside, and Nurse Blythe declared that the other would
very soon follow suit.
And once Dulcie had limped the whole length of the
ward, leaning on the head nurse’s arm.
Oh, I can assure you, the Homeopathic Hospital
doesn’t do things by halves.
It does not say much about itself, this institution;
it is singularly modest indeed, but some day it
will be recognised and appreciated as it should be;
and I fancy that day is not very far distant.
And, in the meantime, there are many who keep for
it loving, grateful memories in their hearts.
Teddie “ the second ” had wakened, and was
whimpering peevishly as Mona came towards him; he
was hot and thirsty, and suffering greatly with his hip,


but he subdued his cries, and was quite good and
patient, as she sat beside him, soothing him with her
low, gentle voice.
Presently his eyes closed, and she got up wearily.
As the night advanced the cold grew intense, and
she shivered as she knelt for a moment in front of
the fire, and spread out her hands to the dull, red
glow.
And the chill night wind brought to her ears the
sound of the city clock, chiming the hour.
Three!
She found herself wondering how the streets, that
echoed to the tread of so many feet in the light of day,
looked in the darkness and the silence, and a vague
sense of desolation swept over her.
“ Nurse! ”
It was Jessie Naughton who was calling her, and
she hurried to her side.
“ I meant to be awake when you came in, Nurse
Leigh ; is it late ? ”
“Just three, Jessie.”
“ I’m going to-morrow, did you know ? Dr Stuart
said to-night I was quite well enough to travel, and I
was so afraid I shouldn’t get these cuffs done before I
went; you’ll wear them, won’t you ? your hands must
get so cold.”
“ I should think I would,” Mona said, drawing them
on at once, to the girl’s delight; “ how very kind of you
to think of them.”


For answer Jessie caught her hand, and laid it
against her cheek.
“Nurse Leigh.”
“ Yes, Jessie.”
“It was the gentleman who came to see me that
time, that paid for mother to stop down with me—Mr
Gwynne, you know. I wish you would thank him for
us; it’s hard to thank anyone when you feel so very
much about it.”
“ I will tell him.”
“ May I kiss you just once ? ’
Mona bent, and them lips met.
Then Jessie turned her head away, and a little sob
came choking up.
They had been so good to her —and there was no
father waiting for her now at home !
Mona turned away with misty eyes.
Later, before a pale dawn trembled in the east,
she carried round to each bed a small tin dish with
warm water and soap, and a piece of lint, and those
able to, sat up and washed their faces and hands, some
sleepily, some with many a grumble at the coldness of
the morning, and the hard-heartedness of “Nurse”;
one and all anxious to get through with it, and snuggle
down under the warm bedclothes for a last sweet
sleep, before the hospital should wake to life, and the
day begin in earnest.
Some of them yawned, and blinked heavy eyes,
carrying out their ablutions in a “ lick and a promise ”


fashion, which would have struck horror to Nurse
Blythe’s heart; then, with a satisfied grunt, slipped
down on the pillows, and soon had forgotten their woes
in dreamland.
Then in the street below came the monotonous
rumble of the market carts, sounding weird in the still-
ness of the coming dawn.
It was yet quite dark, and the steady, continuous
grind of the wheels, with never a pause, produced a
strange effect on Mona’s strained nerves.
It seemed to her as if the sound had been in her ears
for horns, and would never go out of them again, and
she began to picture the long procession, wondering
what the faces of the drivers were like, and whether
they looked pale and ghastly in the chill morning air.
Then she roused herself with an effort.
There was a great deal to be done even yet, and
soon would come the much needed rest.
The faint grey in the sky turned pink, tender, yet
vivid; dark storm-clouds, low on the horizon, glow T ed
with purple and rose colour; solemnly, majestically,
the sun rose, and the dawn tints faded in the clear
light of morning.
The dreaded night had passed.


CHAPTER XXIX.
“I’VE NO OBJECTIONS.”
“ Yet far through the misty future
With a crown of starry light,
An hour of joy you know not
Is winging her silent flight.”
Adelaide Procter,
A pretty room, the one of all others for a sick room,
with its quiet tones and restful shades. The curtains
snowy muslin, with deep frills ; the hed a very marvel
of comfort, with great plump, pillows ; the eider-down
quilt resting cosily against the sleeping face of the
child, to save whose little life Dr Cranston had offered
his own. One would have found it difficult to picture
so tragic a scene enacted in these tranquil surround-
ings, such an air of rest and repose was over all, and
the whirr of the batteries came drowsily through the
half-opened window.
Certainly Nurse West’s presence had brought a
great change.
'While the danger had lasted, Mrs Vaughn had
been almost helpless with passionate grief, forgetful


of everything but her own trouble, but that was
over now, and she was finding time to make elaborate
toilettes once more, and to allow the old insolent tone
to creep into her voice.
And she considered Elsie West “ most delightfully
ingenuous; a perfect godsend. Quite too young, and
much too pretty, for a nurse,” she had remarked to
Mr Vaughn, and he had agreed with his wife, as every
husband should.
She came in now, in a rich tea-gown, grace in every
movement.
“Are you there, Nurse ? I’m sure you must be
dying for a cup of afternoon tea, aren’t you ? ”
Nurse West followed her into the handsome
dining-room, and thought of the merry group that
wnuld be gathered in the pantry at the hospital just
about this time.
Mrs Vaughn caught the sound of a suppressed sigh.
“You know,” she said, lazily, “you really should
take wine, or something to keep your strength up;
you’re looking simply awful. Don’t you think you
are much too delicate for a nurse ? ”
“ I am a great deal stronger than I look,” the gild
said, gently.
“ I thought, of course, when I wired for a nurse they
would send someone strong. One always connects
strength with a nurse, don’t you think ? ”
“I do not know that. I have never thought much
about it.”


“ Oh, of course you do very nicely, and Trix is quite
fond of you; still I wonder that you did not take up
some other profession —nursing is considered a pro-
fession, is it not ?—I should have thought some light
position, such as type-writer, would have suited you
better ? ”
Then, with a meaning glance into the proud,
sensitive little face:
“ I’ve always thought it remarkable that girls of
the present day should rush so frantically into
hospital life; to me it seems repulsive; I’d far rather
be a servant. Still, of course, there is the costume—
a very picturesque one it is too—and I suppose some
of the doctors are unmarried ? Now, you mustn’t be
offended with me; to those who like it, I suppose the
work is quite romantic. Miss Leigh never rested
till she got back to it, but then in her case, of course,
there was a cause ! Didn’t she tell you about it ? I
should have supposed you girls had quite affecting
confidences at times. Ask Dr Cranston why Miss
Leigh went to the hospital.”
The flush on the girlish face deepened, and
indignant words were trembling on her lips, but she
checked herself with an effort, and Mrs Vaughn
continued; “ I suppose you are quite looking forward
to meeting Dr Cranston to-night. I should never
have forgiven myself if anything had happened to
him, but you know it was such a very foolish thing
to do; it will tell greatly against him in his profession,


lam afraid; did Mrs Muir say whether he was to be
on view to-night ? ”
“ You saw her note, I believe, Mrs Vaughn ? ”
“You have never seen her yet, have you? it was
such a pity Dr Muir threw himself away so, he is
such a distinguished-looking man, and if he were not
a Homeopathist, might make his name. But I
mustn’t talk so to you; I suppose you are an ardent
admirer of the system ? One of your strongest argu-
ments is, that if the medicine doesn’t cure, it doesn’t
hurt, is it not? —rather a negative virtue, I should
say.”
And then, to Nurse West’s intense relief, she was
summoned into the drawing-room, to entertain a
caller.
A little later, Dr Muir coming in, he carried Trixie’s
nurse off to make his wife’s acquaintance.
“I have heard of you so often from Mona,” Una
said, as she greeted her warmly, “ that I feel as if we
were quite old friends;" and then she stopped
suddenly, for the face that smiled into hers was one
she had seen before, and remembered most vividly.
“We are not strangers after all! ” she exclaimed,
gleefully; “ you were in Iredale once, weren’t you ? ”
“ Yes,” replied Elsie, with a swift glance into the
lovely, glowing face.
“ And you went to see a sick girl, and took her
some flowers, and this.”
She had taken a tiny, crumpled slip of paper from


between the leaves of a book, and now placed it in her
visitor’s hand.
“ Do you recognise it ? ”
“ But you are Mrs Muir! ”
“ And used to be Una Cranston; ah, surely you
remember now.”
“Oh, I am so glad,” Nurse West answered, as a
sudden light broke upon her ; “ but I thought—”
“Ah yes, what we all thought; but you see I have
only a little wee limp to remind me of that time.
Come now, I want you to see my brother, and to rest
in the very easiest chair you can find. I know Mrs
Vaughn.”
O
She opened the door softly, and Jack looked up,
then rose, and came slowly to meet them.
He often thought of it afterwards, and the picture
seen in the warm lamplight remained freshly and
vividly in his memory. Una, with her bright hair,
and sweet, happy smile, and the graceful figure beside
her—the fair, tired face with its deep violet eyes, so
purely womanly, so delicately strong.
So they came to meet him.
“ I asked her to come in her uniform, so that I
should know just what Mona looked like,” Una
said, when she had introduced them to each other;
and Jack, isn t it lovely ? Mona’s Nurse West
is the very girl I have longed to see all these
years, the one who came to visit me in Iredale,
you know ? ”


Then they sat down and chatted merrily.
She had often wondered just what he would be like,
this Dr Cranston about whom she had heard so much;
and when her eyes had first met his face, so kind and
gentle, with such a sweet gravity in his welcoming
smile, she felt as if she had found a friend.
And Jack ?
Shall I tell you what he was thinking of, as he
leant back in his lounging chair, and watched the
lamplight play over the sunny head ?
He was thinking that the man who had brought
suffering into her life deserved a good horsewhipping;
and he wouldn’t have objected to the job.
And when the flower-like face had lost its wearied
look, Una turned to her entreatingly.
“ Will you tell me all about the hospital ? just
everything, please.”
What a long, happy evening it was, to be sure.
Outside, a steady rain was pouring down, but the
room was cosy with ruddy firelight, and the time sped
all too rapidly.
“Well, Jack,” Una had said, when the parting
words had been spoken, and Dr Muir was driving
Nurse West back, “how do you like her ?”
And he had leaned against the mantelpiece with
his old merry smile, as he answered her:
“ Ask me a month hence.”
“ You’re not disappointed in her ? ”
“ I am not.”


“ I made her promise to come again on Monday,
and we will have some music.”
“ Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday,” said Jack to
himself, musingly, but aloud he said nothing.
“ And she doesn’t wish me to call her either ‘ Miss,’
or ‘Nurse’ West—simply Elsie.”
“ Elsie,” repeated Dr Cranston, still under his
breath; “ yes, it suits.”
Then to Una—“ Well, little lady, I’ve no objec-
tions.”


CHAPTER XXX.
“ —SIMPLY ELSIE.”
“ And she to be coming and slandering me, the base little liar !
But the tongue is a fire, as you know, my dear, the tongue is
a fire.” Tennyson.
Mrs Vaughn was giving a select dance. An
unusually select one, it was; for she knew almost to
a pound the income of every gentleman she had
invited, and income makes the man, as everyone
knows.
Character ?
Oh, that is quite another matter, as Mrs Vaughn
would have told you, with her low, soft laugh and a
gleam of her white teeth, and she would probably
have added: “ All of us have our failings, you know.”
Her little daughter was making a very slow
recovery, and Nurse West had stayed on, sorely
against her will at first.
O
She was feeling particularly tired, and a little
low-spirited, on the evening in question.


At Mrs Vaughn’s request she had arranged the
flowers in the costly vases, and the dim, fragrant
drawing-room, and the very tones of the superb
piano, as the lady of the house had run her fingers
over the keys, had roused an old pain that lately
had been somewhat deadened.
But to-night—
Well, not altogether to-night either. I fancy if she
had looked back to the afternoon, she would have
found part explanation of the lonely, sorrowful mood
which had taken possession of her.
Of course it had really nothing to do with her, —
but—he had been kind and gentle, and she had fancied
that he was true and sincere.
“ What a pity Dr Cranston is such an accomplished
flirt, Mrs \ aughu had said, as she had leisurely
poured out afternoon tea, and somebody’s heart had
given a boimd, and then seemed to stand still.
“ It didn’t concern her,” she had told herself then,
and now
But her face was very sad as she sat in the low
chair beside her patient’s bed, listening to the regular
breathing of the sleeping child.
The child whose life he had saved, at such risk to
his own!
Ah, it couldn’t be !
But her face burned as the hateful words came
back to her.
Ive really been quite sorry that you’ve been


thrown so much into his company ; you are a little
romantic, are you not ? And his very frankness
throws one off guard ; it’s his only failing, and almost
excusable, for the girls have run after him terribly
since he came to Hurlstone, and then he s so hand-
some. Poor Miss Leigh, you know—it was quite an
infatuation with her, and I fear he gave her every
reason to believe her affection was returned. Don’t
you make an addition to his list of victims.
And then she had laughed at the storm in the
bright eyes, and the rich crimson glow in the white
cheeks.
Do not mistake her—she had been exceedingly
grateful to the man who had endangered his life for
her only child—she had written to him a letter,
perfect in its expression of delicate gratitude, touch-
ingly pathetic in its reference to his action in the
matter, and she had enclosed a large cheque —which
had been returned!
But the temptation to make mischief was irre-
sistible.
She came in, in her beautiful evening dress; her
blue eyes deeper in colour with pleasurable excitement,
diamonds sparkling at her throat and in her golden
hair,—and Elsie West looked at her in honest
admiration.
“Just imagine—half-past eight, and Mr Vaughn
not home yet! isn’t it dreadful ? You will have to
help me receive my guests after all; I’m sure your


costume would attract more attention than any other
in the room. What is it, Jeanette ? ”
“Dr Cranston, ma’am; I took him into the breakfast
room.”
“ You had better bring him here; it may be Miss
West whom he wishes to see.” Then she turned to
meet him, with her most brilliant smile.
“ I wasn’t sure whether we were to regard this
as a professional or a social visit, doctor. You w'on’t
stay, I suppose ? It is such a pity you do not dance ;
I was trying to persuade Nurse West to join us, but
she is quite obdurate.”
“ Indeed!”
He looked from the radiant vision in silk and lace
to the sweet, weary face, framed by its bright hair and
dainty cap; then he turned to her.
“ I brought a message from my sister, who is afraid
her note sent this morning cannot have reached you,
Nurse West. She would very much like you to spend
the evening with her, —us, if you will give us that
pleasure.”
“ And so take her out of the means of temptation,”
Mrs Vaughn said, smoothly; “ you are very thoughtful.
As I can’t coax you to spend the evening with me—
us” she continued, with malicious emphasis, “go by all
means, Nurse.”
What a silent walk it was they took together that
night, but Elsie West’s heart was throbbing painfully.
“ You are feeling quite strong now, I hope, Dr


Hr**
Cranston?” she asked, when they turned down the
last street, and were nearing their destination.
“ Quite,” he replied, gravely. Then “You won’t be
sorry to get away from that place?”
“No, indeed.”
“ You will be glad to go back to Melbourne ? ” —with
a keen glance at her face, for the moonlight was very
bright just then.
“ In some respects.”
“I’m glad it is only in some, for I am sure Mrs
Vaughn has told you of all our little failings.”
Did he guess what had been said ?
“ I suppose, for instance, she has said a good deal
about me ? ” continued he, daringly.
“ She has said a great deal about—everyone, I think.”
“ Exactly; that goes without saying. Did you
believe her, Miss West ? ”
“ About—everyone ? ”
“ About me” he corrected ; a flash of fun in his eyes.
But they had reached the door, and Una was
waiting for them there.
No, it wasn’t a happy evening; the little hostess felt
vaguely that something had gone wrong; there was
such a visible air of constraint about two in the room,
and Alan, whose presence ahvays set things right, at
least to Una’s eyes, was only able to look in upon
them for a brief ten minutes.
At last she slipped out, to procure a book Jack had
been talking about, and the silence became oppressive.


Then Dr Cranston rose from his chair, and stood
leaning against the mantelpiece.
“ Did you believe her, Miss West ? ” Then as her
eyes met his with such startled confusion, “ I am
afraid you did. I may at least know what she has
charged me with ? ”
“ Ah, Dr Cranston, do not ask me.”
“ I am sorry to pain you, but I think I should
know.”
But she did not answer him.
A curious pallor had overspread his face.
“ Had it anything to, do with—someone you and I
both know ? ”
She raised her face resolutely.
“ It was only—she said that Miss Leigh cared for
you, and that—that you had flirted with her.”
“ Ah, I see; as charitable and truthful as most of her
stories, and, as usual, with enough of the truth in it to
make it more dangerous. For, long ago, Miss West, I
did care for Miss Leigh, but she never cared for me.
And lately I have begun to think it w T as all a mistake,
for someone else has grown so dear to me, that I want
to protect her and give her all my love, if she will
have it. It seems sudden to you, doesn’t it ? I
meant to have waited—before I told you this-—to have
proved it to you. If you can believe that it was a
mistake, if you can ”
He was looking down at her with patient pleading,
and she raised her eyes, so bright now.


“ I made a mistake once too,” she said, simply.
And then he understood.
“ I have found the book you spoke of, Jack, —why,
what is the matter ? ”
He came across the room and put his hands on her
shoulders.
“ Wish me joy, Dame Durden, —I’m not to call
her either ‘Miss’ West, or ‘Nurse’ West, —simply
Elsie.”
The flowers were drooping in the gay drawing-room,
and between the dances everyone wondered vaguely
what had detained their host. For the hours passed
by, and still he did not come.
In the curtained recess, there were groups gathered
round small card tables, but the white hand which
always dealt the cards so skilfully was missing.
Its owner—whither ?
The moonlight lay in broad shafts of light across the
verandah, and pierced its way through the conservatory,
silvering the white walks, and quivering over rare
flowers, and the softly flushed faces of fair girls, who,
with their partners, strolled about, or rested on the
quaint, rustic seats.
Ah, if they had known what they knew after!
Now, the feet of the dancers were moving slowly
and rythmically to a dreamy waltz tune, a plaintive
wail, sobbed out lingeringly by piano and violin; and


in the music and the motion, quick crunching steps
on the gravel outside escaped detection.
Then the whirling figures were brought to a sudden
standstill, for someone had entered unceremoniously;
and that someone w r as Dr Muir, with a face white and
stern.
They crept away in frightened groups, and a little
later through the hall came the heavy tramp of men,
with something in their strong arms, still, motionless.
Death ?
Ah no; chained limbs, fettered reason, benumbed
brain—all this had come to Percy Vaughn, in that
living death—Paralysis !
They had found him in his office, staring with eyes
which saw not, at the open telegram before him, whose
many words spelt but one to him —ruin !


CHAPTER XXXI.
“ NOT THEN, MONA ? ”
“ Be merry, all birds, to-day,
Be merry on eartb as you never were merry before,
Be merry in heaven, 0 larks, and far away,
And merry for ever and ever and one day more.
Why 1
For it’s easy to find a rhyme.
Look, look, how he flits,
The fire-crowned king of the wrens, from out of the pine,
Look how they tumble the blossons, the mad little tits !
Cuck-oo! Cuck-oo ! was ever a May so fine ?
Why?
For it’s easy to find a rhyme,
0 merry the linnet and dove,
And swallow and sparrow and throstles, and have your desire!
0 merry my heart, you have gotten the wings of love,
And flit like the king of the wrens with a crown of fire.
Why?
For it’s ay ay, ay ay.”
Tennyson.
Sunshine, bright and vivid, flooding the streets,
glancing over the blue waters of the bay, dancing
along tiny ripples that sparkled in a shimmer of
changing tints under the keels of white-sailed
yachts.


The ships in port, gay with bunting, the hearts
of the people of Melbourne heating high with
expectation.
For after a long, stormy voyage, the “Sunbeam”
had almost reached her haven, and Victoria’s subjects
waited breathlessly, eager to welcome to the sunny
Australian shore their Governor and his wife.
In the city the excitement increased with every
hour, and at St, Kilda the crowd grew denser and
denser.
And when at last the eventful moment came,
ringing cheers filled the air, and bright faces and
hearty voices showed how true the welcome, how
lovingly the Victorians greeted their Queen’s repre-
sentatives from the dear old country.
It was not a Collins Street practice, such as he had
been used to dream of in the old boyish days,'—a very
humble beginning, in a very unpretentious suburb—
but nevertheless, Harold Leigh, Bachelor of Medicine,
with his degree as painfully new as the brass plate on
his crate, envied no one that bright, beautiful day, and
o 7
felt himself to be quite as important to the world at
large, and Victoria in particular, as vice-royalty
itself.
Yes, it was a day to be remembered, so much had
happened in the years leading up to it.
Part of the dream had been realised, it is true; in a


small paddock adjoining the neat grounds, a mild-
eyed cow munched the long grass,—a genuine Jersey,
« and a daisy at that,” Harold had pronounced with
enthusiasm; the buggy house held a pretty phaeton,
and Mrs Leigh waited to receive her guests in a silk
dress that was very beautiful to her, because it had
come from her boy.
How they had laughed over it all, Mona and she,
but I think they were a little bit proud too.
She had worn many richer dresses in the far-off
days, that only Mona could remember, but this was
different.
* * * * *
It was still early in the afternoon when Mona
hurried from the hospital, to find Harold taking the
garden-path in long strides, looking exceedingly dig-
nified, and very professional indeed.
“How does :it look?” he queried with boyish
eagerness, and a rapid glance at the erection over the
gate, which at night would throw a soft, red light
around.
“ Grand, dear boy! Harold, doesn’t it seem
funny ?”
“Don’t speak so loud,” he implored, comically;
“don’t let everyone in the neighbourhood know Im
so shockingly new.”
Then as they went up the path together, “ Yes, it is
a bit queer, to think a few years can have turned me
into a doctor, and you into one of the most valued


nurses in the hospital; say, Mona, aren’t you tired of
it yet ? ”
“What an idea ! I tried to persuade Nurse Blythe
to come home with me to-day, but she was terribly
frivolous, and preferred seeing the arrival of the
Governor; she started off to see the swearing-in
ceremony hours ago. We had a glorious view from
the balcony. Now I suppose I must descend to the
ordinary affairs of life, and do some cooking. Harold,
you’ll never learn Melbourne ways; don’t you know
it’s dreadfully unfashionable to invite people to tea—
unless it happens to be afternoon tea? Mother, I’m
going to send you into the drawing-room, and you are
not to stir till you’re called. How does your Phyllis
do, Hal?”
“Dont mention her, Mona. We packed her off to-
day,” he said, grimly, as he followed into the bie
o
kitchen, “ What a relief to see her outside that gate !
Observe the picturesque confusion she left behind
her.”
“ Poor fellow, give me the broom; it’s time I came
home to look after you. Whatever have you got on
that table ? ”
‘ The result of a little shopping expedition, my
dear girl, Ive had to do it lately; mother can’t, you
know; at least I wouldn’t let her, and Phyllis-
proper name Susan—always forgets what she’s sent
for. These are for to-night, in honour of you and
our other visitors.”


Mona’s eyes danced.
“ You’re very moderate. Do you know, Hal, what
this reminds me of ? ”
“Of that night in Hurlstone, when we brought
Una into the kitchen to have tea, and you cooked
pancakes for us all. Say, Mona, pancakes are aw fully
nice.
“Ai d awfully indigestible,” she laughed; “do you
recommend them to your patients, Dr Leigh ?
Then the work began in earnest.
* * * * *
An hour or two later a bicycle whizzed down the
road, and Dick Norris sprang off, and took a comical
survey o: the gate.
The same Dick, yet with a difference ; a firmer,
more resolute face, as became the manager of
an up-cointry branch of the “ London Chartered,
now, since the upheaval and reconstruction, known
to the colony as The London Bank of Austialia,
Limited.
He walked briskly up the path, and gave a pio-
longed peal at the bell.
“ What a jolly little shop,” he said, gaily, as Harold
came out to meet him; “you’re sure you have no
skeletons about ? Then I’ll come in. Nurse Leigh,
I’m quite exhausted, having wheeled it all the way
from Denton ; aren’t you sorry for me ? No ? then
your profession is making you hard-hearted, as I said
it would.”


3 12 CLOUDS THAT PASS.
“ Bid you come straight here ? ”
“ 1 hay en’t had any accidents, if that’s what you
mean.”
“I you came through St Kilda; it would
only be about ten miles out of your way. When is it
to be, Dick ? ”
Ask Marion, he said, with his old sunny smile.
And just then the other expected guest made his
appearance.
Perhaps the years had changed him most of all;
tune, and the earnest endeavour that had carried him
to high achievement.
It showed in his face, so strong in its gravity, in
every action, in every glance, the patience and the
quiet self-denial that had developed what Eric had
seen in his worst days. Eric and another.
But the struggle had been hard.
The evening ended as such evenings will, and once
again Mona started out for the hospital, and again Mr
Gwynne walked beside her. But they were strangely
silent. S J
“ Jt seems ab surd to think of Dick marrying and
settling down, doesn’t it,” she began, a little nervously,
when the silence became oppressive. “ Marion is just
the wife of all others for him.”
But he wasn’t listening.
O
“Mona, do you remember that night at Hurlstone
just before you left.”
“ I remember.”


“It is painful to think of it, and yet I asked you
then, if, in the years to come, I could say to you
that I was worthy of your friendship, what you would
answer, and you said —‘ It would be yours,’ That
has helped me often in my lonely life, and it has
been lonely.”
“ I am sure it has.”
“Such a weary waiting-time, Mona, and I feel
to-night less worthy than ever of your regard,” he said,
drawing his breath in sharply, and looking away from
her, along the twinkling line of lights that led city-
wards, “ and so I want to ask you one question, only
one—l shall then know the worst I have to face. It
was something Eric said to me on Dr Muir’s wedding-
day—he had been talking of the ceremony, and—other
things. And he said, —forgive me if I pain you, dear,
—‘ Don’t marry anyone but Mona, Rex; I think she
would be sorry! ’ ”
His voice had broken a little, and his face was very
pale.
“ Is it true, Mona ? ”
“ Quite true,” she said, simply.
A wave of colour swept over his cheeks, and a look
of swift gladness flashed into his eyes.
“ Oh, Mona,” he said, huskily; “ then you do care a
little?”
“ I have always cared,” she answered, gently.
“ Always ? ” he repeated; “ not the night of the
storm —not then, Mona ? ”


“ The night of the storm ? ” she echoed. “ Ah, you
didn’t ”
“ I heard what you said. Dear, don’t look so
troubled ; indeed, I well deserved it. We will not talk
of that now ; it has all gone, let us forget its bitterness,
you and I; to-night is worth it all. Mona,” —with a
swift change of tone, —“ I want my home and my wife
very soon—l seem to have w T aited a very long time;
you will come to me at once ? ”
“ If you wish it, Eex.”
Oh, the bright, beautiful night! What a world of
happiness lay around them. She thought of the other
walks she had taken along that road ; then she looked
up proudly into the strong, resolute face—yes, it had
been worth it all.
He had proved his love in the quiet repression so
hard to maintain in his constant meeting with her, the
patient waiting, till his purpose was achieved and his
ambition fulfilled.
What did they talk of ? How can I tell you ?
Of the future much, then of the past, and Eric.
“ I wonder,” Eex said once, looking up at the
brightness of the sky, “if he knows ? ” And Mona
said, “ I am sure he does.”
Once more the hospital gates were reached, and
they looked across the lawn to the softly lighted
building.


“ They will miss you, Mona.”
“And I them.”
“When we get rich, you and I, w T e will build a
beautiful house somewhere at the seaside, and give
the nurses a long rest every now and then. Must
you go ? Not many more times, Nurse Leigh ! ”


CHAPTER XXXII.
“ KNIT TWO TOGETHER AND REPEAT.”
“Joy comes, grief goes, we know not Row ;
Everything is happy now.
Everything is upward striving ;
’Tis as easy now for the heart to be true
As for grass to be green or skies to be blue—
’Tis the natural way of living :
Who knows whither the clouds have fled 1
In the unscarred heaven they leave no wake ;
And the eyes forget the tears they have shed,
The heart forgets its sorrow and ache.”
The Vision of Sir Launfal.
The weeks sped rapidly by, and brought many
changes.
One beautiful afternoon, with the faces she loved
most around her, Mona Leigh became Mrs Rex
Gwynne. Eor they were all there.
Marion Desmond, now Mrs Norris, and Dick,
looking very important indeed, with his old boyish
ways in nowise diminished, —Dr and Mrs Jack
Cranston, Alan and Una, and their wee, golden-haired


laddie, called after the child whose memory was so
fresh in every heart —Eric.
And I think perhaps the other Eric was not so very
far away—who can tell ?
There was only one bridesmaid, a slight, brown-eyed
gird, who walked with a scarcely perceptible limp.
And Harold thinks Dulcie Leigh a vastly prettier
name than Dulcie Desmond, and—dutiful son that he
is—is quite sure that his mother will need a daughter
to replace the one she is losing.
“I little thought,” Mona had said, with a loving
glance into the shy face, “ that the sister I adopted in
the hospital would be really mine one day.”
And Dick declared that the said hospital was
responsible for a good deal of match-making; then
broke off hastily, a mist in his blue eyes, as he
remembered the quiet room where he had first met
Marion Desmond.
Back to the quiet mining town they went, to the
old home.
“I have thought often,” Bex had said, “that I
would like to take up life there again; and I see the
house is tenantless just now. Shall we take it, sweet-
heart ? ”
And she had answered him with shining eyes.
It was so dear to her—the place where she had
spent the happiest and the saddest portions of her life ,


and many a time the thought of strangers moving
about the old rooms had given her a quiet heartache. °
But to go back now—!
She knew it was hard—to relinquish for the present
at least, the prospect of more rapid progress, -to return
to the town which held such bitter memories, to live
amongst those who had known him as he had been—
but it was right! A time might come, would—she
felt sure—when his name would be heard of, but Ido
not think she will feel as proud of him, should that
day arrive, as she did when he told her that he thought
his duty lay in Hurlstone.
No small sacrifice—for Eex Gwynne was now a
rising barrister, and those who knew, predicted a
brilliant career for him.
Of course it was Nurse Tug next—and Nurse Blythe
sighs, and wonders how things will get on without
her. For “ lagoo” has been so unmindful of the
interests of the hospital as to get married!
And such a name, the head nurse exclaimed when
the news had been gently broken to her. “ Tug was
bad enough in all conscience, but Tuff! Aud° you
never once gave a thought, I suppose, Nurse, as to how
we should manage when you were gone ? ”
But Nurse Tug, blissfully happy in the prospect of
at last having an unwearied auditor, smiled serenely.
For the amiable Mr Tuff, soft as his name is other-


“KNIT TWO TOGETHER AND REPEAT. 3*9
wise, was vastly proud of his conquest, and a firm
believer in her skill.
*****
The ward itself alters very little, save that new faces
constantly come and go, but there are never wanting
Mrs Whynes and Mrs Grumbuls.
Teddie “ the second,” limping about the Melbourne
streets, looks back sometimes to the time he spent m
the hospital, and wonders where Nurse Leigh is.
Teddie has turned his singing to account, and passers
by forget to laugh at the shrill voice, piercing the air
with the latest street catch, when they glance at the
small deformed body; and end by throwing him a
coin.
And in his own way he is very happy indeed.
♦ * * * *
Mr Vaughn lives on, an embittered, cynical invalid,
for poverty, grim and relentless, has been his lot for
many a month, and the fair little lady who ruled her
small world in Hurlstone would not be recognised in
the woman whose ceaseless repinings add to the
bitterness of a cup already overflowing.
The care he needs is never given by her, he can no
longer supply her with what she lived for,— money,
position,—and life is nothing without these to such as
Mrs Vaughn!
* * *
The “ house by the seaside ” is still in the future,
but not long ago, Nurse Blythe spent her holidays in


Hurlstone, and in the evenings many a merry party
gathered on the old verandah.
Dr Cranston and Elsie, strolling over, generally
found Una there before them; later, Alan would join
them, and they would talk of old times, and of bright
days to come.
But Jack never tired of reminding Mona of the
walk they took from church that mornincr so loner acm
O O
and the frantic attempts she had made to escape “ that
odious Mr Gwynne.”
“How you must have hated me then, I said such
fearful things, Mona said once when they were alone
and were laughing over it.
And Eex answered her merrily—
“ Strange, isn’t it ? I didn’t.”
THE END.
SKILL ASD COMPANY LTD., PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.


Catalogue
S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.’S
POPDUBQILLUSTBOTED BOOKS
CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO PRICES.
MEW BOOKS AMD MEW EDITIONS ARE MARKED WITH
AM ASTERISK.
ssm each.
♦A Hero King: A Romance of the Days of Alfred the
Great By Rliza F. Pollard, Author of “ A Gentleman of England,”
“ The White Dove of Amritzir,” etc. Large Crown Bvo. Frontis-
piece. Cloth extra.
The Dacoit’s Treasure ; or, In the Days of Po Thaw.
Prize Story of Burmese Life. By Henry Charles Moore. Illus-
trated by Harold Piffard. Large Crown Bvo. Cloth extra, gilt top.
A Gentleman of England. A Story of the Time of
Sir Philip Sidney. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of “ The White
Dove of Amritzir,” “ Roger the Ranger,” etc. Large Crown Bvo.
Cloth extra, gilt top.
Pilgrims of the Night. By Sarah Doudney, Author
of “A Romance of Lincoln’s Inn,” “Louie’s Married Life,” etc.
Frontispiece. Large Crown Bvo. Cloth extra, gilt top.
G. MANVILLE FENN.
Illustrated by W. Rainey, R. 1., F. W. Burton, etc.
♦Jungle and Stream; or, The Adventures of Two Boys
in Siam. Large Crown Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth extra.
Cormorant Crag: A Tale of the Smuggling Days. By
G. Manville Fenn. Second Edition. Illustrated, Large Crown Svo.
Cloth extra, gilt top.
In Honour’s Cause : A Tale of the Days of George the
First. By George Manville Fenn, Author of “ Cormorant Crag,”
etc. Large Crown Svo. Illustrated. Cloth extra, gilt top.
Steve Young; or, The Voyage of the “ Hvalross” to the
Icy Seas. Large crown Svo. Fully Illustrated. Cloth extra, gilt top.


S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.'S
3Sm 6dm oaohm
♦Grand Chaco (The). By G. Manville Fenn. Large
Crown Bvo. 416 pages. Illustrated. Cloth extra.
♦First in the Field: A Story of New South Wales. By
the same Author. Large Crown Bvo. 416 pages. Illustrated. Cloth
extra.
♦Through Fire and Storm: Stories of Adventure and
Peril. By G. A Henty, G. Manville Fenn, and John A. Higginson.
Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Frontispiece. Cloth extra, gilt top.
Skeleton Reef (The). A Sea Story. By Hugh St.
Leger, Author of “An Ocean Outlaw,” etc. Large Crown Bvo.
Frontispiece. Cloth extra, gilt top.
Scuttling of the “ Kingfisher ” (The). By Alfred E.
Knight, Author of “ Victoria: Her Life and Reign.” Frontispiece.
Large Crown Bvo. Cloth extra, gilt top.
Missing Million (The): A Tale of Adventure in Search
of a Million Pounds. By E. Harcourt Burrage, Author of “ Whither
Bound?” Frontispiece. Large Crown Svo. Cloth extra, gilt top.
Come, Break Your Fast: Daily Meditations for a
Year. By Rev. Mark Guy Pearse. 544 pages. Large Crown Svo.
Cloth extra.
Hymn Writers and their Hymns. By Rev. S. W.
Christophers, 390 pages. Crown Svo. Cloth extra.
Pilgrim’s Progress (The). By John Bunyan. Illustrated
with 55 full-page and other Engravings, drawn by Frederick Barnard,
J. D. Linton, W. Small, and engraved by Dalziel Brothers. Crown
4to. Cloth extra, 3s. 6d. (Gilt edges, 55.)
Romance of Lincoln's Inn (A), By Sarah Doudney,
Author of “ Louie’s Married Life.” Crown Svo. Illustrated- Cloth.
Story of the Bible (The). Arranged in Simple Style
for Young People. One Hundred Illustrations. Demy Svo. Cloth
extra, 3s. 6d. (Gilt edges, bevelled boards, 4s. 6d.)
Six Stories by “ Pansy.” Imperial Svo. 390 pages.
Fully Illustrated and well bound in cloth, with attractive coloured
design on cover, and Six complete Stories in each Vol. Vols. I, 2,
3, 4, and 5, 3s. 6d. each.
Two Henriettas (The). By Emma Marshall, Author of
“ Eaglehurst Towers,” etc. Illustrated. Large Crown Svo. Cloth
extra, gilt top. 1
White Dove of Amritzir (The): A Romance of Anglo-
Indian Life. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of “ Roger the Ranger,”
etc. Large Crown Svo. Illustrated. Cloth extra, gilt top.


2s. 6d. each.
“ ROMANCE OF COLONIZATION.”
Special attention is requested to this well-written and up-to-date
Series of books on the development of British Colonization from its
commencement to the present day.
Craivn B vo. Frontispiece. 320 pages. Cloth extra , 2 s. 6L each.
*lY.—Canada : Its Rise and Progress. By G. Barnett Smith.
I._ The United States of America to the Time
of the Pilgrim Fathers. By G. Barnett Smith.
ll—The United States of America to the
Present Day. By G. Barnett Smith.
111. —India. By Alfred E. Knight.
*The Son of Ingar: A Story of the Days of the Apostle
Paul. By K. P. Woods. Frontispiece. Crown Bvo. Cloth extra.
Victoria: Her Life and Reign. By Alfred E. Knight.
New Edition. Large Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Cloth extra, 2s. 6d. ;
fancy cloth, gilt edges, 3s, 6d. ; half morocco, or half calf, marbled
edges, net 7s. 6d.; full morocco, or calf, gilt edges, net 10s. 6d.
John: A Tale of the Messiah. By K. Pearson Woods.
Frontispiece. Crown Bvo. Cloth extra.
Brought to Jesus : A Bible Picture Book for Little
Readers. Containing Twelve large New Testament Scenes, printed
in colours, with appropriate letterpress by Mrs. G. E. Morton. Size,
I3s By 10 inches. Handsome coloured boards with cloth back.
Bible Pictures and Stories. Old and New Testament.
In one Volume. Bound in handsome cloth, with eighty-nine full-page
Illustrations by Eminent Artists.
Light for Little Footsteps ; or, Bible Stories Illustrated.
By the Author of “A Ride to Picture Land,” etc. With beautiful
coloured Cover and Frontispiece. Full of Pictures.
Potters : Their Arts and Crafts. Historical, Bio-
graphical, and Descriptive. By John C. Sparkes (Principal of the
Royal College of Art, South Kensington Museum), and Walter
Gandy. Crown Bvo. Copiously Illustrated. Cloth extra, 2s. 6d. ; art
linen, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.
Story of Jesus. For Little Children. By Mrs. G. E. Morton,
Author of “ Wee Donald,” etc. Many Illustrations. Imperial i6mo.
Sunshine for Showery Days: A Children’s Picture-
Book. By the Author of "A Ride to Picture Land,” etc, Size. by
11 inches. Coloured Frontispiece, and 114 full-page and other
Engravings. Coloured paper boards, with cloth back.
Spiritual Grasp of the Epistles (The) ; or, an Epistle
a-Sunday. By Rev. Charles A. Fox, Author of “ Lyrics from the
'7Hills,” etc. Small Crown Bvo. Cloth boards. (Not illustrated.)
Upward and Onward. A Thought Book for the
Threshold of Active Life. By S. W. Partridge. (Fourteenth Thou-
sand.) Cloth boards, 2s. 6d. (Not Illustrated.)


2sm 6dm each.
THE “RED MOUNTAIN” SERIES,
Crown Zvo, 320 Pages. Illustrated. Handsomely l ound
in cloth boards. 2s. 6d. each.
*Norcliffe Court, By John W. Kneeshaw, Author of
“ A Black Shadow,” “ From Dusk to Dawn,” etc.
*The Inca’s Ransom : A Story of the Conquest of Peru.
By Albert Lee, Author of “The Black Disc,” “The Prince’s Mes*
senger,” etc.
*Ad ventures of Mark Paton (The). By Charles J.
Mansford, Author of “ Shafts from an Eastern Quiver,” etc.
* Adventures of Don Lavington (The). By G.
Manville Fenn. Illustrated. Large Crown Bvo. Cloth extra.
Hunters (The); A Boy’s Adventures in the
Higher Alps. By G. Manville Fenn. Illustrated. Large Crown
Bvo. Cloth extra.
*ln Battle and Breeze. Sea Stories by G. A. Plenty,
G. Manville Fenn, and E. Harcourt Burrage.
A Polar Eden : or, The Goal of the “Dauntless.” By
Charles R. Kenyon, Author of “The Young Ranchman,” etc.
By Sea-Shore, Wood, and Moorland: Peeps at
Nature, By Edward Step, Author of “Plant Life,”etc,
Eaglehurst Towers. By Emma Marshall, Author of
“Fine Gold,” etc.
Eagle Cliff (The) : A Tale of the Western Isles. By R. M.
Ballantyne, Author of “Fighting the Flames,” “The Lifeboat,” etc.
Edwin, The Boy Outlaw ; or, The Dawn of Freedom in
England. A Story of the Days of Robin Hood. By J. Frederick
Hodgetts, Author of “ Older England,” etc.
England’s Navy : Stories of its Ships and its Services.
With a Glance at some Navies of the Ancient World. By F. M.
Holmes, Author of “ Great Works by Great Men,” etc.
Green Mountain Boys (The) : A Story of the American
War of Independence. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of “ True unto
Death,” “ Roger the Ranger,” etc., etc.
Great Works by Great Men : The Story of Famous
Engineers and their Triumphs. By F. M. Holmes.
Lady of the Forest (The). By L. T. Meade, Author of
“ Scamp and I,” “Sweet Nancy,” etc.
Leaders Into Unknown Lands: Being Chapters of
Recent Travel. By A. Montefiore, F.G.S., F.R.G.S. Maps, etc.
Lion City of Africa (The) : A Story of Adventure. By
Willis Boyd Allen, Author of “ The Red Mountain of Alaska,” etc.
Mark Seaworth : A Tale of the Indian Archipelago. By
, W. H. G. Kingston, Author of “ Manco, the Peruvian Chief.”
Manco, The Peruvian Chief. By W. H. G. Kingston.
New Edition. Illustrated by Launcelot Speed.


2sm 6dm each.
THE u RED MOUNTAIN ” SERIES Continued).
Olive Chauncey’s Trust. By Mrs. E. R. Pitman, Author
of “ Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands.”
Roger the Ranger : A Story of Border Life among the
Indians. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of “ Not Wanted,” etc.
Red Mountain of Alaska (The). By Willis Boyd
Allen, Author of “ Pine Cones," “ The Northern Cross,” etc.
Slave Raiders of Zanzibar (The). By E, Harcourt
Burrage, Author of “ Gerard Mastyn,” “ Whither Bound ? ” etc.
Spanish Maiden (The) ; A Story of Brazil. By Emma
E. Homibrook, Author of “ Worth the Winning,” etc.
True unto Death : A Story of Russian Life and the
Crimean War. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author of “ Roger the Ranger.”
Vashti Savage : The Story of a Gipsy Girl. By Sarah
Tytler.
Whither Bound ? A Story of Two Lost Boys. By Owen
Landor. With Twenty Illustrations by W. Rainey, R.I.
Young Moose Hunters (The) : A Backwoods-Boy’s
Story. By C. A. Stephens. Profusely Illustrated.
2sm eachm
The Friends of Jesus. Illustrated Sketches for the
young, of the Twelve Apostles, the Family at Bethany, and other of
the earthly friends of the Saviour. Small 4to. Cloth extra.
Animals and their Young. By Harland Coultas.
With Twenty-four full-page Illustrations by Harrison Weir. Fcap. 4to
Cloth gilt, bevelled boards.
Domestic Pets : Their Habits and Treatment. Anecdotal
and Descriptive. Full of Illustrations. Fcap. 4to. Cloth extra.
Our Dumb Companions. By Rev. T. Jackson, M.A.
One Hundred and Twenty Illustrations. Fcap. 4to. Cloth extra.
*Bible Picture Roll. Containing a large Engraving of a
Scripture Subject, with letterpress for each day in the month.
Sunny Teachings. (New Series.) A Bible Picture
Roll containing Twelve beautifully Coloured Scripture Pictures
selected from the New Testament. Mounted on roller.
Young Folk’s Bible Picture Roll (The), Contains
Twelve beautifully Coloured Pictures of Bible Subjects. Printed on
good paper, and mounted on roller, with cord fox hanging up.
Natural History Picture Roll. Consisting of Thirty-
one Illustrated Leaves, with simple large-type Letterpress, suitable to
hang up in the Nursery, Schoolroom, etc.


2s, eachm
THE HOME LIBRARY.
Crown B vo. 320 pages. Handsome Cloth Cover. Illustrations.
*Clouds that Pass. By E. Gertrude Hart.
*A Child of Genius. By Lily Watson.
*Dut of the Deep. By E. Harcourt Burrage.
*Miss Niece. ByM. S. Haycraft.
the Crucible. By J. Harwood Panting.
*More Precious than Gold. By Jennie Chappell.
*John Halifax, Gentleman. By Mrs. Craik. New
Edition. 540 pages.
Ailsa’s Reaping ; or, Grape-Vines and Thorns. By
Jennie Chappell.
Airice : A Story of Imperial Rome. By Eliza F. Pollard.
Brownie; or, The Lady Superior. By Eliza F. Pollard.
Ben-Hur. By L. Wallace.
Better Part (The). By Annie S. Swan.
Bunch of Cherries (A). By J. W. Kirton.
Cousin Mary. By Mrs. Oliphant, Author of “ Chronicles
of Carlingford,” etc.
Dr. Cross ; or, Tried and True. By Ruth Sterling.
Dorothy’s Training; or, Wild-Flower or Weed? By
Jennie Chappell.
Edith Oswald; or, Living for Others. 224 pages. By Jane
M. Kippen.
For Honour’s Sake. By Jennie Chappell.
Gerard Mastyn ; or, The Son of a Genius. By E
Harcourt Burrage.
Gerald Thurlow; or, The New Marshal. By T. M.
Browne.
Honor : A Nineteenth Century Heroine. By E. M.
Alford.
Household Angel (The). By Madeline Leslie.
Her Saddest Blessing. By Jennie Chappell.
Jacques Hamon ; or, Sir Philip’s Private Messenger.
By Mary E. Ropes.
Diving It Down. By Laura M. Lane.
Louie°s Married Life. By Sarah Doudney.
Madeline ; or, The Tale of a Haunted House. By Jennie
Chappell.
Morning Dew-Drops. By Clara Lucas Balfour.
Mark Desborough’s Yow. By Annie S. Swan.
Mick Tracy, the Irish Scripture Reader. By the Author
of “ Tim Doolan, the Irish Emigrant.”
Naomi; or, The Last Days of Jerusalem. By Mrs. Webb,


2s. each.
THE HOME LIBRARY (continued).
Pilgrim’s Progress (The). By John Bunyan. 416
pages. 47 Illustrations.
Petrel Darcy; or, In Honour Bound. By T. Corrie.
Strait Gate (The). By Annie S. Swan.
Tangled Threads. By Esma Stuart.
Tom Sharman and his College Chums. By J. O.
Keen, D.D.
Uncle Tom’s Cabin. By Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Without a Thought; or, Dora’s Discipline. By Jennie
Chappell.
Way in the Wilderness (A). By Maggie Swan.
“ PANSY.”
Chrlssy’s Endeavour.
Three People.
Four Girls at Chautauqua.
An Endless Chain.
Ruth Ersklne’s Crosses.
Ester Ried.
Ester Ried Yet Speaking.
Julia Ried.
The Man of the House.
The Chautauqua Girls at Home.
Wise and Otherwise.
Over 385,000 of these volumes have already been sold.
Is. Gd. each.
THE “WORLD’S WONDERS” SERIES.
A Series of Popular Books treating of the present-day wonders of Science
and Art. Well written, printed on good paper, and fully illustrated.
Crown Svo, 160 pages. Handsome Cloth Cover,
♦Marvels of Ant Life. By W. F. Kirby, F.L.S., F.E.S.,
of the Natural History Museum, South Kensington.
♦The Romance of the Savings Banks, By Arch. G.
Bowie.
♦The Romance of Glass-Making; A Sketch of the
History of Ornamental Glass. By W. Gandy.
The Romance of the Post Office : Its Inception and
Wondrous Development. By Arch. G. Bowie.
Marvels of Metals. By F. M. Holmes.
Miners and their Works Underground. By F.
M. Holmes.
Triumphs of the Printing Press. By Walter Jerrold.
Astronomers and their Observations. By Lucy
Taylor.With Preface by W. Thynne Lynn, 8.A., F.R.A.S.
Celebrated Mechanics and their Achievements.
By F. M, Holmes. -0
Chemists and their Wonders. By F. M. Holmes.
Engineers and their Triumphs. By F. M. Holmes.
Electricians and their Marvels. By Walter Jerrold.
Musicians and their Compositions. By J. R. Griffiths.
Naturalists and their Investigations. By George
Day, F.R.M.S.


A. W. PARTRIDGE 6-* CO.'S
Is b 6dm each,
NEW SERIES OF MISSIONARY BIOGRAPHIES.
Crown B vo. 160 pages. Cloth extra. Fully Illustrated.
Amid Greenland Snows; or, The Early By
History of Arctic Missions. . Jesse
Bishop Patteson, the Martyr of Melanesia. Page.
Captain Allen Gardiner: Sailor and Saint. By
Jesse Page, Author of “Japan, its People and Missions,” etc.
Congo for Christ (The): The Story of the Congo Mission.
By Rev, J. B. Myers, Author of “William Carey,” etc.
David Brainerd, the Apostle to the North
American Indians. By Jesse Page.
Henry Martyn: His Life and Labours—Cam-
bridge, India, Persia. By Jesse Page.
Japan; Its People and Missions. By Jesse Page.
John Williams, the Martyr Missionary of Poly-
nesia. By Rev. James J. Ellis.
James Calvert; or, From Dark to Dawn in Fiji.
By R, Vernon.
Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands. By Mrs. E.
R. Pitman, Author of “ Vestina’s Martyrdom,” etc.
Madagascar: Its Missionaries and Martyrs. By
William J. Townsend, Author of “ Robert Morrison,” etc.
Missionary Heroines in Eastern Lands. By Mrs.
E. R. Pitman, Author of “ Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands.”
Reginald Heber, Bishop of Calcutta, Author of
“From Greenland’s Icy Mountains.” By A. Montefiore, F.R.G-S.
Robert Moffat, the Missionary Hero of Euraman.
By David J. Deane.
Samuel Crowther, the Slave Boy who became
Bishop Of the Niger. By Jesse Page.
Thomas Birch Freeman, Missionary Pioneer to
Ashanti, Dahomey, and Egba. By Rev. John Milum, f.r.g.s.
Thomas J. Comber, Missionary Pioneer to the
Congo. By Rev. J. B. Myers, Association Secretary, Baptist
Missionary Society.
Tiyo Soga: The Model Kaffir Missionary. By H. T
Cousins, Ph.D., F.R.G.S.
William Carey, the Shoemaker who became the
Father and Founder of Modern Missions. By Rev. j. B.Myers.


Is* 6dm each.
NEW POPULAR BIOGRAPHIES.
Crown Zvo. 160 pages. Maps and Illustrations. Cloth extra
♦Four Noble Women and their Work: Sketches of
the Life and Work of Frances Willard, Agnes-Weston, Sister Dora,
and Catherine Booth. By Jennie Chappell.
Canal Boy who became President (The), by
Frederic T. Gammon. Twelfth Edition. Thirty-fourth Thousand.
David Livingstone: His Labours and His Legacy.
By Arthur Montefiore, F.G.S., F.R.G.S.
Florence Nightingale, the Wounded Soldiers
Friend. By Eliza F. Pollard. .
Four Heroes of India: Clive, Warren Hastings, Have-
lock, Lawrence. By F. M. Holmes. .
Fridtjof Nansen: His Life and Explorations, by J.
the Christian Soldier and
Hero. By G. Barnett Smith.
Gladstone (W. E.): England s Great Commoner.
Bv Walter Jerrold. With Portrait and thirty-eight other Illustrations.
Heroes and Heroines of the Scottisn Covenant-
ers By J. Meldrum Dryerre, LL.B., F.R.G.S.
John Knox and the Scottish Reformation. By G.
Barnett Smith. ... T
Michael Faraday, Man of Science. By alter Jerrold.
« One and All.” An Autobiography of Richard Tangye,
of the Cornwall Works, Birmingham. With Twenty-one Original
Illustrations by Frank Hewett. (192 pages.) ,
Philip Melancthon : The Wittemberg Professor and
Theologian of the Reformation. By David J. Deane, Author of
“ Two Noble Lives,” etc. -
Sir John Franklin and the Romance of the
North-West Passage. By G. Barnett Smith.
Slave and His Champions (me): Sketches of
Granville Sharp, Thomas Clarkson, William Wilberforce, and Sir 1.
F. Buxton. By C- D. Michael. _ . _ -r,
Stanley (Henry M.), the African Explorer. By
Arthur Montefiore, F.G.S., F.R.G.S-
Snurgeon (C. H.) : His Life and Ministry. By Jesse Page.
Two Noble Lives: JOHN WICLIFFE, the Morning
Star Of the ßeformation ; and MARTIN LUTHER, the Reformer.
By David J. Deane. (298 pages.) .
Through Prison Bars : The Lives and Labours of John
Howard and Elizabeth Fry, the Prisoner’s Friends. By William H.
William Tyndale, the Translator of the
English Bible. By G. Barnett Smith.
Over 430,000 of these popular volumes have already b-sit s. .- .


5. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.’S
/$• 6dm each .
THE BRITISH BOYS’ LIBRARY.
A New Series of Is. 6d. books for boys.
Illustrated. Crown 8 vo. Cloth extra.
*Tha Old Red School House. A Story of the Back-
woods. By Frances H. Wood.
*Ben : A Story of Life’s Byways, By Lydia Phillips, Author
of “Frank Burleigh.”
*The Secret of the Yew. By Frank Yerlock.
*Major Brown ; or, Whether White or Black, a Man ! By
Edith S. Davis.
The Bell Buoy; or, The Story of a Mysterious Key.
By F. M. Holmes.
Jack. A Story of a Scapegrace. By E. M. Bryant.
Hubert Ellerdals ; A Tale of the Days of Wicliffe.
W. Oak Rhind.
THE BRITISH GIRLS’ LIBRARY.
A New Series of Is. 6d. books for girls.
Illustrated. Crown S vo. Cloth extra.
*Regia ; or, Her Little Kingdom. By E. M. Waterworth
and Jennie Chappell.
*Uno’s Marriage. By Mrs. Haycraft.
*Tephi : An Armenian Romance. By Cecilia M. Blake.
*Christabel. By J. Goldsmith Cooper, Author of “ Nella.”
Sweet Kitty Claire. By Jennie Chappell.
The Maid of the Storm : A Story of a Cornish
Village. By Nellie Cornwall.
Mistress of the Situation (The). By Jennie Chappell.
Queen of the Isles. By Jessie M. E. Saxby.
NEW PICTURE BOOKS.
Happy and Gay : Pictures and Stories for Every Day.
By D. J. D., Author of “Stories of Animal Sagacity,” etc. With
8 coloured and 97 other Illustrations. Size 9by 7 inches. Hand-
some coloured covers, paper boards with cloth backs.
Pleasures and Joys for Girls and Boys. By
D. J. D., Author of “Anecdotes of Animals and Birds.” With
8 coloured and in other Illustrations. Size 9by 7 inches. Hand-
some coloured cover, paper boards and cloth back.
Anecdotes of Animals and Birds. By Uncle John.
With 57 full-page and other Illustrations by Harrison Weir, etc.
Fcap. 410. 128 pages. Handsomely bound in paper boards, with Animal
design in 10 colours, varnished. (A charming book for the Young.)
Stories of Animal Sagacity. By D. J. D. A com-
panion volume to “Anecdotes of Animals.” Numerous full-page
Illustrations. Handsomely bound in paper boards, with Animal subject
printed in 10 colours, varnished.


CATALOGUE OF NEW & POPULAR WORKS n
Is. 6d. each.
ILLUSTRATED REWARD BOOKS.
Crown Svo, 160 pages. Cloth extra. Fully Plustrafed.
♦The Legend of the Silver Cup. Allegories for
Children. By Rev. G. Critchley, BA. With 12 Illustrations. (Small
quarto.)
Aileen; or, “The Love of Christ Constraineth Us.” By
Laura A. Barter, Author of “ Harold ; or, Two Died for Me.”
Duff Darlington; or, An Unsuspected Genius. By
Evelyn Everett-Green. With six Illustrations by Harold Copping.
Everybody’s Friend ; or, Hilda Danvers’ Influence. By
Evelyn Everett-Green, Author of “ Barbara’s Brother,” etc.
Fine Gold ; or, Ravenswood Courtenay. By Emma
Marshall, Author of " Eaglehurst Towers,” etc.
Jack’s Heroism. A Story of Schoolboy Life. By Edith C.
Kenyon.
Marigold. By L. T. Meade, Author of “ Lady of the
Forest,” etc.
Our Duty to Animals. By Mrs. C. Bray, Author of
“ Physiology for Schools,” etc. Intended to teach the young kindness
to animals. Cloth, is. 6d, ; School Edition, is. 3d.
Raymond and Bertha: A Story of True Nobility. By
L. Phillips, Author of “ Frank Burleigh ; or, Chosen to be a Soldier. ’
Rose Capel’s Sacrifice ; or, A Mother’s Love. By Mrs.
Haycraft, Author of “ Like a Little Candle,” “ Chine Cabin,” etc.
Satisfied. By Catherine M. Trowbridge.
Sisters-in-Love. By Jessie M. E. Saxby, Author of
“ Dora Coyne,” “ Sallie’s Boy,” etc. Illustrated by W. Rainey, R.L
Ted’s Trust; or, Aunt Elmerley’s Umbrella. By Jennie
Chappell, Author of “Who was the Culprit?” etc.
Thomas Howard Gill : His Life and Work. By Eliza
F. Pollard, Author of “ Florence Nightingale,” etc.
Tamsin Rosewarne and Her Burdens : A Tale of
Cornish Life. By Nellie Cornwall.
*Our Exemplar; or, What would Jesus do? By Charles
M. Sheldon, Author of “ The Crucifixion of Philip Strong,” etc. 320
pages. Stiff paper Covers, is. 6d. Cloth boards, 2s. This remark-
able book has already had a sale in America of 185,000 copies.
♦lnsects: Foes and Friends. By W. Egmont Kirby, M.D.,
F.L.S., with Preface by W. F. Kirby, F.L.S., F.E.S., of the Natural
History Museum, South Kensington. Demy i6mo. 3 2 P 3 ? 65 of
coloured Illustrations and 144 pages of descriptive letterpress. Cloth
boards, is. 6d.


tsm each.
ONE SHILLING REWARD BOOKS.
Fully Illustrated. 96 pages. Crown Zvo. Cloth extra.
*Dampy Dolly. By E, M. Waterworth, Author of
“ Master Lionel,” “Lady Betty’s Twins,” etc.
*A Venturesome Voyage. By F. Scarlett Potter.
Author of “ The Farm by the Wood,” etc.
*The Pilgrim’s Progress. By John Bunyan.
416 pages. 47 Illustrations.
Always Happy ; or, The Story of Helen Keller. By
Jennie Chappell, Author of “ Ted’s Trust.”
Birdie and her Dog, and other Stories of Canine
Sagacity. By Miss Phillips.
Birdie’s Benefits ; or, A Little Child Shall Lead Them.
By Ethel Ruth Boddy.
Band of Hops Companion (The). A Hand-book for
Band of Hope Members: Biographical, Historical, Scientific, and
Anecdotal, By Alf. G. Glasspool.
Carol’s Gift; or, “What Time I am Afraid I will Trust in
Thee.” By Jennie Chappell, Author of “Without a Thought,” etc.
Brave Bertie. By Edith Kenyon, Author of “Jack’s
Heroism,” “ Hilda ; or, Life’s Discipline,” etc.
Children of Cherryholme (The). By M. S. Haycraft,
Author of "Like a Little Candle,” "Chine Cabin,” etc.
Cared For; or, The Orphan Wanderers. By Mrs. C. E.
Bowen, Author of " Dick and his Donkey,” etc.
Chine Cabin. By Mrs. Haycraft, Author of “ Red Dave,”
“ Little Mother," etc.
Farm by the Wood (The). By F. Scarlett Potter,
Author of “ Phil’s Frolic,” etc.
Frank Burleigh; or, Chosen to be a Soldier. By L.
Phillips.
Frank Spencer’s Rule of Life. By J. W. Kirton,
Author of “ Buy Your Own Cherries.”
Grannie’s Treasures, and How They Helped
Her. By L. E. Tiddeman.
His Majesty’s Beggars. By Mary E. Ropes, Author
of “ Bel’s Baby,” etc.
Harold ; or, Two Died for Me. By Laura A. Barter.
Jack the Conqueror ; or, Difficulties Overcome. By the
Author of “Dick and his Donkey.”
Jenny’s Geranium ; or, The Prize Flower of a London
Court.


ism each.
ONE SHILLING REWARD BOOKS ( continued ).
Jim’s Discovery ; or, On the Edge of a Desert. Ey
T. M. Browne, Author of “ Dawson’s Madge,” etc.
Little Bunch’s Charge ; or, True to Trust. By Nellie
Cornwall, Author of “ Tamsin Rosewame,” etc.
Losing and Finding ; or, The Moonstone Ring. By
Jennie Chappell, Author of "Who was the Culprit ?” etc.
Little Woodman and his Dog Csssar (The). By
Mrs. Sherwood.
Little Bugler (The) : A Tale of the American Civil War.
By George Munroe Royce. New Edition.
Lady Betty’s Twins. By E. M. Waterworth, Author of
“ Master Lionel,” “ Twice Saved,” etc.
Marjory; or, What Would Jesus do? By Laura A. Barter,
Author of " Harold ; or, Two Died for Me.
Marion and Augusta; or, Love and Selfishness. By
Emma Leslie, Author of “ Ellerslie House,” etc.
Old Goggles ; or, The Brackenhurst Bairns’ Mistake. By
M. S. Haycraft, Author of " The Children of Cherryholme,” etc.
Our Den. By E. M. Waterworth, Author of “ Master
Lionel, that Tiresome Child.”
Raymond’s Rival; or, Which will Win? By Jennie
Chappell, Author of “ Losing and Finding,” etc.
Recitations and Concerted Pieces for Bands of Hope,
Sunday Schools, etc. Compiled by James Weston.
Sweet Nancy. By L. T. Meade, Author of “ Scamp and
I,” “ A Band of Three,” etc.
Twice Saved ; or, Somebody’s Pet and Nobody’s Darling.
By E. M. Waterworth, Author of “ Our Den,” “ Master Lionel,” etc.
Three Runaways. By F. Scarlett Potter, Author of
“ Phil’s Frolic,” “ Hazelbrake Hollow,” etc.
Una Bruce’s Troubles. By Alice Price, Author of
“ Hamilton of King’s,” eta Illustrated by Harold Copping.
Under the Blossom. By Margaret Haycraft, Author
of “ Like a Little Candle ; or, Bertrand’s Influence,” eta
Who was the Culprit 7 By Jennie Chappell, Author
of “ Her Saddest Blessing,” “ The Man of the Family,” etc.


Ism casts
POPULAR SHILLING SERIES.
Crown 8 vo, well printed on good paper , and bound in attractive and
tasteful coloured paper covers.
Cousin Mary. By Mrs. Oliphant.
Louie’s Married Life. By
Sarah Doudney.
The Strait Gate. 1 A B y.
I Annie
Grandmother’s Child, f S.
and For Lacy’s Sake. J Swan.
Fully Illustrated.
Living it Down. By Laura M.
Lane.
Eaglehurst Towers. By Mrs.
Emma Marshall.
Without a Thought.)
Her Saddest Blessing, j Chappeii
Fine Gold ; or, Ravenswood
Courtenay. By Emma Marshall.
The above can also be had in fancy cloth , price is. 6d,
CHEAP REPRINTS OF POPULAR STORIES FOR THE YOUNG.
Crown Bvo, 160 pages. Illustrated. Cloth boards, Is. each.
*Claire ; or, A Hundred Years Ago. By T. M. Browne,
Author of “Jim’s Discovery,” etc.
♦The Minister’s Money. By Eliza F. Pollard, Author
of “True unto Death,” etc.
♦Nobly Planned. By M. B. Manwell, Author of
“ Mother’s Boy,” etc. q
♦Her Two Sons. A Story for Young Men and Maidens.
By Mrs. Charles Garnett.
Rag and Tag: A Plea for the Waifs and Strays of
Old By Mrs. E. J. Whittaker.
Through Life’s Shadows. By Eliza F. Pollard.
The Little Princess of Tower Kill. By L. T.
Meade.
Clovie and Madge. By Mrs. G. S. Reaney.
The Safe Compass and How it Points.
The Best Things. I By
Rays from the Sun. J Dr. Newton
Ellerslie House : A Book for Boys. By Emma Leslie.
Manchester. House : A Tale of Two Apprentices.
By J. Capes Story.
Like a Little Candle ; or, Bertrand’s Influence.
By Mrs. Haycraft.
Violet Maitland ; or, By Thorny Ways. By Laura M. Lane.
Martin Redfern’s Oath. By Ethel F. Heddle.
Dairyman’s Daughter (The). By Leg-h Richmond.


Is• each.
PICTURE BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. >
/Va/. 4/0. With Coloured Covers , and Full of Illustrations.
♦Ring o’ Roses : Pictures and Stories for Little Folks.
By Unde Jack, Author of “ Frolic and Fun,” etc. Four Full-page
coloured and numerous other Illustrations. #
♦Holiday Joys: Stories and Pictures for Girls and Boys.
By C. D. M., Author of “ Merry Playmates,” etc. Four full-page
coloured and numerous other Illustrations.
Frolic and Fun: Pictures and Stories for Every One.
By Uncle Jack, Author of “Follow the Drum,” etc. Four full-page
coloured and numerous other Illustrations. _
Merry Playmates: Pictures and Stones for Little
Folks. By C. D. M., Author of “ Brightness and Beauty,” etc.
Four full-page coloured and numerous other Illustrations.
Follow the Drum ; Pictures and Stories for Cheenul and
Glum. By Uncle Jack, Author of “ Bright Beams and Happy Scenes,”
etc. Four full-page coloured and numerous other illustrations.
Off and Away : Pictures and Stories for Grave and Gay.
By C. D. M., Author of “ Brightness and Beauty,” etc. Four full-page
coloured, and numerous other Illustrations.
Bible Pictures and Stories. Old Testament. By D. J. D.,
Author of “ Pets Abroad,” etc. With Forty-four full-page Illustrations.
Coloured paper boards, is. ; cloth gilt, is. 6d.
Bible Pictures and Stories. New Testament. By
Tames Weston and D. J. D. With Forty-five beautiful full-page
Illustrations by W. J. Webb, Sir John Gilbert, and others. New
Edition. Fcap. 4to. Illustrated boards, is. ; cloth, extra, is. od.
Bright Beams and Happy Scenes: A Picture
Book for Little Folk. By J. D. Four full-page coloured and numerous
other Illustrations. Coloured paper cover, is. ; cloth, is. bd. _
Holiday Hours in Animal Land. (New Senes.)
By Uncle Harry. Four full-page coloured and numerous other
Illustrations. Coloured paper cover, is. ; cloth, is. 6d.
Merry Moments. A Picture Book for Lads and Lasses.
By C. D. M- Four full-page coloured and many other Illustrations.
Coloured paper cover, is.; cloth, is. 6d.
BOOKS BT BEV. Bit. XETTTOX.
New and Cheap Edition. 160 pages. Crown Zvo. Prettily bound in
cloth boards, is. each.
Bible Jewels. I . Bible Wonders.
Rills from the Fountain of Lire.
The Giants, and How to Fight Them.
Specially suitable for Sunday School Libraries and Rewards.
♦Molly and I. By the Author of “Jack,” ‘‘At Sunset,”
etc. Long Bvo. Illustrated Title Page. is.
Cicely’s Little Minute. By Harvey Gobel. Long svo.
Illustrated Title Page. Cloth extra, is.


‘S'- W. PARTRIDGE & CO.'S
Is, each.
Queens. By Charlotte Skinner, Author of
"Sisters of the Master.” Small Bvo. 112 pages. Cloth.
Sisters of the Master. By Charlotte Skinner, Author
of The Master’s Gifts to Women.”
The Master’s Gifts to Women. By Mrs. Charlotte
Skinner. Small Bvo. xl 2 pages. Cloth.
The Master’s Messages to Women. By Mrs.
Charlotte Skinner. (Uniform with the above.)
Some Secrets of Christian Living. Selections
from the “Seven Rules" Series of Booklets. Small Bvo. doth
boards. ’
Daybreak in the Soul. By the Rev. E. W. Moore
M.A., Author of “The Overcoming Life.” Imperial i 2 mo’
144 pages. Cloth. J
Steps to the Blessed Life. Selections from the
“Seven Rules" Series of Booklets. By Rev. F. B. Meyer, B.A.
Small Crown Bvo, cloth boards.
Thoroughness: Talks to Young Men. By Thain
Davidson, D.D. Small Crown Bvo. Cloth extra.
Women of the Bible. (Old Testament). By Etty
Woosnam. Third Edition. Royal i6mo. Cloth
Qdm each.
NIWEPENNY SERIES OF ILLUSTRATED BOOKS.
96 pages. Small Crown Zvo. Illustrated. Handsome Cloth Covers.
I ’. or> By Coura S e an d Faith. By C. A. Mercer.
’"Phil S Frolic. By F. Scarlett Potter.
*How a Farthing Made a Fortune; or, Honesty is
Policy. By Mrs. C. E. Bowen. J
A Flight with the Swallows. By Emma Marshall.
Babes in the Basket (The); or, Daph and Her
Charge.
Boy’s Friendship (A). By Jesse Page.
Bel’s Baby. By Mary E. Ropes.
Benjamin Holt’s Boys, and What They Did for
Him. By the Author of "A Candle Lighted by the Lord.”
Ben’s Boyhood. By the Author of “ Jack the Conqueror.’*
Owen I A Lancashire Story# By Jennie Perrett#
Cousin Bessie : A Story of Youthful Earnestness. By
Cla/a Lucas Balfour. . • J
Dawson s Madge ; or, The Poacher’s Daughter. By T,
M. Browne, Author of “ The Musgrove Ranch,” etc.
Five Cousins (The). By Emma Leslie.


Foolish Chrissy; or, Discontent and its Consequences. By
Meta, Author of “ Noel's Lesson,” etc.
For Lucy’s Sake. By Annie S. Swan.
Giddie Garland; or, The Three Mirrors. By Jennie
Chappell.
Grandmother’s Child. By Annie S. Swan.
How Paul’s Penny Became a Pound. By Mrs
Bowen, Author of ‘ ‘ Dick and his Donkey.”
How Peter’s Pound Became a Penny. By the
same Author.
Jean Jacques: A Story of the Franco-Prussian War. By
Isabel Lawford.
John Oriel’s Start in Life. By Mary Howitt.
Left with a Trust. By Nellie Hellis.
Letty; or, The Father of the Fatherless. By H. Clement,
Author of “ Elsie’s Fairy Bells.”
Master Lionel, that Tiresome Child. By E. M.
Waterworth.
Man of the Family (The). By Jennie Chappell.
Mattie’s Home ; or, The Little Match-girl and her Friends.
Paul, A Little Mediator. By Maude M. Butler.
Sailor’s Lass (A). By Emma Leslie.
* Gd. each.
NEW SERIES OF SIXPENNY PICTURE-BOOKS.
Crown quarto. Fully Illustrated. Handsomely bound in paper boards ,
with design printed in Eight colours.
♦Dollies’ Schooltime : Pictures and Stories in Prose and
Rhyme.
♦Birdie’s Message: The Little Folks’ Picture Book.
Sweet Stories Retold. A Bible Picture-Book for
Young Folks.
After School.
Doggies’ Doings and Pussies’ Wooings
Under the Umbrella, Pictures and Stories for Rainy Days.
Rosie Dimnle’s Pictures and Stories for Tiny
Folk.
Playful Pussies’ Book of Pictures and Stories.
Little Snowdrop’s Bible Picture-Book.
This New Series of Picture Books surpasses, in excellence of illustration
and careful printing, all others at the price,


6d. each*
THE “RED DAYE” SERIES.
New and Enlarged Edition, with Coloured Frontispieces. Hand-
somely bound in cloth boards.
Moe and Sally ; or, a Good
Deed and its Fruits.
*The Island Home. By F. M.
Holmes.
*Chrissy’s Treasure. By Jen-
nie Perrett.
*Puppy-Dog Tales. By Various
Authors.
Mother’s Boy. By M.B.Manwell
A Great Mistake. By Jennie
Chappell.
From Hand to Hand. By c.
J. Hamilton.
That Boy Bob. By Jesse Page.
Buy Your Own Cherries. By
J. W. Kirton.
Owen’s Fortune. By Mrs, F.
West.
Only Milly ; or, A Child’s King-
dom.
Shad’s Christmas Gift.
Greycliffe Abbey.
Red Dave ; or, What Wilt Thou
have Me to do ?
Harpy’s Monkey: How it Helped
the Missionaries.
Snowdrops; or, Life from the
Dead.
Dick and his Donkey; or, How
to Pay the Rent.
Herbert’s First Year at Bram-
ford.
Lost in the Snow; or, The
Kentish Fisherman.
The Pearly Gates.
Jessie Dyson.
Maude’s Visit to Sandybeaeh.
Friendless Bob, and other Stories.
Come Home, Mother.
Sybil and her Live Snowball.
Only a Bunch of Cherries.
Daybreak.
Bright Ben: The Story of a
Mother’s Boy.
THE MARIGOLD SERIES.
An entirely new and unequalled series of standard stories, printed on
good laid paper. Imperial Zvo, 128 pages. Illustrated covers with
vignetted design printed in eight colours. Price 6d, each, nett.
Pride and Prejudice. By The Wide, Wide World. By
Jane Austen. Susan Warner.
From Jest to Earnest. By E.
P. Roe.
THE TINY LIBRARY.
Books printed in
Little ChriSSie, and other Stories.
Harry Carlton’s Holiday.
A Little Loss and a Big
Find.
What a Little Cripple Did.
Bobby.
Matty and Tom.
each.
large type. Cloth. \
The Broken Window.
John Madge’s Cure for
Selfishness.
The Pedlar’s Loan.
Letty Young’s Trials.
Brave Boys.
Little Jem, the Rag Merchant.


4dm each.
MEW FOURP EMMY SERIES
Young. With Coloured Frontispieces.
Handsome Cloth Covers.
of Cloth-bound Books for the
64 pages. Well Illustrated.
Poppy J or, School Days at
Saint Bride’s.
Carrie and the Cobbler.
Nita; or, Among the Brigands.
The Crab’s Umbrella.
Sunnyslde Cottage.
Those Barrington Boys.
Two Lilies.
Robert’s Trust.
Dandy Jim.
A Troublesome Trio.
Perry's Pilgrimage.
CHEAP "PANSY” SERIES.
Imperial B vo. 64 pages.
Five Colours.
Many
Illustrations. Cover printed in
•The Strait Gate. By Annie
S. Swan.
•Mark Desborough’s Vow.
By Annie S. Swan.
•Her Saddest Blessing.
Miss Priscilla Hunter and
other Stories.
Wild Bryonie.
A vice. A Story of Imperial Rome.
A Young Girl’s Wooing.
Spun From Fact.
A Sevenfold Trouble.
From Different Standpoints.
Those Boys.
Christie’s Christmas.
Wise to Win ; or, The Master
Hand.
Four Girls at Chautauqua.
The Chautauqua Girls at I
Home. C
Ruth Erskine’s Crosses. )
Ester Ried. \
Julia Ried. \
Ester Ried yet Speaking, f
An Endless Chain.
Echoing and Re-echoing.
Cunning Workmen.
Tip Lewis and His Lamp.
The King’s Daughter. \
Wise and Otherwise, i
Household Puzzles, i
The Randolphs. f
Mrs. Solomon Smith Looking
On.
Links in Rebecca’s Life.
Interrupted.
The Pocket Measure.
Little Fishers and their Nets
A New Graft on the Family
Tree.
The Man of the House.
3dm eachm
THE PRETTY ••GIFT-BOOK" SERIES.
With Coloured Frontispiece, and Illustrations on every page. Paper
boards, Covers printed in Five Colours and Varnished, yi, ; cloth
boards, 4 d. each.
My Pretty Picture Book.
Birdie’s Picture Book.
Baby's Delight.
Mamma’s Pretty Stories.
Tiny Tot’s Treasures.
Papa’s Present.
Pretty Bible Stories.
Baby’s Bible Picture Book.


S. IV. PARTRIDGE 6- CO.’S CATALOGUE.
ILLUSTRATED MONTHLY PERIODICALS.
One Pennt Monthly.
THE BRITISH WORKMAN.
Edited by SAX WOODS, X.P.
An Illustrated Paper containing brightly-written Articles and Stories on
Religion, Temperance, and Thrift, short Biographical Sketches of Self-made
Men. etc.
The Yearly Volume, with Coloured paper boards, cloth back, and full of
Engravings, is. 6d. each; cloth, as. 6d.
One Halfpenny Monthly.
THE BAND OF HOPE REVIEW.
The Leading Temperance Periodical for the Young, containing Serial and
Short Storiea, Concerted Recitations, Prize Competitions, etc.
The Yearly Volume, with Coloured Cover and full of Engravings, cloth
back, is.; cloth gilt, as. each.
One Penny Monthly.
THE CHILDREN’S FRIEND.
The Oldest and Best Magazine for Children. Excellent Serial and Short
Stories, Prize Competitions, Puzzles, Music, etc. A charming Presentation Plate,
in colours, is given away with the January number.
The Yearly Volume, Coloured paper boards, cloth back, is. 6d.; cloth, as.;
gilt edges, as. 6d.
One Penny Monthly.
THE INFANTS’ MAGAZINE.
Full of charming Pictures and pleasant Rhymes to delight the little ones.
Printed in large type. A splendid Coloured Presentation Plate given away with
the January number.
The Yearly Volume, in Coloured paper boards, cloth back, is. 6d.; cloth,
as. ; gilt edges, as. 6d
One Penny Monthly.
THE FAMILY FRIEND and MOTHERS' COMPANION.
A beautifully Illustrated Magazine for the Home Circle, containing Serial and
Short Stories by the leading writers of the day. Also crisply written Articles on
popular subjects, Notes on Dressmaking, etc.
The Yearly Volume, with numerous Engravings, Coloured paper boards,
cloth back, is. 6d.; cloth, as.; gilt edges, as, 6d.
One Penny Monthly.
THE FRIENDLY VISITOR.
AN ILLUSTRATED GOSPEL MAGAZINE FOR THE PEOPLE.
Contains striking Gospel Stories and Articles, in large type, beautifully
illustrated. An invaluable help to District Visitors, Mission Workers, etc.
The Yearly Volume, Coloured Cover, cloth back, is. 6d.; cloth, as. ; gilt
edges, as. 6d.
8 <s* 9, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.


*17 f * ' '
■
V
.
,
\
.
7 -


mm,.
fSSm
*f t r X L s~- ■.
m Mi
' > j5* r V . 2p Jb Ik /»«* ~ If ■** * jfij&zrj,'


Y1A&:


.-V i -
-
