

■W T-T- T . TTT V TTT . T rT TTTTTyTTTTT ,
PRINTED AT THe"bELL,” OFFICE, WVNDHAM STREET.




CO-OPERATION
Jairi and
W. L. REES.
~~ - - '■=■ • ------ ■ '■
PUBLISHERS: UPTON & CO., QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND.




° F \X
S JAHI993 ~i]j
o Jy
hi 6 5
and welfare of the people.
These pages are dedicated to Sir George Grey, the
noble and unselfish leader of all those who, in the
Colonial Empire of Britain, are striving for the liberties


INTRODUCTION.
It is impossible at the present time to conceal from ourselves the
approach of a great conflict between Wealth and Poverty—between
the classes who own the wealth of civilized communities and the
poor. The rapid growth of population in Europe, whose increasing
millions must find food and homes in less densely populated coun-
tries, or starve; the unprecedented accumulation of wealth in the
hands of the few; and the terrible uncertainty of food for the
many; the seething and bubbling fears and aspirations of great
majorities in the different nations—are all signs of the times which
he who runs may read. Every mail which reaches us from England
and America, almost every daily telegraphic summary of news,
contains the record of occurrences which show plainly enough the
tremendous forces operating beneath the surface of society, and
that we are in truth, as Mr. Hyndman has said, “in the dawn of a
revolutionary epoch.” There are two causes which conduce to
revolution—oppression and want. In Great Britain both causes
operate largely; in the colonies as yet neither to any great extent.
We, however, in New Zealand should remember that we are merely
laying the foundations for future generations. Here unfettered
by ancient prejudices or customs, and as yet possessing wide terri-
tories of public lands and sparsely populated private estates, we
should endeavour so to shape our course as to avoid the dangers
which threaten older countries, and find a means of banishing
poverty from the land. Our political privileges are already great
—they can and will become more comprehensive, and we should
now unite in the attempt to build up a system of social economy,
that will ensure general prosperity and cause want to be unknown.
To enable the mind to plan for the future it is necessary to look
back at the course we have travelled, and mark its principal social
and historic features. Thus tracing the causes of our present
position and the principles which have guided our short Colonial
existence, we shall be able—as I trust—to see a way which may
lead to safety and prosperity.


LAND, LABOUR, AND CAPITAL.
CHAPTER I.
THE PAST,
It would not "be pertinent to tlie consideration of this subject to
consider at any length or with extreme minuteness the history of
the colonisation of New Zealand.
It would, on the other hand, be impossible with justice or safety
to attempt to delineate our present position and our future tenden-
cies without pausing to look back upon those portions of our
national history which have led to our present social state. The
times and modes of New Zealand settlements were varied and
diverse. Our earliest progenitors, as a people, were drawn from
very different classes in character and position. The runaway
sailors from whaling ships, and escaped fugitives from justice in
other lands, found homes and hospitality among those same Maoris
whom the missionaries of every church had crossed the ocean to
convert.
Various causes induced the government of New South Wales
and the English government to annex New Zealand to the Empire.
The treaty of Waitangi, agreed to as it was by a very large
section of the native people, confirmed the destiny of these islands.
Then followed the usual incidents of early colonisation—separa-
tion from the Mother Colony—the formation of an independent
government—the birth of municipal institutions, jealousies, mis-
understandings and wars between the original inhabitants of the
country and the new-comers, and the accession of an ever-increasing
European population. The first part of its history terminated in
the charter of the constitution granting to New Zealand repre-
sentative institutions and responsible government.
Since that time the four most prominent series of events, viewed
in connection with the present subject have been the discovery and
the working of rich gold fields in many parts of both islands ; the
Maori wars, commencing at Waitara; the land legislation in regard


Tbotlx to Crown lands and lands belonging to the natives; and the
results of the Public Works and Immigration Policy initiated in
1870 by Sir Julius Vogel.
I do not allude to the repeal of that part of the constitution
which provided for Provincial Government and administration,
because it does not seem to me materially to affect the subject
now being considered, viz., the production and distribution of
wealth. With the establishment of English government in 1840,
all the laws existing in Great Britain, applicable to this country,
came into force here. Not only, however, did the statute and
common law of our fatherland become thus transplanted, but those
laws of social economy, by which, often unconsciously, we are so
completely governed, also became a portion of our national
existence.
Thus the laws of demand and supply, the laws of rent and labour,
of taxation, of capital, of interest, and of wages; all these were
brought into as full control in the infant colony of New Zealand
as they were in the ancient cities and farm lands of Great Britain.
Whatever liberties, civil and religious, our people held in England
they held here. And the same direction which increasing wealth
and growing opulence took in England thfcy took also in New
Zealand.
The different locations made in the colony, the incongruous and
many-sided settlement of Auckland, the commercial establishment
of Wellington and Wanganui, the Episcopalian colony in Canter-
bury, and the gathering of the clans in Otago and Southland, all
tended to create the general desire and claim for political
privileges, and to promote a keen emulation in the attainment of
wealth. While the provinces were in existence, and the Provincial
Governments had power to dispose of the waste lands of the Crown
within their jurisdiction, each province developed a species of
almost national characteristics in disposing of these lands.
Canterbury, strong in its conservative element and old-fashioned
hereditary instincts, made laws which practically gave over
millions of acres of rich land to privileged classes. Auckland,
strong in its cosmopolitan origin and character, passed enactments
of all sorts and conditions for the purpose of managing the territory
belonging to it.
After the four settlements had become solidified, and when the
re-action which followed the excitement of their foundation had
overtaken them, the discovery of gold in Otago brought a vast
influx of people, wealth, and energy to the middle island. What
Gabriel’s Gully did for the South, the war and afterwards the
Thames did for the North, while the metropolitan position and
character of Wellington, and the great wheat-fields and sheep-runs
of Canterbury, gave wealth and population to those places. The
tide of prosperity again ebbed, until in 1870 Sir Julius Vogel intro-
duced his Public Works and Immigration Policy. Since that time


the material prosperity of New Zealand has, without doubt,
depended mainly upon the expenditure of borrowed money. Ido
not desire to criticise the manner in which the five and twenty
millions have been spent —nor do I wish here to condemn that
policy, nor approve it. It is sufficient to aver that whatever its
ultimate consequences may be, the immediate effect was to restore
life and animation to business, to settlement, to and
to speculation. But even the most casual observer cannot fail to
observe that the stimulus which once quickened almost to frenzy,
now fails to rouse us from lethargy and depression. Millions of
borrowed money do not now by their expenditure provide employ-
ment for the surplus labour of the people. So much and deeply is
this felt, that in addition to borrowed money Government last year
gave over a million of acres of land for public works. And yet
there is suffering, want, and enforced idleness in our midst.
During the period of our history since the establishment of
Responsible Government, we have at least kept pace the
British Parliament in the widening and enlargement of political
privileges. With Triennial Parliaments, manhood suffrage, no
property qualification, and the ballot, it becomes difficult to rouse
the enthusiasm of the people upon any question of pure politics,
save upon the abolition of plural voting, the tenure of land, and
one or two other questions which will yet perhaps arouse the deter-
mination of the people. The formation of a State Bank, the proper
adjustment of taxation, and subjects of a like nature, belong to the
questions of policy and not privilege. While the rights of the
people as a whole have been widely recognised, the rights of the
majority in questions of taxation and other matters of policy have
not been so fairly dealt with. #
It is, however, to the social and economical aspects of legislation
that I invite enquiry. Social questions generally, those especially
of the gravest character, have not attracted much attention. Some
few reforms have, it is true, been effected. Wb can judge by
analogy something of the importance of those questions which have
remained utterly untouched. The principal foundation of freedom
is undoubtedly the franchise. Me alone is politically free who h.M
a voice directly or indirectly in the making of the laws by which
his life, his liberty, and his property are to be governed. So he
alone is socially free who has the right to earn for himself the
means of subsistence. To give me the franchise and afford me
no opportunity to exercise it would be mockery ;so to give me the
right to earn my livelihood in any way I choose, and yet not afford
me any opportunity to do so, is mockery also. Here is the bed-rock
of the controversy. Here is the moot question which has agitated
Europe for the last fifty years. How far can Government interfere
to give employment ? How far ought it to do so ? How far can
Government control the distribution of wealth ? How far ought it
to do so ?


Ido not propose to enter into this question at all. I have men-
tioned it to shew that it exists, although dormant. And to shew
also that while political privileges and rights have been conceded
to the labouring and industrial classes, analogous social privileges
and rights have been utterly ignored and passed by in silence.
What then, so far, have been the results of the historic existence
and legislation of the last twenty years to the people of New
Zealand ?
We have increased from about 200,000 to over half a million in
number. We have built railways, erected telegraphs, and
purchased fleets. Villages have grown to towns, and towns to
cities. Commerce, manufactures, productions of all kinds, and
wealth generally have marvellously increased. Art, science, and
literature have been developed. Great ocean steamers give us
direct communication with Europe, and the electric wire flashes to
us beneath the seas the daily news of the whole earth.
On the other hand, we have sold our Crown Lands—parted like
Esau with our birthright for a mess of pottage, —and we have
spent the proceeds. We have allowed millions of acres of Maori
lands to go into the hands of land-sharks and speculators. Our
indebtedness has grown from seven and a-half millions of pounds
to over thirty millions. We have increased our taxation by com-
parison beyond that of any other people.
There are, however, results still worse than these. Not only
have we parted with the fertile lands of the colony, but we have
allowed individuals to obtain titles to estates more vast and
valuable than those of the great landed aristocracy of Britain,
while the great majority of the people are absolutely landless.
The figures published in the recent Doomsday Book are in their
bald simplicity absolutely appalling. These great territories we
have made immensely valuable by the expenditure of borrowed
money. By the same expenditure also we have created a mighty
commerce, which has enriched the merchants and traders of this
and other lands.
We have raised manufacturies, wherein local and foreign
capitalists have invested monies which yield a great percentage.
We have enabled banks and insurance societies, whose shareholders
are mostly foreigners, to pay large dividends. In a word, we have
created a vast aggregate amount of wealth. But at what a cost to
the community as a whole. Our public lands, which might have
enriched all the people, are gone, and we have borrowed and spent
for Government and local purposes about thirty millions, for which
the people have to pay a million and a-half each year! This
terrible burden is placed, not upon those who have gained per-
manent benefit by the lavish expenditure of public money, but upon
the very classes who have received from it no lasting advantage
whatever.
It is a mistake to suppose that times of great prosperity benefit


all alike. To the great land-owner, the opulent capitalist, they are
in a material sense permanently beneficial. But to the industrial
classes, as a rule, they are but gleams of transient sunshine.
While they last employment is plentiful, wages are high, and
things go merrily. Let them, however, pass and yield to those
periods which we call “ bad times,” and we see at once how little
under our present vicious social system the industrial classes benefit
by so-called good times. Employment becomes scarce—wages fall
—expensive habits (save the mark!) induced by prosperity must be
abandoned and curtailed —and soon want, like an armed man,
enters and takes possession. For however prosperous a period may
be, the industrial classes receive but their wages—while the land-
owner and capitalist receive their rents and interest, and besides
that receive all the permanent wealth that is created; so here as
elsewhere poverty marches with progress. I venture to say there is
a larger proportion of poor to-day in New Zealand than there was
at any past period of her history. There are more rich people, and
the rich are richer than they ever were before. Wealth has
accumulated, but in the hands of a few. Debts and burdens have
increased, incurred to make the wealthy still richer, and are borne
by the many. It may be laid down as an axiom that under present
social conditions national prosperity is temporary in advantages for
the many, and permanent only for the few ; the many forming the
industrial class, the few being the owners of land and capital.
CHAPTER 11.
THE PRESENT.
Having thus glanced at the various causes which have resulted in
the state of affairs now existing, I would direct attention to the pre-
sent condition of the colony in its social and political respects.
The position politically is, on the whole, highly favourable.
There can scarcely be a doubt as to the power possessed by the
great body of the people. The franchise being practically univer-
sal, and the industrial classes forming a considerable majority of
the whole population, they can, by organisation for a common and
definite purpose, direct and control both the making of the laws
and their administration.
The social position, however, of the people is not by any means
so satisfactory. Although not perfectly just and equal in political
rights, there is at least in that direction an approach to justice and
equality; while in social and economic matters we behold amongst
ourselves those glaring inconsistencies and dangerous contrasts
which have been the reproach and the terror of all civilisations.
Although less than half a century in age ; although we have run
through and dissipated a magnificent estate; although for different


purposes, local and general, we have borrowed and expended nearly
forty millions of money; although we have raised from ourselves
and expended perhaps another forty millions —yet it is safe to
affirm that three fourths of the total European population of New
Zealand are to-day no richer, no better off than they were when they
landed in the colony. Of the remaining fourth the majority have
perchance amassed a small competency,—while the minority of that
fourth are possessed of great wealth, in some instances of gigantic
fortunes.
It would be invidious to mention names, but there is no resident
in any of the large centres of population in New Zealand who can-
not at a moment’s notice point out many instances to illustrate this
assertion in his own district. And these great fortunes have in no
single instance been amassed by the unaided efforts of the
individual himself, or received by him as the reward of his own
labour. How are the majority of fortunes acquired ?
Is it by the personal labour, mental or bodily, of the merchants,
the land speculators, the manufacturers, the contractors, the ship-
owners, or the investors of money that these fortunes are acquired ?
Not at all. It is by the incessant toil of others 4 by the growth of
communities and of commerce, by the increase of wealth in the
community.
It is strange that this subject is not more clearly understood
by political economists or social writers. For the cause which
results in the accumulation of wealth in the hands of the few is, as
we shall hereafter see, not far to find. Here, however, I propose
to deal with this portion of the subject merely as an existing fact.
The next proposition which attracts the attention in our obser-
vance of the facts of everyday life is that, in addition to the wide
and widening separation between wealth and poverty, we are
compelled to admit that labour and capital are antagonistic. They
live in different camps; they display different sympathies. And
the contentions between them in these colonies are as fierce, and
bitter, and prolonged as in great Britain. Take for example the
bootmakers’ strike in Melbourne, which threatened involve the
whole of the employers of labour throughout Victoria and New
South Wales in a gigantic struggle. This strike cost the Unions
alone £B9OO. Look next at the strike now being carried on
between the Seamen’s Union of Australasia and the Pacific Mail
Company, the end of which is not yet seen. Then regard the strike
of the colliers at Westport against reduced wages, and the boot-
makers’ strike in Christchurch not yet ended. And, to shew the
extreme improbability of any final settlement between labour and
capital under existing social conditions, let any unprejudiced mind,
look at the action of the Auckland Mercantile Marine Association
in its dictatorial letter to the Lumpers’ Union, and the firm and
resolute reply of that Union to the demands made upon them.


No adjustment of differences, no courts of conciliation, no refer-
ences to arbitration, will or can, under the social economy which
has hitherto obtained, reconcile the conflicting interests of capital
and labour.
Again, if we regard the present position in point of locality of
the waste lands of the Crown, we shall at once see that the
possibilities of individual settlement upon those lands is for
ever gone. There was a time when round every infant settle-
ment, round every harbour, and in places where fertile, land was
easily accessible, individual settlement was possible and advan-
tageous.
That day has passed, and passed forever, in New Zealand. Laws,
so framed as to enable their makers to obtain these lands for them-
selves and the great families which they desired to found, disgrace the
statute books both of the provinces and of the colony. For not only
were the Crown lands filched from the public by these means, but
many of the best lands of the natives also were, by arbitrary and un-
just legislation, obtained by the legislators for themselves and their
friends. Where now shall a person desiring to find a home direct
his way ? The Native Minister is indeed attempting to set apart
spots suitable for the location of small groups of families. Even
this can only be done with great difficulty. Wherever land
is fit for settlement, within easy distance of a market or of a
point from which a market can be reached, that land is the property
of private individuals. Intending settlers therefore must now be
prepared to endure the evils and privations of an isolated and almost
savage life, or submit to the exactions of a private land-owner.
Eeturning for a moment to the political world we see that there
are no principles dividing parties, and no defined objects of policy
upon which any actual or supposed coalition is prepared to stand or
fall. For many years, while principles indeed been sternly and
bitterly fought for by that section or party which has followed Sir
George Grey, the end and aim of politicians generally has been to
advance the material interests of the country by spending great
treasures upon railroads and other public works, by introducing
multitudes of labourers into the colony, and by disposing of
the best public lands of the colony for the purpose of so-called
settlement. Material prosperity, brought about in this fashion,
under those social laws which, as we have before seen, now govern
us, has but sent us whirling more and more rapidly upon the road
which older nations have so slowly travelled. _ For he must be
blind who cannot see in every part of the colony increasing likeness
to those European civilisations which are admittedly upon the verge
of revolution. .
The equipages, the mansions, the liveries, the airs of superiority,
with which our wealthy classes now surround themselves, are in
striking and mournful contrast with the appearance and everyday
life of the workers of the community.


And ever and anon the tones of suffering, the tales of want and
wretchedness which are uttered through the columns of the daily-
press show that we are but slightly removed from the pitiable con-
dition of the United Kingdom.
It is an error to think that this so-called material prosperity will
permanently benefit a whole people. Each succeeding wave does,
indeed, land the favoured few higher and higher upon the shore of
prosperity—but the same wave receding drags down the multitudes
to a lower level than they before occupied,
Mr Gladstone, forty years age, gave utterance to the following
words : —“lt is one of the sad sides of the present social order in
our land that the steady increase of wealth of the upper classes and
the accumulation of capital should be attended with a diminution
in the people’s power of consumption, and with a larger amount of
privation and suffering among the poor.”
When twenty years had passed, the same great statesman, speak-
ing in the same House (the House of Commons) said: —“From the
year 1842 to 1853, the receipts from the Income Tax increased 6
per cent, in England; and from 1853 to 1861, 20 per cent. It is
an astonishing fact, but it is nevertheless true, that this prodigious
increase of wealth benefited solely the well-to-do classes.”
Nearly ten years afterwards, in 1872, the late Henry Fawcett
and his wife, Millicent Garrett Fawcett, in their “ Essays and
Lectures on Social and Political Subjects,” speak thus: “ Pro-
duction has increased beyond the most sanguine hopes, and yet the
day when the workman shall obtain a large share of this increase
seems as far distant as ever, and in his miserable abode the struggle
against want and misery is as hard as it ever was. The result of
this is to create a feeling of profound hostility to the fundamental
principles on which society is based.”
It would be useless to multiply quotations of this sort. Looking
generally at the social state of New Zealand we see nearly every-
where business languishing, trade dull, employment scarce, money
still scarcer, and an increasing fear of financial disaster.
The wheat growing of Canterbury has been ruined by the cheap
labour of India; farmers throughout the colony, unaccustomed to
travel outside the routine of other and less-favoured lands, murmur-
ing and discontented. Skilled labour clamouring for protection
to native industry. Owners of property, gloomily contemplating the
possibility of further depression, labor and capital bracing up their
loins for further conflicts. Mortgagors failing to meet the payment
of interest to foreign creditors. Every section of the community
harrassed with anxiety for its own particular interest. All in dread
of increased taxation. And amid all the fears, and hopes, and
anxieties, the industrial classes, forming the bulk in numbers of
the people, are quietly allowing the whole created wealth of the
country to pass into the possession of a small section—the owners
of land and capital. All over the country public meetings are held,


and thousands of the people meet. Sir Julius Yogel, Mr Stout, Mr
Ballance, and Mr Larnach stump the country and utter speeches by
the hour, and save administration—containing what? Major Atkin-
son and other opponents follow Ministers with tiresome minuteness.
Supporters of the party in power rise in their constituencies, and
opponents in theirs. All speak—all are cheered—all receive votes
of confidence. The long accounts day after day become nauseous.
Who remembers or cares to remember the dreary utterances, or
vicious criticisms, “all sound and fury—signifying nothing.”
Once now and then, as in the addresses of Sir George Grey, occurs
a great idea, the shadowing out of some noble thought, some effort
of the past, some hope for the future, some utterances of philosophic
statesmanship and patriotism; but we may say, as the disciples
said of old to Christ, when pointing to the few loaves and fewer
fishes, “ What are they among so many ?” Nothing short of a
miracle can make them sufficient to afford mental food for the
multitude. Meanwhile the daily press, which prides itself not only
upon its power, which is undeniable, but upon its wisdom, which is
at least doubtful—goes spinning on its course either ignorant or
unmindful of the gravity of its self-imposed duties to the people it
teaches. The motto of the Auckland Evening Star expresses more
completely than any other the claims and pretensions of an inde-
pendent newspaper press :
“ For the cause that lacks assistance,
For the wrong that needs resistance,
For the future in the distance,
And the good that we can do.”
No more noble motto was ever written. To perform these
duties, to maintain these principles men have fought and died in
every land and in every age. For this martyrs have suffered on
the rack and endured the flames. For this patriots have bared
their breasts to the sword of tyranny. For this women have visited
the hospital and prison, and followed the steps of armies to distant
lands. For this missionaries have gone forth into the wilderness
and dwelt among savage tribes. For this Christians faced the
lions in the Colliseum, and Havelock and Gordon, in India and in
Egypt, fought and fell. For this Peter the Hermit roused the
nations of Western Europe to the crusades, Arnold of Winkelried
drew a sheaf of spears into his heart, and Howard “ guaged the
dimensions of human misery.” For this, in the plentitude of
mercy, Jesus of Nazareth endured the cross, despising the shame.
The one subject for consideration now is how to distribute that
wealth fairly amongst all which is created by all. Hitherto, thanks
to the ease with which land could be obtained, and to our small popu-
lation, employment has been plentiful and labour scarce. The day
has now come when the scenes enacted in Britain are about to be
enacted here. How shall we prevent this ? How shall we direct
our course while yet we sail upon the open sea, so that we may-
not fall upon the rocks and end our short voyage in disaster and in


•wreck ? How shall we turn the current of social life so that in
New Zealand we shall found a community so truly thriving and
prosperous that every class and Qvery family in the land shall
participate in the general wealth? This is the question. The
solution of this problem is all important; upon that solution
depend the happiness and comfort of many generations. We
possess many and great privileges. Civil and religious liberty
are ours. Political and religious equality we have. One great
principle has, however, yet to be obtained, and that is social
freedom and equality. He is not socially free who is compelled to
sell his labour to another. He is not socially equal who does not
receive as his right that portion of the social wealth which his
labour creates. So long, therefore, as the industrial classes go on
producing wealth in this country, and yet receive nothing beyond
their wages, while all the surplus goes into the hands of the owners
of land and money, so long will they suffer a cruel and degrading
tyranny. Of what importance, in comparison with this, are the
petty questions which engage the attention of the public and the
press, or the base struggles for place and power which often
disgrace and demoralise our parliament ?
To this subject what paper has devoted its columns?
“ Here’s a cause that lacks assistance,
Here a wrong that needs resistance,
Bless our future in the distance,
By the good you now can do.”
It may indeed be said that the press of this colony is no worse in
this respect than that of other places, for this subject, indisputably
the most momentous to all civilised communities, attracts but little
attention, and that not always of the highest order of intelligence.
There is, however, another and a more immediate danger, which
menaces all of us.
In our history, as in the history of all new countries, the tide of
progress ebbs and flows continually. Any person who knows the
past of this colony, will easily recall those periods of severe depres-
sion which have on several occasions swept like a wave over the
country. When the tide has fallen very low and our skies become
dark, and some even thoughtful men have grown despondent—sud-
denly the dawn broke, the tide turned, and New Zealand once more
hoisted all sail and swept along, soon forgetting her past fears.
The discoveries of gold effected on two occasions deliverance—the
rise in wool—the military expenditure, each for a time relieved us,
while the borrowed millions produced the last and greatest, as well
as the most enduring, of our fortunate re-actions. The tide is again
ebbing; what fortunate chance, what well-planned scheme, what
effort of statesmanship, or lucky throw of the dice, is this time to
retrieve our fortunes ? The country is crying out for people and
money to develope its wonderful resources, and to increase its pro-
duction and wealth. From whence are they to come ? Upon the


east coast of the North Island, and in the so-called King
country, as well as in many parts of the South Island, millions
of people could not only find subsistence, but create a great
national prosperity. In those vast districts great sums of English
money could be. advantageously invested—money which would not
only repay itself, hut bring to the Government and to all who were
able to benefit by its use a prosperity such as this colony has never
yet seen. And this could be easily accomplished. If once done,
and done under the conditions I shall explain before I close, then
New Zealand would fear no relapse for many years —for the same
wave which would fill the North with prosperity, would flow South
also, to fertilise and bless all portions of these fair islands.
CHAPTEE 111.
THE FUTURE UNDER EXISTING CONDITIONS.
The records of experience and history will, properly applied, teach
us all that we can hope to conjecture of the future. I see no
foundation for the theory propounded by Herbert Spencer that the
nature and character of man improves through the course of the
ages. Some softening of manners, no doubt exists owing to our
more complete civilisation. The religion of Christ also has, without
doubt, pervaded, and does increasingly pervade, our national life
with a gentle influence wanting in olden days. But, naturally, man
is the same to-day as when Nero fiddled by the light of burning
Eome, when the Babylonish King exclaimed:—“ This is great
Babylon which I have builded,” or when the people mocked at
Noah as he framed the Ark.
Were it otherwise there could be, indeed, no study of sociology
as a science. Because man, the prime factor, continually changing,
the events of the past would be no guide to those of the future.
We may safely believe that, given the same circumstances now as
existed at any period of by-gone time, in the same races or cognate
races of men, and substantially the same results will follow.
We may then reasonably suppose that the same results which
have happened in England will, under existing circumstances, hap-
pen here. The social condition of the bulk of the population of Great
Britain at the present day is one of degradation and want. That
condition has been gradually evolved by changing circumstances,
by the increase of artificial power in machinery, by the gradual
subjugation of natural forces to human use, and by the unprece-
dented increase of wealth in the hands of the propertied classes.
Perhaps the keenest observer of change in the social world is the
author of “Progress and Poverty” and “Social Problems,” Mr.
Henry George, whose writings and speeches are daily strengthening
his hold upon the masses of the English-speaking races. This is


■what he says upon the matter: —“ There is in all the past nothing
to compare with the rapid changes now going on in the civilised
world. It seems as though in the European race and in the 19th
century man was just beginning to live, just grasping his tools and
becoming conscious of his powers. A snail’s pace of crawling ages
has suddenly become the head-long rush of the locomotive,, speeding
faster and faster. This rapid progress is primarily in industrial
methods and material powers. But industrial changes imply social
changes and necessitate political changes. Progressive societies
outgrow institutions as children outgrow clothes. Social progress
always requires greater intelligence in the management of public
affairs; but this the more as progress is rapid and change quicker.
“And that the rapid changes now going on are bringing up
problems that demand most earnest attention may be seen on every
hand. Symptoms of danger, premonitions of violence, are appear-
ing all over the civilised world. Creeds are dying, beliefs are
changing ; the old forces of conservatism are melting away. Politi-
cal institutions are failing, as clearly in democratic America as in
monarchical Europe. There is growing unrest and bitterness
among the masses, whatever be the form of government, a blind
groping for escape from conditions becoming intolerable. To
attribute all this to the teachings of demagogues is like attributing
the fever to the quickened pulse. It is the new wine beginning to
ferment in old bottles. To put into a sailing-ship the powerful
engines of a first-class ocean steamer would be to tear her to pieces
with their play. So the new powers rapidly changing all the rela-
tions of society must shatter social and political organisations not
adapted to meet their strain.
“To adjust our institutions to growing needs and changing
conditions is the task which devolves upon us. Prudence, patriot-
ism, human sympathy, and religious sentiment, alike call upon us
to undertake it. There is danger in reckless change ; but greater
in blind conservatism. The problems beginning to confront us are
grave —so grave that there is fear they may not be solved in time
to prevent great catastrophes. But their gravity comes from indis-
position to frankly recognize and boldly grapple with them.”
So, too, the efforts and teachings of the socialists—especially
since the better sides of those efforts and teachings have been
adopted by men like Frederick Denison Maurice, Thomas Hughes,
and Charles Kingsley —added to the dreadful history of the nation’s
sufferings and want laid bare by Parliamentary reports, and the
observations of the humane and philanthropic, all teach us not
merely that grevious public wrongs are being continually per-
petrated by the operation of present social laws, but that great
dangers to the State are steadily growing as their result.
Do not let us believe that these things happen as part of a
determined plan, for the heart of the English people revolts at the
poverty which accompanies their prosperity, and at the ghastly


■spectacle of multitudes of their fellow-countrymen toiling to
produce boundless stores of wealth for the enjoyment of others.
What reason, then, have we to suppose that the future condition
of our people will, under existing economic laws, present features
in any degree different from the state of Englishmen, Irishmen,
and Scotchmen in the United Kingdom? Clearly none at all.
In the meatime, neither in England nor the colonies is any
adequate plan suggested which shall change either the operation
of the economic laws or those laws themselves, in order to prevent
that oppressive distribution of wealth which at present makes the rich
more wealthy and the poor still poorer. So deeply indeed has the
injustice of the present order of things been felt by the coldest and
most dispassionate of men, that they have been willing to pass into
the deepest, shades of Communism rather than endure the dreadful
•evils of the present, if no other means of ameliorating the condition
■of the labouring classes could be found out.”
John Stuart Mill, one of the clearest, most comprehensive, and
impartial writers of modern times, speaks thus:—“lf, therefore,
the choice were to be between Communism, with all its chances, and
the present state of society, with all its sufferings and injustices—
if the institution of private property necessarily carried with it, as
a consequence, that the produce of labour should be apportioned,
as we now see it, almost in an inverse ratio to the labour, the
largest portion to those who have never worked at all, the next
largest to those whose work is almost nominal, and so in a descend-
ing scale, the remuneration dwindling as the work grows harder
and more disagreeable, until the most fatiguing and exhausting
bodily labour cannot count with certainty on being able to earn
even the necessaries of life—if this or Communism were the alter-
native, all the difficulties, great or small, of Communism would be
as dust in the balance.”
With equal energy speaks another great writer and thinker of
the present day, one truly of greater warmth and enthusiasm than
our own great countryman, the celebrated Belgian economist, M.
Emile de Lavaleye: —“When we look with an unprejudiced
eye at the present division of this world’s goods, and see, on
the one hand, the labourer earning for his daily bread barely what
is needful, —less, indeed, than the wherewithal to live if there be
the slightest possible crisis, —and then turn our eyes to the other
side of the picture, and see the owners of property yearly adding to
fheir estates, and living in ever-increasing ease and comfort, it is
quite impossible to bring this into conformity with notions of
justice, and one can but exclaim with Bossuet: ‘ The complaints of
the poor are just. Wherefore this inequality?’ ”
Hear also the verdict of another great Englishman, John Ruskin:
For most of the rich men of England it were indeed to be desired
that the Bible should not be true, since against them these words


are written in it: * The rust of your gold and silver shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire.’ ”
Yet, amid all this sorrow, no plan is propounded for its allevia-
tion, save that proposal made by Mr Henry George for the nation-
alisation of the laud. This would be ineffectual for the purpose pro-
posed, because it would but shift taxation from men to land, which,
though in itself proper and desirable, could not make nor distribute
wealth among the people. If all the land in the Xjnited Kingdom
were nationalised to-morrow, and the social and economic laws left
untouched, poverty would still accompany progress, labour would
get but the bare wages of subistence, and all created wealthy over
and above the mere payment of labour, would go to the capitalist
class. In all the colonies the land is _or has been practically
nationalised. In all great part of it still is. b<o state treatment of
that land will make wealth which can be distributed amongst the
people. Besides, each man can only claim what he earns and
deserves. How much the writers on political economy and social
science are to blame in not having as yet laid down any foundatiou
whatever for the amendment of those laws which produce results SO'
terrible it is not for me to say. But this is certain, that while all
acknowledge that those laws are faulty, that they have led to
suffering and revolution, and are still leading to suffering and
revolution, not one points distinctly to the errors themselves, much
less proposes any reasonable amendment.
They reason through numberless pages upon the meaning of
terms, the law of supply and demand, what constitutes “ capital,”
in what “ profit” consists and in what “ value,” the fund from which
wages are drawn, what constitutes wealth, the law of wages, and the
laws of rent and exchange, until the mind becomes wearied with end-
less distinctions and technical jargon. For all practical purposes a
hungry man, before participating in a good meal, might as well
reason upon the meaning of the term “food,” or the jaded merchant
or lawyer or workman, before sitting down at his own comfortable
fireside after a hard day’s work, be called upon to define the meaning
of the term “ comfort.”" I do not overlook the ever-increasing public
opinion in England in favour of emigration as a panacea for the
sufferings of the poor. But emigration, unless social conditions be
altered, is simply changing the scene —to a more favourable one,
indeed, for a time —until under the same conditions the same results
must ultimately accrue in new countries as in old. In the
condition of men as at present existing we see vast wealth being
accumulated by the ceaseless toil of busy multitudes, wealth which
is accumulated, not for those who create it, but for strangers. We see
this social robbery producing poverty, drunkenness, shame, disease,
ignorance, and immorality. We know that it is sowing the seeds of
discontent and revolution.
How is it then that our philosophers, patriots, economists,
and legislators do not enquire for the cause of such baneful


consequences and remove it ? For it is not very difficult
to trace these evils to their source, nor ■will it be impos-
sible to men who desire the welfare of their fellow - men
to destroy them. Parliamentary commissions sit now-a-days
upon the most trivial subjects. Societies of the great and
learned meet in every part of the Empire and in the States to
enquire into the cause and effect, the nature and operations, of
everything in the heavens above, in the earth beneath,
and the waters under the earth. Yet here is a subject, fraught
with the destiny of nations and of civilisation—a matter touching
the happiness and temporal salvation of countless millions—which
is scarcely alluded to but in contemptuous pity. War, famine,
and the pestilence are the events which, by poets and historians,
are spoken of to with horror and clothed in the ghastly cerements of
the grave. But what wars, or famines, or plagues ever inflicted
such continuous anguish upon the human race as the unjust taking
by the owners of property of all the wealth of every civilised land
—save, indeed, that small part which gives the bare means of
subsistence to the sorrowful multitudes who build the fortunes of
their tyrants. We paid twenty millions to abolish slavery. Our
brethren in America, when at length they were compelled to face
the deadly thing which raised its hellish front against the State,
gave a thousand millions of pounds and hundreds of thousands of
its best and bravest sons. But even that slavery was more merciful
than the long agony of the generations of our people, hungry,
almost naked, and hopeless, an agony that weeps tears of blood
and thrills the heart with its pitiful wailings. In the olden
countries, the day speeds on when a radical change must come—or
revolution. In these colonies those who aspire to lead the people
and to guide the destinies of young nations should make every
effort to avert the existence of such a state of things as is now seen
in Great Britain. The laws which govern the production and
distribution of wealth can be simply stated and easily understood.
There are, in the language of political economy, three factors of
production—Land, Labour, and Capital. Land includes all the
powers and processes of nature. Labour includes all human effort,
whether of mind or hand. It would be perhaps more simple to
include land which is one form of capital under that term—but it
is not material. To create wealth, all these factors are used.
Sometimes they all belong to the same individual or family, as
when a man of means cultivates his freehold farm with his own
hands, aided perhaps by his children. Sometimes they belong to
different individuals, but are used upon terms by another—as
when, by hired labour, with borrowed money, a man cultivates a
farm which he rents. The different positions which a man can
occupy can easily be seen, whether in agricultural or manufacturing
or trading pursuits.
Each of these factors has a periodic or yearly value—l say yearly


because a year is a complete period of time. The yearly value of,
or recompense for the use of, land we may call rent, because, if the
owner leases it, he receives rent; if he use it himself, he expects to
obtain a return in his opinion equal in value to its rent. So the
yearly value’ of or payment for capital is interest, and the yearly
value of or payment for labour, whether mental or bodily, is wages.
These, of course, all vary in different lands and places, and also
under different circumstances and at different times. But the same
names always represent the same things. The landowner then
receives his rent, the capitalist his interest, and the labourer his
wages. The result of the co-operation of these three factors—after
the payment of the yearly charges, rent, interest, and wages —is the
accumulated wealth of the community. Land has increased in value,
commerce and manufactures have extended, buildings have been
erected, works public and private have been xindertaken, fields
have been cultivated, harvests have been reaped, flocks and herds
have become more numerous, population has increased, the wilder-
ness has become a location of scattered farms, the scattered farms a
hamlet, the hamlet a town, the town a city. All this permanent
result of the co-operation of Land, Labor, and Capital is wealth.
That is production —all have aided in producing. The landowner
has given his land, for which he received the annual payment; the
capitalist his money, for which his return has been received; the
labourer his toil—most important of all —for which wages have
been paid. All cities and communities have grown in this manner
—Melbourne, Chicago, San Francisco, Sydney, Auckland, Welling-
ton, Christchurch, and Dunedin. In Melbourne allotments sold
less than fifty years ago for a few pounds, have recently sold for
over two hundred thousand sovereigns. What was the value fifty
years ago of land in Queen-street, Auckland, or Princes-street,
Dunedin ? All the value, whether the unearned increment or the
improved value, have been given by the co-operation of Land,
Labor, and Capital. And of all the wealth thus created, Labor gets
nothing. All accumulated wealth —that is, wealth after the payment
of rent, interest, and wages—is appropriated by the owners of land
and the owners of money. By no chance, by no possibility, does
one solitary farthing of this created wealth go to the labouring
class, which has borne incomparably the most important part in
its production. This is the injustice under which the labourer
suffers—this is the certain cause of misery to multitudes. The
labourer may, and in new countries, where wages are high, often
does, save part of his wages, and becomeing so far a capitalist or
landowner —some portion of the growing wealth will belong to
him; but as a labourer —nothing. The landowner may spend his
rent, the capitalist his interest, and still the propertied classes grow
wealthier, without toil and without trouble; but let the labourer
expend his wages and some crisis throw him out of employment, he
must starve or accept a pauperising charity. This is the wrong.


There is one remedy, and one only. Let the labourer share in this
accumulated wealth. That is the solution of the social question.
Directly the labourer, besides his wages, shares equally in just
proportion with the landowner and the capitalist in that wealth
which remains after rent, and interest, and wages have been paid,
the problem will be solved. When that time arrives, and it need
not be far distant, the dawn of hope will rise upon the toilers of the
world, and the answer will be to some extent vouchsafed to that
glorious portion of our Lord’s prayer, “Thy kingdom come.”
But if we continue the progress of our colonisation and social and
industrial life upon that basis which ever since the dawn of
civilization has, through the payment of labour by wages only,
given to the owners of property and denied to the owners of labour
the growing wealth of every community, then our increasing popu-
lation and increasing prosperity will simply ensure some violent
catastrophy. The swifter our progress the speedier will be this
end. The people, having all political power and beholding at last
clearly the reason and source of their impoverished condition, will
organise themselves for the purpose of obtaining those rights of
which an iniquitous social system has deprived them.
Not by a revolution of tire and sword will they thus claim and
obtain justice, but by the passing of such laws as, in their opinion,
will secure to them, both for the past and the future, such portion
of the national wealth and property as they consider to be the
reward of toil.
CHAPTER IY.
REQUISITES FOR PERFECT NATIONAL PROSPERITY.
In all ages, from the days when prophets foresaw in the distant
periods of the earth’s history the millennial reign of peace, and Plato
taught in the garden of the Academy, to our own times, men have
indulged in dreams and anticipations of a state of perfect justice
and perfect righteousness upon earth.
Sir Thomas More, Lord Bacon, Campanella, Harrington,
Fenelon, and other great and enthusiastic minds have given to the
world their ideas and their hopes of such a perfect community.
Utopian as were their dreams, Utopian as were their hopes, rudely
disturbed as they all were by the din of war and the selfishness of
civilised life, they show that in every age there has existed a belief
that a better state of society could be found than now exists, and a
hope that such a happy result might be accomplished.
In our own times not only have we the theories of the Socialists
and the Communists, but thousands now living can remember the
practical efforts made by Robert Owen, St. Simon, and Fourier;
while recently Mr Hepworth Dixon has written for us his clever, if
not very deep, observations upon the peculiar communities which


have arisen and flourished with more or less succcess in the United
States. Thinking men seem now to appraise the great insurrec-
tions of thought and action which disturbed Europe for so many
years as the frantic efforts of men to throw off the burden of
tyranny and to obtain justice.
Thus Mr Heath (in the Contemporary Review , April, 1883,) says :
—“ The outbursts which have most alarmed Europe —Lollardism,
the Jacquerie, peasant revolts, Anabaptism, the Camissarde In-
surrection, the French Revolution, the Commune —have been
nothing so much as terrible screams from a humanity crushed and
hunted into a corner. If the movements which ended in these
outbreaks be studied, they will be found, one and all, to have been
efforts on the part of the people to realise exactly the same thoughts
as those expressed in the Sermon on the Mount.”
The history of England supplies many such. The rising which
won the Great Charter; that mighty revolution led by Hampden,
and Pym, and Cromwell, which sent Charles I. to the block, won
the imperishable liberties of Englishmen, and left the greatest
imprint ever placed upon the political history of man; the war of
independence in America; the passing of the Reform Bill; —all
these were but movements of the same spirit, and efforts for a better
state of things.
It may no doubt be said of most of these events that in theory
they were dreams, impracticable and delusive; that in practice
they were failures, or were followed by great re-actions. But they
all give help and light to us, warning and encouraging all those
who search for the promised land, wherein liberty and justice shall
be found. The time is at length ripe for a great social movement.
Never until now could such a movement have been attempted with
a reasonable hope of complete success. In no place save in a new
country, such as this, could such a movement be successfully carried
on. Never before has the necessity for such a movement been so
deeply felt, nor have circumstances ever yet existed so favourable
to its triumph.
The errors in the plans of Utopian or Socialistic reformers have
arisen from incomplete knowledge of that sociology, which, during
this generation, has been the subject of wide discussion. Nor
could there have been a complete and workable system of social
economy without that knowledge and those great advantages which
enquiry, experience, and scientific discovery have bestowed upon us
during the last five-and-twenty years.
To achieve a perfect prosperity in this community, so far as
regards the production and distribution of wealth—a prosperity
which shall not fill the houses of the wealthy with gorgeous furni-
ure, and give to them the means of astonishing foreign states by
tstentatious luxury, while leaving the industrial classes in want
Ond poverty —but a prosperity which shall fill every home in the
and with comforts, in which every citizen shall participate in fair


proportion; a prosperity winch, shall not rob the wealthy to enrich
the poor, but which shall arise from a great production of national
wealth and a just distribution of that wealth, among all who,
whether by capital or labour, help to produce it, —is a task worthy
of the great race which has found a home in these islands of New
Zealand.
There are three classes whose aid and assistance must necessarily
be given for the production and realisation of wealth—the producer,
the capitalist, and the consumer. For without labour no wealth
-can be produced; without capital no land, nor instruments, nor
means of production can be procured, nor labour supported; with-
out a market, no produce save that which could be used by the
producer himself would be of any value.
The producer, the consumer, and the capitalist, therefore, to
onsure complete success, must be joined by unity of interest and
advantage.
To achieve this we must place these three classes in partnership,
and this can be done by the application of the joint-stock principle
and by that only.
Another condition requisite to success is that the three factors of
production—Land, Labour, and Capital— shall be united as the
joint property of one proprietor, and that that proprietor should be
at once producer, capitalist, and consumer. This also can be
accomplished by the joint-stock principle, and by that prin-
ciple only. Then there should exist the wisest organisation
for the employment of labour and capital so as to produce
the greatest amount of wealth, whether in annual production
■or in permanent improvements, at the least cost of time and
money. Nor should we forget that production should be directed
«o as first to satisfy the requirements of all who are interested or
assisting in the production itself, and then to provide ford the
.general purposes of an advantageous commerce.
It is necessary also that all produce and merchandise should be
brought to and distributed amongst consumers without unnecessary
■delay, at the lowest cost and price consistent with a moderate
profit for production. And it is absolutely necessary that no
monopoly should ever be permitted of the benefits to be enjoyed
from such conditions of social life. While on the one hand there
.should be no compulsion, on the other there should be no restric-
tion to the participation of these advantages. All who desire to
contribute labour or capital, or to purchase, and thus, by consump-
tion, co-operate in production and distribution, should be able
to do so.
Finally, wealth having been thus produced, and its advantages
realised by the partnership as a whole, it should be justly and
fairly distributed among producers, capitalists, and consumers, in
proportion to what each class and each individual has contributed
to the general result. And this, as well as all the preceding con-


ditions, can only be accomplished and fulfilled by the application
of the joint-stock principle.
It will at once be seen that the plan here sketched is a combina-
tion of the co-operative and joint stock principles, to be applied
to the powers, the wants, and the social existence, not merely of
individuals, of special classes, or of special callings, but of a whole
community. The necessity of organisation is daily becoming more
apparent. The age in which we live, as we are so often told, is an
age of progress. All pursuits other than those which are peculiarly
personal have developed new circumstances and new conditions of
success. All manufactures, nearly all farming, all undertakings by
which money is earned, and therefore the necessaries and comforts
of life possessed, are carried on upon a scale of magnitude un-
thought of by our fathers, although no doubt it will be surpassed
by our children in an increasing ratio. So vast, indeed, are most
of the great undertakings of this age that single men seldom
attempt them, and they are men of colossal wealth and daring
courage —for all men know that in such cases one slight mistake
may turn a millionaire into a bankrupt. A very large and growing
part of the business of life is now carried on by societies organised
in various ways, generally in the manner of joint-stock companies.
Look around you. The ships of companies bring immigrants to
our shores. Along our coasts the Union and other company’s
steamers cany them from place to place. They land, and a
company’s cars carry them to see the outskirts of your towns.
They return and go to any bank —for all are companies—to cash
their letters of credit. They buy land of a land company, order
materials for a house of a timber company, buy coal of a coal
company, clothes of a clothing company, meat of a meat company,
horses of a stud company, insure both house, and life, and safety
in insurance companies ; get their ironmongery, their soap, and oil,
and candles, their fruit, their lime, from companies ; borrow money
from a company; sell their goods through a company; do their wash-
ing, both personal and relative, by a company; leave a company as
trustees of their wills; then die, and a newspaper company publishes
the obituary notice. It is now a common and perhaps a prudent
course to take when any business becomes too large for individual
responsibility —it is formed into a company on the joint stock
principle. When any exceptionally costly or vast undertaking is to
be accomplished, it is done by means of a joint stock company.
Thus commerce grows, and wealth increases. Productions are
multiplied at half the olden cost, and in a tenth part of the olden
time. The work once done laboriously by multitudes of men, is
now performed by costly machinery with marvellous accuracy and
perfect ease. By a company the Suez Canal was cut; the continents
are traversed by railways built by companies ; upon the surface of
every ocean the fleets of companies carry the commerce of the world;
while far below along the still and silent wires the ends of the earth


are, by permission of a company, whispering to each other the-
stories of joy and sorrow, of loss and gain, of victory and defeat, of
famine and plenty, now telling of an earthquake destroying cities ;
then that nations are thrilled at a hero’s death. It is impossible for
individual working men to compete in the game of life. The end
would be certain ruin. There are also other signs of the times
which compel the mind to the conclusion that organisation and
co-operation are necessary in every department of life. Benefit
societies, clubs of all sorts and for all purposes, associations of all
descriptions, religious associations, chui’ches, Bible and tract
societies, missionary, political, athletic, literary, artistic, scientific,
philanthropic. In short, all civilised life is organised. Govern-
ment and society themselves are but the widest and most
comprehensive forms of organisation and co-operation amongst
men.
It will now be easy to see what organisation I advise. Having
the franchise, the source of all legislative power, the people are
able, by political organisation, to control the making and direction
of legislation. So having Labor and employing Capital and Land
in commercial and business organisation, they can control the
production and distribution of wealth.
If any illustration is required of the benefits of organisation the
daily history of the industrial classes affords an abundant field from
whence those illustrations may be drawn. Not only in the
numerous classes which have been already adverted to, but in those
special organisations, such as trades-unions, in which the labourers of
all branches of industrial life join themselves together for the
purpose of mutual defence against the oppression of capitalist
employers. These, however, are merely for purposes of defence,
while the organisation of labour, which must and soon will prevail,
will be the organisation which I here counsel —an organisation
joining and uniting labour and capital for purposes, not of defence,
but of aggression and conquest.
The common enemies of the industrial classes are anxiety, and
want, and unfairly requited toil. These have io be conquered and
destroyed. It is monstrous, it is a scandal upon our civilisation and
Christianity, while millions of acres of fertile land and avail-
able soil, enriched with a genial climate and opened by noble
harbours, lie untouched and waiting to give forth their treasures of
food and raiment to the hand of industry, that there should be
want of employment and idleness in the land. .
And it is a bitter satire upon our boasted intelligence and
capacity for business that half the labour in the country should be
wasted; that farming, as a rule, should rather impoverish than
enrich the farmer ; that in some branches of industry there should
be so much production as to leave no available market, while in
others there should be so little as to compel us to send large sums,
amounting to hundreds of thousands of pounds, annually to other


countries for articles which, we ourselves, blessed with a peerless
soil and climate, could produce in greater abundance and at less
cost than they can do from whom we buy.
hexry george’s objection to co-operation-.
An almost universal belief exists among political and social econo-
mists that co-operation is destined to produce a marvellous change in
the social and material condition of the labouring classes. Since the
year 1843 the principle of co-operation has been attracting ever-
increasing attention. After the revolution in Paris in 1848 many
callings and businesses were conducted on the co-operative principle,
and continue to be so until now.
In England the first important commencement took place towards
the latter part of the first half of this century. The Rochdale
Pioneer Co-operative Society, which then commenced with a capital
of £2B subscribed by 28 working men, has now swollen to one of
the most gigantic undertakings in the empire. Some idea may be
formed of the magnitude of the business transacted by the co-
operative societies in England when it is remembered that beside
the business done by the Civil Service, the transactions of the year
1881 amounted to over £25,000,000, from which the shareholders,
besides getting better and cheaper goods than they could obtain
from other stores, received £2,000,000 profit in the shape of
dividends.
John Stuart Mill, in the people’s edition of his Political Economy,
published in 1865, devotes a very considerable space to the con-
sideration of co-operation, and states his conviction that co-operation
is destined at no distant time to effect a revolution in the social
and material welfare of the labouring classes.
In no country has theoretical co-operation developed with such
rapidity or to such extent as in Germany, where, under the
influence of the speeches and writings of Podbertus, Ferdinand
Lassalle, Karl Marx, Mario, Schiiffle, and the other great leaders
of this movement, social life is destined to undergo great transfor-
mations.
The Socialist movement developing in a vast scheme of
co-operative industry, had drawn into its ranks as teachers and
leaders a great number of the leading minds in Germany and
Switzerland, including, amongst others, most of the young and
rising professors of the Universities, nicknamed the “ Socialists of
the chair,” the Archbishop of Mayence, and many other philosophic
thinkers, when at length Bismarck, taking alarm at the vast
dimensions assumed by this growing power, prevailed upon the
German Government to pass repressive measures against Socialism
and Socialists. The great German minister has himself, however,
embraced the principles of co-operation, and is attempting, with
some success, to strengthen himself and his government in the


affections and judgment of the people by aiding the various co-
operative associations in many ways.
The sole exception, so far as I know, to the rule that political
and social thinkers believe in co-operation as a potent means of
public and social improvement is Mr. Henry George. But it will
be seen on examination that he rejects it solely through miscon-
ception of its scope and powers.
Mr. George’s argument is that all wealth comes from land and
the use of land; that the co-operation of labour and capital, how-
ever likely to assist in elevating the moral position of workmen,
and to produce wealth more plentifully and at less expense, would
in the end only act in the same way as improved machinery and
means of transmission, and so make greater wealth for the owners
of land. It is surprising that so shrewd a thinker did not see that
one step more would land the co-operative scheme in safety. If, as
he says, co-operation only ends in giving wealth to the land-owner,
then let the Co-operative Associations become owners of the land
necessary for the purposes of production, and the benefits and
increased value will remain to them.
In no scheme of co-operation yet published has the full power
and capacity of that principle been at all realised. In its simple
but complete capabilities it can, like the Nasmyth hammer, mould
the head of a pin or beat into form an iron beam. The engines of
the Thunderer or Devastation might be used to work a simple
wheel for unloading cargo, while powerful enough to drive through
the ocean the great frame of the giant ship.
Like all natural laws and natural forces, co-operation can be
used for purposes of utility in most minute particulars, while
possessing power beyond calculation. Why should co-operation
be restricted to one branch of trade, to one group of callings, to
one sort of industry ? Why should it be confined to labour only,
or to exchange only, or to production, or to capital, or even to
exchange and production, or labour and capital joined? Why not
at once, as here proposed, extend the operations of this principle to
the production and exchange of all things necessary for human use
and enjoyment, and to the utilisation of land, labour, and capital
combined ? There is now, and always has been, co-operation in
the production of wealth, though neither properly organised nor
wisely directed. Every member of every community joins in
creating wealth ; the tiniest child provides a market for some pro-
ducer in the food and clothing necessary to sustain life; the pauper,
the invalid, the wealthy idler and the spendthrift, all make a market
which sustains commerce, encourages industry in many lands, gives
value to the places where it exists, and they all unconsciously
and without knowledge aid in creating national wealth. But
beyond doubt the busy throngs of working men, guided by
the mental power of the scientific and the thoughtful, create
the wealth of nations. They are at once producers and consumers.


Miners bringing forth treasures from the bowels of the earth, sailors
manning those fleets which bear over the seas the commerce of
nations; the armies of operatives who supply the wants of
human kind; the ploughman, the teamster—all, however humble
and obscure their station or employment, co-operate to produce that
vast wealth, the evidences of which astonish us on every hand.
Let co-operation be carried one step further and all then will be
well; let those who co-operate to produce this great wealth, co-
operate also in its ownership and its enjoyment, and the problem
of social life is solved.
CHAPTER V.
POSSIBILITIES OF THE FUTURE OF NEW ZEALAND UNDER NEW
CONDITIONS.
Having considered the past social history of New Zealand, the
probable events of its future, and the capacity for usefulness,
especially in this colony, of the joint stock and co-operative
principles, I propose now to forecast the possible lines upon which
an altered social and economic system will carry us, and the results
—social and moral —which may be attained. Here again, no
doubt, arises the possibility of dreams and of hopes to remain
unfulfilled. Yet beholding the wonderful success which has
attended co-operation when only partially applied ; seeing, as the
unprejudiced mind must see, the vast capabilities of that principle
on an extended scale; remembering that no previous age has
possessed one tittle of our knowledge or power, of applied art and
mechanical contrivance; taking into consideration the advantages we
possess in great areas of unoccupied fertile land, of climate, and of easy
access to the sea, the great highway of the nations ; adding to all
these the intelligence and enterprise of our community, the mar-
vellous ease, certainty, swiftness, and economy of communication
with other countries which we now enjoy, and which open to us
the practically illimitable markets of the world ; and last, but not
least, recognising the fact that should the plans here proposed be
approved by public opinion in England, we should be enabled to
obtain not only a market for our goods, but colonists and money,
almost without limit; it is not improbable that, under such circum-
stances, an alteration in our social economy which would make
producers, capitalists, and consumers partners in the surplus wealth
which they created might produce in this colony a state of prosper-
ity hitherto unexampled.
The immediate result of the adoption of this system would be the
cheapening of all those commodities which are necessary and
convenient for human life and enjoyment.
Consider for a moment the price of food in New Zealand—
taking articles such as meat, bread, cheese, milk, and vegetables.


The price of meat sold retail to the consumer is nearly three times
the amount that the producer receives. Milk is sold throughout
the country districts to the cheese factories at 4d. per gallon, some-
times less; it is retailed in the town at 4d. or sd. a quart. The
retail price of bread and vegetables, of butter and cheese, is far
higher than the same things could be supplied for on the
co-operative principle, although a profit remained on their sale.
So in the case of commodities imported from other countries, and
sold in the stores which would be established under this system.
A substantial saving could be effected, and yet a considerable
margin left for profit. The cost of living would be reduced, and
wages and salaries, in the case of every individual who chose to
take advantage of this system, be made more available for the com-
forts of life.
That this would be a great boon to the community few would
care to deny, for if 20 or 25 per cent, can be taken off the cost of
subsistence, it means that wages and salaries would be increased
by at least that amount.
Under such conditions employment would be plentiful and con-
stant. Fresh markets being opened in other countries for our
produce, and production being constantly directed towards the
supply of wants constantly arising as long, at any rate, as any land of
ordinary fertility could be occupied, or manufactures or commerce
carried on, labour would be always required. Products which we in
New Zealand are able to raise, for the raising of which we possess
almost unrivalled advantages, must ever find a ready sale in the
older countries, especially when those products consist of the neces-
saries of life. Perhaps no country in the world is better adapted
than New Zealand for dairy purposes. For dairy produce, in
many parts of the world, there exists a demand practically without
limit.
Science now affords us means of transmission, such as ten
years ago was impossible and unthought of. Fruit of all sorts can
be cultivated amongst us in abundant quantities and at compara-
tively little cost. This will, upon an organised sj'stem and upon
a large scale, give employment, both in the garden and in the
factory, to a vast amount of labour and produce returns of gold.
The soil and climate of this colony will produce root-crops in
immense quantities. These, indeed, we could not export, but we
could turn them into cheese and butter, bacon and ham, and beef
and mutton. Thus labour would be employed and capital invested.
Under this system also, while producing crops and materials for
local use and sale, and for exportation; while employing labour
upon reproductive work, great areas of waste lands, obtained at a
small price or on easy terms of partnership as to profits, would be,
by labour and by the investment of capital, made more and more
valuable from year to year. Lands obtained thus, at a few shillings
per acre, would not only be made to produce the various articles of


commerce, but would become a large and integral part of the
wealth of the association.
Population would necessarily increase, towns and villages would
arise upon the lands of the society, and its wealth, under manage-
ment of ordinary care and ability,, would increase beyond
calculation.
As occasion arose manufactures, especially for local wants, would
be established, in which the material arising from the lands of the
association, or from its flocks and herds, would be converted to the
purposes of ordinary social life. Nor can it be doubted that, under
proper representations and with evidence of the beneficial effects
arising from this plan, but that we should obtain the assistance
and co-operation of the greatest and the wisest, and the best minds
and hearts in the United Kingdom. In the working of a plan
likely to produce such happy results all might join.
Unless the accounts which we receive from Great Britain are
untrue, there exists at Home, amongst politicians of all sides and
shades of politics, amongst business men, and that great philan-
thropic part of the English people, which has, as a sort of corporate
name, the title of “Exeter Hall,” among the different churches, and
writers of all classes of opinion, an earnest and intense desire to
to develope some plan by which, in the present and the future the
millions of working people now living in a condition of want and
anxiety, dreadful to contemplate, may be not merely relieved, but
by the exercise of their own honest toil, made independent and self-
supporting.
What a boundless prospect does this open to New Zealand.
Workers by thousands, accompanied by money, amply sufficient to
place them upon the waste lands and enable them there to earn an
abundant living. Workers not coming here to enter into competi-
tion in the labour market, but to become producers of national
wealth, to provide cheap food, and to open a thousand avenues to
industry. Nor must we forget that there are in England extensive
organisations, trades unions, friendly societies, co-operative associa-
tions, all whose sympathies and assistance we should probably
obtain, and with whom without doubt we should open valuable
business relations. For behind and beneath all other advantages
there would remain the foundation fact that each labourer would
receive not only his wages, but his proportionate share of the profits
of the association’s commerce, and of the increasing value of the
lands and other properties of the association; that each purchaser
would receive his goods, and in addition a proportionate share of
the profits and the increased value; while the capitalist would
receive the interest on his money and his share of the profits and
increased value.
Under such conditions want and poverty would become almost
unknown; men would grow in self-respect and independence; the
struggles between labour and capital would cease, for such a vast


power would speedily grow up under this system as would, in the
interest of the community and of labour and capital combined,
repress all antagonism between these two potent factors of a nation’s
prosperity.
Under this system the dreams of Utopian philosophers would bo
practically realised, for it is unquestionable that when once
the struggle with want and poverty ceases; when there exists
among all classes, from the highest to the lowest, a consciousness
that equal rights, socially as well as politically, are enjoyed by all;
when the industrial classes know that they are creating wealth for
themselves and not for strangers and oppressors, and that they, by
virtue of their labour, have an interest and a property in that earth
which God has given to the children of men ; when they know that
they and millions of their fellow workers have a right to sit under
their own vine and their own fig-tree, none daring to make them
afraid—then there will arise within them a moral life that never
before had any shadow of existence.
It may perhaps be objected that thus to produce a partnership
between producer and consumer would detrimentally affect a large
portion of the community, such as storekeepers, agents, and others,
who now form that class which is usually designated “middle
men.” To that objection many answers may be given. The first
answer which naturally suggests itself is, that if the middle men
as a class are not necessary to the carrying on of the affairs of the
community, then, as a costly and unnecessary burden, they must be
dispensed with. Is it necessary, is it advisable, is it just that the
artisan and underpaid clerk or struggling widow should pay sd.
per lb. for meat, while the producer received less than 2d. ? Is it
necessary, or wise, or just that the producer should be ruined by
low prices, that middle men may grow wealthy by selling articles
to the consumer at such a price as leaves to him, the middle man
between the two, the real value of the thing itself ?
I am a lawyer, and I have been accustomed for a quarter of a
century to hear the stale old joke about the lawyers eating the
oysters and giving the shells to their clients. But after years of
observation, after years of reading and of thought, I declare it to
be my conviction that all the monies taken by the whole body of
lawyers in New Zealand from their clients in any one year, beyond
fees, fairly earned as compensation for work done, would not
mount up to one-half the sum which half a dozen big mercantile
houses take from the public in the same period of time.
Whose mansions are the largest ? Whose equipages the best
appointed ? Whose bank accounts the biggest ? Whose wealth
the most swiftly increasing ? Why I venture to say that any dozen
of the large mercantile houses in any of the principal cities in the
colony, would, as far as money is concerned, out-weigh all the
lawyers in New Zealand.
If, therefore, it be not necessary for the producers and consumers.


the toilers and wealth creators of the community that the middle
man should still exist, why should such a burden be continued upon
the shoulders of the people ?
But there is another answer. Under the system which I propose
there would be work for all, and work not only of one description,
but of all descriptions. So great would be the impetus given to
production and commerce, so manifold would be the duties claiming
performance in a community rapidly increasing in numbers and
prosperity, that for each person whose business would be so injured
as to compel him to desist, employment would be afforded to
hundreds.
In many cases it would be beneficial to the small traders and
persons who dabble in commissions to give up a life of uncertainty
and of ceaseless worry and anxieties for employment at a certain
income and an equal certainty of receiving a portion of che wealth
continually growing around him.
One of the most beneficial results from this system would arise
from the total change which would be effected in the relations
between human labour and the labour of machines. Hitherto all
improvement in machinery, especially labour-saving machinery,
whether in the field or the factory, whether on sea or land, has had
one invariable effect—while it increased production it oppressed the
labouring class. Under this system that would be totally altered.
As the labourer would share in the sum total of the wealth pro-
duced, it would be to his advantage, as well as to the advantage of
the capitalist, that the most complete machinery that the human
mind could invent or human wealth could purchase, should be
procured and used.
All experience teaches us that combined labour is, beyond
comparison, more valuable than that of individuals. Tasks impos-
sible to the unaided efforts of the solitary settler, become easy and
trivial to the united strength and skill of numbers. Nor is it from
this alone that organised toil is superior. When men work, each
in his own little groove, they waste time, and effort, and money in
every way. Fifty men working together can accomplish five times
as much as the same number working separately. The many
advantages of organised labour are so well known in these days
that perhaps it is unnecessary to dwell upon the point. It may be
sufficient to indicate the fact that under the system here proposed,
a greater and more complete system of industry in all its branches
could be attained that has as yet been seen. One of the greatest
hindrances to emigration from the United Kingdom, or the Conti-
nent of Europe, is found in the fear which fills men’s minds at the
prospect of leaving their present homes and friends to go out to
they know not what. The unknown almost always inspires anxiety,
and very often fear. To land upon a foreign shore—a stranger in
a strange land —has in it something depressing, and indeed terrible,
to the mind. The fear and uncertainty which surrounds the future


in the new land deters tens of thousands from leaving the old.
And these feelings must be of course intensified when a man has
others, perhaps helpless children, dependent upon him;
Then there are great numbers who would cast their lot amongst
their fellow countrymen in the colonies, but they are unable from
want of means. It will be obvious that under the co-operative
scheme proposed, these and many other difficulties of like nature
would be removed. It is difficult to place a limit to the benefits
this colony and its people will receive when the system here advo-
cated shall have risen into complete action. Labour and capital,
flowing like a great river, will come to us, bringing with them a
prosperity beyond calculation. Lands now waste and desolate, and
lands now uuprofitably held, will, under systematic cultivation,
with ample labour and ample means, become a garden. Manufac-
tures of all sorts will be established. Commerce with Europe, with
the Islands, with the great and populous Eastern nations, would fill
our harbours with shipping and our marts with trade. Wealth
would accumulate, while men would not decay, but live
to enjoy the prosperity which they were helping to create.
Monopolies would be silently superseded. The dreadful competition
and struggle for life which now saps our commercial morality and
sets class against class, capital against labour, and each man
against his neighbour, would be modified to a healthy emulation in
which all would join. Prosperity would be built upon a sound
and healthy foundation. Inducements to dishonesty would in a
great measure cease. Capital would no longer desire to wring the
last hours of toil from labour, nor labour strive to extort the
extreme possibility of reward from capital. A sense of justice
would pervade the whole community; want would become rare,
poverty diminish, and crime decrease.
These may be called Utopian dreams. We shall see.
Having traced the theory of my proposals, I do not intend them to
rest in abstract existence. So satisfied am I that they contain the
germ of a new and better social condition for mankind, that having
obtained the assent and assistance of many of my fellow citizens and
neighbours, I have reduced the matter to a concrete form. “ The New
Zealand Co-operative Land and Labour Company,” based entirely
upon the principles laid down in the preceding pages, has been
registered under the Joint Stock Companies Act, and is about to start
into the business of life without further delay. The registered capital
is £20,000, but it is provided in its articles of association that the
capital shall be increased from to time time without limit. All who
desire can at any time purchase shares from the Company ; all who
purchase its productions, and all who labour for it for payment, will,
by virtue of such purchasing and such labour, be entitled to share in
its profits and the increased value of its property. As the first
members will be laying foundations of wealth, that others as time goes
on may come in and share, they will be entitled to preferential


bUwo /V
p lI I o
Printed at the “ Evening Beir Office, Wyndham-street, Auckland.
dividends over later shareholders ; while the labourer and consumer
receive wages and goods respectively, and then their shares of profit
and value, the investor of capital will receive interest upon his shares
and a share also in profit and value—each participating in proportion
to the amount in value contributed by him. Yearly cash profits will
be distributable as in ordinary joint stock companies, while the
increasing value of the company’s properties of all kinds, will every
third year be valued and distributed in shares—such shares to be
inalienable for a period of ten years. Local directors will be appointed
in all large centres of population.
In this effort for the good of men I call upon all to assist. To the
ministers of the Gospel of Christ I appeal in the name of their Master,
and of His suffering creatures. To the churches, now to so great an
extent idle and unfruitful, I commend a practical plan for the allevia-
tion of misery, the elevation of the multitudes in social and moral
happiness and in temporal prosperity, and the performance of that
duty which Christ laid down as the second great commandment,
u Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself.” To the philanthropist,
the statesman, and the patriot I appeal in the name of humanity and of
patriotism. To all in the names of justice and of mercy.
The International Society, founded and formulated by Karl Marx—
before which the mouarchs of Europe trembled—shattered by the
Paris Commune and rent asunder at the Hague, was the first attempt
to join all men together by one common bond of self-interest for the
purpose of asserting the rights of men as against the domination of
capital and oppression. That failed because it admitted violence and'
destruction. The redemption of men from the present oppressive social
conditions, must be founded upon the diametrically opposite principles
—peaceful and increased production of wealth and the means of sub-
sistence, and a just distribution of that wealth among all who help to
create it.




