

Co-operation:
WHAT IT IS,
AND WHAT
IT HAS DONS.
“WORKER” LITERATURE SERIES No. 2.
ghjfcncij:
WORKER” CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING WORKS,
227 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.


INTRODUCTORY.
The visit of the Co-operative Delegates
to Australia affords a suitable occasion
for recording the progress of the co-
operative movement in England. The
following pages are taken almost en-
tirely from a pamphlet published by
the English Wholesale Society, and they
show how much has been accomplished
by that Society. In the meantime, the
movement is spreading throughout
Europe.
These pages are published in connec-
tion with The Worker Literature Fund,
in the hope that they may help the New
South Wales Co-operative Alliance, which
has just been formed.
Worker Office, Sydney,
September 16, 1896.
■mm
“WORKER” LITERATURE FUND SERIES.
No. I.—“ Idlers in the Market Place,” Id. each,
or 2s. 6d. per 100.
No. 2.—“ Co-operation: What it is, and what
it has done,” Id. each, or 3s. per 100.


CO-OPERATION.
The visit of the Co-operative Society
delegates to Australia has given a de-
cided impetus to the cause of co-opera-
tion. The present is, therefore, fitting
time for a brief statement of what co-
operation is, and what it has accom-
plished.
WHAT CO-OPERATION IS.
Strictly speaking, co-operation means
working together. Hence, the partners
in a firm, or the members of an ordinary
joint stock company, may be said to be
co-operators. Indeed, many joint stock
companies take the name of co-operative.
But as used and practised by the
English Co-operative Societies, co-opera-
tion aims at dispensing with the services of
all unnecessary and profit-making agents
between the consumers of commodities and
their producers, and recognizes that the
interests of the producers and the consumers
are one.
In this it helps to economize the cost
of living, and removes the temptations to
adulteration and every other form of
cheating. It is a well-known fact that
the poorer a man is tlje less does he get
for his money compared with his richer
neighbors, because, as a rule, the poor
man buys in small quantities, and the
•commodities he consumes pass through a
larger number of profit-making agents
before they reach him than those do
which are consumed by the rich.
THE GROWTH OF CO-OPERATION.
One of the best records of th« progress
of co-operation in England is given in a
pamphlet entitled “The Wholesale Co-
operative Society: What is it?” most
of which is embodied in this article.
Co-operation in England began in a
very small way. From retail stores for
the sale of commodities it advanced to
manufactures, and at length, in self-
defence against the opposit on of the
wholesale merchants, the Wholesale Co-
operative Society was established.


THE ENGLISH CO-OPERATIVE
WHOLESALE SOCIETY.
The Co-operative Wholesale Society is
a trading partnership of 1035 retail
stores, holding amongst them share
capital to the amount of £635,541 and
loan capital amounting to £1,085,873.
The shares carry 5 per cent, and the
loan money 3 per cent, interest.
Every retail co-operative society affi-
liated with the wholesale has three £5
shares for every 20 members, so that
every member of a retail store which is
in partnership wdh the wholesale is
really a proprietor of that great institu-
tion, and is, therefore, personally in-
terested in its success.
The Co-operative Wholesale owns
freehold land and buildings at Man-
chester, Newcastle, London, Leicester,
Heckmondwike, Batley, Durham, Crump-
sail, Dunston, Irlam, and other parts of
Great Britain.
The freeholds are daily growing more
valuable as assets of the wholesale, but
have been written down by quarterly de-
preciation to the extent of £281,127.
The wholesale has in reserves (includ-
ing bank) more than £70,000, and an
insurance fund of £292,563. The stability
of its resources is evidenced by the fact
that £200,000 is invested in consols and
£255,000 in municipal securities. The
wholesale, too, has investments in the
following societies and companies:—
Airedale Manufacturing Society, Assing-
ton Agricultural Association, Ballyhahill
Co-operative Creamery, Bootle and Sea-
forth Co-operative Society, Burnley Self-
Help Cotton Spinning and Manufactur-
ing Society, Castlemahon Co-operative
Creamery, Chicago Board of Trade and
New York Produce Exchange, Coventry
Watch Manufacturing Society, Drum-
collogher Co-operative Dairy Factory,
Eccles Manufacturing Society, Fenagh
Co-operative Dairy Society, Garston and
District Co-operative Society, Goole and
District Provident Co-operative Society,
Halifax Flour Society, Hebden Bridge


Fustian Society,' Hull Co-operative So-
ciety, Keighley Ironworks Society, Lan-
cashire and Yorkshire Co-operative Pro-
ductive Society, Leicester Coal Company,
Leicester Second Hosiery Manufacturing
Society, Liverpool and District Fruit
Buyers’ Association, Longton and Dis-
trict Co-operative Society, Macclesfield
Silk Manufacturing Society, Manchester
Co-operative Insurance Company, Man-
chester Co-operative Newspaper Society,
Manchester Co-operative Printing So-
ciety, Manchester Co-operative Union,
Manchester Equitable Co-operative So-
ciety, New Telephone Company, New-
castle-on-Tyne Co-operative Society,.
Paisley Co-operative Manufacturing So-
ciety, Rochdale Corn Mill Society, Shef-
field Cutlery Co-operative Productive
Society, Sowerby Bridge Flour Society,
Star Corn Millers’ Society, Tower Ham-
lets Industrial Co-operative Society.
In order to meet the convenience of
widely-scattered societies—those which
lay wide apart from the various business
centres —Sale rooms have been established
at Leeds, Blackburn, Nottingham, Hud-
dersfield, Birmingham, Northampton,,
and Cardiff.
The growth of the wholesale’s trade in.
Continental produce led to the society
embarking in the shipping trade. A
small vessel was purchased in 1876,
which sailed between Goole and Calais,,
taking out coal and English manu-
factures, and bringing back French pro-
duce. In 1879 the steamship Pioneer
was built for the purpose of running
between Garston (Liverpool) and Rouen,
and in a few years afterwards the Goole-
and Hamburg service of steamers was,
established. The society now owns a
fleet of seven steamers, which bear the
following names; Pioneer, Progress,
Equity, Federation, Liberty, Dinah, and
Briton. Their total cost has exceeded
£78,000, but, like other properties of the
society, they have been liberally de-
preciated, no less a sum than £47,000'
being set aside for this purpose.


The society has purchasing depots at
he following places: Cork, Limerick,
Tralee, and Armagh. These are used
for the collection of Irish butter and
eggs, whilst at the two latter places
machinery has been put down for the
purpose of working up farmers’ butter.
The combined shipments for 1895
amounted to over £380,000. New York
has a buyer of general provisions, and
last year saw the opening of a depot at
Montreal. Considerably over £450,000
is annually spent through these two
depots. The increasing demand for
Danish dairy produce has resulted in
putting buyers at Copenhagen, Gothen-
burg, and Aarhus, in addition to one
located in Hamburg, and the question
of extending the society’s operations to
other parts of Europe is under considera-
tion. The sales from Copenhagen and
Gothenburg are over £928,000 a year,
and the shipments from Aarhus exceed
£465,000, and from Hamburg £215,000.
During 1895 a further development
in the butter industry was brought about
by the establishment of creameries by
the wholesale in various parts of the
south of Ireland, where it is expected
that an article superior to that of any
foreign importation will be produced.
In 1882 a buyer was appointed to take
charge of the purchase of teas and coffees
direct from the importers, instead of as
heretofore conducting this business
through a firm of tea merchants. The
success of this step was soon demonstrated
by the rapid increase in the sales of tea
and coffee, which now amount to over
£690 000 per annum, against £190,020
in 1882.
The manufacture of chocolate and
cocoa has since been added to this de-
partment, and is making very satisfactory
progress, the supplies for the year 1895
being over £16,000.
The department finds employment for
over 800 hands.
To enable the most elementary of co-
operators to master the intricacies of
business, a weekly price list is supplied


to all societies in the federation. It may
be remarked here, too, that the wholesale
sometimes meets with unfair play in con-
nection with this price list from disloyal
societies who supply its competitors with
the weekly copy to enable them to under-
quote it.
The following are some facts concern-
ing the productive works of the society :
In 1878 the society made its first ex-
periment in co-operative production by
commencing at Crumpsall, near Man-
chester, the manufacture of biscuits and
boiled sweets, and at the same works
there was subsequently added the manu-
facture of jams, marmalade, and dried
goods. The progress of these works has
been continuous, and they now find
employment for 800 work-people, and
produce over £IOO,OOO of goods annually.
The hoot and shoe works at Leicester
were also established in the year 1873,
and are now making 1,200,000 pairs of
boots and shoes annually, the value of
the same being about £270,000. The
number of employees is 2200.
Encouraged by the success of these
undertakings a soap works was estab-
lished in Durham in 1874 ; and in the
autumn of 1895 a splendidly equipped
soap factory was opened at Irlam, where
at the present time 100 tons per week of
this article are being turned out.
Another boot and shoe works was
opened in Heckmondwike in 1880, and
are now making over 168,000 pairs of
boots and shoes annually, a currying
department being added in 1887.
A woollen mills at Batley in 1887.
A clothing factory at Leeds in the fol-
lowing year, and in 1891 a large flour
mill was erected at Dunston, near New-
castle-on-Tyne, capable of manufacturing
40 sacks of flour per hour. Permission
has been given by the members to acquire
a suitable piece of land for the erection
of a second corn mill for the use of
societies in the London district, and it is
expected that in the course of the next
year or two this will be erected and fully
equipped.


the tu
nd has
now acc
um mated
through
premiums and additions from the profits
to £292,568, a fact which fully justifies
its establishment.
The progress of the Wholesale Society
has, on the whole, been rapid and con-
tinuous, as will be seen from the follow-
ing statement
, which shows the business
of the society at intervals of five years
from the first complete year of its exis-
tence,
viz., 1865 : —
J-t 0) .
<D a
,0 03 0)
0) ,
l«S
|oi ®
S o O
=3 £ a
.•= AM .
CD
CC3
O
<D
OLi
O &D Sn
* a g>
*3
m
P4
at
|§o
m
£
£
£
1865
24,005
7,182
120,754
1 858
1870
89,880
44,164
677,734
7,6.6
1875
249,516
379,607
2,247,395
26,750
1880
361,523
565,854
3,339,681
42,090
1885
507,772
841,175
4,793,151
77,630
1890
721,316
1,474,466
7,429 073
126,979
1891
751,269
1,636,397
8,766,430
135,008
1892
824,149
1,741,645
9,300,904
98,532
1893
873,698
1,779,301
9,526,167
84,156
1894
910,104
1,891.102
9,443,938
126,192
1895
930.985
2,093.578
*10,141,917
192,766
* 53 weeks’
sales.
The making of brooms and brushes
was commenced in 1894 in London, and
a considerable trade has already been
diverted from outside competitive houses.
The making of bedding and materials for
cushions has also been undertaken.
In 1895 the wholesale commenced
doing its own printing and binding. The
works are situated at Manchester, and
already find employment for 80 people.
The total capital employed in the so :
ciety’s various productive works amounts
to about £600,000, the value of the goods
produced is £1,000,000 per annum, and
the number of employees about 4000.
In 1873 the nucleus of an insurance
fund was formed by transferring £2OOO
from the reserve fund. The society
insures its own steamships in this fund
as well as a proportion of its various
buildings, fixtures, stocks, &c., and goods
in transit. Notwithstanding that large
payments have been made to meet losses
through fire, damage to steamships, &c.,
the fund has now accumulated through
premiums and additions from the profits
to £292,568, a fact which fully justifies
its establishment.


The total sales from the commence-
ment of the society to December, 1895,
amount to the large sum of £124,654,765,
and the net profits to £1,665,303.
The total number of employees in the
service of the wholesale now exceeds 6400.
THE CO-OPERATIVE WHOLESALE
AND THE CONSUMER.
The co-operative retail store saves the
customer the profits which otherwise go
to the retail dealer and the profit-making
agents who stand between him and the
wholesale. Another and a smaller saving
is made when it is possible to dispense
with the wholesale dealer.
A well-conducted retail store gives
back to its members Is. 6d. to 2s. in the
£ in dividends on their purchases, thereby
proving that a man’s wages are worth
to 10 per cent, more to him when they
do not pass through the hands of the
private retail storekeeper; and if these
dividends, instead of being withdrawn
and spent, are left in the stores as loans
or shares, they are increased by interest
at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum.
This is done by the Co-operative
Wholesale, which either manufactures
the goods which it sells or purchases
them direct from the producers or
importers. Its business is now far away
in excess of any private concern, and its
large purchases and prompt payments
secure for it the very best treatment by
producers and importers. It now sup-
plies upwards of. 930,000 members of
co-operative stores, and the value of its
sales exceeds ten millions sterling per
annum, all of which goods are handed
to the members of retail stores subject
only to to bare working expenses.
A still further saving is effected, and
further purity of commodity secured,
when the individual and joint-stock
manufacturer can be dispensed with,
together with the use of their capital.
The Co-operative Wholesale now manu-
factures boots and shoes at Leicester and
Heckmondwike, soap at Durham and
Irlam, biscuits and sweets, preserves.


and dry soap at Crumpsall, and brushes
at London, and every member of a
partnership store may, therefore, in a
trading sense, call himself a manufacturer
of all these articles. A larger demand
and increased capital will enable the
wholesale to extend and cheapen the pro-
duction of these commodities, and also to
embark in new directions. If twenty
shillings per week were spent at a retail
store by every member, and if the retail
stores drew only one-half of their supplies
from the Co-operative Wholesale, its
business would be immediately increased
to upwards of £20,000,000 per annum.
Clothing factories have been established
at Leeds and Broughton, cabinet-making
at Broughton, a corn mill at Dunston, a
woollens mill at Batley, a cocoa works at
London, and a printing works at Man-
chester.
Rich men and trading societies
generally have dealings with bankers,
and a well-conducted bank divides from
7 to 20 per cent, per annum upon its
share capital. The Co-operative Whole-
sale has a banking department, and if all
the co-operative stores were to keep their
current and deposit accounts there, they
would greatly increase the capital at the
command of the wholesale, and would
thereby extend the area of its business,
still further improve its purchasing
power, and increase the dividends payable
to the stores on their purchases. The
bank is a department of the wholesale,
and every member of a partnership store
is, therefore, in a trading sense, a banker.
The exigencies of latter day co-opera-
tion have led the wholesale to institute
special departments for the inspection
and supervision of societies’ books and
accounts. The labors of those engaged
in these departments have been very
fruitful in saving societies from loss and,
in many cases, total wreckage. All in
the federation should know that the audit
staff of the wholesale are, at all times,
ready to step in and put accounts that
may have become dislocated in good
order.


THE PROFITS OF THE CO-OPERA-
TIVE WHOLESALE.
The simple object of all competitive
traders —landlords, farmers, manufac-
turers, importers, wholesale and retail
dealers —is to secure the largest amount of
saving or profit for themselves ; whilst the
object of the Co-operative Wholesale is, on
the contrary, to secure the largest amount of
saving for its customers, the retail stores,
and, through them, for the actual consumers
of produce.
The landlord takes the largest rent
which he can get for the use of his land,
or, in other words, he appropriates the
first-fruits of the combined efforts of the
farmer and the laborer, only he takes his
share in money instead of in wheat or
other produce ; then the farmer, having
kept back enough of his produce for seed
and for the payment of his laborers, takes
the highest price which he can screw out
of the miller or the merchant for the re-
mainder ; in other words, he keeps back
as much of the produce as he can
manage for his own living and saving ;
then the miller or the merchant, and the
wholesale and retail dealer, each repeat
the same process, until, by the time the
general consumer is reached, the article
is either very much raised in price or is
depreciated in quality to an equivalent
extent, because of the unnecessary dealers
through whose hands it has passed and
whom it has paid, and the opposing
interests which it has encountered. So,
where an article has to pass through a
manufacturing process before reaching
the consumer, the interest of the employer
is to give to his workpeople the smallest
possible share of the result of his capital
and their labor, whilst he and the
merchant, and all the whole string of
dealers, go through the process above de-
scribed, under the continual temptation
to depreciate the quality whilst retaining
the appearance of the genuine article, in
order to aid in the profit-making process.
Now, the retail store which buys from
a private wholesale dealer simply gives
the profit of the retail shopkeeper to its


own members ; but the retail store which
purchases its supplies of groceries and
provisions at the Co-operative Wholesale
gives to its members the profits of the
wholesale dealer also; and the retail
store which buys its boots and shoes, its
soap, its biscuits, sweets, and preserves
at the Co-operative Wholesale gives its
own members the profits of the manu-
facturer on these articles also ; and many
stores have, in consequence of the estab-
lishment of these manufactories, been
enabled to pay larger dividends to their
members. For whilst the practice of the
competitive tradesman is to take all he
can out of his customers in exchange for
his goods, the practice and policy of the
co-operative store, and of the Co-opera-
tive Wholesale, is to give all they can to
their customers, both in quantity and
quality, in exchange for their money.
Thus, whilst the competitive tradesman
pockets all he can get in 'the shape of
profit, the co-operative store and the
Co-operative Wholesale first pay 5 per
cent, for the share, and 8 per cent, for
loan capital with which they trade, and,
after discharging the bare expenses of
working day (say per cent, for retail
stores and 1£ to per cent, for the Co-
operative Wholesale), they divide all the
profits amongst their customers in divi-
dends on purchases. This is the simple
difference between competitive and co-
operative production and trading : under
competition everyone strives to benefit
himself alone, whilst under co-operation
everyone works for the general good.
THE MANAGEMENT OF THE CO-
OPERATIVE WHOLESALE.
Each retail store which has shares in
the Co-operative Wholesale has the right
to send delegates (in proportion to the
number of its members) to the general
quarterly meetings in Manchester, at
which the committee of the Co-operative
Wholesale submits its report of the
business done and the accounts for the
past quarter. These accounts show—
(a) the stocks of goods on hand at the


commencement of the quarter; (5) the
goods purchased during the quarter ; ( c)
the goods sold during the quarter ; ( d )
the amounts owing by the society; (e)
the amounts owing by the various stores
to the society ; (/) the expenses of
management: (g) the amount of profit
realized, and ( h ) the manner in which
it is proposed to dispose of the profit.
Each delegate is furnished with a copy of
the report and balance-sheet, and the
fullest possible discussion takes place
with regard to any apparent defect in the
management, and upon every proposal
for improvement; and, as the delegates
usually number from 600 to 750 smart
business men, it is not likely that any
serious fault will ever escape remark.
The auditors are always present in the
meetings, and are ready to explain any
exceptional item m the accounts.
The Co-operative Wholesale (whose
central store is in Balloon-street and
Dantzic-street, Manchester) has branch
establishments in Leman-street, White-
chapel, London ; and in Waterloo-street,
Newcastle-on-Tyne, which are managed
by branch committees of members resi-
dent in these districts. The branches
also hold quarterly meetings (at which
the central store is represented by the
members of committees) a week before
the meeting at the central stores, and
these branch meetings are composed of
delegates from the various stores con-
nected by trade with the branches. The
same report of the business done and the
accounts for the quarter are submitted
to these meetings as are submitted to the
general quarterly meetings held in Man-
chester, and which are designated above.
Depots have been established at Liver-
pool and Bristol, and the large amount
of trade that has found its way to the
wholesale through these agencies is suf-
ficient proof of their usefulness.
The committee of the central store
consists of sixteen members, each of
whom retires after two years of service,
and is eligible for re-election. The branch
committees consist of eight members for


each branch, who serve for the like term
of two years. They are all elected by
voting papers, which are distributed by
post to the committees of all the partner-
ship stores, and the voting power is in
proportion to the number of members in
each store. Every member of a partner-
ship store is eligible for election, and the
committee of any parnership store is at
liberty to nominate candidates. The
result of the voting is declared at the
central and branch quarterly meetings.
Any proposal to alter the business
management of the Co-operative Whole-
sale is first discussed at the branches in
London and Newcastle, and is afterwards
submitted at the central meeting in
Manchester, when the votes of the dele-
gates to the central store and the
branches are reckoned together, and the
matter is decided by a majority of votes.
Thus every member of a partnership
store is, through the delegate sent by the
committee, directly represented in the
management of this great institution.
The committee of the Co-operative
Wholesale divides itself into sub-com-
mittees for the different branches of
business, which sub-committees meet
weekly or oftener, and report to the
general committee weekly. The general
committee appoint, apportion the salaries
of, and dismiss all officials at the stores.
Such is the Co-operative Wholesale, an
important part of the great scheme which,
by dispensing with all needless individual
and joint-stock investors of capital for
profit, whether in shopkeeping, wholesale
dealing, or manufacturing, will econo-
mise the cost of living, secure purity in
food, soundness in clothing, integrity in
dealing, honesty and skill in workman-
ship, and so exalt morality and sweeten
social intercourse.
WHAT TO DO.
The way of progress is open, and all
which is further needed is that men shall
walk in the straight path, and then
without sacrifice, without effort even, the
revolution will accomplish itself; yes,


literally without money and without
price may all these good things be ob-
tained within a reasonable number of
years. Let every member o I a retail
store go there for every article which he
needs and which they keep ; this is no
effort —he must go somewhere for them.
Let him leave his dividends to accumu-
late ; this is no sacrifice, it will cost no
more to leave the profits at the store
than in the hands of the shopkeeper.
Let him attend the quarterly meetings of
the store; the hours of labor are over,
and he may as well spend an evening
there as elsewhere; and when there let
him demand that the committee of the
store shall require their buyer to go the
Co-operative Wholesale for all such of
his goods as they keep in stock. If a
man is not dumb he must talk about
something, and he may as well talk in a
good cause, and it must be a good cause
which, whilst supplying goods as cheaply
as they can be got anywhere else, also
adds to the dividends of the store and
forwards a great and patriotic cause.
We have shown that the retail and
wholesale stores together save about
per cent, for consumers. There are five
millions of families of working people in
Great Britain and Ireland receiving
amongst them some four hundred mil-
lions sterling per year. Now, if all
except what is necessary for payment of
rent and taxes was spent at the store,
and by the store at the Co-operative
Wholesale, 10 per cent, saving thereon
would amount in twenty years to over
six hundred millions sterling, which sum
would be sufficient to make them all their
own employers.
Is not co-operation, then, well worthy
of the support of workingmen ?
Nearly the whole of the foregoing is a
reprint of a pamphlet published by the
English Co-operative Wholesale Society.
The facts are specially interesting just
now, as they show what can be accom-
plished by steady and persistent co-opera-
tion carried out on true principles.


I C L! O
f S (o C>!
“Worker” Literature Fund.
'i™ is a fund started by the Editor of The
Woeker for the purchase, printing, and
distribution of Literature dealing with Social
questions.
The present position of the Fund is—
Eecipts .. .. £ll 3 8
Expenditure (printing and
postage) .. .. 6 12 9
Balance in hand ~ £4 10 8
The intention is to use the funds in the printing
of pamphlets treating Social questions from a
local point of view, and in the purchase of
standard pamphlets by well-known authors.
The books will he sold wholesale at prices just
sufficient to cover cost. Where it is thought
desirable a free grant of Literature will be made.
Societies, Leagues, Trade Unions, and in-
dividuals may help the Fund—
1. By small donations ; or,
2. By the purchase at wholesale prices of
Literature for subsequent free dis
tribution.
All particulars on application to
J. MEDWAY DAY.
Woekee Office,
227 Oastlereagh-street, Sydney,
September 16, 1896.
