

CO-OPERATIVE AND *< .*
PROFIT SHARING INDUSTRIES
With Remarks on Trades Unions
LORD BRASSEY, K.C.8., D.C.L
Commander of the Legion of Honour.
Melbourne :
MESSRS. GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.,
Little Collins Street.
ECHO PUBLISHING COMPANY, LTD.,
Printers, 343 Flinders Lane.




COD PE RATI V
WITH REMARKS
ON TRADES UNIONS
LORD BRASSEY, K.C.8., D. C. L.
COMMANDER OF THE LEGION OF HONOUR.
Melbourne :
MESSRS. GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. LITTLE COLLINS ST,
ECHO PUBLISHING COMPANY, LTD,, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE.




M 33557 F 73^4
Co-operative and Profit
Sharing Industries.
je^b«L.
HEN the historian of the future passes in review the age
in which we live, some dark and gloomy pages will be
filled with the constantly recurring disputes between
Capital and Labour. For months the daily journals have
recorded the melancholy incidents of the strife between
'mrS employers and employed in the trade, in which it is
our pride and boast in the United Kingdom that we
pre-eminently excel. Statesmen, political economists, men
of business, and the great body of workers, are alike looking for
remedial measures. Under the wages system, the interests of workers
and employers are in a sense inevitably conflicting. Under the
co-operative or profit sharing system it is contended that unity of
action and purpose will be secured. The occasion seems appropriate
for a review of the progress which has thus far been made in
co-operative and profit sharing industries.
Dealing first with co-operation, it may be defined as the union Co-operation,
of small capitalists for the purchase, production, or distribution of ments. Experi "
goods, and for mitigating the'baneful consequences of wasteful com-
petition. Experiments in co-operation were first attempted at the end
of the last century both in England and in Scotland. The results were


unsatisfactory. The profits in those earlier societies being distributed
to shareholders and not to purchasers, no special inducements were
held out to the poorer class.
The next stage in the movement for social improvement by co-
operation is due to the efforts of Robert Owen. Once more the
results proved disappointing. Commercial experience was wanting.
Agents unworthy of confidence were employed. Undeterred by many
discouraging experiences, the friends of co-operation, of whom some
were to be found in high places, persevered in their endeavours. At
a meeting called by Mr. Owen, shortly after the accession of our
Gracious Queen, the Duke of Kent commended the principle of
co-operation as conducive to the well-being and good order of society.
In establishing an industry on the co-operative plan, a difficulty
is encountered in the initial stage. Under any method of conducting
the operations of trade and industry, it is essential to have capital at
command. For the working man the process of accumulation by
cutting down expenditure must be slow and painful. It was seen,
however, that a considerable saving could be effected by buying
wholesale, and distributing profits to customers, in proportion to the
value of their purchases. With the moneys thus placed to credit,
contributions to capital could be made. The first association for the
management of business on these principles was that of the Rochdale
pioneers. The system thus inaugurated has been widely extended.
In a recent presidential address at the Co-operative Congress, Lord
Winchelsea compared the statistics of 1865 and 1894. The number
of co-operative societies had doubled, the membership had increased
from 150,000 to 1,000,000; the capital from £1,000,000 to £15,000,000
sterling; the annual trade from £3,000,000 to £5,000,000, and the
profits from £270,000 to £5,000,000 a year. The value of the
buildings held exceeded £5,000,000; while the investments were valued
at no less than £6,000,000. In the extent of their operations many
societies, subsequently established, leave the parent society of Rochdale
far behind. The Co-operative Wholesale Society of the United
Kingdom, having its headquarters at Manchester, may be described as
a retail partnership on a vast scale with no less than one thousand
stores, a share capital of nearly £700,000, and a loan capital of over
£1,000,000. Some 4,000 persons are employed; while the sales in
4
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


1894 amounted to £9,443,000, and in 1895 to £10,141,000. In various
productive manufacturing establishments, a capital of £600,000 has
been invested, while the goods annually produced exceed £1,000,000
in value. In London five great co-operative stores have been
organised. They are retail establishments working for profits like
other traders, but originally confining their operations to customers
belonging to the Navy, Army, and Civil Service. The sales of goods
exceed in the aggregate the annual value of £6,000,000. In London,
co-operative stores have not taken root among the masses. The
retail trade is carried on by dealers having exceptional aptitude for
their work. No co-operative store could compete with the coster-
mongers in price, quality, or in the convenience of delivery to the
very doors ot the smallest customer.
In the belief that it would tend to raise the condition of the
producers and workers, the Christian Socialists, among whom we may
specially name Tom Hughes, Vansittart, Neale, Maurice, Ludlow, and
Kingsley, were earnest promoters of the co-operative movement*
They were looking not so much to the cheapening of commodities as
to the moral and social elevation of the whole body of the workers.
They desired to see them advance from the condition of wage earners
into a more independent position. They viewed, therefore, with
apprehension the growth of the wholesale societies of Manchester and
Glasgow, in numbers, in wealth, in prosperity. They disapproved of
the concentration of the business of the miller, the baker, the shoe-
maker, and the manufacturer, under one central organisation. It was
not denied that vast operations were being conducted with conspicu-
ous ability, but the departure was wide from the lines on which the
first friends of co-operation had desired to proceed. Their aim had
been that all necessary capital should be raised by the workmen, and
that the management should be in the hands of committees chosen
by popular election. In the workshops and factories, established by
the wholesale societies, no contributions to capital had been made, nor
had the principle of control by the workmen been accepted.
And now let us turn from the combination of consumers who
employ producers to the combination of producers who employ
5
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


themselves. It is with this branch only of the co-operative move-
ment that it is proposed to deal in the present paper. The
progress of industrial reforms, like other forces, has moved along the
lines of least resistance. Co-operation in productive industries has
made little progress. Co-operative store-keeping has been largely
successful. Its benefits, however, are limited to the cheapening of
commodities. As a means of reconciling the conflicting claims of
Capital and Labour, it will have no effect. It does not exhibit a
standard or gauge by which to determine the fair rate of wages, nor
does it establish unity of interest between Capital and Labour.
Numerous attempts have been made by workmen to become their
own employers. Excluding the productive industries conducted by
the English and Scottish wholesale societies, the statistics laid before
the Labour Commission by Mr. Greenwood gave a total for England
of eighty-eight independent co-operative societies with an aggregate
membership of 8,081, an aggregate loan capital of £235,244, a reserve
of £19,000, a saleable stock valued at £142,000, a fixed stock of
£lOl,OOO, an annual sale of nearly £600,000, and a profit of £25,000,
of which £B,OOO is paid as interest on capital.
Having given the general statistics, let us pass in review the
principal co-operative establishments in the United Kingdom. The
Burnley Self-Help Cotton Manufacturing Society is a perfect illustration
of the co-operative ideal. The management is vested in a committee
elected by the work-people, who number 320, all contributing to the
capital, and sharing in the profits of their labour. The trade in 1895
aggregated nearly £61,000, the profits were over £2,000, the share
capital nearly £6,000. Many other cotton factories have been
established in Lancashire, more or less on a similar basis. The
commercial results have rarely been satisfactory. It was stated m
evidence by witnesses before the Royal Commission on Labour that the
operatives fought shy of mill shares.
We have another interesting example of co-operation in the
business, formed in 1886 by some sixty working men, chiefly employed
in the Leicester boot and shoe factory of the Co-operative Wholesale
Society, and receiving wages in the ordinary way. The management
is vested in a committee with a president, treasurer, and secretary,
elected at the general meeting by the workers themselves. In the
6
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


division of profits the aim is to treat them not only as individuals,
but as members of a community. While therefore each receives a
personal share, contributions are set aside from profits for provident
and educational funds, and other objects in which all are concerned.
In the beginning it was difficult to raise the capital required. Perse-
verance has brought prosperity to the society. It now possesses
1,070 members, a share capital of £9,878, a loan capital of £14,334,
a reserve of £BBI, and a trade of £47,296. The profits in 1896
amounted to £2,484.
The United Bakers’ Society of Glasgow may be quoted as another
example of successful co-operation. Established in 1868 as a federa-
tion of distributive societies, its business, conducted on a co-partnership
basis, is the largest in the United kingdom. The workers are not taken
into partnership individually. They form a Bonus Investment Society
(Limited) which employees only are eligible to join. They are
represented by delegates at meetings of the members, and are
gradually securing a substantial holding in the business. In this
federation the share capital belonging to societies is £37,907, and to
workers £2,900. The loan capital contributed by the societies is
£79,114, by workers, £5BO, and outside individuals £10,728. Of the
830 workers employed, 275 have become members. In 1896 the sales
aggregated £220,536, while the profits amounted to £27,490.
In many societies claiming to be co-operative, the workers, while
sharing in the profits, take no part in the management. The Hebden
Bridge Fustian Manufacturing Company is the leading example of
this form of industrial partnership. When first founded in 1870, it
was anticipated that the capital could be provided by the workers out
of weekly wages. The capital of the society is actually held in the
following proportions : Co-operative societies, £10,415 ; workers,
£7,398; outside shareholders, £8,032. In 1895 the business yielded a
profit of £5,185, the aggregate sales exceeding £43,000. When we
compare the small scope of the co-operative movement with the aggre-
gate output by earners of wages under ordinary conditions, we see
that co-operative production is, thus far, a neglectable quantity in the
industry of the United Kingdom.
Passing from the manufacturing industries to farming, co-operative
experiments have been tried in the United Kingdom on a limited
7
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


scale. The acreage cultivated is under 4,000, and thus far the losses
have greatly exceeded the profits. Agriculture can only flourish under
skilled management. The farmer should be a judge of stock, a
chemist, a mechanic, a veterinary surgeon, and an accountant. Such
a combination of qualification will not easily be found among our
agricultural labourers at home. It is admitted by the most sanguine
supporters of the movement that co-operative agriculture in the
United Kingdom must await the wider spread of education, and a
larger capacity for taking in new ideas on the part of our rural
population.
Co-operative dairying has been largely developed in France,
Switzerland, Denmark, Germany, and the United Kingdom, and, I am
happy to add, in Victoria. In 1882 dairy factories were first estab-
lished in Denmark. In ten years no less than 1,000 associations
were at work, fitted to deal with the milk of from 400 to 2,000 cows.
Almost every village has its dairy. Factories have also been estab-
lished for the production of bacon, the sales of Danish bacon in
England amounting to £2,500,000 annually.
In Germany co-operation has not flourished in its application to
productive industry. Collective action has been chiefly directed to the
establishment of the people’s banks, of which Mr. Schulze Delitsch
was the first founder. These banks have been most successful, the
majority of the shareholders being working men. People’s banks on
the German method have been established in Switzerland, Russia, and
in Italy . In the latter country it has been found by experience that
the financial institutions created by the people have only been
successful, when those concerned have been willing to act on the
advice of men of experience in business. In Victoria, as we know,
the advantages, which it is sought to obtain in Europe by the
institution of people’s banks, have been provided by the State,
In Italy numerous co-operative societies for distribution have been
established, and the value of the goods annually sold exceeds
£1,000,000 sterling. The appropriation of profits is on the plan
usually followed in the United Kingdom. At Milan an extensive co-
operative business is carried on by a combination of seven hundred
working cabinet makers. The operations embrace the warehousing,
upholstering, and joint selling of goods made in their own homes.
8
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


A review of the experiments hitherto tried, points to the con-
clusion that while in theory the advantages of co-operative production
are obvious and incontestable, in practice they are balanced by
difficulties which in numerous instances have led to disastrous failure.
Of all the difficulties the greatest is to secure competent commercial
management. Skill in commerce and finance is a rarer gift than strictly
technical knowledge and manual dexterity. For a just appreciation of
the qualities required in the man of business, I turn to Dr. Jowett’s
admirable volume of College Sermons :
“To be a thorough man of business is really very high praise. It implies
a clear head and mastery of details; it requires accuracy and constant attention
and sound judgment. It begins with figures of arithmetic, it ends with a knowl-
edge of the characters of men. It is that uncommon quality ‘ Common Sense ’
applied to daily life. The man of business is in his own sphere a man of the
world also. He is not easily imposed upon, because he will never have anything
to do with matters which he does not understand. He knows instinctively the
familiar truth that ‘ high interest is another name for bad security.’ If he has to
invest property, he will not act upon fancies of his own, but upon the best ad-vice
and information which he can obtain. He will attend to his own concerns,
and will retain the threads of them in his own hands. There is nothing in it
which appeals to the imagination, there is nothing grand about it, but it is useful.
And it runs into higher qualities, uprightness, self-denial, self-control. The
honourable man of business is one of the noblest forms of English character.’’
We have another description of the qualities necessary to success
in industrial administration, in Mr. Lecky’s recent volumes on
Democracy and Liberty :
“ Experience has shown that Government organisation may be applied, with
some success, to such industrial undertakings as can be managed on the system
of strict routine, and by rigid and inflexible rules. But in all those departments
of industry, which are not susceptible of this kind of management, it is certain to
fail. Equally hopeless would be the attempt to convert the State into a gigantic
shopkeeper or storekeeper, or manufacturer. The rare combination of daring,
caution, and insight, by which alone these great forms of industry can succeed,
will never be found in routine-ridden Government officials.”
A captain of industry should be a competent judge of the material
upon which he works, and understand the machinery in use in his
trade. Theoretically and practically he must be master of his
business. He should have natural abilities, special training, and long
personal experience expanded by general reading and information; he
must be honourable, and honest, alert, prompt in action, inventive,
versatile, and persevering. He must be happy in the choice of his
9
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


assistants, and know how to reward and encourage their exertions-
by trust and confidence. Decision on the part of the leader is as
necessary in the operations of peace as in war, and a Council of
War never fights. Lines of policy may be laid down by a Board.
Corporate management is incapable of exercising an executive con-
trol over the huge ship-building yards, ironworks, and factories of
modern times. A competent commercial manager will rarely obtain
in a co-operative concern such remuneration as is readily paid by
individual capitalists. Hence the skilful management and general
capacity required in great industries is seldom available. Capi-
tal on the other hand can be raised with fatal facility in an
overflowing money market. Loans at usurious rates of interest to
bankrupt governments, wild rushes into land booms, eager subscrip-
tions to bubble companies, reckless investments in railways, gold
mines, iron works, sheep stations, cotton factories —these are among
the many fields in which self-deception, folly, ignorance, and the
ungovernable appetite for gain have wrought mischief and havoc.
Having referred to the difficulty of securing good administration
under the co-operative system, let us turn to the method of profit
sharing. The idea seems to have had its origin in France, and it is
in that country that we find the most successful examples. In the
Familistere of Guise, the largest establishment of its kind in the
world, the entire capital of £450,000 is owned by the workers, and
the production of stoves and other ironwork reaches the value of
£160,000 a year. The strictly working men’s productive associations
are said to number 140, with a business ranging from £40,000 a year
downwards. In Paris and Lyons these societies include a great
variety of trades, and are federated together in consultative chambers..
In addition to the societies founded by the workmen themselves,
productive industries, originally founded by private firms, have become
co-operative by the sharing and capitalisation of profits. The painting
and decorating association founded by Leclaire attracted much attention
from John Stuart Mill. The first step in the conversion of the
concern was taken in 1838, when Mr. Leclaire established a Mutual
10
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


Aid Society. The profit sharing scheme followed in 1842. The
foundations were laid with care, and the structure was cautiously
built up. It was necessary to overcome the prejudices of the men
and to win their confidence in the sincerity of their employer. All
this has been successfully accomplished, and perfect harmony between
interests which were formerly conflicting has for many years prevailed.
The results to the founder were entirely satisfactory. The son of a
village shoe-maker, he had divided among his men out of the profits
of his house-painting business £40,600. He died leaving a property of
approximately the same value. The Maison Leclaire endured the
ordeal of the Commune unshaken, and in its direst hours gave succour
and support to all connected with it. At the present time the
management is entrusted to two partners, who receive a small salary
and interest at five per cent, on the capital they have contributed. Of
the remaining net profit, one half is divided among the workmen. -In
the beginning the benefits of participation were restricted to the
permanent staff. They are now shared by every man employed. In
the latest year of which we have returns, the participants were nearly
one thousand in number. The total amount paid in wages was
£43,000, the bonus payments were nearly £IO,OOO, the ratio of the
bonus to wages being twenty-two per cent. For excellence of work
the house of Leclaire is held in high repute among the architects of
Paris.
It will not be possible to describe in detail the many establish-
ments which are being successfully conducted in France, on profit
sharing principles. In the building trade they are found in every
branch. In the La Roche-Joubert Paper Mills at Angouleme, the
workers own £60,000 out of the total capital of £IBO,OOO. The Bon
Marche, an enormous soft goods establishment, a combination of
Whiteley’s and the Army and Navy Stores of London, is a flourishing
example of profit sharing. Monsieur Boucicaut, the founder of the
Bon Marche, was the son of a hatter in a small way. He and his
wife were generous paymasters. The employees have been able to
invest more than £300,000 in the business, while the employers have
amassed handsome fortunes. Many other French examples, illustrating
the material advantage to employers from the adoption of the profit
sharing plan, might be given. The case may be quoted of Monsieur
11
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


Godin, the founder of the works which bear his name. While paying
a bonus of fifteen per cent, on the wages earned by his workers, he
drew from his works an income, which, in a good year, is said to have
amounted to -£IO,OOO.
In the simplest form of profit sharing a distribution is made in
ready money at the close of the year. Monsieur Bord’s piano factory
in Paris is worked on this plan. Some hundreds of workmen are
employed, and the pianos manufactured may be reckoned by tens of
thousands. In consequence of a strike in 1865, participation was
introduced. After deducting from the profits interest at ten per cent,
on the capital, the remainder is divided between Monsieur Bord and
his workmen. To the former, the distribution is proportional to the
amount already drawn as interest on capital. The payment to the
workmen is proportional to the amount paid during the year in wages.
The important work of Dr. Victor Bohmert, Professor of Political
Economy at Dresden, contains an exhaustive enumeration of industrial
profit sharing establishments. The system established by the firm of
Billon et Isaac, musical box makers at S. Jean near Geneva, is among
the examples described. After deduction of interest on capital and
payments to the reserve and maintenance funds, the entire net profits
are divided into two parts. One half is annually distributed in cash
bonuses proportional to wages earned individually during the year,
while the remaining half is invested in the gradual purchase for the
respective beneficiaries of £4 shares in the company. In a letter
addressed to Professor Bohmert in 1877, a workman writes as follows: —
“ We all consider ourselves as members of one and the same family.
The good of the establishment has become the object of everyone’s
solicitude, because our own personal interest is bound up in it.”
Passing from Europe to the United States, profit sharing estab-
lishments are few in number, and on the whole have not been
successful. In the Pilsbury flour mills of Minneapolis, the most
extensive in the world, and the gigantic dry goods store of John
Wanamaker at Philadelphia, the results are said to be highly
satisfactory.
In the United Kingdom, though profit sharing has not been
extensively developed, favourable examples may be quoted. In an
article on the labour problem, published in the Fortnightly Review of
12
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


October, 1889, Mr. Schloss describes the system established by Messrs.
Thomas Bushill and Sons, printers and manufacturing stationers of
Coventry, as deserving special notice. The plan adopted avoids the
objection to divulging figures which it is advisable to keep private.
Messrs. Bushill have stipulated that out of each year’s profits a certain
sum called the reserve limit shall be first set apart for the benefit of
the firm. The balance is divided between the firm and the work
people. The amount of the reserve fund is made known to a chartered
accountant, who thereupon certifies the sum due in respect of bonus
to the workers. The result of this experiment has been equally
satisfactory to the Messrs. Bushill and the people in their employ. A
desire to economise both as to time and use of material has been
noticed, combined with a fertility of resource in overcoming difficul-
ties and in devising cheaper methods of production. The value of
profit sharing as a lubricant, it is said, can scarcely be over-estimated.
In this connection, it is a fact which merits attention that em-
ployers who have most thoroughly developed the system, are those
who pronounce the most favourable judgment on its merits. Mr.
Galpin, a director of the great publishing firm of Cassell and Co., is
a strong advocate of profit sharing. His firm pays a dividend of ten
per cent., and profit sharing has been in force since 1878 with
distinctly beneficial results, both to the work-people and their
employers.
In 1895 a special report on gain sharing and other systems of
bonus on production was issued by the Board of Trade.' In that
report are described at length the profit sharing systems of the Gain
and Towns Manufacturing Company, of Stamford, Connecticut; the
premium plan submitted to the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers by Mr. Halsey, manager of a Canadian Company engaged
in the manufacture of mining machinery ; the system adopted at the
works of Willans and Robinson, Engine and Steam Launch Builders
on the Upper Thames, and the good-fellowship scheme of the Thames
Ironwork Company at Blackwall. It will not be necessary to describe
the arrangements in detail. In each case, in addition to fixed or mini-
mum wages, a premium is paid depending in amount on the saving
effected upon a specified standard of cost of production.
In the application of the principle of profit sharing to practical
13
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


conditions, we have first to determine, to the satisfaction both of
employer and employed, a standard of cost, and that standard must
be maintained for a certain space of time. Such a standard can be
most easily fixed where we have to deal with staple articles uniform
in character, and produced year after year by similar processes of
manufacture. The difficulty increases in proportion to the variety of
the articles with which we have to deal. In considering the items
to be included, those only should be taken into view which have a
direct bearing on the efficiency or the inefficiency of the labour
employed. Charges for rent, interest and depreciation, may obviously
be excluded. So, too, questions must arise as to whether the whole
or part only of the difference between the actual wages cost and the
standard cost should be surrendered by the employer, observing that
even where workers claim the whole or nearly the whole of the
advantages derived from the higher efficiency of their labour, general
and established charges are reduced by an increased output. Experi-
ence shows, as might have been expected, that the stimulus created
by premiums for efficiency is the stronger in proportion to the
promptitude with which the reward of labour follows upon the
exertions put forth by the worker. We have further to distinguish
between collective and individual payments. The larger the group
amongst whom a bonus is divided, the less is the inducement offered
to the exercise of intelligence and diligence by the individual work-
man. It has been objected to the method of remuneration by bonus
that it tends to the scamping of work, and involves excessive com-
plexity of accounts. It is urged in reply that where the bonus system
has been applied in establishments engaged upon work, involving the
highest degree of accuracy and skill, the workmanship has not been
found to deteriorate. Nor can the keeping of full accounts in such
cases be carried too far.
Let us now sum up the results of our inquiry. We have seen
how vast are the operations of the associations for the distribution of
commodities in some of the busiest and most populous countries of
the United Kingdom. Their success may be accepted as evidence
14
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


that the agencies which formerly existed left much to be desired.
Goods were inferior and prices excessive. As a distributive agency,
as a means for the benefit of the masses of the people, co-operation
does not appear capable of further expansion. The later develop-
ments have been chiefly among the middle classes.
When we turn from consumption to production, little has thus
far been done. Where close attention to detail, keen watching of
every turn in the market, the perfecting of mechanical contrivances,
brilliant intuitions, and prompt decisions are required, no deliberative
body, no committee chosen by the popular vote, will compete in
efficiency with personal management.
Nor does co-operation relieve industry of its independence on
capital. If provided by the workers, severe economy must be practised,
and life must be harder than now. It will be necessary to scorn
delights and live laborious days. Is it well to get rid of capitalists
and captains of industry at such a sacrifice ? If again capital be
borrowed, the rate of interest charged by the money-lender will
probably exceed that obtained by the employer in the form of profits.
We may confidently claim that no other nationality rivals the Anglo-
Saxon in the capacity for self-government and the quality of self-help.
The principles of co-operation, though persistently recommended for
more than a hundred years by persuasive advocates, have gained few
adherents. The experiences of other nations enforce the same lesson.
In Switzerland, the nursery of accomplished artisans, whose citizens
are trained in self-government more perfectly than those of any other
country in the world, we find only thirteen small co-operative societies
of production. In Germany, Prince Bismark and Von Ketteler, the
Bishop of Mayence, were eager for a reconstruction of the methods
of productive industry. By their influence the co-operative principle
on the lines recommended by Lassalle was extensively tried, but with
the result that the capital invested melted rapidly away.
Turning to profit sharing it is claimed by its advocates that it
establishes a more perfect identity of interests between employers and
workmen than payment by the piece irrespective of what employers
may gain. A good year for the employer means a good year for
the men. If profits exceed a certain amount, the men know that a
1 5
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


portion of the excess will belong to themselves. They have a strong
motive to make them as large as possible.
Profit sharing was much discussed in connection with the strike
among the gas-stokers of London. The observations which follow give
the substance of an able article published in Engineering on January 3,
1890. In any co-partnership it is essential that the scheme shall be
honest and fair to all concerned, and that the mutual principle shall
apply to all. Proceeds should be equitably distributed in proportion
to risks and services. In a profit sharing concern each party con-
cerned surrenders something for the common good. To obtain greater
security for his money, the capitalist is willing to forego a proportion
of his profits. The workman wants security of employment, and in
order to obtain it he puts into his work a higher degree of personal
interest. He undertakes extra labour and extra responsibility, he
uses more skill and more care, he keeps always before him a high
standard of efficiency. The man working on his own account is
more alert and enterprising than the mere productive machine. He
does not deliberately waste time. He does not require constant
supervision. He is thrifty and thoughtful in the use of materials and
in handling machinery and appliances.
If the fusion of interests, as between Capital and Labour, is not
so perfect under the profit sharing as under the co-operative plan, the
system seems capable of a wider expansion. If it does not abolish
the capitalist nor the wage earner, profit sharing brings both together
on terms more generally advantageous than under the wage system.
Profit sharing is adapted to the circumstances of those workers,
necessarily the majority, who have not sufficient capital to start
on their own account.
The principle has been strongly recommended by political econ-
omists, and notably by the late Mr. Fawcett. He held it vain to
expect any marked improvement in the general economic condition
of the country so long as the production of wealth involves a keen
conflict of pecuniary interests. The more he thought of the plan of
profit sharing the greater was the importance which he attributed to
the extension of the principle.
The objections to profit sharing are similar to those urged before
16
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


the Royal Commission on Labour in reference to piece work. On
purely economic grounds piece work is justifiable ; it secures a
fixed ratio between the wages and the work. In practice it is con-
tended that it operates injuriously, and, like overtime, is unfavour-
able to the steady and regular employment so essential to the
general well-being of the workers. This aspect of the question
was discussed at length in the report of the Commission. Trades
unionists, they say, are inclined to distrust a system which seems to
enlist the interest of the workmen in maintaining the rate of profits
rather than the rate of wage, and which tends, to quote the evidence
of Mr. Tom Mann, “ to lift the man out of the ranks of the army of
labour.” Looking again to profit sharing from the employers’ point
of view, considerable weight attaches to the objection put forward by
Sir Robert Giffen, of the Statistical Department of the Board *of
Trade. As he pointed out to the Royal Commission, employers,
whose profits were small, could only work the system by raising the
wages of their workmen up to the level of the earnings of men
employed by firms which had large profits to share. Such profits
were rarely earned. The number of profit sharing firms in the United
Kingdom did not exceed seventy-nine, with some 16,000 employees.
In concluding this rapid survey of co-operation and profit
sharing industries, the admission must be made, not indeed without
regret, that the lessons of experience do not encourage the belief
that thought and labour would be profitably employed in the
endeavour to re-construct our system of industrial production
upon the co-operative or profit sharing plan. It is indeed greatly
to be desired that the workers in every industry should be able
to judge for themselves as to the fairness with which the profits
earned are apportioned as between wages, remuneration for skilled
management, and interest on capital. Co-operation, in so far as
it may be practicable, will supply this knowledge.
It must, however, be assumed that industrial operations will
continue to be conducted mainly by the combined efforts of employers
working for profits and workers rewarded by wages. In the existing
commercial world, industrial establishments cannot face competition
without that skill in business, energy and concentration of power.
17
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


which can only be looked for in individual employers, and the highly
trained managers in the service of great companies. Co-operative
establishments will probably be few, but their influence will, as the
commissioners observe, spread far beyond their own members. They
will thus be the means of spreading widely among the industrial
classes a sound knowledge of the principles and conditions which
govern the remuneration of work.
While profit sharing and co-operation will achieve something in
the solution of labour difficulties, we may anticipate far greater results
through the agency wisely directed of Trades Unions. The present
generation has witnessed a notable change in the popular view of
trades unions. They are no longer dreaded or denounced as a danger
to society. The Royal Commission on Labour, in the concluding
observations of their report, describe the creation of considerable
bodies of workmen, more or less separate in their lives and pursuits
from those under whom they work, as a necessary result of the growth
and expansion of large industrial establishments during the present
century. It was in industries where the separation of classes was
most marked that they observed the fullest developments of that
organisation of the respective parties which is the most remarkable
and important feature of the present industrial situation. Powerful
trades unions and powerful associations of employers had been the
means of bringing together in conference the representatives of both
classes, thus enabling each to appreciate the position of the other, and
to understand the conditions under which their joint undertakings
must be conducted. The Commissioners saw reason to believe that
the course of events was tending towards a more settled period, and
a clearer perception of the principles which must regulate the division
of the proceeds of each industry, consistently with its permanency and
prosperity, between those who labour and those who supply managing
capital and ability.
Reviewing the publications of Mr. George Howell on “ Trades
Unions,” in his recent volumes on “ Democracy and Liberty,” Mr.
18
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


Lecky observes that it is clearly shown how entirely subordinate is the
part which strikes have held in the policy of the most important
trades unions; how admirable and conscientious their administration
has usually been ; what a vast sum of self-help and providence exists
among the better class of the English labourers ; and what incalculable
benefits these trade unions have conferred upon their members.
The aggregate amount devoted by the fourteen largest societies to
what might be called the constant and permanent requirements of
workmen, namely, pecuniary assistance in cases of need over which
they have little control, reaches the grand sum of £7,331,952, while
the total ascertained amount expended solely on strikes was only
£462,818.
It is not possible in the present paper to deal exhaustively with
the subject of trades unions. Let us limit our view therefore to the
■essential services they are capable of rendering both in the collection
and diffusion of information on the state and prospects of trade, on
wages, and the standard of living at home and in the countries with
which we compete. As a necessary preliminary to successful
negotiation, workers must know their case, and they can only know
it by the aid of their unions. They cannot individually keep in
touch with all the seats of industry. To spread an accurate knowledge
of trade conditions is a work of national and international co-operation
in the best sense.
We may apply these observations to a case which has for many
weeks engaged the attention of the whole civilised world. I refer to
the prolonged struggle in the engineering trade. The struggle has
been arduous indeed for the workers. It has imposed heavy sacrifices
on their employers, while the falling off in the exports of machinery
from the United Kingdom shows clearly the loss to the community
at large. Let us ask ourselves whether either of the contending
parties would have engaged in a struggle so disastrous if all the facts
had been fully ascertained in advance. Did employers and employed
fully compare the net wages earned, the efficiency of labour in the
19
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


United Kingdom and in the continental countries with which we
compete, the cost of living, the prices obtainable for salaries and
interest, and profits at home and abroad ? If such an inquiry had.
been made in the light of ample information, both sides might have-
been more ready for the compromises and concessions which it is
most earnestly to be hoped will result from the conference held;
December 14, 1897.
In the latest exchange of views between the engineers and the
employers, the latter insist that their arrangements with their work-
men shall be conducted directly with the men and not through the
agency of the unions. It has been repeatedly stated that the
employers in the present regrettable struggle are contending even
more against the growing tendency to interfere with the details of
business than the reduction of hours. While concentration of com-
mand is clearly necessary for successful management, the claim now
put forward that wages and conditions of labour should be settled
with the men individually and not through the unions, is not
supported by the report of the Labour Commission. In the para-
graph giving their general view of the methods of adjustment of
wages, they say, “In the vast majority of cases workmen are paid by
way of fixed wage-rates, varied from time to time in well organised
trades as the result of negotiations between the bodies of employers
and workmen. The strong trade organisations, composed chiefly of
males, skilled workers, accustomed to act together in masses, have
made the old method of settling individual wages by the higgling of
the market impossible, and have for the most part already caused the
substitution of wages boards or other more or less formal institutions,
by which they secure a consultative voice in the division of receipts
between Capital and Labour. A standard wage is thus established.”
Again in the paragraph of the report in which their leading character-
istics are described, it is said that “a strong trade society, having a
central executive council, thoroughly representative of the members,
and implicitly trusted by them, possesses a machinery which will
enable it to negotiate with employers with the least possible friction,
either from time to time as occasion may require, or by way of a
permanent joint board, for the purpose of settling hour and wage
20
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


rate questions and other points of dispute, and to give undertakings,
and to enter into agreements, upon which employers can rely.”
The passages quoted can scarcely be regarded as approving the
conditions on which the employers in the negotiations now pending
insist And who were the commissioners who signed the majority
report which we have been quoting ? They were men with a great
stake in the industry of the United Kingdom. The chairman was the
Duke of Devonshire. His colleagues included among public men Sir
Michael Hicks-Beach, Mr. Gerald Balfour, Mr. Mundella, Mr. Leonard
Courtney, Sir Frederick Pollock, and Mr. Marshall, Professor of
Political Economy at Cambridge. Trade and industry were ably and
influentially represented by Mr. David Dale, the late Sir Edward
Harland, Mr. Ismay of the famous White Star line of Liverpool, Mr.
Hewlett and Mr. Livesey. The trades unionists were represented by
Thomas Burt.
To the views of the Royal Commission I may briefly add a recent
personal experience. Up to the date of my departure from England
for Victoria, I was a director of the great ship-building company at
Barrow. Our pay sheet amounted not rarely to the large sum of
£IOOO a day. The tonnage we had on hand for the government
alone was sometimes in excess of the total at any single dock-yard.
In conducting operations on so vast a scale, it was found a convenient
practice in cases of dispute between different trades to call in the
representatives of the unions involved. It was a distinct advantage
that they came from a distance and were thus free from local
prejudices. Our managing director never failed to come to terms,
and I may say that during all the years in wdrich I was connected
with Barrow, we had no serious difficulty in our relations with the
large bodies of workmen, nor was there in any single case any
important difference between the estimated and the actual cost of
labour in the building of ships of the largest dimensions and most
complicated design. Our greatest difficulty was caused not by the cost
of labour, but by the severe competition of rival ship-builders. Thus
estimates were cut down, and no reasonable margin remained for
contingencies or profits. It is certain that the margin would have
remained just as narrow if the cost of labour had been reduced all
21
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


round by 50 per cent. As yet no opening has presented itself for the
intervention in the engineers’ dispute. The public, however, are grave
sufferers by the suspension of one of the most important industries in
the United Kingdom. In an article published in the Economist of
the gth October last, it is pointed out that the strike of the engineers
was not to be regarded as a proof that socialism in the German
sense had any appreciable hold on the mass of English skilled
workmen. It might have been the object of the men to squeeze the
capitalist on what was held to be a rising market. They might have
over estimated the profits of their employers. They might have been
working for a joint control with the capitalist. They had given no
indication that the}/ were working for socialist or collectivist objects.
There was much reason to fear that the dispute had aroused an
ugly temper, a disposition to fight rather than reason, which might
cause a drift into disorder and decadence. It is much to be regretted
that there are no means of ascertaining and giving publicity to the
industrial facts. If it could be proved to an impartial and accepted
authority that the concessions demanded could not be made, and that
if they are insisted on, orders must go to Continental competitors,
the demands it is clear must be modified or withdrawn. Already
large orders have been placed on the Continent of Europe and in
the United States, which should have been secured for the United
Kingdom, The trade thus diverted may never return.
VII.
In an earlier part of the present paper the claims of good employers
on those whom they employ, and on the community at large, have
been strongly insisted on. In closing, it may not be unfitting to
return once more to a special aspect of the question before us which
should not escape attention. Employers are in full possession of all
the facts. Their books are always open to their careful study. The
workers in great industries are in a position of serious disadvantage
from imperfect knowledge of costs, prices and profits. It is however
upon a comparison of these essential elements that a just decision
can alone be formed as to when it is prudent to accept existing
22
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


conditions, and when a claim can be fairly pressed for shortened
hours, higher wages, or improved conditions. The worker is com-
pelled to accept statements without the means of verification. He
sees his employer in better conditions of life than his own. He
knows nothing of the painful and arduous struggle by which commerce
and industry are built up. He knows nothing of the many who fail
where one is successful. He may not clearly see that every accumula-
tion of capital means more and better paid employment for his own class.
He does not fully realise that if there were no profits there would be
no wages. In the absence of any independent tribunal to which they
can appeal, and with no information to guide them, coming from an
impartial and trusted authority, neither the workers nor the public are
in a position to decide as to the justice and the fairness of the
demands which are from time to time put forward on behalf of labour.
To use the forcible language of Mr. Mallock, “ Some demands are
really made by misery, and can only be ignored by cruelty. There
are other demands which could only be made by mad men and
listened to by fools.” When the conditions would admit of an advance
in the reward of labour, and when it is necessary that the cost should
be reduced, neither the workers nor the general public are able to
decide. Certain it is that neither legislation nor the most powerful
combination of workers can compel employers to carry on their
business when it has ceased to be profitable.
It has been shown that co-operative industries would be of special
advantage in fixing a gauge or standard of wages for the whole body
of workmen. In view, however, of the slow and limited development
of co-operative industry there is no reason to anticipate any extensive
transfer of difficult forms of enterprise from personal and co-operative
management. We must look for other means of spreading light and
knowledge. To open confidential books to public inspection being
impracticable, it is the more incumbent on employers to go as far as
they possibly can in friendly reasoning and full explanation of their
position and their difficulties to their workmen. Courts of conciliation
for mutual explanation and consultation should be set up in every
industry. For more than a generation the schoolmaster has been
abroad. The spread of education has created in every class a more
23
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.


democratic spirit. Organisation has given the workers more confidence
in their own strength. Education has created a stronger desire to
know reasons, and to judge independently of the fitness of things.
Every consideration points to the desirability of frequent and friendly
conferences between employers and employed. Courts of conciliation,
wages boards, and periodical conferences are in harmony with the
liberal sentiment and tendency of the present age. Wherever they
have been established, cordial relations have grown up between
employers and employed. They have never yet been found to fail,
and we may confidently rely on their efficacy in the future as a
safe-guard and protection from the miseries of industrial war.
24
Co-operative and Profit Sharing Industries.




