

CO-OPERATION:
THE SOCIAL EQUALIZER,
THE PACIFICATOR OF ALL ANTAGONISM BETWEEN
CAPITAL AND LABOUR,
THE GOAL OF ALL INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISE.
AN ESSAY
ADDRESSED TO THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY
GEORGE LACY.
AUTHOR OF NUMEROUS SOCIAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMICAL, AND PHILOSOPHICAL
ESSAYS.
pprCE suxup-btstcib.




CO-OPERATION:
THE SOCIAL EQUALIZER,
THE PACIFICATOR OF ALL ANTAGONISM BETWEEN
CAPITAL AND LABOUR,
THE GOAL OF ALL INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISE.
AN ESSAY
ADDRESSED TO THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY
GEORGE LACY.
AUTHOE OF NXJMBEOUS SOCIAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMICAL, AND PHILOSOPHICAL
ESSAYS.
IP BICE SIXP^JIiTCE.




PREFACE.
As will perhaps be surmised from the style in which it is
written, it was the intention of the author to offer this essay to
some magazine or review, hut before it was quite finished it
occurred to him that it would he more likely to reach the class
for whose benefit it was intended if issued in its present form.
■When this thought first occurred to him, it also seemed that
it would be desirous to re-write it in a style more in character
. with a popular address, but, on mature consideration, he does
not deem it needful to do so, as there is nothing in it that will
not come home to the commonest understanding. For many of
the facts, and for some of the ideas, it contains, the author is
indebted to Mr. George Jacob Holyoake’s History of Co-operation;
and as Mr. Holyoake is the greatest living authority on the
subject, and has been for the last thirty years its chief moving
spirit in England, no better source could possibly be found.
In offering the essay to the public, the author is actuated by no
other desire than to benefit his fellow-creatures by disseminating
a knowledge of what he knows to be the most powerful agent
yet discovered in softening and alleviating the social grievances
and injustices which are now the lot of the poorer classes; and
he will bo more than rewarded if he is in any way instrumental
in the recognition of this fact by some of those in New South
Wales whose fate it is to be ranked among those classes.
Sydnerj , April , 1880.




CO-OPERATION.
A student of contemporary history, with the capacity of under-
standing the significance of the social movements he sees in
operation around him, cannot but be struck with the fast-
growing tendency towards amelioration in the position of the
labouring classes, and towards equalization in the distribution
alike of the good and bad things of this world, which these
movements exhibit. Philanthropic schemes are started in every
direction, some highly judicious and beneficial, and others well-
meant but ill-judged and vicious in their operations; some
paternal, and granting as favours what should be conceded as
rights, and others recognising these rights, and fostering the
principle of self-help. Especially are these efforts directed to-
wards the too great accumulation of property in one class, to the
detriment of another, and towards the more equitable division of
it among all. In days happily gone by for ever, and whose
notions are now to be found only among a few worthy, old-
fashioned, simple-minded people, and among a few with whom
the pernicious occupation of money-grubbing has warped the
intellect, all such schemes were stigmatized as Communistic, and
Socialistic, and on these grounds, contemptuously put aside,
exactly as all conceptions of religion drawn from nature were
denounced as atheistic, and likewise contemned. That those who
acted thus could neither, if desired, define the terms of con-
tumely used, nor explain the action of the schemes, or the
principle of the doctrines in relation to which they were em-
ployed, is a fact now only too well known, but which need not
concern us here. In our own day, all things are decided on
their own individual merits, and, whether socialistic or atheistic,
on these merits they must stand or fall.
Among all splendid contrivances for the more equitable
distribution of material wealth, which have emanated from the
human intellect, there can be no question that the discovery of
the principle of Co-operation holds the first place; and yet,
strange to say, it is the one above all others concerning which
the greatest amount of ignorance is displayed. Nor is this
ignorance confined to Co-operation alone, for all purely social
questions appear to be alike unstudied by those who aspire to
lead the opinions of the English race—the bookmakers and
journalists of England. The one thing deemed to be needful
appears to be a knowledge of political economy, and as political


economy has, as yet, to a very limited extent, taken cognisance
of these questions, they are, in consequence, entirely neglected.
And thus Communism, Socialism, Rationalism, Co-operation and
Internationalism are confused together and mixed up in the
most bewildering and amusing manner. Not only are they thus
confused, the one with the other, but the meaning of not one of
them seems to be understood. Thus, there are at the present
day prominent English statesmen, and writers, and editors of
leading London journals, who think that the object of the Paris
Communists of 1871, was to obtain community of property,
whereas a similarity in the sound of the word is the only
connection between them, and they are as distinct as a horse-
race and the human race. The Commune meant the parish, and
the sole object of the Paris Communists was to obtain parochial
boards of self-government, such as are enjoyed by England,
New Zealand, and Victoria, and their proper name should have
been Communards, as was proposed by some of themselves, to
avoid the very confusion which has since arisen. Only seven of
the seventy Communist leaders had Communistic ideas, such as
we understand. That so much confusion should have taken its
rise from a similarity in the sound of two words, is only another
instance of the truth of the saying of the sage, “ With how
little wisdom is the world governed! ”
But co-operation is so little understood that even those who
write upon the subject, with a view of spreading a knowledge
of its beneficent principles, nay many of those who take part in
practical schemes for its establishment, seldom appear to have
mastered the science—for science it is—in its entirety. Thus wo
see in England numerous establishments like the Civil Service
Supply Associations, or like the Civil Service Co-operative Store
in Sydney, which call themselves, and are popularly supposed to
be, co-operative stores. But as a matter of fact these stores are
no more co-operative than are those of Messrs. Shoolbred, or
of Farmer and Company. Co-operation is a distinct and well re-
cognised principle, or science, and any establishment professing
to be carried on on co-operative lines which does not comply with
every particular of the science is trading under false pretences.
An establishment is either co-operative or it is not, but the mere
fact of having the word “ Co-operative ” over the doorway is not
of itself sufficient compliance with the principles at issue to ren-
der it in very truth a co-operative store, and is just as misleading
as would be the announcement of a chiropodist that he was Corn
Cutter to the Khan of Khiva. And in like manner neither does
the partial assent to, or carrying out of, the doctrines of the
science, make an establishment truly co-operative; any more
than the mere act of signing the pledge would make a man a
Q-ood Templar, although he did not leave off his drinking habits.
That these establishments are useful in their spheres, and de-
cidedly beneficent in their operations, is readily admitted; but


that is not the point, and it is distinctly denied that they are
really co-operative. .
Co-operation maybe divided into two branches, Distributive
and Productive ; but the principle is precisely the same in both
cases. The former branch comprises the stores, by which the
produce of the world is distributed among the people; and the
latter includes manufacturing, banking, farming, mining end
other kinds of business. It is the former which is proposed to
be chiefly dealt with, both as being more adaptable to the pre-
sent stage of progress in the colonies, and as being more ivide-
spread in its general influence, and likewise because it should
always precede the Productive phase. The one standard prin-
ciple of co-operation is, that all who participate in the creation
of wealth should likewise participate in its profits ; or in still
plainer language that, all who participate in the creation of
wealth should share that wealth among themselves, in exact pro-
portion to their share in its creation. This appears plain enough,
and yet few seem able to understand its full meaning. Civil
Service Co-operative Stores established to sell things cheap
among the proprietors, and afterwards divide the profits among
the shareholders ; industrial partnerships admitting some of the
operatives as limited partners; co-partnery which hires money
and labour and divides the profit, and other similar tiadmg
societies do not comply with this principle, and aie
therefore—however good in themselves —distinctly not co-opera-
tive. In distributive co-operation all concerned in their creation
share the profits —the shopmen, clerks, travellers, buyers,
managers, and also the purchasers, or customers, oe the
stores. Herein lies the one secret in the distribution of wealth.
For what profit could a store make if it could find no purchasers?
The purchasers are in fact the great power by which all profit is
made, and to leave them out of the division of these profits is
clearly to violate the principle above enunciated, that, all who
participate in the creation of wealth should share that wealth
among themselves, in exact proportion to their share in its crea-
tion.” And in like manner in productive co-operation all con-
cerned in their creation share the profits the managers, cler s,
operatives, mechanics, labourers, and the customers, or pur-
chasers. The action of this principle is threefold—it attracts
customers to the store, and thereby increases business and pro-
fits; it divides the specific profits made in an equitable manner;
and it assists the great generalisation of a righteous dissemina-
tion of material wealth among the mass of the people. <
It will be observed that, in thus laying down the principles of
the distribution of profits, no mention is made of capital; and
herein does co-operation radically differ from all other trading
and industrial societies. In co-operation capital does not
participate in the profits. For what is capital. Capital is
not a man, it is a thing ; and for it to share in the profits would


be as equally absurd and illogical as that the house in which the
business is carried on should do so, or that the machinery should
do so. What could the house, or the machinery, do by itself ?
And what can capital do by itself ? It is the brain and muscle
that use these things which make the profit, and without them
they would be useless; and therefore it is the brain and
muscle to which the profit must go. Capital, therefore, is paid
for, and done with. In all co-operative establishments capital is a
fixed charge, like salaries, rent, and wages. Five per cent is paid
to it, and beyond that it receives nothing whatever, in any shape
or way. For it to ask for more is just as absurd as it would be
for the landlord to ask for a bonus on his rent, or for the doctor
to demand a double payment of his bill; and it is one of the
anomalies of the time that this fact is not yet generally recog-
nised, as it soon must be.
This, then, is the fundamental principle of co-operation —
that all profits should be equally distributed among all engaged
in creating them, or to benefit the capitalist at the expense of
the workmen. To benefit the workmen at the expense of
the purchasing public, would be clearly to violate this principle,
and therefore any societies that do so are not co-operative.
The benefits claimed to arise from a general adoption of the
co-operative principle are so numerous, so wide-spreading, so
in accord with the spirit of the times, and so really surprising
in degree—not merely in theory, but actually demonstrated in
practice —that the thoughtful mind involuntarily becomes yet
more thoughtful in observing how slowly it makes its way
among those to whom it would be a real Jacob’s ladder, by
which they could climb into what would be a comparative
heaven. The reason, however, is not far to seek. Like those of
Free-trade, the processes of Co-operation are marked by a certain
degree of intricacy, which, though simple enough to follow by
those who are able to generalise a little, and whose minds are
not too much filled up by a single idea, may, nevertheless, be
doubtless not quite so apparent to those who have not the ability or
the time to study them. Processes that are not immediate in
their effects, or whose effects are not directly perceptible, require
a certain degree of mental culture for their appreciation, and are
often apt to be misunderstood, or undervalued, by the average
and uncultivated mind, and by that peculiar, but very large class
of mind which has been termed “ gaseous,” and in which ideas
become so inflated that only one at a time can be contained.
Even to enumerate these benefits would of itself require a
volume of respectable dimensions, and nothing more than the
indication of a few of them can here be attempted. But before
fore doing this it would perhaps be as well to explain the prac-
tical working and management of a Co-operative Store, in order
that these benefits may be more fully understood and better
appreciated.


In the old country, where shops are mostly confined to the
sale of a single class of article, a “ store,” selling everything—
from a needle to an anchor, and from a “ lolly” to a haystack,
was of course a greater anomaly than it would be in colonies,
where we have long been used to see such establishments, con-
ducted by private individuals. The celebrated Robert Owen, a
philanthropist, with ideas much too large for the days in which
he lived, but whose socialistic schemes were strangely mixed up
with an amount of High Tory paternalism and Imperialism, which
rendered them altogether impracticable, was the first to establish
stores on a system of co-partnery, which he did among the
operatives employed at his extensive cotton mills. But they were
not co-operative, and it was not until 1844, when Mr. Charles
Howarth discovered the principle of including the purchasers in
the division of profits, that Co-operation became possible. In
establishing a co-operative store, small beginnings are best. The
great Rochdale store, which is now dividing an income of nearly
sixty thousand per annum, and increasing it very largely every
year, commenced business thirty-six years ago, with twenty-
eight members, paying twopence per week each! and this was
all the capital it had! In ten years it had 900 members, and a
profit of £1700; in ten more 4750 members, and a profit of
£23,000 ; and in another ten 7650 members, and a profit of
£41,000. As a commencement, two or three people, who fully
understand what they want to do, and how to do it, and why it
should be done, must call a meeting of those likely to be bene-
fitted, and explain the whole matter, keeping the interest alive
by active propagandism. Capital is provided by each person
putting down his, or her, name for threepence, sixpence, or a
shilling a week, or as much as they are able, towards the pay-
ment of one five pound share. It is not considered a sound
principle for members to be proprietors of smaller interests than
five pounds, and of course the more that are able to subscribe it
at once the better the commencement of the business will be.
Borrowed money should on no account be resorted to, as all
co-operative business is conducted on strict cash principles, and
credit of any kind, and in any direction, should be entirely
ignored. A secretary and treasurer are then to be appointed,
and two or three collectors to gather in the weekly payments of
members. The business may then be commenced, and it is more
judicious to begin with a grocery and general provision store,
leaving other branches to grow with the extension of trade.
Technical knowledge will, of course, be required, but there
should be no difficulty about this, though many stores have
suffered for want of it.
The available funds are disposed of quarterly in six different
directions. First: expenses of management, including all sala-
ries, wages, commission, rent, rates, taxes, insurance, stationery,
horse feed, &c., &c. Second : an amount equivalent to ten per


cent, per annum on the value of the fixed stock, set apart to
cover its annual reduction in worth owing to wear and tear. All
fixings and properties other than stock-in-trade are included in
this item. Third : dividends on subscihed capital of members.
These are always fixed at five per cent., and no further interest
or bonus of any kind whatever is awarded to it. Capital is thus
a fixed charge in the working expenses, and does not participate
in the profits. Fourth: such sum as may be required for the
extension of business. As will be shown, the profits of a co-
operative store are very much larger than in an ordinary shop,
and when once the affair is soundly established, business, with
good management, increases rapidly; but it is safer not to
launch too fast into extensive operations. Fifth : two and a
half per cent, of the remaining profit, after the above items are
provided for, to be applied to educational purposes. This is of
paramount importance, and should by no means be neglected.
By educational purposes is meant the establishment of a reading-
room provided with papers, magazines, books of reference, &c.;
to be ultimately supplemented by a library, by a few scientific
instruments as microscopes, electric apparatus, &c., by scientific
classes, lectures, &c., and by the issue of a monthly or weekly
journal of propagandism. The Rochdale Store has all these,
and much more, its reading-room being equal to that of some of the
best London Clubs. Sixth: the residue, and that only, is
then divided among all the persons employed, andmembers of the
store, in proportion to the amount of their wages, or of their re-
spective purchases during the quarter, varying usually, from
eighteen pence to half-a-crown in the pound. The value of an
employes services, and consequently the share he is supposed to
have had in the creation of the profits, is estimated by the amount
of his salary, and in this proportion is he awarded his share in these
profits. The first part of this principle has by some been objected
to as inequitable because a manager in receipt of, say, £IOOO
a year, would get ten times as much as an assistant in receipt of
£IOO ; but it would be very easy to show that the manager, by
the exercise of his brain, created ten times more profit than the
assistant by his handiwork. A store without good managers
would soon come to grief. Its operation, moreover, has been
found to have the very best effect, for every one connected is
stimulated to his utmost in the creation of profits, having a
direct personal interest in their increase, and thus managers
draw custom by well-devised schemes, by supplying the very
best articles at reasonable rates, by making the premises as
attractive as possible to the eye, and by other similar means;
while all assistants vie with each other in civility and attention.
Thus service is not, as in competition, a menial office; in
Co-operation, it is a position of influence, and there is a direct
bond of sympathy between the customer and the server, instead
of an antagonism, in which each tries to better the other. For


it is to the benefit of both that the store should profit by the
trade done ; therefore the customer is not so much inclined to
haggle, knowing that he will get back in dividends what he is
unsuccessful in knocking off in price, and the server is all
sauvity and alacrity, knowing that the more favorable the im-
pression that he makes, the more will the business increase.
With respect to that portion of the residue which is awarded
to the purchasers, the method employed is as follows The
amounts is not paid in cash, or by a discount on the price of the
goods bought, but are retained by the store, and entered in a book,
the customer being given a metal or other check. When the
accumulated sum due to any customer equals the value of a
share, he is at once registered as a proprietor, and receives a
dividend of five per cent, besides being admitted to participate
in all the privileges of the establishment, whatever they may be.
Thus, without any effort of his own, without parting with a
single penny, and without becoming the recipient of any bounty,
he finds himself part proprietor of a flourishing establishment,
and on his way to become a man of capital. For it will un-
doubtedly appear to him that the more he spends the richer he
gets, and though this, of course, is really a fallacy, it is one that
the uncultivated mind would find, some difficulty in explaining ;
and as, unlike most fallacies, it works in the right direction,
there need be no extra pains taken to explain it. The effect on
the great body of working men of the operations of this prin-
ciple cannot be over-estimated. Even from a purely material
point of view, the gain to them is equal to a rise in their wages
of nearly ten per cent., and this without strikes, without dis-
putes with employers, without extra work, and without any
difference whatever in their daily routine. For instance, if a
skilled labourer, in receipt of £l5O a year, spent £lOO at the
store, he would, at the end of a year, be the owner of two shares
and a-half, worth £l2 10s.; if a dividend were declared, as it
nsually is, of two shillings and sixpence in the pound; and he
would also receive twelve shillings and sixpence interest on these
shares. If they were allowed to capitalize, instead of being
parted with, he would, in ten years, be a shareholder to the
extent of £125, and would, besides, have received £34 during
that time for interest, thus being £159 richer, which is more than
ten per cent on his wages. And the only work he had don© for
this, was the agreeable one of spending his money! and, of
course, the shares being transferable, he could, at any time,
realize, and could therefore, with the assistance of a building
society, be, in a very short time, the unincumbered owner of a
house and garden, and be, as a matter of fact, much better off
than many a so-called “ gentleman,” with three or four hundred
a year. These figures are no myths, and their accuracy has
been demonstrated in numberless instances in England, some of


the working-men proprietors of the Rochdale store holding
shares to the amount of between two and three hundred pounds.
Nor is this all. It is a very old saying that the poorest have
the most servants, and buy their necessaries in the dearest
markets. The man with capital at his command can go straight
to the wholesale dealer and lay in a stock of goods of the best
quality, at wholesale prices. But before these goods can get to
the poor man, who can only afford to buy very small quantities
at a time, they go through two or three different establishments
to get to the small shopkeepers, from whom the poor man buys,
and each establishment has to make a profit, all these three or
four separate profits, being drawn from the poor man’s money.
Besides which they undergo an amount of doctoring in their
travels, at which we can do little more than guess. At the time
of the outcry against the miserable pittance paid to needle-
women in England, it came out that these worst-paid of all
working people, had to buy their one luxury—nay, necessity—
tea, in half ounces, and were charged at the rate of sixpence an
ounce, or more than double what the rich man paid. Co-ope-
rative stores do away with all this. Buying in the wholesale
market they are enabled to sell the very best unadulterated
goods at a fairly reasonable rate. For, as the store avoids all
the expenses arising from the necessity of the middle-men
making profits, and thus intercepts these profits, and as, owing
to the cash system not calling for the employment of so many
hands as the credit, the business is conducted with greater
economy, they are enabled to sell all quantities, large or small,
at similar standard prices. The buyer of an ounce is thus
able to purchase at the same rate as the buyer of a hundred
weight, or if any difference is made it is only trifling, to pay
for the extra labour in making up the orders. The member of
a store is, therefore, not only better off in actual cash, but his
health must be better, for he uses genuine wholesome tea, coffee,
sugar, butter, flour, &c., instead of undergoing a slow process of
poisoning by iron-filings, burnt saw-dust, sand, tallow, and
ground tomb-stones.
His children also, if earning anything, could likewise
become members, and many a young woman has in this way
brought quite an acceptable little marriage portion to her hus-
band. Indeed, in some of the manufacturing districts, a young
woman, who is not a member of a store, finds difficulty in getting
married at all. The advantage to himself and his family which
arises from access to a reading-room is also absolutely incalcul-
able, and though of course the room cannot at first be conducted
on a very liberal scale, the funds available for the purpose
increase annually, and the Rochdale store can afford periodically
to spend hundreds of pounds merely in the preparation of a
catalogue of books in the library.


But although the material benefits accruing to the working
man from the connection are so great, they are even over-
shadowed by those affecting his moral nature. The chronic
state of the average workman is one of debt, and debt means a
certain degree of self-abasement and want of self-respect. Few
men, who are always in debt to the shopkeeper, can walk along
the street with chest out and shoulders back, in dignified self-
satisfaction and a sense of perfect freedom and ease of mind.
They rather slouch and slink along with an air of apology, and
never know what it is to be absolutely careless of what people
think of them. By buying at a co-operative store all this is
escaped, for all co-operative business is strictly ready money. It
may be said that if he can pay ready cash to the store, he can
also do so at the shop, but there is this fundamental difference —
by buying at the store the debt extinguishes itself without any
effort; whereas, at the shop, it grows, with interest and other
charges, instead of decreasing. A man with an income only
sufficient to live on, can rarely catch up a debt. Once contracted
it is for ever afterwards an incubus he cannot shake off. But at
the store it takes itself off by the simple operation of mere
living. The store, by awarding a dividend on every purchase,
and then retaining this dividend until it has grown to five
pounds, not only teaches him the advantage of saving, but also
actually saves for him at the same time. It is very easy to say
that the man might save for himself, but that is to show great
ignorance of human nature, and in fact to suppose it perfect.
An average uncultivated man with half-a-crown in his pocket
would not regard this coin with any great degree of veneration.
He would not be able to recognise the latent possibilities that
lay in it, and would most probably toss it away on the first whim
that occured to him, such as a drink a piece for three or four
friends. But if some kind fairy were to transmogrify it to a five
pound note he would think twice before he got rid of it; and
would most likely take it home to his wife and consult her as to
its disposal for mutual benefit. This is exactly what the store
does, and thus the man gets a lesson in the advantage of saving
and self help that cannot but have the very best effects on his
moral character; and what is even yet more important through
him on his children. “No homily, no precept, no wise saw or
modern instance, no exhortation, or prayer, or entreaty, can in-
spire strength of will, or wise and lasting purpose in the average
mind of any class.” But the Co-operative store does teach the
man this, and that in spite of himself. The lesson is iterated,
and reiterated, to him every day of his life, and even if he is too
stupid to learn it he, at all events, reaps the material benefit it
would bring if he did. No other human device has ever effected
the one thing or the other. Nothing is more calculated to keep
a man out of the public house than that sense of increased dig-
nity and social elevation which the assurance of being part


proprietor of a flourishing establishment, and of being actually a
man of capital, must of necessity give ; and this combined with
the counter attractions of the reading room must always make a
co-operative store one of the most powerful agents of the cause of
temperance. These are but a few of the moral benefits which
co-operation gives. Others will be gathered in the course of this
essay, and without here re-enumerating them it must be admit-
ted that those already pointed out are of the most important
character.
The great problem of the day is how equitably to reconcile
the conflicting claims of capital and labour, of workmen and em-
ployers. Hitherto almost the only elucidation of this problem
has been in the direction of making the breach wider, instead of
drawing the extremities together. Trades unions have been the
instrument of the workmen, and strikes their only offensive
weapons : and the masters have retaliated with combinations
among themselves to keep down wages. As Mr. Holyoake has
pointed out “industrial conspirators have not been very intel-
ligently treated. A combination of workmen to advance their
industrial interests is called a conspiracy, and treated as such,
while a similar combination of employers passes under the pleas-
ant description of a * meeting of masters to promote the interests
of trade ’.” But herein the workmen have chiefly themselves to
blame, for entering into conflicts that can have no permanently
beneficial results, when there are methods of curing the evil
without conflicts at all. For although it is readily admitted that
trades unions are useful in showing workmen that union is
strength, and that by combination they can wield a power com-
pletely invulnerable, yet it certainly appears that strikes are in a
very great degree suicidal. Whichever way they are looked at
it cannot be denied that they entail upon the district in which
they occur a great and permanent loss of capital, For both the
profits of the employers and the savings of the men are com-
pletely dissipated. “A strike is a war, and all war is a waste
of the material means of the combatants.” Moreover beyond
this, and beyond the physical suffering they entail and the con-
sequent lasting injury to health, there is a point in connection
with them generally overlooked, but which should be of the first
consideration to all workmen of liberal proclivities. To profess
liberal principles and then to attempt to limit the freedom
of ones fellows by coercion is a very contemptible pro-
ceeding, but it is exactly what trades unions do. “Of course,
it is necessity of trade war—but, at that point, the union
action becomes a tyranny.” In the words of Lord Derby :
“ There is hardly a despotism since the world began that has not
founded itself on this plea that it would carry into effect more
surely than free citizens the recognised will of the majority.
To refuse to recognise the freedom of your neighbours, is''the
first step towards losing your own.” The only strikes at all


excusable, and which trades-unions would be justified in sup-
porting, are strikes against the demand of employers that their
members should do cheap, bad work, bv which both their own
characters as workmen and the character of the industry of the
country is injured; and strikes for industrial partnerships. As
Mr. Holyoake shows, these latter would be fairer to both
parties than strikes for higher wages. For all profits must be
earned before they are had ; whereas, in strikes for wages, the
employer is simply plundered, if he is forced to yield where he
really cannot afford it. By industrial partnerships is meant that
system by which all operatives receive a per centage on the
profits over and above their wages. Thus, in good times, when
profits are large, the workmen’s per centage would be large, and,
in bad times, small. But trades unions take no consideration of
these things, and often arrange strikes for higher wages in bad
times, by which injustice is done to employers.
But Co-operation does away with all necessity for strikes.
Instead of quarrelling with the masters for an extra slice of
their capital, it quietly and silently goes to work and creates
new capital of its own. It does not discuss with them, but it
dispenses with them. Co-operators do not petition for an in-
crease of wages, do not send deputations and wait upon the
great man’s pleasure ; they simply increase their own wages,
and make themselves masters. They supply their own capital,
fix their own wages, and divide the profits among themselves.
They rob no one, deprive no one of his wealth, inflict no injury
on existing wealth, but simply exercise the right of all to create
new wealth. They use no coercive measures, set no bounds to
the freedom of their fellows; but, on the contrary, join hand-in-
hand, in perfect amity with all, and proclaim and practice the
most perfect liberty of individual action. Their system entails
no hardships, demands no privations, calls for no half-wages and
semi-starvation, initiates no contest in physical endurance; but,
quite otherwise, it increases material comforts, and gives reple-
tion of the very best qualities of food. Dr. John Watts, in a
lecture delivered in England, nearly twenty years ago, thus puts
the two different methods and results of Trades Unions and Co-
operation, in connection with the great strike at Colne, in
Lancashire, in 1860. by which 4000 looms were kept idle, and
the weavers were out for fifty weeks, “If the Colne people,
instead of going on strike for fifty weeks, had kept at work, and
lived on half-wages, as they had to do during the strike, and
saved the other half, and if the East Lancashire people had sub-
scribed £20,000, as they did towards keeping the Colne people
on strike, the result, at the end of fifty weeks, would have been
£54,000 in hand, and at £ls a loom, that money would have
set to work in perpetuity, for the hands themselves, 3600
looms out of the 4000 in Colne. The self-same effort which threw
them into beggary, would have raised them into independence.”


Strikes seldom have any real permanent effect that would
not have come in the ordinary course of trade competition,
though, perhaps, a little more tardily, and what they do
effect they effect at the cost of the loss of all previous savings,
and of a terrible amount of privation. Co-operation, on the
other hand, gives an immediate and permanent, though, at first,
not altogether perceptible, rise in wages, without any squab-
bling, any loss, or any hardship. It is a silent and perpetual
strike, having for its object, not the injury of the masters, not
the confiscation of his capital, not the seizure or depre-
ciation of the property of others, but an honest effort at
creating new wealth, to be enjoyed by those only
who create it. Workmen should never demand anything as a
“ right,” any more than employers should insult them by
offering them a “bonus,” for they have no “right” for more
than they contract for. They may prefer a claim, and refuse an
agreement to work unless it is conceded. In Co-operation,
where capital is only an agent, and all profits belong to the pro-
ducers, everything is done by mutual agreement. But competi-
tion is not mutual agreement, but hostility and war. Outside of
pure Co-operation there is no right; it is all claim and contest.
The capitalist has no right except to what he can keep, and the
workman has no right except to what he can get. It may be
urged that as strikes only occur in large industries, these argu-
ments refer to industrial co-operation only, and that a mere
co-operative store has little or no bearing on the matter. But
this is a mistake, for as I have endeavoured to explain, it is the
store that gives the immediate and direct rise in wages. Indus-
trial Co-operation can either be established separately or allowed
to grow out of the store. In the colonies it will be found that
as the business of a store increases, the addition of corn mills,
of bread and biscuit factories, of tinned and preserved provision
branches, of sugar refineries, of cloth factories, of candle and
soap manufactories, of dairy farms, of market gardens, of tan-
neries, boot factories, tailoring establishments, printing offices,
and many other kinds of businesses, will be both easy and appro-
priate, and of the greatest possible benefit to all concerned.
Industrial Co-operation, established separately, of course
requires capital to start it, and as workmen are not often over-
burdened with this necessary, it is almost impossible, without
application to the userers, which is at the best but a very bad
principle. Nevertheless there are many industries not requiring
a very large amount of capital at first, which might, with much
advantage, be initiated, prominent among which may be men-
tioned all classes of mining, taking contracts for road-making,
fencing, &c., corn and maize growing, and others. Gold mining
is especially adapted to being carried on on co-operative prin-
ciples, and the miners of Victoria lost a grand chance when they
allowed the profits of their mines to pass practically into the hands


of Melbourne capitalists. It is, however, not too late to remedy
this in New South Wales, for there can be no question that
here mining is in its infancy. That a country the size of this
colony can be properly prospected for a century to come is one
of those things that are manifestly absurd. When a country is
limited in extent there may be some sense in saying that its
mineral wealth is worked out, but in the present case there can
be none. It is an old adage that there are as good fish in the
sea as ever came out of it; and when a country has a metapho-
rical sea to fish in, as New South Wales has, the adage will
be found to bear practical fruit; therefore gold miners should
band themselves together in Co-operative Societies and extend
their operations at every chance as new rushes occur. It is
only an extension of the principle of half-a-dozen or so working
together as mates. In a Co-operative Gold-mining Society all
are mates together, and after all expenses are paid in the
manner already pointed out, the residue is divided among all
concerned, from the manager to the kitchen man, in proportion
to the amount of wages they are in receipt of.
In this way it will be seen that that great curse of all new
countries—absenteeism, is completely done away with. All
wealth created is divided on the spot among those who create it,
and those who have no hand in creating it cannot possibly have
any hand in the spending of it, except at second-hand after the
original creators have done with it and passed it away. Thus
such exhibitions as the Mackays spending millions in Paris,
while the miners are making it for them in Nevada, or as
colonial grandees cutting a dash in London, with dividends drawn
from Ballarat, would be absolute impossibilities. This phase
of co-operation is lost sight of even by Mr. Holyoake, but
its importance can hardly be exaggerated. Protectionists, and
other blind leaders of the blind, may rave about their nostrum
for keeping money in the colony, but compared with co-operation
it is absolutely non-effective. As it should be a standing rule in
all co-operative societies that no individual member should be
allowed to hold more than a certain number of shares, after the
business is fully established, no important income could possibly
be drawn by any not actually engaged on the spot in building
up the dividends. The object of this rule is of course to guard
against the attempts which are often made to transform the
establishment into a common joint stock affair, in which the
shareholders divide theVhole of the profits and the creators of
them get none. This is always a great danger, for it is a melan-
choly fact that so selfish are the majority of mankind that when
once they begin to finger dividends they lust to increase them,
even though this can only be effected at the expense of their
fellows. The best safeguard against this is in educating the
members in the real processes of co-operation by weekly journals
and lectures; for when once they have fully mastered these there


is little chance of a few selfish dividend hunters talking them out
of it.
It has been objected that co-operative stores can only be
established at the expense of injury to existing shops, and that
thus while they do good in one direction they do harm in another.
Nothing can be further from the truth. There is room for both,
and when there is a flourishing store in a street all shops in its
neighbourhood flourish as well; just as shops in the neighbour-
hood of Messrs. Shoolbred or Messrs. Marshall in London, or the
great Louvre shop in Paris, flourish. This is a well-known fact,
and the reason is plain enough. The majority of people can
never, in our day, be got to see their own interest properly, and
will always continue to buy dear bad things even when they can
get cheap good ones, if the cheapness is not a direct cash cheapness.
As Mr. Holyoake says, “no fool can be a co-operator,” and it is a
sad, but undisputable, fact that a good many of our race ake fools.
When it is said, “ what the co-operator gains comes out of the
shopkeeper’s pocket,” a misstatement is made—mischievious
alike to the shopkeeper and the Co-operator. The profits of a
store are four or five times as large as those in a shop, but the
extra profit is not made at the expense of the shopkeeper, but is
simply consequent on the principles on which the store is
carried on. Those principles enable economy to be practised
to its very fullest extent. There is economy in buying ; for by
purchasing direct from the great Co-operative wholesale
Society, of Manchester, the very best markets are reached, while
at the same time creating a fund by the dividends awarded by
that Society to all purchasers. (Of course, it is readily admitted
that this could not be done at first, but it is a step that should
be taken as soon as practicable). There is economy in manage-
ment, resulting from the cash system, and the few books there-
fore required to be kept. And there is economy in distribution,
to a very large extent. It is by these means that the extra profit
is made, and by keeping faith with customers, and by members
giving a discriminating support to capable and business-like
managers,. As Mr. Holyoake says: “If every shopkeeper was
abolished to-morrow, by Act of Parliament, Co-operators would
not gain a penny if they relaxed in fidelity, in the principles of
concert, of confidence, of mutual trading, of honesty in quality
of goods, and equity in distribution of profits, which are the
main source of Co-operative profits.”
And while Co-operation does not injure the shopkeepers,
neither does it attack capital. On the contrary, it gives capital
a wide berth, and lets it go its own way; and the more of it
there is about, the better for the Co-operator. It stands apart,
and creates new capital of its own. Capital already created is
sacred in its eyes, and if it requires its assistance, it pays for it
honestly, and shakes hands genially at parting. It bears no
grudge against capital, and puts no barriers in the way of its


employment. All it attempts is, that wealth not yet created, and
which every one has a right to scramble for, should be more
equitably distributed among a large number, instead of gravi-
tating into the hands of a few lucky ones, It is thus, instead of
being like a round game of 100, or vingt-et-un, in which one wins
at the expense of the rest, rather like a round game in which all
receive winnings from a mechanical and exhaustless pool. No
doubt there are some, especially among those who are habitually
lucky, who would prefer the excitement of the 100, but if the
will of the majority were taken, they would choose to sit down
to the game in which the winnings were certain, 'even if small.
Every one looks forward to share in the wealth that is yet to be
developed in the world, and 00-operation simply aims at
giving every one a share. It is true —but sad—that every one
also looks forward to getting a larger share than his neighbour,
but herein Co-operation does not countenance him. It calls him
greedy. It looks upon him as actuated by bad, dishonest, and
immoral principles ; and awards him just as much as he is
worth, and no more. If he works hard, with either brain or
hand, and creates a large amount of capital, he gets a large
share of it; if he loafs, and shirks his work, he gets a small
share, but so long as he is a Co-operator, he gets a share of some
sort.
But Co-operation does not encourage idleness and depend-
ence. The loafer will soon get turned out of a co-operative
society. “ The instinct of Co-operation is self-help; only men of
independent spirit are attracted by it.” It aims at teaching men
to help themselves, and shows them that if, while doing so, they
help others also, the benefit to themselves is the greater. Thus
the beauties of fraternal justice are inculcated. The man who
wants to better himself at the expense of his neighbours can
never be a co-operator ; but if he is glad to see that while he is
bettering himself he is also doing the same to others, then he is
a true co-operator. Self-reliance is the foremost characteristic
of the co-operator. He sets to and looks after himself, and asks for
neither sympathy, charity, pity, nor prayer. Charity is a fine
thing in its proper place, but co-operation dispenses with it. It
is no doubt very generous, and high-principled, and benevolent,
for the grandee, or the wealthy man, to give bonuses in bad
times, and “ do what lies in his power for the less fortunate,” but
the co-operator declines to trouble him. He takes off his coat
and makes for himself what others are content to receive in
charity. Or, rather, he makes it for himself without taking off
his coat, for the profits of Co-operation are so large that the
hours of labour may be materially shortened, if desired, by
general consent.
Co-operation is like Free-trade—it benefits the many at the
expense of none. Protection and competition benefit the few at


the expense of the many. They prey upon the mass of the
people in order to bolster up a few private diggings.
It is not claimed for Co-operation that it cures all social
inequalities, and does away with all social wrongs, and produces
a mtllenium. Every social scheme is effective in its own par-
ticular direction, and numberless agencies are at work with the
same end of equalising the burdens of the world, and all that is
claimed for Co-operation is that it is by far the most powerful of
them. Acting with all the rest, aided by them, and giving aid
to them, it trascends the whole of them in the power it is able to
wield, and in the energies it is able to bring to bear against
social grievances and injustices. It alleviates distress, and
accelerates the acquirement of competence, as no other organis-
tion can possibly do, It softens down the differences of classes
to a degree that reformers of a few years ago could only dream
of as a consummation they yearned for but saw no practical
path to; and it does this, not by bringing down the higher to the
level of the lower, but by raising the lower gradually from the
depths into which they have in former times been forced. Yet
in its infancy, it is the great power that will control the future,
and those who look with a philosophical eye over the surgings
of the society of the world, and dwell thoughtfully on its seem-
ingly aimless movements, see by its light that all these move-
ments have a meaning—a meaning unknown to those who take
part in them —that they all tend to one and the same end, and
however dangerous they may appear they regard them compla-
cently, for they know that that end is equality for all, and that
Co-operation is the most powerful agent by which it will eventu-
ally be brought about.
They gave me advice and counsel in store,
Praised me and honoured me more and more,
Said that I only should “ wait awhile,”
Offered their patronage, too, with a smile.
But, with all their honour and approbation,
I should, long ago, have died of starvation,
Had there not come an excellent man,
Who bravely to help me along began.
Good fellow, he got me the food I ate,
His kindness and care I shall never forget;
Tet I cannot embrace him, though other folks can;
For I, myself, am that excellent man.
Leland.




NEW BOOK
OUR AUSTRALIAN
COUSINS,
THEIR PROCLIVITIES, PASTIMES' AND
POLITICS,
BY
MAORI,
With Many Illustrations.
Royal Bvo.,
Handsomely illustrated and Bound in Best Cloth,
Price, 16s, ; Free by Post, a iBs.
