

COALITION OF INTERESTS
NOT THE
UNITY OF THE FAITH
A REVIEW OF THE UNION NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE SYNOD
OF VICTORIA AND THE FREE PRESBYTERIAN
SYNOD OF VICTORIA.
REY. ARTHUR PAUL,
FREE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, ST. HILDA.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WILSON, MACKINNON AND FAIRFAX,
78, Collins Street, East, & 74, Collins Street, West.
1856.
Z j




COALITION OF INTERESTS
NOT THE
UNITY OF THE FAITH
A REVIEW OF THE UNION NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE SYNOD
OF VICTORIA AND THE FREE PRESBYTERIAN
SYNOD OF VICTORIA.
REV. ARTHUR PAUL,
FREE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, ST. KILPA.
MELBOURNE;
PRINTED BY WILSON, MACKINNON AND FAIRFAX,
78, Collins Street, East, & 74, Collins Street, West.
1856.




PREFACE.
The object of the writer is not to gain notoriety to his own
private views, but to do what he considers an act of justice to the
cause of truth. Anxiety as to the results of the approaching
meeting of Synod had induced him to prepare the materials by
which his conduct and views were to be defended. What the
issue of this meeting may be is yet to be seen, but it is fondly
hoped that no unhappy precipitancy will be suffered to force on a
union which, as it now stands, must be attended by disunion and
separation. It was the writer’s original intention to keep the fol-
lowing pages by him in readiness for an event which he once
feared as inevitable. The solicitation of friends, like-minded, has
obtained an earlier publicity than the author had designed to his
thoughts, and their generosity has not suffered the means of pub-
lication to be wanting. The whole is earnestly pressed on the at-
tention of the members, and especially of the ministers of the
Free Presbyterian Church.
The public may wonder that such a union should have reached
so forward a stage of threatening maturation, and may question
the fairness of the author’s delineation. This surprise no one can
feel more than the writer himself. The most agreeable way of
accounting for the strange result is to believe that the leaders of
the Free Synod were dazzled with the prospective advantages of a
project which is commendable in itself, and that the younger minis-


ters reposed a natural, but as it has turned out, excessive confi-
dence in the judgment of their seniors. The Synod of Victoria is
undoubtedly entitled to some explanation, and perhaps apology for
the length to which the negotiations have been unhappily allowed
to progress. Whatever advantage may be taken of recent and
painful occurrences in that Synod to sopite the union, the views
taken in the present paper are believed to be the controlling and
fundamental ones by which alone the question can be fairly
settled by the Free Church.
St. Kilda, Ist November, 1856.


COALITION OF INTERESTS
NOT THE UNITY OF THE FAITH.
For the last two years the idea of union between the two bodies
of Presbyterians,—the Free Church and Established Church sec-
tions, —has prevailed over the colonies of Australia. It has been
eagerly hailed by undoubted friends of the Presbyterian cause;
and it would be impossible to deny that it has received a large
amount of popular sympathy. For the writer of the present
paper to say that he has no faith in the projected alliance might
almost appear the part of a self-willed obstructionist, and lay him
open with some minds to the censure of an overweening attach-
ment to his own idea, or, as it might be otherwise expressed, of
begotted devotion to his own private fancies. It might but swell
the amount of censure were he to urge the overbearing require-
ments of the word of God, as the ground of the opposition which
he cannot but maintain towards the movement.
Various circumstances, some of them incident to the condition
of a Colonial Church, have urged the importance of union on the
minds of Presbyterians. The proximity—the threatening prox-
imity and the progress of more numerous and influential bodies,
have given rise to a fear that unless Presbyterianism present a
united front, all the interests connected with it, including the
points of difference between the several sections, may be swal-
lowed up by a different, and it may be—as in the case of Popery,
—by a noxious and exclusive system. The absence of all compul-
sory enactments on the part of the colonial Government, and the
concession, hitherto unrestricted, granted to all bodies of Christians
to direct their internal administration, on principles approved of by
themselves, have largely helped to color the arguments of those
who desiderate a general fusion of Presbyterian interests. An


argument has been found in the fact that the. difference between
the Free and Established Churches of Scotland has no legal
standing-room in the colonies ; and that no apprehension of any
unwarrantable interference on the part of the State need ever
disturb the relations of those who might even attach different
degrees of importance, and yield different degrees of compliance
to such an interference. Moreover it has been said, and said, it is
admitted, with literal accuracy, that every definition of principles
required by ministers of the Free Church would be acceded to and
adopted by those whose connection has hitherto been with the
existing Scottish Establishment, so that a doctrinal basis, unex-
ceptional in itself, might be obtained to cover the Free Church
position: and when, finally, the Legislature of the colony is willing
to sanction any . necessary enactment in order to facilitate the
tenure of existing properties in the new connection, much, it must
he granted, has been obtained, and many will say that everything
desirable has been secured to make the projected alliance honor-
able and safe to the parties concerned.
It cannot be denied that the difficulty of opposing sound argu-
ments to the progress of the contemplated union is prodigiously
augmented by the facts now stated, and as these facts are very
important in themselves, so the firmest advocate of the measure
will admit that the difficulties of the position which the writer
assails have not been extenuated.
Before a movement which covers so wide a field of argument
can be met, it will be necessary to retire somewhat deeply into
those more general and comprehensive principles from which alone
we can look down upon the various lines through which the
argument extends itself.
And here it will be right to claim that consideration which
every Christian mind knows how to give to one who opposes Scrip-
ture principles to considerations of expediency. Whatever part of
revealed truth is confronted with the calls of immediate secular
interest, is sure to suffer in the encounter. From the sensuous
tendencies of the human mind it will always be plausible to point
at the advantages which a united body is supposed to possess and
easy to ridicule the presumed insignificance of principles not


illustrated by palpable examples for the sake of which union may
be opposed. It is always difficult to do justice betwixt faith and
sense; and the broad acres to which the Ministers of the Free
Church would gain access by the key of union may be thought an
ample recompense for any violence done to the lock, or even for a
wrench which might throw the door of the sheepfold from its
hinges altogether; a damage which the intrant once in would
never more need to look at.
The advocates of the present union put forth very confident
claims to the countenance and support of Scripture. It may be
well to keep in view some scriptural warnings, which should tend
to moderate the confidence of this assertion. It is frequently
urged that union is a duty prescribed by Scripture. It may with
more accuracy be said that unity is a distinction of the Church
ever and strenuously to be maintained. So it is desirable to pre-
serve the unity of a vase or crystal, but no one confounds this with
the union of its parts when accident or violence has shattered it.
The white lead or other cement which forms a union is a poor
substitute for the original integrity of the porcelain. The fol-
lowing passage of Scripture is recommended to the consideration
of those who may have given a too easy assent to the assertion in
question, “ Because, even because they have seduced my people,
saying Peace and there was no peace, and one built up a wall and
10, others daubed it with untempered mortar: say unto them that
daub it with untempered mortar that it shall fall.” The walls of
the true Church are built up of living stones. The common
adhesion of the stones to one another expresses the unity which
reigns through the body of believers. But this unity may be
parodied by the devices of men, and such a faulty union it is not
duty to seek and yields no strength after it is effected.
The source of authority in the Church is also the centre of
unity. To say that unity is promoted when the requirements of
Scripture are set at nought; to say that the interests of the body
of believers are consulted, when the authority of the Head is
trampled on, would not be to reason, but to sophisticate the whole
question. The facts of the case clearly convict the movement in
question of this practical fallacy. It is a union at the expense of


disunion ; union with men at the sacrifice of disobedience to
Christ; a union of secular strength with a loss of vital principle;
a compact of mere numbers in the absence of spiritual integrity.
Let this important consideration go to the proof. Is it so that in
this combination of ecclesiastical bodies the fusion of interests will
be attended by a loss of vital principles ? Will this union disen-
gage the genial warmth of spiritual feeling, and steep the Church
in the chill of conscious unfaithfulness ? In a word, is the Church
moving the wrong way in search of union, deserting the plain
path of commanded obedience, to follow the delusive counsellings
of a worldly expediency. Such a course must be fatal to the
interests of true unity. To leave the centre of authority is schism
against the true members, as against the Head of the Church.
What is the Free Church ? Is it a new or an old body, counting
its existence by centuries or by decades? What is its origin, and
what principles does it assert ? In one sense, the Free Church is
an ancient—in another, it is a recent body. Eecent in form, it is
old in its identity. If its claims be good, it is the historical
Church of Scotland, standing apart from the State now, so as it
did for seven years after its first settlement. If its adversaries
are to be believed, it is a creature of yesterday, based upon a fancy
to which the ancient Church of Scotland was a stranger, and
grown like a mushroom under the high fervor of popular excite-
ment ; destined to the fate of the prophet’s gourd—to perish in a
night, as it came up in a night. So long as the Free Church of
Scotland has an inch of ground on which to defend her claims,
she must regard herself as the representative of that time-honored
institution, which, for three hundred years since the reformation
from Popery, maintained the character of a Protestant national
establishment in Scotland. The body now in legal possession of
her name and inheritance, as seen from her point of view, is an
usurper, a waster of God’s heritage, exercising religious functions
under the control of civil authority, and degrading the supre-
macy of Christ in spiritual things, in order to bow before the
image of Cresar. This is simply to express in words the fact
which is patent to the eye of the world, that the two bodies no
longer keep house together, and that the difference between them


is so great that the one cannot touch the emoluments of the State
at the sacrilegious price which the other pays for them.
Taking this as a correct expression of the dissidence between
the two Churches, it is a question, now, what conditions are
necessary to reconcile them. On this point it will be of some use
to quote the opinion of Dr. Chalmers. If any one man more than
another may be regarded, as the father of the Free Church of
Scotland, it is unquestionably he. And as if the providence of
God had been ordered so as to confound the envious insinuations
of pretentious egotism, Dr. Chalmers’ noblest confession of the
Free Church faith, was given before a committee of the British
House of Commons, a few days only before his death. We quote
question and answer as given in the Parliamentary report, the
questions being put by the Hon. Fox Maule, now Lord Panmure,
himself a steady adherent and consistent office-bearer of the Free
Church of Scotland.
“ Q. If that be so, is there any prospect of a re-union taking
place between the Free Church and the Established Church?
“A.I am afraid not in the way of a re-union. I think that a
restoration is possible, but not in the way of a re-union between
the two bodies, —that is, between the Free Church and the Esta-
blished Church.
“ Q. You say that a restoration is possible ?
“A. Yes: but if I were to state the process, it would appear, I
fear, so extravagant, that I have not the slightest hope of its being
at present brought about. We must, of course, provide for the
perfect integrity of our own ecclesiastical principles; and Ido not
see how that can be done, except by the Legislature adopting the
Free Church as the Establishment, and then leaving us to deal
with the ministers of the Established Church as so many eccle-
siastical delinquents who have forsaken their original principles.
I dare say that we should be very mild and indulgent in dealing
with them, so far as was consistent with our principles. I state
this in answer to your question ; but at the same time, I have not
the slightest hope that it is a measure which will soon be carried
out If there was such a resolution of the Legis-
lature come to, I would venture to say, that there should be no


such thing as an instant deprivation of the emoluments of office
of any individual, but they should be left to die out, and when a
parish was vacant, it should be filled up by a licentiate of the Fi’ee
Church; and in that way there would be a substitution of a
Church with its original principles, for a Church with its altered
principles.”—Memoirs, vol. iv., appendix.
Nothing can show more clearly than such an answer, given, as
it was, before the highest authority in Britain, that the difference
between the Free Church and the Establishment, against which
she protested, was not, in the opinion of Chalmers, to be easily or
quietly composed. It never occurred to his sagacious mind that
the breach was to be healed by such a skin-deep remedy as the
Australian peace-makers have employed. A re-union, with the
question in dispute left open, he did not regard as a desirable 01
justifiable expedient; and yet this is the identical project with
which, in the colonies, we are to prove that he was mistaken.
The principle upon which Chalmers proposes to restore peace to
the Church was by dealing “ with the ministers of the Established
Church as so many ecclesiastical delinquents who have forsaken
their original principles his first care was to cut off the possi-
bility of any addition to their numbers, so that “ they should be
left to die out.” The proposed plan of pacification is just the
contrary. It is to receive these ministers freely, just as they are,
and to make room for their admission by thrusting Free Church
principles into a corner, or locking them up, like the talents of
the unfaithful steward, in Articles, emasculated of all force, and
which neither party can interpret to the satisfaction of the other.
It is surely very plain that union, if it be an honorable and satis-
factory one, should be available for the Churches in Scotland, as
well as in the colonies. If the Synod of Victoria holds the prin-
ciples and maintains communion with the Establishment in
Scotland, and the Free Synod holds the views and cherishes the
friendship of the Free Church, surely a union of the two repre-
sentatives implies that the Churches represented may unite in like
manner, and that, sinking their common differences, they should
embrace the general body of Christian truth which each sees in
the other. An Chalmers could not see how this was to be


done. The father of the Free Church, he perceived an obstacle
to the alliance, and he forbade the banns. More distant relatives
are less fastidious of the Church’s honor, and court a union for
her:—
“ For interest’s sake, the living to the dead.”
Coming to the facts of the case, we find this union based partly
upon a series of articles, partly on a legal provision of the Colonial
Legislature. By the articles it is presumed that all the distinctive
principles of the Free Church are secured. By the legal enact-
ment, provision is made for transferring the church properties on
both sides from the present connection, to that which places them
under the control of the union. With the property phase of the
question simply, as such, the present paper does not deal. It is
not for property, but for principles’ sake, that union should either
be sought or resisted. But as it has been attempted to argue the
whole case, from what may be called the property point of view, it
may be useful or necessary to spend a few considerations on this
point. It has been argued, then, that the whole question between
the two Synods consists in the legal “ connection ” which subsists
between the establishment in Scotland and the Synod of Victoria.
This “ connection,” exhibited in the name which the Synod
adopts being recognised by the Colonial Government, makes the
Synod of Victoria the legal representative of the Church of Scot-
land, and the trustee of property and privileges accorded by the
Victorian Legislature to the adherents of the Scottish establish-
ment. This legal standing of the Synod of Victoria, by which it
chooses to be a trustee for others, rather than a principal acting
for itself, constitutes, it is said, the whole difference which the
Free Synod has with her. It is alleged that the Colonial disrup-
tion would never have happened if this subordinate position had
been abandoned, and a position independent of any foreign church
assumed; and then the conclusion is drawn that the link of
property connection with the established Church of Scotland being
now broken by Act of Council, and the property formerly held in
that connection being now set free, the stumbling-block has
been removed by which the two Synods were kept from approach-


ing each other. This argument, taken together with the phrase-
ology of the articles, forms the ground on which some have
acquiesced in the project of union who previously stood aloof,
while the release of the property was imperfectly provided for.
The fallacy of resting on the mere release of the property is,
however, very apparent. The “ connection ” with the established
Church here spoken of has more phases than that in which the
Colonial Government recognises it. It is more than simply a
Colonial title to certain property. Viewed as between the Colonial
Government and the Synod of Victoria, it is, of course, a qualifica-
tion entitling those who adopt it to a certain definite portion of State
endowment. But the questions immediately arise, how is the
amount of this definite portion ascertained ? On what footing is it
granted? Does the nature of the grant involve any ecclesi-
astical question as between the Synod of Victoria and the Free
Synod?
Now the share of public funds given to the Synod of Victoria is
ascertained by the number of those who rank themselves in the
census as adherents of the establishment in Scotland. The allow-
ances given are destined for the benefit of those so adhering. They
are given to the Synod as the spiritual guardian of the members of
the Church of Scotland, standing to them in the Colony in loco
parentis, in the room of that church at home, with which they have
professed themselves in connection. It is therefore as the
Colonial representative of the establishment, charged with the
spiritual oversight of all who adhere to its doctrine and discipline;
it is as the colonial equivalent, so to speak, of the Established
Church in Scotlond, that the Synod of Victoria receives a certain
share of public funds. The ground of difference between the two
Synods is not that the Synod of Victoria obtains a certain share of
public money, but that the money is received under a name which
identifies the Synod in doctrine and practice with the establish-
ment in Scotland. It is not the name, but the thing signified by
the name—not the words “in connection with the Church of
Scotland ” simply as words —but the implied unity of profession
and practice which requires to be changed. It was not as an
objectionable title to property that the colonial disruptionists


part of the wall. What is truth at home is true here also, and the
controversy, too important to subside into silence, is shut up into
the inquiry whether one party has become a convert to the other.
Coalition being excluded, conversion is clearly the alternative of
union : if conversion is not pretended, then coalition of interests
is the grave of truth. In which of these two shapes has the
questionable spirit of union come. Conversion and coalition, these
are the two extremes of the question.
It might seem at first sight that the Synod of Victoria had
become a convert to Free Church views. This, indeed, was
publicly announced at a meeting of the Free Church Synod, held
at Geelong in November, 1855. Any unsophisticated person com-
ing to examine the articles of union would naturally conclude that
such was the case, and that a testimony condemnatory of the sub-
servient relations of the Established Church in Scotland had
really been raised by her former colonial representative. Such a
simple-hearted or ingenuous person would, however, commit a great
mistake. It is true, indeed, that all grammar, and all logic, and
all honesty, would favor his conclusion. It is true that the third
Article of Union defines the headship of Christ over his Church
in terms which breathe the very ipsissimum of Free Church views.
True, the very words of the Article are, that the rulers of Christ’s
Church have “ an independent and exclusive jurisdiction over the
government of the Church in all spiritual things, and that it
belongs to them alone to admit or exclude members and office-
bearers, and to license or ordain ministers, to induct and settle
them over congregations,” etc. True, it is added, that “ with these
and the like functions it is equally presumptuous and unwarrant-
able in the magistrate to interfere, and faithless and sinful in the
Church to permit or submit to such interference.” And yet, what-
ever may be signified by all this in grammar, in logic, in
honesty a testimony against the present subserviency of the
Scottish Establishment, it neither is nor is intended to be, so far
as the views of the Synod of Victoria are concerned. A view the
direct contrary has been frequently, publicly, and firmly stated in
conferences, and committees, and negotiations of the two synods—
a view which holds this very article as equally compatible


with an Established Church as with a Free Church connection,
and which claims communion and correspondence specially in the
vital matter of ministerial supplies equally with the one church as
with the other. So sensitive indeed have the members of the
Synod been on this point, that on the occasion above referred to,
when it was publicly announced in the Geelong Synod that instead
of the ministers of the Free Church “ going back to the Established
Church, the ministers of the Established Church were coming
over to them,” the Synod of Victoria, which was then also in ses-
sion, instantly required and received a retractation of the statement
—a retractation which contains, in gremio, a concession of that very
communion and correspondence with the Established Church of
Scotland which it has been the distinction of the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria all along to decline, and which the Articles of
Union themselves clearly convict of “ unfaithfulness and sin.” “ In
employing the language attributed to him,” the speaker explained,
“he did not mean to identify the Synod of Victoria with the
Established Church of Scotland, or to affirm that the former was
coming over to the Free Church of Victoria, but simply that the
principles held by the Free Church were held in common by the
Free Victorian Church and by tbe Synod of Victoria, and that
those who come from the Established Church of Scotland, and join on
such a basis, come over to what he considers essentially Free Church
ground.” Everybody knows that this is the very pi-ofession of the
Establishment throughout the colonies. They maintain that they
have essentially all the principles for which the colonial Free
Church contends, and this humiliating explanation, by dropping
all allusion to home relations, plays away the distinctive position
of the Free Church into the hands of those who have uniformly
represented the disruption movement as made for visionary and
frivolous objects. The claim of the residuary Synod has always
been that they are as Free Church as those who claim the appella-
tion par excellence, while they also claim the privilege, not very
compatible with this profession of principles, of holding out the
right hand of fellowship to the Established Church of Scotland.
This, indeed, is the vital test by which the worth of the Articles
of Union is to be appreciated. If they do not ascertain the home


relations of the United Body in connexion with the Free Church,
they ascertain nothing. Whatever their logical import may be,
if they do not, in point of fact, settle the controversy as to the
source of future supplies, they are useless. This always was the
testing point between the Free Synod and its Victorian rival, and
if this question be still undetermined, as undoubtedly it is, then
the code of articles, however good in itself, is vox et nihil prceterea,
it is a constitution without a sanction, a series of enactments with
no visible embodiment —a rule without example—a faith without
works —and dead because alone.
Notwithstanding the strong language of the Articles upon a
subject which has been elaborated in connection with the history
of the Scottish Church, the Synod of Victoria denies that they
necessitate any prseterition of the present Estsblishment in the
matter of communion and correspondence. Ministers may be
received from that Church into the united body as freely as from
the Free Church; and as the composition of the united body
might be modified by this arrangement to any extent, it follows
that the united body might come to he altogether composed of
ministers adhering to the Established Church of Scotland. And
the condemnation which the writer pronounces on the union is this,
that with a series of articles calculated to beget the belief of a Free
Church connection, the practical working of the system would be
quite indeterminate, and might issue in a total alienation of the
proposed union from Free Church principles, and a total aban-
donment of Free Church ground. A few references to authoritative
documents will establish the assertion that the articles are not
suffered to ascertain a Free Church connection for the proposed
united body.
In the document entitled “ Annotations,” &c., and hearing the
signature of an influential minister of the Synod of Victoria, “ the
facilities for correspondence with the Church of Scotland ” are
claimed the united body, |so as they exist in the Synod of
Victoria at present. In the same document “ the inconsistency of
these articles with certain usages in the Church of Scotland ” is
broadly admitted, and the following views of the discrepancy are
expressed: “ That inconsistency relates to the existence of lay


patronage in the church. Lord Aberdeen’s Act . . is a declara-
tory Act, defining what the old law of patronage really is. That
law was and is a law of the State. The Church of Scotland exists
under it and obeys it, and the Church of Scotland must continue
to do so until it is got rid of by constitutional means.” It is
plainly admitted here that the Church of Scotland sanctions
practices incompatible with the articles of union. The articles
themselves characterise the defect in question as “faithless and
sinful ,” and then they shut up the correspondence of the united
body with “faithful churches,” and yet equal facilities of corre-
spondence with the Established Church of Scotland are claimed
under these articles as subsists now in the Synod of Victoria. This
document is quoted as the opinion, given in writing, of a single
minister, because of his influential position. If was, indeed,
originally received as a public document, supposed to issue from a
committee of the Synod of Victoria. This, it seems, was a mis-
taken supposition. The very communication, however, in which
the Free Church Committee were apprised that the “ Annotations ”
had been disowned by the Committee of the Synod of Victoria,
itself contains a statement which re-pones the objectionable views
above referred to. The Committee of the Synod of Victoria having
declined all responsibility for the “ Annotations ” go on to say :
“ The Committee, at the same time, direct me to assure you that
they desiderate no privilege for the Church of Scotland above any
other church, hut that they do positively refuse to consent that the
United Church shall be debarred by express prohibition and
exception from correspondence with the Church of Scotland.”'
This was addressed to the convener of the Free Church Union
Committee by the Union Committee of the other church. It is
the last communication, in writing, which ever passed between
them. One other communication contains an epitome of the
views and feelings with which the union is regarded by the mem-
bers of the Synod of Victoria. It is a communication dated 28th
June, 1855, and signed by the convener of the Union Committee
of the Synod of Victoria. It is divided into paragraphs, of which
the 3rd, 4th, and sth are given as follows : —3rd. “ That they are
fully aware of the decided views which the brethren of the Free


Presbyterian Church hold in reference to the application of the
general principles of the articles of union to the Established Church
of Scotland, and that it is with the full knowledge of their having
these views, and of their determination to follow them out in the
part which they take in the government of the united body, that
they agree to unite with them. 4th. That they do not regard
themselves as debarred by the articles of union from holding eccle-
siastical communion and correspondence with the Church of
Scotland, and that in like manner they assume that the brethren
of the Free Church, in proposing to unite with them, did so in the
knowledge that such were their views, and that they on their part
should also act on them on all fitting occasions. sth. That not-
withstanding the discrepancy of the views so entertained by them,
they deem it competent for them to unite on the general
principles contained in the articles of union, and agree that it
should be distinctly provided as a matter of mutual concession,
that the united church, in holding communion and correspondence
with other churches, shall in no instance call on any minister to
perform any act which he conscientiously considers to be inconsis-
tent with any solemn engagement into which he had entered while
a member of the church to which he had previously belonged.”*
The views thus expressed in writing had been previously enunci-
ated in conference between the two Synods, in April, 1855 ; so
that the Free Synod has been publicly and repeatedly warned that
these sentiments are held by the church with which they propose
to unite.
The effect of these reiterated statements evidently is to weaken
the moral force and significance of the articles. No ingenuity can
reconcile the sentiments so expressed, with an honest and intelli-
gent adherence to the basis of union. The value of Church
* It has not been forgotten, in making the above quotation, that the documents
from which they are taken were reported at the Geelong Synod to have been with-
drawn The writer is aware that the annotations were so withdrawn, and that the
withdrawal itself reiterates the objectionable views of the discarded paper. He has
never been able to obtain evidence that the other minutes were withdrawn even to
this extent. And after all it is simply as documents, not as expressions of opinion,
that any paper has been retracted. The views expressed in Conference between the
two Synods have never been revoked, and they are identical with those engrossed in
writing.


standards consists in expressing the conscientious convictions of
of those who adhere to them, and when the adherence is professed
and withdrawn almost in the same breath, the natural inference
is that the standards are divested of all binding force ; that they
are set up for show to look at, and not as fixed sanctities, to rally
round and contend for; that they denote simply what it is con-
venient to profess, not what it is duty and obligation to maintain.
It has been argued, indeed, and, argued strenuously, that uni-
formity of opinion in holding church standards is neither to be
expected nor inquired after. The argument is very hold, and its
success has been equal to its audacity. It possesses all the con-
venience of a condensed and pregnant statement. It is easily
handled and fruitful in its results, but it is vicious in its nature ;
and as the tree, so are its fruits. Let us examine it.
It is argued, in general, that Church standards have fulfilled
their purpose, when they exhibit scriptural truth in unexception-
able language. Persons may subscribe the standards, it is alleged,
who do not intelligently comprehend the truths embraced in
them. As a matter of fact, it is affirmed, that many of those who
do sign Confessions of Faith are known to be defectively grounded
in the belief to which they pledge themselves. And while this is
not as it should be, as regards the person subscribing, it is a
matter of little moment as regards the church which receives the
signature. The truths are the same ; the pledge is equally valid
whether the party believing as the church believes, realises the
import of his Carbonarian faith or no. And following up this
assertion by a homethrust at weak-minded gainsay ers, it has been
affirmed on high authority that a large proportion of the ministers
of the Free Church are actually in this situation, misunderstand-
ing the principles to which they are pledged, quite as grossly as
the members of the Synod of Victoria misunderstand the ai tides
and thus offering, the writer would feel inclined to add, a short
and easy explanation of these remarkable negotiations. Assuming,
then, that the articles are doctrinally sound, the argument is, that
all further inquiries are labor lost. It is always to be presumed
that the person subscribing comprehends their import and bows
to the obligation. No further evidence is admissable as a test of


his sentiments beyond his profession of adherence to the standard
which the church has set up. As a corollary it follows that all
questions as to the sense in which the articles are received by the
Synod of Victoria are superfluous ; the sense being always as the
grammar, and the misconceptions of the Synod and heterogeneous
element, not entering the question and not affecting the result.
It is obvious to perceive that if this Canon of no interpretation
be good for articles of union it is good for all church standards. A
sound principle will guide safely wherever it is applied; and if
union may be consummated safely on this basis it remains to be
seen how much farther the work may be advanced. Of all church
standards, the first and highest are the Holy Scriptures. If it
does not matter how a standard is received, so be it is sound in
itself; if the sense attached to it be a bagatelle—an infinitesimal
calculation vanishing out of the account; if this be the "great
principle on which union is to be consummated, then let all unite
who can subscribe to the Holy Scriptures. This standard, if any
being objectively unexceptionable, let the subjective acceptation be
put altogether out of account. With no uneasy misgivings as to the
sense in which they may he subscribed, let subscription itself suf-
fice. Let a church be formed upon this basis, and then what matters
it that here a Socinian and there an Arian attach each his signature
to the volume of inspiration. The subjective rendering is nothing;
the objective correctness of the basis is everything; and now, with
subjective purity eliminated out of this objective peace, the wolf
and the lamb may feed together, and the lion eat straw like the ox.
Socinian and Arian, Calvinist and Arminian, Episcopalian and
Presbyterian, have another Pentecost of united hands and hearts,
and bury their animosities and their faiths under the dead letter
of a meaningless and uninterpreted Bible. What applies to the
standard as a whole will also apply to its several parts. We need
not inquire in what sense any adherent takes the Scripture asser-
tion, “ Whatsoever is not of faith is sin,” or the maxim, “ First
pure then peaceable.”
It might have been thought incredible that any minister of the
Free Church in Victoria should lend himself to such an argument.
The whole Free Church position is stultified by it. The parties


separated by the disruption held the same standards up to the point
of disunion. Each of them retains the same standards now, or, if
the Free Church has adopted additional symbols, these are ex-
pressly designed to do the very thing which this theory condemns
and scouts. The later standards are designedly framed to ascertain
the sense in which the older ones are held. The argument is
equally inconsistent with the formalities observed in granting
license to preach. The candidate is examined by the Presbytery,
up and down, in all the subjects embraced in the Confession of
Faith. Questions are addressed to him, and discourses prescribed,
the very object of which is to ascertain his subjective rendering of
the Church standards, and any student found defective in his
theology is warned of his shortcomings. Some have their studies
even continued for a further period, when their views expressed in
answer to the examination are found to fall short of the doctrines
of the standards. The following passage from Pearson’s Essay on
Infidelity occurs in the chapter on “ Indifferentism or the denial of
mans responsibility “ It will also be found that in societies pro-
fessedly religious, where the dry skeleton of a creed remains, but
where men nominally adhering, and others avowedly opposing, are
gathered under one ecclesiastical organization around it; the
doctrine of responsibility in its high import, is either denied or
fluctuating and feeble. Wherever religious belief comes to be
regarded as an accident of the mind, just as color is of the hair of
the head, or wherever responsibility though admitted is languid,
doctrinal articles are counted as of little worth ; the standards are
either deserted or friends and foes proclaim a truce, and shake
hands around them, and the distinction between the Church and
the world, a distinction so much insisted on in the New Testa-
ment, disappears and is lost.”
The writer holds that the sentiments publicly and officially
expressed by Committees and Deputations of the Synod of Vic-
toria, are fairly to be taken into consideration, conjunctly with the
terms of the articles of union. Relatively to the basis, these
reiterated sentiments stand in the same analogy as the oral exami-
nation of the student to his acceptance of the Confession of Faith.
The examination may stultify the profession of adherence to the


standard, and then the students progress is arrested. A similar
inconsistency of sentiment on the part of the Synod of Victoria,
with regard to the articles of union, justifies the Free Synod in
arresting the negotiation.
In short, the Synod of Victoria would enter the proposed union
with the same privileges as the Free Synod ; equally entitled to
direct the policy and interpret the standards of the united Church.
If its interpretation be incompatible with the rendering of the
Free Synod, the Church so constituted would have no authorita-
tive standard, and no intelligible deliverance on the subject.
Each of the two Synods is at this moment proclaiming to the
world that no change has come over its policy or principles.
Each is resenting the imputation of faltering in its course or for-
saking its former faith. Neither confesses error in its past acting,
nor promises reformation for the future. And yet it is notorious,
that error and sin there have been ; that repentance and amend-
ment there should be somewhere. If the Colonial disruption was
a pure mistake, the Free Church owes a debt of contrition to the
Synod of Victoria and the whole community. If sympathy with
suffering integrity was due to the Free Church from all her Colo-
nial adherents, the apathy of the Synod of Victoria has been a
betrayal of sacred trusts. That one of these alternatives has become
a realised fact, history will not allow any one to doubt, and the
history of the union negotiations shows as unequivocally that no
acknowledgment of wrong has been made by one side or by the
other, before God or before man. “ Now therefore there is utterly
a fault ” among us, because of this thing.
The effect of disunion in the Church operates sadly upon the
world. No one but should breathe the Saviour’s prayer, “ that
they all may be one, that the world may believe that thou hast
sent me.” But the world would be long enough in regarding as
one, two churches which had buried their disagreements in the
grave of mutual honesty. To hold up articles, and call them a
basis of union, when they embrace the very doctrines on which the
parties differ—when the symbol to which they both subscribe gives
expression to the subject of disagreement rather than of consent—
the world would rejoice in such a union, but would never believe


in it. A union of interests not of principles, the world would hail
it as a tribute to its own spirit. The truth and glory of God
would have neither part nor lot in such a matter.
The union of the churches will he the union of like precious
things—the union of fusion—in a furnace—by disunion as well as
amalgamation—by the exhalation of foreign ingredients, in order
to the approximation of the true affinities. To fulfil God’s pur-
poses man’s way is to bring down the divine standard to his own
imperfections, God’s is to purge the imperfection into conformity
with the standard. To argue from the level at which he stands
is man’s weakness; to see from the height ot his own omnipotence
is God’s prerogative. How is uniformity of view ever to be gained
by creatures so constituted? Is the desperate question of unbelief
reclining on the experience of six thousand years ? Is anything
too hard for the Lord ? is the silence commanded upon every pre-
sumptuous doubt from the secret place of the eternal counsels ?
“ Hear the word of the Lord, 0 ye nations, and declare it in the
isles afar off, and say, he that scattered Israel will gather him and
keep him as a shepherd doth his flock. The Lord which gathereth
the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather others to him besides
those that are gathered. Thy watchman shall lift up the voice;
with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to
eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion. Thus saith the Lord
God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do
it for them: I will increase them with men like a flock.
WILSON, MACKINNON AND FAIRFAX, GENERAL STEAM PRINTING OFFICES, COLLINS STREET,




