

COCKATOO ISLAND.
1858.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Legislative Council.
REPORT
FROM
THE BOARD OF INQUIRY
INTO THE MANAGEMENT OF
COCKATOO ISLAND;
WITH
APPENDICES A TO E.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL,
AND
ORDERED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE PRINTED,
24th March, 1858.
Sydney:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM HANSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
PHILLIP-STREET.
1858.
c 1—A


COCKATOO ISLAND.
1858.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
2UBfelatt&e (Council.
REPORT
TROM
THE BOARD OF INQUIRY
INTO THE MANAGEMENT OE
COCKATOO ISLASD;
WITH
APPENDICES A TO E.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OP PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL,
AND
OEDEKED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE FEINTED,
2 ith March, 1858.
PRINTED BY WILLIAM HANSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
PHILLIP-STREET.
1858.
c I—A




THE COLONIAL SECRETARY to THE HONORABLE SIR W. W. BURTON.
75. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, \2tli October, 1857.
Sir,
The management of the Convict Establishment on Cockatoo Island has for a
considerable time been the occasion of much anxiety and frequent embarrassment to the
Government.
Some of the difficulties which surround the question have doubtless arisen from the
endeavour to combine the two objects of making the island a penal establishment, and at the
same time of employing the convicts on executing a great public work.
Had the officers employed on the island cordially co-operated with the Government
in endeavouring to accomplish these combined objects, it is believed that they need not have
been considered antagonistic; but, unfortunately, from want of a judicious exercise of the
powers respectively confided to them, the course adopted by these gentlemen has not unfre-
quently tended to impede rather than to promote the carrying out the instructions of the
Government. Instead of devoting their time and attention to the duties immediately
devolving upon them, the public service has been obstructed by their complaints and charges
against each other, and the Government is continually appealed to upon points which ought
never to have arisen.
The Legislature has, upon more than one occasion, made the conduct of the estab-
lishment the subject of investigation, and Boards of Inquiry have been repeatedly appointed
by the Executive Government, with a view of obtaining suggestions for remedying a state of
things, which, notwithstanding, continues apparently without improvement, so far as a
judgment can be formed upon the matter.
In addition to this, public attention has of late been drawn in a marked manner to
the establishment; and it would appear to be an imperative duty upon the Government to
ascertain, by a thoroughly searching inquiry, whether the system pursued there is so ineffi-
cient as is alleged, and whether the officers in charge do or do not faithfully perform their
duties.
This inquiry, it is desirable, should also be of the most comprehensive character, in
order that the Government may be fully informed upon the subject previous to the adoption
by them of those measures which, in the opinion of the Board, will be necessary for correcting
any irregularities which may exist in the island, as well as for expediting the completion of
the Dry Dock, without interfering with the proper coercion and discipline of the convicts.
From the interest which you took in the question of secondary punishments when
you formerly occupied the official position of Judge of the Supreme Court in this Colony,
the Government is desirous of availing itself of your services on the present occasion, and I
have now the honor to request that you will consent to preside over the investigation which
it is proposed shall take place. Should you accede to this application, I beg to state that
Captain Ward, R.E., and E. C. Merewether, Esq., Clerk of the Executive Council, will be
associated with you as your colleagues in the Board. While the Government in no way
desires to limit the scope of the inquiry, it is suggested that the chief points to which your
attention should be directed, are, whether the conduct of the officers and servants upon the
island has or has not been such as to merit the displeasure of the Government; whether the
management of the establishment generally by the Superintendent is in accordance with the
regulations laid down for his guidance ; whether the penal discipline of the island is main-
tained and impartially carried out; and whether the regulations, generally, are sufficient for
the objects contemplated. If they are not, then what modification of them can be suggested.
If the labors of the Board can, in your opinion, be facilitated by a reference to any
documents in my office, or to the Reports of previous Boards of Inquiry, they shall be placed
before you; and I shall be happy to co-operate with you in any other manner in which the
important inquiry entrusted to you may be furthered.
I have, &c.,
CHARLES COWPER.
The Honorable Sir W. W. Burton,
&e., &c., &c.


1858.
INQUIRY INTO THE MANAGEMENT OF COCKATOO ISLAND.
REPORT.
The Board of Inquiry into the Management of Cockatoo Island, to The Honorable
the Principal Secretary, reporting the result of their investigation.
Sir,
In compliance with the desire expressed in your letter to our President, dated
the 12th October, 1857, we at once undertook and entered upon the inquiry committed to
us respecting the management of the Convict Establishment at Cockatoo Island.
We visited the island upon two occasions, and personally inspected the works in.
progress, —the mess-room, wards, cook-room, dormitories, and cells, and also the gardens. We
inspected the convicts in their gangs, inquired into their complaints, examined the office-books
and several witnesses, and we have devoted much time and attention to the subject.
For, long as will doubtless appear the time between the dates of your letter and of
this, no delay has been allowed which, with a due sense of the importance of the inquiry
committed to us, could have been avoided; but such very serious accusations have been
brought before us by several persons, impugning the management of the penal discipline of
the convicts by the present Superintendent, and involving so many points for our considera-
tion, that we could not deem any but the most searching investigation of every such accusation
would be satisfactory to the Government.
We have accordingly received the statements of every person who has appeared in
support of the charges brought against the Superintendent, and where those charges have
not rested on the personal knowledge of the party bringing them forward, we have examined,,
and that very critically, as will be apparent to you on reference to the minutes of evidence
taken, every person who has been named to us as capable, upon fair and established principles,,
of sustaining the charges.
This course has necessarily involved frequent adjournments of our Board, in order to
give parties the opportunity of attending.
The important interests also of the Superintendent, his character and position,
demanded that our proceedings should be conducted with a due regard to his convenience,
and especially that sufficient time should be allowed to him to prepare his answer to such of
the matters brought before us as in our opinion required explanation or answer.
In all the proceedings the Superintendent was, on his application, assisted by his
legal adviser, and it is satisfactory to us to feel assured, as we do, that whilst every facility
has been afforded by us to parties accusing him to prove their allegations, the utmost latitude
has been given to the Superintendent and his legal adviser in conducting and preparing his
defence.
The management of an establishment like that at Cockatoo Island, where the two
objects of penal discipline and the execution of a great public work are combined and
carried out by two independent departments, entertaining opposite views of their relative
duties, and each inclined to arrogate superiority, might, we think, at the inception have
produced the inconveniences to the public service which have been so frequently brought
to the notice of tlm and have occasioned so much public concern. We concur,
however, in your opinion, that such a state of things ought not to have been, and further
that their continuance ought not to have been so long permitted to be, as they have been, a
continual source of annoyance and complaint.
We are decidedly of opinion that no collision of views ought to be entertained by the
heads of the respective departments, and that there is not, and really ought not to be, any
* 17—B incompatibility


incompatibility in combining the two objects of penal discipline and employment of the
convicts on the public works under an independent department.
The Superintendent of Convicts may perfectly discharge his duties in all that concerns
the safe keeping, discipline, and good order of the convicts; and the Civil Engineer is
responsible for their labor being properly applied when duly assigned over to him and his
overseers, and we see no reason, except such as arises from unrestrained infirmity of temper,
or arbitrary assumption of undue authority or interference, on either part, which should
cause them to clash in the conduct of their separate duties.
Such, notwithstanding the papers laid before us by your command, sufficiently shew
to have taken place, and to have given rise to the frequent intervention of Government.
In so far as these matters are concerned, we are happy in being able to state that
this very reprehensible state of things, by which doubtless the progress of the dock and
other works has been materially impeded, no longer exists.
Captain Mann, whose zeal and assiduity we think to be worthy of every commendation,
and who has unquestionably had serious difficulties to contend with, after enumerating
various causes of complaint which formerly existed, and especially of “ men having been
“ taken off the works at a critical period,” of which he complained to the Government, and
which was investigated and reported upon by a Board, adds, “ nothing has occurred of a like
character since that report.”
Several persons have presented themselves before the Board, avowing themselves to
be the authors of various letters and papers referring to the management of the island*
published in the Empire newspaper, on several dates between the 26th September and the
7th of October, in the last year. The chief of these were Mr. Parkes, the proprietor of the
Empire; Mr. Thomas, who was the Resident Engineer on Cockatoo Island, under Captain
Mann, for nearly four years, and the Reverend John Pendrill, who was one of the Chaplains
from July, 1856, to the end of March, 1857; Mr. Richard Thompson, formerly Reporter to
the Sydney Morning Herald, also attended the Board as the author of a letter which
a ppeared in the Empire newspaper of the 6th October; and Mr. Christopher Murray, as a
witness to several of the facts stated by the before mentioned persons, himself also the writer
of a letter in the Empire newspaper of the 7th October.
Mr. Parkes stated, that he admitted the several letters above-mentioned into the
Empire newspaper on the dates mentioned, and also others before and subsequently, “on
ascertaining who were the writers, and, in the greater number of instances, on having first
“ a personal interview with them ; ” and, with the permission of those writers, Mr. Parkes
communicated their name 3 to the Board, as Charles Robertson, senior, Bleak
opposite Cockatoo Island, the Reverend John Pendrill, Mr. J. H. Thomas, Mr. Richard
Thompson, and Mr. Christopher Murray, who was formerly one of the boat’s crew, or a
constable on Cockatoo Island.
Mr. Parkes also stated, that “ numerous applications or representations had reached
“ him throughout a series of years, both as Editor of a public journal and as a Member of
“ the old Legislative Council and a Member of the Legislative Assembly,” and he produced
three letters as instances of such communications, the two first from a person who had been
formerly a convict on the island, and having been Sub-Editor to the Sydney Morning Herald,
was slightly known to him, now holding a ticket-of-leave at Bathurst, the other from a person of
the same class, who was not personally known to him, holding a ticket-of-leave at Drayton,
Darling Downs.
Mr. Parkes having been called upon to afford evidence “ concerning the facts par-
« ticularly referred to in the leading article of the Empire of the 3rd October,” stated, in
general terms, that, according to his view, “ the island is under very improper management;
“ that the Superintendent, who has the general management of the island, does not possess
“ the qualities that are absolutely requisite in the conduct of a great penal e. blishment
“ exclusively for the punishment and reformation of criminals;” but he products no fact
within bis own personal knowledge, excepting one, which he detailed to the Board, in support
of the statements he had placed before the public.
It was as follows, in Mr. Parkes’ words :—“ I will state how I first became acquainted
“ with Mr. Ormsby. Some years ago, I should think twelve years ago—it may perhaps be
“ more —i held a subordinate situation in the Custom House, and was entrusted with the
“ charge


charge of a ship, in the capacity I then filled. On that occasion I saw Mr. Ormsby for
“ tiro first time. lie came to visit the captain of the ship; he dined there, and remained,
tl as far as my recollection serves me, till near midnight; and I had an opportunity of seeing
“ that he was indulging in wine or spirits, or both, nearly the whole of the time. Towards
“ midnight, or between the hours of eleven and twelve, a police boat, manned by four hands,
“ came to take Mr. Ormsby home. As I have already stated, I then filled a very subordinate
“ situation ; but the thought that came into my mind was, that if I were the Governor Mr.
“ Ormsby should not be Superintendent of that island five minutes longer. From that time
“ to this I have never had any personal acquaintance with Mr. Ormsby, but I have been in
“ a position to hear much concerning him, and have had opportunities of observing his
“ conduct; for I habituate myself to observing the conduct of everybody who occupies a
“ public position ; and what I have seen of Mr. Ormsby, leads me to the impression that he
“ is one of the most completely unfit men to fill the situation that could be found.”
In justification of an article in the Empire of the 3rd October, of which Mr. Parkes
avowed himself the writer, and in which there is this sentence, —“ If illiteracy, the most
“ confined views on social questions, a self-indulgent disposition, ungovernable passions, and
“ violent language, were qualities desirable in the superintendence of a penal establishment,
" then Mr. Ormsby would be the very model of a gaoler.” Mr. Parkes stated that “in the
“ month of July, or early in August last, the present dispenser of Cockatoo Island, Mr. J. F.
“ Peers, called upon him, and asked his advice how he should act with reference to Mr.
“ Ormsby’s conduct towards him, on a particular day, a little previous, on which occasion
“ Mr. Ormsby called him a ‘ damned liar, a damned scoundrel, and a damned pimp” and
Mr. Parkes handed in the original letter of Dr. West, of Mr. John Duff, and of Mr. Ormsby; ■
the two former to prove the fact of the use of improper language towards Peers, the last as
shewing Mr. Ormsby’s illiteracy.
As to other facts in the leading article above referred to, Mr. Parkes furnished the
Board with the names of several persons, his informants, whom he desired should be examined.
Those whose attendance could be obtained have been critically and carefully examined; and
we will now inform you of the conclusions to which these examinations have led.
The first charge inquired into was that of an alleged desecration of the Lord’s Day on
Sunday, the 20th of September last. It purported to have been made by the father
of a family, and was in the following termsOn Sunday last myself and family were at
“ afternoon prayers, when at a distance of nearly a quarter of a mile wo were disturbed by
" a frightful yelling, and hallooing. On going outside my impression was that Cockatoo
" Island was in a state of mutiny; but this suspicion was removed on there being no
“ further noise. On calm evenings I hear most distinctly singing and choruses until a
“ late hour, certainly late for such a place.
“ I am disposed to think that such breaches of discipline occur only in the absence of
“ the Head Gaoler, for it is my impression did he permit such occurrences to take place on
“ the island during his presence, that he is anything but a proper person to have charge of a
“ place intended for reformation.”
Mr. Parkes gave the name of the person who furnished him with that piece of
information as " Charles Robertson, Senr., Bleak Cottage, opposite Cockatoo Island.” We
have not obtained the evidence of this person, Mr. Parkes “ not having been able to com-
“ municate with him,” and our endeavour to find him having failed, the answer to our inquiry
being that “ no such person or address is known ;” but we have examined every person capable
of giving us information on the subject, and the result of our inquiry is, that there has been
singing on the Lord’s Day, though not during hours appropriated to Divine Worship, as well
as on other days during leisure hours, but it has not been shewn to have been of so disorderly
a character as to amount to a desecration of the sacred day.
We refer on this point to the evidence of the Revd. Mr. Pendrill, the Revd. Mr.
Kenyon, the Revd. Mr. Agnew, Mr. Peers, and Mr. Easton.
Mr. Thomas, indeed, who resided on the island nearly four years in the capacity of a
Civil Engineer, although he says he was not on the island on the particular Sunday, alluded
to, speaks to “ great noise in the camp, hallooing, and so forth, in fact almost every Sunday,
“ similar to that referred to in this charge, during the whole four years he was on the
" island, generally in the afternoon or evening when they were all mustered, and in the wards
“as well.”
In


In his second examination, on the part of Mr. Ormsby, he says that “ he did not
“ complain of those noises.”
Mr. Ormsby’s explanation of the particular instance alluded to is contained in his
letter to the Visiting Magistrate, Bth October, 1857, as follows, —“ The disturbance herein
“ mentioned arose as follows,—One old man in the yard seized a belt from another, who was
“ swinging it about, and run away with it; he was chased by the party from whom he took the
“ belt, and the rest of the prisoners laughed to sec two old men running one after the other
“ There was no frightful yelling or hallooing, as stated; the noise did not continue one
“ minute.” With respect to the singing and choruses —at eight o'clock the men are-
“ all in bed, and from that hour they are not allowed to make the least noise.”
In that explanation Mr. Ormsby is fully borne out by Mr. Peers, the dispenser.
The next charge inquired into was one brought by the Revd. Mr. Pendrill, one of
Mr. Parkes’ informants, who avowed himself a? the writer of a letter in the Empire
newspaper, dated 2nd October, signed “ Witness,” —namely, as to “ the police having often
“ applied for the regulations of Government, but not having been able to obtain them,
“ though as frequently promisedand “ as to Gleadall, a constable on the establishment,
“ having been dismissed on a charge of drunkenness, although four or five persons swore that
‘‘ he was not drunk, and the general impression amongst the police at the time that he was
“ really discharged because he had ventured to insist on seeing the regulations, and that the
“ drunkenness alleged was merely a pretext for punishing for a reasonable request not
“ punishable in law.”
It is established by the evidence, without a doubt, that the Inspector and other
officers of the police have applied for and have been refused a copy of the regulations, and
that, we think, upon very improper grounds. Gleadall was one who applied and was so
refused.
Inspector Dunning states the same fact, as well as Christopher Murray ; and we are
concerned to find not only the Superintendent but the then Visiting Magistrate also, accord-
ing to this evidence, evading the very proper requ st; and that the latter said in answer,—
■ “ Your duty is to obey orders,” or “ the regulations are, you are to obey all lawful orders,”
or “ you have an Inspector or Sergeant to go tothus passing by the superior orders of the
Government comprised in the regulations, and venturing to substitute for them such orders
as the police should from time to time receive from the Superintendent.
The fact is, that a change had been made in the instructions in placing the police
under the Visiting Magistrate, instead of, as before, under the Superintendent; and the
refusal to furnish a copy of the regulations to the Inspector of Police, when such were
demanded, we consider to have been very detrimental to the public service and highly
censurable.
The police were, by those regulations, in a great degree rendered independent of the
island authorities, and they were required to perform duties which have been wholly
neglected, it is not too much to say in consequence of the withholding from them the
regulations. We refer particularly to the duties of preventing persons from landing without
the proper permission, of searching boats landing at the island, and the prevention of spirits
and other articles being landed from the boots without the requisite authority.
So, as to the drilling, discipline, and frequent inspection of the Police Force, which was
deemed by the Government to be essential to their effectiveness; the former seems to have
been put an end to by the Superintendent taking it into his own hands, and discouraging it
for the future.
Finally, on this point the police have not done their duty in many respects; and,
we should say they have been led into that neglect—first, by not having the regulations to
refer to as occasion should occur; and, secondly, by being employed in the boat on private
purposes in a manner never contemplated by the Government, and so rendering a relaxation
or neglect of their proper duties a necessary consequence.
Whether Gleadall was dismissed in reality as a troublesome person, who had insisted
upon prosecuting persons for disorderly conduct, whom the Superintendent did not desire
should be prosecuted, and had demanded a copy of the regulations which the Superintendent
chose to withhold, or for drunkenness, involves other and more grave considerations; since,
jn the former case, the Reverend Mr. Kenyon must have conspired with Mr. Ormsby to
bring


bring a false charge, and thereby to impose upon Mr. North, and the latter must have bees
imposed on to give a false judgment, a conclusion to which we could not come but upon
clear and unexceptionable evidence, and certainly not upon the vague suspicion of Jjaspeotftr
Dunning, who, because he sees Mr. Ornisby and Mr. Kenyon talking together, suspects thjg
Mr. Ormsby is urging Mr. Kenyon to prosecute. We have perused the depositions taken
before Mr. North, and have no doubt whatever of the truth of the charge against jjleadall,
and, consequently, of the propriety of his dismissal.
It was next insinuated, rather than directly alleged, that prisoners have been
arbitrarily and improperly sentenced to the cells for “insolence” (an undefined offence) to
the Superintendent or Overseers, and that the prisoners are treated in a manner to provoke
insolence.
It is sufficient to say, as to this charge, that no complaint was made to i|f|iby tlto
convicts when, upon two occasions, we visited Cockatoo Island, and invited the expniuion rf
their complaints, if any existed ; that, although there were a few other causes of-dissatis-
faction amongst them, no person on the establishment was charged with arbitrary,.or over-
bearing, or unjust, or insolent behaviour, towards them; and no complaint was made of any
one having been unjustly sentenced to the cells.
Neither was evidence brought before us of any such instance.
We quote the evidence of Mr. Brown, the Deputy Superintendent, on the subject.
He says —“ I have known prisoners to be confined to the cells till the Visiting Magistrate
“ came, for insolence to the Superintendent, myself, and others. The Visiting Magistrate
“ came once a-week, and inquired into the cases. I have known, on one or two occasions, a
“ man confined for five days before the Visiting Magistrate saw him, and decided his case-
" This occurred in more than one instance. When men have been so confined, they have
'' been reported next morning to the Visiting Magistrate. I have known of no instance of
'(overbearing conduct by the Superintendent or officers to the prisoners, and all insolence
“ to the officers has been unprovoked.”
An instance was indeed alleged by Mr. Pendrill to have occurred in the case of a
Chinaman, named Tan, and we inquired minutely into the circumstances of it. “ Tan
“ was stated to have been desirous of making some complaint to the Visiting Magistrate, and
" requested that the interpreter might be sent to the island. Each week he was promises!
“ that he should come, but weeks passed away, and he came not. At last the poor man
" lost all patience, and, in the fullness of his disappointment, he threw down his tools,
“ exclaiming, 'lnterpreter no come —me no work.’ ”
Mr. Ormsby’s explanation of this case is, that “ he was sent to the cells for refusing
“to work; he desired to make a complaint, and an interpreter was sent for. He made his
" complaint to the Visiting Magistrate, who investigated it on the 22nd April, 1857. His
“ complaint was that he was convicted of an offence he was not guilty of, and that his former
" master, Mr. Sandeman, owed him money. He had asked for an interpreter several
'' times before one was obtained, and before he was confined in the cells.”
Mr. Thomas’ evidence shows how greatly the facts of this man’s case have been per-
verted. '' The man was at work in a gang, and had been so at work until the middle of the
" day, when he threw down his pick, saying something in Chinese, ” which Mr. Thomas could
not understand, and walked away. Mr. Thomas positively denies that he said the words in
English, “ No interpreter come—me no work.” ;
Mr. Brown’s evidence is quite conclusive. He says—" I remember Tan refusing to
" work on three occasions ; once because a man at the hand-cart would not pull; on another
" occasion when other Chinamen were leaving the island, with whom he wished to go. He
" asked for an interpreter. I took him to the Superintendent, who satisfied him that he
“ should see the interpreter, and he went to work'.' On the third occasion he declined to’
" work, because he was not allowed to go away with four other Chinamen who had been sen#
" on the island with him.”
We are of opinion that there is no reason for imputing his confinement to the cells as
“ on questionable grounds.”
Next, Mr. Pendrill charges, that “ when prisoners are consigned to the cells, the
" Superintendent refuses to allow them to attend Divine Service on the Sabbath,” and in his
evidence he states an instance in which they were so refused.
*l7-0 This


This refusal does not appear to have been the unauthorised act of Mr. Ormsby; but we
think the restriction an unnecessary one, and that men in the cells ought to be permitted to
attend Divine Service, under arrangements which might easily be made for their security and
■ non-intercourse with the other prisoners.
It was nest stated that “ the prisoners complain that their letters are read aloud in
“ the office, and made a matter of jest, and that the contents of their letters to their friends
“ are thus made known to their fellow prisoners.”
Mr. Ormsby’s answer on this point is unsatisfactory.
We have no doubt of the truth of that complaint, and Mr. Thomas states an instance
of very reprehensible behaviour of the Superintendent respecting a letter of a convict which
was read aloud in the office, and a laugh raised by its contents.
Avery grave accusation is next brought by Mr. Pendrill, upon a statement apparently
made to himself “ by one of the prisoners, that a case of ‘ mortal sin ’ had been committed in
“one of the wards; that if he brought it under the notice of the authorities he would be
“ condemned to the cells; that a case had previously occurred, and the offender had not been
“ punished, though the facts were known to the administration.”
We have inquired very strictly into this matter, and find that no portion of the
statement is borne out by the evidence. We are of opinion—first, that there existed no
ground whatever for the pretended apprehension of the supposed informant of Mr. Pendrill;
secondly, that no case of the nature stated was ever known to the administration in which
the offender was not brought before the Visiting Magistrate and punished; and, lastly, that
there is no ground or pretence whatever for imputing to the Superintendent or Visiting
Magistrate any remissness, negligence, or indifference, on so disgraceful a subject; on the
contrary, the evidence, particularly that of Mr. Brown, the Deputy Superintendent, warrants
us in saying that Mr. Ormsby has been particularly vigilant and careful in separating sus-
pected persons, in placing young persons especially out of reach of contamination in separate
dormitories, and we have found especial reason, after a very searching inquiry, to commend
his conduct in this respect.
Mr. Pendrill’s statement rests upon what he was told by a prisoner, whose name he
did not give to the Board, although he handed in a list of other persons whom he desired
should be called in support of other of his statements.
Mr. Thomas was examined on this point, and he states that he had heard from people
on the island of such a charge having been made with reference to two men who absconded and
concealed themselves—that they did so for the purpose of committing an unnatural offence.
We have thus a clue to the case alluded to, and the real facts appear in the evidence
of Peers, the dispenser. It was that of two persons named Clarke and Roberts, the former
aged about 27, the latter about 17; they absented themselves for about twenty-four hours,
as was supposed for the purpose of making their escape. When taken, Roberts was so ill,
from exposure to wet and cold, that it was necessary to take him into the hospital, where he
remained “for a month or two at least.” His condition was such that he could not be
punished, and for that reason the other prisoner was exempted also.
Peers says, in answer to a question, “ Do you know of any reason for supposing that
“ they concealed themselves for the purpose of committing a nameless offence ? No, indeed
“ I do not.”
Easton speaks of the case by rumour only.
Mr. Brown, Assistant Superintendent, says,—“ I remember the circumstance of two
“ men concealing themselves on the island, but there was no charge preferred against them,
“ except that of hiding to effect an escape ; no other charge was hinted against them by any
“ one at that time.” Mr. Brown’s evMence is so conclusive upon the general charge brought
against the Superintendent of gross neglect, almost amounting to connivance in offences of
this nature, that we request your particular attention to it.
He says,—“ I remember one circumstance of suspicion of an unnatural offence. Un-
“ locking the wards one morning, it was reported to me that one man had gone into another’s
“ berth. The case was reported to the Superintendent, and by him to the Visiting Magis-
“ trate, and the charge dismissed, as without foundation.”
“ It was never reported to me during my stay on the island of such an offence having
“ been committed in the wards, or elsewhere.”
“ There


“ There was a case of suspicion of unnatural offence occurred about a year ago, arising
“ from a man approaching another in one of the wards and laying his hand upon him ; the
“ man who approached the other was knocked down by him. The case was reported to me,
“ and by me to the Superintendent, and by him to the Visiting Magistrate, who dealt with
“ it, and punished the man by imprisonment in the cells. That man has ever since been
" made to sleep in a separate cell.
“ This is the only case I recollect of any suspicion of an unnatural offence. The
“ separate dormitories seen by the Board on their visit are used for young lads and feeble
“ old men. There are four persons now using them, the Chinaman Tan, one old man, and
“ two young men under twenty years of age.
“ I have never known a man punished for reporting another for an unnatural offence,
<l and I have never known a case of unnatural offence occurring, and it is therefore not true
“ that such a case has occurred, and the man not punished.”
Next, Mr. Pendrill charged, that " A certain part;/ was accused of appropriating the
“ rations of the prisoners; that the facts could not be denied; and the defence was that the
“ prisoners were consenting to the appropriation. That to obtain this consent the votes of
“ the prisoners were canvassed. They were told that it was ' a Government question,’ and I
“ understood that they were, by way of retaliation for their opposition, placed in the cells on
“ the first opportunity.” It was not without much hesitation, and once refusing to answer
the question of the Board, that Mr. Pendrill at length stated that the person alluded to as
“ a certain party” was the Superintendent.
The case had been stated to him by a prisoner, not named, under confinement, and in
irons, as a ringleader; on one occasion, when a number of prisoners had refused to work,
“I was (he said) put in unjustly, because the Superintendent has a down upon me.” On
subsequent inquiry this prisoner was released as not having been concerned in the transaction.
He was Mr. Pendrill’s authority.
Several points are involved in this accusation. First, whether the Superintendent
slid upon any occasion appropriate rations of the prisoners to his own use.
Secondly, whether the prisoners were canvassed on the subject, and their consent
taken to its appropriation.
Thirdly, whether any prisoner was punished by way of retaliation for his opposition
to that course.
There are two circumstances stated in the evidence which have given rise to this part
of the charge.
First, that the refuse homminy left after the men’s meals has been applied to the
feeding the poultry of the Superintendent, and other free persons on the island; and, secondly,
that a piece of good meat was found among the refuse.
The application of the refuse homminy to such purposes was brought to the notice of
the Visiting Magistrate then, 11. H. Browne, Esq., so long since as 1849, who directed, by a
written order, that the refuse homminy should be thrown away, and this gentleman says, that
the usual way of doing this was, throwing it into the water at the back of the kitchen on the
north side.
It appears to have been accordingly so disposed of for about two years, when the very
proper order of the Magistrate came to be disregarded, and the homminy was again distributed
amongst the free persons, as before.
Mr. Ormsby remarks in his answer, that the poultry, “ if driven up to the place
“ where it was thrown away, might have taken it,” meaning, that is, without infringing the
order of Mr. Browne ; but we apprehend not, for it was thrown into the water, and if the
fowls could have got at it, there would not have been any necessity for what certainly took
place —an abandonment of the order —and the re-distribution of the homminy, with the
consent, or at the request of the prisoners.
In February, 1857, however, this appropriation caused discontent amongst the
prisoners, who complained that the homminy was badly boiled by the cooks, in order that it
might be rejected and given to the Superintendent’s fowls. Mr. North, the Visiting Magis-
trate, inquired into the matter, and found the homminy bad, but stated that he had no
reason to suspect it had been wilfully spoiled. Mr. North ordered it to be thrown into the
sea, to avoid suspicion for the future.
There


There were two other instances alleged of wrongful dealing with the rations. First,
a piece of good beef cooked was found in the refuse basket, and brought to notice by a
prisoner attached to the kitchen. How it came there could not be ascertained. Our own
opinion, formed on the evidence on that fact of the case, is, that it was designedly put there by
some person, in order to form the foundation for the charge subsequently made, and most
likely was placed there by the person who pointed it out, or by some other with his
knowledge.
It is not shewn in any way that Mr. Ormsby was connected with the transaction.
The other instance was, the underdone ration of a Chinaman being also found in the
refuse basket. ■
The account given by Mr. Brown of all these transactions is doubtless correct, and we
refer you to it as such accordingly. He says, “ the sweepings up after prisoners’ meals of the
homminy and meat used to be distributed among free officers for their fowls.”
“ Henry East once charged the Superintendent with having appropriated prisoners’
“ rations; his charge was that a piece of good meat was put amongst the sweepings for the
Superintendent’s use. It was brought by the Superintendent before the Visiting Magistrate,
“ and as he could not substantiate the charge, he was punished by imprisonment to cells. Up
" to this time (i. e. February, 1857,) the prisoners gave their consent to the sweepings being
“ distributed among free officers, and had helped to collect them. ’
“ I am not aware of any canvassing for votes having occurred as to whether the refuse
“ should be so applied. I know Captain Browne was Visiting Magistrate in 1849, and he
“ ordered the sweepings to be thrown away, and that order was acted upon for about two years.
“ The order was never relaxed by any Magistrate. The infringement of it occurred from
“ the spontaneous wish of the prisoners, communicated to the Superintendent, that the refuse
“ should not be wasted. It then began, by the Superintendent’s order, to be distributed among
“ the free officers, till about nine months ago, when the charge before stated about the piece of
“ meat was made, since then the refuse has been thrown into deep water, and is the practice
“ now. The piece of meat found amond the refuse, before referred to, was good meat,
“ about two pounds weight, cooked.”
“ On another occasion the meat of some Chinaman was underdone, and taken by him to
“ the overseer of the cook house, who changed it for his own. The overseer kept this meat
“ till the morning, when, it having turned bad, he flung it into the refuse.
“ The prisoners when they sent to the Superintendent that they wished the refuse to
“ be distributed were unaminous, as far as I am aware.”
Upon this charge, then, we find that the Superintendent did, of his own authority and
with the consent of the prisoners, without bringing the circumstance to the notice of the
Visiting Magistrate, set aside and disregard the very proper order of Mr. Browne, and did
permit a re-distribution of the refuse to take place, during the whole period about 1851 and
1857.
The abuse and the suspici ; attaching to such a course, one also by which he himself
profited, as well as others, should have led to an opposite conduct iu the Superintendent,
and to a strict adherence to an order which ho was bound to carry into effect.
"VVe think his setting aside that order was highly censurable, and that his doing so
upon the wish or consent of the prisoners, formed not the least exceptionable part of the
proceeding.
There is no evidence to connect him with that consent as inviting or canvassing for
it. Such may, doubtless, have been the representation of some of the prisoners, and there
may have been pretences set up of the kind with Mr. Ormsby’s knowledge, but it must have
been very acceptable to him, or he would not have taken upon himself so 'readily to act
upon it.
As to the last point in the charge, we find no evidence that any prisoner was ever
punished by way of retaliation for refusing to vote for the appropriation. Mr. Thomas
negatives the supposition of there having been any dissent among the prisoners on the
question.
It was next alleged that “ the whole administration of the island is partial and
u unjust; that some, the administration unduly favor, on others it has a perpetual, down,’ ”
that


that “ great criminals are released by undue influence, whilst lesser criminals wanting this
“ pay the full amount of their sentences.” And the case of a prisoner known as “ Old
Fox,” (who was sentenced to fifteen years for murder, but obtained his release before he had
suffered one-fifth of his sentence,) was referred to as an instance of this.
Mr. Brown, Assistant Superintendent, says, upon this point, —“I have no reason to
" believe that Mr. Ormsby’s administration has been partial or unjust, or that he has any
“ favorites, or has a ‘ down’ upon any one.”
“ The several subordinate situations upon the penal establishment are vested in the
“ Superintendent. I have never known favor shown in the exercise of that power.”
With respect to this particular case of “ Old Fox ” —he was discharged by order of
the Governor General, on the recommendation of the Classification Board, and Mr.
Ormsby produced to us the letter of the Colonial Secretary, communicating the decision of!
the Government.
The next charge made by Mr. Pendrill is two-fold, namely : First, that “ the Par-
“ liament provides a boat for the use of the officers of the establishment, or rather, of the
“ gum placed on the estimates for the police at Cockatoo, the pay of four men is set apart
“ for a boat’s crew. They appear on the estimates as policemen, but really are boatmen,
“as they do no police duty. The Superintendent claims the exclusive control of this boat
“ and crew, and endeavors, by making the use of it as uncomfortable and impracticable as pos-
“ sible to others, to secure, as far as possible, the monopoly of it for himself and family—it is
,l used by him for picnics, pleasure parties, and other non-official purposes, not only by day but
“ by night. In order to do this and secure the good-will of the crew, they are permitted indul-
“ gences not allowed to the other police, and the use of the boat is denied to those entitled to
“ use it, to the prejudice of the public service.” Secondly, that “ the Chaplains have been
<l obliged, frequently, to find their way across the bush on foot, and then be ferried over in
“ the guard-boat to the island, because the use of the boat was withheld. On one occasion
“ the Chaplains of the Church of Rome and of the Church of England were sent off from
“ the island in the company of a convict in irons, in an old guard-boat scarcely large
“ enough to hold them, with a stiff breeze blowing, while the proper boat was sent on a pleasure
“ party, consisting of the Superintendent’s family or friends. ”
It is perfectly true that the Superintendent does claim the control over the boat and
the crew, imputed in the first part of this charge, and has largely used the boat for his own
private purposes, for picnics, for pleasure parties, for fishing excursions, and other non-official
purposes, not only by day but by night.
It is perfectly true, also, that the Chaplains of the Churches of Rome and of England
have been put to the inconvenience complained of in the second part of the charge, and that,
in one instance, the proper boat, in which they should have been taken from the island to the
main, was then at the island, but was refused to them, and shortly after despatched on
a picnic excursion.
Mr. Ormsby’s answer to these charges must be left to the consideration of the
Executive Government, who will best decide whether he was warranted by their authority in
the use he has made of the boat.
Mr. Thomas, who was for four years on the island, attached to the department of the
Civil Engineer, says,—“ The officers of the Engineer’s Department could never have the use
“of it; I have been down to the boat and wanted to go to Sydney, and have been refused by
“ the coxswwain.”
“ I have applied to the Superintendent, and he has told me that the boat belonged to
“ his department, and he would not allow any one else to use it.”
“ This has occurred since these new regulations have been in force. I have been
“ refused half a dozen times since these regulations have been in force.”
“ Not on the plea that it was required for the public service—it has been going to
“to town with no one in it but the crew. Upon one particular occasion Mr. Kenyon, the
" Roman Catholic Chaplain, was going to town ; I went down to the wharf, and was going
“ into the boat when they refused to go off with the boat and to take me to town. They
“ said I had no right to the boat.”
“ This occurrence was subsequent to the promulgation of the rules.”
* 17—D Mr.


Mr. Thomas says he has “seen the boat used for parties of pleasure many times;
he has “ seen it go away with stores up Lane Cove, on one occasion up to Five Dock, and on
“ others to various parts of the harbour.” He says —“ I should say from twenty to thirty times
“ I have seen the boat come back from pleasuring. On those occasions Mr. Ormsby or
“ some of his family were in the boat.”
“ I have known it to be away till ten o’clock at night; and it has gone away at nine
“or ten in the morning on parties of pleasure” —“ frequently.”
“ I have even known it later than twelve—as late as one o’clock ; and I have even
“ known it to be away all night, and to come home early in the morning with him.”
“On those occasions, when it has returned so very late at night, or early in the
" morning, it has been employed in these parties of pleasure or picnics.”
“ When Mr. Ormsby was one of the company.”
“ And this has occurred so often as twenty or thirty'tiuies while I was there. I will
“ take one occasion when he went away up Lane Cove; when Mr. Pendrill, the clergyman,
“ came down to the boat, the Inspector, Mr. Dunning, told him that the boat was being
“ repaired. I know that for a fact, for I was on the wharf, and Mr. Dunning told me ho
“ had to tell Mr. Pendrill that story.”
“ I did not hear him tell him, but Mr. Dunning told me that he had to tell him that
“as an excuse. Mr. Pendrill said to me ‘ this boat is being repaired,’ and I said ‘ no, I have
“ 1 seen it go up Lane Cove.’ ”
We beg to refer further to the evidence of this witness on this point, as in the
margin, for other instances of similar employment of the boat.
The use of the boat for private purposes, as for picnics, parties of pleasure, going to
Sydney to the theatre, and to evening parties, is also spoken to by Dunning —-see his evidence.
He says farther —“ On several occasions when the boat has had no other duty to do, when
“ there has been no officer coming to the island, advantage has been taken of the day to send
“ the boat’s crew to cut wood, or to fish.”
There was a net bought by subscription of Mr. Ormsby and others, the free persons
on the island, amongst whom were the police, and the boat was used to go fishing with this
net, manned with the crew and other parties belonging to the police, “ at first twice a week,
“ afterwards once a week” —the fish were divided on one occasion according to the shares in
the net; afterwards the boat’s crew that went fishing took their shares, and the remainder
the Superintendent got—“ ultimately the net was sold.”
“ Two or three times the boat went to cut wood whilst I have been on the island ; ”
“ the boat’s crew went in the boat for that purpose.” “ The wood was for poles and trellis
“ work for the vines in Mr. Ormsby’s garden.”
The visitors’ boat has been absent all night. “On several occasions Mr. Ormsby has
“ gone to balls, both at Balmain and Sydney, and the boat has been all night away and
“ returned in the morning. That has not been a frequent occurrence.”
He says “he has known the visitors’ boat carry away fowls from the island, and
“ baskets of cabbages brought to the boat by the Superintendent’s convict servants; they
“ were put into the boat with instructions to the coxswain what to do with them.”
Christopher Murray’s evidence as to the employment of the boat for private purposes
is to the same effect. He says, —“ Two Government boats have gone on a fishing excursion on the
“ same day, one conveying the net, the other the party, consisting of Mr. Ormsby and Mr.
“ Davis, Xlth Regiment.” He has seen two boats go on two occasions, and frequently one.
The persons who worked the boats were constables. On Easter Monday, 1856 he
was in Chowder Bay with a pleasure party in young Mr. Ormsby’s boat; the ladies and the
Superintendent were in the visitors’ boat; they were away all day.
He has known the boat to be used in taking poultry to town ; he has seen two baskets
full, they were taken to Cummins’ the poulterer; he has assisted in taking them, and
brought back beef, corn, porter for Mr. Ormsby. He says he has known the small boat sent
for the clergyman when the other was idle, and has known it to be sent for billet-wood for
free men when tbe ration has run short.
John


John Smith, coxswain of the boat, says lie has been coxswain of the visitors’ boat
three years. The boat has been in one instance to the Heads, once to Garden Island, once
to Chowder Bay, and four times up Lane Cove. The party consisting of Mr. Ormsby and
family, and visitors. On such occasions the boat has gone away at lor 2 p.M., returning at 6
or 7 p.m., and once as late as 9 p.M. During two seasons about eight or nine times fishing
with the seine in the guard-boat. Once Mr. Ormsby, his daughters, and . family, and some
Military Officers went in a boat brought by the Officers. “ Three of the police and I drew
“ the seine; the fish were divided among the proprietors of the net.”
He has carried in fowls to Dr. O’Brien, a turkey to Dr. West, and several of Mr.
Ormsby’s friends, from Mr. Ormsby; and has taken poultry to sell to Mr. Cummins about
four times, and received not exceeding fifteen shillings at any one time.
This person also speaks to the same effect, as to the boat going on picnics when
required by the Chaplain, and he sent in the small boat, and to the frequent employment of
the boat in taking Mr. Ormsby’s friends to the island, and him and his family to parties at
Government House, and the Theatre, as late as 12 at night; to having been away from the
island all night, keeping the boat at Sydney; the boatmen then having leave to go to their
families, as also from the afternoons of Sundays till Monday mornings.
In fact there can be no doubt as to the free use made by Mr. Ormsby of the island
boat for his own purposes, and, as in the ease of Mr. Pcndrill, before referred to, when it was
required for the public service.
We have endeavoured to trace the history of the boat service of the island.
During the time Mr. Browne was Visiting Magistrate there was but one boat on the ,
island, namely, the guard-boat. 1
The duty of taking the prisoners and overseers to and fro was managed by the Royal
Engineer’s boat; next, when the Engineer’s Department was placed under Captain Mann,
the Water Police boat was substituted as the means of communication, and must, of course,
have been under the orders of the Water Police or Visiting Magistrate.
When the Superintendent wished to visit Sydney he informed the Magistrate, and ■
requested to have the boat sent for him; iCws sufficiently large to take himself and family,
and he was allowed to use it.
He was not allowed to have the boat for his private business : he applied for per- 1
mission to leave the island, and the Visiting Magistrate sent the boat to bring him to
Sydney and to take him back.
There was no boat attached to the island. The boat which Mr. Browne sent, and in i
which the Superintendent was taken to and fro, “ was to all intents and purposes a Water
Police boat.” It used to go armed with carbines and cutlasses, and everything in the same
way as a boat employed by the police.
The boat was sent for him when he asked leave, even if he went on private business,
but was not at his disposal all the time. Mr. Ormsby complained very much; he thought it
a great hardship to be so completely shut up upon an island of that kind without a boat at ■
his control whenever he thought proper.
Mr. Browne says, “he never asked to take the boat for pleasure pai iies or picnics; ,
" and I am sure I never authorised it.”
Mr. Browne expressed himself very decidedly of opinion against the propriety of a
boat being attached to the island as a visitors’ boat, on account of the danger of the police
who manned the boat, being the medium of communication with the friends of prisoners at
Sydney. Mr. Ormsby and the officers complained of the hardship, but Mr. Browne con-
sidered it essential to the public service.
Captain M'Lerie, who succeeded Mr. Browne as Visiting Magistrate in June, 1851,
and held the office till October, 1856, says, —“ On the days on which he had leave he was
allowed the use of one of the boats —one of the guard-boats—to Sydney and back.”
“ There were then,” says Captain M'Lerie, “ the guard-boat and the visitors’ boat,
“ which remained at the island; the latter required extensive repair, and I applied to the
“ Government for anew boat, which was given. The old one was then repaired and returned
“ as a supernumerary boat, in case of an accident to either of the others.”
(It


(It is remarkable that this boat continues serviceable to this day, and is the one in
which Mr. Pendrill was sent, as complained of by him.)
In Mr. Browne’s time the visitors’ boat was part of the police establishment, and he
had two additional men allowed him for the purpose of the boat.
“ When I took charge that arrangement was radically changed: four men were
“ placed in the boat as a crew, and thenceforward that boat was called ' the visitors’ boat; ’
“ the other boat was called ' the old boat/ and the third ‘ the guard-boat.’ ”
Captain M'Lerie says he remembers the circumstance of Mr. Ormsby asking leave for
the boats to go a-fishing. On more than one occasion “ Mr. Ormsby said the policemen had,
“ in their leisure hours, made a net, and he asked' me would I have any objection to their
“ fishing in the bay in one of the spare boats. I gave him that permission, when the police
“ were not on duty, more than once.” Again —“ There was no rule with regard to the
“ visitors’ boat, but it was perfectly understood that when the boat was not required for the
“ purpose for which it was granted, it was at the service of Mr. Ormsby.”
When he asked for the boat on a certain day, it was left at his disposal for the whole
of that day, “provided it did not interfere with any public duty ”
“ There was no regulation.” “ The boat could not be under my control, for I never
“ saw it except when I visited the island.” “ I left it under his control. I could not have
“ the control when I was in Sydney.”
“ I recognised Mr. Ormsby using the boat when it was not required for the public
“ service.”
“ Without my leave Mr. Ormsby could only use the boat on days when he was
“ authorised by the Governor General to leave the island.”
“ I do not believe Mr. Ormsby left upon any other days than those on which he
“ obtained leave.”
“ It was in my time he went to Chowder Bay.”
“ That was by my permission.”
“ He asked whether, instead of coming to Sydney, he might go to Chowder Bay.”
“ I presume I had the power to give permission.”
Mr. North, who, succeeded Captain M'Lerie as Visiting Magistrate in 1856, says,
’ when he took charge the b.at was used by Mr. Ormsby on his own authority, without asking
permission to use it. He once asked permission to go on a picnic. “ I never knew him to
“ use the island boat for the purpose of picnics.”
Mr. Elyard, the Under Secretary to Government, kindly attended the Board, but wa3
unable to throw any additional light upon the subject. But upon consideration of the evi-
dence of the three gentlemen who have successively filled the office of Visiting Magistrate,
we think that the boat which was during all Mr. Browne’s time, that is up to June, 1851,
under the Visiting Magistrate’s control, as belonging to the Water Police, came afterwards,
on Captain M'Lerie’s appointment, to be attached to the island; and, being manned by
policemen, and the police force being under the Superintendent’s order, the control of the
boat would seem naturally to have fallen upon him ; but still only for the public service.
The circumstance of Ims occasionally asking permission of Captain M'Lerie and Mr.
North for the use of the boat on private purposes, shewed that he did not then claim such a
right whenever it was not absolutely required for the public service.
We can recognise no such right without the authority of Government, and are
accordingly of opinion that the use of the boat in the manner it has been shewn to us to
have been used, was unauthorised, contrary to the general rules of the service, which forbid
the use of public property for private purposes, and highly injurious to the service ; for in
consequence of the liberty taken by Mr. Ormsby, indulgences must have been granted to the
policemen who manned the boat, and whose labor was greatly increased by the use made of
it, to reconcile them to it. And we observe one mode of indulgence to have been the very
frequent opportunities and liberty given to the boat’s crew to spend a considerable part of
their time in Sydney, and we cannot shut our eyes to the facilities thus afforded them of
communicating between prisoners and their friends.
We


"VYe regret that one of our number, Captain Ward, does not concur in these conclu-
sions ; his views upon the matter are expressed in a separate memorandum, which is appended
to this letter, and it will be for the Government to decide to which view the most we’ght
should be attached.
In every point of view, however, we concur in condemning the practice, whether
authorised by the proper authority or not.
But we believe it to have been wholly without that authority.
Partly allied to this subject of the boat service is the complaint of the Rev. Mr.
Pendrill of the course of treatment he experienced on his ministerial visits to the island.
He and the other Reverend Chaplain, Mr. Kenyon, were sent in the small or super-
numerary boat, (the history of which has been before given) in blowing and unfavourable
weather, with also a convict in irons, while the visitors’ boat had, after Mr. Pendrill's
arrival at the island, been sent away on a picnic excursion; and a falsehood was imposed
on Mr. Pendrill, by Dunning and the coxswain, to account for the small boat being used
in this service, viz., that the other boat was being painted, or under repair.
These facts are stated unquestionably by Mr. Pendrill and Mr. Thomas, and sufficiently
admitted by Dunning.
But this was not a solitary instance of discourtesy and disrespect shewn to Mr.
Pendrill in this particular; several other instances are stated in his evidence, to which we
refer in the margin.
We think also that the Rev. Mr. Pendrill was not treated with the respect due to his
sacred office —a remark which applies in part to both the Reverend Chaplains, but chiefly
and personally to Mr. Pendrill.
It appears that at one time Mr. Pendrill, in common, doubtless, with the Rev. Mr.
Kenyon, was on his visits to the island received as a guest by the Superintendent, and
obtained the use of a suitable room in his quarters for retirement and preparing himself for
Divine Service, a courtesy which was put an end to, as Mr. Ormsby states, when “ he became
“ troublesome by interfering with the prisoners, extra his duty as Chaplain, upon which
“ subject Mr. Ormsby spoke to him, and with reference to what he had heard as to his
“ being the medium of communication between them and their friends without his knowledge
“ or authority, that he turned round offensively on him, and from that time he ceased to be
“ an acquaintance of his, and commenced the line of conduct he has since been adopting
“ towards him.”
Being thus dislodged from the Superintendent’s residence, and from a courtesy which
ought, in our opinion, neither to be imposed upon the Superintendent to show, nor the
Chaplain to be dependent upon, Mr. Pendrill resorted to the surgeon’s dispensary, for the
purpose of robing, &c. Mr. Pendrill —to use his own words —was “ turned out of the
“ dispensary,” and informed, through the schoolmaster —who sent a message to him, that
he wished to see him in the school-room—“ that he was to put on his surplice there, and to
4 ‘ go down from there to the place where the service was held.”
Mr. Pendrill, considering the distance inconvenient, “ ordered the gown to be taken
“ down to the Assistant Superintendent’s office, about which there was considerable
“ hesitation,” but at length it was done, and, with that officer’s permission, Mr. Pendrill
continued to robe himself there during his connexion with the island.
The circumstances which led to the rupture between Mr. Pendrill and the Superin-
tendent are related by Mr. Pendrill.
There was a prisoner on the island who had formerly been a parishioner of Mr. Pen-
drill, and under his ministry, and he became an object of interest, as one who felt deeply
his sad and fallen condition, and wept for the state to which his crime had reduced his wife
and family, and besought Mr. Pendrill to visit them.
Mr. Pendrill promised to do so, and he kept his word; he went as a Christian
Minister to comfort the unoffending wife of a prisoner.
There was, however, a policeman there before him, who took notes of what passed;
and when he next visited the island, he says, “ Mr. Ormsby came up to me and said —‘ I
“ ‘ have a charge against you, for carrying messages from prisoners to their families.’ He
* 17—E added


added, that Captain M'Lerie had been informed by a detective that I hal carried a
message from Cockerell to his family.”
The charge was unfounded.
The surveillance thus exercised over a Minister of the Gospel in the exercise of his
duties we think was both unnecessary and improper. The discretion of a gentleman in that
position might, and ought to have been, relied upon, that nothing would be said or done in
any such intercourse contrary to the discipline of the convict establishment. In fact,
however, no charge was made against Mr. Pendrill that his communication was of that
nature.
The arrangements for the performance of the Chaplain’s duties were, however,
defective and unbecoming in every respect; and this remark applies to both the reverend
gentlemen who attended the island as Ministers of Religion.
Not only was a suitable room altogether wanting for retirement, which several hours
stay upon the island rendered imperatively necessary, but neither was there one proper for
the purpose in which either of the reverend gentlemen could see and converse confidentially
with prisoners desiring spiritual comfort and admonition.
The use of the school-room was indeed allotted to the Revd. Mr. Pendrill after much
annoyance and delay and refusal, but it was not a room fit for the purpose; there were men
smoking in the next room, and there was no accommodation.
Mr. Pendrill says,—“ I applied for that room in consequence of having been turned
“ out of the dispensary by Dr. West, T had been in the habit of using it as a vestry on
“ Sunday, but one Sunday Dr. West sent his assistant to request me to leave it, as he said
“ he wished to see his patients there. I left, blit had no place to go to ; I went out and sat
“ on the wall.”
There is other evidence of Mr. Pendrill, relating more particularly these circum-
stances, and shewing the treatment and privation he experienced, and the complete unfitness of
the school-room, to which we especially direct your attention. Enough has perhaps been
stated specifically to shew' that Mr. Pendrill was treated most unbecomingly, and that he had
great reason to complain.
Mr. Thomas, who was employed on the island as Civil Engineer for nearly four years,
one of Mr. Parkes’ informants, and who admitted himself to be the waiter of a letter in the
Empire newspaper of 5th October, signed “ Another Witness,” attended before the
Board, and, in addition to the points on which his evidence has been already stated, instanced
an infringement of the 5th regulation by the Superintendent: namely, “ nor shall any per-
“ son whatever who may have daily business in Sydney be permitted to sleep on the island,
" and it is absolutely necessary that the intercourse between the island and the main should
“ be as much restricted as possible.” That two sons of Mr. Ormsby were resident on the
island who have daily business in Sydney.
This statement is quite true, and moreover that the young men are allowed to keep
their boats on the island ; and one irregularity has certainly arisen from their living in it,
namely, that one of them, a lad of about fourteen years at the time, was, without the
knowledge of his father, instructed in sparring by one of the convicts five years ago.
The residence of these young men with their father was authorized by the late
Governor General Sir Charles Fitz Roy, before the present regulations came in force, and
again by His Excellency the present Governor General, on the Superintendent’s application,,
through the Visiting Magistrate, Captain M'Lerie, after the regulations in December, 1855;
and no irregularity on their part, or any abuse of the privilege beyond the instance just
mentioned, has been shewn to have arisen from their residence with their father.
Next, a charge was made by Mr. Thomas against the Superintendent, in the following
terms : He was asked, “ Did you ever know any act committed by Mr. Ormsby that was
“ unjust or discreditable to the establishment ?” He answered, “ Yes, there was one case
“ where I could not say that he took the cedar, hut we missed a large plank of cedar out of
“ the timber yard; I informed Mr. Ormsby that it had been taken from the Engineer’s
“ stores, and he said, 1 Well, I will make inquiries and see who has’taken it;’ he came out of
“ the gate about a quarter of an hour afterwards and said he had heard one of my own
“ foremen (Mr. Cahill) had got it in his quarters. I went to Mr. Cahill’s quarters and told
“ him


“ him I had heard such a report. He denied that it was true, and I then looked about the
“ premises and found that there was nothing there. I went to Mr. Ormsby and told him
“ Mr. Cahill had not got it: He said, ‘ Never mind, wait a little longer, we will try and
“ ‘ find out who has taken it.’ Some time after that it was brought down from his house,
“ by the gardener, to Mr. Cahill.”
“ Mr. Ormsby must have known it was in his place ”
' “ I spoke to Mr. Ormsby about it on the day it was missed during dinner time,
“ between one and two o'clock.”
“ He was on the island on that day.”
William Augustus Cahill, foreman of works under Captain Mann, being asked about
this circumstance, stated that there was “ a man named Spenser employed in the Engineer’s
“ department, but who was allowed by Mr. Thomas, for Mr. Ormsby, a day or two at a time.”
“ He was the man suspected of taking the plank ”
“ He was at that time working for Mr. Ormsby.”
,! The planks were in the yard when the men were turned out to dinner; they were
“ placed in such a way that one could not be taken without being missed. Directly I came
“ from dinner I missed two planks from the heap. I looked round the yard and could not
“ see them, hut I observed foot marks on the wall that led to Mr Ormsby’s place—to the
“ garden. I reported to Mr. Thomas. Whether he reported it to Captain Mann I cannot
“ say, hut he spoke of it to Mr. Ormsby when he came home.”
“ He was at Sydney on that day.”
“ He returned some time in the evening, and, I believe, the following day Mr. Ormsby
“ made a search for the cedar through his yard, and returned it.”
This is the whole case upon which Mr. Thomas sought to fix a charge upon Mr.
Ormsby of at least conniving at the taking of a cedar plank from the Engineer’s stores.
The evidence wholly fails in affecting Mr. Ormsby as conniving at the theft; hut the
matter does not appear to have been followed up by inquiry, as it ought to have been, in
order that the real offender might be discovered and punished. In this, we think, there was
a remissness on the part of Mr. Ormsby.
Another charge by Mr. Ormsby against the Superintendent is, that on a certain
occasion he used most foul and abusive expressions towards Mr. Peers, the dispenser.
Mr. Peers himself, as well as Mr. West, states what these expressions were, and Mr.
Ormsby states the occasion on which they were used.
Peers had reported something to Mr. West as having been said of him by Mr. Ormsby,
concerning the performance of his duty as Visiting Surgeon, which the latter said was
untrue, and on Mr. West complaining to Mr. Ormsby that he had so spoken of him to his
subordinate, instead of making any complaint he might have to himself, Mr. Ormsby became
exceeding angry with Peers, and did make use of the improper expressions imjmted to him.
These cannot he justified; but, considering the provocation which Mr. Ormsby con-
sidered himself to have received, are partly excusable.
We come now to an important charge brought- against Mr. Ormsby, namely,®*that
sparring matches having taken place on the island with the knowledge or connivance of the
Superintendent and other officers of the island, and that he and his two sons, subordinate
officers and strangers, have been present at them.
There were two men skilled in the art of boxing, prisoners on the island at the same
time—Perry and Sinclair; the former a very powerful and remarkable man, by trade a car-
penter, the other a barber, as stated by Mr. These two would obviously at times,
when released from work, be incited by each other and by their fellow prisoners to exhibit
their skill in a short stand-up, and thus far, it-is admitted by Mr. Ormsby, might have
occurred; but he denies that any regular match ever did occur, or could occur, without
his knowledge, and that of every subordinate officer on the establishment.
We are of that opinion on the latter point. None such could occur without its being
known to the Superintendent and every officer on the settlement. But we find upon the
evidence that sparring matches, really deserving of that name, did occur upon several
occasions, and upon the Lord’s Day, and that several officers of the establishment, and the
officers
107.
113, 114.
115.
Mi . < rt .ill.
Nos. 26-33.
34.
36.
37.
08.
39.
See Mr. Peers,
Nos. 22, iO.
Mr. West, 4,
and Mr.'Onr.sby’s
answer.
Easton, Nos. 10,
46, 72, ICS, 116,161,


officers of the Military guard, and strangers did witness them ; that a pair of gloves, obtained
in some surreptitious manner, was found amongst them by Mr. Brown, the Assistant Super-
intendent, and on another occasion a substitute for gloves, made of an old flannel jacket.
We find further that Perry, a shipwright, who was a powerful athletic man, and ought
to have been kept on the works, was taken off the works by the Superintendent and placed
over the cells, a duty which does not require a man of that description; for the cells arc so
constructed, being excavations out of the solid rock, as to make the duty of an overseer a
very easy one ; and that Sinclair was put to do duty as a barber ; that on one occasion Perry
was relieved at the cells, and brought down to exhibit his powers in the prison yard, another
man being substituted for him in the meanwhile at the cc-lls, which must have been the act
of someone having authority to relieve him, as a subordinate officer at least. When we find
that the Superintendent, knowing he had these two characters on the island, adopted no
means of keeping them apart, but rather, by placing them in the easiest berths, gave in effect,
though not in intention, facilities to them of following their pastime, and amusing the spectators
prisoners, and others; when, moreover, we find that a sparring match did take place at the
quarters of the Military Officer, between Perry and a visitor of that officer, Captain
Macdonald; that on that occasion the Superintendent was applied to, and gave permission
for Perry to go to the officer’s quarters, as Captain Macdonald wished to see him —for we
it perfectly incredible that the Superintendent could be quite ignorant of what he was
wanted for—when, in addition to all this, one of his own sons learned the art of boxing from
one of the men, we cannot acquit the Superintendent, and indeed any officer on the establish-
ment, of either the most culpable remissness or indifference, amounting to incapacity for such
a charge, or of knowledge of, and connivance to some extent in this malpractice.
We acquit, however, the Superintendent and his sons of ever having been present on
any of these occasions.
The evidence which has brought us to these conclusions will be found as stated in the
margin.
Another charge made by Mr. Thomas was, that he had known the Superintendent to
take a man into the hospital, named Spencer, who had been reported to the doctor as fit for
work, and that he was employed at Mr. Ormsby’s.
It was not in Mr. Ormsby’s province to take a man into the hospital, and Peers, the
dispenser, denies the fact altogether. That Spencer was employed by Mr. Ormsby on his
private business, on several occasions, with Mr. Thomas’ permission, is proved, but not to any
great extent. Cahill, under whom the man was employed in the workshop, states, once or
twice in a week or fortnight for a day or two at a time, and Mr. Ormsby, in his answer to
the charge, states the amount of the man’s labor to have been very small.
Still the employment was contrary to the regulations, and should neither have been
permitted by Mr. Thomas nor asked for by Mr. Ormsby.
But we fear that a more serious infraction of the regulations has taken place in the
employment of convict labor upon the garden known as the Superintendent’s garden, which is
of large extent, probably about three or four acres, sub-divided by numerous walls, built
roughly of rubble stone without mortar, and frequently requiring repair.
These repairs are performed by convict laborers, on a requisition by Mr. Ormsby to
the Civil Engineer.
The walls are repaired as Government work.
But we think it could never have been contemplated that gardens so extensive should
be kept up by convict labor, especially when it is remarked that one gardener only is allowed
by the regulations to the Superintendent. The cultivation of so large an extent of garden
must, in our opinion, have occupied a large number of men at times.
Mr. Ormsby states that 30,000 or 40,000 cabbage plants are grown there yearly,
and that all persons on the island, free and convict, together with his own family, are
occasionally supplied from it.
But there is a prisoners’ garden, expressly for their supply ; and we do not approve
of the mixing together public and private property.
Mr. Ormsby is allowed a garden, and one gardener for his private use, —a privilege
which ought not to have been encroached upon, as the evidence throughout shews that it has
been to a large extent.
We


We are of opinion that it has led to much irregularity and abuse.
The Superintendent is next charged —•“ That he refused to give any assistance when
“ applied to upon the occasion of fifty prisoners leaving the works, (in spite of the endeavors
“of the overseers to prevent them), and going to the office of the Resident Engineer, and
“ threatening that officer with his life, and that these men received no punishment for their
“ conduct.”
And again—“ That the prisoners on one occasion refused to go to their work, and
“ that no stops were taken to enforce the orders given them.”
Next—two instances of insubordination on the part of the prisoners, and apathy or
unconcern on the part of the Superintendent, are related by Mr. Thomas himself, who was
the Resident Engineer mentioned:—“ I was present when the prisoners left the works, and
“ I went and complained to the Superintendent. I was at my office at the time, whieh is
“ next to Mr. Ormsby’s. I went into him, saying that these men had left the works, and
“ come up to me in a threatening way, and I ashed him to give me some assistance in
“ sending them away. This he refused, and said he could not do anything with them, and
“ could not send them down. The men remained there for some time, in a very threatening
“ manner ; they came up to my office, and commenced abusing me. He said he would have
" nothing at all to do with it, and refused to give me any assistance. After remaining some
“ time, they walked away to the works.”
The other instance Mr. Thomas brought forward upon hearsay.
Upon the first case Mr. Thomas referred us to Easton, as his witness of the transac-
tion. His account is—“ It has generally been the rule, since I have been on the island,
“ which is eight or nine years, that there used to be five men to draw the hand-cart up that
“ hill, always; and I believe Mr. Thomas gave orders for four men to draw it up, and they
“ were third-class men —not able-bodied men.”
One individual, a partially insane person, went towards Mr. Thomas } he was taken
before tbe Yisiting Magistrate, and “ Mr. Thomas declined to come forward.”
Upon the other instance Mr. Thomas referred us to Mr. Broderick, who was attached
to the Engineer’s Department, and had particular charge of the mechanical branch. He
relates the cireumstanee —“ It was on a Saturday, when the “ Claremont ” was discharging
“ machinery at the island ; the Captain asked whether the men could not be employed in the
“ afternoon in discharging, as he wished to get away.”
Saturday afternoon has been a customary holiday to the men, and Mr. Broderick
gave instructions to the foreman to acquaint the Superintendent that the men would be
required to work after dinner that day.
The Superintendent appears to have sanctioned the requisition, for the men were
seen descending the hill towards the works, when, all at once, one of the gangs turned back,
and the others followed their example. Mr. Broderick says—“l met Mr. Ormsby on the hill,
" and asked him what the meaning of that was—he said they had refused to work, ' what
“ ‘ can Ido in the matter ? ’ He said ho would take the names down of those who refused to
“ work, and all he could do was, as I understood, to bring them before the Yisiting
“ Magistrate.” The men did not go to the work.
The desiring them to do so was an infringement of their usual privilege of a respite
from work on Saturday afternoon, and was for the purpose of accommodating the Captain of
the “ Claremont.”
The case was brought before the Yisiting Magistrate, who dealt with it, and sentenced
several of the prisoners to the cells.
But and Mr. Thomas appear to have thought that the men ought to
have been “ forced to go to the work,” and that the Superintendent should have called out
the Military guard.
We think that the Superintendent should have first well considered the propriety of
the order before he gave it, and having done so, he should have insisted on its being obeyed,
as it probably would have been if he had shown the requisite determination.
For this refusal about twenty-five persons were confined to the cells several days, and
amongst them one mentioned by Mr. Pendrill as “ having been first confined on the charge
“ and then released.”
* 17—E Another
Mr. Tliomas,
Nos. 173-181.
Mr. Broderick,
Nos. 10-38.


Another charge was brought by Mr. Thomas against the Superintendent,—that he has
borrowed money from the prisoners.
No surmise or suspicion of such a transaction was mentioned to us by any one person
examined but Mr. Thomas, and by him only on “ hearsay.” Mr. Brown repels the suspicion
in the strongest manner—“ I never heard it stated or suggested on the island in my life that
“ the Superintendent had borrowed money of the prisoners.”
Mr. Thompson —formerly reporter to the Sydney Morning Herald, another of Mr.
Parkes’ informants, and writer of a letter in the Empire of the 6th October, signed “ A Third
“ Witness,” in which he put himself forward as “ personally cognizant for some years past
“ of the disgraceful state of the island, and of the apathy and neglect which have rendered
“ all reports of the infamous proceedings there mere farces —admitted that he was only od
the island twice; once when Sir Charles Fitz Roy laid the first stone of the dock, and again
for three days on a visit to Mr. Thomas. He stated'as the only fact which fell under his own
observation a trifling dispute about the key of the bathing house, and the insolence of a
prisoner who was sent for the key, and some uncivil expressions used by Mr. Ormsby of Mr.
Thomas, and that “the general demeanour of the prisoners towards Mr. Thomas was.
“ disrespectful.”
He stated that his only means of knowledge were those three days visit to the island—
that he knew of none of the facts for which he vouched, as having been “ personally cog-
“ nizant for some years,” and his only authority was information communicated by others.
Yet this person took upon himself to assure Mr. Parkes and the public, “ that the
“ statements set forth in the form of queries in the letter subscribed ‘ Another Witness ’ (Mr.
« Thomas), are not only true but that they do not include one tithe of the enormities which
“ have for years past rendered Cockatoo Island a worse hell, if that be possible, than Norfolk
“ Island.”
He was asked, “ How many of the statements of ‘ Another Witness ’ can you support
“of your own knowledge ? ” he answered, “ None; I only knew them from Mr. Thomas’ and
“ Mr. Duff’s statements,” and when stating “ I was perfectly cognizant for years, I had no
“ other knowledge but that acquired from three days residence on the island, and communi-
“ cated by others.”
Respecting another categorical statement by him in the newspaper of a person having
been brutally murdered on the island, being asked his authority for that, he said, —“ Both
“ Mr. Thomas and Mr. Duff told me that very suspicious circumstances attended the cases,
“ and that the man who was supposed to have thrown him down was discharged from the
“ island, and that was the authority on which I made the statement.”
We will not trouble you farther with a comparison of this unworthy person’s public
statements with his authority when examined upon them; but we desire your reference to
the whole of his evidence, as shewing the mode in which charges such as these can be got
up, and persons found to vouch for them.
Mr. Christopher Murray, formerly a constable on the establishment, one of Mr.
Parkes’ informants, and writer of a letter in the Empire of the 7th October, signed
“ A Fourth Witness,” attended the Board, and was examined upon all the matters under
inquiry; but he made no new charge, excepting an unfounded one of the mal-appropriation
of a small portion of his pay, which had been stopped for a breach of duty, and applied to
the Police Fund, under the order of the Visiting Magistrate. His evidence will be found
referred to under the several heads of inquiry, and is important upon several of them.
We come now to those material points in our inquiry to which you direct our
especial attention—
1. “ Whether the conduct of the officers and servants upon the island has or
“ has not been such as to merit the displeasure of the Government.”
2. “ Whether the management of the establishment generally by the Super-
“ intendent is in accordance with the regulations laid down for his
“ guidance.”
3. “ Whether the penal discipline of the island is maintained and impartially
“ carried out;” and
4.


4. “ Whether the regulations generally are sufficient for the objects contem-
“ plated —If they are not, then what modification of them can he
“ suggested ? ”
Upon the first point we do not think ourselves called upon on the evidence to bring
particularly to your notice the conduct of any officer or servant on the establishment in the
discharge of his duties, except that of the Superintendent, of the Visiting Surgeon, of the
Assistant Superintendent, and of the. Dispenser. No irregularity or impropriety of conduct
has been imputed to any other.
Several instances have been already noticed by us in which we think the conduct of
the Superintendent to have been more or less reprehensible; we need not allude again to
these.
One of the charges brought before us has concerned the conduct of other officers of
the establishment than the Superintendent, viz., that of the Visiting Surgeon and Dispenser,
relative to the treatment of two prisoners who died in the hospital—Daniel Dunsmore and
William Murphy.
Dunsmore was a young man about twenty-one years of age. He complained to the
Dispenser, Mr. Peers, who, being resident on the island, has the general charge of the hospital,
on the 25th March, 1858. His case and the treatment of it are stated by Peers —“ His disease
“ was consumption, or disease of the lungs, rather pleurisy. He was not admitted into the
“ hospital in the first instance, but exempted from work and put into the exempt list. At
“ first his symptoms were merely an inflammatory cough, for which I treated him —I gave
“ him lobelia and aether. About nine in the morning fully examined him, not considering
“ his case worthy of more attention at that time, and sent him to the exempt ground.
“He came three times a day to take his medicine—he came again next day. I gave him cough
“ mixture, camphorated opium, ipecacuanha, and ammoniacum. On the 27th the same
“ treatment was continued, but he was taken into the hospital during the day.”
“ He was sent back the exempt ground—think Dr. West must have seen him, for I
“ see digitalis is added.”
“ On the third day he went again to the exempt ground, and on the fourth day he
“ was admitted into the hospital, viz., the 28th. On that day the Visiting Surgeon saw
“ him ; he continued in the hospital on the 29th, 30th, and 31st under treatment, and on
“ the Ist of April he died.”
The exempt ground is a platform of the rock on the south and south-west side of the
island. We think the sending a man laboring under such symptoms as Dunsmore’s at the
end of the month of March to such an exposed situation as the exempt ground for three days
was an act of most cruel aud culpable negligence. He ought, clearly, under such symptoms
to have been taken at the very first into the hospital, or put in to some warm sheltered place,
instead of being exposed at any season of the year, but especially at the fall of the year, to
changeable winds and weather.
The blame for that is chargeable against Mr. Peers, who has ceased to be the dispenser..
We think, however, he should have been seen earlier by Dr. West, whose regular visits
to the island are twice a week. On this occasion he was sent for at eleven o’clock at night,,
on the 28th of March, the day on which Dunsmore was admitted into the hospital,,
and then saw the patient for the first time.
A post mortem examination was made by Peers, the dispenser, which Mr. West did
not attend; a neglect on his part which we think should be noticed, and no inquest was held
on the body.
The other case charged as one neglected by the medical department was that of a man
named William Murphy. He was an old man, about eighty years of age, admitted into the
hospital at half-past ten on the night of the 3rd December, and died at two p.m. on the 7th
December.
“ His disease was spasmodic asthma.”
There was no post mortem examination, and no inquest was held on the body.
There seems to us no ground for imputing neglect in this case.
In both cases, however, it has been stated that the hospital books have been falsified,
and entries made after death, to give an untrue account of the treatment.
We


We have critically examined both Mr. West and Peers, and their books, and are
satisfied that there is no ground for this part of the charge. We think, however, that con-
siderable looseness has existed in this department.
First, in drawing full rations for every person in the hospital, whatever be the diet
ordered for each.
Secondly, in there being no sufficient check to the expenditure of medicines and
medical stores.
Thirdly, as to the books which should be kept in the' hospital but are not, viz., a
prescription book and a diet book.
Fourthly, in not attaching a ticket to the head of the bed of each patient, stating
the diet ordered, and so affording the prisoner the satisfaction of observing if
he receives the diet prescribed.
A charge, not indeed affecting any officer of the establishment, was brought by Mr.
Thomas, which we have thought it right to inquire into.—“ How was it that an inquest
“ held on the body of a prisoner killed in the dock was adjourned but never sat again; and'
“ does the death of this man remain to this day a mystery on that account ?”
Mr. Thompson, who gives Mr. Thomas and Mr. Duff as his sole authority, says,
broadly, that “ very suspicious circumstances attended the case ; that the man was brutally
“ murdered by a fellow convict in sight of other convicts; that the then coroner, Mr. J. Ryan
“ Brenaa, opened the inquest and adjourned it, yet did not resume it; that the body of the
“ murdered man was buried without further inquiry.”
If Mr. Brenan failed in his duty in not resuming the inquest, he must answer for
that.
We are clearly of opinion that no murder was committed by any one, and that the
unfortunate man fell into the dock, and was killed accidentally.
But the three cases of death on the island which have been mentioned, in two of
which no inquest was attempted to be held, in the other not carried out to a verdict, suggest
to us that in future the rule of the English law ought to be imperatively observed, whereby
it is required that an inquest should be held upon the body, in every case of death in gaol;
indeed it has been provided for by the Bth Regulation, in cases of sudden or accidental death.
We think that notice of every death of a prisoner ought to be given to the "Visiting
Magistrate, and an inquest held.
With respect to the general management of the. Superintendent, we are unable to
state either that it has been, or is now, in accordance with what a proper state of discipline
would demand, or what the regulations require.
We separate these two points because the regulations do not contain any instructions
as to the discipline to be pursued and enforced : it consequently comes to be such as is in
accordance with the Superintendent’s own ideas of convict discipline, or such as the
Visiting Magistrate for the time being has recommended. At one time,'under Mr. Browne’s
superintendence as Visiting Magistrate, it was apparently more strict, many liberties and
recreations having been since allowed which that Magistrate would have forbidden; such
as noisy amusements at any time, singing or loud talking in the wards, and the obtaining
of extra clothing not contemplated by the regulations.
On these heads we think it absolutely necessary that the Government should prescribe
authoritatively the system of discipline which it will have pursued. That followed
by the present Superintendent, except during the time Mr. Browne was Visiting
Magistrate, appears to us to have been, and still to be, most objectionable. It, nevertheless,
has had the approval of both Captain M'Lerie and Mr. North ; and we would seriously draw
your attention to the evidence of both these gentlemen, as shewing the views entertained by
them with respect to their duties.
As to punishment, it is of the mildest sort, and consists merely of labor on the public
works during the ordinary laboring hours, and a system of taskwork which admits of a
willing and industrious man earning many indulgeneies in diet, &c.
The convicts are altogether exempted from labor during unfavorable weather, and when
employed on works requiring extra clothing, provided with such clothing; and during the
hours


tours cessation from labor, they are confined in the prison yard, and at night in close wards.
This imprisonment and labor are all the punishment a convict undergoes, save for offences
against good order and discipline on the island, then only is inflicted close confinement in the
cells, and an extension of the term of service necessary to entitle the prisoner to a ticket-of-
leave.
We are far, however, from thinking slightly of even this extent of punishment; it is
all perhaps that the general opinion and feeling of the age would allow, and being one of
entire seclusion, except to the society of offenders of all classes and degrees of depravity
separation from all ties of domestic life and affection; the loss of liberty for the period of
sentence, and the being subject during it to a species of government which the mind is apt
to consider arbitrary, despotic, and tyrannical, must operate upon a person possessed of any
sensibility.
It is a state of things which encourages and gives birth to suspicions where no ground
exists for them, and these frequently of the most revolting and odious nature. Partiality,
favoritism, and persecution are generally charged against superiors, and they are largely
charged against the Superintendent of Cockatoo Island.
The mode of government is open to such abuses, and these are difficult of proof,
although carrying conviction to those who witness such proceedings, as for instance were
pursued by the Superintendent in Gleadall’s case, and in Perry’s and in Sinclair’s.
Minds like theirs could not perceive any cause for the removal of Perry and Sinclair from
laborious occupation to the lightest, and even to situations of trust; nor, as in Pox’s case,
the remission of the greater portion of his sentence altogether, without attributing these
indulgencies to favoritism ; nor could they in the belief that Gleadall was on several occasions
obnoxious to the Superintendent attribute his 'dismissal to any other cause.
The regulations of Government made for the guidance of the Superintendent have in
several important and material points come to be wholly disregarded—points on the observance
of which the discipline and order of a penal establishment, we are of opinion, mainly depend.
We pass over several instances of infringement of the regulations by the Superin-
tendent of minor importance, which will occur to you at almost every page on reading the
evidence, and will bring to your notice only those which are of more grave and prominent
character.
And, first, we think the removal of Perry, the boxer, from the works to the cells was
contrary to the 12th regulation. Secondly, there have been frequent infringements by the
Superintendent of the 20th regulation, in the employment of Spencer, although for no long
periods, and in the employment of more than the “ one gardener” allowed to the SuperiD.
tendent by the Regulations, on the cultivation and manuring of the garden, which goes by
the name of the Superintendent’s, and in building and rebuilding the walls when fallen.
Thirdly, the second general regulation, —“ That no person (except those duly authorized)
“ shall land on the island without an order from the Colonial Secretary or Visiting Magis-
“ trate, and always in the presence of the Superintendent or his Assistant,” has been in the
latter part wholly disregarded. Again, the 4th General Regulation, —“ That all boats (except
“ certain therein specified) going to or coming from the island, will be liable to be stopped
“ and examined by the Water Police.” Fourthly, the regulation for the Assistant Superin-
tendent, overseers, and other subordinate officers of the penal establishment, have come to be
disregarded in the most extraordinary manner, and in the widest sense utterly subversive of
the first principles of a penal establishment. “ They are to bring nothing on the island
“ without the knowledge and consent of the Superintendent”—and “ no overseer or other
“ subordinate officer will on any pretence be permitted to bring spirituous liquors on the
“ island.” So the regulation for the police, No. 23. —“ No spirits will he allowed on the
“ island, except under the written authority of the Visiting Magistrate, Superintendent, or
“ Civil Engineer.”
In consequence of the breach of the General Regulations, No. 2, and no arrangement
being made by the Superintendent for carrying it out, according to its spirit, if inconvenient
or impossible for himself or his deputy to attend the landing of boats, such as instructing
the Inspector of Police, or some other officer to perform it, this most necessary duty has been
wholly unprovided for, and the evidence on this point leads to the conclusion that the utmost
irregularity has prevailed.
* 17—G Parcels


Parcels and letters have been landed from boats, carried up to the quarters of the
free officers by convict servants, under no supervision whatever; and thus articles of indul-
gence have been obtained by the prisoners in a surreptitious manner—extra articles of
clothing, newspapers, and on one occasion boxing gloves.
And, in consequence of this breach of the regulation for subordinate officers, and of
the Police Regulation No. 23, wine, spirits, and beer have been landed at the island for
subordinate officers of every class, without inquiry, search, or check of any sort.
So gross a violation of this essential regulation has surprised us greatly; but the
evidence of it is too clear to be doubted, and shews that, in fact, there is no effective super-
intendence upon the most important matters to be cared for in a penal settlement.
"We refer you particularly on all these points to the evidence of Mr. Dunning, the
Inspector of Police.
The evidence of Mr. Brown, the Assistant Superintendent, is to the same effect. He
says —“ I did not attend, nor did the Superintendent, at the landing of boats, except when
“ the indulgence boat brought things for the prisoners, paid for out of their task money;
“ these things were taken by me and examined before issued. The Superintendent’s or free
“ officers’ things used to be taken direct by the servants of these persons to their quarters,
unexamined by the police or me. I have seen a keg of wine brought to the island, and
“ spirits, to the extent of a bottle at the time, without the knowledge or consent of the
“ Superintendent. It is not the practice to ask the Superintendent’s leave.”
“ I never examined any bundles or parcels brought to the island, or the person of
“ any one visiting the island.”
“ The free overseers and subordinate officers did bring spirits on the island.”
“ I can positively state that the regulations regarding subordinate officers bringing
“ spirits to the island have not teen carried out.”
“ I have always had access to the regulations, and am familiar with them ”
Smith, coxswain of the visitors’ boat, says,—“ I have brought beer in kegs for many
" people on the island, also, wine and spirits, in cases, for Mr. Ormsby, but not for any one
“ else. The other boatmen are in the habit of bringing parcels, and they might have con-
“ tained spirits, but never to my knowledge ; the bundles were not examined at the wharf.”
“ Beer and wine and spirits were brought to the island fn Chandler’s (or the shop)
“ boat, for the free people.”
Mr. Browne says, that when he was Visiting Magistrate (which was before the present
regulation of Government,) he was never applied to for permission to land spirits, and he con-
sidered that the Superintendent was responsible for the landing of any spirits. Mr. Browne
was referred to the regulation as to the prohibition to free officers to bring spirits on the
island; there was such a rule as that in existence during his time; he was never applied ta
relax it, and never did. One or two cases of drunkenness occurred amongst the
where spirits had been brought to the island surreptitiously, and a constable on duty was
dismissed.
Captain M'Lerie gives an extraordinary reason for the old rule concerning spirits
having been abandoned, and that by the authority of a Board, in which we think him
altogether in error, except indeed, unfortunately, as to the fact of the violation of the
rule. He says, —“ There were orders against bringing spirits to the island, but I found
11 after the number of civil officers increased, and people connected with the Engineer’s
“ department, that it was a restriction they would not assent to. There was a Board appointed,
“ and the rule was modified,” “ of which Board two of the gentlemen now present were
“ members.”
On this point Captain M'Lerie is clearly mistaken. There was no such modification
of the rule by any Board of which the two gentlemen alluded to (Captain Ward and Mr.
Merewether) were members, nor, we believe, by any legitimate authority whatever.
It is possible Captain M'Lerie has misconceived the purport of the regulation of
Government in 1855 as justifying such a departure from first principles; but it is the
infraction of the rule of 1855 which we consider to be so highly reprehensible, and the
total abandonment of which is wholly unjustifiable and inexcusable. That rule did not
altogether prohibit the use of spirits, &c., to the free persons employed on the island, but
placed


placed them under the reasonable check and restraint of “ the permission of the Visiting
“ Magistrate, Superintendent, or Chief Engineer, being necessary —a most reasonable and
necessary regulation, for the breach of -which we can see no excuse whatever.
Mr. Ormsby did complain of the disorderly conduct of the new comers to the island
in 1853, particularly of their drunkenness, and Captain M'Lerie states that he received a
good many communications to the same effect.
Captain M'Lerie says “he never had any application from a subordinate officer for
“ leave to bring spirits to the island; ” he thinks he recollects on one occasion some report
having been brought to him of “ a bottle of wine having been found in the possession of the
“ police.” He says,—“ Mr. Ormsby informed me of it, and said the man was unwell, and I
“ told the Inspector not to take notice of it, as it might be looked upon as medicine.”
We hardly know how to look upon this incident. It might seem to imply that
extreme care was taken by the Superintendent to report to the Visiting Magistrate “ a single
“ bottle of wine,” which had been brought to the island by a policeman who was unwell;
but when we observe the wholesale and unrestricted importation which has existed, we scarcely
like to express what we really think of it, viz., that it was a piece of pretence. Captain
M'Lerie adds, —“There were no complaints that spirits were brought to the island, but I was
“ convinced that spirits were brought, as on one or two occasions I had to punish prisoners
“ for being drunk.”
Another incident of the same nature occurred in Mr. North’s time. Under examina-
tion before the Board he stated, “ this morning a written application was made to me for
“ permission to take a bottle of porter to the island.” That was the first instance of an
application being made to him. Captain M'Lerie states, “in justice to the authorities,
“ the officers of the island, we found on one occasion spirits in a ‘plant,’ as it is
“ called. After the prisoners are recalled to their barracks the sentries are withdrawn
“ from the shores of the island, which are thus left unprotected, and boats can land.
“ Spirits may then be planted among the rocks in positions with which, by preconcerted
“ signals, the prisoners may be made acquainted.”
“ The only limit (to bringing spirits to the island) being the want of means on the
“ part of the prisoners to purchase them.”
Mr. North’s evidence on this subject is equally unsatisfactory. It shows the
unchecked and unrestricted importation of spirits, &c. to the island. He knew the rule as
to the importation of spirits; was never applied to for permission to land any except on the
occasion above referred to, when he gave permission to land a single bottle of porter.
The 17th General Regulation has also been neglected, and we think very much to
the injury of the service. It states that “ the general duty of the Superintendent as con-
“ nected with the prisoners whilst employed on the works, is to insure, by his own super-
“ vision, the vigilance of his officers, and the safe custody and discipline of his prisoners.”
It is stated in the evidence that he wholly neglected this very important duty.
If it had been performed, it is hard to conceive how many irregularities could have
taken place without his knowledge and interposition which are stated in the evidence to
have occurred; for example, the disobedience of the prisoners on two occasions mentioned by
Mr. Thomas—boats landing, and parcels, &c., to a large amount carried up to different
officers’ quarters by convict servants without search or inquiry. Indeed we cannot imagine
so deplorable a state of things to exist in any penal establishment if the Superintendent did,
according to the spirit of the 17th regulation, “ give his own personal supervision,” and
apply his own vigilance to every transaction which might lead to a breach of the penal
discipline and good order.
Such being the state of discipline, and such the nature and extent of the punishment
of offenders under the system pursued, there is still one subject to which we must invite your
attention, our own having been forcibly drawn to it.
It is this, —the total want of any system or means whatever for the reformation of the
criminals.
It is true that two reverend gentlemen, one of each of the principal religious com-
munions, are attached to the island, and we are not so unmindful of their zeal in the great
cause of religion as to doubt that they would do all in their power in their several callings;
but


but we cannot designate the formal services of religion which take place on the Lord’s Day
merely, and the casual visit of a clergyman on one other day in the week, as really elfective
means for the reformation of the criminals. We are of opinion that the reverend chaplains
should, for their good offices to be effectual, be permanently attached to the establishment of
the island, and that their ministrations should be daily and constantly applied to the great
end of bringing sinners to repentance, and confirming the more decent or the wavering.
They should be received, and looked upon, and treated with the respect due to their
sacred calling. They should have suitable lodgings convenient to themselves, and for
receiving persons seeking spiritual comfort through their means.
No such accommodation exists at present, hut might surely he provided by means of
those convicts whose eternal interests they are sent to serve.
There are, as described by all the reverend gentlemen, many penitents of each com-
munion, of whom, if they could be separated from the more depraved, they would have
reasonable hope.
There is, however, no such separation as should depend upon conduct.
We are of opinion that such a division should he made, and that without delay; even
under present circumstances thus much might at least he accomplished; and further, we
think that the Reverend Chaplains should have a principal voice in the selection of persons,
to be kept separately—we mean at work and in the wards, and as much as possible on all
other occasions.
There is a small room imperfectly adapted for the purposes of a school for the children
of the free persons on the island. A larger school should be provided for the use of adult
convicts, under the charge of the Chaplains, and means and opportunity should be afforded
to better disposed prisoners to avail themselves of the instruction so to be imparted.
In our view of this matter, the appointment of a schoolmaster is indispensable.
Lastly, the whole system pursued upon the island requires organization. At present
the convicts are employed as laborers merely. Those who have any acquaintance with
handicraft trades are, on account of their superior usefulness, of course employed in their
line, but there is no instruction for the uniniated—all are mere laborers; such as they were
when they went to the island, such they leave it. No one systematically receives there the
instruction which should fit him on his return to the society from which his crimes have
banished him a better man, or better fitted for getting an honest livelihood. He returns
a worse man in every respect than he went.
Such a total want of means of useful instruction we consider to he a radical error in
the system.
Trades of all useful kinds should be systematically taught, and only the other-
wise useless person should be altogether a mere laborer.
We do not mean that any prisoners should be altogether exempt from labor. This
must, we fear, unhappily continue, for the sake of what is considered necessary to constitute
the notion of punishment, that the well-disposed, for example, might be encouraged by being
allowed to learn a trade as a reward for good conduct, and a certain time of exemption from
labor should be allowed to those who are employed in learning trades.
We are, of course, aware that the quantum of labor would be thus reduced, but the
benefit must hereafter accrue to the whole community.
Subject to these remarks, we are ourselves of opinion that the employment of convicts
on public works in the neighbourhood of Sydney, such as those now in progress on Cockotoo
Island, is the best mode which could be devised for the punishment of criminals, for making
them useful to the community which they have injured by their offences, and for their own
reformation.
And we are further of opinion that any such public works may be perfectly and
efficiently conducted by engineers and free overseers, by means of convict labor, without any
difficulty whatever.
We think the regulations for the engineer department have at length become effectual
for preventing any collision of authority; hut there are wanting vast changes in the whole
a-rangements of the convict department to render it effective.
The


The preceding remarks will have shewn in what respects, nevertheless, we will briefly
submit to you our views as to what these changes should be. %
These would, in our opinion, be the appointment of a more suitable person as Com-
mandant or Superintendent than the present gentleman.
We are by no means desirous of detracting from Mr. Ormsby the credit which is
undoubtedly due to him of preserving any kind of authority and decency amongst a band of
criminals so depraved as those who unhappily become the subjects of penal discipline.
Mr. Ormsby lias, of course, had many difficult circumstances to contend with; and
although we are not, as the general tenor of our letter will shew, at all satisfied with the
results of his administration, yet we must do him the j ustice to observe that no authoritative
system of discipline or government has been prescribed to him, —he has been left to follow his
own somewhat mild and lax, but arbitrary, ideas of prison discipline.
We can find no sufficient excuse for the frequent disregard, in the particular instances
we have pointed out, of those regulations which have been given to him, or for the improper
use which he has made of the Government boat, of the policemen, and of the labors of the
convicts.
The Commandant or Superintendent of a penal establishment such as that on
Cockatoo Island, so near to the temptations of Sydney, and on which both free skilled
laborers, as well as .a large body of convicts are employed, should be a person long accustomed
to strict discipline, a man of honor, and of high principles.
The emoluments of such a gentleman should be more commensurate with the charge
confided to him than those of Mr. Ormsby have ever been.
The particulars also of what may be termed perquisites of office, such as convict
servants, the use and extent of a garden, should be'again so strictly defined as not to admit
of any doubt. The regulations in force would certainly, in our view, appear to be sufficiently
explicit; but they have been evaded.
It should not be allowed to be possible for the officer in charge to quote as his
authority on any point verbal instructions, however given. His written instructions should
be his only guidance, never varied, but in writing.
Secondly,—the Medical Officer in charge of the island should be resident, and fitting
quarters should be provided for him.
Arrangements for the hospital should also be made, corresponding to those in use in
Her Majesty’s Hospitals, as to the various books and accounts kept, the drawing of diet, and
other particulars; for the faithful carrying out of all which the Medical Officer should be
responsible.
We disapprove entirely of the present establishment of a Resident Dispenser, and a
Visiting Surgeon; instead of the former, we think a responsible Resident Surgeon is
necessary.
As to inspection by an officer unconnected with the establishment, if that be deemed
essential, we are clearly of opinion that it ought to be entrusted only to a responsible officer,
under the general title of Inspector General of Prisons.
The employment as Visiting Justices of magistrates performing other and suffi-
ciently onerous duties, without pay or emolument of any kind, has, in our opinion, been
found in this case —and will probably be found in every case in which it shall be tried -a
failure.
Thirdly,—the Chaplains should also be resident on the island, and suitable quarters
should be provided for them.
To these reverend gentlemen should bo committed, not only the spiritual charge,
which they have by virtue of their office, and which should be daily exercised for the benefit
of their people, but also the superintendence of schools, conducted by free and competent
teachers, for the secular instruction of adult prisoners.
These points we think particularly necessary to be attended to in an establishment
professing to have for its object the reformation as well as the p mishment of the criminals.
If our suggestions on this head be approved of, it will be for the Government, the
officer in charge, and the reverend gentlemen themselves, to devise and carry out a reform-
* U atory


atory system to its proper extent, in the teaching of useful manual trades to the unin-
structed but better disposed part of the criminals, so adapted as to make neither their
punishment nor their instruction a sole object, but prudently, carefully, and with moderation
to combine both.
There only remains to be submitted to you a minor change which we think should
:be made, as to the person supplying the prisoners with indulgencies paid for out of their task
work earnings.
The person who has this privilege also supplies the Superintendent and subordinate
officers of the establishment with necessaries.
The prisoners objected, on one of our visits to the island, to this arrangement, and
'we think this objection well founded. A distinct purveyor for the prisoners of their own
selection ought to be permitted.
In the appendices will be found the whole of the evidence taken by us in the inquiry,
Mr. Ormsby's explanation, and various letters which passed between the Board and parties
concerning it. The latter are not referred to in our Report, as not affording evidence upon
any of the points investigated, and are only thus preserved in case hereafter any occasion
should arise for their production.
Wo have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your very obedient servants,
W. W. BURTON.
E. W. WARD.
EDWARD C. MEIIEWETHER.
I dissent from the opinion which the Report contains of Mr. Ormsby’s conduct in
regard to the use of the Government boats at Cockatoo, for the following reasons :
Captain M'Lerie was Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo from 1851 to 1856. It was
during this period that the extensive use of the public boats for private purposes was
introduced, and it appears to me, from the evidence of Captain M'Lerie, to have been so
with his sanction.
Captain M'Lerie states, that on the days on which Mr. Ormsby had the permission
of the Government to leave the island he was allowed the visitors’ boat, which for that day
was considered at his disposal, if not required for the public service.
It has not been shewn or alleged that Mr. Ormsby ever quitted the island without
leave. Captain M'Lerie has stated that he has granted leave for the boat to be taken
fishing, with a net stated to have been purchased by the police, in their leisure hours.
Leave was granted to the police to fish in one of the spare boats in the bay, provided the
police were not on duty. This has been granted more than once by Captain M'Lerie.
Captain M'Lerie also recognized Mr. Ormsby using the boat when not required for
the public service, without leave from him.
Though the boat’s crew were called police, it does not appear that they ever were
required to do duty as police ; , and I believe further inquiry would show that they were
entered as policemen, though in reality boatmen, to bring them under the provisions of the
Police Act, as to discipline. Ido not then consider that the crew, when taken on picnics,
were necessarily taken from duty.
For these reasons, I consider Mr. Ormsby cannot be censured for the use he made of
the boats, except on the occasion of his sending Mr. Pendrill to Sydney in an inferior boat—
the visitors’ boat having been taken for a picnic, under the knowledge of it being required
for the public service.
At the same time, I do not approve of such a license being granted for the use of
public property; it is liable to be abused, and is unnecessary. It remains, however, with
Captain M'Lerie to justify the license he gave, and to satisfy the Government that he did not
exceed his instructions.
E. W. WARD.


APPENDIX.




APPENDIX A.
Bathurst,
Wednesday, Evening.
God in Heaven bless y.,u, my dear Sir, for the exposure you have made of the
iniquities of Cockatoo, of which I have complained over and over again to Dr. Woolley and
others. But it was one of the many misfortunes of my miserable position that this should be
regarded as the mere offspring of the impatience natural to me, placed in such a position.
“ Witness’ ” strictures are not in the least degree overdrawn; and whoever he may be —I
think I can guess who the writer is—l should be thankful, in the belief that lam only doing
my plain duty, if you will tell him that I shall bo happy to corroborate and enter into the
details of all the .complaints he has made. I should, of course, be glad that the publication
of my name were unnecessary; but even this sacrifice I hold as nought in the contemplation
of the good which might, and I believe will, accrue from your publication of Mr. Ormsby's
abominable dealings'. Mr. Pendrill will tell you how earnestly I sought to improve the con-
dition of my fellow prisoners while at that miserable place, and how all my efforts were
thwarted and undermined. Pardon my writing to you in this familiar strain, but I have
waited so long for this consummation that my joy has, perhaps, got the better of my dis-
cretion. I saw the Chief Justice last week here, and mentioned this very subject to him ;
but he gave me no encouragement to enter into details. Mr. Dailey will tell you also that,
if it is possible to do so, I am doing my best to retrieve my former good character here, in
the face of most heavy discouragement. If I can support you in anywise in this crusade
against tyranny, and I may say every conceiveable iniquity, be assured I shall only be too
happy. My sense of revenge, if it ever existed, has subsided, and I only regard those who
I know are subjected to such an infernal influence.
* * * * * * *
I have, &c.,
J. ALWORTH MEREWETHER.
Free Press Office,
Wednesday Evening.
APPENDIX B.
(Private.) Bathurst Free Press Office,
Friday Night.
Dear Sir,
I wrote so hurriedly the other day that I fear I was quite unintelligible ; hut
at all events you must have understood my motive to express my gratitude for the energetic
manner in which you have taken up the abuses at Cockatoo. I see a letter in Wednesday’s
Empire, signed “ Still another Witness,” which I believe to have been written by Mr.
Taylor, the Clerk of the Bench there, or rather for him by a man named Hibbert, whose
real name is Arnold, a prisoner and overseer in the hospital, who has been employed in a
similar manner before, against Mr. Thomas the late Resident Engineer. It is well that you
should know that this same Mr. Taylor is the individual who works the puppets on the
Cockatoo stage; he forges the bolts which the Superintendent discharges; he is the M. Rodin
to Mr. Ormsby’s Aurigny; and a more crafty, unprincipled man, I believe, never existed.
The present Visiting Magistrate, Mr. North, can, if he will, bear testimony to the
scandalous manner in which the Superintendent treated me and Beer; he accused me of exciting
a mutiny, without the slightest shadow of a pretext for the accusation. I insisted upon its full
investigation, and I have good reason to know that Mr. North saw through the whole thing. It
was done to prevent my leaving the island at the expiration of my imprisonment, as there is
a bye-law which prevents any prisoner who has received a sentence from the Visiting Magis-
trate from .leaving the island for six months; thus in effect adding to the judicial sentence.
This has been continually carried out in the instance of prisoners obnoxious to the Superin-
tendent; he always has ready engines of perjury to support his wishes. Mr. Broderick, the
overseer of the engine-house, can prove this. I would give- much to be able to see you in
propria persona; it is so difficult to convey all one wishes in a letter, and one so hurried as
this. If I could afford it, I would come down to Sydney, where I much wish to be, on
account of my own business.
There is also another point to which I very much wish to direct your attention. In
the early part of 1856—1 think in the month of March—a young man, named. Daniel Duh-
more, was attacked with pleuritis, and complained to the dispenser, asking to be taken into
the hospital. The dispenser, however, a very ignorant man, most unfitted for his situation
■in every point of view, refused him admittance, and sent him to the exempt ground—a damp
bank —where he was exposed to rain, and his disease was doubtless much aggravated by this
treatment. He became so much worse the next day that he was literally carried from his
ward to the hospital, and in three days died. He was a young man of one or two and twenty,
the very picture of robust health; and the suddenness of his death, combined with the
knowledge of his previous sufferings, all unheeded as they were, naturally produced a most
powerful sensation among the other men, and, after a good deal of consultation and dispute
as to what was the most preferable way of setting about it, they went in a body to Mr.
* 17—I Brown,


Brown, and demanded a satisfactory explanation of the cause of his death. Their conduct
was most violent, for they were much excited, and they threatened to drag the dispenser out
of the dispensary by the hair of his head. I, however, interfered, shewed that by such
violence they would defeat their own ends, and Mr. Brown suggested that a deputation should
be sent up to Mr. Ormsby to request an investigation. They at once asked me to form one,
and five others were chosen. .We saw Mr. Ormsby, and after his usual system of deceit and
treachery, he pretended to sympathise with the men, and granted them paper to make a-
statement to Captain M'Lerie, and every facility. I drew up the statement in the most
temperate manner possible, and enumerated many other cases of cruelty at the hands of the
dispenser, who is universally detested. To this document were appended the names of 163
men, all of whom had some grievance, real or imaginary, against the dispenser. After a
delay of a fortnight, on a muster Sunday, Captain M'Lerie sent for the men who had signed
the statement on behalf of the others—said that Dr. West had certified'that the young man
had been subject to pleuritis for some time previously —that he had refused medicine, and
that an inspection of the hospital register would substantiate his statement. The first excuse
should have entitled him, one would imagine, to more than ordinary care ; the second was
notoriously untrue, for he had refused his rations for three days previous to his admission
to the hospital, and his groans at night disturbed his neighbours. Captain M'Lerie
attacked me furiously as “ a ringleader,”—threatened to send us all to the cells for 28
days, and said he was only prevented from doing so by the cautious manner in which
I had worded the statement, —that he would do so on any future occasion, if he ever
found two or three men conspiring together against the authorities, without a trial!
The whole thing was treated as a plot to annoy the Government, and so it was hushed
up. I have not the slightest doubt that both Captain M'Lerie and Dr. West con-
nived at this —they must have done so. I have'reported this to the clergy from time to
time. An old man, named Murphy, also died from neglect not very long ago. The register
in the hospital was altered to suit the story trumped up to meet the emergency, and a
different treatment of Duumore inserted. Beer, who has seen it, told me it was quite as
improper as the one they were said to have adopted in the first instance. I cannot tell you
how I have been persecuted while there in consequence of my connection with the Herald;
Mr. Ormsby was so fearful of my exposure of all these things. With regard to the death of
Hourigan, who was said ’to have been murdered, I believe in my heart that it was the result
of a pure accident. He was a very quiet inoffensive man, and on the best possible terms with
the man who is said to have struck him. This man (Smith) happened to have made himself
obnoxious to the Irish party, who were all-powerful there, and they, being backed to their
heart’s content by Mr. Ormsby, wreaked their vengeance upon him by making this accusa-
tion. I think none of the better disposed men believed it at all. The clergy can tell you
how very hard I worked to get up a school there, at the request of the men themselves, and
how I was thwarted by Mr. Ormsby’s representations to the Chaplain. I made, together
with Beer, a formal complaint against Mr. 0. to Mr. Pendrill, but he had not discovered as
much as he knows now of the place. Father Kenyon, too, of the Sacred Heart, is well aware
of what I had to endure there. ’ I have the very worst opinion of the Superintendent in a
moral point of view ; I have heard him utter the most frightful blasphemy, seen him stamp-
ing and jumping with rage outside the door of his office, positively foaming at the mouth;
I know, too, that he has concocted, or connived at the concoction of, false accusations against
prisoners placed in “ billets” where they were likely t-o see too much of the depons les cartes,
and could not bo made to act subserviently to their ends.
* * * * * * *
I trust that if any investigation does take place every encouragement will be given
to the prisoners to come forward and say what they know. The mental imbecility to
which the Superintendent would reduce all who come under his authority, and the conse-
quent intimidation which he can exercise, prevent many from ever speaking the truth ; but
they would do so if security from further tyranny were assured them. Mr. Ormsby, has
many most clever aides-de-camp, especially the man Hibbert, whom I have already
mentioned, and they do not hesitate to employ any artifice or perjury to support him in any
difficulty.
I must apologise to you for the length of this note, but I think you will yourself find
an excuse for it. I have always so longed to find some means of communicating with you when
I was upon the island, but I was so narrowly watched, and every one was a spy upon
me, for some reason or other, —for I believe the Engineer’s department looked upon me
as “ a chiel amang them taking notes,” as much as the other party did. Mr. Ormsby made
me promise, when I first went there, and before I knew anything of the place, that I would
never write anything to be sent off the island which had not been previously seen by him.
Of course this was done in anticipation of what might be. The present Chaplain, Mr. Agnew,
knows a good deal which, I should think, he could have no possible objection to divulge. I
have communicated much to him, and Mr. 0. tried hard to prevent my having any intercourse
with him.
* * * * *
I remain, &c.,
J. F. ALWORTH MEREWETHER.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX C.
COCKATOO ISLAND AND ITS DISCIPLINE.
To the Editor of the Empire.
Sir,
The mail which arrived to day placed ine in possession of several of your impres-
sions, containing a number of letters and editorial articles on the disgraceful state of our
Penal Establishment at Cockatoo Island. So far from the facts of these letters being exaggerated,
I can assure your readers that I can bear my humble testimony to their truthfulness, even to the
minutest particular. If it is possible for man to realise “ a hell upon earth ”we have only
to visit Cockatoo between the hours of six and eight in the evening, and there we have it in
all its hideous deformity. It is no exaggeration, Sir, to say that it is a liot-bed of vice—a
nursery of crime, a den of the blackest infamy, where crimes that'would rise the blush of
burning shame upon a demon’s cheek are nightly prrp tratcd, —and yet the guilty heartless
wretches who are the perpetrators of these diabolical crimes—crimes that brought such a fearful
■retribution on Sodom and Gomorrah—have been frequently chosen to rule and domineer over
their fellow prisoners. Even the ruffian Synnet, who attempted to assault Mr. Mann, and
called him “ a grey headed old -, ” who has been to Norfolk Island, and to all the penal
establishments in the Colony, and was even charged with committing a nameless offence, was
selected to fill the office of “ camp constable,” the highest official position it is possible
for a prisoner to occupy on the island ; and his predecessor was perhaps about as cold blooded
a monster as ever trod the surface of God’s green earth, and his successor but little better.
As to discipline, Sir, there is not such a commodity to be found on the island, except
it be in the military quarters. The prisoners are all huddled together like so many wild
beasts. The youth of eighteen, young and inexperienced in the ways of the world, being
linked with one whose hairs are grey with vice and villainy, and the clattering of whose
manacles proclaims him a murderer, or a felon of the deepest dye. The sad [results of this
constant association with the most hardened offenders are often but too apparent. Touch
pitch and defilement necessarily follows. Crime, like the liydra-headed cholera, is contagious,
as many a young man who has had to suffer punishment at Cockatoo will bear me testimony.
Immediately he lands on the island, no matter how high and respectable a position he might
previously have occupied, he is compelled to co-mingle with villians of every shade and dye.
At night ho is compelled to listen to the disgusting recital of their deeds of darkness—to their
fearful oaths—their awful imprecations —their threats of vengeance, —and sleep is banished
from his sorrowful eyes by the wild chorus of vulgar, ribald, and licentious songs. He
has no kind instructor to give him a word of advice; his clergyman he sees and hears but
for an hour on a Sabbath-day, and he is left to dwell in an atmosphere which religion never
pierces, and which is thoroughly impregnated with every species of degradation and depravity.
And this, Sir, is our Reformatory Institution ! —this the establishment to which we send our
criminals, in order to satisfy the law’s demands, and to make them wiser and better men.
Surely inquiry into such an abominable state of things becomes an imperative necessity.
There is one circumstance, Sir, which occurred in June, 1856, which appears to have
escaped the notice of your correspondents, and which I bring under your notice, in order to
show the gross carelessness which pervades every branch of the Penal Department of Cockatoo.
A young man, in the month and year above alluded to, went to the Resident Dispenser, and
complained of a severe pain in his side; he was told by the worthy disciple of Esculapius
that he was scheming, and that if he came again ho would put him in the cells. On the
following day he applied again, complaining still of an increasing pain in his side, and
received from the kind (?) Christian (?) dispenser a dose of strong Epsom salts, and told to
proceed to his work. His fellow-prisoners were moved to compassion at his unfortunate
position—disrobed themselves of their grey jackets, and made him a bed upon which to rest
his weary limbs. The next day he was received into the hospital, and in two days subse-
quently was a corpse! Exasperated to observe a young man cut off, at the age of twenty-one,
through gross negligence and cruelty, the prisoners made a complaint to the Superintendent,
and requested an investigation. The facts of the case were placed on paper, and laid before,
the Visiting Magistrate, who declined to interfere, and even gently rebuked Mr. Ormsby for
being so foolish as to allow the prisoners to make a charge against a free officer! The young
man died from [inflammation of the lungs; and there can be no doubt that, had he
received proper medical treatment in the first instance, he would have been alive to this day.
Facts, Sir, are stubborn things. Magna est verilas, et prevaelebit. It cannot be denied that
Cockatoo Island is in a most deplorable condition; and it becomes the duty of our present
Government to see that the wishes of the public are complied with, by a searching and rigid
investigation into the truthfulness of the statements which have recently gone forth to. the
world, bearing the strong impress of truth and veracity.
I enclose you my address, and remain, &c.
Darling Downs,
16 Oet., 1857.
G. H. W.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX D.
278, Pitl-street,
22 July, 1857.
Dear Sir,
I was truly grieved at the turn matters took yesterday morning, and you must
have remarked that I never made an observation nor spoke to either after the violent lan-
guage I heard used; but when you recollect that Mr. Ormsby is my personal friend, lam
sure you will feel, on reflection, the very unpleasant position you would put mo in if I were
to advise you against him. If you asked me if I would state what took place, if necessary,
my answer would be, certainly, honestly and impartially, if lie were my brother. If you do
not know how to act yourself in this matter, it- cannot be possible but you have a friend
capable to whom you should make a full statement and bo guided by him. You must have
perceived I did not bid Mr. Ormsby good-bye, neither did I wish you to accompany me to
the boat, so that neither party should suppose I acted with the slightest partiality, and,
should I ever be called on to express my opinion, you may rely I shall do so with the same
spirit.
Believe me, &c.,
GEO. WEST.
Saturday Morning.
(Reply.)
Let Mr. Peers prove before Dr. West when and where I made use of the expressions
lie accuses me of, relative to Dr. West’s non-attendance on Eriday week, for Monday morning
last is the only time I spoke to him since Sunday week. If he can prove such a thing, I will
willingly retract, but certainly not otherwise.
CHAS. ORMSBY.
Fits Roy Dry Dock,
29 July, 1857.
Dr. Peers,
Iu accordance with your request, I beg to state that I was present during the
time Mr. Ormsby was swearing at and abusing you on the morning of Tuesday, the 21st
July, and am willing at any time to state what I heard.
Yours truly,
JOHN DUFF.
July 24, 1857.
Sir,
In submitting to you the following remarks, I sincerely trust you will give
them your best consideration, which I feel assured, in your cooler moments, you will,
I sincerely regret the turn matters took on Tuesday last; what I said and did I con-
sidered to be my duty, and further, I believe you intended that Dr. West should know
of what you said. _ .
It is not impossible but I may be mistaken, but such was my impression. I assure you
most solemnly that I never tried to injure you as the private and personal friend of Dr.
West; on the contrary, I have often spokon to the Doctor of your kindness to me, to which
Dr. West can attest.
I feel that I cannot submit to the fearful language used by you to me on last Tuesday,
in the presence of my superior officer and the hearing of a number of convicts.
Whatever my present position may be in this island, I have always held that of a
gentleman, and, therefore, I trust and hope you will see the propriety of retracting your
assertions.
I am willing to make all allowances for your age, position, and, I must add, infirmity
of temper. I would not wish you to do anything derogatory to your position on this island,
or your character as a gentleman.
As to relative position being any impediment to your making any acknowledgment,
I feel you would add to the, dignity of a gentleman by recalling the offensive language used,
for, wore a noble to insult a.day.laborer who gets his bread by the sweat of his brow, and he
knew that laborer could not resent the insult by meeting him like a gentleman, I have no
hesitation in saying that that nobleman would sooner amply apologise than the feelings of
the laborer should be outraged.
In conclusion, let mo assure you that I never tried to injure you in any way whatever
since this affair took place; I have refrained to mention it to any one except Dr. West, who
declined to act in the matter, as you were bis personal friend.
I fervently hope you will consult your better feelings, which, I feel sure, will prompt
you to do that which is correct and just. Let me remind you that you are the father of a
family; you have sons; those sons have sisters—pray, let me ask you what your feelings would
be if one of your sons was called what you called me, and which I am ashamed to repeat;
you would feel as I do, that violence had been done to the feelings of yourself and family,
which nothing could remove but an ample apology.
J. F. PEERS.
Th.e language used to me was, that I was “ a damned liar, a damned scoundrel, and
a villain, and a damned pimp.”
" ' " J. F. P.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX E.
Mr. Samuel North examined, 20th October: —
I visit the island once a week, and hold Court. During the time I have been Visiting
Magistrate the convicts have behaved well. I have no suggestions to offer respecting their
general treatment. Do not consider any regulation respecting myself requires alteration,
nor respecting any other department on the island. I have always found that the discipline
of the island has been carried out for the good of the service, and that the Superintendent
has carried out the regulations and instructions faithfully. Eight months since, heard a
complaint against the Superintendent to the effect that the cooks made the homminy bad, in
order that it might be rejected and given to the Superintendent’s fowls. I inquired into the
matter, found the homminy bad, but had no reason to suspect that the homminy had been
wilfully spoiled. I recommended a course to remove suspicion for the future ; there was one
complaint since, but it proved without foundation. My recommendation was to throw un-
consumed homminy into the sea. Ido not believe there is a pig on the island ; there are fowls
and goats, but, I believe, in accordance with the regulations. During the Superintendent’s
absence from the island the Assistant Superintendent (Mr. Drown) takes charge The
prisoners’ daily rations are received by a delegate chosen by themselves; the delegate was
formerly appointed by Mr. Ormsby, but, for the satisfaction of the prisoners, they were allowed
to choose their own.
Mr. Ormsby examined
I have been Superintendent 16 years, and 44 years in the service; nearly 2on Nor-
folk Island as Assistant Superintendent of Convicts and Visiting Magistrate ; am exactly 60
years of age. I find the regulations for my guidance sufficient, and requiring no alteration.
I carry them out faithfully. There are no pigs on the island; there are goats, but not, so far
as lam aware, beyond the prescribed number. Send requisition for provisions every morning
to the contractor, Mr. Johnson. I draw the provisions for the convicts. The officers
generally make arrangements with the contractor. I inspect prisoners’ rations every morning ;
if bad, the provisions are condemned by a Board, and returned. There is a school on the
island to educate free children ; about 26 attend; they are taught by a convict; application
to Government fora free schoolmaster was formerly made, but refused. One Roman Catholic
and one Protestant clergyman attend twice a week. If a prisoner requires special attendance
of a clergyman he is sent for. Divine Service is performed on Sundays by each, once. I
somtimes attend, my Assistant Superintendent always. The sacrament has been administered
some three or four times in the last sixteen years—the last time was about eight months since.
There are three boats, viz., guard-boat, the visitors’ boat, and a spare boat belonging to the
island. The visitors’ boat is for taking officers to and fro. The boats are never sent pur-
posely for any other purpose, but visitors occasionally take the opportunity to come in the
boats. The officers of the Civil Engineer Department can, on application to me, obtain a
passage in these boats, on the same footing as my own officers. The usual way of transit to
the main is by Waterview. My two sons have boats. They are employed daily in Sydney,
and live with me. My sons are allowed to reside here and have boats, by verbal permission
of the late Governor General, communicated by the Visiting Magistrate, Capt. M'Lerie. They
never bring private visitors without authority to the island. My own private visitors get
the permission of the Visiting Magistrate, and come in the visitors’ boat. The officers of
my department get leave from me to leave the island ; the officers of other departments get
leave from their respective heads. My sons generally return from Sydney by 6 p.m., but
my younger son has been permitted to land as late as 11 at night. My daughters have
sometimes accompanied my sons to the play, and have returned as late as 12 o’clock at night.
Their boat is moored off at the proper buoy, in charge of the police. Letters written by the
prisoners to friends off the island a»e read by my clerk, initialled and sealed by him.
Capt. Mann examined :
I have had charge of the Engineer’s Department on the island during eight years,
especially the Dry Dock. The work of the dock has been done by prison labor, with a slight
exception. The men are handed to me, or my overseers, every morning, and are distributed.
I have at times doubted if all the available men have been handed over to me—that is,
mechanics have been retained for servants, &c., and laborers sent in their place on the works.
Eighteen months or so ago Perry, the black, was kept back; a shipwright was taken off the
works and employed in the cells. I did not make any official remonstrance in the matter.
I am instructed in Colonial Secretary’s letter of 24th March, 49, and 12th May, 52, to
perform all the mechanical works on the island. I have reason to suppose that such have been
performed without my authority. On the 29th October, 1856, a prisoner was kept from
work for the purpose of repairing slings for hauling up the Government boats; also, on the
27th of the same month, a requisition was made to Mr. Thomas for a man to build a chimney
to a forge, and was granted. I have no other specific complaint to make against the Super-
intendent of having prevented my carrying out my duties, but I do not consider I have
generally received cordial assistance from him. For instance, men having been taken off the
works at a critical period, of which I complained to the Government, and which was inves-
tigated and reported upon by a Board. Nothing has occurred of a like character since that
report. lam not impeded in any part of my duties by the Government Regulations.
* 17—K Mr.


23 OCTOBER, 1857.
Mr. John Taylor called in and examined :
lam Clerk to Superintendent and Clerk of Petty Sessions. I have been ten years
here, and .have charge of books and office, and have to keep records of Visiting Magistrate
and Superintendent—under whose orders I am. The daily requisition for rations for con-
victs is drawn out by me, and signed by the Superintendent, and then given to the con-
tractor. I do not draw the rations for the free officers; they are drawn by themselves.
Some families draw all bread, some meat and bread. I draw my rations of meat twice a
week, and my bread daily. Some officers compound with the contractor to secure meat
instead of bread, and vice versa. The contract valuations. The tea and sugar
of the free officers are supplied, monthly to the Superintendent, who distributes them. The
convicts are allowed sugar and salt, issued, the former twice a week, the latter once. These
rations are weighed over to the delegates. We draw full diet for the whole of the men on
the island, including those in hospital. The delegate issues the full diets to the overseer
of the hospital without consideration of the diet which may be ordered for the patients.
There is sometimes a surplus of homminy, chiefly in summer, which is invariably thrown into
the sea. All reports of complaints are made to the Superintendent, who acts on them per-
sonally. On any boat approaching the island, a report is made to the Superintendent; the
boat is received by the Superintendent, or his Assistant, who, for this purpose is the Inspector
of Police. A report is made daily of all boats and persons arriving and departing by the
Inspector. Report for 22nd annexed.
If complaints are made of any provisions, a Board is appointed by the Superintendent
to investigate, in accordance with the provisions of the contract for supplies.
The man who supplies the indulgencies to the convicts, which they purchase out of
their task money, is a Mr. Chandler, —attends the island every morning. Twice a week the
prisoners come to the office, and the articles they require are taken down on the list, paid for
at the time at Chandler’s prices, communicated to the convicts by mo. The following morning
the list is given to Chandler, with the money, and the day after the goods are supplied. The
indulgencies consist in tea, sugar, coffee and tobacco. Mr. Chandler supplies also free persons
on the island including Mr. Ormsby, the Assistant Superintendent, and all free officers, more
or less. Mr. Chandler supplies to them the same articles at the price paid by the prisoners.
A shop list, as laid before the Board, is a specific list of articles required by each
man, and of the sums paid by each ; an abstract is furnished to the shopkeeper ; the sum is
paid here and the receipt taken. (A. receipt was shewn to the Board.')
Complaints have been made, but not lately; all such are immediately communicated
to the Visiting Magistrate, and his decision taken and recorded.
All payments of public claims against the department are made by the Visiting
Magistrate, by cheques drawn on sum placed to his credit at the Joint Stock Bank, and the
account kept on the usual Government form. A task-work return is made by me monthly;
the task-work clerk shewing the total amount of credit due to each man, —this is called the
Task-work Register.
By the Board: Is there any check that the proper number of rations is issued to the
prisoners daily, and no more ? Yes. The check is that a list is supplied monthly to the
Colonial Secretary showing the number of convicts rationed daily on the island; the con-
tractor’s claim is made out by himself from the requisitions, and is checked in the Superin-
tendent’s office before payment by the Visiting Magistrate; and the Government is able
to check the quantity demanded in the requisitions from the returns we make to the Colonial
Secretary.
Mr. Ormsby called in and examined:—
I remember the circumstance (stated in N.B’s letter of 22nd September in Empire
of 26th) of a disturbance on the island on Sunday; it* occurred in the afternoon, in the
prisoners’ yard, not during Divine Service. The circumstance was as stated in my letter to
Visiting Magistrate forwarding my replies to this and other charges in the Empire.
With reference to the discharge of the prisoner " Old Fox,” —he was discharged on
the recommendatien of the Classification Board, by direction of His Excellency the Governor
General. I produce the letter communicating the decision of the Government. With res-
pect to the prisoners Clarke and Roberts, they concealed themselves for the purpose of escape.
I brought the case before the Visiting Magistrate, who discharged them; no reason for their
discharge was recorded. Whenever a case of unnatural crime has been brought before me,
I have reported it to the Visiting Magistrate; and whenever I have a doubt or suspicion of
such a crime being contemplated, I have taken the precaution of immediately separating the
parties. With respect to the Chinaman, —there was one sent to the cells for refusing to work ;
he had a desire to make a complaint, and at his desire an interpreter was sent for and came ;
he made his complaint to the Visiting Magistrate, who investigated it on 22nd April,
1857; his name was Tan, the man seen in the cells by the Board on the 20th instant. The
nature of the complaint was that he was convicted of an offence of which he was not guilty,
and that his former master, Mr. Sandeman, owed him money. He had asked for an inter-
preter several times before one was obtained, and before he was confined in the cells. An
interpreter was obtained as soon as possible.
With respect to the sparring alleged to have taken place on the island —there was a
man named Perry, overseer of the cells, a tall, athletic man, a boxer; he served two sen-
tences here. I never witnessed a sparring match between him and another person. I never
visited the yard, nor did either of my sons, to my knowledge, during a sparring match. I
never knew of a sparring match going on. I have heard a few days after the occurrence that
one has taken place between Captain Macdonald and Perry during the time Mr. Naper, of
the


the 11th, was officer of the guard. Captain Macdonald and some of his friends came to the
island on a visit to Mr. Naper, by an order of the Brigade Major. At Mr. Naper’s request
I allowed Perry to go to the officers’ quarters, on the ground that Captain Macdonald wished
to see him. I was informed a few days after that lie and Captain Macdonald had sparred
together. I did not know that Perry was required for the purpose of. sparring, or I should
not have allowed him to go. Neither of my sons were present at the match. Sinclair,
another boxer, was prisoner on the island with Perry. I was not present at any match
between them, or my sons, to my knowledge. I don’t remember hearing, of a match between
them in public or private on the island. Perry was a very remarkable man. Five years
ago my younger son, I believe, received some lessons from Perry without my knowledge, or
consent. Neither Perry nor Sinclair was ever employed as cooks. Sinclair was by trade a
barber. Sinclair was discharged from the island about five years ago—Perry for the second
time two months since.
lam aware it has been said that a cedar plank was found near my quarters. Three
decayed boards of little or no value were so found, which I believe had been taken from the
stores by someone, I don’t know by whom, or how they came there. I had nothing to do
with it. I thought at the time they wore put there for the purpose of annoying me. I
reported the circumstance to the Visiting Magistrate, in a letter dated 21st August, 1856, of
which I hand in a copy.
"With reference to the charge that I had refused to give the visitors’ boat to the
Chaplain to proceed to Sydney, on the ground of its being repaired, I do not recollect the
circumstance. I have gone in the visitors’ boat with my family on a picnic. .1 do not know
of any regulation forbidding me to use the boat so. lam in the habit of using it one day-
in the week for my private purposes, that is, taking myself and family to Sydney in the
morning, and returning to dinner at three o’clock, keeping the boat during the time. I have
not used the boat for picnics more than three times for the last sixteen years. I have not
used the visitors’ boat for my own more than one day in seven. I consider the visitors’ boat
under my orders in the absence of the Visiting Magistrate, and I am responsible for the use
of it.
Mr. North re-examined :
The visitors’ boat is under my orders when I require it, at other times it is under the
Superintendent’s orders, for public purposes. I know of no authority for the boat being used
for picnics or for any private purpose. lam aware that the Superintendent has used it to
go with his family to Sydney once a week. I found that custom existing when I took
charge as Visiting Magistrate, and I have not interfered with it, supposing that it had the
sanction of authority.
Mr. James Henry Thomas was called in and examined as follows:
1. By the Chairman: You are, I believe, a Civil Engineer? Yes.
2. And were lately employed upon the works on Cockatoo Island ? Yes, as Resident
Engineer.
3. Under Mr. Mann ? Yes. :
4. How long have you been employed in that capacity ? Nearly four years.
5. Of what class of persons did your workmen consist ? They were all prisoners; we
employed no free labor, with the exception of two or three men who came out from England
as mechanics, to put up the caisson.
6. The overseers—what were they ? They were all free men.
7. But not belonging to your establishment? Yes.
8. You had quarters on the island, had you not ? Yes.
9. Had you any family with you ? My wife.
10. There have been a series of papers laid before us, published in the Empire newspaper,
letters and articles relating to the state of Cockatoo Island, —are you aware of the circum-
stances referred to in them ? Yes, lam aware of many of them.
11. Will you be good enough to look at this paper, the Empire of the 26th September.
(The Chairman handed the paper to the witness.') You will there find a letter signed
“N. B.” ? Yes.
12. Do you observe that this letter signed “N. B.” is dated September 22nd? Yes.
13. Were you upon the island on the Sunday previous to that date? No, I was not there.
14. You had left the island at that time ? Yes.
15. Then I presume you cannot speak upon any facts stated in that letter ? No, not to this
particular fact, but I have often during my residence on the island heard the same thing on
Sunday.
16. What have you heard ? A great noise in the camp, hallooing, and so forth ; in fact
almost every Sunday.
17. Were you in the habit of spending Sunday on the island ? Occasionally.
18. And you have heard disturbances and noises upon that day similar to those described in
this letter ? Yes, the whole four years I have been upon the island.
19. At what time of the day? Generally in the afternoon; in the morning they were
generally pretty quiet, on account of the clergymen coming down.
20. At what time in the afternoon have you heard this ? In the afternoon or evening, when
they were all mustered, and when they were in the wards as well, there was generally singing
going on.
21. Was that on the Lord’s Day more than on any other ? Ido not say that it was more on
the Lord’s Day, but every evening when they were in the wards they were singing.
22.


22. You are aware, I suppose, what time the Roman Catholic Clergymen spent on the
island ? He used to come sometimes in the morning; I forget whether it was before or after
the Protestant Clergyman.
23. Did you attend either service? No ; only three officers attended.
24. Do you know the time of attendance of the Protestant Clergyman ? He came in the
morning, but I cannot say the time.
25.. You cannot say whether these noises were during the time these gentlemen were on the
island ? They generally came in the morning, and very seldom these noises were in the
morning.
26. Are you quite sure you are correct about that—did they both come at the same time, or
did they come at different times ? They did not come together, because the boat used to go
in with one, and upon its return bring the other.
27. Look at this paper, the Empire of the 2nd October, and you will there see a letter
signed “ Witness” ? (The Chairman handed the paper to the witness .) Yes.
28. Can you speak to the facts contained in that letter? I have read the letter, and I
believe everything stated in that letter is perfectly correct.
29. Are you the author of this letter? No ; of neither of the letters you have shewn.
30. Did you see it before it was printeil ? No.
31. Do you know the author of it ? No; I know the author of the first, but not of the
second.
32. Respecting the rules and regulations—are you acquainted with the rules and regulations
of the island ? No ; Ido not know that there are any connected with the penal department;
I have never seen any beyond the general regulations of the island; I have a copy of them,
but they are not very explicit.
33. Were there any regulations affecting your establishment ? All the regulations I had
came from Captain Mann.
34.. Will you be so good as to look at these regulations, and you will see some referring to
the Civil Engineer—were you acquainted with these on the island ? (The Chairman
handed to the witness the General Code of Regulations, approved by the Executive Council,
KHh September, 1855.) These are the regulations I have seen.
35. You are acquainted with them ? ' Yes, we have a copy of them in the office.
36. Do you know of any breach of the first of these regulations in your own person ? No
breach of it from the time these regulations were made.
37. You know the regulations —is any one of them in itself such as to have been an
impediment to you in the performance of your duties as Civil Engineer? No, I do not
know that any of them were, without looking through them.
38. I suppose you have made yourself acquainted with these regulations before ? No, Ido
not think so.
39. Has the operation of any rule been such as to impede you in the execution of your duty
as Civil Engineer ? No.
40. Bi/ Captain Ward: Have these regulations, as far as concerns yourself, been administered
oppressively ? With the exception of that one allowing people to land upon the island, I
do not know of any. Mr. Ormsby allowed his own friends to land upon the island, to see
his own family, without the order of the Visiting Magistrate, but he would not allow mine.
41. In allowing his own friends to land on the island, has he acted in conformity with these
regulations ? Yes.
42. By the Chairman: Of your own knowledge —and I must ask you particularly as to
that —of your own knowledge, do you know of any infringement of these regulations? Yes;
an infringement of the regulation, that no person having daily business in Sydney should be.
allowed to reside on the island.
43. What is that instance? Two sons of Mr. Ormsby, who are resident.on the island, have
daily business in Sydney.
44. Is there any other point you can mention ? No, I think that is the only one.
45. Do you know of any irregularity to which that circumstance gives rise, of your own
knowledge ? No, I cannot say that I do.
46. Do you know, of your own knowledge, of any person having applied to the Superintendent
for the regulations, who has not been able to obtain them ? I have often heard the police
47. That is why I guard myself; I say, do you know of your own knowledge ? No, Ido not.
48. Was there a policeman named Gleadall discharged on the charge of drunkenness? Yes.
49. You know that as a fact ? Yes.
50. That was in your time ? Yes, in my time.
51. Was he discharged from the police ? He was.
52. Do you know anything, of your own knowledge, with reference to the charge—whether
he was drunk or not ? Not of my own knowledge; I was in no way connected with the
police and could not know.
53. But you said just now that you knew the facts stated in the letter to be true, and I am
anxious to have them categorically stated—by whom was he discharged ? By the Visiting
Magistrate, but upon the advice of Mr. Ormsby.
54. Upon the complaint of Mr. Ormsby, I presume, you mean —his complaint or advice—do
you know, of your own knowledge, whether that man had asked for the regulations ? Not of
my own knowledge.
55. Do you know anything of the circumstances of an assault being committed on the police
on the North Shore ? Not of my own knowledge, but from hearsay.
56. Did you ever know any person to be punished, directly or indirectly, for demanding to see
the regulations ? No, not of my own knowledge. I have heard it complained of.
57. Did any prisoner ever complain to you that he had been punished for violating rules he
had not the means of knowing? No.
58.


58. Did you ever know, of your own knowledge, of anyone being sentenced to the cells for
insolence to the Superintendent or overseers ? Yes; I recollect one case where a prisoner
came up and wanted to see the Governor, I think it was during the time the Governor was
on the island, and Mr. Onnsby refused to allow him ; he was very insolent to Mr. Ormsby,
and was sent to the cells by him. I know that cf my own knowledge, for I was present; but
I have heard of many other cases.
59. You were present and saw that the man was insolent ? I was present on that occasion.
60. Do you know anything of a particular Chinaman being committed to the cells for
throwing down his tools and saying he would not work ? Yes; I recollect one case of that
kind.
61. Were you present ? Yes.
62. Did you see him throw down the tools, and hear him say he would not work ? Yes; 1
saw him throw down his tools.
63. Did he speak in English ? No.
64. Did you hear what he said ? No.
65. Were you near enough ? Yes; he said something in Chinese.
66. Not in English ? No.
67. He threw down his tools and walked away 1 Yes.
68. What had he been working at ? I know he had a pick in his hand.
69. Had you seen him for any length of time working with a pick ? Yes, just before. Ido
not know whether that is the case referred to there.
70. Had he been working any time that you saw him? He had been some time—several
times.
71. I mean on this day—l am only inquiring about this day ? It was somewhere about the
middle of the day.
72. Had he other men at work with him ? Yes ; there was a gang with him.
73. He threw down his pick and walked away, saying something in Chinese, which you did
not understand ? Yes.
74. Did you hear him say, “ Interpreter no come, Ino work” ? No, I did not hear him.
75. You were so near as to hear him speak in Chinese ? Yes.
76. But not in English ? Not in English.
77. Did you ever know of any prisoner in a cell desiring to attend Divine Service on the
Lord’s Day? No.
78. Were you ever present when the Superintendent inspected letters sent by the prisoners
or received by them ? I have been present.
79. Will you tell us on what occasion, and what transpired—what was the mode of doing
it ? I could not say the date; but I remember one day being there when the Superintendent
inspected a letter of a prisoner. There was something he wished to refer to in one of the
letters, and he called Mr. Taylor to hand him over that particular letter, and he then read it
out to me.
80. Mr. Ormsby read it? Mr. Ormsby.
81. Who else was in the office ? Mr. Taylor; Ido not think any one else.
82. Did any prisoner ever complain to you of the mode in which his letter was read ? No.
83. Was there anything indecent or unbecoming in the mode in which Mr. Ormsby read
this letter ? He laughed over it: it was something about a sister.
84. W r ith whom did he laugh ? With me and Mr. Taylor : there was some queer expres-
sion made use of in the letter.
85. Was the convict present himself ? No.
86. Was any other prisoner? I would not be certain whether one of the prisoner clerks was
there, but he has been there two or three times when letters have been read over.
87. Did you observe any indecency in the mode of reading the letter ? No further than he
would read the funny passages and say, “ This is a queer thing to say.”
88. He made that remark aloud ? Yes.
89. Was the prisoner present on either of those occasions? No.
90. And the remarks he has made have raised a laugh? Yes, they have raised a laugh.
91. Did you ever hear any one charged with committing an. unnatural crime which was not
inquired into ? Yes.
92. How did you know it ? I knew it from hearsay; as to the charge itself, I could not of
course possibly know.
93. Did any of the prisoners tell you that such a charge was made ? I have heard from
people on the island with reference to the two men that concealed themselves that they did
so for the purpose of committing an unnatural offence.
94. Was it the report of the island that the two men you allude to —that is the two men
who absconded and concealed themselves on the island —did conceal themselves for the
purpose of committing an unnatural offence ? Yes ; and I believe Mr. Ormsby told Mr.
Duff
95. That is going too far —were you present when Mr. Ormsby told Mr. Duff anything ?
No.
96. And you never inquired into the real facts of that case ? No.
97. Are you aware whether the Visiting Magistrate did ? No.
98. Was it his duty to do so? I believe it is.
99. Do you know of any person on the island having been accused of appropriating the
provisions of the prisoners? No, but I have heard it; I know Mr. Ormsby was accused of
appropriating the rations of the prisoners.
100. Do you know under what circumstances or to what extent ? No ; I think it was seven
pounds of beef one morning that was taken up to his place.
101. Do you know the circumstances? No; no further than that it was taken to his place
and appropriated by him.
* 17—L 102.


102. Do you know that he did take that? No ; I only know by hearsay.
103. You say you are not the writer of the letter sigued “ Witness,” and do not know who
is ? No, but I know who “N. B.” is
104. But you do not know “ Witness ?” Not “ Witness.”
105. Did you ever know any act committed by Mr. Ormsby that was unjust or discreditable
to the establishment ? Yes.
106. Tell me what it was ? There was one ease, where I could not say that he took the cedar,
but we missed a large plank of cedar out of the lumber yard; I informed Mr. Ormsby that it
had been taken from the engineering stores, and he said, “ Well, I will make inquiries and
“ see who has taken it.” He came came out of the gate about a quarter of an hour afterwards,
and said he heard one of my own foremen (Mr. Cahil) had got it in his quarters. I went down
to Mr. Cahil’s quarters, and told him I had heard such a report; he denied that it was true,
and I then looked about the premises and found there was nothing there. I went to Mr.
Ormsby, and told him Mr. Cahil had not got it. He said “ Never mind, wait a little longer,
we “ will try and find out who has taken it.” Some time after that it was brought down from
his house by the gardener to Mr. Cahil.
107. By Captain Waid: Which do you think the discreditable part of the transaction on
the part of Ormsby ? Mr. Ormsby must have known it was in his place.
108. How must he have known ? A large cedar plank could hardly be taken without his
knowledge.
109. You consider that Mr. Ormsby knew —you only believe that he knew ? 1 believe he knew.
110. By the Chairman: You say you spoke to Mr. Ormsby about it yourself? Yes.
111. And that then he told you what he supposed about it ? Yes.
112. Had the plank been lost on the day you spoke to Mr. Ormsby about it, or previously ?
On that day.
113. The day it was missed? Yes ; it was during dinner time it was missed —between one
and two o’clock.
114. Was Mr. Ormsby on the island on the day on which it was missed —be particular about
that ? Yes.
115. You are quite sure of that ? I feel sure of it that he was on the island.
116. You are sure that he was not off the island on that day, and that he did not comeback
the next? Yes.
117. By Mr. Merewether: Was it a plank of any value—was it a two-inch or a one-incli
plank ? I think it was a two-inch plank, and twelve or fourteen feet long.
118. Was it sound ? It was sound.
119. Useful timber ? Useful timber.
120. By Captain Ward: For what purpose do you think Mr. Ormsby would have appro-
priated it had he taken it ? To the making of furniture ; I know he has done a great deal
in that way.
121. Can you say that from your own knowledge ? I have never been in his place, so that
I cannot say from my own knowledge, but I have seen it go up from the wharf—legs of chairs
and tables that have been turned in Sydney.
122. Not from Government timber ? I could not say from Government timber.
123. By Mr. Merewether : What did you purpose using the cedar plank for ? We had it
in stock to use it for patterns and a variety of things.
124. By the Chairman : Respecting the use of the boat for the officers of the establishment—
have you any complaint to make with respect to the mode in which that boat was used ?
The officers of the engineering department could never have the use of it. I have been down
to the boat, and wanted to go to Sydney, and have been refused by the coxswain.
125. Did you ever apply to the Superintendent? I have applied to the Superintendent, and
he has told me that the boat belonged to his department, and he would not let any one else
use it.
126. By Captain Ward: Have you been refused since these regulations have been in force ?
Yes.
127. Can you specify any particular instances when you have been refused? I could not
specify the dates, but I could say for certain 'I have been refused half a dozen times since
these regulations have been in force.
128. Upon the plea that the boat has been required for the public service ? No ; it has been
going to town with no one in but the crew. Upon one particular occasion Mr. Kenyon, the
Roman Catholic Clergyman, was going to town. I went down to the wharf and was going
into the boat, when they refused to go off with the boat and to take me to town. They said
I had no right in the boat.
129. By Mr. Mereu-ether: Was this occurrence subsequent to the promulgation of the
rules ? Yes.
130. By the Chairman : Have you ever known the boat to be used for parties of pleasure?
Yes, many times. I have seen it go away with stores up Lane Cove; on one occasion I saw
it go up to Five Dock, and I have seen it go away to various parts of the harbour.
131. How often have you seen that? While I was on the island I should say from twenty
to thirty times I have seen the boat come back from pleasuring.
132. On these occasions was Mr. Ormsby in the boat? Yes, or some of his family.
133. You have seen that twenty or thirty times? Yes.
134. Can you say what length of time the boat has been absent? I have known it to be
away till ten o’clock at night, and it has gone away at nine or ten o’clock in the morning.
135. Upon these parties of pleasure ? Yes.
136. Have you known it to be away at ten o’clock at night frequently, when it has been
employed in these pleasure parties ? Yes; I have known it even later than twelve, as
late as one o’clock, and I have even known it to be away all night, and to come home early
in the morning with him.
137.


137. On these occasions when it has returned so very late at night, or early in the morning,
lias it been employed in these parties of pleasure or picnics ? Yes.
138. When Mr. Ormsby was one of the company? Yes.
139. And this has occurred so often as twenty or thirty times while you were there ? Yes. :
I will take one occasion, when he went away up Lane Cove. When Mr. Penderill, the
clergyman, came down to the boat, the Inspector, Mr. Dunning, told him that the boat was
being repaired. I know that for a fact, for I was on the wharf, and Mr. Dunning told me he
had to tell Mr. Penderill that story.
140. By Mr. Merewether: Did you hear him tell him? No; but Mr. Dunning told me
that he had to tell him that as an excuse. Mr. Penderill said to me—“ This boat is being
“ repaired,” and I said, “ No, I have seen it go up Lane Cove.”
141. By Captain Ward: Did Mr. Penderill apply to Mr. Ormsby for the boat? I do not
know.
142. You do not know whether he applied to Mr. Ormsby or to the Inspector for the boat ?
No.
143. Do you know whether Mr. Ormsby instructed him to say that the boat was being
repaired ? No.
144. Then you do not know whether it was by the authority of Mr. Ormsby that the
Inspector so informed the clergyman ? No.
145. It might have been stated on the Inspector’s own responsibility? Yes.
146. By the Chairman : You know the fact of Mr. Pendrill not being able to go to town
with the boat, and that at the time the boat was away on a picnic excursion ? Yes.
147. By Mr. Merewether: Who were the persons in the boat ? Miss Ormsby was one.
148. Was Mr. Ormsby in the boat ? I cannot say, but I know some of the family had gone
away in the boat.
149. By Captain Ward: Can you name the date ? No.
150. Can you state whether, on that occasion, Mr. Ormsby had leave of the Visiting Magis-
trate to leave the island ? No.
151. You say they •went on a picnic—how do you know that —did they take provisions with
them ? Yes.
152. You are sure they did not go to Sydney ? No; they went up Lane Cove.
153. By Mr. Merewether: In which direction is Five Dock from the island, to the east or
the west ? To the east, between the dock and lialmain side.
154. You are quite certain that on the occasion you have referred to they were going to
Five Dock and not to Sydney ? On that occasion the officer, Mr. Davis, was in the boat;
they went up Five Dock at that time; they were going fishing.
155. Is that in the opposite direction to Sydney ? Yes, just the reverse.
156. Can you see the entrance to Lane Cove from the island, so as to be quite assured that
the boat did not go to Sydney on those occasions to which you have referred ? Yes; Lane
Cove is just opposite.
157. By the Chairman : Do you, of your own knowledge, know whether the boat’s crew have
any indulgence not allowed to the other officers of the police ? I have never seen them do
duty as policeman, and I should have seen them on the island if they had been so employed.
158. Did you ever know the circumstance of any convict in irons going in the boat which
conveyed the chaplain from the island ? Yes, it was upon the occasion when the boat went
up Lane Cove.
159. AVhat boat was that he went into ? One of the smaller boats, employed to cross to
Balmain.
160. On the occasion when Mr. Pendrill went in a boat with a convict in irons the proper
boat was absent upon a picnic up Lane Cove ? Yes.
161. In the Empire of the sth October, there is a letter signed “ Another Witness”—will
you look at that. (77ie Chairman handed the paper to the-witness.') Do you know the
facts stated in that letter ? I know some of them by hearsay.
162. Are you the writer of that letter ? lam the writer.
163. Were you present upon one occasion when the Superintendent made use of expressions
to the dispenser of the island unfit to be repeated ? I have only seen the correspondence.
164. Do you know the fact of your own knowledge ? I was not present, but I have seen Dr.
West’s letter, in which he states it.
165. Do you know a prisoner on the island named Perry ? Yes.
166. Have you ever seen him ? Yes.
167. Have you ever seen him spar ? No.
168. Were you present at any time when this prisoner was sparring ? No.
169. As to, the fourth question in this letter —have you told us what you know of that pro-
ceeding with respect to the cedar plank ? Yes.
170. Did you ever know the Superintendent to take a man into the hospital who had been
reported by the doctor as fit for work ? Yes.
171. Who was that man ? Spencer was the man.
172. What was he ? A carpenter.
173. You know that he took a carpenter named Spencer into the hospital after he had been
reported by the doctor fit to work ? Yes.
174. What has become of that man ? He has left the island.
175. Was he employed in any way ? Yes, up at Mr. Ormsby’s.
176. Are you aware of that of your own knowledge ? No, lam not; but I have heard him
say so.
177. Do you remember the circumstance of a number of prisoners leaving the works ? Yes.
178. You know that of your own knowledge ? Yes; I was present upon one occasion when a
number of prisoners left the works.
179. Did you complain, or were you present when any complaint was lodged with the
Superintendent about that ? Yes; I went in and complained to the Superintendent.
180.


180. What was the result of that ? I was up at the time at my office, which was then next
to Mr. Ormsby’s. I went in to him, saying that these men had left the works, and had come
up to me in a threatening way, and I asked him to give me some assistance in sending them
away. This he refused, and said he could not do anything with them, and could not send
them down. The men remained there for some time, in a very threatening manner.
181. When the men left the works what did they do? They came up to my office, which
was next Mr. Ormsby’s, and commenced abusing me at the gate.
182. And you went and complained to Mr. Ormsby ? Yes.
183. And asked for some assistance in sending them away ? Yes.
184. What did he say or do ? He said he would have nothing at all to do with it, and
refused to give me any assistance.
185. What became of the matter? After remaining some time, they walked away on to the
works.
186. By Captain Ward: Was this a matter that the former Board inquired into—was it
connected with the men working in the water? No.
187. This particular circumstance was not inquired into by the former Board ? I believe not.
188. By the Chairman: Do you know, of your own knowledge, the fact of the prisoners
refusing in a body to go to work ? I was not present on that occasion, but I know it from
hearsay.
189. The eighth paragraph in your letter you have already referred to —you say the chaplain
went away in a small boat, with a convict in irons, while the proper boat was away at a
picnic ? Yes.
190. You have told us of this boat having been employed for parties of pleasure —do you
know how frequently it was employed on any private business of the Superintendent ?
From hearing the policeman say so; of course I could not know it of my own knowledge,
unless I had been constantly in the boat.
191. In reference to paragraph 11 of this letter—do you know whether the Superintendent
has upon any occasion borrowed money from any of the prisoners ? I have been told so.
192. Have any of the prisoners told you that they have lent money to the Superintendent ?
No.
193. Do you know any instance whatever of any person having been singled out as an object
of persecution, for having made complaints ? Yes.
194. Tell me the parties ? John Henry was one of the prisoners singled out.
195. Tell us what the circumstances connected with him were? He was a man who worked
very well for us, and I tried to obtain for him an overseer’s place, and succeeded; but Mr.
Ormsby objected, and said he would not have this man for an overseer, although the reports
from all the foremen were most favorable to the man’s conduct on the works. Upon several
occasions, on the smallest pretext, he was put into the cells.
196. Have you ever known any prisoner to be treated with injustice by Mr. Ormsby ? Yes,
I believe that was a piece of injustice in that case.
197. Do you know any of the prisoners who have been the objects of particular favor ?
Yes, I know tw r o prisoners, now at present in his office, who are in particular favor.
198. Who are they ? Keogh is one.
199. Who is the other ? lam not certain of his name.
200. What is the particular favor shewn to them ? They are allowed to walk about the
works and look about just the same as free men ; I have complained to Mr. Ormsby about it.
These men would come and stand with their hands on their sides and look about the works
the same as free men.
201. You think these men are treated with undue favor ? Yes.
202. Do you know any reason for that ? The clerks holding the same rank in the Engineer’s
office are not allowed out on Sunday; these men are. They walk about the island, sit by the
flag-staff, and go where they please; in fact the free overseers are in dread of these men. I
have complained to Mr. Ormsby many times about these men.
203. You regarded them with suspicion—as spies? Yes.
204. You mention Mr. Mannion as an instance of a person who complained, and was singled
out as an object of persecution—was he on the island during your time ? It was before my
time.
205. You also mention Mr. Ainslie ? Mr. Ainslie was there during my time.
206. Do you know any instance of persecution to which he was exposed ? He was not
allowed to go off the island on several occasions, I have heard. Mr. M'Lerie would not let
him leave.
207. Mr. Collier? Mr. Collier was dismissed on account of having said that something was
under consideration; lie said he was dismissed for having appeared to be on the side of the
Civil Engineer.
208. By Captain Ward: Are you certain, as- a matter of fact, that that was the reason of his
being dismissed ? I only known from his own statement, and from the general belief of the
people on the island; I have not seen the correspondence.
209. By Mr. Merewelher: Whose department was he in—was he in the penal department?
He was partly in one and partly in the other. The Engineer’s department paid him for what
he did for that, and the penal department for what he did for that; but he was considered
to belong more to the penal than to the other department.
210. Was it from the fact of his being employed there as a penal officer that you got his
services ? Yes. He was put down on our abstract as well as upon the other.
211. By the Chairman : Were you on the works at the time an inquest was held on the
body of a prisoner who was killed in the dock ? Yes.
212. Do you know, of your own knowledge, the circumstances under which that man met with
his death? Not of my own knowledge.
213. Did you see him after his death ? Yes.
211.


and in consequence the matter was referred to the Inspectors of Prisons in Ireland, andAhey
wrote to say that, under the Act, he had no power to compel me to attend him.
81. Does Mr. Ormsby get the use of the medicines ? I do not know; he may have done,
once or twice—any small thing.
82. Or any of his family? lie has very seldom required any thing.
83. Or any any of the free servants ? They all do.
84. Are they entitled to it ? I think they are; they were always entitled to it in Ireland.
85. By Mr. Merewether : If a record were kept of the prescriptions, would you not then be
able to check the consumption ? I think not ; for instance, in making an infusion, the
dispenser might burn it, and then it would have to be thrown away. Medicine, above all
things, is one you cannot make a second use of.
86. By Captain Ward: What is your general opinion of Mr. Ormsby’s government of the
island ? I must say Ido not think any one could be more anxious to carry out the govern-
ment of the island efficiently. He may err in judgment, but he is anxious to see the duties
properly carried out.
87. Did you ever hear of Mr. Ormsby’s life having been threatened, as stated in Mr. Pendrill’s
letter ? I think Mr. Ormsby told me of some man going to attack him, and that he took up
a ruler and knocked him down.
88. Has there been during your time an inquest upon a man who died there ? There have
been many, but I have not been at them.
89. By Mr. Mertireiher : Was there an inquest upon a Chinaman who was said to have been
murdered, or knocked down from' a wall on the works ? I recollect I saw the man.
90. Were you called in ? I was not called in.
91. By Captain Ward: Did you hear recently that a prisoner threatened the life of the
Visiting Magistrate ? I know they are a most diabolical set; one of them attacked the
dispenser; but I never received offence from any man on the island. They are always civil
and obedient, and lam generally very sharp with them. Ido not give way to them.
The Reverend Philip Agnew was called in and examined, as follows :
1. By the Chairman : You are a clergyman of the Church of England ? Yes.
2. And are at present chaplain of Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
3. How long have you been in charge of Cockatoo Island ? I think about five months.
4. Have you any other charge ? Yes; lam chaplain of Darlinghurst Gaol, and also to the
Immigration Barracks.
5. Have you been long engaged in such duties ? Yes; I was some ten years ago chaplain of
Darlinghurst Gaol, and chaplain of immigrants. I have had a good deal to do with men of
that class and description.
6. How often do you visit the island? Twice, and sometimes three times a week.
7. Always on the Lord’s Day ? Yes, always.
8. And if there be any urgency are you sent for ? I have never been sent for particularly ;
but I always hold myself ready to go if I am.
9. Where do you perform Divine Service on the island ? In the usual place ; I believe it is
used as a dining room ; it is where the men mess.
10. Is that convenient for the purpose ? Yes, very, considering the other accommodation
there.
11. Do you go through the whole of the service? Yes, Igo through the whole of the after-
noon service.
12. Do you preach a sermon ? Yes, every Lord’s Day.
13. What is the conduct of the men during divine service ? They are very peaceable and
very respectful, but there is one peculiarity I have remarked about them. In the gaol at
Darlinghurst the men stand or sit according to the portion of the service read, but at Cockatoo
that is not so well observed; they generally sit.
14. Throughout the whole service ? Yes.
]5. Have you ever explained their duty to them in that respect ? I have hinted it to them,
but I have never made it a particular point to insist upon it,
16. Do you not think you should, in the case of people of that class, instruct them as to the
proper attidude of devotion ? It struck me as arising from this cause, —that at Darlinghurst
the Principal Gaoler, when well, is always present, and the people follow his example as to
rising and sitting. This is not the case at Cockatoo.
17. Does the Superintendent of the island attend your service ? No, never.
18. And never has during your time ? No. I think it would be as well if he did.
19. Do the civil officers of the establishment ? Yes, several of them ; three or four of them.
20. Does the Assistant Superintendent, Mr. Brown ? No, Mr. Brown does not attend.
21. Do the overseers attend ? Two of them pretty regularly.
22. Only two out the whole number of overseers ? Yes; there is a person also who acts, I
think, as clerk of the establishment.
23. Mr. Taylor? No.
24. Is there a man who officiates as schoolmaster? Yes.
25. Are the overseers free men or convicts ? Free men.
26. Then on the part of the overseers it is a matter of choice whether they will attend or
not ? It is so.
27. Then there is no superintendence but of these men during Divine Service ? No.
28. Are you aware whether Mr. Ormsby is a Protestant or not? He is.
29. And the other overseers of whom you have spoken, are they Protestants ? They are
Protestants.
30. Is Mr. Brown a Protestant ? He does not attend, and I have never inquired.
*l7_N 31.


31. What number of Bibles and Prayer Books have you on the island ? There is a Prayer
Book for each person. They are plentifully supplied with respect to Prayer Books, but they
want a couple of dozen Bibles.
82. How many Bibles are there ? About fifty.
33. Are there any other religious books ? A few, but not sufficient.
34. Under whose care are they kept during the days you are not there? They are kept in
an apartment under the charge of one of the overseers, who has a list of them.
35. Do you occasionally look into that department ? Every week.
36. Are the books kept in respectable order ? Yes.
37. Are they much dilapidated ? Many are almost worn out, others are stained.
38. Have you lately made any requisition to the Government for any books ? No.
39. Do you think it desirable that such a requisition should be made ? I think it is.
40. Then why have you not made it—Do any of the men send for you to have private con-
ferences on religious matters ? Yes ; but more particularly with reference to other circum-
stances connected with them.
41. Do they confidentially disclose the state of their minds to you? Yes.
42. Are there any upon the island whose minds are impressed with their state ? Yes, several.
43. There are several there under the influence of conscience? Yes, there are, whom I
believe to be honest, good moral men.
44. Men that are convicts, but whose minds are not utterly depraved ? Yes, there are men
whom I could point out.
45. Is there any difference of classification made with respect to these men ? I believe not.
I expect their conduct recommends them to some little post.
46. Otherwise they are kept in the wards with the others at night, and are worked with
others by day? Yes.
47. What number of men are there of whom, as regards their state of mind and conscience,
you have a hopeful opinion ? I think I could point out twenty, or more.
48. Out of the Protestants on the island? Protestants—men brought immediately under my
notice.
49. With whom you have communicated upon religious subjects, and of whose state of mind
you are aware ? Yes.
50. Have you ever recommended any separate employment for these people, or any sub-
division ? No.
51. There is no ward sot apart for them ? No.
52. Do you not think it would be desirable to separate them from the rest of the prisoners,
in order that their religious progress might be more certain ? Yes.
53. But you have never recommended such a course ? Not at Cockatoo.
54. Do you think it impossible to effect it ? Under present arrangements; it would involve
such considerable alterations and further accommodation.
55. With respect to their personal accommodation, you have never made such a representa-
tion to the Government or to the Superintendent ? Not to the Government. I generally
speak to the Superintendent when I find men of that character, and recommend them to his
notice.
56. Do you not think it desirable that it should be represented to the Government that there
are men in a hopeful state of mind, and that it would be a great benefit to them to be
separated from the other prisoners ? I shall be very pleased to do it.
57. By Captain Ward : Do you ever take steps to lay it officially before the Superintendent ?
No; because I know there are no means at present of separating them ; and I have always
found that any recommendation for our department has utterly failed.
58. By the Chairman: It is, no doubt, a very delicate business, but might there not be a
process by which those who are well disposed might be distinguished from the others—if
you were Superintendent of the island would you think such a thing impossible ? I
would at once recommend a system of classification.
59. By Captain Ward : Did you ever recommend to the Superintendent those men whom
you considered worthy of consideration ? Not exactly. I have mentioned his name, and said
such a one is a good man.
60. Has your recommendation been acted upon ? I have found Mr. Ormsby willing to do
so, so far as circumstances would allow.
61. By the Chairman : Is there a school on the island? Only for the children of the free
people.
62. What number of children attend that school ? I scarcely know the number.
63. You do not examine that school ? No; because there are Boman Catholics among
them.
64. Do you think the means of education for those children who are residing with their
parents on the island sufficient ? Yes. I have examined several of the children, and I think
the course of education is very respectable.
65. What books have they for the purpose ? I believe they are very good.
66. Are they in want of books ? I believe not.
67. Do you think the education of the young people on that island should be a special
object of attention on the part of the minister ? It ought to be a special duty.
68. Do you ever report to the Government on the state of education of the children ? No.
69. Perhaps you will think it advisable to do so ? If I knew the circumstances of the people.
70. Do you not think that the state of the children on the island, although they are not
immediately under the charge of the Government, situated as they are among a horde of
convicts, must be a matter of grave attention and of Christian observation ? Yes.
71. Do you not think it desirable to represent their state to the Government? Yes.
72. Perhaps you will do so ? Yes. - . •
7.3. The schoolmaster is a convict I believe ? No, I think he is a free person.
74.


74. You are in error there—you had better inquire whether he is or not? I never con-
sidered myself as having authority to interfere.
75. But you were put in charge of a place where there were twenty-eight children, who,
from their position, were peculiarly entitled to Christian sympathy and regard, and it is upon
that ground I put the question to you.
76. By Mr. Merewether: You look upon the convicts as the special objects of your care ?
Yes.
77. By the Chairman: With respect to the convicts, there is nothing for their moral or
spiritual improvement but your ministerial services ? No.
78. There is no education for them if they are desirous of it? No; I have often asked them
if they were desirous of forming a class and of receiving instruction, but they have said there
is no time allowed.
79. Do you think, if there were time allowed, they would gladly avail themselves of it ?
Yes ; I have inquired into that matter.
80. Up to the present time there has been none ? Not while I have been there.
81. I will now leave those subjects and ask you whether you have had any hinderance from
the Superintendent or the officers of the island in performing your duties ? No.
82. Have you ever had to complain of not being able to perform your duties, in consequence
of any of the arrangements at all ? No, except from my own arrangements. Bor instance,
I have to visit ships on Sunday sometimes; and on one occasion, through my own arrange-
ments, I was prevented visiting the island.
83. Are you always able to visit the island for the purposes of your duty ? Yes, with the
exceptions I have mentioned.
84. Are you ever disappointed with respect to the boat ? No.
85. Or by any other circumstance when you are going officially to perform your duties ? No.
86. Is there any want of courtesy to yourself in the performance of your duty ? No.
87. By Captain Ward : How often is the Sacrament administered on the island ? It has
not been since I have been there.
88. There is no regulation about it ? No.
89. To whom is it left to name the day for the administration of the Sacrament. ? It would
be to the Visiting Clergyman, at the request I should think, of the prisoners themselves.
90. Have you never urged Mr. Ormsby to have a Sunday set apart for that purpose ? No.
91. He has never suggested it to you ? No.
92. By the Chairman : Does any member of his family attend your service ? No.
93. Neither male or female ? No.
94. By Captain Ward: Have the men confined in the cells the use of biblos? Yes.
95. When they require it, or is it left with them as a matter of course? I think it is
generally left there. Anything the men require in confinement they would have from the
library.
96. Any religious book ? Yes.
97. Are there any other books for the use of the men ? Yes, a few.
98. If they asked for them would they be allowed ? Yes.
99. Books of amusement ? Yes, moral books.
100. By the Chairman : Did you ever know a man to have a bible in his cell ? I visit the
men in the cells generally on Sunday, and I generally see a bible with them.
101. By Captain Ward : Any suggestions coming from you would receive the attention of
the Superintendent? Yes.
102. You feel confident of that ? Yes.
103. You have given one part of your evidence in opposition to the statement of the Super-
intendent —are you quite sure the Assistant Superintendent never attends Divine Service ?
I cannot say who he is.
104. Mr. Brown ? The person who works in the office ?
105. No, that is Mr. Taylor ? I was referring to him ; Mr. Brown does attend always.
106. By the Chairman: When you said the Assistant Superintendent does not attend Divine
Service, you were alluding to Mr. Taylor, the clerk in the office ? Yes; Mr. Brown attends
regularly; I have never known him absent, excepting when he has been sick.
107. By Mr. Merewether: How long do you stay on the island when you go on Sunday ? An
hour and a-half, and sometimes two hours.
108. Not more? No.
109. During the time you are on the island is it orderly ? Yes, very.
110. There is no disturbance among the prisoners ? No.
111. By Captain Ward: On a certain occasion, the 20th September, did you hear any
noise—l allude to the case mentioned in the papers ? I remember the day. I never saw
anything of it.
112. Were you there in the afternoon ? If it were Sunday, yes.
113. It is stated by Mr. Ormsby that it was about two o’clock —would you have been there
at that time ? Yes.
114. Did you hear any noise ? . No.
115. By Mr. Merewether : At what time do you go there? At one; the service generally
occupies an hour.
116. The prisoners who are in the cells do not attend the service—do you visit them in their
cells ? They are not always in the cells; I think I see every one who is in the cells.
117. By Captain Ward : When you go to the island on service, do you generally go with
the Chaplain of the Church of Rome and return with him ? Never.
118. That is from your special choice ? The service performed by me is at another part of
the day ; it would not be convenient for me to go at the same time, on account of my other
duties.
119. Do you return with him ? No.
120.


120. Then the boat goes to and fro twice on Sunday ? Yes.
121. By the Chairman : With respect to the prisoners in the cells, they do not attend
Divine Service ? No.
122. Has any prisoner in the cells asked you to obtain permission for him to attend Divine
Service on the Lord’s Day ? No.
123. You have never been asked to obtain permission ? No.
124. By Captain Ward : Would you not be prepared to request it ? I think it would be a
proper thing for them to leave their cells ond to attend Divine Service, and to be taken back
again, without communicating with the rest.
125. Is it possible to take them from their cells to Divine Service, and to convey them back
without their communicating with the other prisoners ? It is ; when the general con-
gregation were assembled, seats might be left near the door to which they might be taken,
and they might then be removed before the rest.
126. Then they might attend Divine Service on the silent system as it were ? Yes.
127. By the Chairman : You never make any requisition ? No.
128. You may think it desirable to do so ? 1 will now it has been mentioned; but I
scarcely thought it proper to interfere with any arrangement I found existing.
129. But as Chaplain, the only comforter many of these people have, do you not think you
should make your services as acceptable and beneficial as you can ? Yes.
The Reverend Patrick Kenyon was called in and examined, as follows : —•
1. By the Chairman: Are you upon the Establishment of Cockatoo Island as Chaplain ?
I have been, until within about the last three weeks.
2. How long were you in that capacity ? Since last May twelve months.
3. Are there many people of your church in the establishment? Yes, there were about 150.
4. About one half the entire number, in fact? I do not know, in fact, the entire number
of prisoners on the island.
5. How often did you attend the island in the performance of your duty ? Twice every
week regularly, and very frequently three times.
6. Were you ever specially sent for by any prisoner? No, I was never specially sent for,
except iu the case of sickness or death.
7. Then you have been sent for ? Yes, I was on one occasion, to attend an old man who
was sick, and who died subsequently.
8. Are you always prepared to so if you are sent for by any who require your attendance?
Yes.
9. -What are your duties on the Lord’s Day? My duties on Sunday are to celebrate Mass
and to preach.
10. To conduct the whole service of your church ? Yes; to give catechetical instruction
and moral instruction, and to celebrate Mass.
11. Do you give catechetical instruction before the service ? No; at the close of the service
I generally gave an exhortation, which was partly a moral exhortation and partly catechetical
instruction, as the occasion called for.
12. You celebrate Mass every Lord’s Day ? Yes.
13. Are any of your people so far advanced as to partake of the Eucharist ? Yes; I had
nearly every Sunday, on the average, four or five
14. Who habitually received the Eucharist? No, they were not always the same; I had,
on the whole, about thirty persons who frequently partook of the Holy Sacrament.
15. I think you never receive any to that rite without previous confession ? Never.
16. Are you much and confidentially spoken to by the men on the state of their minds and
consciences ? I have frequently exhorted them to more frequent application to myself; but
I had about thirty or forty who visited me every month or three weeks, on the Saturday.
This was the general number; but the individuals were constantly changing, as they were
gradually drafted away and others supplied their places.
17. What was the conduct of the men of your church, generally, during Divine Service ? I
never had occasion to find fault with them except once, and then some persons were rather
sleepy.
18. Do any of the officers of the establishment attend your service ? Yes.
19. And partake of the Eucharist ? Sometimes.
20. These men, into the state of whose minds you particularly inquire, how do they seem to
be affected —I mean are these men whose progress towards repentance you think to be
hopeful ? I think generally, from my acquaintance with the Catholics, that any of these
men who make an effort to be good, with God’s help, generally succeed; they please me
very much.
21. Do you take any means to separate them from other persons? There is no mode
available.
22. At present ? At present.
23. Can you conceive of no mode to be available ? I can conceive of no mode under the
present circumstances of the island; the number of wards is so limited that there can he no
classification.
24. Taking the Protestants and Catholics together who are well disposed, might they not
occupy an entire ward—might they not be numerous enough to occupy an entire ward ?
Perhaps they would, if you could segregate them sufficiently.
25. Have you never proposed any such thing to the Superintendent, or to the proper
authorities? No.
26. Are the arrangements for the performance of your duty satisfactory, as far as they can
be ? As far as they can he.
27.


27. Is there anything you wish to have altered, in that respect ? The want of cleanliness in
the room where we celebrate Mass; but I think it is as clean as it can be kept under the
circumstances.
28. It is used as a dining-room upon the very day on which you perform Divine Service, and :
is occupied by three hundred men for that purpose ? Yes, and it has been cleaned up
after breakfast, and sanded over just before.
29. And then, I suppose, can only be partially done ? Not as well as I could wish.
30. Have you represented that to the Superintendent ? I represented it at the beginning, as
far as I can recollect.
31. Is there any hinderance to you in the performance of your duty—are you ever at a loss,
for instance, to obtain a passage in a boat to and from the island ? Never that I recollect.
32. You know of no impediment in the way of your performing your duties ? None that
I recollect.
33. Is there anything in the regulations or in the conduct of the officers of the island that
throws any impediment in the way of the performance of your duties ? Not in the
performance of my duties.
34. Not in your personal accommodation ? I was constrained once to take a long walk
across the bush, as it is called —across Balmain.
35. How did that arise ? Returning to Sydney in the boat regularly appointed for me, one
of the officers sought a passage in it, and it was stated that he had no right to come in this
boat; they said they had no right to let him unless he applied for permission; he refused to
get out of the boat or to leave the boat, if the boat were to go to Sydney with me —he said
if the boat were to go to Sydney he would accompany me.
36. Who was that gentleman ? He was in the engineering department there.
37. Was it Mr. Thomas ? Yes, that is the name. I had to leave the boat in consequence,
to get into the guard-boat, and to come across to Balmain.
38. While he came on to Sydney ? No; he came in the guard-boat, to which he had
no right.
39. Do you ever visit the school upon the island ? Yery rarely.
40. Are there not some children there whose parents belong to your church ? Yes, there are.
41. Do you supply them with books for their instruction ? No; I applied to the parents
to have them come to the celebration of the Mass, and they objected; their objections were
very futile, I considered, and I had nothing to do with the children afterwards.
42. You are on the island during a great part of the Lord’s Day, are you not ? No;
about two hours.
43. What is the conduct of the people on that day, orderly or disorderly ? As far as I
observed them on that day, as well as on any other, it was always orderly.
44. You never saw anything to complain of in that respect ? No.
45. Is there any point in connection with the management and conduct of the convicts upon
the island you would wish to submit to the consideration of the Board ? Except that great
and most difficult one of classification.
46. You think that is a subject which requires consideration and attention ? Yes, and very
serious attention, because of its importance and the very great difficulty of carrying it out.
47. Do you visit the men in their cells when they are put into solitary confinement ? Only
once have I visited one of them.
48. Perhaps none of your people have been there ? I believe there have been members of
the Catholic Church there, but only on one occasion did I go there when a man wished to
see me. When I have been there I have found men in the cells, but they are there only for
a short time.
49. You have never been applied to by any of them to be permitted to come out to Mass ?
There was one man who asked to be allowed, but I did not think he was very upright in his
seeking; he merely sought to get away for the indulgence.
50. You did not apply for him? No; for otherwise he behaved very badly; he treated
the wardsmen badly.
51. By Captain Ward: Are there books kept on the island for the prisoners’ reading ? Yes.
52. Have you any voice in their selection ? I have the entire choice of the books for the
Catholics, the Visiting Magistrate having a veto which he does not require to exercise. He
said that such books as treat on controversy should not be allowed, therefore I guarded
against such books.
53. Are these books allowed to the prisoners who are confined in the cells ? I give them
in charge to one of the officers who keeps them.
54. Are the prisoners in the cells allowed the use of them ? lam not aware.
55. Have any recommendations coming from you in your capacity of Chaplain been generally
attended to by the Superintendent ? I think generally, as far as he could.
56. He has generally co-operated with you to carry out your views? Yes; but I have
seldom applied to him; I have had anything I needed.
57. Does the Superintendent ever attend Divine Service ? No; he is not a person of my
profession.
58. What officers attend with you? Mr. Easton.
59. He his an overseer in the Civil Engineer’s Department? Yes.
60. Does any officer of the Penal Department attend, to preserve order ? I believe there is
not a Catholic officer or free overseer. The free overseers are generally outside in the yard,
and are immediately in care of the prisoners.
61. Then you consider their attendance inside unnecessary, if it is against their consciences ?
I think there is sufficient done to ensure order and regularity by their remaining outside.
62. But they do, as a rule, remain outside ? Yes.
63. Does Mr. Ormsby remain there ? Not Mr. Ormsby, but two of the free overseers. Two
* 17—0 of


of them are very attentive in seeing that the dining hall is cleared up, and in preserving
order and regularity.
64. What are their names ? Mr. Ferris is one.
65. Is Mr. Brown, the Deputy Superintendent, one? Yes; he is attentive, hut not so
remarkable as one other man, who has a brother in the police force there.
THURSDAY, 29 OCTOBER, 1857.
ilrmnt
Sir W. W. BURTON, Knt., in the Chair.
E. C. MEREWETHER, Esq. | Captain E. W. WARD.
Mr. Henry Parkes was called in and examined, as follows:
1. By the Chairman : You are the proprietor of the Empire ? lam the proprietor.
2. Our attention has been called to a leading article in your paper, and to letters published
on the 26th of September, and on the 2nd, sth, and 6th October, relative to the management
of Cockatoo Island; have you anything you can state to us upon those facts and circum-
stances of your own knowledge ? There are letters in the Empire newspaper on the 26tli
September, and on the 2nd, sth, and 6th of October, and on other days, both previous and
subsequent to those dates, on the management of Cockatoo Island. The whole of those letters
were admitted by me on ascertaining who were the writers, and in the greater number of
instances on having first a personal interview with them. I have the permission of the
writers, with one exception, where I have not been able to communicate with the party,
to give their names to this Board. The exception where I have not had that permission
is in the case of the letter, inserted on the 26th September, by “ N. 8.,” but I feel so assured
that the writer in that case would not wish to withhold his name, that I venture to give his
name at once. I have written to him but have received no reply. The writer gives his
private address to me as “ Charles Robertson, senior, Bleak Cottage, opposite Cockatoo
“Island.” On that letter reaching my office, it called to my mind various other applications
that had been made to me throughout a number of years, both as editor of a public journal,
as a Member of the old Legislative Council, and as a Member of the Legislative Assembly,
and on that account I paid more attention to it than I otherwise should have done. The
writers of the letters, in addition to the one just named, are the Rev. John Pendrill, Mr. J.
H. Thomas, Mr. Richard Thompson, a reporter of the Sydney Morning Herald, and Mr.
Christopher Murray, who was formerly either one of the boat’s crew or a constable on
Cockatoo Island, and who resides in Princes-street, opposite the Wesleyan Chapel. I may
say here that several of these letters were softened in expression by me, prior to pub-
lication—the manuscript would shew the charges were in stronger terms than they appear
in the publication. In addition to these letters, I have had letters and applications from
various other persons; some of them from persons who have been confined on Cockatoo
Island as prisoners. In these cases I have neither published the letters nor communicated
with the parties; but I have some of those letters here, which I think I might hand in to you
as evidence, to be taken for what they are worth.
3. Are they known writers ? Yes. As soon as the first publications on this subject
reached Bathurst I got this letter from a Mr. Merewether, who was formerly, I believe
sub-editor of the Sydney Morning Herald, who was slightly known to me in con-
sequence of the necessary connection between the two newspaper offices, and who was
confined on that island for some time, but whom I have never seen since his con-
nection with the Herald ceased. (The Witness read the letter. Vide Appendix A.~)
I have not, since the receipt of that letter, communicated with Mr. Merewether upon the
subject, but I have received a second letter from him. ( The Witness read the letter. Vide
Appendix B.) Besides the letter from Mr. Merewether, I have received a letter intended for
publication in the Empire, anonymously, from William Henry Groom, storekeeper, of
Drayton, Darling Downs, which I declined to publish, simply because I had not the means
of judging for myself who Mr. Groom was, but which also contains specific instances of
mismanagement, cruelty, and manslaughter. He charges the dispenser with causing the
death of a man.
4. By Captain Ward : Is that the present dispenser ? Yes.
5. Are you aware whether this man, Groom, was also a prisoner ? I know nothing more of
him than I have stated. (The letter was read to the Board. Vide Appendix C.) In the
first letter addressed to me from your Board, I am asked to afford evidence concerning the
facts particularly referred to in the leading article of the Empire of the 3rd October. These
facts, as it appears to me, are—that the island is under very improper management; that
the Superintendent, who has the general management of the island, does not possess the
qualities that are absolutely requisite in the conduct of a great penal establishment —an
establishment exclusively for the punishment and reformation of criminals. It will be
necessary, I think, for me to say, that throughout my life I have paid considerable attention
to the question of criminal management; that as a Member of the Legislature I lost no
opportunity of doing all I could to promote the general improvement of'the prisons of the
Colony, and that, for some years past, I have lost no opportunity of visiting those prisons.
Hence the publication of these letters, the writing of this article, and their publication, are
merely parts, as I might say, of a life-long conduct, so far as lam concerned. Now, coming
to this particular establishment, which I regard as of immense importance to the Colony,
because I cannot conceive of any greater mischief that can accrue to the Colony than that
of a number of hardened offenders —the most hardened the Colony produces—being sent here,
and


and no proper attention being paid to the tempering of the system of punishment, with
even-handed justice on the one hand, and no proper attention being paid to their gradual
reformation on the other. And, moreover, that they should there get that worst of all
impressions, that the persons placed in charge ot them are as liable to mal-practices as them-
selves. I can conceive of no impression so dangerous to get abroad as this, and none so
likely to lead to consequences fatal to good order, and to the general and proper stability of
society. It is hence I attach so very much importance to this matter. Now, coming to this
establishment, I will state how I first became acquainted with Mr. Ormsby. Some years,
I should think twelve years ago—it may perhaps bo more —I held a subordinate situation in
the Custom House, and was entrusted with the charge of a ship in the capacity I then filled.
On that occasion I saw Mr. Ormsby for the first time. He came to visit the captain of the
ship; he dined there, and remained, as far as my recollection serves me, till near midnight;
and I had an opportunity of seeing that he was indulging in wine, or spirits, or both, nearly
the whole of the time. Towards midnight, or between the hours of eleven and twelve,
a police boat, manned by four hands, came to take Mr. Ormsby home. As I have
already stated, I then filled a very subordinate situation, but the thought that came
into my mind was that if I were the Governor Mr. Ormsby should not be Superinten-
dent of that island five minutes longer. From that time to this 1 have never had any
personal acquaintance with Mr. Ormsby but I have been in a position to hear much concern-
ing him—have had opportunities of observing his conduct. I habituate myself to observing
the conduct of every body who occupies a public position, and what I have seen of Mr.
Ormsby leads me to the impression that he is one of the most completely unfit men to fill
the situation that could be found. I wish to guard myself from being understood to mean
more than my words properly convey. I do not say that Mr. Ormsby may not be a very
upright man, a very excellent man, but he entirely lacks the qualities which are now
generally acknowledged by all men who pay attention to the question of prison management
as absolutely requisite for such an important situation as that. I avow myself the writer of
this article in the Empire of the 3rd October. In that article there is this sentence, —“ If
“ illiteracy, the most confined views on social questions, a self-indulgent disposition, ungo-
“ vernable passions and violent language were qualities desirable in the superintendence of
“ a penal establishment, then Mr. Ormsby would be the very model of a public gaoler.”
The article then goes on to state, in a very imperfect manner, what kind of man should be a
governor of a gaol:—“ But the interests of society demand a very different class of qualities.
“ The man selected for such an oflice should be one of calm temperament and inflexible mind,
“ with the severest notions of honor and justice, capable of much self-denial, and utterly
" incapable of any kind of favoritism or low manoeuvre; and one, moreover, possessing a good
" knowledge of the world and a sound discrimination in juding of character.” The article
then states, with a desire not to be understood as denouncing Mr. Ormsby as absolutely bad,
that he might make a very respectable tradesman and be extremely useful as one, seeking to
carry out the meaning I have already tried to convey, that all the writer meant was that he
was unfit for that particular situation. Now, my opinion was formed mainly by the oppor-
tunity I had had of judging of the. Superintendent of Cockatoo Island, as already stated.
There was also this circumstance, that in the month of July, or early in August last, the
present Dispenser of Cockatoo Island, Mr. J. F. Peers, called upon me and asked my advice
as to how he should act with reference to Mr. Ormsby’s conduct towards him on a particular
day, a little previous, on which occasion Mr. Ormsby called him “ damned liar,” a “ damned
“ scoundrel,” “ a villain,” and a “ damned pimp.” Here is the original letters of Dr. West,
the medical visitor, acknowledging that violent language did take place on the day alluded
to. Here is the original letter of Mr. John Duff, the Clerk of Works, stating that he heard
this disgraceful language and is ready to come forward and prove it. Here is the original
letter of Mr. Ormsby, which is sufficient to shew that he is a man of extreme illiteracy, utterly
unfit for this situation. (The witness handed in the original letters and copies above referred to.
Vide Appcndixi) In another part of this article there are these words, —“ Hitherto it is alleged
" that any person in a subordinate position who has dared to breathe a murmur of complaint has
“ been singledout as the object of a petty and unsleeping persecution, which, sooner or later, has
“ cleared the scene of his presence, if it has not involved him in some fabricated disgrace. This
“ species of tyranny has been systematised, it is said, by the employment of the.basest of the
“ prisoners as spies, who have been encouraged by the usual indulgences allowed for good
“ conduct.” This has been stated on the authority of the gentlemen whose names I have
already handed in to the Commission, namely, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Pendrill, Mr. Richard
Thompson, and Mr. Christopher Murray. As to other facts within my knowledge, and my
means of obtaining which I am not prepared to state, I believe that on Easter Monday, in
1856, Mr. Ormsby entertained a large company of friends at a picnic at Chowder Bay; that
on that occasion seven constables belonging to the establishment at Cockatoo Island were
employed as boatmen to convey his friends, and to perform other menial offices in connexion
with the entertainment. The names of these constables were John Smith, Daniel Beattie,
John Waltam, Richard Musgrove, Samuel D. Johnson, Richard Sadlier, and Christopher
Murray, who, I presume, if they can be called before this Commission, will give evidence to
that effect. I have reason to believe, as another evidence of the entire want of discipline on
Cockatoo Island, that some time, not very far back, Mr. Taylor, who is son-in-law to the
Superintendent, and fills some subordinate situation in the establishment on Cockatoo,
obtained a convict named Sullivan as his house servant; whether the regulations of the
island allow that or not Ido not pretend to say; that Sullivan went to the house of a Mr.
Horsford on the island, and represented to him that Mrs. Taylor was ill and wanted a bottle
of gin; that the gin was thereupon supplied, and that Sullivan, the convict so employed, was
found afterwards dead drunk with the bottle lying beside him. He was found so by one of
the overseers, Mr. Byron. Ido not of course pretend to know whether the subordinates on
the island are allowed convicts to be distributed among them as servants.
6.
Mr.H.Parkeg.
29 Oct, 1857.


,6. By the Chairman : The regulations allow certain servants to the officers ? I was not
aware of that. I have reason to believe that the boat has been away on frequent occasions
, to picnics at Lane Cove, a considerable distance from the island; that it has on other occa-
sions taken Mr. Ormsby and his friends to Homebush races, by going up the Parramatta
River to a bay called Homebush Bay, and that the policemen whose names have already
been given will be able to give evidence to that effect. lam assured, on information upon
which I am inclined to rely, but the particulars of which I cannot communicate to the
Board, that Mr. Ormsby keeps a very extensive establishment as to the production of choice
vegetables, and poultry in great numbers; that the Visiting Magistrate and the Visiting
medical man, the only checks there are upon the conduct of Mr. Ormsby in his isolated
position, have repeatedly received presents of poultry, vegetables, and so on, from Mr.
Ormsby on their visits, —to which I think the Board will, if it should find the fact as
stated, attach a grave importance, considering that Mr. Ormsby is so isolated, as much so
indeed as though he were a thousand miles off in the Pacific, and that the only regular
checks upon his management are the visits of the Magistrate and of the medical man. I
believe John Smith, a German, who is coxswain in the boat of the establishment, will satisfy
this Commission that he has repeatedly conveyed presents of turkeys to Captain M'Lerie, to
Dr. West, and to other gentlemen who occupy these very important positions as checks upon
the management of the island. I have reason to believe that Mr. Byron, the penal overseer,
Mr. Easton, overseer of the Engineer’s department, Mr. Broderick, engineer, Mr. Cahil, fore-
man of works, Mr. Kelleher, foreman of works, Mr. Fitzgerald, foreman of works, will all give
evidence of the very great difficulty they have experienced from want of discipline among
the convicts employed under them, and that their complaints of this want of discipline, and
consequent difficulty in the progress of their works, have been generally disregarded, to the
injury of the public service, and to their great dissatisfaction. There is a person on the
island of the name of Scott, a constable, who, I have reason to think, will give the Commis-
. sion valuable evidence. Ido not know that I have any thing else to add, unless there be
any other question you have to ask respecting this publication. There is one thing I
omitted to state with reference to my advice being asked in the case of the dispute between
Mr. Peers and Mr. Ormsby. When the correspondence I have handed in was laid before
me—and I should like Mr. Peers to be examined on that point —I advised him, unless he
was prepared to risk all the consequences of bringing his case before the Colonial Secretary,
which he did not appear to be prepared to do, to take back the correspondence, to put up
with the indignity he had met with, and to go on discharging his duty so that no one could
possibly call him to account, and to set all other parties at defiance by the exemplary course
of his conduct.
FRIDAY, 30 OCTOBER, 1857.
present
Sir W. W. BURTON, Knt., in the Chair.
E. C. MEREWETHER, Esq., | Captain E. W. WARD.
The following letter from Mr. H. Parkes was received and read: —
“ Sydney, August 30, 1857.
“ Gentlemen,
“ With reference to what I understood from the Board yesterday,—that
“ Mr. Ormsby, though permitted to be present with his solicitor during the examination of
“ the witnesses named in my evidence, will yet not know who those witnesses are till they
“ enter the room, I beg to point out that it will be impossible to carry out this intention on
“ part of the Board if my evidence is read to Mr. Ormsby before their examination. Ido
“ not suppose that Mr. Ormsby would seek, by any indirect means, to tamper with these
“ witnesses in consequence of the knowledge so obtained, but it must be recollected that such
“ things have been done, and that in this case the persons are his subordinates in office, and
“ are placed in circumstances that offer peculiar facilities for the operation of improper
“ influences.
“ Standing, as I do, before your Commission in the capacity of a censor, I cannot, on
“ mature reflection, admit the justice of being excluded from the examination while Mr.
“ Ormsby is allowed not only to be present, with legal assistance, but to exercise the privilege
“of cross-examination. Any inquiry into the management of the penal establishment at
" Cockatoo Island will be unconsciously diverted from its great ends—the vindication of
“ public justice and the promotion of the public welfare —if the personal character of any of
“ the officers in charge be made the first object of concern. I respectfully submit that the
“ character of those officials who have acted wisely and uprightly, and with an enlightened
“ sense of their duties and responsibilities, must necessarily rise in the light of a thorough
“ investigation, and are perfectly safe in the result without any special means of protection.
“ I have, &c.,
“ HENRY PARKES.”
“ The Hon. Sir W. W. Burton, Knt.
“ E. W. Ward, Esq.
“ Edwd. C. Merewether, Esq.”
The Board resolved, “ That there was nothing in the evidence given by Mr. Parkes
“ which made it requisite to recall Mr. Parkes to be cross-examined by Mr. Ormsby, as there
“ was no specific charge within that gentleman’s own knowledge contained in his evidence,
“ and that, therefore, his request should be complied with—that it should not be read.”
The


The Reverend John Pendrill was called in and examined, as follows:
1. By the Chairman : Are you a clergyman of the Church of England in the Establishment
of New South Wales ? I was.
2. And at this time ? lam not.
3. How are you now employed ? lam helping Mr. Savigny in the conduct of his school.
4. Were you Chaplain of Cockatoo Island ? I was.
5. For what period of time ? From July, 1856, to the end of March in the present year.
6. Will you be kind enough to look at the Empire newspaper of the ‘26th of September last;
you will there find a letter signed “N. !>.” ? '{The Witness referred to a newspaper.') Yes.
7. Have you seen that letter before ? Yes.
8. Do you know the writer of that letter ? No.
9. Do you, of your own knowledge, know anything of the circumstances there stated 1 No,
I do not.
10. During the time you were Chaplain of the establishment were the arrangements made
■for the conducting of your duties such as to be satisfactory to you? Not altogether.
11. Will you tell us in what respect they were otherwise.—l mean now particularly with
reference to the actual performance of your duty in your ministrations in conducting
Divine Service ? On one occasion I was turned out of the dispensary, and on another
occasion I had a message brought to me from the schoolmaster—l believe he is also called
the taskmaster—saying he wished to see me in the schoolroom. I went up to him, and he
gave me a letter without any address, but which appeared to be a letter addressed to Mr.
Ormsby, by the Colonial Secretary. I said I could not receive that letter as it was not
addressed to mo. He said he had been instructed to shew me that letter, and to require me
to put on my surplice there, and to go down from there to the place where the service was
held. I said I should not do anything of the kind, that it was too far to walk from the top
of the hill to the yard, and I ordered the gown to be taken down to the Assistant Super-
intendent’s Office. There was considerable hesitation, and at length I went down and said
that if the surplice was not brought down I should be compelled to go through the service
without it, I believe that was done with the intention of affront.
12. When did this occur ? On the 15th February, it appears from my note.
13. Was Mr. Ormsby present at any part of that discussion ? No. '
14. Then the message was given to you by the schoolmaster—what is his name? I do not
know.
15. One of the prisoners on the island? No; one of the free officers —the taskmaster I
think he is called. There was a case previous to that which I may as well mention. There
was a prisoner on the island of the name of Cockerill. Shortly after his arrival I saw him
in the yard. The last time I had seen him previous to this was at the baptizing of his
child at Christ Church, of which place I was Curate. I went up and spoke to the man, and
said, “ I am very sorry to see you here ; you are now in a very different position from that in
“ which I saw you last.” The man was very much affected, and tears came into his eyes.
He talked of the circumstances of his case, and said what caused him the most grief was
the position he had brought his wife and family into, and that he did not know but that all
his things would be sold, and his wife be turned into the street. I said I feared that might
be the case, but that I would see his wife. I went to his wife, but it was a perfectly
voluntary act; having known the people before I felt justified in doing so, and even had I
not known them, I did not suppose that my being Chaplain of Cockatoo Island should
prevent my doing a Christian act. I saw a man, when I went into the room, who I learned
was in the police, and he asked mo who I was. I told him I was the Chaplain at Cockatoo
Island, and stated plainly that I had seen her husband, who was greatly distressed about her.
The man offered me a chair, took out a piece of paper and wrote down all that was said.
Shortly after, when I went to Cockatoo, Mr. Ormsby came up to me, and said, “ I have a
“ charge against you for carrying messages from prisoners to their family.” He then added
that Captain M'Lerie had been informed, by a detective, that I had carried a message from
Cockerill to his famil} - . I was much astonished and annoyed, and said the charge was
unfounded. I was going to write to Captain M'Lerie, to ask him whether I was to be
subject to the reports of the Detective. Police because I was Chaplain of Cockatoo Island.
16. By Captain Ward: It was made a charge against you ? That I was carrying messages
from the prisoners to their friends, which was unfounded.
17. What was the result ? There it ends.
18. By the Chairman : We are upon the subject of the arrangement for the performance of
your duties, more particularly with reference to the arrangements for the performance of Divine
Service, and of giving spiritual instruction ? There was very little opportunity for that,
except on the Saturdays. I requested the use of a room where I might see the prisoners.
19. Was that always granted ? I had one afterwards. I had the use of the school-room,
but it was not a room for my own use.
20. Upon those occasions, when you have had to confer with the prisoners? There were men
smoking in the adjoining room, and there was no accommodation. I applied for that room,
in consequence of having been turned out of the dispensary by Dr. West. I had been in
the habit of using it as a vestry on Sunday; but one Sunday Dr. West sent his assistant to
request me to leave it, as he said he wished to see his patients there; I left, but had no
place to go to ; I went out and sat on the wall.
21. Was there any place when you went over to the island which you could use as a place
of retirement, or as a vestry ? None, but the dispensary.
22. You used that by a kind of permission ? I was shewn to it when I went there at first,
but I was turned out of it afterwards. I applied for a room, and it was refused me.
23. To whom did you apply? To Mr. North. I had a correspondence about it.
24. You applied for a room to be assigned to you ? Yes.
* 17—P 25.


25. Was it granted ? I was granted the use of the school-room, of which I had the use
before.
26. What means of retirement had you ? Mr. Brown’s office, the Assistant Superintendent’s.
27. With his permission ? Yes.
28. For the purposes of robing and retirement? There was not much retirement there; the
place was not above eight feet square. On Saturdays I had the use of the school-room to see
the prisoners, but it was not what might be called private, for there was a room adjoining
where the convicts attached to the office went, and sat and smoked, and there was only a
slight partition between the two, so that prisoners who came to me might fear they would be
overheard.
29. The convicts, I suppose, were, many of them, in the habit of requiring your advice and
instruction ? I gave notice to Mr. Brown to receive the names of any convic'.s who wished
to see me from time to time; but very few applied to me, and it was considered not a recom-
mendation to a man if he desired to see the Chaplain very often.
30. Were you in fact consulted by some of them upon their spiritual state ? Yes, I was. I
proposed last Easter to administer the Sacrament; at least one of the prisoners requested
that I would.
31. Was the Sacrament administered? I left before the time.
32. You were in charge from July to the end of March ? Yes.
33. During that time, was it usual for the Superintendent to attend Divine Service ? Never.
34. Did any of the family of the Superintendent attend ? No.
35. Did the free overseers of the establishment? Mr. Brown attended regularly.
36. How did the men conduct themselves during their attendance ? Some of them used to
attend; some of them lay with their heads on their hands half asleep.
37. They all attended, did they not? No, a great many did not attend that should have
attended ; it seemed to be optional, I understood.
38. By Captain Ward : Are you aware whether any who ought to have attended did not
attend —do you know of your own knowledge ? I have known the schoolmaster not to attend
from time to time.
39. But the convicts ? He was a convict; there was a second schoolmaster; I refer to him.
40. Was there any one else ? Not to my knowledge.
41. By the Chairman : How long used you to remain on the island when you visited it ? I
used to go after dinner on Saturday ; the men dined at two, and I got to the island about
half-past two or three o’clock, and left at four, when the men had their supper or tea.
42. Then you went again on the Lord’s Day ? Yes, on the Sunday.
43. And were there for how long ? At one time, when I first went there, I had a service for
the free officers, and I used to have a few of the free children in a class, and generally
left for Sydney between two and three o’clock.
44. How long were you there on the Lord’s Day ? At this time I had two services.
45. Two services every Lord’s Day ? I had at first, but latterly I was obliged to have only
one.
46. But you had in fact at one time two services ? Yes, and then the free officers did not
attend; then the military volunteered to have a service, but they did not come to the service
then.
47. Did the military attend any of your services ? I used to have a service in their own
apartment. I had previously a service over the cells, which any free officer so disposed used
to attend.
48. In what manner was the Lord’s Day observed during the time you were there, so far
as you had an opportunity of noticing ? The men were ranging about the yard, or sleeping
about the yard; during the time I was there I was employed in my duty.
49. Was there any desecration of the Lord’s Day shewn in your presence while you were on
the island ? I never had an opportunity of observing the conduct of the men, except when
they were engaged in the service.
50. You may say whether it appeared to you that the Lord’s Day was properly observed
on the island during the time you were there—did you observe any desecration of it ? No.
51. Were you assisted by the Superintendent and officers of the establishment in your work
among the prisoners ? No.
52. Were you thwarted ? It is difficult to say that I was positively thwarted, but in my
opinion very little encouragement was given to the Chaplain.
53. By Captain Ward : Did you ever demand assistance and have it refused ? I had so
much unpleasantness that I could not ask it.
54. Then you never did ask it ? No. I once asked for slates for the prisoners, and my
request was refused.
55. By the Chairman: Did you ever hear indecent yelling and hallooing on the Lord’s Day,
when you were there on that day ? Not when I was there.
56. I put into your hands a newspaper, the Empire of the 2nd October ; will you be good
enough to look at a letter in that signed “ Witness”? ( The witness referred to the paper. )
57. Do you know the writer of that letter ? Yes.
58. Who is it ? Myself.
59. With respect to the disturbances on the island on the Lord’s Day mentioned in this
letter, you say —“ It is a fact to which the attention of the Government has frequently been
“ called”—do you know of your own knowledge of the attention of the Government having
been called to such facts ? I have called the attention of the Government to the general fact.
60. With reference to the disturbances on the island ? Not to the disturbances on the
island, but to the general state of the island.
61. Have you any copy of your communications to the Government upon that subject? I
produce the draft of a lettter, dated 19th February last, addressed by me to the Colonial
Secretary. (The letter was read. Vide Appendix A.)
62.


62. It appears from this letter that there must have been a prior communication ? Yes,
there was one in November. On the 13th November last I wrote a letter to the Colonial
Secretary, to which I received no answer. On the 17th December I wrote to the Governor.
63. Did you receive an answer to that? Yes, dated the 24th December. ( The letter was
read. Vide Appendix Bi)
64. Was the letter of the 19th of Frebruary in reply to that ? Not exactly in reply—in
continuation of the same subject.
65. Were you furnished with a boat for the performance of your duties at that time ? No ;
only very irregularly.
66. Was there any impediment thrown in your way ? In the first instance I did not know
how far I was entitled to use the boat, and I got no answer to my letter to the Colonial
Secretary requesting information. I then wrote to His Excellency the Governor General,
calling attention to the fact, and received the reply that the boat should be placed at my
disposal when I required it; that was not carried out, and that was the cause of my letter.
67. Was there any special occasion when you were refused the boat when you required it—how
did you make known that you required it ? On several occasions I was refused a boat;
indeed it was so frequently the case that myself and the Priest of the Church of Rome
made a coalition, in order that we might secure a boat between us, and 1 agreed, at much
inconvenience, to go with him to the island at eight o’clock in the morning, to visit the
hospital, and attend a small class I had formed; that he should have his service first, and then
I should have mine, and that we should return together at twelve o’clock. In accordance
with that arrangement, on the 9th of November I went to the King-street wharf, and found
no boat; I hired a boat, went across to Balmain, and then walked across the mainland
opposite Cockatoo. I then hailed the guard-boat, and was conveyed across to the island. On
my arrival I saw Mr. Ormsby, who made no apology for what had occurred. I then requested
that the boat might remain at the island until I was ready to return, but it did not; it went
away without me to fetch the Visiting Magistrate. When I came down I found the boat
gone, and the Inspeceor of Police stated that he Mul told Dr. West to wait for me. I took
the boat across again and walked through the bush. No apology was offered for this, and I
complained to the Colonial Secretary. Then there were several times, on week days, when
I have been on the island, and the boat has left for Sydney without the compliment being
paid me of asking me whether I would proceed in it. On one Sunday particularly, after
declining the use of the boat to take me back to Sydney, with the view of saving the men
the trouble of a second trip, as they complained of being so much engaged on the Sunday,
the boat was sent to Sydney with someone else, and it was not intimated to me that the
boat was going. In a letter to the Colonial Secretary, dated the 10th of September, I
complained of the inefficiency of the service, and of the impertinence I was subject to from
the coxswain of the boat. The boat was sent to me in a disorderly manner. I know what
Government service is, for I have seen something of it in various parts of the world, and I
know what ought to be done; and I saw that that was not done with respect to me in this
boat. I complained to the Inspector of Police, and asked him whether the boat belonged to
him. He said, “ Well, Sir, it does belong to me, and it does not belong to me.” I perfectly
understood what he meant. The boat, as I said to him, to be sent to me in a way as if they
thought “ anything would do for the parson;” and I was positively assured that that was
the language the boat’s crew used when they used to come for the parson. I frequently
used to walk across, because the men complained to me that owing to the heavy nature of
their services on Sunday they had no time to themselves; and I expected in return for that,
that when I did want the boat I should have it.
68. Was there any particular occasion on which the boat was refused to you, that you were
aware of its having been employed in other service? Yes ;on the 7th February 1 was sent
to Sydney with the Chaplain of the Church of Rome, and the convict Garbut in irons. I
protested to the Sergeant of Police against being sent in a boat with a convict in irons; I
said I had no objection to the man Garbut, but I considered that it was a personal insult,
and as such I resisted it. At this time the proper visiting boat was sent away on a picnic,
a party of pleasure, a fishing party, or something of the kind —at all events it was sent away
on a private excursion.
69. Did you see that yourself? I can prove it.
70. That the proper boat was at that time away ? It was at the island when I arrived, and
it left after I arrived. I was put into another boat with this convict in irons. The boat
was very small, and it was blowing very fresh at the time. The convict was placed in the
bow of the boat; but as the water broke over the bow, and the man had on the ordinary
convict canvas clothing, I said, “ That man cannot sit there —he will get wet through;”
and as he was going to Maitland to give evidence in a case of horse-stealing, he would have
had to wear them all night. The sergeant said he had orders to keep him in the bow, but
that if I directed it he might come aft. I told him to do so, and accordingly he came and
sat to leeward opposite me. This brought the boat very much down by the stern, and the
man pulling the stroke oar said he had not room to pull.
71. You went in the boat? Yes ; I had no alternative.
72. Have you any other case to mention? I think it is as well to stick to one or two cases
that I can specifically prove. I wish to state specific facts, and to prove them. Ido not wish
to occupy the time of the Board unnecessarily.
73. Have you any other complaints to make with respect to the boat? If you think that is
not sufficient.
74. Do not appeal to us, but state what you think necessary ? I name that as a specific
instance.
75. Is that then the usual course of proceeding? It is a sample of the usual course.
76. By Mr. Merewether : When you required to leave the island, what was the usual course?
I


Ido not know; I applied to the Colonial Secretary for information upon that point, and had
no information given me.
77. If no intimation were given by you, how could they know that the boat would bo
required ? That was the fixed day ; that was after the specific arrangement that I should
have the boat on Saturday. It was a definite arrangement, that on that day I was entitled
to have the boat. That I can prove ; I gave my order on one occasion to Mr. Ormsby,
respecting the boat, and that order was not attended to.
78. By Captain, Ward: How do you mean that you gave your order to Mr. Ormsby ? I
told him I required the boat on Saturday.
79. Are you entitled to the boat on any particular day ? Yes, certainly.
80. How do you prove that title ? I presume that is the title. {The Witness handed in
two letters. Vide Appendices V. and D )
81. Mr. North places the boat at your disposal on Saturdays and Sundaj’B ? Yes
82. When you applied for the boat on those occasions whom did you ask ? The boat was
always sent ; that was the understanding.
83. It came as a matter of course ? It was understood as a permanent order, that the boat
was to be there when I wanted it.
84. When you wanted it? I always wanted it.
85. Were you there on any occasions on Saturday or Sunday after this date, the 29tli of
January, when the boat was not there ? On that particular occasion I refer to, the 7th of
February.
86. The boat should have been for you at what wharf? At Cockatoo Island, on the occasion
I have referred to.
87. By the Chairman : You do not complain of not having been taken to the island on that
occasion, but of not having been brought back in the boat? There was a case of not having
been brought back, but that was after this.
88. By Captain Ward: The letter goes to this, that the boat should attend at King-street
wharf, for the purpose of conveying you to the island ; does that imply that the boat should
be at your disposal for the whole of the day ? Certainly, until I returned.
89. On Saturday and Sunday, for the whole time the boat was at your disposal ? Yes.
90. That was your interpretation of the letter ? Yes
91. P»j the Chairman : Have you anything more to say as to the accommodation of the
boat? After that, I gave the following notice to the Inspector, Mr. Dunning. ( The
Witness read the same as fellows') :
“February 21s/, 1857.
" Sir,
“ As the Superintendent on Sunday last refused to allow me the use of the boat
“ provided by Government for the officers of the establishment, I have referred the matter to
“ the Colonial Secretary; meantime lam not prepared to accept any inferior boat which the
“ Superintendent may of his own caprice think fit to substitute.
“When it is distinctly understood that the visiting-boat is not provided hy the vote
“ of Parliament as a pleasure boat for the Superintendent and his friends, but for the public
“ service, I shall avail myself of it; until this is settled, you need send no boat to fetch me
“ from Sydney.
“ I find that the boat’s crew are rated as police on the Parliamentary Estimates, and the
“ brat service therefore belong to your department. It is my intention, if necessary, to have
“ the subject brought before Parliament, and 1 trust you will, in this ease, he prepared to show
“ that you are in no way answerable for the mismanagement which prevails in this branch
“ of your department.”
“ I have, &c.,
“ JOHN PENDRILL.
“ The Inspector of Police.”
That notice I gave to Mr. Dunning to shew to the Superintendent, and told him to keep it
for reference. He afterwards told me that the Superintendent had taken it from him.
92. On the 7th of February, was the visiting boat being painted or not ? No
93. By Captain Ward :By whom were you informed that it was being painted ? By one
of the boat’s crew.
94. Not by Mr. Ormsby ? No.
95. You say in your letter —“ Oil Sunday last, November 15, tlie small boat having been
“ sent for me to Sydney, I refused to return in it, and desired the coxswain to have the
“ proper boat ready after service, but Mr. Ormsby positive!y refused to let me have *t, and I,
“ in consequence, returned to Sydney, through the bush ” —did the circumstances occur as
there stated ? Yes.
96. How do you know the fact that Mr. Ormsby refused to let you have it ? Because I sent
a man and waited till he brought back an answer.
97. By the Chairman : Referring to this letter, I w'ould ask you are you aware that there are
printed rules and regulations ? I have never seen any —none wore over shewn to me.
98. Do you yourself know a policeman of the name of Gleadall ? Yes.
99. Do you know the fact of his being discharged from the force ? Yes.
100. Do you know the charge upon which he was discharged ? For being “ disgustingly
41 intoxicated but not drunk,” that I believe was the precise wording of the charge.
101. Do you know any of the facts of that charge yourself? I believe the man was dismissed,
arid that he was sworn to he perfectly sober.
102. Do you know that he was drunk 1 No ; he never was drunk, as far as it was stated to
me.
103. Do you know, of your own knowledge, whether he was drunk or sober ? I was
assured
104.


104. I ask you, do you know, of your own knowledge, whether the man was drunk or
sober ? I know, of my own knowledge, that the man'was sworn by the Inspector of Police
to be sober.
105. Did you hear the Inspector of Police sworn ? No.
100 Then, of your own knowledge, you do not know the fact ? I do know so far as this, that
it was a statement made to me upon which I could rely—l was not a witness.
107. Yo could not swear to the fact ? I could swear that it was told me as a fact.
108. Did you ever know an instance of a person being punished in any way for demanding
to see the regulations—of your own knowledge ? Well, I was told that man -was punished
for that.
109 That fact is stated upon your own knowledge ? Ido not think it is stated upon my
own knowledge ; it is mentioned among the other matters for inquiry.
110. You say, “ A demand to see the the regulations, though an unpunishable offence, is a
“ matter to be punished indirectly as soon as an opportunity offers,” —of your own knowledge
do you know' that ? It was stated to me by one of the police that Gleadall was punished on
that ground.
111. “ The prisoners likewise complain that they arc punished for violating rules and
“ regulations without having the means of knowing what those regulations are ” —Do you
know that of your own knowledge ? That statement has been made to me by the prisoners.
112. Do you know of any Chinaman having been confined to a cell ? It was my custom
when I went to the island to inquire what prisoners were in the cells, and on a certain day
I was told there was one man there. I inquired who he was, and the reply was that he was a
Chinaman. I then asked what he was there for and was told that this man
113. This is not a ease that comes within your own knowledge? No, of course, I had no
means of communicating with the man; the man could not speak English.
114. We must not have hearsay evidence ? lam prepared to call evidence in support of
what I state.
115. Who is the person ? If I give the name of the party will he he guaranteed the pro-
tection of the Court? {The Chairman stated that would be a matter for the future con-
sideration of the Board.) ■
11G. You say, “ When prisoners are consigned to the cells the Superintendent refuses to allow
“ them to attend Divine Service on the Sabbath ?” Yes.
117. Have you ever applied for any to be allowed to attend ? Yes.
118. Will you mention any instance ? At the time the “ Claremont was discharging,
when there was some disturbance on the island, there were sixteen men in the cells ; of these,
I think, seven were members of the Church of England; 011 Sunday morning, when I went
on the island, I sent a written requisition to the Superintendent to ask if the men could
attend the soivice, and if not why not. The answer sent me was that the request was a very
unusual one, but that he would ask the Colonial Secretary on the following day. When I
went over the next Sunday the men were still in irons, and I was told they could not attend,
for it would be breaking the period of their confinement.
119. In the sixth matter referred to in your letter you mention a case of “mortal sin”—do
you know anything of that except by hearsay ? It was a statement made by a prisoner that
a case had occurred, which he could bring evidence to prove, and he said that ho did not
venture to mention it because if he did he should be confined to the cells. Ho said a case
had occurred previously where the person who had perpetrated the offence had not been
punished, but the man upon whom it was perpetrated was punished. He said if I could give
him protection he would mention the ease.
120. You say, in the seventh, “ A / '•stain parti/ was accused, some time since, of appropri-
“ ating the rations of the prisoners” —who is that party ? I will tell the story as it was told
to me.
121. To whom do you allude as “ a certain party ?” I should like to know what protection
is guaranteed to the parties?
122. I want to know the party to whom you allude? I will state that when you have
settled the question of protection.
123. Then you decline to answer the question? Yes. {After some hesitation.') Well,]
alluded to the Superintendent. lam prepared now to state the case.
124. What was the case? At the time of the disturbances connected with the
“ Claremont ” there was a prisoner put in irons as being a party to that transaction,
and I saw him; he was not kept there for the same term as the other men, as he
himself stated he was put in unjustly, and he was released. When I saw him, I
said, “lam surprised you should get yourself into fresh trouble, seeing your time for
“ going out has nearly arrived ” His answer was, “ I was put in unjustly; I was put in
“ because the Superintendent has a down upon me.” I said, “ what do you mean?” {Mr.
Dillon objected to the witness repeating conversations affecting the Superintendent when Mr.
Ornisbij was not present.)
125. Do you know any of the facts stated in that article of your own knowledge, or merely
from hearsay from the prisoners ? Of course I know them only by hearsay.
126. Btf Captain Ward: Do you know whether the prisoner was confined ,by authority or
without ? The man was confined, hut he was released upon evidence being given that he was-
not one of the parties; he was found not to he guilty of the offence for which he was confined.
127. The case came before the Visiting Magistrate, and the Visiting Magistrate adjudicated
upon it ? Yes. The man was accused of being a ringleader of the mutiny, as it was called,
upon the island, which-took place with regard to the “Claremont.”
128. You say the whole ease went before the Visiting Magistrate? Whether he was the
ringleader or not. ■
129. Was that the only ease that went before the Visiting Magistrate ? Yes.
130. Are you sure of that ? No.
* 17—Q 131.
The Bev.
J. Pcndrill.
30 Oct., 1857.


131. You do not know that the whole case was not considered by the Visiting Magistrate
and adjudicated upon? I have reason to believe it was.
132. You do not know that ? No further than that I was told, and I do not suppose the
. person told me an untruth.
133. Then the statement is simply hearsay ? It is a statement made to me as Chaplain of
the island.
134. By the Chairman : Have you anything else to state upon the matters contained in
that letter—l have pointed your attention to all that is specific, will you add anything as a
a matter of fact, of your own knowledge ? Of course there are many things which may be
considered as matters of knowledge, as they are derived from ordinary means of information,
but I cannot swear to things that took place when I was not on the island. All I say is,
that they are cases that should be inquired into. lam prepared to call evidence in support
of them, if I have the opportunity. It is to be ascertained from the examination of those
witnesses whether I have stated the truth or not. I may add that our salaries were usually
paid at the beginning of the month ; and, after I had left the island, I met Mr. Taylor, and
said, “ I would go to the island and receive my last month’s salary, and that I wished to see
“ some persons on the island.” I received a notice from the Superintendent that I could not
be allowed to land without an order from the Visiting Magistrate; I regarded this as an
insult, because I knew the clergy had landed on the island without an order. Mr. Stephen
and Mr. King when they went to perform my duty took no order, and at Darlinghurst no
order is considered necessary for the admission of a clergyman. I understood an order was
given to the police not to allow me to land.
135. You wished to go to the island to receive your salary, and you were told you could not
land without an order ? Yes. There is another fact I would wish to state. A prisoner
requested me to get him a German Dictionary, and he informed me he would pay for it out
of his earnings. I inquired whether the man had earnings, or whether it was possible for
him to have the sum properly in his keeping; I was told it was; and I bought the dic-
tionary, but when I went again to the island the man was in one of the cells, and I left the
dictionary in the assistant»Superirjtendent’s office, which I used as my room. I have been
told that the book has been taken out of that office, and that it has been endeavoured to con-
coct a charge against me of selling books to the prisoners.
136. Was the charge ever brought against you ? No; but the book was taken out of the
office.
137. How do you know that it was endeavoured to concoct a charge against you ? I am
informed that the book was taken possession of and carried up to the Superintendent’s office.
138. What further was done ? Nothing further was done ; I only mention it as one of those
things intended to damage my character.
139. All that was done was that the book was taken possession of ? Yes; the book was taken
possession of and never returned to me, but I understood that use had never been made of it.
140. By Captain Ward: I want to ask you about the case of Cockerell—you say you went
to see his wife at the man’s inslance? Not at the man’s instance ; I volunteered to see her.
141. When you went to the island again you communicated to him ? No, the man was in
the cells, and I did not speak to him for a month or more; he always seemed to avoid me.
142. You say a charge was brought against you by Mr. Ormsby—in what manner was it
brought ? He said, “ I have got a charge against you from Captain M'Lerie of carrying
“ messages from the prisoners to their friends.”
143. That is to say, he verbally charged you with this ? Yes.
144. Was the matter carried any further ? No, it then and there rested. I was going to
carry it forward, but I was told that not having any written evidence it was not well to do so.
145. On your explanation Mr. Ormsby let the matter drop ? Yes; nothing more was said
about it.
146. By the Chairman ; You state in a portion of your letter in the Empire of October the
2nd, that " the prisoners complain that their letters are read aloud in the office and made a
“ matter of joke, and that the contents of their letters to their friends are thus made known
“to their fellow prisoners”—do you know any facts in support of that charge ? Yes. One
of the prisoners, named Beer, called on me one day, and said he wished to make a communi-
cation to a gentleman in Sydney, who was a friend of his family, and he wanted me to take
it. I said, “If you have any communication to make, you write and send it through the
*' Superintendent.” He said, “ No; it is of a kind that I cannot send through him.” I
replied, “ If it is a communication not proper to be sent through him, it cannot be proper for
“me to take it.” He said, “ Well, Sir, I will tell you what it is. My family are Swiss, and I
“ have had a letter from my father, who is a very old man ; he wishes me to assure him that
“I am innocent of the charge, and says if I will do so he will be perfectly satisfied. I wish
"to assure him of that, and to state what are my feelings.” I said, “Write the letter.”
He replied, “ I cannot; it will have to be passed, with the other letters, through the hands
“of the Superintendent.” I told him that it would be like letters opened in the Dead
Letter Office—a perfect secret, confined to the Superintendent. He said—“l some time
“ since wrote a letter to my sister, and although I have not been what I ought to have been,
“ I have been religiously brought up, and in my letter I quoted some psalms which had been
“ a consolation to me in my imprisonment. The Superintendent met me shortly after,
“ 'and said, 'What have you got to do with writing psalms’?—naming the psalms —and
" stating that the letter had been read in the office, and ridiculed by other prisoners as ' cant-
“ ‘ ing humbug.’ ”
147. By Captain Ward: Do you know, as a matter of fact, that this letter was read in the
office ? I cannot know that, but I know that a letter had been written by that man to his
sister.
148. You do not know, of your own knowledge, that any letter was read in the office ? No
further than I knew from the information of others.
149.


149. Could you name any person who w'ould give evidence upon that —any free man ? I beg
to say that it has been stated that the writers of those letters have been conspirators, and
actuated by evil feelings towards Mr. Ormsby. Now, I beg to say that lam no conspirator,
and that I have no personal feeling whatever in the matter I can declare on my honor. ( The '•
witness then wrote the' following as the list of persons he desired to call in support of his
statement ): —
“ Mr. Dunning, Inspector of Police, respecting Glcadall’s case, also respecting the
“ use of the visiting boat when I was sent to Sydney with convict.
“ Mr. Thomas, late Resident Engineer, can affirm that he has heard letters read
“ aloud in the office.
“ Mr. Brown, Assistant Superintendent, can give information respecting the Chinaman
“ who was confined unjustly for refusing to work when the interpreter did not come.
“ Dr. Beer stated about his letter being read, and his being reproved for quoting
“ psalms.
“ Merewether made the statement respecting rations ; that is, as far as his being
“ unjustly confined for ‘ voting against the Government’ on the question of appropriation.
“ Assistant Superintendent may be asked what assistance I had in my duties.
“ Inspector of Police, respecting the irregularity of the boat service.”
150. Cross-examined bg Mr. Dillon : Is there any one single instance within your personal
knowledge of misconduct on Mr. Ormsby’s part to justify a complaint of any kind by you?
Yes, certainly. I should not have made a complaint unless I had thought so.
151. What instance is there which you intended, by the evidence given by you to-day, to
shew as being within your own personal knowledge ? I shall go into nothing that has
already been gone into before the Board.
152. If you will allow me I will repeat the question, which you do not appear to understand,
and, with the permission of the Board, I will require an express answer from you. —What
portion of your evidence to day do you intend to put forward as that on which you rely for
any fact, within your personal knowledge, of fair ground of complaint against Mr. Ormsby ?
The refusal of the boat on the 7th February.
153. And is that all ? Oh no! I complained of the manner in which I was treated when
I was required to go to the school to robe. I believe that was done as an express mark of
disrespect. There was a case on the 15th of November. Another refusal of the boat on
the 9th of November, when the boat left the island without taking me.
154. With the leave of the Commissioners, I will put my question to you again, which at
present you either do not understand, or, have not given a correct answer to, or, I have not
known how to put properly. Give a plain answer to this question.—ls there any instance,
except that on the 7th of February, in which you had personal knowledge of any impropriety
on the part of Mr. Ormsby, which you intend to convey as matter of complaint in your
evidence before the Commissioners to-day—any instance of your personal knowledge? Yes.
I once made an entry in the Visitors’ Book, respecting the removal of a tract —one of the
tracts sent over by the Bishop of Sydney. That complaint w T as cut out of the Visitors’ Book
and the names were written over again, upon another page.
155. Was that done by Mr. Ormsby ? It was cut out and re-written.
156. My question is a plain one—can you tell the Commissioners, or inform me of one single
fact, one single incident that you can state as the cause of complaint for anything wrong done
by Mr. Ormsby, in your evidence now given ? I can state that the complaint I entered in
the Visitors’ Book was cut out of it.
157. By Captain Ward: In that particular case, was that done with Mr. Ormsby’s
knowledge ? I presume names are not cut out of the Visitors’ Book without his knowledge.
158. Was it done with Mr. Ormby’s knowledge, that is what I understand Mr. Dillon to
mean ? If Mr. Dillon wants to go into any other thing, lam perfectly willing to do so.
159. By the Chairman : You complain that a page was cut out of the Visitors’ Book, by
whom, and by whose orders you do know ? No ; you can refer to the Visitors’ Book.
160. By Mr. Dillon : Do you recollect, with regard to what you say was cut out of the
Visitors’ Book, whether the substance of it was not calculated to lead to some controversy
between you and the Roman Catholic Clergyman ? That is not the question at issue.
161. By Captain Ward: You can answer that? Ido not know that it was.
162. By the Chairman : What was the remark made ? It was simply to the effect that he
had stepped out of his own department when he had taken the tract out of the hospital.
163. A tract you had put there ? No ; my predecessor.
164. That was the remark in the book ? Yes ; and I requested him to attend to his own
affairs ; that was cut out of the book.
165. By whom you do not know? No.
166. By Mr. Dillon : Are you the writer of a letter published in the Empire of the sth of
October, signed “ Another Witness ? ” No.
167. Do you know who is ? No. I did not know the writer of any letter at the time; I
have heard since.
168. Do you know the writer of the letter in the Empire of the 6th October, signed
“ A Third Witness ? ” No; all I know I confess to.
169. You spoke of the case of Cockerell ? Yes.
170. Were you not aware that it was contrary to the regulations for messages to be taken to
the prisoners’ friends ? No; I never heard of any regulations on the island.
171. Did you not know that it is against the regulations to carry messages from Cockatoo?
No, I do not, and 1 carried no message from Cockatoo.
172. Did Mr. Ormsby ever personally refuse you a boat ? I personally requested him that
the boat might remain for me on the 9th of October, and it was not attended to.
173. By Captain Ward: What was his reply ? That it should; it did not, and no apology
was made.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX A.
Sydney, 19 February , 1857.
To the Honorable the Colonial Secretary,
Sir,
By a communication from you of 24th December (No. />G-918(j.) enclosing a letter from
the Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo Island, on the subject of the visiting boat, and other matters con-
nected therewith, I was led to hope that I should receive from the Superintendent of that estab-
lishment, in his future arrangements of the boat service, that courtesy and respect wlxich I feel assured
(as your letter indeed states) it is the desire of the Government should be shewn to Ministers of Religion
by the officers of the establishments which they visit. I am sorry to be obiged to complain that the
intimation to this effect, given to the Superintendent of Cockatoo Island, has been as yet without result.
Notwithstanding the disavowal of intentional discourtesy, expressed by him, through Mr. North’s report,
he persists in refusing to me the boat specially provided for the use of the establishment. As this
refusal involves a prominent principle of Mr. Ormsby’s administrations, namely a constant disposition
to make his arbitrary will and pleasure the only recognised law on Cockatoo Island, I am not prepared to
pass it over without remark.
The subject of complaint may seem a small matter, but it is just one of those small matters which
illustrate the petty and overbearing spirit in which the Superintendent disch rges his duties on Cockatoo;
and by the abuse of the unlimited authority, which he has either received in trust or else usurped,
creates a feeling of general dissatisfaction throughout the whole island.
In a penal establishment, where the law vindicates its claim by inflicting its severest penalty,
the general administration, even in its minutest details, ought to be conducted in most entire sub-
mission to law on the part of its officers, or, in other words, on fixed and definite principles. Even
prisoners have certain rights, and when these rights, small though they be, are respected, when no petty
and extra-judicial inflictions are added to their just judicial sentence, it is felt that justice reigns supreme,
and the criminal feels that whatever he surfers he suffers justly.
But if an administrator, whose office it is to exact from others the penalties of violated law,
himself continually violates the principle of law in little things, because liis position enables him to do
it with impunity, lie degrades justice, and leads the criminal to complain that her ways arc not equal,—
general dissatisfaction will be the result, and this dissatisfaction will not be the less deep and sincere
because a pressure is applied to prevent complaint and redress.
It is for reasons of this kind that the present administration at Cockatoo is obnoxious to every
one on the island, whether bond or free, except the special objects of a capricious favoritism.
I am, therefore, induced to enter a protest against the Superintendent’s proceedings in respect to
myself, as this merely forms part of an arbitrary and vexatious system, which presses severely on many
whose dependent position on his absolute sway prevents their offering any complaint.
I conceive that I am entitled to require, not merely such conveyance to and from Cockatoo Island
as the Superintendent in his caprice may think fit to oifer, hut sueli proper and suitable conveyance as
the Government arrangements enable him to provide. 1 believe that the Chaplain at Cockatoo formerly
received an allowance for boat hire. It was thought desirable to withdraw this allowance, and in lieu
of it a suitable and well appointed boat was appointed for the general use of the officers of the establish-
ment.
At present, about £4OO (beside rations) of the sum voted by Parliament on account of the Police
Estimates of Cockatoo Island are set apart for the maintenance of this boat and crew. The crew are
indeed rated as police, hut they do no police duty; their only duties are the boat service. In thus
furnishing the means for providing an effective crew and good boat, it is obviously the intention of
Parliament that the officers of Cockatoo Island should be served in this rcpcct in such a manner as
becomes a well ordered Government establishment. A good boat is provided that there may be no
excuse for a negligent and slovenly performance of the service.
I consider that the Superintendent is in no way justified in contravening this arrangement of his
mere caprice; he is not justified in substituting an inferior boat; still less is lie justified for so doing,
that the proper one may be reserved for the special service of himself and friends in their parties of
pleasure or visits to Sydney, to the hinderanee and detriment of the public service.
On February 7th, I was informed that the visiting boat was being painted, and that the coxswain
was at work on her, and that for this reason lie would not accompany the boat sent for me to Sydney.
I was on that day sent hack to Sydney in the small boat without the full crew; the Chaplain of the
Church of Rome returned in same boat, and there were sent with us a convict, in double irons, and the
sergeant of police; it blew a stormy breeze, and the boat was so deep in the water that one of the crew
complained that he could not work his oars. Mr. Ormsby bad given orders that the said convict should
he placed in the bow of the boat, hut as the sea was so rough that it sent the spray over the boat, and
he had no provision against the wet beyond liis prison dress, we did not feel justified in permitting the
Superintendent’s most inconsiderate order to be obeyed.
The crowded state of the boat and the roughness of the wind and tide made the passage most
uncomfortable.
The proper boat (said to be painting) was, in fact, sent up to Lane Cove, or some other place, with
a party of pleasure from the Superintendent’s a short time before we left the island. *
Oil Sunday last, November loth, the small boat having been sent for me to Sydney, I refused to
return in it, and desired the coxswain to have the proper boat ready after service, but Mr. Ormsby
positively refused to let me have it, and I, in consequence, returned to Sydney through the bush.
Whether the boat was again required for a party of pleasure, or whether the refusal was purely
a matter of caprice and intentional discourtesy, I cannot pretend to say.
I must, moreover, remark, that the small boat is so short, and lies so low in the water, that it is
much heavier to pull than the proper boat, and the use of it unnecessarily imposes on the crew double
labor, and, from the same causes, when the weather is rough, as is frequently the case, it dips so much
into the sea as to inflict on crew and passengers an uncomfortable amount of salt water.
I consider that the Superintendent is guilty of a gross dereliction of his duty when he thus
abuses his control of the boat service, not only by hindering its efficiency, but by raising up obstacles
in the way of those who are entitled to it. This system is, doubtless, mucli to bis own personal
advantage and convenience. By making the use of the boat as uncomfortable and as disagreeable in
every way as possible, lie prevents others from using it, and thus secures a more exclusive command of
boat and crew than ever for himself and friends ; yet, at the same time, it must be admitted that the
system is little creditable to the establishment in which it exists with impunity.
This, however, is but one small item of that general system of arbitrary misrule and abuse of
power which prevails at the establishment at Cockatoo Island.
I am persuaded that the Government is not aware of the extent to which this power is made to
bear oppressively, and, 1 fear, unjustly in the lesser and tails of internal administration; nor indeed can
the Government be aware until a full inquiry into these matters he instituted ; and, by inquiry, I do
not mean an inquiry with closed doors, conducted by the Superintendent, with power to conceal facts,
suppress evidence, and intimidate subordinates fearful of losing their situations, but an open and
impartial inquiry, with a single desire to ascertain the truth and place the establishment on such
# footing that none may have cause to complain of its unjust, impartial, and capricious administration.
I have, frc.,
JOHN PENDRILL,
Church of England Chaplain of Cockatoo.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX B.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, 24 ill December, 1856.
Reverend Sir,
With reference to my letter of the 23d instant, I am now directed to transmit
to you the copy of a Report, received from the Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo Island, on the subject
of your representation of inattention and want of courtesy from the Superintendent of that Establish-
ment, and to express the hope of the Colonial Secretary that the arrangement which you will observe
Mr. North is prepared to make, for providing you with a boat to visit the island, will prevent any
further cause of complaint.
I have, &c.,
The Reverend John Pendrill, W. ELYARD.
Sydney.
APPENDIX C.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 23 rd December, 1856,
Reverend Sir,
I am directed to inform you that your letter of the 18th instant has been referred
to the Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo Island (Mr. North) for the purpose of inquiring into and report-
ing on the arrangements for furnishing a boat for the use of the clergyman visiting that establishment.
2. I am desired to add that, in consequence of your former letter, a r. ference was made through
the Visiting Magistrate to the Superintendent, who stated that he always felt pleasure in meeting, as
far as possible, the wishes of official visitors ; and it did not appear that any disrespect was intended.
A communication to this effect was intended to have been written to you at an earlier date, accompanied
by a statement of the days and hours at which boats from the island are available for such visitors ;
hut the Visiting Magistrate has again been referred to, and a further letter will be addressed to you on
the receipt of his report. It is, of course, the desire of the Government that every respect should bo
shown to Ministers of Rfcligion by the officers of the establishments they visit; and this has been already
intimated to the Superintendent of Cockatoo Island.
I have, &e.,
The Reverend John Pendrill. W. ELYARD.
APPENDIX D.
Office of the Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo Island,
2§th January, 1857.
Sir,
In compliance with your letter of the 24th instant, a boat will attend at the King-
street Wharf, for the purpose of conveying you to Cockatoo Island, every Saturday and Sunday, at 2
o’clock, p.m.; but I could have wished 3’ou had named any other day instead of Saturday, as the boat-
men have always had that day allowed them for cleaning themselves and boats. I have no doubt
that every respect will be paid to you in the performance of your duties, and I trust you will not find
me unwilling to enforce it whenever any instance is brought under my notice.
As I am not aware to what your last paragraph alludes, it is impossible for me to reply to it.
I have, &c.,
S. NORTH,
W. P. M.
George West, M. D., was called in and further examined, as follows:
1. By the Chairman: Do you remember a man named Daniel Dunmore having been a
patient in the hospital in March, 1856 ? I could not recollect it unless I could refer to the
books.
2. A young man who died of pleuritis ? I think I begin to recollect something about it
3. A communication has been made to us to this effect :—“ A young man named Daniel
“ Dunmore was attacked with pleuritis, and complained to the dispenser, asking to be taken
“ into the hospital) the dispenser refused him admittance and sent him to the exempt
“ ground—a damp bank—where he was exposed to rain, and his disease was doubtless much
“ aggravated by this treatment. He became so much worse the next day that he was
“ literally carried from his ward to the hospital, and in three days died ” ? I have some
recollection of it, but not so particularly that I could give the evidence respecting it I could
wish; I have this recollection, that the dispenser told me he got a great deal better of it,
and, at his own request, left the hospital.
4. You could not, at this moment, give the particulars ? No.
5. By Captain Ward: Who was the dispenser at that time ? The same person. I have a
perfect recollection that he told me he was a great deal better for the treatment he had had,
and that he had left at his own request.
6. Do you remember the case of an old man named Murphy—the statement we have received
is that “an old man named Murphy also died from neglect not very long ago. The register
“ in the hospital was altered to suit the story trumped up to meet the emergency, and a
“ different treatment of Dunmore inserted ” ? This is the first time I ever heard of this.
Mr. James H. Thomas was again called in, and further examined, as follows:
[The evidence given by Mr. Thomas on the 23 rd instant was read,]
1. Cross-examined by Mr. Dillon : You spoke awhile ago of your having made a complaint
of some prisoners threatening you ? Yes.
2. And I believe you, on that occasion, returned them to the penal department ? Ido not
recollect.
3. They refused to work after hours ? No ; that was not the case.
4. Do you recollect the Visiting Magistrate requiring you to bring this case before him ?
No ; that is not the case; that has been settled before.
* 17—E 5.


5. You spoke awhile ago of Spencer working for Mr. Ormsby—do you not know, is it not
within your own personal knowledge, that what he did was by order of the llesident Engi-
neer—in fact by your own orders and directions? No.
6. You state that ? I state that.
7. By Captain Ward: Are you aware what Spencer did upon that occasion? No; I never
could be aware what Spencer did, as I had not access to Mr. Ormsby’s premises.
8. How long ago was that ? There were several occasions.
9. Was that case of Spencer brought before the Government ? There have been one or two
cases ; I do not know whether that is the particular ease.
10. By Mr. Dillon: How long have you been on the island ? Nearly four years. I have
stated that.
11. You speak, to your own knowledge, of Mr. Ormsby or of his family having used this
boat twenty or thirty times during that ? Yes, more.
12. Are you aware that he has an authority to. use that boat one day in the week ? I have
no knowledge. I do not know' what the orders are. I know nothing of that; I have no
means of knowing. I only state that he has used it.; whether he has orders I have not the
means of knowing.
13. You spoke of Mr. Ormsby having allowed his friends to land on the island without an
order, is that within your personal knowledge ? I only know from two gentlemen who have
told me so—Mr. Spain and Mr. Macdonald; they told me that they were allowed to land
without an order when they went to see Mr. Ormsby.
14. You do not know, as a fact, that they had no order? No, because Mr. Ormsby might
say he had an order. When they came to see me they were not allowed to land, for I was
on the wharf at the time.
15. By Captain Ward: How long was this ago when Mr. Spain andiMr. Macdonald came to
the island ? About six or eight months ago; but Mr. Dunning w T ill be able to say.
16. By Mr. Dillon : Then, in point of fact, you do not know whether Mr. Ormsby had an
order. Is it not a common occurrence for Mr. Ormsby to have authority for persons to land
before they come to the island—do you not know that? No; how is it possible for me to
know ?
17. You profess to know one way, and, as you know what has been the case with respect to
yourself, you may know something in the other direction ? I have never seen the orders.
18. Have you not had orders for your friends to land before they have come to the island ?
Yes.
19. Then the same thing may have happened in Mr. Ormsby’s case ? Yes, that may be. I
am only giving you the names of persons who have told me it was not so.
20. Are you and Mr. Ormsby on good terms ? No; we never have been from the day I
landed.
21. In your evidence you state that it is in your power to give evidence to his prejudice.
On this occasion you profess to do so from a sense of duty to the public ? I have no interest
in the matter; I am out of it now.
22. Then you come forward from a sense of public duty, and not from any personal ill-
feeling ? From a sense of public duty. I give the names of persons, and in my letter I
state certain matters as things to be inquired into.
23. You are guided altogether by a sense of public duty, without any personal ill-feeling ?
There has never been any private quarrel between us; our disagreements have been over
matters of public duty. There has never been any chance of personal quarrel.
24. Did you ever on any occasion send a very offensive message by any police officer on the
island ? Ido not see that that has anything to do with this. What does that refer to in
the evidence ?—I decline to answer that.
25. Do you ever recollect sending any message by one or more of the policemen on any
occasion, to this effect, or in these words —really the words are so offensive that I do not like
to repeat them to this Board, and wish to be quite certain as to the precise words—that
“ the police would kiss Mr. Ormsby’s arse,” but that Mr. Ormsby might “ kiss your arse,
■“ and they might tell him so” ? No.
26. Do you swear that ? I swear it; I swear that was not the expression.
27. Or to that effect ? That is another thing.
28. What was it you said ? I said Mr. Ormsby might kiss my backside, in reference to some
impertinent allusion made to me in reference to Mr. Ormsby. If that may be allowed I will
bring other things to shew that the same thing has been expressed with reference to me. I
can instance a number of cases where I have met with insult and annoyance. I will go into
them if you wish, but I should like my legal adviser to be present.
£ The Chairman said the presence of Mr. Thomas’ legal adviser was not necessary, as he did
not stand in the position of one accused. ]
29. Did you ever, in the presence of the prisoners on the island, or to any of the prisoners,
use an expression to this effect, on one or repeated occasions, “ Damn Mr. Ormsby” ? No,
never to a prisoner.
30. Or within the hearing of a prisoner on the island ? No —at least I will not swear that I
may not have said it within the hearing—l never said it to a prisoner. But Ido not see that
I am here to answer these questions.
31. You speak of noises on the island on the Sabbath-day —did you ever make a complaint on
-that subject ? It was not my duty.
32. Did you, or did you not ? No, I did not.
38. Are you aware whether any of these singings you speak of did or did not proceed from
the military guard ? Yes, I am quite sure of it; I am quite positive of it, as I have been
walking round the prison and could distinguish.
34. What I ask plainly is this —will you undertake to say that on none of these occasions,
when you heard these noises you speak of, they proceeded from the military guard, from the
men in their barracks ? Yes, I will. 35.


■35. You speak of a cedar plank having been taken, and you say also very positively that Mr.
Ormsby was on the island on that day ? I did not speak so very positively.
36. Now will you undertake to say whether he was or was not present ? To the best of my
belief he was. i
37. You will not he certain ? I would not take an oath that he was.
38. Was it a cedar plank or two hoards ? A cedar plank.
39. Do you recollect, whether there was nut an inquiry by the Visiting Magistrate as to the
fact that it was put there, or as to the supposition that it was put there in, Mr. Ormsby’s
absence—do you remember an inquiry upon that point ? That might have been, but I never
knew of it.
40. Do you know Mr. Cahil ? Yes.
41. Do you think him a person worthy of belief—that his evidence is worthy of belief?
Yes, I think so; I have no reason to doubt him.
42. With respect to the opening and reading letters, it was only on a single occasion you
were present at an occurrence of that kind ? No ; I was there on two or three occasions.
43. Has the result been the same on all those occasions—that is, that Mr. Ormsby has
ridiculed them ? Yes, that lam ready to swear to.
44. Do you recollect the passages in the letters? No, but the substance; they were made
matter of ridicule.
45. You do not state, as a matter of certainty, who was in the office besides Mr. Ormsby and
the clerk ? No, there might have been the tw T o prisoner clerks there; I was standing in
such a way that it was impossible to tell.
46. It was in reference to what was written in the letters that Mr. Ormsby smiled ? Yes.
47. You never knew, of your own knowledge, of his keeping back any letters, or of his
invading the privilege of the prisoners to write to whom they pleased ? Not of my own
knowledge, but I have heard of cases.
48. I suppose you are aware that no letters should go from the island without being examined
by Mr. Ormsby? Ido not know that is the regulation ; I have heard that it is.
49. By Captain Ward : Is it not down in the regulations ? Ido not know.
50. By the Chairman : Have you anything you would desire to add to the statement you
have already given ? At the time I was examined I imagined that it would be to state
generally as to the state of the island. • For the first two years that I was upon the island I
kept two diaries, in which a. number of entries were made; and if I were allowed to go to
the island and refer to the hooks in the Engineer's Department, I could refer to dates on which
I was subject to the system of annoyance and opposition which prevailed.
51. By Captain Ward: Do you mean previous to the former inquiry ? Yes, and I think
cases have occurred since.
52. All these have been brought under the notice of your superior officer, Captain Mann ?
Yes, in every case.
53. And Mr. Mann has dealt with them ? No.
54. They have been under his supervision ? Yes; when I had reported to him I had done
my duty.
WEDNESDAY, 4 NOVEMBER, 1857
Sir W. W. BURTON, Knt., in the Chair.
E. C. MERE WETHER, Esq, | Capt. EW. WARD.
Mr. Ormsby.
Mr Dillon, Solicitor for Mr. Ormsby.
[4 letter was read from Mr. Dillon. — Vide Appendix. The Board deliberated, and resolved
that the requests contained in the letter could not be complied with. ]
The Chairman to Mr. Dillon : We have had a letter handed to us by you, containing several
requests. First, —that you should have a list of the charges against Mr. Ormsby. With
respect to that I must tell you, by desire of the Board, that you are already in possession of
as much as they, as these charges, whatever they may be that affect him, are in the different
papers that have been published. With reference to the second, —that the Board will allow
Mr. Taylor to he present to assist you in the arrangement of your papers,—they can do no
such thing. Thinking that in the course of this inquiry into the general management of
the island the evidence of some witnesses might affect Mr. Ormsby, it was considered just to
him to allow him to be present, and, in consequence of his apparent infirmity, you were
admitted to assist him, hut the Board can yield no further.
Mr. Joseph Francis Peers, was called in and examined as follows:
1. By the Chairman : You arc the dispenser upon Cockatoo Island? I am.
2. How long have you been there? Nearly two years.
3. Are you a regularly educated medical practitioner ? Yes.
4. Have you been a surgeon in the Navy ? I have been an assistant surgeon, not full surgeon.
5. During the time you have been on the island you have, of course, made yourself acquainted
with the state of penal discipline there ? Yes, to a certain extent.
6. Do you remember the case of two prisoners who concealed themselves for a time upon the
island ? I do.
7.


7. How long were they absent from their duty ? I think not more than twenty-four hours,
as near as 1 can recollect; lam not certain on that point.
8. Was either of them brought to the hospital after being recovered ? Yes—the boy Roberts.
9. What age was this boy as you call him ? He was a lad, I should think between sixteen
and seventeen—quite a boy.
10. Was he long in the hospital ? Off and on for some time.
11. How many weeks or days? Exactly, I could not answer; but about a month or two at
least, I should think.
12. .Did you ever see the other prisoner who absconded with him ? Yes.
13. Do you know his name? Clarke.
14. What aged person was he ? A young man, I should think about twenty-seven or twenty-
eight, as far as I could judge from his appearance.
15. Have you seen this paper, the Empire of October sth, in which there is a letter signed
“ Another Witness? ” Yes.
16. Will you look at No. 1, —you observe that it is stated that two prisoners concealed them-
selves for forty-eight hours on the island, as it was supposed, for the purpose of committing a
nameless offence; do you know of any reason for supposing that they concealed themselves
for that purpose ? No, indeed Ido not.
17. Were you present at any inquiry upon the case of those two persons ? No.
18. One was a boy of tender years, sixteen or seventeen ? He might have been more, but he
could have been but very little more.
19. Can you give the Board any information respecting that case ? No.
20. What punishment was inflicted? Ido not know.
21. Whether there was any or not you do not know ? Ido not.
22. With respect to the Superintendent, I would ask you, “ Did the Superintendent upon a
“ recent occasion call the dispenser, in the presence of the Visiting Surgeon, the clerk to
“ the dry dock, and several prisoners, a name unfit to repeat, and make use of other foul
“ expressions to him, for having reported something to the superior officer.” I presume you
are the person alluded to as “ the dispenser ” ? I suppose so.
23. Has there been any correspondence between you, Mr. West, and Mr. Ormsby on that
subject ? There was some correspondence.
24. Was there any occasion upon which such a name was used to you, and what was it?
There were some words between me and Mr. Ormsby. I cannot give a direct answer, as lam
not asked what it was.
25. Was there an occasion on which a name was applied to you “ unfit to repeat ” ? Yes.
26. State what that was, and who were present ? If you will ask me any question about it,
I will answer it
27. My question was a very full one; did the Superintendent upon a recent occasion, call
you in the presence of the Visiting Surgeon, the clerk to the dry dock, and several
prisoners, a name unfit to repeat ? Yes.
28. What was that name ? Do you wish me to go into that.
29. I ask you a simple question—what name did he call you ? He called me a pimp.
30. What other foul words did he use ? He said I was a damned liar, and in fact the three
successive words were, that I was a damned liar, a vagabond, and a scoundrel.
31. Where was that—at your dispensary, or in his office ? Close to his office.
32. In the street, or rather in the open space by his office ? Yes.
33. Who was present on that occasion ? Dr. West.
34. Was Mr. Duff present? I believe Mr. Duff was present.
35. Any other persons ? There are always persons round there—prisoners.
36. Do you know the cause of your having such epithets applied to you? I had never given
any cause.
37. Did Mr. Ormsby say there was any cause ? Yes, there was a misunderstanding between
Mr. Ormsby and myself, as regards Dr. West. The day previous for Dr. West’s visit he did
not come, and Mr. Ormsby expected him, I believe. Mr. Ormsby told me that he was
disappointed that the doctor did not come, and I fully understood from Mr. Ormsby, from
his manner, and I still believe, that ho wished me to inform Dr. West that he was annoyed
that he had not come. I, fully understanding Mr. Ormsby to that effect, told Dr. West.
Dr. West was very vexed about it, and went to Mr. Ormsby and said, “ What you have to
“ say I wish you would say to myself, and not to my dispenser ?” Mr. Ormsby asked what I
had said, and I replied that I had told Mr. West what he had said to me about his not
coming, as I believed he intended me to do. Mr. Ormsby got in a passion, and applied this
language.
38. He applied these epithets to you? Yes.
39. Look at that correspondence ( handing/ 'witness Appendix E to Mr. Parkes’ evidenced)
and see if that is the correspondence which passed between you and Mr. Ormsby with
reference to that matter ? That is correct.
40. Do you wish to add anything upon that particular point? No.
41. This is the Empire of the 2nd October ( handing the paper to the witness) —“ A certain
“party was accused some time since of appropriating the rations of the prisoners.” Who is
the party alluded to in that letter—do you know ? No I cannot say that I do.
42. Do you know the circumstance there alluded to ? There was a circumstance occurred
some time ago about the rations.
43. Tan you tell us with particularity what the circumstance was ? I can tell you as far
as this, that some rations were supposed to be taken to the Superintendent’s; but I -was
present at some investigation which appeared to fall to the ground; it was some refuse
rations.
44. That is a little too incoherent to be taken down. When did this circumstance occur—
tell us only what you know yourself ? If it is to speak positive, I cannot.
45.


45. Were you ever made aware of such a circumstance—did you ever know a charge to be
made against Mr. Ormsby of having appropriated a part of the rations of the prisoners ?
There was such a charge, but I cannot tell the date.
46. Who made the charge ? A number of the prisoners.
47. What was the charge? Of appropriating the rations of the prisoners.
48. To what amount ? Ido not know.
49. Was there an inquiry made ? Yes.
50. By whom ? By the Visiting Magistrate.
51. Were you present ? I think I must have been —I am not sure.
52. What was the result ? The result I believe was, so far as I saw, that it was satisfactorily
explained there was no appropriation.
53. What did the Visiting Magistrate do with the case ? He cautioned the men against
taking matters of this kind into their hands without being properly prepared to go on with
the charge, and to substantiate any charge they might bring.
54. What did he do with the charge itself? I think it was dismissed.
55. By Captain Ward : You are quite sure it was examined into before the Visiting
Magistrate ? Yes.
50. By the Chairman : Will you look at the Empire of the 26th September, to a letter
signed “ N. 8.,” and tell the Board if you know the writer of that? ('['he witness referred to
the paper.") I have seen this letter before.
57. Who is the writer of it ? Ido not know.
58. Are you the writer ? No.
59. Did you see it before it was published ? No.
60. Do you know the writer ? No.
61. Do you know the circumstance referred to? After seeing this I knew to what it
alluded. One Sunday afternoon there were two old fellows in the yard playing, or
skylarking, as we say at sea, and there was some fun or other, and there was a general roar
of laughter —that was all.
62. Was that of long continuance ? Not very long—not longer than a minute or two.
63. You reside upon the island ? Yes.
64. Are you generally there upon the Lord’s Day ? Sometimes, except in the morning.
65. What was the observance of the Lord’s Day; was it generally decently and properly
observed ? Yes.
66. Were you ever disturbed by frightful yelling and hallooing ? I never was.
67. At a late hour at night did you hear singing and choruses ? I was never disturbed ; I
have heard the men singing little ditties in the ward, but nothing to call indecent noise or
confusion.
68. Then, whoever wrote the letter signed “N. 8.,” the facts stated are not true? Inasmuch
as I have stated they are true—l heard this laughing.
69. And that was all ? That was all.
70. Have you ever known upon any occasion a man to be taken into the hospital who has
been reported by the doctor to be fit for work ? No.
71. That is with reference to the fifth charge in the letter of the sth October ? No.
72. Do you remember a carpenter named Spencer being taken from the hospital for any
purpose ? No, Ido not remember his being taken from the hospital for any purpose what-
ever.
73. Do you remember a carpenter of the name of Spencer being taken from the hospital by
the Superintendent to work at his own quarters ? I had a man in the hospital of the name
of Spencer, and the only thing I know about that is, that as I was coming back to the
hospital—he was a patient in the hospital at the time—l found him just coming in. He
had been out, but where he had been I could not say.
74. Did he say where he had been ? Yes.
75. What did he say ? He told me he had been up to the office.
76. Merely up to the office ? Merely; that is all.
77. Will you now tell us what you know of the case of the young man Daniel Dunmore ? Yes.
78. Did he die in the hospital ? Yes.
79. What was his disease ? Consumption, or disease'of the lungs rather—pleurisy.
80. Was he admitted into the hospital in the first instance ? No, he was exempted from
work at first; he was put into the exempt list.
81. What were the symptoms of his disease ? At first it was merely an inflammatory cough.
At this time there were a great many men sick with influenza, and there Were, therefore, a
great number of cases of the same kind.
82. What you do with him ? I treated him for inflammatory cough.
83. How did you treat him ? He had the usual treatment; I have it here—l could not say
extempore.
84. Have you the treatment here ? Yes.
85. Let me see it ? (The witness produced the day hook.) This is my certificate that he
is exempted by the authorities on the island.
86. Where does he appear in the book ? (The witness referred to the hook, and pointed out
the several entries relating to Dunmore. “ Daniel Dunmore presented himself at the hospital
“ on the 25th of March, for a pain in the chest.”) We gave him lobelia and aether.
87. At what time in the day was that? About nine in the morning.
88. Was his breathing oppressed? Yes; he had the general symptoms of influenza at
that time.
89. You felt his pulse ? Yes; I fully examined him. ■
90. And exempted him from duty, not considering his case worthy of more attention at the
time? Yes.
91. And sent him to the exempt ground? And sent him to the exempt ground.
* 17—S 92.


92. What kind of weather was it at that time ? Something like it is now—sometimes hot
and sometimes cold.
93. When did you see him again ? He came three times a-day to take his medicine.
94. When did he come again ? The next day. I gave him cough mixture —camphorated
opium, ipecacuanha, and ammoniacum.
95. This is your own prescription ( refer: inq to the book) ? Yes.
96. When did the Visiting Surgeon see him? I cannot say.
97. The next time you saw him laboring under the same symptoms, and gave him the
same treatment as before ; on the 27th he came again ? Yes.
98. Then he was not in the hospital ? Yes; I took him in to watch the case. I took him
in during the day, but discharged him at night.
99. You gave him cough mixture on the 27th ? Yes, and I sent him back from the hospital
to the exempt ground. Then I think Dr. West must have seen him, for I see " digitalis ”
is added.
100. By Captain Ward: W T here are the prescriptions taken from that I see tacked on here
( referring to certain slips of paver pinned to the pages of the hooky ? They are taken from
another book.
101. By whom are they written ? By myself.
102. By the Chairman : On the third day he went again to the exempt ground ? Yes.
103. And on the fourth day ? He was admitted into the hospital. Now his name ceases in
this book. His treatment ceases in the day-book, and is entered in the hospital-book. (The
witness produced the hospital book. )
104. He was taken into the hospital on the 28th ? Yes. That is Dr. West’s prescription.
105. On that day you say the Visiting Surgeon saw him? I suppose so; I believe this
prescription is Dr. West’s.
106. Where does he appear again? On the 29th he is still under treatment, and a blister
is added.
107. On the 30th he is still in the hospital? Yes: ammonia acetate—that prescription is
Dr. West’s.
108. On the 31st ? He was still under treatment.
109. On the Ist April ? He died on the Ist.
110. At what time of the day ? I must refer to my private journal for that. {The witness
referred to his journal. ) I bring this forward voluntarily ;itis my own journal.
111. This is only from the time of his coining into the hospital? Yes.
112. I think you told us that the prescription on the 28th was Dr. West’s? lam not
positive. I have not the visiting book here.
113. By Captain Ward: I see in this book that you mark down Thomas Edgar to see Dr.
West, but there is no such mark against Dunmore’s name at all. What record is there that
he saw Dr. West ? For instance —sometimes a man comes to me and says he has symptoms
of a certain disease, and that he should like to see Dr. West when he comes, and I put down
his name’; that is the cause of that man’s name being written down in that book.
114. By the Chairman : When did Dr. West certainly see him ? He saw him several times,
but I could not positively say.
115. You say he came into the hospital on the 28t.h of March, and died on the Ist of April;
how often did Dr. West see him from the 28th of March to the Ist of April ? I should
think two or three times at the very least, even if he attended him only on his ordinary
visiting days.
116. He gave anew prescription for him ? Yes.
117. By Captain Ward: I suppose Dr. West will be able to tell us himself? Yes.
118. By the Chairman : Was a post mortem examination made? Yes.
119. Who conducted that examination ? Myself.
120. Alone? Yes.
121. Was any inquest held upon him ? No.
122. When was he buried ? I think on the same day, or the day after.
123. By whose order was he buried ? By the Visiting Magistrate’s.
124. I observe that this book (the private journal) has been sealed up in the previous pages—
is there any entry in the former part of this book sealed up concerning Daniel Dunmore ?
None whatever.
125. And there is none in any other part ? None whatever, only in this particular part.
126. I must now ask you for that extract from your private journal to annex to the pro-
ceedings ? Certainly. 1 have brought that book to refute the charges as they aflect me.
(Vide Appendix .)
127. I must now ask you respecting the case of William Murphy ( The witness produced
the hospital booled) William Murphy was an old man ? Yes, he was of great age, I believe
above eighty.
128. When was he admitted to the hospital ? At half past ten on the night of the 3rd of
December.
129. What was his complaint? Asthma.
130. How long did he continue in the hospital ? I think a very short time. (The witness
inferred to the boi,ki) He died at 2 p.m. on the 7th December.
131. Was he seen by the Visiting Surgeon ? Yes.
132. You think this man was of the age of eighty ? He was very old, so much so that I
would not allow him to go down the steps.
133. What kind of asthma did he labor under —spasmodic asthma? Yes.
134 . And he was treated both by you and Dr. West? Yes.
135 When was this treatment inserted (referring to an entry in the book)? First by
myself, and then apparently Dr. West must have seen him, for there was not room to insert
it, and it ig crowded in.
136.


136. When was this entry made.by Dr. West? On the very day upon which it is dated,
137. That you are sure of? Yes, I will pledge you my word.
138. By Dr. West ? By both.
189. Was .there any post mortem examination of that man ? No, because we knew exactly
what he died of.
140. He died of spasmodic asthma, and was a very old man ? Y"es.
141. Was there any Coroner’s inquest held upon him? No.
142. Had you any other death on the island during your time ? None.
143. Was there the death of a man who fell or who was thrown into the dock ? That was
not in my time.
144. You do not know of any other death in the hospital during your time ? Yes, from
chronic diseases.
145. How many deaths occurred in the hospital during your time? Five, in the two years
1 have been there.
146. Have there been any Coroner’s inquests held upon them ? No, because all the diseases
could be accounted for.
147. Whose handwriting is this ( referring to the entry of Dunmore s death')'! That is my
handwriting; it is all my own, and was done on the same day.
148. There appears to have been a dash in the line originally, afterwards written over ? It
is very likely that in the morning, when I make up my books, I made those dashes across
the line, and that the man died in a later part of the day, and I then wrote over the dashes.
149. With respect to Dunmore’s case, was the entry which appears under the date of the
28th entered on that day? Upon that very day.
150. YYu are positive ? Yes.
151. It has not been entered since ? No.
152. And also that on the 29 Emplash : myttoe, —was that entered on the same day, and not
since ? Yes, certainly not since.
153. This ammonia acetate, was that entered on the same day ? Yes.
154. Were all these entries of the treatment of Dunmore entered at the time ? Yes, at the
time they are headed, and not since. I speak most positively and distinctly. Here is proof,
you see so many entries made afterwards.
155. But the treatment of Hugh Duggins, which follows, is in a large hand, this is written
in a small hand ? Yes; but the case of Dunmore is a difficult case, and there is more writing
to be got into the space.
156. By Mr. Met ewether : There is a difference in the writing and in the ink? I might
write one way to-day and another to-morrow.
157. Ido not doubt your word, but there have evidently been alterations, —there are some
words in brackets, and there is a difference in the ink ? There has never been any altera-
tion, I pledge you my honor.
158. By the Ohaii man : I wish to ask you some questions upon another point: will you
look at the 11th paragraph in the letter of “ Another Witness”—do you know of any such
circumstance having occurred as is there mentioned ? No.
159. Have you any reason to believe that any such circumstance ever did occur ? No.
160. By Captain Ward: That is with regard to borrowing money of the prisoners? Yes.
If I could not speak positively I would not answer at all.
161. I wish to understand your position on the island relatively to Mr. Ormsby,; that is to
say, is Mr. Ormsby answerable for your conduct on the island ? No more than as regards
the police regulations.
162. A.re you subject to his control, and if so, in what way ? Merely in this way: he sees
that I do my duty, and I cannot leave the island without his permission.
1.63. Do you receive any orders from him with respect to the prisoners? None whatever.
164. Then, as far as your treatment of the prisoners is concerned, Mr. Ormsby is not
responsible ? No.
165. If you treated a prisoner in a manner different from that which his case required,
would it be his duty to bring the case to the notice of the Government? Exactly.
166. What would he do, would he report it to the Visiting Magistrate or to the Government?
In the first instance to the Visiting Surgeon.
167. You were asked just now whether Spencer was ever taken out of the hospital for any
purpose; I would now ask you whether he was ever taken into the hospital when he was
reported to-be fit for work ? No; Dr. West took him into the hospital in every case himself.
Dr. West took him in, I never did.
168. I want to ask you with reference to a specific charge, whether Spencer was ever taken
into the hospital when the doctor reported him fit for work ? Not to my knowledge.
169. Can you speak positively to that ? Yes.
170 You stated to the Board verbally, when they were upon the island, but it has not been
taken down in your evidence, that it was left to you to give what diet you chose to the
prisoners, notwithstanding what might be issued to them by the contractors; for instance, if
full diet were issued for them you might give them only spoon diet ? Yes.
171. Did you make any record of the diet given ? No; except I may have done so in my
private journal, for my own benefit at a future day.
172. With respect to the meat that may be left, what do you do with that? Some are upon
low diet and others require nourishing diet; we therefore take, what may be left of the
rations of the one, put the meat into a boiler, and make beef tea for the rest, so that one
man has to assist the others.
173. Has the residue ever been sent away ? No.
174. Never to Mr. Ormsby 7 s'quarters, or anywhere else? Never, that I am.aware of.
175. Would you have allowed such a thing to have been done ? Decidedly not.
176. How many prisoners are in the hospital, on the average, throughout the year ? There
is an average of seven daily. 177.


177. How many of these are generally upon spoon diet? When we receive a man into the
hospital we generally put him upon spoon diet, excepting the cases of convalescents, and we
feed them up to keep up their strength.
178. How long do you generally keep them upon low diet? Until the fever abates, or
whatever their symptoms may be.
179. Take the cases of Dunmore and Murphy ? One case being hopeless, we gave him
whatever we had
180. Do you not think it would be better, both for your own satisfaction and the satisfaction
of the Government, to record what diet was given ? Yes.
181. And also for the satisfaction of the prisoners, in order that they might know they had
all that was allowed them ? Yes, I think it would be better to keep such a book.
182. To keep such a record as is kept by you in your private journal ? Yes.
183. There is a treatment book kept on the island? Yes.
184. But that treatment book does not include the diet ? No.
18). By the Chairman: Still the diet is part of the treatment ? Yes.
186. But the treatment book does not include the diet? No. Certainly no man would
give meat to a man labouring under fever.
187. By Mr. Merewcilicr: With respect to the first charge—that contained in the letter
signed “ N. B ,” —you say you reside on the island, and that you sometimes hear singing in
the dormitories ? In the wards, not in the dormitories.
188. What do you mean by the wards ? The dormitories are the single sleeping places, the
wards are the general sleeping places.
189. Did that occur frequently ? No.
190. At what hour of the evening ? Never after the lights were put out.
191. At what time were the lights put out ? At eight o’clock.
192. And you never heard singing after that ? Never after that.
193 Was it at any time loud enough to be heard on the south shore ? . I could not say.
194. To the best of your opinion ? I have heard it at my own house; Ido not think it
could be heard much further.
195. How far is your house ? It is very close.
196. How far is the south shore ? About a quarter of a mile.
197. Could it be heard at that distance ? They would have to sing loud.
198 Was it loud enough to be heard at that distance ? I never heard it.
199. Are you on the island every Sunday evening? Generally. Yes, decidedly; .1 am
never absent in the evening.
200. By whose permission do you leave the island ? By Mr. Ormsby’s.
201. And only by Mr. Ormsby’s? Only by Mr. Ormsby’s.
202. You do not get the permission of Dr. West? No; still, if I neglected my duty, I
should be reported to him.
203. However, you are on the island every Sunday evening ? Yes; Ido not think I have
been absent above one or two Sunday evenings.
201. If there had been these disturbances on the island you would have had opportunities of
hearing them ? Yes.
205. With regard to the fifth charge, about Spencer, has the Superintendent, upon any
occasion, told the dispenser to take any man—l do not now refer to Spencer, but any other
man —into the hospital, whom Dr. West has pronounced fit for work ? Quite the reverse.
I have been most anxious to send the men to their work as soon as possible, and to keep
them at work.
206. I want a plain answer to my question ? Never.
207. With regard to Spencer, I do not quite understand the answer you gave to a question
at an earlier part of your examination : you said that one day as you were coming to the
hospital you found him returning to it—at What time was this? About one o’clock.
208. When did you see him last in the hospital previous to that ? In the morning at eight
o’clock.
209. He was then a patient ? Yes.
210. Then he might have been absent from the hospital from eight to one o’clock without
your knowledge ? I scarcely think it possible, because I should have heard of it if he had been.
211. Do you think he was long enough absent from the hospital to have been employed at
work, as it has been stated, at the Superintendent’s quarters ? I think not.
212. He might have been absent from eight to one, but you do not think he was ? No; in
fact I can almost speak positively that he was not.
213. By the Chairman : Did you ever know any sparring on the island between any two of
the prisoners ? No ; I never saw any such thing take place.
214. Did you know of anything of the kind ? I have, heard of such things, but I cannot
speak positively. I have never seen it.
215. Did you know a man named Perry? Yes.
216. Are you aware that he was a pugilist ? Yes.
217. Did you know another man named Sinclair ? That was before my time.
218. Then you never saw any sparring between Perry and Sinclair ? No.
219. Or knew that it was going on ? No ; because, the day that was reported to have taken
place, I took advantage of the holiday and was absent from the island.
220. Crons examined by Mr. Dillon : With reference to the language on the part of Mr.
Ormsby towards you, I believe it originated in a misapprehension, on his part, as to a com-
plaint made by you to Dr. West ? I believe there were, perhaps, misunderstandings, or
mistakes, on both sides.
221. It grew out, I believe, of the anxiety of Mr. Ormsby to see that the duty of the
Visiting Surgeon should be properly discharged ? It had all that appearance, I must say.
222.


222. And it did not at all grow out of any negligence of duty on the part of Mr. Ormsby,
but the contrary—the language that took place ? Ido not clearly understand.
223. Mr. Ormsby seemed to understand that there had been some neglect on the p>art of
Dr. West ? No, I can not admit anything of the kind.
224. By Captain Ward : What was the misapprehension of Mr. Ormsby, as far as you
understood ? It was inasmuch as this, —Dr. West did not visit the island according to the
expectation of Mr. Ormsby; he appeared to be annoyed, and made some remarks which I
fully believed he intended me to repeat to Dr. West. I did so. Dr. West was annoyed to
think that Mr. Ormsby should mention anything of the kind to me, I being his subordinate,
without going to him, and went to Mr. Ormsby. He said, “ I wish, Mr. Ormsby, if you
“ have anything to say respecting the performance of my 7 duties, you will say 7 it to me and
“ not to my dispenser.”
225. Mr. Dillon : It grow out of Dr. West having imagined that Mr. Ormsby had found
fault with him for his non-attendance ? Yes.
226. And the thing passed away from your mind, and from that of Dr. West afterwards,
when there was an explanation among you all ? There was no explanation.
227. There was a conversation between you, Dr. West, and Mr. Ormsby ? I am not aware.
228. B// the Chairman : Did Mr. Ormsby apologise to you afterwards ? No, never.
229. Will you tell me whether Mr. Ormsby was in the habit of using such words as those
you specifically declare were used by him on this occasion ? I never heard him use such
words before or since.
230. By Captain Ward: I would ask you with respect to the general management of the
island—into which the Board is appointed to inquire—whether you have reason to suppose
that the duties have been misconducted ? I will tell you the exact impression made upon
my 7 mind. I have been some years in Her Majesty’s Navy, where I have been used to strict
discipline; and I believe the only fault to be in the matter of discipline—the men have too
much their own way. I allude to the prisoners. They are kindly treated in every way,
and are well looked after; but I believe they are not —to my simple idea, it is my mere
individual remark—that they are not kept so strict as they ought to be as regards leading
them to reformation or well-doing The men behave themselves, certainly so far as I see,
very well.
231. What I want to know is, whether you consider that Mr. Ormsby, on the whole, dis-
charges his duty faithfully as a public officer ? I have never seen anything to the contrary.
232. What is your opinion ? I believe Mr. Ormsby does his duty, as far as lam able to
judge of the duty of a Superintendent; but I never w 7 as at such a place before.
233. As to the regulations, are you acquainted with them ? I applied for them, and read
them on a particular point as regards myself.
234. You could not say, then, from your own knowledge, whether Mr. Ormsby carried them
them out ? No ; I merely read these regulations as regards that particular point.
235. You say you. have been two years engaged in the discharge of your present duty—is
there any modification of your instructions which you think might be beneficially adopted ?
No, lam not aware of any. I think the hospital could not be iu a better state than it is in
at present.
236. By the Chairman: You would recommend that a diary, similar to that kept by you
for your private information, should be kept as a public record? Yes; there might be a
column added to the present book, in which the diet might be inserted.
George West, M. D., again called in and further examined :
1. By the Chairman : Were you present upon an occasion when Mr. Ormsby spoke to Mr.
Peers, the hospital dispenser, about some message he had delivered to you ? Yes.
2. Without going into particulars, the fact was that the dispenser reported something to-
you ? He did.
3. Was Mr. Ormsby made aware of that by yourself? I asked Mr. Peers would he allow
me to mention what he had said to Mr. Ormsby. He said he would rather not, as it might
make things uncomfortable for him on the island. I said I would rather hear no messages
that were conveyed to him unless I were allowed to bring the matter forward, and I insisted
upon doing so. I did so. Mr. Ormsby denied the thing, and there were angry words.
4. What words did Mr. Ormsby use towards Mr. Peers? He told him he was a damned
liar, that ho had never said such a thing. Mr. Peers said, upon his honor, but, before he
said any more, Mr. Ormsby said, “ Upon your honor, Sir, you have no honor, you are a
“ great blackguard ” ; and I think he said ho was a pimp and a mischief-maker on the
island, carrying stories backward and forward. I went away, as I did not wish to hear any
more of the quarrel. Mr. Peers followed mo shortly after, and wanted to accompany me,
but I said, “ Go to your quarters, Bir, I do not wish you to accompany me. ” I did not wish
to hear any more of it.
5. With reference to the case of the man Dunmore, who died in the hospital—here is the
hospital book ; will you be kind enough to refer to it and see when you first became
acquainted with the case? (The witness referred to the boolc') I think the first day I saw
him -was the day on which he entered the hospital. I was then sent for, late at- night, to see
him ; I think at eleven o’clock at right.
6. That was on the 28th of March ? Yes. I think I ought to mention that there was a
round-robin got up among the convicts and sent to the Visiting Magistrate; that an inves-
tigation was held on this case ; that the persons who came forward were severely repri-
manded by the Magistrate, who said he -was inclined to commit them all to the cells, and
that, if they brought such a charge again, he would punish them, as there was no foundation
for the charge.
* 17—T 7.


7. What was the eharge ? Principally against the dispenser for the treatment of this man,
but of course it was against the medical establishment altogether.
8. Under what was Dunmore laboring when you first saw him ? Inflammation of the
lungs, as was proved afterwards by the post mortem, examination.
9. Were you made aware that he had been complaining for three days before that ? I was
made aware, by the dispenser, that he was exempt, and that, at his own request, as he was
so much better, he was allowed to go out, and then he had a relapse.
10. We are told that he came to the hospital on the 25th, complaining of a pain in the
chest, that the next day it was increased and accompanied by a cough —do you think the
exempt ground a proper place for persons laboring under these symptoms ? The report I
got was that there were no bad symptoms, no violent symptoms ; the first bad symptoms
would appear to have been on this day ; he was taken into the hospital late at night.
11. He had been labouring under certain symptoms for three days, and was kept on the
exempt ground, with the men who are exempt from work, —are you aware where they are
kept ? They are kept on a bank on one side of the island.
12. In what situation, what aspect has it—is it exposed ? It is immediately as you come out
of the gate from the camp.
13. Is it on the north, south, east, or west side of the island ? I am stranger here to the
cardinal points. It is on the side looking towards Balmain.
14. You cannot say whether it is on the east, west, north, or south ? I cannot indeed.
15. Do you remember what sort of weather it was at that time? I have not the most distant
recollection. I think it was fine. I think going over I remember remarking what a beau-
tiful night it was.
16. The month of March is usually cold and sometimes rainy ? I quite recollect now ;it was
a delightful night.
17. That is on the night of the 28th, when you were sent for, but supposing he had been for
three days previous to that on the exempt ground, under some kind of treatment, was that a
proper place for him,- —or was the mode of treatment proper ? It is hard to answer that
question. I did not see the man, and he might have had some insiduous symptoms which might
have escaped the notice of the dispenser. He thought it a common case of cough or cold.
18. Cough or cold could hardly be considered as properly treated by requiring the patient
to stand about the exempt ground ? There are some chronic cases that we hardly know how
to deal with.
19. He was a young man, and his was not a chronic case ? No.
20. You prescribed for him ? Yes.
21. Is your prescription there ( referring to the book)? Yes.
22. Was it entered at the time ? Not at the time; it was late at night when I went there.
I dictated it to the dispenser, who wrote it down on a piece of paper folded like a book, and
entered it afterwards.
23. When did you first see it entered ? That I cannot tell you.
24. Did you ever see it before this day ? Yes, I did ; we had an investigation about this
matter before, and I saw it entered then.
25. Was it entered before the man’s death or after ? Before.
26. ' That you are positive of? I could not say positively, but that is my belief.
27. You have already said it was not entered at the time, but was it entered subsequently
either the following morning or the day after ? I think the dispenser would be the proper
person to examine upon that point.
28. We have examined him ? He can say when he entered it.
29. By Captain Ward : Will you describe what is the usual practice ? It is to have the
books made up every evening.
30. By the Chairman: Look at the. next entry where his name appears. {The witness referred
to the book. ) Is that your prescription ? I could not tell.
31. The next —is that yours ? I dare say it was ; I could not tell.
32. Now look to the Ist of April, the day on which he died? (The witness referred to the
dispenser s private journal.') I prescribed again on the 29th, and again on the 31st.
33. How often did you see him before he died ? I think only on those days when I prescribed.
34. Did you see him on the day of his death ? No.
35. Did you see him after his death ? No ; his death was reported to me.
36. Yo did not attend tlieyiosf mortem examination? No ; I never do unless it is something
important.
37. Was there no inquest held ? No.
38. I now wish to ask you about a man named Murphy, —do you remember that person being
in the hospital ? Yes, Ido now. I did not the other day.
39. When did first you see him ? He was brought before mo for classification when he was not
ill at all. I was told that, he was the man who built the light house. He was a very old man,
and unfit for work. I was told he was 79. It was one of those cases reserved for classification,
and I exempted him without medicine.
40. You did not prescribe for him ? No, not at that time.
41. What was he laboring under ? Hernia and great debility.
42. Was he suffering from asthma ? At this time he did not appear to be laboring under
it—l am speaking of his first coming on the island.
43. When he first came under your notice in the hospital, what was he suffering from ? It
was not asthma, though it was entered by the dispenser as asthma. There are cards over
the beds on which are written the names of the diseases.
44. Had he the disease called asthma ? I think he had bronchitis; he had great difficulty
in breathing, and the dispenser called it asthma.
45. It might have been old age, in fact ? I think it was bronchitis attacking an old man;
he


he was exempt a good many days, and going about without medicine before getting seriously
ill; when he became so ill I went to see him.
46. In what state did you find him ? I found him very low; it was a very rapid case.
47. How soon after you saw him did he die ? (J’Ae Witness referred to the private journal?)
It is marked bronchitis here; he died on the 7th.
48. He is marked asthma here preferring to the hospital book) and I think aether was
given ? HMiereal mixture of lobelia. That is not my prescription, but the prescription of
the dispenser. Here is my prescription, half-past ten, the 3rd of December.
49. With reference to the case of Dunmore,—l find that on the 25th he complained to the
dispenser; on the 26th he was treated; on the 27th he was treated, and on the 28th, as he
was much worse, he was taken into the hospital, and you were sent for —did you approve of
his being kept out of the hospital for three days ? The statement made to me was, that he
was going on very well, that indeed he was so much better that he had been allowed to go
out on his own request.
50. That was what you were informed on the 28th, when you were called for ? That was
the statement made to me.
51. He was then in an alarming state ? He was taken seriously ill.
52. By Captain Ward: From that statement you thought Mr. Peers was justified ? Yes,
and I did not question it at all.
53. He did not appear to you to have been acting rashly ? No.
54. You did not think he had done wrong in allowing Dunmore to go out ? They are only
allowed out in the warm part of the day; they are on a sunny bank. I made a suggestion
with respect to that which, I believe, has been followed out, —that when it was a cold day, or
the sun was not on that part of the island, they should be removed to some other place.
55. About the practice of prescribing —as I understand your-prescriptions are copied into
that book —where do you prescribe? I dictate the prescription to the dispenser; he has
a small book, or a piece of paper folded like a book ; he takes this round when he accompanies
me, and writes in it what I prescribe; he then copies from that into the hospital or
treatment book.
56. Then we can, by an examination of that book, ascertain which are your prescriptions?
I cannot say. lam quite satisfied this is my prescription. I recollect the thing very well
now. If you look at the treatment I think you wiil see it has been very accurate.
57. By Mr. Merewether : What portion of this entry (the 4/A December ) belongs to you, and
what to Mr. Peers; —hot fomentation, mustard poultice, aether, and so on ? • The entry is all
in Mr. Peers’ handwriting.
58. Cross-examined by Mr. Dillon : This conversation that has been alluded to —this violent
language —I believe grew out of your having understood the dispenser to say that Mr.
Ormsby had said something about you that Mr. Ormsby denied ? Yes; if you wish me to
mention what it was, I will do so. I was not well on the visiting day previous, and I did
not go there. When I went to the island Mr. Peers asked me why I was not there, and said
Mr. Ormsby had made some observations about my not being there, and “ whatever he said,
“ I think he intended me to convey to you.” I said —“ lam very much annoyed that Mr.
“ Ormsby should have made any remark to you about it; if he feels that lam neglecting
“ my duty, he should speak to me about it, or else report mo to the proper authorities.”
I asked him to allow me to speak to Mr. Ormsby about it; he said he would rather not, as
it would make the island very uncomfortable. I said that when things came to my know-
ledge in that way I considered I was at liberty to make use of them. I was going away,
when Mr. Ormsby came up to me, and said—“ Where are you going, Doctor? ” I said—
“ I feel very much annoyed that you should make any complaint or observation to a subor-
“ dinate officer, and that you should not come to myself.” He asked what it was all about,
and when I told him he got very angry, and the words I have repeated followed.
59. By Mr. Merewether: The dispenser is under your orders, is he not ? Yes.
60. What did he mean by saying “it would make the island uncomfortable”? I suppose
lie meant that Mr. Ormsby might object to his leaving the island
61. By Mr. Dillon : The dispenser, I think, stated in his examination that he had never
heard such language as that you have referred to from Mr. Ormsby before or since. I believe
you have not been in the habit of hearing him use such language ? No, I never did. I was
sorry, for I thought he had lost his temper. It struck me he was a little too hasty in losing
his temper; but he felt annoyed at this being reported to me.
62. What did it grow out of—did it not arise out of excess of zeal ? It arose from excess
of temper.
63. Was Mr. Taylor present on that, occasion ? I do not think any one was present, except
my son.
64. Did Mr. Ormsby say that any conversation he had had with Mr. Peers was in the
presence of Mr. Taylor ? I think he said that whatever had been said was in the presence
of other persons, and he could prove what he had said from them.
Daniel Dunmore's case. Copy from the Private Journal of Mr. J. F. Peers.
Daniel Dunmore, aged 21, “ Mary Anne,” admitted March 28th, 1856.
Disease, with detailed symptoms.
Pleuritis.
March 28th.—This man was admitted complaining of great heat, thirst, and restlessness. During
the last night a violent acute pain on one side, so much so that he was unable to lie on it; difficult
breathing; flushed countenance; expectoration bloody; tongue coated; pulse strong.
March 29th.—No improvement; slight diarrhoea.
March 30th.—Febrile symptoms abated; great dyspnoea-; tongue much coated.
March


March 31st.—To-day there was a marked improvement, less difficulty in breathing, pulse quieter,
tongue cleaning, and appeared in better spirits. At eight o’clock p.m., on my visit, this alteration for the
better had ceased; great dyspnoea, and accession of febrile symptoms: ordered the calomel, ant., and opium
every four hours. Twelve o’clock sent for—-symptoms still aggravated ; delirium, with quick pulse, and
great difficulty of respiration; ordered him to be watched. At six o'clock this morning suddenly
raising himself, and asking for a drink, he laid down, passed a considerable quantity of mucous, and
expired so quietly it was difficult to say when breath ceased.
Treatment.
Dec. 28th.—Cerat. Ant. Tart. 1 Pulv. Jacobi, gr iii. Venn sectio ad. jxvii.
Foment Cali®, ad. peet. f Hyd. Chlor. gr. iv statum. Emp. Ly. Hoe.
Dec. 29th.—Hyd. Chlor. gr. ii.; I’opii, gr. p. Ant. Pot. Tart. gr. - f i. 4 lioris. G W pears.
Dec. 30th.—Rep. Pulvis. Liq. Ammon. Acet. §vi; Vin. Ipecac 3ii.
R Opio. Camp, 3 ip. M. Camp. Jvi. Nd. Jip. sexh’s lioris.
Sumcno. Emp. Ly. Hoe.
Dec. 31st.—Rep. M st. 8 o’cl. Rep. Pulvis. Hyd. Chlor. gr. iii. Ant. Tart. gr.
Pulv. Opii. gr. p. 4 lioris.
Post Mortem Appearances.
Heart natural and healthy; very small quantity of fluid in the. pericardium. Pleura and
mediastinum preternaturally red and inflamed; lungs, particularly right lobe, pretcrnaturally red, and
air cells crowded with coagulated lymph and blood; slight adhesion on the lower part of the right lobe
to the pleura. Liver healthy. Gall-hag large. Stomach.healthy—distended with flatus.
J. F. PEERS.
William Murphy's case. Copy from the Private Journal of Mr. J. P. Peers.
William Murphy, aged 79, “ Canada,” admitted December 3rd, 18dti.
Disease, with detailed symptoms.
Bronchitis.
Dec. 3rd.—This man who lias been perpetually exempt since bis arrival on the island,
and who is very much debilitated and suffering from scrotal hernia, applied to me at 10 o’clock
p.m. for the first time; lie complained of chills and oppression of the chest, with quickened and
laborious respiration. lat once admitted him to hospital, applied mustard plasters, and cupped him ;
and, considering his advanced age, and debilitated frame, that there was considerable danger, sent for
Dr. West.
Dec. 4th.—Dr. West attended; approved the treatment pursued and prescribed.
Dec. otli.—Symptoms aggravated; pulse higher; cough, expectoration, and febrile symptons
increased.
Dec. 6th.—Ho improvement. Dr. W. ordered treatment to be continued.
Dec. 7th.—Breathing with the greatest difficulty ; copious tracheal rattle ; all the symptoms of
acute suffocative catarrh developed. Death ended his sufferings at 2 p.m.
Treatment.
Dee. 3rd.—Foment Calia. Emp. Sinap. ad. peet. searificat ad. gviii.
Inhale -Ether. Mist. Lob. Inf. -Eth. 4 horis.
Dee. 4tli.—Emp. Ly. Hoe. Mist. Ammoniaci jvi.
Ant. Pot. Tart. gr. ii.
Nit. Pot. 3 i.
R Camp. Cos. et Syrup Limp, ad §i. hd.
Oocli. i. 2 ant. 3rd lioris.
Dee. sth.—Rep .Mist. 6 Rep. Mist.
Post Mortem Appearances.
The bronchial tubes preternaturally red and inflamed ; the submucous cellular tissue and mucous
membrane itself appearing injected with red fluid. The inflammation shewing most towards the termi-
nation of the trachea and commencement of the bronchi; the posterior part of the lungs infiltrated, and
the lungs generally congested.
J. F. PEERS.
Mr. Thomas Easton was called in and examined, as follows :
1. By the Chairman: What office do you hold on Cockatoo ? lam Foreman of Works.
2. Under Captain Mann ? Yes.
3. How long have you been on the island ? Eight years and four months.
4. You have lived on the island the whole of that time ? Yes.
5 With your family ? Yes.
6. Are you subject in any manner to the Superintendent of the island? In none at present.
7. He has no control or authority over you ? No,
8 Then you are under no apprehension with respect to any evidence you may give here ?
I am not aware of any.
t). It is only my duty to tell you, that if you should be—-or if any person coming to give
evidence should require to be so told —you have no need to he afraid to give evidence before
this Board ; because, if we discover that any consequences should follow disagreeable to any
witness, we should recommend the officer causing it to be removed from his office ? lam
obliged to you, but you will get nothing from me but the truth, in any way.
30. Do you remember the circumstance of a sparring match on the island, between Perry
and some other person ? I saw it; Ido not recollect the date.
11. Where did it take place ? Inside, in the camp.
12. When was that—how long ago ? I dare say over two years ago.
13 Who else was present ? There were a great'number of people ; a few of the free officers,
were present at that date, but I do not remember seeing any one else.
14. Were any of the prisoners there ? Yes.
15. These two men, the sparrers, wore prisoners, were they not ? Yes.
16. It was in the prison yard, in fact ? Yes.
17.


17. Were they stripped to the waist for sparring, or not ? They were in that position. I
will not exactly say that it was a prize fight, or anything of that; they might have had
their Guernseys on.
18. They were not stripped to the waist, then ? No; they were not in what we term boxing
style.
19. They had their Guernsey frocks on ? Yes.
20. How long were they sparring ? I should say about half an hour.
21. It was a regular match? Pretty well; they both seemed pretty well sized.
22. AVas the Superintendent himself present ? I did not see him on that occasion.
23. Were any of his sons? If I were sworn, I could not say that they were on that date.
24. Were you present at any other boxing match ? If it were named I might recollect.
25. You have told us of one'occasion ? I shall tell you the plump and plain truth. I have
been there on many occasions to see them spar.
26. In the same place ? Yes, in the same place.
27. When the prisoners Were present, and their free officers ? Yes.
28. On any of these occasions was Mr. Ormsby present ? I never saw him in my life.
29. Or his sons, or either of them ? I cannot bear in mind that I saw Mr. Ormsby’B sons
or himself particularly present ever. I never saw Mr. Ormsby there in my life, at any such
employment or exercise
30. How frequently have these exhibitions taken place on the island, do you suppose ?
Well, Sir, they have taken place many times; I could not exactly tell you the number.
31. For whose amusement were they got up ? That I cannot say, by whose authority or
whose amusement it was for.
32. AA r ere any of the overseers or officers of the penal establishment present ? Yes.
33. At what time of day have these transactions taken place ? In general in the afternoon.
34. Upon what days—the ordinary days of the week or the Lord’s Hay ? Some afternoons
on the Sabbath-day.
35. And on other days—ordinary days? Providing they were holidays—the Queen’s
Birthday, or something of this.
36. By Captain Ward: They took place after working hours? I cannot say.
37. Were they not ever kept away from their work for the purpose of sparring ? Not to my
knowledge.
38. On these occasions they were sparring in their leisure hours ? Yes; Ido not mean to
say in their working hours.
39. By the Chairman : From the officers of the establishment and the free overseers being
present, was it not pretty well known on the island when a sparring match was going on ?
Well, your Honor, I should think not.
40. No one on the island could be off knowing it? Occasionally.
41. How often do you suppose these things have taken place ? They must have been four or
five times.
42. By Captain Ward: Have you ever seen Mr. Brown ? Yes.
43. He has been present at these sparring matches ? Yes.
44. Have you seen Mr. Dunning, the Inspector of Police, present ? Yes, he has been
there also
45. Do you know that as a fact ? lam not aware of speaking to Mr. Dunning, that I could
positively swear.
46. Have you seen Mr. Taylor, the clerk, present? No, I never saw him there. I cannot
say, but he might have been there.
47. By the Chairman : Do you know anything about cedar plank having been taken from
the stores of the Engineer’s Department ? No, only from what I have heard.
48. You know nothing but what you have heard ? That is all.
49. Do you remember the circumstance of its being found ? I heard tell of its being found.
50. You only heard tell; you were not present ? I was not.
51. Do you remember the circumstance of a number of the prisoners leaving the works?
I remember once particularly—there were seventeen of my own gang.
52. Did you report it to the Superintendent or his Assistant, Mr. Brown ? Yes.
53. What was the cause of their leaving the works ? Mr. Thomas—on the day lam going to
mention it was near bell ringing, and my men had been quarrying above, for generally I
was foreman over the gang that was quarrying the stone —Mr Thomas, as clerk of the
works, or acting engineer, requested that the men should go down to the dock for to work;
and these men that I made mention of requested they should have shoes or trowsers.
54. By Captain Ward: Was that the working in the water question ? Yes.
55. AVhich was inquired into by a former Board ? Yes.
56. It was inquired into by myself and Captain Mayne ? Yes; I believe it was.
57. Ihe men objected to go into the water without proper shoes or boots ? Yes.
58. By the Chairman : Was there any other occasion? Yes; but the men did not exactly
belong to me.
59. You remember the circumstance ? Yes.
60. Do you yourself know that that was reported to the Superintendent? Yes.
61. AA r hat was done in that case ? As well as I recollect, the prisoners were brought before
the Visiting Magistrate.
62. Do you remember any of them going to the office of the Resident Engineer, and using
threatening language to him ? Yes, I do.
63. By Captain Ward: Can you describe what took place on the occasion of the men going
to threaten Mr. Thomas ? If it was mentioned in any time, I may recollect it.
64. Do you recollect it now ? Not the date.
65. It was the time the men refused to work, and went up to Mr. Thomas’ office in a riotous
manner ; can you recollect that ? Not unless it was respecting the hand-cart.
* 17—U 66.


. 66. Will you describe that occurrence ? It has generally been the rule since I have been on
the island, which is eight or nine years close up, that there used to be five men to draw the
. hand-cart up that hill always, and I believe Mr. Thomas gave orders for four men to draw it
up, and they were third-class men —not able-bodied men. To one individual, I believe, he
gave the order to do it, but I was out of the way, at the top of the blocks, and he did not put
me in possession of the rule. The men said they would not draw the hand-cart up the hill
without five men, and the person who received the order went up to the office with the men.
I was reported myself for that.
67. By whom ? By Mr. Thomas to Captain Mann.
68. By Mr. Merewether: It would have been your business to have carried out the order if
you had received it ? Yes.
69. By Captain Ward: Do I understand you, then, to say, that you think the men had
reasonable cause of complaint in being required to draw the hand-cart up the hill with only
four men ? Yes.
70. By the Chairman : And, in fact, instead of their going up in a body, they were taken
up to the office ? I was not present on that occasion at first, but when I heard of it I went
up to the office and saw Mr. Thomas and another foreman of works, and the men were
standing opposite the gate, ranked up two deep. I did not see any man go up to strike or
assault Mr. Thomas.
71. Was there any unbecoming behaviour on the part of the men towards Mr. Thomas, or
any threatening language used ? Not while I stood there. None but this man, who was
something rather insane, I believe, and he walked towards Mr. Thomas, but never attempted
to strike. I believe he was taken before the Visiting Magistrate for the same, but lam not
certain. I believe Mr. Thomas declined to come forward upon that.
72. By Mr. Merewether : You say there were men sparring on the island on one particular
occasion—who were these men ? There was one of the name of Perry.
73. Who was the other? The other was named Sinclair.
74. Where were they sparring? In the camp yard.
75. Give us some better description; what do you mean by the camp yard ? Inside the
iron gates.
76. Where the prisoners are lodged ? Yes.
77. Was Mr. Ormsby on the island at the time ? That I cannot say.
78. On what days of the week did these exhibitions occur—you say they occurred five or six
times? As I should suppose, in the generality on holidays, or perhaps it may be on Sunday
afternoon.
79. Should Mr. Ormsby have been on the island at these times; under ordinary circum-
stances would he have been on the island ? I would be very sorry to state except what I
could swear to.
80. If he had been on the island could this sparring have gone on without his knowledge ?
I believe it could.
81. Was it accompanied by any noise? No, I could not say it was. In the general run,
there is great silence when such a thing is going on.
82. Did you see any strangers, persons not employed on the island, present on these occa-
sions ? I could not say.
83. Do you mean to say that you could not have noticed if there had been any strangers
present; Ido not want you to say that there were any present, I merely want a straight-
forward answer ? So I would give it if it was a thing I knew; if you will name any name
I will tell you.
84. I do not want the name; I ask you if there were any strangers present ? Ido not
know whether Mr. Thomas was present, he might have been.
85. Do you call him a stranger; by stranger I mean any person not connected with, or
employed on, the island ? I did not belong to the establishment.
86. That is not an answer to my question I ask you whether you saw any strangers present
at these sparring matches, persons unconnected with the island—that is a plain question ? It
is a plain question. I cannot say I did, that I did not know any person that I saw there.
87. By the Chairman : Did you ever see any person there not belonging to the island—did
you ever see any visitor of any kind, any person unconnected with the island ? I would not
tell a falsehood, but for me to know whether there were visitors or strangers I should know
the date, and I do not know the date.
88. Did you, or did you not, see any person unconnected with the island present at any of
these sparring matches ? There might be plenty of them for me.
89. Did you ever see any one ? I cannot say.
90. By Captain Ward: Do you know as a fact that any strangers were present ? If I was
sworn I could not say.
91. By Mr. Merewether : Will you say yes or no ? I mean to say there might have been.
92. By the Chairman : Cannot you form a judgment upon the matter, whether you did ever
see any strangers there, or persons unconnected with the island ? If it was not a customary
thing for strangers to be there I would know, but it is customary for persons to be there
every Sunday.
93. By Mr. Merewether: Do you think there have been any persons unconnected with the
island present on these occasions ? If I had seen them I should tell you in a minute ; I am
not aware, but I say they might have been.
94. Were there so many people in the camp that you could not see who were there ? I am
not upon that intention when I go to look at two men sparring.
95. Was the camp so full, I ask you, that you could not see who were there ? If I under-
stand, it was pretty crowded with the men al there.
,96, Thep this occurred when the men were all mustered in the camp ? On these occasions.
97.


97. I cannot help expressing my opinion that you are decidedly trying to evade my question ?
I beg your pardon.
98. You have been nine years on the island, and are, I suppose, perfectly acquainted with
the rules and regulations ? No, not with regard to the rules; I never saw them.
99. By the Chairman : With reference to the persons resident on the island, if you have
been there eight or nine years you must know them all—you are simply asked whether there
were any persons present who did not reside on the island ? There were the soldier officers.
100. By Mr. Merewether : Was the soldier officer in command present? Yes, and other
officers that were on a visit there.
101. You have been beating about the bush, I believe; these were strangers on the island ?
I have seen them.
102. By the Chairman : You have seen military officers there ? Yes, besides the officer on
guard; but 1 never considered them as strangers, for they were there themselves every other
fortnight.
103. By Mr. Merewether : You are pretty certain that the Assistant Superintendent was
present at these exhibitions—Mr. Brown ? I never saw him.
104. You stated just now that you had seen him ? Yes, and so was his assistant.
105. You never saw Mr. Ormsby there? No.
106. You have been a long time on the island—nearly nine years ? Yes.
107. What is your opinion as to the general discipline during that time—l confine myself
principally to the last two years—what is your opinion of the management during that
period ? That it is very leaning.
108. What do you mean by “ leaning ?” I mean something leaning rather to the prisoners.
109. Am Ito understand that if there are regulations they arc mildly carried out? I am
not aware of any regulations.
110. But if there are any regulations they are mildly carried out ? I mean to say they have
been mildly carried out.
111. That is the only interpretation you put upon the word? Yes.
112. You say you are not aware of any regulations, and therefore cannot say how they are
carried out ? No.
113. From your own observation, do you consider that any one prisoner is favored more than,
another ? I believe so.
114. How can they be favored ? In many instances.
115. How ? They can commit themselves in some way, and then in two or three days after
they will be appointed to some place.
116. You mean that after the commission of some offence they may be appointed to some
post on the island ? Yes.
117. By Captain Ward: Can you state any particular case where that has occured? Yes,
I think I can in one instance 1 will shew you how there was laxity of discipline. I had
an occasion to find fault with one man in particular; I reported that man three times for
disrespect in every way that he could treat me, and that man held the office as constable of
the Superintendent’s office. He treated me with contempt and disrespect in every way. 1
had to caution him twice about taking the hand-cart ofl the work, and he said he would do it
as often as he liked from a sub-overseer. Another time I took a man to the office, and told
this same man to go to the Superintendent; he wanted to know what charge I had to prefer.
I said, “ I cannot tell you anything of the sort; you are a prisoner as well as the man I am
“ bringing.” He said “I do not care a damn whether you do or not.” That man I reported,
and he continued in his situation afterwards.
118. By Mr. Merewether: Did yiu prefer any charge against him? Yes.
119. To whom did you report him ? To Mr. Ormsby twice, and after a lapse of fourteen or
fifteen days he was brought to Court.
120. Was the offence dealt with by the Visiting Magistrate ? Yes.
121. Was the man discharged ? Yes; by Mr. Ormsby giving him a recommendation as a
creditable man.
122. What was Perry on the island ? I believe he was a carpenter by trade, but he was
once over the cells, and once over the cook-house.
123. What was Sinclair ? He was barber in the camp.
124. Were there any instances, besides the one you have mentioned, where you think
favoritism was shewn ? No further than men who have been punished have been put in
office very shortly after.
125. They have been placed in offices on the island very shortly after they have been
punished ? Yes.
126. Can you name any other instance—you are speaking generally now ? Well, I really
believe myself there were many instances.
127. You cannot name them ? Not at present.
128. You say you reside on the island ? Yes.
129. Are you there all day and every day ? Yes.
130. Are you there on Sundays? In general.
131. On Sunday evenings? On Sunday evenings in general.
132. Is the island quiet and orderly on Sunday evenings ? Well, it is quiet.
133. Do you ever hear any noise of singing? Yes, after hours.
134. Where ? In the camp.
135. Loud singing? No, not loud singing; in a mild regular manner.
136. What do you call a mild regular manner of singing—were they singing Psalms?
Well, there is no disorder or shouting if a man be singing a song.
137. Do you call that regular, singing songs in the yard on a Sunday evening ? Yes.
138. Is that a frequent occurrence ? Yes, generally, on working days; but I have heard them
on Sunday.
139.
Mr.T. Fasten.
4 Nov., 185?.


189. Is it usual for the prisoners to sing in their dormitories ? Yes.
140. Does it ever cause you annoyance ? No; if I went out of my house I
141. You do not mind the prisoners singing ? No.
T. 42. It does occur frequently on Sunday as well as on week day evenings ? Yes.
143. Is Mr. Ormsby on the island on Sunday evenings ? In general; in fact he is seldom
off the island on Sunday evenings.
144. Cross-examined by Mr. Dillon : I believe that after the lights are put opt there is
nothing of that kind allowed ? No.
145. I think you were going to say something as to your being able to hear the noise of
singing when you would come out of your place —could you hear it if you did not come out?
I could not hear it inside my house; but if I went out I could hear it quite plain.
146. You stated, in a previous part of your evidence about these sparring matches, that you
have seen them four or five times ? Yes.
147. And not more ? I could not say for myself being present more than that.
148. Were they accompanied by any violence or noise that would cause apprehension or
disturbance to the business of the island ? I said before that it is in silence all such things
as that is done.
149. There was no disturbance, no noise ? No; for their own diversion they keep silent.
150. Was there anything unusual in such an amusement as that being practised by the men
in after hours—was there anything unusual, offensive, or riotous—there was nothing you
would have found fault with as a breach of discipline —if the men had been under your
orders would you have found fault with this sparring, as calculated to produce disorder ? If
your Honor wishes me to answer the question 1 shall. I have not been in the power to see
whether I should or not.
151. Do you recollect the officers of the guard being present at one of these occasions you
speak of? They have been there more than once, I believe, to my eyesight.
152. Was that in the officers’ quarters ? No ; I have never been in the officers’ quarters.
153. What did occur in that way was in the prisoners’ after hours? Not exactly in the
working hours, by no means.
154. By Captain. Ward : Did these sparring matches take place with boxing gloves or with
fists ? Always with boxing gloves,
155. Blithe Chairman : Always with gloves ? Yes.
156. Who provided the gloves? I believe the men themselves subscribed and purchased the
gloves—they were brought by some means to the island.
157. What means had they of getting them? Your Honor lam not particularly aware; I
believe they could be purchased and brought to the island.
158. By Mr. Merewcther : Whom do you mean by “ the men” ? I mean the prisoners.
159. By Mr. Dillon : Did you ever hear of Mr. Ormsby having these gloves seized ? Yes.
160. By the Chairman: This is a very important point which has been raised respecting
the boxing gloves—you say you think the prisoners may have had means of getting them
there ? Yes.
161. Had the prisoners the means of getting anything else they liked ? Well, I could not
exactly swear, but there are many things, against the regulations, got for the prisoners.
162. What have they got ? Clothes, neck-ties, and braces.
163. They can get these things easily ? Yes.
164. Indulgencies ? Yes.
165. You say contrary to the regulations—do you mean contrary to the written regulations,
or to your own idea of what prison regulations should be ? I never saw the regulations.
166. You mean contrary to your own idea of prison discipline ? Yes.
167. What sort of things? Comforters, handkerchiefs, braces, and parcels of different
descriptions, and, as far as I know of discipline, for the last six and twenty years I never
saw it permitted.
168. Can the prisoners get paper, pens, and ink? Yes; the Superintendent himself issued
them.
169. Can they get these things otherwise ? Yes.
1701 Can they get letters from their friends, paper, pens, and ink ? Yes.
171. Do they ever get the indulgence of a newspaper ? I believe I have seen them frequently
reading a newspaper.
172. Have you seen the prisoners in the presence of overseers and persons of that descrip-
tion reading newspapers ? Yes, I have.
17.3. Commonly ? I have seen it several times.
174. Have they any indulgencies in the way of food? I believe that is allowed.
175. Tea and sugar they are allowed to buy out of the money they earn from their
task work ; I am asking you with respect to indulgencies they obtain on the island out
of the regular way —in some clandestine way ?It might be the case, but lam not in
possession of it.
176. You say they get braces and newspapers, that must be clandestinely ? Ido not know
whether they are in the habit of getting them, or who may be the purchaser.
177. By Mr. Dillon : As to the things you say the prisoners get, do you not know that when
any of their friends go there they take parcels with them, of whatever they think right, and
give them to Mr. Ormsby to be delivered to the prisoners, if he thinks right ? But I am well
aware the purchasers are not the friends or relatives.
178. I suppose Mr. Ormsby will not allow them to have newspapers? No; I have known
him to seize them.
179 How do you suppose they can get these indulgencies without the Superintendent’s
knowledge? lam not aware whether they come from the boat that brings the stores, or
what boat brings them. There is a prisoner receives the things from the boat every morning,
and brings them to the office—that is, anything they pay their money for into the; office
is pupffiased. 180.


180. That is for tea and sugar ? Yes, and for these braces.
181. Then they are brought by the Superintendent’s permission ? Yes.
182. 7>v the Chairman : Newspapers, articles of dress, and such things? Yes.
183. Did you ever see the boxing gloves—were they brought in that mode do you suppose ?
I have seen them once or twice when they have been handed over to these two men.
184. Who handed them over? Some other prisoners.
185. I think you said the discipline was lenient towards the prisoners—do you mean by that
that it was mild ? Well, with respect to that, what I mean is that it is not strict discipline.
186. I understand you to mean that is what we should call loose discipline ? In some degree.
187. I think you said there was favoritism as regards discipline —that some men W'ere favored
and others were not ? Well, I believe so still.
188. Do you know any instance of favoritism toward any particular person ? I know' some
men have been taken to the office to be punished, and in three or four days they have got some
employment.
189. Were these men, Perry and Sinclair, stout men, men capable of hard work? Yes,
more so than any other men on the island.
190. Did you ever know either one of them to be at work on the island ? Yes, for a short
period.
191. Take Perry—when was he at hard work ? The last time he was on the island I believe
he was at hard work.
192. When ho was there the first time was he at work ? For a short period.
193. What work was ho employed upon ? He w T as some time over the cells.
194. That is not hard work ? He was employed at carpentering.
195. How long was he there ? Many months—a long time.
196. Where was he taken to from that ? I think he went over the cells.
197. As overseer of the cells ? Yes.
19S. How often has he been upon the island ? Three times to my knowledge.
199. Sinclair—what was he there ? He was barber at the camp.
200. Was he a strong or a weak man ? A strong man, an able-bodied man.
201. Capable of hard work ? Yes.
202. Ws the situation of barber reckoned an easy and indulgent post? Yes, it was easier,
but ho had nothing the better pay for it.
203. But he was excused from hard work ? Yes.
204. These two men, in fact, were not usually employed upon hard work ? No.
205. Was it at the time he was overseer of the cells that these sparring matches took place ?
•Once or twice they did.
206. Then he must have been taken from his duty at the cells to have been present at these
sparring matches ? I cannot say for that.
207. Do you know whether some oue relieved him for that time ? I know it was a general
thing for someone to relieve him if he was wanted for sparring.
208. Have you known that? I have; on one occasion I saw a man go in his place when he
went to sparring.
209. Who sent the man in his place ? I think it must have been, in my opinion, one of
the free overseers in the department; there is no other man got any control.
210. Did you ever hear such a thing said as that there was reason to fear if any prisoner
reported any circumstance he would be liable to the displeasure of the authorities ? I
heard it said, but it is a thing I cannot prove.
211. Did you ever hear of an unnatural offence being committed on the island ? I have
heard it.
212. Were any means taken to bring the parties to justice? I never knew either of the
parties to be brought to justice myself; lam not in possession of it.
213. Did you ever know any reason for the parties not being brought to justice ? I cannot
say.
214. Was there any reason for any to fear bringing it forward ? I heard it rumoured as
such, but that is all. I did not belong to the department.
215. You say the discipline toward the prisoners was what you call “leaning,” and by that
word you mean something loose or lax. With regard to the conduct of the free people on
the island—more particularly to the conduct of the Superintendent—was that to be
denominated loose or lenient, or was it strict ? I cannot say with respect to tlic free officers
under the Superintendent, for I believe they have no control. If a man be brought before
the Superintendent, it depends upon him whether he shall be discharged or not.
216. It is left, to his discretion to bring the matter forward or not ? It may be.
217. Were you ever in the Superintendent’s garden? Yes.
218. What is its extent ? I dare say it is about from three to four acres, if not more.
219. Are there walls and considerable buildings in it that must have taken considerable
time in their erection ? There are a few buildings inside.
220. Have you ever seen any part of it cultivated ? Yes.
221. What number of persons have you seen employed in that garden ? I suppose I have
seen two and three at a time.
222. Is that an usual thing or has it been only an accidental occurrence ? No ; it has been
continued, to my knowledge, for some time.
223. Do you think there have been more than three at any time employed ? Yes, as many
as six sometimes.
224. Have you known more than six to be employed there occasionally ? I will put your
Honor in a right position : If a man came to the island in the evening late he would not go
down to the Engineer’s Department at once, but he would be sent to work in the garden,
and then the next day he would go into the gang.
* 17—X 225.


225. By “ the garden ” do you mean the Superintendent’s garden or the public garden ? I
did not know it was a public garden ; I thought one was Mr Ormsby’s garden as well as the
other.
226. I am speaking, of the garden round Mr. Ormsby’s house—how many men do you sup-
pose it would have taken, and what period of time, to build the walls in Mr. Ormsby’s
garden ? I would say it has taken, within the last three years, over a hundred men.
227. To build all these walls ? To keep up the breachesin different parts of the walls. In
wet weather parts of the walls would fall, and then we had to send up six or eight men to
mend the breaches in the walls.
228. In the walls in Mr. Ormsby’s garden ? Yes ; I believe that is Mr. Ormsby’s garden.
229. In the cultivation of the garden attached to Mr. Ormsby’s house, and which runs down
the side of the hill, how many do you suppose were employed ? In the general way, the men
are removed from the prisoners’ garden to Mr. Ormsby’s, and if there is any work to be per-
formed in the prisoners’ garden they go back to it again. That is only occasionally.
230. You are aware that Mr. Ormsby’s private garden is a very extensive one, and has a great
many walls in it ? There are a great many divisions.
231. Which it must have taken a large number of men to erect ? Yes.
232. Have you known any of them to be erected in your time ? Not to my knowledge; only
when they have fallen they have been built up again.
233. To whom has Mr. Ormsby reported that they have fallen ? A requisition has been sent
to the Engineer’s Department.
234. How many men have been sent up to repair the walls ? According to the nature of the
breaches. I have known ten or twelve men to he sent. I have sent ten or twelve men
myself. Within the last three years that has happened six or seven times, for three or four
days. In heavy weather they fall down.
235. They are built without mortar, and fall down in rainy weather ? Yes.
236. During this time the men are taken off the works ? Yes ; by a requisition of the Super-
intendent.
237. Do you think the allowance for the prisoners is larger than they consume—the quantity
of homminy, for instance? It was some time ago. They have not consumed what was pre-
pared. I have seen buckets and barrows full taken out.
238. What has become of that ? I have seen it in a heap, partly at Mr. Ormsby’s gate, and
more of it divided among the free officers.
239. Does that take place now —has it occurred within the last six months ? No, nor within
the last nine or ten months.
240. Do you know' as to the assistance afforded to the Engineer’s Department by Mr. Ormsby
whether there has been reason to complain of the assistance afforded to your department by
the Superintendent? Well, I shall tell you that directly. In the first instance, if I took a
man with a charge to Mr. Ormsby, he decided whether he would take the man before the
Court or whether he would reprimand him.
241. Did that interfere with your duties? Sometimes it did, in some cases. In many cases
it interfered with me ; I found I need not take the man again.
242. Do you mean that it was of no use for you to take a man before Mr. Ormsby ? Yes; I
was of that feeling.
243. By Mr. Merewether : Whatever a man did it was of no use to take him up ? Yes ;in
some cases they were actually sent away to the works by Mr. Ormsby, and not brought before
the Magistrate.
244. By the Chairman Let me understand you perfectly with reference to the requisitious
for the repairs of the walls—were these made to the Engineer’s Department by Mr. Ormsby?
Yes.
245. Were these the walls of his private garden ? Yes. Sometimes he would not ask for
the men, hut would take from four to six men out of a gang without making an application
for them.
246. At other times he would make a requisition for men to repair the walls, which walls
were in his own garden and for his own private use ? I cannot say that it was his own private
garden, for there were very few officers of the island but got the benefit of it. They all get
some vegetables occasionally.
247. By whose gift ? I believe it is an understood thing with the Government.
248. Who supplies them ? The gardener, or, at least, a prisoner we call the gardener.
249. At Mr. Ormsby’s desire ? Yes.
250. And upon his authority ? Upon his authority.
251. And at his will ? Yes.
252. Not a regular allowance by order of the Government ? No, I cannot say that it is a
regular allowance. I know the garden was once called the public garden.
253. You are aware that there is a prisoners’ garden ? Yes ; but every man, by the regu-
lations, is supposed to have a share in the other garden, and is allowed to walk in it as well
as Mr. Ormsby.
254. By Captain Ward: I see in the regulations that—“ All requisitions and applications
“ which, either directly or indirectly, lead to the expenditure of public money on account of
“ the penal establishment are to be countersigned by the Visiting Magistrate.”—Are these
requisitions sent by Mr. Ormsby to the Engineer signed by the Visiting Magistrate ? I
never saw them so signed.
255. On what authority then does the Civil Engineer send up the men ? On Mr. Ormsby’s
application.
256. He is not authorised to do so without the signature of the Visiting Magistrate ? I
never saw that.
257. If the Resident Engineer or Captain Mann sent the prisoners up without the signature of
the Visiting Magistrate he acted against orders ? lam prepared to say I never saw this
signature. 258.


258. When these men are sent and employed in building these walls, is their time taken
down as though they were employed on the public works ? If the men are employed on the
convict department we do not return them at all.
259. How are these men paid ? By the Superintendent of the island —a penny a day.
260. Out of the public money ? Out of his own contingency I suppose.
261. Do you know how they are*paid ? Ido know that we do not pay them.
262. You are quite sure that you strike them off your list ? Yes.
263. By the Chairman : Are you sure they get their task money from the Superintendent—
that they get their penny a day ? No-
-264. By Mr. Merewethcr : You stated a short time time ago that, in addition to the prison
luxuries which are allowed, other things were brought to the island for the prisoners ? I
named the other things.
265. And that they wore handed over to the convict who received the general luxuries ? Yes.
266. What became of them—where did they go to ? They were taken to Mr. Ormsby’s
stores, or to his office, I believe.
267. By Captain Ward : You say you believe, do you know that ? I have seen them there.
268. By Mr. Merewether : You have seen them taken to the Superintendent’s office ? Yes.
269. I ask you this question, to carry out Sir William Burton’s last point of examination,
and I want you to be quite sure of it; —do you consider that you have had all the convicts
available for the works handed over to you in the morning ? That I could not say, by no
means. There is a lot of men fall out every morning, and they are examined by the doctor
or dispenser, and, of course, I do not know about the number that fall out, whether they are
sent to the exempt ground, or what is done with them—of course, what I get upon the works
I number.
270. Are you one of the persons who receive all the prisoners in the morning ? Yes.
271. Are you the next man under Mr. Thomas ? No, lam the second.
272. You receive your own men ? Yes, for gangs.
273. Are they the same number of men each morning ? Sometimes there are more, some-
times there are less; this morning there may be a hundred men, to-morrow there may be
ninety-six or ninety-seven.
274. Do you know any reason for the difference—are you told why the men are kept back ?
No.
275. Therefore you cannot say whether you have all the men who are available or not ?
No, I cannot, by no means.
276. You have nothing to do with the workshops ? No, unless occasionally.
277. Who is the Foreman of Works? Mr. Cahil.
278. By Mr. Dillon: The walls you have spoken of as having been repaired have been built
a great many years, I believe ? Yes, a great many years.
279. Is it not the fact that the prisoners and free people get from that garden the use of
the vegetables just the same as they do from the other, or prisoners’garden? Yes, the prisoners
and free oyerseers.
280. What men have been sent to the garden from the Engineer’s Department have been
sent on Mr. Ormsby’s requisition ? Yes, on his signature.
281. Clan you state to me any case of the favoritism you have alluded to? I said just
now
282. Can you state one single instance ? I could state many if I had kept a memorandum.
283. Tell me the name of any one person ? I will tell you—Keogh; after reporting him
three times to the Superintendent
284. You got no redress? No. He was taken before the Visiting Magistrate; Mr. Ormsby
gave him a recommendation, and the man was dismissed.
285. Mr. Ormsby gave him a character? Yes.
286. And because Mr. Ormsby gave the man a good character the Visiting Magistrate
dismissed him ? Very likely it was for that.
287. Have you a doubt that it was for that ? I know he was a useful man.
288. Just answer the question, if you please.—Have you any doubt that it was because
Mr. Ormsby thought it his duty to give that man a good character that the Visiting
Magistrate dismissed the case ? Ido not know what his motives might be.
289. Can you name any other instance of favoritism ? Yes.
290. What is the name of the party ? There was a man of the name of Paddy Murray ;
he was in the workshop, and I took him up on a charge of abusing the overseer; he was
sent back again, and the result was, when he came back one of them drew a knife and
stabbed the other.
291. How long ago was this ? Three or four years ago.
292. Was there any inquiry about that at the time ? No, Ido not think so ; for I took the
man before Mr. Ormsby for abusing his overseer, and he was dismissed, and the result was
that he stabbed him.
293. What was the other man’s name ? He was a sub-overseer.
294. What was his name ? I cannot say. He was a real good character, for he was hanged
since, if I do not mistake.
295. What reason did Mr. Ormsby assign for not punishing this man ? That I cannot say.
296. He assigned no reason that you can give ? No.
297. You brought this man up on a formal complaint to Mr. Ormsby ? Yes.
298. What did he do ? He cautioned him.
299. Did he refuse to punish him ? He did not punish him.
300. What was the complaint you made against this man ? I complained of Murray for
abusing the sub-overseer and using threatening language, and when he returned Murray
stabbed the sub-overseer.
301.


,301. Were you ever dismissed from the service by Colonel Barney? No.
302. Were you ever under his orders ? Yes.
, 303. Were you dismissed by him ? No, never.
304. Was there any complaint made of you to Colonel Barney on any occasion ? None;
never in my life ; I believe Colonel Barney can certify to that.
305. Bj the Chairman : You have spoken about indulgences being obtained by the prisoners,
and brought in some mode or other to the island ; I presume you mean by some of the boats
that come to the island ? I must think nothing else.
oUG In what mode do these indulgences reach the island —how do they come, and in what
boats ? There are so many come to and go from the island, back and forward, that I am
not prepared to answer ; whether it is by the men that bring the rations to the island, or
whether it is by the police boat or the visitors’ boat, I cannot answer.
307. I>id you ever see anything come in the visitors’ boat? Not to my knowledge.
308. Or in young Mr. Ormsby’s boat ? No; Ido not remember anything coming to the
island.
309. You have spoken of indulgencies coming to the island; now, do you know of any-
thing going from the island, in the way of presents, or anything of that kind ? Well,
I have seen some things leaving the island; I caunot exactly say what —poultry, vegetables,
and many things.
310. In what boat or boats? In the police boat.
311. In what other boat ? I think in Chandler’s boat, the man that supplies us with every
thing of that sort.
312. Were these things sent to Chandler? They were given over to Chandler to be taken
to Sydney; but what I have seen was in the policcfboat—vegetables.
313. You have said poultry—what kind of poultry? All kinds of poultry. There have
been young poultry, ducks, and different things from time to time taken in that police boat.
314. In what quantity? I should say half a dozen, eight, ton, or twelve there might be,
altogether.
315. For instance, of turkeys ? No. I have seen some of them going over, but not such a
number of them. There might be one or two of them.
316. There may have been six, eight, ten, or twelve chickens sent over at a time ? Yes.
317. Or ducks? Yes.
318. Sent over to Sydney ? Ido not know where they went.
319. Vegetables? Yes.
320. In the police boat—how often have you seen that ? If I must speak certainly, I have
only seen it twice.
321. Within what period ? Within the last twelve months.
322. Who sent them ? lam not aware; the prisoner always brought them down to the boat.
323. What prisoner—was it the prisoner employed in the office of the Superintendent ?
Yes, this man Keogh.
324. How was he employed at this time ? He was employed by the Superintendent.
325. Keogh brought these things down to the boat, and they went away ? Yes.
326. Do you know to whom they went ? No.
327. Has there been any transmission of that kind lately ? Not of late days.
328. AVithin the last three or four months? No; I should say not within the last ten or
twelve months.
329. Has Chandler taken away any poultry, or things of the kind you have described ? lam
not always there when the boat comes in, and I cannot say.
330. At what time does his boat come in? At eight, nine, or ten o’clock.
331. At what time does it go away? About half an hour after.
332. What things has he taken away? I cannot state.
333. Have you ever seen him take any thing away? I cannot prove that I did.
334. Can you say that you did? No; but L have seen him bring many things.
335. AVhat quantity and kind of vegetables have you seen taken away; have you seen any
great quantity? I cannot say exactly; as much as a large basket would contain.
-336. By Mr. Dillon : You have said you have seen this twice within twelve months? Yes,
I think so; if I said more I think I would be something right.
337. The things you have seen landed have been taken possession of by the Inspector of
Police, and by him have been sent up to the office—do I understand you to say so ? The
Inspector is not always there.
338. Or the serjeant ? Yes.
339. Have you not seen these things taken possession of by one or other of them, and by
them sent up to the Superintendent? Yes; the police, of course, were present, but I was
speaking of the man who took them up.
340. Have you sent poultry off the island ? Yes.
311. By the Chairman: To whom have you sent them? I have made presents of them
whatever I have sent.
'342. Poultry brought up by yourself? Yes.
343. By Mr. Merewether : AVhatever you have sent you have made presents of; do you
mean to say that others who have sent them have not done the same ? lam not prepared
io say.
APPENDIX


APPENDIX.
To the Honorable the Commissioners of the Cockatoo Island Inquiry.
Sydney, i.th November, 1857.
Honorable Sirs,
I respectfully acquiint you that I find it impossible to do justice to Mr. Ormsby
without my thus trespassing on your forbearance.
2. I solicit then, gentlemen, that you will be pleased to give me a written memorandum of the
charges which, acting for Vlr. Ormsby, I am to meet.
8. And I ask your leave to inquire whether the various things hitherto disposed of by previous
inquiries are now to be reopened, or may I conclude that Mr. Ormsby need not enter on these transac-
tions which have been examined into and dealt with by the Government or its officers previously to the
present inquiry.
4. I earnestly solicit you will allow Mr. Taylor, the Assistant Superintendent, to assist me before
your Board in referring to details and answers to the evidences as being given, which, if the charges
were classified, could have been easily done, but which it now embarrasses and incapacitates me from
doing my duty, by the excitement and hurry of these refm encos, and disarrangement of my papers,
which attends rnv own personal efforts to refer to the points in question from amongst the mass of
written matter (given as my instructions) at one and the same instant of time that I am endeavouring
to take notes of the evidence as well as to watch the deportment of the witnesses.
I have, &c.,
JOHN DILLON.
THURSDAY, 5 NOVEMBER, 1857.
13rcernt
Sir W. W. BURTON, Knt., in the Chair.
E. C. MEREWETHER, Esq. | Capt. E. TV. WARD.
Mr. Ormsbv,
Mr. Dillon."
Mr. AVilliam Augustine Cahil, was called in and examined, as follows:
1. Ry the Chairman : Do you hold an office upon Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
2. What is it? Senior Foreman of Works.
8. Under Captain Matin ? Yes.
4. How long have you been on the island ? Six years, less about two months —I shall be
six years, if I live until the 29th of December, on it.
7). Did you know any prisoner named Perry on the island ? Yes.
6. A pugilist ? Yes, I believe so.
7. Did you know another of the name of Sinclair ? Yes.
8. Also of the same profession ? Yes.
9. Were they in any of the working gangs under you? Yes; one working at the forge,
under my direction —that was ' inclair; he was in the blacksmiths’ shop.
10. How long was he at work there ? I cannot exactly say; I believe nearly twelve months.
11. What became of him then ? lam not certain whether he went to a tiekct-of-leave, or
whether he got into the convict department.
12. Perry —was he ever employed under you ? Yes, up to the last time that he was upon
the island; but this has been his second time on the island.
13. Was he under you all the fhst time ? YYs, I think he was.
14. The last time, what was he ? He was under my direction, working as a sort of rough
carpenter.
15. Was he removed from that employment at all ? Not on the last occasion.
16. On the first occasion ? My memory is not very correct about that; but I know this,
that he was in the convict department.
17. You mean by that that lie was employed in some other way upon the island? Yes;
not in the. Engineer’s Department.
18. Are you aware of there having been any sparring matches on the island between these
two men ? I have heard of such things, hut I have never seen them ; I never attended the
camp once the business of the day was done.
19. You were never present at any such match ? Never.
20. Did you know at the time that a match of the kind was going on in the camp ? Not of
my own knowledge; I heard of it.
21. Did you hear of it at the time the sparring match was going on in the camp ? I heard
there was a match there.
22. More than one ? I cannot say that I heard there was more than one—l cannot say
positively.
2d. I now wish to ask you respecting a cedar plank said to have been taken from the
stores of the Engineer’s Department—do you know anything of that circumstance ? Yes,
perfectly well.
24. Will you state what those circumstances were ? On one of those days when the men
were at dinner—about one or two o’clock
25. How long ago? I think I should refer to some memorandum to find it. ( The witness
referred to a memorandum book') At all events, not very long before Spencer left the
island—l do not know that I have got the date exactly—but that the occurrence did take
place is quite certain. I cannot say that Spencer was the man who took it, but it was he
I suspected.
26. There was a man on the island named Spencer ? Yes.
* 17—Y 27.


27. What was he ? A carpenter.
28. How was he employed ? He was generally employed for the Engineer’s Department, but
upon certain occasions Mr. Thomas allowed him to Mr. Ormsby.
29. Were those occasions frequent ? They were.
30. For how long a period? Perhaps for a day or two at a time.
31. You mentioned his name just now in connection with a cedar.plank ? He was the man
suspected of taking it.
32. Was he at that time working for Mr. Ormsby? He was.
33. How did you miss it—you say it was between one and two o’clock ? The planks were in
the yard when the men were turned out to dinner. They were all placed in such a way that
one could not be taken without being missed. Directly I came from dinner I missed two
planks from the heap ; I looked round the yard, and could not see them, but I observed foot-
marks over the wall that led to Mr. Ormsby’s place.
34. To what part ? To the garden. I reported it to Mr. Thomas; whether he reported it
immediately to Captain Mann I could not say; but he spoke of it to Mr. Ormsby when he
came home.
35. Was Mr. Ormsby on the island at the time? No; he was at Sydney on that day.
36. When did Mr. Ormsby return ? Some time in the evening, and, I believe, the following
day Mr. Ormsby made a search for the cedar through his yard, and returned it.
37. That is the circumstance of the cedar to which reference has been made ? Yes.
38. Have you anything else to say in connection with that? No, I have nothing to say in
connection with it.
31). By Captain Ward: You said just now that Mr. Thomas often allowed Spencer to work
for Mr. Ormsby ? Yes.
40. Can you tell us the description of work for which he was allowed? For carpenter sand
and joiner’s work —anything he could do for Mr. Ormsby.
41. Do you consider that it was for Mr. Ormsby’s private work ? I believe so; I cannot
positively say.
42. Do you know what work he did—do you know whether it was Mr. Ormsby’s private work
or not ? I believe it was some work for Mr. Ormsby’s residence.
43. You do not know that ? No.
44 The house belongs to Government does it not ? Yes.
45. You do not know whether it was private work, or the repair of the house ? I cannot
say whether he was employed on furniture or on the repair of the house.
46. Was Spencer obtained by requisition ? No.
47. Was it by a requisition made to the Engineer’s Department ? Not in the official way
that requisitions are made.
48. Was it as a matter of favor or of duty he was granted ? Asa matter of favor, I con-
sider, when it does not come through a requisition.
49. Did it rest upon Mr. Thomas to refuse or to grant it, as he chose? Certainly. Ido not
know that Mr. Thomas had the power to grant it.
50. Mr. Thomas was not bound to send a man to Mr. Ormsby upon his order? No.
51 Then it was left to Mr. Thomas’ discretion ? Yes, I believe it was left to Mr. Thomas’
option, and I believe he exceeded his power, for I do not think he had the right to grant it.
52. When this man was so lent, do you know how he was paid for ? Ido not think at the
time he was charged on the books ; he was struck off the public works, to the best of my
recollection. That can be proved, however, for I have the greater portion of the dates.
iTe ivitness referred to his memorandum book : “ Spencer at work for the Superintendent,
“ Saturday, May 10. Tuesday, May 20, per order of the Resident Engineer. ’)
53. Was he struck off the public works as far as his pay was concerned ? I think to the best of
my recollection he was.
54. Do you think, as a general rule, he was struck off the works? Yes.
55. Do you know how he was paid, or whether he was paid at all? During that time not
to my knowledge.
56. From any other public funds ? lam not aware.
57. By the Chairman : Are you acquainted with the Superintendent’s quarters —his house —
you know the form of his house, and the accommodation ? I know the exterior, lam not
very well acquainted with the interior.
58. The garden ? I have been through the garden.
59. It is extensive, is it not ? Yes.
60. And must have cost a great deal of labor in making it ? No doubt it has.
61. In what manner has that garden been cultivated ? By prison labor, of course.
62. You are aware that a gardener is allowed to Mr. Ormsby for the cultivation of the
garden ? Yes.
63. A gardener ? Yes.
64. Is one gardener sufficient for the cultivation of that garden, or have more been employed ?
I cannot speak very correctly upon that, but I believe one gardener is scarcely sufficient to
do what is requisite.
65. Are there not many walls in the garden ? There are a great many —at least the extent
is very considerable; they are very thick, and are built of loose rubble stone.
66. Would they have taken great labor to accomplish ? Yes.
67. And many men ? Yes.
68. Did you ever see any of them built? I have seen breaches in them—breaches that have
been caused by bad weather.
69. What has been the consequence ? Perhaps twenty men at a time have been taken to
repair them.
70. How was that done ? By requisitions to our department.
71.


71. lam speaking of Mr. Ormsby’s private garden ? I think they are all Mr. Ormsby’s
private garden.
72. I speak of the one which is unequivocally so—the one round his house—what use is
made of the vegetables out of that garden ? Some of them are distributed among the free
people, such as cabbages.
73. Is it his custom to distribute them every day, or so long as they are in season?
Generally they get a sufficiency of them.
74. Are any of them given to the prisoners ? I believe the prisoners are accustomed to get
vegetables.
75. Was there a great quantity of poultry kept ? Yes, I believe a large quantity.
76. What became of them ? I cannot say ; they have disappeared.
77. Up to what period were there a large quantity kept ? Some months since; to the time
there was an order made to throw the waste homminy into the water.
78. Since that a number have disappeared ? Yes.
79. Had that any connection with the disappearance of the homminy ? Ido not know whether
it had anything to do with the disappearance of the homminy, hut it has had with the dis-
appearance of the fowls.
80. There have been less kept since that time? Yes.
81. Perhaps you are aware that by the regulations the Superintendent may keep four milch
goats and thirty head of poultry, and each free officer two milch goats and twenty head of
poultry ? I think I have heard something to that effect; hut if a free officer feeds his
poultry himself, is there any objection to his keeping any quantity ?
82. Jh, Captain Ward: Did Mr. Ormsby exceed the number allowed by the regulations?
I should be rather inclined to think he has had something more than thirty.
83. What became of this poultry when it was diminished ? I cannot tell you.
84. You know nothing about it ? Certainly not. They have been sent to Sydney or dis-
posed of. I could not tell you how Mr. Ormsby disposed of his own property.
85. You may know ? I have no knowledge
86. With reference to the repair of the walls of the garden—when a requisition is sent to
Mr. Thomas, is it generally understood that he is justified in acceding to this requisition ?
It was customary for Mr. Thomas’ authority to be limited. Any weighty matter requiring
serious consideration Mr. Thomas is not to act upon till Mr. Mann has seen it.
87. Would Mr. Mann grant such a requisition? He has, frequently.
88. Then, if Mr. Ormsby’s garden wall had fallen down from rain, when a requisition was
sent to Mr. Thomas he would have been justified in refusing to grant it ? Captain Mann
has given his consent to do so.
89. Often ? Yes.
90. In that case how are the men paid ? From the Engineer’s Department.
91. You still kept him on cheek? Yes; the time they are at work is marked down as being
expended on the convict department.
92. Then who pays ? Captain Mann.
93. As belonging to the works on Cockatoo ? Yes.
94 You are quite sure of that? Yes.
95. You are quite sure the Visiting Magistrate does not pay for it on account of the penal
establishment ? I never heard ef it.
96. You are the foreman of works on Captain Mann’s department —have you seen some of
these men charged in his pay list ? I have no doubt they were.
97. B; / Mr. Merewether : Do‘you return them as employed by you? No; they are not
immediately under my control, but under the control of another foreman, and he returns the
time. They are paid, hut the time is marked against the convict department.
98. By Captain Ward : Were they paid on account of the Dry Dock or of the penal estab-
lishment ? 1 cannot correctly answer to that.
99. Bulhe Chairman: Is there not a prisoners’garden ? Yes.
100. Are they not taken off in numbers of twenty or thirty for the garden ? Never; unless
for the purpose of repairing breaches in the wall.
101. Have you ever known any men to he taken off for the cultivation of the-garden? I
believe there have been a few men, but, if I recollect rightly, there have been requisitions
sent down on those occasions for men to assist in manuring the garden.
102. By Captain Ward : In those cases how are the men paid ? In the same manner as I
have before stated.
103. They are kept on your check list ? No; when these men are given up to Mr. Ormsby
he pays these men himself.
104. They are paid in the same way as the men taken off to repair Mr. Ormsby’s house are
paid, that is, they are not paid by the Engineer’s Department ? They are not paid by the
Engineer’s Department.
105. By the Chairman: Did you not say just now that both gardens were Mr. Ormsby’s?
I meant those gardens round his own place—there are four or five enclosed by one wall.
There is a garden down by the military barracks; that is called the prisoners’ garden. I
think there is also a garden for the military.
C 6. By Captain Ward : Are the prisoners allowed to work in this garden? There are none
else to work.
107. Are they taken off in the same way as the men for Mr. Ormsby’s garden ? I have seen
but one man or two there.
108. Has Mr. Ormsby ever allowed any prisoner to be taken off the work to be employed in
the military officers’ garden ? I cannot say.
109. Has Captain Mann ever allowed the men to go off the work to that garden ? I do not
recollect that they were ever applied for.
110.


110. How is the military officers’ garden cultivated? [ believe by the military themselves.
111. Does Captain Mann allow the men to go off the works to manure that garden ? Not
that I am aware.
112. How is that other garden manured ? Sometimes Mr. Ormsby’s men come down to
assist
113. Then the men taken off the works for Mr. Ormsby’s garden sometimes go down to the
other garden to assist in manuring it? These are the men attached to Mr. Ormsby’s own
place.
114. His own servant ? As they may be called—his servants, I suppose they are ; they are
chiefly about his place. They are sometimes brought down to the prisoners’ garden to assist.
115. Are they servants allowed by the regulations, so far as youkuow them ? Ibelieve they
are; they are men who have not been for a long time on the works They are attached to
his place.
116. Then, when Mr. Ormsby has obtained prisoners from off the works to manure the
garden, have they been exclusively applied to the garden round his house, or have they been
applied to the prisoners’ garden also ? I believe exclusively to the gardens round his house;
they may have been removed to the prisoners’ garden sometimes.
117. They have been applied to the special cultivation of his own vegetables? Yes, to his
own vegetables, and those of the free people.
118. By the Chairman : You have spoken of manuring—where does it come from ; what
manure is there upon the island ? At one time the damaged grain that remained in the
siloes was used.
119. Has that been disposed of? All that was saleable has been disposed of.
120. And the rest ? A great portion still remains in the siloes.
121. Is it still applied for manure ? I cannot say whether it has been lately ; I know it was
at one time.
122 Are there any cattle or pigs on the island? Nothing, unless goats.
123. Then there is nothing to form manure—is manure brought to the island? The cess-
pools are the only supply.
124. The men’s privies, in fact? Yes.
125. lUj Mr. Mere wether: With regard to the man Spencer—was ho often allowed to be off
the works. You are specially in charge of the shop, and this man was specially under you ?
Yes.
126. How often—twice a week, once a week, once a fortnight ? It might not happen twice
a week, but once a fortnight, or three weeks, or perhaps sometimes in a month.
127. Did he go out as he stood, or did he take tools with him ? He took tools.
128. What class of tods? Carpenter’s.
129. What kind ? Perhaps saws, chisels, hammers—any tools necessary for the work he had
to do.
130. Did he ever indicate what sort of work he was going about ? No.
131. He was at liberty to take what tools he pleased, and you had no means of knowing
what work he was going about ; —had he any requisition; did the requisition say that he was
to take up tools suitabl for making chairs, or for mending or making doors ? lam speaking
of his going on Mr Ormsby’s order without a requisition.
132 You were told by Mr. Thomas to let him go and take what tools he pleased ? Yes.
133. Had you reason to suppose that he was going to be, employed on Mr. Ormsby's business,
or on public business ; —was there anything that led you to suppose ho was going to be employed
on private work—did he take beading planes, chisels, mortice-chisels ? I cannot call
correctly to mind; but I believe he had been fitting up cupboards or presses in Mr. Ormsby’s
house for a portion of the. time.
134. Do you know whether he was in the habit of making chairs? Ido not.
135. Or other articles of furniture? I heard so; but Ido not know it of my own know-
ledge.
136. Did he take tools fitted for such work ? lie could do it with the tools he took.
137. You were responsible for the tools he took, were you not? Yes.
133. You had some idea then of the tools he took ? They were of different kinds.
139. Were they tools suited for mending doors, or were they such tools as beading planes,
mortieing-ohisels ? Yes—they would do for general work.
140. Generally useful tools? Yes.
141. A beading plane would not be wanted for mending a door ? They were tools used for
general work.
1-12. Were there other mechanics besides Spencer taken off the works ? I believe there were,
sometimes.
143, To what purpose were they put—have you any idea? I have.
144 What were they ? Plasterers.
145. Were they frequently taken off? I cannot say they were.
146. What class of people were they principally ? Plasterers and masons.
147. Not carpenters ? Plasterers and masons as well as carpenters. Spencer is the man
who was principally employed about Mr. Ormsby’s house.
148. Had the frequency with which these men were taken away the effect of impeding the
works you had charge of? Well, they did not promote its expedition, that is certain.
Spencer has been employed both with and without a requisition.
149. What time were they absent when they were taken away—a day, or half a day ?
Frequently a day ; sometimes two days.
150 Do you know the state of repair of Mr. Ormsby’s house —is it in such a bad state as
to require a man to be there once or twice a week ? I know the roof has been in a bad state
of repair, and that it has been re-shingled.
151.


151. Were.the tools required for re-sliingling? No; he was never employed for work of
that kind. It was for inside work he was required.
152. If the house required such constant repair, it must be in a very bad state ? Ido not
know that it did; I cannot say what the work was.
153. I may assume that he was not engaged in repairing the house ? .1 do not know how he
was employed.
154. The reason I press you upon the point is, that I believe you are aware how ho was.
employed ? On my honor and word Ido not. I have been a great stranger to Mr. Ormsby’s
house I assure you.
155. By the Chairman: I hope you are not afraid to tell? Not I. I have nothing to fear
from any one. I defy either Mr. Ormsby or Captain Mann to bring a charge against me
that would injure me.
156. Bt] Mr. Merewether ; You said just now that you had seen fowls leaving the island?
No, I did not say that I had seen them leaving the island, but that I had missed them from
the island. I said that I had seen great quantities there some time ago, and that they had
disappeared ; I learned that they went to Sydney by the boat.
157. You did not see them ? . I never saw them.
158. Do you reside on the island ? Yes.
159. May I ask the position of your residence? Almost at the rear of Mr. Ormsby’s
premises, looking up the Parramatta River; about the most remote part from the police
station.
160. You confine yourself to your own business without seeing what is going on on the
island ? I confine myself to my own business. •
161. I judge from your replies that you take no notice of what is going on, except as
concerns your particular business? I take no notice of what is going on, and seldom inter-
fere with anything but my own business.
162. Cross-examined by Mr Dillon : Was not Spencer allowed to go out to any other officer
who might require him, in the same way as to Mr. Ormsby? That depended upon whether
Mr. Thomas would let him go or not.
163. Has he not, in point of fact, been allowed to go to other free officers besides Mr.
Ormsby ? If he has it must have been a very unfrequent occurrence, for I have heard
nothing of it.
164. You do not recollect the fact ? Ido not recollect it.
165. Are not all requisitions sent to Captain Mann, and not to Mr. Thomas ? They are
directed to the Civil Engineer.
166. Do you happen to recollect whether Spencer repaired the paling about Mr. Ormsby’s
premises, and also put up the pigeon-boxes. I have no recollection of his repairing the pigeon-
boxes. I believe he was employed to repair some paling.
167. What sort of boards were those you spoke of awhile ago —were they good boards, or
worthless—what do you suppose might have been their value ? They were boards about ten
feet long and twelve inches wide—what we call cedar boards ; there were two of them.
168. What do suppose might be the value of them ? The value of cedar at the time, I
suppose, would be about sixpence a-foot; or ten shillings for the two boards.
169. Were they sound boards ? Yes, they were.
Mr. Henry Broderick was called in tnd examined, as follows:
1. By the Chairman : You are in the Engineer’s Department on Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
2. What post do you hold ? I am foreman of mechanical engineers up to the present
moment.
3. For what period of time have you filled that office ? Four years.
4. You have particular charge of the mechanical department ? Yes.
5. And of the prisoners working in that branch ? Yes.
6. Were the prisoners assigned to you for that purpose kept constantly at work, or were they
occasionolly moved for other purposes ? They were occasionally moved, but very seldom.
7. Tell us for what purpose, and by what authority ? Whenever they were required on
other parts of the work an application was made to me for their assistance for the time being.
Whenever they were required for the ppnal department a requisition used to be sent to the
Engineer’s office, and an inquiry was made of me whether they could be spared for the time
being.
8. That is when they were required to be employed on another branch of the public works ?
Yes, on the penal establishment.
9. Do you know of any of these mechanics having been taken off for private purposes ? I
am not aware.
10. I hold in my hand a paper of the sth of October, in which there is a letter with
reference to Cockatoo Island. I refer you particularly to paragraph 7, and ask you if
you know of the circumstance to which that relates —namely, the men in a body leaving
the works? {The witness referred to the letter .) Yes, I remember one occasion parti-
cularly ; it was at the time the “ Claremont” was discharging machinery at the island. It
was on Saturday afternoon, and the captain had spoken to me before dinner, and
wished to know whether the men could not be employed on Saturday afternoon in
discharging, as he wished to get away ? I said I would make arrangements for that
purpose. Accordingly I gave instructions to the foreman to acquaint the Superintendent
that the men would be required to work after dinner that day. I should have before said
that it is customary for the men to leave their work at an earlier hour on Saturday, and that
only a portion of the men, a certain number of the gangs were required for this work. I was
walking up and down with the captain on the wharf waiting for the men to come, when I
* 17—Z saw


saw a number of them coming down the hill apparently to come to work as usual. Tho last
gang that was near the camp all at once appeared to turn back, and there was a sudden
stopipage among all the men of the other gangs. Those thaf were- upon the works, seeing
the others moving towards the cam]), also turned round and walked up the hill.- I said to
the captain, “I wonder what this means; I will go and speak to Mr. Onnsby upon the
“ matter I met Mr. Onnsby on the hill, and asked him what tho meaning of that was.
He said they had refused to work—“ What can Ido in the matter?” He said he would
take the names down of those who refused to work, and all he could do, as I understood, was
to bring them before the Visiting .Magistrate.
11. Did the men actually go to work that day? They did not.
12. Then they were not sent to their work at all; they escaped that time? Yes.
Id Do you know what steps were taken against them ? I heard the names of the ring-
leaders were taken down.
14. They wmre not on that occasion obliged to go to work ? No ; no further steps were
taken on that day
15. That was Saturday afternoon, when there was ordinarily a respite from labor ? Yes;
they usually leave off at two o’clock on Saturday.
10. So that sending them to-work at that time was so far an infringement of their usual
custom, and what they might consider their right ? Yes.
17. For the purpose of accommodating the captain of the “Claremont”? Yes; it was-to
assist him in getting away.
18. It was for his convenience, and not for tho benefit of the public service ? It was more
for his convenience.
19. T presume it did not signify to tho department whether the vessel were discharged on
Satui day or on Monday ? No.
20. By Captain Ward : Did Mr. Onnsby report the circumstance to the Visiting Magis-
trate ? lam not aware personally.
21. By Mr. Merewether : You were not called upon to appear against them ? Yes, in one
case I was called upon.
22. In connexion with this given instance ? Yes There was a party pointed out to me by
Mr. Ormsby upon tbe hill, and he said he believed he was inducing the men not to go to
work. I was called upon on that occasion to give evidence.
23. He was brought before the Police Magistrate, and you were summoned to appear against
him? Yes.
21. By Captain Ward: And the Visiting Magistrate dealt with the case? Yes.
25. Do you think Mr. Ormsby on this Saturday afternoon did all he was justified in doing
so far as expediting the public service was concerned ? I think, perhaps, more might have
been done upon that occasion. Ido not suppose Mr. Ormsby was aware at the time whether
it would be an advantage to the public service or not; but I think some other steps might
have been taken to have forced the men.
26. What s’eps would you have taken if you had in Mr. Onnsby’s place ? I think I
should have called out the military guard, and then have appealed to the men to know how
many of them would volunteer to go to work. I heard some of the men say afterwards that-,
if they had ben asked, a good many of them would have volunteered to have worked at the
vessel, hut that they were called out, and compelled as it were to go to work without being
asked, and they did not like it, as it infringed upon the time they eonsideied as their own.
27. Suppose the men had refused when tl# guard had been turned out, what could you have
done—suppose they had refused in a body ? In the first place, I believe only a small number
refused ; tho men nearest the camp turned back and then the rest followed.
28. Assuming that the men still refused after the guard had been turned out, what power
would Mr. Ormsby have had of making them work ? Ido not think lie would have had any
power.
29. Did Mr. Ormsby when they did refuse try to induce them to go to work ? Mr. Ormsby
on that occasion, after they had removed further up the hill, sang out to one of the men—l
do not know the party’s name —“ Will you not go to work —to-morrow is St. Patrick’s Day ;
“ you shall have no holiday if you don’t go to work.” He said that to one or two of the
men individually, I think.
30. You think he made all reasonable endeavours to get the men to work ? There were one
or two of the men he called out to, to ask them to go to work.
31. By Mr. Merewether : Did he order them to do so ? No.
32. Y T ou did not hear him order them to go to work ? No.
33. Were you present when the men mustered ? No, I was not; T was up' n the work.
34. He might have ordered them without your hearing it ? YYs; the greater portion of the
men were going up tho hill before I got there.
35. By Captain Ward : Would they have been paid for the work if they had done any ?
Yes.
36. How much ? I could not say exactly, hut they might have been returned for one or
two quarter days.
37. What would that have brought in money ? A penny.
38. And what in remission of sentence? Nothing. It was said by the prisoners afterwards,
that if volunteers had been called for there would have been plenty.
39. Cy Mr Merewether: You arc aware that it is an order to your department that every
facility shall be afforded for carrying out the works in progress ? Yes.
40. And it is an order to the convict department to facilitate the operations ? Yes.
41. And you are at liberty to employ the men after the usual hours? Yes.
42. And you do so frequently ? Yes.
43. It was in pursuance of that understanding and order that you wished to employ the men
on this occasion ? Yes.
44.


44. You have feeen a long time on the island—-wlsat is your opinion of the general discipline
observed among the prisoners? Generally speaking, I think it is pretty good; although
I have not been residing on the island until very lately, I have not perhaps been made
acquainted with so many things as others.
45. By the Chairman : What has been the general conduct of the prisoners when employed
under you upon the Government works ? I have generally found the men willing to work,
and, generally speaking, they obey orders. Now and then some of them may be a little
troublesome.
46. By Mr. Merewether: In this particular case the men did pretty much as they liked —
do you know of any similar case, when it has not been their pleasure tow-ork? I have heard
of a ease, but I do not know it of my own knowledge.
47. Your general impression is that the discipline of the island is pretty good, and that the
men were under control ? Yes.
48. B:/ the Chairman : Were you ever at a sparring match on the island ? Never.
49. You never saw such a thing? No.
sth Did Mr Ormsby appear to conduct the business of the island by himself or through any
other person ? Generally by himself.
51. He interfered with matters himself, and gave his own orders personally? Yes.
52. By Captain IF arid: You think he did his best for the public service generally ? Yes,
as far as my observation went.
53. By the Chairman : Have you any reason to impute partiality or favoritism in the
treatment of the prisoners to him ? As to that I could only speak from hearsay.
54. By Mr. DiUo i: Have you experienced any difficulty at any time from Mr. Ormsby in
receiving whatever assistance you required in the discharge of your duties—has Mr.
Ormsby assisted you in every way in his power? I never met with any obstruction from
Mr. Ormsby in the discharge of my duties.
55. By Mr. Me) ewetker : lias ho co-operated With you ? I can scarcely comprehend the
question.
56. Has he worked with you for the public good ? We have been so separate I could hardly
say. If I required anything from Mr. Ormsby to be done I generally sent up a requisition,
and he has sent down a reply, but it has always been favorable.
57. And if ho did not comply there was a satisfactory reason assigned? Yes.
58. By Mr. Dillon : One of the Commissioners asked you awhile ago with reference to
these men being sent down by Mr. Ormsby’s orders. I think you stated that in the first
instance you sent up a request to him that the men might be sent down in the afternoon ?
I sent up a. foreman of works to say that the men would be required after hours.
59. One of the Commissioners asked you would you have thought it a prudent thing for
Mr. Ormsby to have brought a body of military out to compel these men to work after they
had refused ? I think he ought, as Superintendent, to have power to compel the prisoners
to work if they refused.
60. What I mean to ask you is, whether, if you had been in the Superintendent’s place, you
would have brought a body of military among the prisoners to compel them to work after
refusing ? I do not profess to understand much of prison discipline, or the management of
prisoners ; it would depicnd upon circumstances.
Mr. John Kelleher was called in, and examined, as follows:
1. By the Chairman : Were you employed by Mr. Mann in the construction of the public-
works on Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
2. In what capacity ? As Foreman of Works at the dry dock.
3. Do you know anything of the circumstances of a number of prisoners leaving the works
contrary to the orders of the overseers, and going to the office of the Resident Engineer in
a body ? Yes; I recollect the circumstance.
4. What was that circumstance ? Some of these men refused to go down to work in the
mud and water, and others refused to remain out to work. They were told to remain, and
they went away up to the camp.
5. What resulted from that? The men that went up to the camp belonged to me, and I
followed them up and took their names down, as I had order from the Resident Engineer
to take their names down, and not to bring them to w r ork again until further orders. I told
the Superintendent not to send them out till further orders, but the following morning they
were brought down, and I took them back again.
6. By Captain Ward : Was not that matter inquired into by a former Board—by myself
and Captain Mayne ? Yes.
7. The Board imagined into this matter and reported upon it ? Yes.
8. By the Chairman : Is there anything else you have to tell us in furtherance of our
inquiry into the management of the island—Have you anything to complain of as to want
of assistance rendered by Mr. Ormsby ? There appeared to be a misunderstanding. I was
generally the medium of communication between the Resident Engineer and Mr. Ormsby
on those occasions when the men were required to be kept out. Mr. Ormsby was of opinion
that the communication should not come through me, but in writing from the Engineer’s
Office, and he always complained when I took a message, and thought he had no right to
act upon it; the Engineer thought otherwise.
9. The Resident Engineer sent requisitions through you personally ? Yes, verbally.
10. Instead of through the office, in writing, and Mr. Ormsby objected to this? Yes; I
recollect on one occasion I took a message, and Mr. Ormsby- went himself and removed a
man who had been kept out, from the engine-house —at least he sent one of the overseers to
remove h ; m.
II For what purpose was lie employed ? He was pumping- out the dock.
12.


12. After hours ? Yes.
43. By Captain Ward: Was not that circumstance inquired into by a former Board?
Yes.
. 14. Was it not reported upon by the Board ? Yes; I believe it was.
15. By the Chairman : I ask you if you have ever been obstructed by Mr. Orinsby in your
work ? Not except in that manner.
16. In fact, these circumstances you relate were rather misunderstandings between Mr.
Ormsby and Mr. Thomas personally than obstructions of the department ? The works were
obstructed by them, and they frequently caused a great deal of delay.
17. They arose from the circumstance that Mr. Thomas would send requisitions informally,
and that Mr. Ormsby would not attend to what was informal ? Yes, if it were informal.
18. That was the supposition ? Yes.
19. Were you ever at a sparring- match on the island ? No.
20. Have you heard of such occurrences ? I have heard of them, but have never been
present.
21. By Mr. Merewelher: You have been a soldier, have you not? Yes.
22. As to the general discipline of the convicts on the island—do you think that is such as
they should be subject to ? No ; if I were in charge of them I would not allow it.
23. Was not the discipline lax ? Yes, by allowing it.
24. Bn the Chairman : Allowing what ? Allowing these sparring matches.
25. Was the general discipline of the island good or lax ? if I knew what the regulations
were I could answer that question better.
26. Have you ever been upon any penal establishment before ? Yes. I was in the East
Indies, at Trichinopoly. I was in charge of the penal establishment there.
27. Did it ever appear to you that the penal discipline of Cockatoo Island was proper ? I
was always of opinion that that the prisoners were dealt with too leniently—that the discipline
was not severe enough.
28. Do you think that any blame was attachable to the Superintendent, or that there was a
want of proper instructions ? I cannot say.
29. Did it appear to arise from want of energy, or from what other circumstance ? I could
not say what it arose from.
30. Did Mr. Ormsby seem to want anything of firmness or decision? No.
31. Did you ever see an instance where he.gave an order and did not insist upon having it
obeyed ? I think he would enforce an order if he gave it.
32. He was not a man who would yield —you never saw any wavering or yielding in any
way? No.
33. By Captain Ward : Did you ever see the regulations for the government of the island ?
I saw them when I first went upon the island; 1 glanced at them for five minutes.
34. Are not the regulations in the Engineer’s office ? There is a copy in each office I believe ;
I inquired for them, but I never saw them.
35. Whom did you ask for them ? Mr. Thomas.
36. Did Mr. Thomas refuse to let you see them ? He said Captain Mann had them under
his control.
37. By Mr. Merewelher : With regard to the discipline of the island, you say it appeared to
be be lenient; can you instance any case where the discipline appeared to be lax or favorable
to the prisoners? I thought sometimes when a man was brought up the punishment did not
seem severe enough.
38. When brought up for what ? For neglect of work.
39. To what do you attribute that—to a general leaning towards the prisoners, or to favor
to any particular prisoner ? To a general leaning towards the prisoners.
40. In your opinion there has been an undue leniency towards the prisoners—can you give
any particular instance? One instance occured to myself, where the prisoners made a report
against myself; the matter was investigated and the report proved to be false. The matter
was investigated by the Bench, and the parties who made the charge escaped altogether.
41. By Captain Ward : Mr. Ormsby was not connected with that ? It was proved to be
false. I was accused of bringing the wife of a prisoner to the island.
42. That matter was brought Magistrate ? Yes.
43. It was not dealt with by Mr. Ormsby ? These men escaped without punishment. That
is the principal thing I have to complain of. The charge was proved to be false ; but I never
could find out to this day who the men were that made it.
44. Cross-examined by Mr. Bilim .- Are you, or are you not, aware that Mr. Ormsby is
constantly present during the transaction of business on the island —are you not aware that
he gets up between five and six o’clock every day, and attends to the business of the island ?
I know he is a very early riser ; and when I have had business at the office in the morning
I have found him there ; or, if I have sent up to the house he has come down.
45. Have you ever found the slightest degree of delay in affording you assistance in the
discharge of your duty ? Whenever I have taken up a man to him, he has supported me ;
and if a charge has been supported against a man, he has dealt with the case.
46. Has he ever been any impediment to you in the discharge of your duty ? The only
thing I complain of is respecting these men who brought a charge against me.
47. You have had experience in another penal establishment —as the result of your experience,
which do you consider more for the interest of the public, as well as of the Government, a
violent or comparatively gentle way of dealing with the prisoners ? It depends very much
upon the character of the individual brought forward.
48. In a convict establishment like that, do you think it desirable to resort to brute force or
violence on every occasion ? It is necessary sometimes when you have some characters
brought forward.
FRIDAY,


FRIDA Y, 6 NOVEMBER, 1857.
Urgent:—
Sir W: \\ . BURTON, Knt., in the Chair.
E. C. MEKEWETHER, Esq, | Captain 'E.'W. WARD.
Mr. Ormsby.
Mr. Dillon.
Mr. Henry Fitzgerald was called in and examined, as follows : —-
1. .By the Chairman : I believe you are Foreman of Works at Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
2. How long have, you been employed there? Since the 2nd of February, 1854.
8. Tn that capacity ? Yes.
4. Have you experienced any difficulty from want of discipline among the convicts employed
under you —have you had any difficulty in carrying on the public service? Yes; on some
occasions it would be found necessary to take the pi honors up to the office to get them
punished for insubordination.
5. To whom did you complain on those occasions? To the Superintendent.
6. Have these complaints been disregarded, or have they been inquired into? On some
occasions, where the matters complained of were trivial, they would be discharged; in. other
cases, where they were weighty', the prisoners were confined in the cells for the Visiting
Magistrate to inquire into the charge.
7. Have you ever had occasion to complain of Mr. Ormsby for his mode of treatment when
you have so complained ? No, not generally; oil th#two last occasions I did not get the
satisfaction I anticipated. ...
8. What were those cases ? One man was detained in the penal department without my
permission, and I gave notice of it.
9. Who was that man ? Young; he was a stonemason; he was sent for, and on coming out
of the gate in the morning he turned to me, in the presence of my brother officers, and said,
“I am much obliged to you, Mr. Fitzgerald ; it may come to my turn yet to do you a good
“ office.” I took it ironically, and the man partly acknowledged it to bo. I took him to Mr.
Ormsby, and he said he would send him to the cells and leave him there for the decision of
the Visiting Magistrate. The Visiting Magistrate came on the following Wednesday, and,
I believe, he was at the cells from that time until the attendance of the Visiting Magistrate,
when he was discharged.
10. With that decision you were dissatisfied ? Yes.
11. Mr. Ormsby did his duty in bringing the case before the Magistrate? Yes, and he
would have sent him to the cells if I had insisted upon it.
12. What was the other case ? One of longer date, in consequence of one of the men.
charging me with making false entries in the book in favor of the prisoners that were exempt.
I had about a score of men working at a difficult employment, and I was directed by Mr.
Thomas to give them extra encouragement, to the amount of four-ponce a day. These men
were exempt, and their follow prisoners did not get so much as those who were exempt, and
they complained. I brought that before the Visiting Magistrate, and at length got a hearing,
but the case was dismissed.
13. That was not owing to Mr. Ormsby? No.
14. Then, if your complaints did not meet with the decision you thought they deserved, it is
owing to the Visiting Magistrate, and not to the Superintendent? Yes, it was the Visiting
Magistrate I felt displeased with.
15. Have you any complaint to make of the Superintendent’s conduct towards you or the
men under you ? None whatever. 1 have personal complaints, as concerns myself and my
own department, if I am allowed the protection of the Board to make them public.
16. Most undoubtedly ; and we can tell you, that if any person who gives evidence is visited
with any displeasure on account of any evidence he may give here, the Board have determined
that that person shall be dismissed? In one case —and it would be just to mention that—
it was at the instance of Mr, Ormsby, or of the Visiting Magistrate. I had been employed
as Sergeant of Police on the island, and during that time I think neither Mr. Ormsby nor
any other person had complained of my conduct, when an opportunity occurred of appointing
an Inspector; and being the senior officer, I considered I was entitled to the office. When
I did not get it I was dissatisfied, and would not remain on the island.
17. Your complaint on that point is, that Mr. Ormsby or Mr. M'Lerie did not give you a
certificate ? Mr. Ormsby said Mr. M'Lerie was the gentleman to whom I should apply.
18. Have you any other personal matter to complain of? No. I left the police on the
31st of January, and on the 2nd of the following month was employed on the island, under
Captain Mann, as soon as he found no person had any claim upon me, at seven shillings a
day, with the increase. It was with the view of getting the increase I joined that depart-
ment. Ido not know whether lam acting right to go into details ; for on one occasion I
was going to petition the Legislative Council for the increase of pay. I went with the
intention of giving it to Mr. Cowper, when I thought whether I was going to do what was
proper, and he told me I had better show it to the head of my department. I went to
Captain Mann, and he told me to rest satisfied, and that when my time came round I should
not be overlooked.
19. Did your petition contain any complaint against the management of Cockatoo ? No.
20. How long were you in the police ? From January, 1851, to 1854.
21. During that time you had your eyes sharply about the island, I suppose ? During that
time I had.
* 17—2 A 22.


22. Do you recollect sparring matches taking place in the camp, between the convicts ? I
have heard of them, but I never saw them.
23. You never had the curiosity to go to them ? No; I was never in there on such days.
24 In what manner is the police boat used ? It is since I left the force that the visitors’
boat has been got up.
25. The visitors’ boat —did you ever see that used in a manner that was improper, not on
the public service ? When I was first on the police, the police did duty as sentry, and one
boat was continually kept on police duty.
26. Have you known that boat to be employed on any other than the public service?
There was another boat that was continually sent to Sydney.
27. By Mr. Merewcther ; You were merely an ordinary constable? At the commencement.
28. Were the new regulations then in force —was there a visitors’ boat while you were in the
constabulary? Ido not think it bore the name of visitors’ boat. The Water Police boat
brought the surgeon and the other gentlemen to the island. I was never in the present
boat.
Mr. Charles Dunning was called in and examined, as follows
1. By the Chairman ; You are Inspector of Police at Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
2. How long have been on the island ? Five years.
3. In what capacity ? . At first as an ordinary constable, at present as Inspector of Police.
4. Were you promoted from coustablo to inspector at once ? Yes; I never was sergeant.
5. It may,, perhaps, be necessary to say that you need be under no apprehension with
reference to the evidence you may give here. W’e expect you will tell us the truth, and if
one resents your doing so, the Board wift/take care to protect you. Do you remember a man
of the name of Gleadall being discharged from the force ? Yes.
6. When was that? I remember his being discharged, but Ido not exactly remember the
month,
7. About bow long ago was it ? About six or eight months.
8. Do you know what he was discharged for ? A charge was brought against him for being
drunk on duty in the boat.
9. Did you see him at the time of the charge being laid ? Yes.
10. Was he drunk or not ? He was sober.
11. Who made the charge of drunkenness against him ? The Rev. Mr. Kenyon, the Catholic
Clergyman.
12. To whom ? To me in the first instance, and I reported it to the Superintendent, Mr.
Ormsby.
13. What was done with that case—who heard it ? It was taken before the Magistrate.
14. Was he put in the cells ? No; he was taken before the Magistrate. I did not with-
draw him from his duty; he was suspended.
15. On that charge was he dismissed ? Yes.
16. Did you give evidence that he was not drunk ? I did.
17. Who stated that he was drunk ? I did not hoar the priest’s evidence, but I heard the
evidence of the Superintendent, and of two other constables who were in the boat.
18. What evidence did the Superintendent give ? That he was sober.
19. And you gave evidence that he was sober ? Yes.
20. You and two other constables ? Yes.
21. You now state, advisedly, that he was sober? Yes. I read a portion of Mr. Kenyon’s
letter, and he said he was “ disgustingly intoxicated, though not drunk.”
22. In your opinion, was he at all intoxicated or drunk ? He appeared as if he had been
drinking, but was quite sober for duty.
23. Do you make a distinction between being quite sober and quite sober for duty—was he
entirely sober or not ? If a man is fit for duty I consider him sober.
24. He was not drunk ? No.
25. By Captain Ward: Was he fit for duty ? Yes; but the priest required him to with-
draw from the boat.
26. By the Chairman: He was dismissed ? Yes.
27. Was there any reasou for his being dismissed; do you think he was treated unjustly?
I could not say that.
28. Did you not think it unjust for him to he dismissed for drunkenness when you swore he
was not drunk ? I think it was a curious thing.
29 Can you find any reason why he was unjustly treated ? During the time he was in the
force he asked for the regulations.
30. Whom did he ask ? Myself, and I applied for them.
31. To whom ? To the Superintendent.
32. Did you get them ? No.
33. Have you any copy of the regulations ? I have of the old regulations.
34. Not of the new ? Not of the new.
35 When did you apply to Mr. Orrngby for a copy of the regulations? On three different
occasions.
36. And he never furnished you with them ? No, not with the new.
37. Gleadall had asked you to be allowed to look at the regulations; you had applied to Mr.
Ormsby for them, and they had not been given ? They were not given
38. Are you the head of the police on the island ? lam considered so to be, but, according
to the regulations I have at present to go by, I have merely the charge of the police under
the Superintendent’s control.
39. The dismissal of Gleadall from the police was Mr. North’s act? Yes.
40.


40. The Superintendent gave evidence for the man ? Yes, in his favor.
41. Do you attribute his dismissal to Mr. Ormsby? It was suspected among the force.
42. Do you yourself consider or believe that *t(r. Ormsby was the cause of bis dismissal
seeing that he gave evidence in favor of the man? 1-know that Mr. Ormsby personally
disliked the man.
43. You heard him give evidence in his favor before the Magistrate? Yes, on that occasion.
44. You know Mr. Ormsby disliked the man—why do you suppose that he obtained his
dismissal ? From my own observation. I have seen the Superintendent with the Catholic-.
■Clergyman; they have been talking together, and I have suspected they were talkiug about
the matter, and that he might have influenced the priest to bring the charge against the
man.
45. You did not hear what he said to the priest, but you thought Mr. Ormsby disliked the
man, and you suspected that he influenced the priest to bring forward this charge ? Yes.
46. Suspicion is part of the police character, but unfounded suspicion should not be the part
of any man's—is the only ground you have for suspicion what you have stated ? Yes.
47. You saw Mr. Ormsby speak to Mr. Kenyon, and you suspected that he was inducing;
Mr. Kenyon to bring this charge ? Yes.
48. And yet, when the charge was made, Mr. Ormsby gave his evidence in favor of Gleadall?'
Yes.
49. That is the whole of the c-asc ? Yes.
50. Have you any reason to suppose that Mr. Ormsby had any objection to produce the
regulations when you repeatedly required him to do so ? Have you the new regulations
here ?
51. Yes? Then, if you compare the second paragraph of the new with the second paragraph
of the old regulations, you may see the reason. You will see that Mr. Ormsby has no con-
trol over the police under the new regulations. ( Captain Wai and read ihe regulations.')
52. Have these regulations which have now been read been seen by you before? Yes; I
read them once at the Superintendent’s office.
53. Was it upon some application made by you that you did see them ? Yes.
54. Were you in fact acquainted with the regulations? Yes.
55. You knew the tenor of them ? Yes.
56. You knew from the tenor of them that you were under the orders of the Visiting Magis-
trate ? Yes.
57. Then in what respect were you ignorant of these regulations ? I wished to produce
them to the police
58. In fact you had not a copy ? Yes. I never had a copy ; I never have had a copy given
me to this day.
59. Have you applied for a copy ? Yes.
60. When did you see the regulations ? It was immediately after the inquiry in 1855.
61. By Captain Ward: These regulations say you are under the orders of the Visiting
Magistrate—was not he the proper person to apply to for a copy of the regulations ? I did
apply to the Visiting Magistrate afterwards.
62. And you applied to Mr. Ormsby as well ? Yes, on three different occasions, and I after-
wards applied to the Visiting Magistrate.
63. What did he say ? He said the regulations were that I was to attend to the instructions
of the proper authority.
64. Did he give you the proper authority ? No.
65. Did he give you his reason for declining? No.
66. Did Mr Ormsby give you a reason for declining to furnish you with the regulations ?
Yes; he always said he would give them when they had been revised, but that they required
revision.
67. They had been revised by the Board, had they not? Yes; but he said they required
further revision; as they are at present they are quite obsolete.
68. Both the Visiting Magistrate and Mr. Ormsby declined to give you the regulations when
you applied for them ? That was the answer given to me—that I was to obey the proper
authority.
69. Bi/ Mr. Merewether: But he did not tell you who the proper authority was? No.
70. He made no further comment ? No further comment.
71. When did Mr. Ormsby shew you the regulations- —was it after you had applied three
times ? No, in the first instance, when the regulations came out he shewed me.
72. So that you were aware from the first that the police were under your orders ? Yes;
and for that very reason the police wanted the new regulations. I also think my duties are
laid down in the island regulations as well as the others, and the island regulations were
never in the possession of the police.
73. By the Chairman: Did you ever know any man to he punished, directly or indirectly,
for having asked to see the regulations? Ido not know any case at present, except it may
be Gleadall’s.
74. If that were the case ? Tf that were the case.
75. By Mr. Merewether: Did Mr. Ormsby refuse or decline to let you see the regulations?
He refused to give them tome; he did not decline to let me see them,
76. He refused to give you a copy ? Yes.
77. What would have been the result if he had given you a copy ? I should think the result
would have been that I should have had charge of the men myself. I would have taken
upon myself the charge of the men.
78. And not having the regulations you did not take charge of them ? Yes.
79. You still treated them as under Mr. Ormsby’s orders? Yes.
80. Even after the regulations were promulgated ? Yes; on account of not having the new
regulations I acted under the old, and always considered myself under Mr. Ormsby’s orders.
81.


81. Had anything else occurred to create any dislike to Gleadall besides this asking for the
regulations ? A circumstance occurred at the North Shore on the Anniversary Day, 26th
January, 1856. The Clerk of Petty Sessions and the dispenser of the island were there
upon the spree; they had been drinking, and two of nry men were assaulted; the consequence
was that they were brought to Court at Parramatta.
82. State the circumstances ? Mr. Ormsby made a great objection to the matter being-
brought forward at all.
83. By the Chairman : How do you know that ? Because I was present when the men
went to get leave to take a summons out.
84. Who were the men assaulted by ? By the dispenser.
85. Who was with him ? Mr. Taylor, the Clerk of Petty Sessions.
86. Mr. Taylor and the dispenser were together on the North Shore ? Yes; they were
fighting, and the police interfered.
87. How did the police get there ? They took them over in the guard-boat, and they went
over afterwards to fetch them back.
88. When they went back they found them fighting ? They did not find them fighting, but
they heard screams.
89. Will you state the circumstances more particularly ? I was on leave myself that day.
90. Tlow did you hear of the ease ? 1 heard of it from the general talk of the island.
91. You did not know it yourself ? No ; I was on leave that. day.
92. However, there was a disturbance between the dispenser and Mr. Taylor, which was sub-
sequently investigated at Parramatta ? Yes.
93. You say Mr. Ormsby objected to the men bringing it forward ? Yes; he made many
objections and would not give the men leave to go for some time.
94. Had that anything to do with, the men asking for a copy of the regulations ? Ido not
think it bore upon that.
95. If the police were under your orders, or the Visiting Magistrate’s, was it necessary for
them to go to Mr. Ormsby for leave ? I cannot give a man leave without Mr. Ormsby’s
permission ; he signs their leave.
96. Not under these new regulations ? I have never had them.
97. Supposing you had had them, could you have given the men leave without referring to
Mr. Ormsby ? Ido not think I could from the general regulations, for no person could leave
the penal department without his authority.
98. Mr. Ormsby did decline to give them leave ? He did.
99. But eventually did they go ? Yes; Mr. North gave them leave.
100. IVas Gleadall one of the men that made the complaint? Yes. They prosecuted Mr. Peers.
101. And Mr Taylor ? No. One of the constables took a summons out against Mr. Peers
for striking Mr. Taylor, but the case did not come on—Mr. Taylor would not enter into it. .
102. Then there was no {summons against Mr. Taylor ? Ido not think there was.
103. Why should the taking of this course by Gleadall cause Mr. Ormsby to dislike him—
there is no apparent connection between the two circumstances ? Because Mr. Taylor was
connected with the affair.
104. Is Mr. Taylor anything more to Mr. Ormsby than any one else? He is his son-in-law.
105. Has anything else occurred to create dislike to Gleadall on the part of Mr. Ormsby,
which you could assign as a reason why Mr. Ormsby should desire to get rid of him ? I
believe the same man made a complaint about his clothing; I am not certain of that, how-
ever.
106. Do you remember the occasion when Mr. Pcndrill, the clergyman, wanted to leave the
island, and there was no boat for his transit—the visitors’ boat was absent ? The visitors’
boat was absent.
107. By Captain Ward ■ He wanted to leave the island, and applied to you for a boat; did
you on that occasion tell him that the boat was under repair ? I never remember telling him
that—Do you mean on the 7th of July ?
108. By the Chairman: I mean on the day he went in a small boat with a prisoner in it ?
I. could not tell him so, for when he arrived the boat was.on the other side of the wharf, close
to him, and did not leave the island until after he had landed.
109. Did you see him leave the island ? Yes; he went with a convict and a sergeant of police.
110. That was in the small boat ? Yes.
111. Where was the other boat ? Away pienicing.
112. You are quite sure that she was away at that time ? Yes.
113. Did Mr. Pendrill apply to you about getting across? No.
114. Did you deliver any message to him—did you tell him the boat was being painted ?
No ; 1 could not have told him that.
115. You did not tell him so ? No.
116 Was that boat frequently away on picnics ? Eight or nine times.
117. Eight or nine times, within what period ? I should say within a period of three years.
118. Bi/ Captain Ward : Could it have been away any more without your knowledge? I
do not think it could ; I make a distinction between pleasure parties and picnics.
119. What is that distinction ? Ido not include going to see races or going fishing.
120. By the Chairman : For his private use, how often has Mr. Ormsby used the boat within
the last three years ? That is independently of going to Sydney ?
121. Independently of the public service—includiug his going to Sydney r for private pur-
poses ? I could not tell when he went for private and when for public puposes.
122. How many times then was it engaged in pleasure parties to other places than Sydney?
I could not give the exact number. ■
123. As nearly as you can ? I should say fifteen times in the three years.
124. That was exclusive of Sydney ? I could not tell you where it went.
125.


125. Do you rememember its going up the river to the races at Homehush ? Yes.
12(5. Who went in it ? Avery large party —the boat was quite full.
127. Was Mr. Ormsby and his family in it ? Yes.
128. Has it ever been employed in carrying the Superintendent’s family to Sydney without 6
the Superintendent, and therefore not on duty ? I think it has, on several occasions.
129. lias it ever been out late at night? Yes, at all hours.
130. On duty, on picnics, or pleasure parties ? In all ways.
131. By whose order is it so employed ? I never give any order myself.
132. Who has done so on these occasions? The order was given by the Superintedndent to
the coxswain of the boat.
133. That is to say, whenever the boat was so employed the order was given by the Superinten-
dent to the coxswain of the boat ? The coxswain goes up to the Superintendent every
morning and gets his orders from him.
134. You do not get the orders from the Superintendent ? No; I give no directions to the
boat’s crew at all.
135 By Captain Ward : Can you give any information to’the Board respecting a picnic that
took place at Chowder Bay in Christinas 1856 ? 1 could not speak as to the particular day.
136. Was it a holiday ? I could not say that the boat went to Chowder Bay, except from
what the boatmen said; I never accompanied the boat on any picnic; all I know of the
picnics or pleasure parties is from hearsay.
137 Do you understand from the new regulations that the boat is under you and not under
Mr. Ormsby ? The regulations do not speak to that I think.
138. Is it under the Visiting Magistrate or under Mr Ormsby? I do not remember any-
thing about the visiting boat; it is entirely in charge of the coxswain.
139. You do not know whether there was an understanding between the Government and
Mr. Ormsby as to the use of that boat ? Ido not.
140. By Mr. Mcrewether: Do you remember the 7th February last? I have spoken of
that already.
141. On that occasion was the Chaplain of the Church of England put into a boat with’ a
convict in irons ? Yes.
142. In what boat did he come to the island ? He came to the island in a small boat, and
left in a small boat. At the time he arrived on the island the large boat was lying along-
side the wharf, ready for the picnic. Mr. Pendrill arrived about three o’clock, and the
other boat started about a quarter of an hour afterwards.
143. Do you remember whether it was blowing fresh on that day ? It was.
144. Cross-examined by Mr. Billon : You speak of the boat having been out at night on
some occasions—do you happen to know where Mr. Ormsby was upon those occasions? I
was on the island, and could not know whether Mr. Ormsby was in Sydney or not.
145. You spoke awhile ago of many things that you had received on hearsay—did you not
hear on these occasions when he has been out at night he has been to Government House ?
I might have heard so.
146. You heard it just as you heard other reports ? Just the same.
147. Are you not aware, or are you aware, that Mr. Ormsby himself requires leave from the
Colonial Secretary or the Visiting M agistrate on those occasions ? lam aware.
148. Now, when you applied to Mr. Ormsby about these regulations, did you say he allowed
you to see them, but did not give you a copy ? On one occasion he allowed me to see them.
14 9. On one occasion he allowed you to see them, and on another you asked him for a copy ?
Yes.
150. Did he refer you to Mr. North ? Mr. North was not the Visiting Magistrate at
the time.
151. Was Captain M'Lerie ? Captain M'Lerie.
152. Did ever the Visiting Magistrate refuse you a copy of the regulations, whether Captain
M'Lorie or Mr North? Captain M'Lerie said to me that the regulations were, that the
men were to pay respect to the proper authorities.
153. Was it not the, invariable rule on the island that whatever report you had to make was
to be made to the Superintendent, to be reported by him to the Visiting Magistrate? Yes,
according to the regulations.
154. That was the course—complaints were to be made to the Superintendent, and by him to
be made to the Visiting Magistrate ? No. Mr. North said we were to have a copy of the
regulations, and instead of the new regulations I had sent down to me a copy of the old
regulations, dated 1850. ( The witness produeed the cory.')
155. By Captain Ward : When you applied for a copy of the regulations, you had sent down
to you a copy of the old ? Yes.
154. From whom did you receive them ? I received them from a prisoner.
157. By Mr. Merewether : Did he say whom he brought them from ? He brought them to
me, and said there were the regulations. He was the office messenger, and I received all
orders through him.
158. B;/ the Chairman : Were these regulations in their present state when they were
brought to you ? Yes.
159. That is to say, they had these pencil alterations? Yes. The rules I had were those in
force previous to the inquiry of 1851 ; instead of the new regulations I had these dated 1850,
when there were only four constables on the island.
160 By Mr. Mcrewether : When did you get that copy? In March last,
161. By the Chairman: Do you know of any sparring match having taken place on the
island ? No; my business never takes me to the camp, except at evening, when I plant the
sentries; sometimes the sergeant plants the sentries.
162. About the visitors’ boat—that boat is manned by policemen, and all the policemen are
under your orders ? Subject to the control of the Superintendent, and I act under him.
*l7—2 B 163.


163. Those who pull the boat are under the Superintendent for that purpose? Yes, I
suppose so.
164. Are they employed upon the Superintendent’s private business more than upon the
public business ? Not more.
165. Are they equally—are they employed as much in the one as in the other—in these
picnics, pleasure parties, and in taking .Mr Onnsby’s family to Sydney and elsewhere? No,
they do more duty than they do for Mr. Ormsby privately.
166. Do you think three days out of seven they are employed on his private business ? The
Superintendent goes in the boat to Sydney himself once a week —sometimes he does not go
so often as once a week.
167 How many days in the week do his family or friends use the boat ? Sometimes some
of his family go in with Dr. West or with the Visiting Magistrate.
168. Taking advantage of one of the officers going in ? Yes ; instead of his own day.
169. How many days are you able to say the Superintendent has employed them for his
sole private purpose—you say one day in the week he goes to Sydney ? Yes ; sometimes he
does not go to Sydney ; and, on several occasions, when the boat has had no other duty to
do—when there has been no officer coming to the island —advantage has been taken of the
day to send the boat’s crew to cut wood or to fish.
170. What party has gone fishing ? The boat’s crew and other parties belonging to the
police.
171. Fishing for themselves ? Fishing with a net. There was a net we all had subscribed
to; the police had fourteen shares in it.
172. All the free persons on the island ? We had a share each, and the Superintendent
had two shares.
173. How often did the boat’s crew go fishing with the net? In the beginning they used to
go twice a-wcck.
174. In the end how often did they go ? Once a-week ; the men got disgusted with it.
175. Why ? I do not exactly know ; they disliked fishing.
176. How were the fish divided—were they divided according to the shares in the net ?On
one occasion, but not afterwards ; the boat’s crew that went fishing took their share, and the
remainder the Superintendent got.
177. In the beginning the boat’s crew went fishing twice a-week, that afterwards fell off to
once a-week ? Yes; and ultimately the net was sold.
178. When was it sold ? Some time since—about nine months ago.
179. How often did the boat’s crew go to cut wood ? Two or three times.
180. Two or three times, within what period ? To my knowledge, while I have been on the
island.
181. Who went in the boat for that purpose? The boat’s crew.
182. What became of the wood ? It was used for propping up the grape vines in the
vineyard.
183. It was not used for burning, but for making trellis-work for the vines ? Yes.
184. For whose vines ? Mr. Ormsby’s.
185. In Mr. Ormsby’s garden ? Yes.
186. Then this boat was employed? Not the large boat, the small boat.
187. The boat was used then for picnics, pleasure parties, and cutting poles for the vine-
yard ? Yes, in cutting poles.
188. Was it employed in any other mode not for the public service? It may have gone to
the theatre.
189. Have you known it go to the theatre ? Yes.
190. Who was in the boat on those occasions ? The Superintendent.
191. Who else ? Perhaps part of his family.
192. At what time did the boat go? In the evening, and catne back at twelve at night.
193. Has it been later than twelve at night ? Not much later.
194. How frequently has that occurred ? Not very often.
195. How often ? Once or twice a year.
196. Did the boat ever go to take the family to evening parties in Sydney ? Upon occasions.
When the family go to evening parties Mr. Ormsby’s sons generally pull their own boat.
The boat may have gone on several occasions.
197. The sons of Mr. Ormsby have a boat ? They have two boats.
198. And they pull their own boats ? Yes. On many occasions they have brought people
from Sydney in them; but it is possible that, on some of these occasions, they may have had
the visitors’ boat.
199. At what time did these young gentlemen come back ? At eleven or twelve o’clock.
200. Later or earlier ? It would depend upon where they went.
201. Were they frequently out late ? Not frequently.
202. But they were out occasionally as late as eleven ? Yes, eleven or twelve.
203. None of them were out later than that ? They might have been as late as half-past
twelve or a quarter to one.
204. Then these boats the young gentlemen used as they liked ? They were employed in
Sydney, and they went to and from the island in their own boats.
205. When the boat came back to the island where was it kept ? It was left at the buoy,
in the charge of the police. All the boats were in our charge.
206. These boats were always pulled by the young gentlemen ? There may have been a
solitary instance of a policeman going on leave, pulling.
207. jSv Mr. Merewether : Has the visitors' boat ever been absent all night ? It has been.
208. Who was in it when it was absent—who took it away and who came back in it ?On
several occasions Mr. Ormsby has gone to balls, both at Balmain and Sydney, and the boat
has been all night away.
209.


209. And has returned in the morning ? Yes.
210. Has that been a frequent occurrence? Not a frequent occurrence.
211. By Ctplain Ward: Do you know whether on those occasions Mr. Ormsby obtained
from the Visiting Magistrate leave to go? I never could tell.
212. By Mr. Merewether : Have you ever seen the visitors’ boat carry away fowls from the
island? I have.
213. Anything else ? I have seen it take away baskets with cabbages.
214. Were they Government property ? I could not tell that.
215. Were they in any quantity? I should say a large-sized basket full.
216. Of vegetables ? Yes.
217. Were there any quantity of fowls —one couple—two—three ? Sometimes more.
218. Do you know whose property they were ? I understood them to be the Superinten-
dent’s ; they were brought to the boat by his servant? —his prisoner servants.
219. Do you know what became of them ? No.
220. You know they have been taken off the island ? These things are put into the boat,
with instructions to the coxswain what to do with them.
221. What is the coxswain’s name ? Smith.
222. All boats land at the public wharf, do not they, where you are stationed ? Yes.
223. Is it your business to attend and see what is landed ? Yes, it is
224. Does any one attend from the Superintendent’s department ? No one, unless when the
provisions come for the prisoners, and the free overseers come down for their newspapers.
225. Is there anything to prevent clothing, articles of luxury, or spirits being brought to
the prisoners—are you authorised to stop anything ? No ; you will see, from the regula-
tions, that it is for the Superintendent or his assistant to do that.
226. Are they ever there when the boats arrive at the island ? Occasionally.
227. Not as a rule ? Asa rule they are when prisoners arrive there.
228. On other occasions provisions may be landed ; do they or do they not see what is landed ?
Anything landed the prisoner servants take up, no matter what it is—books, parcels, liquor,
or what.
229. Where do they take them ? To the free overseers’ quarters.
230. Suppose they are not going to the free overseers’ quarters but to the camp, is there
anything to prevent a prisoner when he comes down to the boat from saying that he comes
from a free overseer, and taking what he obtains to the camp ? Not to my knowledge.
231. You are not aware of any regulation which makes it incumbent upon the Superintendent,
or his assistant, to be present at the wharf when the boats land ? I think you will see in
the police regulations that we are to prevent spirits being landed.
232. Suppose the man who came down to the wharf said he came from any of the free
overseers, would you.be authorised to stop spirits said to be intended for them? When I
was first appointed I reported to the Superintendent that spirits were landed; he did not
stop it, and I did not interfere after. I could not say whether spirits were landed or not
without I broke the bottles.
233. By the Chairman : Did you ever search the boats when they came ashore ? Never
for spirits.
234. Did you over search for anything ? No.
235. By Mr. Mer wether: Anything is allowed to be landed? I am supposed to prevent
spirits being landed.
236. Practically you do not —why do you not ? I receive every thing that lands on the island,
I and the sergeant.
237. Are you authorised to stop anything? lam not.
238. Then your receiving is a mere matter of form? It is a mere matter of form.
239. Are you aware of any regulations by which any one else is allowed to stop spirits brought
to the island? Yes; the Superintendent and his assistant are supposed to search all parcels
and bundles.
240. Do they, as far as your observation goes ? Ido not know any instance of it.
241. So, I am to understand that anything may be landed on the island without any check
to prevent it—spirits, tobacco, clothes, or anything else may be landed ? Yes. All parcels
are carried up to the Superintendent’s office; anything directed to the prisoners passes through
my hands.
242. And a prisoner takes these things to the office, or you suppose he does ? lam
instructed to deliver everything to this prisoner.
243. Suppose this prisoner did not choose to take up anything to the Superintendent’s or
Assistant Superintendent’s office, but wished to drop it on the way, is there not the lime-
kiln, and are there not other places where he could conceal anything? Yes.
244. None of your men go up with him ? No.
245. By < 'aptain Ward: Are you aware of any spirits having been smuggled into the
enclosure at all ? No, I never heard of it.
246. You do not know that spirits have ever got among the prisoners under the existing
regulations? I have heard it rumoured.
247. What was the rumour? That Mr. Ferris, one of the overseers there, was in the habit
of selling spirits to the prisoners.
248. Was the charge ever made to Mr. Ferris? Not to my knowledge; lam quite ignorant
of anything that occurs on the island.
249. When boats approach the i.-land are they not noticed from the signal station? Yes,
and reported to the Superintendent.
250. He is aware of the arrival of every boat ? Yes.
251. That gives him the opportunity of sending down a man to see what is landed ? Yes.
252. Does he, as a rule, do so ? There is no person sent down but the prisoner-messenger.
253.


253. What do you consider to be your duty when the prisoner comes down as a boat is
unloading—do you give every thing to the prisoner ? Yes.
254. Do you allow any one else to take the things from the boat ? No.
255. You insist upon the prisoner taking all these things to the office ? Yes; he comes
down for these things.
256. By the Chairman : You do not see him deliver them ? No.
257. By Mr. Merewe.iher : Are the free overseers allowed to take from the boat anything
directed to them ? They have got their own servants.
258. Who come down and receive these things? Yes.
259. Has not Mr. Ormsby two messengers, who come down and receive these articles? No;
one messenger and one flagstaff man.
260. Both convicts ? Yes.
261. B / Captain Ward: Do you think the present practice with respect to the landing of
the boats sufficient to prevent spirits getting among the prisoners ? That depends upon the
interior management of the prisoners.
262. What further improvements would you suggest in your office as Inspector, with regard
to the landing of goods front the boats at the island? I should say that all things, such as
liquor, should be marched up together, in charge of a constable, who should see that every
thing was delivered by the prisoners.
263. You consider that it would be your duty to ascertain whether there was any liquor in
the boats, and, if so, to send it up in charge, of a constable to the Superintendent’s office ?
Yes, to the different parties.
264. You think that would prevent the spirits falling into the hands of the prisoners? Yes.
265. That would throw the responsibility on you? Yes. There is nothing to prevent the
prisoners getting spirits under the present system.
266. By Mr. Mereivcfher : Supposing Mr. Ormsby, or his assistant, were down at the wharf
when the boats arrived, would that prevent it? No; I have seen things landed under Mr.
Ormsby’s own eye, and ho has said nothing.
267. He has seen it and said nothing? He has seen it.
268. If the Superintendents were there, and did their duty, would not that prevent spirits
and other articles being landed surreptitiously? Yes, if the orders were carried out.
I remember, on one occasion, when I was first made Inspector, there were some mechanics
came to work on the island, and they brought spirits with them.
269. Why did you not carry out your orders with respect to the landing of spirits ? The
first week I was Inspector I saw spirits come on to the island, and I reported it to the
Superintendent.
270. In writing? No, verbally.
271. Was any answer received by you in writing? No; he said it was of no consequence—
there was no harm in it.
272. Who brought the spirits on that occasion ? It was wine, I think; it was one of my
own men.
273. To whom did he take it? It was for his own use ; he took it to his own room.
274. You reported that to the Superintendent? 1 reported it to the Superintendent, and
he said, as it was wine it did not matter.
275. By the Chairman: Do you recollect any other instance —any instance of spirits being
brought to the island ? I did on one occasion.
276. By Mr. Merewether: Who brought them in that case ? Mr. Cahil.
277. By the Chairman : What was the answer to you on that occasion ? I forget the exact
answer that was made.
278. No further notice was taken ? No.
279. You are aware that spirits are landed freely? Yes, without obstruction; it comes in
barrels or packages.
2(80. By Mr. Mercwether: In barrels ? In kegs—in two gallon or one gallon kegs.
281. Does that occur frequently ? Not frequently.
'282. Bi/ the Chairman : Yem say it is not usual for the Superintendent or Deputy Superin-
tendent to be at the landing place when boats land ? No.
.283. They do not perform that duty ? The Superintendent is never there for that express
purpose.
284. Nor the Deputy Superintendent ? The Deputy Superintendent is there once or twice
a-week to receive indulgences and rations for the prisoners.
285 On other occasions who is present ? I, or my sergeant attend.
286. Not the Superintendent or Deputy Superintendent ? No.
287. I understand from your evidence that you never search any of the boats ? No, I never do.
288. Whatever is landed is carried up from the boats, either up to the Superintendent's
office by the convict messenger ? That, is with regard to letters and messages.
289 Or to the free persons’ quarters by their convict servants? Yes.
290. Without examination by you, or by anybody in your presence, and unaccompanied by
any free constable ? Yes.
291. So that in fact there is no supervision or control as to anything landed ? No.
292. Spirits, wine, or beer may be largely landed without check or control ? Without check
or control.
293. Have you seen any person drunk upon the island? I have seen people in liquor after
coming from town, but never doing duty on the island.
294. Never whilst on duty ? No ; only when they have just come from town.
295. Persons ordinarily residing on the island, who had just returned from town ? l 7 es, but
on the island I never saw an instance of it.
296. As to the employment of the boat —by one of these regulations I observe that all boats
excepting


excepting those containing the official visitors, Mr. Ormsby and his family, and so on, either
going to or coming from the island, are liable to be stopped and examined by the Water
Police boat—is that regulation carried out? I never heard of that regulation.
297. Are these boats ever stopped and examined by the Water Police ? No; I was not aware
of that regulation.
298. If you had been aware of that regulation, what should you have done? Acted up to
it; if I had had the control of these things I would have acted up to the regulations.
2j9. According to the regulations, no person without permission of the Governor General is
to be allowed to remain on the island after ten o’clock at night ? I have known people to
remain on the island with the magistrate’s permission—any immediate relation, such as a
brother or sister of those they go to see.
300. With whose permission ? The Visiting Magistrate’s.
301. There is a regulation that no pigs are to be kept on the island, and that but thirty
bead of poultry and four milch goats are to be kept by the Superintendent, and two goats
and twenty head of poultry by the free overseers—has that regulation been attended to ? I
have seen more than that.
302. Who has kept more than that ? Without exception I think every one keeps more,
those who can afford it; there may be a few constables who do not.
303 Does any improper consequence follow from their keeping more ; has any use been made
of the prisoners’ rations for feeding them ? At one time the fowls were fed upon the homminy;
that I understood.
304. Whose fowls ? Every body’s fowls.
305. Do you mean the spare homminy—the refuse after the people had done their meals ? I
do not know how it was obtained; I never lived there; but I have seen it pass to the free
people’s quarters.
30'o. Where from ? From the direction of the camp. I was never inside to see it.
307. Did you see it at all the overseers’, or only at one or two ? More particularly at the
Superintendent’s quarters.
308. Are you aware that the spare homminy, the surplus, is now thrown into the sea? I
am aware that it is the order, but I have never seen it thrown in.
309. Do you believe it is thrown in ? [ never took any interest in it.
310. You are aware that the Visiting Magistrate ordered it ? I have heard so.
311. Has there been any dimunition of the stock on the island since that ? I have heard
the men say that the goats and fowls have died.
312. You have told us that they have been taken off the island ? There has been a diminu-
tion in both ways —both from selling them off and from their dying.
313. Have you ever known any letter to pass from or to any prisoner without being read by
the Superintendent ? I cannot answer that question.
314. Are any letters passed clandestinely? The letters arc taken to or from the boat in my
presence. They are given to the prisoner-messenger, and he takes them, or is supposed to
take them, to the Superintendent.
315. All letters ? Yes ; I send them up to the office by him.
316. You have no security beyond the fidelity of the person employed for the proper delivery
of the letters ? No.
317. No check upon him at all ? No; it is the special business of the messenger who comes
down for the letters.
318. By Mr. Merewether: You do not give him any scrip to shew that he has received fifty,
forty, or any other number of letters from you ? No.
319. You receive them and hand them over to him ? Not at all times; sometimes he gets
them direct from the boatman. He is supposed to take them to the office.
320. You do not know what becomes of them ? No further than that.
321. !hj the Chairman : Does the Superintendent personally superintend the works going
on upon the island ? No, not to my knowledge.
322. I refer to the regulation referring to the general duties of the Superintendent, con-
tained in the 17th regulation? I have noticed him on many occasions go round the works,
but not as a daily practice.
323. Have you ever known any prisoners performing any work upon their own account, or
for private parties on the island, or for the private advantage of any resident on the island,
excepting as servants —have any prisoners, other than as servants, been employed by any
person on the island for his private purpose ? I have from time to time seen a carpenter at
work, but whether he has been employed upon requisition or not I cannot say.
324. What was the name of the man you saw employed ? Spencer.
325. Employed in what way ? At cabinet work.
326. Where ? At the Superintendent’s; he was making boxes and trifling things.
327. How frequently, or for what length of time have you seen him thus employed ? I have
generally seen him accidentally when I have gone up to the place. I have never gone there
purposely to see him.
328. Was that frequently the case ? At one period it was frequent.
329. Running over what period of time was that frequent ? Perhaps a space of two or three
months, or a month. I could not state exactly.
330. He was frequently employed within a period of two or three months ? Occasionally.
331. Do you know that prisoners have been employed by Mr. Ormsby as gardeners ? I have
gone into the garden and seen a prisoner there.
332. How many have you seen in the Superintendent’s own garden ? I have seen one man,
not more ; but I am not in the garden every day.
333. How often does the Visiting Justice come to the island ? Once a-week.
334. No more than once a-week ? No.
* IT—2 C 335.


335. Does he hold a Court upon every occasion ? I believe ho does; lam not up every
time he comes, indeed I am up very seldom unless I have a case of my own.
336. Does he ever muster the prisoners ? He comes specially once a month to muster the
prisoners.
337. Does he muster them oftener than that ? Ido not think he does. lam quite ignorant
of all these things connected with the penal department.
338; I see by the regulations, that it is your duty to have the constables properly drilled to
the use of the carbine —do you attend to that? Not lately.
339. Why have you not done that lately ? On one. occasion when I was drilling the men
they reported me to the Superintendent for it, and he came down and dri lcd them himself.
He said they were sufficiently drilled, and I have not taken the trouble to drill them since.
340. How long is that since ? I dare say six months.
311. Do you not consider it to be your duty to drill the men ? Yes, it is according to my
orders; but as the Superintendent said they were sufficiently drilled I did not attend to it
any more.
342. Did he tell you not to drill them any more ? No.
343. Have you arms for them all ? Yes.
344. Do you inspect them regularly ? No, Ido not.
345. Do you inspect them to see that they are clean ? Yes.
346. How often ? Every time they turn out for sentry.
317. Their amunition —is that kept under your orders ? I see that it is kept correctly.
343. You see before they go on sentry that their arms and ammunition are in order ? I
do not inspect their arms closely, but I see that they are in order.
349 Do you always attend at the wharf when the boat arrives ? lor the sergeant.
350. Do you attend with an armed guard ? No ; the guard boat is armed.
351. Are-you aware that you are to attend with a guard of six men, armed, when a boat
conies to the island ? That is not done now ; I have a sentry at the wharf.
352. Military or police ? There are four men, armed, on duty to receive the boat.
353. Did you ever know an instance of a person landing on the island without an order
from the Colonial Secretary, the Brigade Major, or the Visiting Magistrate ? Yes.
354 Are you aware that no person has a legal right to land without permission either from
the Colonial Secretary, the Brigade Major, or the Visiting Magistrate ? Yes.
305. Have you known any infringement of that regulation ? Yes ; gentlemen come to the
island and send their cards up to the Superintendent, and the Superintendent gives us
instructions to allow them to land.
356 What gentlemen do you refer to ? There was one —Commander Lethbridge, 11 N.
357. Any body e'se ? There may have been others, but I do not recollect their names. 1
know there have been one or two instances.
358. Not often ? Not very often.
359. By Mr. Merewether: Should all persons desiring to land produce an order to you ?
Yes; they cannot land without they produce an order, unless we have it already on the file.
360. You must have an order for the landing of persons upon the island, either previous to
their arrival, through the Superintendent, or produced by themselves? Yes
361. You must inspect an order in some way or other? Yes, according to the regulations.
36‘2. That rule is frequently departed from ? Not frequently ; on one or two occasions it
has been.
363. You specify one particular instance, and the same thing had occurred before, but you
cannot recollect the names of the parties ? Yes
364. By the Chairman: Are you aware that, by the regulations, none of the free officers are
permitted to leave the island, but with the Superintendent’s permission? Yes.
365. Is there any infringement of the rules ? I am responsible for that, and lam very
careful to have it observed. There may be occasions when the Superintendent is absent,
and the Assistant Superintendent sends an order.
366. Are you aware that by the regulations no convict is allowed to approach the wharf
within a distance of fifty yards, the servants of the free officers excepted ? That is not
carried out, and it cannot be carried out, from the nature of the works in progress.
367. Bit Captain Ward: Except in charge of an overseer ? I never see a prisoner in charge
of an overseer. Only the cart gangs who move about from place to place are in charge of
convict overseers
368. By the Chairman : You ha.ve not a copy of the new police regulations ? No, I have
only the copy I have produced.
369. Have you told the truth upon all those matters which have been inquired into ?To
the best of my knowledge, I have.
370. With respect to the transaction of taking Mr. Pendrill to town in the small boat, did
you tell me the truth when I asked you the question about the painting of the visitors’ boat ?
Yes, to the best of my knowledge. It was impossible for me to tell him that it was being
painted, for when he landed the visitors’ boat lay on the other side of the wharf, within two
or three yards.
371. The boat was away upon a picnic on that day ? Yes; it left about a quarter of an hour
after he landed.
372. It was not there to take him away ? No.
373. Was any suggestion made to you from anybody on the island as to what evidence you
should give upon that point of the boat ? Yes.
374. Tell the Board by whom the suggestion was made, and what was the nature of it?
After you had left the island, on your last visit, the Superintendent called me aside and
requested me to go up to the Clerk of Petty Sessions and to concoct some story
375. What were his words ? Those were his words to concoct some story, so as to clear him
pf this case of picnic.
376.


376. Were those the words he used? Yes, that was his meaning, or the effect of his words
377. Can you not give his words more correctly ? Ho said he wished me to go up to Mr.
Taylor to concoct a story, in order to clear him of this picnic case.
378. What did you say to this? I promised that I would.
379. Did you go to Mr. Taylor? No, not on that occasion. I did on another occasion ;
that was upon a different subject.
380. Upon what subject was that ? It was connected with the regulations of the island
381. Tell us what it was ? He wanted me to go over the papers printed in the Empire—
the minister’s letter.
382. Did he say with what object ? The object of making the thing as light as possible.
383. What did he say upon the subject ? He said he would wish me to go up to Mr;.
Taylor, and go with him over the letters published by the minister, Mr. Pendrill.
384. What did he say besides —did he give you any reason for wishing you to do this ? To.
get up a statement to refute what was in the minister’s left r.
385. Did he tell you that? Yes.
386. Did you go up to Mr. Taylor? I did, subsequently
387. Did you read over that letter with Mr Taylor? Mr. Taylor went over several points.
388. What paper was it he produced ? The Empire of the 22nd October.
389. Did Mr. Taylor produce that paper ? ( handinj a copy of the Empire of the 22nd
October .) It was a copy of that.
390. What passed between you and Mr. Taylor on that occasion ? lie wanted to know what
Mr. Pendrill said to me with regard to the coxswain—he wanted to know whether it was true
or not what Mr. Pendrill said, whether he complained of the coxswain, and whether I gave
him that answer. I said I did.
391. The answer about the boat being painted ? No; he said he complained to me of the
rudeness of the coxswain, and that I said I was subject to the same treatment myself.
392. Did Mr. Taylor a3k you anything about the boat that went to the picnic? No, Ido
not think he did; I think lie left that out, and I did not point out that matter to him.
393. Did he ask you, or propose to you, that you should give any evidence that was not true,
or that should mislead us in our inquiry ? No; though he was talking to me as though he
was trying to impress upon my mind that I should speak the truth, still lie was telling me
how I should act.
394. What did he want you to state ? To impress upon the Board that it was he refused
them, or advised the Superintendent to refuse them, and he would take the blame.
395. Was it the Superintendent in fact that refused them ? Yes.
396. Did he say anything else to you ? There was one remark he made while I was there
about our clothing; he said we were well off, that we ivcre not police at all, and that our
clothing came to such an amount of money, about £5 each There were fifteen men, and five
times that would be £75. It did not strike me at the time, but I thought afterwards that
there was £IBO down on the estimate voted by the Legislative Assembly for ou^ clothing;
had I thought of it at the time, I should have asked how much of it was really expended on
our clothing.
397. 71/ Mr. Merewether : You said just now that Mr. Taylor made some remark about your
being well off—what was the drift of that remark ? He was always casting that up ; he said
I had rations and clothing, and was better off than he.
398. Bj Captain. Ward: With respect to the concoction of a story —did he propose to you
to say anything that was untrue ? He did not want me to make an untrue statement, but
to state it so that Mr. Ormsby should not be blamed for it.
399. What was the concoction ho wished you to adopt? He told me that he did not
remember that there was a constable in the boat that day, and wanted me to state there was
none.
400. Are you quite sure there was ? Yes ; I can shew there was.
401. What answer did you give him ? I think the answer I gave him was that I would do
so ; nothing further happened.
402. What made you promise to tell this story ? I was afraid to give any other answer.
403. Why were you afraid —-what would have been the consequence if you had told the
truth ? I should have been subject to annoyance, at least I imagine so.
404. Had you been subjected to annoyance before for telling the truth ? Not for telling the
truth, but I had been subject to annoyance from time to time.
405. What for ? Doing my duty
406. Had you ever been subject to annoyance before for speaking the truth ? No.
407. Then you took upon yourself the responsibility of telling a lie because you feared you
might be subject to annoyance ? I promised, but I never intended to do so.
408 You said so through fear, but never intended to do what you said ? Yes.
r (JUS DAT,


TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER, 1857.
Received a letter from Mr. Dillon—annexed.
Resolved, That the Chairman communicate to Mr. Dillon that he has already
been informed of the course the Board intend to pursue, and that
the Board do not see any reason to alter their decision.
A letter was also received from Mr. Pendrill, read, and answered by the Board.
Christopher Murray, examined :
I was constable in the visiting boat of Cockatoo Island (not coxswain.) I know
nothing of facts stated in letter of Empire, signed “ N B.” I have been two years and a
half on the island. Visitors are in the habit of going to and from the island all Sunday.
The guard-boat is largely employed on this day for this service. I have no knowledge of
writer in Empire of 2nd October. [ wrote a letter in Empire of 7th October, signed
“ Fourth Witness.” To my knowledge the police of the island were not in possession of
regulations, (I left the island eleven weeks ago.) They were applied for, but not given.
Application was made to Captain M'ljerie, in my presence, by the Inspector, Dunning.
Captain M'Lerie said the regulations were, they were to obey all lawful orders, but gave no
copy. The regulations were again applied for by Constable Scott, to Mr. North ; he stepped
out of the ranks and stated his wish for instructions for his guidance in the absence of the
inspector and sergeant. Mr. North said he had an inspector and sergeant to goby; this
was about eight months ago. I know nothing of Gleadall having applied for the regulations ;
lie was dismissed on a charge of being disgustingly intoxicated —but not drunk. The charge
was mode by Father Kenyon, who reported it to the inspector, in whose presence and the
sergeant’s he was examined. I was present at the time I consider the man was under the
influence of liquor, but not drunk. The man was afterwards dismissed. I have known
Constable Pierce to be taken out of the guard-boat on various occasions, and sent to Balmain
for legs of mutton, and on private messages, for Mr. Ormsby. The last time was not longer
than nine months ago. I have seen the guard-boat at various times sent on private business,
fishing, &c. I have been in the boat on such occasions. The fish on such occasions were
taken to Mr. Ormsby’s house. A fishing net was purchased by general subscription. The
constables, Mr. Brown, Mr. Taylor, and free overseers, had shares. On those occasions a
smaller boat did the guard-boat’s duty. Two Government boats have gone on a fishing
excursion on the same day, one conveying the net, the other the party, consisting of Mr.
Ormsby, Mr. Davis, Xlth Regiment. I have on two occasions seen the two boats go,
frequently one boat. The persons who worked the boats on these occasions were constables.
I have kifcwn the larger boat used for pleasure and picnics. On Easter Monday, 1856,
1 was in Chowder Bay, with a pleasure party, in young Mr. Ormsby’s boat; the ladies and
the Superintendent were in the visitors’ boat. We were away all day. I have known the
boat to be used for conveying poultry to town. I have seen two basketsful go. They were
taken to Cummins’, the poulterer. I assisted in taking them there on one occasion, and
sometimes part of the way there. I have brought back beef, bees, corn, porter for Mr.
Ormsby; when landed at Cockatoo these have been conveyed, by convict servants, to Mr.
Ormsby’s house. I have known the small boat, when unfit for the purpose, sent for the
clergyman, when the other was idle. ' The small boat has been sent for billet-wood for the free
men, when the ration supply has run short. I had the ill-will of Mr. Ormsby myself. I left
the island in consequence of being dismissed. I said something about Mr. Ormsby before
two men, who reported it. Mr. Ormsby reported me, and the Visiting Magistrate dismissed
me. I had been suspended before, on the complaint of the coxswain, who told me to scrape
the oars, and I told him he might do it himself. Another time I was detained in Sydney,
waiting for Mr Ormsby’s beef. I was reported by the boat’s crew for being drunk, and
suspended again. I was suspended three times before I was dismissed. On the two first
occasions I was not brought before the Magistrate, but my pay was stopped, which I
considered unfair. On the last occasion, I was brought before and dismissed by the Magis-
trate. I can find no motive for Mr. Ormsby having treated me unfairly. I was very kind
to Mr. Ormsby, and transacted his business without complaint. My money was stopped for
three days on one, and two days on another occasion. I believe Saddler and Carey,
constables,, have also been suspended by Mr. Ormsby. When I was-called for by Mr. North
and dismissed, I made no complaint of my pay having been stopped.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dillon: There was no fishing parties from the island for twelve months
before I left the island, and no picnic party for about nine months. I had conversation
yesterday with the dispenser of the island, who had been examined before this Board. Mr.
Pendrill, about a fortnight ago, asked mo how I came to leave the island; I said through the
ill-will of Mr. Ormsby. I have gone into Mr. Parkes on different occasions since the publication
of my letter, to know when I should be required before the Board. I have asked Inspector
Dunning how the inquiry was going, and if I should be examined —he has told me I should
be. I know other free people on the island keeping poultry, but I cannot say if they sent
any to Sydney. On one occasion the Bishop of Sydney went to the island in the boat which
I have called the dirty boat. I consider my dismissal from the island to have been unjust,
as the witnesses disagreed. On the third occasion of my pay being stopped, when my case
was brought before the Visiting Magistrate, I do not know if he told me that it went to the
Police Reward Fund. Ido not recollect having asked him.
THURSDAY,


THURSDAY, 12 NOVEMBER, 1857.
Mr. Jeremiah Brown, Assistant Superintendent of Cockatoo Island, examined :
I have been on the island ten years, first as overseer and now as Assistant Superin-
tendent, under Mr. Ormsby. My duty is to open wards and count out men every morning.
I afterwards fall them into gangs, call out the sick, and send the gangs to labor. I after-
wards dispose of the sick according to the dispenser’s directions. 1 attend at meals and take
complaints. In the absence of the Superintendent, the general charge devolves on me. I
have known the Superintendent to be absent twice a week on his own businiss, not oftener.
I remember the circumstance of two men concealing themselves on the island, but there was
no charge preferred against them, except that of hiding to effect an escape ; no other charge
was hinted against them by any one at that time. 1 remember Perry and Sinclair—boxers.
The men are in the habit on holidays of amusing themselves in the yard boxing a little,
jumping a little, and so forth ; but no regular set-to has taken place to my knowledge. On
one occasion I discovered some gloves had been made by the men out of a leather apron ; I
reported this, and, by Ormsby’s orders, I seized them and burnt them. The military officers
might have seen something of this kind from outside the railings, but I never knew them
to attend for the purpose of seeing a sparring match. I remember on a Saturday the prisoners
refusing to go to work ; their names were taken down, and a report sent to the Visiting
Magistrate, who heard the case on his next visit, and about twenty-five of the men were con-
fined —I presume there was a record of it made at the time. On another occasion the men
were dissatisfied with Mr. Thomas, respecting the number he put to draw a cart. I was
present when the case was brought before Mr. North. Mr. Thomas charged the sub-overseer
(a prisoner) with employing one extra man at the cart. The man pleaded that he was
ordered to do so by the free overseer; this plea was substantiated by one of Mr. Thomas’
free overseers, on which Mr. North dismissed the charge. These were the only two instances
I know of men having refused to work. The Church of England Chaplain once asked mo
where he was to see men who wished to speak to him ; I showed him the school-room, by Mr.
Ormsby’s order. I always attended Divine Service, and Mr. Ormsby sometimes, more
frequently while Dr. Steele, Mr. Donkin, and Mr. Synge were Chaplains, than latterly.
My duty was to keep order during service. Mr. Pendrill was in the habit of going to my
room in the yard to change his dress; he never complained of that accommodation, and he
never asked for any assistance regarding his duties ; if he had done so, I would have rendered
him every assistance. Mr. Pendrill never made a formal complaint to me respecting the
boat service. I, the police, some free officers, and the Superintendent took shares in a fishing
net; the fish caught were distributed among shareholders. I have known the Superintendent
to go fishing once, and to picnics four or five times, during the time I have been on the island.
I never knew the boat to be sent from the island solely for the private business of Mr. o*msby;
but when going for other purposes it was also employed on private business. I did not
attend, nor the Superintendent, at the landing of boats, except when the indulgence boat
brought things for the prisoners, paid for out of their task money; these things were taken by
me and examined before issued. The Superintendent’s or free officers’ things used to be taken
direct by the servants of those persons to their quarters, unexamined by the police or me.
I have seen a keg of wine brought to the island, and spirits to the extent of a bottle at a
time, without the knowledge or consent of the Superintendent—it is not the practice to ask
the Superintendent’s leave. I never examined any bundles or parcels brought to the island,
or the persons of any one visiting the island. The free overseers and subordinate officers did
bring spirits on the island. I can positively state that the regulations regarding subordinate
officers bringing spirits to the island have not been carried out. I have always had access to the
regulations of the island, and am familiar with them. I muster the prisoners eight times
a day—to and from meals and work and to bed—according to regulations. I never heard
it stated or suggested on the island in my life that the Superintendent borrowed
money of the prisoners. I remember the Chinaman Tan refusing to work on three
occasions, once because a man at the hand-cart would not pull, on another occasion when
other Chinamen were leaving the island with whom he wished to go. He asked fur
an interpreter. I took him to the Superintendent, who satisfied him that he should see
the interpreter, and he went to work. On the third occasion he declined to work because he
was not allowed to go away with four other Chinamen who had been sent on the island with
him. I have known prisoners to be confined to the cells, till the Visiting Magistrate came,
for insolence to the Superintendent, myself, and others; the Visiting Magistrate came once
a week and inquired into case. I have known on one or two occasions a man confined five
days before the Visiting Magistrate saw him and decided his case. This occured in more
than one instance. When men have been so confined, they have been reported next morning
to the Visiting Magistrate. I have known of no instance of overbearing conduct by the Super-
intendent or officers to the prisoners, and all insolence to the officers has been unprovoked.
I remember one circumstance of suspicion of an unnatural offence. Unlocking the wards
one morning it was reported to me that one man had gone into another’s berth ; the case
was reported to the Superintendent, and by him to the Visiting Magistrate, and the charge
dismissed, as without foundation. It was never reported to me during my stay on the island
of such an offence having been committed in the wards or elsewhere. Theie was a case of
suspicion of unnatural offence occurred about -a year ago, arising from a man approaching
another in one of the wards, and laying his hand upon him ; the man who approached the
other was knocked down ; the case was reported to me, and by mo to the Superintendent,
and by him to the Visiting Magistrate, who dealt with it, and punished the man by confine-
ment in the cells; that man has ever since been made to sleep in a separate cell. This is the
only ease I rpcollect of any suspicion of an unnatural offence. The separate dormitories
seen by the Board on their visit are used for young lads and feeble old men; there are four
* 17 —2 D persons


persons now using them, the Chinaman Tan, one old man, and two young men under twenty
years. I have never known a man punished for reporting another for an unnatural olfenee;
and I have never known a case of unnatural offence occurring, and it is therefore not true
that such a case has occurred, and the man not punished.
The sweepings up after prisoners’ meals of the homminy and meat used to he distri-
buted among the free officers for their fowls.
Henry East once charged the Superintendent with having appropriated prisoners’
rations; his charge was, that a piece of good meat was put among sweepings for the Super-
intendent’s use. It was brought by the Superintendent before the Visiting Magistrate, and, as
he could not substantiate the charge, iie was punished by confinement to cells. Up to this
time the prisoners gave their consent to the sweepings being distributed among the free officers,
and had helped to collect them. lam not aware of any canvassing for votes having occurred
as to whether refuse should be so applied. 1 know Captain Browne was Visiting Magistrate
in 1849, and he ordered sweepings to be thrown away, and that order was acted on for about
two years. The order was never relaxed by any magistrate; the infringement of it occurred
from a spontaneous wish of the prisoners, communicated to the Superintendent, that the
refuse should not be wasted; it then began, by the Superintendent’s order, to be
distributed among the free officers’ servants, in equal proportions, till about nine mouths
ago, when the charge before stated about the piece of meat was made; since then
the refuse has been thrown into deep water, and that is the practice now. The piece
of meat found among the refuse before referred to was good meat, about 2 lbs. weight,
cooked. On another occasion the meat of some Chinaman was under-done, and taken
by him to the overseer of the cook-house, who exchanged it for his own; the overseer
kept this meat till the morning, when, it having turned had, he flung it into the
refuse. The prisoners, when they sent to the Superintendent that they wished the refuse to
be distributed, where unaminous, as far as lam aware. I have no reason to believe that Mr.
Ormsby’s administration has been partial or injust, or that he has been any favorites, or
has a “down” on any one. The several appointments to subordinate situations among the penal
establishment are vested in the Superintendent. I have never known favor shewn in the
exercise of that power. Ido not believe there ever w r as a case of a man having been confined to
the cells by the Superintendent and released without the knowledge of the Visiting Magistrate.
The Superintendent’s garden is sometimes manured by men obtained upon requisition to the
Civil Engineer, and the vegetables are distributed among the free people, and also the prisoners
when the latter’s garden is low. I do not consider it my duty in the absence of Mr. Ormsby
to examine boats coming to and leaving the island. lam not aware that either myself or
the Superintendent is required to accompany visitors when on the island. Visitors to
prisoners see them in the presence of the police; other visitors are accomanied round the island.
I hat* known strangers, by the permission of the Visiting Magistrate, sleep on the island.
Boats communicate between the island and the main three or four times a day, always, however,
by leave of the Superintendent—on Sunday, sometimes. A journal is kept of passing of boats
to and from the island daily, and preserved in the office. I have never received any instruc-
tions as to what is to be considered discipline on the island.
Cross-examined by Mr, Dillon : I have acted under the orders of Mr. Price (lately
murdered at Melbourne) at Norfolk Island for twelve months. Since I left Norfolk Island I
have been at Cockatoo, to which place I was appointed on the recoinandation of Mr. E. D.
Thomson. lam competent to give an opinion on prison discipline. I have seen nothing
in Mr. Ormsby’s system of managing convicts which I can find fault with. Ido not know
of any man more fitted to carry out the mild system of prison dicipline established here by the
Government—l mean the system in which flogging is abolished. I have never known Mr.
Ormsby wanting in firmness; he has always insisted on having his orders carried out. Ido
not believe Mr. Ormsby capable of carrying out anything unjust, tyrannical, or unkind. He
could not be so without it being known. Mr. Pendrill was in the habit of taking refresh-
ment at my own quarters. He had been in the habit of breakfasting and dining with Mr.
Ormsby at first; that ceased, and he then took his refreshments with me. I have seen Mr.
Ormsby receive the Sacrament. I never saw r in any penal settlement the sabbath kept with
more propriety, and I have been on a good many.
FRIDAY, 13 NOVEMBER, 1857.
John Smith, Coxswain of Boat, examined
Has been three years coxswain of visitors’ boat. Our duty is to go in for Magistrate,
Priest, Parson, Visiting Magistrate, and others. The boat has been on picnics : twice to
the Heads, once on Garden Island, once to Chowder Bay, and four times up Lane Cove—the
party consisting of Mr. Ormsby, and family, and visitors. On such occasions boat away at one
or two o’clock pm , returning at six or seven p m., and once as late as nine o’clock p.m. During
two seasons we have been about eight, nine, or twelve times fishing—the seine was carried
in the guard-boat. Once Mr. Ormsby, and his daughters and family, and some military
officers went in a boat brought by officers. Three of the police and myself were employed
to draw the seine; the fish was divided among proprietors of net. I receive orders direct
from Mr. Ormsby. I have carried in fowls to Dr. O’Brien and several of Mr. Ormsby’s
friends, from Mr. Ormsby. I have taken poultry for sale to Mr. Cummins. I have sold
poultry about four times, and received not exceeding 15s. at any one time. I have bought
corn and taken it to Mr. Ormsby. No one else has had poultry to sell for Mr. Ormsby but
myself. I have taken a present of a turkey to Dr. West, not to any one else. On one
occasion I took a party to the island consisting of Colonel Bloomfield and other officers to
Mr.


Mr. Ormsby, and brought them back about ten o’clock p.rn I have taken Mr. Ormsby and
family to parties at Government House, and to theatre, returning as late as twelve o’clock,
or one a.m. I have been away from the island all night, keeping the boat in Sydney. On
one or two occasions, when Mr. Ormsby has been at a Government House ball, the boatmen
wore then allowed to go to their wives who reside in Sydney. They also get leave from
Sunday afternoon to Monday morning to visit their wives in Sydney. I never was out all
night with the boat on a picnic excursion. When we went, to the Heads we started at ten
o’clock a.m. and returned at nine o’clock p.m. I remember the occasion of Mr Pendrill
leaving the island in a small boat. I did not tell him the visitors’ boat was painting. I was
not coxswain then. The visitors’ boat was at the buoy, and went a picnic that afternoon—l
think it had gone before Mr. Pendrill left the island. The regular weekly duty of the boat
is, on Tuesday, to go for Dr. West, Visiting Surgeon ; Wednesday, the Visiting Magistrate;
Thursday, the Superintendent has the use of the Wat ; Friday, Visiting Surgeon again ;
Saturday and Sunday, the Clergymen ; Monday is a blank day, and is usually devoted to
clean the boat. I have occasionally taken Mr. Ormsby and Mr. Taylor into Sydney on
Monday. The visitors’ boat is not employed in taking people to the mainland—the guard-
boat does that. I have brought in presents of vegetables to Mr. M'Lerie and Mr. North.
I have brought beer in kegs for many people on the island; also wine and spirits
in cases for Mr. Ormsby, but not for any one else. The other boatmen are in the habit of
bringing parcels, and they might have contained spirits, but never to my knowledge—the
bundles were not examined at the wharf. I sold one turkey once for 7s. (id. I never go to
the mainland, nor does the visitors’ boat. Dear, and wine, and spirits were brought to the
island in Chandler’s (or the shop) boat for the free people. That boat brought other supplies.
I have seen the Inspector on the wharf when the boat was coming in, and also a sentry, but
the boat was never searched. Johnson’s boat brings the contract provisions. In addition
to the special duties I have detailed, the boat is frequently employed on other duties, for
instance, for clergyman or doctor at night. Mr. Ormsby does not always use the boat on
Thursday ; he has stayed three weeks at a time on the island. Mr. Taylor often goes on
official business to Sydney. I have taken vegetables to Mr. Ormsby's son, and left them at
Chandler’s. I have been the longest in the visitors’ boat of any boatmen employed here.
TUESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER, 1857.
Mr. Richard Thompson, formerly Reporter to the Sydney Muming Herald, called in
and examined:—
I visited the island of Cockatoo on the occasion of Sir C. Fitzroy laying the first
stone of the Dock; I was then entertained by Mr. Oimsby. I wrote one to the
Empire; that in the paper of the 6tli October, signed “ Third Witness,” was written by
me. I was on the island subsequently to the above period, for three days ; I was there by
leave ; I left on the third day. Mr Thomas advised me while there to bathe, and having
sent for the key of the bathing house to Mr. Ormsby, lie sent it by a prisoner to me ; I
afterwards declined to bathe, and Mr. Thomas asking the prisoner fur the key was refused
and abused, and told to go and be damned. I reported this to Mr. Ormsby, who said that
Mr. Thomas threatened to kick the man, which I said was false. Mr. Ormsby added—“that
“ fellow Thomas is always making a piece of work on the island; I have told you bis
“ character long ago; when you go to Sydney I shall be much obliged if you report it to
“ Captain M'Lerie.”
I took no further steps in the matter, and do not know what became of it. On
another occasion he spoke again to me disrespectfully and offensively of Mr. Thomas; I also,
during the three days I stayed on the island, noticed the insolent demeanor of the prisoners
towards Mr. Thomas, who said he had reported it again and again, but received no redress.
By the President; Have you anything further to add in support of the facts stated
in your letter, and are the facts which you have now stated those which induced you to
write —“ personally cognizant, as I have been for some years past, of the disgraceful state of
“ the penal island, and of the apathy and neglect which have rendered all reports of the
“ infamous proceedings there mere farces”? Yes, these are the facts which induced me to
write that passage; but I would add, since I commenced writing articles for Colonial and
Foreign Journals on the subject of the Dry Dock, Mr. Ormsby’s manner towards me has
changed Once he met me in the street and said —“ What in the name of God are you
“ writing such nonsense about the Dock for ? It will never be finished so long as these two
“ impostors, Captain Mann and Thomas, are on it.”
By the President: In your letter you write —“ I, whilst assuring you that the state-
“ ments set forth in the form of queries in the letter subscribed ' Another Witness,’ which
“ appears in this morning’s Empire, are not only true, hut that they do not include one
“ tithe of the enormities which have, for years past, rendered Cockatoo Island a worse hell
“ (if that be possible) than Norfolk Island ever was.” —How many of the statements of
“ Another Witness ” can you support of your own knowledge ? None ; I only knew them
from Mr. Thomas and Mr. Duff’s statements; and when stating “ I was personally cognizant
“ for years,” I had no other knowledge but that acquired from three days’ residence on the
island, and that communicated by others.
By the President: You ask in your letter—“ Was it not known to every officer and
“ convict on the prison side of Cockatoo Island, that the man whore death and the mysterious
“ circumstances attending it are alluded to in the letter of 'Another Witness,’ was brutally
“ murdered by a fellow convict in sight of other convicts ; that the then Coroner, Mr. J.
“ Ryan Brenan, opened the inquest and adjourned it, yet did not resume it; that the body
“of the murdered man was buried without further inquiry ; and that the alleged murderer
“ and


“ and the witnesses of the murder have since, by the expiration of their respective sentences,
“ been discharged from the island, and are now at large.” —Were you on the island at the
time the circumstance occurred ? I was not, nor did I see the evidence, nor the Coroner’s
. notes.
By the President: On what authority did you make that statement? I was aware
that the inquest was not resumed, and no verdict returned. Both Mr. Thomas and Mr. Duff
told me that very suspicious circumstances attended the case, and that the man who was
supposed to have thrown him down was discharged from the is’and, and that was the
authority on which I made that statement.
By the President: In your letter you write—“On the occasion of the sparring
“ match in the prison yard, alluded to by ‘ Another Witness,’ between two pugilists, each
“ under sentence for felony (Perry the black, and Patrick Sinclair,) w r ere there not, in
“ addition to Mr. Ormsby and his sons, a party of sporting men from Sydney, who visited
“ this penal island just as they would a public Fives Court, or a prize ring?” —I)o you
know such a state of things, of your own knowledge, to have taken place? No. My
statement respecting the sparring match is made from information received from Perry, the
black. Some few days ago he told me Mr. Ormsby had never been present at any sparring
match ; that there had been sparring matches on the island; and that these had been
witnessed by the officers of the guard and other gentlemen. Mr. Thomas was my authority
for the remainder of that statement.
By the President: Further on in your letter you write—“ Has not the son of the
“ Superintendent of Cockatoo Island, who so brutally assaulted Mr. Parkes, on Saturday
“ last—who holds a Government appointment in Sydney, but who sleeps at his father’s
“ quarters at Cockatoo Island—has he not, I say, for a long time past, been receiving lessons
“ in pugulism from the abovenamed convict pugilists, both under sentence for heavy crimes;
“ yet Perry being employed as cook, Sinclair as under-cook, so as to afford them time to give
“ their pugilistic lessons ? ” —Do you know these to be facts ? No ; I have been misinformed.
Perry told me it was not that, but another son who had taken lessons from him; my
informant had been Mr. Thomas. It was only the day before yesterday Perry set me to
right as to the facts. I had made the statements entirely on Mr. Thomas’ and Mr. Duffs
authority.
Captain H. 11. Browne, called in and examined :
I was Visiting Magistrate of. Cockatoo from 1848 to June, 1851. The general
discipline of the island during that period was, on the whole, good. When I first took
charge the means for coercing the prisoners were very bad—the means of reformation also;
a large number were crowded together in three dormitories; the overseers lived in temporary
huts, on the island; no officer was in chat'ge of the military guard; the number of overseers
was insufficient, and some had been prisoners; no lights were kept in the wards. On taking
charge the Government, at my request, appointed an officer of the guard, granted some
overseers, authorised erection of quarters for the overseers, also lighting the wards, and made
arrangements for perfect supervision of wards. I introduced muster and washing days. The
berths were subsequently divided, on the recommendation of Mr. E. Deas Thomson. I
found rules in operation, some of which were revised during my term of office. Ido not
recollect any rules laid down for silence being kept in wards —but singing in wards I should
have stopped had it been brought to my notice; my impression is, the men after being
locked up were allowed to work or read till 8 pm , and then to be silent.
[Mr. Palmer, short-hand writer, here entered and took evidence .]
1. What recreation was allowed during their leisure hours, after they were turned into the
camp ? There were no leisure hours, excepting Sundays and Saturday evenings.
2. And meal times ? During these hours there was no recreation that I am aware of;
during their leisure hours they were expected to wash and mend their clothes.
3. On Sundays ? On Suudavs they were expected to read, and to conduct themselves in an
orderly and quiet manner. The Chaplain visited them once on Sunday, and there were
overseers and constables—men who had some idea of religion—who used to read to the men.
I always visited the island one Sunday in every month, and mustered every person on
the island.
4. Will you tell mo in what manner the Superintendent himself obtained leave of absence ?
By communicating with me, and asking leave ; I generally referred his application to the
Government, for approval or refusal.
5. How often was that leave of absence obtained? I think he sent in a return once a
month, stating the days on which he wished to obtain leave of absence.
6. What number of days would he generally apply for in a month ? I think he took very
little leave during my time ; sometimes ho did not obtain leave more than two or three times
in a month.
7. Was the specific object of his asking for leave ever stated ? I think he has stated on one
or two occasions that he wanted to absent lrimself on Sunday evening, in order to go to
Church. I think, to the best of my recollection, that was stated on some occasions.
8. Were there any applications made by him for leave of absence to go on pleasure parties or
picnics ? I think not; but I never interfered with his object; I simply referred the matter
to the Government.
9. The applications for leave were sent to you, and forwarded by you to the Government for
their sanction ? Yes, it was sinctioned by Government.
10. What boats were on the island at that time ? The guard-boat was the only boat I
alowed on the island. I think the Superintendent had a small private boat when I first
took charge, but I pointed out to him that it was irregular, and he immediately got rid of it.
11.


11. During your time there was only one boat on the island, which was the guard-boat?
Only one ; I will not say the whole of the time, for I think when I first took charge of the
island the duty of taking the prisoners and the overseers to and fro was managed by the
Engineer’s boat. The island was formerly under the charge of the principal engineer 1
officer, and when Captain Morley took charge of the department, some correspondence took
place between him and the Government respecting the carrying on of the Dry Dock, and
Captain Morley decided upon having nothing more to do with it; and it was then placed
under the charge of Captain Mann. In consequence of this, all the other changes took place,
which brought the Water Police boat into operation as the means of communication with
the island. I think for some few months after I took charge of the island it used to be
visited by a boat manned by prisoners, or, at all events, part free and part prisoners. That
was not under my control, but under the control of the Boyal Engineers
12. B'/ Mr. Merewether : Was there any rule at the time you took charge forbidding any
other boats being kept at the island ? lam not sure whether there was any rule, but I
considered it to be irregular.
13. By the Chairman : If you ordered Mr. Ormsby to get rid of this boat, there must have
been some order prohibiting it, I presume ? In looking through the book I have here
(the letter book prodwed hi/ the witness ) I see that in some correspondence I had with the
Colonial Secretary I point out the necessity that there should be no other boat.
14. You believe that during your time no other boat was allowed on the island than the guard-
boat? Yes, and the Water Police boat, which I used to employ for communicating with
the islaud, either to take prisoners there or to bring them thence; or to take the Superin-
tendent to or from the island.
15. At present, we are informed, there are three boats —the guard-boat and two others,
attached to the island—that is since your time ? That is since my time ; there was only
one boat then, the guard-boat, which was locked up in the shed when not employed.
16. Are you aware whether any young gentlemen, members of Mr. Ormsby’s family, lived
upon the island at that time? Yes, but they were quite boys at that time ; they used to
come to Sydney and go back again.
17. Do you know whether there was any leave given for that? No ; I think, in his original
instructions, the Superintendent had permission to allow members of his family to go on
shore. If I remember rightly, his youngest boy was at school, and the second was in some
Government office. 1 think he was almost the only one that came backwards and forwards
to the island. The eldest son was a locker in the Customs, was married, and lived in Sydney.
18. Hi/ Mr. Merewether: Are you aware that by the regulations no one having daily
business in Sydney is permitted to reside on the island? I must say that I did not myself
interfere with this boy coming backward and forward. lie used to come to the North Shore
from the Balmain side of the island in the guard-boat.
19 B</ the Chairman : You saw no harm in that? I did not. I would not have prevented
the Superintendent sending his son to school.
20. With respect to spirits—did you ever give permission to any one to take spirits upon the
island, or wine, or beer ? In the regulations that were issued to the police, if I remember
rightly
21. Do not say if you remember rightly—you must remember rightly or not at all ? It is
not easy to go so far back, particularly ■as I have had no opportunity of refreshing my
memory upon t'ne>e matters ( The witness referred In his minute hnok.') I think there is a
rule hero respecting spirits On. the 12th February, 1850, in my letter to the Colonial
Secretary on the subject of some regulations that were submitted for my report by the Board
of Examination which had sat upon the island some short time previous, I see this memo-
randum, which applies, I think, to spirits as well as to everything else brought to the
island :—“ Civil officers not to be searched by the guard when the Superintendent or his
“ assistant is present” I say, “ I submit the following proposition, —that the civil officers
“ of the island and their families should not be searched by the guard when allowed to land
“or to leave the island if the Superintendent or his assistant are present at the time.” I
think that would naturally imply that they were liable to be searched if the police had any
suspicion.
22. Did you ever give any permission for spirits to be brought to the island —was any
application ever made to you for such permission ? I never interfered—Do you mean by
any civil officer ?
23. Yes? I never had any application made to me. I considered that the Superintendent
was responsible for the landing of any spirits.
24. Was any complaint ever made to you of spirits being improperly brought to the island ?
No, I never had a complaint of the kind made
25 By t-'aplain Wan!: You think the Superintendent generally tried to carry out the
regulations with respect to spirits being brought to the island ? I never had reason to doubt
it; I considered that it was a matter for the exercise of his discretion, and that he should
not prevent the families of the civil officers having what was necessary for their comfort,
but certainly not what might lead to breaches of discipline.
26 Hi Mr. Me-ewrth’-r: Will you read the latter part of the regulation referring to the
prohibition to free officers to bring spirits upon the island. (The witness read the regulation .)
Was such a rule as that in existence during your time ? Yes.
27. B;/ the Chairman : Were you ever applied to to relax that rule ? No.
28. Did you ever relax it ? Never.
29. Was the circumstance ever brought to your knowledge that the engineers, or any person
in their employment, were bringing spirits in undue quantities to the island? No. When
I was Visiting Magistrate there were very few engineer officers there; that was at a later
date.
*l7—2 E 30.


30. Was any circumstance ever brought to your knowledge with reference to the refuse
rations—the homminy ? I gave instructions during the time I was Visiting Magistrate that
all the refuse homminy should be destroyed.
31. In what manner ? It was usually thrown away into the water on the north side of the
island at the back of the kitchen. I did this, because I conceived that it might open the
door to charges being brought of frauds committed on the prisoners, if the homminy were not
destroyed.
32. Was there any complaint of such a tiling having occurred ? No; but sometimes there is
a great difficulty in boiling homminy ; sometimes it will be so bad that the prisoners cannot
eat it, and therefore, to prevent the slightest chance of any prisoner being able to say that it
was boiled badly for the purpose of being handed over to the free officers to feed pigs and
poultry, I directed, that if it were bad, it was to be thrown away; thus, if it were bad, and
the prisoners lost their breakfasts, nobody else would gain any benefit by it.
33. At what time did you give that order? Somewhere about 1850—-about the time
I directed the pigs to be removed from the island. Formerly, pigs were kept on the island,
and poultry in large quantities, and about 1850 I directed all the pigs to be removed, and
the number of poultry to be kept by each officer to be limited; the Superintendent was
included in this order.
34. Was that order obeyed, do you think, during the time you were Visiting Magistrate ?
I have no reason to suppose it was not.
35. Were any complaints made during that time by the prisoners that their rations were
wrongly appropriated ? I never had an actual complaint that the rations were wrongly
appropriated; but it appeared to me to be a proper precaution to prevent the possibility of
such a thing, and, I think, it met the views of the Superintendent.
36. Under whose orders where the police during your time ? I generally appointed them,
but.they were under the Superintendent’s orders; there were only about five or six during
my time; seven, I think, was the utmost number.
37. During your time were there any deaths among the prisoners on the island? A great
number from various causes.
38. Were inquests always held upon those persons who died? No, only in those cases
where they met with violent deaths.
39. You are aware that the English rule of law is that an inquest shall be held on every
prisoner who dies in prison ? Yes, but I understood that that applied only to gaols, and that
was not applicable to other penal establishments.
40. Was it during your time that a man died from falling, or being thrown, into the dock?
No, I think not.
41. You were a member of the classification Board, I believe? lam still a member.
42. What is the course pursued with reference to a prisoner when he goes to the island—of
what docs the classification consist ? In the first place, there is a perfect record obtained
of the previous career of the prisoner.
43. How do you classify the prisoners—according to their crimes, or according to their
characters? The classification proceeds according to a rule approved by the Executive
Council, the 19th December, 1848.
44. Upon prisoners going to the island they are classified under those rules ? Yes.
45. Was their classification ever changed in consequence of anything on the island ? Con-
tinually, for misconduct, which was reported to me at the end of every month by the task-
work clerk, and, according to the nature of the offences of which they were convicted, they
were reduced in their classes.
46. Were they promoted to higher classes for good conduct ? They were promoted for good
conduct.
47. Upon what data were they promoted for good conduct ? Their promotion for good
conduct depended very much upon the representation of the Superintendent; the overseers
came more particularly under his notice than the men in gangs, but the latter were recom-
mended cither by the overseers of gangs or the task-work clerk, who recorded the amount of
work they had done.
48. It was upon the report of the Superintendent that indulgence was given in that par-
ticular? Yes.
49 Do you recollect the circumstance of a prisoner named Fox not being released from the
island ? I cannot charge my memory with that.
50. Was it in your time or not ? Ido not remember it.
51. By Captain Ward: At what time were the prisoners generally locked up in the
evening ? Immediately after their supper.
52 I refer to their being put inside the square ? There was no square at the time I took
charge of the island ; it was merely an open hollow square, without the slightest protection
from the prisoners who were allowed to roam all over the island.
53. By Mr Merewether : The men were mustered from work at what hour ? I have fre-
quently seen them marched up from their work to supper, and immediately after they had
their suppers marched off to the wards.
54. By Captain Ward: After the hours of business, what were the legitimate hours for
recreation ? I should not say there was any recreation.
55. Was there not some time between the period of their knocking off work and of going
to bed, or being locked up in the wards ? Yes.
56. This was their time of leisure—had they any recreation then, or how did they spend
their time ? They roamed about the square, smoked their pipes, and talked together. After
dinner they were allowed to smoke, between the time of finishing their dinners and of being
returned to their gangs.
57. During these hours of leisure would you have objected to the prisoners taking recreation
in such a way as playing at leap-frog ? Yes.
58.


58. By Mr Merewether: You would have objected to their sparring? I should, decidedly.
59. By Captain Ward : When I ask you whether you would have objected to their taking
recreation, I mean, of course, provided it were orderly ? I think a prison is not the place
for recreation. I should not have advised it to be permitted. I cannot say that it did not
take place, but it was never brought under my notice ; if it had been I should have objected
to it.
60. There were no regulations at the time to forbid orderly amusements? Ido not know
that there 'were j but I imagine that the allowing amusements would have been a matter for
the exercise of my discretion, and if Mr. Ormsby and myself had disagreed with reference to
it, I should have referred it the Government. I say it might have taken place, but it was
never reported to me by the Superintendent.
61. There were no regulations at the time to forbid orderly recreations ? No there were not,
I believe.
62. By Mr. Merewether : Do you think that kind of recreation compatible with prison dis-
cipline ? I think not.
68. By Captain Ward: Did you, at any time while you were Visiting Magistrate of the
island, notice any scenes which would indicate that spirits had obtained free access to the
island; for instance, were the prisoners over found drunk ? Yes, there was one case, if not
two cases, of the kind, where the question arose respecting- spirits; but it was, if I recollect
rightly, after the appointment of police on the island, and at that time, in organising the
police, wo had some difficulty in getting decent men. One or two of the police were, in the
first instance, discharged for drunkenness. I think, upon reflection, only one case was
brought to my knowledge where spirits had been brought to the island through one of the
police. A servant appointed to attend upon the police was found tipsy. I think that is the
only case that came to my knowledge, but I have heard it rumored that spirits were left on
the island at night. Ido not, however, know 7 that as a fact.
64. In this particular case, had you any reason to suppose that the spirits were brought to
the island through any negligence on the part of the Superintendent —did ho exercise due
vigilance to prevent it ? No ; the Superintendent could not be always at the wharf, and at
that time, I think, I acquitted the Superintendent and dismissed the constable, who was the
man on guard. I think the spirits were brought by some of his friends in the boat. I did
not blame the Superintendent.
65. You say that during your government you ordered that no private boat should be left on
the island? Yes.
66. Then how was it supposed that the Superintendent would get to Sydney and back to the
island on his own private business ? He informed me by letter on what days he wished to
go to Sydney, and as I usually visited the island twice a week, he used to say, I should like
the boat to be at the island at eleven o’clock, twelve o’clock, or any other time, and I
took care that the boat should be sent for him. It was sufficiently large to take himself and
family, and he was allowed to use it.
67. Was he allowed to have this boat by the Government on his own private business, according
to your understanding ? No, I did not allow him to have the boat for his private business;
he applied for permission to leave the island, and I sent the boat to bring him to Sydney, and
to take him back.
68. Did he apply for it on official business ? He only applied to be allowed to leave the
island on certain days, and on those days I gave him the means of coming to Sydney and
of returning to the island.
69. If he had applied to come to Sydney on his private business would you have allowed
him to have had the boat —is the Superintendent authorised to employ the boat one day of
the week upon his private business ? During the time I was Visiting Magistrate there was
no boat attached to the island absolutely; but ********
and with that I manned a four oared boat, and that boat was, to all intents and purposes, a
Water Police boat. It used to go armed with carbines, cutlasses, and everything in the
same way as a boat employed by the police. That boat went for the Superintendent, took
prisoners to, or brought them from the island, and only went and came as directed by me.
70. Do you consider that the Superintendent after being allowed any boat on the
island was authorised to use that boat, if he got leave one day of the week upon his private
business —I want to know if when he wanted to go to Sydney on his private business he was
allowed to use the boat ? Yes; he went to Sydney on his private business. When he
obtained leave he might do what he liked till he came back again.
71. When he applied to you, and informed you that he wished to leave the island, the boat
went for him and took him back to the island at what hours he liked ? Yes.
72. Even if he went on his own private business? Yes.
73. By Mr. Merewether : But it was not at his disposal all the time ? No. I know Mr.
Ormsby complained very much; he thought it a very great hardship to be so completely shut
up in an island of that kind without having a boat at his control whenever he thought
proper.
74. By the Chairman : Did you ever authorise Mr. Ormsby to take the boat for pleasure
parties or picnics ? He never asked me for it.
75. And you never authorised him to employ it for such purposes? lam sure I never
authorised it.
76. I'lf Captain Ward: Have you ever known the Superintendent to confine prisoners for
misconduct, and to release them again upon his own responsibility, without bringing them
before the Visiting Magistrate ? I dare say there might have been one or two cases of the
kind, but it was not a general principle.
77. Was such a complaint ever brought before you by any of the prisoners or subordinate
officers ? I do not think ho ever did so ; when he considered it necessary to confine a
prisoner he never released him till I came to the island; if he then begged him off, in con-
sequence
Capt. H. H.
Browne-
-37 Nov., 1857.


sequence of his previous conduct on the island, which might have been the case, I might
have acceded to his request, but I do not think he went so far as to release prisoners without
bringing them before me.
78. The case was handed over by him to you to be adjudicated upon ? Ye 3.
79. You spoke of the reformation of prisoners—was there any power in the clergyman to
have a prisoner kept off work for the purpose of mental improvement, for reading, writing,
or other similar occupation ? One of the prisoners, I think, acted as clerk to the clergyman
who visited the island, and he had some exemption from duty, in order that he might attend
in the hospital and read to some of the prisoners who were sick.
80. Generally, is the clergyman allowed any discretion to recommend prisoners to be kept
off the works ? No ; Ido not think it was done in my time.
81. Ih/ Mr. Merewrthey : Do you consider it absolutely necessary, from the experience gained
by you during the time you were on the island, that there should be a boat attached to the
island, what you call a visitors’ boat —that there should be any such communication estab-
lished ? My impression on that point is, that it is very advisable there should not be a
boat. I have had many conversations with Mr. Ormsby upon the subject, and I believe he
agreed with me frequently in the views I advocated, that the less the means of communica-
tion with the prisoners the better. There were police on the island who were attached to
the boat, and, as we know the class of people to which many of the police belong, it was not
unlikely that they would be the means of communicating between the prisoners and their
friends in Sydney. In order to guard against any evil from this cause, while I was Visiting
Magistrate I would not allow the Water Police to land upon the island, or to mix with the
island police. As soon as I landed they were sent off the island to the buoy.
82. Was there any complaint of inconvenience from the officers as to the want of a boat?
Yes, they all thought it very hard that they should be placed at such a distance from Sydney,
and be obliged to depend upon me for the means of communication. I agreed that it was a
hardship, but I believed that the public service was benefited by the arrangement. I know
Mr. Ormsby complained of it very much.
83. You think, for the convenience of the officers, it is desirable that a boat should be
attached to the island, but that for the public service it is objectionable ? Yes.
84. What is your general opinion of the mode in which Mr. Ormsby carried on the manage-
ment of the island ? As far as I saw, during the long period that I was Visiting Magistrate,
although we might have differed upon some points, he generally performed his duty in a very
satisfactory way. We were always upon the very best terms, although we were, on duty, as
distant as if we had never known each other; and when I felt it to be my duty to complain,
I did complain, and I found that Mr. Ormsby attended to my directions.
85. You were generally satisfied with Mr. Ormsby’s management of the island during the
time you were there ? Yes. I think he had a very difficult task to perform; and with the
means and appliances at his command when he first went there, I think it redounds much
to his credit that he was able to keep the people in the order he did.
John M'Lerie, J.P., was called in and examined, as follows :
1. By the Chairman : You are the Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo Island? I was.
2. You succeeded Captain Browne? Yes; I succeeded him in June, 1851.
3. 1 1 what state did you find the island in point of discipline ? Very good.
'4. What was the conduct of the prisoners? Very good, generally; there were exceptions
occasionally.
5. Did you know of the existence of the rule established by Captain Browne for the destruc-
tion of refuse rations —that is to say, the sweepings, or what was left by the men after
breakfast or dinner—are you aware that there was in existence any rule for throwing away
the refuse ? I cannot, at this moment, recollect. I know that when I had charge of the
gaol at Darlinghurst 1 had a rule to that effect.
6. Are you aware that this refuse homminy was disposed of in any particular manner ? I
am not aware.
7. You do not know what became of it ? Ido not recollect that the matter was ever brought
under my notice in any way. \The minute lonic was produced ]
8. Hi/ Mr Merew ether: Did you ever see this minute book —it was opened by Captain
Browne about the time he took charge ? I never read this minute book. I kept one myself;
or, rather, carried on this from the time I took charge.
9. You were not aware of the entry at the foot of the page, which directs that the refuse
homminy shall be thrown away ? No, Ido not recollect ever seeing that before.
10. By the < hnirman : Perhaps you can charge your memory with this—whether you
authorised any other disposition of it? Not to my knowledge.
11. Did you ever order it to he distributed among the free overseers for their stock ? If I
did it will be found in my minute book; all my orders were entered there.
12. What were the rules with reference to the conduct of prisoners in their wards—were
there any rules in existence in your time with reference to that ? You mean after being
locked up ?
13. After being locked up ? Yes, there were rules, and I think I made some change in
them t at I thought might be an improvement. I employed wardsmen under the free over-
seers outside, who were responsible for the conduct of the prisoners.
14. Was there anything like singing in the dormitories ? After being locked up they were
allowed to talk, but not after a certain hour.
]5, What was that hour? Bight o’clock, I think.
16.


16. Were there any rules as to their conduct, during work, as to silence ? The silent system
was not enforced, hut no improper language was allowed.
17. During their leisure hours was any recreation allowed ? When I first took charge of
the island they were allowed to make cabbage-tree hats in their spare hours.
18. By Mr. Merewether: Will you explain what you mean by their spare time? When
not employed on the public works under the engineer.
19. What were the hours? The hours varied according to the season of the year.
20. By the Chairman : During some portion of their meal hours did they make cabbage-tree
hats? Yes, at any time when they were not employed otherwise.
21. After being locked up ? Yes.
22. Before eight o’clock ? Yes ; before the hours fixed for silence.
23. They -were allowed to make straw or cabbage-trca hats at these times? Yes, at that
period
24. How long did that continue ? I think it was discontinued in 1853.
25. On account of some objections having been made to it? Yes.
26. Were these objections which you yourself entertained? Fes; I was very glad when the
Government did away with it.
27. You thought it open to abuse ? Yes.
28. Were recreations, such as singing, dancing, leap-frog, allowed during the time they were
not employed on the public works? Innocent amusements of such a kind as leap-frog, so
long as the amusements were not too boisterous, or offensive, or likely to lead to a breach of
discipline.
29. You considered that allowable ? Yes.
30. On Sundays would the same recreations have been allowed ? Xot on Sundays, certainly.
31. In what manner did the Superintendent obtain leave of absence when he required it?
On the first of every month an application was made to me from the Superintendent, which
application I forwarded to the Governor General for his approval. In this application the
Superintendent mentioned the days on which he wished to leave the island, and as, from
various causes, principally on account of the public service, it was not sometimes convenient
for the Superintendent to leave the island on the days allowed by the Governor,*l found it
necessary, shortly after I took charge, to add the words, “ and if any of the days so named
“ should bo found inconvenient on account of the public service, such other days in lieu
“ thereof as may be approved by the Visiting Magistrate.”
32. And, except with that permission, the Superintendent could not leave the island ? No.
33. In what manner did he avail himself of the permission—when he did leave how did ho
get to Sydney and back again to the island ? He was allowed to make use of one of the
boats, one of the guard-boats.
34. Was that a boat sent for him ? No; all the boats belonging to the island remained
there.
35. What boats were then allowed ? The guard-boat. The visitors’ boat, although not
unserviceable, required extensive repair, and I applied to the Government for anew boat,
which was given. After the other boat was repaired, it was retained as a supernumerary
boat, in case of any accident to either of the others.
36. So that there arc two visitors’ boats in fact ? There was one before, but it was an occa-
sional boat.
37. By Mr. Merewether : Was the visitors’ boat established on your taking charge ?In
Captain Browne’s time the visitors’ boat was part of the Water Police establishment, and
Captain Browne had two additional men allowed him for the purpose of that boat.
38. Was that arrangement radically changed when you took charge ? Yes; there were four
men placed in the boat as a crew.
39. Bi/ the Chairman : Thenceforward that boat was called the visitors’ boat ? Tes.
40. The other boat was called the old boat, and the third the guard-boat ? Yes. Sometimes
the old boat was required on Sundays, as one of the clergymen lived on the North Shore
and the other in Sydney, and two boats were sometimes employed.
41. Was this old boat that was unserviceable, and afterwards repaired, the old police boat?
Yes.
42. Then, in one of these boats the Superintendent would come to Sydney when ho had
leave ? Yes.
43. With respect to spirits —was there any restriction as to bringing spirits to the island ?
There were orders against it; but I found after the number of civil officers increased, and
people connected with the Engineer’s Department, that it was a restriction they would not
assent to. There was a Board appointed, and the rule was modified.
44. Then there was a rule in existence against bringing spirits to the island ? Yes; but
when the number of free officers connected with the Engineer’s Department increased on the
island, they would not submit to the restrictions imposed by these regulations. There was
a modification of the rule made by a Board appointed, of which two of the gentlemen now
present were members.
45. Do you remember receiving a letter from Mr. Orrnsby, of which this is a copy ? (77ic
copy of a letter was handed to the witness, and teas read as follows ) :
“ Cockatoo Island, 19 September, 1853.
“ Sir, —I have the honor to enclose you two reports made to me by Acting Inspector
“ Finnucane, relative to the conduct of the free mechanics employed under the Civil Engineer,
“ by which you will perceive that they are not under any control, and presume to commit
" themselves in a manner that persons dare not do in Sydney. From the repeated misconduct
“ of these men, and no notice whatever having been taken of it, I am half inclined to think that
“ the Government do not wish to have them interfered with; had it not been that the wives
* 17—F "of


“ of the Messrs. Hodgekiss were with them, and the hour so late, I certainly would not have
“ allowed them to land.
“ Mr. Warwick was, also, I am informed, in a state of drunkenness yesterday, walking
“ about the island. The noise and bad language made use of by Mr. Hodgekiss was disgraceful,
“ and ought not to be tolerated at a penal settlement. I trust you will at once take measures
“ to prevent a repetition of such conduct; for, if persisted in, and an example is not made of
“ some person, all control, not only of the free officers of the island but also of the prisoners,
“ will be lost. This is the same man who was connected with the wheat transaction. I think
“ that Mr. Mann ought to send his boat on Saturdays and Sundays for the accommodation of
“ those men, as our boat is constantly employed by them on these days.
“ I have, &c.,
“ CHARLES ORMSBY,
“ Jno. M'Lcrie, Esq., J.P., “ Superintendent.
“ Visiting Magistrate.”
Yes, I received a good many communications of this kind with reference to the conduct of
these people who arrived on the island.
46. Then, in fact, Mr. Ormsby did represent to you that irregularities occurred? Yes, and
I brought it under the notice of Government, and in consequence of similar representations
the Board was appointed, and the modifications were made.
47. Did any one ever ask you for permission to land spirits—l mean the free overseers. You
are aware that by one of the regulations of tiie Government no spirits can bo landed without
permission of the Visiting Magistrate —were you ever asked for permission ? I think
there is an exception ; I never had such an application from a subordinate officer.
48. Do you know whether spirits were brought to the island without such permission? I
cannot say.
49. Was it ever reported to you that spirits were unduly imported to the island ? I think I
recollect on one occasion some report having been brought to me that a bottle of wine had
been found in possession of one of the police. Mr. Ormsby informed me of it, and said the
man was «nwell, and I told the Inspector not to take notice of it, as it might he looked upon
as medicine.
50. Was there any complaint that spirits were brought freely to the island ? There were
no complaints hut I was convinced that spirits were brought, as on one or two occasions I
had to punis prisoners for being drunk.
51. Therefore you were satisfied that spirits got to them ? Yes. There is one thing I ought
to mention in justice to the authorities —the officers of the island. We found on one occasion
spirits in a “ plant,” as it is called. After the prisoners are recalled to their barracks, the
sentries arc withdrawn from the shores of the island, which are thus left unprotected, and
boats can land ; spirits may then be planted among the rocks in positions with which, by
preconcerted signals, the prisoners may he made acquainted.
52. By Mr. Merewether: By what means ? By people coming over in the boats. After
the evening the sentries are drawn around the prison, and the shores are all exposed; and I
have no doubt that other prohibited articles, besides spirits, are left in the same way.
53. By Captain. Ward: Can you suggest any means of stopping such things in future ?
Nothing hut a cordon of sentries, and that would be rather expensive.
54. By the Chairman : You think that the prisoners need not resort to the boats which visit
the island during the day for the moans of conveying spirits to them, so long as their friends
could have access to the island by night and conceal them where they would he able to get
them when they wanted ? No. Of course the officers are always on the look out for such
things, hut on such an extensive island it is easy to elude their vigilance.
55. By Mr. Merewether : Are not all the prisoners concentrated on one part of the island
for work ? No ; they are all round the island.
56. So far as my observation has served me when I have been on the island, they have all
been concentrated upon one point ? There are nearly a hundred prisoners who are not on
the works, who are variously employed as servants to the officers, cooks, and sentries.
57. But outside of all of them there is a cordon of sentries ? These are called in at night.
58. You do not appear to see the point of my question. If there is a cordon of sentries in
the day, these men can have no access to the shore, as if they break the line the sentries are at
liberty to shoot them ? But they do not break the line. When the prisoners are withdrawn
the sentries are drawn round the prison, therefore the shores are left exposed ; by previous
arrangement parties come to the island at night and plant the spirits, which the prisoners
take the next day.
59 By the Chairman: How could they go to get them the next day? Supposing a
prisoner to he leaving the island to-day and coming to Sydney as a free man, he might make
an arrangement with his previous comrades to plant spirits in a certain place.
60. In what manner would the prisoner get down to the place ? It would be left in such a
way that the prisoner would have access to it.
61. But, as Mr. Merewether said, he would have to break the line of the sentries to get to
it ? Suppose two men are working at a certain stone and one of them is to he set free
to-morrow, he says to his comrade, “If you look under this stone the day after to-morrow
•“ you will find something.” The man would then deposit it in the place agreed upon inside
the lines. One of the reasons of my looking upon Cockatoo Island as an objectionable place
for a penal establishment was that it was so near Sydney; and, therefore, so easy of access by
fhe companions of the prisoners.
62. Are you of opinion that it is next to impossible to prevent spirits being conveyed, to
Cockatoo by that mode ? Yes; the only limit being the want of means on the part of the
prisoners to purchase them.
63. The police of the island are, I believe, under your orders ? They were.
64.


64. Did they ever complain to you of spirits being brought to the island in the island boats?
I do not remember.
65. Are you aware whether the police did their duty in searching the boats? They had
their orders. There was a complaint made by Mr. Ormsby —something about a package of
bis being searched for spirits; that was about the time that the rules, as applicable to the
Engineer’s Department, were modified.
66. Are you aware of the fact whether the boats were searched or not ? I cannot be aware
of the fact.
67. Are you aware whether the police had or had not a copy of the regulations ? They had
a copy of the regulations.
68. Of the new regulations? The old regulations were in the book, and every officer had
them read to him before he was sworn in.
69. They were the old regulations ? There was no change in the police regulations.
70. Was there not this important difference in the two regulations, that the police were
under the Superintendent in the old regulations and under the Visiting Magistrate in the
new —will you read that? (A copy of the regulations was handed to the witness.') I see
that, but they were under me before.
71. But they appear to be under Mr. Ormsby in the old regulations ? Yes; he had a
certain control on the island, but I did not assume any more authority after the new regula-
tions than I did before.
72. Had they a copy of these regulations with the alteration to which your attention has
been directed —do y 7 ou remember one of the policemen applying to you for a copy of the
regulations and being refused —Constable Scott, for instance ? Ido not think it likely any
constable ever applied to me for a copy of the regulations.
73. Did you ever make such an answer as this, upon an application being made to youforthe
regulations —“ Your instructions are that you are to obey 7 the orders of your superior officer” ?
Yes, Ido remember the circumstance now. At the time these regulations came out the rules
for the police, as drawn up, -were not applicable to the body as it then existed, but to a
smaller number; the rule as to posting sentries did not apply. I had intended to bring this
matter under the notice of the Government, and to have the rule changed, and before I did
so, I remember the Inspector asking for the rule, and I said, “for the present obey the orders
“ you receive.” But these rules, with that exception, ought to have been in the possession
of the police, and I am not aware that they were not.
74. By Mr. Merewcthcr : It is the fact that a change was wade in the rule that refers to the
management of the police, and that the name of the Superintendent was scratched out and
that of the Visiting Magistrate inserted ? That did not affect my responsibility in the least.
75. But did it not render it necessary that the rules should be placed in the hands of the
police ?
76. By the Chairman: All we want to know is whether an application was made to you by
the policeman for a copy, and whether you declined to give it him? I did not decline; I
remember giving him the answer I have just been reminded of. I intended to have brought
this point under the notice of the Government, and when I was applied to by the Inspector,
I said, “ for the present obey the orders you receive.”
77. Did any deaths occur on the island while you were Police Magistrate ? Frequently.
,78. Were inquests always held upon them ? Yes.
79. According to your recollection ? Yes.
80. By Captain Ward: This same Constable Scott applied to Mr. Ormsby for the regulations,
and he declined to give them—was it under your authority he declined to give them or not ?
I do not know whether he heard what passed.
81. You declined to give them because they were not perfect in certain details—was Mr.
Ormsby cognizant of that ? I remember having a conversation with Mr. Ormsby as to the
change necessary to meet the altered number of the police.
82. Had Mr. Ormsby any authority, direct or indirect, to refuse these regulations until
they were altered ? Not to refuse them.
83. When Inspector Dunning applied for them, do you think Mr. Ormsby ought to have
given them to the police ? He was perfectly aware that I was about to apply to the Govern-
ment to make the alteration in the rule.
84. By the Chairman: But you never did obtain that alteration? No; I left the island
about that time to obtain my present appointment.
85. You gave no authority 7 to Mr. Ormsby to refuse him; if the Inspector were refused it
was not by y 7 our authority ? No, not by my authority.
Bt>. You never gave the Inspector a copy of the regulations ? No.
87. Then the Inspector was left without the new regulations ? Yes; for the reason I have
stated.
88. Do you remember the death of a man named Dunmore ? Not by name.
89. He was a young man who died in the hospital of inflammation of the lungs; a memo-
rial was drawn up and signed by some of the prisoners charging the dispenser with having
sent him to the exempt ground and thereby exaggerated disease ; that he was taken to the
hospital and died two or three days after ? If such a charge were made against the dispenser,
I have no doubt I handed it over to the Visiting Surgeon.
90. It was in March, 1856—were you Visiting Magistrate then? Yes; but I do not
remember the circumstance.
91. Do you remember a person on the island named Merewether ? Yes.
92. Can you tell us what sort of a character he was ? On the island he was a man who
gave me some trouble, and I was obliged to punish him for a breach of the regulations.
93 In what respect? He was a good penman, and a short time after he had been on the
island I appointed him assistant to the task-work clerk, where he was not mixed up with
the other prisoners, and I found that he had been encouraged by the wife of an officer then
on


on the island to go. to her house and write letters, which she or her servants conveyed to
the town, which was a breach of the regulations.
94. What officer was that ? Lieutenant Davis, of the 11th.
95. Was there anything else against this man ? Well, there was a suspicion which,
perhaps, I should not mention, of impropriety of conduct in another way—there were
grounds of suspicion.
96. In consequence of these grounds of suspicion, what did you do? I sent him back to
labor with the other prisoners.
97. It was not a suspicion of such a nature as to induce you to confine him separately ?
No; it did not amount to that.
98. Do you remember a prisoner of the name of Groom on the island ? Ido not remember
him at all. I may also mention that Merewether was a man of a superior class to the
prisoners generally, and was a kind of leader in all sorts of complaints.
99. Do you remember his being at the head of a deputation about a man who was said to
have been ill-used by the dispenser ? Yes; I remember, on one occasion, Merewether did
come with another man to the office.
100. Do you remember that occasion, and whether you inquired into the circumstance
complained of or not ? If I knew the date I would refer to my minute book—to the best
of my recollection I referred the matter to the Visiting Surgeon. (77ie witnexs referred to
Tiis minute book.) Here is the entry, the loth April—-“ George Stokes, Joseph Murphy,
“John Merewether, Henry Snelgrove, Charles Skerritt, and John Clarke, were admonished
“ for making certain statements against the dispenser, Mr. Peers, which, upon investigation,
“ turned out to be without foundation.”
101. Generally, as to the management of the island, were you satisfied with the discipline
of Mr. Ormsby ? Yes, generally.
102. Do you think he was a man who carried the regulations of the island generally into
effect ? Yes.
103. Was he firm in the discharge of his duty or pusillanimous ? I always considered him
firm; that was a quality which I considered he possessed in an eminent degree.
104. Was his treatment of the prisoners kind and humane or the contrary ? If I had any
fault to find with him, it was that he was almost too humane.
105. His system was rather of the mild than of the severe order ? Yes.
106. Have you any fault to find with his system as being unreasonably mild, or was he given
to favoritism or partiality ? No.
107. Was there any such, charge against him during your time? In an establishment of
that kind, where there are berths, as they are called, to be given, it was almost impossible to
avoid the charge of partiality. I made the appointment, as A r isiting Magistrate, but the
prisoners were under the impression that the men appointed were recommended by Mr.
Ormsby.
108. Have you had complaints of partiality made ? I have had complaints.
109. If any complaints were made, did you inquire into them ? I satisfied myself by
referring to the previous history of the parties, and their conduct on the island.
110. Were you satisfied that Mr. Ormsby had acted rightly ? Yes; there may have been
occasions where I have found fault with Mr. Ormsby.
111. Are you aware whether persons have ever slept upon the island /who did not belong to
it, with or without the permission ? Not without it.
112. Were you in the habit of giving permission occasionally ? The only instances where
I deparated from the rules were, when the wives of free officers have been confined, and have
required nurses; in such cases I have given permission to their relatives, or other persons, to
come to the island to nurse.
113. Are you aware whether the regulations were carried into effect with reference to the
number of fowls, and other animals, allowed to be kept on the island by the Superintendent
and officers ? I was aware that a regulation did exist as to the number to be kept. I have
asked Mr. Onnsby whether the number was exceeded, and he has replied that it was not.
114. You knew nothing upon that subject yourself? I never counted the poultry, but Mr.
Ormsby told me that the regulation was carried out.
115. Do you know what became of the poultry, or any part of it—it has been suggested to
the Board that you have had a present now and then ? I had a present once. Mr. Ormsby
had a very handsome description of Cochin China fowls some few years ago, and was kind
enough to send .me one of each sex on one occasion.
116. And a turkey upon another? I do not recollect—it may have been the case, but it
mut have been a long while ago. I recollect Mr. Ormsby requesting me to accept a cock
and hen of the Cochin China breed, which was then so much in request.
117. I put .these questions at the request of Mr. Ormsby. Do you remember the circum-
stance of Mr. Ormsby asking leave for the boat to go a-fisliing ? I do.
118. One more than one occasion ? Yes. Mr. Ormsby said the policemen had, in their
leisure hours, made a net, and he asked me would I have any objection to their fishing in
the bay in one of the spare boats. I gave him that permission when the police were not
on duty.
119. More than once? More than once.
120. Do you know the circumstance of young Mr. Ormsby living on the island ? Mr.
Ormsby was Clerk of the Bench at Wollombi, and the Government at that period gave him
an appointment at the Treasury in lieu of it; and Mr Ormsby said, as his son was in a
Government office, and living in Sydney, he should be glad if he could be permitted to live
upon the island. I spoke to the late Governor, Sir Charles Fitz Roy, upon the subject, and
he gave permission.
121. Are you aware that two of his sons lived upon the island? Yes; that was with the
permission of Sir Charles lutz Roy.
122.


122. Are you aware that they kept a boat ? Yes; that was mentioned also. On one occasion,
coming from the island with Bir Charles Fitz Roy, we met his sons in their boat.
123. Was that under the sanction of Sir Charles Fitz Roy? Yes.
124. Are you not of opinion that the keeping of boats at the island was subject to great
abuse ? It was perfectly understood by Mr. Ormsby that if it were found to lead to any
abuse it -would be immediately stopped; but Ido not believe it was ever abused.
125. He was informed of that ? Yes.
1“26. And the young men were also informed ? Yes.
127. You have no reason to suppose that it was abused at all ? I have no reason.
128. By Captain Ward: With respect to the days when Mr. Ormsby had the use of the-
visitors’ boat to come to Sydney, was he allowed to have the use of it for the whole day ?
There was no rule with regard to the visitors’ boat; but it was perfectly understood that when
the boat was not required for the purpose for which it was granted it was at the service of
Mr. Ormsby.
129. When he applied for the boat for a certain day, -was it left at his disposal for the whole
of that day ? Provided it did not interfere with any public duty.
HO. By Mr. Mireiteilur : That was your regulation ? There was no regulation.
1 £l. By Captain Ward: Captain Browne kept it as his own boat ? Yes; he was the executive
officer of the Water Police, and required it himself; I did not require it for any purpose.
132. We are told that up to eight o’clock singing was allowed in the wards— can you justify
that ? I have already answered that question—that I did not discourage innocent amusement;
and so long as there was nothing offensive or disgusting in the song, I should not have
objected. 1 was anxious to introduce reading among them during their leisure hours.
133. B'j Mr. Merero. ihtr : Singing and reading are two very different things—do you think
amusement of that kind should have been allowed ? 1 have said I should not have objected
to it if the songs were not of an offensive character.
134. Hy Captain Ward: We are told that presents of clothing have been sent to the
prisoners—was that during your time ? Whenever an application was made to me by the
friends of prisoners to be allowed to send under-clothing for the winter I permitted them to
do so ; but I allowed no article to be worn that changed their external appearance.
135. Small articles, as neck-ties ? I have allowed woollen comforters, mufflers, worsted socks,
and drawers; but I have never allowed any change in the outer garb of the prisoners.
136. Ido not think you have stated how long you were Yisiting Magistrate of Cockatoo ? I
was -appointed in June 1851, and I ceased on my appointment to my q>resent office, in
October 1856.
137. I want to get some sort of opinion from you with respect to the regulations being
refused by Mr. Ormsby to Inspector Dunning, whether he was aware of your having first
refused the regulations, and of the grounds of that refusal ? I cannot answer that question.
When I was asked hy Dunning for the regulations I cannot say whether Mr. Ormsby was
within hearing or not.
138. Do you consider that Mr. Ormsby ought to have given these rules to Mr. Dunning
when he required them ? I can see no reason why Mr. Ormsby should not have given them,
subject to the alterations I have referred to.
139. By Mr. Mtrewether : I should like to thoroughly understand under whose control the
visitors’ boat -was —was it under yours or Mr. Ormsby’s ? It could not be under my control,
for I never saw it, except on the days that I visited the island.
140. Then, am Ito understand that under your administration he had the entire control over
it, except when employed to fetch yourself, the Yisiting Surgeon, or the clergymen ? Yes.
141. You left it under his control? Yes; I could not have the control when I was in
Sydney. To shew that I did not look upon it as a boat exclusively for the officers for whom
it was purchased, there is a memorandum, in my writing, to the effect that on all occasions
when there was a spare seat in the boat any free officer going to or coming from tbe
island should have the use of it. It was a boat- for the use of the free officers of the island,
as well as for visitors.
142. Was that the object for which it was voted ? It was for the conveyance of the visiting
officers who did not reside on the island.
3 43. Then you thought you did not depart from the rule by extending its use to the free
officers on the island ? Certainly.
144. By Captain. Ward: Did you recognise Mr. Ormsby’s using the boat when it was not
required for the public service ? Yes.
145. Without your leave having been previously asked ? Yes. Mr. Ormsby could only use
the boat on days when ho was authorised by the Governor General to leave the island.
146. You are not aware whether he ever left upon any other days than those for which he
obtained leave? Ido not believe Mr. Ormsby ever did; I have no reason to suppose
he would infringe his orders.
147. It must have been during your time he went to Chowder Bay ? It was.
148. That was hy your permission ? Yes.
149. By Mr. Mei-ewether : Did you give Mr. Ormsby permission to go with the boat to
Chowder Bay ? Mr. Ormsby asked whether, instead of coming to Sydney on the day for
which he had obtained leave, he might go to Chowder Bay.
150. Had you the power to give that permission ? That is a question which remains for the
Government to decide. I presume T had the power.
151. Then, in case of any diversion of the boat from its ordinary uses, it was necessary for
Mr. Ormsby to apply to you for leave ? Yes ; hut I have taken prisoners over in the boat
myself
152. That was for the public service ? Yes.
153. Whose duty was it to inspect the boats arriving at and leaving the island—from your
* 17—G recollection ?


recollection ? I think there was a former order—either the Superintendent or Deputy
Superintendent.
154. You are not aware whether that is carried out ? lam aware that every boat approach-
ing the island has been reported to the Superintendent when I have been there.
155. You are not aware whether the regulation has been carried out —and the Superin-
tendent himself has been present when the boat has arrived ? lam perfectly satisfied he
could not have been in many instances, because at the time the boat arrived he has been
engaged with me.
156. Whose duty was it “to be present ? Under former orders, the Superintendent or his
deputy.
157. You say that young Mr. Ormsby was allowed to have a boat, and that there were three
other boats— do you think it advisable there should be so many boats attached to a penal
establishment—are not the facilities for bringing spirits and other forbidden articles to the
island thereby increased ? Ido not think so, if precautions are taken.
158. Do you think it desirable that there should be frequent communication between the
island and the mainland? It is not desirable; but at Cockatoo Island, in its present state,
frequent communication could not be avoided. There are two or three boats connected with
the Engineer’s Department.
159. As far as the statements made to the Board have gone, the 'people who come to the
island are brought in the island boats? That is a mistake.
160. What other boats are there ? Watermen’s boats; one of the officers of the Engineer’s
Department lives off the island ; he has permission from Captain Mann, who himself has a
boat.
161. Hy Captain Ward: Those boats are sent off to the buoy after the parties have landed,
are they not ? Yes.
162. By Mr. .Merewether : There are other boats than those attached to the penal depart-
ment of the island constantly going backward and forward ? Yes; and this, of course,
increases the difficulty of keeping up the penal nature of the island.
163. And renders it still more desirable that the Superintendent, or someone, should be
there to receive the boats ? The Inspector of Police is always there.
164. By Mr. Dillon: Are there not two other boats, one kept by Mr. Broderick, and the
other by Mr. Duff, an officer in the Engineer’s Department ? Yes, there are two boats con-
nected with the Engineer’s Department, besides Mr. Mann's.
165. By Captain Ward : In fact, there is no limit to the boats ? No.
166. Bi/ the Chairman : In consequence of the proximity of the island to Sydney, you are
of opinion that it is not a suitable place for the carrying out of penal discipline effectually ?
Yes, I have always represented that to be my opinion. In fact I regard Cockatoo Island, at
present, as only a slight improvement upon the old stockades of the country.
167. Do you think that the introduction of so many free people under another department
(the Engineer’s) has increased the difficulty of the management of the convicts ? It has. I
have always represented that the increase of free people on the island, connected with the
Engineer’s Department, renders it more difficult to carry out the penal discipline strictly.;
168. By Mr. Merewether : Can you mention in what way it increases the difficulty ? The more
constant communication between the island and the mainland increases the number of
visitors to the island; I have sometimes given half-a-dozen permissions in a day to the
friends of people on the island.
169. You might have refused those persons who applied to you ? I might, but I should not
have felt myself justified in doing so. I should not think it fair to treat free officers as if
they were prisoners. I have, however, frequently refused people.
At ike request of Mr. Dillm the tollowinq regulation was read: —“ The Superintendent is
“ not in any way to interfere with the officers and men of the Civil Engineer’s Department;
“ his power being restricted to the officers and men of his own department.”
Samuel North, J.P., was called in and examined, as follows:
1. By the Chairman : I believe you are Visiting Magistrate of Cockatoo Island ? I am.
2. And have been how long ? Twelve months, exactly.
3. Will you be so good as to tell us whether you are aware that any regulation existed with
reference to refuse rations at the time you took charge ? lam not.
4. You are aware that there was an old order of Captain Browne’s that the refuse rations
should be thrown away ? I have heard there was such an order, but lam not aware.
5. What was the practice at the time you took charge—what became of the surplus rations ?
I was not aware there was such an order until it was brought under my notice.
6. Until a complaint was made of the appropriation, and then you found it had been the
practice to distribute them among the officers ? Yes.
7. And you put an end to that ? Yes.
8. Had you reason to suppose that it occurred afterwards ? Yes.
9. Do you know how it came about that the order made by Captain Browne came to be
relaxed ? No, I never heard a reason given for it.
10. You never heard the circumstances under which that order originated ? No.
II You never knew what became of the surplus rations, or whether they were, or were not,
destroyed, until the complaint was made against the Superintendent, which you inquired
into, and then made an order that they should be thrown away? Yes; I did so without
knowing there had been a former one.
12. As to the kind of recreation allowed to the prisoners during their leisure hours, was any
recreation whatever allowed during their leisure hours on Sundays, or at other times when
they were not at work ? lam not aware of any regulations respecting recreation.
13.


13. Did you lay down any rules upon that subject ? No.
14. Did you impose any restrictions as to their being allowed to sing, dance, play, wrestle ?
No ; it was never brought under my notice.
15. Did you ever authorise any particular recreations ; were you ever asked whether the men
might be allowed to sing at night ? I have no recollection.
16. Were you ever asked whether the men might be allowed to play at leap-frog ? No.
17. Or to wrestle, box, spar ? No.
18. Were you ever applied to upon the subject at all ? No; I think I heard something said
about it, but not in the way of asking my sanction. There is something on my mind
about it.
19. Are you aware how they employed their leisure hours ? No, lam not.
20. Then you do not attend to anything that is not matter of complaint or adjudication?
No; Ido not consider lam there for that purpose. I attend to my rules, and have always
considered these were matters for the Superintendent to arrange.
21. As to spirits—were there any complaints made to you of spirits coming to the island? No.
22. Did you ever give permission for spirits to come ? No ; 1 gave permission this morning
for a bottle of porter to go there.
23. Is that the first instance of an application having been made to you? Yes; a paper was
brought to me, stating that it was required for a woman who was confined the other day.
24. That is the only occasion upon which an application has been made to you? Yes.
25. Do you think that one bottle of porter has been the supply to the island during the
twelve months ? No, Ido not.
26. Then, as you never gave permission, if it got there it must have done so without
permission ? Yes.
27. Are you aware that it should be only taken to the island with the permission of the
Visiting Magistrate ? Yes.
28. By Mr. Mereweiher: Have you ever been requested to relax the rule prohibiting
overseers and subordinate officers bringing spirits to the island on any pretence whatever? No.
29. By the Chairman : In what mode has the Superintendent obtained leave of absence
during the time you have been Visiting Magistrate? He always, on the first of every
month, names the days on which he wishes to leave the island.
30. This goes through you to the Governor General, and is sanctioned by him ? Yes; it is
signed by Sir Wm. Denison.
31. In what manner does he avail himself of it—how does he leave the island ? In what
is called the visitors’ boat.
32. You are Water Police Magistrate ? Yes.
33. Have you a boat of your own ? Yes, for Water Police purposes; but the island boat
conveys me to and from the island.
34. Does the Superintendent use it for the purpose of visiting the main when he has leave ?
Yes.
35. Does he use it without asking your permission ? He does not ask my permission; he
uses it himself.
36. It is under his authority ? Yes.
37. When he has asked leave has it been for the special purpose of a pleasure party, or a
picnic ? lam not aware that he did ask permission to use the boat for any purpose.
38. Did he ever ask permission to go upon a picnic party ? Yes, I think so.
39. Do you know how often, or whether more than once ? I recollect one occasion ; I think
he was going somewhere down the harbour, he asked some officers of the 11th, and he
asked mo to be of the party; but I was prevented and did not go. Ido not remember any
other particular occasion, but I think he then went in a steamer; I do not think he used the
boat.
4.0. Did you ever know him to use the island boat for the purpose of picnics ? I did not.
41. Is there an Inspector of Police‘now on the island as well as a Sergeant ? Yes.
42. Do you know whether the Inspector of Police ever applied to you for a copy of the
regulations ? He spoke to me at one time about them.
43. About the new regulations ? Those are the only regulations that have been in force
during my time.
44. What answer did you give him ? I said I would inquire about them. I spoke to
Captain M'Lerie and Mr. Ormsby about it, and they said they all knew their orders very
well.
45. He asked you for a copy of the regulations, and you did not give it ? Yes.
46. You did not tell him to go to Mr. Ormsby ? No; but I understood from Mr. Ormsby,
or the clerk, that they had the orders posted up.
47. Then you did not tell Mr Ormsby to give him a copy ? No.
48. Do you think he would have asked for a copy if he had one? He might not.
49. Do you remember Gleadall’s case ? Yes.
50. What was that case? You mean the cause of his dismissal ?
51. Yes —he was constable, was he not? Yes.
52. Do you remember whether he over applied for the regulations ? No, I am not aware;
I do not think he did.
53. Upon what charge was he dismissed ? Drunkenness.
54. Upon whose complaint ? The Roman Catholic Chaplain’s.
55. Did you inquire into that ? I did.
56. Your decision was that he should be dismissed? Yes.
57. Did Mr. Ormsby give evidence upon that matter ? Ido not think he did; but I could
ascertain from the depositions. I think the Roman Catholic Clergyman and the boatmen
were the parties examined.
58. Where was the inquiry conducted ? At the Water Police Office.
59.


59. By Captain Ward : You cannot say whether Mr. Ormsby’s opinion of the man had any
influence on that occasion ? lam quite sure it had not.
60. B// the Chairman: But, if Mr. Ormsby stated, either upon his solemn affirmation or
upon his oath, that the man was not drunk, would not that have influenced you? It might;
but a considerable time might have elapsed from the period when he was said to be drunk
until Mr. Ormsby saw him, and he might have sobered by that time. I would observe, with
respect to that case, that, after hearing the whole of the evidence and the constable’s defence,
before coming to any decision I placed the whole matter before the Inspector General, and
his advice was to dismiss him.
61. That is Captain M'Lerie ? Yes.
62. Do you remember the case of a man named Murray, one of the boatmen, who was
suspended ? Yes, I remember something about it.
63. Do you know on how many occasions he was suspended ? I cannot exactly recollect; I
think twice before.
64. And his pay stopped —do you remember that ? No; for it was not in my time he
was suspended.
65. If any stoppage of pay occurred would it not appear in the abstract ? Yes; it is paid
to the Police Reward Fund, and a receipt taken from the Treasury for it.
66. If the pay were stopped it would be paid into the Treasury? Yes; into the Police
Reward Fund.
67. Do you remember more than one occasion ? No.
68. Do you remember his having been suspended by Mr. Ormsby, and not by yourself? No.
69 Could his pay be stopped upon any other authority than yours, or some other magistrate’s ?
No ; I should say not I have never stopped their pay where they have not been legally
convicted
70. Did this man complain to you that his pay had been illegally stopped ? No, he did not.
71. Btj Captain Ward: With respect to the two first occasions, can you say whether his pay
was or was not stopped—-is there any mode of ascertaining that ? The Board might obtain
the information from the Treasury.
72. Do you not sign cheques for the payment of every thing that is paid for on the island ?
I pay in one cheque for the whole abstract.
73. Where is this abstract kept? In the Treasury ; a copy is also kept at Cockatoo.
74. Would not the abstract shew if his pay were stopped for any particular week or day ?
No ; the abstract is made out for the full amount of pay, and we send in a separate form for
the fines.
75. When the pay is stopped, as a rule it is paid into the Police Reward Fund ? Yes.
76. When that is paid in you send in a return with it, and, by comparing that with the pay
list, we should be able to ascertain when the pay had been stopped ? Yes.
77. Does not the man sign for his full pay ? Yes.
78. And it is in his power to refuse to sign if he do not receive full pay ? Yes.
79. If he did not sign for full pay they would not pass it at the Audit Office ? No.
80. Bt/ the Chairman : Do you remember the case of a man named Sadleir, whose pay, it
has been said, was stopped ? I remember fining a constable named Sadleir.
81. And Cahil? Yes.
82. Did any of these men complain to you of Mr. Ormsby stopping their pay without your
authority ? They never did.
83. Do you believe that they ever could have done so or ever did ? No.
84. Have you ever authorised strangers to sleep on the island ? I have, in some instances.
85. Whom did you ever authorise ? Some of the near relatives of some of the overseers, or
of the police, who have been on a visit, I have allowed to remain during the night.
Sometimes, in case of sickness or confinement, a female has gone to nurse her married sister.
86. Do you remember the case of Philip Donohue and another man who absconded for forty-
eight hours, and respecting whom there was a suspicion that they had been guilty of an
unnatural offence ? Ido not. remember the names of the parties, but I remember a circum-
stance of the kind being mentioned to me by Mr. Ormsby.
87. Some seven or eight months ago ? Yes.
88. Did you inquire into the charge ? No, I did not. Mr. Ormsby told me that no evidence
could be procured, and I therefore thought it not advisable to bring the matter forward.
89. Btj Captain Ward: Murray states that he was suspended three times before he was
dismissed ; that on the first two occasions he was not brought before the Visiting Magistrate,
but that his pay was stopped—can you ascertain whether the pay was stopped or not? Yes.
90. By Mr. Merewether: One of the witnesses has stated —“ I remember one circumstance
“of suspicion of unnatural offence. On unlocking the wards one morning it was reported
“ that one man had gone to another’s berth. That case was reported by me to the Superin-
“ tendent, and by him to the Visiting Magistrate, and the charge was dismissed as without
“ foundation” —do you remember the circumstances of that case ? I think that must be
the case I have referred to, respecting which Mr. Ormsby said he could not bring evidence
in support of the charge.
91. There was also a case of suspicion of unnatural offence which arose about a year
ago, where one of the prisoners approached another, placed his hand upon his shoulder,
and was knocked down. That case, it is stated, was reported to you, and you dealt
with it, and punished the man by confinement in the cells —do you remember that case ?
I have no recollection of that particular case ; very possibly it may have taken place. At
the time Mr. Ormsby mentioned the circumstance to me he said he had not sufficient
evidence, and I approved of not bringing the men forward unless he had, because I think it
better not to enter upon such investigations without sufficient evidence.
9u. It came out in the evidence of one of the witnesses, that in the boat which brings the
recognized luxuries for the prisoners there “ are occasionally brought some articles in
addition


addition to the clothing allowed by Government, as comforters and under clothing? I know
two or three instances in which clothing has been sent.
93. Sent with your permission ? In one case, it was Mr. Jenkins wished to send a flannel
waistcoat and comforter to a man who had been his overseer, and I allowed them to be taken.
94 You are not aware of their having been taken in the ration or shop boat ? No.
95. Is that according to the rules, or is it a matter that should be left to the discretion of
the Superintendent ? I think it should be loft to (he discretion of the Superintendent.
96. Do the Inspector and Sergeant of Police apply to you for leave of absence ? They have
done so; but I think the Superintendent is the person to whom they should apply, unless
for any prolonged time.
97. In the face of these regulations, you still think the police ought to apply to the
Superintendent ? Yes, I think so, in the first instance
98. Although it is laid down in the regulations that they arc under you? Yes; all persons
on the island are under the Superintendent.
99. By Captain Ward: Not the Inspector of Police? He takes his orders from him. I
send my orders to the Inspector through the Superintendent.
100. The Superintendent has not, according to the regulations, the power to give any orders
to Inspector Dunning. The police are placed under the Visiting Magistrate ? By the regul-
ations every one on the island is under the Superintendent.
At the request of Mr. Dilion the, following rule, was read :—“ The Assistant Super-
Vintendent, overseers, and other subordinate officers of the peunl department, will be under
“ the control and immediate orders of the Superintendent, whose Instructions they are strictly
“ to obey, and are never to be absent from the island without his sanction.”
101. Have you ever given the Inspector and Sergeant of Police leave of absence at the same
time ? No, they never asked ; I never knew an instance of it.
Mr. William Elyard was called in and examined, as follows: —
1. By the Chairman : What is your office ? lam Under Secretary to the Government.
2. We wish to ask you what records the Government have of the boat establishment in con-
nexion with Cockatoo Island ? lam not prepared to give the history of the original estab-
lishment of the visitors’ boat at Cockatoo Island, but I find that some years ago the engineer's
boat was used as the visitors’ boat. I have here a paper which shews the days on which the
various officers were conveyed to the island by the Royal Engineer’s boat, and the officers
conveyed. Ido not know the date of the paper, but it shews that the Visiting Magistrate
and Medical Officer were conveyed on different days, and that the Protestant Clergyman, the
Superintendent and family, and the Roman Catholic Clergyman and the Deputy Superin-
tendent and family, were conveyed on other days.
3. Can you state what is the earliest definite notice you have of the employment of the boat ?
The papers to which I have referred do not shew that. The matter to which I have more
particularly directed my attention is the complaint of the late Chaplain, the Revd. Mr.
Pendrill, but I have not the different regulations under which the boat was employed.
4. By Captain Ward: Can you state whether any discretion is allowed the Visiting Magis-
trate to permit Mr. Ormsby to use the boat for his private purposes, or whether it is an
understanding that he may use it when not required for public purposes ?
5. By Mr. Merewether: What was it established for in the first instance —can you tell us when
the visitors’ boat was first established ? I could not; the Visiting Magistrate could give you
better information upon that point. It is a matter of long standing, and without searching the
correspondence throughout I could not say what has passed on the subject. There is an item
in the regulations which refers to the visitors’ boat; but those arc revised regulations, and,
of course, the particular uses of the boat must depend in a great measure upon what had
been the practice for a number of years; there is, however, a regulation which refers to the
use of the boat. My impression is, that the boat was originally established for the purpose
of conveying the Chaplain, the Surgeon, and the Visiting Magistrate to the island, as well as
any other officer who might require to go to or from the island. For instance, if Mr. Ormsby
wanted to come to Sydney, if the boat were not otherwise employed, I imagine it would be
quite at his disposal for that purpose. I imagine, from inquiries made both of the present
and former Visiting Magistrates, that it has been the practice when the boat has been carry-
ing the official visitors to take other passengers, that it is not for the exclusive use of any
one person for any one time, so long as due regard is had to the convenience of the parties.
6. By Captain Ward : Do you think it was recognised by the Government that Mr. Ormsby
might use it for picnics when not required for public purposes ? I could not say that.
7. Can you say whether the Government has known of such things, and recognised such an
employment of the boat by not taking notice of them ? lam not able to say that something
may not have occurred, in a long course of years, different from my own impression upon the
subject, but by the regulations Mr. Ormsby is to have permission to go off the island, and
that permission being given, I should imagine that, for any reasonable purpose, he must have
the means of leaving it.
8. Then you think, within reasonable bounds, he may use the boat for his private purposes ?
Yes, I should say so. I know that the practice was formerly for him to use the boat.
*l7—H
MINUTES


MINUTES of Proceedings before the Board appointed to inquire into certain charges pre-
ferred against Mr. C. Ormsbg, Superintendent of Cockatoo Island.
WEDNESDAY, 27 JANUARY, 1858.
present
Sir W. W. BURTON, Knt.
E. C. M ERE WET HER, Esq., | Capt. E. W. WARD.
Mr. Dillon applied to tlie Board for a further postponement, on the ground that lie had
• not had an opportunity of revising the answers he hud prepared to the charges preferred
against Mr. Ormsby.
Mr. Dillon withdrew.
Mr. Ormsby was then called in.
The Chairman : Have you anything you wish to say to the Board?
Mr. Ormsbg : I am sorry to state that there is a very disagreeable misunderstanding
between Mr. Dillon and myself. lam most anxious to meet the Board. I have no wish to
delay. I have every document necessary, in my own view, contained in this paper. (A parcel
(j documents held bg him.) Mr. Dillon wishes to make some alterations in these documents,
but Ido not know that it is necessary. I have nothing but a simple, plain, unvarnished
tale to tell ; it is all contained hero; and I will refer you to some witnesses, if you wish to
call on them, not on my own account, but in order to satisfy the Board, if necessary. Ido
not like to say much about Mr. Dillon, but there have been some disagreeable circumstances
between us, so much so that he has taken serious offence and so have I. I felt this morning,
and I have felt for two or three days since I heard the Board had written to Mr. Dillon,
that any further tampering with the Board or delay was improper. lam anxious to meet
the Board, and Mr. Dillon says if you press it he will come forward with the papers that are
here ; but it you give him a certain time longer he would be better prepared to discharge his
duty according to his own view. For my own part, I have in m3' hand what T think is a
fair and honest statement, and I would be willing at once to hand it in, but I believe Mr.
Dillon’s great anxiety is from a fear that, as there is an action now pending, wc should do
anything that would prejudice me in that matter.
The Chairman : Fou must remember, Mr. Ormsby, that we only admitted Mr. Dillon
in order to assist you, and at your request, but ive suggested to you, upon more than one
occasion, whether the course being pursued was doing you any good ; but we must now put
it to 3 r ou whether you are prepared to go on with the case ? The Board have come to the
conclusion not to delay one day longer. We sent your legal adviser all the points which
were to be met, and I have no hesitation to say that I, or any other gentleman of the Board,
that any gentleman of the legal profession, or that yourself, might have drawn up a fair
categorical answer to those points in two or three days.
Mr. Ormsbg: I believe it could be done, and it is done here. {Referring to the
papers held by him.)
The Chairman : Are you prepared to go-on with the case yourself, or is Mr. Dillon ?
Mr. Ormsbg : Mr. Dillon is prepared to go on with the case if you press it.
The Chairman : I think you say you have the papers here ready to lay before the
Board—have you drawn up any statement ?
Mr. Ormsbg : I have the charges here, and my answers to them.
The Chairman : What else is required ?
Mr. Ormsby: I can refer you, in support of my statements, to officers on the island
who have not been examined at all.
Captain Ward : Are you prepared to go on with the case without Mr. Dillon ?
Mr. Ormsby: If you will allow me I should wish to call in Mr. Dillon, not because I
am not prepared to conduct the matter myself, but there is an action going on, and I am afraid
he might withdraw my action.
The Chairman : You are afraid if he were not called in he might withdraw your
action ?
Mr. Ormsby: He might withdraw himself from conducting it, and cause me great
difficulty and expense to put it in other hands.
J Mr. Ormsby withdrew. After ash rt lime Mr. Ormsbg and Mr. Dillon were called ire.]
Mr. Dillon : I take the liberty of stating, having understood that the Board will not
postpone this case, and that therefore I must elect between going into the case, which lam
not prepared to do, or abandon it, that of course I will do that which T consider the best
mode of discharging my duty to my client, and shall therefore endeavour to convey to the
Board my views of the case, and to lay before them whatever documents Mr. Ormsby' now
proposes to give. I have only to request, as an indulgence, that a gentleman as an assistant
unay be allowed to sit beside me while I address tlie Board.
The Chairman : The Board see no necessity for anything of the kind; you have got
off hitherto without such assistance, and may do so still. It is now one month since you
received the points from the Board, and have had abundant time to prepare your reply.
Mr. Dillon : The first observation I feel it my duty to address to this Board is, that
it ought to be, and I respectfully submit to the Board has been, one of the chief matters for
their consideration, that whilst the charges forwarded to me to be answered amount to
twenty-six, there are none of them, as it appears to my humble judgment, worthy of grave
remark


remark, much less of serious censure, or calculated to endanger Mr. Ormsby as a citizen, or
in the general line of his character. It is, I say, and I respectfully submit- it to you us a
matter well worthy of the gravest consideration, and as one of the most impreguable features
in Mr. Ormsby’s case, that it is most gratifying that he comes before you as a man free from
every imputation against his integrity, the slightest against his moral character, against liis
indulgence in those habits or vices which prevail, if not in this Colony and among official
officers of the highest rank in this Colony, at least in every other part of the British
dominion where offices of the highest honor are held. I appeal to the convict population, to
the infamous community over wdiich his misfortunes have compelled him to preside at a
paltry amount of salary for the support of himself and children, not proportioned in any
degree to his position, an amount which I am compelled to pay an assistant, if 1 could get
one. I appeal to the infamous residents of that place, some of whom can boast of family
names which ought to command respect. I appeal to those ruffians whether he has ever
exposed himself to the slightest imputation that could bring him before you as a man of any
kind of character beyond that of an unquestioned man of honor; as a gentleman who would
faithfully discharge those duties required of him. (4/r. D lion having become somewhat
excited and vociferous, was reminded that gentlemen in the offices adjoining and overhead
might be disturbed in the discharge of their duties )
Mr. Dillon : Your Honor has known me many years, and I would appeal to you, and
I have the written testimony of men all hut as eminent, who have known me, that even in
moments of the deepest distress I have never lent myself to the shielding of dishonesty;
that I have never uttered a word that I did not believe to he an honest one ; and I would
cut my tongue out before for Ormsby, for my very wife, I would state anything but the very
truth. And let me remind you —but I need not remind you, for you know it—that without
truth, without that purity, that clearness, that light which Heaven gives to every created
object, life is not worth enduring, and Government a name for tyranny and corruption. If,
from the earnestness of my manner, or the strength of my expressions, I seem to exceed the
proper bounds, I trust you will not attribute it to disrespect, or suppose that I have lent
myself to any unworthy defence.
Well, gentlemen, suppose we go to the charges at once —“ Singing in the wards.”
The paper I am now reading contains the answers to the twenty-six charges sent to me by
Mr. Merewetlier on the 24th of December last.
The Chairman : Do you intend to hand that in ?
Mr. Dillon : I intend to read it, and to comment upon it as I go along, and then to
hand it in. I shall protect Mr. and myself from any possible errors in it, by stating
this much respecting it:—Some days ago I went to Cockatoo Island to prepare my answers to
these charges—that they were delayed before was owing, solely owing, to my belief that I
should have had access, with Mr. Ormsby, to the evidence recorded here, so as to pick out of that
evidence the facts which I know, or which certainly were stated by the witnesses themselves, as
sufficient to answer these charges. If I had had that access, and had thus been enabled to
have picked out of the mass of matter that is there the pithy points that would have gone
into my statement —and that which alone was pithy and relative to Ormsby—and certainly not
be expected would be searched for in the Courts above or the places where this evidence will go,
I would have picked out and put in this paper. Having failed in that way—rightly or wrongly
I will not attempt to say —but I did not get them. Mr. Ormsby impressed upon me, with a
degree of earnestness which frightened me very much —for I have undergone more labor
and anxiety in the management of this case than any amount of money would pay me for —
Ormsby pressed me with such a degree-of earnestness to go into the case, fearing that there
might he suspicion raised of some trick or delay on his part, that I devoted one whole day from
morning to night in dictating this paper. It was a long paper, and I am lawyer enough to'know
that, without lending myself to any trickery or evasion, a lengthened paper, like a lengthened
letter, or a lengthened affidavit, without a person is on the spot to explain what he meant
to convey by it, may leave the person making it open to be picked at by vermin calling
themselves lawyers, and I know that there are such vermin here, living upon the corruption,
upon the festering wounds, upon the maggots of which they feed. I know that there are men
who would do any kind of dirty work, and knowing that, I felt —although I had drawn
up that paper myself, had dictated it to Mr. Onnsby’s clerk, walking up and down tbe
room with Mr. Merewether’s paper in my hand —I felt that it was too grave a thing
to go from my hand without being more carefully revised ; and, when I left Mr.
Ormsby on that day, I ordered that a copy of this should he made, and that I would
then finally alter it for settlement, and when L could not get the evidence that was before the
Board, I would pick out of my own notes of the proceedings, which extended over eleven
days here and four or five days in the Supreme Court, such points as appeared necessary.
I devoted Saturday last, from morning to evening, with Mr. Ormsby’s clerk in doing that; and
I made my arrangements so that everything should be cut and dried, in order that I might
attack at once the vulnerable points, and satisfy you on the subject. That arrangement was
interfered with, and I have not been able to prepare the revised paper; and Mr. Ormsby
now thinks that the paper which wis dictated by me at his house is sufficient, and this I
shall therefore proceed to lay before you. But 1 crave of you to hear these facts in mind, so
that if there is anything which appears to you as honorable men not to meet the charge as it
should for Mr. Ormsby, or if there should be anything stated which you deem unsafe to him,
that you will say to .me, “ Mr. Dillon, wc think that is insufficient;” and I will then be
prepared to meet your objection. At the same time, let me entreat you, do not visit on poor
Ormsby’s head the fault that is my own.
Having said so much by way of preface, I do not apprehend that anything more is
necessary for me to do than read the charges, and the answers as I drew them up upon the
spur of the instant. (.Ifv. Dillon then proceeded to read the several charges, and answers
thereto,


thereto, and to comment thereon. Having concluded, he handed in the same, with several
letters appended .)
[ln the course of Mr. Dillon s address Mr. Mereivether left the Board, in order to attend a
meeting of the Executive Council. ]
The Chairman : Here you must be, in my judgment, and I am quite sure you know
enough of me to feel that my judgment is, correct, when I tell you that you have done wrong
in imputing a course —in imputing motives to one of the members of the Board. It is my
duty, as President of the Board, to call upon you to make an apology for that; and at the same
time, in order to exonerate your mind for making that apology, you must take my judgment,
and my word for it, that there was not any cause or any ground for imputation. The other
member of our Board, now absent, has been kind enough to take a great deal of trouble in
this matter, and has thus spared us. He has kept the evidence; he has written the letters,
but we have dictated those letters or given the points to him ; he has done all in his own
name simply because he wrote the letters which we desired him, but in all that Mr. Mere-
wether did, he simply did what the Commissioners agreed upon, and nothing else. The fact
of his name having appeared more prominently in the affair than any of the other members
of the Board has, I apprehend, been the cause that Mr. Dillon, from his professional habits,
has taken an idea of a bias on his part. Now, my judgment is, that Mr. Dillon has erred
very greatly in making three or four insinuations and imputations in the course of these
proceedings, and, therefore, I call upon him in express terms for an apology.
Mr. Dillon : I should be wanting in the first duty which I have invariably had in
my view in every transaction with men of character, if 1 did not at once admit the
impropriety of insinuating, much less asserting, anything that could give offence, and any-
thing more especially as 1 now unfeignedly believe, from what the learned Judge has said,
that is without the shadow of foundation. I therefore, do most earnestly, and most humbly,
but I believe most heartily, and without abating anything of the feelings of a man and a
gentleman, apologise to the Board, and more especially to Mr. Merewetlier as a member of
the Board, for having done so.
The Chairman : As to the refusal of a copy of the evidence, it is right we should
tell you that Mr. Parkes applied for a copy, and it was refused to him. He has not been
allowed to be here while the evidence has been taken, or to have a copy of it; and for that
reason the Board thought it right to refuse it to you, knowing an action was proceeding
between you.
