

jky*st xSK
, II ■ .
j A . '*^l' HI MMD Wl
Hb W /X / / a ffifeg f; i. - *•-
IT{}{]{i 0 [&
/VOE >
ill
<4..<
**«<&
/ r »








I
COCKY AND CO.
THEIR ADVENTURES
VIOLET M. METHLEY


\ ~
" Dere White Bird!" she cried. "Me catchum —you takeum
White Bird!" ( Page 121).




i£ l ill \
T
His
LET GO—LET GO, SHELAGH!" COXAL SHOUTED
Pa


COCKY AND CO.
" AND THEIR ADVENTURES
( VIOLET M. METHLEY
Illustrated by
If I '/ 1\ W RAPHAEL TUCK & SONS LTD.
TIL LLFJF LONDON - PARIS - NEW YORK


THE "TREASURE TROVE" LIBRARY
Five books uniform in size and price
BRAVE DEEDS BY BRAVE MEN
By Alfred Miles and C. Sheridan Jones. Illustrated by Howard Davie and R. B. Ogle.
COCKY AND CO.
AND THEIR ADVENTURES
By Violet M. Methley. Illustrated by T. Cuneo.
SEEING THE EMPIRE
THE ADVENTUROUS TOUR OF STEVEN AND SALLIE
By Violet M. Methley. Illustrated by C. E. Brock, R. 1., and O. Sandreczki.
THE PEARL FISHERS
AND OTHER STORIES
By Major Gorman, Percy F. Westerman and others. Illustrated by C. E. Brock, R. 1.,
V. Cooley, and others.
TRAVEL WAYS
BY LAND, SEA, AND AIR
By' G. G. Jackson and others. Illustrated by T. Cuneo and Barnard Way.
"The jaguar crouched low, snarling furiously, with lashing tail." {Page 75).


THE BUSH
PAGE
7
24
34
49
60
77
A7/A
CONTENTS
PART I: THE BUSH
I. THE WHITE WALLABY . PAGE
11. CONAL AND COCKY .....
111. THE SUN-DOWNERS
IV. THE STOW-AWAY
PART II: THE FOREST
I. CRUSOE'S ISLAND
11. THE AMAZON ADVENTURE . <-
111. "ROLLING DOWN TO RIO"
PART III: THE JUNGLE
I. SALLY OWN AND NANNY POO O
11. COCKY DECIDES
***•••• 99
111. CONGO COCKY
IV. NOAH'S ARK
PART IV: THE WOODS
I. COCKY—COWFIGHTER .
11. COCKY FINDS SOMETHING NEW /-
111. How IT ENDED


"Please do you dig houses, too? "
"Oh, dear no! Much too much trouble. I
just live in one tree till I've eaten all the
leaves, and then move to another and eat—
and eat ( Page 15).


PART I: THE BUSH
CHAPTER ONE
THE WHITE WALLABY
A BRIGHT green parrot flew out of the wattle-bush with
a hideous screech; Shelagh's pony went on and Shelagh
• came off—for the seventh time since she and her cousin
Conal had started out from Bundaburra Station that morning.
Seven's a lucky number anyway," Conal remarked with a
grin as Shelagh picked herself up from the bright yellow patch in
which she had landed.
Well, if you call it lucky to have sand in one's nose and eyes
and mouth and ears " Shelagh's indignation ended in a series
of tremendous sneezes, and by the time she had recovered she
too, was laughing helplessly.
"But you can't expect me to ride like you, Con," she protested.
I never see a horse at school. Its all cars in Sydney."
"I know, and I think you're jolly plucky to stick on so well,"
di o ntam Sa Sde a r lrmgly ' ° f the h ° MayS you ' U be a
to ha trSr f, T ks! " Shelagh Sighed ha PP i! y- "It's gorgeous
to Jet me t lt W0 m °" thS UP °° Untry ' and U ° Cle J oe ' S a lamb
to let me stay with you at Bundaburra."
Were glad to have you," Conal assured his cousin, whom
e pnva ey considered a great sport, nearly as good as another
boy of his own age. He had no brothers or sisters, and since his
7


mother had died years before, it was often rather lonely at Bunda-
burra, which was more than ten miles from the next station or farm,
at those times when Mr. Reardon, his father, was away or busy.
It was fun to show Shelagh everything, to prove to her how
beautiful it was here, on the borders of Queensland and New South
Wales, to give her lessons in riding and shooting, for she had never
before been far from her Sydney boarding-school.
Shelagh proceeded to remount the pony, which waited quietly
near by; she picked up the reins and shook the black curls out of
her blue eyes.
"Let's get on," she said. "I want to see wild kangaroos and
emus and everything."
"Depends what you mean by everything," Conal laughed.
"Emus are rare nowadays, and even 'roos not as common as they
used to be. Still, we'll ride across Maroola Plain towards the prickly
pear belt, and p'raps we'll be in luck."
The plain was fairly flat and open ground with clumps of tall
trees or patches of scrub here and there; they had ridden quietly
for some distance when Shelagh suddenly pulled up and pointed.
"What's that —over there?" she asked. "It looks like some-
thing white moving through those fern-trees; could it be a sheep?
"Sheep? No!" Conal, who had been peering in the direction
indicated, spoke excitedly. "You've good eyes, She! I do believe
it's the white wallaby."
"A white wallaby?" Shelagh repeated. "But I thought they
were always just grey or brown, like smaller kangaroos.
"This one's famous; it's what they call an albino, or something,
snow-white with eyes like red rubies."
"Sounds a magic beast!" Shelagh laughed.
"The black-fellows think it is; the white wallabies are awfully
rare anyway, and this one has been hunted for ages it s supposed
to be tremendously old, nearly thirteen, I believe."


"How funny!" Shelagh's eyes danced and twinkled. "You
don't call us so tremendously old, and we shall both be thirteen
in the next few months!"
"Beasts are different from people," Conal explained gravely.
"Thirteen years is old for a wallaby. Let's creep up as close as
we can and look at it."
"Let's catch it if we can," Shelagh suggested eagerly. "Wouldn't
that be thrilling?"
Conal shook his head.
"We'll try if you like," he said. "But that white wallaby isn't
likely to be caught easily; it's been hunted too often."
Riding slowly and carefully, the two were soon close to the
clump of tall fern-trees, with their palm-like stems and feathery
heads. Now and then they caught a flash of something white
moving through the greenness, and suddenly Conal, who was in
front, pulled up his horse and raised one hand warningly.
Ssh—look!" he whispered, and Shelagh, close behind, peered
over his shoulder, as a kangaroo-like creature about the size of
a greyhound moved out into an opening between the fern-trees
and began to nibble the grass. It looked a magic beast, just as
Shelagh had said, gracefully snow-white, with a beautiful deer-
like head and big liquid eyes, dark ruby-coloured, as could be
seen when it raised them and glanced round timidly, twitching
its ears.
Then it must have seen or heard something of the intruders,
for the white wallaby was there and gone, all in a flash, taking
one long graceful leap across and out of the clearing, off and away.
Almost as quickly the cousins were after it, riding close together,
their ponies as excited by the chase as themselves.
Beyond the tree-ferns was a stretch of open grassy country,
and here the wallaby could be seen quite plainly taking the grace-
ful bounds which carried it along so quickly and lightly, faster


than horses
could follow, as
COUia lOIIOW, cLb -
Conal and Shelagh discovered.
Somehow the white creature,
without seeming to hurry, always kept well ahead, however much
they urged their ponies on.
Soon all three were amongst scrub and low bushes again, and
Shelagh found herself separated from Conal—and also from her
hat, left on an overhanging thorny bough.
"But as long as I can stick to you, I don t mind! she panted
to the pony, tugging rather wildly at the reins, to turn it aside
from a prickly thicket.
She caught a glimpse of Conal —then of a white shape
away to the right, and galloped in that direction along a kind
of grassy track, with the wallaby now in plain view straight
ahead.


Suddenly right across the way appeared an obstacle, a
huge fallen tree-trunk, with reddish stringy bark hanging
from it.
Over went the wallaby, light as a white feather, without a
second's hesitation; after it plunged Shelagh, prepared to take
the leap. And then —just as the pony was about to take off, some-
thing came back over the tree-trunk with a great bound, taking
horse and rider entirely by surprise. The pony shied and reared;
Shelagh clutched at its mane, found herself slipping—and was
off for the eighth time, her fall broken by a clump of tall yellow
grass.
She scrambled to her feet, more bewildered than hurt, as Conal
rode up.
"Did you see it?" she stammered.
"The wallaby—yes! I say, She, any damage?"
"No—nothing much. But didn't you see ? It must have been
magic."
"Whatever do you mean?" Conal demanded.
"Why, why—it changed! It went over the tree-trunk
a white wallaby, and it jumped back, right on top of us, and
frightened poor Moyra, just a second afterwards—a brown
one!"
Conal began to laugh, leaning back in his saddle.
"Why, of course, there were two wallabies," he explained.
"The brown one was hidden behind the tree-trunk; probably our
white friend jumped right on top of it and frightened it out of
its wits. That's why it bounced over double quick and startled
you and Moyra."
"Oh!" Shelagh looked distinctly crestfallen. "Where's the
white one, then?"
"Gone into the prickly-pear belt ahead there " Conal
pointed across the fallen tree. "Where we can't follow it."


"Why not?" Shelagh asked.
"Because it's an uncommonly nasty place/' and Conal went
on to explain how the prickly-pear, introduced into some parts
of Australia years ago, with the hope that the dry sandy soil would
suit it, had proved far too much of a success for the comfort of
farmers and settlers.
Like rabbits, sparrows, bumble-bees, blackberries and other
beasts and plants brought over to the Antipodes from Europe, the
prickly-pear had become a terrible pest, growing and spreading,
becoming taller and thicker and pricklier than in its own native
lands, forming at last what were called "Prickly-pear belts," some-
times as much as twenty miles long and ten or more wide, growing
so closely that these belts were like natural barbed-wire entangle-
ments, and men and horses could not possibly pass through
them.
"There are lots of little paths that wild animals have made
through the cactus scrub," Conal said. "But they're so winding
and narrow that you can't see ahead more than a few yards, and
less still either side, the prickly-pear hedges are so thick and often
twenty feet high. It's bad enough to be ' bushed' when it s only
ordinary gum-trees or wattle and ti-bush —but in the prickly-pear
belt you're lost for good and all, you can't find the way or be found
either."
"Then must we give up trying to find the white wallaby?"
Shelagh asked sadly.
"'Fraid so. Anyway, it's something even to have seen it, you
know. Look here, I vote we rest a bit and eat our lunch, before
starting off to ride home. There's a nice place under those blue-
gum trees."
"All right," Shelagh said, looking more cheerful. "And we
can watch the edge of the cactus-belt just in case the white wallaby
comes out again.


"Have a hope!" Conal grinned. "I'm afraid we've seen the
last of that wallaby, my child! My word, you are grimy! You can't
sit down to table with hands like that. Better go and have a wash
—there's a nice little stream over there by those rocks—we've
often used it for tea-making."
"I will! I do feel simply covered with dust," Shelagh said,
and ran off to the stream whilst Conal tethered their horses and
sat down under the almost shadeless shade of the grey-green gum-
trees to begin their picnic meal.
He never could have imagined that at this particular moment
a third person was just preparing to come into their lives, some-
one who was to be very important in all the strange adventures to
follow—someone whom Conal and Shelagh would never have seen
if the white wallaby had not led them to the fringe of the prickly-
pear belt that morning.
It only shows that no one ever knows anything beforehand.
CHAPTER Two
CONAL AND COCKY
THE eldest of the family pushed aside his brothers and sister,
scrambling up to see life for the first time from the middle
of a prickly-pear clump, all spine-covered greenish-grey leaves,
with small yellowish flowers. Perched unsteadily there, he was
a queer, ugly little creature, nothing but dirty greyish down and
a huge, gaping mouth, except for bright, observant eyes, which
seemed to foresee his own adventurous career and make him want
to start upon it at once.
He did so, unintentionally, that very minute; his claws slipped
on the edge of the clumsily-built nest and, with a squawk, the
young cockatoo went tumbling and flapping out into the world,


through a gap in the prickly-pears. Down to the ground he came
and picked himself up with a shake.
" I flew / " he said proudly, looking round to see if anyone was
admiring him, but all the Bush Folk were much too busy with
their own affairs to pay attention to one fledgeling.
He was in a narrow space between the high cactus hedges;
near by was one of the rare clumps of trees which grew in the
prickly-pear belt, stringy-bark gums, with twisted roots and narrow
blue-green leaves. Amongst the branches was something which
the young bird cocked his head sideways to see more plainly —
a wonderful object of woven grass and leaves, lined with soft down.
Coloured flower petals were stuck about it, and bright, gleaming
pebbles, with some empty snail-shells.
Close by a quietly-feathered brown and buff bird sat on a bough,
and the small cockatoo questioned her.
"What is that beautiful place?" he asked.
"My little home," the other answered. "We Bower-birds
like to have nice things about us, and we've always been excellent
builders."
"Our nest isn't like that," the fledgeling said sadly.
"I should think not!" The Bower-bird cocked a scornful beak.
"You people have no taste; you think any old bundle of twigs
just knocked together is good enough for a nest; you're not in
the least house-proud like us."
"When I'm grown-up I shall have a much more beautiful house
than yours or anyone else's," the young cockatoo boasted, fluffing
out his down.
"You'd better see others before you squawk," said the Bower-
bird, flying away, whilst a gruff voice spoke from the foot of the
tree close to the cockatoo.
"She's right: I've a lovely cosy house here, dug deep amongst
the roots. You can come in if you like; Wombat's my name."


"Thanks, but —but it looks rather dark." One glance at the
burrow's entrance scared the young bird, and he edged away from
the furry brown creature with short sturdy legs and a rather
guinea-pig-like face.
"We like darkness." The Wombat showed long front teeth.
And if we don't go deep, the black-fellows dig us out. There aren't
many of us left; we're getting as rare as friend Koala up there.
Only vulgar creatures like rabbits get common every year, and
thank goodness we don't see them hereabouts."
Peeping up into the gum-tree the cockatoo's round eyes met
the beady black ones of Koala, the native Bear, twice as big as
the Wombat and with a comical fluffy-eared cub clinging to her
back.
"Please, do you dig houses, too?" the little bird asked, and
Koala answered sleepily, twitching her black, hooked nose:
Oh, dear no! Much too much trouble. I just live in one tree
till I ve eaten all the leaves, and then move to another and eat —
and eat "
The native Bear s beady eyes shut slowly—but she went on
nibbling the gum-leaves even in her sleep, whilst the baby
cockatoo went hopping away, determined to see all there was to
be seen.
It was warm and drowsy here, deep in the prickly-pear belt,
which stretched for miles in both directions, forming a place of
refuge, where beasts and birds can make their homes safely, where
even kangaroos and emus hide, when chased by men who dare
not follow them into that maze of tiny tracks twisting and turning
between the high prickly-pear hedges. Water-holes are sometimes
to be found in the depths of the belt, and wild creatures discover
plenty of food there, where the dusty grey cactus barriers grow so
gh and thick that it is impossible to see or be seen more than
a lew yards away.


Birds and beasts, therefore, think it a pleasant place; numbers
of them were about, as the wanderer soon saw and heard. Suddenly
and without warning a huge creature came bounding along with
great leaps, and the young cockatoo gave a muffled squawk as he
squeezed under a bush, just in time to escape being trampled to
death The beast paused at a little distance and began to nibble
the short grass of the track, resting upon its heavy tail, now and
then raising its deer-like head to look around with beautiful gentle
eyes for even a six-foot "boomer" kangaroo is a most harmless
creature unless driven to bay by dogs and men. Presently it bounded
softly away, and the little bird crept out to hop off on his travels agam.
A queer scuffling noise puzzled him, and cockatoo-curiosity
made him blunder into the cause of it in the shape of a bird twenty
times his own size, with a bare, skinny head and neck, rising from
a bright yellow
cowl or collar.
A sharp-nailed,
spurred foot
toppled the
interloper head
over claws into
a pile of dead
leaves which
the Brush-
turkey was
scratching
together, and
he had scarcely
breath left to
gasp:
"Please —
don't kill me!"


"Why do you get in the way when I'm building my nest?"
the big bird said severely, and the young cockatoo looked up at
the six-foot-high heap of sticks and leaves.
"Is that where you live?" he asked.
"No, but it's where my wife will lay her eggs, so that we can
cover them up and leave them to hatch, all snug and warm," the
Brush-turkey answered. "It's the only sensible arrangement.
Now, be off and don't bother me."
Fearing another kick, the small bird hurried away. He was
just beginning to feel claw-sore and hungry, to realise that there
was no mother to bring food to pop into his gaping beak, flies,
grubs or bits of fruit. He had seen flocks of green and yellow
parroquets feeding on the flowers of the prickly-pear, and he
stretched up to peck at some of them now. But the blossoms were
rather tasteless, and not many grew within his reach; he hopped
and scuffled on disconsolately, wishing that he knew the way home
to the nest.
The track had grown wider; presently it opened out into a
clearing, which held a few trees and some tall piles of reddish earth.
One of them, close to the little cockatoo, was built up in layers
or steps, rather like a wedding-cake, and as he examined it, head
on one side, another animal came slinking past, who might have
been a wolf, a jackal or a fox (if the fledgeling had ever dreamt
of such things), but was actually a Dingo, the wild dog of Australia,
prowling for a meal. So perhaps the young bird started his
conversation rather unfortunately.
I' Oh, please—l'm looking for something to eat!" he squeaked.
bo am I!" snarled the Dingo, making a grab, which would
ave caught the little cockatoo by the tail if it had been there.
rem' r.' , ]USt mana § ed to flu tter away, and then, suddenly
emembermg how he left the nest, flapped both absurd wings and
B ° W succeeded m raising himself from the ground and flopping


up, step by step, to the top of the seven-foot high heap of earth,
just out of the Dingo's reach, and clung gasping.
The yellow dog growled, showing all its teeth, and sprang up,
missing its prey again by a feather's breadth. But the small cockatoo
would certainly have been caught in the
end if it had not been for the sudden
appearance of a young waUab y- bound '
ing across the clear- ' in § like a . ver y
appearance of a young
ing across the clear-
long - legged rabbit,
much more substan-
the Dingo gave chase
in pursuit of
the nearest
little bird to
and promising a
I tial feast. At once
fn and disappeared
the wallaby down
track, leaving the
recover from his
fright by degrees
and to remember
again how hungry
he was.
Then he no-
ticed the hole at
the bottom of his
place of refuge,
through which a
stream of small
passing in
dark creatures was
and out, thousands and thou-
sands of them. Peering round
* to see that no other danger
was in sight, he hopped down to look more closely.
At once one of the tiny creatures stopped and stood still, holding
up a pair of ugly-looking pincers in defiance.
"What are you doing there?" the cockatoo enquired.


"Don't you know an ant-hill when you see it?" the other
asked.
"D'you mean this is your house, that you made it yourselves,
as big as this?" the young bird asked in astonishment.
Of course we did. Nothing s too big to build if there are enough
working and if you work hard enough," the ant snapped.
Please go away. We don't like strangers near the hill. It's so
disturbing."
I wonder if you re good to eat," the little cockatoo said
thoughtfully, forgetting in his hunger how tactless such a remark
was.
"You'd better not try," the ant cried fiercely. "Our bite's
poisonous, and if you touch one the rest will attack you and nip
you to death and pick your bones."
This sounded so unpleasant, and so many of the ants were
standing upriglrt in a ring, opening and shutting their pincers, that
the cockatoo decided to escape while he could. Off he went, scramb-
ling along on wings and feet together in a clumsy way, until he
was well away from the clearing and almost though not quite
out of sight of the prickly-pear hedges, for he had come out
through the edge of the belt into the more open country
beyond.
He was beginning to feel very miserable and to realise how
many enemies there were in the Bush for a lost little bird who
could not possibly find the way back to his own nest. As he squatted
forlornly m a tuft of long grass wondering what to do, he saw a
very strange animal sitting quite near under a gum-tree, such an
animal as the young cockatoo had never seen before.
This creature was neither furry nor feathery, it had no wings
nor tail, and it was nearly as large as the kangaroo. But it did
not look fierce—and it was eating something. Very slowly the
young bird hopped nearer, too hungry now to be frightened. He


sidled from tuft to tuft of grass until he was very close —and then
the creature saw him.
"Hullo, you funny little beggar!" it said. "What are you?
Do you want a crumb?"
The young cockatoo did not understand the words, of course,
but the voice of this queer animal sounded kind, and he was drop-
ping something on the ground, something that looked as though
it might be good to eat. The little bird came closer, whilst Conal,
sandwich in hand, watched eagerly, keeping quite still.
The small cockatoo took another hop and a peck at the crumbs,
then swallowed one so hastily that he almost choked, for he had
not really learnt to pick up his own food yet.
"Poor little chap, you are hungry!" the boy said. "Have a
bit of banana? "
He held the fruit out between his fingers, and the little bird
eyed it, head aslant. It looked very tempting, more so than the
crumbs, and after a few minutes of hesitation, he came near enough
to peck at it clumsily and to decide that it was nice. Very gently
Conal moved his hand, and then —how it happened neither of
them quite knew —but the bird was perched on the boy's knee
and the boy was dropping bits of ripe banana into the gaping
beak.
"You are hungry," he repeated again. "It doesn't seem as
if you'd ever be satisfied. Oh—there you are, Shelagh! Don't make
a noise and scare this little thing."
Shelagh, refreshed by her wash, walked noiselessly towards the
pair under the gum-trees, and spoke in an excited whisper.
"What is it?" she asked.
"A baby Cocky. Must have fallen out of a nest," Conal answered.
"It's quite tame; not a bit wild or afraid of me. I suppose that's
because it's starving. . . . Whoa, Cocky, you'll choke if you bolt
such big lumps!"


• • , ——— «^,
"Or because he's never seen a human boy before and doesn't
know there's any need to be frightened," Shelagh laughed.
'I shall take it home for a pet and teach it to talk," Conal
said. 'lt must be quite young; it's only just beginning to grow
proper feathers."
So young I'm afraid it won't live," Shelagh said. "Baby
birds need a lot of looking after."
"This one will get it," Conal declared. "I'll look after it and
feed it as if I were its own mother! Cockatoos live to be very old,
too. Over a hundred years, some of them, and I'm glad of that.
It is such a pity when pets only live a few years, like dogs and
cats. Now, we 11 make a sort of grass nest to carry him back to
Bundaburra."
Yes, 111 collect some soft leaves and moss—only don't be


too disappointed if he dies, Conal," Shelagh said doubtfully, remem-
bering some unsuccessful experiments of her own with young
birds.
Cocky didn't die. On the contrary, he grew bigger every day,
which was no wonder, considering how much he ate. He grew
handsome, too; the dirty down became dazzlingly white feathers,
a long sulphur-coloured crest drooped down the back of his head,
or was raised up like a cockscomb when he was excited or angry.
His eyes were bright grey with a black rim, his beak jet-black like
his legs and shining like polished ebony. Altogether Cocky was
a beautiful bird by the time he had lived six months at Bunda
burra Station—which in Australia means a farm—and he knew
it, too!
He was becoming a clever bird, as well; already he knew quite
a number of words and sentences. He began with " Pretty Cocky
and "Good Morning!" and simple things like that, but one day
Conal was surprised by a loud voice remarking as he walked up
the verandah steps from the garden; ' What a lovely Cockatoo!
At first he thought it was a visitor—until he discovered that Cocky
himself had spoken, using the phrase which he had heard from so
many admirers.
After that, he picked up many other things. He would call
the dogs and the cat, imitate Conal calling for his tea, whistle like
an Australian magpie, and sing several tunes, as well as performing
a multitude of tricks. He was so much at home in Bundaburra that,
most likely, he had almost forgotten his birthplace in the prickly-
pear belt and his strange adventures that first day when he tumbled
out of the nest. But not quite. He remembered having boasted
to the Bower-bird that some day he would have a finer house than
hers, or any other Bush creature.
"And I have!" he thought with satisfaction, looking at the
beautiful cage which stood on the verandah, all green and gold,


with seed and water-pots and always a piece of banana or apple
or a nut or loquat besides. There was a perch on a stand, too, under
a tall red camellia-tree, and a china bath with "Cocky" printed
on it.
Not that Cocky ever spent much time in his house or on his
perch, for wherever Conal went, Cocky went, too, sleeping on the
back of a chair in the boy's bedroom, even riding on his shoulder
down to the bathing-pool and sitting scolding on the bank while
Conal splashed and swam. When Conal was on horseback Cocky
perched on the front of the saddle; he sat beside him on the table
at meals or when he was studying, and watched from some-
where close by when he played lawn-tennis or cricket. Boy
and bird were inseparable; Conal was certain that Cocky under-
stood every word he said to him, and very likely he was not far
wrong.
Long before Cocky had grown up to this extent, Shelagh's
holidays were over and she had gone back regretfully to her school
in Sydney, promising to return to Bundaburra as soon as she could.
Somehow, one thing and another prevented this, and eighteen
months later the cousins had not met again. Conal was now just
fourteen, a taU, strong boy for his age, brown-faced, brown-eyed
and brown-haired, and a good rider and swimmer. For lessons,
he rode over to the nearest township three times a week, to study
mathematics, history and geography with a retired naval officer,
until Captain Ferrar left, a few months before Conal's fourteenth
birthday. The boy knew that his father longed to send him home
to England for three or four years' schooling if funds allowed, but
nothing had yet been settled, and Conal was quite content to jog
on quietly at the Station with Cocky as company.
But Cocky's adventures were not over yet by a very long way,
and Conal's had not really even begun, although the beginning was
to come much sooner than he expected.


CHAPTER THREE
THE SUN-DOWNERS
IT looked that morning as though the big paddock behind the
station, green with young grain a few minutes before, had
suddenly become a mass of soft white flowers, moving gently
in the breeze. But Cocky, perched on the verandah rail, knew
better, and chuckled excitedly.
He had seen them come, a snowy cloud against the blue sky,
that huge flock of birds, seen them swerve this way and that, then
drop down upon the paddock and begin to feed, with a rustling,
crooning sound. And they were cockatoos like himself, white-
plumed, sulphur-crested —more cockatoos than he had ever imagined
lived in the world; no wonder Cocky jigged from one foot to the
other and squawked loudly.
Answering shrieks came from the flock, and in another moment
Cocky had flown across to the paddock fence to investigate more
closely.
"What a lovely cockatoo!" he screamed, but the other birds
did not understand and took no notice, only went on feeding
greedily, as if they knew very well that they had no right to be
there. Cocky watched a minute or two longer, then his curiosity
was too much for him. Down he fluttered and disappeared into
the live snowdrift, just as a couple of men came running up.
"See those cockies!" one yelled to the other. "They'll have
the whole crop ruined if we don't drive 'em off."
"Too true!" the second man shouted back. "I'll fetch the
guns to frighten 'em."
The cockatoos were only left in peace a few minutes longer.
Then the men returned and —"Crack —bang!" shot after shot


rang out, disturbing the warm, wattle-scented morning. Up rose
the birds again in a white cloud, wheeling and screeching in fear,
as they flew this way and that above the paddock—and just at
that moment Conal tore down towards the slip-rails as fast as he
could.
From the orchard on the hillside above the station, he had
seen Cocky's flight from the verandah, and had come as fast as
possible to the rescue; now he leant against the rail, calling in
breathless fear:
"Cocky! Cocky!"
For a moment nothing happened; then there came in answer
a faint squawk, and a much dishevelled and terrified bird fluttered
up to Conal's shoulder, ruffling himself protestingly as the boy
walked over to the verandah steps and sat down.
"You bad fellow!" Conal was too much relieved to be really
angry. "Oh, Cocky, I thought you'd be killed, and then what
should I have done? You're almost the only friend I've got now in
the world, you know, old boy."
Cocky made a soft crooning noise and rubbed his beak against
Conal s cheek, as the boy stared drearily away across the garden,
bright with nasturtiums and petunias, with clumps of white and
yellow arum lilies. It was almost as if the bird understood, and
certainly he did know something was wrong with his friend, and
that for a long time now everything was changed and Conal' very
unhappy. J
Nearly two months ago the accident had happened, when
Mr. Reardon was killed by a fall from his horse, and it soon turned
out that poor Conal had lost not only his father, but nearly every-
thing else besides. What with drought, locusts, rabbits and bush-
fires, things had gone very wrong at Bundaburra for years past,
and Mr. Reardon had lost money so heavily that there was nothing
left for Conal when all the business affairs were settled.


The station itself had a new owner now, and although he offered
to let Conal work there for his keep, and even suggested paying
him a small salary later on, the boy knew that his father would
not have wished him to stay at Bundaburra.
"He wanted me so much to go to school in England," Conal
was thinking again now. "And I'm sure if I could only get there,
Uncle Jack and Aunt Sylvia would help me. But I can't ask them
for my passage home, even if I knew their address for certain.
Somehow I must. Don't bite my ear, Cocky; I'm just making a
plan."
Half an hour later the plan was almost made, and Conal, as
he went to his own room, looked and felt much happier than he
had done for weeks. For he had determined to make his way to
Sydney and, once at the great seaport, try to get a passage in a
homeward-bound steamer.
"I'd do any sort of work to pay for it," he thought. "And
—yes, of course, I'd see Shelagh before I started; she's a jolly
sensible kid and might be able to suggest something, so that I can
do what father wished."
It was cheering to think that he would not be quite alone in
Sydney, and Conal decided that the sooner he set off, the better.
"To-morrow, before sun-up, we'll make a start," he told Cocky,
who was perched upon the foot of his bed. "I'm not going to tell
Mr. Ferguson—he'd try to stop me. I'll just leave a note thanking
him and explaining, and we'll be miles away before he finds it.
We've got to foot it, Cocky; you and I will be sun-downers, and
carry our swags on our backs, tramping down to Sydney."
In another hour Conal had chosen the few things he meant to
take, and wrapped them neatly in his "bluey," which is Australian
for blanket, making a pack or swag to be slung upon his shoulders,
with a billy-can for tea-making hanging outside.
Wearing shirt, shorts, and a battered felt hat as a protection


against sunstroke, Conal looked the part of the "Swagsman" or
"Sun-downer" who tramps from station to station in Australia,
always sure of a meal and a shake-down at sunset, which he will
generally pay for by cutting wood, or doing some other farm job.
So the two set off on the long journey to Sydney in the very
early morning, with grey mist hanging over the billabongs or water-
holes and making the pale-trunked gum-trees look like ghosts in
the dim light. By sunrise Conal had walked about ten miles, with
Cocky perched rather sulkily on his shoulder, feathers fluffed-out.
But when the sun came up, golden from behind a slope covered
with yellow wattle, everything suddenly changed, and Cocky began
to perk and preen himself.
They were in a level plain with low hills here and there, round
which wound the sandy track, for it was little more. At first there
was not a living thing in sight, but as they passed a clump of ti-
bush and crimson waratah, Conal saw something moving on the
further side and crept forward noiselessly, holding Cocky so that
he might not give the alarm.
In a little clearing half a dozen crane-like birds, nearly as tall
as the boy himself, were moving to and fro, in a measured stately
way, exactly as though dancing. They were beautiful creatures
with crested heads and soft grey plumage touched with pink;
their partly-raised wings looked like ballet-skirts lifted to show
tights as they paced and circled, bowed and pirouetted in a
way that was half comic, half graceful.
Conal watched eagerly, until some movement in the further
trees startled the birds and they strutted away out of view.
Were in luck," Conal told Cocky. "Not many people have
seen that sight, for he knew that they had been watching the
dawn-dance of the brolgas, or "native companions," one of the
queerest things to be seen in the Australian Bush, that place of
queer sights.


-ex -
The sun was
fully up now,
and Cocky grew
lively in the
warming air,
flying from
bush to bush
beside the
track and
answering the
many birds
who were wak-
ing, to whistle,
pipe, scream
or chirp, whilst
kookaburras or
laughing jack-
asses guffawed
loudly. Pre-
sently they
reached the boundary-fencing of a large station, beside which the
road ran for some miles, and Conal sat down for breakfast, and
to make sure of his position with the aid of the map and compass
he had brought with him.
Afterwards they tramped on again, the boy talking aloud to
the bird as usual.
"Don't think much of their boundary-riders on this run," he
commented. "Just look at the rabbit-burrows each side of the rails
—shows they haven't wired and trapped properly. All this range
is alive with bunnies, Cocky—just see their scuts bobbing up and
down, and they've gnawed all the bark off the young trees in
that plantation. Yes, some of the chaps in the job here ought


to be sacked, unless perhaps the owner's badly off. That's
possible."
Cocky listened and looked wisely, head on one side, just as
though he quite understood the difficulties of Australian farmers.
Pretty Cocky!" he remarked gravely. "Have a bun?"
At which Conal laughed, declaring that Cocky talked quite
as sensibly as most people, and that it was time they took their
mid-day rest.
That night they slept out in the Bush; next evening, just at
sundown, they reached a station, and were welcomed in the kindly
Australian way. So things went on for a week, four nights of which
they spent under as many different roofs, with baths and meals
thrown in, although Conal insisted on wood-chopping, weeding and
fruit-picking for a few hours to pay his way, in real sun-downer's
fashion.
Then came a hot and airless day, after a night spent in the
open, when Conal, after plodding along till afternoon, was obliged
to confess to himself and Cocky that he was uncommonly footsore
and weary.
I m certain I've got a blister about the size of an orange on
each heel," he said ruefully. "And it's an awfully long way yet
to Sydney. We've not too much tucker, either, and I can't say
I'm looking forward to another Bush night. 'Fraid we're in for it
though."
All through the afternoon Conal trudged along, but matters
were not improved when Cocky elected to follow a flock of green
parrots, and disappeared amongst the trees. This meant a chase
for which poor Conal was very much disinclined, and by the time
he had caught Cocky he felt hot and angry.
Id like to shake you," he told the fly-away severely. "You
deserve a good thrashing, going off like that. How'd you have
liked it if I'd left you to get really lost?"


Cocky only gave a defiant squawk in answer, and when a piece
of string was fastened to the ring round his claw, sat sulkily on his
master's shoulder whilst Conal limped on, until the sun was shining
low down through the gum-trees, turning their pale trunks red,
and the air grew cooler. Suddenly the peace of the evening was
broken by a strange sound, a long-drawn howl, which rose and fell
and died away, then began again, most weird and uncanny in the
dimness of the Bush evening.
Conal stopped short and listened. Again the cry came, and he
frowned, for he knew quite well, as any New South Welshman
would, what it meant.
"Dingoes!" he muttered. "And they're on the kill. Now I
wonder where —seems to come from quite near, over there where
the trees end."
The boy began to run, forgetting his blisters and tiredness for
a minute. He had all an Australian farmer's hatred for the destruc-
tive wild dogs, and something in the sound told him that serious
mischief was afoot, for now the howls had changed to ugly worrying
snarls, not far away, as Conal ran on.
The trees thinned out, and beyond a scrub-covered open space
showed a boundary fence, with a grassy slope rising beyond. And
on that slope a cluster of whitish objects could be seen huddled
together, from which came muffled, piteous sounds of bleating.
"Sheep!" Conal whispered. "And —yes, there they are, the
ugly brutes! I thought as much!"
For dimmer still in the dusk, circling round the sheep, yellowish-
brown shapes were moving, very wolf-like and sinister, whilst at
a little distance two of them were chasing and trying to bring down
an unfortunate panic-stricken sheep they had separated from the
rest. Close by, a big gap in the wire with stakes dragged up showed
where they had found a weak spot and broken through.
"What on earth's to be done?" Conal thought. "They'll kill


that whole bunch of sheep and lambs if I go away for help, but
I don't see how I'm going to drive them off with no gun. I'll see if
I can frighten 'em, but they're as cunning as monkeys about knowing
who's dangerous."
He shouted and coo-eed at the top of his voice, and the dingoes
slunk away for a moment. But they stopped at a little distance,
gazing prick-eared, and evidently soon made up their crafty minds
that one boy, without a gun or a dog, could not harm them. Once
more they began to circle round the sheep, making vicious dashes
forward, snapping and snarling at their victims.
"I can't frighten them off that way, it's very certain," Conal
decided. "But how then? Perhaps if I made a fire—that's so
dangerous though, and it'd spread like anything if all this scrub
and dry grass caught. It s only something they don't understand
that scares the brutes, something unnatural. Dad told me once
how he frightened off a whole dingo-pack by covering himself up
with a Willesden-canvas rick-cover and crawling about so that they
couldn't see what was moving it. But I've nothing to hide myself—
unless By jove! I wonder —could I do it? Like—who was the
Johnny in Shakespeare . . . Macbeth or Macduff or someone?"
Before his thoughts got to this point Conal was already busy,
working with frantic speed. Only some ten minutes later, just as
the dingoes succeeded in driving off and cornering another sheep,
there appeared in the fence-gap an extraordinary object.
It moved slowly towards the cluster of sheep with the wild dogs
hovering round them, and at the sight of it the dingoes crouched,
staring, their eyes gleaming green, in the light of the just-rising
moon. For they had never seen anything like this before; trees
were objects which stood still, but this one was moving, waving
branches nearly twelve feet high, as though they were threatening
arms, whilst all its leaves and twigs rustled as it came on—on —on.
The dingoes snarled and whined, but the sounds were now more


frightened than threatening. They slunk away, bodies close to
the ground, leaving the sheep, even those they had pulled down.
And then, as the moving tree came near, and the leaves rustled
and waved more furiously, the yellow dogs took fright and tore
away, yelping in terror, vanishing like evil, cowardly shadows into
the deeper shadows of the bush.
Conal, pausing in his pursuit, chuckled behind the screen which
hid him from the enemies.
"That was 'Birnam woods coming to Dunsinane,'" he meditated.
"Lucky thing I thought of taking a leaf —or a lot of leaves —out
of old Macduff's book. Well, I never thought all that Shakespeare
I read with Captain Ferrar would come in really useful. It just
shows that one can't know, ever. Whew! It s scratchy and prickly
in here; I wonder if I dare come out. The brutes seem to have gone.
For Conal had transformed himself rapidly into something
like an old-fashioned Jack-in-the-Green. He had stuck six-foot
leafy branches into the leather belt round his waist, to wave high
above his head. He had covered himself entirely with thick masses
of tangled shrubs, dragged up by the roots and secured round
neck, legs, waist, arms with tough creepers. In each hand he carried
long boughs torn from a tall white-flowered camphor-tree which
grew amongst the lower bushes —and the dusk hid any gaps there
may have been in his leafy disguise.
As Conal paused, deliberating whether the dingoes had really
gone, shouts came from the opposite direction, and a few
minutes later two riders appeared, galloping at full speed. One
of them threw himself off at the gap in the fence and coo-eed
to start back in utter amazement when Conal's reply came from
so close to him.
"Why—what —my Colonial!" he exclaimed, as the boy began
to emerge from his prickly coverings. "How did you get in there?
What's the idea, at all?"


"To frighten the dingoes," Conal explained. "And it did, too.
I say, I hope they've not hurt many of the sheep; they'd just got
hold of that one."
"We'll be able to save her," the newcomer said. "They're
more frightened than hurt —but things would have been far worse—
they'd have had the lot if you hadn't driven the brutes off and
warned us of
what was hap-
pening by your
coo-ees a little
while ago."
notice," Conal laughed.
"I'm awfully glad we
happened to come
along in time."
We? ' The other looked round for Conal's companion, but Cocky
had already answered the boy's whistle, flown from the rail and was
perched upon his master's shoulder, crooning and scolding by turns.
Well, my name's Grant, and I own this run," the man said.
So I needn t tell you that I'm grateful to you! These are a valuable
lot of sheep. Where are you off to, my lad?"


"Sydney," Conal answered. "And if you could put us up for
a night I should be awfully grateful."
"I'd do that for any sun-downer," Mr. Grant said. "Come on
now, and we'll talk things over."
CHAPTER FOUR
THE STOW-AWAY
FROM Conal's talk that evening with Mr. Grant came a most
wonderful bit of luck. For the sheep-farmer, in his gratitude
for the camouflage-stunt, as Conal called it, offered to take the
two sun-downers to Sydney.
"I'm motoring down there on business, starting the day after
to-morrow," he said. "And you and the bird can just as well come
along; there'll be plenty of room. I suppose you're going to relations
in Sydney?"
"Yes, I've a cousin there," Conal answered promptly, but
he did not say that the cousin was only a school-girl of his own
age. He had an idea that Mr. Grant, if he heard of all his plans,
might try, like Mr. Ferguson at Bundaburra, to persuade him to
stay in Australia, and that Conal was quite determined that he
would not do. The boy accepted this new friend's offer most
gratefully, for he had begun to wonder whether he and Cocky
would ever reach Sydney on foot.
The old-fashioned Ford car seemed to Conal quite luxurious,
and this was how he and Cocky arrived at the outskirts of Sydney
and saw from a low hill the wonderful harbour stretched out, with
its hundreds of blue bays and inlets set in the greys and greens of
the country round, and the distant white surf border of the Pacific
Ocean beyond the gateway of the Heads.
Mr. Grant insisted on Conal having lunch with him at a big


hotel before parting, but he little knew when they said good-bye
that the boy had just four-and-sixpence left in his pocket and
no likelihood of getting more.
"He'd have said I was mad, Cocky, or offered me money,
and I couldn't cadge, after he'd been so jolly decent," Conal
told his companion, as they started towards the suburbs and
Shelagh's school. The big town, with its fine streets and build-
ings, seemed extraordinarily noisy after the quiet of the Bush,
and poor Cocky was terrified and bewildered by the traffic and
crowds.
They were both glad when they reached the school, although
Conal was to get a most unpleasant surprise before Shelagh had
been in the room for five minutes.
She came through from the verandah with a rush, black curls
flying, blue eyes shining, a long-legged fourteen-year-old herself
now, in a blue serge gym tunic.
"Oh, Conal, how frightfully jolly to see you after all these ages,"
she cried. "And Cocky, too, the lamb —how he's grown! Only I
do wish you'd come weeks and weeks ago, because I'm sailing for
England to-morrow."
"What?" Conal gasped, and Shelagh nodded violently.
"Yes, I am truly," she said. "It was all settled in a tremendous
hurry, and I have to pinch myself to know it's real, but Grannie
in England wants me to go to school there, and she managed every-
thing. She's my guardian, you know, ever since Father and Mother
died, though I've never seen her yet. My passage is taken in the
Crusoe, and I'm to be in charge of the Captain. I rather wish I
weren't, because he's a frightening sort of person, with a black
pointed beard."
"I came to Sydney to go home too," Conal said slowly.
"Oh, that's grand! We'll be together then. I'm sure you could
get a berth on the Crusoe. ..."


"No, I couldn't, because I've no money to pay for one. I shall
have to work my passage somehow. Dad had fearfully bad luck,
you know, Shelagh: there was hardly anything left."
"I see; I'm awfully sorry, Con." Shelagh looked serious. "Well,
then, you must get a job on the Crusoe."
"If they'll have me. I'll try her, anyway, and I'd better go
straight away if she's sailing so soon. Look here, She, could you
meet me somewhere for tea and bring Cocky? then I can tell you
what's happened."
"Yes," Shelagh nodded. "The Head said I could go out with
you when she heard you were my cousin. I'll meet you by the
Post Office at five, and I do hope you'll be able to get a job on the
Crusoe. She's alongside at Circular Quay; I'm to take my things
on board to-night, as we start very early in the morning."
The hopes of Conal and Shelagh were disappointed. There
was no job for the boy aboard the Crusoe, so the purser told him,
and it was the same on all the other ships which he visited; nobody
wanted Conal as a sailor, steward or even stoker, and Shelagh,
when he joined her for tea, was quite as disappointed as himself.
"Oh, Conal, we must go home on the same boat!" she said.
"It is a shame —and there isn't time to cable for money to Grannie
or anyone."
"I couldn't, anyway," Conal said stoutly. "She isn't my Grand-
mother, only yours, you know. But I'll get to England somehow,
if I have to stow away in a ship."
"Oh, Conal, what fun!" Shelagh's eyes, which had been tearful,
began to dance again. "And you must do it on board the Crusoe ;
then I can look after you and bring you food."
"It's not fair to mix you up in it," Conal began, but Shelagh
would not listen. She started making plans at once, and in a few
minutes had settled everything, even the place on board where
Conal was to stow himself. He must get inside one of the ship's


boats on the upper deck, she declared; they had canvas covers,
and it would be easy to slip underneath.
"I saw those boats when we went on board about my cabin,"
she said. "It will be ever so much better than hiding in the hold
or somewhere below; how could I get down there? And I'm sure
they won't take the boat covers off before we start. Can't you
see what a splendid idea it is? The hold would be horrible —all
rats and blackbeetles, and pitch dark, too."
Conal was obliged to agree with his cousin that a boat on deck
in the air and light did sound nicer, and they began planning. When
Shelagh went on board that night, Conal could go with her, helping
to carry the luggage. Then they would slip up on deck, Conal hiding
in the boat, with Shelagh to fasten down the cover, and, with luck,
no one would notice that he was still on the ship. He must take as
much food as possible for himself; afterwards Shelagh would keep
him supplied, smuggling things into the boat when no one was
about.
And you needn't stay hidden for long," Shelagh ended cheer-
fully. Once we ve been a week or so at sea it will be quite safe
for you to come out, because then the captain would never turn back."
He might put me off at the first port we came to," Conal said
doubtfully.
Well, that would be better than nothing! Conal, I don't believe
you re a bit adventuresome really. Td love to stow away instead
of just travelling in an ordinary cabin."
Conal wondered whether Shelagh would think the same if she
spent a day or two in the boat, but he kept such thoughts to him-
self. After all, she was being very decent, and he could not think
of a better plan in a hurry.
Everything worked out well. Conal spent his whole four-and-
sixpence on food that was easily stowed away and, late that evening,
followed Shelagh up the Crusoe's gangway carrying two suit-cases.


Once these were taken to his cousin's cabin, Conal left her there
with the school-mistress and friends who had come to see her off,
and went up on to the busy crowded decks to wait. Nobody took
any notice of the boy; presently it grew dark and the friends of
the passengers began to leave, then at last, after what seemed
a very long time, Shelagh appeared.
"Come on," she said breathlessly, and led the way to the boat
which she had especially noticed, a small one, slung rather low.
Part of the canvas cover was quickly unlaced, and Conal climbed
up and slipped through the opening, whilst Shelagh arranged the
cords which fastened the canvas.
"I've left it partly open —it doesn't show," she whispered.
"And here's my thermos full of lemonade, and a travelling
rug. Make yourself comfy, Conal, and I'll take great care of
Cocky."
For it had been agreed that Shelagh must take charge of Cocky,
who could not be trusted to keep quiet at the right moment. He
would be safe enough in the cabin, and Shelagh promised to
bring him to visit Conal whenever she could, to keep the chain
fastened to his ankle-ring, for fear that he might fly away, and to
give him plenty of his favourite bananas. All the same, Conal felt
very lonely when Shelagh's footsteps padded away. He did not
find her parting instructions easy to follow. The boat's bottom was
very hard and ridgy: it was nearly as dark and stuffy as any hold
could be, and the stow-away dared not move much in case someone
might be near and hear him.
It was impossible to sleep, and Conal lay cramped and wakeful
all night, listening to the sounds of departure and expecting to
be found every minute. Feet ran or walked past, derricks creaked,
the donkey-engine panted, men shouted. There was all the bustle
of a ship's sailing, and presently the deep sound of the syren and the
ting-ting of the engine-room telegraph.


More shouting, rattling of winches, straining of cables, and
Conal, waiting breathlessly, could feel the Crusoe moving away from
the quay. They were off! Jangling of bells, loud orders, louder
stamping of feet were all drowned by blasts from the steam-whistle.
Conal lay, once more listening, whilst his hiding place grew gradually
lighter.
It seemed a long while before a voice spoke softly beside him.
Are you all right, Con? We're past the Heads—and I saved a
roll from breakfast, buttered. I'll poke it in, and a box of chocs
the girls gave me. They're very nourishing. Nobody's about, but
we'd better not talk much."


The canvas was lifted, and Conal received the roll and chocolates.
After that there was nothing to do except lie there growing hotter
and hotter with the snn blazing down on the canvas cover. He
was very thirsty, but dared not use up the lemonade or the oranges
he had brought too quickly, since he did not know when he might
get anything to drink again. But presently, in spite of all the un-
comfortableness, he fell asleep, and did not wake until it was dark
and so quiet that he ventured to lift the cover a little and peep
out.
This part of the ship seemed empty, although a band was
playing somewhere on the deck below, and Conal actually dared
to creep out for a little and walk about, until he felt rather less
cramped and aching. Twice one of the crew passed whilst Conal
was out of his hiding-place, but took no notice of the boy leaning
over the railing; most likely they thought he was one of the passengers
taking a stroll in the dark before going to bed. Presently there
was a soft pattering of feet, and Shelagh appeared, carrying a
tumbler of lemon-squash.
"Oh, Conal, do you think it's safe to be out?" she whispered.
"There's a dance going on, and I brought you something to drink
and some biscuits."
"Good! It's all right; nobody can see who I am in the dark.
I mean to come out every night," Conal said decidedly. "You've
no idea how uncomfortable it is in that boat."
"Oh, dear, I wish you could come out for good!" Shelagh
sighed. "We could have such fun. It's lovely being on board
ship."
"Is it?" Conal said grimly. "Well, I suppose I'd better get
back. Take care of Cocky."
Early next morning, Conal was waked from an uncomfortable
sleep by a sharp patter-patter on the canvas cover overhead. It
was just like being inside a drum, for the noise was almost deafening


on the tant surface, and for a while it was difficult to imagine what
it could be. Harder and harder —until the boy's curiosity made
him lift a corner of the canvas, get a lump of melting ice full in
his mouth and fall back spluttering and gasping.
"Hailstones!" Conal thought. "And what whopping big ones!
They're jumping off the canvas on to the deck just like marbles."
The hailstorm was short and sharp; soon after it had ended the
sun came out, and Conal resigned himself to another roasting day
in his cramped prison, and miserably wondered how long he ought
to stay there, before taking the risk of coming out.
"I don't believe I could stick a week of it," he thought. "Seven
whole days and nights—oh, my goodness!"
His imprisonment was not to last even seven whole hours more,
if Conal had only known it, but it most certainly did not end in
the way he—or Shelagh—would have chosen.
It was after mid-day before Shelagh appeared, or, rather, before
her voice sounded, suddenly and unexpectedly.
I m here, Con —and Cocky, too. I'm going to pretend to be
talking to him, in case anyone passes, so that I can lean against
the boat and you 11 hear every word. But there's nobody about;
they re all at lunch. I asked the steward for some sandwiches
and fruit to eat on deck, and we'll share them."
A rather one-sided conversation followed, for Conal was afraid
to say much. Not that the third person present was silent; Cocky
seemed in a lively mood, squawking and chattering and hopping
about on the canvas cover or fluttering down to the deck. Doing
her best to amuse Conal, Shelagh described the passengers, the
deck-games, the swimming-pool, the school of porpoises which was
passing at that moment, the skimming, silvery flying-fish.
K , there is an albatross following the ship," she went on.
It s just swooped down to get something that was thrown over-
board, and it looks simply enormous when you see it close. The


chief officer told me that it's quite a well-known bird and often
follows the steamers on this route; the sailors know it and feed
it and call it 'Old Bill/ so it's quite tame. Its wings are more
than seven feet across, so I don't see how it can be right in the
Ancient Mariner about hanging an albatross round one's neck
'instead of a cross.' Don't you remember —the sailor who shot
one with his cross-bow and —oh, Cocky!"
Suddenly Shelagh's voice broke off in a scream of startled
horror.
In watching the albatross and describing it to Conal, she had
quite forgotten the cockatoo, and had let his chain slip from her
fingers. Cocky, finding himself free, had hopped away to some
little distance along the empty sunlit deck, chuckling and crooning
to himself, quite unconscious of danger.
But the albatross, as it swooped and wheeled in the ship's wake
for the scraps thrown over by its old friends, the crew of the Crusoe,
had seen with those wicked yellow eyes, which were so marvellously
quick and long-sighted, the white bird hopping along the deserted
deck, and thought that Cocky would make a far daintier meal
than even a lump of fat pork.
Down it planed, the huge wings extended, straight towards
its prey, and just as Shelagh screamed, the terrible curved beak
snapped, missing Cocky scarcely by a feather's-breadth and sending
the startled bird fluttering and scuffling away in a panic of
fear.
The albatross rose, surprised for an instant by the girl's voice,
but not for long. Just overhead it hovered, preparing to swoop
down again, whilst Shelagh sprang forward in wild terror to catch
Cocky, who, almost blind with fright, only hopped further away
and out of reach.
"Cocky —Cocky —oh, he'll be killed!" Shelagh cried desperately,
but already, at her first shriek, Conal was dragging back the


canvas cover and scrambling out of the boat, quite reckless of
consequences.
He saw Shelagh in pursuit of Cocky, saw the terrible bird from
overhead swoop down again, looking a monstrous size as the shadow
of its wings swept along
the deck. And then, as
it was just about to seize
Cocky, and before Conal
could get near enough
to help, Shelagh plunged
forward and caught the
albatross by its dang-
ling feet.
Startled and angry,
it swerved aside, strugg-
ling and beating with
its wings, but Shelagh
hung on desperately,
entirely forgetful of her
own safety in her wish
to rescue Cocky.
"Let go—let go,
Shelagh!" Conal shouted
at the top of his voice,
realising what might
happen, as he saw his
cousin dragged across the
deck, losing her footing, stumbling.
The albatross, thoroughly alarmed now, used its enormous
wing-power to the utmost, rose higher, pulling Shelagh right off
her feet, against the low rail. Then and only then she relaxed her
grasp of the legs of the great bird—too late. The albatross had


dragged her already over the rail, and as it rose high, in wide circles,
and beat away south, there came a splash and a despairing cry
from the sea beyond the ship's side.
A second splash followed with barely time to breathe between
them, for, as his cousin disappeared, Conal sprang upon the rail
and dived overboard after her.
Fortunately Shelagh's cries and the screeches of Cocky had
attracted the attention of some of the crew upon the lower deck,
who now came running to see what was the matter. Whilst one
sailor hurriedly unlashed and flung a lifebuoy over the rail, another
raced away towards the officer on the bridge, and in a marvellously
short time after the first man had shouted "Man Overboard!
the engine-room signals were jangling out the orders "Slow speed
ahead" and to reverse the engines, whilst with creaking of davits
one of the quarter-boats had been swung outboard, with half her
crew already in her and others swinging themselves down by the
ropes and tackle like monkeys.
But, short as the time really was, it seemed ages to Conal and
Shelagh. The boy was a strong swimmer, and the instant that he
came to the surface after his dive he went threshing arm over
arm towards the place, already far astern, where he caught a
glimpse of a scarlet sleeve, a wet dark head, an arm raised for a
moment.
Water dripped into his eyes, but he plunged on blindly, caught
another glimpse of Shelagh, and in a few seconds more had her
by the arm.
"Don't struggle "he gasped breathlessly. "Just let your-
self float and it will be all right—but don't try to catch hold of
me, whatever —you do—or—we'll both be drowned "
"I'm not — going to!" choked back Shelagh, so indignantly that
Conal would have laughed at any other time. "I can swim too!"
"Good —but don't try to swim too hard, all the same," Conal


retorted. "We may have to keep up a long time, till they get off
a boat —we mustn't waste strength."
He managed to rub some of the water out of his eyes and look
back across the glittering sea-surface anxiously. There was the
Crusoe , looking already an immense way off, but he could see move-
ments and figures on her side, and guessed that they were lowering
a boat. But, better still, at that moment he saw something else,
bobbing on the crest of a little wave, diving down, reappearing
again.
It s a life-belt, Conal gasped. "I'll get it, Shelagh; it's
floating down to us."
He swam a few strokes, then grabbed at the belt and caught
it by one of the dangling life-lines, with which he towed it to where
Shelagh floated, paddling with hands and feet.
Catch hold of this, old girl," he said. "I'll hang on one side
and 3/ou the other. Good luck! This'll keep us up for hours and
hours."
Clinging each to an edge of the white-painted life-buoy, the
two grinned at each other as cheerfully as they could across its
circle.
Keep as low in the water as you can—let it support your
weight," Conal advised. "What luck that it's so calm! It would
have been ever so much harder for them to pick us up if it had
been a rough sea."
Ye-es, Shelagh gulped. " But—but if it had been r-r-ough "
She broke off, but, without knowing it, her eyes told Conal
what she had been thinking, just because he was thinking precisely
the same thing himself. If it had been rough—there wouldn't be
so rauch fear of other things, above all, of one thing
"It's lucky, too, that we have such light clothes on," Conal
went on as loudly and cheerfully as he could. "Nothing heavy to
weigh us or—what's the matter, Shelagh?"


"I —I —felt something
touch my foot, s-s-some-
thing cold '' Shelagh
faltered.
Conal lowered himself
quickly, ducked, bobbed
up again, his face
whiter than he knew,
although he tried to speak severely.
"Don't be an ass, Shelagh—there's your cold thing, just a
jelly-fish! Heaps of them floating round."
"Sorry—I—I —thought it was ash a fish " Shelagh
almost sobbed, as Conal burst out fiercely:
"Of course it wasn't! Nothing of the kind. There aren't —
they don't —there's no danger "
But his voice faded away. It was of no use for him, an Australian
boy, to tell Shelagh, an Australian girl, that there were no sharks
in the Pacific Ocean. Both had heard of them and seen them too
often.
Clinging one to each side of the life-buoy, they expected each
instant to see a black fin above the surface, a white-grey body
beneath it. They tried to keep on smiling at each other, to talk,
even to laugh, but all the time they were waiting, so much so that
they scarcely heard the steady thud-thud of rowlocks, the regular
splash of oars, until a shout came to them across the water:
"Hang on, you two! It's all right—we're coming!"
It was the voice of the Crusoe's second officer, and almost at
once the boat shot up to the life-buoy and the boy and girl were
handed in over her side. And as she lay on the bottom boards,
dripping and panting, Shelagh gasped out:
"Oh, I thought at the very last minute —they'd bite off the
leg that was left hanging over —are we —are we really safe?"


"You really are," the second officer assured her. ''And
now let's wrap this coat round you, though my nurse
always used to tell me that you never caught cold from sea-
water!"
Dripping like half-drowned rats, the pair were handed up the
side of the Crusoe, now barely moving through the water, to be
met at the top of the gangway by the stern, black-bearded Captain,
and by Cocky, perched upon the rail and scolding and screeching
vigorously, as though the whole adventure had been everybody's
fault but his own.
"Well, what's the meaning of this, young lady?" the Captain
said to Shelagh. "And who may this be?"
"I we " Shelagh began.
"She 1
Conal tried to support her, but the Captain
interrupted.
"Go and get dry first—then come to my cabin and
give me an explanation," he said, his eyes very cold and
grave.
As Conal changed in the Second Officer's cabin into the spare
clothes which Shelagh had kept for him, he felt thoroughly miserable.
The Captain did not look at all the man to encourage stow-aways —
and somehow the idea of being left friendless at some South American
port was very dreary.
Outside the Captain's cabin, Conal and Shelagh met —and
Cocky, perched upon his master's shoulder, was very much the most
cheerful of the three. As the boy and girl timidly knocked and
still more timidly entered, it was Cocky who gave what Conal
considered a most tactless yell.
Hullo, old Bean! ' he shrieked. "What a lovely cocka-
too!" 7
. Captain, who was sitting at his table, looking, as Shelagh
said afterwards, like a Court Martial or something, did not smile—


but there was a look in his eye that might have been the faint
shadow of a twinkle, as he said in his deep voice:
"Now then, my lad, let's hear what you have to say."
"Please, I want to tell you first, sir, that Shelagh—my
cousin—had nothing to do with it," Conal began, but Shelagh
interrupted:
"Oh, you story-teller! Why, I suggested you coming on the
Crusoe, you know I did!"
"Only after I'd told you I was going to stow away," Conal
said, and went on to tell the whole story as plainly as he
could.
The Captain listened in silence; at the end, he looked gravely
at Conal.
"Well," he said. "What do you propose now?"
"If you'd only let me work my way to England," the boy
stammered. "As a sailor or stoker —I don't suppose I'd be much
use, but I'd try awfully hard "
"I can't consider such a thing," the Captain said shortly, and
then, before Conal's heart had time to sink lower than his heels,
added, in a different voice: "But I'm willing to take you on as
my own personal boy, to wait on me and do odd jobs. There's a
cubby-hole of a cabin next to mine, so you'd be on the spot —
weh?"
"Oh, sir!" Conal found that he could not manage to say any
more, but the Captain seemed to understand, for he nodded kindly,
and looked at Shelagh with what was a decided twinkle.
" And I won't work him too hard; he'll have plenty of time
to play with you."
Outside the cabin, Conal and Shelagh gazed at each other.
"He may look severe," Conal said. "But he —well—he's —I
didn't think anyone could be so decent!"
"He's just a lamb!" Shelagh declared.


PART II
CHAPTER ONE
CRUSOE'S ISLAND
CAPTAIN CLARK kept his promise. Although Conal was
determined to do all he could towards earning his passage,
there were plenty of spare hours to enjoy the voyage with
Shelagh and Cocky, after his jobs were done.
The time passed quickly as the Crusoe kept on her straight
course across the Pacific Ocean, with bright blue days and dark
blue nights, when the phosphorescence on the sea gleamed like
the stars overhead.
On one of these nights, as the cousins hung over the rail to
watch the ship's shining wake, Conal spoke mysteriously.
The first place we stop at will be the greatest surprise of your life."
"Why should it?" Shelagh asked. "Valparaiso doesn't sound
frightfully thrilling."
Well, you just wait and see," Conal said, and most annoyingly
refused to reveal any more.
. Two d£ W s later Shelagh was waked very early, feeling that the
ship was no longer moving. She sprang up, but the porthole only
framed empty sea, grey-blue in the dawn.
Hurry up on deck!" came Conal's voice outside, and Shelagh
ressed at express speed. She found Conal looking at the sunrise
and at something nearer, wild and rocky mountains and cliffs,
dark against the golden eastern sky.


"But that can't be Valparaiso!" Shelagh stared. "It's a desert
island!"
" Right first time," Conal chuckled. " The desert island, Robinson
Crusoe's own, where the poor chap lived who was 'monarch of all
I survey'— you know!"
Shelagh knew, and sighed with satisfaction as she heard that
they were to spend twenty-four hours at Juan Fernandez, putting
in there before reaching Valparaiso, three hundred and sixty-five
miles beyond, on the South American coast.
"The Captain told me ages ago," Conal said importantly.
"And I'm to have the whole day off; we'll go ashore in the first
boat directly after breakfast. Look—that's Cumberland Bay where
we land, and the queer square-topped mountain behind is El Yunque,
that means The Anvil. It's three thousand feet high.
"But I see houses; I thought it was a desert island." Shelagh's
tones were rather disappointed.
"Well, it isn't now. That place is San Juan Bautista, the
settlement of about two hundred and fifty people. They catch
cray-fish to export mostly; whopping big ones live amongst the
rocks here."
"You seem to know all about it," Shelagh remarked.
"Ought to. The Captain lent me a book," Conal grinned.
" I bet you hadn't heard the island's real name, Mas a Tierra, meaning
'Nearer to the Land.' But that's enough for now; let's hurry."
Conal and Shelagh never forgot the thrill of landing on " Robinson
Crusoe's Island." Crossing wide and beautiful Cumberland Bay
towards the landing-place, they could think and talk of nothing
but Crusoe, his goats, his parrot and "Man Friday.
"I expect to see them everywhere," Shelagh said. Lets get
right away from houses, Con, as soon as we can, just you and
Cocky and I."
We must go to Crusoe's Look-out —you won't understand


if I call it 'Portezuelo de Robinson/" Conal told her. "Unless
you're afraid of a steepish climb."
"Of course I'm not," Shelagh declared indignantly. But after
scrambling up rocky paths for over two hours to reach the "look-
out" in the middle of the twelve-mile-long island, she confessed
that "steepish" scarcely described it.
The view, however, was worth the climb. From here they could
see the whole of Juan Fernandez and the other island as well, Santa
Clara, where only goats live—two lumps of rock, a big and a small,
in the middle of blue ocean.
"Just fancy poor old Robinson coming up here day after day
and longing to see a ship," Shelagh said.
"Only he was really Alexander Selkirk, you know," Conal
corrected. "Here's a lot about him on this slab."
There on the tablet fixed to the rocks of the "look-out" in
1868 by the officers of H.M.S. Topaze, the two read how Alexander
Selkirk, the Scottish sailor, who gave Defoe the idea of writing
Robinson Crusoe, spent more than four years entirely alone on the
island after he had landed there from the galley Cinque Ports in 1704.
"He was taken off by the Duke privateer in 1709, and afterwards
he was Lieutenant of H.M.S. Weymouth," Conal said, as he studied
the inscription. And he died in 1723, when he was forty-seven.
Poor old Robinson Crusoe!"
"Poor ol' Cocky!" Cocky squawked from Conal's shoulder,
evidently thinking himself disregarded, and brought them back
from yesterday.
"Let's get down to one of the beaches," Conal said. "We might
have a bathe and explore a bit."
But after another hour of scrambling, sliding, losing and finding
the way, Shelagh was too tired to feel like swimming, and, it must
be confessed, rather cross as well. When they reached a little rocky
bay, she flung herself down, refusing to explore any further.


"I shall rest here," she said stubbornly. "You can do what
you like."
"I will!" Conal answered crossly. "But I do think you're a
slacker."
"Don't care," Shelagh grunted, curling up on the sand, with
Cocky, also somewhat sulky, perched on a rock beside her, whilst
Conal stumped off angrily.
It was very hot and still; in half a minute, so it seemed to Shelagh,
she fell fast asleep.
When she woke it was still hot and silent, but the shadows
stretched much further across the white sand. Wondering where
Conal was, she sat up —
and suddenly felt like
Robinson Crusoe himself.
The beach was covered
with firm sand between
rocks, and close to Shelagh
was the clear print of a
bare foot, which certainly
had not been there when
she fell asleep.
" Man Friday!" Shelagh
gasped, rubbing her eyes
to find if she were really
awake. Next instant she
felt more certain than
ever that she must be
dreaming, for there, stand-
ing on some rocks a short
distance away, staring
out across the sea, was
Robinson Crusoe himself!


Shaggy beard, pointed hairy cap, goatskin coat and leggings,
gun in hand —it was all exactly like the pictures, even to the green-
and-yellow parrot on his shoulder, and Shelagh's spine crept with
a queer shivering.
It s a ghost," she thought, "Crusoe's—or Selkirk's; I expect
it does haunt the island —and Friday's too."
For a few moments Shelagh sat, her eyes fixed on the strange
figure; then the tense silence was broken by a hoarse screech, and
a white-feathered bombshell hurled itself across the beach, Cocky,
who evidently disapproved of parrot ghosts, attacking this rival,'
beak and claws.
Cocky, how dare you?" A very human voice scolded him.
"Get away! Here, look out !"
There was a clattering, slithering sound, and Robinson Crusoe
disappeared, as completely as any real ghost, but Shelagh was
already running towards the place where Cocky was vindictively
tearing to pieces a green-and-yellow body. On the further side
of the big shelf she found Crusoe; taken by surprise, he had slipped
down, almost to the beach level, and was vainly trying to drag
out his foot from a crack between two rocks.
It was that wretch, Cocky. He startled me, and my ankle's
slipped in here and got caught," Conal's voice explained.
Give a hand, Shelagh; it went in, so it must be able to come
out."
This did not seem to follow, however. Shelagh tugged
and twisted with both hands, but the foot refused to be
moved.
The ankles swelling," she said. "And the more we pull the
more it swells. I believe it would come easier if you rested it for
a bit."
I can t! Conal said fiercely. "Don't you see the tide's coming
m, and if I'm caught by it here "


There was no need to say any more. Shelagh understood as
she looked at the sea creeping steadily up the beach and now only
a few yards away. She jumped up.
"I'll go and get help," she said. "Do you know how far it is
to the nearest houses?"
"Nearly half-an-hour's walk," Conal said. "It wouldn't be
any use."
"But we must do something," Shelagh cried desperately. "Let's
both try together."
Their fresh efforts had no result except to make the ankle swell
visibly and grow more and more red and inflamed.
"We're only making it worse," Shelagh declared. "Con, I
believe the best thing would be if the tide did come up!"
"And drown me, d'you mean?"
"Don't be silly! But the cold water filling the crack might
make the swelling go down and—oh, what an idiot I am! Of course
—only how can I carry it? Yes —that will do "
In another minute Shelagh was at the sea's edge, scooping
up water in the goatskin hat which she had snatched from Conal's
head. Backwards and forwards she ran, carrying the dripping cap,
splashing its contents into the crack, over the trapped foot and
ankle, back and forwards, racing the tide.
Soon Shelagh was panting for breath, her hair wet, stragg-
ling down over her hot face, but she would not stop for a
moment.
"We must get the swelling down," she gasped. "Does it feel
any looser? —but don't try to force it."
The sea seemed following the girl, creeping up the beach after
her. It was already sucking and gurgling into the crack before
Conal, cautiously wriggling and twisting, could say:
"It is easier, I do believe —the water's made it so cold that
I can hardly feel, but —Aaah!"


Pressing
with his
hands on
each side of
the crack,
he made a
great effort;
out came
the foot
with a plop,
like a cork
from a bot-
tle, and
Conal fell
sprawling
on his back,
just as the
first big
wave broke
over the
rocks, cover-
ing both of
them with
spray.
Next instant Conal was on his feet, and the two hurried up the
beach, with Cocky fluttering after them, screaming excitedly.
Thats the way to the village," Conal said, showing a path
which ran up through a narrow valley. "We'll go easy now; my
oot aches a bit, though there's nothing much the matter with it."
Yes, and / want to know who turned you into Robinson
rusoe, Shelagh said. "Though you don't look so much like him
without the hat, and your beard's all crooked too."


Conal pulled it off, laughing.
"I thought of it all on board," he said. "Directly the Captain
told me about stopping at Juan Fernandez. That fat stewardess
helped me with the dress; she had these old goatskin mats and
the stuffed parrot too. She will be sick with Cocky for tearing
it up; it belonged to her great-aunt, or somebody. One of the
sailors lent me the gun, and he took the things ashore and left
them at a cottage for me."
"So that's why you didn't want me to rest so far away!"
Shelagh laughed.
"Naturally! Look what miles I had to walk in this awful hot
kit," Conal grumbled. "But I took you in splendidly. I could see
by your face that you really thought I was Crusoe's ghost.
"I certainly did," Shelagh confessed. "It was Cocky who gave
you away by being jealous of the parrot. He couldn't bear to see
you petting another bird!"
"The most difficult part was making the 'Man Friday' foot-
steps." Conal chuckled at the remembrance. "I only thought
of it when I saw you asleep, and I had an awful job sneaking across
the beach from rock to rock, so that I mightn't leave tracks all
the way, or wake you. But you kept on peacefully snoring '
"I didn't! I never snore," Shelagh cried indignantly.
"Then it must have been Cocky. Anyway you didn't wake,
and if it hadn't been for that awful bird, you'd have firmly believed
you'd seen Crusoe himself on Crusoe's Island."
Shelagh did not deny it, and when their steamer moved slowly
out of Cumberland Bay that evening and they saw the peaks of
Juan Fernandez black against the scarlet sky, she almost fancied
she saw a dark figure watching from the look-out —Alexander
Selkirk or Robinson Crusoe, it didn't matter which.
Nothing could be more different than their next stopping-
place. Two days later they were alongside the quay in Valparaiso


Bay, biggest seaport of Chile and western South America, with its
surrounding hills and the second snow-covered line behind of the
Andes.
"All the same, I'd rather have Robinson's Island," Shelagh
said. "Even if this is called the 'Pearl of the South Pacific.' It's
so new and noisy."
"P'raps you'll like Santiago better," Conal answered. "That's
supposed to be one of the finest cities in the world."
They were staying two days in Valparaiso, which gave plenty
of time to visit the capital of Chile, three hours away by train.
And certainly Santiago was a fine city, with the huge snowy chain
of Andes towering 13,000 feet high to eastward, and a queer hill,
Cerro San Cristobal, rising straight from the middle of the plain
in which Santiago lies.
"There are wonderful buildings and wonderful views, and it's
all very grand," Shelagh said. "But I still like Crusoe's Island best."
The two returned to the steamer to find Cocky in dire disgrace.
During their absence he had been allowed in the Captain's cabin,
as a great favour, but, most ungratefully, he had spent his time
in tearing a favourite cushion to shreds, so that the whole place
was covered with feathers and scraps of silk.
"And he doesn't even seem sorry!" Shelagh said, when Cocky
chuckled and screeched, as though he had done something clever,
and appeared quite annoyed at being chained to his perch in
punishment.
The coolness between Cocky and the Captain continued as
the Crusoe cruised up the west coast of South America, stopping
at ports with queer-sounding names, Antofagasta and Iquique
in Chile, and Callao, Peru's biggest seaport, although the really
interesting place there was Lima, the capital, only five miles away.
Conal and Shelagh, driving through the palm-shaded streets
in the Captain s car, decided that it was a lovely town beside the


river Rimac, which means in the old Indian language "He who
speaks." It was partly the Captain's stories which made everything
interesting, but it delighted Shelagh to see loaded llamas stepping
proudly through the streets amongst motor-cars and trams.
"I like Lima's real name best, though," she said. "'The very
noble, very distinguished and very loyal City of the Kings of Peru.'
It's a lovely sound."
"I'd rather say plain 'Lima' if I were in a hurry for a railway
ticket," Conal declared unromantically.
"There's not much left of the old city, built exactly four hundred
years ago by Pizarro, the Spanish conqueror of Peru," Captain
Clark told them. "The whole place has been destroyed by earth-
quakes several times; in fact it was almost wiped out in 1746. As
fast as they built, down it all came again, but they stuck to it like
so many Brace's spiders. As for Pizarro himself, who drove out
the old Incas of Peru —well, you'll see him for yourself when we
go to the Cathedral."
"See him?" Conal echoed, but they found that it was true when
they saw, in the Cathedral which he began to build with his own
hands in 1535, the glass case which holds the mummified body of the
great Conquistador.
After ices under the trees in the beautiful Zoological Gardens,
they drove back to Callao, the Crusoe —and an exciting event.
All three had just reached the closed door of the Captain's cabin
on the upper deck, when they heard a voice from inside.
"Please, sir, I didn't mean no 'arm—reelly, I didn't! I just
'appened to be passin' an' "
"What do you want?" a second, much deeper voice broke in,
a voice which made the Captain start, and stare at Conal and Shelagh.
"Upon my word!" he muttered. "It sounds to me "
"It's you speaking, sir," whispered Conal, just as the first voice
whined again:


"I wasn't doin' nothin'—l'll go awye "
"Lie down!" barked the deep voice sharply, and at the same
moment Captain Clark flung the door wide.
A rough-looking individual in grimy dungarees stood before a
desk of which the locked doors had been forced open, staring at
the open door of the sleeping cabin. At the sounds behind him
the man swung round and his obvious terror so that he
cringed and stammered.
"I didn't mean—l thought as you was "
"Safely ashore, so that you could play the sneak-thief," the
Captain said grimly, but the robber gave a kind of yelp, pointing
at the other door.
"You was in there—talkin' to me. I swear it!" he howled,
collapsing
on the deck.
At first
sight the
inner cabin
seemed
empty, until
down flut-
tered Cocky
from the
upper berth
to Conal's
shoulder,
shouting in
the same
voice as be-
fore:
<I T *
L 1 e
down!"


It was an exact imitation of the Captain speaking to his dog;
something like that other "what do you want?" which Cocky
had heard many times repeated and used now to good effect.
He had reduced the would-be thief, a sneaking dock-rat who had
crept on board from the wharf, to utter panic, with those gruff
orders which seemed to come from nowhere —and there was money,
which he would have certainly stolen, as well as important papers,
in that locked desk.
"Cocky has more than made up for tearing my cushion," the
Captain said, after the robber had been handed over to the dock
police. "I think I can't do less than give him the freedom of my
cabin in future, and trust that he'll continue to act as a watch-
cockatoo."
And Cocky, on Conal's shoulder, dipped and bowed and screeched
cheerfully, if with rather a lack of respect,
"Right-o, old Bean!"
CHAPTER TWO
THE AMAZON ADVENTURE
IT'S funny to think that two mosquitoes nearly stopped the
Panama Canal from being made," Conal said.
"They must have been big ones!" Shelagh laughed.
"Two sorts of mosquitoes, silly! There's a town kind whose bite
gives yellow fever, and the malaria sort which lives in the country.
So many of the canal workmen got ill because of them that the
job was almost given up, until the mosquitoes were killed by pouring
oil into the pools and ditches where they breed. Now the canal
is quite healthy."
"Lots of people still live in those meat-safe houses, though,"
Shelagh remarked, having been much interested by the copper-wire


gauze mosquito guards surrounding many bungalows in Panama
City and Balboa at the Pacific end of the canal.
The Bay of Panama, all dotted with islands, had looked very
beautiful as the CYUSOC steamed across to begin the forty-four
mile journey through the world's largest canal, the canal which
joins two oceans and divides two continents and has been called
"Man's greatest liberty with Nature."
Now they had passed through the two Milleflores Locks,
five miles from the Pacific, and reached the Culebra Cut,
where a way for the canal was dug and blasted through a solid
rocky hill.
"It takes only a day from the Pacific to the Atlantic now,"
Conal said, staring up at the steep banks. "But if the canal wasn't
here, we'd have been obliged to go round Cape Horn to reach the
Amazon. Soon we shall come out into Lake Gatun, and beyond
that are the three Gatun Locks, the biggest in the world because
then we get down to Atlantic level, about eighty-five feet. And that's
the end of the Panama Canal, with the two towns Cristobal and
Colon."
. "Meaning 'Christopher' and 'Columbus,' I suppose," Shelagh
said, "just as if we called two towns in Australia 'James' and
'Cook,' because Captain Cook discovered it."
"After that we shall be in the Caribbean Sea, otherwise the
Spanish Main, Conal added. "And 'Rolling down to Rio.'"
"But there's the Amazon first," Shelagh said with satisfaction.
"A thousand miles up the biggest river in the world, after we've
been through the biggest canal. I'm looking forward to exciting
Amazon adventures."
If Shelagh had known just what was to happen up the Amazon,
she might have thought the prospect rather too exciting. As it was!
she counted the days until they should arrive in Brazil, and that
port of Para which is the Gateway of the Amazon.


Nothing more than just pleasant ordinary things happened
during the board-ship days between leaving the canal and entering
the river. Perhaps the most important event was only known to
Cocky at the moment, this being the fact that he could quite easily
prise open a certain link in the chain fastened to his ankle-ring.
It was a case of Satan finding mischief for idle beaks; Cocky was
bored, in spite of being a civilized bird.
So he pecked and twisted the link, and only chuckled mischiev-
ously when Conal said: "Look, he is sharpening his beak to be
ready for Brazil nuts!"
At last they had left Para and were steaming up the huge river
with its numberless branches and islands, like a water-world of its
own. The Crusoe passed through the Narrows and reached that
part of the Amazon called the Forest Walls; huge trees grew close
down to the river's edge on each bank, trees with trunks like pillars
and twisted roots, whose feet were in dark damp shade whilst then-
heads, hundreds of feet above, basked in blazing sunshine and
were wreathed with marvellous blossoming creepers or many-
coloured orchids.
As the stream narrowed, the beauties of those river-banks could
be more plainly seen, the flowering trees and shrubs, the birds
and butterflies so brilliant that they looked like flying flowers
themselves. One kind of butterfly in particular was quite startling.
Conal and Shelagh saw them first when the steamer was moored
alongside the bank near one of the small trading stations for rubber
and timber.
They were looking into the dusky green of the forest when,
suddenly, it seemed as though bits of vividly blue sky had fallen
from above the tree-tops and were drifting here and there through
the dimness, gleaming like live jewels.
"Oh —look!" Shelagh said, and Conal added: "Yes, they're
butterflies."


"Butterflies? But they're so huge! As big as birds."
"A jolly sight bigger than those humming-birds we saw yester-
day. They're called Giant Morphos, and it's from their wings,
under glass, that all sorts of ornaments are made—you know,
jewellery and trays and cigarette-cases that look like coloured
enamel."
"Yes, they called it Butterfly-wing work, I remember now,
but somehow I never thought they'd really been alive," Shelagh
said slowly. "Oh, Conal, fancy catching those and tearing off their
wings!"
"I know, but they do) hundreds and thousands of them are
collected for that, and soon very likely they'll be extinct. . . .
I say, look at them in that patch of sun."
"Just like fairies," Shelagh whispered. "They seem to be
eating something—the honey from flowers, I suppose."
"More likely a dead mouse or bird." Conal grinned at his
cousin's disgusted expression. "Yes, it's true, She; those lovely
fairies of yours like rotten meat better than anything. They're
not nearly so romantic as they look."
"I do wish you wouldn't spoil things," Shelagh complained.
The nights on the Amazon were even more beautiful than the
days, with the brilliant tropical stars reflected in the ripples of the
river, and fireflies, like shooting stars, flickering amongst the trees
on the banks. Night birds hooted, and sometimes a wild fierce cry
came from the Forest which the Captain said was a jaguar or puma,
one or other of the big cats.
At last came the morning when they had almost reached the
end of that thousand mile cruise up-river; next day the Crusoe
would turn back, with the marvellous voyage over. Shelagh and
Conal were up before dawn, when white mists still hung over the
water and crept in wreaths through the forest, so that they might
not lose a minute of the last day.


The steamer was moored close to the bank, just where a tributary
stream ran into the main river, a lovely narrow stream with creeper-
covered trees almost meeting above it, looking like a kind of
water-road into fairyland.
Suddenly, as the two watched, something brilliantly coloured
flashed through the greys and silver-white of the mists, something
all vivid blue, crimson, orange, and emerald green.
"Oh, what a huge bird!" Shelagh cried.
"It's a macaw —a lory," Conal said. "Goodness, what a monster
-he'd make four of Cocky. And what a voice!"
For the macaw had given a hideous screech as it disappeared
amongst the trees, a screech which was answered from the deck
of the Crusoe. It was Cocky, who also had seen and heard what
he naturally considered to be an enormous parrot, and greeted
it as a relation. But his excitement carried him further than that,
and next instant Conal gave alarm at sight of a white shape in
full flight after the macaw, disappearing, too, amongst the trees.
"Cocky! He's escaped, Shelagh! Look, he's broken his chain!
He'll be lost!"
Without pausing a second, the boy raced for the gangway,
which had been swung across to the river-bank only a short time
before, with Shelagh close at his heels. The Crusoe's decks were
empty; nobody saw him go, and next instant they were both run-
ning at full speed along the bank of the narrower stream, drawn
by a glimpse of snow-white feathers, just seen for an instant far
ahead.
"Cocky! Cocky!" Conal panted, but Cocky was far too much
occupied at the moment to come at his master's call, even if he heard
it in his excitement.
"There he is!" Shelagh caught another glimpse. "Oh, Con,
we must catch him! He'll be killed amongst all these strange birds
and animals."


"Try to keep him in sight!" Conal gasped, and they plunged
on, tripping over fallen branches, dodging rocks and pools and
between huge tree-trunks in that mad chase. Of course they soon
lost sight of the truant cockatoo. Cocky's wings might be out of
practice for want of exercise, but they carried him faster than
any boy or girl could run. Besides . . . there was the chance that
they might have already passed him: that he had flown up into
the higher branches of one of these towering trees.
It was this thought which finally brought Conal to a standstill,
although neither of them could have run much further. The forest
stretched along, dim and mysterious, on all sides, with mist still
drifting through it. Down below all was very still, but far overhead
birds were singing in the tree tops, from which they could already
see the sun rising above the distant mountains.
The cousins walked on slowly, calling Cocky in turns, hoping
each instant to see him come fluttering down with one of his familiar
squawks. But no Cocky answered them —until suddenly and
unexpectedly a most weird and hideous sound broke out from near
by. It was a kind of wailing yell, sinking to a low roar, rising again,
and answered by other similar howls. Shelagh, her face very white,
moved closer to Conal.
"What can it be?" she whispered. "Jaguars—pumas?"
"Doesn't sound quite like either." Conal, too, had turned
pale. "Besides —they don't go in packs, and this seems all round
us. It must be some sort of wild beast, She."
"I should say so!" Shelagh laughed rather hysterically. "Oh
Conal, it's horrible! And it's coming nearer."
For the chorus of wild and hideous yells had broken out
more loudly than ever; it sounded like the cries of those in terrible
fear or pain; it seemed to come now from all sides and from
overhead. . . . Conal, peering upwards, gave an exclamation of
surprise.


"I do believe —yes! Can't you see them, Shelagh? Up there —
high up—and one's in those trees —heaps of 'em! —big fellows too."
"I think —yes " Shelagh screwed up her eyes, frowning
up through the leaves. "They look like monkeys—long thin
monkeys, with tremendously long arms."
"That's what they are —monkeys! The doctor told me about
them. I ought to have remembered, only I never imagined they'd
make such an unearthly row. They're Howling Monkeys; they
go about in flocks or colonies, and that's their morning song to
the sun. Pretty, isn't it?"
"It's awful!" Shelagh said as the hideous wails and roars rose
again, then gradually died down, this time into silence. Far over-
head, the dark monkey shapes could be seen moving away, swinging
from bough to bough, crashing and rustling until the sounds of
their passing died away in the distance.
"Well, that was a queer stunt!" Conal said. "I should think
if Cocky was about it frightened him into a fit. Which way did
he go?"
"Over there, I think " Shelagh pointed, then broke off
doubtfully. "At least, I'm not sure: it may have been that way
—where did we come from?"
"I'm not certain of that either," Conal confessed, and the two
looked at each other, with the same thought at the same moment,
the ugly thought that they were lost.
"Well, it's easy enough," Conal said firmly. "All we've got
to do is to find that stream and follow it back to where it runs into
the river—and there will be the Crusoe. We can't have come so very
far, either."
"I don't know. We ran a good bit, and it was away from the
stream, I think," Shelagh answered. "But let's try to find it."
"We'll be able to get our direction by the sun soon," Conal
said hopefully, but, unfortunately, the sun did not seem at all


disposed to help them. From the dimness of the forest it looked as
though clouds had come up; most likely it was raining above the
thick matted leaf umbrella which sheltered them, for a kind of
soft whispering sound came down through the trees.
They set off on their search for the river, but three hours later,
by Conal's wrist-watch, they did not seem to be any nearer to
finding it, and all the time an uncomfortable feeling grew that
they might be going in exactly the wrong direction. And though
neither wanted to confess it, both were growing tired, hungry
and thirsty.
"It's a good thing we're not alone," Shelagh said bravely. "Two
together can't feel quite so lost as one. I wonder if those red berries,
rather like plums, are good to eat, Con."
"H'm." Conal considered the fruit which lay thickly on the
ground under a tree with smooth broad leaves. "They look all
right, but of course they might be deadly poison, and we can't
tell without trying."
"You are encouraging!" Shelagh sighed. "I say, do you hear
something—a sort of rushing and grunting?"
Both stood listening. Then the sound came again more plainly,
and Shelagh laughed.
" I do believe it's a big herd of pigs, wild pigs, I suppose. Listen
—they're snuffling and snooting about and grunting like anything
—why, whatever is the matter, Conal? You look awfully queer."
"It's because I've just remembered something I heard on the
boat." Conal spoke in a strained whisper. "Quick, get up this
tree—don't waste a second!"
"Let me climb on your back then." Shelagh, without under-
standing, realised there was danger. "Then I can easily reach
the big bough—there! Can you manage by yourself, Con?"
But Conal was already clambering up, and had swung himself
on to a higher branch. He stretched down a hand to Shelagh.


"You'll be safe here in the fork," he said. "Wedge yourself
in tightly. I should think we'll be all right here, but it's lucky
there was a climbable tree handy."
"But why, Conal? Surely, if they're only pigs, they can't be
dangerous?"
"These pigs can! Haven't you ever heard of peccaries? They
only live in South America, but they're about the fiercest, most
dangerous wild animals in the world, though they're not big as
pigs go. But they'll attack anyone and anything —look, there they
come!"
Out from a thicket of flowering shrubs blackish shapes came
pouring, grunting and snorting, pushing their way through the
dead leaves and tangled grass; whilst the patter-patter of their
tiny feet sounded like falling hail.
Of the size of small pigs, they were long-legged, very active,
and covered with thick bristles. Most of them had ugly tusks
like wild boars, which gleamed white as they rooted here and there
in the undergrowth.
"P'raps they'll go on without seeing us," Conal said, but it
soon appeared that the peccaries were too sharp-sighted or quick-
eared for that.
Suddenly one of the leaders lifted his head with a snort, and
his little eyes caught a glimpse of the boy and girl. He trotted
over to the foot of the tree and began tearing at the tree with his
tusks. Others followed, until Conal and Shelagh looked down
into a kind of peccary-pool swirling round them, fighting as to which
should come closest, grunting, snapping, rearing up against the
tree, pawing with their feet, only growing more angry and excited
when Conal shouted at them.
It was even worse when they formed a kind of ring, some
squatting down on their haunches, with gleaming black eyes fixed
on their trapped victims. It seemed just as though they said:


"We don't mind waiting; we'll stay here until you come down,
however long it takes."
"F-fancy if we went to s-sleep —or s-slipped down," Shelagh
said uncertainly.
"Oh, they'll go before that —as soon as they're hungry," Conal
said, but at the end of an hour the peccaries still showed no sign
of moving.
"I'm getting frightfully
cramped," Conal said. "I think
I'll climb a bit for exercise."
"Do be careful you don't
fall!" Shelagh spoke anxiously
as he stood up on the bough,
and, reaching above his head,
swung up to a higher branch.
"Hullo, I can see further
now," he cried. "Over the tops
of the other trees. I can see —
what do you
think, She? The
river's there all
the time, quite
close —if only
we weren't
trapped by this
horrible pec-
cary-pack!"
With Conal
and Shelagh
imprisoned in


their tree, it is a good time to tell something of Cocky's
adventures.
He had just twisted the link in his ankle-chain well apart when
he caught sight of the macaw and thought at once that he must
be back amongst the parrots of his native Bush —for geography
was not Cocky's strong point.
Almost without knowing what he did in his excitement, he
flew after the brilliant bird through the shadowy forest, until the
macaw perched on a tree and Cocky fluttered to a bough beside
him, in a very flustered state.
"What a lovely cockatoo!" he cried, but the macaw, who did
not understand English, stared with a cold grey eye.
Cocky pulled himself together and used the language all birds
understand, although he was rather out of practice.
"What's your name, please?" he asked. "I'm a stranger in
this Bush."
"I'm a Macaw," the other answered stiffly. "And these are all
the Sylvas of the Amazon."
"What's Sylvas?" Cocky asked.
"It is the Spanish for forest," the Macaw explained, scratching
his head with his claw in a refined way.
"Oh!" Cocky looked blank. " I say, would you show me some-
thing good to eat? I don't know any of these nuts or fruit, and
I'd like a look round before I go home."
"Your beak won't crack our nuts," the Macaw said contemptu-
ously. "The small parrots eat those berries over there —but I'm
afraid I must leave you now."
He flew off, and Cocky, rather snubbed, ate some of the red
berries, trying to pretend to himself that he knew his way quite
well back to the Crusoe and that he was enjoying this adventure
very much.
A number of other birds had gathered round, grey and


red parrots, scarlet and blue tanagers, tiny, impertinent humming-
birds with needle-sharp bills, and a large bird, brilliantly feathered
in orange, green and white, at whom Cocky stared in amazement,
never having seen a Toucan before.
"I say!" he gasped. "I thought that Macaw had a big beak,
but yours—well!"
"Personal remarks are extremely vulgar," the Toucan answered,
and flapped heavily away, looking as though the enormous beak
were top-heavy, whilst the rest of the birds gathered round Cocky
in a rude and offensive manner, jeering at his white feathers, telling
him that no one in the Amazon forests would dream of wearing
a silly crest like his.
"There are thousands and thousands of cockatoos in the Bush
where I come from, and no one laughs at them," poor Cocky cried
at last, and that only made the other birds mock at him more
unkindly.
"Thousands and thousands are there! I knew you were a
common creature!" one of the grey parrots screeched, pushing
Cocky rudely just as he was going to peck at another berry, and
then they all began to hustle the poor bird so that he flew
away in disgust, fluttering from tree to tree until the red berries
were far behind him —and the Crusoe farther still. But Cocky
didn't know that, although he felt angry and miserable at such
treatment.
"We should never treat strangers like that in the Bush," he
thought, as he smoothed his ruffled feathers. "I wonder if all the
creatures in this place are so unpleasant."
Something rustled amongst the dead leaves, and Cocky peered
down sideways at the queerest beast he had ever seen. It was
larger than the Bundaburra fox-terriers, with a pointed head and
tail, so much alike that it was by the tiny gleaming eyes that Cocky
knew which was which. The four legs were very short, and body,


head and tail all covered with scaly ridges, which made a scraping
sound against the leaves as the creature moved slowly along until
it came to some freshly turned earth, where ants were running
about excitedly.
Suddenly an immensely long bluish tongue shot out from the
animal's mouth and was drawn in again, covered with ants. This
interested Cocky so much that he leant down as far as he could
and screeched loudly:
"I say! What are you?"
Immediately something happened, so quickly that Cocky nearly
overbalanced, and sat blinking his grey eyelids in surprise. For
the beast's legs, head and tail disappeared, leaving nothing but
a big scaly ball, which did not look as though it had ever been
alive.
In his curiosity Cocky hopped down and pecked at the armour-
like scales, but it never moved, and after watching it for some time
he spoke beseechingly.
"I say, I didn't mean to startle you. Please come out and talk
to me; I'm quite harmless."
The animal did not answer, but after some minutes it uncurled,
and the tiny bright eyes blinked at Cocky.
"I'm an Armadillo," it squeaked. "And I never take any
chances, by waiting to see if things are harmless or not —I just
roll up, and there I am."
"It's a grand idea," Cocky said, "I wish I could do it."
"It wouldn't be any use with feathers," the Armadillo said.
"With my armour-plating, once I'm rolled up no one can touch
me —not even jaguars."
"What are they?" Cocky asked.
"You'll know soon enough if you stay in the Forest," the
Armadillo answered. "Look out for Spots—that's all! they mean
death."


Cocky was just
another question when
rupted by someone
a yawn as he had
before.
" Aa—aa —aa—oo—
from overhead, and,
looking up, it seemed
mass of greenish grey
from a bough had
of those clusters which
many of the trees
around.
"Lazy brute!" The
Armadillo scarcely
bothered to look.
"Sloth's his name and
sloth's his nature. He
only just rouses him-
self enough to eat
sometimes."
going to ask
he was inter-
yawning, such
never heard
OW!" came
to Cocky,
as though a
moss hanging
yawned, one
draped so
Peering up, Cocky caught a weary look from a half-shut eye
as the Sloth yawned again. He hung head-downwards from a
branch, his greenish hair blending with leaves and moss so that
he was almost invisible, a shaggy tangle nearly covering his face.
Moving one clawed foot after another, he propelled himself slowly
along, then seemed to drop asleep once more and remained
motionless.
"Disgusting!" the Armadillo snorted. "That's what I call
d useless existence. Serve him right if the Indians caught and
ate him!"


"What are Indians?" Cocky asked.
"Don't know much, do you?" the Armadillo remarked. "They're
the people of this country, of course. Probably you'll see some if
you go down to the river over there. Glad to have met you."
The Armadillo bustled off, and Cocky flew on until he saw water
between the trees. Next minute he was perched on an overhanging
branch, swaying, as he admired his reflection in a pool.
"What a lovely cockatoo!" he chuckled, and wondered how
to know if he saw an Indian.
A sudden plunging and snorting amongst some thick rushes
was rather alarming; still more so when a large animal appeared,
an animal rather like a baby elephant—only Cocky had never
seen such a thing.
"What a long beak he's got," the Cockatoo thought. "P'raps


he wouldn't like me to ask questions; I'd better keep quiet till
he goes."
So he sat still as a mouse whilst the big beast waded knee-deep
to drink, then plunged away through the reeds again. And that is
why Cocky never knew that he had seen a Tapir.
It was warm and still there by the river; presently Cocky began
to doze, although some instinct made him keep one eye-corner
open—and it was as well he did, for out of that corner he saw
something moving in the tree behind him.
"Good gracious!" Cocky woke with a start. "What a cat!"
For he remembered his friend Tory, the big tabby at Bunda-
burra; perhaps this cat would romp, too, though it didn't look
very playful, creeping nearer —nearer along a bough, lashing that
gold-and-black-ringed tail.
The big velvety paws padded softly; great amber eyes glowed,
glaring at Cocky, making him feel somehow queer; one of the paws
was raised and he could see curving claws. . . .
This cat wasn't quite like Tory: instead of grey and black stripes,
this had yellow fur with black spots —Spots! Suddenly Cocky
remembered the Armadillo's words: spots meant a jaguar and
death. With a loud squawk of terror he fluttered away, just as
the big paw flashed through the air, barely missing his tail feathers.
But he had escaped to a further bough, whilst the jaguar crouched
low, snarling furiously, with lashing tail.
I m not safe here," Cocky thought. "I'll fly across the river."
He tried to do so, but his wings felt stiff and clumsy. He fluttered
a little way, then found himself falhng into the water, his feet
and feathers wet, as he struggled to fly up, screeching with fright.
But poor Cocky s adventures would certainly have ended in drown-
just then, a large canoe had not flashed round a bend in
the stream, paddled by six nearly naked brown figures, with fringes
of black hair falling into their eyes. One of them reached out and


pulled Cocky out of the water, a miserable draggled object, too
frightened to understand that these were some of the Brazilian
Indians of whom the Armadillo had spoken, in one of their dug-out
canoes called pirogues.
The men chattered together, for they had never before seen
such a bird, and Cocky preened and tidied his feathers, feeling
very important, as they paddled slowly on. He was quite himself
again twenty minutes later when they came to a certain river-
reach, where high trees rose close to the banks.
And looking towards those trees, Cocky saw something which
made him suddenly flutter both wings, raise his crest and begin
to scream at the top of his voice.
''Here's a lovely
Cockatoo!" he yelled.
"Hullo, Old Bean-
Pussy, pussy, pussy —
Pretty Cocky ! —How
do you do —Where are


you going to, my pretty maid?— Come here at once —Cocky!
Cocky!"
The Indians looked at each other startled; they knew this
was white man's talk, and it made them think that this must be
a magical bird and might bring them bad luck. But at that moment
another voice shouted from the river-bank.
"Cocky! Cocky! Shelagh, there's Cocky in a boat!"
The Indians saw, as Cocky had, a white boy in a tree, and they
knew just enough English to understand that he needed help. As
they pulled into the bank, the grunting squeals of the peccaries
told them exactly what was the matter, and they jumped ashore,
shouting and waving spears, making so much noise that it sounded
like at least a hundred hunters.
The wild pigs, fierce as they were, seemed to believe this too,
and rushed off, clattering away through the forest, so that Conal
and Shelagh were able to come down from their tree and make
friends with the Indians, who knew quite well where the Crusoe
was and willingly paddled them down the river.
They found the whole ship's company much disturbed at their
disappearance, and the Captain preparing to send out search parties.
The Indians were rewarded with tobacco and little presents, and
Cocky was alternately scolded and petted. For, as Shelagh remarked,
it was hard to say whether he was the villain or the hero of the
adventure.
CHAPTER THREE
"ROLLING DOWN TO RIO"
BEFORE to-day I'd have fought anyone who said so," Conal
said gruffly, and Shelagh sighed.
"Yes," she agreed. "I hate having to, but it's true. This
harbour's even more beautiful than ours."


"It's different, of course," Conal allowed reluctantly. "But
it certainly is jolly fine."
It was a hard confession for two Australian-born Sydney-siders
to make, but Rio de Janeiro Harbour had taken their breath away,
such a strange and marvellous place it was.
Peaks of queer fantastic shapes stood like guardian giants at
the entrance of the deep blue bay —peaks whose names described
them: Corcovado, or the Hunchback; Pao de Assucar, or the Sugar-
loaf, and, further away beyond the Rio, five-peaked Organ
Mountains, which are called in Spanish the Fingers of God. They
had steamed past two ancient forts, past many tiny islands dotted
here and there like bright-coloured beads, before coming in
sight of the city itself, a snow-white city set everywhere in
masses of tropical trees often covered with brilliant-coloured
blossoms.
"No wonder it's called the Emerald City," said Conal.
"Or sometimes the Garden City," Shelagh added. "It's both.
I only wish we were staying here more than three days. We shall
have to fill them very full."
When the Crusoe left Rio it certainly could not be said that
the cousins had wasted time. They had been up the Hunchback
and the Sugar-loaf, by funicular railway in the first case and a
most hair-raising aerial cable car in the other, and seen from the
summits most wonderful bird's-eye views of the whole bay. They
had walked five miles along a promenade of white marble, stared
into the splendid shops of Avenida Rio Branco, bathed from the
golden beach at Copocabana —and the more they saw, the more
they were ready to believe that this was THE most beautiful city
in the world.
Cocky, left alone on board the Crusoe, felt thoroughly disgusted
with Rio. Conal and Shelagh would not take him ashore with them,
and his chain had been mended and strengthened, so that altogether


he was a very depressed and miserable bird, and even refused the
choice bananas which Conal bought especially for him.
No, Cocky thought nothing of Rio, the Beautiful, and he was
delighted when one afternoon they steamed out of the harbour,
southwards down the coast of Brazil, and he was allowed on deck
again.
"He doesn't know that we'll be in port again to-morrow,"
Conal said. " It's only about twelve hours' journey by sea to Santos."
"I wonder if it's as nice as Rio," Shelagh said.
"Don't suppose so —it's a great place for trade; the Captain
says more than two thousand cargo-ships put in there every year.
There's jolly fine bathing, though, I believe, and he says that he'll
p'raps take us up to Sao Paulo, the capital of Brazil," Conal
added, "he" meaning Captain Clark, the boy's great hero and
friend.
"What on earth would have happened to me, if he hadn't been
so frightfully decent?" Conal often said to Shelagh. "And he's
paying for all my trips ashore, by way of salary, he says."
"Yes, he's a lamb!" Shelagh always agreed fervently. "I don't
know why I ever thought he was frightening; I suppose it was just
that black beard."
Early in the morning, the three were on deck as the Crusoe
made her way slowly up the beautiful Santos River, with docks
and town opening out upon the banks ahead.
It s an enormous place," Shelagh said. "And doesn't it look
as though it had been built with a box of very new toy bricks,
thousands and thousands of them? It smells lovely, though—
like a million very nice breakfasts at once."
That s the coffee," Conal laughed. "This is the biggest coffee-
port in the world."
Doesn tit make one hungry?" Shelagh was sniffing the air
luxuriously. "It isn't only Santos, Conal; our breakfast-coffee


is smelling too. Let's hurry down, so that we shall be ready to
go ashore as soon as possible."
During the early part of the morning, Conal and Shelagh explored
Santos, in its plain between mountain and sea, by themselves,
seeing and smelling coffee everywhere. But although the factories
and new buildings might look toy-brick-built, they discovered
that there was a four-hundred-year-old town as well, with ancient
churches and monasteries and white Spanish houses buried in
roses of every imaginable colour, whose scent almost smothered
that which distinguishes Santos from all other places on
earth.
They tasted the famous coffee in a restaurant near the docks
where they met the Captain at midday; afterwards a motor-car
was waiting to carry them off to Sao Paulo, high on a plateau in
the mountains.
"But on the way, we're going to stop at one of the biggest
fazendas, or plantations, and see how the coffee grows," Captain
Clark told them, as they went humming away along the broad
white road towards the mountains.
Half an hour later Shelagh was declaring that she never knew
coffee grew on such a pretty plant. They were standing on a hillside
with the glossy-leaved, low trees stretching away in every direction
as far as eyes could reach, planted in neat rows. Some were covered
with the cream-white blossoms, which had their own delicious
scent; on others the deep-crimson berries were already ripe for
picking.
"But I thought coffee was brown," Shelagh said, as she watched
those berries being gathered into flat rush baskets by hundreds of
dark-faced, gaily-dressed men, women and children, who showed
very white teeth when they smiled.
"Only when it's dried," Captain Clark told her. "After the
berries have been washed they spread them out in the sun to dry,


before bagging them up; gradually they turn light-brown, but it's
roasting them afterwards that makes them the dark colour you
know."
"What's that huge place over there with the pillars and the
dome?" Conal asked, pointing to a building which looked some-
thing between a palace and a cathedral.
"Oh, just the country house of the owner of this estate," the
Captain said. "Most of the coffee growers build themselves wonder-
ful mansions and live there in the middle of their plantations.
We're going up to the house, so you'll be able to have a look at
the inside of it."
That look made both Conal and Shelagh feel that they would
rather be coffee planters in Brazil than anything else in the world.


The white marble house was built round a huge patio or courtyard
where rose-trees and oleanders grew. In the middle was a bathing-
pool of green marble with a fountain at one end, and under a kind
of colonnade were aviaries, big enough to hold growing bushes,
full of the most gorgeous-coloured birds. Altogether it was like the
Palace in Beauty and the Beast , Shelagh declared, as they drank
coffee by the pool, and only too soon, in her opinion, they were back
in the car on their way to Sao Paulo.
And Sao Paulo was a city to take one's breath away. There
were palm-trees and there were sky-scrapers, huge factories and
splendid parks and gardens, with people from every country in the
world filling the wide streets —Turks, Hindoos, Chinese, Arabs,
Japanese, and Europeans of every kind.
"They're supposed to make everything here from pins to pianos,"
Captain Clark told them. "They grow everything, too, from
bananas and oranges to mulberry-trees for silkworms. It's a great
place, Sao Paulo."
Yet after all, what Shelagh remembered best about that excursion
was just a farm, partly because it was such a strange one, partly
for what happened the night after they had been there.
"There's no other farm quite like this one in the world, or at
any rate it's the largest," the Captain told them. "So I don't think
we ought to miss it."
That was when they were driving out to Butantan, which did
not look, at first sight, a very large or important place, not big
enough to hold the 180 different kinds of stock which the cousins
heard were kept there. There did not seem to be any sheds, stables
or paddocks either, only low buildings, a few enclosures, carefully
wired round, and a large tin-lined pit about six feet wide covered
with a thatched roof.
For Butantan is a Snake Farm, and really a most wonderful
place, where scientists study the ways of snakes and prepare remedies


for their poisoning, made from the venom extracted from the snakes'
own fangs, remedies which are sent all over the world and must
have already saved thousands of lives.
The keeper who showed the party of three round the farm
did not seem in the least afraid of his charges, some of them in
glass-fronted cages, others in the pit or wired enclosures. He picked
up a rattlesnake which was making a noise like an angry alarum
clock, and held open its mouth to show the fangs, before tossing
it back into its pen, and told Shelagh that as long as people weren't
afraid of snakes, they did not often attack.
"Of course, there are some who are pretty spiteful and aggress-
ive," he said carelessly. "The Coral Snake for instance —not very
big, but the most poisonous specimen we've got here and the most
disagreeable. There he goes!"
He pointed to a low bush in the enclosure, and Shelagh caught
just the flick of a brilliantly coloured tail as it disappeared.
"I don't think I'll disturb him," the keeper said. "But he's
a handsome creature, quite different from other snakes, banded
in coral-pink and black, rather like a sugar-stick. So you'll
know the beggar if you see him! Most of our snakes are quite
harmless, though; you'll scarcely believe it, perhaps, but out
of the hundred and eighty varieties we keep here, only ten are
poisonous."
Once she was certain of this, Shelagh found the snakes rather
fascinating, and watched quite calmly when Conal allowed a
brilliant green one to coil round his arms and neck, although she
drew the line at fondling them herself.
It was late before they left Butantan for Sao Paulo, where
they were to spend the night at a hotel, and Shelagh was too sleepy
to feel that she wanted anything much except a bath and bed.
She quite disgraced herself, in fact, by falling asleep during dinner,
and only being aroused when her head sank forward into her plate


—just as though she wanted to drown herself in Mulligatawny soup,
as Conal said severely.
A hot bath made Shelagh even drowsier, but it was when she
was on the way back to her bedroom afterwards that something
happened to startle her wide awake.
She had nearly reached the door of Conal's bedroom, which
was nearer to the bathroom end of the corridor than her own, and
was just thinking how nice it was that all these rooms opened with
french windows into a beautiful patio-garden which had a fountain
in the middle.
"It will be lovely to go out there early to-morrow morning—
if I don't sleep too late," Shelagh thought, with an enormous yawn
—and then stopped short, staring at the marble pavement outside
Conal's room.
The light was rather dim here in the corridor, but there was
quite enough to see that long thin shape, half under the door and
making its way into the room still further, as Shelagh's horrified
eyes watched. It was banded with deep pink and black —rather
like a sugar-stick—how well she remembered those words, spoken
only that afternoon! —There couldn't be any doubt as to what it
was —one of the deadly Coral Snakes, so fierce and poisonous.
It had come in from the garden, of course; now it was wriggling
its way under Conal's door. At any minute he might come out
of the room, not knowing it was there, and tread upon the dangerous
creature; Shelagh could see through the glass panel over the door
that the electric light was not turned on inside, so that the room
would be nearly dark.
The brilliantly-coloured creature gave another convulsive wriggle
as if trying to force its way under the crack, and suddenly Shelagh
realised that somehow she must stop it from getting in, before she
could warn Conal. She sprang forward and set both her feet as
firmly as she could upon the soft wriggling shape, holding it down


with all her might and shouting as she did so, at the top of her
voice:
"Conal, Conal, are you there?"
"Yes," Conal's voice answered from inside. "Wait half a sec
and I'll open the door for you "
"No, no!" Shelagh interrupted him wildly. "Go away —don't
come near the door whatever you do —keep the other side of the
room!"
"But I—whatever do you mean, She? What are you talking
about?"
"Keep away —oh, do keep away!" Shelagh sobbed, clinging
to the door-handle, pressing down as hard as she could upon the
snake's body as it struggled and pulled, trying to drag itself away,
to escape from her into the room.
"I shan't be able to hold it much longer!" poor Shelagh thought
desperately. "It'll get away—or else it will twist round and come
back to attack me —I can feel how angry it's getting—oh, Ido
believe I heard Conal close to the door! Keep away, Conal, don't
come near, whatever you do!"
Hang it all, I can't get away!" Conal's voice sounded angry;
Shelagh could hear him breathing heavily, hear his feet scuffling
on the floor, and suddenly she realised that he, too, on the bay
side of the door, must be fighting with the other half of the Coral
Snake—and the more dangerous half.
Oh, do be careful!" she sobbed. "Go away, go away and
call for help, go out through the garden way, whilst I hold it down
so that it can't get through "
You re holding it!" Conal's voice sounded utterly amazed,
and at the same moment Shelagh felt the door-handle, to which
she was clinging for support, turned from inside, whilst the snake
under her feet seemed making more and more violent efforts to free
itself.


Then —the door was flung open and Conal stood there, flushed
and panting, his hair tousled, his face and voice extremely annoyed.
"What on earth are you playing at?" he demanded. "Why
do you want to hang on to the cord of my dressing-gown like that?
"The—the—the c-cord " Shelagh stammered, staring first
at Conal, then down towards the ground as though she could not
believe her eyes. Something long there, something red-and-black
which trailed down from Conal's waist —and Shelagh collapsed
into a heap on the floor laughing feebly.
"I call it a poor sort of joke," Conal said aggrievedly. "I got
the girdle of my dressing-gown caught under the door, but I didn t
know you were hanging on to it outside. So that's why I couldn t
get away! But what on earth you were yelling about, all
that rot about not coming near the door, when you yourself
were holding me back —if that's what you think funny, I don t;
that's all."
"I—l d-do now " Shelagh gasped. "But I d-didn't a minute
ago. I —l thought it was a Coral Snake —your dressing-gown
belt "
When Conal had heard the whole story, he did not laugh, at
first, quite so much as Shelagh expected.
" I say, if it really had been a snake and you'd stood on it like
that," he said seriously, "it would have bitten you as sure as fate.
That was a mad thing to do, She."
"But I didn't—at least, it wasn't!" Shelagh protested. "It's
all right now, so what does it matter?"
" It does —or it might have —anyway you thought it was a Coral
Snake, so it counts just as if you'd done it and saved my life,"
Conal persisted. "Anyhow, / count it that way, She; and I'm
every bit as grateful to you as if it had been a real snake."
Shelagh did oversleep herself next morning, as she had expected;
so much so that there was only just time to scramble into her clothes


and through her breakfast before the car started for Santos again—
Santos, the Crusoe and Cocky.
Down the South American coast they steamed, from Brazil
to Uruguay, south to where the great Rio de la Plata makes a
boundary between Uruguay and Argentina, with the capital cities
of both countries upon its two banks.
"And I bet you don't know why the chief town of Uruguay
is called what it is," Conal said, as they approached the port from
the sea and saw the sloping streets of the white city rising to the
domed cathedral.
"Monte —Monte " Shelagh frowned. "Mountain of some-
thing, I s'pose—but I don't know what."
"Warmish, but not right. 'I see a Mountain —Mountain, I see'
—that's what Montevideo means," Conal told her triumphantly.
"It's simply what the first Spanish sailors who discovered the place
said, two hundred years ago or so, when they saw that mountain."
He pointed to the conical peak standing alone to south-west
of the bay, but Shelagh tilted her chin rather contemptuously.
"Mountain, indeed!" she remarked. "I should have said:
'I see a hill' —and not a very big one either!"
"I expect they'd been at sea a long time, so that almost any-
thing looked to them like a mountain," Conal said reflectively.
However that might be, Montevideo itself turned out to be
an attractive town —clean and snowy-white houses, streets edged
with blue gums, whose sight and smell made the Australian-born
cousins homesick, and everywhere rose-gardens—such masses and
multitudes of roses of every imaginable size, shape and colour,
covering walls, trellises and arches, that Shelagh declared the town
should have been called after them rather than a mountain which
didn't exist. And at night the roses were illuminated; tiny electric
fights were arranged behind the arches, towers and pergolas, so
that their lovely colours showed almost as brilliantly as in the


daytime —for the Montevideans are immensely proud of their
roses.
"It's like that old fairy-story —the Rose Garden of King Larey,
where they bloomed all the time, even in snow," Shelagh said,
and was sorry to leave Montevideo when the time came to take
the overnight steamer across the broad Rio de La Plata to the capital
of the Argentine on the other bank. Buenos Aires, or 8.A., as it is
called by way of a pet-name by those who live there, is the ninth
largest city of the whole world.
Such a huge city, with its neat chess-board-like squares of
streets all arranged round one enormous square in the middle,
the Plaza Mayo. Beside the deep blue of the sea there is a long
marble Promenade leading to splendid parks; beside the river miles
and miles of docks with the great "frigorificos," the refrigerators
for the meat shipped at Buenos Aires from the herds of cattle on
the prairies stretching away behind the city.
"All these Spanish names seem to mean something," Shelagh
announced as a discovery. "'Argentine' is 'Silver,' of course, and
'de la Plata,' the same —'the silver-plated River.' And I've found
out about the town, too. It was a Spaniard called Mendoza who
came up the river here in February, 1535, just over four hundred
years ago. There wasn't anything there then, only prairies and
the river—and wind blowing right away from the prairies, hundreds
of miles, smelling of hay and flowers. So Mendoza said: 'What
beautiful air! Let us call this place, in gratitude for reaching it,
and for its freshness, Santa Maria de Buenos Aires —Saint Mary
of the Beautiful Airs.' So that's why it's called Buenos Aires to
this day, and I'm so glad that our last American place has such
a nice name."


PART III: THE JUNGLE
CHAPTER ONE
SALLY OWN AND NANNY POO
IT was very disappointing. As Shelagh said, you really don't
go to the Tropics and expect it to rain every single day, a
steady downpour from a grey sky, with a grey sea, making a
curtain of wet grey mist drawn closely round the ship.
Yet this was the weather they had run into halfway across
the Atlantic between America and Africa, and the wettest day of
all was the one when they actually crossed the Equator. After
this things changed for the better, although their first sight of
Africa was that of a very Dark Continent indeed, with black peaks
against a slate-grey sky, as they steamed into harbour late at
night.
Next morning the sky was blue and the mountains a wonderful
green, covered with tropical forests sweeping down to the sea.
"There's Sally Own," Conal said, pointing shorewards, when
Shelagh joined him on deck, and she stared eagerly in the same
direction.
"Where is she? In a boat?" she asked, and Conal grinned.
"Thought I'd catch you!" he said. "That's what the negroes
here call Sierra Leone, just as Fernando Po, further south, is Nanny
Poo. One peak's the Sugar Loaf, and the biggest is Sierra Leone
itself, the Lion Mountain, with Freetown, the capital, at the foot
of it, where we'll soon land."


The first thing that struck them about Sierra Leone, after they
left the wharves, warehouses and factories along the waterside,
was its hothouse smell. And no wonder, for heavy-scented tropical
flowers grew everywhere, and everywhere tropical fruit was for
sale, as brightly coloured as the print overalls and the brilliant
head-kerchiefs of the negro market women.
One street Shelagh never forgot; it was lined on both sides by
flamboyant-trees, with leaves the lovely green of acacias and flaming
with orange and vermilion blossoms. But Conal remembered better
the jack-crows which are not crows at all, but big vulture-like
birds, with scraggy necks, the scavengers of the town, perched in
rows on walls or roofs, their untidy wings sticking out all ways,
making them look like badly rolled umbrellas.
The cousins explored "Sally Own" by themselves for some hours,
the Captain being busy until the afternoon. Towards mid-day they
were in Freetown market, fascinated by a stall of monkeys, parrots,
lizards, lemurs, and numberless other birds and beasts. Conal was
bargaining for a large green frog, when Shelagh said suddenly:
" Oh, dear, Ido believe it's going to rain again. Just look at that
cloud coming over the hills! Such a queer-looking cloud, too."
It was like a dense brown mist pouring over the wooded hill-
tops, rising high to obscure the blue of the sky. Conal and Shelagh
were just deciding that it must be some kind of tropical hurricane
and wondering where they had best take shelter, when one of the
market women began to shout excitedly:
"Look, dey locusts lib for to come! Town be took by locusts!"
Locusts! So that was what the queer brown cloud meant, millions
and millions of locusts! Cocky became excited and had to be held
very firmly. " I wish we'd not brought him," said Shelagh.
"I say, what does one do in a locust storm?" Conal had scarcely
begun to speak when the cloud of insects descended upon them,
and all the air was full of the dry, crackling rustle of their horny


*'' * * '
* •
wings. They were everywhere, covering the market stalls, the
ground, the trees, choking the gutters as people flapped and swept
them off the footpaths. They flew into faces, clung to clothing;
Shelagh, who detested all flying and creeping insects, was almost
crying as she tried to beat them off.
"Oh, the beasts! There's one tangled in my hair!" she sobbed.
"D-do t-take it out, Conal!"
Conal looked round for some place of shelter, shielding his eyes
with one arm from the locusts which beat against his face. The
owner of a near-by fruit-stall, an enormously fat, good-natured
looking negress, seemed to guess what he wanted, and beckoned
to the pair.
" Missie
flighten?" she
said. "Him
packem here."
She pulled
off the lid of
a big wooden
crate, made to
hold fruit,
which stood
in a corner. It
was empty,
and next in-
stant Shelagh
found herself
crouching in-
side, with the
lid replaced.
There were
cracks between


the slats of the case, large enough to let in air, but not
locusts, and although it was cramped and stuffy, Shelagh felt
thankful for the refuge, as she heard the locust swarms whirring
and rustling outside.
"They're making fires out in the open street —I s'pose the smoke
stupefies the brutes, or something," Conal told his imprisoned cousin.
"Are you all right in there, She, for a few minutes? Because, if so,
I'll just have a squint to see if the Captain's about."
"Quite all right," Shelagh answered, and Conal hurried off, the
locusts on the ground slippery and crunching underfoot.
It was perhaps ten minutes later, and Shelagh was just wonder-
ing how long Conal would be, when she heard the pad-pad of bare
feet hurrying towards her, then the voices of two men talking to
each other. She could not understand what they said, but next
instant felt her crate picked up and carried along quickly.
"Wherever are they taking me?" Shelagh thought, trying to
steady herself, as she was jolted and bumped from side to side
and then, through the slits in the case, heard a loud fierce crackling
and saw the red glare of a fire close by.
She began to bang on the sides of the crate, calling at the top
of her voice: "Let me out —let me out!"
One of the negroes carrying the case dropped his end of it with
a bump, crying: "Duppy! Duppy!" and at the same moment, to
Shelagh's great relief, she heard Conal's voice quite near.
"What on earth are you doing with that box?" he shouted.
"Put it down at once; there's someone inside!"
"Please, Massa, we done been gwine burn it on de locus' fire,
but sure, dey's a duppy inside!" the negro who still held the box
explained in a terrified voice, whilst Conal answered angrily:
"I don't know what you mean by a Duppy, but my cousin's in
there!"
A few minutes more and Shelagh, very dusty and ruffled, was


standing outside the box, near the bonfire upon which all kinds of
rubbish was being piled, and which she had so very narrowly escaped.
It was a horrid idea, but Shelagh soon recovered from the shock
and was able to laugh when Captain Clark, who had come up with
Conal, explained that a Duppy was a hideous kind of goblin or
ghost much feared by the negroes.
The smoking bonfires had cleared the air of locusts, although
they still lay everywhere in heaps, which some of the negroes were
collecting to roast and eat. Cocky, too, seemed to consider them
a nice change of diet, as they found when they got back to the
Crusoe, whose decks were covered with the insects.
Several of them had squeezed through the bars into the big
parrot-cage, where Cocky, to his great disgust, had been, and was
now again imprisoned whilst the steamer remained in port, and he
cracked and ate them with much satisfaction.
There was a new addition to the Crusoe's crew, brought on board
by the Captain, in the shape of a small greenish-grey monkey called
Mungo, the most mischievous little creature who ever gazed out of
innocent appealing eyes. At first Cocky was very jealous and sus-
picious of the stranger, but afterwards they became great friends —
a friendship which, later, was nearly to lead to tragedy for the
cockatoo.
But for the moment Mungo sat innocently sharing Cocky's
meal of locusts, with a most terribly mournful expression.
The Crusoe put in at several more of the smaller ports along
the Gold and Ivory coasts of West Africa after they left Sierra
Leone, but there was a certain sameness about them all, and Shelagh
afterwards declared that she could not exactly remember which
was which.
"They've all got just the same pattern —in stripes," she said.
"First, there's a dark green stripe of forest, then a yellow one of sand,
and a white one of surf, just a sort of border to the blue of the sea.


Sometimes beyond the forest there's another paler-blue stripe,
which is hills, otherwise it's the same all the time, going on and
on, like those wall-papers that have the same pattern over and
over again. But I don't mean that it isn't a lovely pattern, because
•i• y >
it is.
It was at Accra, one of the biggest of the West Coast ports,
however, that Conal had an adventure —by himself, this time.
The cousins had been asked to spend the day at the home of
the British Consul, a big bungalow some distance outside the town
of Accra, to which they drove along the coast road and through
another splendid avenue of flamboyant trees.
There was a wonderful garden round the bungalow full of tropical
flowers and fruit, and from that garden and those fruits Shelagh
entirely refused to budge an inch, when, in the afternoon, Conal
wanted to go for a walk and explore the country round.
"I don't care if I am lazy and greedy," she said, rocking in the
gaily-coloured hammock and picking out another particularly juicy
mango. "I like it —and I'd much rather stay here than walk any-
where."
"Well, you'll be sorry afterwards, when I tell you all the interest-
ing things I've seen," Conal declared, and went off alone down the
sandy road, which led, as he had been told, to a native village.
There were coconut palms with feathery heads and banana-
groves where huge bunches of fruit hung amongst the brilliantly
green leaves. And presently the boy came to a little cluster of
thatched mud houses, where comical chocolate-brown or black
"Pickins," as the small negro children are called, rolled about in
the dust with few or no clothes, except, sometimes, an enormous
straw hat, completely covering their faces.
The elder members of the family worked in their gardens, or
patches of sugar-cane, and grinned at Conal good-humouredly, one
offering him a banana, another a freshly-opened coconut, which he


sat down to eat under a frangipani tree covered with sweet-smelling
cream-coloured flowers.
Little green lizards darted in and out of the ferns which grew
on the brick coping of the village well near by, an enormous butter-
fly, with wings like pink and black velvet, hovered round the frangi-
pani flowers. It was hot and sweet-smelling and drowsy, and Conal,
sitting there, very nearly fell asleep.
He was roused by a shout from one of the older "Pickins,"
who had been
rolling about
in front of a
hut door with
a fat yellow
puppy. Now
he ran to-
wards Conal,
screaming
and rolling
his eyes,
showing the
whites, so
that they
looked just
like pepper-
mint bulls-
eyes.
"Harnts
—harnts!"
he shrieked
as he ran and
pointed at
something


amongst the bushes near the hut, whilst Conal looked round
trying to make out what the mysterious word meant, and deciding
that it was some language he did not understand.
Then he saw a movement in the grass and undergrowth, and
suddenly realised what the frightened "pickin" was trying to show
him. At first he thought it was a huge blackish snake, writhing its
way along and glittering in the sunlight, a python or boa constrictor.
Then, going to look more closely, Conal saw that it was not one
creature, but millions, a tight-packed mass about a foot broad, a
moving column of insects.
"Ants—that's what you mean!" Conal cried, and the child,
rolling his eyes more wildly than ever, repeated "Harnts! Harnts!"
Conal was quite near to the ant-army now; he could see that
they were dark-brown, about half-an-inch long, with long, ugly-
looking pincers on their heads. They were moving all the time,
marching on steadily, the tail of the long column hidden somewhere
amongst the bushes, whilst the head
Conal turning to see where the advance-guard of the army might
be, saw the broad, moving band trailing across the sandy ground
in front of the huts, and saw that it disappeared into the open door of
the hut, in front of which the "pickin" and puppy had been playing.
"Hullo!" the boy thought. "I wonder if that's what frightened
the kid, seeing the ants —my word, here comes his mother or some-
one of the sort, and she seems jolly well upset, too!"
Out of the hut ran a negress, jabbering at the top of her voice,
waving her arms and followed by more "pickins," big and small,
than Conal would have thought could possibly crowd into such a
tiny dwelling-place. They simply streamed out, all yelling with
fear, dodging and leaping to avoid the stream of ants which was
marching steadily on all the time.
The negress was now shouting and gesticulating to one of the
men working in the sugar-canes, and he came running up. Then


both disappeared into the hut, followed by the bigger children,
and soon emerged again carrying all manner of things, bags, jars,
boxes, treasures which, as Conal began now to gather, they were
trying to save from the ant invasion.
The insects swarmed into the hut faster and faster now; they
covered the doorstep, and it was easy to see that their pincers were
nasty weapons, for several of the children were crying and rubbing
the bites on their bare feet and legs, and all the negroes seemed
afraid to go back into the hut again.
At this moment the mother of the family gave a more piercing
howl than before, and began talking loudly between sobs and groans.
"He ham in dere—oh, he ham in dere!" she wailed. "Dey
harnts gib him what-for, him lib for to die!"
While it was difficult enough for Conal to understand her queer
way of speaking, what she meant to say seemed clear enough.
Someone was still in the hut, someone who was in great danger,
who was likely to be hurt or killed by the swarming ants; that
seemed to be quite plain.
"Can't you go back and get him?" asked the negro, who was
also groaning, jabbering and rolling his eyes, but nobody seemed at
all anxious to venture back again, even when the negress scolded
and entreated in turn, moaning:
"Massy me! oh, massy me! He ham lib for to die sholy! Dey
won't be not one bit of him lef—dey harnt ate him all!"
At this horrible suggestion Conal could bear it no longer. He
felt sure by now that it was one of the smaller "pickins" who had
been left behind in the hut by the cowardly family, and, if so,
something must be done.
"If all of you are afraid of ants. I'm not!" he cried. "And if
you won't go, I will!"
He ran towards the hut, although the negro tried to stop him,
shouting and protesting about the "harnts" and the danger of


going near them. But Conal took no notice, disgusted as he was by
the cowardice of the man. He reached the doorway, now entirely
blocked by the stream of ants, which had also spread inside all
over the beaten mud floor of the hut.
It was no use hesitating. Already Conal felt several sharp nips
at his ankles above the tops of his canvas shoes.
"No good standing about —so here goes!" he thought, and
plunged straight through the ant-column, stamping as hard as he
could and reaching a wooden stool in three bounds. On top of
this, he was fairly safe for a few minutes; at any rate it gave him
time to look about him—and to see in the far corner of the hut
a small blackened object huddled on the ground.
It seemed to be moving—no, that was only because ants swarmed
over it and covered it in a seething mass. But there could be no
doubt all the same as to what it was; he could see blackish skin,
some sort of white-cotton garment.
Conal did not hesitate another instant. He sprang down from
the stool, crossed the floor in big leaps, snatched up the "pickin,"
and raced for the door, ants biting his hands and nipping his legs,
but almost unheeded in the excitement of the rescue.
He was outside, and in a second the negro ran forward and
snatched the prize from his hands, evidently both delighted and
excited by what Conal had done.
But his next action was more amazing to Conal than anything
that had gone before. Still holding the "pickin," he ran to the big
water-butt beside the door and hurled it in, turning to the boy
with a broad grin of delight.
"Dem harnts drown-dead!" he remarked.
"What on earth are you thinking of?" demanded Conal. "Can't
you see you'll drown the baby, too? Get it out at once, poor little
beggar!"
He reached the butt before the unnatural father, and bent


over to re-rescue the "pickin," only to stare in amazement. For,
freed from the mass of ants which had covered it so thickly, the
victim could be seen more plainly —not as the baby negro Conal had
supposed, but a blackish-skinned ham, wrapped in a piece of white
cotton.
"Yes, those were Driver Ants,—Visitor Ants as they call them
sometimes, because of their unpleasant habit of paying the sort
of call you saw," the Consul said, after Conal had returned and told
his adventure. "They're horrible creatures—they'll eat their way
through a hut when they start marching, and even kill small animals
who come in their way."
"Well, I don't want to come in their way again," Conal said,
rubbing his ankles.
"And I'm glad I was greedy and lazy, so that I stayed behind,"
Shelagh declared. "There are too many insects in Africa."
CHAPTER TWO
COCKY DECIDES
I LIKE the sound of Elephant Lake," Shelagh said.
"J think it would be frightfully idiotic not to go to Buea,"
Conal declared. "After all, it's three thousand feet up the
Great Peak of Cameroons, and that's the highest mountain of the
west coast —one of the highest in all Africa."
"I don't like mountains," Shelagh protested.
" I think lakes are dull as ditchwater —and I'm sure there aren't
really elephants there," said Conal.
The argument had been going on ever since they had arrived
at Tiko, the port of Cameroons, and been offered by the Captain
their choice of a short excursion. Conal had longed to climb part


of the way at least up the Great Peak ever since he saw it from
"Nanny Poo," towering nearly 14,000 feet on the mainland, nine-
teen miles away.
Fernando Po itself is an island, the 10,000 foot mountain of
Clarence Peak rising straight from the sea and very fine to be seen.
But the higher Mungo Mah Lobeh, or Throne of Thunder, which
is its native name, was grander still, and the trip there meant seeing
real tropical forests, too.
"Look here, we'll let Cocky decide," Conal said suddenly,
and when Shelagh agreed the words "Lake" and "Mountain" were
written upon two slips of paper and laid upon the cabin table.
"Which ever he picks up first is the place w r e're to go to," Conal
went on, as the cockatoo' hopped up and down, eying the slips in
a coy, hesitating way. At last he made his choice, which turned
out to be Conal's.
"Good old Cocky! He shall come too, as a reward!" the boy
declared, and so, when they started for the mountain, Cocky accom-
panied them, perched on Conal's shoulder.
It was a wonderful motor ride, up to Buea, the Residency, high
on a mountain ledge, with the steep south-east face of the peak
rising sheer behind it; and the view from that height was wonderful,
too, over the estuaries and mangrove swamps of the Cameroon
and Mungo rivers.
But Conal was not satisfied. There was nearly a whole day
before them, for they had started early and were to spend the
night at Buea. It seemed a grand chance to climb a bit higher up
the mountain, seeing the forest at the same time.
Shelagh, resigned now to the loss of Elephant Lake, was quite
willing, and the cousins were provided with a negro guide called
Sixpence, who could speak a little English and wore a bright pink
shirt, which, as Shelagh said, made him easy to see and follow
through the trees.


They started, up a steep path, with Sixpence carrying their
lunch, and until after that picnic meal all went well. Huge trees
rose on all sides like columns supporting a green roof, the trunks
thickly covered with feathery moss, in which ferns and lovely
orchids grew. It was a damp forest: underfoot the mossy ground
felt like wet velvet, and veils of white mist floated through the
trees. There were bees, too, everywhere, creeping or flying, to spoil
Shelagh's pleasure, although Sixpence declared "him bee no lib for
bite."
But in the afternoon it seemed as though "Thunder Mountain"
turned sulky and decided to show that it deserved its name. There
were distant rumblings, sudden moaning gusts of wind, and Six-
pence, looking round uneasily, declared that a tornado was coming
and they must hurry back at once.
This was easier for him than Conal and Shelagh, who, not used
to travelling through tropical jungle, were constantly tripped up
by stones or roots or nearly strangled by creepers —lianas or tough
prickly "Bush-rope"—dangling from above. They couldn't hurry,
and every minute it grew darker and the rumblings of the thunder
nearer.
Then they came out on to an open space of mountainside, where
they could see the Peak wrapped in an ink-black cloud and in the
opposite direction great twisting columns of blackness against
a pale-green sky.
"Tornado him dere!" whimpered Sixpence, and at that moment
came a terrific crash of thunder, whilst jagged flashes of lightning
played round those cloud-columns, sweeping down upon them.
Conal and Shelagh plunged blindly after their guide into the forest's
shelter, although both felt that they would have been safer in
the open.
Boom! came the thunder again, and then the tornado was upon
them, floods of water crashing down through the forest, a wind which


bent great trees as though they had been reeds, which made them
rattle and shake and strain against their creeper cordage like the
masts of a ship in a storm. Now and then came the crash of a tree
falling, and every few seconds the glare of lightning lit up every-
thing, to be followed by black darkness.
Conal, looking round in one of the flashes of violet light, saw
some big rocks and dragged Shelagh towards them.
"We —must shelter "he gasped. "Here in this crack —
quick!"
There was just room to squeeze in, and the place gave some
little shelter, especially as a great leafy bough had fallen across the
top, roofing in the crevice. They were all drenched, Cocky, especially,
just a bunch of limp wet feathers, but they could only crouch
together and hope that the storm would soon pass.
"I wonder where Sixpence is; I can't see his pink shirt any
longer," Shelagh said.
"Running for his life, I bet!" Conal answered grimly. "Fine
sort of guide he is! I say, there's a funny noise going on: sounds
like— look ! "
The boy's voice dropped to a whisper as a sheet of blue light
blazed out again, showing them a slab of rock only a few yards away
and, crouched low upon it, with ears flattened and tail lashing,
a big leopard. Spitting and snarling, with eyes half-closed, he
sounded furiously angry, and Conal expected each moment that
he would see them and charge into their hiding-place.
It was Shelagh who guessed the truth.
"I do believe the poor lamb's as frightened as we are," she
whispered. "The rain and the lightning are blinding him, and he's
soaked to the skin."
"That won't make him any better-tempered if he sees or smells
us," Conal whispered back.
But the leopard did neither. And suddenly, between two


lightning flashes, he had gone, never to be seen again by his
neighbours in the storm.
Gradually the tornado growled and muttered away over the
mountain. Cocky began to shake and preen himself, and the three
ventured out again.
"And now we've got to find our way back to Buea," Con a 1 said
"We ought to be all right if we keep on going downhill."
Shelagh did not feel quite so certain as Conal that this would
work, but there seemed nothing else to do. They set off through the
dripping forest, and presently Conal, just ahead, turned to
shout encouragingly to Shelagh.
"It's all right! I can see
the Residency down below.
be "
Conal never finished that
He took a step forward
looking where he
stumbled and sank
knees. Shelagh,
up to help,
herself
the earth
under her
slithered
wards.
There
crackling,
and then
a heap to-
brushwood
dead
found
the roof of
We'll soon
sentence.
without
was going,
up to the
running
also found
falling,
giving way
feet, as she
down-
was a
crashing—
the two, in
gether with
and damp
leaves,
that they


were at the bottom of a pit, feeling scratched, bruised and sorry
for themselves.
"Are you killed?" Shelagh moaned.
"No —are you?" Conal answered lugubriously, rolling over
to investigate. "I say! it's lucky we came down in a bunch at the
side —just look here —if we'd fallen on these!"
Here, by the dim greenish light from above, showed some ugly
sharpened stakes, driven into the ground point upwards, and
proving, together with the brushwood covering, that this pit was an
animal-trap in which they had been caught.
"Pretty Cockatoo!" came raucously from above, and they
saw Cocky, peering * down, head aslant, from a tree-trunk which
had fallen right across the trap about twenty feet above their heads.
The sides, curving inwards, seemed unclimbable except by a fly,
and the cousins looked at each other rather hopelessly.
"If we could only get up where Cocky is!" Conal said longingly.
"But I can't see how it's to be done."
"There's some of that spiky 'bush-rope' creeper amongst the
stuff we brought down with us," Shelagh said. "It's awfully tough,
if we could only get it over the tree-trunk."
"How?" Conal demanded. "There's nothing down here to
weight the end with—even if I could throw it over the tree from
where we are, which would be pretty well impossible."
"There ought to be some way, if we could think of it." Shelagh
frowned over the problem. "If we could get a thin string over first
and haul up the creeper-rope by that—and here's the string
that was round our lunches, a good long bit when it's joined
together."
"I still don't see how " Conal began, and then shouted:
"Cocky!" so loud that the cockatoo nearly fell from his perch and
came fluttering down in great excitement, expecting a treat of some
kind.


"I didn't mean I wanted you, Cocky—at least Ido " Conal
was so anxious to explain that he found it difficult. "Dont you
see, Shelagh—Cocky's the way to get the rope over the tree-trunk!"
"Do you mean throw him?" Shelagh sounded doubtful about
such a proceeding.
"Of course not. Can't he fly? Look here " Conal was
tying Shelagh's long piece of string, as he spoke, to the light chain
fastened round Cocky's ankle. "Now he must fly up on to the
tree-trunk and come down the other side —don't you see? That
will bring the string over the tree, and when we've tied the bush-
rope to the end we'll haul that over, too. Then I'll climb up and
pull you up after me. It will be as easy as winking."
It might have been, so far as Conal and Shelagh were concerned,
but Cocky was a different matter. He did not seem able to grasp
what was required of him a bit, and even when he flew up to the
tree-trunk, came down again on the wrong side, which was no
good at all.
Nearly an hour of patient coaxing and bribery with a small
piece of chocolate found in Conal's pocket was needed before the
bird at last fluttered down on the right side, drawing the string after
him, and it was possible to begin the next stage of the proceeding.
The bush-rope, with its prickly stems, turned out to be horrible
to handle, especially as it was necessary to make knots in it for
climbing up by; but the inner fibres were very tough, and when
two lengths of it hung over the tree-trunk Conal made the ascent
and sat astride the big log in triumph.
Shelagh was soon beside him, but once more Cocky proved an
obstacle, and chose perversely to stay down in the pit, pecking
amongst the dry leaves, and only squawking impertinently when
called from above.
It was growing quite dark when he at last consented to come
up, and although the lights in the Residency verandah were visible


as a guide, they did not make it easier to find a way through the
forest, with the thought of possible snakes and other dangers at
every step.
"But it would be worse to stay here till the morning," Shelagh
said. "Or even to take the chance that they may come to look for
us. If only you had your electric torch, Conal!"
"Well, I haven't, so what's the use of talking?" Conal answered
rather crossly. "I do hate 'if onlies!' We must keep together
and go slowly "
"As if we could do anything else!" Shelagh scoffed. "I don't
see myself hurrying, somehow —but whatever is that light over
there? It looks almost like a torch."
Both stared, in the wild hope that it might really be the torch
of someone searching for them. But the bluish light did not move,
only flickered faintly, showing the outline of a tree-stump.
"What can it be?" Shelagh tried to laugh. "It—it's a ghostly
sort of thing, Conal —a bit uncanny."
"We'll go and see," Conal said stoutly. "At least, I will; you
stay here, if you'd rather."
"No, I'll come, too, of course," Shelagh protested, but she
followed so slowly that Conal made his discovery alone.
"It's phosphorescence!" he cried. "Decay, you know —there's
a sort of fungus growing on this rotten wood that gives off the
light. It's bright, too, enough to see by for a yard or two —my
word, what a bit of luck!"
"How do you mean?" Shelagh was by his side now, examining
the queer phosphorescence.
"Why, it's a kind of natural electric torch! We'll each take a
bit, and it'll give us enough light to mind our steps. It ought to
be a great help."
A help it certainly turned out to be, and by slow degrees the
pair managed to make their way down the mountain side until


they reached
the Residency,
and found the
rest of the
party sitting
peacefully on
the verandah
waiting for
dinner.
It appeared
that the
cowardly Six-
pence had not
yet reported
himself; he
was discovered later, lurking in the cookhouse, afraid to tell
how he had deserted his charges. But the "Throne of
Thunder" is a legendary mountain amongst the Cameroon negroes;
he had been so terrified by the tornado and the "Duppies" which
he had imagined loose in the storm that he had run for his life
and hidden until it was all over.
"He wouldn't have been much good to us if he had stayed,
in that state," Conal said. "And we managed by ourselves all
right."
"Ye-es," Shelagh agreed, reflectively. "But perhaps it would
have been better still if Cocky had decided for Elephant Lake
after all. And now we'll never see that."
But this disappointment was soon forgotten in the interest of
all that they did see as the Crusoe steamed South down the West
African coast towards the Congo.
At one or two small ports the Captain would not let Conal and
Shelagh land for fear of fever, but they had found a great interest


on board in the shape of Nettlerash, who was not a disease, but
a Kruboy, as black as ebony, who had taken this unlikely name.
Nettlerash had shipped as steward, and he was the most obliging
and good-natured creature possible. Not only that, but he could
tell the most delightful stories of West African beasts, birds, fairies
and "Duppies," and was always ready to pour them out, whilst
he plaited a rush hat for Shelagh or carved out a model native canoe
for Conal —for Kruboys are wonderful sailors.
Everything seemed to remind Nettlerash of new stories, and
one of the nicest started with the rainbow-coloured scarf which
the Captain had given Shelagh as a present from Accra.
Nettlerash looked at it as he squatted on the deck plaiting
a grass collar for Cocky, with a flaming African sunset all orange
and scarlet behind his black head.
"You know how dat come?" he said. "Long time ago lib a
great hunter, who tread on a poison-thorn, so his foot sick, so he
couldn't hunt. Then he feel plenty miserable, because he think
he and his wife and his pickins soon die of hunger. Well, one day
the hunter see how a spider make a net an' catchem flies, so he
think —why shouldn't I do dat, too?
"So he make like spider's net of bush-rope and put it 'cross
path an' catchem bush-cow, an' bush deer an' porc'pine an' all sorts.
So he make more'n more nets better'n better. One day he make
very fine net an' his wife say—dis good for wear, better 'n bark
or skins.
"But the net not good fit for wear, so man go to spider an' say
—Please'm how you make net good shape? So he see spider made
net on sticks an' he get sticks and bush-rope and make better nets
that way.
"Den his wife say—Bush-rope too big, not good for wear. So
the hunter took offerings to spider an' askem—oh, Lord, show
me how you make fine rope!


"But spider not sayin' anythin'—jus' spinnin' rope out of
hisself.
" So de hunter he can't do dat, but he lookem here and he lookem
dere an' he find reeds an' he find grass an' make rope plenty thin,
weave dat on sticks, so it plenty fine net. So his wife pleased.
"So bimeby he find cotton, more finer still —an' dat how spider
show pussons how dey make nets an' weave cloth, so if dere be no
spiders, nobody never wear nufhn but bark an' skins. You watch
spider an' you see dat true story."
CHAPTER THREE
CONGO COCKY
COCKY, his head screwed very much on one side, looked
thoughtfully at Mungo, the monkey, through his cage-bars.
The monkey stared back, too mournful, apparently, to
take any interest in the lump of sugar which the cockatoo held
under his claw.
But Cocky knew better; Cocky had learnt that Mungo liked
sugar better than anything in the world; that was why he had
saved this piece, given to him by Shelagh at breakfast, although
his beak watered to peck it.
For Cocky was terribly bored with his cage; even the perch
and chain had been better than this prison, especially now that
there was another Bush, as he thought, quite near, instead of nothing
but sea all round.
It was nearly a week since they had reached Boma, the trading-
port some miles from the mouth of the Congo, and Conal and
Shelagh found their first sight of the great river very disappointing.
They had expected something like the Amazon, very green and
blue and tropical . . . and here was a huge chocolate-brown river


rolling sluggishly between banks which were just endless mangrove
swamps, under a low grey sky, which might have belonged to
England in November.
There was something depressing about the mournful, sunless,
colourless scene, about the silence of it all, and they had seen hardly
any animals or birds, except a few cranes and the hideous pinkish
land-crabs, with stiltlike legs and mushroom eyes, scuttling about
on the twisted, naked-looking roots of the mangroves. Shelagh
decided inwardly that if the Congo were always like this, she wished
they had gone somewhere else.
But Captain Clark, as usual, had a plan, and the spirits of
the cousins went up several degrees when they heard that, whilst
the Crusoe was taking in cargo at Boma and Matadi, they were
going for a trip in a small stern-wheel paddle steamer up one of
the rivers which run into the Congo—a trip to give them some
idea of real African jungle. They had begged for Cocky and Mungo
to come too —and that was the beginning of trouble.
The old-fashioned-looking paddle steamer was in no great
hurry to get anywhere. At first they had chug-chugged along close
to the mangrove swamps on the right bank, with the sight of an
occasional crocodile as the chief excitement, and short runs ashore
when the boat stopped at a trading-post —just a store-house, a
bungalow, a pier on wooden piles and a few native mud-huts, as
a rule.
But when they left the Congo itself for the narrow tributary
river, things became more exciting. The banks closed in on each
side, growing steeper, greener, more tree-covered; the water, though
dark, was not so muddy, and even the weather changed to blue skies
and bright sunlight.
There were butterflies and flowers now to see; in the early morning,
birds to watch and hear, although once the sun rose high the
jungle grew strangely silent, and there were no glimpses to be caught


of the Big Game for which Conal had secretly hoped. Still, there were
always possibilities, and the two enjoyed themselves thoroughly.
Not so Cocky; the sight of the thickly forested banks had made
him dreadfully homesick for the Bush again, and he was using
all the wits he had to get free for a time. That was the reason for
the hoarded sugar, and now, with the steamer moored along-
side the river-bank to take wood for engine-fuel on board
the cockatoo thought his chance had come.
It was the hottest time
everybody and everything
as Cocky sidled along his
clutching the sugar, and
close beside
who squatted
"Would
sugar?" Cocky
sweetly, and
without
mournful
made a sud-
"Oh, no,
Cocky
indignantly,
the thin paw.
giving it to
of the day;
seemed asleep,
perch, still
eyed Mungo,
his cage.
you like this
enquired
the monkey,
changing his
expression,
den grab.
you don't!"
squawked
jabbing at
"I'm not
you for
nothing. You've got to do something for me in return."
"What's that?" Mungo asked suspiciously.
"Oh, nothing much! Just lift up the catch of this wretched
cage-door," Cocky said airily. "My wings want exercise."
"I shall get into trouble if I do," Mungo grunted unwillingly.
"My dear fellow, who'll know it was you?" Cocky protested.
"They'll only think I did it myself, and so I could, only the catch
is a bit stiff and I don't want to hurt my beak."


The monkey eyed the sugar greedily; Cocky shifted his claw to
show what a large lump it was—and next instant the deed had
been done. Mungo's quick, clever fingers slipped up the catch, the
cage-door opened; Cocky squeezed out and fluttered triumphantly
to the steamer's rail, whilst the monkey sat crunching the sugar,
his eyes as mournful as ever.
In another moment, Cocky had disappeared amongst the trees
on the bank, and the hot silence settled down once more on steamer
and river, with only the empty cage to show what had happened.
As for Cocky, he was delighted with himself and his own
cleverness.
"I should have lost the use of my wings if I had stayed in that
cage much longer," he thought, fluttering from tree to tree, dipping,
diving, looping the loop and doing all manner of flying stunts in
his excitement.
This part of the forest was dim and shadowy, with enormously
tall trees and the ground underneath covered with large dead leaves
scattered thickly on the sand. And it was so quiet that, every now
and then, the rustle of another leaf falling could be heard.
But, all the same, the place did not seem so deserted and utterly
silent to Cocky as it would have done to Conal and Shelagh or
other human beings, for the shy jungle people did not bother to
hide themselves, freezing into stillness and holding their breath
until the stranger had passed, when that stranger was only a
bird.
When he flew up to the higher tree-branches where tangled
creepers made curtains, hiding the ground below, he found quite
a number of creatures at home there, even if some were taking their
daily sleep and not at all pleased when Cccky disturbed them.
First he came upon a family of Colobus monkeys, delicate and
aristocratic-looking with their long white whiskers. But when
Cocky tried to make friends by telling them of Mungo, the only


monkey he had ever met
before, the father
Colobus looked super-
cilious and superior.
"Ah, one of the
common members of our
race, I imagine," he said.
"We never associate
with other monkeys
ourselves; in fact, we
seldom, if ever, come
down to earth at all.
We prefer to live in the
heights, and we find it
wiser, too. Our skins
are so much prized
that we do not care to
take unnecessary risks; perhaps you may not be aware that only
Kings or Great Chiefs are allowed to wear our hair."
The Colobus stroked his silky white beard and looked at Cocky
with half-closed eyes, so that the poor bird felt very common, and
fidgeted uneasily from one foot to the other.
"I think I'll be go "he began, but had not finished the word
when something slashed past, nearly knocking him oh the bough.
The Colobus monkeys quite forgot their dignity, as they went
bounding away, but the smallest of the family was not quick enough
to escape the darting head of the twelve-foot python which had
writhed silently up to the tree-tops. The poor little monkey was
caught by the foot, and began squealing piteously, whilst the others
jabbered at a distance.
But Cocky was not afraid of snakes, however big. Perhaps
some queer instinct told him how birds of his kind often deal with


these enemies in the Bush, for in a moment he was pecking furiously
at the python's head, with a squawk between each jab.
"There!" screeched Cocky. "There! There! There!"
Whether it was the unexpectedness of the attack, or the noise,
or the sharpness of Cocky's beak, which defeated the big snake,
it is hard to say, but it released the little monkey unhurt and
slithered off down the tree, whilst Cocky preened himself and
assured the Colobus family that it had been no trouble at all.
"My people always kill snakes at sight," he said. "Please
don't mention it —I'm delighted to have been of use."
Off he flew, feeling very self-satisfied over the adventure, only
to be considerably startled by a most hideous noise from close by,
something between a bark, a screech and a donkey's bray.
When he saw that it was made by another bird, although a
very large one, Cocky quickly recovered himself, staring boldly
at its black-and-white plumage and enormous, top-heavy beak.
"I know your name," he announced. "You're a Toucan. I
met relations of yours in America, only they were a different
colour."
"You're quite mistaken," the other bird said severely. "I
am called Hornbill. You're evidently a stranger to these parts."
"Yes, I am, but I think it's an interesting country." Cocky
tried to make friends, but the hornbill gave another harsh croak
and flew clumsily to a small hole in a tree-trunk from which the
tip of a beak stuck out.
This was Mrs. Hornbill, who was sitting on her eggs inside,
unable to come out until the young ones were hatched, because of
the clay with which Mr. Hornbill had plastered up the entrance
to the nest, leaving only just room for him to poke food into her
open beak at intervals.
"I wonder she stands it," Cocky thought. "I'd never treat
my wife like that."


He flew away from the unsociable Hornbills, and presently fell
in with a little colony of green parrots, who were more pleasant,
and made him feel so much at home that he stayed with them for
some time. They took him to a native village where a loquat-tree
grew, loaded with the yellow plum-like fruit, and feasting on these,
Cocky almost fancied himself back at Bundaburra, amongst the
loquats in the orchard.
"They make me quite home-sick," he said pathetically, but one
of the parrots answered rudely:
"If you eat so many, you will be sick, of course."
"You don't understand my meaning," Cocky said with dignity,
and when the parrots laughed, decided that they were a common
lot, after all, and flew off alone on his exploration.
Presently he came to the river again, only this was quite different


from the part where he had left the Crusoe —much wider, with reeds
growing thickly along low, muddy banks.
Rising above the water in mid-stream were some smooth,
blackish rocks, and on these a number of birds were perched—
snow-white, crested birds, who seemed to Cocky at first sight as
though they must belong to his own family.
In his excitement he flew towards them over the sluggish, muddy
water, screeching with delight and shrieking:
"Oh, what a lovely cockatoo!"
The white birds, being Africans, of course did not understand
when Cocky spoke in English, and looked at him very coldly when
he alighted beside them on one of the black islands. Even when
he explained who he was in bird language, they were no more sociable.
"None of our relations are cockatoos," they told him stiffly.
"As you see, we have long legs, not short stumpy ones, like yours!
We are cranes, although some people call us Hippopotamus Birds."
"What's a Hippo—whatever it was you said?" Cocky asked
with interest, but at that moment the island under his claws heaved
and shook, so that he almost lost his footing.
"Hullo! It must be an earthquake!" he screamed, trying to
prevent himself from sliding off into the river, and fluttering oh
to another of the rocks, as the one where he stood sank beneath
him under the water.
And then he had another shock. For in the smooth surface by
his feet an eye opened, and two huge nostrils rose slowly out of the
river, snorting loudly. Worse still, one of the other islands gaped
widely, showing great teeth in a pinkish cavern of a mouth. Then
Cocky realised that what he had taken for smooth, dark islands
were really enormous beasts, and he flew in terror to the reeds on
the bank, where the white cranes had gathered.
"What is it?" he gasped. "Those awful things in the river
—the creature I stood on?"


' ~,sl t
"It's just the answer to your question a few minutes ago," one
of the birds answered with a sneering laugh. "A Hippopotamus."
The flock of cranes flew off, leaving Cocky feeling very small
and snubbed.
"Wait till they come out to Australia," he grumbled to himself.
"Then I'll laugh at them! They'll look foolish then."
But as it did not seem likely that he would ever meet the Hippo-
potamus Birds in the Bush, Cocky tried to forget their sneers, and
looked round for something else of interest.
"After all, I'm seeing the world," he consoled himself. "Those
others think themselves clever, but they're only ignorant really."
He flew along the river-bank cheerfully for some distance, finding
plenty of insects amongst the reeds and enjoying himself thoroughly.
Im learning to know my way about," Cocky thought. "I
shall never be so silly as to perch on a hippopotamus again. Fancy
thinking it was an island! Well, I shall be wiser next time!"
A big log, with its rough brownish bark all gnarled and knotted,


lay amongst the reeds, and Cocky flew down upon it to be closer
to the water and any eatable beetles which might be skimming
the surface. He was just cocking his head sideways to look—when
the log under him rolled sideways, and he caught a glimpse of green,
glassy eyes staring at him.
Cocky gave one squawk and flew headlong into the reeds, hear-
ing, as he did so, the clack of the crocodile's jaws and wicked jagged
teeth. When he dared to look back, he could see the monster standing
upon a mud-bank, its short legs a-straddle, its jaws still grinning evilly.
It was about the narrowest escape from the most hideous enemy
in all Cocky's adventures, and it made him terribly nervous.
"Dear me!" he thought, watching the crocodile from a safe
distance. "Fancy taking that for a log and being deceived again!
I shan't dare perch upon anything at this rate for fear that it may
turn out to be alive. I really wish I were back in that cage again!"
Meanwhile there was great distress on the river-steamer when
Conal and Shelagh came on deck and discovered the empty cage.
"Cocky must have found out how to open the door!"
Shelagh cried. "Do you know where he's gone, Mungo?"
But the
monkey only
gazed back
at her with
mo u r n f u 1,
innocent eyes,
as though he
had never in
his life even
heard of such
a creature as
Cocky.


Conal and Shelagh searched the steamer, then stood looking
along the river-bank in all directions and into the depths of the
jungle which stretched away, fold upon fold, up to the hills. To
think of finding one small cockatoo in those miles of forest seemed
about as hopeless as any needle in a haystack, but neither could
bear even the thought of losing Cocky.
"We'd better look different ways," Conal said. "That will
give us double as much chance of finding him before the steamer
starts. Perhaps he hasn't flown very far."
"I'll go towards the village," Shelagh said, and Conal nodded
as he ran off in the other direction.
The village, which was about half a mile away, consisted of no
more than a dozen mud and thatch huts, with a yam-patch, a few
banana-trees and coconut palms. But a Mission bungalow was not
far off, and Shelagh had discovered that most of the "pickins,"
who were being taught there, spoke a little English.
She ran as fast as she could along the red-sanded path, and just
outside the village met a small girl sucking a stick of sugar-cane almost
as long as herself. She looked just like a little brown doll, with her
woolly black hair and red-and-white striped cotton frock, and she
began to nod her head in a doll-like way directly she was spoken to.
"Have you seen a white bird?" Shelagh asked slowly and dis-
tinctly. " A bird all white with long feathers on its head —like this?"
To her delight the little girl answered at once, showing that
she understood quite well.
"Yes, yes, me seeum white bird—bird big as dat!" She spread
out her little black hands to show something about Cocky's size.
"White bird go hop—hop . . . sing like disl"
The screech which the "Pickin" gave, the way in which she
imitated a bird hopping along, made Shelagh feel sure that she
was really on Cocky's track.
Do you know where the white bird is now?" she asked eagerly,


and the child nodded again, pointing along a path which led away
through the jungle.
"Him dere," she said.
"If you'll find him and show him to me, I'll give you this,"
Shelagh said, holding up the coral necklace she wore, and the little
girl grinned and nodded.
She caught Shelagh by the hand and trotted beside her along
the path, talking all the time in her comical broken English, and
stopping every few minutes to imitate the White Bird.
"Him go peckum like dis!" she said. "Put him face like dis!"
—and the way she tilted her head on one side made Shelagh
feel more sure than ever that the "pickin" had really seen
Cocky.
"Yes, that's the White Bird I want," she said. "But let's
hurry, or perhaps he'll fly away."
"Yes, yes, makeum run!" the little girl said, and began to race
along, dragging her companion after her in a way which reminded
Shelagh of the pictures of "Alice" with the "Red Queen."
She was already hot and tired, and her small guide seemed
to be taking her much further than she had expected, but it would
never do to give in now.
She pictured Conal's delight and surprise when she came back
with Cocky, and struggled on bravely, until at last the child
began to tug still harder at her hand, shouting: "Me seeum! Me
seeum!"
Between the trees Shelagh could make out the huts of another
village, and she, too, hurried on in her excitement. They came out
into an open sandy patch, with the usual mud-cabins and gardens,
the usual yellow dog and black babies rolling in front of the doors.
There were a few scraggy hens as well, and to Shelagh's horror
she realised suddenly that it was towards one of these that the
little girl was pointing in triumph.


"Dere White Bird!" she cried, and Shelagh found tears, hot
and pricking, in her eyes, so that she could scarcely see the dingy
white hen, with its scraggy legs and draggled tuft, which was sup-
posed to represent their beautiful sulphur-crested Cocky. At that
moment it stopped pecking in the dust and gave a hideous: " Cluck —
cluck —cluck —cluck —CLAWK!" which made the child dance up
and down, clapping her hands delightedly.
"Hearum sing!" she cried. "Me catchum —you takeum White
Bird!"
"No—no!" Poor Shelagh was almost sobbing in her dis-
appointment. "It isn't my White Bird at all. I don't want it.
Here " She pulled off the coral necklace, thrust it into the
little girl's hands, and, turning, ran away down the path as fast
as she could. She did not want a black "pickin" to see her crying,
but to be so terribly disappointed, when she had come so far
and was feeling so hot and tired. . . . Well, it was really too
much!
Shelagh sank down on a stone by the side of the path and began
to feel for her handkerchief. . . .
But before she found it, she heard something which made her
forget her tears, for the moment at any rate. Someone was calling
her name: " Shelagh—Shelagh!"
And it was Conal's voice—Conal whom she had believed to
be ever so far away in the opposite direction.
Springing up, Shelagh looked towards the place from which
the shouting came, and caught a glimpse of the river between the
trees. As she ran that way, what had happened was plain enough:
the path to the village must have taken her, in its twists and turns
through the jungle, right back in a half-circle behind the part of
the bank where the steamer lay.
But what could have happened to Conal—why was he calling
her?


Panting and breathless, Shelagh reached the river-side
and stared horror-struck.
Close to the bank, caught in the twisted roots of a tree, was
a small native canoe, floating bottom upwards. Had Conal been
in it and capsized? Was he drowning when he shouted just
now?
But before there was time really to think these thoughts,
Shelagh heard the shouts again, and there was Conal on a mud-
bank in the middle of the river.
"What luck that I saw that blue dress of yours through the
trees!" he called to her. "I struck on a snag under the water, the
canoe upset, and I just managed to scramble out here, before it
floated away ashore."
"Can't you swim over here? It's no distance." Shelagh looked
puzzled, knowing what a good swimmer Conal was.
He answered her with only one word, but it was enough.
"Crocs!"
"Oh, I see!" Shelagh shivered, glancing at the water as though
she really did see the hideous monsters —and wasn't that a swirl,
a glimpse of something long and dark moving under the
surface?
"There are lots of them about, and, of course, they could get
up on this bank quite easily," Conal went on. "So if you can manage
to get the canoe topside up and paddle it over, well —the sooner
the better."
"Of course I will." Shelagh was scrambling down amongst
the twisted tree-roots, breathing quickly as though this was a race
—as it was—a race between her and the crocodiles.
From the mud-bank, Conal watched her anxiously, shouting
that she mustn't go into the water on any account, an order which
Shelagh disobeyed, plunging in up to her knees at the last moment,
to reach the canoe.


There was a horrid minute or two whilst she was struggling to
right it; then it tilted over, floated, and Shelagh was able to scramble
in and secure the paddle, which was fortunately wedged inside the
canoe.
A few minutes' paddling carried her across to the mud-bank,
but not before she had seen again more than once that ugly
swirl in the water, that dark shadow beneath. But at last
both cousins were in the canoe, and Shelagh felt that she had
won the race.
As Conal paddled them back towards the river-steamer, she
told her own adventure, ending mournfully: "So we've neither
of us found Cocky after all."


"No," Conal agreed. "I'm afraid this time the poor old
fellow has really gone. I wouldn't mind so much if I thought
he'd get on all right, but he'll probably starve; he isn't used
to looking after himself."
"Poor Cocky!" Shelagh said sadly. And neither spoke again
until they reached the steamer.
And then as they tied up the canoe to the bank and walked
dejectedly up the gang plank and along the deck, they were greeted
by a loud and most unexpected voice.
"Hullo —hullo! Here's a pretty Cockatoo!" it screeched, and
there was the truant Cocky himself, who had found his own way
back, entered his cage, and was sitting there nibbling a nut, as
calmly as though he had never even dreamed of an escapade, much
less made that dream come true.
"You bad fellow, where have you been?" Conal demanded,
but Cocky only eyed him sideways, ducking his head in the way
that meant he wanted to have it scratched.
Both boy and girl were too relieved and delighted really to scold
the cockatoo, but Shelagh said with a sigh of satisfaction:
"Really, it's a good thing that we are on our way home now,
and that there won't be any more forests to tempt Cocky to escape! "
If she had only known it, Shelagh spoke a little too soon.
CHAPTER FOUR
NOAH'S ARK
THERE was to be one more big adventure before Africa had
done with Conal and Shelagh, or they with Africa, but in
this Cocky played only an innocent part.
It happened whilst they were still up the Congo, or, rather, in
one of those tributary streams which ran into the great river itself,


having trading stations upon their banks visited by those stern-
wheel steamers on one of which Cocky and Co. were travelling to
see something of Africa's interior.
This particular tributary river was queer from the very begin-
ning, Shelagh said, leaning over the steamer's rail as they entered
its mouth.
"Look at the water —it's black as ink! Much clearer, too, than
the muddy old brown Congo, and moving quicker."
"It's something to do with the soil, up in those mountains where
it rises." Conal pointed to the steep ridges towering above the
forests ahead. "The river comes out of an ink-black lake, too, the
engineer told me; it certainly does look strange."
"But the jungle on each side is lovely—nearly as good as the
Amazon," Shelagh said, looking at the huge creeper-wreathed trees,
almost meeting over the stream at places where it narrowed, and
dropping large flat leaves so that the clear black water was all
patterned over with green.
Enormous rose-red dragon-flies flickered to and fro; now and
then a flock of brilliant-coloured crimson and yellow birds —barbuts
was their name —flew across the river, screeching, and Cocky, from
his cage on deck, screeched back in answer.
If there were snakes in the overhanging trees, or crocodiles under
the leaf-carpet on the river, they did not show themselves. Once a
bright green chameleon with huge topaz eyes fell plop on to the
deck close to Cocky's cage and sat gasping, whilst the cockatoo
watched him, head on one side, apparently wondering whether this
queer beast was good to eat.
But to Cocky's amazement and the amusement of Conal and
Shelagh, the chameleon realised that its leaf-greenness made it too
conspicuous in these new surroundings, and changed quite quickly
to a dull sandy colour which made it almost invisible.
Cocky was very much puzzled; he scratched his head with a


claw, evidently wondering where the interloper had gone. But it
was the chameleon's turn to be confused when Shelagh laid it upon
her bright red scarf. This was too much for its powers of camouflage;
the best it could manage was a muddy brown, and it sat panting
and goggling its eyes in two directions at once, until Shelagh took
pity and carried it ashore. On a hibiscus bush it soon recovered,
to catch fly after fly with lightning darts of its immensely long
tongue, whilst Conal and his cousin ate their lunch near by.
The hibiscus bush, with its scarlet flowers, was in the garden of
a rest-house just outside a village where the steamer was to lay up
for a couple of nights. There were the usual warehouse and store-
sheds, with a cluster of mud-and-wattle native huts on the river-
bank, the huts mounted on piles to be above high-water-mark.
The rest-house consisted of three or four little separate thatched
wooden huts, also standing on "legs" round a square of sandy
garden. Each hut had two rooms, surrounded by a verandah, and
Conal and Shelagh, with Cocky, to their great satisfaction, were
allotted a small house to themselves, the one nearest to the river,
so that the verandah hung right over the water.
"It's almost as good as being in a boat," Shelagh said as they
took possession of their abode. " Better —because we're very nearly
in the jungle as well. At the other end of the verandah we can look
right into the trees."
They sat on their own verandah after dinner that night, before
going to bed, whilst the others from the river-steamer had gone to
the store-keeper's house to play bridge and listen to the gramophone.
But Conal and Shelagh considered it far better fun to watch the
fireflies flitting amongst the trees on the opposite side of the swiftly
running river, blacker than ever in the darkness, and listen to the
soft tom-tomming of a drum in one of the native huts —and to
another sound rather like a very large drum a long way off in the
mountains.


"I don't believe it is, though," Conal said at last. "It's thunder
—a storm up in the hills; just look at that black cloud and you'll
see that lightning keeps flicking out of it."
"Such blue lightning, too," Shelagh said. "Yes—it is thunder;
that last peal was much more rumbly, not really like drums. I
hope the storm will stay up in the hills and not come down here."
"Doesn't much matter. We shall be snug enough under the
thatch in our own little house," Conal laughed. "Strikes me we'd
better go to bed pretty soon; the mosquitoes are beginning to bite
badly —I suppose the thunder in the air makes them extra lively—
and we'll be safer inside the nets."
"All right," yawned Shelagh. "I'm sleepy too-oo! Good night,
Cocky."
Conal picked up the cockatoo's cage, and, after a last look at
the steamer's lights alongside the bank further up the river and at
the black clouds hanging low over the mountain-tops, the two went
to their rooms and were soon securely tucked away inside the
mosquito-nets.
For some time Shelagh lay listening to the angry little trumpets
of the insects, as they vainly tried to find a way in; then she fell
asleep, soothed by the swish and rush of the river.
She woke with a start, wondering what had roused her, to hear
the steady beat of rain on the roof and the thrashing of wind through
the tree-tops. Then came a crash of thunder, to tell Shelagh
that the storm had not stayed up in the mountains according to her
wish. It was there—very much there, roaring through the jungle like a
huge wild beast, sending the river swirling and rushing along through
the darkness.
Blue lightning suddenly made the room as bright as day, and
Shelagh could see the trees beaten backwards and forwards against
the sky. She saw something else, too: Conal standing on the verandah
fully dressed, and turning when she called to him.


"Oh, are you awake, She? I think it would be a good scheme
if you put your things on. Somehow I shouldn't wonder if the
steamer has to leave —and you can't sleep, anyway, with this awful
row going on. Cocky's frightened out of his wits."
To be quite honest, Shelagh was frightened, too, as she scrambled
into her clothes and listened to the roll and crash of thunder and
the scream of the wind growing fiercer every moment. In a very
few minutes she was out on the verandah on the river side of
the hut beside Conal, and peering through the blackness of the
night.
"How frightfully dark it is—except when it lightens, and that's
worse than darkness," she said. "The river's much higher, isn't it,
Con? It seems to be swirling up against the piles; it quite shakes
the hut."
"Yes, it is," Conal said, peering down." I'd like to get over to
the big hut and see what the others think "
"Oh, Conal, don't leave me alone," Shelagh begged. "Let me
come too, if you go."
"I don't know —I don't like taking you down there." Conal
still peered down uneasily. "I believe the garden's still under water
—I say, listen to that!"
A terrific roar, louder than any of the thunder-claps which had
gone before, rose above the screaming of the wind, the rushing of
the river. It seemed to come out of the blackness which hid the
mountains, and instead of dying away, it grew deeper, nearer, more
plain, the sound of many waters.
It was Conal who first guessed what it meant, and clutched
Shelagh by the arm.
"It's some terrific cloudburst up in the hills, I believe!" he
shouted in her ear, above the noises of the storm. "And—l'm
almost sure—a great flood coming down the river. I wonder what
will happen to the steamer —I wonder if these huts will "


4 -M j
a ' 7.. ' '^V
I k Vft-* v?J^Pj^^^^3BBn|Swy-^BaBl
V V > ■■ K "- - r/«jL -,
Kg^J
.' / *^ w 4Uw ' f'
THIS IS ONE OF THE THINGS I WANT YOU 1
ARE THE CAM
TI


' >


At the same instant the roar of the river grew louder, and with
it came a smashing blow against their hut as though a great fist
had struck it, making it shake and shiver. As Shelagh clung to
Conal's arm the lightning blazed out once more, and for a few
seconds they saw everything plainly, the swaying trees, the black
clouds, the river—the river which swirled past now under their
hut, as well as beside it, overflowing both banks, breaking in angry
waves against the piles. But there was something missing which
the lightning should have shown, as Conal had noticed.
"Shelagh—the steamer's gone!" he cried.
"Are you sure?"
"Yes. I saw the whole of the bank quite plainly, and it just
isn't there. I expect the moorings gave way and it's been carried
downstream with the flood. There wouldn't have been time for
them to get upstream."


"Oh, Con, what shall we do then?" Shelagh's eyes looked wide
and frightened under her ruffled hair.
"She'll come back. Anyway, we couldn't have got to her until
after the storm, any more than we can get to the other huts to see
if anyone's there. But it'll be all right, old thing; we'll just have
to stay here till . .
But Conal's consoling speech was cut short very startlingly.
High above the sounds of wind, water and thunder came a resound-
ing crash, a crunching, splintering crash which did more than shake
the hut. For they felt the whole light building tilting sideways,
and thought for a horrid moment that it was going to be swept
away entirely, there and then.
Shelagh clung tightly to Conal's arm; Cocky shrieked in terror;
then, as the echoes of that frightful crash died away, they found
that the hut still stood, although the floor was all aslant.
"What's —happened?" Shelagh gasped breathlessly.
"We must go and see," Conal answered, and began to stumble
and slide towards the door which opened on to the verandah, fol-
lowed by Shelagh.
Outside it was pitch dark, but almost at once another flash of
lightning showed them what had happened. A large tree had fallen
close beside the hut, so near that some of the branches striking
them had pushed the supporting piles partly over, and the great
earth-crusted mass of roots rose as high as the roof, close by the
heads of Conal and Shelagh.
The leafy top of the tree and most of its trunk lay in the
water, which was dashing up against this new barrier as though
in annoyance.
"I say—that was a near thing!" Conal whistled. "If it had come
on top of us the hut would have been squashed."
"Yes, but . . ."a howling gust of wind interrupted Shelagh,
swooping down upon them, shaking the hut, so that it seemed again


as though it would be blown away. Worse still, a cracking, splin-
tering sound from beneath told that the wooden piles were actually
giving way with the pressure of the fallen tree and the wind together.
"We're not safe here, She," Conal said. "The hut may be
carried away any minute, and the river would soon batter it to
bits."
"What's to be done, then?" Shelagh asked.
"I think we'd better climb on to that fallen tree. It seems solid
enough," Conal decided, leaning against the splintered verandah
railing to look at the huge trunk. "It would be easy enough to
drop on to it from here —only a few feet. We could wedge ourselves
in amongst the roots or the branches and be pretty snug."
"All right," Shelagh agreed. "I'll just put my things to-
gether."
She was gone, back into her room, before Conal could say any-
thing, but after a few minutes of waiting he called to her impatiently:
"I say, Shelagh, do come! It's not safe to wait a minute longer;
the hut's getting awfully wobbly—might go any time!"
"Yes, yes, I'm coming!" Shelagh answered from inside. "I'm
just shoving all the things into my rucksack —I shan't be half a
sec."
"What things? " Conal asked in exasperation, going to the door.
" Oh, only my toothbrush and comb and soap and Cocky's sugar
and the ammonia stuff for bites " Shelagh pushed a bottle into
the rucksack as she spoke. "And my little hussif."
"Cocky's sugar! Stuff for bites!" Conal repeated the words with
vast contempt. "Isn't it just like a girl to bother about things
like that in the very middle of a flood!"
"You may be glad of the bite-stuff —and I'm sure Cocky will
need the sugar," Shelagh rejoined, swinging the rucksack over her
shoulder as she hurried out on to the verandah. "You climb on to the
tree first, and I'll hand Cocky down to you."


"No —you go first," Conal said. "And look sharp about it."
"Well, if you will do the I'm-the-captain-and-I'll-stick-to-the-
ship stunt," Shelagh sighed, "Cocky and I will be women-and-
children-first."
"Don't be an ass!" Conal snapped short-temperedly. "Over
you go! Are you down? Then take Cocky."
Shelagh had swung herself over the broken edge of the verandah,
and stood supporting herself on a branch as she reached up for the
end of Cocky's chain. Conal followed —and he was scarcely in
safety on the tree-trunk before the storm swept down once more in
a furious squall, driving rain into their faces, sending the waves
of the flood dashing over the tree, carrying the hut away com-
pletely. . . .
By the flicker of lightning they saw it swept past them, the
thatched roof carried bodily away into darkness, the rest of the hut
washed off in fragments.
"There! You see what would have happened if I hadn't hurried
you!" Conal shouted into Shelagh's ear, as he clung to the roots
beside her, and entirely recovered his good humour in the satisfac-
tion of being proved so entirely in the right.
They squeezed close together into as sheltered a position as
possible, and waited to see what would happen next. And that
next happening was not very long delayed. The river, under the
pressure of water caused, as Conal had thought, by a tremendous
cloud-burst in the hills, was still rising rapidly, and the current
ran swiftly down-stream. Very soon the two on the tree-trunk—
not to mention Cocky —felt the great trunk heaving under their
feet, then swaying from side to side, and realised that it —and they
—were afloat. Soon came a great swerve sideways, a rocking motion,
and it was launched from the bank, where the earth-covered roots
had held it for a time, and fairly out in the stream, bobbing along
as if it had been no more than a chip on a brook.


For a time both Conal and Shelagh were silent, with the same
fear in their minds that the tree might roll over when the force of
the current caught it. But the outstretched boughs on each side
acted as outriggers and supported it in the water more or less
upright and steady, and after a few minutes Conal sighed with
relief.
"I don't think we're going to capsize," he said. "But goodness
knows where we'll fetch up at the finish!"
"Somewhere down in the Congo, most likely," Shelagh suggested.
"Or p'raps we'll run ashore on one of the banks. Anyway, we can't
do anything at present, so it's no use bothering."
"You're pretty plucky—for a girl," Conal conceded. "Others
would be howling like anything if they found themselves on a tree-
trunk drifting in a flood."
"It's too exciting," Shelagh said. "I'm too busy wondering
what will happen next to cry over it. . . . Ugh! there's
something crawling on my arm —Con, I do believe it's a snake!"
Something dark and slim glided away over the roots, reminding
the voyagers that there might be more living things on their queer
craft than themselves. These other passengers—or some of them
—soon showed themselves. A centipede scuttled almost from
under Conal's hand, and a pitiful chirping noise led Shelagh to
find a drenched and draggled young parrot crouched in a cleft,
so wet and frightened that it showed no further fear when she
took it in her hands to warm it.
"Poor lamb! We'll keep it and tame it as a companion for
Cocky," Shelagh said. "This old tree of ours seems to be quite
a Noah's Ark, doesn't it—full of beasts? Well, there's room for
everybody, if only they'll leave us alone."
Gradually the wind dropped and the rain lessened; the storm
was blowing itself out, the waves dashing less fiercely against the
tree. Presently, too, Conal noticed something else.


"It's getting light," he said. "Soon it'll be day-break, and
we shall be able to see better where we are and what's happening."
Slowly the grey streaks in the sky widened, showing pearly
whiteness behind the clouds; slowly trees on the banks took shape
from the blackness, and they could see the river, covered with
drifting wreckage.
Behind them rose the tangled roots; in front, beyond a space
of gnarled trunk almost clear of branches, was the immense dark
leafy mass of boughs, which had once towered high over the rest
of the forest trees, and now made a cover deep enough to hide
many things.
As the sun rose, rather pale and watery, some of these things
began to show themselves, creeping out into the faint warmth.
First, rather to Shelagh's disgust, came a small green snake, but
this soon slipped down into the water and swam away.
The next appearance was a grey, black-striped squirrel, who
only stared at his fellow-passengers with round boot-button eyes
before beginning to lick his damp fur diligently. Another squirrel
followed, then a draggled little bird, who stood spreading his wings
and fluffing himself out before flying away towards the jungle.
This sight reminded Shelagh to put the young parrot in a sunny
place to dry, and soon he disappointed her hopes of youthful
companionship for Cocky by flying off, too. But she was too
engrossed at the moment in watching a tiny mouse, running along
the tree-trunk with the jerky movement of a mechanical toy,
to bother very much.
They were drifting along with the current quite quickly, but
so far there had been no sign of the steamer and no movement of
their tree towards either bank. Certainly they had no intention of
trying to swim ashore; the possibility of crocodiles was too alarming.
"And it's really rather interesting watching all the beasts,"
Shelagh said.


"If there was any chance of breakfast!" Conal's face was
gloomy. "If you'd got some chocolate in your rucksack, instead
of all that toothbrush rubbish, there'd be some sense in it."
"There's Cocky's sugar!" Shelagh said brightly, fumbling in
her rucksack for the little packet, but, as Conal subsequently
remarked, seven small lumps of sugar divided between three people
could scarcely be considered a satisfactory breakfast. Even when
Shelagh suggested that it was better than nothing, he refused
to agree, saying ungratefully that it was just enough to make him
want more.
Cocky was the only one satisfied. He sat mid-log, nibbling
at the sugar in his claw, chuckling and crooning, with Shelagh
holding the end of his chain, in case he fell into the river, all three
quite unconscious of the new danger which was crawling stealthily
down upon them.
It was a faint rustling amongst the branches which made Conal
look up and clutch at Shelagh's arm.
"Keep back," he whispered. "Get Cocky . . . quick!"
Shelagh snatched the cockatoo back by his chain before she
followed Conal's eyes and saw what he had seen, the head and
shoulders of a leopard thrust out from amongst the leafage at the
further end of the tree. The striped golden and black creature
was crouching, its round green eyes fixed greedily on Cocky, exactly
as a cat stalks a bird.
When Shelagh caught up the cockatoo, it blinked, cat-like,
and drew back a little, only to emerge suddenly with one bound,
alighting midway along the trunk, lying there outspread, tail
lashing, claws contracting as it stuck them into the bark and
snarled wickedly.
There could be no doubt that the spotted beast meant mischief.
It was hungry, it had spent a wet and miserable night, and now
it meant to have a meal as soon as possible. At any instant it


might spring—and Conal looked round desperately for some sort
of weapon with which to defend Shelagh and himself.
Nothing was at hand, not even a branch which he could break
off; the twisted roots were far too tough and stubborn, and if
he moved towards a bough he knew that it would most likely be
just a signal for the leopard to leap upon them.
"Keep still!" he whispered under his breath, catching some
movement from Shelagh. "Don't stir a finger!"
But even "freezing," which, as Conal had read, was the only
thing sometimes to prevent wild animals from attacking, had
no effect upon this particular leopard. Perhaps it was too hungry;
perhaps, like Conal, it had caught Shelagh's tiny movement. In
any case, it growled again, more loudly, digging its claws into the bark,
slashing furiously with its tail —then suddenly sprang, just as
though a spring had been released.
Conal moved to get between the leopard and Shelagh—but
Shelagh herself had acted even more promptly. Her hand, which
had been fumbling in the rucksack, emerged, and with a lightning-
quick movement flung something full into the angry beast's face,
as it rose in its spring. In mid-air, it swerved aside with a howl
of rage, and alighted on the edge of the trunk, some yards short
of the mark, snarling, spitting, pawing at its own face, rolling its
head, with closed eyes, in a mixture of pain and fury, whilst some-
thing broke with a crash and went scattering away in a shower
of gleaming fragments.
Then, almost before Conal had realised what was happening,
the beast slid into the water, rose gasping and spluttering,
and struck off towards the land, swimming with quick jerky
motions.
"Oh —I do hope the crocs, won't get him!" Shelagh cried,
and watched with strained anxiety until the big cat scrambled
ashore and disappeared with one bound into the jungle.


"He's safe," she sighed with relief. "I'd have hated to see
him killed."
"He jolly nearly killed us" Conal said. "But how on
earth did you stop him, She —what was it you threw in his
face?"
"The bottle of ammonia for bites," Shelagh answered. "I
loosened the cork and just got it out in time. You know how
frightfully ammonia stings if you get it in your eyes; it's absolutely
blinding. But it doesn't last long—l expect he's feeling better
already, poor lamb!"
Conal began to laugh.
"You are a funny kid!" he cried. "But it was jolly clever of
you, and it's pretty certain that you saved all our lives with that
ammonia of yours."
"Ye-es," Shelagh said slowly. "It's rather a good thing that
I stayed behind long enough to pack my toothbrush and things,
isn't it?"
They were drifting along more slowly now, with the sun high
over the jungle. But it was still quite early in the morning when
they heard a well-known hoot coming from beyond the next bend
in the river. Next moment the stern-wheel steamer appeared,
making her way slowly up against the still rapid current.
Standing up on their tree, Conal and Shelagh waved and shouted,
and very soon they had all three been safely trans-shipped to the
steamer and were sharing the stories of their adventures since the
evening before.
It appeared that the steamer had, as Conal guessed, been blown
away from her moorings and carried downstream almost as far
as the place where it entered the Congo. The return had taken
them until now, but all the rest of the crew and passengers had
managed to get on board before the steamer went adrift, and their
only anxiety had been for the safety of Cocky and Co.


So now all was well, and the river boat started on the journey
down the Congo, to rejoin the Crusoe once more.
"At any rate, we can't say that we didn't have a grand adventure
to finish up with," Conal said. "I think p'raps Africa has been
the most exciting country of all."
"And it was just luck having the chance to see it," Shelagh
remarked. "We wouldn't have done all three continents if we'd
come by an ordinary everyday liner. America —yes, but after
Panama and the Amazon we'd probably have gone straight across
to England —unless it had been for those cargoes Captain Clark
was bound to deliver and pick up at the West African ports."
"The moral of which is—always come by a cargo-boat if you've
time to spare —especially if you can manage to stow away and
get your passage for nothing!" Conal grinned. "That's where
my luck came in."
"And mine when the lawyer in Sydney found that it was cheaper
to take my passage in a ship that dawdled because she had freight,
and just took a few passengers," Shelagh said. "He said I'd see
more sea and land and learn more geography that way —which
appealed to the Head Mistress, of course! Well, if we'd gone by
the most expensive way and the most enormous ship in the world
we couldn't have had a lovelier time, or a nicer captain—the lamb!"
"That's true," Conal agreed. "And as for passengers —why,
we've not had anything much to do with them. We haven't
wanted them —we've just been Cocky and Co."
"And very nice too!" said Shelagh.


PART IV: THE WOODS
CHAPTER ONE
COCKY —COWFIGHTER
THE morning was still not quite sure whether to be day or
night when Shelagh and Conal yawned their way up on deck.
Secretly each of them wished that Captain Clark had not
given such strict orders to wake them early, so that they might
have their first sight of the famous Peak of Teneriffe.
Even big cups of hot coffee had not been enough to clear away
their sleepiness; it hung about them, just as the woolly white
mists were hanging over the horizon.
"It's all foggy. We shan't be able to see anything now that
we are up," Conal grumbled. "We might just as well have stayed
in bed."
They hung over the rail, staring across the pearl-grey sea in
the direction where they knew that Teneriffe should first appear.
But not the smallest mountain-peak showed upon the misty horizon.
"I call it a fraud!" announced Shelagh.
"Suppose you look a little higher," said the Captain's voice
behind them, and both tilted back their heads at the same moment.
"Oh!" came in a simultaneous gasp from Conal and Shelagh,
for the Peak, which they had been seeking at sea-level, was far
above, seeming as though it hung high there in the sky, gleaming
white against palest blue, almost the most marvellous and magical
thing they had seen in all their wanderings.


"It isn't like an earth-mountain at all," Shelagh said, as they
watched the whiteness turn to pink and pale gold, away there above
the mists, whilst Conal made no more complaints about this early
rising, and announced that he didn't want to see the Peak in broad
daylight at all, after that first sight of it.
However, Teneriffe in morning sunshine was still beautiful in
a different way, although Shelagh declared herself much disappointed
not to find canaries flying about the streets in their namesake
islands after the manner of the sparrows elsewhere. They saw a
few for sale, but these were dowdy, greenish birds, quite unlike
the bright golden caged singers.
As for the Canary Islands themselves, they all looked exactly
what legends say they are —the mountain peaks of a Lost Continent,
left standing up above the surface of the Atlantic Ocean, which
drowned the rest of Atlantis years ago.
It was here that Shelagh and Conal learnt about a new language
—not just the kind of Portuguese dialect which the Canary Islanders
speak amongst themselves, but something quite different and much
more interesting.
They had gone for an expedition inland, riding on small sure-
footed donkeys who were used to the mountain paths, for inland
nearly always means "up" in the Canaries, and very steeply up,
too. The donkeys wore red and white saddle-cloths and yellow
tassels to keep flies off, which made them look very gay as the
little party rode along between vineyards and olive-yards and
houses painted pink, yellow, or bright blue, covered with many-
coloured flowering creepers.
There were flowers everywhere: the gardens seemed so full
that they simply brimmed over with roses, freesias, violets and
carnations; even the donkeys had bunches of geranium tucked into
their head-bands.
Presently they left the bright-coloured houses, where the narrow


road ran up through a mountain valley and there was nothing on
each side but steep brown cliffs and scattered juniper bushes. Then
they came to little field-patches of maize or potatoes, and Captain
Clark, who was riding ahead, pulled up his donkey.
"This is one of the things I want you to see," he said. "Up
there are the caves."
Shelagh looked with interest in the direction towards which
the Captain was pointing. She had been quite excited at the idea
of the cave-dwellers; somehow she had imagined people living in
rocky caverns, killing wild animals and wearing their skins —cave-
men and women. She had expected to see them peering out of
openings in the hillside, and now. . . .
"Why!" she cried. "They've got gardens and window-boxes
—and washing hanging out!"
Captain Clark and Conal both laughed at the disappointment
in Shelagh's face and voice—and if Conal was a little disappointed
himself he was not going to show it.
The cave-houses were there, certainly, hollowed out of the
mountain-side, but some of them had fronts, with windows and
doors, and even wooden porches and rooms built out on ledges.
And there were bright, tiny gardens and flowers in boxes, as Shelagh
said, with tomatoes and cucumbers growing beside the fluttering
strings of washing.
The people, too, were disappointing—brown-faced, black-haired
—apparently much like the rest of the islanders, and certainly not
in the least savage-looking.
Still, the cave-houses were interesting, once one had given up
imagining something quite different, and Shelagh was even resigned
to buying picture-postcards of the queer village from one of the
inhabitants. It was so strange to think that people had lived in
those hillside holes, one above the other just like natural flats,
ever since the days of real cave-men, most likely.


They rode up and into the mountains, the scenery growing
wilder and more beautiful all the time. Presently, as they rode
along a narrow path, with a precipice falling sheer on one side
and another rising sheer on the other, their guide, a boy of about
eighteen, stood still, pointing away across the wide deep gorge
to the further mountain-side, and spoke to Captain Clark.
"He says that white building with the clump of trees near it
is where we'll have lunch—and he's going to let the man who's
standing by the door know how many are coming and what we
shall need," the captain told Conal and Shelagh. "Let him
know? But it's miles away," Conal said. "Listen," the Captain
answered, for the guide had begun to whistle in a shrill chirruping
sort of way, repeating the same notes several times over. Then
he waited —and from the tiny figure far across the gorge came a
faint answer. The boy whistled again, using different notes.
'' I tell him just what you want —he say yes, it is well. All be ready!"


" It's a kind of whistling language of their own," the captain said.
"Used for centuries to communicate with each other across these
mountain valleys. The sounds carry a surprising distance, and they
manage to give a great amount of information, as you'll see when
we get to the Inn and find exactly what I ordered ready for lunch."
"It sounds almost like the very top high notes of a canary
singing," Shelagh said. "I wonder if that's what made them think
of it—the Canary people, I mean."
"I'd like to learn how it's done," Conal remarked. "I'll get
the chap to teach me. It might be jolly useful."
He urged his donkey forward, and spent the rest of the journey
and, later on, most of the way back in trying to master the strange
twittering notes, which Juan, the guide, was willing to teach him.
Conal's efforts sounded, so Shelagh declared, more like a pig being
killed, and it was impossible to tell how far his whistles carried,
whilst as for understanding what they meant
"You forget that it's a new language," Conal said with dignity
in answer to Shelagh's derisive remarks. "I'm only sort of learning
the alphabet—there's no time for more, worse luck! But if I ever
come back, I won't be satisfied till I can order a meal like this
from miles away. Jolly useful, I call it!"
He surveyed with satisfaction the salad, omelet, fruit and cheese,
spread on a table in that Inn garden, where they all fingered as
long as possible, looking at the wonderful view, before going back
down the mountain road to the town —and the Crusoe, already
getting up steam for her departure.
That was their last sight of Africa, but now Conal and Shelagh
were looking forward eagerly to their first sight of Europe.
It took the shape of distant blue headlands, one of which, so
the Captain told them, was Cape St. Vincent. But they soon
had a closer view of the new continent, for the Crusoe's last stopping
place before reaching England was Lisbon, all sunshine and white


or brightly colour-washed houses, almost hidden in the trees and
flowers which covered the hillsides.
Although it was only the end of April, roses were already in
bloom here, with pink and white oleanders and masses of geraniums
everywhere. Ever afterwards, indeed, pink ivy-leaf geraniums were
to remind Shelagh of Lisbon, although not altogether pleasantly.
In reward for his good behaviour since the Congo adventure,
and because he had not tried again to escape from his cage, Cocky
went ashore with them, and created quite a sensation in Lisbon's
chief restaurant by asking for and eating an ice.
Afterwards they wandered about the town, Conal declaring,
more to tease Shelagh than in real earnest, that he wanted to see
a bull-fight.
"They don't kill the bulls in the Portuguese kind," he informed
his cousin. "And it must be frightfully exciting."
" I think you're horrid even to think of it," Shelagh said disgusted-
ly, and refused to join Conal when he wanted to investigate the
placards outside a large building which might possibly be a bull-ring.
"I shall go this way," she said with determination, and marched
off in the opposite direction with Cocky on her shoulder, leaving
Conal to follow when he chose.
And that is how Shelagh found herself in the narrow passage,
twisting and winding upwards between high whitewashed walls,
which were nearly covered with masses of rose-pink geraniums.
She had stopped to look up at them and to admire the Peacock
and Painted Lady butterflies hovering round the flowers, when
she heard sounds coming from beyond the next bend in the alley.
Shelagh had scarcely time to realise what they meant, before round
that bend, almost filling the narrow path, came a huge black cow.
Now Shelagh disliked cows at any time, and this one, with
wide-spreading, sharply-pointed horns, looked as fierce as any bull.
Coming to a standstill a few yards away, the beast lowered her


head threateningly, pawing at the ground and making a deep angry
mooing, whilst her bloodshot eyes gleamed wickedly.
Poor Shelagh looked round in despair. There was no sign of
Conal, no possibility of escape between those geranium-covered walls.
And if she turned and ran, she felt certain that the cow would be
after her in a moment
remembering all she ]
but this cow would
not even catch her
opponent's gaze.
Her eyes were
fixed in a sinister
glare on Shelagh's
scarlet sports coat,
which the girl J
realized was acting
as a real red rag \A
to a cow!
Would it be
possible to pull it
off and throw it
over the cow's
head, as a bull-
fighter does his
scarlet c loak?
Shelagh began try-
ing to slip one arm
out of its sleeve,
but the movement
only annoyed the
cow extremely.
She lowered her
t. She tried to face the angry beast bravely,
had heard of the power of the human eye;


head still more and seemed just about to make a rush, when a third
person most unexpectedly decided to take part in the fight.
Shelagh had almost forgotten Cocky's existence until this very
moment. Now, suddenly, he was between her and the cow, a
kind of catherine-wheel of whirling white feathers and erect, yellow
crest, flying straight into the face of the big, black beast.
Beating with his wings, screeching at the top of his voice, peck-
ing, clawing—it was no wonder that the cow was taken aback
by this new enemy, especially as Cocky made a deliberate attack
upon her eyes, so that she was almost blinded for the moment.
With a frightened bellow, she turned tail and galloped round
the corner, the sound of her flying hoofs clattering away into the
distance, whilst Cocky, crest still raised, returned to Shelagh's
shoulder and squawked defiance after his beaten foe.
Shelagh, feeling very shaky about the knees, walked slowly
back and met Conal round the next twist in the passage, strolling
towards her, hands in pockets and whistling carelessly.
"I've decided that I won't bother about that bullfight after
all," he said, adding in a suddenly changed voice: "What's
up, She? You look awfully white and funny. Has anything
happened?"
"N-nothing much," Shelagh answered rather unsteadily. "Only
if you'd been here a bit earlier you'd have seen a bull-fight or a
cow-fight anyway —with Cocky as matador! And he beat the cow,
too—the lamb!"
The Crusoe had scarcely left Lisbon when the weather changed,
and as she ploughed through grey seas under a grey sky, it was
hard to believe that there had ever been sunshine and pink geraniums
in the world.
As for the Bay of Biscay, it seemed determined to show just
how badly it could behave when it really tried, and Conal so often
repeated suitable lines from Kipling's "Ballad of the Bolivar


that Shelagh at last protested, when he quoted with much expression
the verse beginning:
"Oh, her nose flung up to sky, groaning to be still!
"Up and down and back she went, never time for breath.
"There's no need to say poetry about the horrid old Bay and
make me feel more seasick than I do already," she said. "It's
bad enough to see it going up and down, through the porthole,
without talking about it!"
"I rather like it myself," Conal boasted. "A calm Bay of
Biscay would be pretty dull. I think it's fun to see fiddles on the
tables and watch the water swishing from side to side in the bath
and the pea-soup in the plates "
"Don't!" Shelagh groaned, and made a dash for her cabin,
where Cocky was huddled in the upper berth looking nearly as sorry
for himself as Shelagh.
The bad weather lasted until they were in the English Channel,
and it was some consolation to Shelagh when the Captain told her
that it really was bad, the worst gale that he remembered for many
years. It made her less ashamed of having felt so ill. Then there
came a morning when she woke to find that the things in her cabin
were not swinging and jingling any longer, but there were other
queer noises going on, drowned every few minutes by the blare of
the Crusoe's syren. When Shelagh pulled away the curtain from the
porthole she could see nothing at all, nothing but yellowish whiteness,
and it was just the same when she got up on deck.
"Yes, it's a pretty bad fog," Conal told her. "The Captain's
staying on the bridge all the time; there's nothing sailors hate
so much as this sort of thing, especially in places like the Channel,
where the sea is simply crowded with traffic."
"That's such a funny way of putting it," Shelagh laughed.
"It makes one think of taxis hooting and trams and omnibuses "


"Well, doesn't it sound a bit like it, too?" Conal said. "Just
you listen!"
They stood silent, leaning against the rail, staring into the fog.
And out of that woolly greyness came the sounds of sea-traffic, fog-
horns or syrens, near or far away, with now and then the distant
clang-clang of a bell. Suddenly a moaning hoot rang out, and
Shelagh started.
"Made you jump, didn't it?" Conal said. "That ship must
be pretty close. We aren't very far from land, either —do you
hear that bellowing noise? One of the sailors told me that it's
the fog-signal of a lighthouse near some dangerous rocks. I don't
wonder the Captain sticks to the bridge."
For some time they stood there, listening to the ships calling,
as they crept blindly, like themselves, up or down the Channel,
and to that distant warning like the bellow of a great bull.
"Funny, we were wondering yesterday what our first sight of
England would be," Conal said presently. "It looks very much
as if we shouldn't have any sight at all, if we crawl into
Southampton like this."
"And there Granny will be waiting for me and your uncle for
you—and our voyage is nearly all over," Shelagh said.
"Yes, I wish it weren't," Conal said. "Although I daresay
England will be all right when we're used to it, and school,
too."
"But that won't come for months yet, not till after the summer
holidays," Shelagh said contentedly. "It was awfully nice of your
uncle and aunt to ask me to stay with them."
For there had been plenty of time during the Crusoe's long
cruise for letters to come and go and plans to be made. Conal
was to five with his uncle and aunt, who had no children of their
own, and his home would be in London —although not yet, as he
reminded Shelagh now.


"Yes, and we shall be in the country all the summer, too —
Uncle Jack's taken a house in the south, at that place beginning
with B—l never can remember what it's called."
"Brighton? Bournemouth?" Shelagh suggested.
"No! It's not actually on the sea either —I'd know the name
if I saw it, but anyway, it doesn't matter now. I say, it's beastly
chilly, this fog—let's go down to the saloon for a bit."
The day dragged on, with the fog growing thicker and thicker —and
the traffic, too. Conal and Shelagh found it impossible to settle to
anything, as they wondered how long it would be before they reached
Southampton—where they should have been some hours before.
"It's a dull sort of end to the cruise," Conal grumbled. "And
I did want to see the Solent and Southampton Water and the Isle
of Wight and everything "
But it was just at this very moment that the dullness came to
a sudden and startling end.
Bump! Shelagh, who had been peering out of a porthole, was
sent stumbling and sliding against the table where Conal stood,
and the two fell together in a heap. They struggled to their feet,
but could hardly stand on the slanting deck, whilst from overhead
came shouts, whistles, with the clang of the engine-room bell.
"What's happened?" gasped Shelagh.
"Don't know—but I'm going to see," Conal answered, as he
staggered towards the companion, followed by Shelagh.
Just as they reached the deck they could see looming through
the fog, very close by, a great dark shape, with dim lights gleaming
here and there upon it and sounds of shouting coming across the
water between.
"What is it?" Conal cried, as a figure ran past them.
"We collided with that big liner—" the sailor paused to jerk
his thumb at the dark shape. "Her fault, but we've got a hole
in the bows—we're close inshore, though."


He was gone, and the cousins looked at each other.
"We may be sinking," Shelagh whispered.
"Even if we do, you heard what he said —the shore's close,
and it's calm —and —Captain Clark's in charge," Conal said confi-
dently. "Hell see that everything's all right."
" Cocky!" Shelagh suddenly remembered. " I'll fetch him —''
She was gone before Conal could stop her, wrestling with the
cabin-door when he hurried down breathlessly a little later.
"It's jammed," she told him. "Help me, Con —we must get
him out."
"You oughtn't to cut off like that," Conal scolded. "The second
officer's brought a message from the Captain —we're to go off in
a boat that's just starting from the lower deck with some of the
passengers—he wants to feel that you and I are safely ashore,
although I don't believe there's any danger really to anybody.
You see, the Crusoe's got a big hole —but the Captain's run her
on to a sandbank, where she'll be quite safe till the tide turns —
by that time everyone'll be off, and they'll dock her —I knew he'd
put everything right."
Conal's long speech came jerkily, whilst he wrenched and pushed
at the cabin door. At last he managed to open it, and Cocky
fluttered out, scared and ruffled.
The three reached the deck where one of the smaller ship's
boats was already swung out, being lowered to the water. In a
few minutes more, Shelagh found herself sitting in it, with Conal
beside her, moving away from the high side of the steamer.
Thud —creak—splash—went the oars; it was queer to be leaving
the Crusoe like this, so different from what they had expected. She
had disappeared now, and the fog wrapped itself round them like
wet cotton-wool. The sea was very calm, and the sailors rowed
on steadily through the greyness which seemed just the same,
over, under and on all sides of them.


Then at last tiny
flecks of white
appeared ahead,
and there was the
lapping, dragging
sound of waves
breaking on a
beach, small harm-
less waves which
scarcely made the
boat rock when
she reached them.
There came the
grating of the keel
on shingle, and two
sailors jumped over
the sides, to pull
the boat's bows up
the beach clear of
the water. Soon
everyone except
four rowers was
out of her, stand-
ing where the wet sand was streaked with foam
"We've got to go back to the ship," the man in charge of the
boat said. " But if you wait here, there'll be more come ashore soon."
"Where are we?" an elderly man, one of the passengers,
asked anxiously.
"Cant say for certain, sir," the sailor answered. "Somewhere
between Lymington and Milton, we think."
Are there likely to be houses near? I must find shelter for my
wife." The elderly passenger sounded very fussy.


"Well, I don't suppose you'd have to go very far to find a house
of some sort —but I'd advise you to wait, sir, until more have come
ashore," the sailor said, jumping into the boat.
"We shall get fearful colds, standing about in this wetness,"
the passenger grumbled. "We'd better move about."
He and his wife disappeared into the fog as the boat had done;
the few others walked away along the beach, leaving Shelagh and
Conal alone —and it is queer how much alone fog makes one feel.
"Don't see how another boat can be sure of landing just here,"
Conal said. "Perhaps we ought to follow the rest."
Although Shelagh agreed, this was not easy to do. They groped
their way up the beach, "until the shingle turned into a bank of
rough grass. There they felt the hardness of a road underfoot,
and made out a hedge beyond.
"I do believe the fog's a bit thinner," Shelagh said. "I see a
sort of white post. Where's your torch, Con?"
"Here." A faint light showed. "Where's this post of yours?
Wonder if we can make out what it says. P'raps I could climb up."
A minute later Conal had managed this, and the light of his
torch showed the lettering on the sign-post: "To Brockenhurst."
"Hel -lo!" In his excitement Conal slid down more quickly
than he had gone up. " That's the name I couldn't remember —
the place where we're going, where Uncle Jack's house is!"
"Oh, Conal, I wonder how far it is? It doesn't say how many
miles."
"I don't suppose it's any distance," Conal said confidently.
"What luck hitting on the post! We'd better start along this road
at once and get to Brockenhurst as quickly as possible. We'll
soon find Uncle's house, and be there, most likely, before they've
heard about the wreck of the Crusoe and got anxious. Come on,
old thing; we'll walk fast and get warm. Cheer up, Cocky, you
miserable object!"


"It does seem as if it were the best thing to do," Shelagh said.
"But I do hope it's not a very long walk."
"We might get there any minute," Conal said cheerfully. "But
we must keep a look-out for more sign-posts, in case the road
branches. Wouldn't do to take the wrong turning. But the fog
is thinner."
They set off, walking close together, the damp and dismal Cocky
on Shelagh's shoulder, feathers fluffed up over his head. It was
just possible to make out a low hedge on one side of the road and
flat ground on the other, from which came the sound of trickling
water, but it was dark now as well as foggy, and they could not
see more than a few yards ahead
The road was sandy, and
soon began to rise gradually
until they reached the top of
a hill, where it grew a little
clearer and trees could be seen
on both sides, in high dark
masses, from which came a
fresh wet smell.
"A bit like the Bush."
Conal sniffed the air, but
Shelagh was too wet and weary
to appreciate anything of the
kind or to do more than
murmur:
"I do hope it's not much
further."
Even if the fog would have
let them they dared not hurry,
for fear of passing a turning or
another sign-post, and it was


slow work keeping a look-out with Conal's torch on both sides of
the road at once.
"If only a car or something would come along and give us a
lift—or even tell us how far it is," Shelagh sighed. "But I suppose
no one's about on such a night as this."
"Too true!" Conal grunted, for his excitement had died down,
and he was beginning to wonder whether it had been wise to set
off so blindly towards Brockenhurst without knowing whether the
distance was two miles or twenty.
They seemed to have walked miles, to have been walking for
hours already, and still there had been no break in the double ranks
of trees, which, as they peered into them, showed more and more
trees behind, closing in upon both sides of the road.
It was so quiet, too; the only sounds seemed to be the dripping
of moisture from the boughs and sometimes a faint rustling, for
the fog muffled everything, even noises.
Then at last came what they had expected and searched for,
another turning on the right, another sign-post, just a single point-
ing finger-board, low enough to be seen without climbing.
"To Brockenhurst, 5 miles."
"Oh!" Shelagh gave a little sobbing gasp. "And I don't
feel as if I could go another five minutes ! "
"Pooh! what's five miles?" Conal felt secretly rather relieved
that it was not fifteen or twenty. "We can walk that in an hour
and a bit!"
"Can we? At this rate —and we daren't go faster for fear
of missing another turning, even if we could!" Shelagh said
miserably.
"Well, it won't help to talk about it, and the sooner we start
the sooner we'll be there," Conal answered. "It's a much narrower
road, too; we can easily see both sides at once, but it's still through
trees."


On they plodded, too tired to talk, feeling stupid and dazed
with fog, so that at first neither of them quite believed in it when
they heard a new sound. Conal stopped to listen.
" I can't make out whether it's just a singing in my ears," he said.
"No, I hear it, too," Shelagh interrupted. "You mean that
thud—thud—thud ''
"Horses galloping —yes! And coming this way, too. Sounds
like quite a lot of them. Funny for people to be riding in this
fog, but I shall be jolly glad to see anybody—here they come!"
Out of the fog they came suddenly, with snorting and a clatter
of hoofs, horses' heads, tossing manes and tails, filling the whole
narrow track. Conal had only just time to catch Shelagh by the
arm and swing her to one side amongst the trees, before the horses
were on them, all around, riderless horses, who swerved and kicked
up their heels with frightened whinnies at the sight of strangers,
passing on into the fog.
"They've no riders —but there must be somebody driving
them," Conal gasped. "They can't be wild —in England. There
aren't brumbies here, like down under —they must belong to someone."
But nobody followed the Forest ponies, as they went galloping
on along the road, their shoeless feet thudding in the sand, and
Shelagh picked herself up from the pile of leaves on which she had
fallen.
"Oh, dear, what a shock!" she exclaimed. "I don't know
whether I'm on my head or my heels, and I've grazed my arm
against that tree and — Conal! Where's Cocky? He's gone!"
They looked at each other, then peered all round them, calling
to the cockatoo, whilst Shelagh sobbed:
He must have got j-jolted off my shoulder when you pulled
me out of the way of the horses. I expect they frightened him, too,
the noise they made. Oh, Conal, we'll never find him this time!
He's really and truly lost!"


CHAPTER TWO
COCKY FINDS SOMETHING NEW
THE clatter of hoofs, the shock of being jerked suddenly
from his perching-place, was enough to startle a sleepy bird
almost out of his wits. Cocky flew blindly away into the
fog amongst the trees, completely lost from the first minute.
When he recovered himself, he was clinging wildly to a branch,
high in a tree-top, with leaves rustling all about him. There was
/(
• f uNtp "
I
nothing to do
except stay there
till daylight, the
cockatoo wisely
decided, although
it was chilly and
uncomfortable.
Cocky was
just dozing when
something soft
brushed him. He
opened his eyes;
close by on the
bough was a
great white
shape, with round, gleaming, yellow eyes.
"Who —whooo! Whoo-oo are you-oo!"
hooted the Owl, and Cocky, his beak
chattering with fright, answered quaveringly:
"I'm a cock-atooo-ooo!"
"Hoo-whoo-oo!" The owl sounded
contemptuous, as it swooped noiselessly away,


but Cocky tucked his head under his wing and settled to sleep
again.
The sun woke him, shining warmly through the young emerald
leaves of the beech-tree where he had roosted. The sky was brilli-
antly blue, birds were singing everywhere; at the feet of the smooth
grey tree-trunks was spread a yellow, white and purple carpet of
primroses, wind-flowers and violets, whilst beyond the clear stream,
rippling over brown pebbles, was a fallen sky of blue-bells.
"This is a very nice place," thought Cocky, blinking happily,
and he was right. There is nothing in the world much nicer than
English woods early in a spring morning.
"I wonder if those yellow things are good to eat," Cocky medi-
tated, peering sidelong, and fluttered down to peck at the primroses,
which proved disappointing. He had hopped to the stream's
edge to drink when a loud hoarse laugh made him look up to where
two birds watched him from a low branch.
It was the smaller who had laughed, a sturdy crested bird,
brightly feathered in blue, green and brown; the other was larger
and very beautiful, Cocky considered, all black and white, with
a long graceful tail.
"Who do you think you are?" shrieked the Jay, whilst his
companion watched with shining black eyes.
"I don't think; I am a Cockatoo —from Australia," Cocky
answered with dignity, but the Jay only screamed with laughter
again.
"Well, you're a funny-looking creature, anyway—eh, Magpie?"
he chuckled. "We don't wear all white in England; too con-
spicuous."
I ve heard Magpies in Australia whistle beautifully," Cocky
said, but the black-and-white bird merely remarked over its
shoulder: I don t, 'as it sailed away, dipping and rising.
The Jay seemed more friendly, and Cocky asked:


"What's this place?"
"The New Forest," the Jay answered.
"How new is it?" Cocky asked, and the other answered indig-
nantly :
"New, indeed! It's the very oldest part of England. Do you
see those big oak and beech-trees over there? They were growing
here a thousand years ago, before William the Conqueror."
"I don't know him," Cocky said meekly. "But if it's such an
old place, why call it New?"
"Because it is!" the Jay screamed. "And don't ask silly
questions if you want to be popular in the Forest. Well, I'm off
to find some eggs for breakfast."
"You're that sort, are you? Cannibal!" Cocky shrieked
disgustedly as the Jay flew off, but he felt hungry himself, and
mournfully drank more water.
A flash of turquoise and emerald passed, there was a splash, and a
small blue and green bird with a large head sat on a twig near Cocky,
a tiny silvery fish in its sharp-pointed beak. Gulp!—the fish dis-
appeared, and
Cocky said
admiringly:
"That was
quick work!"
"Practice—
just practice,"
the other bird
answered.
" They call me
Kingfisher, you
know The
King of
Fishers."


"I wish I could catch fish, or anything else," Cocky said. "I'm
so hungry."
"Your beak's not the right shape— or for digging worms,"
remarked the Kingfisher.
"If I could find any nuts or berries. . . .'
"Ah, that's a problem! It's the wrong time of year. There's
one person, though, who might. ... Hi, Squirrel! Have you
any nuts to spare?"
There was a rustling in the leaves overhead, and a tiny face with
great dark eyes peeped out. Softly the lovely red-brown creature
slid down the trunk to sit looking at Cocky, bushy tail cocked up.
"I'll look in my larder," the Squirrel said, and showed Cocky
a hole in a tree-fork, with acorns and nuts neatly stored.
"Let me see —I think one of these." The Squirrel cracked a
hazel-nut in his sharp teeth, and politely handed the kernel to
Cocky. "But I believe you'd prefer a fir-cone —they're too big for
me to store, but I'll show you where they grow."
The Squirrel led Cocky to a tall dark fir-tree, and introduced
him to the delights of a large cone, full of sweet almond-like kernels.
Being both greedy and hungry it was quite a long time before Cocky
had had enough, and the Squirrel left him to his feast.
Afterwards he flew on from tree to tree, rather pleased with
himself when he saw the interest and curiosity of the Forest folk
at sight of him. All the birds, large and small, stopped in what-
ever they were doing to look and talk to each other; the sparrows,
whom Cocky had seen at Bundaburra and always considered ill-
bred and common, did not even trouble to lower their voices.
"Who is he?"—" Where does he come from? " —"What a funny-
looking fellow!" They chirped and twittered loudly to each
other, and presently began to crowd round Cocky, staring in their
impudent way. As they grew bolder, they even jostled him, and
one sidled up behind and gave his tail feathers a sharp tweak.


At this,
Cocky lost his
temper, and
gave a screech
of pain and
annoyance, but
this only seemed
to amuse the
"X- cheeky spar-
. ('„ w . r o ws -
"Do it again
—do it again!"
they chirruped, making little
dashes at the cockatoo to peck
and ruffle him, so that he grew more and
more angry.
"Wait till I get at you!" he screamed. " I
wish I'd never come here, if this is the way English birds behave!"
Suddenly a loud, harsh cry rang through the Forest; it sounded
so stern and commanding that the sparrows scattered at once to
other trees and bushes, as a large bird stalked out into the open
and gazed around. His long trailing tail, his plumage of gold and
russet, crimson, purple and green, shewing like metal on head and
neck, made him look very splendid, and Cocky fluttered down to
the grass, bowing politely.
"Thank you very much for driving off those troublesome spar-
rows," he said. "I'm quite a stranger here."
"I am a foreigner, too, although I have settled in this country,"
the Cock Pheasant said in his stately way. "I came from the
East —from Persia. And you?"
"Well, I came further still —from Australia, in fact," Cocky
explained.


"Welcome to our Woodlands," the Pheasant said graciously.
"But I must warn you —there are dangers. Men with guns—
traps —foxes."
"I've met flying foxes down under," Cocky said, "they were
harmless creatures enough—lived on fruit mostly."
Our foxes do not fly—fortunately," the Pheasant answered.
"But neither do they eat fruit—far from it! If you see a red beast
with a bushy tail. . . ."
"Why, isn't that a squirrel?" Cocky enquired, rather pleased
to show off his knowledge. "I met one of them , and very kind
he was "
"I do not mean a squirrel," the Pheasant said with dignity
"You'll very soon know the difference if you are not. .
'Ware!"
He ended with a harsh, warning crow, and, rising suddenly,
flew off, whilst Cocky, startled, fluttered back to the bough over-
head barely in time. Someone stood now just on the spot where
he had been talking to the Pheasant, someone rather like the dingo
of his early adventure, but smaller, handsomer, red-coated, bushy-
tailed. . . .
Oh, I do know the difference now!" Cocky gasped, as the
Fox looked up at him, showing his teeth in a wicked grin, before
gliding into the bushes.
I must certainly be careful, Cocky told himself as he flew on.
Still foxes can t climb trees, and I needn't go near men with
guns or traps. Hullo rabbits! Who would have thought of meeting
them here?"
In his delight at seeing anyone from Australia, Cocky forgot
possible dangers, and flew down to a low bush by the clearing where
a number of Rabbits were nibbling grass and sitting up to wipe the
dew from their noses with their fore-paws. But the friendly squawk
with which Cocky greeted them had a disastrous effect; with
L


squeaks of terror every one of them vanished in the twinkling
of an eye or the flick of one of their white scuts, and although the
cockatoo called and whistled and waited, not one of them so much
as peeped out again.
It was very discouraging; Cocky felt almost afraid to breathe
when some other
animals whom he
recognised came
crackling through
the budding gorse-
bushes to crop the
grass big
creatures, but the
cockatoo had
ridden on horse-
back too often to
be afraid of them.
These Horses
were small and
shaggy, and there
were tiny foals,
who stared at
Cocky, whisking
their tails. But
the mothers
looked at him
suspiciously, and told them not to go near strange birds, who
might peck their eyes out.
"I'm quite harmless," Cocky said meekly. "Only a cockatoo."
"I've seen plenty of fowls, but never a cock like you," one of
the mares answered. "Better keep away from him, children —
you never know."


The Forest ponies moved on, and poor Cocky began to think
the animals of this country rather unfriendly. Still, the woods
themselves were so lovely, the sun so warm and everything smelling
so deliciously that he could not be sad long, and presently he met
some fat, good-natured Wood-pigeons, who made him feel quite at
home, crooning and chuckling near their nest of sticks and moss.
Better still, they showed him where to find some hips and haws
left over from the winter, which made quite a good meal. It was
while he was nibbling a large red hip, holding it up in his claw, that
some large and beautiful creatures came stepping daintily through
the curling green shoots of young bracken.
Their heads and big dark eyes rather reminded Cocky of kan-
garoos, but the largest had large branching horns, and they walked
on all four legs instead of hopping like a 'roo. There were several
babies, with cream and brown dappled skins and big ears, and
these Cocky admired very much.
'Who are they?" he asked the Wood-pigeons.
"Deer," crooned the mother-pigeon.
"Dears? I can see they are," Cocky answered. "But what's
their name ?"
"Deer," the pigeon repeated. "Or stags, does and fawns,
if you like that better."
It s rather muddling, such a lot of names," Cocky explained.
Perhaps just dears is best, as they certainly are."
"As you please—as you plea-ease," crooned the Wood-pigeon, so
drowsily that Cocky could get no more sense out of her, and flew
away, to look for more adventures.
It seemed to him that there were babies everywhere—fledge-
lings, fawns, and foals, little pinkish pigs who ran away squeaking
through the bracken after their black mother, shaggy young donkeys
and, near a cottage which Cocky eyed doubtfully through the
trees, cheeping, scuttling broods of chicks and ducklings.


Then he came to a fenced-in space amongst the huge ancient
oaks and beeches—and this was full of more babies, tree-babies,
seedlings of firs and larches, some of them no more than two or three
inches high, some as many feet, quite sturdy little trees.
Perched on the wooden fence, Cocky eyed them thoughtfully,
in a satisfied way. "I suppose that's really why it's called New,"
he decided. "Because of all the young things that live here."
This idea pleased Cocky very much, and he thought himself
an extremely clever bird to have thought of it.
"That's the best of travel," he reflected. "And living with
clever people like my Two —even if I don t always understand
what they're talking about. Dear me, I'm beginning to get hungry
again; I wonder if I could find another squirrel, with nuts to
spare."
But
Squirrels
seemed rare
in this part
of the
Forest, and
Cocky flew
on for some
distance,
until in an
open grassy
space he
saw a
motor- car
drawn up,
with
several
people


sitting on the grass beside it, having a picnic. Cocky might
have joined them boldly, but two of the picnickers were small
children, and he was not very fond of babies, knowing by
experience that they were apt to tease him, pull his tail and
do other annoying things. So he waited patiently on a beech-
branch until at last the party had finished and began to pack up
their baskets.
Cocky watched eagerly, head on one side, wondering if these
stingy folk were going to take all the food away.
"They might leave a little bit for poor birds like me," he
thought. "I'm sure I would; they'd never miss one of those apples
dear, dear, they've put them all into the basket!"
The motor-car began to move slowly away towards the road;
then, just at the last minute, one of the small children, who had
already eaten too much, decided that he did not want the biscuit
he had asked for; he threw it out of the car —and Cocky could
scarcely wait until the coast was clear before he flew down to
grab it.
He knew the ways of sparrows; probably a flock of those
greedy wretches were already waiting in the trees. ... So Cocky
pounced and secured the biscuit. Holding it in his claw, he looked
round before eating it, and found half a ham-sandwich; that was
positively all, except a banana-skin, which the cockatoo despised.
You can have that\ " he told the sparrows, who arrived on
the scene just a little too late for once in their lives, and flew off
to devour his meal —and to decide that he didn't like ham and
loathed mustard.
Still, the biscuit was good, and he felt much better afterwards,
flying on through the golden sunshine of the afternoon. All the
Forest birds and beasts were quieter now, but Cocky caught a sound
which he had often heard before at Bundaburra.
Chop chop chop! Someone was cutting wood near by, and


Cocky's
curiosity
made him
fly in that
direction.
He saw
the some-
one —and
nearly fell
off a
branch
in his
excite-
ment.
"Why,
it's a
Black-
fellow ! I
must have
got back
to the Bush somehow!" he thought, showing how very weak his
geography was. But there below him, chopping away at some
saplings, was a black fellow, certainly, although not at all in the
way that Cocky meant. His face and hands were coal black, so that
his teeth and eyeballs looked very white, and close by was a kind
of mound covered all over with earth, from which tiny trickles of
smoke curled away through the trees, leaving behind them the
tang of burning wood.
"I wonder if he's cooking something," Cocky thought greedily,
and waited for quite a long while with that hope in his mind.
He was disappointed, however; the supposed Blackfellow went
on cutting wood steadily, until Cocky, without thinking what he


was doing, gave a little squawk. At that, the man dropped his
axe and began to peer up into the branches, and Cocky decided
that flight was his wisest move. After all, as he suddenly remem-
bered, Blackfellows had a nasty habit of cooking and eating cockatoos
when they got the chance—only this one wasn't going to get it!
Away went Cocky in a perfect panic, whilst the man scratched
his head and muttered:
"Thought I saw a big white bird —but I doubt it was only a
pigeon. I'd best get back to my job."
So, as it happened, Cocky never knew that his Blackfellow
was really a charcoal-burner, one of the very few left in the Forest.
The mound of earth was his kiln, under which a pile of wood was
smouldering away into charcoal, just in the very same way that
charcoal had been made for more than a thousand years. Just
as a charcoal-burner called Pirkis, chopping wood for his pile in
the same way, one day when hunting-horns sounded in the Forest,
found under an oak-tree the dead King, William Rufus, killed by
the arrow of Walter Tyrrel, and carried him away in his wood-
cart.
But these were not things which Cocky could understand,
being no better at history than he was at geography.
It was late afternoon, and Cocky began to wonder where he
would spend the night, and how he could find Conal and Shelagh.
If he had not thought very much about them all day, it was not
from want of heart, only because his mind was rather small and could
not hold a great many things at once.
Even now it was very difficult for the cockatoo to make any
plan, as he had not the least idea where he was, or which way to fly.
I shall have to go where there are people," he decided at last.
"Then, perhaps, I shall find my two."
Ftying from tree to tree, Cocky came presently to a gleaming
black road, winding through the Forest like a great snake


Plenty of people were going backwards and forwards along this
road, but most were in motor-cars, which Cocky hated. Perched
on a tall fir, he watched and watched for some time, but could
not see anyone in the least like his friends. At first no one
noticed him, but, growing bolder, he hopped on to a bough
almost overhanging the road, where his white feathers showed up
plainly against the dark green of the trees.
Suddenly from a passing car came a shout: "Oh, look, Dad,
there's a cockatoo!" The car drew up with an alarming grinding
sound, and Cocky was still more frightened when the red-headed,
red-faced boy who had shouted, scrambled out and ran towards
his tree, yelling: "Come on! Let's catch him!"
Off flew Cocky with a loud screech, and was soon out of sight
amongst the trees, but the scare had made him dislike the sight
and sounds of cars more than ever, and he kept away from the road,
especially when dusk fell and the cars had huge blazing eyes to make
them more frightening still.
"I'd better find somewhere to sleep," Cocky thought. "And
begin to look for them again in the morning."
He had just settled upon a smooth, slender beech-bough, which
he could grasp comfortably with his claws, and was preparing to
tuck his head under his wing, when he heard voices.
"Perhaps it's Them, looking for me," Cocky thought, and flew
in the direction of the sound to make sure.
The voices did not come from a road, but from an open space
amongst the trees, where there seemed to be several very small
houses, with three or four horses tethered near them and a wood-
fire blazing and crackling.
By the red light, Cocky could see a number of people moving
about, but none of them seemed to be Conal or Shelagh. To be quite
certain, he flew nearer, and noticed three or four dogs and a large yel-
low cat, who was sitting on the door-step of one of the tiny houses.


"Perhaps They may be there, even though I can't see Them,"
Cocky thought, peering down, head on one side. "I'd better call
out, so that They'll know who it is, just to tell Them I'm here."
He gave a loud screech and then shrieked at the top of his voice j
"Hullo! Hullo! How-do-you-do? What a lovely Cockatoo!"
That ought to let 'em know!" Cocky thought, preening
himself with satisfaction. They're listening and coming out of
the little houses to hear. I must keep a good look-out for Them."
To do this, he hopped down to a lower branch —and never
noticed that a man and a boy were whispering excitedly, their
rough dark heads very close together.
A real talking bird if we can get hold of him, there's money
in it, but you'll have to be careful," the gypsy said softly to his son.


"Creep up behind that tree —and if you lose him, I'll skin you
alive!"
The brown-faced boy slipped off into the shadows, whilst Cocky
continued to chuckle and screech and peer down from his bough,
still hoping that Conal or Shelagh would hear and come to him.
He never heard any of the faint scraping and rustlings made
by the gypsy-boy as he climbed, monkey-like, up the tree. Poor
Cocky was absolutely taken by surprise when there came a sudden
movement from behind and he felt himself clutched and held tightly.
"Got yer!" a strange voice cried, and although he screeched,
struggled and pecked, he soon found that he could not escape
from that grasp. His captor soon reached the ground, and bigger
hands seized Cocky and carried him over to the fireside.
" He's a lovely bird!" the gypsy said triumphantly. " And a grand
talker. He'll have escaped from some house —or from a show very likely.
You don't get talking cockatoos wild here or anywhere else either."
"There'll be trouble, likely as not, if you try to sell him, Jasper,"
a woman's voice said from the steps of one of the caravans. "Them
who lost the bird'll be on the look-out, that's a sure thing."
"So they may be —but it don't follow that they'll see him,"
the gypsy chuckled. "You leave that to me, old girl; I'll give
him such a bath that his own mother wouldn't know him."
Carrying Cocky, still struggling and screeching, he went into
one of the caravans.
CHAPTER THREE
HOW IT ENDED
'RAPS he'll come if we call him," Conal said, trying to rub
I—^the fog out of his eyes. "Cocky! Cocky! Hi—hullo, She —
what do you think you're doing?"
"I believe I see him—something white over there!" Shelagh


panted, and made a wild dash into the Forest, disappearing from
Conal's sight in a second. She blundered on, knocking herself
against trees, stumbling over roots, drawn on by the flicker of
white ahead which she saw —or fancied she saw, because very
soon she was obliged to confess to herself that it was only fancy.
And there she stood with the clammy, clinging fog all round
her, and not the least idea in the world which way to go to reach
the road and Conal again.
"Conal! Conal! Cocky—Cocky!" she called in turn, but neither
boy nor bird answered, and the fog seemed to muffle her voice
like cotton-
wool. It was
thicker than
ever here;
Shelagh could
not see a
yard in any
direction as
she went
groping on,
still bumping
into trees, still
tripping over
obstacles.
"What an
idiot I was
to go tearing
off like that!"
she told her-
self angrily.
" Now, all three
of us are more


or less lost, because Conal won't go on till he's found me, I know.
If only I'd had sense to stay with him—l think that bump I got
must have knocked me silly —and I was so dreadfully afraid of losing
what I thought was Cocky. Cocky! Cocky —Conal —Conal!
The fog in her throat had made Shelagh's voice low and husky
now, and she felt horribly sure that she was going all the time in
the wrong direction, most likely.
Here was a nice beginning to her life in England—and even
yet she couldn't say that she'd seen the old Country!
"I'm feeling it though," Shelagh thought ruefully, as her leg and
elbow together bumped the trunk of a tree, and the rough bark grazed
the skin. " I must have got miles into the woods; I shall probably be
obliged to stay out here all night—oh, dear, what a horrible idea!"
The very thought of a night in the fog was too much for her;
she began to cry, tears adding to the clammy wetness of her face,
and making her throat still more sore and choky.
"T-talk about B-babes in the w-wood!" she sobbed. "There
were t-two of them t-together, anyway! 00-oh! What's that?"
Bump! She had stumbled against something which wasn't a
tree, something which moved and gave a loud, fierce snort, some-
thing which felt wet and prickly against her out-stretched hand.
An animal of some kind, a big one —but Shelagh did not stop to
discover that it was only a harmless old donkey. She set off running
as fast as she could in the opposite direction, her heart thumping
in her mouth, or thudding in the heels of her shoes, she couldn't
be quite certain which.
When at last she stopped, she could hear nothing—nothing
at all except the drip-drip of moisture from the trees. She might
have been all alone in a wet, white world.
And then —Shelagh heard something.
Or was it anything? She held her breath to listen. Yes —there
it came again, very faint, but quite clear, a high, chirruping whistle,


repeated once —twice —three times. Shelagh knew what it was at
once —hadn't she heard Conal practising it on board ship over
and over again, ever since that day up in the mountains—hadn't
she tried to do it herself, very unsuccessfully?
It was the Canary language, or as near to it as Conal could
manage, the high whistle that could be heard so far away. Conal
hadn't deserted her —Conal was there, somewhere in the fog, calling
to guide her.
Shelagh tried to answer, but all that came was a kind of hoarse
squeak. She began to hurry as fast as she could in what she hoped
was the direction of the sound; there it was again, a little louder,
a little nearer. On she ran, slipping and stumbling—but that didn't
matter now. All that did matter. . . .
"Oh!" Shelagh gasped, as what she had thought was only
another tree-trunk caught her by the arm. "Oh, Conal, are you
really here!"
"'Course I am," Conal answered gruffly. "Did you think I'd
go till I found you?"
"Oh, I am glad to see you —or feel you! When I heard the
Canary whistle and knew you were there "
"Came in jolly useful, didn't it? I thought it might some time.
You've not found Cocky, of course? Nor I either. Don't see how
we can expect to in this fog."
"Let's try calling him a little longer," Shelagh begged. "It's
so horrid to think of leaving him out here, poor lamb."
It was after they had been calling Cocky and trying to see through
the fog for about a quarter of an hour, that Conal caught sight
of Shelagh s pale, tear-stained face, and remembered something.
"I say, you've had a rotten day, and you look frightfully tired,"
he said. "We'll push on to Brockenhurst at once—we can't wait
about here any longer."
"B-but C-C-Cocky ?" Shelagh sobbed.


"We'll never find him like this. If he were anywhere near he'd
have come to us. We must try again by daylight," Conal answered.
"He may be miles away by then. This is the third time he's
escaped, and I've a h-horrid f-feeling that it will be the 1-last!
Shelagh said mournfully.
"Let's hope so!" Conal tried to sound cheerful. "Anyway,
you've got to do as I say, old thing—so come along!
Fortunately by this time they were quite close to Brockenhurst
and the home of Conal's uncle, without knowing it. Very soon
they found themselves at the gates of a level crossing, and beyond
were streets and houses instead of Forest. More luckily still, the
first person they met told them where Mr. Reardon lived, and ten
minutes later the damp and depressed pair were standing outside
a front-door, feeling shyer and more wretched than they could have
ever thought possible.
Ten minutes later still everything had changed. After the
welcome which Uncle Jack and Aunt Sylvia gave them nobody
could go on feeling shy or wretched. As they sat at supper before
a huge log fire and told their adventures, Shelagh herself even
began to hope for the best where Cocky was concerned.
The news of the wreck had not reached Brockenhurst; Uncle
Jack was waiting for a telephone message saying that the Crusoe
had arrived in dock at Southampton before motoring over to fetch
Conal and Shelagh —but they had come before the message.
"And the sooner the better," Aunt Sylvia said in her kind soft
voice. "Your rooms are all ready; Ido hope you'll like them."
Uncle Jack was quite cheerful when told of Cocky's loss, and at
once telephoned to the Police Station, offering a good reward to any-
one who found him, and giving his description.
"He'll turn up—don't you worry," he said. "Sulphur-crested
cockatoos aren't common in the New Forest, and someone's sure to
find him."


" I'm so afraid that English birds and beasts will be nasty to him,"
Shelagh said mournfully.
" I expect he's quite able to look after himself, from what you say,"
Uncle Jack laughed, and Conal agreed, remembering the cow-fight
and other adventures of Cocky.
The shipwrecked pair was packed off to bed early, and woke to
find sun pouring in at their windows and the Forest close outside
to cheer and comfort them, as it had the wandering Cocky even
earlier that same morning. For the house was on the very edge of
the town, and there was only the lowest of hedges between the
garden and the Forest, so that from their windows they could look
right away through the trees, and see birds and rabbits and a pair
of red squirrels darting up and down a huge beech-trunk.
There was not a trace of fog, and the first thing Conal and Shelagh
did after breakfast was to go with Uncle Jack, as nearly as they
could fix it, to the spot where they had lost Cocky.
"It's here, I'm almost sure," Shelagh cried, after they
had retraced their steps slowly and carefully. "Yes —don't you
remember that queer-shaped tree, Con? I saw that, even in the
fog."
But they were disappointed in their hope that the cockatoo
might not have flown far from this place. They searched the neigh-
bourhood all through the morning without being able to discover
a trace of him, and when they got back to the house no news had
arrived there either.
The more they heard about the Forest, the more hopeless Conal
and Shelagh felt, although they would not confess it to each other.
It seemed such a big place to hide one small cockatoo.
Although not nearly as big as the Amazon Forests or the African
jungle, said Conal, trying to encourage himself and his cousin.
And we found him in both places."
Three days passed without any news; the police shook their


heads and even Uncle Jack confessed that he had hoped to hear
something before this of the lost cockatoo.
"The worst of it is, the Forest is such a lovely place, and we
might be having a lovely time here," Shelagh sighed. "But we can't
enjoy it without Cocky, poor lamb!"
The fourth morning was dull and depressing with drizzling
rain, and Conal and Shelagh set out on their search feeling more
hopeless than ever. They were soon beyond the Brockenhurst
houses, and took a narrow track which led them into the Forest's
depths, along the primrose-covered banks of a clear stream.
They crossed a log bridge, then took a still narrower path through
bracken and brambles into the loveliest of beechwoods, but at that
particular moment the cousins were thinking too much of Cocky to
notice how beautiful it all was.
There were any amount of birds all round, every bird in the world,
it seemed, except just the one they w r anted. Woodpeckers and
jays laughed in their different ways, although they did not sound
so jovial as the Bush kookaburras. Chaffinches cried "twink-twink,"
and yellowhammers asked for "a little bit of bread and no chee-
eese!" The thrushes were singing their hearts out, one calling to
"Mary —Mary!" the other: "Pretty Dick —Pretty Dick!" whilst
blackbirds whistled more sweetly even than Australian magpies.
But Conal and Shelagh hardly heard them, as they walked deject-
edly along, stopping every now and then to call: "Cocky! Cocky!"—
although no bird or answer came, and they had really given up
expecting it.
Presently the path they were following sloped downwards into
a hollow where there were light green patches and clumps of long
wavy grasses with heads like fluffy white cotton.
In all their wanderings, Conal and Shelagh had never seen a
place quite like this, and they did not know that those fluffy cotton-
heads grew there as a kind of danger-signal. Conal, who was leading,


stepped on to one of the green turf-like patches—and suddenly sank
through it up to his knees.
"Be careful —don't come any further!" he shouted back to
Shelagh. "It's some sort of bog—goodness, how sticky it is!"
"Conal, you're sinking in—it's over your knees," Shelagh
gasped, horror-struck. "Couldn't I pull you out, if you get hold
of my hand?"
"You must be jolly careful not to get caught yourself!" Conal
tried not to show how horrid that sucking feeling round his feet
really was. "Don't come near me, but . . . yes, look here! That
big bough broken off that tree; could you drag it over here and push
it across between me and that big stone?"
Panting with haste, Shelagh raced across to the clump of fir-
trees, from one of which a large, needle-fringed branch dangled,
almost broken through. It needed a strong pull, however, stretching
above her head and swinging all her weight on it, before Shelagh
could quite separate bough from trunk. Then—cr-r-rack! Down
it came with a strong smell of fresh turpentine, and Shelagh hauled
it down to the edge of the bog.
In spite of all his efforts, Conal had sunk a bit lower, but Shelagh,
pulling and pushing, managed to make the leafy bough a kind of
bridge between him and the stone.
He could just manage to grip hold of some of the smaller
twigs and branches and pull himself along inch by inch. But the
bog pulled too, sucking at his feet and legs, making ugly,
squelching sounds, almost as though it were angry at giving up its
victim.
At last one foot was free, and Conal threw himself face downwards
on the top of the bushy branch and dragged out the other with a
parting squelch.
Oh, do be careful!" Shelagh called anxiously. "Won't the
branch sink, too, with your weight?"


"If I waited long enough!" Conal answered. "But I shan't —
don't you worry! Wow! It's prickly!"
He wriggled himself across the tangle of twigs and fir-needles
until he reached the large stone on which the thick end of the branch
rested; once there, he could stand up and jump on to firm ground
beside Shelagh, his legs coated with slimy black mud to well over the
knees.
"Ugh! How horrible it smells!" Conal wrinkled his nose.
" Help me scrape it off, She."
"Well, we won't try to cross that again." Shelagh eyed the
deceitful bog with disgust. "After all, we've not got to go in that
direction. Here's a tiny path up through the bracken —let's see
where that leads."
Shelagh and Conal afterwards decided that the bog must have
been a blessing in disguise —very much disguised, certainly,
but still it did turn out for the best. Because if it hadn't stopped
them, if they had been able to cross easily, they would have
taken quite the wrong direction and never made a certain
discovery.
"In fact, the good old New Forest played up with that bog to
help us!" Conal grinned. But that was later, when things had
happened.
In the meantime they trudged wearily up the little path, until
they reached the crest of the hill above the bog and saw, through the
thin scatter of trees over an open heath, that they had come out
quite near to one of the main roads through the Forest.
"May as well see where it goes to," Conal said. "P'raps it'll
take us back to Brockenhurst."
"Yes, we oughtn't to stay out much longer, or Aunt Sylvia
will be anxious," Shelagh agreed.
They had nearly reached the road when, from amongst the
thicker trees on the further side, along a rough track, a procession


emerged
which
100 k e d
very queer
indeed to
Conal and
S helagh.
For they
had never
seen any-
thing be-
fore like
these small
houses on
wheels,
painted in
vivid yel-
low and
red, hung
outside with baskets and brooms, with bright-coloured curtains
fluttering at the tiny windows.
These wheeled houses were dragged by thin horses, men and boys
pulling at their heads or switching them on, whilst children and
dogs ran alongside, shouting and barking.
The string of caravans filed out into the highway and came
jogging along at a good pace towards where Conal and Shelagh
stood at the edge of the road, waiting, with interest, to watch them
go by.
It was just as they came level that Shelagh had an idea, and
spoke quickly.
Conal, p raps if they ve been staying long in the Forest, they
might have seen Cocky, she said. "Let's ask, anyway."


"Good thought!" Conal answered. "I will."
He stepped forward and spoke to one of the dark, foreign-looking
boys.
"I say, you don't happen to have come across a cockatoo —
a white cockatoo? Because we've lost one, and we're trying every-
where to find him."
The boy only stared, and jerked his head towards the caravan
in front. The still darker and more foreign-looking face of a man
appeared over the closed half-door, and Conal repeated his question.
The man shook his head.
"Don't know anything about no white bird, young gentleman,"
he said. "Sorry not to be able to help you, but we've got to be
getting on to Ringwood. We can't stop, an' waste any more
time."
"I don't see why you should be in such a tremendous hurry,"
Conal said. "Couldn't you ask some of the others? They might
have seen him, if you haven't yourself."
"I'd have heard if they had —sorry, young gent, but we've got
to push on. Get along, you, Sam!"
The man shouted to the boy who was driving the cara-
van, and Conal turned to come back to Shelagh by the
roadside.
"It's no use," he said. "They swear they haven't seen
him. . . ."
At that very instant another voice joined in, a voice that came
from inside the caravan and sounded rather muffled.
"Hallo —hallo —hallo! Good morning! How are you, old dear
—here's a lovely cockatoo! Good mor. . . ."
The word broke off in a screech and a scuffling, with much
flapping of wings, as the man turned away from the caravan door
with an angry exclamation. But Conal had already dashed across
the road and was standing on the step.


"It's Cocky!" he cried. "You've got him in there! You've
stolen him!"
The man came back to the door, barring the way and speaking
hurriedly.
"There's no white cockatoo here, young gent—l swear it!"
he cried. "You can look for yourself."
"I'm going to!" Conal told him fiercely. "Let me pass,
this instant!"
"I don't say as it wasn't a bird talking," the man said. "It's
a parrot, a green parrot, as belonged to grandmother—been in the
family for years, an' a fine talker."
But Conal and Shelagh were hardly listening. With a screech,
a queer-looking object had fluttered past the man's head and down
into the road.
It was green, certainly, but to Conal and Shelagh's eyes, it was
just as certainly Cocky—Cocky crooning and curtseying with
delight as he flew to his master's shoulder, squawking at the
top of his voice:
Cocky! Here s a lovely Cockatoo! Con! She! Cocky'
Cocky!"
"It's a funny thing that he knows us so well, if he belonged
to your grandmother," Conal said grimly. "You've dyed him
green, that s what it is, so as to hide him from us, you dirty
thief!"
Shelagh said afterwards how queer it was to see the sudden
change in the man and his story. In an instant he was smiling
and explaining everything away.
Well, now, young gentleman, you've been too clever for me,
an' I don't mind sayin' it," he said. "It is your Polly, but, when
we found it, I didn t even know one was lost. I took such a fancy
to the lovely bird, I couldn't bear partin' with him, an' that's a
fact."


"Why did
you dye him
green, if
it wasn't to
hide him ?"
Conal deman-
ded.
"Well, you
see that was
just a little
mistake. But
the police,
they're always
tryin' to pick
on us poor
Romanys
gypsies, you
know —trying
to make out
we're in the
wrong.
' So when I see the reward for the cockatoo, havin' dyed
him already, I didn't like to go to the Police station —I knew
they'd think it looked black against me . . . just as you're
thinkin' now."
"All the same you did steal him," Conal persisted. "If we
hadn't come along just then, we'd never have seen him again,
that's quite certain."
"But you've got him back now," the gypsy grinned.
" An' I won't even ask for the reward, young gentle-
man.
"Well, of all the cheek! I should think not indeed!" Suddenly


Conal began to laugh at the quickwittedness of the gypsy, although
he tried to look severe.
"You ought to think yourself jolly lucky I don't give
you in charge of the police," he said. "That's what you
deserve."
"Ah, you won't do that," the gypsy said ingratiatingly. "Lovin'
the bird yourself, you understand just what I felt, now don't
you?"
It all ended in the gypsy caravans jigging off down
the road in one direction, whilst Conal, Shelagh and Cocky
set off homewards in the other, the happiest trio in
England.
That is really the end of the Cruise of the Crusoe and the adven-
tures of Conal, Shelagh and Cocky.
Yet not quite the end for, after all, the adventures
are still
there
to be
remem-
bered
and
talked
over
again
and
again;
or even
to be
written
down,
like
this.


| . • •
It took some time to restore Cocky to his old snowy whiteness,
and for a long while he was a pale-green cockatoo, and very much
ashamed of his appearance.
And now, when Conal and Shelagh hear him chattering away
from his perch in the New Forest garden, or on the Hampstead
balcony, when they are all in London, they feel quite sure that
Cocky is telling his adventures, in Bush, Forest, Jungle and Woods,
to the Hampshire blackbirds and thrushes, or to the cheeky London
sparrows.
THE END
Raphael Tuck and Sons, Ltd.,
Loudon, Paris, New York


From "Tales of
THE GOLDEN TREASURY LIBRARY
Now comprising eighteen volumes, uniform in size and price. Printed on
beautiful paper. Six full-colour plates and numerous black and white drawings.
Cover in cloth, bevelled boards, gold blocked. Full-colour picture on front.
Crown octavo. Each in artistic wrapper in full colour. 256-288 pages.
WONDROUS DEEDS OF BYGONE DAYS
BY HILDA HART AND M. D. BELGRAVE
ILLUSTRATED BY H. G. THEAKER
TALES OF THE SEA
PERCY F. WESTERMAN AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY T. CUNEO
TALES OF WONDER
M. GASTER, PH.D., AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY C. E. BROCK, R.I.
TALES THAT THRILL
T THRILL BY MAJOR CHARLES GILSON AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY C. E. BROCK, R.I.
SHAKESPEARE TALES
FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
ILLUSTRATED BY
HAROLD COPPING AND OTHERS
DICKENS'S DREAM CHILDREN
MARY ANGELA DICKENS
AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY
HAROLD COPPING AND OTHERS
Wonder "


GOLDEN TREASURY LlBRARY— continued
From "Heroic Deeds of Great Men"
HEROIC DEEDS OF GREAT MEN
BY ALFRED H. MILES AND C. SHERIDAN JONES
ILLUSTRATED BY HOWARD DAVIE AND HARRY PAYNE
THE HEROES, OR GREEK FAIRY TALES
CHARLES KINGSLEY
ILLUSTRATED BY HOWARD DAVIE
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
LEWIS CARROLL
ILLUSTRATED BY A. L. BOWLEY
KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS
DORIS ASHLEY AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY ARTHUR A. DIXON
ROBINSON CRUSOE (ABRIDGED)
DANIEL DEFOE
ILLUSTRATED BY HOWARD DAVIE
THE WATER BABIES (ABRIDGED)
CHARLES KINGSLEY
ILLUSTRATED BY MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
LEGENDS OF ANIMALS FAR AND NEAR
ROSE YE ATM AN WOOLF
ILLUSTRATED BY EDWIN NOBLE


From "Tales of Adventure "
THB GOLDEN TREASURY LlBRARY— continued
THE ROMANCE OF THE RAILWAY
G. G. JACKSON
ILLUSTRATED BY BARNARD WAY
OLD TIME FAIRY TALES AND NURSERY RHYMES
ILLUSTRATED BY JENNIE HARBOUR
TALES OF THE ALHAMBRA (SELECTED STORIES) BY WASHINGTON IRVING
ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY G. THEAKER AND OTHERS
TALES AND LEGENDS FROM INDIA BY M. D. BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART
ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY G. THEAKER
TALES OF ADVENTURE BY NATALIE JOAN, VIOLET METHLEY AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY T. CUNEO
From "Tales of Adventure"


G00SE
RAPHAEL HOUSE LIBRARY OF GIFT BOOKS
NINETEEN BEAUTIFUL VOLUMES
Bound in Pictorial Boards, Cloth Back, or in Cloth, Bevelled, Gold Topped, with picture in Gold
on the Back.
Printed on rough art paper. 144 pp. letterpress, crown 4to.
12 or 10 full-page colour plates and numerous black and white drawings.
Each Volume can he supplied in an Attractive Box with same Illustration on Lid as on Cover of Book.
The tales are told by able authors of to-day and celebrated writers of past
years, with lavish and excellent illustrations by popular artists.
HANS ANDERSEN'S STORIES (SELECTIONS)
ILLUSTRATED BY JENNIE HARBOUR
MY BOOK OF MOTHER GOOSE NURSERY RHYMES
ILLUSTRATED BY JENNIE HARBOUR
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
LEWIS CARROLL
ILLUSTRATED BY MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
HANS ANDERSEN'S FAIRY
TALES (SELECTIONS)
ILLUSTRATED BY
MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
ILLUSTRATED BY
MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL
GOLDEN LOCKS AND
PRETTY FROCKS
STORIES BY
EDRIC VREDENBURG
AND OTHERS
ILLUSTRATED BY
AGNES RICHARDSON
From
"Hans Andersen's
Stories "


THE RAPHAEL HOUSE LlBRARY— continued
From " Animal Legends from many Lands "
TINKER, TAILOR
STORIES BY CAPT. EDRIC VREDENBURG
ILLUSTRATED BY LOUIS WAIN
THE HEROES (ABRIDGED EDITION)
CHARLES KINGSLEY
ILLUSTRATED BY HOWARD DAVIE
ANIMAL LEGENDS FROM MANY LANDS
ROSE YEATMAN WOOLF
ILLUSTRATED BY EDWIN NOBLE
TALES OF THE ALHAMBRA (SELECTED STORIES) BY WASHINGTON IRVING
ILLUSTRATED BY ARTHUR A. DIXON AND H. M. BROCK, R.I.
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM OLD BRITISH LEGENDS
M. DOROTHY BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART
ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY G. THEAKER.
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM THE NORTHERN LEGENDS [Tales of the Norse Heroes)
BY M. D. BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART
ILLUSTRATED BY H. G. THEAKER
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM INDIAN LEGENDS
BY M. D. BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART
ILLUSTRATED BY H. G. THEAKER


' ' '' r^ •• Qjg British Legends."
RAPHAEL HOUSE LIBRARY — continued
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM JAPANESE FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS BY N. KATO
ILLUSTRATED BY H. G. THEAKER
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM ITALIAN FAIRY TALES AND LEGENDS
ILLUSTRATED BY HOWARD DAVIE By lilia ROMANO
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM RUMANIAN LEGENDS AND FAIRY TALES
BY M. GASTER, PH.D., ( Late President of the English Folklore Society, etc.)
ILLUSTRATED BY C. E. BROCK, R.I.
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM THE POETS {Tales of Romance and Adventure)
BY M. D. BELGRAVE AND HILDA HART
ILLUSTRATED BY FRANK ADAMS
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM TENNYSON BY NORA CHESSON
ILLUSTRATED BY J. H. BACON, A.R.A., ARTHUR DIXON,
HAROLD COPPING, AND OTHERS
CHILDREN'S STORIES FROM LONGFELLOW BY DORIS ASHLEY
ILLUSTRATED BY A. A. DIXON, HAROLD COPPING, AND OTHERS


THE MODERN LIBRARY FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
A series of ten most attractive volumes of enthralling interest, beautifully
illustrated.
112 pp. letterpress. Frontispiece in full colour. Numerous black and white
pictures. Size x BJ. Pictorial boards, front and back in full colour.
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
LEWIS CARROLL
ALI BABA AND OTHER STORIES
FOREST TREASURE
FROM THE ARABIAN NIGHTS
MAJOR CHARLES GILSON
C
SHERIDAN JONES AND ALFRED MILES
FAMOUS HEROES
FROM SIR WALTER SCOTT
IVANHOE AND OTHER STORIES
From "The Speckled Tortoise"
KING ARTHUR'S NOBLE KNIGHTS BY DORIS ASHLEY AND OTHERS
SECRET SERVICE AND OTHER STORIES BY C. B. RUTLEY AND OTHERS
SHAKESPEARE STORIES FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
ILLUSTRATED BY JOHN H. BACON, A.R.A., AND OTHERS
TALES OF THE GREEK HEROES (ABRIDGED) BY CHARLES KINGSLEY
THE SPECKLED TORTOISE AND OTHER STORIES
MAJOR CHARLES GILSON AND OTHERS


BAD RHYMES ABOUT
GOOD ANIMALS
(With a few exceptions.)
A BOOK FOR ALL AGES
CECIL G. TREW
\\ ith a Foreword by W. P. PYCRAFT, British
Museum, ''Zoology."
This attractive book is both a pleasure to read
and a delight to the eye. Its rollicking verses
about the habits and habitat of many well-known
animals and birds are enlivened by numerous
characteristic black-and-white drawings and thumb-
nail silhouettes which combine to make the whole
both instructive and artistic. The quaint vein of humour which runs through the boot
will appeal to a wide range of readers of all ages and especially to those who value some-
thing which strikes an entirely new note.
W. P. Pycraft in his Foreword says: "Of books of 'nonsense-rhymes' on Animal Life
there are many; but there is something refreshingly diSerent in the whimsicalities of this
volume. The author is evidently a lover of birds and beasts of all kinds, and has contrived
to 'hit-ofl' their several peculiarities in lines bubbling with humour It is a book for
grown-up, as well as 'growing-up' children, and we shall all be grateful for the charming
fancies it creates for us."
With about 60 illustrations
and numerous thumb-nail
silhouettes.
Frontispiece in full colour.
120 Pages. Size 5Jx 8$ in.
Decorative board cover with
silhouettes of animals; also
Full Cloth Bound, blocked in
colour, each in an attractive
wrapper.
R aphael Tuck and Sons, Ltd., London, Paris, New York.




/I/ $
8?3 I
A1 S?Pca ,
(//copy) I




