

SR VJ ffitvx S' M>£C6B
CODE OF LAWS
MELBOURNE
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTION.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY SAMUEL GOODE, AT THE PATRIOT OFFICE, COLLINS
STREET.


CODE OF LAWS
MELBOURNE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTION,
I.—The Melbourne Mechanics’ Institution shall have for its object the
untusion of scientific, literary and other useful knowledge amongst its
Members and the community generally.
ll,—Every person desirous of becoming a member of this Institution,
shall be nominated to the Committee by two members of the Institution,
in writing, and shall enter his name in a book, to be kept in the Library lor
such purpose, and upon payment in advance of a quarterly subscription of
Five Shillings, or One Pound annual subscription, shall be admitted a
member of the Institution, unless a majority of the Committee of Manage-
ment decide to the contrary. A subscriber of Ten Guineas, duly admitted,
shall become a member of the Institution for life.
lll.—The sons and apprentices of members, under sixteen years of age,
may be admitted as junior members, for one-half the above subscription,
and be entitled to all the privileges of ordinary members, except those of
eligibility to office, and of voting at meetings; and any junior member on
attaining sixteen years of age may become an ordinary member by paying
the full subscription.
IV. —Every member shall be entitled to two admission cards for
Lectures, besides his own, for the use of his family.
V.—No member shall be entitled to vote in the election of any officers,
or in the decision of any question at a General Meeting, without having
previously paid up whatever subscription may be due, and until he has
been a member for three months.
Vl.—The affairs of the Institution shall be regulated by the Committee
ef Management.
Vll.—The Committee of Management shall consist of a President, two
Vice-Presidents, Secretary, Treasurer, three Land Trustees, Curators of
Museum, and fifteen additional members chosen from the members of the


general body, five of whom shall retire each year by rotation, but shall be
eligible for re-election. Moreover such mumbers as may be appointed
trustees of the Government Aid or who may become responsible for the'
property or monies of tbe Institution, shall be members of the Committee in
right of such responsibility.
VIII.—The Committee of Management shall meet on the first Monday
in every month. Five memlers shall form a quorum, but in tbe decision of
auy question under discussion, it shall be necessary drat, faar members at
least do concur in their opinions, and in the event of the votes being equal,
tbe Chairman shall have a second or casting-vote.
IX.—Any member of the Committee, who shall have been absent three
successive monthly meetings of the Committee, during the course of the
vear, shall be considered to have vacated his office, unless some satisfactory
reason be shown to the Committee.
X.—lt shall be competent for the President and Vice-Presidents, or any
three members of tbe Committee to call a Special Meeting Of the Committee
<it Management, and notification of such meeting shall be made by tbe Se-
cretary to all members of tbe Committee in Anting at least twenty-four
hours previous to the specified hour of meeting.
Xl.—The Committee of Management shall have the power to form stu b
llve-Taws as may seem to them necessary according to circumstances, to
name honorary members, to apply the funds of the Institution to the pay-
ment of all current nnd necessary expenses, to provide lectures and oilier
means of instruction, to engage and dismiss all paid officers of tbe Insti-
tution, to frame regulations for tbe management of the library, to purchase,
hooks, apparatus, and transact generally all tbe business of tbe
Institution.
XII. —It shall be competent for the Committee of Management, or, upon
their refusal, fifteen members of the Institution qualified to vote, subscribing
n requisition to the Secretary for that purpose, and stating at the same time
the object for which the meeting is requested to be held, to convene a
Special General Meeting, notification -of such meeting, and of the object
tliercof, shall be made in the newspapers at least fourteen days previous to
the day of meeting, and no business but such special business shall he enter-
tained thereat, *
XIII.—The Committee of Management shall have the custody of all pro-
perty belonging to the Institution ; and the Committee shall require, and-
ure hereby directed, to take such security as they may deem necessary from
all officers through whose hands any such property of the Institution shall
pass, or in whose care op custody any property may be deposited.
XIV. —The Committee shall render to each Annual General Meeting
a Report of the proceedings of the past year, and the state and 1 prospects of
the Institution,
XV.—Should any vacancy occur in the Committee of Management, it
shall be competent for the rcinoining members of the Committee to supply
such vacancy, subject to the approval of tbe nest General Annual
Meeting.
XVI.—An Annual General Meeting shall be convened by the Secretary,
during the last week of the month of January in each year, on such day as


the Committee may appoint, for the purpose of electing Officers, of receiving
the report of the Committee, and any other business of the
Institution.
XVII.—The President shall take the chair at all General and Committee
Meetings, when present; in his absence, the senior Vice-President shall
preside; and in case neither the President nor either of the Vice-President?
be present, the meeting shall then name one of their number to act as
chairman during the meeting, who shall have a second or casting vote*
XVIII.—The Secretary shall keep a continuous account 'of all trans.
actions appertaining to the business of the Institution, report such progress
to every stated meeting of the Committee, open all correspondence directed
to the Committee, execute all orders of the Committee within one week
after such orders arc given, unless otherwise specified, and take care ge-
nerally of the interests of the Institution.
XIX,—AII cash, when received on account of the" Institution, shall he
paid over to the Treasurer, who shall nay the same into the Bank of the
Institution whenever the amount in his hands shall exceed five pounds, and
every disbursement shall be made by drafts upon the said Bank, signed by
the Treasurer, and countersigned by the Secretary.
XX.—The Treasurer shall balance and lay his accounts before the
Auditors within five days after the first January and first July in each year,
ami the Auditors shall furnish (heir report upon the same within five days
subsequently to the Secretary for submission to the Committee of Manage-
ment.
XXL—The hooks of the Treasurer and Secretary shall be produced at
all monthly meeting? of the Committee of Management, and shall be open
at all times for inspection by the Auditors and any member of the Committee.
XXII.—It shall be competent for any member of the Institution to
nominate any other member for any office in the Instiution, provided such
nomination be made in writing to the Secretary at least fifteen days previous
to the day of election, and be accompanied with a written declaration that
the consent of the nominee has been obtained to such nomination ; and it
shall be incumbent on the Secretary to hang up in the public room of the
Institution, at least ten days before the day of election, a list of Members
thus nominated, specifying the office proposed for each, and the names of
the respective nominators.
XXIII.—On a requisition made in writing to the Secretary, and signed
by any three members of the Institution, the conduct of any member as such,
shall be taken cognizance of by the Committee of Management, who shall
in consequence proceed to award any punishment by way of fine, suspension
of privilege or expulsion, us upon due deliberation they shall consider
requisite for supporting the credit of the Institution, such member to be
allowed an appeal to a Special General Meeting, provided such appeal be
made within six months.
XXIV.—No paid officer of the Institution shall be a member of the
Commi tee of Management.
XXV.—Any member desirous of withdrawing from the Society, shall
he expected to give one month’s notice of his intention, in writing, to the
Secretary, previously to the cxphution of the current yew.


XXVI.—No individual member shall have any right or title to any part
of the property of the Institute without the concurrence of at least three
fourths of its members. Should the dissolution of the Institution be thus
determined on, the property of the Institution shall be disposed of in such
way as the majority of the members shall determiner And dissolution shall
not take place unless with such concurrence of three-fourths of the members
present, at two separate Special Genera] Meetings of members, of which the
second Special General Meeting shall be held not less than one month, nor
more than two months after the first Special General Meeting,
XXVII.—No alteration of any of the preceding Laws, shall be entertained
without {be sanction of two-thirds of a General Meeting, and fourteen day*
notice of such proposed alteration must be posted in the reading room*
5 OOODE, PRINTER, PATRIOT OFFICE, MELPOVUSt.
