





CODE OF RULES,
POEMS OF PEOCEDUEE, AND STYLES
, jaU F*
(PKOPOSED) EOK THE USE OF THE
flf Jgintt| MaEs
[Ordered by the General Assembly to he sent down to Presbyteries , with
instructions to report thereon] said report to be sent to the Committee
on Forms of Procedure, {Rev. James B, Laughton, Convener ), not
later than three months before the next Session of Assembly. — Vide
Minutes of Assembly, Session 1868, Fourteenth Sederunt. ]
SYDNEY:
JOHN L. SHEER IFF, PUBLISHER,
18 WYKYAED SQUARE.
Price, One Shilling and Sixpence.


.
1. ‘ ' I I
*
k ■ ■ '
X.» *
V '
% ■
i •’


NOTICE.
Sfo JUmto cf iljt toeral gUsimHjr,
AND OTHERS.
To avoid imposing additional burdens on the funds of
the church, a Subscription List has been opened to defray
the cost of printing and circulating this proposed Code,
Members of the General Assembly, and others, are in-
vited to send their names and amount of subscriptions ,
in postage stamps or otherwise, to the publisher, who will
forward copies to the amount of subscription. Subscribers
in the country ivill please forward extra stamps for
postage . Seven copies and upwards, postage free, on
receipt of Half-a-Guinea in stamps.


■
X
>
' 11 , ,
*
\
\
,
•
/.
■
■
-
-
• M //. , -
J tWm. Sesi I


RULES, FORMS OF PROCEDURE,
and STYLES, <fec„ See.
A BRIEF STATEMENT OF PRESBYTERIAN PRINCIPLES.
The fundamental principles of that system of Ecclesias-
tical Polity which is called The Presbyterian, are these
three :
X. Presbyterian Parity: or the official equality of
Presbyters.
11. The Government oe the Church by Presbyters
or Elders, distinguished into the two orders of
Teaching and Puling Elders.
111. Representative Courts.
I. Presryterian Parity.— lt is admitted by all parties
that the designation of ‘ Presbyters ’ is given in the
Apostolic writings to the ordinary Ministers or Pastors
of the Church, to whom belongs the office of preaching
the Word and administering the Sacraments. Presbyterian
Churches hold, that the Government of the Visible Church
also belongs to Presbyters, and that there is no superior
order, of Divine appointment, or necessary to the true
constitution or efficient administration of the Church on
earth. We hold, that the ordinary and permanent
Ministers of the Church, by whatever title they may be
known or designated, whether as presbyters, bishops, or
pastors, have officially equal rank and equal powers; and
that they have authority, by virtue of their office, and when
sitting in duly constituted courts, to discharge all the
functions required for the perpetuation of the Ministry, and
for the government and discipline of Christ’s household.


This doctrine of Presbyterian Parity is defended on the*
following grounds: —
1. That the titles of Presbyter and Bishop are in tho
New Testament applied, not to distinct orders of
Ministers, but to the very same individuals. (Acts xx„
17, 28 ; Titus i. 5,7; 1 Pet. v. 1,2).
2. That there is no mention in the New Testament of
any other order of office-bearers as exercising
permanent rule in the Church. The offices of
Apostle, Evangelist, and Prophet, were extraordi-
nary, and not intended to be permanent. They
ceased when they were no longer required; and
moreover, none of them bore any resemblance to the-
modern Diocesan Bishop.
Proposed addition to this paragraph :
“ Every function of a permanent character pertaining to
those offices is competently discharged by the ordinary Pastors
or Missionaries of the Church .”
3. That while the Apostles in their writings give minute
directions to all classes of persons, we find no such
directions addressed to any functionaries resembling
Diocesan Bishops; an omission quite inexplicable,
if Diocesan Episcopacy had been the only lawful
form of Church government. Those qualifications*
which the Apostle Paul declares to be essential to
the office of a bishop, are specified in order to enable
Timothy and Titus to select persons who should be
ordained as presbyters.
4. That, as ordinary presbyters have the power of
exercising all the functions of government, mutual
discipline, and ordination to the ministerial office,
which Diocesan Bishops have claimed as belonging
exclusively to them, there is no warrant for main-
taining any order superior to Presbyters. (Heb.
xiii. 7, 17 ; 1 Tim, iv. 14 ; 2 Tim. i. 6).
5. That if the ordinary pastors, or presbyter-bishops*
have not these functions of government, mutual
discipline, and ordination, it does not appear that
such powers exist in the Church at all by Divine
appointment.
So just are these grounds generally acknowledged to be,
that many intelligent advocates of Diocesan Episcopacy do-


not insist on the theor y of a jus divinum, but defend that
form of government chiefly on grounds of expediency.
Presbyterian Churches, however, prefer following scrip-
tural precedent; and are confirmed in so doing by the
comparative working of the two systems. It does not
appear that Episcopal Churches have proved themselves in
any respect more efficient, or less liable to doctrinal or
administrative corruptions, than Presbyterian Churches,
though the majority of Protestant churches throughout
Christendom are Presbyterian.
11. Government by Presbyters as distinguished
into Teaching and Puling Elders.
The government of Presbyterian Churches is not entirely
in the hands of those Presbyters who minister in word and
doctrine. Conjoined with them are Puling Presbyters,
commonly called simply Elders, who have equal authority
with the Teaching Presbyters, or Ministers, in the govern-
ment and discipline of the Church, though they are not
called to the work of public teaching.
The passages of Scripture in which this distinction of
Presbyters seems to be recognized are Pom. xii. 6-8;
1 Cor. xii. 28 ; 1 Tim. v. 17.
The ancient constitution of the Jewish Church was
essentially Presbyterian. It is evident that from a very
early period, elders of the people, sometimes called
“ancients of the house of Israel,” were associated with
the priests in the management of ecclesiastical affairs.
After the Babylonish Captivity the Sanhedrim, or Great
Council of Presbyters, was fully established (Acts iv. 5), &c.
And it appears always that in the Christian Churches
there was a plurality of Elders; and it is impossible to
suppose that these could all have been Teaching Elders.
That congregations have a right to a voice in the
government of the Church by means of spiritual officers
chosen by themselves, appears to be generally acknow-
ledged : and experience has shown that such aid is both
needful and salutary.
In the Apostolic and Primitive Churches it is evident
that there was another class of office-bearers, called
Deacons. Presbyterian Churches are not entirely agreed
as to whether this office was intended to be permanent, or
as to the precise functions of the Deacon, All are however


agreed that these office-bearers had no part in the govern-
ment or discipline of the Church, but were concerned only
in the administration of the funds, and in the oversight
of the poor.
111. Representative Courts; or the Association of
several Congregations under a common Government
by means of Representative Assemblies.
It is in this feature chiefly that Presbytery differs from
Congregationalism or Independency, according to which
system every congregation contains within itself all the
powers necessary for the government and discipline of the
Church.
But, by our very profession as Christians, duties devolve
upon us collectively, which we cannot adequately discharge
as individuals, or when associated only in congregations.
Such, for example, are the duty of securing common action
throughout the Church at large, and of promoting common
edification; the duty of preserving sound doctrine and
purity of discipline; and the whole Missionary Work.
Whenever Congregational churches wish to perform these
duties they are compelled to act on Presbyterian principles.
And it may be added that Episcopal churches have of late
years been compelled to have recourse to Synods, or
representative Assemblies, for the more efficient adminis-
tration of their affairs.
Presbyterian Churches have a regular gradation of
Courts, the constitution, powers, and duties of which are
explained in the subsequent pages. In several of the
Churches in Scotland, but not elsewhere, there is an
intermediate Court between the Presbytery and the General
Assembly, called “the Provincial Synod,” which consists
of all the members of the several Presbyteries within its
bounds, together with a corresponding number from a
neighbouring Synod. The Supreme Court of the Presby-
terian Church of New South Wales exercises the functions
both of a Synod and of a General Assembly, being not
only a Court of Review and Appeal, but also of Legislation
and final Judgment. And for this reason, though its
constitution resembles that of a Synod, it has adopted the
title of “The General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales.”


CHAPTER FIRST.
OF CONGREGATIONS AND CHARGES.
1. A Congregation, in the ecclesiastical sense, consists
of any number of persons statedly worshipping together,
and duly organized. The whole body of people under the
care of one Minister is called a Pastoral Charge, and some-
times consists of several congregations, with distinct organi-
zation for temporal purposes. A Collegiate Charge is one
that has two Ministers of equal status.
2. Any number of persons, approving of the principles
of this Church, and desiring to bo formed into a congregation,
and supplied with Divine Ordinances, may apply by petition
to the nearest Presbytery. The Clerk of Presbytery, if con-
sulted, will assist such persons in preparing their petition,
which must state fully and accurately the circumstances of
the locality as bearing upon the application. It is desirable
that one or more of the petitioners should appear before the
Presbytery when the petition is considered, in order to afford
full information.
3. If the circumstances disclosed appear to the Presbytery
sufficiently encouraging, a member of Presbytery is appointed
to meet and confer with the people in the locality whence the
petition comes. The Minister so appointed holds a meeting,
and ascertains the wants and prospects of the locality, and
reports to the Presbytery, which eithef at once declares the
petitioners to be a congregation, or appoints farther enquiry
to be made by a committee or otherwise; granting supply
of ordinances, or not, as appears expedient.
4. A congregation consists of members and adherents.
Members are those in full communion with the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales, and whose names are upon the
communion-roll of the particular congregation. Adherents
are those who A statedly worship with the congregation, and
contnbufe7~aS / seatholders or otherwise, to its funds, and
whose names are upon the adherents’ roll (Vide Art. 175).
5. On the occasion of the first election of a Minister in a
newly-erected charge, all professing adherents, who have
contributed to the funds, are admissible to vote. In settled
It*. .


charges, members alone have the right of voting in elections
of Ministers, Elders, and Deacons. Adherents have a vote in
the election of Managers, and at all meetings in matters
affecting the temporal affairs of the congregation. Adherents
are also entitled to signify their concurrence in a call to a
Minister, hut are not qualified to offer objections.
6. The real property of a congregation is vested in
Trustees, not fewer than three, who must be adherents of
of the Church, and, if possible, members of the particular
congregation. On their appointment, which must be con-
firmed by the Presbytery, they severally subscribe a
declaration acknowledging the jurisdiction of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales over the property vested in them.
The declaration so subscribed is held by the Presbytery, or
forwarded to the Clerk of Assembly to be kept with other
documents of the Church.
7. The temporal affairs of congregations are administered
either by a Deacons’ Court, or by a Committee of Manage-
ment.
Proposed addition to this article :
“ Each congregation has the poiver of making Bye-Laws
for the administration of its own pecuniary affairs , which
are submitted to the Presbytery through the Session, and are
of no force until approved by the Presbytery. Adherents not
complying with such approved Bye-Laws may be declared
disqualified from voting
CHAPTEE SECOND.
OF THE DEACONS’ COURT.
8. A Deacons’ Court consists of the Minister and Elders,
together with the Deacons, of a Congregation.
9. Deacons are permanent officers, duly elected to the
office by the members of the Congregation, and solemnly
ordained by the Minister. A Deacon, once ordained, is not
ordained again ’ but on joining another congregation, is not
entitled to a seat in the Deacons’ Court, unless duly elected
and admitted.


10. Deacons must be twenty-one years of age, members
of the Congregation, having a good report, and maintaining
the worship of God in their families.
11. Where there is a paucity of Elders, Deacons may
be requested to assist in the serving of the Lord’s Table.
They may be asked also to give their advice to the Session
in strictly Sessional business, but cannot vote in the Session.
12. When an election of Deacons is required, either to
form a Deacons’ Court for the first time, or to fill vacancies,
the Minister intimates from the pulpit that a meeting of the
•congregation will be held for the purpose of nominating
suitable persons at such a time and place, specifying the
number required. This intimation must be made on the two
Sabbaths immediately preceding the day of nomination, and
at all the diets of worship held within the bounds of the
charge during the currency of the intimation.
13. On the day appointed the Minister takes the chair,
and opens the proceedings with prayer; after which he states
the circumstances which have led to the convening of the
meeting, and declares the duties and qualifications of Dea-
cons (Art. 10). He then calls upon members present to
nominate qualified persons. Any number of persons may be
nominated; and each nomination, when seconded, is recorded
by the Clerk of the Deacons’ Court, or by a clerk temporarily
appointed. These nominations form a Leet; and from the
Leet thus formed the members of the congregation are re-
quested severally to select the names of the persons whom
they prefer, and for whom they will vote, and hand in a list
of such persons accordingly, subscribed with the name of
the voter, on the following Sabbath, to the Clerk or other
person appointed. These lists are examined by the Deacons’
Court, or by the Session if there be no Deacons’ Court; and
all unsigned lists being rejected, and the names of all un-
qualified persons (Art. 10) being struck out, those persons,
to the number required, having the highest amount of votes,
are declared duly elected. The election being declared, the
ordination or admission of the Deacons elect follows, the form
of procedure being the same with that appointed for Elders
■(vide infra Arts. 41—47). The Rules for exercise of
discipline in the case of a Deacon are the same as those pre-
scribed for Elders (Arts. 48—50).


CHAPTER THIRD.
OF THE COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT,
14. Where there is no Deacons’ Court, the temporal
affairs of a congregation are administered by a Committee
of Management, consisting of the Minister and Elders,
and a certain number of Managers elected by the members
and adherents of the congregation. Their number is regu-
lated by the requirements of the congregation, but is not
less than three. Managers must be twenty-one years of
age, members or adherents of the Church, and of good
report.
15. Managers are elected in the manner prescribed for
election of Deacons (Arts. 12, 13), except where the method
of open election is preferred. One third of the number
retire annually in rotation, beginning from the bottom of
the roll, but are- eligible for re-election (vide infra, Art. 25).
16. Managers falling under spiritual censure, or leaving
the congregation, become disqualified, and their seat is
vacated. Yacancies occurring during the year by death,
resignation, or disqualification, may be filled up by the Com-
mittee until the annual meeting of the congregation.
CHAPTER FOURTH.
OF THE BUSINESS OF THE DEACONS’ COURT OR COM-
MITTEE OF MANAGEMENT, AND OF CONGREGA-
TIONAL MEETINGS.
17. Every Deacons’ Court or Committee of Management
has a Chairman, a Clerk, and a Treasurer.
18. The Minister of the charge is ex officio Chairman of
the Deacons’ Court, but the Committee of Management elects
its own Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman in either
case, any member may be appointed chairman pro tempore.


19. Meetings of Deacons’ Courts or Committees of Manage-
ment are convened by intimation from the pulpit during
Divine the Lord’s Day next preceding the day
of meeting. There are usually monthly or quarterly meetings,
as agreed on ; but the Minister may convene a meeting at any
time when he deems it necessary, either by intimation from
the pulpit or by personal or written notice to the members ;
and is bound to convene a meeting at any time when requested
in writing by two members.
20. The Chairman has a right of expressing his sentiments
from the chair upon any subject before the Court'*' and in case
of equality has a casting vote.
21. The Clerk is elected by the Court, but if not a
member has no voice in its deliberations. On accepting
office he makes a declaration de jideli. His duties are, 1. to
keep an accurate roll of the Court, the names being
arranged by seniority of office in the Court, or by the
higher number of votes at new elections. 2. To take minutes
of all proceedings of the Court, and engross the same in a
book provided for the purpose by the Court. 3. To keep
in safe custody all books and papers the property of the
Court, except such as fall to the charge of the treasurer.
22. The Treasurer is elected by the Court and* is
always a member. His duties are, —l. To receive and
take charge of all moneys raised by the congregation, and to
deposit the same in a bank as directed by the Court. 2. To
pay salaries and other disbursements, sanctioned by the Court
so far as the funds to the credit of the congregation
will allow. (It is usual for cheques to be signed by
one or more members of the Court appointed for that purpose,
in addition to the Treasurer’s signature.) 3 To keep a
regular account of charge and discharge, and to produce the
same at every ordinary meeting for the information of the
Court. 4. To prepare an annual balance sheet in accordance
with the regulations of the General Assembly, at the close
of the financial year of the Church, and to ; forward the same,
after confirmation by the Court to the convener of the
Assembly’s Committee authorized to receive the same.
5. To prepare an annual Balance Sheet to be submitted
to the annual meeting of the congregation, after examination
by auditors duly elected {infra, Art. 25).
* Understand ‘ or Committee ’ all through the chapter.


23. Every'congregation holds an annual meeting, at
which all members and adherents are entitled to be present
to vote.* The Deacons’ Court fixes the precise time fo
such meeting, and the same is intimated from the pulpit
during Divine Service on two Sabbaths immediately
preceding, The Minister presides ex officio at this, and all
•meetings of the congregation ; but if he desire it, the meeting
may appoint another chairman.
24. At the annual meeting of the congregation, the
Deacons’ Court presents its report of proceedings, with an
Abstract of the Treasurer’s accounts, and a clear statement
of the financial position of the congregation. Matters
affecting the temporal concerns of the congregation are then
•considered ; but no motion for the alteration of any existing
regulation can be entertained, unless notice thereof in
writing shall have been given to the Deacons’ Court at or
before the ordinary meeting of such Court next preceding the
annual meeting of the congregation, so that public intimation
of such notice of motion may be made from the pulpit at the
time when the meeting is intimated.
25 Managers are nominated at the annual meetings in
room of those retiring by rotation, and to fill up vacancies.
The persons nominated may be elected at once by show of
lianas, unless some member or adherent demand an election
by lists or voting papers (Arts. 12 and 13). Auditors
(usually two) are also elected, by open vote, for the ensuing
year.
28. No Deacons’ Court has power to borrow money on
security of the real property of the congregation, even with
consent of the Trustees, without the consent of a meeting
of the congregation duly called for the purpose If repairs in
Church or manse are required, the cost of which is likely to
•exceed £5O, in any one year, the consent of a congregational
meeting must be obtained, unless the necessary funds are
provided by private subscription,
27. No change in the seat-rents, or in the Minister’s
stipend, can be made without consent of a congregational
meeting.
* Congregations may hold their annual meetings at any time, hut it will he found
■ convenient to themselves, and will much facilitate the duties of the Treasurer
of the General Assembly, if their meetings are held immediately after the close
•of the financial year of the Church viz..—3oth September.


28. H it appears that the congregation is not able to
ycontinue to pay the full amount of stipend guaranteed to the
Presbytery at the time of the Minister’s settlement, as
provided by AcC of Assembly, it is not competent for the
congregation to conclude upon a modification of stipend until
the case has been reported to the Presbytery through the
Session. The Presbytery will enquire into the case ; and, if
satisfied that the circumstances have been faithfully repre-
sented, may consent to a modification ; or, if the stipend be
thus reduced below the Assembly’s minimum, may apply to
the Supplementary Stipend Fund Committee for a grant in
aid, or otherwise act as may appear most expedient.
29- Deacons’ Courts and Committees of Management are
at all times bound to furnish returns and full information
respecting the temporal affairs of their congregations when
required to do so by the superior Church Courts.
30. Deacons’ Courts or Committees of Management
appoint the stated collections at public worship, determine
the manner in which they shall be made, and name collectors.
If special collections are required, they consult the Session.
31. All meetings of Deacons’ Courts, Committees, or
congregations ,must be constituted and closed with prayer;
and both facts must be recorded in the minutes, otherwise
there is no evidence that the meeting has been regularly held.
{lnfra, Art. 79, Note).
CHAPTER FIPTII.
OF THE SESSION.
32. The Session is the lowest spiritual judicatoi’y, and
consists of the Minister and Elders of a congregation or
pastoral charge.
33. The Minister of the charge is ex officio Moderator.
In Collegiate charges the Ministers preside alternately or as
may be arranged between themselves, the other sitting and
voting as an ordinary member. The Minister and two elders
are necessary to form a quorum of the Session. No meeting
of Session can be held without the presence of the Minister, or


some other Minister authorized hy him. The Minister alone
convenes the Session, by public intimation from the pulpit
during Divine service on the Lord’s day immediately preceding
or during any other diet of public worship, or by written
notice to each of the members. The Minister is bound to
convene the Session, when requested in writing by two
members, or in obedience to the direction of a superior Court.
34. When a charge becomes vacant, the Presbytery, at its
first ordinary meeting thereafter, appoints one of its members
to act as Moderator of the Session during the vacancy, or for
such time as the Presbytery may see fit. The Minister so
appointed is empowered to do within the charge all minis-
terial acts proper to be done by the Minister of the charge.
The Session, thus constituted, makes arrangements with the
Presbytery, or through the Presbytery with the Home Mission
and Church Extension Committee, for the supply of ordinances
to the Congregation.
INTERIM. SESSION.
35. When there is no Session in a charge, the Presbytery,
on application from the Minister,or of its own motion, appoints
two or more of its members to act as Assessors with the
Minister or acting Moderator. Ministers or Elders not
members of Presbytery may be appointed as Assessors, pro-
vided they are Ministers of this Church, or hona fide acting
Elders of some Session within the bounds of the Presbytery.
The Minister, with the Assessors so appointed, form an Interim
Session.
36. The Interim Session takes steps for the formation of
a permanent Session, by making enquiries, and at the proper
time convening a meeting of the congregation for the nomina-
tion of suitable persons as Elders. If it appears that two
suitable persons, at least, willing to act, cannot be found {vide
infra Art. 4ol the case is reported to the Presbytery, which will
appoint Assessors from time to time till the defect is remedied.
37- No charge ought, if possible, to be without a Session ;
and on the other hand, a Minister who has no Session cannot
take upon himself to ordain Elders and form a Session without
authority from his Presbytery. Such an ordination is null
and void from the beginning. In very remote charges, how-
ever, and other exceptional cases, Presbyteries may make
special arrangements, proceedings under such arrangements
being always reported to the Presbytery.


38. When the required number of Elders has been elected
in manner described in the succeeding articles, the Interim
Session appoints the Edict to be served, and the ordination to
take place, on certain days specified.
ELECTION AND ORDINATION OF ELDERS.
39. When a Session already exists in a charge, and it is
thought desirable to increase the number of Elders, no appli-
cation to the Presbytery is necessary. The existing Session
determines whether any, and how many, additional Elders are
required, and makes all the arrangements for the election.
The form of Procedure is precisely the same as that above
appointed for the election of Deacons (Arts. 12—13).
40. Elders must be men of godly walk and conversation,
diligent in altering upon ordinances, strict in the observance
of the Lord’ff day, and maintaining the worship of dod in
their families. They must be also of the full age of twenty-
one years, and in full communion with the congregation. It
is highly desirable that they should possess some knowledge
of ecclesiastical business, or at least have some aptitude for it.
If the Session is not satisfied as to the qualifications of any
individual elected, he is rejected, intimation of such rejection
being made by the Session clerk to the mover and seconder
of the nomination, who, if dissatisfied, have the right of
appeal to the Presbytery.
41. The persons having the highest number of votes being
declared duly elected, the Session appoints the Edict* to be
served on the two following. Sabbaths, and the ordination to
take place, if no valid objections be lodged, on such day
thereafter as may be found expedient.
42. On the day appointed, which may be either a Sab-
bath or a week-day, the Sessson is constituted before the
commencement of Divine Worship, and intimation is made
for the last time to the assembled congregation, that if any
person has any objection to offer against any of the elders
elect, the Session is prepared to hear proof of the same. If
any objection be offered, and found relevant, and satisfactory
evidence produced, the ordination must be postponed till
farther enquiry has been made. If no objection be offered,
* An Edict is an intimation issued by authority of any Church Court, to the
effect that certain persons have been elected to certain offices, and that they wij
be admitted to such offices on a specified day, if no valid objections arc lodged
previously to that day. A style is given in the Appendix. I.


the Minister proceeds to the pulpit, and preaches a sermon
suitable to the occasion. After sermon, ho briefly narrates
the steps that have been taken with respect to the election/'
43. The Moderator then calls the Elders elect to stand
forth in the presence of the congregation, and puts to them
the questions appointed to be put to persons about to be
ordained to the office of Elder or Deacon in this Church, as
follows :
I. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments to be the Word of God, and the only
authoritative Rule of Faith and Practice?
11. Do you acknowledge the Westminster Confession of
Faith, (subject to the explanation contained in the
fourth Article of the Basis of Union agreed to by
this Church on the eighth day of September, 1865,)
as an exhibition of the sense in which you under-
stand the Holy Scriptures, and as such a confession
of your faith ?
111. Do you acknowledge the Presbyterian form of
Government, by Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial
Synods, and General Assemblies, to be founded upon
the Word of God, and agreeable thereto ; and do
you promise to submit yourself to the Government
and discipline established and practised in this Church,
and never to endeavour, directly or indirectly, the
subversion or prejudice of the same? And, while
cherishing a spirit of brotherly love towards all the
faithful followers of Christ, do you engage to seek
and promote, as God shall give you power and oppor-
tunity, the purity, edification, peace and extension
of this Church?
The members of the congregation are then reguested to
stand up, and the following questions are put to them :
i. Do you, the members of this congregation, now confirm
the election of these brethren (or this brother') to the
office of Ruling Elder (or Deacon) in this congre-
gation ?
ii. And do you promise to render them (or him) all due
respect and encouragement in the discharge of their
(or his) office?
* See Style for Narration of Steps, Appendix II


Be pleased to signify your assent hy holding up the right
hand.
The congregation assenting, the final question is then put
to the Elders elect: —
IV. Do you accept the office of Ruling Elder (or Deacon )
in this congregation ? And do you promise, through
Divine Grace, and according to the ability which
God shall give you, faithfully to discharge the duties
of the same ?
44. Satisfying answers having been given hy each of the
Elders elect to these questions, the Moderator descends from
the pulpit, and the other members of the Session (or
Deacons’ Court, if Deacons are to be ordained,) take their
places near him. The Moderator then ordains the Elders
elect to the office by prayer, and commends them to the grace
of God for aid and countenance in their office. After prayer,
the Moderator gives to each of the newly-ordained Elders the
right hand of fellowship, declaring them severally to be duly
admitted to the office of Ruling Elder in the Church of
Christ, and specialty to the exercise of the same in that
congregation. The other Elders present give them the right
hand of fellowship in succession ; after which the Moderator
returns to the pulpit, and gives suitable exhortations to
them and to the congregation. Public worship is then
concluded, and thereafter the newly-ordained Elders sign the
Formula, their names are added to the Roll, and the Session
is closed in the ustial way, the whole proceedings being
carefully recorded in the minutes.*
GENERAL RULES.
45. An Elder, on removing to another district, is entitled
to demand from the Session of which he is a member, an
extract of his ordination, and certificate of good fidelity,
provided there be no charge pending against him, and pro-
vided be shall have given notice of resignation previously to
his removal and applied for such extract and certificate. An
Elder leaving a district without due notice to the Session
can only receive a certificate afterwards ex gratia. The
extract of ordination may be demanded at any time.
* These Articles, as well ns others describing the procedure in Elections, &c.,
have been drawn purposely with great minuteness of detail, in order to avoid the
necessity of giving Styles, for Minutes in the Appendix, and increasing the bulk
of the publication. As a 'general rule, the Minutes should follow the details of the
Articles, giving them an historical form, and supplying the proper names and dates.


46. An Elder ceasing to worship, during twelve months,
in the congregation of whose Session he is a member, and
negkcting°to "notify the Session of any explanation of his
conduct, may he declared disqualified. Before such dis-
qualification is recorded, however, the Session Clerk requests
him to explain his conduct, either in person or by letter. If
he fail to satisfy the Session within two months, he is
declared no longer qualified to exercise the office of an elder
in that congregation, and notice accordingly is sent to him.
47. An Elder, removing to another district in a regular
manner, presents his extract and certificate to the Session
of the congregation which he joins, but does not become
entitled a seat in that Session until he has been elected
thereto by the congregation. The Session itself judges of
the expediency of proposing such election. If considered
expedient, intimation is given from the pulpit, on two
Sabbaths, to the effect, that the Session proposes to admit
Mr. , an Elder of the Church, and bearing certificate
from the Session of , to a seat in the Session of that con-
gregation ; and that, if no valid objections are previously
lodged and sustained, Mr. will be admitted on
the following Sabbath. The form of procedure for admission
of Elders Is the same in all respects as that appointed for
their ordination, but the act of ordination is not repeated.
48- An Elder may demit the exercise of his office in the
congregation to which he belongs, and resign his seat in the
Session; but such demission and resignation are not valid
until they have been accepted by the Session, and recorded
in the Minutes. Demission cannot be accepted when it
would defeat the ends of discipline.
CHAPTEE SIXTH.
OF MINISTERIAL FUNCTIONS AND PREROGATIVES, AND
OF THE BUSINESS OF THE SESSION.
49. It belongs to the Minister alone to conduct public
worship and administer the Sacraments in the congregation ;
and for the manner in which he discharges these functions
he is accountable only to the Presbytery, from which he re-


ceived the charge. The right of admission to the pulpit
belongs also exclusively to the Minister, except when the
Minister is under censure or process, when the right reverts
to the Presbytery. The Minister has also the right to the
keys of the Church-doors, and may grant or refuse the use
of the Church for any purpose of a religious character.
If the use of the Church be asked for a lecture, or other
purpose not strictly religious, the application is referred to
the Boaoon» or Manage*.-;. The Presbytery, by its own
authority, appoints its meetings in any Church within its
bounds; and the General Assembly, or any Committee
thereof, may appoint its meetings in any Church under the
Assembly’s jurisdiction.
60. Ministers do not, as a matter of professional ethics,
preach, or perform any other ministerial function, within the
limits (where such limits exist) of another minister’s charge,
without the consent of such minister. Ministers may not
baptize the children of parents residing in another charge,
without a certificate from the Session of that charge.
CT I /A.. 1 • 1 • • • •. , - - . © .
Ministers of this Church without
settled charges may not exercise ministerial functions except
as authorized or appointed by a Presbytery or Committee of
Assembly, and are not entitled to be registered for the
solemnization of marriage, without the express sanction of
the General Assembly. This does not apply to Chaplains
employed by Government, or by any Religious Society.
53. Ministers have no right to prosecute for their stipend
in the Civil Courts, when a guarantee has been given to
the Presbytery. In cases of arrears. Ministers report to their
Presbyteries, and leave the matter in their hands.
53. The business of the Session is, to assist the Minister
in the spiritual oversight and government of the charge;
to devise and carry into effect measures for promoting reli-
gious knowledge, growth in grace, and holiness of life, among
the people; to establish, promote, and superintend Sabbath-
Schools, Congregational and Sabbath-School Libraries, and
other agencies for the moral and spiritual welfare of all
within the bounds of the charge to whom their influence
may extend. It belongs to the Session also to appoint the


times for public worship and administration of the Sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper; to judge of the qualifications of those
who desire to be admitted to Church privileges ; to receive
and grant certificates of Church-membership; to exercise
discipline upon offending members; to and direct
Precentors and choir-singers, and exercise a general control
over the Psalmodical arrangements; _to convene congre-
gational meetings, and arrange the business con-
duct all congregational elections, plri'tmnr oPDeag.o**s,
n-i-A r-mdnntrd by if there be one ;
to appoint, as they see fit, special collections for congre-
gational purposes; and to be the medium of communication
between the congregation and the superior courts.
54. The Session appoints one of its members to act as
Clerk, who on accepting office makes the usual declaration
dejideli. The duties of the Session-Clerk are the cairns as
those of the Clerk of the Deacons’ Court (vide Art. 21).
55. The Session alone has the right to advise the Minister
with respect to intimations to be made from the pulpit during
public worship, even though such intimations relate solely to
the temporal affairs of the congregation. A minister is not
bound to make any intimation from the pulpit unless by
resolution of the Session or Superior Court.
56. Every meeting of Session must be opened and closed
with prayer, and both facts must be recorded in the Minutes.
COMMUNION ROLL : CHURCH PRIVILEGES.
57. Every Session is bound to keep a Communion Poll,
or Roll of persons in full Communion with the Church within
the bounds of the Charge.y This Roll is examined and
adjusted by the Session before every administration of the
Lord’s Supper, or at the least once in every year, and also
before every election of Minister, Elders, or Deacons. At
these adjustments the names of members who have died,
or otherwise been disjoined, are struck off, the date of death
or disjunction, and other particulars, being carefully recorded.
Members who have been absent from the Lord’s Table during
eighteen months are notified, and requested to explain their
absence. Failing any satisfactory explanation, th Jr names
may be struck off, and the parties notified accordingly.
* Some Sessions leave the appointment of the Precentor to the Congregation.
t Appendix 111.


A Roll of Adherents is also kept, and adjusted once a year,
and before every election of a Minister.
58. Parties coming from other places, and claiming
Church privileges, must either produce certificates of mem-
bership from the congregation they have left, or otherwise
satisfy the Session as to their Christian character. If cer-
tificates are dated far back, they are not received without
enquiry. Certificates, when received, remain in custody of
the Session Clerk. Members leaving a congregation are
entitled to certificates of disjunction, and ought not to omit
to apply for them at the time of their leaving.
DISCIPLINE AGAINST ELDERS.
60. Caution must always be exercised in entertaining
accusations against Elders. If an Elder is accused of
conduct inconsistent with his office, he is first dealt with
privately as a brother - } but if this be unsuccessful, he is
cited to appear before the Sesssou, and answer to the charge.
If he confess, or if the offence be proved by credible wit-
nesses, he may be admonished, rebuked, or suspended,
according to the nature of his offence, intimation thereof
being given (if thought necessary) to the congregation on
the following Sabbath.
61. If the offence charged be of a very heinous character,
or accompanied with aggravations, the case is reported to
the Presbytery for advice; and the Presbytery either
appoints Assessors to sit with the Session, or itself proceeds
to adjudicate, the accused having every facility afforded him
in making his defence. If found guilty, either by his own
confession or by satisfactory evidence, and if no milder
censure can be deemed adequate, the accused is formally
deposed from the office, and declared no longer a member of
the Church. The act of deposition is always preceded by
prayer (vide infra , Art 181).


DISCIPLINE AGAINST PRIVATE MEMBERS.
62. In the exercise of discipline Sessions are bound to
proceed with great prudence and tenderness. They cannot
notice mere rumours ; but if a charge be made against any
member of the congregation by another member, or by any
person of good repute, though not a member, the Session will
first ascertain whether the delator has communicated privately
with the member accused in terms of our Lord’s precept
(Matt., xviii, 15—17). If the accusation be concerning a
matter of personal injury or offence, the delator must be
informed that his accusation cannot be received until he has
followed this precept without obtaining satisfaction. If the
deem it expedient to deal with the case, the accused
must be-fully apprised of the nature of the charge brought
against him, and requested to attend and answer thereto. If
be refuse or neglect to appear when duly cited, he may be
held as having confessed, and his name struck off the roll.
If he appear, and confess, the Session will act according to
circumstances, giving full weight to all extenuations alleged,
and not proceeding to extremities where there is promise of
amendment. If the accused do not confess, and the case is
such that the interests of religion require that it be brought
to an issue, the Session will hear evidence, and give every
opportunity to the accused to clear himself. When the case
has been fully heard, the Session gives judgment, the
accused having the right of appeal; or the Session, if the
case be one of peculiar difficulty and delicacy, refers it to the
Presbytery.
REPRESENTATION OF SESSION IN SUPERIOR COURTS.
63. Every Session has the right of electing one of its
members to represent the Session in the Presbytery and in
the General Assembly. The representative Elder receives a
commission in due form (Appendix IV), without which he is
not entitled to sit in the superior Courts, appointing him to
act for a definite time, usually twelve months, or from the
commencement of the ordinary Session of Assembly in one
year to the day of such commencement in the following year.
Sessions do not lose the right of representation during the
vacancy of the charge.
64. Sessions at a distance from Sydney (that is, beyond
the County of Cumberland), may elect as their repre-


sentatives in the General Assembly, but not in the Presby-
tery, bona fide acting Elders of other congregations, certified
as such by the Clerk of the Session to which they belong.
Not more than two Elders of the samecongregation are, how-
ever, permitted to sit in the same Assembly as representatives
of congregations other than which they belong. If
the Elder elected as representative finds it impossible to
attend, the Session may elect another at any time previously
to the meeting of the General Assembly and the substitute
so elected is admitted to a seat on producing his Commission
to the Clerk of Assembly. Commissions must be forwarded
to the Clerk of Presbytery previously to the ordinary
meeting of Presbytery next before the Annual Session
of the General Assembly.
65. Sessions may, at all times, apply for advice and
assistance to the Presbytery, or, through the Presbytery, to
the General Assembly.
CHAPTEE SEVENTH.
OF PETITIONS, REFERENCES, DISSENTS, COMPLAINTS,
APPEALS, OVERTURES, &g.
PETITIONS,
66. Any member or adherent of a congregation is entitled
to bring any case or matter, bearing upon the interests
of the congregation, or of the Church generally, before the
Session of that congregation by Petition.
67. Members of the Church have access to the Presbytery
through the Session, and to the General Assembly through
the Presbytery, or through a Committee of Assembly.
68. Parties outside the Church have access to the General
Assembly through a Presbytery or Committee of Assembly,
and are directed how to proceed on application to the Clerk
of Assembly, or Convener of the Committee to which the
matter of their application properly belongs.
69. Petitions must be what they profess to be ; that is,
they must pray for something which could not have been, or


cannot be, otherwise constitutionally obtained. Thus, a
Petition complaining of the judgment of an inferior Court,
which might have been appealed against, is irregular, and
cannot be received. Petitions must be respectfully worded,
or they cannot be transmitted or received.*
REFERENCES.
70. When an inferior Court finds itself unable to arrive
at a unanimous or satisfactory judgment in a particular case,
or in any part of a case; or when, from various causes, it
does not appear advisable for the inferior Court to give
judgment; the whole case may be referred simpliciter to the
next superior Court; or the Reference may be made respecting
some particular feature of the case, or question bearing
thereon.
1 71. References must be stated in writing, and accompanied
with full extracts of all proceedings of the inferior Court
relating to the case, or point of reference.
73. One or more members of the inferior Court arc ap-
pointed to take charge of the reference while it is before the
superior court, and to receive the minute of the superior Court
thereon. Failing such appointment, the Moderator and
Clerk of the inferior Court, or either of them, are authorized
to act.
73. When a Reference is made, all parties interested must
be notified to appear before the superior Court for their
several interests.
74. Members of inferior Courts from which a reference is
made do not lose their status in the superior Court while the
reference is under consideration.
75. When a reference is called for in the superior Court,
the papers are first read, and the member or members of the
inferior Court charged with the case are heard in explanation.
The superior Court then considers whether the reference has
been properly made, and on proper grounds, and if the finding
be in the negative the reference is dismissed. A reference
is not sustained unless it appear that the inferior Court has
exhausted all the means within its power for arriving at a
satisfactory conclusion. If sustained, the superior Court hears
parties, and, after deliberation gives judgment. References
* Styles for Petitions, Appendix V.


from Sessions to Presbyteries, may, if the Presbytery see
■cause, be referred simpliciter to the General Assembly.
DISSENTS.
76 Any member of any Church Court may dissent fro m
any judgment of that Court, if he believe the same to be
■either unlawful or inexpedient, and may require the fact that
he has so dissented to be recorded in the Minutes. By such
Dissent he exempts himself from censure, but does not exempt
himself from the necessity of obeying the judgment.
77- A Dissent must be intimated immediately after the
judgment has been announced from the chair, and not before
such announcement, nor after other business has been entered
upon. If there has been a division, members only who have
voted in the division are at liberty to dissent; but members
who have so voted, may, immediately after the Minutes are
read at next subsequent Sederunt, intimate their adherence to
a Dissent.
78. A Dissent does not, per se,sist proceedings, or entitle the
dissentient to be heard in the superior Court against the
judgment. But a dissentient may, when intimating his
dissent, give his reasons in very few words, and require these
to be recorded. Or he may intimate that he will give in
reasons at the next subsequent Sederunt, in which case they
are not recorded, but lie in retentis. Every Court has always
the power of refusing to receive reasons of Dissent couched in
disrespectful language, or injuriously reflecting on individuals.
COMPLAINTS,
79. Any member of an inferior Court may not only dissent
from any judgment, but may also protest for leave to complain
to the superior Court.* This he must do immediately after
the judgment is announced from the chair, and cannot be
permitted to do afterwards. He must also, within ten days,
lodge with the Clerk of the inferior Court his reasons of
Dissent and complaint. The inferior Court appoints a com-
mittee to prepare answers to the reasons; and the reasons
* Members of congregations may also dissent from the Resolutions of Congrega-
tional meetings on the ground of irregularity in the proceedings, or incompctency in
the Resolutions themselves, and mav apply to the Session to call another and special
Congregational meeting. If the Session refuse to call another meeting, the dissentients
may appeal to the Presbytery, or may at once protest for leave to complain to the
Presbytery. The Dissent and Protest must, however, in every case he intimated at
the meeting, and members not present at the meeting cannot be allowed to concur.


and the answers with extract minutes and all relative docu-
ments, are forwarded without delay by the Clerk of the
inferior Court to the Clerk of the superior Court. The
inferior Court also appoints one or more of its members to
defend the judgment before the superior Court.
80. A Dissent and Complaint sists further proceedings in
the case, and sists the inferior Court, the complainer or
complainers, and all parties concerned, at the bar of the
superior Court. An inferior Court may, however, refuse to
take notice of a complaint which it deems frivolous or
vexatious, and the complainer, if he feel aggrieved, may
petition the superior Court.
81. When the case is called in the superior Court, the
papers are read, and the first question to be determined is,
“ Whether the complaint shall be entertained?” If it appear
to the superior Court that the complaint is frivolous or
vexatious, it is dismissed at once. If it is decided to enter-
tain the complaint, parties are heard in accordance with the
rules of the Court and judgment given.
APPEALS.
82. A party in any cause, not being a member of the
inferior Court, may also bring any judgment of such inferior
Court in his cause before the superior Court for review, by
Protest and Appeal. The procedure throughout is precisely
similar to that prescribed in cases of dissents and complaints
(Arts. 79—81).
83. Dissentients and Complainers, Protesters and Appel-
lants, must, at the time of their Dissent or Appeal, apply to
the inferior Court for extracts of the proceedings bearing
upon the case, which are granted ex jure . But Clerks are
not warranted in giving extracts otherwise than as ordered
by the Court. Extracts cannot be given until the Minutes
have been read in open Court, and approved.
84- Extract Minutes must be prefaced by a statement
of the place and date of the meeting of the Court from
whose proceedings the extract is made, and must bear that the
said Court was constituted and closed with prayer. If the
party applying for the extract require it, the names of the
‘ Sederunt ’ must also be given, except in the case of extracts
from the Minutes of the General Assembly. If other
business has been done at the meeting, the extract is intro-


duced with the words i! Inter alia.” The formal attestation
of the Clerk of the Court is added.
85- In cases of settlement of Ministers, or in cases of
discipline Complaints or Appeals do not necessarily sist pro-
ceedings until the final step has been reached, which must
be deferred until the superior Court has given judgment.
86. When any inferior Court has given judgment in a
case, the Moderator intimates the judgment to the parties
present, and asks if they acquiesce therein, informing them
that they have the right of complaint or appeal. If parties
acquiesce, or do not appeal, and if no member of court dis-
sent and complain, the judgment is final, and cannot after-
wards be reviewed or disturbed by any Superior Court (vide
Art. 80.
OVERTURES.
87- An Overture is a proposal to the General Assembly,
either for the enactment of a new Law; for the repeal or
amendment of an existing Law; for a declaration or inter-
pretation of the Law on a particular point; or generally, a
proposal for anything to be done or declared which it is com-
petent for the Assembly to do or declare.*
88- Overtures usually come from Presbyteries. An
Overture from a Session must come through the Presbytery ;
but it is better for Sessions to petition the Presbytery to
overture. Every member of the General Assembly has also
direct access to the Assembly by Petition or Overture.
89. Sessions and Presbyteries are bound to assist mem-
bers of the Church in preparing Petitions and Overtures,
so that they may not be rejected on the ground of inform-
ality or other impropriety. A Session or Presbytery in
transmitting a Petition or Overture is not bound to support
it, and hence the inferior Courts rarely refuse to transmit
such documents unless for some grave objection. If for
any cause a Session or Presbytery refuse to transmit, the
party aggrieved may require an extract of the Minute re-
cording the refusal, and may himself forward the refused
document, with such Extract Minute, to the Clerk of the
superior Court.
* Style for Overture, Appendix VI.


CHAPTER EIGHTH.
OF THE PRESBYTERY.
CONSTITUENT MEMBERS AND OFFICERS.
90. A Presbytery consists of all tbe ministers holding
-charges within certain territorial bounds determined by the
General Assembly; of Professors of Divinity (being
ministers) in any University, College, or Hall, within the
said bounds ; and of one Representative Elder irom each of
the Sessions of the several charges within the same bounds.
Where there are two Ministers in a charge, both are members
of Presbytery/X -
91. The General Assembly alone has the power to erect
new Presbyteries, or to alter the constituent charges of those
already existing. Parties desiring the erection or alteration
of a Presbytery petition the General Assembly ; and, in
order to afford time for enquiry, the Petition lies on the table
of the Assembly till the Session of the following year.
When a new Presbytery is erected, the Assembly appoints
the time and place of its first meeting.
92. The Moderator of a Presbytery must be a Minister.
In large Presbyteries the Moderator is changed every half-
year ; in smaller ones annually, and at the first meeting of
Presbytery following the Session of Assembly. The
Ministers of the Presbytery are usually chosen in rotation
according to seniority of ordination, or as they stand on the
Roll of the Presbytery. Nevertheless, every Church
■Court, except the Session, has the inherent right of choosing
its own Moderator, and of determining the forms of Election.
In the absence of the Moderator de facto, the last Moderator
presides ; or failing him, the senior minister present.
93. The Moderator has a right to express his sentiments
-on any question before the Court, when the debate is con-
cluded, and before the question is put to the vote, but
before speaking he leaves the chair. The Moderator also
leaves the chair when any question arises in which he is


interested as a party. In such cases the chair is taken ad
interim by his predecessor. The Moderator has a casting,
but not a deliberative, vote.^
94. Every Presbytery elects its own Clerk, who must be a
member of the Court. The Salary of the Presbytery Clerk
Is provided by contributions from, the several congregations
within the bounds of the Presbytery.* On accepting office
the Clerk makes the usual declaration de Jideli.
MEETINGS.
95. Meetings of Presbyteries are held at stated times
fixed by themselves. These are called Ordinary Meetings,
and it is at such meetings only that ordinary business can be
transacted.
96. At all Meetings of Presbytery, three form a quorum,
of whom two must be Ministers. But from the occasional
difficulty of obtaining a quorum in small Presbyteries, when
any routine business requires to be transacted, such as the
Examination of a Student, or any formal appointment, it is
provided that two ministers may, without constituting them-
selves into a Presbytery, transact such business, subject to
confirmation by the Presbytery at the next ordinary
Meeting. Ministers so transacting any business, draw up
and sign a memorandum of what they have done, and submit
the same to the Presbytery at the next Ordinary Meeting.
If approved, the memorandum is entered upon the Presbytery
Minutes by the Clerk, as part of the proceedings of the
Meeting at which it is approved, and is then of full force
and validity.
97- If on any day of ordinary meeting a quorum be not
formed, the Presbytery does not become defunct, but simply
stands adjourned till the next ordinary day of meeting.
The Moderator may, however, in such case, convene the
Presbytery for ordinary business on an earlier day, if he
judge it necessary.
98. Every meeting of Presbytery is constituted, and also
closed, with prayer, and both these facts must be recorded in
the Minutes, as likewise in any Extracts from the Minutes,
as evidence that the meeting has been regularly held.
* Suggested—That the minimum Salary of a Presbytery Clerk be £5 per
annum, to bo paid rateably by the congregations. When there are more than five
charges in a Presbytery, the Clerk shall he entitled to £1 from every charge.


99. If any important business present itself which does
not admit of delay, the Moderator of his own motion may call,
and on requisition from not less than one-fourth of the members
of the Presbytery is boufidVo call, a meeting pro re nata, by
circular, issued by himself, or by the Clerk at his direction,
to every member of Presbytery, not less than eight days
previously to the day of meeting, and specifying the par-
ticular business for which such meeting is called. When
the Presbytery meets in consequence of such notification, the
Moderator, after constituting the court, explains his reasons
for convening the Presbytery; the Presbytery approves or
disapproves his conduct; and such approval or disapproval is
recorded. If the Presbytery decline to sustain the res nota,
the meeting takes end at once, and is closed in the usual
way. If sustained, the Presbytery considers and deals with
it. No business whatever, other than the matter or
matters specified in the circular, can be transacted at a pro
re nata meeting.
100. A Presbytery frequently appoints meetings at cer-
tain times and places for the transaction of special business,
such as moderating in a call, the ordination or induction of a
minister, and the like. These are called meetings in Tiunc
effectum. Where the business is strictly executive and formal,
as a moderation or induction, the Presbytery sometimes appoints
one or more ministers as a commission, to do, in name and
by authority of the Presbytery, whatever the Presbytery has
appointed to be done, or whatever the laws of the church
require to be done in such cases. If any unexpected difficulty
arise, it must be reported to the Presbytery.
101. It is a principle of ecclesiastical law, that no inferior
court can meet while the superior court is sitting, without
permission of such superior court. Presbyteries accordingly
cannot meet during the Session of the General Assembly,
without special permission asked by the Moderator of the
Presbytery, and granted by the Assembly. All the members
of Presbytery being presumed to be present in the Assembly,
the announcement from the chair of the Assembly, or by the
Clerk, is a sufficient notification of such meeting. The
business transacted at such meetings usually relates to
matters before the Assembly in which the Presbytery is con-
cerned; but any business of an urgent nature may be
transacted.


102. A Presbtery is an open court, and any person may
be present during the transaction of ordinary huisiness. But
during the preliminary trials of a student, that is, before he
is taken on public trials for license, the Presbytery must be
alone; and all cases of discipline are considered with closed
doors.
103. A member of one Presbytery has no right to sit or
speak in another, unless specially invited to do so by the
Presbytery. Such invitation is not given as a matter of
course, or of mere courtesy, but only •when the Presbytery
has business before it in which additional counsel is desired.
Such associated members have no vote, and do not speak
unless requested by the Moderator. But the General
Assembly may, upon cause shewn, appoint members of one or
more Presbyteries to act as constituent members of another
for the conduct of a particular case, which being disposed of,
their commission is closed.
CHAPTER NINTH.
BUSINESS OF THE PRESBYTERY.
GENERAL BUSINESS.
104. The business of a Presbytery is, generally, to take
the oversight of the whole work of the Church within its
bounds; and more particularly to give advice to Sessions, and
through Sessions to Deacons’ Courts and Committees of
Management; to hear and judge in matters of Petition or
reference from Sessions, and in complaints and appeals
against their decisions; to superintend the training of
students for the holy ministry; to grant licenses to preach
the Gospel, subject to the regulations of the General
Assembly ; to form new charges on competent application ; to
provide supply of ordinances for vacant charges, and assist
Sessions in the spiritual government of such charges during
vacancy ; to grant or refuse moderations for election of
ministers, and to sustain or reject calls ; to judge of the
qualifications of candidates for ordination, and to ordain


them, if approved, to the pastoral office ; to judge of all
matters affecting the personal character or public teaching of
ministers holding charges, and of ministers and licentiates
residing, within their bounds; to inflict censure on parties
found guilty, according to the nature of the offence ;to
translate and induct ministers ; to receive demissions, and
loose Ministers from their charges; and to visit congregations
when occasion requires.
105. Presbyteries are bound to take order that the in-
junctions of the General Assembly are faithfully carried out
by ministers, elders, and congregations, within their
respective bounds. In particular, that the collections
appointed by the General Assembly are made in every con-
gregation at the appointed seasons ; that all returns, of
whatever kind, required by the General Assembly, whether
from Presbyteries or congregations, are punctually forwarded;
and that all overtures, schemes, and other matters, sent
down to Presbyteries for consideration, are duly considered
and reported upon to the next General Assembly, or to any
Committee of Assembly specially charged therewith,
106. With a view to ensure regularity in these im-
portant matters, as well as to promote zeal and energy in
congregations, every Presbytery is required to prepare a
written Report of the evangelistic agencies employed in every
charge, naniely, Sabbath-services, Sabbath-schools, week-day
services, administration of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper,
number of communicants, prayer-meetings, &c., &c.;
together with a statement of all sums raised by each congre-
gation for general or local church purposes ; and any other
particulars relating to the work of the Lord, and affecting the
interest of the denomination, or of the Church of Christ at
large. These Presbyterial Reports are prepared annually
from statements required to be furnished by the respective
sessions to the Clerk of Presbytery one month previously to
th 6 ordinary meeting of Presbytery next before the Annual
Session of the General Assembly; and being approved by
the Presbytery, are forwarded without delay to the Clerk of
Assembly, or to the Convener of the Committee of Assembly
appointed to receive the same.
107- Presbyteries are bound to take ox’der that the
Sessions within their bounds keep regular minutes, and that


the same are ready to be produced when called for, Also r
that the Register of Baptisms, Marriages, and Burials,
solemnized by every minister, is properly kept; and that the
Communion-roll of every congregation is duly adjusted at least
once-a-year. Presbyteries may at any time require these
books to be produced for inspection. Sessions are accordingly
instructed to certify in their annual statements, that “ the
Minute Book and Register have been accurately kept, and the
Communion-roll duly adjusted, during the past year;” and
the omission of such certification is noted by the Presbytery
in its Annual Report.
108. At the meeting of Presbytery next before the
General Assembly, the Presbyterial Roll is made up.’" The
roll exhibits the name of each charge, the name of the
minister or ministers of the same, and the name in full of the
Representative Elder commissioned from each charge to the
General Assembly; as also, the name of any professor of
divinity who is a member of Presbytery. Presbyteries must
be satisfied that the Elders’ Commissions are in proper form,
and that any commission in favour of an Elder of another
session than that issuing the commission is accompanied with
a certificate from the session to which such elder belongs,
setting forth that said elder is a bona fide acting elder of
such session, Commissions unaccompanied by such certifi-
cates are received cum noia , and with the understanding that
if the certificate be not forwarded to the Clerk of Assembly
before the commencement of the Annual Session, the com-
mission will not be sustained. The Presbyterial Roll thus
made up is forwarded, with Extract Minute, to the Clerk of
Assembly. At the same meeting of Presbytery Commis-
sioners are appointed to the Assembly’s Committee of Bills
and Overtures, vide infra , Art. 188.
PRESBYTERIAL VISITATIONS.
109. If it appear at any time that Returns are not
regularly sent in from the Session of any charge, or if the
returns are not satisfactory, or if any other circumstances
seem to the Presbytery to require it, the Presbytery may
appoint a Presbyterial Visitation of such charge, with a view
of making enquiry, and suggesting a remedy for any evils
that may be found to exist. Presbyteries do not, however.
* Style for Presbyterial Roll, Appendix VII.


appoint such visitations unless there is a reasonable prospect
of a satisfactory result. It is frequently found more
expedient to report the circumstances to the General
Assembly for advice. If a Presbytery appoints a visitation,
notification thereof is sent to the minister, the session, and
the deacons or managers, who are bound to attend on pain of
censure; but the enquiries made by the Presbytery must be
strictly confined to the proper objects of the visitation • and
nothing of the nature of a private inquisition can be per-
mitted under covert of such visitation.
PROCEDURE IN MODERATIONS AND CALLS.
110. When a charge becomes vacant by the death or
removal of the minister, the Presbytery appoints one of its
members, being a minister, to moderate in the session of the
vacant charge, &c , as in Art. 34.
111. It is the duty of the Acting Moderator to give every
assistance to the congregation with a view to the settlement
of another minister. He will see that previously to any
application for a moderation, the Communion Roll, and also
the Roll of Adherents, are duly adjusted ; he will take care
that the congregation is fully informed of the regulations
of the church with respect to stipend, and so forth • and will
preside in a meeting publicly convened for the purpose of
ascertaining how far the congregation is prepared for the
election of a minister.
113. If it appear that there is a probability of a har-
monious election, and that an adequate stipend can be
guaranteed, a petition to the Presbytery is prepared, asking
for a moderation * The Petition is signed by the elders
and deacons or managers; and one or more commissioners,
who must be members of the congregation, are appointed to
appear in support of the petition and give information
thereanent to the Presbytery. The petition is forwarded by
the Clerk of Session to the Clerk of Presbytery.
113. The Presbytery, having heard the petition, and
the commissioners from the vacant charge, and being satis-
fied with the information, but not otherwise, grants the
moderation, and appoints one or more ministers to proceed
as a Commission in such moderation. Previous intimation
of the moderation must be given from the pulpit of the
* Style for Petition for Moderation in Appendix YIII.


vacant charge on two Sabbaths, or, if there he not public
worship every Sabbath, the Presbytery may direct public
notice or advertisement to be given in any other way that
may be practicable and sufficient.
114. On the day appointed for the moderation, the pro-
ceedings are commenced with public worship, conducted by
one of the commissioners from the Presbytery. After
public worship the Moderator explains the purpose for which
the meeting has been called, states what has already been
done, produces and reads a form of call, * and then invites
any member of the congregation to propose the name of a
minister or licentiate of the church for insertion in the
call. Every nomination must be seconded, or it cannot be
received. If there be only one nomination, the sense of the
congregation is sufficiently signified by the holding up of
the right hand. But if there be two nominations, after a
show of hands has been taken, the Moderator may direct,
or any member of the congi’egation may require, that the
roll of members be called, and their votes taken down in
writing. And if there be three or more nominations, a vote
is first taken between the last two nominated ; then a second
vote is taken between the one who had the majority in the
first vote and the one next preceding ; and so on ; and the
one that has the final majority is declared duly elected.
115. The result of the election being announced from
the chair, the name of the elected minister or licentiate
is inserted in the call, and the members of the congregation
are invited to come forward and subscribe the same.
Adherents are also invited to subscribe a paper of concur-
rence, which is drawn up on a separate sheet in a prescribed
form.f These signatures, of both members and adherents,
are attested by the Moderator. J
116. The meeting being closed with prayer, the call and
paper of concurrence are left in the hands of the Session,
which will give opportunity to the members and adherents
not present to adhibit their signatures. Every such
signature must be attested by an elder of the congregation
appending his initials.
* Form of .Call in Appendix IX.
t Form of Concurrence in Appendix IX.
% Form of Attestation in Appendix IX.


117. At the next meeting of Presbytery, which is held
as early as convenient, the report of the commission is heard,
and the call is laid upon the table by commissioners from
the congregation, who are heard in support of the same. If
there be any counter-petition, the petitioners are then called
and heard, and the commissioners from the congregation are
heard in reply. Parties are then removed, and the Presbytery
proceeds to give judgment. If 4* appear tlnrt thoproaoaduagc
counter-petition can be received after the call has been sus-
tained.
118. But if it appear that there has been any canvassing,
or other undue influence used, by any minister or licentiate,
in order to obtain the concurrence of any member or adherent,
the call is vitiated, and is rejected as irregular.
A simoniacal compact or transaction; that is the
or offer, or promise of payment, of any sum of
forbearance of any just claim; or the
r of any temporal advantage whatsoever,
vote,
eccles-
proved,
is a just cause for a minister or depriving a
licentiate. If any miniscbc or licentiate is informed that
any such simoniacal carried on or proposed to be
carried on by others in his and fails to notify the
same to the Presbytery, he is deposed or deprived.
And if, after a minister’s discover that any
such simoniacal compact has been macuShy others in his
behalf, and shall homologate the same, he to depo-
sition as if he had himself entered into the compa^W
120. When a call has been sustained, the same is notified
to the person called. If present, a personal notification is
sufficient; but if absent, he must be officially notified by the
Clerk of Presbytery, and cited to appear at the next meeting
of the Court. The congregational commissioners are also
notified to appear.
121. If the person called be a minister of the same
Presbytery, his congregation receives official notification of
the election, and is cited to appear by commissioners at the


next meeting of Presbytery; failing which, they will be held
as consenting to the translation.
122. On the day appointed the Presbytery hears the
several parties as follows: — First, the commissioners in
support of the call; Secondly , the commissioners from the
minister’s congregation ; Thirdly, the commissioners from the
calling congregation in reply; and Fourthly , the minister
himself who has been called. . It is usual to give effect to the
deliberate judgment of the minister himself; but the Presby-
tery, in its decision, has regard also to the majus honum
ecclesice. If the Presbytery resolves to translate, a day is
appointed for the induction of the minister into the vacant
charge.
123. If the person called be an ordained minister holding
a charge in another Presbytery, th ejirst Presbytery ( i.e . the
Presbytery to which the calling congregation, belongs,)
sends official notice to the minister called, and likewise to the
Moderator of the second Presbytery, (i.e., the Presbytery
to which the minister called belongs,) requesting him to
convene his Presbytery to consider the question of
translation, and to notify the called minister’s congregation
to appear for their interest. The first Presbytery algo
appoints one or more of its members as commissioners to
prosecute the translation before the second Presbytery. The
travelling expenses of such commissioners are paid by the
calling congregation. If the commissioners are unable to
attend, it is competent for them to send a written statement
of reasons for translation to the second Presbytery.
124. The second Presbytery is bound to proceed with all
■convenient despatch. The Moderator convenes the Presby-
tery pro re nata, if the ordinary meeting be too distant.
Parties are heard in the same order as indicated in Art. 122,
and the Presbytery grants the translation or not as may be
found expedient.
126. If the translation is granted, the second Presbytery
instructs the minister to wait for and obey the instructions of
th ejirst Presbytery. The Commissioners from the Jlrst
Presbytery report their diligence without delay, and a day is
appointed for the induction, whereof the minister is duly
notified. A minister, in such a case, is not actually loosed
from the one charge until regularly inducted into the other.


126. If tlie person called be an ordained minister or
missionary not holding a charge, but labouring or residing
within the bounds of this church, the first Presbytery notifies
the call, both to the person called, and to the Presbytery
within which he labours, or resides. If the person so called
be employed by any Committee of the General Assembly, he
may not accept the call until he has completed his appoint-
ment, without special permission from the said Committee
and no Presbytery can induct a minister so circumstanced
unless evidence of such permission is produced. Otherwise,
the person called simply intimates to the first Presbytery his
acceptance or declinature of the call. His acceptance at once
places him under the instructions of the first Presbytery.
127- If the person called be a minister holding a charge
in any other Australian colony, the same course is pursued
as in Art. 123, except that if commissioners are appointed to
prosecute the translation, they may be members of the
Presbyterian Church in the colony to which the call is sent,
or of any Presbyterian Church holding the Westminster
Standards.
128. If a minister holding a charge in this church
receives a call from a congregation in another of the Austra-
lasian colonies, his Presbytery receives any commissioners
(being members of some Presbyterian Church holding the
Westminister Standards) appointed by the calling congrega-
tion, and in other respects proceeds as above. The minister
however is not translated, but simply loosed from his charge,
if the Presbytery find it expedient to give effect to the call.
Ministers so loosed are entitled to certificates in common
for.m, unless some charge have been proved, or process com-
menced, against them.
129. When the person called is a Licentiate of this-
church, and the call be sustained, his license and presby-
terial certificate must be produced before any farther steps
can be taken. If these documents are satisfactory, and the
licentiate signifies his willingness to accept the call, the
Presbytery appoints him to deliver trial discourses on sub-
jects prescribed, and which include a lecture, a homily, an
exegesis in Latin or English on some controverted point of
theology, and a popular sermon. He is also examined in
the Hebrew and Greek languages, a knowledge of the sacred


texts being indispensable, unless by express permission of
tbe General Assembly; and he is further examined, either
viva voce or in writing, in theology and Church History.*
These trials having been sustained, the Presbytery appoints
a day for his ordination, and appoints ministers to conduct
the several parts of the service. The edict of ordinationy
must be publicly read in the congregation at least one sabbath
before the day appointed.
Procedure in ordinations and inductions.
130. The Presbytery meets for the ordination at the
time and place appointed, and is constituted before the com-
mencement of public worship. Intimation is also publicly
made to the congregation, for the last time, that if any per-
son has any objection to the life or doctrine of the person to
be ordained, the Presbytery is ready to hear the same. If
any such objections are offered, they must be proved instanier.
If a relevant objection be proven proceedings are sisted.
If no objections are offered, or if those offered are frivolous or
irrelevant or not proven, the services proceed as appointed.
131. After sermon, the presiding minister briefly narrates
the history of the call and of the steps taken by the Pres-
bytery, and calls upon the minister elect to stand forth
and answer the questions appointed to be put to all persons
about to be ordained or inducted to the ministry in this
church, as follows ;
I. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments to be the Word of God, and the only author-
itative rule of faith and practice ?
11. Do you acknowledge the Westminister Confession of
Faith, (subject to the explanation contained in the
fourth of the Articles of Basis of Union, agreed to by
this church on the Bth of September, 1865), as an
exhibition of the sense in which you understand the
Holy Scriptures, and as such a confession of your faith ?
111. Do you acknowledge the Presbyterian form of govern-
ment, by Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and
General Assemblies, to be founded upon the Word of
God, and agreeable thereto : and do you promise to
submit yourself to the government and discipline es-
* See Course of Study, infra, Arts. 216 —218.
f Style for Edict of Ordination in Appendix X.


tablished and practised in this church, and never to en-
deavour, directly or indirectly, the subversion or pre-
judice of the same ? And while cherishing a spirit of
brotherly love towards all the faithful followers of
Christ, do you engage to seek and promote, as God
shall give you power and opportunity, the purity, edifi-
cation, peace and extension of this Church ?
IV. Are zeal for the glory of God, love to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and a desire to save souls, and not worldly
interests or expectations, so far as you know your own
heart, your great motives and chief inducements, to
enter into the office of the Holy Ministry ?
Y. Have you used any undue methods, by yourself or
others, to obtain the call from this congregation ?
Here the Members of the congregation are reguested to stand
Up 1 and the folloicing questions are put to them :
i. Do you, the Members of this congregation, adhere to
the Call which you have already subscribed in favour of
Mr. A. B. to be your Minister ?
ii. And do you now cordially receive -him as your minister,
promising to provide for him suitable maintenance, and
to give him all due respect, encouragement, and obedience
in the Lord ?
Be pleased to signify your assent by holding up the right
hand.
The congregation assenting, the following additional
questions are then put to the minister elect:—
VT. Do you accept the call which you have received, to
be the minister of this congregation, and do you
promise by the help of God to perform all the duties
of a faithful minister of the Gospel among this people ?
VII. Do you promise to give conscientious attendance
upon the Courts of this Church, and to direct your
best attention to the business thereof, doing all in the
spirit of faithfulness, brotherly kindness, and charity ?
VIII. Do you promise in the strength of Divine Grace to
lead a holy and circumspect life, to rule well your own
house, and faithfully, diligently, and cheerfully to
perform all the parts of the ministerial work to the
edifying of the body of Christ in love ?


IX, All these things you profess and promise through
grace, and as you shall he answerable at the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ?
132. Satisfying answers having been given to all these
questions, the presiding minister descends from the pulpit,
and the ministers of the Presbytery stand on either side of
him, the minister elect kneeling. The presiding minister
then offers the Ordination Prayer, in which he introduces
words to the following effect : —“ We beseech Thee abundantly
“ to bless and prosper Thy servant before Thee, who has been
“ called by this congregation to labour amongst them in holy
“things, and whom we now, in the Name and by the
“ authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, the only King and Head
“ of the Church, do solemnly set apart and ordain
\_At the word ‘ordain’ the presiding minister and all the
ministers present lay their hands upon the head of the minister
elect ]
11 to the office of the Holy Ministry in the Church of the
“ Living G od, and specially to the spiritual oversight of this
“ clarge, See., &c.” The prayer being concluded, the minister
ordained rises, and the presiding minister, taking him by the
right hand, declares him, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ and by authority of the Presbytery, duly ordained and
inducted to- the pastoral charge of the congregation. The
other members of the Presbytery then give the newly-ordained
minister the right hand of fellowship. Suitable addresses
are delivered to the minister and to the congregation ; and
at the conclusion of the services the minister, accompanied by
one or more members of Presbytery, proceeds to the principal
door of the church, or other convenient place, and receives
the right hand of fellowship from the members of the
congregation. Afterwards the Presbytery resumes, and the
newly-ordained minister subscribes the Formula, and his name
is added to the Roll.*
133. In the induction to a charge of a minister already
ordained, the same procedure is followed in every particular,
except that no preliminary examination or trial discourses are
required, and the imposition of hands is omitted.
DEMISSIONS.
134. A minister who has been inducted into a charge by
any Presbytery cannot demit the same otherwise than into
* See Formula in Appendix XI.


the hands of the Presbytery from which he received it, and
to which he is responsible, not only for the faithful discharge
of his official duties, hut also for maintaining a consistent
walk and conversation.
135. If a demission be tendered by any minister, the
Presbytery enquires fully into the circumstances, and does
not accept that Demission unless fully satisfied of the honajides
of the proceeding. The minister’s congregation is allowed
an opportunity of objecting to the acceptance of the
demission.*
136. If it appear that there are just grounds for process,
the demission cannot be accepted until the matter has been
fully investigated, If the Presbytery ultimately sees fit to
accept the demission, a certificate is not given unless the
Presbytery is satisfied that it can be given consistently with
the purity and general interests of the church. A minister
demitting his charge without a Fresbyterial certificate is
ipso facto prohibited from preaching within the bounds of
this church.
137. A minister abandoning his charge without being
regularly loosed from it by the Presbytery, commits a grave
offence, receives no certificate, forfeits his status as a min-
ister of this church, and the Presbytery resolves and declares
accordingly.
138 A minister who duly intimates to his Presbytery
his intention of joining another evangelical denomination,
and who makes no attempt to alienate his congregation, or to
retain possession of the church property, or to pursue any
schismatical or injurious courses, and against whom there
exists no cause of complaint on moral or doctrinal grounds, is
entitled to claim the acceptance of his demission with
certificate, the Presbytery declaring him no longer a
minister of this church. But if these conditions have not
been complied with, such a minister forfeits his status,
receives no certificate, and the Presbytery resolves accordingly,
and declares him no longer a minister of this church.
DISCIPLINE AGAINST MINISTERS AND LICENTIATES.
139. When a minister is accused either formally or by
fama, of any offence, affecting either his personal or his
* Style for Demission in Appendix XII.


official character, the Presbytery is bound to investigate
the grounds of the accusation. A precognition is first
held, either by the Presbytery, or by a Commission con-
issting of one or more members of the Presbytery, (with
whom one or more elders within the Presbytery may be
associated), and who are authorized to require the atten-
dance of members or adherents of the church, and to request
the attendance of any other person or persons, whom they
may have reason to suppose capable of giving information.
The accused is notified of the intention to hold a precognition,
though his presence is not necessary, nor has he any right to
be present while it is held; but he may be permitted to be
present ex g'laticu, if the Presbytery see fit. Witnesses are
not precognosced in each other’s presence, which vitiates their
evidence; and before any further step is taken, the accused,
if present or in attendance, is allowed an opportunity of
offering any explanations.
140. If the precognition has been held by the Presbytery
itself, the minister accused may be asked at once to plead;
and if he plead guilty, and declare his readiness to submit to
the judment of the court, the Presbytery may at once dispose
of the case by admonition or rebuke, without further process.
141. If the precognition has been held by a commission,
the proceedings are reported to the Presbytery without delay,
the accused being cited to appear before the Presbytery and
answer to the accusation, should the Presbytery sustain the
same. If the Presbytery, after hearing the evidence, sustain
the accusation, that is, declare that there is prima facie
evidence of its truth, the accused may at once be required to
plead ; and if he plead ‘ guilty,’ and declare himself ready to
submit to the judgment of the Court, the Presbytery may
summarily dispose of the case by admonition or rebuke.
142- But if the accused do not confess, or If the accusation
be such as, if proved, would infer a higher censure than
admonition or rebuke, the Presbytery instructs the clerk, or
appoints a committee to prepare a libel,* or formal accusation,
and to send a copy of the same, with names of witnesses to be
examined, to the accused, with citation to appear before the
Presbytery and answer thereto on the day appointed for its
* Styles for libels in Appendix XIII.


consideration. The citation and list of witnesses must be
personally served on the accused, or duly posted to his address
(in a registered letter), ten clear days before the day
appointed for the consideration of the libel.
143. When a Presbytery resolves to libel a minister, such
minister is suspended from all the functions of his office
until the proceedings are brought to an issue, the Presbytery
providing supply for his pulpit. A Presbytery so suspending
a minister is, however, bound to proceed in the case with
the utmost despatch. If the suspension be disregarded,
he is dealt with as contumacious, and may be deposed
without farther process.
144. If the accused fail to appear, (the delivery of the
citation being proved,) and send no valid excuse, (the only
excuse recognizable in such a case being actual inability to
attend by reason of personal or family sickness or distress,
certified to the satisfaction of the Presbytery,) he is held as
confessing the truth of the libel,* and the Presbytery proceeds
to sentence.
145. If he appear, the relevancy of the libel is first
determined. A libel is relevant when the alleged offence is
properly a subject for ecclesiastical censure, and when the
alleged facts, if proved, would convict the accused of the
offence libelled. The accused is first asked if he has any
objection to the relevancy; afterwards any member of the
court may object; and such objections, if offered, must be
considered and disposed of before proceeding further. At
this stage also, any amendment, not affecting the general
tenor of the libel, may be made. A libel is not to be
defeated by any mere verbal or formal inaccuracy.
146. If the libel is found relevant, the accused is required
to stand up while it is read over to him, and he is then
required to plead. If he plead ‘ guilty,’ the court at once
proceeds to pronounce sentence.
147. If he plead ' not guilty,’ evidence is heard. Where
a committee has been appointed to prepare the libel, the
members of said committee act as prosecutors, and conduct
* To avoid unnecessary delay by repetition of citations, the accused should bo
requested to acknowledge receipt of the citation, and if he fail to do this, the
delivery of a registered letter can always be ascertained from the Post Office.


the examinations of witnesses and other proceedings, and
such members have no vote on any question arising in any
part of the process from the time of their appointment till the
final judgment has been given.
148. Witnesses intended to be examined receive a formal
citation * If members or adherents of this church, they are
bound to appear when duly cited, on pain of censure. If
not members or adherents, they can only be requested to
give evidence. Witnesses for the accused are also cited by
the Presbytery, if a list of such witnesses be forwarded by the
accused to the Presbytery Clerk in sufficient time. But the
accused, if he prefer it, may cite his own witnesses.
149. Witnesses are not examined on oath, but the usual
rules as to their competency and credibility are observed, and
they are solemnly enjoined to speak the truth as they shall
answer to God. A member of Presbytery, who may be
examined as a witness does not thereby lose his right to
deliberate and vote in the case. The accused is at liberty
to cross-examine the witnesses produced in support of the
libel, and the prosecutors are at liberty to cross-examine his
witnesses. The accused has full liberty to speak in his own
defence, and every facility is afforded him in the whole
management of his case. The defence being concluded, one
speech from the prosecutors is heard in reply, when the case
is closed, parties are removed, and the court proceeds to give
judgment.
150. If all the allegations of the libel have been proven
to the satisfaction of the court, the accused is pronounced
l( guilty as libelled : ” if part of the allegations has been
proven, he is found “ guilty as to such part; ” if none of the
allegations is proven to the satisfaction of the court, he is
pronounced “ not guilty.”
151. As however it sometimes happens that, con-
sequence of the apathy or timidity of witnesses, sufficient
evidence cannot be produced, while at the same time great
imprudence on the part of the accused is disclosed, such a
result ought to be contemplated in the libel, and
imprudence in such and such particulars specified as an
* Form of Citation in Appendix XIII.


alternative or cumulative charge. In this way the evasion
or defeat of the ends of discipline may he prevented.*
152. If the charge is not proven, the accused is pronounced
‘ not guilty’; the entire proceedings in the case are expunged
from the minutes; and the accused is restored to his office,
with admonition if necessary.
153. If he is found ‘ guilty ’ in whole or in part, the
Presbytery determines what sentence shall he pronounced,
and intimation thereof is made to the accused, if present, and
he is informed that he has the right of appeal to the General
Assembly. If he appeal, the final pronunciation of sentence
is deferred; but he remains suspended from office, notwith-
standing his appeal, until the General Assembly has given
judgment in the case, the Presbytery providing pulpit supply
at the appellant’s expense. If he do not appeal, the Presbytery
proceeds to sentence.
154. If the accused be not present, no appeal can betaken
in his behalf, and the Presbytery pronounces sentence.j-
-155 If the scandal has been very great, and the minister’s
usefulness in his district irreparably damaged, the Presbytery
may loose him from the charge, and declare the same vacant,
referring the question of his future status to the General
Assembly, and in the meantime suspending him from all
functions.
156. When a minister is accused of heresy, the libel must
specify the words employed by the accused, whether in speech
or writing, and shew that they amount to a doctrinal error at
variance with the standards of this church. The minister
accused is bound to give up to the Presbytery his manuscripts
as required, and otherwise to answer the Presbytery as to his
views. In other respects the procedure is the same as in any
other case.
157. If the accused person be a licentiate of this church,
and is found guilty, he is either admonished, rebuked, sus-
pended for a time, or deprived of his license, according to the
nature of his offence.
168. The General Assembly alone has power to repone a
* Suggested—whether, in cases where a Presbytery has full proof before it, the
libel may not be dispensed with; and whether in any case however flagrant, even
inferring deposition, if the accused confess, a libel is necessary.
f See Perm of Deposition, inf ra. Art. 181.


deposed minister, or one who has been suspended sine die , or
to restore his license to a deprived licentiate; and this is
never done without the most ample and satisfactory evidence
of repentance and reformation during a considerable period.
Under no circumstances is a deposed minister reponed in the
charge from which he was separated by his sentence.
159- No law agents, solicitors, or barristers are admitted
to plead as such in any court of this church.
160. Presbyteries are sometimes requested to enquire into,
and endeavour to reconcile, differences between a minister and
his Session or managers, or his congregation generally. Or
such enquiry may be instituted by the Presbytery without
application from the parties, if it shall see cause. Sometimes,
in consequence of a minister’s imprudence in his general
deportment, or other causes, his usefulness in that congregation
is completely destroyed; and when such appears to be the
case after full enquiry, and when all means of adjusting-
differences have been tried in vain, and the congregation is
threatened with disorganization, dispersion, or alienation, it
is competent for the Presbytery to advise the minister to
demit his charge, or if he decline to do this, to report the
circumstances to the General Assembly, which may, if
necessary, dissolve the pastoral tie, and declare the charge
vacant, instructing the Presbytery to grant a certificate to the
minister, or not, as to the Assembly may seem meet. Great
caution and tenderness are required in dealing with such
cases, to prevent reputable ministers being sacrificed to the
unreasonableness or vindictiveness of individuals or of a
party.
161. When a minister follows divisive courses, or leaves
his charge without having obtained permission from his
Presbytery, or sets at defiance the authority of the church
courts, or otherwise acts disorderly and contumaciously, the
Presbytery may report the case to the General Assembly,
which will either suspend him, or declare him no longer a
minister of this church, and declare his charge vacant.
162- When a minister is deposed, his charge is declared
vacant, and a member of Presbytery is appointed to preach in
the vacant church, and intimate accordingly to the congre-
gation.


PROCEDURE IN LICENSING PREACHERS.
163. Students of the University, and others desiring to
be received as Students of Divinity, apply to a Presbytery,
presenting certificates of church membership, and of their
previous course of education. If the Presbytery is satisfied
of the literary attainments and character of the applicant, he
is admitted as a Student of Divinity, and directed in the
course of study* appointed by the General Assembly, or
certified to the Professors of Theology recognized by the
Assembly.
164. When the course of study has been completed, the
student applies to a Presbytery for license, producing cer-
tificates from the theological professors or tutors whom he
may have attended, as well as from the Presbytery under
whose superintendence he has been during his theological
studies, and by which he has been examined from time to time,
not less frequently than once a year, during said course. The
Presbytery, being thoroughly satisfied of the exemplary walk
and conversation of the student, of which explicit testimony
must be produced, either reports to the General Assembly,
and asks permission to take the student on trials for license,
or if the Session of Assembly be more than three months
distant, sends circular letters to the several Presbyteries of
the church, stating that it is proposed to admit the student
to trial.
165- If any Presbytery object, the case must be referred
to the General Assembly; but if no Presbytery object
within two months, or if the General Assembly give per-
mission, the student is admitted to trial.
166. The trials consist of Examinations, either viva voce,
or by written papers, (the latter being by far the more
satisfactory method,) in the Hebrew and Greek languages, and
in Divinity and Church History, according to the Schedule
appointed by the General Assembly. These examinations
are conducted by an Examining Committee appointed
annually by the General Assembly, and a satisfactory cer-
tificate from said committee must be produced to the
Presbytery, The student is also required to deliver before
the Presbytery a ‘ Lecture ’ or exposition •of some large
portion of scripture; a ‘ Homily ’ or discourse on some
See Course of Study, infra [Arts. 216-218.


doctrinal or practical subject; an ‘ Exegesis ’ or discussion
of some controverted question of theology; a Critical
4 Exercise ’ on a portion of the original text of Old or New
Testament’ with ‘ Addition' of doctrinal and practical
lessons; and a < Popular Sermon l on a short text; the
subjects being prescribed by the Presbytery, which may
also, if necessary, examine the student on the subjects of the
discourses.
167. The trials being concluded, the Presbytery considers
the whole conjointly, and if they are not satisfactory, the
license is withheld, the Presbytery directing the student to
pursue his studies, or otherwise, as may seem most advisable.
168. If the, trials are sustained, the student is required
to produce evidence of his being twenty-one years of age,
and the Moderator of Presbytery puts to him the questions
appointed to be put to such as are about to be licensed, as
follows:—
Questions 1., 11., 111., IV., are the same as those put to
ministers before ordination (Art. 131).
V. Do you promise, in the strength of Divine grace, and as
you shall be answerable at the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to lead a holy and circumspect life,
taking heed to yourself and to the doctrine you
preach, faithfully fulfilling all and in-
structions given you by competent authority in accor-
dance with the laws of this Church, and otherwise
diligently and cheerfully discharging all the duties of
a licentiate of this Church ?
169. Satisfying answers having been given to all these
questions, the moderator briefly addresses him on the respon-
sibilities he is about to undertake, and _ engages in prayer;
after which the Moderator addresses him in words to the
following effect“ In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the only King and Head of the Church, and by authority of
this Presbytery, I hereby declare you, Mr.
licensed to preach the Gospel of Salvation:! gne you e
right hand of fellowship as a Preacher of the Gospel : and
most heartily bid you God speed.” After the Moderator, the
other members of Presbytery give him the right hand, and
wish him success in the Lord. The licentiate then subscribes


the formula (Appendix XI.) and his name is added to the
roll of Licentiates of this Church.*
ADMISSION OP MINISTERS, PREACHERS, AND CONGREGATIONS
PROM OTHER DENOMINATIONS.
170. Ministers or Preachers of any of the Presbyterian
Churches in the Australasian Colonies, or of other churches
holding the Westminster received by any
Presbytery of this church ad eundem statum, subject to the
approval of the General Assembly (Art. VI. Basis of Union.)
171. Ministers or Preachers of other denominations are
admitted by the Assembly alone, on the recommendation of
some Presbytery. The applicant prepares a Petition to the
General Assembly, which must be presented through a
Presbytery. Or the Petition mav be addressed to the Pres-
bytery. The petition sets forth the applicant’s previous
history, his place of birth, course and manner of education,
previous employments of whatever kind, and all particulars
bearing upon his character or. general eligibility. Documen-
tary evidence in support of the statements of the petition
must be produced to the entire satisfaction of the Presbytery;
which must likewise be satisfied, that, at the time of his
quitting the denomination with which he had been previously
connected, the applicant was under no censure, or fear of
censure, on any moral or doctrinal ground.
173. If the Presbytery be fully satisfied on all these
points, the applicant may be employed by the Presbytery, or
recommended to the Home Mission and Church Extension
Committee for employment, as a Missionary, until the
pleasure of the General Assembly be known; but, as a
general rule, the Assembly will not admit applicants whose
educational attainments are materially below the standard
required of licentiates.
173. A Minister and his congregation of another de-
nomination may apply conjointly for admission into this
church. The application must be made through a Pres-
bytery by Petition, the statements of which must be carefully
investigated by the Presbytery before it is presented to the
Assembly. A congregation of another denomination without
a minister, desiring to be received, 17111 proceed as directed
in Art. 2.
« Extract of License, Appendix XIV.


CHAPTER TENTH.
OF CHURCH CENSURES.
174. The Censures of the Church are not to be adminis-
tered in any case where private counsel, remonstrance, or
reproof may suffice; and in all cases where it is possible,
such private dealing must be taken before the church is
called to exercise discipline against offenders. Discipline
must on no account be made a pretext for inquisitorial
prying into private or family concerns ; nor is it the province
of Church Courts to enquire even into conduct positively
sinful, unless scandal has arisen therefrom, and there is
reason to fear that the cause of religion may be injured
thereby.
-175. Members of the church are proper subjects of church
discipline. Adherents are not strictly subject to the spiritual
discipline of the church, but are subject to its laws in so far
as applicable to them (vide Arts. 5,7, &c).
176. Admonition is the lowest degree of censure. A
member or office-bearer who is negligent in attending public
worship, or reported guilty of any imprudent conduct causing
scandal, is for the first offence admonished. He is required
to appear before the session privately, or before the Presbytery
if he be a minister, and the Moderator addresses him on the
nature of his offence, and exhorts him to greater circumspection
for the future. Or the Moderator may be requested by the
session to visit the offender and admonish him privately, and
on the minister reporting this as done, it is minuted.
177. Rebuke is a higher degree of censure, applicable to
wraver offences, or where an offender has been admonished ,
and has again offended. Rebuke can only be given in presence
of the Session, and, if thought necessary, it may be reported
to the congregation. In administering rebuke , the Moderator
deals faithfully with the offender, and with all kindness warns
him to greater circumspection of conduct,
178. Suspension from sacramental privileges is the third
degree of censure. Suspension continues until the Session is


satisfied of the sincere penitence of the offender, when he is
restored with a solemn admonition; and if the suspension have
been intimated to the congregation, the restoration is also
intimated.
179. Ministers, Elders, and Deacons may be farther cen-
sured by SUSPENSION FROM THE FUNCTIONS OF THEIR OFFICE,
either for a limited time, or until the proper Church Court is
satisfied that it ought to be removed, which is called suspension
sine die. Suspension from church privileges necessarily
involves suspension from office; but sometimes it may be
necessary to suspend from office when it is not necessary to
suspend from all church privileges; and it is sometimes
expedient to restore to church privileges without restoring to
office. Suspension pendente causa is not in itself a censure,
but a necessary caution.
180. Excision is the cutting off a member from the
Church by formally declaring him to be no longer a member
thereof; or in the case of an office-bearer, by declaring him
to be no longer a Minister, Elder, or Deacon of this Church.
181. Deposition is the highest degree of censure now
practised, and is only inflicted when an office-bearer has been
found guilty of some fundamental heresy or gross immorality.
Deposition is pronounced with very great solemnity. In the
case of a minister, if he be present, the Moderator calls upon
one of the ministers present to offer prayer ; after which the
sentence is pronounced by the Moderator in the following or
equivalent form : —“ In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the sole King and Head of the. Church, and by virtue of the
power and authority committed by Him to the Church for the
edification of the body, I do now solemnly depose you, Mr.
A B , from the office of the holy ministry,
prohibiting and discharging you from exercising the same in
all time coming, and 1 do declare the pastoral charge of
C vacant from the day and date of this sentence.”
If the minister be absent, the word “ him ” must be sub-
stituted for “ you,” or omitted, where necessary.
The same form wall suffice for other office-bearers, the
necessary verbal changes being made, and ending with the
words “ in all time coming.”


CHAPTER ELEVENTH,
OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
182. The General Assembly is the Supreme Court of the
"Church, and consists of all ministers holding settled charges
or theological professorships within its jurisdiction, together
with one duly commissioned elder from each session.
183. The General Assembly meets annually on the Tues-
day next following the tenth day of October, at seven o’clock
post meridiem. Nine members, of whom six must be ministers,
form a quorum of the Assembly, provided that of the nine
there be not more than four members of the same Presbytery.
184. The Officers of the General Assembly are the Mode-
rator, the Clerk, and the Treasurer. The Moderator is changed
annually ; the Clerk and Treasurer are permanent officers, and
hold office without re-election until they resign, or are su-
perseded.*
185. At the commencement of the Annual Session of
Assembly the Moderator preaches a sermon, and immediately
thereafter constitutes the court with prayer. The Permanent
Minutes of the previous Annual Session, and of any pro re nata
Session which may have been held, are held as read, and are
signed by the Moderator and Clerk. The Clerk then intimates
the changes that have been made in theEoll,by death,removal,
or accession, since last assembly, according to the intimations
he has received from Presbytery Clerks. The Clerk then
proceeds to call over the roll, which he has made up from the
certified rolls of Presbyteries forwarded to him by Presbytery
Clerks, the members present answering to their names. Mem-
bers not present at the calling of the roll, but entering
afterwards, are required to report themselves to the Clerk.
The Presbytery which stands at the head of the roll one
year is placed at the bottom the following year.
186- The Assembly then proceeds tc elect the Moderator
for the ensuing year. The mode of election is by Presby-
terial votes. Each Presbytery at some meeting not less
* The duties of the Clerk are defined in the report of a special committee, adopted
hy the Gen. As. 1887, Sederunt 11., and printed in the Appendix to the Minutes
of that year.
4


than six weeks previously to the meeting of the Assembly r
nominates an individual from the roll of ministers who are
members of the Assembly for the Moderator’s chair; and
the Presbytery Clerk, immediately after such nomination,
forwards the same to the Clerk of Assembly* Presbyteries
of not more than seven settled charges have one vote. Pres-
byteries of more than seven settled charges have two votes,
provided three-fourths of the members present at the
nomination concur in the same, otherwise such Presbyteries
have only one vote. Vacant charges are not reckoned. The
Clerk of Assembly produces the Presbyterial nominations,
and by direction of the Moderator reads the same in open court.
If there appear a majority of Presbyterial votes in favour of
the same individual, the Moderator immediately declares him
duly elected. If there be not a majority of Presbyterial
votes, the Assembly elects one of the individuals nominated
by the Presbyteries by vote in the usual way, without dis-
cussion ; and the individual who has the final majority of
votes is declared duly elected. In case of equality, the
Moderator has a casting vote.f Any member of Assembly
may record his dissent from the election, but without remark.
The Moderator elect is conducted to the chair by one or
more previous Moderators, the Assembly rising. The Mod-
erator having made his acknowledgments, the members take
their seats, and the Moderator delivers a suitable address.
187. The Report’of the Committee of Bills and Overtures
is then brought up by the clerk, which enumerates documents
received and ordered by the committee to be transmitted to
the Assembly, as well as any documents received but rejected
as informal or incompetent, and against the rejection of which,
the parties concerned may have appealed to the Assembly:
The arrangement of business as proposed by the committee,,
or by a sub-committee, is then announced, and is always
approved by the Assembly; nor is the arrangement departed
from, except in case of emergency or urgent necessity shewn
to the satisfaction of the Assemby.
188. The Committee of Bills and Overtures consists of
the Moderator and Clerk of Assembly, who are ex officio
Chairman and Clerk of this committee ; of all ex-moderators
* Style for Nomination in Appen Jjx XV.
t Act of Assembly anent Election of Moderators, Session 1867, Appendix XVI,


of Assembly, ex privilegio ; and of commissioners from Pres-
byteries, that is to say, from Presbyteries of more than seven
charges, two ministers and two elders, and trom 1 resbyteries
of not more than seven charges, one minister and one elder,
vacant charges not being reckoned in any case. The extract
minute of appointment of such commissioners must be for-
warded to the clerk of Assembly on or before the day of
meeting of Assembly. Failing such appointment by any
Presbytery, the Moderator and Clerk of such Presbytery are
authorized to sit as commissioners ex officio ; or failing these,
the Moderator of Assembly may request any members of such
Presbytery to act ; or failing such, any members of the
Assembly.
189- The Committee of Bills and Overtures meets at
10 a.m. on the day appointed for the meeting of the Assembly.
Five members are a quorum. The second meeting is heM at
5 p.m. on the first Thursday of the session; the third
meeting at 5 p.m. on the first Monday of the session.
Subsequent meetings are held, as may be necessary, for
of business, at which three are a quorum; but no
new business can be received after such third meeting from any
Presbytery or member of Assembly, otherwise than ex gratia,
and on urgent cause shewn.
190. All documents intended for transmission to the
■General Assembly should be forwarded to the Clerk of
Assembly as early as possible, so that in the event of any
informality there may be time for its amendment. All
documents must be written legibly, with black ink; each
separate matter or subject being written on a separate sheet
of foolscap paper, with a binding margin one-fourth the width
* of the page. The proper styles should also be observed.
Documents expressed in disrespectful language, or improperly
reflecting on any person or persons, cannot be received.
191. Parties whose documents are rejected by the Com-
mittee of Bills and Overtures are notified thereof by the
committee, and have the right of appeal to the Assembly, if
the appeal be taken at the time of rejection. It is therefore
advisable for all parties having documents to be transmitted
to attend the first meeting of the committee. Appeals against
-decisions of this committee are heard immediately after the
report has been presented to the Assembly, or at the following


sederunt before other business is taken up; but the assembler
usually sustains the decisions of the committee unless on very-
urgent cause shewn. Rejected documents may, however, be
presented to the Committee in an amended form, not later than
the third meeting.
193. The Assembly, at its second sederunt, after a diet of
devotional exercises, proceeds to consider the business trans-
mitted by the Committee of Bills and Overtures, in the order
appointed, and continues to sit de die in diem, until the whole
is disposed of.
193. Matters requiring very careful deliberation, and
matters of delicate enquiry, are usually referred to special
committees, which are nominated by the Moderator with the
advice of a committee of selection, consisting of the Moderator
and Clerk of Assembly, all ex-Moderators of Assembly, and
Moderators of Presbyteries. Every such committee has a
Convener, appointed by the Assembly on nomination of
the Moderator with advice of Committee of Scdection.
Meetings of special committees are announced from the
chair of the Assembly, and such announcement is suffi-
cient notice to the members; but such meetings cannot
be held while the Assembly is sitting without express
permission. Special committees are instructed to report
either during the present session of Assembly, or at the
following session. When the report of such a committee has
been presented and received, the committee is thereby dis-
charged. Small committees, for business of a routine character,
are nominated at once by the Moderator alone.
194. The Assembly also appoints Standing Committees, for
the management of the Schemes of the Church, and other
operations of a permanent character. These Committees, with
their respective Conveners, are appointed annually by the
Assembly on nomination of the committee of selection.
Standing committees are not discharged when their report,
is presented but continue in office till the new committee is
appointed.
195. Every Committee appoints its own clerk, and keeps
regular minutes of its proceedings. Standing committees,
in presenting their Annual Reports, also lay upon the table
of the Assembly their minutes for the past year, duly signed
by the convener and clerk. Such minutes 'must exhibit the


attendance of members at each meeting of committee; and
members who have been remiss in their duty without satis-
factory excuse are liable to censure.
196. The Assembly meets for despatch of business during
its session on every lawful day at 10-30 a.m.; adjourns at
2-30 p.m. ) and resumes at 6 p.m. ; with the following
exceptions:—On the first Wednesday of the session the
Assembly meets at 945 a m. for devotional exercises, and at
10-30 for despatch of business. On Saturday the Assembly
meets for despatch of business at 9-45 am. and adjourns
at 1 p.m. There is no evening sederunt on Saturday, and no
morning sederunt on Monday.
167. The Moderator takes the chair at the time appointed
for each sederunt, or so soon thereafter as a quorum is
assembled (Art. 183), and constitutes the Assembly with
prayer. The minutes of the previous sederunt are then read
by the clerk in rough draft, and if approved by the Assembly
as an accurate record, are signed by the Moderator. Business
remaining unfinished from last sederunt is then first taken up,
unless it has been otherwise expressly ordered at some
previous sederunt.
198. It is the duty of the Moderator to see that the
business fif the Assembly proceeds in an orderly manner, and
to announce officially all results. He conveys the thanks of
the Court when voted, or intimates and administers its
censures. With respect to speaking and voting he has the
same powers as the Moderator of a Presbytery (Art. 93).
In the absence of the Moderator the chair is taken by the
last preceding Moderator present, or failing him, by the
senior minister present.
199- Any member of court has a right to call to
order any speaker who departs from the question, or trans-
gresses any rule of court. A speaker called to order sits
down until the point of order is settled. The member
raising the point briefly states his reasons, after hearing
which the Moderator rules, unless the point be one of con-
siderable importance and difficulty, when he may ask the
judgment of the Court. The ruling of the Moderator is in
all questions of order, final. Members calling to order, or
interrupting speakers, without adequate cause, are them-
selves liable to censure.


200. All motions must be given to the Clerk in writing
so soon as made to the court, and are immediately read to the
court hy the Moderator or Clerk. Until so read the motion
cannot he seconded, and until it has been seconded, no dis-
cussion can be taken, A motion not seconded falls to the
ground. When a motion has been seconded, it is competent
for any member to move an amendment upon it, proposing
the alteration or omission of one or more words, which
amendment (or the motion in the proposed amended form) must
also he handed to the Clerk in writing, and read to the court,
before it can he seconded, or discussed. Or a second motion
may be made and seconded, proposing an entirely different
method of dealing with the matter before the court from that
indicated in the first motion. Any number of motions or
amendments may be subsequently made and seconded. The
mover of the first motion cannot amend the same, if his doing
so be objected to by any mover or seconder of any subsequent
motion or amendment, nor can he withdraw it, if objected to
by any member of the court. The mover of the first motion
has the right of reply when all that wish to do so have spoken,
and after such reply the debate is closed, and no other member
can be heard on any pretext whatever.
201 When there are only two motions, or a motion and
an amendment, the vote is taken for “ motion or amendment,”
or “ first motion or second motion.”
When there are three motions or amendments, or more,
they are distinguished as first, second, third, fourth motions,
and so on.
These are reduced by separate votes, till only two remain,
in the following manner :
The first question is—Whether the motion last made, or
the one before it, shall be put as an amendment against the
first motion ?
The second question is—Whether the motion preferred in
the previous division, or the one before it, shall be put as the
amendment against the first motion ?
And so on, till only one amendment remains, when the final
vote is taken between this amendment and the first motion ;
and that which has the majority of votes, being announced
from the chair, becomes the deliverance of the Assembly (vide
Art. 77.)


In all other respects the ordinary rules of deliberative
assemblies are followed.
202. For purposes of conference on matters requiring
minute examination, or for the consideration of overtures or
■schemes involving many details, the Assembly, when it sees
fit, resolves Itself into a Committee of the whole house, the
Moderator leaving the chair and sitting as an ordinary
member of the house, and another member being appointed
as Chairman of Committee. Separate minutes of the proceedings
■of such committees are kept in a separate book, and on the
house resuming, the chairman reports the findings of the
■committee, which are usually held as read, and the Assembly
resolves in terras of the report. The findings of the committee
thus become resolutions of Assembly, and are recorded in the
minutes, either in substance or in detail, as ordered.
Proposed New Article.
“• Overtures for Neio Laics cannot he adopted as the per-
manent Law of the Church until they have heen sent down to
Presbyteries, and the approbation of a majority of Presbyteries
obtained. But where the matter is of urgent importance, the
Overture may be adopted ad interim, and Presbyteries in-
structed to report to next Assembly
203. In matters requiring privacy, the General Assembly,
■or a committee of the whole house, has the right of sitting
with closed doors.
204. In hearing causes, references, complaints, appeals,
&c., not more than two speeches are heard on each side; and
•where there are more than two parties, not more than one
speech; the promoter of the cause having always the right of
reply. Parties are then removed, and the Assembly gives
judgment.
205. The' Assembly has the right of suspending its
standing orders, or any of them; but notice of motion for such
suspension must be given, and intimated from the chair at,
two several sederunts, before the motion can be discussed.
The Assembly may also, on urgent cause shewn, and after
notice as before, temporarily suspend any other law or form
of procedure. And generally, the Assembly being the
Supreme Court of this church, its judments are binding on all
office-bearers, members, and adherents of the church, and are
not to be disobeyed as to their substance, under plea of any
formal defect.


206. No protest or appeal can be taken against a judg-
ment of the General Assembly. Members may, however,
dissent, and give in reasons (Art. 78) ; and these reasons are
answered or not, as the Assembly sees fit. If answered, a
committee is appointed for the purpose, and the answers are
submittecOtp Assembly, and, if approved, are ordered,
with thq reasons, to be_ kept in retentis, in a book specially
kept ffoghe purpose; or the Assembly may authorize the
publication of both reasons and answers in an Appendix to the
Minutes.
207- The Moderator is bound to call a pro re nata meet-
ing of the General Assembly, on receipt of a requisition from
nine members, not more than four of whom belong to the
same Presbytery; and such requisition shall be a justifica-
tion of the Moderator, even though the res naia be not
sustained. Such meetings are called by circulars, issued by
the Clerk on the Moderator’s written authority, addressed to-
every member nf Assembly, and posted not less than fourteen
days before the day of meeting.
208. The Minutes of Proceedings of the Annual Session of
Assembly, and of any pro re nata meetings held during the
previous year, are published, as soon as possible after the
close of the session, under the direction of the Clerk, assisted
by a Committee of Revision named by the Moderator, the
Clerk being convener of such committee.
209. The business of the Session being concluded, the
Moderator addresses the Assembly, and after praise, dissolves
the same in the Name and by the authority of the Lord Jesus
Christ, appointing the next meeting on the day fixed of the
following year.


CHAPTER TWELFTH.
OF THE SCHEMES OF THE CHURCH.
210- The Presbyterian Church of New South Wales has
four principal schemes, or agencies, for extending the
kingdom of Christ, and securing an efficient ministry,
namely, the Supplementary Stipend Scheme; thg Home
Mission and Church Extension Scheme; the Scheme for
Missions to the Heathen ; and the Widows’ and Orphans’
Scheme.
211. It is a general regulation, applicable to all the
schemes of the church, that none of the articles of any
scheme shall be altered, unless notice of the proposed altera-
tion be given by way of overture; in which case, if the
Assembly decide in favour of the proposed alteration, the
same shall take effect ad interim, and be sent down to
Presbyteries to report thereon before its final adoption.
213. Articles of the Supplementary Stipend
Scheme.
Vide Appendix C., Minutes, 1866.
213. Articles of the Home Mission and Church
Extension Scheme.
Vide Appendix C., Minutes, 1865.
214. Articles of the Scheme for Missions to the
Heathen:
1. The General Assembly shall create a fund to be called
“ The Fund for Missions to the Heathen. ’
2. This fund shall be under the management of a com-
mittee appointed by the General Assembly under
similar provisions to those specified above in de-
partment I.
3. This fund shall be devoted to the support of mission-
aries who shall be employed by the church —among
the Chinese in the colony, and among the natives
of the New Hebrides; but the committee shall be
at liberty to assist any missions approved by them,
which may be established among the aborigines oi
Australia.
215 Articles of the Widows and Orphans Scheme,
Vide Appendix D., Minutes, 1868.


CHAPTER THIRTEENTH.
OF THE COURSE OF STUDY TO BE PURSUED BY CANDI-
DATES FOR THE HOLY MINISTRY.
216. An Examining Committee is appointed annually by
the General Assembly to examine candidates for tbe ministry
as to their literary and theological attainments.
217. Before any person, not being a graduate of some
university or college, is admitted as a student of divinity by
any Presbytery, he is examined by the examining committee
in the following subjects :
1. —English Grammar and Composition.
2. —One book of Caesar de Bell. Gall.; and one book of
Virgil’s iEneid, or Horace’s Odes.
3. —Gospel of John, and Epistle to Ephesians, in Greek
Testament; Greek Grammar.
4 —First and Second Books of Euclid, and any simple
course of Natural Philosophy.
5. —Logic and Mental Philosophy.
6. —General knowledge of History and Geography.
7. —General knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.
Graduates of Universities, or such as have passed
through the Curriculum of Arts in any University
or College, are not required to pass this examin-
ation, but may be admitted to the study of theology
on producing satisfactory evidence of church member-
ship and moral character.
218. —The following Courses of Study, which shall extend
over a period of not less than two years, are appointed as a
temporary arrangement.
First Course.— Paley’s Natural Theology and Evidences
of Christianity; Butler’s Analogy ; Written exercises,
as prescribed; Horne’s Introduction to study of
Scriptures; Moral Philosophy, if not already studied,
Wayland’s Moral Science ; Macintosh’s Dissertation ;
Greek Testament, the Four Gospels.


Second Course. — Systematic Divinity, Hodge's Out-
lines; Written Exercises and Discourse as prescribed;
Hebrew Grammar; Greek Testament, Epistle to
Romans; Church History, Mosheim, first three
centuries.
Third Course. —Systematic Divinity, Hodge’s Outlines }
written exercises and discourse; Hebrew, Genesis,
Story of Joseph; Greek Testament, Acts and
Hebrews, with critical exercises thereon; Church
* History, Mosheim, 4th to 10th century.
Fourth Course. —Pastoral Theology, Bridge’s Christian
Ministry ; written exercises and discourse ; Hebrew,
Book of Psalms; Greek; the General Epistles;
Church History; remainder of Mosheim.
219. Students may be examined at the end of each
course, or not less frequently than once a year, by
Presbyteries ; and, on applying for license, are examined in
the whole subjects of the four courses by the examining com
mittee, and are not taken on public trials by the Presbytery,
until the certificate of the examining committee is obtained.
220. Students who may have passed through part of the
curriculum in any university or college, or who may have re-
ceived partial theological training in any 'recognized Hall or
Institute wherein the doctrines of the IVestminster
Standards are taught, are allowed to reckon their attendance
in such university, college, or theological hall, as part of the
attendance required by this Church; and, generally, the
Assembly has power to make special arrangements for special
cases, or in exceptional circumstances.




APPENDIX.
Style for Edict of Ordination of Elders or Deacons
(Art. 41).
“At a meeting of this congregation held on day, the
dky of ,18 , said meeting having been duly intimated from the
pulpit on the two Sabbaths immediately preceding, Messrs. G. H.,
K. L., M. N., were nominated to the office of in this congre-
gation ; and the voting papers handed in by the members on the
following Sabbath having been examined by the Session (or Deacon’s
Court) it was found that the highest number of votes were in favour
of Messrs. G. H. and K. L., who are accordingly declared duly
elected.
And intimation is hereby given that if any person or persons
have any objection to the admission of said G. H. and K. L., or
either of them, to the office of in this congregation, they are
requested to lodge the same in writing with the Clerk of Session (or
Deacons’ Court), on or before day the day of 18 ,
■with certification, that if no relevant objection be offered the ordi-
nation and admission of said Messrs. G. H. and K. L. will be pro-
ceeded with on the said day according to the laws of the Church.
Style for Narration of Steps before Ordination of
Elders or Deacons (Art. 42).
“It is now my duty to intimate to you that the session (or Deacons’
Court) having decided that additional Elders (or Deacons) were re-
quired for this congregation, a meeting of the congregation was duly
convened for the nomination of suitable persons on day, the
day of ,18 ; and the lists handed in by the members
on the following Sabbath having been duly examined by the session
(or Deacons’Court) it appeared that Messrs, G. H. and K. L. were
duly elected, and their edict was accordingly appointed to be served
on Sabbath the day of , and Sabbath the day ol
* . No objections having been offered, the ordination ot the
said Messrs. G. H. and K. L. will now be proceeded with according
to the laws of the Church.
I therefore now call on Messrs. G. H. and K. L. to stand forth and
publicly answer the questions appointed to be put to persons about to
be ordained to the office of elder (or deacon).


APPENDIX
STYLE FOR COMMUNION
When admitted, and
Note. —The small columns are intended for keeping a Record of
whom a Token is given should be taken down, and the Elders will note
or not. The Session Clerk will fill up the Attendance Record from the
P denotes that the member was present. A, absent without excuse,
gation. Members receiving tokens and prevented by any cause front
Elders without delay.


111.
EOLL. (Specimek Filled Up )
When dis-
charged, and
how.
Dec. 18, 1869.
Cert, to Ba-
thurst.
Dec. 18, 1869.
Cert, to Ba-
thurst.
June, 1869.
Struck off.
P A A
Dec. 18,1868.
died.
Sept. 1869, re-
moved with-
out applying
AAA
for cert.
P A A
Attendance of members at communions. The names of every one to
whether those who have received tokens are present at the communion
Elders’ reports. .....
E, absent with lawful excuse. E, removed from the district or congre-
us'ing them, are hound to return them to the Minister or one of the


Style for Elder’s Commission. (Art. 63.)
At the day of 18 , the session of
Church, , being duly met and constiuted
with prayer. v
Inter alia,*
The session elected Mr. A B one of its members
(or, an elder of the congregation of , as shewn by
accompanying certificate) to represent the session in the Presbytery
of , and in the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales, for the period of twelve months, com-
mencing on the Tuesday next following the 10th October, 18 ;
Closed with prayer.
Extracted from the minutes of the session of
by me,
Signed, C I) , Session Clerk.
Countersigned, E F , Moderator.
Style for Certificate enclosed in foregoing.
(Place and date.)
1 hereby certify that Mr. A B is, at the date
hereof, a bona fide acting elder of the congregation of
Church,
Signed, G H , Session Clerk.
Countersigned, K L , Moderator.
Note. —Sessions can only bo represented in Presbyteries by their
own members. Their commissions are in the above form, omitting
the words “ and in the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
of New South Wales;”
* The words “ Inter alia ” are not inserted in Extract Minutes unless there has been
other business transacted besides that recorded in the Minute extracted.


Styles for Petitions. (Art. 66-69.)
To a Session.
To the session of Church,
"the petition of the undersigned, being members or adherents of the
•congregation of said church
Respectfully sheweth,
That '
That petitioners accordingly pray
And petitioners, as in duty hound, will ever pray.
(Here follow the signatures.)
To a Presbytery.
To the Reverend the Presbytery of
The Petition of the undersigned members or adherents of the con-
gregation of
; Respectfully sheweth
Ac. &c. as in foregoing.
'To the General Assembly.
Unto the Venerable the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of blew South Wales.
The Petition of the undersigned, being
Respectfully sheweth _
Ac. See. as in foregoing.


Style for Overture from a Presbytery
At , the day of ,18 •
which day the Presbytery of being met, and consti-
tuted with prayer;
Inter alia, the Presbytery resolved to transmit the following Overture
to the General Assembly ;
Whereas *
It is, therefore, humbly overture! to the Yenerable the General
Assembly by the Presbytery of
That t- -
Closed with prayer.
Extracted from the records of the Presbytery of
by me
Presbytery Clerk
Countersigned Moderator.
* Here must follow the preamble stating the grounds on which the overture is.
made.
f Hero must follow the procedure proposed to be adopted.
Style for Presbyterial Roll. (Art. 108.)
At the day of 18
j r
which day the Presbytery of being duly met and
constituted with prayer,
Inter alia, the Presbytery preceded to make up the Poll of the
Presbytery for the General Assembly, for the year , and
the same was made up as follows :
Karnes of Ministers. v Charges. Representative Elders.
The Presbytery found that the commissions of the above-named
elders were ail in due form (with the exception of that in favour of Mr.
, which was unaccompanied by the necessary certi-
ficate, and which is, therefore, sustained cum nota, on the understanding
that such certificate shall be forwarded in due time to the Clerk of
Assembly, failing which, the commission shall be of no force or
effect); * and the Presbytery instructed the clerkdo forward an extract
of this minute to the Clerk of Assembly.
Closed with prayer.
Extracted from the records of the Presbytery of • by me-
Presbytery Clerk.
“ The words within parenthesis arepiot inserted if all the commissions are regular.


Style foe Petition for Moderation (Art. 112).
To the Eeverend the Presbytery of the Petitic
the Petition of
the undersigned elders and deacons (or managers) of the congregation
of
Eespectfully sheweth
That the said congregation has been for
months without a settled pastor: that the members are now
prepared to unite in a call, with every prospect of harmony, and with
concurrence of the adherents ; and that they are prepared to guarantee
an adequate stipend, namely j per annum, with (or without)
That the Petitioners accordingly pray your Eeverend Court to grant
a Moderation in a call on as early a day as convenient.
And petitioners as in duty hound, &c, &c.
[Here folloiv the signatures .)
Form of Call to a Vacant Charge (Art. 114),
"We the undersigned, members of the congregation of church
(or, members of the Presbyterian congregation at
• or, ’if a first call to a newly-formed congregation, adherents
and contributors to the funds of the Presbyterian congregation at
vide. Art. 6.), being desirous of promoting the glory ot
God and the’ prosperity of His church; being destitute of a fixed
pastor; and being satisfied by good information, or our own _ex-
perience, of the soundness in the faith, piety, prudence, and other minis-
terial qualifications, of you, Mr. , preacher (or minister)
of the Gospel, as well as of the suitableness to our edification ot the
sifts bestowed upon you by the Great Head of the Church, do hereby
heartily invite, call, and entreat you to undertake the oversight of
our souls, and to execute all the parts of the pastoral office among us ;
and upon your acceptance of this our call, and being inducted into the
charge by the Presbytery of we promise you all
due respect, encouragement, and obedience in the Loid, and engage
to contribute to your suitable maintenance as God may prosper us.
In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names this
day of 18
Names. Eesidence.
Xm-v —The call is written on the face of a largo sheet of stout paper, to which
other sheets may he added if the first sheet will not hold all the signatures.


Form of Concurrence {Art. 115).
We the undersigned, adherents of the congregation of
do hereby signify our hearty concurrence in the call in favour of the
to the pastoral charge of said congregation.
Form of Attestation.
The above are the signatures of members (or adherents) of the
congregation as certified by the
elders of said congregation.
Moderator in Call.
Style for Edict of Ordination or Induction of a
Minister (Art. 129).
The Presbytery of having resolved to proceed to
the ordination (or induction) of the Rev. has directed
an edict to be published accordingly; in pursuance whereof, notice is
hereby given, that if any person lias any objection to offer against the
life or doctrine of the said Eev, he may lodge the same
in writing with the Eev. . clerk of said Presbytery, on
or before day the day of ; with certification,
that if no relevant objection be lodged, the Presbytery will proceed
to the ordination (or induction) of said Eev. according
to the laws of the Church, and admit him to the pastoral charge of
this congregation.
Signed
Presbytery Clerk.
■o
Articles of Basis of Union agreed on and solemnly
subscribed by tbe Synod of Australia in* oonnetien with
the Established Church of Scotland, the General Synod of
the Presbyterian Church in New South Wales, and the
Representatives of the Session of the United Presbyterian
Congregation, Sydney, on Friday, the Bth September, 1865,
within the Masonic Hall, Sydney, where the said parties
met for the purpose of consummating a Union on the terms
previously agreed on in several conferences :


I. That the designation of the United Church shall ho “ The Pres-
Ibyterian Church of New South Wales;” and that the Supreme
Court of the Church shall be designated “ The General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales.’’
11. That the Word of God, as contained in the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testaments, is held by this Church as the Supreme, and
only authoritative, Rule of Faith and Practice.
111. That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and
Shorter Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterial Church Government,
the Directory for the Public Worship of God, and the Second Book
of Discipline, are the subordinate standards of this Church.
IY. The subordinate standards above enumerated, are received with
the following explanations :
1. That, while the Confession of Faith contains the creed to which.
as to a confession of his own faith, every office-bearer in the
Church must testify in solemn form his personal adherence,
and while the Catechisms are sanctioned as Directories for
catechising ; the Directory for Public Worship, the Form of
Church Government, and the Second Book of Discipline, are
of the nature of regulations rather than tests, and are not to
be imposed by subscription upon Ministers and Elders,
ff. That in adopting these standards, this Church is not to be held
as countenancing persecuting or intolerant principles, or any
denial or invasion of the rights of private judgment.
3. That, by Christ’s appointment, the Church is spiritually inde-
pendent, and is not subject, in its own province, and in the
administration of its own affairs, to the jurisdiction or authori-
tative interference of the civil power.
Y. That this Church asserts for itself a separate and independent
position in relation to other Churches; and that its highest Court
shall possess supreme and final jurisdiction over its inferior judi-
catories, office-bearers, and members.
VI. That this Church shall receive Ministers and Probationers from
other Presbyterian Churches applying for admission, on their afford-
ing satisfactory evidence of their qualifications and eligibility, and
subscribing the Formula.
FORMULA
To be signed by all Ministers, Elders, and Deacons, at the lime
of their ordination or induction, and by all Licentiates on being
licensed.
I do hereby declare, that I do sincerely own and believe the whole
doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith, as adopted in the fore-
going Articles, to be in accordance with the Word of God, and I do
own the same as the confession of my faith ; as likewise I do own the


purity of worship presently authorized and practised in this Church,
and also the Presbyterian government and discipline thereof; which
doctrine, worship, and government, I am persuaded, are founded on
the Word of God, and agreeable thereto. And I promise that, through
the grace of God, I shall firmly and constantly adhere to the same, and
to the utmost of my power shall in my station assert, maintain, and
defend the said doctrine, worship, and discipline of this Church, and
the government thereof by Sessions, Presbyteries, and provincial and
general Synods, together with the liberty and exclusive jurisdiction
thereof; and that I shall, in my practice, conform myself to the said
worship, submit to the said discipline, government, and exclusive
jurisdiction, and not endeavour, directly, or indirectly, the prejudice
or subversion of the same. And I promise that I shall follow no
divisive courses from the doctrine, worship, discipline, government,
and exclusive jurisdiction of this Church, renouncing all doctrines,
tenets, or opinions whatsoever contrary to, or inconsistent with, the
said doctrine, worship, discipline, and government or jurisdiction of
the same.
Note. These Articles and the Pormulashould be copied into the Minute
Book of every Session and Presbytery at the beginning of the book,
and a page or two left blank for signatures.
XII.
Style roit Demission. (Art. 185.)
To the Reverend the Presbytery of
I, Minister of , in said
Presbytery, being moved thereto by just and sufficient causes, do
hereby demit my said pastoral charge purely and simply into the
hands of the said Presbytery, declaring that, in so far as I am con-
cerned, the said charge shall be held vacant, and that it shall be free
to the congregation of said charge to call, and to said Presbytery to
admit, another minister thereto. And I further consent that this my
deed of demission shall be recorded in the Presbytery’s books, in
J'u fur am rei memoriain.
Witness my hand this day of 18 ,
A B , Minister.
y j Witnesses.


Styles for Libels. (Art. 142.)
Libel for Immorality.—A committee of Presbjtery
being prosecutors.
[N.B. —The style is given in a complete state, with cumulative
charges and aggravations. It is applicable to a variety of cases, and
must of course he modified to suit the precise circumstances of each.]
Mr. A B you are accused, at the instance of Messrs.
C. I), and E.F., a committee of this Presbytery, for that, in opposition
to the Word of God and the Laws of this Church, you are guilty of
the sin of drunkenness ; in so far as that upon the day of
18 ,or about that time, and within the house of
(or otherwise describe place) you were in a state of intoxication ; as
likewise upon the day of you were again intoxicated,
and used obscene (or profane) language (quote the language, if not too
gross, or say, “too gross to be repeated” ); as likewise upon the
day of you were again intoxicated ; and your offence was
aggravated by the circumstances, that the said last-named day was the
Lord’s day, and that you attempted to conduct Divine Worship while
intoxicated, hut were prevented by certain members of your congrega-
tion (specify additional circumstances if anjC to the great scandal of
religion and the disgrace of your sacred profession.
All which, or part thereof, being confessed by you, or proven against
you by credible testimony, you ought to be visited with adequate
censure according to the Word of God and the Eules of this Church,
that others may he deterred from committing the like offences in time
coming.
You, Mr. A. 8., are accordingly cited to appear before the said
Presbytery of , on the day of _ 18
and answer to the aforesaid charges, in support of which the following
witnesses will he called, namely :
(Names and residences of witnesses to he added.)
Signed, K. L. Moderator
M. N. Clerk.


Libel foe, Heresy.—(Private Prosecutor.)
Mr. A. 8., you are accused at the instance of Mr. C. I), (residence
and designation) for that you are guilty of teaching erroneous and
heretical doctrine, contrary to the standards of this church; in so far
as, in a book published by you (give the title of the book, and the
page referred to) you have taught as follows:—(Quote in full.)
Or, in so far as, in a discourse dehvered by you in
on the day of 18, or about that time,
you used the following language, or language of the same force and
effect. (Quote the words alleged to have been used.)
All which, or part thereof, &c., &c., as before. List of witnesses, or
documents to be adduced in evidence, to be added.
Form of Citation of Witness.—To Mr.
You are hereby cited to appear before the Reverend the Presbytery
of in the Church of on day
the day of * 18 , and there, upon that or suc-
ceeding days, as may be required, to give evidence in the matter of the
charge against the Rev. A. 8., now pending before said Presbytery.
By order of Presbytery. Signed
M. N., Presbytery Clerk.
XIV.
Style for Extract of License to Preach the Gospel.
At the day of 18 ;
•which day the Presbytery of " being duly met and con-
stituted with prayer; Inter alia, the Presbytery, having taken into
consideration, that Mr. A. 8., Student of Divinity, having produced
the certificate of the examining committee of the General Assembly,
had been by this Presbytery and with consent of the General Assembly
admitted to public trials for license, and had been examined in?divinity
and Church history and in the Latin and Greek languages ; That he
had likewise delivered with approbation before the Presbytery, a
lecture, a homily, an exegesis, a critical exercise, and a popular
sermon; and that the Presbytery is fully satisfied that the walk and
conversation of the said Mr. A B are in all respects suit-
able to his professional views:—
Did, on a conjunct view of his whole appearances, declare that the
said Mr. A. 8., is a fit and proper person to be admitted as a licentiate
of this Church, and resolve that he should be admitted and licensed
accordingly. Whereupon the be put to such as
are to be were


'
■
■■ 3 i . %. v 1 „ - v '#c y,
s., libili Sn m m .tel* :. sSm . ... I i


