



COINS OF JAPAN.




COINS OF JAPAN
NEIL GORDON MUNRO,
M. B. & C. M.. Edin. Univ.
iFtrat Edition.
YOKOHAMA, JAPAN,
J 9 0 4.


Copyright 1904,
All rights reserved.
Stereotyped, Printed and Lithographed by the
Box of Curios Printing and Publishing Company,
Yokohama, Japan.


Pu iy. 4
PREFACE. S MAR 1937
With the object of shewing the characters on the
various coins of Japan in as clear a manner as possible,
tracings were made which were afterwards photographed
and reproduced by half tone process. By this means
the shadows of the characters in relief on the coins have
been eliminated. If the resulting illustrations are more
of the nature of sketches than full pictures, they may at
least claim to shew the coins in their true proportions,
both with regard to size and the delineation of the
characters. In a few instances, where the half tone
figures have been imperfect, wood cuts have been used to
replace them. It some of the characters are not clear in
evm-y detail, I would plead that it is not always possible
to obtain perfect specimens. The best available ones
have been drawn upon for this purpose, from my own
collection and those of my friends Mr. Morita Jihei and
Dr. Majima, to whom I extend ray hearty thanks.
I wish also to express my appreciation of the work
done by Messrs. Yuzawa and Takechi in preparing
translations and to thank Miss Sato for the preparation
of the index. To Mr. Yuzawa especially, am I much
indebted for careful and conscientious labour and
particularly for his assistance in elucidating the archaic
characters to be found in an appendix to this volume.
To Professor Chamberlain, tor kind advice and the loan
of historical works, and also to Mr. Mason for much
generous help in the correction of proofs, my indebted-
ness is great.
For the knowledge of the coins themselves, I am
mainly under obligation to Mr. Muramatsu, the well
known antiquary, who imparted to me, in the most
frank and generous manner, the results of a ripe
experience, extending for thirty years and ranging over
all the coins of China, Annam, Corea and Japan. He


lias been no less kind in the help which ho has given in
the preparation of this work.
As I have stated elsewhere, the translation of the
year names is a matter of peculiar difficulty, because it
is often impossible to bring their self contained announce-
ments into line with each other. My attempt to do
so may be held by those of high scholarship to be
improper. On these and other matters I shall esteem
it a favour to receive criticism and suggestions.
The pronounciation of the Japanese words will be
facilitated if the reader remembers that the vowels have
the Italian sound, that the letter O may soften to the
sound of Ng in going, but never takes the place of J. Full
details will be found in any good Japanese grammar,
such as those of Chamberlain or Aston. I have not
attempted to distinguish between the long and short
pronounciation of the letter O. There are many shades
of emphasis given to this, and it would have been
difficult to ensure perfect accuracy when so many other
points need attention.
I may add that the many details incidental to a
work of this nature have been gathered and arranged in
the leisure moments of professional life. If the health-
ful counterpoise which this has afforded to the more
serious work of a physican can contribute its quota,
through this volume, to the relaxation of other brain
workers, I shall feel that the drudgery of seeing it
through the press has not been useless. In this respect
my labours have been lightened by the attention and
consideration of Messrs. Thorn and Son, who have under-
taken the printing, not only of the text, but of nearly
all the illustrations, and whose lithographic reproduc-
tions of the gold and silver coins have contributed much
to the value of this work.
N. GORDON MDNEO.
Yokohama.


CONTENT S.
Introduction vii
I. Prehistoric and Protohistoric 1
11. The Antique Coins 22
111. Mediaeval Coins 79
IV. From Tensho to Meljl 100
V. Provincial Coins 155
VI. Gold and Silver Currency 186
Meiji Currency 210
VII. Experimental and Ornamental Coins . . . 215


There is something very fascinating in the study of
Far Eastern coins. They do not appeal to us through any
pictorial effect, but a subtle and impersonal charm
pervades their inscriptions and the sentiments which
they set forth.
They are written in characters which are a manifest
survival of tlie picture writing of early man. He
wrote, that is to say, scored or scratched,* various outline
sketches of his doings and the more intimate facts of his
surroundings, on bone, clay or other material. Previous
to this, he had learned to utter speech sounds, (names
nouns , by which things are known), in association with
the various objects of his environment. Originally, these
names were short and simple sounds, given probably,
in imitation of some notable feature in the thing which
they served to distinguish. Longer words were formed
by joining the simpler ones, and thus it is that language
is capable of being resolved into simple sounds or syl-
lables, which latter are again into elementary sounds,
namely vowels and consonants.
The primitive pictures of objects have also under-
gone further development, but this did not keep pace
with the evolution of language. As speech is more import-
ant than writing, which, in early times was a crude and
inefficient adjunct to it, Ithas resulted that many nations
have reached quite an advanced stage in the arts of life
without developing the art of writing to a useful degree.
This art has always been of very slow growth, its progress
being Impeded in its early stages by reason of its
1. In Japanese also, the word “Kaku” means both to write and to scratch.
The characters for Kaku, to write and Kaku, to scratch, are different be-
cause they were adopted in Japan long after the ideas were differentiated.
Still, the character Sho or Kaku, to write, also means to sketch or draw.


clumsiness and incompetency to fully express the spoken
idea. It is obvious that the change from the representa-
tion of the thing in itself to that of some special quality
which it possessed, must have taken a long time to
effect. To illustrate this by a familiar example, the sun
in archaic Chinese is represented by Q and the moon
by p, which are pictorial outlines, (See appendix A)
though they are now written 0 and 0. it is easy
to understand why the symbol 0 oro came to be used
for day, which is equivalent to one sun, but it probably
was long before it occurred to any one to place the cha-
racters for sun and moon together to signifly light, or
brightness.
From the idea of brightness to that of enlightment
in the Intellectual sense, is a still wider step, but the
same character is used to convey this Idea and may be
seen on any of the Japanese coins of the present era of
Meiji (iHio), which means “Enlightened Government”.
Thus it is that the pictorial writing of early man has
gradually come to adapt itself to the expression of ideas
other than those of the object which they originally
delineated. It will Interest the reader no doubt and
assist his memory, to trace back the origin of the
characters on the Japanese coins, to their archaic forms.
With this object I have placed in an appendix a list of
the characters on the antique coins with their primitive
pictorial forms, as far as I can trace them, and the
meanings which they probably conveyed.
It is generally supposed that the written language of
the Chinese presents such a forbidding aspect and
bristles with technical difficulties of almost insurmoun-
table extent, so that none but those who devote their
whole lifetime to the task, can hope to have more than a
nodding acquaintance with it. To learn to write the
characters is no easy matter, but it is not essential to


master the writing of Chinese, while simply to read them
is a good exercise for the attention, involving little or no
fatigue. To be able to read the inscriptions on the
coins of Japan involves a very limited area of ideogra-
phic acquirement, yet it is an end in itself and no one
need feel incapable of quickly mastering it. This result
achieved, the reader will have the satisfaction of having
got to the root of his subject, and the pleasure of viewing
or collecting these coins will be greatly enhanced.
The mottoes are often of great interest. They
belong to the order of sentiment which is based
partly on theological, and partly on purely human
interest. “The First Treasure of Divine Merit”, “The
Eternal Treasure of Prosperous Peace”, are examples of
the earlier mottoes, whose grandiose sentiments wore
often sadly at variance with the actual stateof thecoinage,
or the conditions that attended its debut. Many of these
coins bear the name of the “Nengo” or year period in
which they were issued, and serve in this way to
punctuate Japanese history. It has been the custom,
from very early times in Japan, to mark the occurrence
of special events, such as an accession to the throne or
some other fact of real or fancied significance, by
changing the name of the period in which it occurred.
The new period thus inaugurated, was named so as to
conform in some way with the new event; thus the
period Taiho, or Great Treasure (A. D. 701) marks the
discovery of gold, or (more correctly perhaps) silver;
Wado, or Japan Copper, the finding of this useful metal
in notable amount; while Genwa (1615) or Commence-
ment of Concord, celebrates the peace which though
temporary, practically established the Tokugawa
Dynasty on the throne of the Shogunate.
The coins themselves are especially interesting on
account of their variety of design and motto, while those


of the antique group carry us back over a thousand years
to the dawn of Japanese history. Those little relics,
precipitated as it were, from the obscurity of the past,
beg to assure us that the civilisation of that time was
no myth, but a real if elementary fact, and that they
came into being in order to further the needs of a
progressive people. To the Japanese collector, those
coins of earlier origin are particularly fascinating on
account of the “Sabi” which has formed upon them and
which bears testimony to their antiquity. The word
“verdigris” may be used to convey an idea of this
“Sabi” which is found on these bronze coins, but it does
not quite cover ail that is implied in this expression.
The “basic acetate of copper” is doubtless apropos when
the door plate is neglected and the copper stew pan
wears bare, but I am convinced that this chemical
substance is not the whole of “Sabi”.
Even in its literal sense, the expression “verdegris”
is not always appropriate, for there is a blood-red Sabi
which is supposed to take about a thousand years to
form and which is found especially on those coins which
have been buried with the dead. Ido not know whether
that time is absolutely necessary for the production of
this red colour, but I have only seen it on coins of
venerable age. As many of the antique coins in existence
have been recovered from old graves, it is evident that
some special condition must encourage this red Sabi,
which is but seldom found. Of the green Sabi there are
many kinds and varied hues. Sometimes it is of a dark
olive tint, sometimes it is almost black, or it may be
grass green or even blue. The best of all, no matter the
colour, is when it lies on the coin with a thick glaze upon
it, like the varnish of a Cremona violin. Rarely it is
almost transparent and I have seen it till up the body of
the coin, so that the characters were covered, though


plainly to be seen underneath the translucent coating.
Here probably, some silicate (perhaps of lead) had
formed a glassy covering. Indeed it may be questioned
whether the word Sabi does not include many chemical
compounds of the various metals which are to be found
on the bronze of these coins. When one has been long
buried in lime soil, it acquires a Sabi of-green mixed
with creamy filling, often crystalline. In water con-
taining iron, it becomes coated with a thin yellowish
film and it is astonishing how very fresh and new may
be the appearance of coins which have been immersed
for centuries in water.
The antique coins are frequently very brittle and
require careful handling, while one wonders often at
their exceedingly light weight. Five specimens of
nearly or quite the same size, of a coin called the Jinko
Kaiho, in my collection, weighed respectively in centi-
grammes, 500.5, 465.5, 456, and 355, whereas the book
called the Dai Nihon Kwaheishi gives the heaviest weight
of this coin as 1.05 fun, which is about 394 centigrammes,
This difference of 21 per cent in the weight of coins
which present not more than five per cent variation in
size, is remarkable and at first sight might be attributed
to some dissimilarity in the quality of the metal of which
they were made. The reason however is to be found in
the action of the earthy salts with moisture, and perhaps
the action of free ammonia in the soil, which combine to
dissolve the metals (especially the baser ones) of which
the coin is made. Thus it acquires a spongy consistence
and becomes both light and brittle. Another factor in
lessening the weight of these coins accounts also for the
frequency with which one comes across coins which have
no Sabi at all. Japan is a country of earthquakes and
consequently wooden houses, and it Is not surprising that
conflagations are very common. Many genuine old coins


have been burnt in this manner and the softer metals
have been melted or vaporised, leaving' the copper and
some other residnm behind. The Sabi has of course
shared the fate of the above and disappeared. It is an
unwritten law that this garb of antiquity cannot be
bestowed more than once upon the same coin, but it may
happen that an attenuated and inferior Sabi forms on a
coin which has been burnt, so that the above statement
must not bo taken as absolute. For a reason which will
presently be mentioned, the collector of Japanese coins
looks with suspicion upon such burnt coins, though
many of them are quite genuine.
The earliest record of coin collecting in Japan, appears
to have been written before the period of Keicho, 1596,
1615, but it was not until the Qenroku period 1681-1704-
that it became a regular cult. At this time the family
of the Tokugawa was established in the office of Shogun
and invested with the control of affairs, and the Daimyos
were beginning to settle down to something like a peace-
ful life. The collecting of coins soon became a fashionable
craze, and the active Japanese mind found some vent for
its surplus energy in the classification of these tokens of
civilisation. The coins of China were especially sought
after: even those of Annam and Corea seem to have
been held in greater esteem than those of Japan itself.
Like the “Tulip craze” in Europe, this enthusiasm
affected all classes of society from the Daimyo to the
artisan. Bare coins were enthroned in ivory boxes,
decorated with lacquer of gold, the pride and joy of
their owners and winners of the respectful admiration of
the select few who were permitted to view their charms.
Much literature was devoted to the subject and though
mistakes were not few, still there was much accurate
work done in the classification, not only of Japanese but
of other Ideographic coins. Indeed, with the exception


of the Chinese work entitled the “Ko Sen Wai”, it may
be said that the accuracy of the classification by Japa-
nese collectors and scholars has not been approached by
those of the greater empire. From the period of Bunsei,
1818-30, many works have appeared which would do
credit to any learned society of Europe. It is from
these that I have gleaned in the following pages most of
the information which is contained therein.
It will be understood that such enthusiasm and
zeal in the acquistlon of coins, of which many were rare
and some were scarcely to be duplicated, led to their
Imitation on a very wide scale. As the Chinese coins
were held in greater estimation than those of Japan, it
follows that these have been mostly the subject of
imitation, but the rare coins of this counry have
also been forged for the delectation of the unwary
collector. It is well to be specially careful therefore,
when offered these rare specimens, most of which are no
longer obtainable in the market. The beginner would do
well to confine his attention to those that are easily pro-
curable. Specimens even of the antique coins can be had
for a few shillings each, though the better and rarer
kinds are very expensive. Prom a respectable dealer
one can purchase “models,” imitations, of the rare
varieties, some of which are “really old” (but made
within the last two hundred years) and he can trust to
time and extended experience to acquire some of the
genuine ones.
Until the present era of Meiji, the government coins
of Japan, with the exception of some gold and silver
ones, have been cast, not struck. The currency was copper
diluted with other metals that is to say, bronze, and the
quality was rather inferior in many of the coins, so that
the metal was not suited to the process of stamping. When
a coin was to be made, a sample was engraved and sub-


mitted to the officials in charge of the currency. From the
impression of this on clay, a certain number of “Tane”or
“Seed” coins were made of the best finish, and these were
used for the purpose of “sowing” or impressing the
surfaces of the coin on clay moulds. They are therefore
much rarer than the ordinary coins and are surrounded
by the halo of original sanctity. These moulds were
then cut out so as to form connecting channels between
each coin impression. After the mould was heated, the
molten metal was poured in. It will be understood that
one side of the mould contained the obverse and the
other the reverse, which were apposed, so that the result-
ing east was a complete coin, or rather a series of coins
arranged in rows and connected by the metal which had
been poured through the connecting channels. These
were broken off and filed so as to have uniform edges.
It should be well kept in mind that the coins
of Japan have a flat edge like this n ; not rounded
like this, o. This point is of great importance, for
coins which are forged or imitated have been cast
on a» smaller scale and in doing so it is very difficult
to get this flat edge. The filing of the edges quite
flat, was done with many coins ip rouleaux, so that
many edges were finished at one time. This art is
said to have been specialised in certain families. This
may be so; at any rate it is certain that this edge is
something quite special, and not to be easily imitated.
When the edge of an imitation coin has been flattened it
may usually be noticed that it is not perfectly even, the
result of filing it as an individual coin. The body of the
coin is less likely to be of uniform thickness, especially
at the edges, owing to imperfection of the mould and the
smaller quantity of metal used. The bronze coins have
almost always a square central hole. In the case of the
antique coins this was not filed, so that early coins with


marks of the file on the edges of this hole are to be
regarded with suspicion.
The quality of the metal used is also of much
importance in deciding the reliability of the older
coins, it being less brassy in colour in the genuine
than in the imitated ones. The mould which was
used in the making of government coins was usually
of the finest clay, so that but few marks were left
on the surface of the resulting coin. This is not the case
with imitation coins. In the vast majority of these a
distinct sandy appearance is to be noticed in the field of
the coin, as if cast from a course grained mould. Then
there is something quite characteristic about the appear-
ance of the writing in the genuine government coins,
which I can scarcely describe, but which like the expres-
sion of a face, gives at the first glance, an indication as to
their real nature. The characters are cleaner cut, and
less rounded on the surface than those of imitated
coins, but wear and tear effect a certain degree of
obliteration which is apt to be mistaken for this. In
such cases however, attention to the above points will
enable the connoisseur to distinguish almost Infallibly
between true and false coins. Some of the imitations
which have been made during the last two centuries are
so exactly like the genuine coins that a careful scrutiny
is essential and here the condition of the Sabi is of
importance, for it is most difficult to imitate. Like the
famous Cremona varnish, it imparts to an antique coin
the semblance of authentic age and like it, has had many
imitators. Chemical treatment has not reached such a
degree of perfection that an expert can be deceived. The
best substitute hitherto found, and a good one, is the coat-
ing of the coin with coloured lacquer. To detect this it is
usually necessary to scratch the coin, and owners are na-
turaly unwilling to permit their treasures to be injured.


There are three methods by which the best imitations
are made. The first consists in making an impression
of the real coin in clay, which is then used as a mould.
The resulting coin is an exact model of the true one, but
is slightly smaller, because the clay mould, which has to
be heated for the reception of the molten metal, con-
tracts somewhat in the process. This is sometimes
counteracted by increasing the width of the rim; hence
suspicion is apt to attach to unusally wide margins in
certain coins, though there are some varieties which are
specially characterised by this feature. There is some-
thing about the appearance of such coins, as above
stated, which leads one to suspect them, the characters
having a lack of definition and the body a want of
uniform surface. The second method consists of taking
a real coin and either renovating an indistinct character,
or cutting out one or two characters and replacing them
by others, so as to change the coin to the likeness of a
rarer one. Sometimes a portion of a coin is broken off,
and one character altered so as to make it appear as an
imperfect specimen of a rare variety. The character can
be replaced by excavating the site of the new character,
which is then filled in with molten metal and carved
out, after hardening. The third plan is to paint with
lacquer one or more characters on a coin, or to alter
the style of writing in this way. Some of these imita-
tions are perfect works of art, and not at all easy to
detect. Poorer imitations are made by pasting a
tracing of a genuine coin on wood, which is then
engraved and used to make the impression on the clay
mould. They have even been made by being copied
from the illustrations in works on numismatics, but are
then easily detected. It is not uncommon to see
specimens which some painstaking person has evolved
from his inner consciousness, no such coin having been


in existence. Probably these had their moment of
triumph, followed by exposure and disgrace. Some of
them are nicely made and may belong to the order of
fancy coins or medals, of which there is a superabun-
dance. Many of the latter were made of silver, in imita-
tion of noted coins. Together with the picture coins of
Japan, they have a place in a work of this kind, though
not current coin, nor properly speaking, coin at all.
Illustrations of these will be found in the last chapter.
Tracings on paper are of great value to the collector
of ideographic coins, who cannot always possess genuine
specimens. At first these were made by painting ink on
the coins, which were then covered with tissue paper,
which shewed the impression in an incomplete way, on
the other side. The present method was first used by
the Daimyo Masatsuna Kucbiki, ruler of Fukuchiyama,
who adapted it from the old method of taking im-
pressions of ancient tiles. The coin is placed on a piece
of wooden board, covered witli three or four layers of
Japanese paper. This is slightly moistened at the spot
where the coin is to be placed, so that the latter may not
slip during the process. A piece of thin tissue paper,
preferably of the finely ribbed variety known as “Haku-
shi,” is moistened with water and after being half
dried, is placed over the coin and pressed closely to it
with a small pad of cotton wool. Any excess of mois-
ture is removed by pressing another piece of tissue paper
upon it. The clearness of the impression is thus secured,
as the paper will not take the ink properly if too damp.
The ink used is of that pasty kind, called “Niku,”
having an oily menstruum which is made to saturate
the fibres of a plant called the Mogusa (Artemesia moxa).
This is covered with silk, to prevent the fibres from
getting on to the pad which transfers the ink to the
coin.


This pad Is made with cotton wool, about three
quarters of an inch in diameter and is covered with
fine silk. By pressing It on to the ink, removing
excess by rubbing it against another pad, and then
lightly touching with it thp paper covering the coin
an excellent impression is obtained, which, after,
drying, is indelible. Before drying, the slip of paper
is pressed between blotting paper, so as to take out any
creases that remain. In this manner I have pre-
pared most of the illustrations for this work.
I would advise collectors of coins to adopt the method
above outlined, so that they may have correct delinea-
tions for reference. To take the impression of a coin in this
manner, occupies not more than three minutes for both
obverse and reverse. Societies exist throughout Japan
for the study of numismatics. These publish at varying
intervals, journals which are illustrated simply by past-
ing these slips of tissue paper or “Uchigata” as they are
called, on to the leaves. These might be exchanged for
similar impressions of the coins of other lands and thus
the science of numismatics could not fail to benefit.
The first hook writtten on the coinage of Japan was
called the “Kwacho Buieu”,* or “Classified Collection of
Coins”, but it only appeared in manuscript. It was
written about the period of Tenwa, 1681-83. The story
goes that the Daimyo Toyama of the Province of Etcliu
was asked to write it, but being unable, or unwilling
lie asked one Tennojiya Chozaemon of Osaka, to do so.
The dislike of high, or military personages to have their
names even academically associated with filthy lucre,
*. 'lhe origin of the word Kwacho, as a synonym for coin, dates back to
the time of the To Dynasty of China. The Emperor Bokuso, so says the
legend, gave a great reception at court, during which many butterflies
entered the palace and clung to the flowers which decorated the reception
hall. The courtiers and ladies had some difficulty in capturing these, and
the Emperor ordered the butterflies to be caught in nets and sent to the
houses of his guests. Imagine the surprise of the latter, when they found
that they had turned to gold coins I Hence the word “ Kwacho,” which
means “Disguised Butterfly.”


was most marked. The next work of any note was
entitled the “Hanji Roku,” or “Catalogue of Coins”.
It was also written by hand and appeared in 14 volumes,
during the period of Kyoho, 1716-35. The author was
Senoo Ryusai. The “Wakan Kohodzukan,” or “Illustra-
tions of Japanese and Chinese Coins,” is another work of
the same period, written by Nakatani Kozan. On
account of the lack of reference, there are mistakes in
these early works, but they are evidence of the keen
spirit of enquiry and scientific investigation which was
abroad in the land a century and a half before the
“civilisation” of the Meiji period.
About the period of Meiwa, A. D. 1764-71, Fujiwara
Teikan, a learned man and ardent antiquarian, wrote
several books on coins, his work on the Kwanei coins
being still regarded as the classical treatise on the
subject. About this time or a little earlier, Unno So in in
of Osaka, who had acquired a very complete collection of
Chinese and Japanese coins, wrote a “Continuation of
the Kacho Ruien”, but it was not printed. Towards the
end of the eighteenth century the daimyo Kuchiki Masa-
tsuna, better known by his nom de plume Rlukyo, order-
ed one of his retainers to publish the “Kokon Senkwa
Kan” in his own name, as it was then considered
beneath the dignity of one of his rank to write on matters,
connected with money. This work is in twenty volumes
and is of great assistance to collectors. In the latter
part of that century too, the celebrated book called the
“Wakan Sen II” or “Collection of Japanese and Chinese
Coins” was written by Yoshikawa Iken. The first
volume, dealing with the Coins of Japan was alone
issued; it is a comprehensive treatise on the Japanese sen,
but does not go into the varieties of the Kwanei coins.
Other notable numismatists were Kawamura
Hadzumi, who wrote the “Kisei Hyaku En,” a well


known work; Omura Naritomi, author of the accurate
and useful book, the “Chin Sen Kihin Dzuroku”; Kariya
Kwaishi, who produced the “Shin Kosei Koho
Dzukan”; Narushima Rynhoku, who wrote the very ac-
curate work “Meiji Shin Sen Sempu”, theiast volume of
which was compiled by Morita Jihei. Nor must one forget
to mention that luminous and voluminous book (in thirty
six volumes), the “Ko Sen Tai Sen” the work of Imai
Teikichl. A list of these and other works on numismatics
will be found in the appendix.
Amongst professional experts too, are some who have
illuminated the subject of far Eastern coins. Quite a
romantic story attaches to the entry of Inouye Qeni into
the profession of coin expert. Having lost his fortune and
being reduced to poverty, he sought inspiration at the
shrine of Kwannon in Asakusa. For seven days
he went without food and for seven days he prayed
fervently for a sign. On the seventh day while absorbed
in his devout supplication, something struck him on the
neck and fell down his back within the loose garment
worn by Japanese. This something was a coin which
some one, whom we will suppose to have been an elderly
female, had tried to throw into the Sai Sen Bako, or
offering box of the Temple. (See Frontispiece). Now this
very coin is illustrated in Plate I, No. 5, chapter 4, and is
excessively rare; Indeed there are not supposed to be
more than two in existence. It is mentioned at page
13. Inouye who had considerable knowledge of coins,
was, we may be sure, struck with wonder when he
inspected this rare specimen and immediately regarded it
as an omen from the deity. With confidence and
determination he established his office near the entrance
to the Temple and for three generations this family
carried on the business of Kosensho or coin merchant.




PREHISTORIC AND PROTO HISTORIC,
XT may be taken as an axiom, that in no time or
place, have the capabilities of man, and the oppor-
tunities of his environment, been so evenly distributed
that all products of human industry were fashioned
exactly alike, in quality or number, by each individual
member of the race. There must always have been a
time when some one was able to make a certain article
of better quality, or more abundantly than his neigh-
bours. Even in the most rudimentary stage of culture,
to-wit, the early paleolithic age, when rough splinters of
stone did duty for weapons and implements wherewith to
cut sticks and to carve bone and horn, some one must
have been able to make or to use these splinters with
greater facility than those around him. Thus the origi-
nal craftsman came to have a surplus which he could ex-
change for other commodities of which he stood in need,
but could not so easily produce. In this way, the earliest
act of commerce was initiated, to which we now give the
name of barter. The boy at school, who exchanges a top
and four marbles for a two-bladed knife, illustrates the
principle of barter as carried on by the primeval savage.
Without committing ourselves to a statement of relative
values, we may suppose that those remote ancestors
of ours might have exchanged ten stone arrow-heads,
(counted on the fingers,) for a shoulder of venison, a


couple of skins to cover the body and, at a later period,
some vessels of wood, or rude pottery.
A decided advance on this trading by barter was
accomplished when arrow-heads, which were necessarily
in the possession of all, came to be recognised as a con-
venient medium which could be stored until required,
and exchanged at will for other commodities. In this
way arrow-heads might acquire a value quite apart from
their utility as weapons. They vyould in fact constitute
money, of a very primitive kind, but serving all the
purposes of a medium of exchange: that is to say,
having a fairly constant value in themselves, they would
gradually come to bear a recognised ratio to other
commodities, whose value could thus be adjusted on the
principle that things which were equal to a given
number of arrow-heads were equal in value to each other.
Tylor, in his “Anthropology” gives an excellent illustra-
tion of such primitive standards of value at a period,
which, though much later and higher than the above,
still lacked what we are accustomed to regard as essential
to trade, namely, a metallic currency. “In the old
world” he says, “many traces have come down of the
times when value was regularly reckoned in cattle; as
where in the Illiad, in the description of the funeral
games, we read of the great prize tripod that was valued
at twelve oxen, while the female slave who was the
second prize was worth only four oxen. Here the
principle of unit of value is already recognised, for not
only could the owner of oxen buy tripods and slaves with
them, hut also he who had a twelve ox tripod to sell


could take in exchange three slaves reckoned at four oxen
each.” In the later neolithic, and certainly in the
bronze and early iron stages of European civilisation,
cattle were a favourite medium of exchange. The
English word “fee” which was also an equivalent for
money, was derived from the Anglo-Saxon “feoh,”
meaning cattle, while every one knows that the expres-
sion “pecuniary” comes from the Latin “pecunia,”
money, itself being derived from “pecus”, cattle. In
430 8.C., the Lex Julia Papiria ordered that fines should
be paid in money instead of cattle. It is possible that
the word “oof”, vulgarly applied to money, might be
traced to “hoof,” which is used to designate the foot
of certain animals, but was formerly applied to the
animals themselves, especially when counting them for
sale or exchange. The common Japanese word for
money is “O Ashi,” honourable foot.
Various are the commodities which, in different
times and places, have done duty as currency. Fur,
amongst the people of Northern Europe and America,
olive oil in the Mediterranean, salt in Abyssinia, in
Iceland dried fish, in Africa the iron blades of hoes, brass
wire, beads,* cloth and shells have been, and in some
places still are used as money. In Asia and the East
of Africa, the cowrie shell was employed for a similar
purpose, while in North America the haiqua shell and
wampum served the same object. It is interesting to
note that those words in Chinese relating to money
* In plate 1, tig. (i, are seen lour beads of Diue glass, from the dolmens of
Japan, with a bead of carnelian. These, with tig. P, were possibly in use as
money, 2000 years ago or more.
Pig. H. of the same plate, illustrates the cut shell money of Micronesia.


usually have the character “kai” () meaning a shell,
as a component, surely a suggestive survival! The
Indians of America used discs and other shapes of
“lignite, coal, bone, shell, terra-cotta, mica, pearl,
cornelian, chalcedony, agate, jasper, native gold, silver,
copper, lead and iron, whicli were fashioned into forms
evincing a skill in art to -which the descendants of the
aborigines now surviving are strangers.”* These
specimens of “money” are often inscribed with archaic
drawings and hieroglyphs, and some with characters
which were identified by Schoolcraft as those of the
“ancient rock alphabet” used by the Pelasgi and oilier
Mediterranean nations.
The rings of silver and gold, used by the Celts, and
other early nations of Europe, as well as amongst the
people of Asia and America, seem to have been used as
money in the days of primitive civilisation. Dr. Moritz
Hoernes says “Ornament was equal to riches, since it
frequently constituted a man’s sole possessions. Much
decoration signified a well filled purse, for the ornaments
mostly in use were the representatives of money, for
which more useful articles were exchanged. Nor could
a more secure place for them be found than on the
person of the owner. For this reason the most ancient
money recognised as European has the form of rings.”f
He goes on to say, “They are recognised as money by
the fact that they are all of different weight, whilst an
additional proof is furnished by the circumstance that
* “The American Numismatic Manual ” by M. W. Dickeson, M.D.
+ “ Primitive Man ” P. 13


they are held together by another ring which takes
the place of the purse.” What he probably intended
to say was that though of different weight, these rings
are proportioned to a definite standard of weight,
true at least with regard to the Celtic rings, whereas
the fact of their all being of different weight would
by no means prove their claim to be regarded
as money. Rings resembling these have been in
use in Eastern Asia, including Japan, for at least 2500
years, but in the latter country at least, gold seems to
have been very scarce and copper to have been rather
a precious metal, for they are usually made of the latter
covered by beaten gold, or silver. Sometimes, probably
for the sake of lightness, they were made hollow and
covered in the same manner with beaten gold. They
are found in the ancient stone sepulchres of Japan which
are akin to the dolmens of Europe. They are called “Kin
Kwan” and “Gin Kwan” according to whether they are
made of gold or silver. (Figs. B& 0, Plate 1.)
From the great numbers which have been found, it
might also be argued that the cut crystal beads, called
“Kiri Kodama,” (Fig. D) the claw or comma shaped
“Magatama”f (Fig. A) of agate, jade, <fec., and the
f There has been much discussion as to the nature and significance of
these Magatama. It has been suggested that they are embryonic forms,
but it is more likely that they were shaped after the claw of some animal,
possibly a tiger. This is supported by the existence of claw-shaped stones
closely resembling the talon of the tiger, one in my collection being almost
an exact model. The tiger’s claw is the strongest of amulets even to this
day in Corea. Lastly, the word “Magatama”, which is supposed to come
from “ Maga," curved, and “Tama”, a gem, may, with equal propriety, as
it seems to me, derive its latter portion from the archaic form of “Tsume”,
namely “Tume”, a talon or nail. The character in which it is written was
given to it long after its coming into favour and about two centuries before
the end of the dolmen period. The word “ Kudatama” refers to its tube-
like fkudaj form. “Kiri Kodama” means cut crystal jewels or gems.


cylindrical “Kudatama” (Fig. E) were used as a means
as well as a token of wealth.
I am strongly inclined to believe also that the small
arrow-heads of agate and other superior stone which
existed in Japan previous to the dolmen age, may
have been a form of primitive money (Fig. I). Ac-
cording to many archeologists, these have been used
for the hunting of small birds, but it is scarcely
credible that such superior stone, so difficult to
obtain and to fashion into arrow-heads, could have been
employed in shooting among shrubs and trees where,
from their small size they were very likely to get lost.
Besides, many of these “arrow-heads” are only shaped to
suggest the title and not adapted to the purpose of
shooting. Those illustrated in Fig. I appear somewhat
larger than in reality.
Such considerations as the foregoing relate entirely
to prehistoric civilisation and are applicable, in a work
of this kind, only as a foundation on which to rest the
more definite superstructure of knowledge gained by
historical research. They belong to the domain of
archeology, rather than to history which, rigidly defined,
is the narrative of past events compiled from con-
temporary record. The written document is thus held
to be the best witness of its truth. Judged by this
standard, the dawn of Japanese history must be placed
in the beginning of the eighth century of our era, for
the first known record called the “Kojiki” was not com-
pleted till the year 712 A.l). The twilight which
precedes the dawn had begun however, some three




hundred years previously, when the art of reading and
writing arrived with the Chinese ideograph,* and it is
safe to assume that the accounts given of this interval
are not entirely legendary. It may be called the
Protohistoric Period of Japanese civilisation. Its inter-
est to the numismatist lies in this, that it has been
credited with the production of a coinage which has
fallen into oblivion, and left only the vestiges of its
former existence. How far this surmise may be correct
it is our present object to enquire. As the condition of
the Japanese people however, prior to, and during these
three centuries, is not without bearing on the question ot
the existence of protohistoric coins, I propose to give it
some brief consideration.
The Japanese people area mixture of various offshoots
of the Mongolian race, but they possess distinct traces
of Aryan blood. My present belief is that three and
possibly more stocks are represented in the modern
Japanese. There were first the autochthones or indigenes,
who have disappeared or merged into the common
blend, before rising out ot the stone age, but whose
knowledge of various arts of civilisation, such as the
making and decoration of pottery was equal if not
superior to that of the aborigines of America. They
were probably a people of no great stature. Their
remains have been found as far north as the Kurile
islands and might possibly be traced to the continent
*Wani, the first teacher of the Chinese character, mentioned in the Kojilcli
is stated to have arrived at a date corresponding to 284 A,D., but Aston has
shown that it should properly lie placed about the beginning of the sth.
century.


of America while they extended to the southern islands
(the Luchus), and similar remains have been found in
Formosa. Next came the Ainu, a hunting race,
probably from northern Siberia, who resemble the Euro-
pean rather than the Mongol, being very hirsute with
wavy hair and horizontal eyes. This race still exists
in Yezo, and the northern islands, to the number
of sixteen thousand. They have no knowledge of
pottery making, though they have, during the present
era of Meiji taken on some of the arts of civilisation in
a very limited way. Though this small remnant of ori-
ginal stock seems quite insignificant, still these people
are largely mixed with the modern Japanese and it is
probably from them that the Japanese derive their leaven
of Aryan blood. Probably about, or a little previous
to 1000 B.C. there came an invasion of virile stock, from
the mainland of Asia, through, if not entirely from, what
is now Corea. It is a moot question whether there were
not two invasions, and I am even Inclined to suppose that
there was an anterior invasion, perhaps about 2000
B. C, or earlier, of a people in the bronze age, but this
cannot be discussed here. The latter invaders used
weapons of iron only, excepting bronze arrow-heads in
limited numbers, and they (at least their chief warriors)
were protected by iron armour and helmets, while they
rode horses caparisoned with cloth and bells, witli
beautifully wrought ornaments of studded iron work,
covered with silver and gold. Though probably much
Inferior in numbers, the great superiority of their
weapons and military qualities gave them much the


same advantage over their foes as if half a dozen
modern battleships were to engage the whole Armada.
In time they blended with the indigenes and the con-
quered Ainu, and having killed most of their male
Opponents in battle, or massacre, it maybe taken for
granted that this mixture was accomplished with
greater celerity than had the immigration been of a
peaceful character. Whether these invaders were pure
Mongols is doubtful.
A mythological account of the beginning of things
and of the lineal descent of emperors from godlike
ancestors (invaders), is contained in the “Ko-Jiki” or
Kecords of Ancient Matters. It belongs to the same
intellectual order as the Mosaic account of creation, but
is less simple and refined. It was compiled by order of
the Emperor Temmu, and written down, after his
death, to the dictation of one Hiyeda no Are, who had
memorised these ancient legends. It was completed as
previously stated, in the year -712 A. D., and the later
portions, say from the end of the 4th century, contain
some true history. This has however been reduced to
somewhat thin proportions by the criticism of such
scholars as Chamberlain and Aston, who have shewn
that many of its dates are not reliable and that its facts
areas islands in a lake of traditional Action. This work,
unlike its younger and more fashionable sister, the
“Nihongi” or Chronicles of Japan, completed in 720 A.D.,
is written mainly in archaic Japanese, and its originality
may pass without question. By the use of the
etymological spade, Professor Chamberlain has found,


amongst the often incoherent language of the Kojiki, the
material from which ho has been able to sketch the sur-
roundings of the prehistoric .and protohlstoric Japanese
and to give us some idea of their mode of living, during
at least the latter period. This is contained in the
introduction to his translation of the Kojiki, and in the
following account, his remarks are freely quoted.
“The Japanese of the mythical period, as pictured
in the legends preserved by the compiler of the “Records
of Ancient Matters,” were a race who had long emerged
from the savage state, and had attained to a high level
of barbaric skill. The stone age was forgotten by them,
or nearly so, and the evidence points to their never
having passed through a genuine bronze age *** They
used iron for manufacturing spears, swords, and knives
of various shapes, and likewise for the more peaceful
purpose of making hooks wherewith to angle, or to
fasten the doors of their huts. Their other warlike and
hunting implements (besides traps and gins), which
appear to have been used equally for beasts and birds,
and for destroying human enemies), were bow and
arrows, spears and elbow pads, the latter seemingly' of
skin, while special allusion is made to the fact that the
arrows were feathered.” Mention is made of the “pestle
and morter, of the Are drill, of the wedge, of the sickle,
and of the shuttle used in weaving.” Boats were not
unknown, but there is little reference, and that doubtful,
to the art of sailing. This may possibly help to
strengthen the supposition that their sea passage to
Japan was a short one, that they r were not a maritime


people previous to the invasion, and that they came from
the mainland and not from the Malay archipelago, as has
been surmised. Their palaces were wooden huts, with a
hole In the roof for the escape of smoke from the fire
which was used in cooking. The doors opened and shut
like those of Europe, rather than like the sliding doors
of modern Japan. Rugs of skin, rush, matting and even
of silk are mentioned. Personal cleanliness received
some attention and latrines were in use. Fish, the
flesh of wild animals, and rice were used, as well as the
alcoholic beverage called sake. “Cooking pots and
dishes, the latter both of earthenware and of the leaves
of trees, are mentioned, but of the use of fire for warming
purposes, wo hear nothing. Tables are mentioned several
times, but never in connection with food. * * * In the use
of clothing and the specialisation of garments, the early
Japanese had reached a high level. We read in the most
ancient legends of upper garments, skirts, trowsers,
girdles, veils and hats, while both sexes adorned them-
selves with necklaces, bracelets, and other ornaments
of stones considered precious.” Ear-rings of copper
covered with gold (Kin Kwan) were in vogue and a clay
image of the dqlmen period in my possession illustrates
their use in this respect. These, together with the
“Magatama” and other ornaments of superior stone,
probably took the place of money, the latter idea, it may
be, having arisen from the similar use of arrow-heads of
superior stone, in a previous age.
The protohistoric interval, of little over three
centuries before thp period ofWado, witnessed a gradual


rise of culture to a higher level than that outlined in
the above sketch. The arrival of Buddhism, about the
middle of this interval, must have carried in its slow but
steady progress, the elements of such enlightenment as
the use of the ideograph and the inculcation of the
higher moral precepts could bestow on those who came
within its reach. In many other ways, the increasing
intercourse between China and Corea, brought, not only
such literature as the times afforded, but the knowledge
of various arts, for instance, silk rearing and weaving
and the working of metals. The constant warfare of
these early times had, doubtless long ere this, developed
the art of weapon making to a degree even superior to
that of the great invasion. We are told also, that
tliis interval produced a large image of Buddha, cast in
bronze, and garnished with gold, so that the arts of
metallurgy were not unknown. Most, however, of the
copper and bronze ornaments, mirrors, etc., which have
been found in the stone tombs, or dolmens, are of
Chinese or Corean origin. The scarcity of iron and
copper was such that weapons and mirrors were some-
times copied in soft stone and placed in tombs for the
service of the dead, though it was considered of the
highest importance to provide the departed with the
proper equipment for their long voyage. The scarcity
of gold and copper is a theme upon which the old
historians have much to say. It would seem as if the
efforts of the protohistorie Japanese were mainly
directed to squeezing tributes of these metals from the
minor kingdoms which now constitute Corea. Aston


and Chamberlain have shewn that these expeditions were
neither so numerous nor so uniformly successful as the
early accounts would lead us to suppose, but their
object is none the less clear.
It may be that the influx of gold or copper was not
entirely in the form of loot or compulsory tribute and
that it was limited by reason of the fact that Japan
was not always able to provide an acceptable quid pro
quo. To this dearth of these metals we may trace the
comparative rarity of bronze or copper ornaments of the
protohlstoric age, though we should not lose sight of the
later conversion of such metallic objects into images of
Buddha. What do remain are mostly of Chinese origin
and bear out the supposition that until the period of
Wado, copper was a rare and practically precious metal.
The principal occupation of the Japanese at this time
seems to have been fighting, with a background of
agriculture to retire upon; and they probably had little
opportunity, or taste for acquiring the higher arts of
civilisation. The account given of the Anglo-Saxons by
David Hume, in his History of England, is fairly
applicable to the Japanese of the pre-Wado period.
“The military profession alone was honourable among all
these conquerors; the warriors subsisted by their pos-
sessions in land; they were in general a rude, uncultivated
people, ignorant of letters, unskilled in the mechanical
arts, untamed to submission under law and govern-
ment, addicted to intemperance,* riot and disorder.
Their best quality was their military courage, which
* This Is supported by the account of a contemporary traveller frcm
China.


yet was not supported by discipline or conduct.” The
government of the pre-Wado era, however, seems to
have taken a fatherly, if selfish, interest in the welfare
of its subjects, a virtue to which the Heptarchy in
England has but little claim.
The dolmens, or stone sepulchral chambers of the
early Japanese, ceased to be built about a century be-
fore the Wado period, and it is practically certain that
no coins were then in existence. Mr. William Howland,
who had exceptional opportunities of studying this sub-
ject, and who examined no fewer than four hundred dol-
mens, states with regard to the burial of the dead,
‘‘When a warrior was laid in these rude stone chambers
of the dead, his wants in a future world where he was
supposed to continue his existence, were supplied in no
unstinted measure. He was clothed in his robes, adorned
with his personal ornaments, his implements of war and
of the chase, and the bits and trappings of his horse were
all placed near him. Around and at the entrance of the
dolmen chamber were arranged offerings of food, water,
wine and flowers, in vessels of pottery, some of which
are of elaborate forms.” But “coins are absent,” he
tells us. I have visited many of these dolmens and
have made diligent enquiry in the neighbourhood of
those that had been opened, as to whether any coins
have been found, but have been unable to get one in-
stance of their being exhumed from these stone tombs.
We know that coins were made during the period of
Wado. We know that they were then placed in the
graves of the dead as a necessary part of their outfit.


Had they been in existence during the dolmen age, they
would almost certainly have been found in these tombs.
During the century that elapsed between the end of
the dolmen age and the beginning of Wado, there is no
valid evidence that there had been a metallic currency
in Japan. China had possessed such for twelve
centuries before the Wado period, and I confess that I
was greatly astonished to find that coins were lacking
in this country so late as the beginning of the Bth
century. It is stated in the historical works, “Nihon
Shoki” and “Dai Nihoushi,” that asilvercoin was made
as early as the reign of the Emperor Kenso, 485-187.
The statement in the Dai Nihonshi however, has evi-
dently been taken from the Nihon Shoki, and the latter
lias inferred it from an obscure passage in the Nihongi,
the historical accuracy of which is very much open to
question, even, as Mr. Aston has pointed out, as late as
the 6th century. Several pieces of silver have been
found, bearing the same badge or stamp, which have
been claimed by many writers on numismatics as the
coin in question. The first of these was found in the
province of O-Sumi, during the
period of Kyo-Ho, (1716-1735) ; then
in the Settsu province, in the 11th
year of Ho-Reki (1761) a number
were found, while pieces of similar
size, but with varying badge or
marks, have since been exhumed in
other places. Such a piece of sil- fig, i.
ver (figl.) bears, as Dr. Enomoto Bunshirohas pointed


out, no written character whereby its age or identity
might be ascertained, but only a crest or badge which
lias nothing to distinguish it from the stamps placed
on precious metals as a guarantee of weight. Mr. Yoko-
yama, who has specially Investigated this matter,
found that nearly a hundred pieces were exhumed
from a held at Shimpo-In, province of Settsu, in
the above-mentioned period of Horeki, but that only
two escaped destruction, one of which was owned by
himself. He could not find any evidence that these
coins were in circulation in the sth century. One which
is in my collection, is said to have been found in the soil
at the village of Kawanishl, in the province of Yamato,
in the 3rd year of Kei-O (1867); but as the Japanese are
known to have been ardent collectors of coins, fifty
years before the period of Kyoho, when the first silver
coin was found, and as imitations of old and rare coins
have been frequent since the end of the 17th century, it
is more than likely that some at least have been made
(or the delectation of collectors. This one, illustrated
FIG. 2.
in lig. 2. is open to suspicion. The silver piece above-
mentioned is known as the “Mu-mon Gin Sen,” or


uon-inscribed silver sen, in recognition of the fact that
it has no proper character or ideograph on its face,
but inasmuch as the word “Mon” implies also a crest or
badge, the definition"Mu-Mon,”meaning without writing
or badge, is regarded by Mr. Nakagawa as inappropriate;
and he proposes the term “Kwammon Gin Sen” i.e.
Flower Badge Silver Sen, which seems equally unsui-
table. This piece has apparently been roughly cast, and
then struck with a design that has been variously descri-
bed as that of the sun, moon and three stars, a flower, a
bunch of rice heads, etc., which similies are somewhat
conflicting.* If it be symbolical of anything, the rice sup-
position may be near the truth, for it is probable that
rice was used for money long after the Wado period.
On the other hand, it may have been the trade mark
of some merchant of advanced ideas, or of a local
governor, or perhaps it corresponds to something like
our hall-mark, and may have been intended as a guar-
antee of quality or weight.
Another so called coin (fig 3.) is
said to have been of copper and is
supposed by some authorities, with-
out any serious reason that I can
discover, to have been in circula-
tion even before the silver one.
It is illustrated in the older fig. 3.
books, but no specimen of it is known to exist. It
appears to have been round, with an oval hole in the
centre, and the marks of four crosses, or what have been
* On the reverse there is the mark of some stamp, but it is quite illegible.


called the “symbols of rice-plants,” arranged around the
circle. To my poor judgment, they might be taken for
rice-fields as easily as rice-plants, or even the four
leaved-shamrock. Possibly they were intended to depict
the end of a rice bag witli the straw rope tied crosswise
over it, as is now usually the case, and thus we
might suppose that these four marks represented
four bags of rice, each bag having a definite weight.
Mr. Hamath Kenjiro in an interesting little brochure
entitled “Nihon Kodai Tsuka Ko,” or Reflections on
Ancient Japanese (Mins, suggests that these are rice
plant symbols, intended to shew that this token could
be exchanged for a given amount of rice, which
latter he shews to have been used as a medium of ex-
change. It is then possible that this, and also the silver
coin, had some such function with regard to rice as a bank
note has with regard to gold, namely, that they indicated
a definite amount, for which they could be exchanged.
This surmise seems more likely than the suggestion that
one of them was a ticket for admission to the “Ko”
dance, though such tickets were in use. As it appears to
me, the most that can be said about these medals is that
they are probably pictorial, but as they do not correspond
to any known ideograph and are not sufficiently distinc-
tive, they cannot speak for themselves, and we cannot
speak for them.
The written character was known at Court at least as
early as A.D. 400 and the silver coin mentioned in the
Nihon Bhoki was produced, according to its account,
more than 80 years later. Chinese coins, which, with


the exception of their most primitive tonus, are always
inscribed, must have been known to the authorities, and
it would be very remarkable it the government of Japan
should have produced a coin at this date without the
slightest sign of a written character thereon.* As 1 have
pointed out, the historical reference to this supposed coin
rests on a very slender foundation, and we shall see that
(tven a thousand years later, history lias mentioned a coin,
the“Ken-Kon Tsu-Ho” which never went into circula-
tion.
More'interesting and more convincing to me, is the
contention of Mr. Hamada that rice was the current
medium of exchange during the later prehistoric and
protohistoric age. He states that the word “ine,” rice
in the stalk, may be recognised in “nedan” value, price,
and that the word “atai,” also meaning value, price,
worth, is derived from “ateshi”, rice equivalent. He
refers to the existence of markets during the proto-
historic period, and argues that a medium of exchange
was essential to commerce. Cloth, he says, has been
credited with this function, bnt he believes that rice was
a much more likely medium, owing to its general use
and the facility with which it could be divided. He
remarks that after the period of Wado, during which
coins were plentiful, great difficulty was experienced in
educating the people to their use, and many edicts were
published with that object. “In the Ima Mukashi
Mono Gatari,’ or “ Talks of Things Present and Past ”
♦ According to the ‘Wakan KiseiSempu” a copper coin called the
“Kai Ka Jimpo” was minted in the second year of the reign of the
Emperor Tenchi A ,D. 669, but the statement is apocryphal.


he says “a certain person Is stated to have said with
one ryo of gold I bought three koku of rice and with
the rice I bought a house,” which would indicate
that rice was more acceptable than gold as a purchas-
ing factor. It cannot be said, however, to prove that
it was the general medium of financial transactions.
There is ample evidence that rice was used in payment
of taxes after the Wado period.
The value of rice must have been subject to severe
fluctuations from climatic and other causes, such as the
devastation accompanying rude warfare; and this must
have occasioned much inconvenience. During the latter
part of the 7th century several appointments were made
relating to the establishment of a mint, and the regula-
tion of matter's concerning taxation, weights and
measures, precious metals, etc. There is no evidence,
however, that coins were actually produced, for the
reason probably that copper was not found in sufficient
quantity to justify its employment as a circulating
medium.
Perhaps the most notable event in the history of
Japan, the physical basis indeed of her later civilisation,
the auspicious omen which ushered in the accession of
the Empress Gemmyo, was the discovery of copper in
abundance in the province of Musashi. This occurred
in A.I). 707-708, and on this account, following also the
established custom of changing the year name on the
accession of a new sovereign, the last year of the period
Kei-Un was changed to Wa-Do (fn|PP) meaning Japan
Copper. At last the long deferred hope was realised.


The land had opened out its hoard of precious metal,
the solid basis of wealth and prosperity. A metallic
currency would remove the stigma of barbarism and
advance the country in the esteem of China, the source
of all its civilisation, than which no higher culture
could be imagined at that time. Thus, under the
feminine sovereignty of the Empress Qemmyo, Japan
made her first firm stride in the march of civilisation.


TUB ANTIQUE COINS.
From the first year of Wado to the second of
Tentoku, that is to say, from the year A. IX 708 to 958, a
period of two hundred and fifty years, twelve coins of
different denomination were issued by the government
of Japan. These coins, together with those that follow,
are called sen (Page 263), a word of Chinese derivation,
meaning a fountain, hence something which flows.
Our own word “currency” originates from the same basic
idea. Sen, or “O Ashi”, as they are called in common
parlance, come under the heading of “copper coinage,”
but every one knows that the copper is diluted with tin,
zinc, and sometimes lead in varying proportions, and
should properly be called bronze. The quality of the
bronze is liable to considerable variation, and in the case
of the twelve antique coins, there is to be noticed a
gradual deterioration from first to last, not only in size,
but in quality of material. The cause of this deteriora-
tion is to be found in the fact that the copper of the Wado
period became exhausted and great difficulty was ex-
perienced in getting fresh supplies for the mint. The
great wave of Buddhism, which swept over the country,
was responsible to a considerable extent for this scarcity,
for vast amounts of coin, copper ornaments and utensils,
as well as fresh supplies, went into the melting pot,


I
! mm^Wm
: tHUHI KS »3i
: \Hr
; ||^|
|
. rffjSßßw :r — :
O i2| 111
MBr


WA-DOKA'-HO This coin, the first of the Japanese sen,
fli [i'l 1)3 % is usually called “Wado Kai-Chin” and is
A. D. 7CB so named in the Japanese works on the
subject. The characters read round the coin, from the
top to the reader’s right, then down and to the
left, like the figures on a clock (figs. 1 and 2.) The
twelve antique coins are alike in this respect, but from
the 15th year of Tensho (1587) onwards, the reading* is
crosswise, from the top downwards and from right to
left. The late Mr. Narnshima Ryuhoku, an eminent
scholar and high official of the present era of Meiji, and
author of the authoritative work called the “Meiji Shin
Sen Sempu,” noticed that the character “Chin” (Jjft) on
the Wado Kaichin coin is an abbreviated form of "Ho”
meaning treasure. The character “Ho” (JJ), is
found on many of the Chinese, Annamese, Corean and
Japanese sen, and frequently occurs as a classical inscrip-
tion “Tsu Ho” (iliJlc), which reads “current treasure.”
Now, the character “Chin” (ffa), which may be described
as the middle third of the character “IIo” (Jlf), means
precious or curious, and is not used on any of the Japa-
* See illustrations in Chapter 4. Note also that the Chinese coin shown
in Fig. 3 Is read crosswise.
FIG. 1


neS e or Chinese coins. This character was probably
therefore intended as an abbreviated form of ‘-Ho. ’
This is the more likely, as the second character “Do”
(JfjJ) on this coin, is certainly written in the abridged
style, instead of in its ostial manner ln a variety
of the last of the pre-Meiji sen, called the Hunkyu Eiho
(Chapter 4), the “ Ho” is also abbreviated, but in this
case the roof, or top, and the left half of the middle
third are retained. Compare (ffo) and ('-£).
It is reasonable to suppose that, at this period,
artificers in metal wore not expert in the engraving or
casting of small objects in bronze; indeed the few
specimens left of their handicraft in metal-work, are by
no means souvenirs of skill. It is probable, therefore,
that the easier form was adopted at the expense of strict
accuracy. This impression is borne out by a glance at the
FIG. 2


earlier Wado coins, (figs. 4,5, 6, and 7). Compare them
with tigs. 1 and 2, which represent a later mintage.
There is every reason to suppose that these later son
were cast by Chinese workmen, imported for the purpose.
Their likeness to the Chinese coin “Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho”, of
the To dynasty, with regard to size, design of the face
and reverse, and the exact likeness w 7 hich the characters
“Kai” (f$J) bear to each other is so striking that it is
difficult to escape the deduction that they were minted
by artificers from the mainland. I have introduced a
specimen of the “Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho” (fig. 3.) for purpose of
comparison. At that time, China was the fountain-head
of Japanese civilisation. Previous to the Wado period,
and long subsequent to it, skilled w r orkers, male and
female, came over from China to teach various arts to
the eager Japanese.
There are other considerations which make it proba-
ble that the abbreviated characters “Do” ([tf)) and “Chin”
(4yjv), originated in the need for simplicity in the casting
of the earlier coins. The very first Wado Kaiho coin,
or Japanese Copper New (Initial or Commencing) Trea-
sure, was not made from copper, but was cast in silver.
Figs. 4 and 5 are taken from this silver coin which
FIG. 4


was cast in the fifth month of the Ist year of Wado,
while the copper one did not materialise till the
eighth month of the same year. A glance at these,and a
comparison with figs. 6 and 7 which shew the first cop-
per, ”Ko”, or old Wado sen, proves their striking simi-
larity in the writing and general clumsiness. The
silver sen was really the advance agent of the copper
coin. Take our modern bank-notes, it carried the
name of the real metallic currency of the country
but unlike them tiie material of the certificate was
of greater value than the currency which it reprc-


sented. At first this caused no inconvenience, for the
simple reason that tire currency in question was not yet
in existence, if it be asked why the first Wado son was
not made of the metal whose name it bore, I can only
surmise that Japanese officials of the mint may
have found that the copper coin, which had been adver-
tised, so to speak, to appear at a certain date, by govern,
ment edict, was more difficult to make than had been
anticipated. The characters “Wa-110 Kai-I io” ( f|] [rij
stand for something like “Japanese Copper Com-
mencing Treasure,” a distinct announcement that the
coin is of copper and that it is the first to lie made of
that metal. It is on record that the amount of copper
which was discovered in the district of Chichibn, in the
province of Musashi, was sufficient to justify the change
of the year name from Keiun to Wado, Japan Copper.
There is clear proof of the intention to make the coin of
copper, and also of the supply for that purpose. Why
was this intention not immediately carried out? Wo can
imagine, that with feminine impetuosity and patriotic
wish to uplift the name of her country and to celebrate
her accession to the throne, the Empress Oemmyo
ordered the coin to be cast at once. We may also believe,
which is even more likely, that her advisers of the Fuji-
wara family, who practically controlled the affairs of
state, were responsible for the decision to open the Wado
period with a copper currency. Experience, however, in
the extraction of copper from its ore presupposes the ex-
istence of that metal. As copper did not exist in any
notable amount prior to Wado, it is probable -that the


first attempts to extract copper from its ore, or to refine
and alloy it for the purpose of minting, were only
partially successful. Mot only the workmanship but
the material of the copper “Ko” Wado sen is inferior to
the later issues, and suggest that haste and self-con-
fidence, rather than foresight and experience, were the
guiding actors in its inception. On the whole, it may be
supposed that the task of producing the first Wado coin
proved more difficult than was anticipated and that, to
simplify it as much as possible, the characters “Do” and
“Ho” were cut down to their abbreviated proportions.
The old but favourite work on the Japanese sen
called the “Wakan sen li,” states, on what authority
I do not know, that the characters of the earlier Wado
sen were written by Fujiwara Gyoyo and Awata
Mabito, while those of the later issues came from the
pen of Ono Dofu. In figs. 4 and 5 representing the
first or silver Wado coin, and in figs. 6 and 7, which shew
the earliest copper issue, the two key-shaped parts of the
character “Kai” (pi), are closed above by each inner
vertical stroke, while in the later issues (figs. 1 and 2)
this stroke begins lower down, so that the upper end
of each key-shaped part is open. Other differences
exist, but this is distinctive. It is in this latter re-
spect that the character “Kai” of the later issues
resembles that of the Chinese “Kaigen Tsuho,” (fig. 8.)
Some experts maintain that both the silver and the
copper “ Ko” or old Wado sen are found with the open
“Kai” but how this is determined I do not know. The
Silver Wado is becoming rare, and the Copper one of the


same style is much more so. It has usually a doubtful
appearance, as if cast from the silver coin, but com-
petent authorities maintain that a few are genuine relics
of the first issue of the copper coin. It may be that
their very paucity in number and quality attest their
premature debut. They are Inferior to those that follow,
and to the contemporary coins of China, so that some
disappointment must have been felt, and if the Empress
(Jemmyo was at all interested in the matter, no doubt
her mint-master Tajihi MabitoMyaki Maro heard her op-
inion about these first attempts at coin making. It is
perhaps not too much to suppose that a messenger was
sent post haste to China to solicit from the Emperor Chu-
So, the skilled artisans who cast the later Wado coins
after the fashion of the beautiful “Kaigen Tsuho.”
The later Wado sen are not all of the same standard
either in size or quality. The existing specimens of the
Wado Kaiho exhibit so much variety in size, width of
outer or inner rims, position, size, and even minor
differences in the style of the character, that it is some-
times a puzzle, even to an expert, to decide between the
genuine and counterfeit coins of this period.
With regard to size, it may be stated generally, as
applicable to all of the antique sen, that the first issue of
each denomination is larger than those that follow. To
some extent this is due to the shrinkage of the clay
mould in heating it for the reception of the molten
metal. If the sen which have been cast in one mould
are used for making the impression on another, the
coins from this second mould will be smaller than those


from the first. In the “Dai Nihon Ivwaheishi,” Mr.
Yoshida Kensuke takes it upon himself to give the size
and weight of the earlier as well as the modern coins.
With respect to the former, such statements do not rest
upon historical information, but on measurements and
weights of such specimens as he or his authorities have
had in their possession. As the earlier issues of cast
coins are larger than those that follow, a fairly reliable
indication of their relative age is thus available. In
my own collection there are specimens of greater
diameter, and probably therefore of earlier origin than
some of those described in his work, which, I may state
in passing, is by far the most complete and reliable on
the subject, from the purely historical point of view. If
we suppose that no larger ones have been lost, careful
measurements of all the best specimens might give us
reliable information with regard to size. The difficulty
of ascertaining the exact weight must still remain. The
peculiar verdigris or “Sabi,” as it is called in Japanese,
which forms on these bronze coins, must necessarily
alter their weight, and the prolonged exposure to
moisture and earthy salts when buried in the soil, dis-
solves some of the metals which are alloyed together.
Owing to frequent conflagrations, too, which are
numerous in this earthquake country as a result of the
houses being built mainly of wood, many of the antique
coins Inu e been burnt. This results in loss of weight
from the melting of the baser metals.
Variations in size may also be partly explained by
the fact that this coin was not always minted at the


same place. At first it was cast in the province of Onii,
near the seat of government, but latterly it was found
more convenient to make it nearer the sources of copper
and therefore Dazaifu, Harima, and Nagato were chosen
for the purpose. The intentional debasing of the coinage
in order to reap a profit must however be regarded as
the main reason for the progressive deterioration in size,
from the first issue to later ones. The officials to whom
the privilege of minting was entrusted were sometimes
the highest in the land, and in these rude times their
conduct was above effective criticism. This remark
applies not only to the Wado sen, but to all the coins of
the antique group.
The change of the mint from one place to another
may also account for slight differences in the writing
which are to be noticed in these coins. Sometimes the
handwriting is quite distinctive and thus several
varieties are recognised. Some of these are open to
grave suspicion, for there is ample historical proof that
as in England about the same time, the ignoble art of
counterfeiting was carried on to a degree embarrassing
to the government. During the two centuries and a half
which saw the production of the antique sen, many
edicts were issued by the government against (he
persistent forgery of the national currency.* The
penalties of death, forfeiture of property, banishment
and exclusion from the clemency extended to ordinary
criminals on occasions of rejoicing, testify to the
severity with which the Crown regarded the crime of
* See Appendix.


counterfeiting, or even the passing of impure coin. It
may be that the characters were altered from time to time,
in order to guard against counterfeiting, as happened
in the case of some Chinese coins, but this plan would not
be very effective; indeed, it may be doubted whether it
would not render it more difficult for the ignorant pea-
sants and merchants to distinguish between gen nine and
counterfeit coin. On the other hand, the design may
have been altered without any valid reason, for there is
sometimes no accounting for the vagaries of officials,
oven in Japan.
It is likely enough that some of the existing
specimens are forgeries of the Wado period, or shortly
after it. The classical sen, which we may call the
“Kaigen” Wado, was almost certainly, a government
coin, as is also the silver Wado, and probably the copper
“ Ko” or old, Wado. What is known as the “Nogo”
FIG, 9


Wado, flgs. 8 and 91s so called because the two lower ob-
lique strokes of the left band part of the character “Wa”
(|B), are nearly equal in length, while In the ordinary
or “Futsu” Wado sen, ligs. 1 and 2, the left stroke is
much longer than the right one. This left hand part
thus resembles the radical or “Hen” called “Koge”
hence the name. The “Noge” Wado is exceedinly
rare and many imitations exist. It has the appearance
of having been a regular government issue. Figs. 10 and
11 shew the “Hane” (®c) or “hook” Wado, so called from
the fact that one or more of the characters has a hook
or “Hane” on the lower end of each vertical stroke. It
PIG. U)
FIG. 11
is doubtful whether this coin is a regular issue and Mr.
Muramatsu looks upon it with severe scepticism. In
the work called “Shin Kosei Koho Hzukwan” there is a
variety illustrated, called the “Sho Chin” or “Small


Chin” Wado which is scarcely worthy of special mention,
hut, following this precedent, I give it here, lig. 12. It
PIG. 13
may be recognised by the fact that an interval separates
the right oblique stroke of the character “Ho”
from the margin of tire central hole. Many such
“varieties” exist, the slightest difference in the writing
of which even if due to the casting, or some accidental
circumstance, may give a certain specimen the patent
of nobility in the eye of its possessor, and stamp it as
the one and only one of its kind.
There are many genuine specimens of the Wado
sen which may be bought for a shilling or two, though
specimens like tig. 1 are rare. I have come, however,
to regard some of my specimens of this sen as ancient
counterfeits, made during the Wado period, or shortly
after. These may justly claim to be over a thousand
years old; and though we may despise them in our
hearts, they are entitled to the outward respect which
Is paid, even to disreputable age.
Although the silver Wado coin heralded the advent
of the copper currency, its circulation was stopped in
me eighth month of the second year. This was exactly
one year after the copper coin came into circulation.


According to the “Zoku Nihongi,” the government
had announced in the third month of the ‘2nd year of
Wado, that the ratio of silver to copper would be one to
four. The same work states that it was found necessary,
as early as the first month of the ‘2nd year, to issue a
prohibition against the “many forgeries” that were
being made, that is to say only five months after the
copper, and eight months after the silver coin came into
being. Whether the silver coin was considered to have
done its duty as the forerunner of the copper son, or
whether it was arrested with a view to stop these
forgeries, the tempting ratio of one to four being more
than honesty, such as it was, could withstand, history
does not relate. It is certain, however, that the
bimetallists of the day were unable to uphold the
sanctity of this fixed ratio against the stern reality of
practical economics. From this time forth,until the period
of Meiji, copper, in a more or less diluted form, has been
the mainstay of the official currency. Some silver and
gold coins have been produced, not always for circula-
tion, and those that have been so designed, had probably,
as we shall see, a special raison d'etre, such as to
stimulate foreign trade.
In the 4th year of Wado, the price of rice, or
its ratio to copper, was fixed by government edict.
Six “sho” or sixty “go” of rice could then be had
for one cash or sen, usually called in its unit
capacity, the “Mon.” At the present day the price for
average quality of rice is about one yen for sixty “go.”
Presuming that the measure called the “go ” is the same


now as then, tho purchasing value of the Wado son was
about a thousand times that of the present day. A
Japanese man consumes about five “ go ” of rice daily, so
that he could have lived in the Wado period for twelve
days on one sen or mon, with the addition of a few
■snacks” offish and vegetable. At the present time,
the wages of a carpenter are about a yen per day. Now
the yen is equal to a thousand mon of the smaller sen
and five hundred mon of the larger ones, so that ho could
have provided himself with rice, if we count only live
hundred mon to the yen, for sixteen years, on the wages
which he receives for one day’s labour in the year 1904!
At this time, the highest officials in the realm, chiefly
princes of the blood, received in one year, 30 “Iliki” of
cloth, 100 hanks of silk and the princely salary of 2000
mon, the present equivalent of two yen, while the eighth
class were given 1 “Hiki” of cloth and 20 mon per
annum, which is equal to one fiftieth of the present yon.
As the yen is about the value of two shillings sterling,
the latter officials could not have got less than one half-
penny per annum.
The decision to pay these handsome salaries was
announced in the tenth month of the fourth year, and at
tho same time an order appeared offering various grades
of official rank to those who had amassed certain
amounts of cash, the lowest being five thousand mon, a
comfortable fortune in those days. Severe penalties
were imposed upon those who borrowed money for this
purpose. A concrete instance this, of the rank being “but
the guinea stamp”; still, habits of thrift were encouraged,


while the government got rid of its surplus slock. This
latter object was also furthered by an edict in the sth
year, ordering travellers to use sen instead of com-
modities to defray the cost of travelling, and in the
6th year it was decreed that no officials could rise above
their present grade unless they possessed a sum of 6000
mon. In the sth year of Yoro the ratio of copper to
silver was fixed at twenty-five to one, the value of the
silver Wado, it will be remembered, having been one to
four of the copper sen.
It would appear that the WadoKaiho was coined for
fifty years after its first appearance, for wo read in the
Zoku Nihongi, that in the 2nd year of Tempei Hojo the
Empress Koken gave permission to Shibi Naisho
Fujiwara Ason Nakamaro, one of the great Fujiwara
family, upon whom she looked with favour, to cast coin
for the government. The long continued mintage of
this coin probably accounts for the fact that, although
the most ancient of the twelve antique coins, it is the
least rare of any, and it may also explain the
circumstance that there are so many different sizes of
this coin.
MAK-NEN TSU-HO I’ l the third month of the fourth
jSi Sfi 9Sf year of Tempei Hojo, A. D, 760, the Em-
A.D. 760 press Koken having gone into retire-
ment (which afterwards proved to be temporary), three
new coins were minted, of copper, silver, and gold re-
spectively. Each coin had a distinct denomination.
There is little doubt that the copper coin alone went into
general circulation. It is called the “Man-Nen Tsu-Ho”


( ®f)» or Current Treasure of Ten Thousand Years.
The characters thereon are said to have been written by
Kibi Mabi, a scholar and man of genius, who invented
the first Japanese system of syllabic writing, known
as the Katakana. Mr. Euomoto Bunshiro attributes
the production of this coin to extensive forgeries of
the Wado sen, which a former edict stated to equal
in amount the legal currency. The new coin was
issued at the rate of one to ten of those previously in
circulation. With the exception of the “Jingo Kai-ho,”
the third on the list, each new issue of the antique sen
was valued at one to ten of the previous denominations,
so that the government, or those interested in the
matter, made a huge profit out of the transaction.
When a new issue was decided upon, the last specimens
of the former one were usually so poor in size and
quality, that the new sen was quite superior, and
its acceptance was doubtless facilitated by this fact.
The possession of money, too, was chiefly limited to
the" upper classes, or those in the provinces im-
mediately surrounding the capital, who probably found
moans to recoup themselves for this sudden and rather
startling fall in exchange. Still, it is difficult to see
how such a measure could avoid producing distress
and discontent. We are not told whether, in fixing
this exchange of the good new, to the bad old cur-
rency, any attempt was made to discriminate be-
tween the former government issues and those coun-
terfeits which were the assumed raison d’etre of the new
coin.


The first issue is a large coin with good body and fair
workmanship, though not so line as that of the 3v«u~
gen” Wado sen, figs. 13 and 11. It is called the Ogata
FIG. 14
or “Large Size” Mannen, and it will be noticed
that the dot of the character “Neu” (represented by a
short stroke) is placed vertically on the lowest horizontal
one. Another variety, fig. 15, known as the “ Yoke Ten”
FIG. 15
(ifjerif) or “Horizontal Dot” Mannen, has the dot (Ten)
written horizontally (Yoko) between the two lower


strokes of the character “Nen” (££). All of the
characters differ slightly from those of the first variety,
especially the lower one, “Tsu.” Figure 16 shews another
U, ''
specimen with a relatively broad rim, and therefore
styled the “Kwatsu En” ( - sfj or Broad-rimmed
Mannen. The dot on the character “Nen” is hori-
zontal. Still another kind has a round dot between
the two lower strokes of “ Nen,” and is therefore
called the “En Ten” (HU,£> ), or “Round Dot” Mannen fig.
17. In a variety of the latter, tig. 18, the lower strokes of
FIG. 17
FIG 18


“Ho” ( 3lf ) both turn to the left. It is open to ques-
tion whether this is a government coin, or a forgery
of the period. Smaller specimens of the Manuen
abound, but they do not fall to the dwarf-like dimen-
sions of the other antique sen. The “Currency of
Ten Thousand Years” expired before a decade had
elapsed, and probably did not have time to undergo
further degeneration.
TAI-Htl GEN-HO This silver coin, which is called Tai-
7C $ bei (tempo, for the sake of euphony, or
A.D. 760 rather it should bo said, for ease of pro-
nunciation, is seen in fig. 19. The only specimen which
PIG. 19
is recognised by experts as genuine, is in the possession
of Mr. Kameoka Seikokn, but there are a few others in
the hands of collectors, which are probably of recent
origin. That seen in fig. 20 is probably not more t ban two
PIG. 20,


hundred years old. “Tai-Hei Gen-llo” reads
“Original Treasure of Great Peace.” It was cast at the
same time as the Mannen sen and was issued at one to
ten of the former. It will be remembered that the ratio
of copper to silver started, during the first years of Wado,
at four to one; then it reached twenty-five to one; now
another rate of exchange, namely of ten to one was
arbitrarily fixed to correspond with the ratio of the
Taihei Qempo to the following coin which was of gold,
and which was called the
KAI-KI SHO-HO. This coin fig. 21, was designed to be
PI 31 M Sf issued with the silver and copper sen
A.D. 760 above-mentioned and to bear the same
ratio to the silver coin that it held in regard to the Man-
FIG. 31
nen sen, namely one to ten. Like the Taihei Gempo,
it has, with a solitary exception, vanished from human
ken, and left a host of conjectures which it would
not profit us much to pursue. The one specimen
now remaining, is in the possession of the Imperial
Household Department, and was exhumed from under
the gateway of the Sai-Dai-Ji Temple at Kara, in com-
pany with one Taihei Gempo, one silver Wado, and one
Mannen Tsuho. In the second year of Jisho, A. D. 1177,


according to the book called “Sel-Sui-Kl,” Komatsu Nai-
daijin, a famous minister of the crown, placed 99 pieces
of gold under the pillow of his sister, who was the wife
of tlie Emperor, during her accouchement, and prayed
for her speedy recovery. It has been assumed that these
gold coins were no other than the Kaiki Shoho, but this
belief does not rest on any solid foundation, so far as I
know. Pieces of gold stamped with their weight were
known at that time, and besides it was quite customary
to follow the Chinese fashion of using paper substitutes,
which were afterwards burned, as an offering to the god.
This was an economical plan, and reminds one some-
what of the two persons who undertook to place an
equal sum in the coffin of a deceased friend. A, having
conscientiously put his amount therein, B signed
a cheque for double the amount, and pocketed the
change. While we cannot be certain that Komatsu
Naidaijin presented the god with a cheque for the 99
coins, it is equally doubtful that he paid it in cash, and
it would be unwise to accept the story as a proof that
the Kaiki Shoho was current in the twelfth century, or
that it had ever been in general circulation. The words
‘Kai-Ki Sho-Ho”* (||{§ M Sic) probably mean “The
Initial Foundation of Excelling Treasure.” There is no
doubt that this coin was intended to be the pioneer of a
gold currency, and we may believe that the idea had the
approval, and perhaps started in the brain of Kibi Mahi,
the most original and learned genius of his time. The
* Kaiki is a Buddhist term and now usually refers to the founding of a
new temple or sect. The specimen above illustrated is said to be an exact
model in gold of the one in the collection of the Household Department,
correct even to weight.


country was, however, too poor to warrant such an ex-
periment being carried out on a large scale, and it is very
probable that only a few specimens came from the mint.
JIN-KO-KAI-HO This coin was issued in the first
3S year of Tempei Jingo, A. I). 765. The
A.D. 765 Empress Koken, who had resigned in
favour of the Emperor Junnin, now resumed the
throne, while the latter went into exile. On this second
assumption of power, she took the name of “Shotoku”
(denoting virtue), and the “year name” was changed
from Tempei Hoji to Tempei Jingo. The expression
“Jingo” is a softening of “Jinko” which may be
rendered “Divine Merit.” It is worthy of remark that
the slang expression “by jingo/’ shews the same
euphonic softening, being derived from the Basque word
“Jinkoa,” “God,” “the Lord of the High.” It has
thus the same basic idea as the Chinese “Jin”* or
“Shin,” “God,” “Superior or Exalted Being,” and 1
venture to think that these words may have a common
origin, as the Basque language has a close affinity to
the Mongol group.
“Jin-Ko Kai-Ho” CjpljlJC/j ) is best translated,
perhaps as the “New Treasure of Bivine Merit.” It has
been given as the “New Treasure of the period Jingo,”f
but this is not correct. Three consecutive periods begin
with “Tempei,” viz. “Tempei Shoho,” “Tempei Hoji,”
and “Tempei Jingo,” and the word “Jingo” of the
* Pronounced variously in the Chinese colloquial, shin, through various
grades approaching the French “ jeune "to the Knglish word “ gin." This
latter sound is often used in Japanese, especially in compound words.
t "Coins of Japan” by William Hramsen isso.


latter phrase is written thus, meaning “Divine
Protection,” and not thus like those of the coin
in question, which reads “Divine Merit.” According
to Yoshikawa Iken, this coin was also written by Kibi
Mabi. It was circulated at the same value as the
Mannen Tsuho, and Mr. Enomoto suggests that its issue
was due to a dearth of the latter coinage. The Dai
Nihon Kwaheishi, quoting the Zoku Nihongi, says that
at this period, the government found that the people
were storing up their money and thus causing a scarcity
in the currency of the country. This is stated to have
been due to the excessively high rate of exchange, those
who had amassed a hoard of Wado sen being naturally
loath to part with it for one-tenth the amount of a coin, in
no respect its superior. This reluctance, and the desire to
save, which was doubtless stimulated by the govern-
ment pronouncement that “the rank is but the guinea
stamp,” doubtless occasioned the shortage of money in
circulation. Be the cause what it may, it is certain that
the Jinko Kaiko was issued at the same value as the
Mannen Tsuho, and is the only member of the antique
group which did not appear at tenfold the value of the
preceding issue. In the eighth month of the 3rd year of
Hold, A. D. 772, it was further decreed that the value of
all old and new coins would henceforth be the same, as
it was found that the people kept the old ones and used
only those recently made.
The early Jinko Kaiho is a coin of good size, quite
equal in this respect to the two previous sen, but,
the size did not remain constant during the thirty


years of its existence. Probably also, its long run of
popularity accounts for the many varieties which are
to be found, of which I shall give only the chief. It will
be understood that, just as two specimens of English
handwriting may resemble each other and yet present
points of difference on close inspection, so the inscription
of Chinese characters by separate individuals may appear
at first sight to be identical, but they are quite easily
distinguished by an attentive inspection.
FIG. 23
If we compare figs. 22 and 23 with 24 and 25 we see
that the characters, in the two former “Ko” (Jjj) are not
quite similar to that in the two hitter. In both, the
character “Ko” is made up of two parts, a left and right
hand radical. The left hand part in both is the same,
except that it is a little shorter and further from the
hole in figs. 22 and 23 than in figs. 24 and 25, its upper


and lower strokes being longer. This by itself is the
character “Ku” (IC.), meaning toil, and in figs. 22 and 23,
its neighbour on the right is the character “To,” (77)
meaning a sword. Toil with the sword was, in ancient
times, the most laudable occupation, and the combination
with its implied deeds of “derring doe,” was a
significant way of writing “merit.” “Ku” and “To”,
combined therefore mean, merit. Now, in figs. 24 and
25 tlie right hand character is not exactly the same as
flic right band radical “To” (77) in figs. 22 and 23. It will
be noticed that the inner vertical stroke of this charac-
ter projects a little above the horizontal line in figs. 24
and 25 whereas it ends on a level with it in figs. 22 and
23. This makes all the difference in the name and mean-
ing of these two right-hand characters, for the one with


the projecting stroke is not called “To” (JJ) a sword, but
“Eiki” ((- j) strength. This coin is said to have been also
written by Kibi Main, and it may have occurred to his
humane intellect, that the combination of strength and
skill was a more worthy way of acquiring “merit”
than expert work with a sword. Although the
reading is recognised as “Ko” on this coin, it is
not the classical and accepted form, but Kibi Mabi,
when he invented the Katakana, departed from ancient
usage in a very decided manner and he may have
made this innovation as a protest against the savage
and uncivilised plan of acquiring merit ( T 7] ) by
swordmanship.
It will also be seen that the character “Kai” differs
in figs. 22, 28 and 24, 25 in that it is “open,” in the for-
mer, as we have described it in the later Wado sen, while
it is “closed” in figs. 24, 25 as it occurs in the early Wade
coins. Close inspection will also reveal points of dissimi-
larity in the characters “Ho” (J|f) and “Jin” and
indeed the “To” Oh and “Rlki” also differ in minor
ways. In passing, I may say that anyone desir-
ing to become expert in the fascinating study of
ideographic coins, will do well to study each character
separately and to compare it with the same on other
coins. In Chamberlain’s “Introduction to the Study of
Japanese Writing,” most of these characters may be
found in very large type, sometimes larger than the
coins themselves, and each detail may thus be easily
impressed on the mind. Without enlarging the scope of
this work beyond reasonable limits, it would be obviously


impossible to point out all the minor differences in the
handwriting of these coins, and I shall be content to
indicate the main features, leaving the reader to exercise
his discrimination in noting the rest, a very useful ex-
ercise for the attention. On account of the above-
mentioned dissimilarity in the formation of the character
“Ko” (SJ), the coin illustrated in figs. 24 and 25, is
known as the “Iliki” ( j}) Jingo. In most of the coins
which I have seen, those bearing the “Kikl,” have a
wider margin than those having “To” as a radical. Of
this style is the sen given In tig. 26, which is called the
PIG. 26
“Kwatsu En” Jingo, on account of its wide margin.
In one very rare variety of the “Elki” Jingo, the charac-
ter “Eiki” is lower and shorter than usual, while the
body of “Ho” (Jf) is rounded, figs. 27 and 28. It is known
FIG. 37


FIG. 38
as the “Shuku” iliki Jingo, or “ how” Kiki Jingo. Another
very rare kind Is the “Cho Ho” Jingo, or long “Ho”
Jingo, (ig. 29, the general characters being much the same
FIG. 39
as in figs. 22 and 23, but minor differences will be noticed,
and the “Ho” is longer. Another specimen, not very rare,
but Interesting, is seen in (ig. 30 and is called the “Fu
FIG. 30
Kiki,” or “Non Kiki” Jingo, from the fact that though
the character “Kai” (|g) is closed, and the others also


resemble those of the Riki Jingo, yet it is not a
Riki coin, as the inner vertical line of what would be
Riki, does not project above the horizontal one. In
figs. 1 and 2, plate 5, chapter 3, may be seen a coin of this
denomination which has been struck, not cast. It
cannot have been a government sen and is either a gross
counterfeit of the period, or a later production of the
“Shima Sen” order, to be referred to later on. An
Illustration of what is known as the “Tsume” Jingo,
will be found amongst the picture sen, in the last chapter.
The mark on the back is supposed to be the impression
of a thumb-nail after the fashion of certain of the Kaigen
Tsuho sen of China, but its whole appearance betrays
rather the work of the forger’s hand.
RYU-HEI El HO In *be beginning of the reign of
\'‘nL 'it the Emperor Kwammu, in the fourth
A.D. 796 month of the Ist year of Enryaku,
A.D. 782, the government decreed that as things
wore sufficiently prosperous, and there was enough
money in circulation, the officials of the mint should be
retired. Eight years later the necessity for a fresh
coinage became evident, and officials were again
appointed to the mint. No definite step, however, seems
to have been taken till the eleventh month of the 15th
year, A.D. 796. An edict then appeared to the effect
that many imitations existed, which were not worthy of
being called current coin, and therefore a new coin would
be Introduced, which would be issued at the rate of one to
ten of the old ones. These latter would be removed
from circulation within four years, counting from


the following year. The new coin would be called the
“Hyn-Hei Ei-Ho” or Eternal Treasure of
Prospering Peace. The delay in issuing this coin may
have been due to the scarcity of copper, for a great wave
of religions enthusiasm had set in, which found ex-
pression in the erection of the gigantic Daibutsu, or statue
of Buddha, at Xara in A.D. 750, which used up 808,000
kin* of copper, while thousands of smaller images were
erected everywhere between this date and the period of
Enryaku. We can be certain that the trend of
thought was profoundly modified by the moral precepts
of Buddhism which had spread throughout the land.
This can be traced even in the decrees which related to
purely economical matters. For instance, in the second
month of the 16th year of Enryaku, the government
announced that it collected taxes in order to assist the
people in times of drought, famine or such calamity.
“Cash or cloth,” it said, “cannot be used as food. It
is understood that at the present time the officials are
receiving cash in payment of taxes, but they should
bear in mind the reason for taxation, and receive cash no
longer. There are various classes in the country, however,
and those who cannot provide enough grain for the
purpose of taxation should be allowed to pay in cash to
the extent of not more than one-fourth of the whole
tax.” The government apparently found that the re-
tention of money in the hands of the people did not
facilitate its circulation, for we read (Dai Nihon Kwahei-
* About 1,157,000 lbs. avoirdupois, on the supposition that the weight
of the Kin bus undergone no changre.


shi, quoting from the Buishiu San Dai Kaku) that on
th 23rd day of the ninth month of the 17th year, a
further decree appeared to the effect that the use of coin
is to give genera! convenience to all alike but that the
officials and farmers in the five provinces* around Kyoto
(the capital), were saving too much money while there
was not sufficient in the city. “This is contrary to our
intention to confer equal benefit on all, and it is strictly
forbidden. All possessed of means must contribute
money and these taxes must be paid in cash. Those
guilty of secreting money will receive the punishment
of lawbreakers, and their property will be divided into
five portions. One fifth will be given to the informant
of the fact, while the remainder will be forfeited to the
government. The provinces of iga, Omi, Wakasa,
Tamba, and Kii, are exempted from this law.”
'Pile early specimens of the “Ryu-1 lei Ei-lio”
/KSj?)' Prosperous Peace Eternal Treasure, are large and
well finished (fig. 31). Note the relatively small size of the
character “Bi” (7JO in this specimen and consequently
the interval which separates it from the cent ral hole.
* The live Provinces or “Go-Ki” were Yamushiro, Yamuto, Kawuohi,
Mzumi, un<l Settsu.
FIG. 31


This is the “Ogata Sho Ei,” or Large Model small Ei coin.
It may he the first issue. Fig. 32 illustrates a coin of the
PIG, 33
PIG. 33
as that given in the first volume e
empu, and was probably the finest
t. It is somewhat inferior to fig. 3
same issue as that given in the first volume of the Meiji
Shin Sen Hem pit, and was probably the finest specimen
then known. It is somewhat inferior to fig. 31.
PIG. 34
What may be called the “Futsu” or ordinary Ryu-
hei, fig. 33, is characterised by the smaller size of the coin
and the larger relative size of the character “ El” (7};)
Note also the writing of the character “Kei.” Fig. 84


shews a neat looking coin, smaller than the above, the
character Ei being rather less than in lig. 33.
Various sizes of this coin exist, with varying bread ill
of rim; but they do not need special description. This
coin is said, by Mr. Yoshikawa, in the Wakan Sen-li,
to have been written by the Emperor Kwammu himself,
and it is certainly worthy of such an exalted penman. To
my thinking, it is almost the best of the “Jin Ni Zone,”
whether in style of writing, material or workmanship.
Over a hundred years ago, a large number of these sen
were found in the river Horiye at Osaka, and a bridge
afterwards built on the spot, has ever since been known
as the ‘'Ryuhei” bridge.
PIG. 36
The chief variety of this sen is the “Nisid” Ryuhei,
figs. 35 and 36. It is so called because the lower of the two
horizontal strokes of the character “Ei” (tK.), instead of


simply extending to the left of the vertical stroke, passes
also to the right, giving the appearance of the numer-
al “Hi” (H), which stands for “two.” The part of the
character below this resembles the character “Sui” (7JO
“Water,” hence the name “Nisui.” There are two kinds of
theKisui Eyuhel, the “ Dai Ji” (Large Character) tig. 35,
and the“Sho Ji” (Small Character) Ryuhei, flg. 36. In
another variety the lower horizontal stroke of the “Ei”
(7JO passes more to the left than is usual and is therefore
called the “Cho To Ei” or Long-headed Ei, flg. 37. Yet
FIG. 37
f 7..x - . % W f—n W
muiH.O I
FIG. 38
another kind is seen in flg. 38, known as the “Cho Hei,”
or Long Hei, because the vertical line below the two
horizontal strokes is longer than the space between
them and reaches down to near the margin of the coin.
In the fifth month of the 3rd year of Daido, in the
reign of the Emperor Heijo, according to the Kihon


Koki, an edict appeared saying “ there are not many
coins in circulation amongst the peasants, and therefore
they will bo permitted to use both old and now sun in
order to relieve this want” (at the same rate of ex-
change?). In the first year of Konin, A. I), 810, and
of the reign of the Emperor Saga, it is stated (Nihon
Koki and Euishlu Koknshi) that 1040 “Kwan”* of coin,
probably Ryuliei sen, were cast from the copper
remaining in the mint. We may presume that this
was tite last issue of this coin.
FU-JU JIN-HO. I' l f* le third month of the 9th year
'y' dj: (i:t]i "f Konin, the governor of Nagato
A.D. BJB province was appointed chief director
of the Mint, the officials of which were, one director,
two inspectors, three accountants, two coiners, one chief
moulder and five clerks (Ruishu Koknshi). In the
eleventh month of the same year, the “Fu-Ju Jin-llo”
Sl'll'fiD pronounced Fuju Jimpo, the Divine Treasure
of Weal Hi and Longevity, appeared—surely a high sound-
ing and felicitous title! It steps forth amid a flourish
of “Gekitaku,”f and smiles its benevolent formula upon
the world. It is not so large and imposing as those
that have gone before, but we hear no reproaches
this time about the degenerated state of the currency.
What it lacks in size it wins in its message of good-will.
‘ Wealth and long life to you,” it says,“if you keep me
* The expression “Kwan” probably refers here to 1000 pieces, though it
may have been applied in the usual sense of 1000 momme, about 854 lbs
avoirdupois.
t Of “ Hyoshigi”, the two pieces of resonant wood which were struck
together to call attention to proclamations, etc. They are still used in
theatres and advertising processions.


long enough, you will never want for either.” We can
well imagine that the good wish found its echo in many
a wistful heart, and that the chord of superstition awoke
to the sentiment, it may even be that the Fuju Jimpo
was much sought after and that there was quite a rush
for it, notwithstanding its diminished size.
Tills coin is said to have been inscribed by the Em-
peror Saga, and by Kukwai, canonised as Kobo Daishi,
who “was noted equally as preacher, painter, sculptor,
calligraphist and traveller”.* He was the founder of the
syllabic writing called the Hiragana and is worshipped as
the sage of writing. We are told that 5670 Kwan of this
coin were cast annually till the 12th year of Konin, (A. 1).
821), 3000 Kwan til! the sth year of Tencho (A. I). 828),
and 1830 Kwan till the first year of Shown (A. 1). 834).
The cause of this reduction is said to have been a falling
off in the production of copper which seems to have been
so serious that the casting of coin from new metal was
stopped for a time, while the former issues of Wado,
Manned, .Tinko and Hyuhei sen were collected and recast
into the form of the Fuju Jimpo. While the primary
cause of this deterioration of the national currency is to
be traced to a deficiency in the output of copper, the
wholesale contribution of coin towards the creation of
Buddhist images, bells and religious ornaments, must be
regarded as an important factor. The Fuju Jimpo was
not destined to carry its message of hope for an indefinite
period, for within eighteen years it had to give place
to another, and finally, like its forerunners, under-
* Chamberlain and Mason's *• Handbook to Japan,


went dissolution in order to furnish the material for
a diminishing currency. The coin illustrated in
fig. il!)
FIG. 39.
is, it we may judge by its size, probably of the first
issue, and therefore I give it precedence. It bears the
characters “Fu-Ju Jin-Ho” (rnrSif'Ml') Wealth, Long-
evity, Divine Treasure. This specimen is usually called
the “Tate Nuki”, or “Warp and Woof” Fuju sen,
because the central vertical stroke in the character “Ju”
crosses several (five) lines on its passage to the
fourth, and longest, horizontal stroke. In other respects
this coin closely resembles the “Taiji” or large charac-
ter sen, fig. 40. In this, however, the vertical stroke
FIG. 40.
extends only to the second horizontal line. The Tate
Kuki sen is said to have been written by the Emperor
Saga.
The Taiji, is stated by Mr. Yoshikawa to have been


written by the immortal Kobo Daishi. Ft is scarcely
likely that the Emperor would have been asked to write
the inscription for an inferior coin such as the Futsu or
common sen, though this is stated by some authorities.
It may be that the statement was invented by the Fuji-
wara who “advised” the throne at the time, in order to
add to the popularity of the coin. As however we have
no data to Judge by, and can not transpose our minds
to the scale of intellectuality prevailing at that time, we
cannot say what motives governed the actions of official-
dom, though we may derive some amusement from
such speculations. Like the “Taiji” or large character
sen, the Ogata or large sized coin, fig. 41, is a much more
FIG. 41
inposing coin than those that follow, and its claim to
represent the first issue is almost as valid as that of the
Tatenuki sen though, so far as I have seen, its diameter
is less than that of the latter, by about a centimetre.
These three coins resemble each other especially in the
writing of the character “Fu” (§■), meaning wealth.
Here we may still discern the roof of the storehouse,
with the goods contained therein, the solid guarantee of
wealth. In the “Tatenuki” and “Taiji” or“Haiji” Fuju
sen, figs. 39 and 40, and in the “Ogata” or “Large Sized”


coin fig. 41, there is no dot on the top of the roof to re-
present the cross section of the ridge pole, nor is there a
horizontal line below the roof, such as we find in the or-
dinary Fuju tigs. 42 and 43. It is scarcely necessary to
FIG. 43
add that the characters are larger in the three former
coins than in the ordinary Pujii and that minor dif-
ferences can bo seen on close inspection, for instance, the
third stroke of “Ju,” which joins the margin of the
central hole in the case of the smaller sen, the dotlike
stroke of the left hand part of “Jin” (jjjljl) etc. Another
well marked variety is called the “Shimesu” Fuju,
figs. 44 and 45 because the lefthand part or radical, of


FIG. 45
the character “Jin,” (jjiljl) exhibits a peculiarity which
causes it to resemble the character “Shimesu” (75),
meaning to indicate. This consists in the lengthening
of the lower horizontal stroke of this radical to the right,
after the fashion of the “Nisni” Kyuhei, tigs. 35 and lit!
The "Ko Hen,” or “Large Hole” Fnju, explains itself;
and needs no illustration in size it resembles the two
previous coins.
SHO-WA SHO-HO. 1,1 month of the 2nd. year
7k fn % of Hhowa, the usual decree appeared, at-
A.D. 835 tributing the defects in the currency to
the “secret counterfeiting by private persons, which nn-
donbedly renders the coinage worthless. To remedy this
a new coin shall be issued.” This coin was named the
“Sho-Wa-Sho-Ho” or “Flourishing Treasure
of (the period) Shown. According to the Zoku Nihon Koki,
the Emperor Nimmei, in a special edict on the occasion
of his accession to the throne, thus gave the reason for
the change of the period from Tencho to Shown. “J
succeeded to the throne of the Peaceful Emperor (his fa-
ther, then living), and now the time has come to give a
new name to the era, thus changing the 11th year of
Tencho to the first year of Shown.” By way of explana-
tion, he stated that he was following the custom of a


thousand Emperors in altering tJie “Nengo,” or year
name on their accession and in choosing an auspicious
title, in order to have a. fortunate commencement to
each reign.
Special eniphasis seems to be laid on the accession
to the “Peaceful Emperor” and we shall probably not be
far wrong to translate the expression “Khowa,” as
“Succeeding Peace.” The “Ogata” or large sized coin,
figs. 40 and 47, is slightly smaller than the Tatenuki or
FIG. 47
Daiji Fuju and the quality of the metal also shews the
stigma of degeneration. From the Fuju sen to the end of
the twelve antique sen we shall see a gradual deteriora-
tion in size and quality, due to the scarcity of copper and
the necessity of remelting former issues in order to get
materia] for the national currency. The “Futsu” or
common Showa, fig. 48, is much smaller than the
“Ogata” sort, and has a narrower rim. The characters


of both coins are supposed to have been written by one
Sugawara Kiyokimi. It is to be noticed that the two
Kid. 4K
characters “Sho,” on this coin, though having the
same sound, are entirely different words, the former
meaning “receiving” or “ enjoying,” (in common use)
and the latter, “prosperity,” (g).
This coin was issued at the rate of one to ten of the
previous coins, in conformity with the usual rule. About
this time there seems to have been a dearth, not only of
copper, but also of silver and gold, as ■ several edicts
appear against the general use of these articles for
ornament, the privilege of doing so being restricted to
officials above the sth grade.
CHO-NEN TAI-HO I' l the loth year of fShowa, the court
M * astrologer announced that rain was im-
A.D. 848. pending, that the year’s produce might
be ruined and great distress follow, unless special precau-
tions be taken. He advised that prayers be offered up to
the great Deities throughout the whole country, for pro-
tection against calamity. For this reason, the new period
Kasho, namely, Rewarding (or Praising) Good Luck,”
was initiated. In the tenth month of the Ist year of Ka-


slio, fi decree said “Heaven has given good fortune and
the “Xengo” (year name) has been altered; if we do not
alter our currency, some calamity will surely befall us.
Tlie new coin will be named “(ihonen Tailin'’ and will
circulate at the rate of one to ten of the old coins.” A
nice way to bluster up a falling currency! Having just
escaped a famine through an appeal to the Gods, and the
adroit change of the year name, the people must now
propitiate the powers by the sacrifice of their hard earned
cash, lest worse things befall them. In this way the
('lumen Tuiho came into being, but it did not avert a
famine which visited the land in the tenth month of the
2nd year of Kasho. To relieve this, 500,000 mon were
distributed amongst the poor of the capital, but history
does not say whether relief was extended to the more
remote districts.
The “t'ho-Xen Tai-Ho” or (treat Treasure
of Many Years, is a dwarf in comparison with the early
members of the twelve sen. Its Ogata or large size
variety, fig It), is but a trifle larger than the ordinary
PIG. 18
issue. Hike the Futsu or ordinary sen, fig. 61, the
character “Tai” (SC) has a hook above the cross stroke.
What is known as the “Talji” (pronounced “Daiji,”) or


large character sen, fig. 50, shews a relatively large
PIG. 50
character in proportion to the size of the coin, which is
usually a trifle smaller in diameter than the Ogata coin.
The hook of the character “Tai” however, is not
quite so marked, and the upper transverse stroke of the
character “Nen” (4j£), is somewhat longer, in the
specimens that I have seen, while the body of “Ho”
is wider. The Futsu or common sen, lig. 51, resembles
the first very closely, a slight difference being observed
in the shape of the character “Ho” (5|F), and sometimes
only in the lower portion of “Cho” (J|). Sometimes
too, the Taiji variety has a slight hook on the lower end
of the vertical stroke of “Nen” (£p), which is absent on
the other specimens. According to Mr. Yoshikawa in
the Waken Sen li, these coins were inscribed by the Em-
peror Nimmei.
PIG. 51


NYO-EKI JIN-H0- This coin was issued in the fourth
HI ijilp M month of the Ist year of Teikwan, A.D.
A.D. 359. 859, in the reign of the Emperor Se-wa.
It bears the motto “Nyo-Bki Jin-Ho” (fillip I 1
which may be rendered “Divine Treasure of Abun-
dant Profit.” The large or introductory variety
is very slightly smaller than the Ogata sen, and
is styled the'“Daiji” Nyoeki, fig. 62. The Putsu or
common sen, fig. 53, is also slightly smaller than
FIG. 53
FIG. 53
the above, and the writing differs from that of the
Daiji sen mainly in size and the greater length, in the
larger coin, of the left oblique stroke of the left radical
(Shimesu) of the character “Jin” There is a slight
difference also in the character “Bki” (@|), but these
characters vary more in point of size than anything else.
The character “Jin”, in the Futsu, specimens frequently
partakes of the “Shimesu” type noticed in theFuju sen,


figs. +4 and 45. In fig. 54 there is rather an interesting
case of faulty alignment, due to careless casting. A rare
variety of the “Bhimesu” type is seen in fig, 55. Here
the character “Jin” (ff) is out of alignment, being
placed too much to the right and the specimen is there-
fore known as the “Sa Jin” or left “Jin” Nyoeki, the
coin being thus, and quite properly, considered to be
facing the observer. Not withstanding the general
inferiority of the Nyoeki, it was placed in circulation at
the rate of one to ten of all previous coins.
JO-KWAN EI-HO- The P riod ot ' Telkwan “lie-
M M J|| holding Chastity,” witnessed the pro-
A.D. 870. duction of another chaste coin, which
took its name and quality from the era in question. It
is called the “Jo-kwan Ei-Ho” or Everlast-
ing Treasure of Telkwan, called in this connection,
Jogwan, and it is not too much to say that it is the
FIG. 55


meanest effort of the Jiu ni zene. In size it is not the
least, but the metal is of very inferior quality, and the
characters are so shallow as to be often indecipher-
able. Fig. off is an exceptionally clear specimen.
According to the San Dai Jitsu Koku, considerable
difficulty had been experienced, and no wonder, in
persuading the long suffering Japanese to take kindly
to these latter coins. By an imperial edict the people
were accused of refusing, sometimes as many as two or
three out of ten and of trusting to their own judgment
instead of considering that “small defects do not
necessarily interfere with their utility as current coin!”
This notice was ordered to be placed on all the high-
ways, and the threat was hold out that any one caught
refusing such coin would be whipped in court. The in-
justice of this proceeding is made apparent by the decree
published In the first month of the 12th year of Teikwan
A. 1). 870, to tiie effect that the coins which were then in
circulation were of little or no value, and that a new coin
would be minted. The Jogwan Elho presents no
noteworthy variety as regards either size or writing,
and is supposed to have been written by Fujiwara no
Ujime, an official at the imperial court and a member
FIG 56


of that family which controlled the affairs of the country
for four hundred years. According to Masatsnna Kuchi-
ki, author of the old hut standard work, Kokon Senkwa
Kan, there were two kinds of handwriting of this coin,
but I have not been able to see a specimen differing from
the above.
KWAN-HEI TAI-HO. The interval between the period of
38" 2]i Teikwan and the first year of Kwanhei
A.D. 890. (pronounced Kampei), when the follow-
ing coin was issued, shews further evidence of the diffi-
culty in gathering supplies of copper. In the 17th year
of Teikwan, 875, A.D. the manufucture of copper utensils
was prohibited by special decree, and subsequently anxi-
ous enquiries were made in various parts of the country,
to ascertain if possible the existence of copper. Special
envoys were sent to the places favorably spoken of, to
make detailed investigations. These efforts met
with some slight success, and accordingly, in the
fifth month of the first year of Kwanhei, the “Kwan-
hei (Kwampel) Taiho” or Great Treasure of
Kwampei “Liberal Peace,” was minted. The characters
are said to have been written by the Emperor Uda, but
chiefly by Sugawara Michizane, afterwards deified as
Tenjin.* The Kwampei Taiho continued to be minted for
* “Tenjin is the name under which is apotheothised the great minister
and scholar Sugawara no Michizane, who. having fallen a victim to calumny
in A, d. 901, was degraded to the post of vice-president of the Dazaifu, or
Governor Generalship of the island of Kyushu, at that time a usual form of
banishment for illustrious criminals He died in exile A. D. 903, his death
being followed by many portents and disasters to his enemies. He is wor-
shipped as the God of Calligraphy, other names for him being Kan Shojo
and Temmangu. He is represented in the robes of an ancient court noble,
and the temples dedicated to him bear in several places his crest of a con-
ventional plum blossom,—five circles grouped round a smaller one. A
recumbent image of a cow frequently adorns the temple grounds, because


18 years, and several varieties are known, of which the
following are the chief. Fntsu or common Kwampei,
fig. 67. Note the difference between the “Kwan” (H[) of
this coin and the “Kwan” (f|) of the previous sen.
Note also the careless casting of this specimen, the ap-
parently greater size of this coin being due to this
cause. “Kwatsu Dai,” or “Broad Tai” sen, fig. 58, is
known by the long transverse stoke of the character Tab
It is said to have been written by the Emperor Uda.
The“En Kwan,” or Long “drown Kwampei,” fig. 59,may
be recognised by the greater length of the upper horizontal
curved stroke of the character “Kwan” (j|[). It may be
easily identified also by the side strokes of the character
“Hei” which are mere dots. Another variety fig. 60,
Michizane was wont to ride on a cow in the land of bis exile. A plum tree
is also often planted near the temple, that having been his favourite tree.
Indeed tradition avers that the most beautiful plum tree in his garden at
Kyoto, flew after him through the air to Dazaifu, where it is still shewn,”
7th edition, page 57, Chamberlain and Mason’s “Handbook to Japan.”
FIG. S8
PIG. 57


shews two short vertical strokes below the upper curved
line of “Kan,” whereas the ordinary sen has only one.
The “Kan En Hi,” or Empi, the long-tailed Kan, and the
“(Jho Hei” or long Hei are also mentioned, but do not
need special notice. It may be taken for granted that
this coin which was issued for 18 years, would exhibit
slight variations such as the above.
FIG. 60
EN-KI TSU-HO 1 n the eleventh month of the 3rd
® 31? year of Engi, “Prolonged Gladness,” in
A.D. 907 the reign of the Emperor Daigo, the
Kampei Taiho sen were recast, with doubtless others of
various sorts and conditions,and possibly with a leaven of
new metal, into the form of the En-Ki Tsu-Ho, (JE &135
j||) (pronounced Engi), or “Current Treasure of Prolong-
ed Gladness.” Like its predecessors, it was issued at
the rate of one to ten and the feelings of “Prolonged
Gladness” of those who were compelled to give ten of
FIG. 59


their sen, bad though they were, for one of these
wretched tokens, could probably not be adequately
expressed by any language at their command at that
time.
The Ogata or large-sized Engi, can only be so called
relatively to the other specimens of this denomination,
fig. 01. The ordinary sen is shewn in figs. 62 and 63,
the latter having rather a broad rim. Pig. 64 illustrates
another of the same, with a slip in the casting of the
reverse.
Owing to the dearth of copper, coins of this
and the next issues are to be found having all the
FIG. 63


appearance of government coin, and which indeed were
so, as far as can be known, but the materia] of which is
not bronze but pewter, an alloy of lead with tin, fig, 65.
KEN-GEN TAI-HO come now to the last of the
fg % 3lf twelve antique sen, namely the Ken-Gen
A.D. 958 Tai-Ho, (S&CAM) ov Great Treasure of
Cosmos.* It was issued in the 2nd year of Tentoku,
A.I). 958. According to the Kokon Senkwa Kan,
the celebrated scholar Ono Dofu, who is said to have be-
gun seriously to learn the art of writing when over fifty
years of age, and one of the Pujiwara, also a noted scribe
of the time, were asked to write the characters for this
coin. The former however, stated that he could not do so,
* “Ken-Kon” Heaven and Earth, are synonymous with ‘'Universe ”
Ihe word Ken ha* usually the signification “ Heaven,” only in this connec-
tion Rvinl.’loi’ llAn-ATIOn In V.?<. .Jl.i! ’ . ..
•Ti i • . . ° j-xcavcu, umy in tins connec-
o^ n ',^ B^ ink ey, I llowe y er ’ * n hls excellent dictionary, gives it this meaning.
Should this word stand by itself for Heaven, then it is quite possible that
this coin sho Id be read in a different order from those of the other twelve
sen, and that it shou cl read “Ken Tai Gen-Ho” ( 45* + * *1 the First
Treasure of Great Heaven. tne nrst
FIG 65


owing to age and visual Infirmity, as the characters were
too small, and the latter was nnahle to comply with the
request as he was in mourning at the time. This double
refusal has the air of being more than accidental.
Without question, it must have been a more difficult
task to write on this dwarfed and degenerate “Great
Treasure” than on the ample surface of a Wado or a
Ryuhei, but it was not impossible, and the refusal of
these two scholars to do so, suggests a siy rebuke. Two
others were chosen to compete for this honour and one,
Aho Muneyuki by name, was finally selected. There
seems to be no Ogata variety of this coin in bronze,
though some may b&half a millimetre or so larger than
others, owing to earlier casting.
See fig. 66, Futsu or common Kengen, about the size
of the Engi Tsuho. Like the latter coin, there is a variety
made of pewter, the diameter of which is about a
millimetre greater than that of the bronze coin, fig. 67.
FIG. 67


It is not likely that this pewter coin was the first issue.
Notwithstanding- its large size, its baser constitution
would debar it from use as an introductory coin. The
refusal of the learned men to write the inscription may be
traced rather to the diminutive size of this coin than to
its composition. In one variety of it the characters
seem to be crowded around the central hole, so that
there is a space between them and the margin. This
kind is called the “Setsu Kaku” (pronounced Sekka-
ku,) Kengen, fig. 68.
I may add another variety, tig. 69, in which (he
FIG 68
character “Gen” is written like this, (%), that is to
say in the style familiar to some of the Chinese coins,
and on the later ones made in Japan in imitation of
these. It will be noticed that the left inner stroke of
this character meets the transverse line above, instead
of joining the right vertical one as in figs. 66, 67 and 68.


A coin resembling this but differing from It in the pen-
manship, is illustrated in the Waken Son li.
In the preceding remarks, enough has been said to
show that the gradual decline in size and quality of the
“Jiu Ni Zone,” must be attributed primarily to a
deficiency in the output of copper and secondarily to the
lavish use of the metal in the erection of Buddhist im-
ages. Although the edicts which usually preceded the
issue of new denominations and fixed the values of new
coins at tenfold that of their predecessors, did not
emanate from an unbiassed source, there is no doubt that
counterfeiting was a common offence. Owing, too, to the
dearth of the red metal, the cost of each new coin must
have been greater than that of previous issues. Yet,
during this period of 250 years, excellent money was
being made in China, at moderate cost, so that it Japan
had been able to give its value in some other commodity 7,
there would have been little difficulty in importing
copper, which could have been coined at a substantial
profit. The probability is that Japan was too poor to buy
this metal, and had to depend upon her home supplies.
The extortionate price of the new, in relation to the
old sen, must be regarded as a species of oppression,
initiated by the high, sullenly borne by the middle and
probably affecting but little the lower classes, the
majority of whom were not likely to come in contact
with “hard cash.” We may also remember that
Japan does not stand alone in the extortionate use
of a debased coinage.


So far as can be known, no coins were made by the
government of Japan during the six hundred and odd
years that separate the period ofTentoku from the 15th
year of Tensho (A.D. 1587). A diminishing remnant of
the twelve antique sen persisted during this interval,
and we have reason to think that counterfeits of the
same were also put into circulation. A series of
nondescript coins, too, came into existence, bearing
mottoes of the most varied kind, the “Shima” sen,
sometimes also called “Bita” sen, though the latter word
more fitly applies to forgeries of Chinese, Annamese,
Corean and Japanese sen, which competed with the coins
imported from the mainland. Though occasionally
in terdicted, we shall see that Chinese coins were in great
demand and were sometimes besought in urgent terms
from the great and friendly neighbour of Japan. Thus
Chinese coin gradually accumulated, so that there
ultimately resulted such an overwhelming prepon-
derance, that it was practically the only currency of
Japan. Although I have included this coinage in the
category of mediaeval sen, it is well to emphasize the
fact that Chinese coins were used long after the period of
Tensho (A.I). 1573-1591). This period has been taken,
as an arbitrary landmark, to divide the mediaeval from
the modern coins of Japan, as the sen known as


“Tensho Tsuho” (silver), was issued in its loth year,
and is the first reliable government coin to appear si nee
the close of the twelve antique sen. As a matter of fact,
the use of Chinese coins continued to extend until the
issue of the “Kwanei Tsuho” near the middle of the
17th century, and, though not now regarded as national
currency, they continue in limited use till this day.
Historical reference is made to two coins as having
been issued by the government, and, although there is
no evidence that these were ever in circulation, I shall
mention them here, for the sake of completeness. The
first is the “Ken-Kon Tsu-IIo” or “Current
Treasure of the Universe.” An illustration of this coin
is given in the third volume of the “Meiji Shin Sen
Sempu,” fig. 1, which was edited by Mr. Morita; but the
specimen from which it is taken wears a very doubtful
appearance.
It may, however, have been made as a sample at
that period. The “Kokon Senkwa Kan,” quoting the
“Kemmu Ni Nenki,” says that on the 28th day of the
third month of the Ist year of Kemmu, in the reign of
the Emperor Go Daigo, an imperial decree appeared to'
FIG. 1


the effect that from a remote period we have had coins
of more than ten different denominations, which appear
in our histories (the twelve sen). In more recent times
many different coins have been imported from foreign
countries and are circulating amongst the common
people. Such a proceeding is against good order; to
remedy this defect we shall have a new coin which
shall be called the “Ken-Kon Tsn-IIo.” The author of
tlie “Kokon Senkwa Kan” says that the coin, which he
had never seen, was said to be a large one, like the Mannen
sen, and he thinks that this may be true, for it was spec-
ially designed to displace the “bad sen.” This coin cer-
tainly did not go into circulation, though probably
some samples were made and submitted to the gov-
ernment. In later years, it was customary for private
individuals, as well as officials of the mint, to submit ex-
perimental, or “Shiken” sen to the authorities for
approval, and many such are still in existence, as will
be seen later on. Still, it cannot be doubted that if this
coin had gone into circulation, it could not have com-
pletely disappeared within the six hundred years that
separates the period of Kemimi from the present
time.
The Emperor Go Daigo seems to have been one of the
few sovereigns who earnestly claimed the temporal power
which was his nominal prerogative. After being com-
pelled to retire, he succeeded in regaining authority for
three short years, between A.I). 1333 and 1336. In A.D.
1334, the Ken-Kon Tsu-Ho was authorised to appear,
but the troubles of the unfortunate ruler began to


recrudescence in that year, and doubtless prevented the
carrying out of this worthy design.
It may conduce to a clearer comprehension of the
matter, and throw light on the raison d'etre of the
“Shima” and other non-official coins, if I give here the
briefest outline ot Japanese historical events, during
the Middle Ages.
Even as far back as the Wado period, the Fujiwara
family had risen to a degree of dignity and power which
overshadowed the throne and controlled its occupants to
such an extent that this relation has been spoken of as
a “proprietorship.” We have indications of this
relationship, in the close intimacy of one Fujiwara with
the Empress Koken, and in the writing of the Wado,
Jogwan and Kengen sen by others of this family. They
became advisers, then dictators and finally the de facto
sovereigns of their country, allied by close marriage ties
to the throne, yet standing aloof in order to enjoy the
privilege of real power which was denied to the sacred
person of the Emperor. “For a period ot four hundred
years,” says Murray, “from A. D. 645 to 1050, they mono-
polized nearly all the important offices in the govern-
ment. The wives and concubines of the feeble emperors
were all taken from its inexhaustible repertoire. The
men of the family, among whom were always some of
administrative ability, found it a task of no great
difficulty to rule the Emperor, who was supposed to be
divinely inspired to rule the empire, especially when he
was usually a boy whose mother, wife and court favorites
were all supplied from the Fujiwara family. This kind


of life and environment could not fail to produce on the
successive emperors a sadly demoralising effect.” The
Fujiwara in turn were ousted from their monopoly by
the rise of the military family of Taira, about the middle
of the 11th century. The long established custom of
controlling the throne from the vantage-ground of
military force, did not lapse, so that Japanese history
continued with few interruptions, to resemble a kind of
chess in which the combatants fought for the control of
the king, without the intention of taking his life or
occupying his nominal position. Sometimes, too, each
side had its own king who, as a penalty of greatness,
was bound to follow the “advice” of the power that
hoisted him on the throne. Yet, with all this lawless
turmoil and bloodshed, it was seldom that outward re-
spect was lacking to the throne, and no one dared to
arrogate to himself the title of Emperor, save those who
had a right to it by descent. European history is not
without cases of a parallel kind, that is to say, attempts
to assume the power of royalty under the guise of
loyalty to the throne. Even at the present day, in
monarchial countries at least, the blood royal is regarded
by the public as something apart from that of the com-
monality, in virtue of its succession through a long line
of ancestors; in the past there have been but few in-
stances in Europe where persons of other than royal
descent have attempted to seize the crown. In Japan
moreover, where the cult of Shinto, the profound
veneration, and even worship, of ancestors is deep-rooted
in the soil of prehistoric antiquity, in this country where


the Emperors, the Sons of Heaven, claim lineal
descent from the godlike beings of forgotten ages, it is
nob surprising that no one has had the temerity to com-
mit such sacrilege. We thus have the spectacle of the
usurper assuming control of the state and ruling it with
an iron hand, yet barred by popular and even personal
convictions from the throne itself. The sacred person
of the Emperor was held inviolate, while his exalted
position was supposed to exempt him from the task of
ruling the common herd. In conformity to this conven-
tional idea, which seems to have been actually accepted
by the majority of the Mikados themselves, there were
occasions when the throne was voluntarily vacated in
order that the resigning Emperor might have a more
controlling influence over the affairs of state.
From the beginning of the eleventh century, the
power of tlie Fujiwara began to pale before the military
prowess of the Taira and Minamoto clans and from the
middleof this century till the end of the twelfth, the his-
tory of Japan was practically a sanguinary see-saw be-
tween these later rivals. First oneand then the other came
up, the supremacy of the latter ending with the life of
the great Yoritomo, whose younger brother, the still
more famous and romantic Yoshitsune, had previously
been slain, or at least had disappeared, after incurring
the jealousy of the elder. The Minamoto family was
then succeeded by that of the Hojo, who have been held
up to execration. “It is the fashion,” says James Mur-
doch, in his “History of Japan,” “to declaim upon the
miseries of Japan under the rule of the Hojo; but as a


sober matter of fact, the administration of the Hojo dur-
ing the first century of their unobtrusive yet vigorous
supremacy was one of the best that Japan has ever
known.” It was one of them who routed the Mongol in-
vaders in A. 1). 1281, and it was the dissolute profligacy
alone of the succeeding thirty years that led to the down-
fall of this family. Then it was that the Emperor Go
Daigo, with bis generals Kusunoki Masashige and Kitta
Yosbisada, succeeded in overthrowing this regency in a
fierce battle at Kamakura in A.l). 1338. Ashikaga
Takauji, wiio had captured the stronghold of Kokuhara in
Kyoto, on behalf of his royal master, now turned upon
him, and by intrigue and force drove him from power and
set up a rival prince of the blood in his stead. The Em-
peror Go Daigo was not, strictly speaking, deposed, but
his authority was defied and his rival, upheld by the
Ashikaga interest, controlled the main finances of the
country. Thus the “Kenkon Tsuho” was never coined.
Thus also the dynasty was Split into two branches,
though united fifty six years later by the diplomacy of
the third Ashikaga Shogun, Yoshimitsu, “the ablest of
all the fourteen successors of Ashikaga Takauji, the
founder of the line” (Murdoch). The Ashikaga family
occupied the position of Shogun for two hundred and
thirty seven years, during which time they managed,
after a fashion, to keep the belligerent daimyos from
deposing them, though, latterly at least, they did not
govern the country in the sense of maintaining law and
order in the provinces. Towards the end of their rule, the
country was torn by the continual feuds of the warring


daimyos, so that a state of general anarchy prevailed.
It was not until the overthrow of the Ashikaga
shogunate by Nobunaga in 1573, that anything like a
genuine central authority existed. This latter general
did not assume the name of shogun, though he wielded
all the power pertaining to the rank. A great man in
himself, he was one of three, the forerunner and uplifter
of the renowned Hideyoshi, “Taiko Sama,” who rose from
a humble station to the highest raids outside the throne.
He was succeeded by the sagacious if unscrupulous
lyeyasu, the founder of the Tokugawa shogunate.
During the Ashikaga shogunate, in the period of
Choroku, A.D. 1457-58, while the emperor Go Hanazono
was on the throne and Ashikaga Yoshimasa was in
power, a coin called the “Cho-roku Tsu-ho”
was said to have been made. There are two, perhaps
three, specimens in existence of a coin bearing this in-
scription, but they do not look like government coins.
We cannot, of course, answer for the products of those
rude times, and opinions are divided as to whether these
are experimental or “Shiken” sen cast during the Cho-
roku period. In any case it is exceedingly unlikely that
the Choroku Tsuho went into circulation. It is
practically impossible that this coin could have so
nearly disappeared had it been in use so late as A.D.
1457. The early works on Japanese numismatics refer
to this coin as a historical fact, but were unable to
show any specimens. That is to say, about two
centuries ago this coin was quite unknown, so that it
must have become extinct within a period of three




tho possession of M i\ .Morlfei, iruiy bo fi “Btiikoii”
wrapped in mystery* For


been sufficient to discourage a demand for such poverty-
stricken emblems of currency. It is possible that they are
“lirummagem” coin, specially manufactured in China
during the middle ages for “export only”; but I do not
think so. There is no positive evidence of their Japanese
origin, but their uncouth make, their usually attenuated
proportions and frequently their inconsequent or mean-
ingless inscriptions, mark them out as the rude product
of troublous times. There is something pathetic, too, in
many of these mottoes. While the shabby look of these
coins betoken “hard times,” their legends seem to breathe
the “sigh of the weary.” They speak of peace which
their owners could scarcely know. Thus the motto
“Tai-Hei” “Great Peace,” is found in many
various kinds of handwriting (Plate 1, Nos. 1,2, 3,4, 5
and 6); “Kan-Hei” ( ), “Universal Peace” (Plate 1,
Nos. 7 and 8 ); “Ten-Hei,” ), “Heavenly Peace”
(Plate 1, No. 10) “Jun-Hei,” “Orderly Peace”
(Plate 3, No. 9); “Ji-Hei” “Tranquil Peace”
(Plate 3, No. 3); these and other lucky or hopeful senti-
ments are to be found on nearly all the legible “Shima”
sen.
In some of these coins the writing is “Hidarl Moji,”
that is to say, “Left-hand Character,” notin the sense
of having been written by the left hand, but the
character appears as if one were looking at it in a
mirror, the left stroke being on the right, and vice
versa, e.g. (Plate 2, Nos. 8 and 10). This is the natural result
of writing on the mould, used for the casting, in the
ordinary manner, instead of in the reverse way. lam


HE'S.


V\ m, .V -HUMA -A'V


; ' 1( f * t ,*•>' s


i't wi. '.MiVi s


informed by Mr. Muramatsu that this “Hidari Moji”
is quite characteristic, being found on the coins of no
other country. Many of these Shima sen are struck, not
cast, and in some the inscriptions are in intaglio, e.g.,
Plate 3, No. 1; Plate 4, Nos. 2,9 and 10; Plate 5, No. 6. In
others again, the characters are either illegible, incom-
prehensible, or, when read together, have no rational
meaning. Some of them would seem to have been made
by illiterate persons. Quite a number have evidently
been taken from the Chinese sen, which were prevalent in
Japan during the middle ages. In few instances has this
copying extended to all the characters, as in the case
of the “Tai-Hei Tsu-Ho” Plate 1. Inmost
cases one character has been altered, occasionally
two, and rarely only the sequence is changed. The
following will illustrate this:
“ Gen-Kai Tsu-Ho” from “ Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho ” Plate 3, No. 2
“ Ten-Kai Tsu-Ho ” from “ Kai-Gen Tsu-IIo” Plate 2, No. 7
“ Kai-Gen Sei-Ho ” from “ Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho” Plate 2, No. 4
“ Tai-Kai Tsu-Ho” from “ Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho” Plate 2, No. 8
“ Kai-Gen 0-0 ” from “ Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho ” Plate 2, No. 5
“ Jun-Gen Sho-Ho ” from “ Jun-KwaGen-Ho” Plate 3, No. 9
Our old friend, the Wado sen, also came in for its
share of this kind of flattery, viz:
“Wa-Kai Tsu-Ho” flom “Wa-DoKai-
Ho” (Plate 2, No. 6). Truly, the Shima sen
furnish food for reflection.
During the middle ages, and for some centuries later,
the currency of Japan, however, was mainly upheld by
the coins imported from China. The general superiority


of their material and workmanship, the high character,
as a rule, of the writing, the veneration held for things
Chinese, and above all their moderate cost, placed
them beyond competition as a medium of exchange.
The scarcity of copper in Japan, which discouraged the
minting of government coins, seems to have lasted
during the whole of the Intervening period between the
Kengen and Tensho issues. We are told that in the
time of the Emperor Shirakawa (A.I!. 1075-1086), three
thousand images of Buddha were made, but that copper
was so scarce that Chinese coins had to be imported,
an instance surely of religious enthusiasm bordering on
reckless improvidence. There is ample evidence that
this influx of Chinese sen was not regarded with favour
by all the rulers of Japan. The sentiment against
foreign coin is shewn in the terms of the previously men-
tioned decree of the Emperor Go Daigo (P. 81), and it may
be traced in various other edicts. On the 4th day of the
seventh month of the 4th year of Kenkyu (A.D. 1191),
it was decreed “From this date, do not allow the coins of
the So dynasty to circulate.” As the coins of the So
dynasty of China (A.D. 963-1273), furnished the great
bulk of the Japanese currency, it is evident that, had this
decree been carried out, the country would have been
practically without a circulating medium. The
ostensible reason was that the Japanese currency had
depreciated since the Kampei sen was issued and the
country had become permeated with foreign coin. It
may bo ungracious to hint that possibly some official had
a sordid motive behind this preposterous ebullition of


patriotism. At any rate, it is difficult to see how such a
measure could improve matters, in the absence of any
attempt to renew the national currency. Iso such
attempt was made till a hundred and fifty years later,
and this, as we have seen, did not succeed, so that the
currency of China flourished for many centuries in
Japan. Even to this day, the average Japanese or
European resident in the country, has a loose and care-
less idea that the sen, or “cash,” which he sometimes sees
floating around, are specimens of Japanese money,
whereas the fact is that there is usually a fair pro-
portion of Chinese coins in a handful of this money.
The following list shows the Chinese coins in use during
tlie mediaeval period:
Kaigen Tsuho
Kengen Juho
Shutsu Genho
Tokoku Tsuho
Shotsu Genho
Taihei Tsuho
Junkwa Genho
Shido Genho
Kanhei Genho
Keitoku Genho
Shofu Genho
Shofu Tsuho
Tenki Tsuho
Tensei Genho
Meido Genho
Keiyu Genho
Kwoso Tsuho
Shiwa Genho
Shiwa Tsuho
Kayu Genho
Jihei Tsuho
Jihei Genho
Kine Genho
Genho Tsuho
Genyu Tsuho
Shosei Genho
Genfu Tsuho
Seiso Genho
Daikwan Tsuho
Seiwa Genho
Senwa Tsuho
Kenen Tsuho
Shoko Tsuho
Junki Genho
Shoki Genho
Keigen Tsuho
Kaitai Tsuho
Kaiki Tsuho
Kajo Tsuho
Taiso Genho
Shojo Tsuho
Tanhei Genho
Kaki Tsuho
Junyu Genho
Kwoso Genho
Kaikei Tsuho
Keijo Genho
Kanjun Genho


The Kai-Gen Tsu-Ho, although the oldest of the com-
mon Chinese sen, dating as it does 87 years before the
Wado period, is very frequently found and its antiquity
lends it interest. There is a Chinese coin of much later
date which had a somewhat dramatic entry into the
country, and which so won its way into favour by its
sterling worth that it received official recognition, and
was actually used as a standard of equivalence for a time.
Though not properly speaking a Japanese coin, yet it
was adopted by and, one might say, naturalised in the
land, and is therefore worthy of special mention. It is
called the “Ei-Eaku Tsu-Ho” or “Current
Treasure of Ei Kaku” (Everlasting Happiness) fig. 3.
It was cast during the Min Dynasty, in the 10th year of
Eiraku, which corresponds to the 19th year of the
Japanese period, Oyei, A.D. 1412. For the following in-
formation, I am indebted to an interesting note by Mr.
J. H. Wigmore, which is well worth quoting in full.*
“In the 10th year of Oyei (1403), says the story, the
greatest typhoon ever known in Japan drove a Chinese
ship to Misaki village in Izu, now Soshu. Ashikaga
Mitsukane, in command of the Kwanto, sent three
* Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan.
FIG. 3


high officers to Misaki to see the ship. The people
of the ship told the story of how they were driven
out of their course, and requested a harbour. Five
or six kwan of Eirakusenf were found on board; and
on hearing of this, ‘Mitsukane’ sent word to Kyoto
to Yoshimitsu, the Inkyo Shogun, and Yoshlmochi,
His son, the Shogun, to ask what should be done;
Mitsukage was told to decide for himself. So he con-
fiscated the ship’s cargo, and, after provisioning the
crew with miso, salt, fuel and rice, sent them back to
China. The author of Denyeu does not credit tins story,
for lie says (1) the 10th year of Oyei, when this incident
is said to have happened, was only the first year of
Eiraku in China, and the Eiraku sen was not coined until
the 9th year of Eiraku, or about 1413, the 19th year of
Oyei; (2) the ex-Shogun Yoshimitsu died on the 15th of
Oyei; (3) Mitsukane died in the 17th of Oyei, so neither
of them could ever have seen an Eiraku sen, nor could
one have been imported in the lOth year of Oyei. This
may all be, and yet the story may have a framework of
truth.” It is generally admitted that a Chinese junk,
with a cargo of Eiraku coin got ashore in this neigh-
bourhood (Sagami), possibly in the 20th year of Oyei,
and that the authorities robbed her, taking care, however,
to provision her for the return voyage, which we may
bo sure was not delayed longer than necessary. The
Eiraku Tsuho, though introduced to Japan in this
f ’‘Five or six Kwan” (b~6 thousand?.) seems to be too small an
estimate. On the other hand. I find in the “Kokan Senkwa Kan” a statement
that then were one hundred. -‘Man” Kwan, literally a thousand millionsl
It may, however, be taken to mean only that there was a vast amount of
this coin on board.


violent manner, may have been subsequently sent over
from China in greater amount, for it is one of the com-
monest of the Chinese coins to be found in Japan.
Though not so large as the earlier antique sen, it greatly
exceeds in size the eight later ones of this group,
and is of infinitely superior finish. Following Mr.
Wigmore’s excellent resume from the “Denyen Jikata-
Kigen,” “Towards the latter half of the 16th century,
the Eiraku sen had begun to displace the ordinary money
(akusen, bad money) in the Kwanto. In 1573, Hojo
Ujiyasu* conquered that region, and soon afterwards he
called a meeting of some of the chief lords of the region
and submitted a proposition prohibiting the use of any
money except Eiraku sen. His reasons were: (1) the
Eiraku sen was of much better quality; (2) disputes
about media of payment must bo stopped; (3) such a
measure would stimulate trade. His views met with
favour, and the law was passed.” (Incidentally, this
method of passing it raises questions of great interest).
“Thereafter” says the chronicler, “all bad money in
every Machi, Gun,'Sho, Go, Mura, and Sato was collected
and sent to the Kamlgata (or Kyoto region); from this
time bad money was called ‘Kyotosen’ (or Kyosen). In
1590 Tokugawa gained the mastery in the Kwanto, and
(in some unexplained manner) the kyosen came partly
into use again and its ratio to the Eiraku sen was fixed at
4to 1. But disputes again rose, and a law was passed
more than once prohibiting the use of the Eiraku sen ex-
cept for the payment of taxes. The reason tor this was
* Not a descendant of the other great Hojo tamily mentioned on page 84.


said to be a dream of Teyasu; for one night in his castle
at Sumpu (now Shizuoka) he dreamed that he was
changing ins castle, and on telling this to Honda, an
official, the latter interpreted it as meaning that the
money should be changed. Perhaps Honda had a stock
of Kyosen which he was anxious to put upon the
market. This account differs slightly from that of the
authorities cited by the learned author, (1) in regard
to the time when the rate 4 to I was fixed; (2) in regard
to the time when the term Kyosen came into use. But
my purpose in mentioning it is to call attention to the
important connection between the Eirakusen and the
history of land tenure. Under Yoritomo there came the
final step in the process of commuting the old labour and
commodity taxes into money. Prom this time (the
middle of the 12th century) until leyasu, the principal
taxes (“ta” and “hata”) were paid in money. Kwan being
the unit of coinage, the amount due from a given piece of
land was called the Kwandaka. It is probable that the
amount of Kwandaka was determined in the beginning
by the amount of land producing sufficient to support
one horseman for the lard's service. Now when the
Eirakusen came into use, the value of the Kwandaka
came to be often expressed in the terms of the Eirakusen.
When so expressed, the term Eidaka was used. The in-
come of the samurai was paid in Eirakusen and the term
Eidaka was thus forced into being. Ordinary taxes were
senno; taxes paid in Eirakusen were Eino. The use of
Eidaka apparently began about the time that Hojo
Djiyasu made Eirakusen the sole lawful medium.”


From tliefaet that this coin received official sanction
to be used as the sole currency of the eight considerable
provinces called the Kwanto, it must have existed in
sufficient amount for this purpose, and, as we have
seen, its present numbers shew that tills was so.
We are scarcely, however, entitled to regard it as a
government coin. Hojo Ujiyasu had possessed himself
of the Kwanto by force, near the end of the Ashikaga
shogunate, and until beaten by Hideyoshi, his son Uji-
masa held the strongest and best provinces of the coun-
try. Still lie did not attempt to give the Kiraku sen a
national distribution, and had not the authority to do so
if he desired it. So far as his authority extended, this coin
was officially recognized, and we must therefore admit it
as a local government coin. lam not aware to what ex-
tent it was sanctioned by Hideyoshi, but the position
seems to have been something like this. Hojo Ujiyasu
collected it in the Kwanto and excluded the other sen,
Shima, Chinese, and Bita sen. Under Hideyoshi, who
defeated the Hojo and succeeded in controlling the whole
country, a redistribution took place, the inferior sen
flowed back to the Kwanto, to the great disappointment
of its population, while the Eiraku filtered slowly out to
tire surrounding country. Owing probably to its
superior excellence, it was admitted, under leyasu, for
payment of taxes, even when debarred from genera!
circulation. By this means it was gathered into the
government coffers.
In plate 7, are illustrated what are known as the
Eiraku “Ban,” or “Numbered” sen, each having a


3
I
I
i
i'i 01 'j f- iku. f j




number on the reverse. They are not to be regarded
as government coin, but may have been east for official
inspection, though not sanctioned for circulation.
Plate 6 shows a number of gold and silver Eiraku sen
from my collection. These might have been appropriately
placed In chapter 4, where they are referred to, but may
lie inserted here for the sake of comparison.
Fig. 4 shows a gold coin with the government crest,
not very distinct, that is to say the “Kiri” leaf and
flower. (Paulownia Imperialis)
Many counterfeits of the Eiraku sen were made in
Japan, but these are easily detected, and come under the
heading of Pita, or bad sen. Pig. 5. which, together with
the Sliima sen and probably the Chinese coins, other than
the Eiraku, were designated in contradistinction to this
FIG, 5
FIG, 4.


desk-able sen, Kyosen (Kyoto sen). The Bita sen include
other forgeries than those of the Eiraku; also probably
the various kinds of “bad sen,” such as small sized, cut
or defaced sen, cracked, broken coins and those made
with very inferior metal, such as lead, figs. 6, 7 and 8.
The class Bita sen, most likely included what are
now known to collectors as Shima sen, but from the
above description, no one is likely to confuse the
inferior imitations of Chinese or other coins, or any of
the host of Infirm, deformed or senile sen, with the
FIG. 8


coins which are like an island in their isolated peculiari-
ties. The Bita sen are the result of accident or evil
design, the “Shima” or “Island” sen seem “poor but
honest”, though decidedly eccentric. A few of them
are of fairly good dimensions, and may have formed the
circulating medium of a daimyo’s realm.


FROM TFA SILO TO MFIJI.
The death of Nobunaga. in 1582 left Hideyoshi
master of the political situation. It is true tliat he had
several rivals and had to walk warily, but lie was with-
out a peer in the combined arts of statecraft and strategy.
Tokugasva leyasu alone, the founder of the dynasty of
Shoguns which ruled from the death of Hideyoshi till the
present era of Meiji, might have coped with him. As it
was, he ventured to oppose Hideyoshi by force; but his
extreme caution, the distance of his base from the
capital, and the failure of his allies to give effective
support, led to the collapse of this opposition. The two
redoubtable warriors thereupon concluded a pact where-
by leyasu gave his support to Hideyoshi during the
lifetime of the latter, while preparing the way for his
own ambitious schemes.
The personality of Hideyoshi dominates Japanese
history. Born two years after Nobunaga and the same
time before leyasu, there was nothing in his plebeian
descent, Ids diminutive figure or homely features to
encourage advancement amongst the proud and great.
He rose by merit alone, an almost impossible feat in
those days. It is true that Nobunaga deserved success, it
only for discerning in a humble laquay the genius of in-
comparable strategy, and applying it to his service. We
may say that the elevation of Hideyoshi became indis-


pensible to the fortunes of his patron, so that, in spite
of the scowis of the aristocracy, he attained a position
second only to that of Nobunaga himself. On his death,
the claims of his infant grandson were temporarily
upheld by Hideyoshi, who was thus enabled to con-
solidate his authority, after which they received scant
consideration. During this period he set himself to
conquer the outstanding Daimyos and directed his
famous expedition against the House of Shimadzu of
Satsuma, A.D. 1587, which resulted in the defeat of this
powerful enemy.
TEN-SHO TSU-HO It was in this year that the coin
A.D. 1587 called “Ten-Sho Tsu-Ho,” or “Current
Treasure of Tensho,” (Heavenly Rectitude) was minted,
tigs. 1,2, 3,4, and 5. This coin was of silver. According
to the works called “San Kwa Zui” and “Wakan
FIG. 2


Sen li,” both a silver and copper coin were issued,
but the few copper specimens in existence are generally
admitted to be copies of the silver coin. It is quite
certain that, had the copper sen been in circulation,
it could not have disappeared completely. The silver
coin was so roughly made that the author of the
“Kokon Senkvva Kan 7 ’ refused to admit that it was a.
government coin. If we consider, however, that the art
of coining had been neglected for centuries, and that
silver requires great care in casting, we need not wonder
at the lack of finish in this coin. It is quite possible too,
that it was cast in haste, like the silver Wado, as it was
intended to .supplement the war chest of Hideyoshi.
FIG. 4
It is said that the inscription was written by the
Emperor Go Yozei. If so, the motive of Hideyoshi in
thus securing evidence of the Imperial approval is not


far to seek, as this coin was identified with the expedi-
tion against one of the most powerful and haughty
princes of the realm. The fact that the Tensho Tsuho was
bestowed upon those warriors who excelled in courage
and conduct, lends also significance to the statement
that it was written by the Emperor. It will be noticed
that the characters “Ten-Sho Tsu-ho,” are not read
in a circular fashion, as in the antique sen, but from
above downwards and from (the reader’s ) right to left.
From this coin onwards, the characters are always read
in the same sequence,* There are several varieties of it.
That shewn in fig. 4 is called the “Kin” Tensho,
as it is supposed to be a copy of a “Kin sen” or gold coin.
The coin does not exist, but is said to have been specially
inscribed by the Mikado. I take this to be a. mere
surmise. It is apparent that the Tensho Tsuho has
been copied from the renowned “Firaku Tsuho,”
FIG. 5
page That shewn in fig 1 . 5 is an exception and
is probably of later design. Here the body of the
character “ Ho” ( ) is huge and square and the align-
ment of the characters “Tensho” indicates that they
were originally “written for the part,” whereas those
* As the reader can thus easily identify the characters, they will
henceforth be omitted from the text except where specially called for.


in figs. 1 mid 4, prove that they were impressed on the
mould of the “Tane sen” after the coin had been shaped
thereon.
BUN-ROKU TSU-HO In the first year of Bnnroku,
A.D. 1588 “Magnificent Gift,” or ‘ ‘Splendid Official
Emolument,” A.D. 1592, the silver coin called “Bun-
Boku Tsu-Ho” or “Current Treasure of Bnnroku” was
FIG. 6
minted. Armed with the Imperial sanction, we may be
sure that Hideyoshi neglected no means, however
trivial, to attract and retain all who had an axe to
grind, and few, whether lord or samurai, were proof
against the attractions of “Bnnroku.” Though it is
known that many of the high born held him in secret
contempt, his tactful combination of the open hand and
the “mailed fist,” earned him the devoted services of the
many who had something to gain or keep. Two years
previous to the issue of this coin, Hojo Ujimasu,
who from his proud and giddy height as com-
mander of the Kwan to had challenged Hideyoshi to
combat, and met a grievous fall. The outstanding op-
position of the Dairayos collapsed, and it remained with
Hideyoshi to reward the faithful with “Splendid Official
Emoluments,” which he did with no niggard hand.
Like the Tensho Tsuho, this coin was not intended for


circulation. It wits probably designed for use in the
invasion of Corea, which began in the year in which the
coin was cast. Like the Tensho sen also, it is coarsely
FIG. 7
made. There are two kinds of handwriting, figs. (5
and 7. A copper coin is spoken of; but does not exist.
Forgeries are shewn by dealers, however, to tempt the
uninitiated. The gold and silver Firaku sen shewn in
plate (5, chapter 8, are reputed to have been designed by
Hideyoshi as rewards to his officers; and though not
current coin, they came into limited use, possibly at
their bullion value. Tn one of these, plate 8, chap.
8, No 1, it will be seen that the characters “Tsn” and
“Ho” have a. great resemblance to those of the Tensho
Tsuho seen in tig. 5. In this case, the Firaku sen
has been copied from the Tensho Tsuho, instead of the re-
verse, and this specimen is therefore of unusual interest.
The Corean war, designed by Hideyoshi as a step
towards the invasion of China, dragged on in victorious
but fruitless battles against the forces of these countries,
and was finally ended by the death of the great “Taiko,”
who quietly breathed his last on the morning of the
Kith September, lulls. Such matters do not properly


fall within the scope of this work, but it may conduce
to a better understanding of the origin of some of the
following coins, if I quote from Murdoch the following
passage: “leyasu was summoned to the Taiko’s sick-
room, and there the dying ruler told him that after his
death, there would be great wars, and that only he
(leyasu) could keep the empire tranquil. ‘I therefore,’
Hideyoshi proceeded, ‘bequeath the whole country to
you, and trust that you will expend all your strength
in governing it. My son Hideyori is still young. I beg
that you will look after him. When he is grown up,
I leave it to you to decide whether he shall be my
successor or not.”
KEI-CHO TSU-HO “The Current Treasure of Keicho,”
A.D. 1606 was cast in the 11th year of Keicho
FIG. 8
“Rejoicing Continually” (1606). It was made of silver
and copper and both these metals were in circulation,
though the copper, or bronze coin, was issued in much
greater amount, and was the principal currency. The
silver coin is getting quite rare. The “Tsu” and “Ho”
of the Keicho coin are taken from the Eiraku sen,
while the “Kei” (||£) and “Clio” have been added
according to the method previously mentioned. Several


varieties are known. Fig. 8 shews the ordinary or
“Futsu” Keieho. Note the likeness of the “Tsuho”
FIG. 9
to that on tire Eiraku sen. In fig. 9 the true silver
eoin is seen. Fig. 10 illustrates the “110 Cho Sei”
or stroke on the head’of “Ho,” added to disguise
the likeness to the Eiraku sen. There are other kinds
FIG. 11
mentioned in the books, viz. “Shoji,” or small letter
Keieho, fig. 11, “Shinsho” a name for a certain square
style of writing, and the silver eoin written in the
“Tensho” style of character. This latter name (as


will be seen by the characters) does not refer to tlie
period of that name but to one of the various styles of
writing. The three latter varieties have been placed
here for the sake of continuity; but they were not in
current use at any time, and ought properly to be classed
with the “Shikeu” (test or trial) sen. The “Tensho,”
as opposed to the true silver coin, may be reckoned as a
“Baku” or fancy sen, probably nob even deserving a
place amongst the “Shlken” sen. Some writers distin-
guish a “Taiji,” or large character variety, but the
distinction is trivial.
The Keicho Tsuho was coined ostensibly in order
to have a substitute for the Kirakn sen, which seems to
have provoked much dissension by its superiority to the
“Bita” sen. If the object was to make a coin of inferior
grade to the Riraku sen, the Keicho Tsuho is a decided
success. At the time of its debut, the celebrated pilot
Will Adams, was enjoying the confidence of the
Shogun Hidetada; his father leyasu, who had retired
in 1603, but who still practically managed the affairs of
the country, ardently espoused the cause of learning
and the arts.
GEN-WA TSU-HO In 1615, the first year of Genwa
A.D. 1615 (pronounced “Genua”) “the Commence-
ment of Concord,” the coin called “Gen-Wa Tsu-llo,”
or Current Treasure of Genwa, was issued. The
period of Genwa was established to celebrate the peace
which followed the defeat of the party whose object was
to put Toyotomi Hideyori, the son of Taiko Hideyoshi,
in the place usurped by Tokugawa leyasu. Another


attempt was made in t lie summer of the first N ear of
(Jenwa, but met with no success. It may lie worth while
to dwell for a moment on the cause of this outbreak in
favour of Hideyori, as it has a bearing on one of the most
interesting coins of Japan, namely the universal “liun”
sen of the Kwanei period. This coin was made from the
metal composing the huge image, or “ Daibutsu,” which
ley as u had iml need Hideyori and ids mother to erect,
together with temples and other buildings, in order it is
said, to exhaust his resources. At the last moment, how-
ever, when the ceremony of consecration had already
commenced, the great multitude which had gathered, not
only from the capital, but surrounding provinces, were
astounded to learn that the ceremony had been prohibited
by leyasu.* His cunning plan of humiliating Hideyori,
on the pretence of having been slighted by an obscure
inscription on the great bell, precipitated the conflict
above referred to, if it was not the sole cause of it. In
extenuation, however, it may be said that leyasu, who
had reached the age of seventy-three, knew that the
rival powers were only waiting for his decease, and
decided to strike the final blow while his presence could
encourage his friends and dismay his enemies. He
accomplished his object, and the Tokugawa family
occupied the shogun ate till the present era of Meiji.
* “It afterwards became known that leyasu had taken umbrage at the
wording of the inscription on the great bell, into which the characters form-
ing his name were introduced, by way of mockery, as he pretended to think,
in the phrase “ Kokka anko", “ May the state be peaceful and prosperous"
[Ka and Ko being the Chinese for le and Yasu], while in another sentence
which ran ■■ On the east it welcomes the bright moon, and on the w r est bids
farewell to the setting sun’’, he chose to discover a comparison of himself to
the lesser, and of Hideyori to the greater Luminary, from which he then in-
ferred an intention on the part of Hideyori to attempt his destruction.’’
Chamberlain and Mason's "Handbook of Japan" sth Chapter, Page H7O.


leyasu died in tiie year following Ids triumph, in the
second year of (fenwn, A.l). 1016.
The “(fen-Wa Tsnho” or “Current treasure of Oen-
wa A. I). 1(515, fig. 12, is a copper coin, of better
finish and design than the Keicho Tsnho. We can still
trace the influence of the Firaku sen in the style of the
characters “Tsu” and “Ho,” though they have probably
not been directly transferred to it, as in the case of the
Keicho coin. On the reverse it bears the Japanese
numeral 1. This might be supposed to refer to the first
year of (ienwa in which it was issued, lint it seems
rather to have been intended to indicate its value,
which was one men or sen. Fig. 13 illustrates a
FIG. 13
variety which, from its comparative rarity, is probably
a “shiken” or “mihon” sen (trial or sample sen). It is
lighter in colour than the “Tsuyo” or circulating sen,


but can scarcely be called a brass coin. The characters
all differ slightly from those on the ordinary sen,
especially those of “(Jen” (%;) and “Wa” Besides
these, there are what are known as the “Ban” or
numeral sen, each having a number on the back, Plate
7 Chapter 3. Nos. 7, 8 and 9. They are made of the
same metal as fig 13, and are rare. It was not unusual
in China to number the coins on the reverse according
to the year of the period in which they were made;
but this can scarcely have been the intention in this
case, for the period of Genwa extended for only nine
years, while the illustrations shew not only the number
Bon the back, but also 10 and 20. Another set (we
cannot say series) for consecutive numbers have not
been found, is made of silver. Pewter sets also exist,
but are of no special interest. These coins, which were
probably made in the government mint are, as already
stated of the nature of “Shiken” sen; and the numbers on
the back were probably affixed for the purpose of inspec-
tion only.
KWAN-EI TSU-HO The period of Kwanei, or Permanent
A.D. 1624 Liberality, began in 1624 and lasted for
twenty years. The throne was occupied by the Emperor
Go Mizu No-O till the 6th year, then by the Empress
Meisei till its close, while the Shogun lemitsu, grandson
of leyasu, administered the affairs of the realm. In the
3rd year of this period the “Kwan-Ei Tsu-Ho or Current
Treasure of Kwanei 7 ’ was minted. The idea of this coin
is said to have originated in a dream of lemitsu
which was interpreted by the priest Tenkwai as a call


for the institution of a new coinage. It proved
so acceptable that it continued to be issued till the (sth
year of Ansei, 1859, that is to say, for two hundred and
thirty-three years. A currency which lasted for such a
time and so nearly bridges over the interval between the
feudal age and modern enlightenment, must have been
deserving of the popularity which it won. It is an ex-
cellent coin, as issued from the government mint, and
even many of the varieties made in the provinces are good
specimens of the minter’s art, though some form an
exception to this statement. We may also make an ex-
ception in the case of the Kwanei iron sen, made in the
provinces from 1769 onwards, which are naturally very
inferior. Including the varieties made in different parts
of the country, many of which were not acknowledged by
the government, and taking into consideration slight
differences in character, size, design, nature and quality
of metal used in their composition, there are over a
thousands kinds of Kwanei sen recognised by
connoisseurs. I possess some three hundred varieties;
and it would be an easy matter to double the
number. To experts in Japanese calligraphy, a full
collection of these sen may be a, matter of interest,
there being Japanese collectors who devote themselves
entirely to it. Except in a. few instances, where
special interest attaches to a specimen, 1 propose to
give only such as can be readily distinguished from one
another.
The first Kwanei Tsuho coins were made in the
province of ?dito, an ancient centre of classical learning


Platk I.—EARLY SKN.
“KWANKI TSUHO.”


and famous for tlie number and variety of the coins
which it produced, not only for provincial but for general
circulation. They are inferior in many respects to the
later sen, and may always be recognized by the fact
that the “Ei” is written in tlie “Nisui” (Zl7jO
style already noticed in the Ryohei Eiho sen, (page
06), tigs. 35 and 3(i. From t lie 13th year of
Kwanei onwards, this coin became the established
government currency, an order bavins 1 appeared in
that year to the effect that it would in future be
minted in Tokyo, the seat of the Shogun, and at Saka-
moto, in the province of Omi, which adjoins that of the
Imperial capital. It was further forbidden to cast it in
any other place. Other decrees relating to this coin
appeared from time to time.
The order limiting the coinage of this sen to Tokyo
and Sakamoto fell into abeyance, and legitimate
centres of minting, as well as private foundries,
sprung up over the land. There are three or four
specimens all which distinctly bear witness to their
origin from previous currencies. Of these I may
mention the “Kaigen” “Te” or hand, Plate 1., No. 5, the
“Eiraku” No. 6, the “Taihei p ” No. 7, and the “Genua”
hand (writing) No. 8. In these cases the “Tsu-Ho” has
been taken by direct transference from China coins.
They are not common, No. 5 being very rare. This
is the coin which was one of the main actors in the
incident illustrated in the frontispiece. The first Kwanei
Tsuho, of reliable date, is illustrated in fig. 14. It
was cast in Mito, Hitachi Province, in the 3rd year


of Kwanei, 1(52(5. On tlie obverse, the character “Ei”
is seen to be of the “Xisui” type, wiiile Hie reverse
bears the Japanese numeral for which evident-
ly refers to the 3rd year of Kwanei. Figs. 15, 16 and 17
are without numbers on the reverse and were also cast in
FIG. 16
Mito. According to the “Shin Sen Kwanei Sempu,”
fig. 14 represents the first Kwanei sen minted in the


FIG. I?
country; but Mils statement may be questioned. It
seems to me that any of them might have been the
first attempts at making the Kwanei Tsuho, though
they were probably not considered good enough for the
FIG. 18 ,
new circulation. In fig. 18, the “Nisui” style is seen
with a dot or star on the hack. (“Hai Mon Sen,” or
FIG . 19
Back Star Character), also made in Mito. .In the 18th
year of Kwanei this mint also produced a coin, fig. 19,


with the Japanese numeral for 13 on the back and with
the character “Ei” written also in the “Nisui” style.”
Jt is rare, and was probably a shiken or trial sen sent
in for government approbation. This appears to have
been refused, for we find that the Kwanei sen were
issued in this year from the Asakusa mint in Tokyo.
FIG. 20
In hg. 20, the first coin made in the hitter mint
appears without the Nisui character, but with a dot on
FIG. 21
FIG. 22


the back. It was issued 1 11 the 18th year of Kwanei.
There were several varieties of this sea fig. 21, “Mu
llai” or “Xo Star,” and fig. 22, “Kj t o Sen” or “Small
Hole”, which appear to be of excellent quality and
design, but for some reason or another this mint did
not retain its monopoly of manufacture, and the edict
above mentioned appears to have reference to the
establishment of a purely government mint at Shiba,
which, with the mint at Sakamoto, in the province
of Omi, were thenceforth decreed to be the only legi-
timate sources of the national currency. This decree
was rescinded, or at least disregarded, even in the
year of its promulgation. The coin shown in fig. 28
FIG 23
is also from tlie Asakusa mint. It is known as the
“Sekkaku” Asakusa sen, because the characters are
crowded around the central hole, like those of the
Kengen Taiho in Chapter 2, fig. 68, p. 77. To numis-
matists some interest attaches to the series of sen
issued from the Asakusa mint called “Ban” or “Num-
ber” sen, though not properly speaking coins of the
realm. Whether they were intended as trial sen, or
whether they were meant for fancy sen, the Asakusa
mint being the source of many such coins, one cannot


say. The fact however, that those sen were also made in
the official government mint at Shiba, may indicate that
they were designed for official inspection, with the
intention possibly of casting fresh coin each year and
placing the date of each on the reverse, after the fashion
of some of the Chinese cash. Such sets are very rare,
practically unobtainable indeed, and consequently there
are many forgeries. Those illustrated in plates 2 and 8,
are good specimens, thirteen out of the sixteen being from
the Asakusa and three from the Shiba mint, namely, Nos.
2, 4 and 10. A close inspection of the latter, will enable
any one to detect the variations in the characters from
those of the remaining thirteen numbers, the difference
in breadth of the body of “Ho” being specially obvious.
No. 17 shews an ordinary sen from the Asakusa and No.
18 a corresponding one from the Shiba, mint. The
“Shiba Shin Sen Za” or New Sen Mint at Shiba, was
established in the 13th year of Kwanei, and the
sen emanating therefrom were of tine quality and
FIG. 24 T
workmanship. Fig. 24 shews one of these sen, a trifle
larger than the “Tsuyo” or circulating sen, for it
represents what is known to collectors as a “Tane” sen.
The “Tane” sen have already been described, but the




Plate 8.—KWAN El BAN SEN.


reader may be again reminded that a “Tane,” sen is one
which is used to make the impression on the clay
moulds into which the metal is poured to make coin.
They are therefore of the best and clearest design and
are much in demand, being also rarer than tlie ordinary
sen. The “Tane” sen of the Shiba mint is far from
FIG. 25 T
common and that shown in fig. 25 is an exceptionally
large and fine specimen.
The sen illustrated in fig. 26, is also a Tane sen,
F IG. 26 T
which I shall indicate in the following pages by the
capital letter (T). It was made in Sakamoto, Omi
Province according to the before-mentioned edict, in the
16th year of Kwanei.
In the same year moreover, this sen was cast
in Nara, fig. 27, Matsumoto, Yoshida, and the


of Ashi-arai and ivoya in Soroka province, bn
s.v. .Alier places which are not exactly ascertained,
That of Ashi-arai is illustrated in tig. 28; tin
some
FIG. 28
what curved lines around the central hole render its
identification easy.
In the Bth year of Kwambnn, 1668, there was cast
at the village of Kameido, in the outskirts of Tokyo, a,
Kwanei sen known as the “Bun” sen, from the character
of that name XjC), meaning “Learning,” “Literary
Composition,” which is inscribed on the reverse, figs, 29
and 80. This sen was made from the fragments of the
Daibutsn, or great image of Buddha, erected by Hideyori,
and the consecration of which was so rudely interrupted
by Teyasu in the year 1611. In 1662 both the temple and
the image were destroyed by an earthquake, and it is


said that Matsudaira Nobutsuna, a noted statesman,
sensibly suggested that it could be put to good use
FIG 29 T
FIG. 30
by converting it into coin, whereas its temple covering
always stood in need of repair and was a source of great
expense. The Emperor Reigen is said then to have
issued a proclamation saying that in the time of the
Emperor Seisho (of the Shu dynasty of China,) the
Buddhist images were destroyed, and coin made in
their stead; a government edict stated that Buddha
teaches the good way to the people, but that these
copper images are certainly not Buddha, whose chief
doctrine is to benefit the people, etc. The character
“Bun” on the reverse of this coin, is the same as that of
Kwanbun, and is no doubt intended to signify the period
in which it was made, the other character “Kwan” being


on the obverse of the coin. It has been said that the
“Bun” was placed on the back of this sen on account of
its having been made by Bun Zaenion, a person of great
wealth, who is stated to have made coin at the Kameido
mint. This is not, however, the general opinion.
The Bun sen is very plentiful; indeed, one can
hardly look at a handful of sen without seeing one, but
it is less common than it was ten years ago, and will soon
be rare. There are two reasons for this. The first is
that the metal contains a very small proportion of gold
and probably silver; the other, that it has come from the
body of the Daibutsu. It has thus a saving grace in the
esteem of those who worship Nicotiana, for they who
have the stem of their kiseru or pipe made of this metal
may burn and inhale the incense all day long with-
out fear of the canker which threatens the devotee of
the fragrant weed. Here surely, does comedy follow on
the heels of tragedy 1 Yet what a history might one of
these humble sen unfold, were it capable of transferring
its experience to ourselves! It may be that part of it
was first handled by man in the Wado period and that
it may have undergone the most varied metamorphoses
through members of the antique sen, and others
besides, ere it was cast by some devotee, trying to follow
the Good Way, into the furnace (whence it mingled with
other and nobler metals) its individuality merged at last
in the Daibutsu, the image of the Great Teacher. Then
the solemn triumph, turned in a moment to less than
nothing, to gall, to unholy chagin, at the word of a
scheming mortal 1 Then the catastrophe, the melting


pot once more, the smooth shining Bun sen, personifica-
tion of Mammon! To be a pipe mouthpiece, beloved of
its owner, is truly a better fate!
FIG. HI
There are about half a dozen kinds of this sen,
which are easy to recognise, amongst which is the
“Shimaya 77 sen, fig. 31, which may be distinguished
from the others by the top of the character “Tsu 77 (5H,).
It was made in Kameido during the period of Kwan-
FIG. 33
bun, along with another sen which has the same face,
but in which the character Bun is lacking on the reverse,
fig. 32. These two coins were made by an establish-
ment having the trade name “Shimaya 77 . I must not
forget to mention a coin, illustrated in fig. 33, which,
though more or less of a freak and probably not intended
for circulation, has an interest all its own, for it is the


last of tlie Bun sen and was literally made from the
dregs of the melted Daibutsu. It is called the “Tori-
FIG. 33
Sumi” sen, such is the inscription, in a running hand on
the back of this coin, but to read it the coin must be
looked at in a mirror for, like some of the Shima sen, it is
written in reverse. The phrase “Tori-Sumi,” “Gathered
Ending” implies that the residue was removed for the
purpose of making this coin. Its metal is not so good as
that of the ordinary Bun sen, as it really represents the
dregs, or nearly so, of the molten metal. It is by no
means common, although forgeries abound. At the
FIG. 84
ancient capital, Kyoto, in the 4th year of Genroku, A.U.
1691, the coin illustrated in tig. 64 was minted. In tig.
85 and 36 are seen coins with the character “Sa” (££) on
the reverse, and tig. 37 another with the same, in a


FIG. 87
different hand. They were all made in the province
of Sado (hence the “Sa”), in the town of Aikawa, but at
different periods. While it is my aim to treat these
Kwanei sen in chronological order, it will simplify the
task of understanding them if such similar coins are
considered together, the time relation being of less
importance than that of similarity. That shewn in fig.
85 was cast in the 4th year of Shotoku, A.l). 1774, while
fig. 80 was made in the 11th year of Kyoho, A.l). 1720.


There are several varieties which space does not allow
us to consider.
That seen in fig. 37 was issued in the first and only
year of Manen, 1860, over a hundred and thirty years
later than the former and as a current coin,
made of iron
The next coin can easily be recognised by the
upward tail of the side stroke of the character Ki,
fig. 38. In this also, as in most of the Kwanei sen,
FIG. 88 T
FIG. 39 T
several varieties can be distinguished. It was made at
Isamba, in the province of Settsu, from the 13th to the
15th year of Kyoho, 1738-1730. The sen exhibited in
fig. 10, bears the character “Sen ” ('fill) a Hermit (see
him approaching the mountain peak) on the reverse.


FIG 10 T
This is the first character of Sendai, at which place
it was minted (Tshi-No-Maki), in the province of Mutsu
from the 13th to the 17th years of Kyoho, 1728-1732.
Fig. 11 represents one with a different top to the charac-
FIG. 41
ter “Tsn” (jl,), and other slight variations.
In the first year of Gembun, 1736, the coin seen in fig.
12 was cast at Jiu-Man-Tsnbo, Fukugawa, Tokyo, and
bears on the reverse the Japanese numeral for “Jin”
FIG. 42 T


(~p) 10, in allusion to the first syllable in five name of its
birthplace. Note that the left leg, so to speak, of the
character Kwan (jit), springs from the lower horizontal
stroke, rather than from the body of the character
while the right leg, or tail extends upwards to a much
greater degree than in any of the preceding coins. The
dot of Ei, too, is formed of an angular stroke, and the
character “Ho” has quite a jaunty air. All the charac-
ters of this sen are different from those of the earlier
Kwanei coins. These points are emphasised, as it was
at this mint that the first iron sen was made, though
a few iron coins are cast on the lines of some of the
previous ones. In fig. 43 is seen a similar coin, though
the numeral “Jiu” is not on the reverse, but on the
margin of the obverse.
FIG. 44
Fig. 44 does not differ from fig. 43, except in the size
of the cross (Jiu) on the margin of the obverse.


As usual there are several varieties one of which,
fig. 45, is characterised by the absence of the indicating
character “ Jiu” In fig. 46 we see the character
FIG. 46 T
“Ko” or “Sho” (/]') on the reverse to shew that this
coin was made at the village of Ko-uma in the province
of IMusashi. This was in the first year of (Sembun,
173(5.
The following coin, fig. 47, was made in the province
of K4i in the Ist year of CJembun, 1736. The long
upward tail of the “Kwan” and the large central rim,
FIG. 47 T


serve to distinguish it. Fig. 48 shews a Kwanei sen
from Onagigawa, Tokyo, made in the second year of
Gembun. The character on the reverse is that of
FIG. 48 T
“Kawa” (jlj), a river (with its banks and the water
between), after the “Kawa” of the word Onagigawa,
Instead of being cast on the back, the corresponding coin
FIG. 49
shewn in fig. 49, is stamped on the margin of the
obverse, with this character. In fig. 50 it is twice
stamped. Fig. 51 shews a sen minted at the village of
Fushimi in the province of Yamashiro, the Ist year of
FIG. 50


(jembnn, A. 1). 178(5; the width of the vim on the reverse
wili attract attention.
The coin illustrated in tig. 52, is peculiar in regard
to the rim of the central hole, which nearly meets the
FIG. 51
outer rim. It was made in the third year of Gembun,
1788, and its coinage lasted till the first year of Kwampo,
1741. It was produced in the village of Kashima, in the
province of Settsu. One or two varieties were made.
FIG. 52 T
A number of the Kwanei sen have the
character “Gen or “Gan” (%) signifying beginning
or commencement, on the reverse. Of these I shall
give only two; the first, fig. 53, being larger than the
second, fig. 54, though the characters are much the
same. These sen were cast at Takatsu, city of Osaka, in
the province of Settsu, in the first year, or commence-
ment, “Gen” (7C) of Kwampo, 1741, hence the character
on the reverse.


PIG 53 T
FIG. 54 T
There was a coin, fig 55, made in the village of
Ashio, Shimotsuke province, in the 2nd year of
Kwampo, 1742, which bears the character “Soku” or
“Ashi” (JS.) a word which means foot, and is applied
in the ordinary colloquial to coin, as mentioned in the
first chapter.
PIG . 55 T
The Japanese numeral for one on the back of
the two following sen (figs. 56 and 57), also refers to their
place of coinage, which was at Ichi-No-Sei in Kii
province. They were also cast in the second year of


FIG. 57 T
KwiEinpo. It will be observed that not only do these
coins differ in size, and in the thickness of the stroke
“Ichi,” or one, but that the characters on the obverse
are very different in style and size. Fig. 58 represents
FIG. 58 T
another of this kind, in which the face characters
resemble those of fig. SG, but the numeral “Ichi” is
stamped in two circles on its margin, instead of being
cast on the reverse. This mint also produced sen with
face characters as in fig. 57, but without the numeral
on the reverse.


Nagasaki comes next on the list, with a rather
inferior coin having the character “Clio” or “Naga”
meaning “long,” cast on the reverse, tig. 59. It was
made in the second year of Meiwa, 1765. Fig. 60 shews a
FIG. 59 T
FIG. 60
“Haha” or “Mother” sen from which the Tane sen are
cast. In the latter year also, an iron coin was issued from
the village of lida. Two varieties, with the long upward
pointed tail stroke of “Kwan”, and sharp points on the
PIG. 61 T


FIG. 63 T
“Ho” are shewn in figs, in 61 and 62. Another iron coin
was minted in the first year of Gera bun 1736, fig. 63, and
from the 4th to the 6th year of Meiwa, 1767-1769, at
Fushirai, Yaraashiro province. The “Tane” sen of the
latter, is an attractive coin, with its solid plain characters
and wide rims on the reverse, fig. 63 A.
FIG. 63 T
FIG. 63 A. T
Copper must have again been getting scarce, for
about this time many iron coins were made in various
parts of the country. At Ishiuomaki, Sendai, in the


province of Mutsu, an iron sen with the character “Sen”
a thousand, to mark its origin from Sendai, was
issued from the 6th to the Bth year of Meiwa, 1769-1771,
FIG. 64 T
FIG. 65 T
tigs. 64 and 65. A reference to fig. 41 will shew that two
distinct characters have been used to indicate Sendai,
one (fll) for the copper and the other for the iron
sen. From the 6th to the Bth year of Meiwa also, an
iron sen was cast at the village of Kizaki, in the district
of Kuji, province of Hitachi. It has the character
“Ku” or Kyu (A.) on the reverse, fig. 66. The top of the
FIG 66 T


FIG. 07 T
“Tsu” (J®,), is triangular; some of them have the charac-
ters “Kyu Ki” on the reverse, tig. 67. The latter is the
Japanese numeral for two, but the two characters
read “Ku-Ni,” or “Ku-Ji”.* This specimen is larger
and better than the copper Tane sen and I therefore use
it for illustration. It was no doubt an iron Tane sen.
From the 6th year of Ansei, 1859, to some time in Keio,
1865-67, an iron coin was made in Asakusa, Tokyo.
FIG. 68 T
The characters are not unlike those of the Shiba sen,
shewn in fig. ‘24, but the whole coin is somewhat less
imposing fig. 68. It so closely resembles the iron coin
* It is a moot point as to whether the characters “ Kyu or (Ku) Ni refer
to the District Kuji only, or whether the “ Ni ” can be intended to indicate
the second issue, of which the coin appears to be a sample. “Ni” is
occasionally pronounced “ Ji,” and the combination may thus he intended
for “Kuji.” On the other hand it is just possible that, as this coin was a
later issue of fig. 66 it may have been minted in the 2nd year of Bunkyu, and
that these words have reference to the date of its issue.


which was cast in the Kameido mint from the 2nd year
of Kwampo, 1742, that one illustration will serve for
both.
During the first year of Ansei also, a copper sen was
issued from Mi to with “To” ( h ) on the back. Two
FIG. 70 T
kinds are seen in figs. 69 and 70, one having a wide and
the other a narrow rim. At Nambn in the province of
Matsu, a small coin, fig. 71, was made both in copper
and iron, probably after A.D. 1860. The first copper
FIG 71


FIG. 73
mine of Akita also produced a copper Kwanei sen,
fig. 72, in addition to those mentioned in Chapter 5. At
the shrine of Aid (the Autumn shrine of Suwa Jinja)
various Kwanei coins were stamped, fig. 73, to celebrate
the erection of the temple.*
FIG 73
We now come to the “Kami” or “wave” sen, tiie
reverses of which explain their title. The “Wave”
design represents water in motion and further illustrates
the similarity between this idea and that embodied in
our word “Currency” (see page 22). They were also
known as “Shi Mon” (W3C), or four mon sen, their
nominal value being one to four of the ordinary sen.
* The God is Take-mina-gata-tome-no-mikoto while his spouse is
Mai-no-zasaka-no-tome-no-mikoto. At Sbima-no-Suwa, there are two shrines
devoted to these dieties, one known as the Autumn (Aki) Jinoa while the
other is the Spring (Haru) Jinja. The male deity, was ages ago, a supporter
of the dynasty which was founded by Jimmu Tenno. though he perished in
the attempt to uphold his political opinions. These divinities are said to
change their abode twice yearly from the Autumn to the Spring shrine and
vice versa. It was at the Autumn or Aki shrine that the coins were stamped.
They are shewn here merely as curiosities,


There are many kinds, but we must be content with a
few of the most prominent varieties.
FIG, 74 T
In tig. 71 we see the “Ni Jiu Ichi Nami”, or Twenty-
one Wave sen, there being several subvarieties. They
were minted from the sth to the 6th year of Meiwa
1768-1769, at Kameido, and are flue specimens of the
minter’s art. Figs. 75, and 75 A, illustrate another
FIG . 75-A T


“Nami” sen, the “Jiu Ichl Nami” sen, or that with
eleven waves. Properly speaking there are only ten
waves; the third from the bottom is interrupted by
the central hole. Many varieties of this latter coin,
were made in several places from the 6th year of Meiwa,
1769 onwards, some of iron. It will be noticed that
the top of the character “Tsu” differs in the “eleven”
and “twenty-two” wave sen; in the former it is almost a
triangle, while in the latter it is rectangular except in
some coins with distinguishing characters on the back.
Some of these coins have not only waves, but characters
on the reverse which I shall briefly mention. Fig. 70 is
FIG. 76 T
tlie Tane sen of an iron issue, cast in Morioka, province
of Mutsu, in the single year of the period Manen. On the
FIG. 77 T


reverse it bears the character “Mori” to indicate
its origin in Morioka.
Fig. 77 has the character “Sen” (-p), a thousand, on
the back, the mark of an iron coin made in Sendai; it was
also made in Manen, 1860.
FIG. 78 T
Fig. 78, shews another iron coin with the syllabic
letter “To” (V) on the reverse. It was made in Mito,
in the 2nd year of Kei-O, 1866.
Yet another iron sen, with the letter “1” (d )on the
reverse was made at Tsu in the province of Ise, fig. 79.
FIG. 79 T
In the town of Aidzu, Iwashiro province, during the 2nd
year of Kei-O, an iron sen with the syllabic letter, or
“Kana” called “No” on the reverse was minted, fig. 80.


FIG. 80 T
It has been suggested that this letter is an abbreviated
form of “A” (T), and that it has reference to the town
Aidzu.
Another with the letter “A” (T)is said to have
been cast at Hiroshima, Aki province, in what year no
one knows. The place of mintage is not even positively
known, some authorities maintaining that it was made
in the foregoing town of Aidzu, and that it was from
this coin that the abbreviation of the letter “A” was
conceived for the sake of appearance. There were
several iron coins of the “Eleven Wave” kind, cast at
Yamagata in the province of Dewa, at various dates.
Figs. 81 and 82 shew both the eleven and twenty-one wave
FIG. 81 T


FIG. 82
FIG. 83 T
varieties. The latter is rare; still more so is the brass
coin shewn in fig. 83 from the same mint.
Certain large and handsome Kwanei sen called “Go
Yo” sen (lit. Honourable Use, meaning, in this case,
“for the service of the government”) were cast under
authority, for the purpose of paying the workmen
engaged in the repairs of the great temples at Nikko.
FIG. 81


I'l ATF: I --KW \ X Kl SILVK]! ANI' TiOMI SKX. (Not-■iirrcnl Coin.}


FIG. 85
There are several varieties, of which I give a few ex-
amples. They are occasionally called “Ogata” or large-
sized “Kwanei” sen. Figs. 84 and 85 were made at
Asaknsa during the Shotoku period, 1711-15. What is
PIG. 86
FIG. 87
known as the Osaka Namba Go Yo sen is shewn in
tigs. 86 and 87. In Plate 4 may be seen some of the
Kwanei gold and silver sen cast since the time of lemi-
tsu. A few of them were issued as rewards, and one


or two were “Haha” or mother sen; most however were
in private use as gifts.
£j This coin was minted in the dth yeai
ot 1 10-Ei, the year of the last eruption of
A.D. Mount Fuji, which resulted in the pro-
minence on the south side of the mountain called, after
the period, Hoei-san; on this occasion the ashes are said to
have covered some parts of Tokyo, about 60 miles dis-
tant, to the depth of six inches.
FIG. 88
The “Ho-Ei Tsu-Ho” or “Current Treasure of
Hoei” (Eternal Treasure), is a large coin, of 37 M.M.
FIG. 89.—Silver Haiia Sen


diameter. Fig. 89 shews a “Haha” or mother sen
from my collection, probably unique, made of silver,
the parent of the Tane sen, fig. 90. This latter speci-
FIG. 90 T
men is a trifle larger and thicker than the common sen
The reverse of the Hoei Tsuho has the characters
“Fi Kyu Sei Yo” cast on the wide margin, in the same
order as those on the face. They read “For the Ever-
lasting Use of the World,” a sentiment which was
not realized. In the case of the “Tsnyo” or current sen,
fig. 88, the additional character “Chin,” meaning pre-
cious, is struck on the margin.
The Hoei Tsuho was issued at the value of one to ten
of the ordinary Kwanei Tsuho but its inconvenient size,
and still more, the fact that it was not intrinsically worth
this amount, rendered it far from popular. Notwith-
standing special edicts to secure its circulation and
threats of condign punishment if it were refused, it did
not make headway and was withdrawn in the 6th year
of the same period, 1709.


FIG. 91
Fig’. 91, represents a coin which is known as the “Xi
,Ti”, or “Two Character” Hoei. The obverse has only
the two characters “Ho-Fi;” the reverse is the same
as the ordinary coin. Tn this specimen, the characters
on the back are not distinct. It is rough but rare, and is
a Shiken sen, pure and simple, as it was not permitted to
go into circulation
TEN-HO TSU-HO (Pronounced Tempo Tsuho.) This coin
A.D. 1835. was first made at Ilashiba, Tokyo, or \ edo
FIG. 92 HiOia Sen


ns it was formerly called, by order of the Tokugawa
government to enable it, it is said, to replenish its ex-
hausted coffers. It is a large oblong coin, fig. 92, and
bears on the obverse the characters “Ten-Ho Tsu-Ho”
“Current Treasure of Tempo” (Preservation of Heaven),
and on the reverse, above the hole, “To Hyaku”, “value a
hundred” (Moo). Below it there is a curious figure, a
signature, it would seem, but of whom no one knows;
surely that of some government or mint official. It may
be that the oval form of the Tempo sen was intended to
suggest the gold “koban”, which it was designed to
ultimately entice into the vaults of the Tokugawa family.
Like most of the Japanese sen, the rim surrounding the
hole is narrower on the face than on the back. It is also
somewhat larger in front than behind. On either side
of the edge, in the case of the current coins only, there is
stamped something like a star, or perhaps a cherry
blossom, such as appears on some of the rectangular
coins. According to the “Dai Nihon Kwaheishi”, which
was issued by the Finance Department, and probably
contains exact information on questions relating to
modern coins, the composition of this coin, as first
issued was, copper 78%, lead 12% and tin 10%. Though
its nominal value was one to a hundred Kwanei sen
(Mon), it is very unlikely that it actually sold for that
amounb. The above authority states that its price at
first was 30 to a ryo of former coin, this probably re-
presenting 1000 mou, so that its actual value, on this
computation would be Ito 33%. This was in the 6th
year of Tempo 1835, when it was first minted. It con-


tinued to be coined in several places, such as Fukagawa,
Honjo in Tokyo, and Osaka. It is possible that the
rare provincial shiken sen, of Morioka, Chikuzen and
Tosa were only made to cover the secret manufacture of
the Tempo coin in these places, a coin which could be used
for general use being of greater value than one restricted
to a certain locality. These coins are very similar to the
Tempo Tsuho in shape and design and were approved by
government for local circulation. They are so scarce,
however, that they could not have been current coin
and I can think of no better reason for their origin
than the above. At any rate it is quite certain that
the Tempo coin was made in other times and places than
those of its first issue, there being more than twenty
varieties, whose differences are only perceptible to those
who have made such matters a special study. During the
period of Ansei, (1851-59), the value of this coin fell to 60 to


tlio ryo, and after the year of'Manen, 1800, to a hundred,
which would reduce it to Ito 10. Si uce the Meiji era it has
further depreciated to 125 to the Yen, which is 1 to 8 Mon.
On account of this depreciation of the Tempo coin, it has
come to be a favourite way of describing a person
who is foolish or wanting in intelligence by calling him
J empo”. Fig- 92, shews a mother sen, from which the
Tane sen is cast; tig. 93 shews the Tane sen, slightly
smaller. The ordinary “Tsuyo”, or current coin,
is a little less in diameter and is stamped on the margin
as above stated.
BUN-KYU EI-HO This is the last copper sen of the
A. D. J 863 Tokugawa Shogunate and was issued in
the second month of the 3rd year of Bunkyu, 1863. It
beais the characters “lliui-Kyu Ei-JTo”, Everlasting


FIG, 90
Treasure of “Bunkyu” (Culture Continued) flys. 94, 95,
and 96. All the Bunkyu sen have eleven waves on tlie re-
verse.
There are three styles of writing, viz. the “Shinsho”
said to be by Matsudaira Shuugaku, the “Gyosho”
by Itakura Shuwo no Kami and the Sosho by Ogasa-
wara Dzusho no Kami. It will be noticed that in
the coins of the “Gyosho” style, fig. 94, the character
“Ho” is written in the usual manner, whereas in those
of the “Sosho”, fig. 95, it is as much abbreviated as in the
Wado coin (page 24), but in.a different way.* The “Shin-
sho” writing, fig. 96, differs from the “Gyosho” slightly
in the character “Ho”, but mainly in the style of “Bun”,
FIG, 97
* With the exception o£ the contracted form of Ho (Chin, ) found
on the Wado coin, the various writings of this character found on the
Chinese and Japanese coins, will he seen in the appendix.


in which the upper vertical stroke comes down to the
middle of the horizontal one, being placed otherwise in
FIG. 98
the first two varieties. Closer observation will also
reveal points of difference in the writing of“Ei”and
“Kyn”; but these need not detain ns here. TheTanesen,
figs. 94 and 95, are larger than fig. 96, which illustrates
one of the ordinary current sen. Without waves on the
reverse, figs. 97 and 98, are examples ot'Shiken or experi-
mental sen of this denomination and of course were
never put into circulation. An iron coin, is occasionally
FIG K,'o


seen, of which figs. 99 and 100 are samples, written in the
“Gyosho” and “Shinsho” styles. They are not official
sen, but sneaked into partial circulation. The total
amount of Bunkyu sen issued since their initation, has
been computed at 891,515,631, —a detailed calculation
indeed, but which may be not far from the truth. It
was issued at the rate of one to four of the former coins,
Kwanei, Chinese, etc., but its value has declined since the
commencement of Meiji to 1% rin, and it is now worth
no more than any of its former competitors.
Many of the Bunkyu Eiho shew variations in the
casting and size of the “waves” and characters, but
these are of so trivial a character that they do not call
for special notice.


PRO VIN CIAL COINS.
Them are now eighty-five provinces in Japan, ex-
clusive of Formosa, but there have been less and more.
“At various times” says Murdoch, “Japan had been
portioned out into provinces; and about the beginning of
the seventh century we hear of as many as one hundred
and eighty provincial governors. However, if not before
the time of Kwammu, at all events within a century
after his death, we meet with that division of the Empire
into sixty-six provinces and two islands, which continued
down to the date of the Revolution of 1868. At the date
of the first appearance of Europeans in Japan these
provinces were mostly geographical expressions.
Originally however, they had been administrative units,
and as such they continued to be down to the thirteenth
century.”
By the expression “Provincial Coins” one would
naturally understand that they have been cast, issued
and sanctioned for use only in the provinces to which
they are credited. This title, though in common use, is
rather misleading, inasmuch as the majority of these
coins were not designed for circulation in any one
province. Most of them were intended for even more
restricted use, such as a Haimyo’s fief, or occasionally
some insignificant locality which was out of touch with
the government currency. Even in places less remote,
the dearth of currency or the exigencies of trade, have
often led to the straying away of these coins from their


place of origin, and their consequent use in other parts of
th e country. It has happened too, that, as in the case of
the later Loch nan coins, they have been made in one
province for use in another, and have a right to the
name of the latter by adoption only, not by birth. It
one uses the title “Provincial Coins,” as a means of
distinguishing them from those issued directly under
the central authority, one may, with the above reserva-
tions, do so without bn propriety.
It is not always easy to ascertain the exact date at
which some of these provincial coins have been made
and I have thought it better on the whole, to treat them
rather from the geographical than from the historical
standpoint, so I shall begin in the South and deal with
the various kinds in the order of latitude.
FORMOSA. There is a set of nine sen, which are supposed
to have been made at Nagasaki and by some are believed
to be imitations of Chinese coins, as staled in the “Sen O
Sempu.” They are illustrated in the “ Wakan Sen Ti,”
and the author inclines to the belief that they were
made at Nagasaki, as they include one with the Kwanei
inscription. This however does not by any means prove
their Japanese origin, for this very coin has been
imitated on quite a large scale, not only in China, but in
Annam. Illustrations of such may be seen at the end
of the seventh chapter.
On the 14th day of the 7th month of the 2nd year of
Manji, 1659, permission was granted to the people of
Nagasaki to make coin for the purpose of trading with
foreigners. It was expressly stipulated, however, that


Plate I.— FA HI TE SEN,


any inscription could be used except that of “Kwanei
Tsuho,” and it is very unlikely that this express
prohibition would have been disregarded. On the whole
we may conclude that there is no evidence that they
were made in Nagasaki. Mr. Muramatsu suggests that
they may have been made in Formosa by the Chinese
officials there, and as the writing resembles that on the
Chinese coins, 1 venture to give them a “local habita-
tion” in the latest (up to date) and most southern
possession of Dai Nippon. These coins are known to
collectors as the “Fi Hi Te” sen, or those written in the
hand (Te) of the first on the list viz. the “Ei-Ri Tsu-
Ho,” plate. 1
Fig. 1. “ Ei-Ri Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Everlasting Profit”
Fig. 2. “ Ei-Slio Tsu-Ho ” “ Current Treasure of Eternal Prosperity ”
Fig. 3. “ Tai-sho 'Tsu-Ho ” “ Current Treasure of Quiet Prosperity ”
Fig. 4. “Ten-Km Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Heavens Unfolding”
Fig. 5. “Sen-Toku Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Widespread Virtue ”
Fig. fi. “Ryu-Kei Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Prospering Gladness”
Fig. 7. “Ko-Ivi Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Peaceful Enlighten-
ment ”
Fig. 8. “Ei-Kaku Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Everlasting Joy ”
Fig. 9. “Kwan-Ei Tsu-Ho” “ Current Treasure of Lasting Magnanimity”
It will be understood that the currency of Formosa,
prior to its annexation by Japan, was almost exclusively
Chinese.
THE LUCHU ISLANDS- There are four well-known copper
coins accredited to this little kingdom, now united to
the Japanese Empire. There are two others, one of
which is not absolutely authenticated, but is of greater
age than the rest and forms such an interesting subject
for speculation, that I am tempted to enlarge upon it to
a greater extent than it may be held to deserve. It has


usually been supposed to be a Chinese coin. I was struck
however with the likeness which it bears to two of the
Guelman coins and lind that the learned author of the
“Kokon Senkwa Kan” thought that it might belong to
these Islands.
Tliis coin, called the Klnsei Fmpo, or “Hound Treas-
ure of the Kin Dynasty,” or of the “Golden Age,”
resembles the Chinese coins “Shoryu Gempo” and “Taitel
Tsuho,” in the writing of the character “Ho.” A glance
at tig. 1 will shew that this writing is quite distinctive.
FIQ, i
Jt suggests the idea that this coin was copied from the
above Chinese coins; the peculiar fishtail like appearance
is found on very few of the Chinese coins, the only other
example that J know of prior to these being the
“Taikwan Tsuho” A.D. 1107-10. Ido not mean to say
that the writing of the “Ho” is identical, but that the
likeness was sufficiently striking to suggest my looking
up the origin of these coins. The “Shoryu Gempo” was
issued in the second year of Shoryu, A.D. 1157. The
“Taitel Tsuho” was, I found, issued in 1177, during the
Kin dynasty (Kin Sei). At first sight this might seem
to corroborate the idea that the “Kin Sei Empo” was a
coin of the Kin dynasty. Further, the author of the


Kokon Senkwa Kan says, “Unnu Somei refers to a book
written by Senno Ryusai which says that the first
emperor of the Kin dynasty, named Tai So, caused the
Kin Sei Empo to be minted, but Unno says that on
reading the history of the Kin dynasty he found that
over forty years had elapsed between the second year of
Shoryo, A.D. 1157, and the date of issue of this coin,
which he thought too Jong an interval to be correct.
I imagine him to mean that this would place the date of
issue of the “Kin Sei Empo” at about 1200 A.D (1157
plus 43), whereas there can be little doubt that Tai
So, the first Emperor, or King, of the Kin dynasty died
in the fifth year of Senna (Chinese notation), that is to
say A.D. 1123. It follows therefore that if this coin
were modelled on the lines of either the “Shoryu Gempo,”
or the “Taitei Tsuho” (1157 and 1177), it could not have
been issued by the Emperor Tai So. It is certainly an
old coin; the sahi on fig. 2, can scarcely be less than
FIG. 2
five centuries old. Now the resemblance which it
bears to two well-known Euchuan coins, figs. 3 and
sis so close, with regard to quality of material,
design, especially noticeable on the reverse sides, and


the round central hole, that it is difficult to resist the
conclusion that it was cast in or for use in that country.
On the other hand it is, with the exception of the
similarity in the character “Ho” so utterly
different from the coins of China, that I am disposed to
place it amongst the currency of the Luchus. lam the
more inclined to do this, as Professor Chamberlain in
Vol. 5, No. 4 of the Oeographical Journal, states, in his
description of the Luchus, that Japanese money some-
times used in the Luchu Islands was always carefully
kept out of sight when the Chinese officials were by to
see. From this we may infer that a coin, such as the
‘Kin Sei Empo” with its suggestion of a Chinese origin,
would probably have been a, useful addition to the
diplomatic “properties” in the flirtation play which
kept this little country aloof from either Japan or China
and preserved its independence for so many centuries.
While it is not possible to fix an accurate date for this
coin, I think that we shall not be far wrong if we place it
about the thirteenth century.
The two following coins are known to be Luchuan
currency and, as above stated, they have a close family
resemblance to the “Kin Sei Empo.” The first, called
fig a


FIG. 4
“Tai Sei Tsuho,” or “Current Treasure of Taisei” figs. 3,
and 4, is like the others, a roughly made coin. The cha-
racters “Tsu” and“Ho” are taken from the “Eiraku
Tsuho” sen. Like the“Kinsei,” the central hole is round,
with a square rim. It was cast between A.D. 1444 and
1460, under king Shotaikyu, who assumed the regal title
of Taisei. He died in the latter year and his third son
Shotoku took the name Seiko. During the reign of the
latter, the second coin, called the “Sei-Ko” Tsuho was
minted. Like the former, it takes the “Tsu” and “Ho”
from the Eiraku Tsuho. The characters “Ei” and
“Raku” were effaced from a good specimen of this coin,
which was then pressed on to the clay mould; the
new characters “Sei” and “Ko” were then also impressed
on the clay. In this manner only can one account for
the irregular disposition of these latter characters.
FIG. 5


There are two writings. In the former, fig. 5, the
lower stroke of the character “Sei,” forms a right angle
with the left vertical stroke. The upper character is
too much to the left, while the lower is placed to the
right. In fig. 6 the opposite is the case. The top
character Sei (jit) being to the right, while the lower
one Ko (jjlj) is to the left.
An interval of four hundred years separates this coin
from the next of which there is any knowledge. This is
the “Eyu-Kyu Tsu-Ho,” fig. 7, or “Current Treasure of
FIG. 7


Rykyu” (Luchu). This may be translated, if some-
what freely, as shining gems and jewels, quite an apt
title for this group of islands. It was made at Tempozan,
Kagoshima, in the first year of Bunkyu, and was valued
at a hundred mon, though its price declined to 88 mon.
Dr. Enomoto says that is was originally intended for
trading purposes with the Luchus, but became so
common in the islands that it was adopted as their
currency. It has the oblong shape of the Tempo sen,
being just a trifle smaller. It is not quite so well finish-
ed as the Tempo, but it is by no means as inferior coin.
It is said to have been inscribed by one Matsuoka
Judayu. On the obverse it bears the characters “Ryu-
kyu Tsuho,” in the same order as on the Tempo coin.
On the reverse it has “To,” meaning “Value” and
“Hundred,” written above and below the central
hole. The hole is not smaller on the reverse side than
FIC!. &


on the obverse, as In the Tempo coin, and the peculiar
signature which distinguishes the Tempo sen is absent.
There is a variety, tig. 8, in which the characters are
somewhat smaller. I have not seen the “Tane” sen of
this coin. The ordinary coins have the “kana” “Sa”
(9"), the first syllable of “Satsuma,” stamped on the
edge to indicate their origin.
In the second year of Bunkyu, 1862, a large and hand
FIG. 9


Plate 2,— HATOME SEN
Ltjchu Islands.


some round coin, fig. with “Ryu-Kyu Tsu-Ho”,
written in the “Tensho”* style, whs east in the same
place. There were fewer of these coins minted than of
the oblong ones. On the reverse, written in the same
style as the face, are the characters “Han” and “Bhu.”
They refer to the value “Han Shn,” or “Half a Shu.”
The “Shu” was the Vig part of a ryo, so that this coin
was supposed to he the equal in value to the i/ 33 of a ryo,
that is to say, about 31 mon. Its real value however
quickly declined to the of a ryo, so that it was only
worth 15% mon. The current coin has also the edge
struck with the character “Ba.”
1 ought to mention the peculiar coin called
“Hatome sen” or “Pigeon eye” sen, plate 2, which were
probably in use in the Luchus about 150 or 200 years
ago. The “Kisho Hyakuen” says that they were
valued at ten to one Japanese mon. A hundred pieces
were strung together, the connecting string being sealed
and stamped by the King. This was probably a dignified
way of getting a “squeeze” on the business done. The
coins, if such they may be called, are not stamped, so
that the official seal 011 the string was not altogether
superfluous.
KAMI. The coins from this mint are amongst the most
numerous of the provincial sen, plates 8 and 4. They
consist mainly of imitations of Chinese sen, and it is not
always easy to distinguish them from the corresponding
replica of the province of Mito. The Kajiki sen were
made in the village of that name, in the province of
* One of the archaic forms of writing.


Osumi, between the periods of Tensho (157:3), and Gen-
roku (1(588). The provinces of Osumi, Satsuina, and
Hyuga, comprising the southern and greater part of the
island of Kyushu, were ruled by the Daimyos of Satsu-
ma. Until the time of Hideyoshi they were practically
Kings, their authority being only nominally controlled
by the central government. The wild and mountainous
region that had to be traversed and the absence of
proper roads, together with the fierce character of the
inhabitants, rendered it difficult to control the Prince of
Satsuma, who boasted descent from the great Yoritomo.
Even when, after repeated victories, the stronghold of
Kagoshima was almost within his grasp, the redoubtable
Hideyoshi found it prudent to make easy terms with
his enemy. The coins which were made, probably about
this time, at Kajiki, were no doubt intended for local
use, but it was thought unwise to use inscriptions which
might be regarded as infringing on the prerogative of
the Emperor or Shogun. For this reason Chinese coin,
which was then in general use, was chosen as models for
the Satsuma coinage. Whether this was done with the
tacit consent of the Government it is impossible to say.
This imitation of Chinese coin would render it no easy
matter to bring home a charge of minting coin, and of
thus foisting a quarrel upon the rulers of Satsuma at
some inconvenient moment.
One of the most interesting of these coins is the
imitation of the “Ko-Bu Tsu-IIo” of China. In an inter-
esting respect, however, it differs from the Chinese coin
and may be identified by the characters on the reverse.


Platk 3.—KAJIKT SEN


These read respectively, “Ka” (/JP), plate 3, No. 1; “Ji”
No. 2 (jfp) and “Ki” No. 3, thus collectively spelling
“Ka-Ji-Ki,” the name of the village at which they were
made. The “Ko'ou Tsuho” from which they were copied
sometimes also has characters on the reverse, but they are-
diflferent from the above, so that it was possible for the
Daimyo of Satsuma to recognise his Own coinage, with-
out betraying it to the officials of the government. It
would appear that there were very few of the “Ka” (Jp)
coins made, as they are very rare. Those with “Ki”
are also scarce, but less so than the former. The “Ji”
(fo) coins are quite plentiful. No. 5 shews a coin
with the character “Ki” written in large hand. In No. 4
the left part of “Bu” (j£) resembles the character
“Tsuchi.” There is a rather rare variety, No. 6, having
the character “Ji” on the reverse, but in which the upper-
most stroke of the character “Bu” (i£), crosses the long
right vertical stroke, and thus creates a resemblance,
somewhat fanciful, to the “Tasuki,” or band, crossed in
front of the loose dress of the Japanese, in order to keep
back the flowing sleeves when engaged in work. It is
essentially a device for household use, but was also
employed during the practice of fencing and other
pursuits. Another uncommon variety is seen in No.
7. Here the reverse also bears the character “Ji,”
but the obverse is copied from the “Tai-Chu Tsu-Ho” of
China. This motto reads “Current Treasure of Taichu”
(Great Centre), the original being a coin of the com-
mencing Min dynasty.


The following list will enable the render to identify
the seti made at Kajiki. I would remark however that
those sen resemble the coins made at Mito so closely
that uncertainty must prevail with regard to some
of them
No. I Kobu Tsuho
•) “ Li
II ‘ ‘ u
4 it “
5 “ “
No. I Kine Gempo
2 Jihei Gempo
8 Genfu Tsuho
4 Genfu Tsuho
No. (5 Kobu Tsuho
7 Taicbu Tsuho
8 (leuho Tsuho
9 Gentsn Tsuho
10 Kentoku Gempo
No. 5 Genho Tsuho
6 Genho Tsuho
7 Seiso Gempo
8 Genfu Tsuho
It is said that coins were made at Nagasaki in
order to facilitate commercial relations with the
Portugese and Dutch traders there. It is possible, as
stated by Murdoch, that the gold “Obau” were made for
that purpose, but I cannot find any authentic record of
it. There was a local paper currency here as elsewhere,
and though such does not fall within the scope of this
work, I give an illustration of one which lias been
included in some standard works on coins, plate 5. Here
the design of a coin called “To-Kwan Tsu-Ho” has been
stamped on a strip of stout paper, the back bearing
the inscription “Cho Ki” (Nagasaki) “To Kwan Yaku
Sho,” or “Nagasaki Foreign House (trading firm)
Government Office”. There is a fictitious representation
of this in metal, made probably about a century ago.


Plate 4.—KAJIKI SKA


41
fJf
Pi.ati: S.—TO KWAX TSUIIO.


CHIKUZEN A coin resembling the Tempo sen was made
in the province of Ohikuzen, bearing on the face, fig
Fia. 10
in the Tensho style, the words “Chiku-Zen Tsu-Ho,” and
on the reverse “To Hyaku,” that is, “Value a Hundred.”
Below the central hole there is a signature, somewhat
like that of the Tempo sen. There is no record of its having
been in circulation and it is probably only a “Bhiken”
(sample) sen, as it is rare.
TOSA Quite as rare as the above are the coins
which were made in the province of Tosa, believed
to have been cast during the period of Keio, A.D.
1865-67. There are reputed to have existed six
round and six oblong coins, bearing different values
on the reverse. It is also stated that there was
an iron sen, value one mon, but 1 have not seen it. lam
able to shew two rare specimens from my collection, figs.


PIG, \2
LI and 12. The first is a very large coin, with the charac-
ters “To-Sa Tsu-Ho 77 on the obverse. Above the square
hole on the reverse is “To, 77 “Value 77 and below, “Ni Hya-
kh, 77 “Two Hundred. 77 The other coin is smaller, a fraction


less than the Tempo sen, and the words “Value, a Hund-
red” (mon), are written above the hole on the reverse.
Mr. Enomoto also states, in the “Journal for
Discussion of Japanese Coins” that there are two other
coins of the Tosa mintage, one like a “Nami” sen on
the reverse, the other of oblong form; from the illustra-
tion in this journal, the latter is about 54 mm. long
and 82 mm. in breadth. The round sen has the same
inscription on the obverse as the other Tosa coins;
the oblong kind bears the characters “To-Shu Kwan-
Ken” or “Official bond of Tosa or (Toshu).” On the
reverse are the characters “Go Momme” meaning
“Five Momme” by weight.
The“Wakan Sen Ti” gives a list of sen which were
minted at Kashima, in the province of Settsu, in the 3rd
year of Genbun, 1739. The list consists mainly of “Ei”
or picture sen, and in chapter 7 some of these will be
treated under this heading.
Iron coins were also made at Kashima, not for
provincial, but for general use.
MITO. There is little doubt that some of the Mito
sen were made before the period of Kwanei. These are
said to have been minted under the Daimyos of the
Gaino family, though this statement is open to doubt.
As we have seen, some Kwanei sen were also made in
this place, or its neighbourhood. None of the Mito
provincial coins bear the names of Japanese year periods,
though those of China are plentiful. The writing of
these, and their general make-up have been severely
criticised by Narushima Uyohoku; but this adverse


verdict cannot be properly applied to all these sen, some of
which are excellent specimens of penmanship, and of by
no means inferior finish.
The following list of Mito sen is illustrated in
plates 5 and 6; the numbers given below enable the
collector to identify the separate coins. There are many
others, but these are representative.
PLATE (3.
No. 1 Gen ho Tsuho
No. 0 Genho Tsuho
7 u a
8 “ “
9 “ a
2 Kayu Tsuho
8 Shosei Gempo
4 Genyu Tsuho
5 Shofu Tsuho
10 Seiwa Tsuho
PLATE
No. i Genyu Tsuho
No. 6 Genyu Tsuho
7 Gensei Gempo
8 Shofu Gempo
9 Tensei Gempo
O u u
8 u u
4 tt
10 Genho Tsuho
KANRAGORI. In the dis
Joshiu, leaden certificates.
district
of Kanra, province of
may be styled coin, were
which
issued by two or three persons of affluence, bearing the
values 24 and 16 Mon, figs. 13, 14 and 15.
Fltt. 13


Plate 6 MITO SEN.


Platk 7.—MITO SKX


FIG. 15
These medals were redeemable at their face value on
the guarantee of these men, whose reputation was no
doubt of a. substantia] kind amongst the people of this
secluded district. They were in a sense metallic bank
notes, issued to cover the deficiency of coin in a place so
difficult of access. This kind of money was called the
“Usui Toge Kitte Sen”, or “Ticket Sen of the Usui
Pass.” Fig. 18, bears on the face “Ni Jiu Shi Mon”,
value 24 Mon, and the names Yoshi Ichi and Hori Kichi;
fig. 15, has “Jiu Roku Mon”, “Sixteen Mon” and the
same names; fig. 14, has “Atai, Ni Jiu Shi Mon” on
the face, and on the reverse the trade mark “Kane


Jo” with star (Hoshi) and the named Toyohiko. The
thick edge of this coin is represented by the figure
between the face and back.
AIDZU- In the 4th month of the first year of Genji,
1864, Matsudaira Hige-No Kami, the Daimyo of Aizu,
asked permission to circulate the following coin, fig. 16 T.
FIG. 10 T
Permission was granted, or, as it is otherwise stated,
the Tokugawa Government agreed to buy it to use as
current coin in this district. On the obverse it- has “Haku
Do Sen’ “White, or (Light coloured) Copper Sen.” On the
reverse, there is “To Ni Hyaku Mon”, “Value Two
Hundred Mon.” The word “Ni” is in the written form.
This coin is commonly supposed to be only a private
attempt at coin making, or a fancy sen; but Mr. Mma-
matsu has found a document relating to it which clearly
proves its title to be regarded as a provincial coin.
YONEZAWA. Two leaden coins, one square and the other
oblong, were made probably Just before the period of
Meiji. Fig, 17 bears the characters “ Atai Ni Hyaku 7 ' on
one side, and “San Jiu Shi Momme” on the other.


FIG. 17
The other, tig. 18, has the same, with the addition of
“Sei San Xyoku,” Hoard of Occupation, on one side.
About this time the Samurai or warrior class found their
occupation gone and were in many cases reduced to great
distress. A society was formed under local government
supervision to give them aid, and this coin was given


FIG. 18
to the samurai of the district in order to enable them to
get the necessaries of life.
SENDAI. The square coin of Sendai, figs. 19 and 20, is an


FIG. 30 T
iron sen, minted at Ishinomaki, Mntsu province, between
the 4th and Bth years of Temmei, 1784-88. It bears the
characters “Sen-Dai Tsu-Ho” Current Treasure of
Sendai. Three hundred and eight thousand Kwau,
over three hundred million, were issued. The coin
was so bad that, according to Mr. Enomoto, there was a
saying that if they were carried in a bag for one day, it
would be torn and out of a hum! red two or three would be
broken. The use of this coin was strictly prohibited out-
FIG. 21 T


side of Mutsu province. As the figures are taken from a
Tane sen, they are presentable, but tlie iron coin is very
FIG. 23


poor. Fig 21, also a tane sen, is smaller; but the
characters are beautifully clear.
HOSOKURA. This huge coin fig. 22, was made of lead, and
was used only in the neighbourhood of that mining
centre, in the province of Tiikuzen. Sendai is now in this
province, Mutsu having been divided up into lesser ter-
ritories. On the obverse, it has“To-Hyaku Hoso-Kura”
and on the reverse, a signature mark. It was so heavy
and inconvenient to carry, that a small one, exchange-
able at the rate of ten to one of the large, was made. On
the face it has the inscription “Gon-Ko-Ei-Tei” in
archaic character, while on the reverse is the word
“Kayeru” meaning “Exchange.” I have not seen the
latter and believe that it was not issued.
MORIOKA- This is an oblong coin, like the Tempo, and
may be only a Shiken sen fig. 23. The face has the
FIG. 23
characters “Mori-Oka Do-Zan” and the back, “Hyaku
Mon Tsu-Yo,” “Morioka Copper Mine Current Use


at a Hundred Mon. It was made at the above mine,
but it is surmised that there was an intention to give it
a wider circulation than its name would imply. It is
rare, and probably never went into circulation at all.
AKITA- The “Nami” or wave sen of the Ugo pro-
vince, wore made at the Aniyama Copper Mine, Akita,
in the 2nd year of Hunyu, 1862. What we may call the
face, fig. 24, has twenty-one waves roughly cast in intaglio
FIG. 24
as the sign of currency, while the back simply has the
inverted character “Aid” for Akita. At the outset,
it was valued at 100 mon, but it was not at all popular
and its value depreciated to such an extent that it was
deemed advisable to have a change. The coin, shewn
in fig. 25, was probably a “shiken,” or trial sen, design,
ed with the object of providing something Jess crude
and uncouth. However it was not used. A brilliant, if
whimsical, notion was carried out, namely, to enlarge the
coin and model it after the favourite sword-guard of the


FIG. 25
Daimyo ofAkita, figs. 2G and 27. In artistic merit it
would entirely eclipse the other. Its association with the
military prowess, real or imaginary, of their Lord, no
doubt conveyed just that suggestion of the fortiier in re
which was needed to still discontent. To the superstitious
too, that is to say, to nearly every one before the Meiji
era, the eight diagrams on the face, the weird Pa-
FIG. 26—Obverse.


FIG. 2G Reverse.
Kua, as they are known in Chinese, invented in bygone
ages by-1110 sage ruler Fou-Si; called in Japanese the
“Hakke,” this mystical device to read the future
out of the Unconscious, must have appealed, as the
emblem of knowledge that was more than human. On
the reverse there is the Phoenix, or Howo, the sacred
PIG. 27 Obverse.


FIG. 37—Reverse T
token of mortality which unites the East and West. It
is indeed a strange coin, perhaps the most original and
bizarre that the world has seen. On the edge of the
“Tsnyo” sen or current money, there is stamped on
FIG. 38


either side, the Chinese character “kyu” in
allusion to the period Bun kyu. There are several
varieties of this coin in my collection, due mainly to
differences in the arrangement of the flowery flames that
surround the Phoenix.
Another peculiar coin hails from Akita. It is made
of lead, is of rectangular form, with a round hole, and
was probably cast in the second year of Bunkyu. It
exists in two sizes. The first, fig. 28, has the inscription
“Do-Zan Shi-Ho” on the obverse, meaning the “Precious
Treasure of the Copper Mine,” while on the reverse there
is “To Hayaku Kyu Ni,” “Value One Hundred, (Bun)
Kyu second.” The lesser, fig. 29, has bevelled corners,
FIG 39,
and bears the same motto as the other, the character
“Ho” being written in the abbreviated style. On
the reverse there is written “Kyu ni Go Jin,” (Bun)
“Kyu second Fifty,” indicating its nominal value as
fifty rnon.


HAKODATE. The currency of Hakodate, Oshima pro-
vince, was in effect, that of the great Northern island
of Japan, the Hokkaido. It was an iron coin, and the
figures here illustrating it, are Tane sen, tig. 30. This coin
FIG. 30 T
is round, and in the common variety, the hole also is
round. It has the characters “Hakodate Tsu - Ho”
on the face, and on the back the character “An ”
is cast as the first part of Ansei, in the 3rd year of which
it was made. It was not issued however, till the 4th year
of that period. The characters are said to have been
written by one Ota Tamesaburo. A Shiken sen exists in
which the hole is not round but octagonal and the writ-
ing of the character “An” is different from that of the
first coin.


For the last seven or eight hundred years, perhaps
even a longer period, gold, in the form of dust or
grains, has been in use as a, means of reward or for pre-
sentation, and sometimes payment. This gold was
handled in bags of paper; and the custom of presenting
money in paper bags of special design, fig 1, coaled with
Fid. i


or silver foil, or an imitation of such, persists to
this day and is doubtless a survival of the habit. Ac-
cording to the Shogun Ke, in the 12th month of
the sth year of Buininei,A. I). 1473, an official valuation
reckoned a bag* containing ten ryo, or a hundred
momme, of gold dust to be worth twenty kwanf of
copper sen. It was customary to have such bass
taken to an exchange bureau and weighed, whereupon a
stamp was placed on the sealed hag as a guaranteee of its
contents and proper weight. The standard of value
having been fixed, it is reasonable to suppose that these
bags would be used as a medium of payment in large
transactions, their value being decided by weight.
Ingots of gold and silver were also used for payment.
These were cut to the desired weight in the exchange
offices. In the Kin Gin Dzuroku, it is stated that bar
gold and silver was used in this manner. The expression
“Kiri Chin” which now means “Exchange Fee,” was
originally the commission fee for cutting(Kiri) and weigh-
ing the precious metals. It has been surmised that the
phrase “Kiri Sen” was also derived from this custom,
implying as it does that coin were cut; but this is
doubtful. The cutting down of copper coin by illegally
paring the rims, did take place, as may be seen in
specimens at the present day, and the word “Kiri”
probably refers to such cut or defaced coins. Pieces of
gold are still to be found which are believed to have
* These bugs were of various shapes but usually made from a piece of
paper folded tightly, tied and sealed after having the free ends cut off.
f See Appendix


been used in the above manner,' some of them are of
fantastic shape and were probably private coin, used at
their bullion value.
It was not however till the period of Tensho, A.D.
1573-92, in the time of Nobunaga, that the gold and
silver coin of large and smaller size, known as Oban
and Koban, written and stamped with their value,
came into legitimate use. In a work of this kind it
would not be possible to shew all the variations of this
coin, which after all was subsidiary to the copper
coinage, and I shall not attempt to give more than the
chief specimens of each issue. These are becoming very
rare and many are unobtainable, so that I have taken
most of the illustrations from a work published by the
government called the Dai Nihon Kwahei Seidzn.
There were three methods of marking the surface of
the Oban and Koban. The first and earliest plan was to
beat the surface with a hammer. In this manner the gold
was flattened out, but it must be confessed that the
markings seen on these coins suggest that they
are a survival of some early process of beating gold rather
than of one actually employed for these coins. These
markings may be seen on the Tensho Oban illustrated in
plate 1. They are known as the “Tsuchi Me” or “Hammer
Mark” (literally “Eye”). The second plan of beating
both sides of the coin on a stone is called the “Tshi Me”
or “Stone Mark.” It is very rarely met with on both
sides of these coins, and it is questionable whether such
were of Government make. It is frequently, however,
found on the reverse side, plates 2,4, 6, etc. In plate 4






it is seen in conjunction with the third kind of marking
called the “Goza Me,” or “Matting Mark,” from its
resemblance to the arrangement of reeds in matting.
The “Goza Me” design is that of parallel cuts or strokes,
produced by striking the metal with a chisel against
a stone. This was supposed to show that the body of the
metal was as pure as its exterior. Sometimes the reverse
is so smooth that it is not easy to say whether the metal
was struck on a smooth stone or a plate of iron. The
Tensho Oban is the earliest of which there is any know-
ledge and was made, as previously stated, during the
period of Tensho, in tlie reign of the Emperor Go Yo Zei.
It is stamped with the Government crest of the day,
namely the Kiri flower (Paulownia Imperialis) and leaves;
four such stamps are placed near the edges of the coin.
The inscription in Japanese ink is the signature of one of
the Goto family, superintendent of the mint. This was
liable to be rubbed off and great care was taken by pru-
dent persons to preserve it. For this reason the coin was
usually wrapped in cotton wool and silk or other fabric.
The inscription could be rewritten, but a fee was ex-
acted for the purpose. The value of the coin is also written
in ink, in this case being ten ryo, equal to one of the
bags of gold dust before-mentioned, for which the Oban
was probably a substitute. It will be remembered that
the ryo was equivalent to twenty kwan, that is to say,
twenty thousand mon of copper coin. This was quite a
little fortune in the Tensho period.
The weight was II momrae, or a little over 165
grammes, but it varied slightly. Plate 15 exhibits one


of the Tensho Koban, or small-sized gold coin of the
Tensho period. These coins are supposed to have been
made by order of Ota Nobunaga, and it has been sur-
mised that they were intended for the encouragement
of trade with the Portuguese. This is quite likely, but I
cannot find any definite confirmation of it.
The Taiko Oban, was made during the Tensho and
Bunroku periods (the latter ended in 1595), and issued by
Taiko Hideyoshi, plates B and 4. It is stamped with
“Oban” and the signature of the mint master and carries
four impressions of the “Kiri” crest and twelve similar
but diminutive marks round the margin. It weighed
38.2 momme, or about 143 grammes. A small rectan-
gular coin of gold called the “Ichi Bu Kin”, or One Bu
gold coin, is seen in Plate No. 16, No. 3. On the face are
the words, “Ichi Bu”, and on the reverse the name Mitsn-
tsugu, an official of the mint. One Bu was the fourth
part of a ryo. It was issued in the 4th year of Keicho,
1599. It weighed 1.2 momme or about 4.5 grammes.
Although not current coin, those illustrated in
figs. 2 and 3, are of some interest. They are called
“Hana Furi Kin,” or Paining Flowers Gold Coin.
According to the Kin Gin Dzuroku, the expression
“Hana Furi” was supposed to indicate the best
quality of metal. It would appear, however, that
several coins of this description were made of anything
but the purest metal, and it may be that “Hana Furi”
refers rather to coins intended as presents. To this day,
the reward given to a geisha or any of the class of pro-
fessional entertainers is called “Hana”, which properly






menus a flower. TJie two coins in question are said to
have been issued by Hideyoshi for the invasion of Corea
in 1592. In fig. 2, the obverse carries the character,
“Ho’ 7 ( Jlc), Treasure, whlJe the reverse has the “Mitsu
Domoe”, the crest of Corea, with its three quaint figures
resembling “Magatama,” the ancient ornaments men-
tioned in the first chapter. Figure 3 shows the shower
of blossom from which these coins take their name, with
the character Tai, the first syllable of Taiko,* the special
appellation of Hideyoshi. On these, and some of the
rectangular coins too, is the mark called the“Fundo-
jirushi”, or emblem of weight. The“Fundo,” it may be
remarked, was a scale weight officially stamped, and was
of the shape shewn in fig. 4. Gold and silver ingots
were also cast in this shape.
FIG, 4
*■ Taiko means generalissimo, but the word has become accepted as the
title of Hideyoshi.


The Keicho Oban, plates 5 and 6, was made in the
fifth month of the 6th year of Keicho, 1601. It
weighed 44.2 iiiomme, about 166 grammes, and is
inscribed with the characters “Jin Byo”, “(Ten Ilyo”
and “Goto”, the name of the mint superintendent.
It carries four impressions of the Kiri crest. On the
reverse are two impressions of the Kiri crest, and a
signature mark. Occasional characters are frequently
but not invariably found on these coins. The Keicho
plaques are regarded as the purest of their kind. The
Tokyo Mint Koban, plate 16, No. 1, weighed 4.8 momme,
about 18 grammes. It has the Kiri crest above and
below, on the obverse, with its value, one ryo, and the
signature Mitsutsugu of the family of Goto. On the
reverse is a signature mark and characters which vary
in different coins. There are several varieties of both
Oban and Koban one coin in plate 16, No. 2, has the
Kiri crest above and below and the inscription “Ichi Bu
Ban”, or One Bu plaque. It was made in the 24th year
of Keicho. A gold rectangular coin, plate 16, No. 4, the
“Ichi Bu Kin”, or One Bu gold, also shews several
varieties. It was issued in the 6th year of Keicho. This
coin has the Kiri crest twice impressed on one side, with
the value, one Bu, while the other bears the signature
Mitsutsugu. There appears to be no “Ni Bu” size of
this coin. The Ichi Bu and Koban of the Keicho period
are stated to have readied the amount of 14,727,055 ryo.
The Genroku Oban, plates 7 and 8, was issued in the
ninth month of the Bth year of Genroku, 1695, and
lasted till the twelfth month of the 19th year of Kyoho,


PLATE s—-KEKJJIO OBAN
(Obv<








1734. Its weight was 44.2 Mom me, about 166 grammes.
On the obverse are four crests of the Kiri, with the value,
ten ryo, and the signature Goto. On the reverse are the
character “Gen”, two crests of the Kiri, a signature
mark and sometimes some small independent characters.
The Tokyo Koban of this issue, plate 17, No. 1, has
two Kiri crests, the value (one ryo) and the name
Mitsutsugu on the face, while the back has a signature
mark and the character “Gen”, in reference to the period
of Genroku, with one or two independent characters. Its
weight was 4.8 momme, about 18 grammes. There are
two or three varieties of the Genroku Oban and Koban.
The Ichi Bu coin, plate 17, No. 3, has two Kiri crests with
“Ichi Bu” on one side and “Gen” with Mitsutsugu on the
other. It was issued at the same time as the Oban and
was stopped in the 3rd year of Kyoho, 1718. A smaller
coin called the “Ni Shu Ban Kin,” or Two Shu (there
were four Shu in one Bu) is made of inferior gold, plate
17, No. 4. It has the Kiri crest and “Ni Shu”, (two Shu)
on one side, with “Gen” and Mitsutsugu on the other.
It was issued in the sixth mouth of the 10th year of
Genroku, 1697, and stopped in the 7th year of Ho-ei
1710. Between the Bth and 11th years of Genroku,
31,795 Oban were issued, while the Koban, Ichibu and
Nishu totalled 13,936,220 ryo.
In the fourth month of the 7th year of Ho-ei, 1700, a
Koban was issued, slightly smaller than the Genroku
coin, from which it is said to have been reminted.
There were complaints about the poor quality of the
Genroku Koban; and it was decreed that as it was


not of sufficiently good quality for the currency of the
country (it contained only of gold), it had to be
changed. The new coin contained of gold, but its
diminished size shews that the mint did not lose much
by the exchange. The obverse resembles that of the
Genroku Koban; the reverse has the character “Ken,”*
which in the Chinese classic on divination means
“Gold.” It has also a signature mark and occasional
characters at the lower end.
Another Koban, plate 18, No. 1, appeared in the
fourth month of the 4th year of Shotoku, 1714, having
about the same size as the Genroku coin, which it
resembles in the obverse. The reverse has a signature
mark and two lesser characters, which need not be
specified. It weighed 4.8 Momme, about 18 grammes.
An Oban was made in the 10th year of Kyoho, 1725,
weighing 44 Momme, about 166 grammes, plates 9 and 10.
It was recoined from the Genroku Oban on the standard
of the Keicho Oban, which contained I‘6AQ% of gold, the
best quality of all. It is sometimes called the “Shin Kin
Oban”, or new gold Oban. On the face it bears four im-
pressions of the Kiri, with “Jiu Ryo”, ten Ryo, and the
name Goto. On the reverse it has two crests of the
Kiri, a signature sign, and occasional characters.
There are several varieties.
In the fifth month of the Ist year of Gem bun,
1736, a Koban was issued, weighing 3.5 Momme,
about 13 grammes, plate 20, No. 1. It is but
slightly larger than the Ho-ei Koban, which it resem-
* “Heaven” in its ordinary signification. Probably used in its deriva-
tive sense “Highest.”










bles in the face; indeed most of the Koban have a family
resemblance in this respect. On the reverse it differs
from the former mainly in the presence of the character
“Bun” and the occasional characters. The Ichi Bu
plaque, has two Kiri crests and “Ichi Bu” on the
face, with the name and signature Mitsutsugu, and
the character “Bun” on the back.
A silver coin of rectilinear form, was made in the 2nd
year of Meiwa, 1765. It is called the “Tanuma Go
Momme Gin” or the Five Momme Silver (not weight,
but- value) of Tauuma, fig. 5. It was valued at the
FIG. 5
I2th of a goldßyo and received its name from that of Ta-
numa who wasTonomo No Kami, or chief of the Palace
Bureau, one of the highest officials in his day.
Desirous of breaking the record as a reformer, he
proclaimed lhat silver ornaments for personal use were
a luxury, and should be confiscated for the purpose of
making silver coin. He had sufficient influence to
have an order to this effect issued in the name of the


Government, a tyrannical edict which did not increase
his popularity with the ladies. It goes without saying
that the gentle sex were roused to fury, when they
heard that their silver ornaments for the hair and other
purposes of adornment were to be ruthlessly seized,
melted, and then circulated amongst the populace. This
coin went into circulation, for how long I do not know,
but probably for a few years only. For several other rea-
sons Tanuma was held in almost universal detestation;
but his influence with the Shogun leharu protected him
from direct accusation until he was assassinated in 1765.
The downfall of his family occurred two years later,
through the agency of the Daimyo of Mito, the vice
Shogun.
The edges of this coin are decorated on both faces
with the wave mark, as a sign of currency, and the sides
are stamped with the cherry blossom, token of official
approval. On a raised rectangular surface are inscribed,
“Gin Go Momrae”, “Silver flveMomme” and “Mon Ji”
“Written Character.” On the reverse are the characters
Jyoze, the name of the hereditary official of the silver
mint of the Tokugawa family.
In the Ist year of Anei, 1772, a rectangular coin, tig.
6, called the “Ni Shu Gin,” or two Shu silver coin, was
cast. On the face it has the characters “Nan Ryo Hachi
Hen O Motte Koban Ichi Ryo Ni Kayu,” which means
“Eight pieces of Nan Ryo (best quality of silver, (later
applied to the Ni Shu) exchangeable with one ryo
Koban.” On the reverse is the Fundo Shirushi and the
characters Ginza Jyoze, that is to say, the Ginza (silver






mint) with the name of the superintendent, and also the
character “Jo” (Sadame), meaning “Guaranteed.” On
FIG. 6
the edge are stamped the petals of the cherry blossom, as
in the Tanuraa coin. It contained of silver. At a
later date, not accurately known, a smaller coin of the
same description and official value was issued.
In the Ist year of Bunsei a coin was made, plate
20, No. 3, bearing on the face two crests of the Kiri and
the value “Ni Bu” with the signature Mitsutsugu on the
reverse. A Koban was issued in the 2nd year of Bunsei
of the value of one ryo, plate 20, No. 2. The face resembles
the preceding Koban. The reverse has the character Bun
(for Bunsei), a signature mark and occasional characters.
In the 7th year of Bunsei, 1824, a square coin, plate 20,
No. 4, of gold, or at least leavened with that metal
was also issued. On the obverse, it has the Kiri crest and
one Shu, and on the reverse the name Mitsutsugu. A
silver coin was made in the 12th year of Bunsei, 1829,
bearing on the face the characters “Jiu RokuOMotte Ichi
Ryo Ni Kayu” or “Sixteen Exchangeable for One Ryo”,
fig. 7. On the reverse it has the Fundo Jirushi and the


FIG, 7
characters Ginza Jyoze, as in the Anei coin. It has also
“Jo” stamped on the upper left corner. Of the gold, coin
(estimating 4 Bn to the ryo,) 14,029,382 ryo were issued.
The circulation was stopped in the Bth year of Tempo,
1837.
During the same period a coin of the value two
Shu Silver was also made, fig. 8.
FIG. 8
From the Bth year of Tempo also, to the Ist year
of Ansei, 1854, a silver coin, of the value of 1 Bu was
issued. Fig. 9 shews the earlier and larger, issue of this
FIG. 9






coin. On the face it bears its value, “Ichi Bu Gin,” or “1
Bn Silver,” and on the reverse the name of the mint and
the signature, Jyoze. The margins of both obverse and
reverse are ornamented with the cherry blossom and the
latter is stamped with the character “Jo” meaning
“Sadame,” “Guaranteed.”
In the same year of Tempo, a gold Koban of five ryo
was issued, weighing 9 Moraine, about 38.8 grammes.
Plate 21, No. 1. Its Issue was stopped in the 7th year of
Kaei (first year of Ansei), 1854, the commencement of
the Crimean war and the opening of Japan by signing the
treaty with the United States. 172,275 ryo were placed
in circulation. On the face it has four Kiri crests, the
character “Go Ryo”, five ryo, with the name and
signature of Mitsutsugu. On the reverse it has the
“Ho” of “Tempo” with a signature mark and incidental
characters. A Koban of 1 ryo was also issued, plate 19,
No. 2. In the same period, a small gold coin,
bearing a Kiri crest and its value, two Shu, on the face
with “Mitsutsugu” and signature on the back, was
issued, plate 19, No. 2.
In the 6th year of Ka-ei, 1853, a small silver coin,
fig. 10, with “One Shu Silver” on the face, “Ginza
FIG 10
Jyoze” on the reverse, with “Jo” or “Sadame,”
meaning “Guaranteed,” was issued to the extent of


9,952,800 ryo. Ifc is said that additional ones were made
up to the second year of the present period of Meiji
1868-69.
In the 3rd year of Ansei 1856, a small gold coin, plate
18, No. 3, bearing two crests of the Kiri with its value, two
Jin (8 Shu) on the obverse and the name and signature of
Mitsutsugu on the reverse, was issued to the extent of
3,551,600. It contained of gold. In the 6th year
FIG. 11
of the same period, 1859, a silver coin, with its value
“Ichi Bu Gin”, one Bn silver, and flower marks on the
margin (and edge), of its face and “Ginza mint” with
“Jo,” “Guaranteed,” and the name Jyozeon the reverse,
was issued to the extent of 28,480,900 ryo. It contained
89.3 % of silver.
The following Silver coin, fig. 12, is of considerable
interest. It was also made in the period of Ansei, but
though it only bears the value “Ni Shu” or “Two Shu,”
that is to say, half the value of the one Bu coin, (fig. 11),
it is much larger. I imagine that it was produced for the
use of foreign trade, as its issue coincides with the con-
clusion of the treaty with the United States.*
* The ojheial who w T as responsible for the production of this generous
coin was reprimanded and deprived of his office.


S 17




PLATE 19


~,
PLATE 20


In the same year a Koban of small size, called the
“She Ji” Koban, from the presence of the character Sho
on the reverse, was issued, plate 18, No. 2, its percentage
FIG. 12
of Gold was 56.97 and it weighed 2.4 momme, about 9
grammes. It has the Kiri crest above and below on the
obverse, and its value “One Kyo,” with the name and
signature of Mitsutsugu. On the reverse it is stamped
with the character Sei, or Sho, hence the name. This
has also the usual signature mark and incidental
characters.
In the first year of Manen, 1860, a diminutive
Koban, Plate 21, No. 2, known as the “Shin”, or new
Koban, with the two Kiri crests and the official value
“One Ryo”, and usual name, on the face. The reverse ha&
the signature mark and occasional characters. Its weight
was .88 momme, about 3.3 grammes, but it contains a
trifle more gold than the former viz. 57.36 %. As, how
ever, it weighed less than one half of the “Sho” Koban,
it will be seen that gold must have risen to about
premium in one year.


The vise in the price of gold may also be seen by
comparing the following attenuated Manen gold coin
of two Shu value, Plate 21, No. 3 with that of the
Tempo period. The weight of the Tempo coin of this
denomination was 4.3 momme, 16 grammes, while this
was only 2 momme, about 7.5 grammes, less than hail'.
The Tempo coin, moreover, contained while this
had only of gold.
Next to the “Hatome sen 7 ’ of the Looclius the
smallest coin made in Japan is the gold one, made at
Kofu in the period of Shotoku, plate 21, No. 4.
Oblong lumps of silver, more or less diluted with
copper, are seen in plate 22, and figs. 13, 14 and 15.
They have no right to be called circulating coin. They
were however, made by the government, and are the
survival of a custom supposed to date back some seven
or eight hundred years, of giving official recognition
of meritorious services by presenting a token of this
kind. The earliest known piece, plate 22, is said to date
back to the time of Hideyoshi, but this is open to doubt.
There is evidence however that one was made in the
period of Keicho, 6th year, 1601. The weight was
supposed to be 43 momme, but owing to uncouth form
and rough casting, these “Cho Gin 77 or “Long Silver 77
pieces frequently fell short of this amount. To correct
the deficiency, pieces of silver of various weights, figs.
16 (Keicho), 17 (Genroku), 18 (Ho-Ei), 19 (Gembun), 20
(Tempo), 21, 22, 23, (Ansei) were added to the gift.
These have been described in some works as
“Bean 77 money , but this is quite incorrect, the






expression “Mame Gin” or “Bean Silver,” having
reference to their usually round or bean like form. They
all represent Daikoku Ten,* the god of wealth, and have
the year period cast in the centre of each figure. These
oblong pieces, “Cho,” or slab silver, as they were
called and their accompanying “Maine” or bean silver,
PIG. 13
* See Chapter 7.
No. 1, Plate 32, is an exception.


varied in the percentage of silver according to the period
in which they were made. Fig. 13 shews a “Cho Clin”
of the Genroku period, while figs. 11 and 15 illustrate
FIG 14
those of Funsei and Tempo. In the case of the Tempo
piece the percentage of silver was only 26. Of this, with
the “ Beans,” 182,108 kwamme were cast. Although not
intended for circulation they could be guaranteed for
circulation at the exchange bureaus of the government


FIG. 15
for the purpose, and sold at the “Ryogai-Ya”, or money
exchanges. In the former case, they were weighed and
corrected to one ryo of silver, then wrapped up and
stamped as a guarantee of weight. In this form they
could be used as money. Some of the forms of the
“Marne Gin” are quite grotesque, as in fig. 21. It is
probable that the oblong pieces, and also the “Maine


FIG. 21
FIG. 33
FIG. 23
MAMK GIN.


Gin”, were given as presents amongst private persons
and in this manner may have been used for small
purchases, without always being referred to the
exchange oflices.
FIG. 34


The silver Koban of Akifca, in the province of Dewa,
and one of the Yamagata province, are seen in
tigs. 2d and 25. Though not government currency,
they circulated in and even out of their provinces, and
FIG. 25


are samples of the coinages which were made by several
Daimyos in their own territories. The Akita silver
Koban were made in the 2nd year of Bunkyn, 1862, and
are simply sheets of silver, trimmed to their weight and
stamped with the archaic form of “Yu” “abundant,”
round the margin, “Kai” (Aratame), Inspected, and
“Aid”, for Akita. Tins one is also stamped with “9
momme, 2 fun.” The Yamagata silver Koban is stam-
ped on the margin with “Yu” (different character),
meaning to circulate. It is also stamped with “Kai”
(Aratame), “Inspected,” and it weighed “8 Momme.”
On the reverse is the character “San”, (Japanese,
Yam a), a mountain, the first syllable of Yamagata.
In the province of Akita, there was also made a
silver coin of the value of one Bu, the fourth of a ryo,
fig. 26. On the face it has the crest of the Satake
KIG. 26
family, the Daimyos of Akita at that time, in the form
of the leaves and flowers of the Sasarindo, the badge
of the Minamoto family. Below is written “One Bu
Silver”. On the back is “Aid”, as seen on the Koban
and the “Nami” sen, and “Dozan Tsuho” or “Current”
“Treasure of the Copper Mine.”


A small silver coin of the Tajima province may be
added as a sample of these provincial silver coins, fig - . 27,
FIG. 2?
On the face it has the characters “Tajima” and on the
reverse “Nan Ilyo,”* which was equivalent to two Shu.
The silver mine from which it was minted is said to
have been discovered in the period of Engi, A.D. 901-22
though the records do not date further back than the
11th period of Tembun, 15-12.
THE MEUI CtTimENCY,
The period of Wado first witnessed the issue
of Government coin in Japan and it was then also
that the story of her earlier civilisation first sought
the light. The period of Meiji is distinguished by the
change in form of her bronze coinage from the ancient
and useful “cash” model, with its central hole for
stringing the coin, to the more solid “copper” of Europe,
While the experiment, first initiated in A.D. 760, of a
three metal currency, was now established as a practical
fact. More important than this, (though it does not lie
within our present province), the present period of Meiji
has seen the first earnest revelation of the Japanese later
* See page. 106




civilisation to the outer world, and her affiliation with
the factors of progress and enlightenment. The word
“Meiji,” implying “Enlightened Government,” which
was used to name this period, has crystallised the idea
which must have been predominant in the minds of
Japanese leaders and thinkers long before 1868, when
the era of truly enlightened government began.
There does not exist in the history of any nation a
hundred years of such progress as that which marks the
19th century in Japan. There is no century in which the
difference between the opening and the close has been so
marked, with respect to general culture, form of govern-
ment, or material prosperity. Suffice it to say here that
this adoption of western methods and ideals, which Is
spoken of by thoughtless persons as the civilising of
Japan, is the blossom only of that tree whose roots were
planted before the Wado period and whose sturdy stem
and vigorous foliage were only awaiting the stimulus
which would change the leaf bud to the flower. To any
one who has read this book, it must be appaient that
there has been no Jack of “civilisation” during the
thousand years proceeding the period of Meiji; indeed
some of the edicts would seem to indicate rather a
plethera of this. Let us hope that in its present form it
will bear good fruit.
The death of the Shogun lemochi in 1866, twelve
years after the signing of the treaty with the United
States, left the way open for the return of the temporal
power to its rightful source. As there was no direct heir
to the Tokugawa dynasty, Hitotsubashi was, after con-


siderable pressure, induced to accept the office, but he felt
that the trend of events was out of harmony with a
dual authority and in November 1867 he resigned. While
proposing this step to the Daimyos he remarked, “It
appears to me that laws cannot be maintained in face of
the daily extension of our foreign relations unless the
government be conducted by one head and I propose
therefore to surrender the whole governing power into
the hands of the imperial court. This is the best that I
can do for the interests of the empire.” The resignation
was accepted, but Hitotsubashi was asked by the
Emperor to continue office until things were properly
arranged, and in the meantime the ex-shogun was made
an unwilling participator in tlie rebellion of 1868 out of a
mistaken feeling of loyalty to his vassals, whose swords
were stirred by their own selfish grievances. Although
he finally resigned in the same year, his daimyos con-
tinued the struggle till 1869.
The Emperor Kernel having died in 1867, he was
succeeded by H. I. M. Mutsuhito who thus unites in his
person the supreme authority in the affairs of the realm
and the sacred office of spiritual Chief, the representative
of that unbroken line of ancestor Kings whose remote
origin in the archaic past of the Yamato Minzoku*
reaches beyond the confines of tradition.
In the 2nd year of Meiji, an order was issued to the
effect that the “Kwammon” or kwan of coin, would be
equivalent to one ryo of gold. In the following year, Mr.
* The so called Yamato ” race who arrived in Japan probably about
1000 B.C.




Kinder and staff arrived from England to organise the
mint at Osaka. Near the end of this year the coinage of
money by stamping with engraved steel dies instead of
by casting was commenced. For a fuller description of
the regulations and other details regarding the institu-
tion of the Meiji currency, I would refer the reader to the
excellent resume by Mr. Van de Polder in the Transac-
tions of the Asiatic Society of Japan for the year 1891.
It will suffice here to give a list of the coins issued and
circulated during this period, eliminating a few unim-
portant varieties.
Plate 23, No. 1, 20 yen gold piece.
“ “ “ 2, 10 “
“ “ “ 3, 5 “ “
“ “ “ 4, 2 “ “
“ “ “ 5, I “
Plate 21, No. 1, 1 yen silver
“ “ “2, 50 sen “
“ “ “ 3, 20 “ “
u it u xo • u u
tt u u 5 ? 5 tt u
The 5 sen nickel coin is illustrated in fig. 28, and a
FIG. 28
curious silver piece is seen in plate 22, No. 2, called the
“ Boeki” coin, from the characters which are stamped on


one side, with the translation on the other, in English,
‘Trade Dollar,” together with the weight and degree
“420 Grains, 900 Fine”.
Plate 25, No. 1,
2 sen copper
U it
au u 9
U U U g /2 U <4
44 44 44 4 1/10 <4 4 4 called the “Rin.”
A specimen of the “Shiken” or Trial sen of the
Meiji era is illustrated in the following chapter.
Space does not allow us to follow the extraordinary
fluctuations of the gold currency in its relation to silver
during the earlier years of the Meiji period. Suffice it to
say that gold is now firmly established as the standard
of currency in this country and that copper, which for so
long acted as the current medium of Japan, now runs
its course as a useful but subsidiary stream to that of
the nobler metal. The glory of the “Do Sen” hath
departed, taut its romantic history will not soon be
forgotten.




EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
It has been stated in a former chapter that
specimens of coin have been made and submitted for
government approval, either by the officials of the
central mints or those of the provinces. These are
known as “shiken”, or experimental sen. This term is
particularly applied to those coins that have been refused
the sanction of the authorities and it will be here used in
this sense. The “Niji” Iloei, page 148, and some of the
Kwan-Ei sen may be cited as examples. In the case of
some of the Provincial coins, and those government sen of
a denomination corresponding to certain of these“shiken”
sen, I have, for the sake of continuity, placed the latter
with their more favoured brethern. There still remain
however some experimental coins which could not be so
classed, and they may be fitly illustrated along with the
ornamental and fancy coins, from which in some cases it
is not easy to distinguish them. In historical order,
the first of these trial sen was the “Kenkon Tsuho”
mentioned in chapter 3, page 80, as having been
sanctioned for issue in the period of Kemmu, 1334,
during the reign of the ill-fated Emperor Go Daigo, but
of which no authentic specimen exists. Another coin
about which some doubt exists, but which probably
represents a “shiken” sen of the period, is called the
“Cho-Roku Tsu-Ho”, or Current Treasure of Choroku,
page 87. It is said to have been cast during the period of
Choroku, 1457-1460, in the reign of theEmperorQo Hana-


■216 EXPERIMENTAL A XI) ORXA MENTAL COINS.
zono, while Ashikaga Yoshiniasa was Shogun. Three
specimens have been known, but so far as I am aware
there is no record as to the origin of this coin.
The next in order is the “Kei-An Tsuho,” fig’. 1, or
Current 'treasure of Keian, “Peaceful Gladness,” a coin,
supposed to have been made during the period of Keian,
1(548-62, but not circulated. A lead and copper sen of
this size are known and also a smaller one of silver.
The reverse has the moon and star and the charac-
ters “Oho No” or “Lasting Capability.” The Em-
peror Go Komyo was then on the throne and the
Shogun was either lemitsu, 1623-60, or letsuna, 1651-80.
The following coin, fig. 2, is rather a desideratum to
the Japanese coin collector and is getting scarce. It
is called the “Kyo-110 Tsuho,” or Current Treasure of
PIG. 2
PIG. 1




218 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
The Qen-roku Kai-Chin, or “Commencing Precious
Article (Treasure) ot Genroku,” flg. 4, “Commencing
Official Emolument”, was cast in the 6th year ot Genroku,
commencing 1693, the year of the Bird. This is expressed
by the picture ot the lien on the reverse. Here also is
Inscribed its value, 1 fun, that is to say, the 10th part of a
mom me. The next coin, flg. 5, was also coined in the 6th
year ot Genroku. It bears the legend “Qen-Roku Tai-
Chin,” or “Great Precious Article of Genroku” which, like
the Genroku Kaichin, reads round the coin as in the anti-
que sen. The year of the bird is indicated by the picture
of a cock on the reverse, on which also is stated the value,
“1 momme”. The discrepancy between the values and
sizes of these two coins, the first being one tenth the
value of the second, is sufficiently absurd to have pro-
hibited their use. The following coin, flg. 6, was pro-


19 I' i l t\ *, ' V ' m< MI [“ f is ( < m M '> t \l< i I i lie
“Gindai”


220 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
In fig. 8 the reverse is plain. This is the typical
shiken sen of this denomination, though a smaller one is
also probably genuine, and forgeries ax - e to be easily
found. Fig. 9is more rare. The handwriting is
different and the coin beautifully finished. On the
reverse, in the running style of writing, is “Ichi Bu”, or
“One Bu” which, if it refers to the silver standard, is
surely an extravagant valuation.
Fig. 10 also represents a light coloured shiken sen, of
what date or place, is unknown. Perhaps it ought to be
placed with the pleasure or fancy coins. On the obverse
it bears the “Fundo Jirushi” (or shirushi), the emblem
FIG. 10
of weight, and the characters “Tai-Sei-Kai”, “Great
Commencing Life” (Birth). On the reverse is “Ichi
Hyaku El Sen,” “One Hundred Enduring Sen.”


bearing’ fclie character “ To-Be u Tsu-Ho 7 * or “Foreign sen
wearing me cuaraci-er xo-smi a.su~rio'' or ■ .rorei
mKmmSSml
Dining the period of Bunkyu, 1861-63, a large and
handsome sen was mad©, under the order of the Toku-
;p; >,i ,i (!< (\ is r, im-in ,Si 11 ■» 1 d-p, fU’ fo i • m I P.i u !©••
“ Hoel Tsuho” (page 146), and the experience with that
coin probably deterred the authorities from putting this
/ ' . . in- . <(<i'i./il Itof I' S i/ i r', ■ , t‘- I lit -I r* *J t : ■ * 5 9 , , I )v’ , i
f'tr, in-u >‘S S'f'i hi hen ('ll fte Ite t l I ■ c r*i U. c * I b.c KI .1
Tsu-Ho”, or Current' Treasurer of .Bunkyii; the reverse








EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 225
FIG. 18
were discarded in favour of the preant Meiji coin. Fig.
19 shews one of these. They were cast with various
values upon them.
PIG. 19
This one bears the motto “Meiji Tsu-Ho”,or “Current
Treasure of Meiji” on the obverse, with the Chrysan-
themum crest on the reverse, its value “Two Mo in me”
and “Kwan Jo,” “Imperial Government”. These are
very rare.
What the farce is to the drama, so are the “E” sen
to the legitimate currency of Japan. In reality they are


226 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
not sen, but tokens, often very curious and whimsical,
designed for quite other purposes than that of a
circulating medium. They are called “E” or
picture sen, because they usually, though by no means
invariably, bear some pictorial design or ornamentation,
and moreover they resemble in shape and material, the
current coin, called sen. Some of these picture sen
have been cast in the government mints and have there-
by, it may be presumed, received official sanction for their
production. There are over a thousand varieties known.
Dr. Majima, who is an authority on these fancy coins,
has illustrated nearly that number in his work called
the Ga Sempu.
For the purpose of giving a general idea of these
however, a tenth of this number will be sufficiently
illustrative. There seems to be little doubt that the
picture sen of Japan did not originate in this country,
but came from China, the source of many things both
wise and foolish. In that country they were, and are
still, used as amulets. No doubt they came over with
the great influx of Chinese coin during the later
mediaeval period, and were known at the court of Ashi-
kaga Yoshimasa. It is said that the first picture sen,
known as “Rokujo sen”, were made during this time, but
according to Dr. Majima and others, the sen which are
now known by that name cannot claim this antiquity -
It would appear that the oldest specimen of these
sen is not earlier than the Tokugawa dynasty, but it
may be that earlier specimens have disappeared, as might
easily happen to fancy coins or gems, which were produc-


EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 227
ed in limited amount, and that the original “E” sen was
made during the time first noted, at Rokujo in the ancient
capital of Kyoto, it will be noticed that the specimen
illustrated in No. 1, plate 1, bears on the face the
name “Wado Kaiho” (or “Kaichin”), the first coin of
Japan. This is the motto of all the Rokujo sen, but
the inscription on the back varies in different cases and
sometimes there is no Inscription at all on the reverse.
Occasionally the characters “Wado Kaichin” are written
in the old order, namely round the coin, or they may
be arranged in the order of the later coins, while in a
few cases they read from above downwards and from
left to right instead of from right to left. In No. 1,
plate 1, the inscription on the reverse reads “San Jiu
Ban Jin,” “The Thirtieth Deity,” in one direction, and
“Jiu Rasetsu Jo,” Awful Female Demon”* in another.
Most of the inscriptions on these Rokujo sen indicate
their superstitious origin and bear out the assumption
that they were originally designed for use as amulets.
Xt says much however for the practical common sense
of the Japanese people that this use of such medals was
not very wide spread, and that few of the E sen appear to
have been been countenanced from a belief in their
efficacy as a means of enchantment, or magic. The
reasons which have led to the production of these sen
are various and may be grouped under the following
heads.
I.—Those which have been made in a government
The word “Rasetsu,” according to Brinkley’s dictionary refers to the
demons “who are said to devour human beings,”


1. >'n. I'. '' S> i fI a Im.; n f;l'n.
i' hit I '.ft iit '‘ K I Sell '', 1 I i <-i‘ ' ,'tf nl iiic Hil/si. II lil’inl) I
i' liiM 'J"! Sit' ' K S< ■!! ’' ,i I i <-i‘ 'j'n- dI iiic )
t'uf a,- t M > in, nH* i hnn i ; i,4 n I rnn n ;e in
i,(iyoknn :iliov>-.
/Si>. ■ • S-l U<- I) K! Ii ‘ "i !i)-i '-JIM


ri.M'K 1. — E SEX


EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 229
though also made of bronze. “Sanko” means the three
luminaries, sun, moon and star, which are shewn above.
The “Kaichin” or “Kaiho” are taken from the Wado
coin. Below is a “Mine” or straw rain cape, and a
“Tsuchi” or hammer.
No. 4. This is also in silver and is called “Wado
Masukage, ” after the Wado characters. There is also a
hieroglyphic illustration of the “Masu,” or measuring
box for grain, and a “Kagi” or key.
No. 5. A silver “Wado Kaiho” made as a pleasure
sen, probably within the last two hundred years.
Nos. 6 and 7. The same in copper, probably made
in a mint for the Kwanei sen.
No. 8. A similar coin in copper, with the “Kaichin”
reading from left to right.
No. 9. “Wado Kaichin Hikidashi” sen. The latter
expression means pulling out, (a colt, in this case) in re-
ference to the picture on the reverse, where the young
horse is seen with his back bending under some burden.
No. 10. “Wado Kaichin Saruhiki Goma.” The
characters are displaced as in fig. 8 and the monkey,
(Saru) is pulling (Hiki), what is supposed to be
a colt, though it looks more like a tortoise. These
horse coins are amongst the earliest of the E sen
and there is little doubt that the idea of using this
design came from China, where equestrian pictures are
found on the amulets. I have several of these Chin-
ese sen which appear to be of much earlier date that those
of Japan. The “Koma” or young horse sen were
frequently used for gambling purposes.


230 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS
Plate 2, No. 1. “Yoshida Roma” sen. Made
at Yoshida in the province of Mikawa and bearing the
characters “Yoshida”. This place was quite celebrated
for its manufacture of E sen and is one of the mints
for the Kwanei Sen.
No. 2. “Nogoma” or “Colt (possibly pony) in the
field.” It does not seem to be happy. Perhaps it has
an antipathy to the pack, or swelling, on its back.
No. 3. “Jkwaugoma” so-called because the man with
the horse is suppose to be in court dress (Ikwan). In the
original coin the figure above is a bag of gold dust, with
the string hanging down at each side. The figure on the
right consists of three “Hoshu”, see page 231, on a chalice.
No. 4. “Eiraku Goma”. This E sen is made from
a stamp consisting of a Chinese Eiraku coin, from which
all the characters have been erased, excepting the “Ei”
(tJC). It is by no means common. The horse too,
is shewing his metal.
No. 5, bears on the obverse the characters, “Kai-
Un Jin-Ho” which may be rendered “Commencing of
Success Sacred Treasure.” On the reverse is a horse
with a “Gohei”* above.
No. 6. “Eiji Koma.” The character “Ei” ( ) is
below and is copied from one of the Kwanei sen. The
“horse” reminds one of Mahomet’s coffin, “suspended
between heaven and earth.”
No. 7. “Hyotan Goma.” The first word means
a gourd, and the picture of the horse coming out
* “ The emblems in a Shinto temple, of the ancient offerings of cloih.
They are now usually strips of white paper” Chamberlain and Mason.
These offerings undoubtedly antedate the use of money in Japan.


Plate 2.—K HEX.


I'l I, .-TV


EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 231
of the gourd refers to the popular saying “Hyotan kara
koma,” a horse coming out of a gourd; lit. to produce an
unexpected result. (Brinkley).
No. 8. “Katate Goina.” Pulling the horse in with
one hand.
No. 9. Koma sen with round hole.
No. 10. This frisky something is also supposed
to be a horse. The coin is somewhat worn, but the
reverse is interesting.
Plate 3, No. 1. “ITikidashi Goma;” drawing forth
the horse. It is a large medal, of pure copper, struck
instead of cast.
No. 2. “Sanpuku (fuku) Koma sen exhibits what
is said to be a horse and three essentials of fortune,
namely the god Daikoku, of whom more presently, a
bag of gold and three “Hoshu,”* transcendent gems.
What the Hoshu-no-tama is I have not been able to
discover. It is an emblem in some way connected with
the Buddhist ritual in Japan, but its origin is lost in
the remote past. In the “Handbook of Japan” by Pro-
fessor Chamberlain and Mr. Mason, it is suggested that
it may be identical with the “Nyu-i-rin, properly the
name of a gem which is supposed to enable its possessor
to gratify all his desires.”
No. 3. “Hiki-ire Goma,” “Pulling the colt in.
Why “in,” is not clear.
* This word might be “Hoju” from “Ho” treasure, and “Ju” a
ball. The latter character is composed of “ Gyoku” a precious stone, and
“ Shu,” red colour. It would therefore refer to a red ball. It is represented
in two forms, one w r ith and one without flames. Possibly it is a survival of
ancient Fire Worship.—N. G. M.


232 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
No. 4. “Hikidashi drawing the colt out.
No. 5. The name of this Ido not know. It might
be called “The last straw.”
No. 6. This is not a lion, nor an infuriated bull,
but a horse drawn by a monkey and is therefore called
“Sam (monkey) Hiki Goma.”
Plate 4, No. 1. A large medal with a rope-like
margin and somewhat similar decoration around the
central hole, which is relatively small. On the face are
a pine tree, a, flying stork, a peasant with straw rain
cape and an active horse.
No. 2. “Wado Kaichin Sara Hiki Goma.” This
is a another example of the left hand writing of “Kai-
chin.” On the reverse is a monkey, apparently
exhausted by his attempt to pull a refractory colt.
No. 3. The characters “Wado Kaichin” are here
written in the ancient order and the monkey, though on
his back, still pulls with both hands.
No. 4. Possibly a theatre ticket.
No. 5. This is a large presentation of the famous
“Kwanei Tsuho” and bears on the reverse the charac-
ters “Namu Amida Butsu,” “I adore the Eternal
Buddha”. It may be thought that this and the
following medals with Buddist inscriptions, were
intended as amulets, and in some cases they may have
been so regarded by the superstitious, but in the
majority of cases, they were issued on the occasion
of certain religious festivals, or to commenorate the
opening of temples. On these occasions they were bestow-
ed upon the subscribers and perhaps visitors generally.


I'j.atk 4.—K SKN


Pi, atm K SKN


EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 233
The texts inscribed thereon have the same intention as
the texts of other religious systems, namely to hold
the attention of the laity and thus to keep in mind
their precepts or admonitions. These text bearing sen
are quite numerous, but I shall only describe a lew of
the better known ones.
Plate 5, No. 1, called “Nembutsu 77 or praying to
Budda, “from the inscription on it, and “Kuruma Nem-
butsu 77 from the fact that it reads round (in this case
from left to right) like a wheel, possibly in allusion
to the praying wheel. The inscription reads “Namu
Myo Ho Renge Kyo, 77 “Adore the Wonderful Doctrine
of the Lotus 7 Scripture. 77 Those who have heard this
text recited in the Buddhist ritual, will not fail to recall
the solemnity of its sonorous accents.
No. 8. This is a smaller specimen and the inscrip-
tion, in a different handwriting, reads from right to
left.
No. 2. “Namu Amida Butsu 77 , “I adore the Eternal
Buddha. 77 The characters here read, one above, two
to the left, two to the right and one below.
No. 3. The same. Size and handwriting different.
No. 4. The same. Reads first above, then two
to the right, two to the left and one below.
No. 5. The same. Roads round the coin like the
figures on a clock.
No. 6. The same, and read in the same order. The
handwriting is different.
No. 7. The same. The rim is wide and carries an
inscription which is not quite legible.


234 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
No. 9. The same written in Hiragana (Syllabic
writing), except the last word (Buddha) “Butsu,” which
is in character.
No. 10. Tliis is made of pewter and bears on the face
“Dai Shi Do Jo To Shiki,” “Temple of Daisiii Ceremony
of Erection” (Muneage). On the reverse it has the
date, namely the 9th day of the fifth month of tlie 22nd
year of Meiji,
Plate 6. I shall first invite attention to No. Gon this
plate, which represents the deified personage who is wor-
shiped as Tenjin, his name while in the flesh having
been Sngawara-no-Michizane. (See chapter 2, page 71,
footnote.) This sen ought to be the pioneer of the
E sen for, according to tradition, in the first year of
Bumraei, 1469, several thousand Engi Tsuho coins
(antique group) were found at the village of Nagasu
in the province of Settsu: these were recast into
the form of the Tenjin coin in order to commemorate
the sojourn of Sugawara-no-Michizane at this place, over
five hundred years previously, on his way to his exile in
Kyushu. It is said that in the first year of Temmei,
1781, several thousand of the same coin were again found
at the same place and half of them were sent to Kitani
to be recoined as mementoes of the great Tenjin. Dr.
Majima says that none of these Tenjin sen appear
to be so old as the period of Bummei, but that it is
possible that they were then so made. It will be readily
understood that the liability of E sen to disappear, must
be greater than that of circulating coin, if only for the
reason that they are produced in less numbers, but it




EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 235
is improbable that several thousands of such coin could
entirely pass out of existence. It seems to me more
likely that only a few, if any, were made at the
earlier period referred to. There are three kinds of this
sen. No. 6 represents Tenjin sitting under the plum
and pine trees, two of the emblems of luck, and the
former his favourite flower.
The Shichifukujin, or seven Gods of Luck. In Japan-
ese, the expression Kami, which is usually translated as
“God” does not necessarily refer to a Supreme Being, but
rather to a superhuman being, the word Kami being used
in the sense of superior, or above humanity in general. An
interesting paper by Signor Carlo Puini in the Transac-
tions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, 1880, gives much
information on the question of the Shield Fukujin, or the
Seven Gods of Happiness. He states that three degrees
of Kami are known, viz., the celestial, the terrestial and
the human Kami.
There can be no question that the Kami, Gods, or
superior beings of the Japanese pantheon, have various
degrees of power and special functions, or perhaps rather
limitations of purpose, ascribed to them, though the
sphere of activity, or utility in one, may overlap with
that of another. The word Kami is of very ancient
origin and is properly applied to initial intelligences,
or to those ancestors whose distant origin in the
mythological period, or whose deeds of surpassing
excellence, entitle them to rank above ordinary
humanity. The former are the recipients of conventional
reverence, but the latter, with their direct human


236 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL (’OINE
connection, have move influence ovev the affairs of men,
either through the use of the special potency with which
they are endowed, or as mediators with the “Powers
that be”.
The Shichifukujin are named respectively: 1 Ebisu,
2 Daikoku, 3 Benten, 4 Fukurokujin, 5 Bishamon, 6
Jurojin and 7 Hotel.
Strange to say, only one of these belongs wholly to
the ancient Shinto religion, whose simple and primitive,
but coherent and effective, ancestor worship has been
complicated by additions from Buddhist and even Taoist
sources. Signor Puini points out that of the seven
Kami, Yebisu only is of entirely Japanese origin, and
that three, viz., Daikoku, Bishamon and Ben-zai-ten are
of Buddhist creation, while three are of Chinese origin,
“of whom the last two are somewhat Taoist”. These
seven are shewn in Nos. 1,3, 4, and 5, and three, namely
Ebisu, Daikoku and Benzaiten, (commonly 1 called Ben-
ten) in No. 2, but it is not easy to discern their special
characteristics. It will be sufficient to illustrate the first
two, namely Ebisu and Daikoku, which are tlie most
frequently found.
No. 4, representing the seven gods of Luck,
is one of those extraordinary medals produced on
occasions of rejoicing by the festive employees in one of
the government or private mints. The connecting strip
of metal is purposely left uncut and the smaller medals
thus remaining attached, shew the images of Ebisu on
the right and Daikoku on the left.
No. 5 resembles No. 3 except that it is made of iron.




EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 237
Plate 7, tig. 1. This is a large likeness of the God
Kbisu, the only one of the Shichifukujin who can claim
an undisputed native origin. In his left arm he grasps a
goodly fish of the kind called “Tai”, a variety of sea
bream and much esteemed. Oil the left is the bamboo
rod shewing its elastic curve to a degree that would have
astonished the author of “The Compleat Angler”and may
furnish a theme for a future edition of “Fisherman’s
Luck”. The God himself looks a trifle uncertain about
the lower extremities (he had weak legs as a lad), but he
grasps the big fish round the gills with a determination
as great as its own (which is also traditional). On the
reverse we behold two other noble specimens of the
mighty angler’s skill and below, the mystic “ Hoshu”,
the wishing ball, which satisfies all desires, even that of
the amateur angler.
No. 2, shews the same god sitting on the waves with
fish and rod. It is struck in pure copper and is probably
more than two hundred years old.
No. 3. Ebisu at work. The reverse has the “Kwanei
Tsuho”.
No. 4. Ebisu catching fish, or being caught,
which is it?
Nos. 7, 8 and 11 also shew him in his classi-
cal attitude. These are cast in iron.
Ebisu is the “Patron of Honest labour”. His
original name is said to have been Hiruko. He
was the offspring of Izanagi and Izanami, the male
and female Deities who created the world and the
terrestrial Kami. He was weak in his legs (perhaps


238 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
from infantile paralysis) so that at the age of three years
he eonld not stand. This was a source of grief to his
tender hearted parents, so they stuck him in a boat and
abandoned him to the elements. He drifted to the
province of Settsu and was, probably on account of his
legs, worshipped as a god. The people were savages,
“Ebisu”, hence his name. Whatever his real origin
may be, Ebis’ Sama enjoys constant popularity: if not
so full of resource as Daikoku Sama, he is scarcely less
esteemed.
Daikoku is usually represented sitting or standing,
on bags of rice with a wallet slung on his back. He is
also depicted holding a mallet called the Hammer of
Happiness. “Each time he gives a blow with it, the
wallet he has by him becomes tilled with money, rice and,
other tilings, according to what may be desired.” Puini,
goes on to tell us, “Daikoku, the name of the second of
the Gods of Happiness, is the translation, through the
Chinese, of Mahakala, which is one of the names of Siva
and other Sivan deities. This god was added to the
Buddist pantheon with other Brahmanic deities.”* He
has got thoroughly acclimatised and seems to be happy
in giving happiness to others, though in his land of birth
he is supposed to be either a great heretic or a perverse
destroyer.
Plate 8, No. 1. This is a “Hori” or engraved sen
called “Ippyo Daikoku” or Daikoku on one rice bag.
* Mr. Yuzawa tells me that the Genkai also gives Daikoku the
cognomen of Okuninushino-Mikoto, the ruling god (or Prince) of Izumo.
This is the popular belief, through which he may claim native origin.






EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 239
No. 2. “Kobo Daikoku”, supposed to have been
modelled from a picture by Kobo Daishi, who is men-
tioned in chapter 2. He is referred to in the “Handbook
of Japan” as “The most famous of all the Japanese
Buddhist saints, was noted equally as preacher, painter,
sculptor, calligraphist and traveller.”
No. 3 and 4. He is here distinguished by the
wearing of a collar, but it is not much in evidence.
No. 5. “Kasagi Daikoku”. Wearing a hat: the back
has a star (Hai Hoshi).
No. 6. Here he also has a hat. The reverse bears
the Kwanei Tsuho characters, rather blurred.
No. 9. “ Tagane Daikoku ”. So called because
it looks as if it had been chiselled out. (Tagane,
chisel).
No. 10. “Kumano Daikoku” made for the Kurnano
temple. The feet are either too large or the rice bags too
small.
No. 11. Ebisu. (See page 237.)
No. 12. This bears the characters “Tai-Chu Tsu-Ho”
after the well known Chinese coin of that name.
Plate 9, No. 1. This is an engraved tane sen, or
probably a “Haha”, or mother sen and is quite rare.
No. 2. Large Daikoku. “YokoMuki,” “Looking
to the side.”
No. 3. “Tachi Daikoku”. Standing Daikoku. The
reverse is supposed to depict tHe famous active volcano
called mount Asama.
No. 4. “Shima Daikoku.” Resembles a Shima sen.
See chapter 3.


‘240 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS .
No. 5. “Tama Nori Daikoku”. Rides on balls
(Tama). These are doubtless the “Hoshu” or wishing
balls.
No. 6. “Dai Fuku,” which characters mean “Great
Luck, or Happiness” and “N 1 Jin, or Two Gods”. These
are the two favonritles, Daikokn and Ebisu.
Plate 10. This is a set of “Matsuri” or festival sen.
In the centre is Ebisu, above is Daikoku; to his left (our
right) is the “Kwanei Tsuho” bearing the handwriting of
the Kutsutani mint in the province of Suruga (where it
was made, probably between the 13th, and 16th years
of Kwanei). Below this sen and also to the right of
Daikoku are sen With the writing “Namn Amida
Butsu”, while below and to the right of Ebisu is a sen
with the inscription “Namu Myo Ho Renge Kyo”. The
reverse is that of the Kutsutani mint.
Plates 11 and 12. Ebisu and five Kwanei sen in
iron, arranged in “Matsui” form.
Plate 13, No. 1. These seven “Matsuri” sen bear
the inscription “Namu Amida Butsu”. Where they
have been made is doubtful.
No. 2. Is also a festival medal. Above is Ebisu; to
his right is another picture of his honourable self, com-
bining business and pleasure, while below is Daikoku
Sama with his mallet, and his bag of tricks. The
Kwanei characters peep above the central Ebisu as they
do in
No. 3of the same plate, where the two friends of
humanity appear side by side. These festival sen were
often set up in front of the household shrines, to pro"


Pt.atk 10.—K SKN.




Fi.atk I






EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 241
pitiate the Lares and Penates, doubtless with most
gratifying results.
We come now to the most popular of all the deities,
namely Inari Hama, whose messenger is the fox and
whose deeds would fills a dozen volumes. He (she or it)
has been identified with the god Uga, and if this bo
correct, Inari is entitled to rank with the Shichl Fuku-
jin or seven gods of Fortune, for this Uga is a form of
Benten.* Like the latter, he takes the fields and their
produce, especially rice, under his protection; his shrines
are the most numerous in the land and nearly every
house, whether Buddhist or Shinto, has an altar where-
with to propitiate and to render him grateful thanks-
giving. Ho is essentially an “Arigatai Kami Sama” or
“Grateful Mr. Deity” and offerings of rice cakes, incense
and rushlights are daily to be found tempting his
appetite, and otherwise giving him immense satisfaction.
It may truly be said that these little acts of devotion
have lightened many a dark and fearful moment and, if
not without, at least the god within the human breast,
responds to the pious offering and bestows the blessing
of hope on the anxious wife or mother.
Plate 14, No. 1. Inari sen. There are always two
foxes as ministers (sometimes regarded as incarnations) of
Inari. One of them has the mystic key to unlock the hid-
den stores of plenty. On the reverse are the five“Hoshu”
or “Hoju”, three with the sacred fire and two without.
No. 2. Large size Inari sen. The central hole is
small and its angles are differently placed than usual.
* Benten is a Goddess.


No. 5. Inari sen with three Hoshu on a chalice and
the mystic key beiow.
No. 7. Koshin sen. I will again quote from Cham-
berlain and Mason. “Koshin, a deification of that day of
the month which corresponds to the 57th terra of the
Chinese sexagesimal circle, and is called in Japanese
“Ka-no-e Saru”. This being the day of the Monkey, it is
represented by three monkeys (sam biki-zaru) called re-
spectively, by a play upon words, “Mizaru”, “Kika-
zaru” and “Iwa-zaru”, that is, “the blind monkey”, “the
deaf monkey”, and the “dumb monkey.” Stouetslabs
with these three monkeys in relief are among the most
usual objects of devotion met with on the roadside in the
rural districts of Japan, the idea being that this curious
triad will neither see, hear, nor speak any evil.”
No. 4. This is an imitation of the ancient “Go
Shiu” coin of China.
No. 6. Called the “Yaban Ji” sen, or “Barbarian
Writing” coin, although classed with the E Sen, it does
not properly belong to this group.
Plate 15, No. 1, is rare. It is called the “Kwau
Tsuki Fuji” sen, or ‘ ‘Ringed Wistaria” sen. It has round
marks, or balls, probably Hoshu, on the back.
No. 2, of the same plate, has no ring, but has nine
balls on the back. No. 4is a large copy of the Wistaria
..design.
No. 3. This might have been described along with
the Ebisu sen. It is a large, somewhat heart shaped
ring, with a Matsuri medal of Ebisu in the interior.


1 illjlilM : j




EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 243
Plate 16, No. 1. We come again upon the Hoshu, or
Hoju, with the sacred flame leaping high; in No. 2 of
the same plate the characters “Kwanei” are seen above
and beneath.
No. 3, represents an incident of medieval Japan.
Benke, a famous man at arms, challenged the world
(of Japan) and mot with his match in the person of the
youthful and noble samurai Ushiwaka, afterwards the
great Yoshitsune, the most romantic figure in Japanese
history. He was half brother to the Shogun Yori-
tomo whom he established in power, but having excited
his jealousy he fled to the north of Japan where he is
still held in remembrance by the Ainos. It is a popular
belief, slender though the evidence is, that he escaped to
China and became the famous Genghis Khan. This coin
represents the meeting of Ushiwaka and Benke on the
Gojo bridge at Kyoto, and the discomfiture of the latter.
No. 4. A “ Yakata” or mansion.
No. 5. Shakin Qoma or colt sen, with gold dust
(bag). See page 861
No. 6. Two men on a raft.
Nos. 7 and 8. “Kabu” or turnip sen. The
right hand figure in both coins suggests the “Hoshu.”
No. 9. “Daikon” sen. This is a kind of radish with
some turnip features and is much esteemed as a
relish.
No. 10. “Uchidashi Dalkoku”. Much is here left
to the imagination. Daikoku seems to be striking an
attitude as he strikes (Uchl De) with his hammer,
the various treasures out of his magic bag. See


244 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
the key, the bag, (no longer bulging,) the Hoshu and the
rice bags.
Plate 17, No. 2. This E sen depicts some of the
treasures, viz., the hat, hammer, straw cape, key and
oblong coin of gold. (Kasa, Tsuchi, Mino, Kage, and
Koban).
No. 5. Tins gentleman known as Shojo, uses a ladle
to till his cup with the alcoholic everage called sake.
His capacity was phenomenal. The name Shojo means
man-ape, and is supposed to be peculiarly fitting in this
case, as monkeys are credited (among the ignorant) in
Japan with a fondness for strong drink. Shojo is
usually represented with rod hair. Nothing is known
about his nose.
No. 1. This is called the “Eyo Men”, or double
faced Kwanei sen. This particular specimen was made in
the Asakusa mint for the delectation of the workmen and
their friends. No. 3 was made in the village of Saruei,
province of Musashi, in the Ist year of Qembun,
1736. No. 4 was probably made in the same mint as
No. 6. The latter was cast at the village of Kameido in
the Province of Musashi.
No. 7. “Mannen Tsuho”. This specimen of the
antique group I have placed amongst the E sen, as it is
evidently not a government coin. On the back is the sun,
crescent moon and a star, none of which are distinct.
No. 8. Tins is after (a long way) the ancient Chinese
coin called the “Taisen Gojiu” or “Great Sen, Fifty”
but the “Gojiu” reads “ Jiugo”, fifteen instead of fifty, if
we read the characters in the usual order.






EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS. 245
The “Kagami sen” or mirror sen, so called either
because they resemble a Japanese metal mirror to the
extent of being flat on one side and decorated on the
other, or may be because they were made from mirror
metal, are not at all entitled to the name of sen. The “E
sen” are made after the manner of coins. They have a
reverse and obverse and other characters of current coin.
Occasionally they may have been used as coin for their
intrinsic value, but tills cannot be said of the “Kagami
Sen”. Still they are usually shewn amongst the E
sen, so I bow to custom. They were playthings,
childhood’s toys of the nobility of other days. They are
old, some of them probably as old as the time of the
Ashikaga Shogunate. These Illustrated in plate 18, were
doubtless the pride and joy of budding Daimyo in the days
when the game of pitch and toss occupied their dreams
perhaps as much as the flash of the toy sword; too soon
to be exchanged for the grim and relentless companion
which clung to them from adolescence to the grave.* For
pitch and toss, or a game betwixt this and marbles, was
the function of the Kagami sen. The reverse is plain,
except the honourable scars of their former vocation.
I shall briefly describe the few shewn.
Plate 18, No. 1 is the god Ebisu still hugging his fish
and dancing with delight; something in the right hand
however, suggests the hammer of Daikoku.
* Sometimes as early as 6 years of age, the Young Daimyo wore real
swords and were so saturated daily with etiquette, including the formal
mannerisms accompanying “Kara Kiri,” or Felo de se by disembowelling, so
that even at that tender age, their behaviour was more like automata
than living children.


246 EXPERIMENTAL AND ORNAMENTAL COINS.
No. 2 is the Imperial crest, with its sixteen petals,
the royal chrysanthemum.
No. 3 can be no one but Daikoku Sama.
No. 4. The“Ogi”or folding fan with the sun or
hole, if you like, as ornament.
No. 5. Mystic key and Hoshu.
No. 6 Tachibana or orange blossom and leaves.
No. 7. Sakura, or cherry blossom.
No. 8. The Kiri crest seen on the gold coins in
chapter 6.
No. 9. Maizuru or flying crane, the badge of the
Mori family.
No. 10. Another coat of arms, the Yotsumeor“Four
eyes.”
No. 11. Fujiyama, the fax - -famed xnountain.
No. 12. A mon or ci'est.
No. 13. Hoshu is it ?or turnip?
No. 14. The Mitsudomoe, probably three magatama.
(See plate 1, first chapter.)
No. 15. Eight jewels, or stars. En passant we note
that the stars deleted in the pictures of China and Japan
are properly represented by round bodies instead of by
radiant points.
Plate 19. All the numbers of this plate with tho
exception of No. 20, are fancy coins in silver, imitations of
Chinese sen. Tne names are as follows: 1, Kaigen Tsuho;
No 2, Shutsu Gempo; 3, Tenho Gempo; 4, Genho Tsuho,
5, Kine Genpo; 6, Seiso Gempo; 7, Taitei Tsuho; 8, Heian
Tsuho; 9, Tenna Jimpo. The last is an ancient E sen
of China, which I have introduced for the sake of








APPENDIX A.
The following characters are to be found on the
antique sen, and some others. The archaic forms have
been taken from the Setsu Mon, a Chinese work of the
first century A. I).
The interpretation given by this learned authority
appears to be influenced by the mystical philosophy of
that period and is frequently rather far-fetched. I have
sometimes therefore ventured on explanations which
seem to me more simple and natural.
The archaic forms too, are in the transition stage be-
tween the rude outline picture and the later Ideograph,
so that confusion is possible. For instance, in paragraph
9, the curve of the archaic character To, a sword, is not
so clearly indicative of the rounded pommel of a sword
(still surviving in the ornamental knob of the modern
weapon), as it is in the same character which is inscribed
on an archaic coin of my Chinese collection, where it forms
the greater part of a circle. The archaic pommel was
sometimes in the form of a ring of iron, cast in one piece
with the blade and handle; a specimen in my collection
has this form, which is also Illustrated in Gowland’s
work on the Dolmens of Japan.
The identification of these archaic forms is the result,
in great measure, of the painstaking search of Mr.
Yuzawa, who has assisted me with much ardour and
judgement in this interesting task.
1. Wa Peace, Japan. Archaic Form $
While most of the Chinese characters are compound
forms, built up of other ideographs, or the essential


parts of such, many of them consist of characters which
are separate, though juxtaposed. The elementary
characters, whether attached or not, are called radicals.
The character Wa has two such radicals. The left hand
radical (shewn on the right in the archaic form) was
originally an outline picture of a plant with the ear
hanging, full of grain. This portrayed all cereals known
at the time. The right hand radical (left, in the archaic
form) is an open mouth. The combination of an open
mouth, with rice, barley etc., ready to fill it, is a most
satisfactory condition amongst an agricutural people,
and therefore a sign of Peace or Harmony, which
is the meaning of this character. The title “ Wa” was
applied to the Japanese by ancient Chinese historians,
though the character is not the same.
2. Do Hii] Copper. (Contracted Form [p]). Archaic
Forms |[jj| and
was one roof or covering: y in this con-
nection is said to mean not merely a mouth, but any-
thing under a single roof. Thus the signification
united or made the same. The left hand radical in
the complete character means metal, and was applied to
the metal gold (probably in Its native form) before other
metals were familiar. It is pronounced “Kin”, and
consists of another character of the same sound, together
with the character for earth, and streaks to represent the
ore*. When copper was found, its resemblance to the
precious metal was indicated by the addition of the
character (pj, (same) which is used in the Wado Kailio
coin without the qualifying radical for metal.
* Chamberlain, “Introduction to the study of Japanese writing.”
Page 107.


3. Kai HfJ Commencement. Archaic Form
The resemblance of this to a gate is unmistakable.
In the archaic form are seen the two hands pushing aside
a bar; hence the meaning to Open or to Commence, as in
our expression “the opening year” &c.
4. Tsu Current. Archaic Form
It is not easy to give a satisfactory explanation of
this. The right hand radical I think, unquestionably
contains the character earth (see the strata) and the
middle vertical line indicating depth. The sidelines are
probably the sides of a channel and the figure above is
doubtless bubbling water. This radical means to gush
forth. The left hand radical is more difficult. The three
upper lines can be traced in the Setsu Mon, to three legs
and was probably intended to show that three legs were
moved in the same time as two, hence the idea of
running. The lower part of this radical is a plant on a
fixed basis and means to stop. The difficulty of com-
bining the ideas of stopping and moving is to some
extent got over by the Setsu Mon, which declares that the
upper and lower parts combined to form this radical,
signify that movement takes place over a flight of steps
without going down one by one. This character is found
on most of the Japanese coins and I have therefore
attempted this account of its origin, which at least leaves
on our minds an impression of rapid movement of water,
hence Current.
5. Ho Jlf Treasure. Contracted in the Wado coin
to Jyjy (Chin). Archaic Form


As In the character “Do,” the enclosing line of the
archaic form signifies a covering or roof. The portion im-
mediately under the roof, the character “Chin,” used in
the Wado coin as a contraction of “Ho,” means “rare,”
“precious.” The origin of “Chin” is interesting. The
left hand part is “Tama”, “precious stone,” derived, we
may suppose, from the character “Earth”, with a
qualifying mark, (the upper horizontal line). The right
hand part of Chin, represents a jar with its lid and
horizontal line to shew that it is full to overflowing, in
all likelihood, with some fermented liquor. A
“precious” combination indeed!
Underneath this character “Chin” is “Kai” (in
Chinese “Bai”) a shell, easily recognised in the archaic
form. In ancient times, shells were used in China as
money, just as they are in other countries at the present
day (see pages 3 and 4). A “precious shell”, under a roof
therefore, not only reveals the rationale of the character
“Ho,” Treasure, but gives us a vivid glimpse of the
civilisation of those archaic times.
6. Man Ten Thousand. Archaic Form
The ancient ideograph is an excellent sketch of a
kind of wasp or fly that swarmed by thousands, hence
the meaning, Ten thousand. The antennae, the body,
attenuated in the middle, and the wings painting
backwards, are well represented.
7. Nen Year. Archaic Form
The upper part of this character, as will be seen on
reference to the first character “Wa” (Paragraph 1.),
consists of rice or some other cereal. The lower is a


person, represented by legs; the horizontal line is a
distinguishing mark, common in these characters, and
probably signifies a farmer, perhaps a female
agricultural labourer. A sheaf of rice associated with a
farmer well depicts the year’s crop. What better event
could mark the passage of a Year, at a time when as-
tronomy could only have been in embryo?
8. Jin jpty Superior Being, Deity. Archaic Form jjj^
In the archaic form, the two horizontal lines mean
“above”, while the three vertical ones indicate the sun,
moon and stars. According to the Setsu Mon, this
radical derived its meaning “to reveal” or to “shew,”
from the fact that Heaven reveals itself by means of
these three “agents”; but this is probably a later inter-
pretation of the Chinese school. There are reasons to
think that the right hand radical by itself meant “God.”
It has the meaning “to extend” “to develop” and came
from the figure which looks very much like a
serpent, though it does not seem to be the archaic form
of that creature. The combination of these two
ideographs to represent the idea God, Superior Being, is
doubtless an effort of more advanced thought.
9. Ko tj} Merit. Archaic Form
The left hand radical of this character is supposed to
represent a perpendicular between two levels and
indicates skill, or in combination with other characters,
sometimes toil; the right hand radical is a sketch of
sinews and means strength. In pages 48-9 it is stated
that the character “Ko” sometimes had as its right


hand radical, not the character “Riki”, “Strength”, but
“To” a “sword”, and the distinguishing features of these
were pointed out. The archaic form of “To”, a “sword”
is . The curved upper part was probably a
ringed hilt, like some of those seen in the tombs of the
early Japanese, or on the sword or knife money of the
archaic Chinese. The lower portion was a curved blade.
The resemblance of this to the character “strength” is
striking and is possibly the result of frequent association
in archaic times. Swordmanship, or skill with a sword,
was the highest degree of Merit.
10. Ryu |Prosperous. Archaic Form
The interpretation of this character is not easy. The
left hand radical seems to represent a cliff or high place
with steps to shew that it can be climbed, hence the idea
“Prominent”, “Great.” The upper part of the right
hand radical depicts a person, and the line behind has
been variously described as a torch, applied posteriorly
(which would certainly make the time seem rather long),
or simply and preferably, an indication of distance or
length. At least it seems that this part of the radical
means “Long”. The lower portion signifies “Life” shew-
ing as it does, a plant springing from the soil.
The character “Ryu,” taken as a whole, would seem
to express a long life which has attained prominence
hence ‘‘Prosperity."
-x-
-11. Hei Peace. Archaic Form
The explanation of this character is also rather a
roundabout one. One part of the archaic form consists


of two horizontal lines with a curved one passing
downwards. This signifies the voice of a crow, the
short sound of “O”. The two short curved lines
between the horizontal ones signify Parting and
the whole radical may be taken to imply that parting
voices delivered in a monotone (voice of a crow), indicate
absence of anger and therefore Peace. If this ex-
planation seems rather far-fetched, I would remark that
the Setsu Mon does not state its views at all clearly and
that this interpretation seems to be the most feasible.
A))
12. Ei Everlasting. Archaic Form
Here, the course of a stream with its streaks of
ripples, is quite apparent. It will be noticed that this is
a slight modification of the character for a river, seen in
the word “Kawa”, page 130. The idea of length, and
hence of Lasting and even Everlasting, is thus derived
from this concrete example. The archaic form of
water is
13. Fu Wealth. Archaic Form
In order from above downwards, we can trace in the
archaic form, the elements needed to portray the concep-
tion of primitive Wealth. A roof, the numeral one, a
mouth, and four rice patches,* that is to say, plenty of
rice for one mouth gathered under a roof!
14. Ju Longevity. Archaic Form
This is not very clear. The top knot and long
line indicate hair, in the archaic character; the curved
* At page 61, I assumed this to be a bale of rice, though it also occurred
to me (page 18) that rice fields might be equally acceptable.


lines beneath the top knot almost certainly signify bent
or bowed , while the lower radical again is a month,
probably in this case, an individual. An individual with
bent back and much hair (on the body) would be an apt
illustration of Longevity.
15. Sho Receiving, or Succeeding to. Archaic
Form
The derivation of this character is made sufficiently
clear by the picture of two hands Receiving an object.
16. Sho g Prosperous. Archaic Form |^|
If the upper figure of the archaic form is a picture of
the sun, as is stated in the Setsu Mon, then its com-
bination with a mouth and a volume of vapour, (breath
or word) arising therefrom gives us a bright or
cheerful word (a sunny smile), which indicates
Prosperity. This curved line is “Ki” (paragraph 26) and
the character may therefore signify a mystical connection
between the sun, as giver of light, warmth, and there-
fore life, and the individual represented by “Mouth.”
17. Cho H Long. Archaic Form
Here the ideograph for man is surmounted by that
for above, hence the meaning Tall, Long. See parag-
raph 27.
18. Tai Great. Archaic Form
This is simply a human figure with the arms and legs
stretched out so as to occupy as much space as possible.


Ajb
19. Nyo j|| Abundant. Archaic Form
The upper part consisting of three lines (a triangle),
signifies gathered (probably under one roof), or com-
bined. The lower portion is a picture of a rice grain
with a spoon, according to the Setsu Mon. The right
hand radical conveys, according to the same authority,
the notion of prominence or elevation, as it consists of
three characters for earth, piled on the top of a bare
mountain. It may therefore give the idea of having
eaten too much food; it is suggested that the sound of
the right hand radical corresponde I to the exclamation
of a person who has eaten too much. Possibly the
notion of earth heaped on a bare or rocky mountain was
connected with the gathering of rice and hence the idea
of Abundance. These explanations cannot be said to be
entirely satisfactory.
20. Eki Profit. Archaic Form
Tiie archaic form shews a vase or other food utensil,
with water, or other fluid, above (overflowing?). It has
thus the signification abundant, as in the previous
character, and the idea of Profit in the modern sense
may have been slowly evolved from the idea increase,
which it still retains.
21. Jo, or Tei J| Chastity, Fidelity of a wife.
Archaic Form (zE)
The primitive sketch represents the shell of the
tortoise, which was used for divination by scorching with
fire. The resulting cracks were of various shapes. The
figure above the shell depicts such a crack. The answer
was supposed to bo infallible, and the process thus came


to be regarded as the best illustration of truth and
Fidelity, like Caesar’s wife, “above suspicion”.
‘22. Kffiin US Beholding. Archaic Form
The upper portion probably signifies a stork, but it
may also refer to an owl. If the two semi-circular figures
mean mouths (see character Wa, paragraph 1.), then we
may say that the upper portion of this character re-
presented an owl, modified by two mouths to mean
stork. The lowest portion is an eye, the two horizontal
lines within the figure being the eyelids. Thus the whole
character may mean seeing (the owl at night and the stork
by day); or it might be that the two semi-circular figures
are also intended for eyes, though this is less likely. In
the other case, the character may be taken to be a picture
of an owl with eyes in caricature and emphasised by the
large eye underneath. The details are rather obscure,
but even we moderns can gather from the tout ensemble
the notion of Beholding.
23. Kwan 3E Spacious; Liberal. Archaic Form
It will be seen from the archaic form that there is
something under a roof, but what that thing may
be is an open question. There seems to be a
quaint mixture of three things, which are used in an
allegorical manner, namely legs, hands and an eye. The
meaning might be thus expressed, room to move, to use
the hands and to see. This seems to me more reasona-
ble than the explanation that this interior figure is a
combination of a goat and rabbit, with the inference that
there is room for these very active creatures to roam
about, hence wide, Spacious, with the later meaning,
Liberal.


24. En Prolonged. Archaic Form
According to the Setsu Mon, the left hand radical
means a Prolonged walk. In the case of the character
Tsu, paragraph 4, it was seen that the left hand
radical depicted three legs as signifying that they were
moving in the same time as two, therefore running.
The same remark applies here. The lower leg is however
prolonged under the right hand character and is
assumed to imply a long walk.
Another interpretation is to the effect that one leg
being lengthened means a slow or leisurely walk.
The right hand radical is certainly a plant; the line
above may refer to the stoppage of its growth, but it
apparently means to lengthen. It would seem therefore
that one radical emphasises the intention of the other to
convey the idea of Prolongation.
25. Ki S Gladness. Archaic Form _S-
-0 \=*
The archaic form shews a drum, or some musical
instrument, surmounted by a plant, to indicate its erect
position (may it not be music on the meadow?) Below
is a laughing mouth, expressive of great joy and satis-
faction (see the character Baku), a vivid picture of
Gladness.
26. Ken Archaic Form
Heaven (when used in connection with Kon).
(The same character, when pronounced Kan,
means dry. In divination, it sometimes refers to
gold, the noblest metal.
This is a complicated character and the explanation
is somewhat involved. The character Ken was used as


an arbitrary symbol to Indicate the mid-distance between
due north and due west, the characters for which were
already established, together with those for east and
south. It is not at all unlikely that the character Ken was
in existence before such distinctions as north-west, south-
west, etc. were made. From its structure it appears
that its use in divination preceded its application as a
symbol for north-west. According to Kloshin, the
author of the Setsu Mon, it consists of two radicals, but
for purposes of description we may regard it as having
four such components. (1) The upper left hand part of
the archaic form portrays the sun, with a growing plant
on the top, to signify its rising. In another archaic
form, two round bodies of smaller dimensions probably
represent stars. (2) The lower portion on the left is a
mystical character composed of the numeral one and a
Curved line “Ki” which signifies vapour, breath or
invisible force, (vital force, magnetism, vril or some-
thing of the kind). Together these two latter may
be taken to signify energy in one, concentrated
force. (3) The upper part of the right hand side,
Is said to mean innermost, or the very inside (view-
ed from without). It appears to have been original-
ly the picture of a man (inside a house). As we
are attempting an esoteric explanation, it may be
safe to hint that this radical, which has the significance,
when combined with the two former, of brightness,
enlightement (perhaps revelation), may possibly refer
to the Innermost essence of things (noumenou). (4) The
lower portion on the right hand side is given in the Setsu
Mon as the second radical of this character. It represents
an irresistable plant, whose growth may meet with
obstruction, but which passes round the obstacle and
grows on. Hence the meaning irresistible. In toto,
this character, as I have remarked, has the signification


Heaven, in combination with Kon (earth, in contrast to
heaven). It is also said to mean Heaven when connected
with the following character “Gen”. The remarks in
the foot note at page 75 may therefore be inapplicable.
27. Gen jC Beginning. Archaic Form A
The character Gen has the same archaic meaning as
Cho, though somewhat more archaic in form (paragraph
17). It represents above and man. It indicates the
Beginning; of Kl, energy, invisible force, something
beyond man, whose beginning is outside his kon*.
28. Baku Pleasure, Music. Archaic Form
I will here quote Professor Chamberlain. “On wood
as a stand we see five drums, —one big drum in the
centre and two small ones on either hand, —the Chinese
idea of music and hence of enjoyment.”—lntroduction to
the study of Japanese writing, page 105.
29. Mei Ijlj Enlightenment. Archaic Form Ojj)
This is a combination of the characters for the sun
G and moon, the brightest things known.
The lines, or dots within these characters are stated
by the Setsu Mon to also represent Ki (energy etc.) This
is probably a later mystical interpretation.
//AP
30. Ji Government, or Peace. Archaic Formmy
The archaic form, meaning to regulate, presents two
radicals. That on the left hand stands for water, but in
* There may he more than a coincidence in the fact that Ken to know
and Ken to engender, to bring forth, to become, so closely resemble in
sound the Chinese Ken and Gen.


China it may also mean a river. The right hand radical
consists of two segments. The upper one signifies “My,”
or “Self”, and the lower is a mouth. The two together
mean Satisfaction.
In China where the irrigation of land is of paramount
importance, the preservation of river banks and canals
with dredging and other operations to regulate the flow
of water has, from the most ancient times, been an im-
portant function of the government. It Is said that
nearly two thousand years 8.C., the Hsia dynasty was
founded by Yu, whose engineering works on the Yellow
river were so much appreciated that he was made Em-
peror on the death of the former ruler Shun. No event
produces more terror or distress in China than inundation
or drought. Though the Setsu Mon is silent on the
subject, I think that we may fairly conclude that the
remedy to such disasters must have been closely associat-
ed in the minds of the teeming millions of agriculturists in
China, with the notion of government. That the word to
regulate should have acquired the signification to govern,
is a fact of no little interest, shewing as it does that the
civilisation of this ancient country was, nominally at
least, based on the principle of the common weal. This
character, with the preceding “Mei”, form the name
“Meiji”, the present period of Enlightened Government.
31. Ho Preservation. Archaic Form
This character formerly signified rearing (fostering,
nurturing). An infant on its entry to this vale of woe,
guarded by an adult person, is graphically shewn in the
archaic form. 'The propriety of youth being accompanied
by a protector will be generally recognised. The exces-
sively tender age of the infant in this case adds sig-
nificance to the presence of the adult and clearly conveys


the idea of Preservation. The above character “ Ho”, is
used on the Tempo coin page 148. Compare with the
“Ho”, of paragraph 5.
32. It has been state! at page 22 that the word
“son” originally meant a fountain. The character was
ft in the archaic form. The dot may represent
the point of origin of the water, which divided into three
streams. The horizontal line perhaps stands for the
numeral 1, thus indicating a single origin. During the
Shin Dynasty however, D.C. 246-210, a character (H|)hav-
ing the same sound was employed, and is retained to this
day as the character for sen. The archaic form is jjjAfe
and. consists of the radical, metal, on the left hand (see
paragraph 2), with two weapons (primitive halberds),
which in combination mean violence, cruelty, robbery.
How they arrived at the signification, (in association
with the radical for metal,) farm implement, except on
the Biblical precedent of “spears” turned into “pruning
hooks,” one cannot imagine. Some of the archaic shapes
of Chinese money might be taken for either one or the
other and it is not unlikely that, as in still earlier times,
a double function was assigned to these implements.
The fact of the sound sera being the same in this character
and that of the original word fountain, together with the
coexistence of coin, in another part of the newly created
Empire of China, shaped after swords, halberds, hoes
and spades, doubtless brought about the general use of
the character in its present form.


APPENDIX B.
The above forms of the character Ho, are to be
coins of the Far East. The Archaic types will be
reference to Appendix A,
found on the
recognized by


Title Number of A
lull. volumes. auiheu.
Date.
Kwacho Ruien
2
Tennojiya Chozaeraon
Teuwa
(1681-3)
Seho Roku
5 Senoo Ryusai
Hoei
(1704-9)
Hanji Roku
14
U U
Kyoho
(1716-35)
Koho Dzukan
1
Nakatani Kozan
U
Zoku Kwacho Ruien
2
Uno Somei
n
il
Kisho Hyakuen
i
Kawamura Hadzumi
Temmei
6th (1786)
Wakan Sen I
1
Yoshikawa I ken
Kwansei
4th (1792)
Kwacho Sendzu
1
Hisano Kokkwan
Kwansei 11th 117991
Shinsen Sempu
3
Kuchiki Masatsuna
Temmei
1st (1781)
Sempei Koi
1
Hisano Kokkwan
Bunkwa
4th (1807)
Kokon Senkwa Kan
20
Kuchiki Masatsnna
Kwansei
10th (1798)
Shin Kosei Koho-
dzukan
1 Kariya Kwaishi
Bunkwa 12th (1815J
Chin Sen Kihin
1
Omura Naritomi
Bunkwa 14th 11ST 71
Dzuroku
Shinkwa Jorei
1 Finance Department
Meiji
4th (1871)
Mein Shin Sen Sempu 3
Narushima Ryuhoku
and Morita Jihei
Meiji
7th (1874)
Kwanei Shin Sen
2 Kamedalchijo, Naka-
Sempu
gawa Kinrei, Eno-
Kwanei Sempu
moto Bunshiro
Meiji
27th (1894)
1
Fujiwara Teikan
Written
die of
in the mid-
the 18th
A list of the principal works by Japanese writers on
the coins of Eastern Asia.
century. Publish-
ed in 1898.
Kosen Taisen 36 Imai Teikichi , Meiji 32nd (1899)
Gwa Sempu 2 Majima Kyou “ “ “
Kwanei Senshi 5 Enomoto Bunshiro Meiji 31st (1898)
Kwocho Shenshi 1 Enomoto Bunshiro Meiji 34th (1901)
Fugo Shenshi 3 Ipposha Kosho Bunkwa (1804-16)
Kin Gin Dzuroku 7 Kondo Morishige Meiwa 7th (1770)
Kin Gin Kwashi 3 Enomoto Bunshiro Meiji 36th (1903)
Kimpu 1 Japanese Government Meiji Ist (1868)
Kimpu 1 Japanese Government
Dai Nihon
Kwaheishi 13 Finance Department Meiji 9th (1876)
Dai Nihon Kwahei
Seidzu _ 1 “ “ Meiji 11th (1878)
Kosen Kaushiki
Kummo 1 Narushima Ryuhoku Meiji 17th (1884)
MAGAZINES.
Tokyo Kosenkwai Zasshi Bisho Senkwai Tomoshu
Kwaneisen Kenkyukwai Zasshi Yokohama Kosen Taikwai
Dai Nihon Kwahei Kenkyukwai Tomoshu
Zasshi Tokyo Kosen Kyokwai Tomoshu


APPENDIX D.
NOTE ON ONO DOFU.
Yoshikawa Iken, in the Wakan Sen I, states that
according to tradition, the later Wado sen were inscribed
by the celebrated scholar Ono Dofu. It has been surmised
that the Wado sen continued to be cast for upwards of
two centuries and if so, Ono Dofu may have been con-
cerned with their inscriptions, though it does not seem
at all likely. If however the Wado coin ceased to be
issued within fifty years after its first appearance, Ono
Dofu could have had nothing to do with the writing of
its Inscription. It is a historical fact that Ono no Dofu
lived in the early part of the tenth century and he may
have been asked to write the characters for the Kongen
Taiho, as stated at page 75. What is certain is that on
the completion of the Seiryoden, a hall of the imperial
palace, he wrote the poems on the karakami or sliding
screens, which were ornamented with the figures of
ancient sages. This was in A.D. 928, two hundred and
twenty j'ears after the Wado coin was first issued and one
hundred and seventy after the issue of it is supposed to
have been stopped.
APPENDIX E.
MEIJI CURRENCY.
The illustrations in chapter 6 shew the copper coins
only as far as the eighth year, the silver coins of the third
and seventh year and the gold coins up to the third year
of Meiji. The gold coins have doubled in value, so that
the twenty yen piece is now (though out of circulation)


valued at forty yen. The silver yen and five sen, are
also no longer current in Japan, the former being entirely
replaced by gold, represented by notes, and the latter by
nickel, though it is still to be seen in circulation.
APPENDIX F.
PBE-MEIJI GOLD AND SILVER CURRENCY.
Collections of the Oban, Kohan and lesser coins have
hitherto been made by the very wealthy and on a
limited scale. The absence of Sabi, their secondary
position as current coin and their comparatively recent
origin, not to mention the high price of the Oban, have
combined to inhibit interest in these really interesting
forms of money. Although, in the course of collecting
Japanese coin I have acquired a fair number, I confess
that I have given them but little study and for the
remarks on this subject have to acknowledge entire
dependence on the following works, Dai Nihon Kwahei-
shi, Dai Nihon Kwahei Seidzu, Kimpu, Kin Gin Dzuroku
and Kin Gin Kwashl. The plates on these coins were
not finished until my remarks were in print and hence
a few more are exhibited than are treated of in the text.
It some measure this defect is remedied by printing the
name of each coin on the plate cover.


APPENDIX G.
GOVERNMENT ACTION REGARDING COUNTER-
FEITING, OVER A THOUSAND YEARS AGO.
Wado 2nd. A.H. 709. Imperial Edict. Those who
counterfeit silver coin shall be enslaved and the forged
coin given to the informant of the crime.
Wado 4th. A.D. 711. Imperial Edict. Forgers
shall be beheaded and those who were accessory to the
crime shall be made government slaves. Those belong-
ing to the Qoho (five homes) in which that of the
forger is included, shall, provided they do not inform
the government, he exiled. If proved to have no know-
ledge of the crime, their punishment shall be com-
muted five degrees.
Should the forger repent of his offence and surren-
der himself up to the government, even if the forged
money has been used, he shall have the punishment
commuted one degree. Should the money not have
been used, he shall receive no punishment should he
confess his crime and surrender himself up to the
government. Probably the property and persons of
the forgers were both held by government.
Wado sth. A.D. 712. An amnesty having been
declared, the punishment of forgers was remitted
one degree.
Tempei Jingo, 2nd. A.D. 765. Edict. Forgers shall
be enslaved and compelled .to work in the government
mints.
Jingo Kelun, Ist. A.D. 767. One Kimikiyo Maro
(evidently a noble) and others, numbering 40, were
exiled to the province of Dewa (northern part of the
main island), the former being given the humiliating
title of Izenlbe (money forger).


Hoki 3rd. A.D. 772. Edict. The regulations hitherto
in force concerning the punishment of forgers, shall,
be changed so as to enforce one degree less penalty, so
that the punishment of exile shall take the place of
beheading in the former regulations. Special care shall
be taken that the degree of punishment shall be in
fair and reasonable proportion to the gravity of the
offence.
Ten-o Ist. A.D. 784. A general amnesty was
extended to ail but those who were guilty of forgery.
Enryaku 22nd and 23rd. A.D. 803-4. Amnesty.
Forgers excepted.
Tencho 10th. A.D. 827. Amnesty. Forgers excepted.
Daido 4th. A.D. 909. Amnesty including forgers.
Jinjiu 3rd. 853. Amnesty to all criminals excep-
ting forgers.
Jokwan 6th. 864. Amnesty; forgers excepted.


INDEX.
Alio Muneyuki 76
Aidzu 174, 142
Ainu 8
Aki 139
Akita coins 139, 180, 207, 208, 209
An 185
Ancient Rock Alphabet 4
Anei
NiShu Gin 196
Anglo-Saxons IB
Aniyama copper mine Akita 180
Annam 87
Ansei
“Sho Ji’“ Kobau. . .Ohap. 6, Plate 18, No. 2. . . . 201
Ni Bu Kin Chap. 6, Plate 18, No. 3. . . . 200
Ichi Bu Gin 200
Ni Sim Gin 200
Arrowheads 2, 6
Asakusa mint 116, 117
Ashi Arai (Kwanei sen) 120
Ashikaga Mitsukane 92
Ahikaga Yoshimasa 86, 226
Ashio (Kwanei sen) 132
Aston, W. G 9
Atai 19
Ateshi 19
Awata Mabito 29
B
Ban Sen 97, 111, 117
Barter 1
Beads 3


Bean Money 302, 206
Beuke 343
Benteu 286, 241
Bisliamon 236
Bita Sen 79, 97
Boeki Gin Oliap. 6, Plate 22, No. 2. .. . 218
Buddhism 12, 58
Bnukyu Eiho 151
Bunkyu Tsuho 221
Buuroku Tsuho 104
Bunsei
Kin Koban Plate 20, No. 2 , 197
Ni Bu Kin Plate 20, No. 3 197
Isshu Kin Plate 20, No. 4 197
Isshu Gin 197
Nishu Gin 198
Bun Sen 130 et seq., 109
Bun Zaemon 122
c
Celtic Rings 5
Chamberlain, Professer 9, 49
Chikuzen Tsuho 169
Chin (precious) 24, 147, 251, 253
China (currency of) 15
China (Written language of) Introduction viii
Oho Gin 202 et seq.
Cho Hei (Ryuhei Eiho) 57
Oho Hei (Kwampei Taiho) 73
Cho Ho (Jingo Kaiho) 51
Chouen Taiho 65
Ohoroku Tsuho 86, 87
Oho To Ei (Ryuhei Eiho) 57
Coin collecting in Japan Introduction xii
Coins absent from the Dolmens 14
Corea 8, 12
Counterfeiting 32, 268
Crystal beads 5
Cult of Shinto 83
Currency 32, 3


Daibutsu - 58, 109, 122
Daiji (Large character) (Taiji). . . . 57, 60, 66, 68
Dazaifn 32
Daikoku Sama 223, 238
Dollar (trade) Chap. 6, Plate 22, No. 2. . . . 214
Dolmens of Europe and Japan 5
Do Sen 23
Dozan Shiho 184
Dream of leyasu 95
E
E Sen 225
Eidaka 95
Eiraku Tsuho 92
“ Ban Sen Ohap. 3, Plate 796
Biri Te Sen Ohap. 4, Plate 11 157
Emperor
Go Daigo 80
Go Hana Zono 86
Go Yo Zei 189
Heijo 57
Junuiu 45
Kenso ' , . 15
Kwammu 52
Komei ’ ". . 212
Go Mizu no O 11l
Nimmei 63
Reigen 121
Saga 58, 59
Sei Sho (of the Chinese Dynasty of Shu) 121
Shirakawa 90
Tai So, of the Kin Dynasty of China 159
Temmn 9
Empress Gemmyo 20
Koken (Shotoku) 38, 45
Meisei 11l
En Kwan Kwampei: 72
Enki Tsuho 73
Enomoto Bnnshiro, Dr 15, 163


Fee 3
Five Provinces, The 54
Ftgiwara Ason Nakamaro 38
“ “ Gyoyo 29
“ no Ujime 70
“ family of 82
Fukoku Kyoliei (Mito sen) 222
Fukuroknjiu 236
Fundo Jirushi 191, 220
Furiki (Jingo Kaiho) 51
Fntsu (common or ordinary) 34
Formosan Coins 156
G
Gamo, Family of 171
Gekitaku 58
Gembun
Koban Chap. 6, Plate 20, No. 1. . . . 194, 195
Ichi Bu Kin 195
Genna Tsnlio 108
Genrokn
Oban Chap. 6, Plate 7 and 8. .. . 192
Koban Chap. 6,' Plate 17, No. 1. . , . 198
Ichi Bn Kin Chap. 6, Plate 17, No. 3. . . . 198
Ni Sim Ban Kin. . .Chap. 6, Plate 17, No. 4. . , . 193
Genrokn Kaichiu 318
“ Taiohiu 218
Toknho 219
Giudai Tsnho 219, 220
Ginei Tsnho 219
Gin Kwan (silver ring) 5
Go Shn 242
Go Yo Sen 144, 145
Gold and Silver Currency 186
Gold and Silver Ingots • • • • ••.... 191
Goto, Family of 189
Government mint at Shiba 118
Goza me (matting mark) 198
Gyosho (style of writing) 152


Haha, or mother sen 146
Hal mon Sen 115
Hakke 182
Hakodate Tsnho 185
Haku Do Sen 174
Hamada Kenjiro 18
Hammer of Happiness 238
Hana 190
Hana Furi Gin 190
Haue (Hook) 34
Han Shu 165
Harima 32
Hashiba, Tokyo 148
Hatome, or Pigeon Eye Sen 165
Hen 34
Hidari Moji 88
Hideyoshi 96, 100, 190
Hideyoshi Oho Gin. . . Chap. 6, Plate 22, No. 1. . . . 202
Hiki (of cloth) 37
Hiragana 59, 234
Hitotsuhashi 211
Hideya no Are 9
Ho, (Treasure) 24, 251-2
, varieties of 264
Ho Oho Sei .■ 107
Hoei Kobau Chap. 6, Plate 17, No. 2. . . . 193
Hoei Tsnho 146
Hojo Family 84
Hojo Ujimasu 104
Hojo Ujiyasu 96
Hoernes Moritz 4
Honda 95
Hosoknra Coin 179
Hotel 236
House of Shimadzu 101
Hyakn mon Tsnho 179
I
Ichi Bn Kin 192, 193, 195
“ “ Gin .198, 200, 209
Ichi Hyakn Ei Sen 220


lemitsu 816
lemoolii 811
letsuna 816
leyasu 100, 108
Images of Buddha, erection of 23, 53
Image of Buddha, destruction of 121
Imai Takechi, Introduction p. xx
lue (rice plant) 10
luouye Geui, Introduction xx
Iron coins 128,134,185,186,137,138,141,142,148,153
Ishi me (stone mark) 188
Itakura Suwo no Kami 152
Izanagi 837
Izanami 237
J
Jingo 45
Jingo Kaiho (Introduction xi) 45
Jiu Hi Nan San (Mitocoiu) 223
Jin Ni Zeue (Twelve sen) 23
Jokwan Eiho 69
K
Kaei, Isshn Gin 199
Kagami Sen 245
Kagi (a key) 844
Kai (a shell) 4
Kaigen Tsnho 25, 26, 92
Kaika Jimpo 19
Kaiki Shoho ~ 43, 44
Kajiki Sen 165 et seq.
Kaku (to Write or scratch) Introduction yii
Kameido mint 138, 140
Kami (god or goddess) 235
Kanragori 172
Kariya Kwaishi Introduction xx
Kasa (head gear) 244
Katakana 39
Kawa (a river) 130
Kawamura Hadzumi xix
Keian Tsuho 216


Keiclio Oban Ohap. 6, Plates 5 and (5. . . . 192
“ Koban Chap. 6, Plates 16, No. 1, . 192
lohi Bn Kin 192
Keiclio Tsnho 106
Kengen Taiho 75
Kenkou Tsnho 80
Kibi Mabi 39 49
Kin (weight) 53
Kin Kwan (Gold ring) 5
Kin Teusho (coin) -. 103
Kinder, Mr 213
Kiri (Paulowuia Imperialis) 97
Kiusei Empo 158
Kiriohiu (exchange fee) 187
Kirikodama 5
Kiriseu 187
Ko (ancient) 27
Koban 188,192,198,194,197,199,201
Kobo Daishi (Kukai) 59
Kobu Tsnho 166
Kofn Gold Coin 302
Kojiki 6 , 9
Koma Sen 339 e i se q.
Koshin Sen 343
Kndatama 6
Knohiki Masatsuna Introduction xix
Kurile Islands 7
Knsunoki Masashige 80
Kukai (Kobo Daishi) 59
Kwammon (one thousand mou) 213
Kwammon Gin Sen 17
Kwampei Taiho 71
Kwandaka 95
Kwanto 92
Kwatsu En 41 50
Kyoho Oban Ohap. 6, Plates 9 and 10 194
Kyoho Koban Ohap. 0, Plate 19, No. 1
Kyoho Ichi Bu Kin Ohap. 6, Plate 19, No. 3 '
Kyoho Tsuho 316
Kyo sen (or Kyoto sen). . 94 j 93


Luoliuan Coins 157 et seq.
Leaden Certificates 173
“ Coin 178,179,183,184
M
Magatama 5, 191
Majima 236
Mahakala 238
Mame Gin 202, 306
Maueu
Shin Kobau 301
Ni Sim Kin 303
Manneu Tsnho 38, 344
Matsudaira Higo no Kami 174
Matsudaira Nobutsuua 121
Matsudaira Shungaku 153
Matskoka Judayn 168
Matsuri Sen 240
Mediaeval Coins 79
Meiji Tsnho 335
Miuamoto 84
Mino (straw cape) 244
Mito Sen 171-2
Mito Shiken Sen 322, 333, 234
Mitsu Domoe 191, 346
Mitsutsngu (of family of Goto) 193
Morita Mr Introduction xx
Morioka Coin 179
Mogusa, (Artemesia Moxa) Introduction xvii
Mumon Gin Sen 15, 16
Muneage 238
Muramatsu Mr 89, 157
Murdoch 106, 155, 168
N
Nagasaki 156
Nakagawa, Mr 17
Nakatani Kozan Introduction xix
Namba Go Yo Sen 145
Narushima Ryuhoku 34, 171


Nedan .. . . 19
Nembutsu (praying to Buddha) . . . 238
Nengo Introduction ix, page 63,64, 66
Nickel coin 213
Nihongi . .9, 15
Nihon Shoki 15
Niji (two character) Hoei coin. 148
Ni Jiu Ichi Nami (twenty one wave) sen 140 et seq.
Nikko Go Yo Sen 144
Nisui Ryuhei - 56
Nobunaga (Ota) 86, 100, 188, 190
Noge Wado 33
Nyoki Jimpo, 68
o
O Ashi 8
Oban, 188, 190, 192, 192-3, 194 and plates 1-14, chapter 6
Ogasawara Dusho no Kami 152
Ogata (large size) coin 40, 61, 66, 74, 145
Omura Naritomi Introduction xx
Ouo Dofu 75 and Appendix D.
Ota Nobunaga 86, 100, 188, 190
Ota Tamesaburo 185
P
Pantheon (Japanese).,, 236
Pecuniary 3
Phoenix (or howo) 182
Polder (Mr. Van de) 213
Primitive Standards of Value 2
Protohistoric Period 7 et seq.
Pnini (signor Carlo) 235
R
Raku (or fancy) Sen 247
Rice, current medium of exchange 19, 20
Rings of gold and silver 4, 6
Rock alphabet 4


Rokujo Sen 226
Ryogaeya (exchange office) 205
Ryo 189
Ryukyu Tsuho 162, 163, 164, 165
Ryuliei Eiho, 52
s
Sa (or left) Jin 69
Sabi Introduction x, page 31, 159
Sadame (guaranteed) 197
Saidaiji Temple 43
Sanko Kaichin 228
Schoolcraft : , . 4
Sei San Kyoku 175
Seiko Tsuho 161
Sen 22
Sendai Tsuho 176, 177
Senoo Ryusai 159
Shell money 3,4
Shiba Shinsenza (mint) 118
Shibi Naisho 38
Shikeu Sen 86, 108, 215 et seq.,
Shima Sen 52, 79, 87
Shimaya Sen 123
Shimesu 62, 68
Shi Mon sen 189 et seq.,
Shichifuknjin (seven gods of luck) 235
Shiusho (style of writing) 107, 152
Shinto) religion) 236
Shojo 244
Shotai kyu 161
Shotoku 161
Shotoku 45
Shotoku Koban 194
Showa Shoho 63, et seq.
Siva 238
Shu 193
Shuku Riki Jingo 51
So Gyoku (two jewels) 228
Sosho 152
Standard of weight 5
Sugawara Kiyokimi 65


Sugawara no Micliizane 71, 334
Surface of Oban and Koban 188
Suwa Jiuja 139
Sword guard of the Daimyo of Akita 181
T
Tai (sea bream) 237
Taihei Gempo 43
Taiji (large character) 60, 66, 68
Tajihi Mabito Myaki Maro 30
Taiko Hideyoshi 105, 191
Taiko Oban . 190
Taiko Ichi Bu Kin 190
Taira (family of) 88, 84
Tajima Silver Coin 210
Takanji (Ashikaga) 85
Taue Sen Introduction xiv, page 118
Tauuma Coin 195
Tasuki 167
Tateuuki (Fuju sen) 60
Teikyo Tsuho 317
Ten jin 71, 284
Tenkai 11l
Tempo Oban plates 11 and 12, chap 6
Koban (five ryo) 199
“ (one ryo) 199
Ni Shu 199
Tsuho 148
Tennojiya Ohozaemon Introduction xviii
Tensho Oban.. • • • • 188 and plate 1, chap 6. . , ,
Koban 190 and plate 2, chap 6. . . .
Tensho Tsuho .' 101
Tokugawa leyasu ' 100, 108, 109
Tokwan Tsuho 168
Torisumi Sen 124
Tosa Coins 169
To Sen Tsuho 221
Toyama (Daimyo of) Introduction xviii
Toyotomi Hideyori 108
Trade Dollar 214
Tsuchi Me (hammer mark) 188
Tsume Jingo 347
Twelve Antique Sen 79


u
Ucliigata Introduction xyiii
Unit of Value 3
Unno Somin (or Somei) 159
Ushiwaka (Yoshitsnne) 343
Usui Toge Kitte Sen 178
w
Wado Kailio 34
Wado Kaicliin 24
Waui 7
Wigmore, Mr. J. H 93
Y
Yamagata Kobau 208, 809
Yamato Miuzoku 212
Yoko Ten (Horizontal dot) Manueu ; 40 „
Yokoyama, Mr 16
Yonezawa Coin 174
Yoritomo 248
Yoshida Keushnke 31
Yoshikawa Ikeu 46
Yoshimitsu 85, 93
Yoshimochi 93
Yoshitsnne 243


CORRIGENDA.
Page 38. For Tempel Hojo read Tempei Hoji.
Page 61. For inposing read Imposing.
Page 66. For bloster read bolster.
Page 93. For then read there.
Page 96. For his son Ujlmasa read his brother &c.,
Page 104. For Ujimasu read Ujlmasa.
Page 113. For Eyohei read Ryu hoi.
Page 130. Figure 49 should shew the three strokes of the
character “Kawa” only on the right side.
The original coins are identical in writing,
so that it was not necessary to do more than
retouch the margin of the obverse in flg. 49.
Page 246. For Kinei Genpo read Shosei Oempo.
Page 228. (So) should be placed between “Jewels” and
“Gyoku.”
Page 231. For Nyu-I-Rin read Kyo-I-Rin.
Page 244. For everage read, beverage.


m m
&
+ t
-b t
Sf i=n «*
*( fffl* H
« **« £ ■
* * ! H 0
1* " n x m «SI
U *J
t ®T *1 BJ
* * ll I *
♦ + ", + ' +
-* _ = =e
$ y S s/ S
I
* 1 »
it I
