

The H. S. Ram 335: "Seed C
/■e wr
Boronii YvS^'ullium, T,


SUTTON’S PURE ENGLISH SEE
Specially Selected for the Tictorian
Climate.
Packed in hermetically sealed orna-
mental boxes.
SUTTON’S SEEDS for the Farm.
SUTTON’S SEEDS for the Vegetable Garden.
SUTTON’S SEEDS for the Flower Garden and Conservatory,
essrs. SUTTON & SOK,
Queen’s Seedsmen,
Royal Seed Establishment,
Reading, England./
ABOVE SEEDS OBTAINABLE AT ALL SHOPKEEPERS.
Sole Wholesale Agents:
WARD KEEP & CO.,
LONSDALE ST., MELBOURNE.


The H.J. Ramsay Seed CO.
Boron! a Via Goulburn,N. S. W
CARDEN WORK FOR EACH MONTH.’
JANUARY,
KITCHEN GARDEN.
When this month proves hot and dry, very little sowing or trans-
planting can be done, excepting where facilities for irrigation
exist. In private gardens a succession of crops may be raised by
a liberal and judicious use of water. On the occurrence of suit-
able weather, or with an artificial supply of moisture, the follow-
ing may be raised successfully, viz. —Peas, both early and late
kinds ; kidney beans, of the earlier varieties; lettuce, in drills,
where intended to stand; a few early-horn carrots; onions for
salads; celery, a good breadth; turnips, both white and yellow;
and round spinach in small quantity. Seed of quick-heading sorts
of cabbage and cauliflower should be sown to provide for autumn
planting. A few marrows may be sown for late use. Thin former
sowings of spinach, carrots, turnips, and lettuce. Plant out cab-
bages and cauliflowers, choosing none but strong plants. Sow
brocoli, Brussels sprouts, and other winter greens. Celery may
be planted in trenches.
Cucumbers, melons, marrows, pumpkins, &c., will need atten-
tion in thinning out the shoots, stopping, and watering, Plant
early varieties of potatoes in late districts, and both early and late
ones in other districts.
FRUIT GARDEN.
For disbudding with the finger and thumb, the season is
almost too far advanced, but a partial thinning of superfluous
shoots may be given with the pruning knife to peach trees, and
to some varieties of plums.
• Garden Work for each Month is here given by kind permission of Messrs. Law,
Somner & Co., seed and plant merchants, of Swansr.on Street, Melbourne, from whose
very valuable “ Hand-book to the Garden and the Farm ’’ the information is culled Wo
would advise every householder to obtain a copy of “ Hand-book to the Garden and
Farm.” It is one of the most comprehensive and complete books published upon the
flower garden, the kitchen garden, the orchard and the farm, and it is issued at the very >
low price of 1/6, or 1/9 if posted to any address in Australia. It may be had wholesale anj'
retail at Cole’s Book Arcade, Melbourne. 1


The shoots of apricots, when inclined to grow long and naked,
should be stopped. Strawberries may be kept in bearing by
copious waterings during dry weather, and by mulching the beds.
The budding of deciduous fruits, oranges, lemons, citrons, limes,
&c., may be proceeded with when the bark separates freely from
the wood. In dry weather, a heavy soaking for a night or two
previously will put the stocks in order, and mulching will serve
to keep them so.
FLOWER GARDEN.
As a fine autumn show is desirable, vacant spaces should be
sown with annuals, or planted with such as have been raised in
reserve beds. Roses may be budded, regard being had to the
sorts which do best when worked, for some kinds succeed best
when thus grown, and others upon their own roots. It is also a
favourable time for budding camellias.
Dahlias, chrysanthemums, phloxes, and all tall growing
plants, should be carefully staked and tied.
Finish taking up bulbs that may require to be parted ; but,
in some cases, every second or third year is often enough. Pot
plants will require shading during the heat of the day, and a good
deal of water morning and evening; the syringe should be freely
employed.
Plant Houses. — Sow, as directed, seeds of cineraria, calceo-
laria, primula sinensis, mimulus, a few petunia, cyclamen, tree
carnation, and other seasonable sorts in a sandy soil, and place
them in a close, moist, and shady frame or house, protecting the
seedlings, as soon as up from the hot winds. Prick off, into store
or single pots, seedlings raised last month. Shift chrysanthemums,
fuchsias, petunias, verbenas, and coleus, also young heaths,
camellias, azalias, or other hard-wooded plants, only one size
larger when the sorts have but a short season of growth before
them ; young ferns may be shifted also. Old cyclamens should
be shaken out and re-potted during this and next month; pot
seedlings also. Gradually ripen off pelargoniums putting them
out of doors in an easterly aspect as soon as fit; early flowering
plants may be cut back. Ripening tubers and corms should be
allowed to become rather dry, and be subjected to more light and
air. Tuberous-rooted begonias should be now in flower, also
fuchsia ; and younger plants of both kinds be coming on to main-
tain the supply. Ferns and many others kept in the store may,
with advantage, be removed to a sheltered part of the greenhouse,
and many cool-house plants to the shade-house or shelter-sheds.
The atmosphere must be maintained in a humid state by sprink-
ling floors and benches ; growing houses should be closed up
early. The spray-pump or syringe should be kept going where
Insects are or are likely to be troublesome. Shading should
ftceive careful attention.


FEBRUARY.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
On the occurrence of moist weather the following may be sown
largely, viz., cabbage, cauliflower, lettuce, spinach, turnip, and
Swede. On a limited scale sow peas, of early varieties, carrot,
onion, and spinach. Plant out largely of cauliflower and cabbage.
Sow brocoli, Brussels sprout, and other greens. A few kidney
beans of early varieties may be sown upon chance for a late crop.
All spare time should be employed in preparing land for future
crops. Plant out celery and leeks in trenches. In warm dis-
tricts early potatoes may be planted; in the colder districts it
would be unsafe to plant largely; kidneys are to be preferred,
and whole sets of medium size are generally used. Radishes and
small salads may be sown as required at any time of year; little,
however, can be done in that way during the hottest season of the
year without the aid of water.
FRUIT GARDEN.
The work of this department consists chiefly of gathering and
storing fruits—many of which are ripe at this season. Budding
fruit trees generally may be continued, but this should be com-
pleted with the month. Look over the early budded plants, and
let those that have failed be worked again. The final stopping
should, early in the month, be given to vines; this will throw the
whole of the surplus sap into the fruit just at the period of swell-
ing off, thus increasing the size of the berries. Oranges may be
planted out where there is water ; these and all other young trees
should be liberally watered. The soil should be frequently stirred
in the orchard and about young trees generally where mulch is
not employed. Apples, pears, peaches, nectarines, and other
seasonable fruits should be gathered when cool and be placed on
the fruit room shelves for a few days to ripen ; fruit in store
should be sorted over, removing decaying and decayed specimens.
Fruit rooms and other fruit stores should now be put in order.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Take advantage of moist weather to sow annuals—all except
the very tenderest. By sowing in autumn, a fine spring bloom
is ensured Those who wait until August or September to sow,
except in the coldest districts, rarely see them in perfection.
Dry-lying ground should be chosen for annuals to bloom during
the winter and spring seasons. Stake and tie dahlias, chrysan-
themums, and other tall growers, and supply them with water
or liquid manure. Continue to bud roses; perpetuals, hybrid
chinas, noisettes, or Bourbons, which were budded early and


have started to grow, may be headed back to a joint beyond the
bad ; they will then make a fine autumn growth. Prune back
slightly the autumn blooming kinds, and give them a good soak-
ing of liquid manure.
If the weather be dry, dahlias, gladioli, tigridias, and liliums
will need watering occasionally; stakes should also be supplied.
It is now time to make an early planting of bulbs, such as snow-
flake, anemone, ranunculus, crocus, tulip, hyacinth, narcissus,
iris, sparaxis, ixia, Watsonia, tritonia, and gladiolus for spring
blooming.
Plant Houses. —All kinds of garden structures should now
be put in a thorough state of repair, the opportunities for paint-
ing and general overhauling being exceptionally favorable An
early batch of flowering bulbs should be potted or established
in boxes, if for cutting only ; hyacinths are on the whole the
most useful, the small white Roman being the earliest. Calceo-
laria, primula, and cineraria seed should be sown, and the first
batch of plants should be potted into their flowering pots towards
the end of the month. Other young softwood plants, including
pelargoniums, should be shifted on also, but the majority should
by this time be in their final pots ; old plants are to be cut back
when out of flower ; cut-backs which have started are to be shaken
out and re-potted. Young ferns should very rarely be shifted
into larger pots after this month. Orchids should have rather
more light and air, to ensure thorough ripening.
MARCH.
kitchen garden.
Most of the hardy vegetables may be sown this month to a
considerable extent. Turnips (both white and yellow), peas of
early varieties, broad beans, and spinach may be sown; lettuce,
cabbage, and cauliflower may be sown and planted out; carrots
of the early horn and intermediate varieties, onions, and beet-
root may be sown in limited quantity, for use as soon as large
enough. Plant out a full crop of celery, and draw a little earth
to any former plantings that may be large enough. Thin advanc-
ing crops of spinach, lettuce, onions, &c. Radishes and small
salads will now do well. Plant out any leeks that may remain
in the seed-bed. Those who wish to grow watercress may plant
slips in a trench. A little water, until they have fairly rooted,
is indispensable; after which, they will do very well in the
winter. Early in the month plant kidney-potatoes, for winter
use. Plant brocoli and winter greens. In the warmer districts
onions, shallots, garlic and other roots may be planted; in the


colder districts plant in spring. Cuttings of tomato may be struck
in pots for early plants. Prepare beds for muslirooras, save seeds,
and push on the preparation of the soil and the destruction of
weeds which will be sure to harbor slugs, snails, and other
vermin.
FRUIT GARDEN.
Now is the best time to make strawberry plantations, using
for the purpose runners of the present season. Prepare for
planting fruit trees by trenching the land intended to receive
them. Trees always succeed better on land that has been worked
a couple of months previously than upon newly turned soil; and,
it may be added, there is always work enough to be done at the
planting season without having that of trenching to perform.
FLOWER GARDEN.
The first work of the month should be bulb planting. The
kinds suitable for planting are those mentioned in the last month’s
calendar. A few hyacinths and early varieties of tulips, of which
the double kinds are the best, may be planted in pots, for indoor
decoration when in bloom. If the weather prove moist, ever-
greens of many kinds may be planted more advantageously than
later in the season. Sow annuals, as directed m the February
calendar. Layer and plant cuttings of pinks, carnations, and the
hybrid varieties of dianthus. Propagate pansies, sweet-williams,
and other perennial plants, by divisions or by cuttings. As soon
as rain has fallen rose cuttings may be planted. Summer
blooming bulbs may be taken up, divided and replanted as soon
as the foilage turns yellow. Plant tuberous kinds of tropeeolum.
Layers of carnations should be separated as soon as well rooted,
and when the ground is moist and the air cool plant them
out. Layers of trees, scrubs, and herbaceous plants may be put
down.
Plant Houses. —Another lot of bulbs should be potted,
hyacinths and tulips largely, also dielytra, spirea japonica, lily
of the valley, Solomon’s seal, and other outdoor bulbs for forcing
indoors. Cyclamens should be potted from the open ground and
the younger ones raised from seed should be shifted on. Pelar-
goniums should be placed under cover before the heavy rains set
in; continue to shake out and re-pot those that have started
sufficiently. Propagate fuchsias, and stand old ones in a dry,
sheltered place to ripen. Stove and greenhouse plants, including
ferns, should be removed from the shelter houses, and be put
under glass. Keep resting roots rather dry, and give increased
light.


APRIL.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
Sow peas of early varieties, broad beans, spinach, and
radishes; sow and transplant largely of lettuce, cabbage, cauli-
flower; plant brocoli and winter greens. Plant rhubarb and
seakale; earth up celery, and make a further planting. Turnips
may be sown largely, and former sowings be singled out to
suitable distances. Plant, in early districts, potatoes, garlic, and
shallots. Earth up advancing crops of potatoes, and let late crops
of peas be staked, as they tic not pod well in winter when trailing
on the ground.
FRUIT GARDEN.
The work of trenching and digging is the chief work of this
department; draining also should be attended to where requisite.
The gathering and storing of late fruit should be completed.
Begin planting gooseberries, currants, raspberries, almonds,
plums; any trees, in fact, which have gone to rest, which may be
known by their having shed their leaves. The date of this occur-
rence varies greatly, according to the character of the season.
Strawberries may still be planted, or, indeed, at any time during
autumn and winter. Fruit pips and stones should now be sown
for raising stocks.
FLOWER GARDEN,
Pot plants are the proper kind of stock with which to com-
mence the season’s planting. The division of perennials recom-
mended last month may still be carried out. Roses and rose
cuttings may be planted ; and when pot culture is intended now
is a very good season to begin. Remove all suckers from the
root and stem of budded roses. Sow a few hardy annuals and
perennials—especially stocks and wallflowers—on vacant spots;
also plant out a few from the seed-beds. Make a further planting
of spring-flowering bulbs.
Plant Houses. —The houses should now be fully stocked ; the
heat-loving and cold-loving relegated to suitable quarters. Cycla-
mens, cinerarias, and primulas will now be in bloom, and with
winter-flowering zonale pelargoniums should receive attention
and encouragement, the growing plants particulary being bene-
fitted by liquid manure. Bouvardias will flower well at this
period in the greenhouse ; later on in the stove. Tree carnations
and pot roses, pots of mignonette and violet, and a large number
of bulbs, should be raised for winter flowering Fuchsias of
several kinds are capital plants for flowering during the winter.
Coleus should be kept rather dry and warm, and be placed near


the light. Deciduous ferns should be placed in reserve till
spring. Ghent azaleas, deutzias, lilacs, and dwarf flowering
prunus should be potted for the greenhouse.
MAY.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
To get peas early in the spring, May is the best month for
sowing. At first, sow the earlier varieties of peas, but towards
the close of the month sow some of the finer kinds, such as Yorkshire
Hero. Sow moderately of quick-heading kinds of cabbage and
cauliflower, and plant out further from the seed-beds, but be
sure that the plants are young and in free growth, for old plants
will be very liable to run when they ought to head. A few
brocoli may be planted; spinach, radishes and lettuce may be
sown. Onions may be sown for transplanting, or for use green.
Plant garlic, shallots and potato-onions. Clear the haulms off
asparagus, rhubarb and sea-kale beds, and make new beds of the
two last. Apply a good dressing of manure to the old beds, and
to asparagus a dressing of salt in addition. Perennial herbs may
be divided and replanted. Prepare a hot-bed, on which to raise
cucumbers and melons. Commence to force rhubarb and sea-kale,
for which hot dung, duly prepared will be required.
FRUIT GARDEN.
The work of planting and preparing land will be the same as
for last month, except that planting should now proceed in
earnest. Pruning may commence on trees that have fully shed
their leaves, but to prune them before that has happened would
be highly injurious. The ingathering of late pears and apples
should be concluded with the month. The ground, wherever
poor, should be suitably enriched, and the trees should be
thoroughly cleansed of all diseased wood, insects and other pests.
FLOWER GARDEN.
The planting of ornamental shrubs and trees may proceed,
remembering that early-planted ones have by far the best chance
of succeeding. Alterations in the plan of the grounds, or the
work of laying out new ones should be completed forthwith.
Continue last month’s work amongst roses. Dahlias may be
lifted and stored. Annuals may be sown, care being taken that
the ground does not lack drainage. Bulbs may be planted and
late ones lifted and replanted. The directions for the last two
months are equally applicable to the present one. Tropseolums
tricolor, Jarrattii, etc., may still be planted. Box edgings may
be formed by planting slips or rooted plants.


Plant Houses. —It will be necessary to complete arrangement!
for storing tender species during the winter. Extemporized
shelves hung over the pathways where drip will do no injury
will be found of the greatest service for storing coleus and many
other tender sorts, but being out of sight the plants are apt to
be forgotten. Cineraria, calceolaria, mimulus, Chinese primula,
early hyacinths, tulips, spirea japonica, Solomon’s seal, bleeding
heart (dielytra), and a host of bulbous and tuberous-rooted
flowering plants should be in flower and be coming on for suc-
cessional effects. A few azaleas and camellias, heaths and
other hardwood autumn flowering species will assist in making
the houses gay. Chrysanthemums should be placed in the green-
house as soon as the buttons show colour distinctly; when indoors,
they will require to be well aired and attentively watered, liquid
manure dressings being a great help. The rule for liquid dress-
ings is—clear, weak and often. To keep calceolarias, cinerarias
and similar soft-wood plants free from aphides and other insects,
it will be necessary to fumigate or spray the foliage regularly.
Watering should be done early in the day, and with a view, in
certain cases, to induce rest by lessening its frequency.
JUNE.
KITCHEN garden.
Sow largely of peas, both of early and late varieties, broad
beans, cabbage and cauliflower; also plant out, checking the
plant at this season as little as possible. Sow and thin spinach.
Plant out lettuces, and sow again. If carrots are wanted, sow a
few early-horn. Earth up celery, choosing dry weather and a
dry state of the soil for the purpose. Thin onions and transplant.
Turnips may be sown, but not to any great extent, in a cool
district, for the success of this crop will depend upon the char-
acter of the season; in warm districts they may be sown largely.
If forced sea-kale and rhubarb are required, the plants must now
be covered with pots or boxes, and over and around these a bed
of hot dung, prepared as for a hotbed. To grow early cucumbers
and melons, sow them on a hotbed. A one-light frame will serve
to raise the seed in pots ; and whilst the plants are getting ready,
the permanent bed must be prepared. Make a hotbed on which
to sow capsicums, tomatoes and tender herbs.
FRUIT GARDEN.
Where the cuttings from vines are intended to be planted, let
them be gathered up on the day they are cut, and be laid in the
ground in rows, separate, and carefully labelled. All kinds of


fruit trees may be planted, and new strawberry beds made; but
these will not bear the first season as good a crop as will the
earlier planted ones; the fruit may be fine, but it will be late.
As soon as the leaves have fallen, begin to dress trees infested
with blights, to dig the ground, and apply manure to exhausted
land.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Transplanting is still the chief work of this department. Grass-
plots may now be made, and edgings and hedges planted. Plant
out annuals and biennials from the seed beds; plant cuttings of
roses early in the month, and attend to last month’s directions
generally. Bulbs may still be planted; but the Dutch kinds—
which are natives of a cool climate—should have been planted
before; they rarely do well when left as late as June. Box
edgings may still be planted; also edgings of thrift, thyme,
myrtle, or other suitable evergreen plants.
Plant Houses. —It will now be time to raise petunias from
seed and from cuttings, both systems requiring the aid of a little
heat. Fuchsia and coleus cuttings, a few of each, may be struck.
A few tuberous begonias, gloxinias, achimenes, and other bulbs,
tubers and corms may be started. Pelargoniums should be kept
near the glass, and have plenty of air on fine days and mild
nights ; young ones, and old ones in a growing state, should be
shifted on and tied out as required. Cinerarias should be care-
fully protected against frost. Deciduous hardwood plants should
be pruned and cleaned; potting some of them towards the end of
the month. During this season a number of hardy plants am
potted and placed in the warmth to bring them into flower.
Hyacinths, tulips, and poet’s or pheasant-eye narcissus, cyclamen,
calceolaria, and a few camellias and forced azaleas should now be
in bloom.
JULY.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
If the season promise to be early and dry, the sowing of main
crops of carrots, parsnips, scorzonera, salsafy, beet, onions, and
leeks, should be proceeded with earlier than would otherwise be
requisite. If sown too early, and the season prove a growing one,
some of these crops are very liable to run to seed; from the end
of this month, therefore, to the middle of next, is generally
regarded as the safest time. This, however, will be modified
by local conditions, such as climate, soil, exposure, &c. Carrots
onions, and leeks may, at any rate, be sown to a moderate extent
early in the month. Thin and transplant former sowings of
onions. Peas and broad beans may be sown to any extent;


advancing crops may be earthed up a little. A few potatoes of
early varieties may be planted on a piece of well-worked dry-
lying ground. Cabbage, cauliflower, and lettuce may be sown,
and transplanted as required. Spinach may be sown, and
former sowings may be thinned ; plant lemon thyme ; sow parsley
and other herbs ; and divide the perennial kinds, if more plants
are needed. Any garlic, shallots, or potato-onions still out of
ground should be planted out at once. Attend to forcing of
seakale and rhubarb, as recommended last month, and plant new
beds. New asparagus beds may also be made; old ones should
be forked lightly over, and put in order for the growing season.
Sustain the heat of cucumber beds by occasional linings of hot
dung. Sow capsicums, chilies, and other peppers, tomatoes, egg-
plants, and tender herbs, on a gentle hotbed. Globe artichokes,
may be planted, and old beds be dug over. Jerusalem artichokes
may also be planted at convenience.
FRUIT GARDEN.
Proceed now with pruning generally, taking the kinds in the
order of their earliness. Trim off the dead leaves of strawberries,
and fork over the beds, giving at the same time a slight dressing
of well-rotted dung, if the soil stands in need of it. All kinds of
deciduous fruit trees may be planted, but this would have been
better done earlier. Grafting of this class may now be com-
menced.
Particular attention should be paid to clearing the trees of
pests. The bark of apples and pears should be scraped and the
scrapings burned to destroy codlin moth and other injurious
insects. The fences and stakes should be dressed with lime-wash,
to which crude carbolic acid may, with advantage, be added. It
will be necessary, in many districts, to protect the stems of trees
against hares and other rodents.
FLOWER GARDEN
Prune and plant roses. If a succession of bloom is required,
prune at various times—say, first one-fourth, and ten days later
another batch ; they will thus bloom in succession. A few tender
annuals may be sown on a hot-bed for future transplanting, and
hardy ones be sown as required in the open ground. Phloxes,
chrysanthemums, hollyhocks, pseonies (tree and herbaceous), and
many other perennials, may be divided. Shrubs of various kinds
may be transplanted. Gladioli should now be planted ; a portion
of the stock may be retained until later in the season. Lilies
may be planted. In earlier districts camellias may be grafted.
Verbenas and petunias should be raised by seed and by
cuttings. Lawns should be formed, and old lawns should be top-


dressed with rich well-decajed manure, bone-dust, or super-
phosphate ; they should be well rolled and mowed frequently.
Plant Houses. —Crotons, dracaenas, and other woody plants
should be raised by cuttings during this month, and the majority
of plants should be overhauled and re-potted. During wet
weather the woodwork should be cleaned and every useless object
offering any harbour to insects be removed. Gloxinias, achimenes,
eucharis, dipladenia, and other bulbous and tuberous herbaceous
plants should be started and re-potted afterwards, old plants of
eucharis and dipladenia will flower better when pot-bound. Stove
ferns and orchids should be shifted as they require it. Another
batch of tuberous begonias should be started, and some of the
fine-leaved kinds also. The atmosphere should be rather dry now
in cool structures. Epiphyllums, some of which will now be in
flower, should be kept warm and rather dry. Close attention
must be paid to fumigation or other methods of keeping down
insects among softwood plants. If plants be placed in heat,
cuttings of fuchsia, petunia, and others may be obtained quickly
and will then root readily.
AUGUST.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
Complete the sowing of main crops, in the following order:
Onions, leeks, carrots, parsnips, salsafy, scorzonera, and beet (both
red and silver). Sow largely of peas of the best summer kind.
Plant the principal crop of potatoes as soon as possible. Sow
spinach, lettuce, radishes, and salads generally. Carry out
last month’s directions with regard to asparagus. Rhubarb and
seakale may now be forced by simply covering the stools with
pots, pans, or boxes, but without dung. Forward potatoes should
be earthed up as they grow, and a few fern branches stuck over
them will help to protect them from frost. On a warm border,
and in early situations, a few vegetable marrows and dwarf
French beans may be sown on the chance of an early crop.
Cucumbers on hotbeds must be kept growing by a libei’al supply
of bottom heat. More may be sown in pots for planting out.
Sweet potatoes may be started into growth on a hotbed. Sow
also capsicum, egg-fruits, and tomatoes in heat, and a few on a
warm border; and plant out a few, under covers, on a warm
border.
FRUIT GARDEN.
Pruning of all kinds should be finished without delay. Plant-
ing may still be performed on chance ; hut, excepting the orange
tribe, it would be almost as well to defer it until autumn. Straw-
berries and raspberries may still be planted, also vines and vine


cuttings. Oranges may be grafted. The grafting of apples and
pears should be brought to a close this month. In early districts
the first sulphuring should be given as a preventative of oidium.
The orchard ground should be thoroughly surface-pulverized, and
manuring finished during this month; mulching should be applied
to young trees at once ; also stakes where required. Continue to
cleanse insect-infected trees, etc.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Seeds of all kinds may now be sown; the tenderest kinds,
such as balsams and cockscombs, on a hotbed ; or, towards the end
of the month, a few may be tried in the open ground. Thin and
transplant annuals and biennials. Dahlias may be planted; but
reserve some for December, in order to ensue a fine autumn
bloom. Propagate from cuttings, fuchsias, heliotropes, and other
soft-wooded plants as required. Continue to prune roses, as
directed last month ; they may also be planted. Early and late
blooming varieties of Cape bulbs, including tigridias, may be
planted for succession. Divide and transplant phloxes, &c., and
sow the annual kinds. Japan lilies may be planted. Camellias
may still be grafted, both in the open ground and in pots under
glass. All kinds of lawn formations and grass edgings should be
completed as early as possible in dry districts; the end of the
month will be early enough in cold districts to plant buffalo-
grass.
Plant Houses. —Ventilation should be given more freely now,
and it will be necessary to shade occasionally towards the end of
the month. In the warm structures a moist heat should be kept
up ; in the cool ones a drier atmosphere should prevail. Propa-
gation of young plants by seeds and cuttings should now receive
a large share of attention, and for this purpose a manure frame
or one heated by other agency will be found very serviceable.
Fuchsias, petunias, coleus, and other soft-wood plants, and
gloxinias, achimenes, and other bulbous plants, should be started
in batches to keep up a succession. Azaleas, heaths, camellias,
and other hardwood plants should be shifted into larger pots, or
into fresh soil in pots of the same size, reducing the old balls.
Shift and tie out pelargoniums as required.
SEPTEMBER.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
If the sowing of main crops (onions, leeks, carrots, parsnips,
beet, and other roots) be not completed, it should take precedence
of all other work. Potato planting should also be finished early
in the month. Sow peas largely; broad beans may still be sown


in late districts. In early districts the main crop of kidney beans
may be sown this month. Lettuces may be sown where they are
intended to stand, as the weather may not be suitable for trans-
planting. The forcing of rhubarb may be discontinued, but
seakale must be attended to as before directed. Plant Jerusalem
artichokes if not already done. Cabbages may still be sown and
planted out largely; cauliflowers may be planted, but in the hot
districts sowing should be done on a limited scale, as they do not
succeed well during summer. Turnips may be sown now, but
as they might have to be used as soon as ready, the area may be
proportionate to the demand. Asparagus beds, if not already
put in order, should be done at once, as the shoots begin to show
early in the month, A light sprinkling of salt and guano would
prove beneficial. Sow and plant out capsicums, chilies, tomatoes ;
sow also vegetable marrows, cucumbers, melons, egg-fruits,
pumpkins, gourds and squashes, being guided as to date by the
appearance of the weather. Protection at night may be required
for the more tender of these. Cucumbers on hot-beds may be
more freely supplied with air as the season advances. Leeks may
be planted out; and now is the time to sow sugar maize.
FRUIT GARDEN.
The season is too far advanced for planting deciduous trees,
but loquats, oranges, lemons, shaddocks, citrons and guavas
may now be planted out of pots, and will succeed better than
when planted earlier. Newly-planted trees may need watering
should the season prove dry, staking also; and the evergreen
kinds above mentioned would be the better for protection from
wind, such as barrel staves afford. Oranges and lemons may now
be grafted. Head down trees budded last season. When the first
leaf or two on each vine shoot are fully developed, they may be
grafted if required, the scions for the purpose having been kept
back by being plunged in a border on the south side of the house.
Be particularly careful to destroy weeds amongst vines at this
season, the damage from spring frosts being always greatest
when weeds are present. Let a careful watch be kept for
oidium; on the appearance of a spot let sulphuring be at
once resorted to. Budding may be started towards the end of
the month.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Shrubs and flowering plants may be planted out of pots with
every prospect of success, choosing dull weather for those that
have been kept under glass. Plant out the rooted cuttings of
carnations, pinks, and hybrid dianthus. Sow balsams, cocks-
combs, phloxes, thunbergias, petunias, and all kinds of annuals,
both hardy and tender. Thin and transplant former sowings.
Dahlias may be planted. Plant bulbs, such as gladiolus, amaryllis,


tuberose, tigridia, Japan lily, &c. Let climbing plants be trained
as they grow. The present is a good time to plant tritoma nvaria,
perennial phloxes, and other perennials.
Rose pruning should be finished, and a sharp watch kept for
the appearance of aphides and other insect and fungoid diseases,
Bouvardias should be struck, and rooted plants be planted out
as soon as sufficiently hardened off. Shrubs should be pruned,
and the tree borders should be dug over or deeply hoed, and
mulching should be applied when there is any fear of drought.
Plant Houses. —Balsams, cockcombs, feathery celosia, coleus,
torenia, petunia, fuchsia, pelargonium, cyclamen, and similar
plants should be sown in pots or boxes, the tender kinds in heat.
Cuttings of several of the above may be struck readily in close
frames now. Ferns and young hardwood plants should be shifted
into larger pots as they start into growth ; potting and re-potting
should now be very general. Crotons, dracaenas, and similar
plants may be raised from cuttings in heat. Hardwood stove
plants should be pruned in and potted, or surfaced with fresh
soil as required. Bulbous and tuberous roots should be started,
and the heat and moisture be gradually increased. Potting and
re-potting should now be briskly carried on.
OCTOBER.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
The following may be sown :—Onions, leeks, carrots, parsnips,
beet, salsafy, peas, kidney beans, lettuce, spinach, turnips, and
radishes, the remarks in the preceding month being still applicable.
Sow and transplant cabbages and cauliflowers. Plant potatoes
and earth up the forward crops. Much of the above work in the
warmer localities should have been previously done, unless the
weather was unfavorable.
Early thinning of root crops is essential, this and hoeing
being the principal work of the month. Sow and plant out mar-
rows, squashes, gourds, pumpkins, cucumbers, melons, the varieties
of peppers, tomatoes, and egg-fruits. Celery may be sown largely,
and planted out as convenience for watering may dictate. Rhu-
barb will be improved by liquid manuring. Sugar maize may
be sown. Finish cutting asparagus, on the plains, towards the
end of this month or beginning of next.
FRUIT GARDEN.
The chief work of the month should be thinning stone fruits
and disbudding, or rubbing off with the finger and thumb, the
superfluous and misplaced shoots of peach and other trees also.
Vine shoots will also need thinning when danger of frost has


passed away. The shoots should be tied to prevent damage from
wind, as soon as they are long enough to reach the stake or trellis.
Strawberries should now he mulched. Continue to plant out
oranges and other evergreen fruits, using the precautions sug-
gested last month. Watering should be begun in good time.
FLOWER GARDEN.
If the weather of the previous month has been unfavourable,
the work of sowing tender annuals will still remain to be done.
The chief work, however, will be attention to newly-planted
stock, in watering, staking, and tying. The same kinds of bulbs
and tubers may be planted as last month. Roses may need
syringing for the green fly and picking for the leaf-rolling cater-
pillars; newly-planted ones will require water should the weather
prove dry. Pansies and other herbaceous plants likely to suffer
from drought should be removed to the nursery grounds.
Plant Houses. —More shading and an increase of atmospheric
moisture will be required this month. Green-house plants require
increased air, cold cutting winds to be excluded. Liquid manure
should be given to softwood plants in an advanced stage of
growth. Staking and training must be followed up closely.
Continue to raise gloxinias, achimenes. and begonias; and to pot
and raise fuchsia, petunia, coleus, and other softwood plants by
seeds and cuttings. Plants generally may now be rearran<jed ;
setting out in the frames or shelter houses ferns, hardy palms,
acalypha, and similar half-hardy plants. Balsams and cocks-
combs should be shifted before they become potbound; if they
receive plenty of light and air they can scarcely be grown too
rapidly. Potted roses, violets, spirea, lily-of-the-valley, and
similar plants should he removed to the shadehouse when out of
flower.
NOVEMBER.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
The raising of seeds, if the weather proves dry, demands a
little ingenuity on the part of the gardener. Pew need be sown
this month, but those who have to sow must be prepared to use
water liberally. All the cucumber tribe will require special
attention in stopping, watering, etc.; they may still be sown, but
melons sown now will hardly ripen in ordinary seasons. Tomatoes
and peppers of sorts may still be sown and planted; thin and stop
the shoots of tomatoes occasionally, and let the plants be sup-
ported off the ground, or the fruit will be damaged. A few peas
may be sown in low, moist situations, also kidney beans. Sow
largely of Brussels sprouts, savoys, broccoli, cabbages, and cauli-
flowers : the two last towards the end of the month. Lettuces


may be sown as the weather suits, and the same may be said of
spinach, radishes and other small salads. Sow largely of celery,
and plant out former sowings. Towards the close of the month
the cutting of asparagus should cease ; let the beds be weeded and
receive a dressing of salt. If weather suits, potatoes may he
planted, carrots and red beet sown. Sugar maize may still be
sown. This crop will come in when much wanted. Rhubarb
will require a good supply of liquid manure. Trim off asparagus
beds and apply a dressing of salt; the heads left should be
fastened up in exposed places. Break off flower stems of rhubarb,
onions and other plants likely to suffer by their presence. Lose
no opportunity to trench and prepare ground for future crops,
and use mulching liberally.
FRUIT GARDEN.
For mulching strawberries nothing need be cleaner than short
grass or seaweed; this should have been applied last month, or
earlier. Disbudding may still be practised on fruit trees; the
thinning of fruit should be finished early in the month. Vines
will need a great deal of work in thinning, tying and stopping
the shoots, weeding, etc. In trellised vines, the upper or stronger
shoots should be stopped first, and subsequently the others.
Attend to sulphuring of vines, if required.
Watering also must be studied; trees should not be allowed
to get dry at this season; water thoroughly, but not too often.
After watering, cultivate the surface or apply mulch. Straw-
berries on the plains should have a weekly supply; a good flooding
will prolong the bearing season and improve the raspberry crop.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Early bulbs, whose tops have become yellow, may be taken up
and stored, or else their portion in the ground should be marked
by a tally, so as to prevent their being disturbed when digging
the beds. Plant out the rest of the dahlias, as well as any
gladioli that have been kept for late autumn blooming. Vacant
spaces may be filled by sowing or transplanting annuals. Roses
may now be budded when it is desired to have more plants of
certain sorts. Hybrid perpetuals that have done blooming for
the present may be cut back a little, but unless bloom be urgently
required, it might be better not to force them into growth by
watering at this season. Azaleas and camellias that have set
their flower buds may be plunged in a cool sheltered border,
where they must not, however, be neglected as regards water.
Plant out chrysanthemums, and thin out and stop the shoots of
established plants ; young plants will yield the finest blooms.
These, and all other softwood plants and softwood shrubs,
including roses, benefit much by applications of liquid manure.


Verbenas and pentstemons should be cut back occasionally: ai
all times exhausted flowers should he removed to prevent seed-
ing, which curtails the flowering period.
Plant Houses. —Chrysanthemums require close attention to
watering and stopping, if allowed to become dry or grow tall,
they will be unsightly. Re-pot fuchsias and young pelargonium*
of sorts, and all other progressive plants of a similar character.
Remove cyclamens to the shade house when out of flower; and
gloxinias and other bulbous plants, ferns, etc., from the stove to
the greenhouse where they have complete growth or are in flower.
Keep the floors, benches, etc., moist. Feed fast-growing plants
with weak liquid manure. Remove pelargoniums to the shade-
house or shady border when out of flower to ripen their wood.
Sow a few seeds of primula, calceolaria, cineraria and other
softwood plants. Syringe frequently to keep down insect pests.
DECEMBER.
KITCHEN GARDEN.
If the sowing of the cabbage tribe directed last month has
been omitted, it should be at once attended to. As the weather
suits, sow peas and spinach. A few French beans and marrows
may be sown for the late autumn crop. Let the ground between
root crops be kept well stirred and free from weeds. Swedish
and orange jelly turnips may be sown ; of the white kinds, also,
a few may be sown. Cucumbers and melons may still be planted
out of pots at the beginning of the month, and the tribe generally
will require, stopping, thinning and watering with liquid manure.
Celery may be planted out and more seed may be sown. Ad-
vancing crops may be earthed up as they require it. If the
whole of the ground cannot be watered before planting, the drills,
at least, should have a good soaking. After sowing seeds at this
season, the ground should be roiled or trodden with the feet.
Herbs and onions should be gathered and stored.
FRUIT GARDEN.
Vines will now demand the chief share of attention; and all
danger of frost being over, the thinning both of shoots and
bunches should be done early in the month. Peaches, plums,
apricots and fruit trees generally, may be budded at any time
during this month or the next. Strawberries will require a
thorough soaking twice a week during dry weather; Hhis will
keep them in bearing, if of the right sorts. As soon as the crop
is gathered, exhausted areas should be dug under and the ground
made ready for another kind of crop. Young runners should be
pegged down for planting, and others be cut away. In dry, hot


weather the oidium very commonly appears; it should be watched
for and met by preventive measures. The bunches should be
thinned for superior fruit.
FLOWER GARDEN.
If anything in the way of bulbs, dahlias, etc., remain unplanted,
let them have precedence of everything else. Continue to lift
early bulbs as they ripen, or else mark them, as previously
directed. Roses may be budded henceforward whenever the
stocks are in proper order ; the ties should be loosened on those
already budded. Let dahlias, hollyhocks, chrysanthemums,
phloxes and all tall-growing plants be neatly and firmly staked
as their flower-stalks advance in height.
Lawns require frequent attention to watering and mowing;
rolling should not be done immediately after watering. Trees
and shrubs should be well and judiciously watered, and vacancies
in the beds and borders be made good by planting out pot-grown
stuff. A good many green-house and stove plants may be planted
out or plunged in pots in the borders; unless very hardy, they
should be shaded at first. Liquid manure will give an impetus
to fast-growing annuals and enrich the colour of leaves and
flowers. Gladioli in a dormant state may be planted. Even at
this late season tea-roses may be planted from pots.
Plant Houses. —Insect pests are sure to be troublesome if the
soil or the atmosphere be allowed to become too dry. Damp
down frequently and syringe the foliage of such plants as are
subject to thrip, red-spider, scale, and other troublesome pests,
on the under as well as upper surfaces ; the cost of a good spray
pump is nothing compared to the labour it saves, and the worry
and annoyance caused where such a really effective implement is
wanting. During dull weather re-pot young growing stock.
Early chrysanthemums may now have their final shift, others may
have their second shift. It is quite early enough in late,
warm districts to put in cuttings for small table-plants or for
pots to fill vacancies in the beds and borders during the flowering
season; plants should be fully exposed to the sun, with the pots
plunged to the rim. Roses, in pots, for winter blooming should
be plunged also, in an open situation; the surface of the
pots may be covered with the manure. Give begonias, gloxinias,
achimenes and other roots liquid manure, and do not expose
them to cutting winds. Keep all kinds of ferns damp and cool.
Attend to climbing and twining plants. Soak basket plants in
vessels of water; also plants in pots that may, by accident, have
become very dry. Be careful to keep the strong sunlight out of
houses, hut do not shade too much. Sow and prick off cineraria,
calceolaria, mimulus, primula, and other winter flowering plants.
Everlastings and ornamental grasses may be sown in pots, and on
moist spots also, out of doors.


CALENDAR
Showing the day of the Week and Month in any Year from 1850 to 1950.
Example.—To ascertain the day of the week on which Christmas Day, 1891, will fall, look in the
Table of Years for 1891, opposite which will be found the letter D (termed the Dominical Letter) •
then look in the Table of Months, opposite December, for the same letter (D), and underneath the
column containing it will be found the Calendar for December, 1891, which shows December 25 to
be Friday. When the Calendar for the Month is found, any other day of the week or month can
easily be ascertained.
It will be observed that there are two letters opposite the Leap Year. The first letter is used for
January and February, the second for the other months.
YEARS.
1850 F
1851 E
1852 DC
18S3B
1854 A
ISSSG
iBs6FE
1857 D
1858 C
18596
1860 AG
1861 F
MONTHS.
Jan. ...
Feb. ...
Mar. ...
April...
May ...
June...
July ...
Aug
Sept
Oct. ...
N0v....
Dec. ...
A
D
D
G
B
E
G
C
F
A
D
F
B
E
E
A
C
F
A
D
G
B
E
G
C
F
F
B
D
G
B
E
A
C
F
A
D
G
G
C
E
A
C
P
B
D
G
B
E
A
A
D
P
B
D
G
C
E
A
C
F
B
B
E
G
C
E
A
D
F
B
D
1862 E
1863 D
1864 C B
1865 A
1866 G
1867 F
1868 E D
1869 C
18708
1871 A
1872 G F
1873 E
1874 D
1875 C
18768 A
1877 G
1878 P
1879 E
1880 D 0
18818
XBB2A
1883 G
1884 FE
iBBsD
18860
18878
1888 AG
1889 F
1890 E
1891 D
1892 C B
1893 A
1894 G
1895 P
1896 E D
1897 C
18988
1899 A
1900 G
1901 F
1902 E
1903 D
1904 C B
1905 A
1906 G
1907 F
1908 E D
1909 C
19108
YEARS
continued.
1911 A
1912 G P
1913 E
1914 D
1915 C
19168 A
1917 G
igiSF
1919 E
1920 D C
19218
1922 A
1923 G
1924 P E
1925°
11926 C
19278
1928 A G
1929 F
1930 E
1931 D
1932 C B
1933 A
1934 G
I93SF
1936 ED
1937 C
19388
1939 A
1940 G P
1941 E
1942 D
1943 C
19448 A
1945 G
i 9 46F
1947 E
1948 D C
19498
1950 A
M
'Hi
W
'Hi
F
S
M
w
ill
p
s
M
ib
w
ill
F
S
£
M
ib
W
'Ri
P
S
£
M
'Hi
M
lb
W
ill
F
S
*
M
ill
W
ill
F
S
M
Hi
W
ill
P
S
M
F
S
is
M
W 6
'» 7
F 8
S 9
is 10
M n
Hi 12
Hi 14
S I 16
£ 1 17
M | 18
It 19
Ki 26
W 27
Hi I 28
F I 29
s i 30
£ I 31
Hr
F
S
W
ih
F
£
M
'lii
w
■III
p
s
M
ib
W
ill
F
S
M
ib
W
ill
F
S
W
Id
F
S
M
8)
W
lii
F
S
M
iti
W
■Ri
F
S
M
'Ri
w
ill
F
£
M
ib
W
Hi
F
ib
W
•Ri
F
S
£
M
Hi
W
ft
F
S
M
ill
W
’ft
F
S
£
M
ib
W
■ft
F
S
M
'Ri
W
'ft


Accidents to Mechanics.
USEFUL SUGGESTIONS IN GASES OF ACCIDENTS
TO MECHANICS.
Bleeding. —lf blood spurts from wound, an artery is divided; bind limb
tightly above wound with india-rubber tubing, strap, handkerchief or scarf,
or bend the limb forcibly at next joint above wound; or press flat hand or
stone where blood is flowing. If blood flows freely, but does not spurt, a
vein is divided; then apply same measures as in case of wounded artery,
but below the wound. If scalp wounded, make a pad of cloth, or waste,
and bandage very tightly over wound with folded pocket-handkerchief.
Burns and Scalds. —Apply, lint, cotton wool or waste, soaked in oil, or
oil and lime water, and bind the same on with handkerchief. If neccessary
to remove clothes, cut them off by running knife or scissors along seams.
Broken Leg. —Pull on leg steadily and firmly until it is of same length
as sound one. Roll up a coat or empty sack into form of cushion; care-
fully place leg upon it; then bind the two together with scarfs or hand-
kerchiefs. Do not lift patient from the ground until stretcher is close at
hand. Take great pains, by carefully lifting, to prevent broken bone
coming through skin.
Broken Thigh. —-Take hold of ankle, and by steady traction, pull limb
to same length as sound one; another person must then tie knees together,
and afterwards the ankles. Both limbs should then be laid over a sack
of straw, or folded coat, so as to bend the knees. Patient should on no
account be moved until stretcher or cart is close at hand.
Broken Arm.— Pull arm to length of sound one. Apply two splints, one
outside, and the other inside, binding them firmly on with pocket-
handkerchiefs. The best splints are made by folding newspapers to neces-
sary length, binding them above and below seat of fracture; anything hard
and light, of suitable size, would act equally well—for instance, wood, paste-
board, twigs, leather, &c.
Broken Ribs cause intense pain when patient breathes; bind roller
towel firmly round chest, fastening with pins, or sewing.
Broken Collar-bone. —Bend arm over front of chest; place it in a sling;
bind it in that position by scarf going round chest, outside sling.
Dog Bites. —Tie a handkerchief or a cord tightly round limb above
wound; suck the wound.
Flesh Wounds. —Uncover wound; wash it with clean water; wring out
a clean handkerchief, or some lint, in cold water, and lay it over the wound.
Then bind in position with handkerchief.
Painting. —From heat, exhaustion, or loss of blood. Keep head low;
undo clothing about neck; plenty fresh air; dash cold water on face and
chest; smelling salts, carefully used; a little brandy, when sensibility has
returned, excepting in cases of sunstroke, and where means have not been
taken to prevent further bleeding.
Insensibility. —Prom blows or wounds on head. Send at once for
doctor or take patient to hospital, keeping him on his back, with head
raised; undo clothing round neck; do not give brandy.
Insensibility. —Prom being buried in falls of earth, or breathing foul
gas; proceed as in drowning.
Pits. —1. If snoring, and face flushed, undo clothing round neck, keep
head raised, dash cold water on top of head; hot-water bottles to feet.
Send for doctor. Do not give brandy.
•>2. If foaming at mouth and convulsed, undo clothing, apply smelling
salts, and prevent patient hurting himself until conscious again.
Rupture. —Try and push it back with flat hand; keep man on his back.
Cold wet cloths laid over rupture will, perhaps, aid its return.


At end of First Year comes the
.. Cotton Wedding
Second Year
.. Paper Wedding
Third Year
.. Leather Wedding
Fifth Year
.. Wooden Wedding
Seventh Year
.. Woollen Wedding
Tenth Year
Tin Wedding
Twelfth Year
Silk and Fine Linen Wedding
Fifteenth Year
.. Crystal vv'edding
Twentieth Year
China Wedding
Twentv-lifth Year ..
Silver Wedding
Thirtieth Year
Pearl Wedding
Fortieth Year
Ruby Wedding
Fiftieth Year
.. Golden Wedding
Seventy-fifth Year ..
..Diamond Wedding
Miscellany.
WHAT HOUSEKEEPERS SHOULD REMEMBER.
That cold rain water and soap will remove machine grease from washable fabrics.
That fish may be scaled much easier by first dipping them into boiling water for
a minute.
That fresh meat beginning to sour, will sweeten if placed out of doors in the cool
air, over night.
That milk which has changed may be sweetened or rendered fit for use again by
stirring in a little soda.
That boiling starch is much improved by the addition of sperm or salt, or both,
or a little gum aranic dissolved.
That a tablespoonful of turpentine boiled with your white clothes will greatly
aid the whitening process.
That kerosene will soften boots and shoes that have been hardened by water, and
will render them as pliable as new.
That thoroughly wetting the hair once or twice with a solution of salt and water
will keep it from falling out.
That salt fish are quickest and best freshened by soaking in sour milk.
That one teaspoonful of ammonia to a tea-cup of water applied with a rag will
clean silver or gold jewellery perfectly.
That salt will curdle new milk; hence, in preparing porridge, gravies, &c., salt
should not be added until the dish is prepared.
That paint stains that are dry and old may be removed from cotton or woollen
goods with chloroform. It is a good plan to first cover the spot with olive oil or
butter.
That clear boiling water will remove tea stains; pour the water through the stain,
and thus prevent its spreading over the fabric.
That charcoal is recommended as an absorber of gases in the milk room where
foul gases are present. It should be freshly powdered and kept there continually,
especially in hot weather, when unwholesome odours are most liable to infect the
milk.
That a teaspoonful of borax put in the last water in which clothes are rinsed will
whiten them surprisingly. Pound the borax so it will dissolve easily. This is
especially good to remove the yellow that time gives to white garments that have
been laid aside for two or three years.
That a good agency for keeping the air of the cellar sweet and wholesome
is whitewash made of good white lime and water only. The addition of glue
or size, or anything 01 this class, is only a damage by furnishing organic matter to
speedily putrefy. The use of lime in whitewash is not simply to give a white colour,
but it greatly promotes the complete oxidation of effluvia in the cellar air. Any
vapours that contain combined nitrogen in the unoxidised form contribute power-
fully to the development of disease germs.
THE WEDDING ANNIVERSARY
GREATEST KNOWN DEPTH OF THE OCEAN.
The greatest depth which has been ascertained by sounding, is five miles and a
quarter (25,720 feet, or 4620 fathoms), not quite equal to the height of the highest
known mountain, Mt. Everest, which measures 29,002 feet, or 51 miles high. The
average depth between 60 degrees north and 60 degrees south, is nearly three
miles.


~M iscellany.
CONCISE DIRECTIONS FOR PRESERVING FRUIT.
Fruit should be of uniform size and ripeness, and rather under-ripe than
over-ripe; also free from bruises and blemishes, and quite fresh.
Fill jars, while cold, with fruit. Make a syrup of sugar (quantity as
below), and pour into jars until \ inch from top. Put jars into boiler, with
a grate, or pebbles, or straw at the bottom, to keep the glass from actual
contact with the bottom, and fill the boiler to the neck of the jars with cold
water. Cover and boil as directed below. Then remove jars, and, after
standing about five minutes, fill up to brim with more hot syrup, and fasten
down the cap or lid; or,
Cook the fruit with syrup, made as directed below. Clean and scald jars
and lids before using. This tests the jars. Fill each jar with boiling water
for a few seconds, then empty and stand on warm deep plate to fill, and,
while warm, fill with boiling hot fruit to brim; then after standing for five
minutes to permit shrinkage of fruit, filling to over-flowing with hot syrup.
Then fasten down cap. Rubbers must be sound and good.
Remember, Cold Fruit requires Cold Jars; Hot Fruit, Hot Jars.
Quinces should be boiled in clear water in a covered kettle until tender,
then carefully place in Hot Jars, which fill to brim with boiling syrup, then
fasten down cap.
Tomatoes may be stewed and poured into Warm Jars and sealed as above;
or, if preferred, put into Cold Jars, whole or sliced, and the jars filled with
cold water, then cook in a boiler as first described.
Boil Cherries moderately 5 minutes; Raspberries, 6 minutes; Black-
berries, 6 minutes; Plums, 10 minutes; Strawberries, 8 minutes; Small
Sour Pears, whole, 80 minutes; Bartlett Pears, in halves, 20 minutes;
Peaches, in halves, 8 minutes; Peaches, whole, 15 minutes; Pineapples,
sliced i inch thick, 15 minutes; Siberian or Crab Apples, whole, 25
minutes; Sour Apples, quartered, 10 minutes; Ripe Currants, 6 minutes;
Grapes, 10 minutes; Tomatoes, 20 minutes; Apricots, in halves, 8 minutes;
Apricots, whole, 15 minutes.
The amount of sugar to make syrup for a quart jar should be:-—For
Cherries, 7 ounces; Raspberries, 5 ounces; Blackberries, 7 ounces;
Strawberries, 9 ounces; Quinces, 11 ounces; Small Sour Pears, whole,
9 ounces; Grapes, 9 ounces; Peaches, 5 ounces; Bartlett Pears, 7 ounces;
Pineapples, 8 ounces; Siberian or Crab Apples, 10 ounces; Plums,
10 ounces; Sour Apples, quartered, 9 ounces; Ripe Currants, 9 ounces;
Apricots, 6 ounces; and so on in proportion for pint or half-gallon jars.
Half-pound of sugar, well boiled in one quart of water, makes a syrup of
average sweetness for most fruits.
Syrup.—All syrup should be well boiled and scum removed before applied
to the fruit, as it prevents it fermenting.
PECULIAR PROPERTIES OF THE NUMBERS 37 AND 73.
The number 37 is one which, being multiplied by each of the figures of
arithmetical progression, 3,6, 9,12,15,18, 21, 24,27, all the products which
result from it are composed of three repetitions of the same figure; and
the sum of these figures is equal to that by which you multiplied the 37.
37 37 37 37 37 37 37 37 37
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27
111 222 333 444 555 666 777 888 999
The number 73, multiplied by each of the numbers of arithmetical
progression, 3,6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, the nine products which result
from this multiplication are terminated by one of the nine different figures,
1,2, 3,4, 5,6, 7,8, 9. These figures will be found in the reverse order to
that of the progression.
