

v&r m
m No - 1 -
RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD
Part I.—A Sketch of the Religious Sects of all Nations
Part 2.—A Sketch of the Sacred Scriptures of all Nations,
Now preparing, and will be published shortly,
Taut 3.—A Collection of the Precepts of All Nations - Containing about 50
„ 4.—The Heavens, Purgatories, and Hells of All Nations - „ 150
„ 5. —A Concise History of about 40 Religious Founders - „ 400
t 50 pages.
150 „
6.—The Ideas respecting a Supreme Being among All Nations „ 100
75—The various modes of Ascertaining the Will of the Deity
WHICH HAVE PREVAILED AMONG ALL NATIONS - - ~ 100
B.—The Ideas respecting Witchcraft among All Nations - „ 50
9.—The Ideas respecting Sacrifices among All Nations- - „ 30
10. —The Cosmogonies of All Nations - - - - - 80
11.' —The Traditions respecting the Origin of Man among Alt
Nations - -- - - - --,, 50
MELBOURNE ;
J$L
..
PUBLISHED BY E. W. COLE, 8, EASTERN MARKET.
jo


POPULATION OF THE WORLD DIVIDED INTO RELIGIOUS SECTS.
• With respect to the religions of China and Japan, there is some difficulty in dividing
them so as to approximate their respective numbers. For instance, Confucius is regarded
as the saint par excellence of China, and venerated by all; and a very great number of the
inhabitants of China worship alike in the three temples of Buddhism, Taeism, and Con-
fucianism ; but to enable us to carry out a uniformity of plan, we have arbitrarily divided
the whole of this class of worshippers, giving as Buddhists the probable number of those
who lean most to Buddhism, as Taeists those who lean most to Taeism, and as Confucians
those who most venerate Confucius. This plan is in a manner objectionable, inasmuch as
the Confucians only appear as twenty millions, whilst the number of persons in China who
venerate Confucius are nearly coincident with the population ; but as the difficulty occurs,
the plan that we have followed appears to us at present to be the best, so as not to destroy
the simplicity of tabulation, or show a false population, by giving one man first as a Buddhist,
then as a Taoist, and then as a Confucian, thereby showing three religious votaries to one
inhabitant. Exactly the same thing occurs again in Japan, with respect to the Buddhists,
Sintooists, and Confucians. Many of the Buddhists of Japan are also Confucians, and the
great proportion of them go on pilgrimages to Sintoo shrines, nd regard the Micado, or
Sintoo Pontiff, with great veneration.




g’tfLfO
No. 1. Price 6d.
Calc's |nform:itfou for tire |focfle
ON THE
RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD
To he completed in about 20 Parts.
THE PRESENT NUMBER CONTAINS :
Part I.—A Sketch oe the Religious Sects of all Nations.
AND
Past 2.—A Sketch of the Sacked Scriptures of all Nations.
Now preparing, and will be published shortly,
Part 3.—A Collection of the Precepts of All Nations - Containing about 50 pages.
>» 4.—The Heavens, Purgatories, and Hells of All Nations - „ 150 „
~ 5. —A Concise History of about 40 Religious Founders - - „ 400 ~
„ 6. —The Ideas respecting a Supreme Being among All Nations ~ 100 „
a 7. —The various modes of ascertaining the Will of the Deity
WHICH HAVE PREVAILED AMONG ALL NATIONS - - - 100 „
tt 8. —The Ideas respecting Witchcraft among All Nations - „ 50 ~
a 9. —The Ideas respecting Sacrifices among All Nations- - „ 30 ~
„ 10.—The Cosmogonies of All Nations - - - - - » 80 „
a 11.—The Traditions respecting the Origin of Man among Ali
Nations - - - - - - _ -t, 50 „
MELBOURNE :
PUBLISHED BY E. W. COLE, 8, EASTERN MARKET.
1866.




P R E FAC E.
The present number forms a very small portion of a large work,
which we intended ere this to have published, upon the Religions of
the World, being firmly convinced that such a work was required for
the information of the masses, whose opportunities for reading are
limited. But circumstances over which we have had no control,
namely a series of ill-health, have prevented us thus far from carrying
out the original design, and consequently we have commenced to
publish, in detached parts, that which we had wished to bring out in
a more perfect and comprehensive form as a whole. There are many
works already extant, bearing such titles as “ The Faiths of the
World, ” “ A Comprehensive Sketch of the Creeds of the World, ”
“ The Cyclopedia of Religious Denominations, ” “ A Full and Com-
plete Account of the Religions of All Nations, ” &c., &c. But most
of these works are partial, sectarian, and dogmatical, and many of
them pre-eminently so, giving hundreds of pages to the insignificant
details of one religion, and scarcely mentioning another whose
votaries are, perhaps, numerically as great; and even then generally
ignoring the better, and giving prominence to the worst features of
such religion. Now, we hold that such works do not answer to
their titles, nor are they fitted for the impartial instruction of the
masses, whom they are professedly written to inform.
What is required, then, is a work impartially, equally, and fairly
portraying the leading features of all the prevailing religions of the
world, and written in the simple untechnical language of every day
life. Such a work we have here attempted laying the foundation of,
hoping that in later editions (whether by our agency or that of


others) it may expand in proportions, completeness, and utility,
forming a book of substantiated facts calculated to engender and
encourage enlightened and useful thought.
It has been said that this kind of information is not required by
the masses, but this we hold to be erroneous. We firmly believe in
the future unity and eternal progress of man, and that it is
absolutely necessary for such unity and progression that knowledge
of every kind should spread, and particularly that kind of knowledge
which tends to annihilate sectarian prejudices, and compel men to
extend justice and charity, by admitting that others who differ from
them in faith are, as a rule, equally honest with themselves in
intention. Therefore we believe that we are speaking truly, and
in the cause of humanity, when we say that it is a paramount duty ?
and to the interest of every man, as far as in him lies, to become
acquainted with the beliefs, the hopes, and aspirations that have in
the past and still do sway the human race. Let us onward then,
friendly reader, in our search after facts, resting assured that we are
in the path of duty : that the discovery and dissemination of truth
can never be detrimental, but must conduce to man’s welfare. Let
us read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest—
Intelligently examine all things
Try to learn all we can :
For universal knowledge brings
The greatest good to man.


PAE T X
Buddhism stands first , not because it is superior to Christianity , because it
has the greatest number of votaries , and this rule of the precedency of
numbers has been followed throughout , except in the case of Paganism •
BUDDHIST SECTS.
Some authors assert that the Buddhists are divided into four grand
sects, but as yet so little is known respecting the Buddhist doctrines in
general, that we cannot, witli any degree of certainty, speak concerning
them. Cunningham, writing on Buddhism, says that there were, at an early
period of Buddhist history, eighteen “inveterate schisms,” seventeen of
which arose in the second century after Buddha. Cuningham’s Buddhist
Topes.” p. 85.
The Jains of Western India are generally allowed to be a distinct sect of
Buddhists, and most writers hold that there is a material difference between
the Buddhism of Ceylon, Burmah, and Siam, on the one hand, and that of
the Northern Buddhists, or those of Nepaul, Thibet, China, Japan, Corea,
Mongolia, and Manchura on the other; but all these countries hold the
Tripithaka, or Buddhist Scripture, as a rule of faith and practice.
A late writer, speaking of the Buddhist sects, says : “ Even the innumer-
able sects into which Buddhism is divided—the Popery of Thibet, the
Protestantism of Burmah, the nationalism of China, the specialities of
Nepaul, Mongolia, and Japan, present some singular analogies to the
external history of Christianity,”—“ British Quarterly Review, July-Oot,,
1859, p. 424.
One of these analogies appears to be a sectarian intolerance similar to
that which unfortunately characterises some of the most bigoted of the
Christian sects. For, although Buddhism is remarkably mild and tolerant
in its general precepts, still there exists a considerable amount of enmity
between its various sects, and they anathematize each other. A native
writer, speaking of two sects existing side by side in Ceylon and Burmah,
says : “ They deny Nirwana (heaven) to each other Their
enmity is so great that they do not salute each other when they meet, and
call each other duc-silayas, or priests without sanctity.”- “ Hardy’s Eastern
Monachism,” p. 238.


The Buddhists form almost the entire population of Burmah, Siam,
Thibet, and Boutan, and the great bulk of the population of China, Cochin-
China, Japan, Corea, Manchura, Mongolia, Formosa, Hainan, and Ceylon ;
there are also a number in Nepaul, Chinese Tartary, and Siberia ; a few in
the Indian Archipelago, Australia, California, &c., and the Jain sect in
India Proper.
CHRISTIAN SECTS.
The Christian Church is divided into three grand Sects.
1. The ROMAN CATHOLIC, 189,390,000 votaries.
The Church of Rome has no sub-sects, and it is said that its doctrines
are the same in all countries where it exists; that although it has many
monastic and other orders, each with its own peculiar management, yet
that none of them differ in essential doctrines.
2. The PROTESTANT, 103,980,000 votaries.
The Protestant Sects, great and small, number probably three hundred
in all parts of the world, but some of these are very insignificant. The
following are the names of some of them :
Episcopalians, English, Irish, Scotch, and American.
Lutherans, founder Martin Luther.
Presbyterians.
Reformed Presbyterians, founders Cameron, Macmillan, and Name.
United Presbyterians.
Bereans, founder John Barclay.
Church of Geneva.
French Protestant Church.
Wesleyan Methodists, founder John Wesley.
Primitive Methodists, opprobriously termed Ranters, founders Hugh Bourne and
William Clows.
Independent Methodists.
Wesleyan Protestant Methodists.
United Methodist Free Church.
Methodist New Connection or Kilhamites, founder Alexander Kilham.
Inghamites, founder Mr. Ingham.
Wesleyan Methodist Association.
Wesleyan Methodist Reformers, founders Everet, Dunn, and Griffiths.
Bible Christians or Brianites, founder Mr. Obrian.
Calvinistic Methodists, founder George Whitfield.
Jumpers or Welsh Calvinistic Methodists, founder Howel Harris.
Huntingtonians, founder Selma Countess of Huntington.
American Episcopal Methodists.
General Baptists.
Particular Baptists.
General Baptists’ New Connection, founder Mr. Dan Taylor.
Freewill Baptists, founder Benjamin Randall.
Strict Communists Baptists.
Free or Mixed Communist Baptists.
Six Principle Baptists.
Seventh Day Baptists, or Sabbatarians.


River Baptists.
Anti-Mission Baptists.
Scotch Baptists, founder Mr. Carmichael.
Old School Baptists.
Bunkers, also respectively termed Tunkers, Bunkers, and Tumblers, founder Conrad
Mennonites, founder Simon Menno.
Independent Congregationalists, founder Robert Brown.
Quakers, or Society of Friends, founder George Fox.
Unitarians and Arians.
Plymouth Brethren.
Waldenses, founder John Waldo.
Moravians, founder or restorer Count Zinzendorf.
Mormons, or Latter Day Saints, founder Joseph Smith.
Shakers, founder Ann Lee.
Swedenborgians, or New Jerusalemites, founder Emmanuel Swedenborg.
Irvingites, or Catholic Apostolic Church, founder Edward Irving.
Boehemites, founder Jacob Boehem.
Glassites, founder John Glass.
Southcottites, founder Joanna Southcott.
Wroeites, or Christian Israelites, founder John Wroe.
Hopkinsonians, founder Rev. S. Hopkins.
Morrisonians, founder James Morrison.
Rappites, founder Mr. Rapp.
Harmonists.
Universalists, founder John Murray.
Perfectionists, founder John Noyes.
Restorationists.
Second Adventists.
Separatists.
Freethinking Christians.
Christian Spiritualists.
Christian Chartists.
Christian Disciples, founder Alexander Campbell.
Christians.
Reformed Protestants.
Unsectarian, &c., &c., &c.
3. The GREEK CHURCH, 91,720,000 votaries.
The great bulk of the Greek Church is comprised in the national church
of Russia. It contains also perhaps thirty sub-sects, besides some others more
distantly related, but generally considered as belonging to it, such as the
Nestorian, Armenian, Coptic, and Abyssinian Churches.
PECULIAR TENETS HELD BY THE THREE GRAND
DIVISIONS OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
All the Christians generally agree in viewing the Bible and Testament as
the inspired Word of God, given to man for his guidance as a rule of faith
and practice, hut differ as to its interpretation.
The Greek Church holds that the Septuagint version of the Old Testa-
ment is the genuine and only true one, whilst the Catholic Church holds
the Latin Vulgate, and the Protestant Churches generally the common
Hebrew version to be the unchanged and unchangeable Word of God.


The Protestant Churches generally disagree with the Church of Rome and
the Greek Church upon the following points:
The Church of Rome and the Greek Church hold that the clergy have
power in the name of God to forgive the sins of those who truly repent; that
at the last moment of a man’s existence in the flesh, even after a life of
hideous crime, if he truly repent, the clergyman has the power to absolve
him from all his sins, and give him a passport into heaven. The Protestants
generally deny that such power has ever been delegated by the Deity to any
man.
The Church of Rome and the Greek Church teach that it is lawful and
necessary to invoke the Mother of Jesus Christ, the Apostles, and the Saints
of the Church, to act as intercessors for man with the Supreme Being, which
the Protestants pronounce to be sinful and inefficacious.
The Church of Rome and Greek Church teach that paintings or images
representing the death of Christ, the temptation, &c., &0., saintly persons,
and scenes of piety, are the most fitting ornaments for places of worship; that
they serve as objects on which to fix the wandering gaze, and bring imme-
diately and vividly before the mind’s eye the scenes and persons which
they portray, and thereby engender pious reflections. The Protestants, with
the exception of some of the Lutherans, who allow images, assert that the
lower classes worship the inanimate images themselves, and view them not
as portraits only, and that therefore it is sinful to use them.
The Church of Rome and Greek Church hold that at the receiving of the
11 Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper,” that the bread and wine
then used is literally changed into real flesh and blood. Learn, says St.
Cyril, of Jerusalem (Catech. Myst. 4), that the bread which we see, though
to the taste it be bread, is nevertheless not bread, but the body of Christ;
and that the wine which we see, though to the taste it he wine, is neverthe-
less not wine, but the blood of Christ. This the Catholic and the Greek
Church hold to be a fact, while the Protestant Churches mostly hold that
the bread and wine still remain bread and wine, and are only used
symbolically.
The Church of Rome and the Greek Church hold, as of equal authority
the Old and New Testaments and the traditions of the Church, and that
inspiration and the power to work miracles has never departed from the
Church from the time of the Apostles down to the present; whilst the Pro-
testants generally hold that the Bible and Testament is the sole rule of
faith and practice, and that inspiration and the power to work miracles
ceased with the Apostles and personal disciples of Christ.
The Church of Rome and the Greek Church differ with respect to the
time of observing Easter, as to the authority of the later General Councils,
as to the number and period of certain festivals, and the observance of
many rites and ceremonies ; whilst the Protestants differ from them both
by ignoring a great number of them.
The Greek Church holds that the Holy Ghost proceeds from God the
Father alone, whilst the Catholic and Protestant teach that it proceeds
jointly from God the Father and God the Son.


The Greek Church disagrees with the Church of Rome, and agrees with
the Protestant Church upon the following points :
The Church of Rome holds that the Pope is the successor of the Apostles,
the duly and only appointed vicegerent of God upon earth, to whom all
churches should submit as their infallible and spiritual head. This pre-
eminence and infallibility the Greek and Protestant Churches deny.
The Church of Rome teaches the doctrine of Purgatory, whilst the
Greeks and Protestants deny the existence of such a place.
The Church of Rome holds it unlawful for clergy to marry. The Greek
Church forbids dignitaries to marry, but allows the inferior clergy to marry
once, whilst the Protestants leave every man at liberty to act as he thinks
proper in the matter.
The Church of Rome holds that it is lawful for the clergy alone to inter-
pret the Scriptures. The Greek Church holds that the learned, both among
the lay and clergy, can do so, but not the ignorant; whilst the Protestants
hold it as a fundamental doctrine that every man has a right to read for
himself, and that it is a duty incumbent upon him to do so.
HINDOO SECTS.
Hindooism is divided into three grand sects.
1. The VAISHNAVAS, worshippers of the Deity as
Vishnoo the preserver.
2. The SAIYAS. worshippers of the Deity as Siva the
destroyer and renovator.
3. The SACTAS, worshippers of the “ female associates or
active powers ” of the members of the Hindoo Trinity.
Theoretically the Hindoos hold that Vishnoo and Siva are only two forms
or manifestations of the Supreme Being; the former as God the Preserver,
and the latter as God the Destroyer and renovator: but, in practice, the
respective votaries of each seem to worship them as distinct and inde-
pendent gods, and anathematize each other with some virulence for
worshipping the wrong one. One writer remarks, “ The worshippers of
Vishnoo and Siva, though separated by a very thin wall of partition, are
continually at variance, each sect not only striving to exalt their own
divinity, but to revile that of their adversaries. The former consider the
wearing of the Lingam [each sect wears a symbolical mark on the forehead)
as the most heinous of all sins; the latter, on the other hand, maintain
that all who bear the Nana will after death be tormented in hell with a
three-pronged fork resembling that tridental mark. The sects of the Nana
and Lingam are further split into subdivisions, which dispute warmly on
the subjects of their differences.” “ Cyclopedia Britanuica,” Art.
“ Brahmins.”


The Abbfe Dubois says : “ Each of these different sects has its peculiar
system—its secrets, its mantras (prayers), its sacrifices, and a difference in
its practice as well as faith.”—“ People of India,” p. 62.
The Hindoos are almost entirely confined to India Proper; for
Hindooism—unlike the other great religions of the world, Buddhism,
Christianity, and Mahometanism—sends no missionaries into foreign countries
to seek converts. To be a Hindoo a man must be born in India of Hindoo
parents, and according to the strict letter of Hindoo law he ceases to be
one if he sets foot out of the country ; still there are a number to be found
in the neighbouring countries of Nepaul, Belochistan, Aff'ghanistan, Ceylon,
and the Indian Archipelago, whom we are compelled to regard as Hindoos
as they are of that faith, notwithstanding the dictum of Hindoo law.
MAHOMETAN SECTS.
The Mahometans are divided into tvwo grand sects.
1. The SONNITES, whio “ are subdivided into four chief
sects; each of which is subdivided agaiin.”—“Sale’s Preliminary Discourse
to Koran,” p. 109.
2. The SHIITES. “Thte principal sects of the Shiites are
five, which are subdivided into an ahmost innumerable number.—ldem,
p. 124.
Sale, speaking of the Mahometans generally, says: “ The number of
their sects, according to the common opiinion, are seventy-three. For the
Mahometans seem ambitious that thteir religion should exceed others
even in this respect; saying, that the Magians {Parsees) are divided into
seventy sects, the Jews into seventy-orue, the Christians into seventy-two,
and the Moslems into seventy-three, as Mahomet had foretold; of which
sects they reckon one to be always orthodox, and entitled to salvation.”—
“Preliminary Discourse,” p. 112.
But this stereotyped idea of the Mahometans is below the truth ; at present
their sects far outnumber seventy-three. The whole of the Mahometans
accept the Koran as a rule of faith and practice. The Sonnites accept
beside the Koran, the Sonna, or oral teachings of Mahomet, collected
together after his death; while the Shiites reject it as apocryphal.
The Sonnites also hold that Abubekr, Omar, and Othman, the three
friends of Mahomet, who succeeded him in the government to the prejudice
of his son-in-law Ali, were his lawful successors, whilst the Shiites hold
that they were usurpers in the office, and venerate Ali as next only to the
prophet. “ Sale’s Pre. Dis.”
Another authority says : “ The Sonnite belief is, that there is one im-
mortal God, whose works are without beginning or end, and that he will be
visible to the souls of the blessed : whilst the Shiahs deny the immortality


of the soul, and maintain that the co-existent principles of Zoroaster will for
ever contend for the mastery. The Shiahs also enjoin pilgrimages to
Kerbelah, Mushed, Kum, and Ardebil, as well as to Mecca and Medina, but
the Sonnites require they should be made to the latter cities only. There
is also a difference in the form and number of repetitions of the prayers; the
orthodox Turks praying five, and the Persians three times a day.”—
“ Chesney’s Survey of Euphrates and Tigris,” vol. 1, p. 86.
As with the sects of most other religions, there is a bitter feeling of enmity
existing between the two grand sects of Mahometans and the Mufti, and chief
doctors of the Sonnites “ have more than once unanimously declared that
to slay a Persian Shiiah is more acceptable to God than to slay seventy
Christians or idolaters.”- “ Taylor’s Hist, of Mahomedanism,” p. 289.
The Shiahs, on the other hand, affirm that the Jews and Christians are
superior to the Sonnites, “ and much nearer to salvation.”
Another authority says : “ In the festival of Hoseyn, the son of Ali, and
next to him tjie chief saint of their sect, the streets of Sheerauz, Ispahan,
and Teheran, ring with imprecations against the Sonnites or followers of
Omar They dignify Ali with the name of ‘ Vicar of God,’ and
curse Omar, whose name in their theology is used for the name of the devil.
—“ Cell’s Geography,” vol. 2, p. 525 ; vol. 4, p. 304.
It is somewhat difficult to get a correct estimate of the number of Ma-
hometans in the world, on account of the imperfect census of Mahometan
countries ; but they form nearly the entire population of Arabia, Persia,
Independent Tartary, Affghanistan, Belochistan, Java, Egypt, Tunis,
Tripoli, Algiers, and Morocco, and a large part of the population of Turkey,
Tropical Africa, India, and the Indian Archipelago. There are also a good
number in Russian Tartary, Chinese Tartary, and China Proper. The Shiite
sect forms the bulk of the population of Persia; there are also a good num-
ber in Arabia, India, Affghanistan, and Belochistan, &c., but they ate less
in number than the Sonnites.
Principal authorities quoted
Taylor’s Hist, of Mahometanism.
Mill’s Hist, of Mahometanism.
Irving’s Life of Mahomet.
Muir’s Life of Mahomet.
Ockley’s Hist, of the Saracens.
Lane’s Modern Egyptians.
Handbook for India, Art, “Mahometan Sects.”
Calcutta Review, vols. 19, 23,
Asiatic Journal, vol. 20.
Sale’s Preliminary Discourse to Koran.
Morell’s Turkey, Past and Present.
Cyclopedia of Religious Denominatians.
CONFUCIAN SECTS.
Of the Confucian sects, or whether there are any, we are uninformed. The
Confuoians are to be found in China and its dependencies, also in Cochin
China and Japan.


TAEIST SECTS.
We have no information respecting the Taeist sects. The Taeists exist
only in China and its dependencies.
JEWISH SECTS.
A modern writer, speaking of the Jewish sects says: “Their chief de-
nominations, some of which represent the more ancient, are the Carites, the
Zabathaites, the Chasidim, the Rabbinists or Talmudists, and the Reformed
Jews The main point of difference between most of these
sects, though not the only one, respects the Talmud.
Eabbinism is the catholic faith, from which all these sects are, in modem
phrase, dissenters. It is the lineal descendant of Phariseeism, and dis-
tinguished by its blind adherence to the Talmud.”—“North American
Review,” vol. 60, p. 353-357.
SINTOO SECTS.
With respect to the Sects of Sintooism, as yet little is known to Euro-
peans. Koempfer says they are divided into two sects. “ The first
of these sects is called Juitz. The orthodox adherents of this sect con-
tinued so firm and constant in the religions and customs of their ancestors,
that they would not yield in any the least point, how insignificant soever ;
but they are so very inconsiderable in number, that the camusis, or priests,
themselves make up the best part. The other sect is that of the Riobus ;
these are a sort of syncretists, who for their own satisfaction, and for the
sake of a more extensive knowledge in religious matters, particularly with
regard to the future state of our souls, endeavoured to reconcile, if possible
the foreign pagan religion ( Buddhism) with that of their ancestors.”—’
“ Account of Japan.”
Goiownm says: ‘ The Japanese, with whom we conversed on the articles
of their belief, are not agreed in the number of the kinds of religion among
them. Some said there were seven, and others only four ; the latter affirmed
that three of the seven were only sects which superstition had formed from
the four principal religions.”—“ Captivity in Japan,” vol 3, p. 41.
But it is improbable that a Japanese, who chanced to be asked, would
know exactly the number of sects in Japan any better than any English-
man would the number of Christian sects in England, and not one English-
man in ten thousand could tell the correct number if asked to do so.


The author of “ Japan and her People,” speaking on the subject, says:
“ An industrious and accurate writer sets down the number of religions or
sects, quite distinct from Buddhism, at thirty-four.”—Page 244.
Sintooism is peculiar to Japan.
SIKH SECTS.
A writer, speaking of the Sikh sects, says: “ The Sikh, or Nanah Shahis,
are classed under seven distinctions, all recognising Nanak as their primitive
instructor, and all professing to follow his doctrines, but separated from each
other by variations of practice, or by a distinct and peculiar teacher. Of
these the first is the sect of Udasis” (i. e. the military sect founded by Govind
Singh.) —“ Wilson’s Religion of the Hindoos,” vol. 1, p. 267.
Cuningham specifies about twenty sects.—“ History of Sikhs,” p. 400.
The country of the Sikhs is the Puujaub, North Western India, but they
are to be found in almost every considerable city of India.
PARSEE SECTS
The Parsees are divided into two principal sects.
1. The EASMIS.
2. The HADIMIS.
They disagree on some points of doctrine, and also about a matter of
chronology, but both accept the Zend-avesta as a rule of faith and practice.
The great bulk of the Parsees are at present to be found in the city of
Yezd and its neighbourhood in Persia, and in the cities of Bombay and
Surat in India.


'


P-V R T 11.
BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES.
The TEIPITAKEN (or Three-fold Treasure). It is also
called by various other names, such as “ Tripithaka,” “ Tripitaka,”
"Ganjour,” “Ka-gyur,” “ Dharmraa.” It contains 810,000 lines, and with its
accompanying atthaktha, or commentary, about 2,000,000, and consists of
three parts.
1. The Yinaya, or discipline, which is divided into five books; two contain
the ceremonial code, two the ecclesiastical and civil code, and the fifth an
explanation of the four preceding ones.
2. The Sutra, or discourses.
3. The Abhidharma, preeminent truths or doctrines.
Sir Emerson Tennant says, the Tripitaken in structure and contents
bears a striking resemblance to the Jewish Talmud.—“ Tennant’s Ceylon,”
vol. 1. p. 516.
It is common to the whole Buddhist world, forming their rule of faith
and practice; but beside it there is a vast amount of sacred literature in
the different Buddhist countries, some general and some held of authority
by particular sects only.
The Buddhist scriptures of Siam, are said to amount to 3,683 small
volumes.—“ Chinese Repository,” vol. 19, p. 550.
The Buddhist scriptures of China, Thibet, Mongolia, and Manchoura,
printed at Pekin, in the respective languages, contain 800 large volumes.
“ Cyclopedia Britannica,” Art. Gotama Buddha.
The Buddhist scriptures of Burmah, are exceedingly voluminous; a
writer thus refers to them ; “ The Buddhist literature of Burmah, said to
contain 80,000 volumes, consists of translations of the ancient Pali literature
of Hindoostan. When Buddhism was overthrown as a religion in Hindoo-
stan, the unceasing efforts of its conquerors were directed to destroying or
altering its monuments and records. It is this fact, which throws so much
doubt and uncertainty on all researches into the actual domestic state of
Ancient India. But in the meanwhile, Buddhism had spread into India
beyond the Ganges, and carrying with it its vast records ; there safe from
persecution, it remains to the present day; and stored in the garner of


ages, it offers a rich and willing spoil to the enterprising student.”—
“ Calcutta Review,” vol. 14, appendix, p. 7.
A writer in the “ Westminster Review,” speaking of the little known in
Europe respecting the Buddhist doctrines, says, “ No single European scholar
possessed of a whit less patience and self-denial than Buddha himself, could
be expected to wander through those vast magazines of theology, mythology,
metaphysics, poetry, and romance—each of which is literally a load for an
elephant. The Thibetan “ Gonjnur ” itself—a mere resume of the religion
—is in a hundred and eight thick volumes, forming in the mass a burthen
as heavy as a camel could walk under.”—“Westminster Review,” Art.
Buddhism.
Another writer describes this work as follows: —“ The Ka-gyur collec-
tion comprises the seven following great divisions, which are in fact distinct
works. 1. Yinaga, or discipline, in thirteen volumes. 2. Prajnya-paramita,
or transcendental wisdom, in twenty one volumes. 3. Buddha-vota-sanga,
or Buddha comminity, in six volumes. 4. Rat-nakuta, or gems heaped up,
in six volumes. 5. Sutranta, or aphorisms, or tracts, in thirty volumes.
6. Nirvand, or deliverance from pain, in two volumes. 7. Janta, or mystical
doctrine, charms, in twenty-two volumes : forming altogether exactly 100
volumes.”—“ Hardy’s Eastern Monachism,” p. 188.
Respecting the origin of the principal Buddhist scriptures, an authority
before us says, “During the first year after Sakya’s ( Buddha's) death, it was
necessary to call a council at Bajagaha, the capital of Magadha. The
doctrines of Buddhism were then defined by the most eminent followers of
the system. To the Sutto-Pittaka, ascribed to Gotama ( Buddha ) himself,
they added two supplementary parts. These compose the most valued
Buddhist writings, for the Council is supposed to have been divinely
inspired, that they might transmit the system pure and authorituous to
future ages The Buddhist age of inspiration is said to
have continued for 400 years. During this period a large mass of reputed
sacred writings were given, called by the Singhalese 1 Pitakattaya,’ or the
three Pittakas.”—“ Calcutta Review,” vol. 19, p. 265.
The Buddhists hold that the Buddhas, the sacred books, and the
associated priesthood, are the three most precious gems of the universe—that
their sacred books were not only delivered by divine inspiration, but contain
all truth “ pure and unmixed.” That the Pali language in which they
were written is the root of all languages—is the language of heaven, and
was spoken by the gods at the creation.
Calcutta Review, vol. 19, p. 265; vol. 16, p. 430.
Sirr’s Ceylon and Cingalese, vol. 2, p. 43.
Faiths of the World, Art. “ Buddhists.”
Another writer, speaking of the estimation in which the Buddhists
hold their scriptures, says ; “It might be expected that the writings which
occupy so exalted a place in Buddhism would be deeply revered. The
Dharmma is regarded as the second of the three greatest treasures in the
possession of either devas { angels ) or men. It is literally worshipped.


The books ftre usually wrapped in cloth, and are never
mentioned without some title of honour The truth con-
tained in the sacred books is commonly called Bana, ‘ the Word,’ and the
praise of the Bana forms the favourite theme of Buddhist authors. They
break forth, on every favourable opportunity, into lofty eulogies, pressing
epithet upon epithet, with glowing warmth. * The discourses of Buddha,’
they say, ‘ are a divine charm to cure the poison of evil desire; a divine
medicine to heal the disease of anger; a fire like that which burns at the
end of a kalpa (world), to destroy the evils of repeated existence; a
meridian sun to dry up the mud of covetousness; a great rain to quench
the fire of sensuality; a thicket to block up the road that leads to the
narakas (hells) ; a ship in which to sail to the opposite shores of (sinful
and painful existence); a collyrium for taking away the eye-film of heresy ;
a moon to bring out the night-blowing lotus of merit; a succession of trees
bearing immortal fruit, placed here and there, by which the traveller may
be enabled to cross the desert of existence ; a ladder by which to ascend to
the deva-lokas (heavens or abode of the angels); a straight highway by
which to pass to the incomparable wisdom ; a door of entrance to the
eternal city of Nirwana (the highest and purest heaven); a talismanic tree to
give whatever is requisite ; a flavour more exquisite than any other in the
three worlds ; a treasure of the best things that it is possible to attain ; and
a power by which may be appeased the sorrow of every sentient being. The
Dharmma is perfect; having nothing redundant and nothing wanting.’ ”
“ London Quarterly Review,” vol. 10, p. 529.
The Tripitaken and other principal
verse, in the Pali, a dead language ; 1
Sanscrit, another dead language, and
Burmese, Siamese, Chinese, Japanese, r .
chourian, Cochin Chinese, Nepaulese, Bo
Buddhist scriptures are written in
but there are translations into the
i also into the modern Ceylonese,
Thibetan, Mongolian, Corean, Man-
Bontanese, &c.
Principal authorities quoted:—
Cunningham’s Bhilsa Topes.
Royal Asiatic Journal, vols. 16,17.
Tennent’s Ceylon, vol. 1.
Dubois’ People of India.
Erman’s Travels in Siberia, vol. 2.
Elphinston’s History of India.
Wilson’s Religion of the Hindus, vol. 1.
Hardy’s Eastern Monachism.
Calcutta Review, vols. 4,14,16,19.
Journal of American Oriental Society, vol. 1.
Cyclopedia Britannica.
Asiatic Journal, vols. 8, 9,16, 27.
Hue’s Chinese Empire, vol. 2.
Westminster Review, Jan. 1830, Oct. 1856.
Bowring’s People of Siam, vol. 1.
Richie’s British World in the East, vol. 1.
British Quarterly Review, July-Oct. 1859.
Crawford’s Siam and Cochin China, vol. 2.
Winter’s British Burmah.
Gutzlaff’s China Opened, vol. 2.
Sirr’s Ceylon, vol. 2.
Chinese Repository, vols. 1, 2,19.
Knighton’s Ceylon, vol. 2.
Martin’s China, vol. 1.
American Cyclopaedia, Art. “Chinese Litera-
ture and Buddhism.”
Ludlow’s British India, vol. 1.
Coleman’s Mithology of the Hindoos.
London Quarterly Review, vol. 10.


CHRISTIAN SCRIPTURES.
I. Ihe For description see Jewish Scriptures.
2. The TESTAMENT, one volume, containing about 200
pages. It is generally bound with the Bible, forming one large volume
containing 850 pages of close type, 3,665,480 letters, and reckoning 50 to a
line, 71,309 lines. s
The Testament contains four short histories of Christ written by as
many different individuals ; a short history of his disciples, after his death ;
21 Epistles containing doctrines, exhortations, and advice, written by the
leading disciples to distant communities of Christians and private indivi-
duals; and a book containing a vision or revelation seen by one of the
disciples in the Island of Patmos. The whole, with perhaps some insignifi-
cant exceptions, was most probably written within the first century of the
Christian Era. The Testament exists in the Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Syriac,
and Coptic (dead languages), in all the modern languages of Europe, and
has of late years, mainly through missionary enterprise, been either in’part
or wholly translated into most of the spoken languages of the world.
There is also a considerable amount of literature, held more or less sacred
by the Catholic and Greek sections of the Church, comprised of the tradi-
tions of the Church, the decisions of various ecclesiastical councils the lives
and writings of numbers of saints, or men of exemplary piety’ &c., &c.
Also some books held sacred by members of particular sub-sects, such as the'
Book of Mormon, and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants by the Mormons
the Book of the 801 l by the Shakers, the Arcana Celeste, &c by the"
Swedenborgians, the so-called Divine Communications of Johk Wroe
Joanna Southcott, Hung-siu-tsin (the originator of the Taeping rebellion
in China), and others by their respective followers.
HINDOO SCRIPTURES.
Ist. 4 VEDAS, respectively named the Eigveda, the Yajurveda,
the Samaveda, and the Atharaveda.
The Vedas are the oldest sacred books of the Hindoos, and were compiled
by Yyasa, a Hindoo sage, probably about 1,500 years b.c. Each Veda
consists of two parts. The Mantras consisting of prayers, hymns and
invocations and the Brahmanas, comprising precepts which inculcate
religious duties maxims explaining these precepts, and theological
arguments. The Vedas collectively contain 400,000 lines.


2nd. 4 UP VEDAS, or Supplementary Vedas. The first treats
of disorders and medicines, and the mode of curing diseases ; the second of
music in its relation to devotional feelings ; the third on the fabrication and
use of arms and implements of war; the fourth explains sixty-four
mechanical arts and handicrafts for the improvement of such as exercise
them.
3rd. 6 VEDANGAS, also supplementary to the Vedas. 1.
Sihska, rules for reciting the Vedas. 2, Kalpa, treating of the ritual of the
Vedas, and containing a detail of religious rites and ceremonies to be
observed. 3. Vyakarana, treating of grammar. 4. Nirukta, or commentaries
in the form of glosses. 5. Chandas, or dissertation upon metres.
6. Gyotish on astronomy.
4th. 4 UPANGAS. 1. Miuavsa, comprehending theology
and moral philosophy. 2. Nyaya, logic and metaphysics. 3. Dharma-
shastra, or institutes of law. The principal work of this section consists of
the moral, criminal, and ceremonial code of Menu, the great legislator of the
Hindoos; it was written probably about 1,200 years b c., and consists of
2,685 verses, 4. The Puranas, or history of the Hindoos. The Puranas are
eighteen iu number, and might more properly be termed a cyclopaedia, as
they contain a great variety of matter, history, science, creeds, philosophies,
legends, love-stories, law, theories, cosmogonies, &c. &c. It is said that there
are in them fourteen distinct accounts of how the world was made, and that
they may, with strict propriety, be called a cyclopaedia of the creeds and
science of India. It is almost impossible to assign the date of their origin ;
the Hindoos ascribe the authorship of them to Vyasa, the compiler of the
Vedas, and hold that they are 6,000 years old. Sir William Jones dated
them 900 years 8.c., but they have evidently been the work of time, and
parts of them are of much later date than even that.
The text of the 18 Puranas collectively contain 1,600,000 lines. The
4th Upanga also contains the Mahabarata; an historic-heroic poem, composed
probably in its original form about 600 years b.c., but contains several
interpolations of a later date; it contains 400,000 lines. 2. The Eamayana,
another historic-heroic poem, supposed to have been written iu nearly its
present form 500 or 600 years b.c. ; it contains 48,000 lines.
The whole of the foregoing are written in the Sanscrit, a dead language ;
but there are translations of many parts of them into the different modern
languages of Hindostan, and a small portion of them into different European
languages ; and the Arabic and Persiac.
Beside the above principal scriptures the Hindoos have a great quantity of
literature, held more less sacred by all or some of the sects; for the greater
portion of the literature of past ages in India, being so permeated and inter-
blended with, and written in subservience to, and in support of their
religious beliefs, is held more or less sacred.
With respect to the extent of the general literature of the country, Sir
William Jones remarks—“ Wherever we direct our attention to Hindoo


literature, the notion of infinity presents itself; and sure the longest life
would not suffice for a single perusal of works that rise and swell, protuberant
like the Himalayahs, above the bulkiest compositions of every land beyond
the confines of India.”—Quoted in “ Ward’s View of the Hindoos,” p. 134.
1 he Hindoos hold that the Sanscrit —the language in which their scriptures
are written is the language of Paradise ;thatthey were a direct revelation from
the Deity, and areacomplete rule of faith and practice. Mr. Ward, speaking of
the Vedas, says—“ Foremost in the vast array of Indian literature stand those
ancient, voluminous, and sacred writings, the Vedas. These are regarded as
an immediate revelation from heaven, and as containing all that man needs
to know respecting the character of God, and his claims upon the rational
world.” They “ are regarded as the fountain of all true religion, and the
primeval sources of every other species of useful knowledge. They are
believed by the community at large to have proceeded direct and entire out
of the mouth of the Creator himself, and therefore as challenging the most
implicit faith and profoundest reverence. When the various portions of the
universe, the gods and men, were issuing from the different parts of the
body of Brahma, these holy works, fairly and fully written, dropped from
his four mouths. After meeting with sundry disasters, by falling into the
sea and like places of danger, from which a miracle alone saved them, they
were finally placed in the hands of Vyasa and other learned men to
methodise and arrange, and from them they have come to our day.”—
“ Ward's View of the Hindoos,” p. 127.
Another writer says “ The Vedas .... are regarded as the word of
God and of divine authority. One text from the Vedas in confirmation of any
doctrine is equivalent to a mathematical demonstration. And after such text
has been adduced the Vedantist professes to be more certain of the thing con-
firmed than he is of his own existence ” —“ Calcutta Review,” vol. 4, p. 54.
Menu himself thus speaks of the Vedas “ A teacher of the Veda is the
image of God.”
“ A priest who has gone through the whole Veda is equal to a sovereign
of all the world.”
“ To patriarchs, to deities, and to mankind, the scripture is an eye giving
constant light; nor could the Veda Shastra have been made by human
faculties; nor can it be measured by human reason, unassisted by revealed
glosses and comments : this is a sure proposition
“ All systems,which are repugnant to the Veda, must have been composed
by mortals, and shall soon perish : their modern date proves them vain and
false
“ All that has been, all that is, and all that will be, are made known
by the Veda
“ All creatures are sustained by the primeval Veda Shastra, which the
wise therefore hold supreme, because it is the supreme source of prosperity
to the creature man.”—“ Institutes of Menu,” chap. ii. v. 225; chap. ix.
v. 245 ; chap. xii. v. 94—99.


Principal authorities quoted :
Adelung’s Sanscrit Literature.
Institutes of Menu.
Ferishta’s Mahometan Power in India, vol. 1.
National Review, vol. 4.
Mill’s Hist, of India, vol. 2.
Wilson’s Religion of the Hindus.
Asiatic Journal, vols. 13,17, 25.
Works of Sir William Jones, vols. 1,3, 6.
Calcutta Review, vols. 1,3, 4, 8,13, 14,15, 24,
Thomson’s Bhagavad-gita.
Yishnoo Pur ana.
Howit’s Supernatural of all Ages, vol. 1.
Journal of American Oriental Soc., vol. 2.
Journal of Royal Asiatic Soc., vols. 5, 6,13.
Asiatic Journal, N. S., vol. 36.
Dupois’ People of India.
Moor’s Pantheon, art. “ Vedas and Pur-
anas.”
Ludlow’s British India.
Forbes’s Oriental Memoirs, vol. 1.
Dow’s Hist, of Hindostan, vol. 1.
North British Review, vol. 1.
Cyclopedia Britannica, art. “ cdas.”
MAHOMETAN SCRIPTURES
1. The KORAN (literally, the book fit to be read) is one moderate
sized volume, containing about 300 pages, 6,000 verses, 77,639 words,
323,015 letters. It was written by Mahomet in fragments, and collected
together by Abubekr, his successor as caliph. It contains the system of
moral, civil, criminal, and ceremonial law, taught by the prophet, and is
written in an ancient form of the Arabic language. It is translated into
most of the languages of Europe, and also into the Persiac, Javan,
Malayan, &c.
2 The SONNA. This work consists of seven books, containing
several thousand traditions of the dealings, habits, and sayings of Mahomet.
It was compiled about 200 years after his death, contains many things
omitted by the Koran, and is considered by the orthodox Mahometans as a
supplement to that book.
3. The JDJHAY-UMMETH consists of the explana-
tions and decisions of the most eminent disciples of Mahomet, especially
the four first caliphs.
4. The KIYAS, consisting of a collection of the canonical
decisions of the imans or priests of the first centuries after Mahomet.
The KYAT UL KULBOOK, next to the Koran,
is the principal book of the Shiah sect in Persia.
The Sonnite, or orthodox Mahometans, hold that the Koran subsisted in
the essence of God from all eternity, and was inscribed by him with a pen of
light upon the table of his everlasting decrees, which table they describe as
of immense bigness, and as standing beside the throne of God in the highest
heaven. That at the era of Mahomet, when God in his boundless mercy
saw fit to take pity on man, he sent a paper copy in one volume, bound in
silk and adorned with gems, down to the lowest heaven by the angel Gabriel,


who delivered it orally verse by verse to Mahomet, during a period of
twenty-three years, as infinite wisdom willed it.
The Mahometans hold it in the highest estimation; in reference to
which Sale says : ** This book is in the greatest reverence and esteem among
Mahometans. They dare not so much as touch it without being first
washed or legally purified ; which, lest they should do by inadvertence, they
write these words on the cover, < Let none touch it but they who are clean.
They read it with great care and respect, never holding it below their
girdles. They swear by it, consult it in their weighty occasions, carry it
with them to war, write sentences of it on their banners, adorn it with gold
and precious stones, and knowingly suffer it not to be in the possession of
any of a different persuasion.”—“ Sale’s Preliminary Discourse to Koran ”
p. 49.
They further affirm that it is the book of books; that it is written in the
language of Paradise, and that “ It is so pure in its eloquence, so just in its
ideas, and so perfect in its creation, that it was not in the power of any
man to create such a book!”—“ Morrell’s Turkey,” p. 74.
Principal authorities quoted;—
Calcutta Review, vol. 19.
Sale’s Preliminary Discourse to Koran.
Gibbon’s Roman Empire, vol. 6.
Salmon’s Hist, of all Nations, vol. 4.
Cyclopaedia Londinensis.
Morell’s Turkey, Past and Present.
Muir’s Life of Mahomet.
North American Review, vol. 71.
Mill’s Hist, of Mahometanism.
TAEISTS SCRIPTURES.
The TAOU TIH KING (literally book of the way
and of virtue), the principal sacred book of the Taeists, was written by
Laou-tsze, founder of Taeism, about 500 years B.o.; it is not very extensive,
and is comprised in a Taeist work called “ Tae-ping-kwang-ke, or General
Peace Extension Miscellany,” in fifty-two volumes.
Asiatic Journal, vol. 5, p. 97.
Hue’s Christianity in China, vol. X, p. 324.
We have little information respecting the sacred books of the Taeists, hut
the name of one more to which they attach considerable importance is called
the 4 4 KAN-YING PEEN .” A writer thus refers to
it: “ Among the Taeists, the book that has the most influence of a moral
kind upon the people is perhaps the ‘ Kan-ying-peen, or Book of Retri-
bution.’ In this treatise the punishments threatened for sin belong to the
present life. They are losses, diseases, early death, and every sort of mis.
fortune belonging to this world. The rewards of virtue are temporal
blessings, and in certain cases immortality and transferences to the abodes
of the Genii.” —“ Edkin's Religious Condition of the Chinese,” p. 171.
The Taeists affirm that their principal sacred book the “ Taou-tih-king”
fell down from heaven.—“ Manners and Customs of all Nations,” p. 14.


CONFUCIAN SCRIPTURES.
mo “ WOOKING” (or five sacred books) is divided as
follows:
1. The Yik-king, or Sacred Book of Changes, is a mystical work.
2. The Shoo-king is an ancient history of China.
3. The She-king is a book of sacred odes.
4. The Le-king, a book of rights and ceremonies, containing ceremonial
customs adapted to every situation and circumstance. These four were
edited by Confucius from ancient documents.
5. The Chun-tseu, of which Confucius himself was the author, is a
history of his native province the kingdom of Loo in his own times.
2. The ‘ ‘SZE-SHOO” (or four books) are divided as
follows:—
1. The Ta-hoe, the great science or art of governing others by first
subduing our own passions.
2. The Chung-yung, the middle path or way to happiness by governing
the passions.
3. The Lun-Yu, the maxims and conversations of Confucius.
4. The book of Mencius.
The three first contain the teachings of Confucius ; collected and edited
respectively by three of his disciples after his death; and the fourth was
written by Mencius, also a disciple of Confucius.
JEWISH SCRIPTURES.
1. The BIBLE, one large volume, containing about 650 pages
of close type. Parts of it were written at various times, from probably
1500 to 500 years before Christ, when it was finally completed by
Ezra, a Jewish sage, it is supposed, in nearly its present form. It
contains an account of the Creation of the world and mankind, and a
history of the Jewish people, from their origin as a nation to their return
from the Babylonish captivity; the moral, civil, criminal, and ceremonial
code of Moses, the great legislator of the Jews; a number of sacred hymns;
a collection of wise sayings or proverbs; some dramatic pieces, embodying
opinions; and the writings of a number of pious men termed oracles or
prophets.
A good portion of the Bible is poetical, although generally translated
into prose. Most of it was originally written in the old Hebrew a


language that has ceased to be spoken for upwards of 2000 years. It at
present exists in the Chaldaic, Syrochaldaic, Arabic, Ethiopic, Syriac,
Coptic, Greek, and Latin, dead languages, all the modern languages of
Europe, and parts of it in most of the spoken languages of the world.
2. 2 TALMUDS, the Jerusalem and the Babylonish.
The Jerusalem Talmud is one large volume, and consists of two parts,
the Mishna and the Gamara.
The Mishna is composed of a collection of sixty-three tracts, containing
traditions of the interpretations given by the ancient Jewish doctors of
the Mosaic law. It was compiled by Rabbi Judah, the Holy, about the
year 200.
The Gamara is composed of the commentaries of the later Jewish doctors
of Tiberias upon the Mishna, which were finally collected and compiled by
Rabbi Johanan, about the year 300. It is written in the Syrochaldaic
dialect, then spoken at Jerusalem.
The Babylonish Talmud, in twelve large volumes, is composed of the
Mishna of Rabbi Judah, the Holy, and the Gamara or commentaries of
the Jewish doctors of Babylon, finally compiled about the year 500. It is
written in the Chaldaic dialect, then spoken at Babylon.
Both Talmuds contain traditions and other interpolations of a later
date.
3. 11 TARGUMS. The Targums are paraphrases in the
Chaldaic language of different portions of the Bible, some of them nearly
literal translations, and others containing the sense with explanations.
They were written at various times, from the commencement of the
Christian era to the seventh or eighth century.
4. The MEDRASH, or Allegorical Interpretations, Beside
the above, the Jews have a great amount of Rabbinical writing, held more
or less sacred by some of the sects Recount, speaking of the Rabbinists or
orthodox sect, says : “ The number of the commandments by the Rabbins,
&c., is now 13,602, besides annotations.”
The Jews hold, that when God delivered the law, written with his own
hand, to Moses upon Mount Sinai, he also gave to him by word of mouth
the traditional law or Mishna, which forms the text of the Talmud; and
also, at the same time, the Targums of Onkelos, and that the Targums of
Jonathon were delivered to the later prophets in the same manner.
They also hold that the Hebrew language is the oldest language in the
world, and was, and still is, the language of Paradise.
The Jews, especially in the less civilized countries, attach much importance
to the Talmud. One writer, speaking of the Jews of Central Europe, says :
“In the opinion of the strict Jew, everything that is worthy to be known
is contained in the Talmud, and therefore the attention bestowed upon any
other branch of knowledge is a pure loss of time.”—Chamber’s Papers, vol. 3,
Art. “ Jewish Life in Central Europe.”


Principal authorities quoted:—
Calmet’s Dictionary of the Bible.
Imperial Dictionary. Faiths of the World.
Jhan’s Biblical Antiquities. Irving’s Life of
Penny Cyclopedia, Arts. “ Targums He-
brew Language.”
Prideaux’s Connexion of Old and New
Testament.
Mahomet.
Lecount’s Notes on the Douay Bible, &c.,
Arts. “ Mishna, Talmud,” &c.
Popular Cyclopedia. Cyclopedia Britannica,
Art. “Language.”
Rapplal’s Mishna.
SINTOO SCRIPTURES.
1. The NIPPON ODAIKI, being an historical and
chronological account of the great men of Sintooism.
2. The SIN DAI KI, containing the history and actions of
the great gods of Sintooism. —“ Koempfer’s Account of Japan.”
We have little information respecting the sacred hooks of the Sintooists,
but, according to Koempfer, they are held in great estimation. He says
they are “ esteemed as sacred among them as the authority of Holy Scrip-
tures is among Christians.”
SIKH SCRIPTURES.
1. The ADEE GRUNTH, one volume, containing
1,282 pages. It consists of the writings attributed to Nanak, the founder,
and of the succeeding teachers of the Sikh faith and others, and was com-
piled by Argoon, the fourth Sikh Guro or Pontiff in descent from Nanak,
towards the end of the sixteenth century.
2. The DUBMAN PADSHAH KA GRUNTH,
one volume, containing 1,066 pages. The greater portion is said to have
been written by, or by the order of, Govind Singh, the tenth Pontiff or
successor of Nanak.
Both Grunths are written in verse in a provincial dialect of the Punjaub.
The Sikhs hold that both Grunths were written by inspiration, and are
most holy.
Mr. Coleman, speaking of them, says : “ These sacred books, or Shastras
of the Sikhs, are reverenced, and read daily at stated periods both by the
religious leaders and individuals. These books are caiefully preserved in
their temples, and worshipped with various ceremonies. They are kept
wrapt in rich cloths, which, previous to the hooks being used, are removed
with great respect; the officiating Qruntees (Sikh priest) and worshippers


bowing with the utmost reverence as the coverings are taken off.”—
“ Coleman’s Mythology of the Hindus,” p. 232.
Principal authorities quoted:—
Cunningham’s History of the Sikhs.
Royal Asiatic Journal, vol. 9.
M'Gregor’s History of the Sikhs.
Coleman’s Mythology of the Hindoos.
Wilson’s Religion f the Hindus, vol. 2.
PAESEE SCEIPTURES.
1. The ZEND-AVESTA, a book containing the moral
and ceremonial code of Zoroaster, the great legislator of the Parsees—a
number of prayers to be used on various occasions, &c., &c. European-
Oriental scholars suppose it to have been composed at various times, and
that some parts of it are very ancient. It is written in the Zend, a very
ancient dead language, has been translated into the Pelavi, another dead
language, but more modern, and also into some of the languages of modern
Europe.
2. The SADDER. “An abridgment or summary of the
Zend-avesta, in the Modern Persian language.”—“ Webster’s Dictionary,
word Sadder.
3. The BUNDESHNE. Mr. Wilson says the Parsees
‘ view the Bundeshne with great respect as containing the account of the
cosmogony to which they attach their faith, and a tolerable good digest of
their religious opinions.”—“ Parsee Religion,” p. 50.
4. The DESATIR, a work consisting of several volumes, and
containing an account of an ancient dynasty of Persian kings, and of the
Parsee religion of their time.
The Parsees hold that the Zend-avesta was composed by Zoroaster under
the influence of divine inspiration, and that the Zend, the language in
which it is written, is “ a holy language, and can only be known to God,
angels, prophets, and enlightened priests,”—“ Trans, of Bombay Lit. Soc.,”
vol. 2, p. 312 ; “ Malcolm’s Hist, of Persia,” vol. 1, p. 203.
Other authorities: —
Westminster Review, October, 1861. Webster’s Dictionary, word Zend-avesta,
Porter’s Travels in Persia. &c., &c.
Beloe’s Notes to Herodotus.


DRUSE SCRIPTURES.
"Ti. BOOK OF THE TESTIMONIES."
This book is said, by the Druses, to have been written by Hamza, their
founder and prophet.
Colonel Churchill thus refers to it: “ These manuscripts comprise four
folio volumes, containing seventy treatises, and are entitled, ‘ Book of the
Testimonies to the Mysteries of the Unity.’ .... This rare book is,
in fact, to the Druses, what the Bible is to the Christians, and the Koran
to the Mahometans.” —“ Churchill’s Mount Lebanon,” vol. 1, p. 205.
MENDEAN SCRIPTURES.
The DIVAN, 11 The Sacred Book of the Christians of St. John,
or Mendeans.”—“ Faiths of the World,” Art. “ Divan.”
We possess no information respecting the nature of this book. The
Mendeans are also sometimes called Nazareans.
PAGAN SCRIPTURES.
Throughout the world amongst the Pagan tribes there are a few scattered
fragments of sacred writings, more or less rude, but the Pagans are generally
governed religiously by the oral traditions of their ancestors and by prophet-
priests, or men supposed to be gifted with oracular power to foretell events
and teach with authority.
For some account of these prophets or oracles of Paganism in different
parts of the world, see :
Maclean’s Compendium of Caffre Laws and
Customs, p. 79.
Fleming’s Southern Africa, p. 275.
Brown’s Exploration Tour, p. 339.
Du Chaillu’s Equatorial Africa, p. 399.
Four Years on the Gold Coast, p. 53.
Captain Tuckey’s Narrative, p. 162.
Burton’s Footsteps in East Africa, p. 113.
Erman’s Travels in Siberia, vol. 2, p. 46.
Black’s Universal Geography, Art. “Sa-
moides.”
Dobell’s Travels in Kamtschatka, vol. 1, p. 158.
Richardson’s Polar Regions, p. 325.
Hazlett’s British Columbia, p. 84.
Crantz’s History of Greenland, vol. 1, p. 194.
Buchanan’s North American Indians, p. 257.
Herrera’s History of America, vol. 2, p. 15.
Irving’s Life and Voyages of Columbus,
vol. 1, p. 370.
Smith’s Araucanians, p. 235.
Dobrizehoffer’s Account of the Apipones,
vol. 2, p. 68.
Mariner’s Tonga Islands, vol. 2, p. 75.
Wilks’s Exploration Expedition, vol. 2,
chap. 3.
William’s Fiji, vol. 1, p. 224.
Old New Zealand, p. 136.
St. John’s Forests of the Far East, vol. 2,
p. 260.
Dr. Comyn’s Philippine Islands, p. 75 of
Preliminary Discourse.
Faiths of the World, Art. “ Religion of the
Formosans.”
Pridliam’s Account of Ceylon, p. 308.
Thomson’s Occult Sciences, vol. 1, p. 163.
The Celestial Empire, or Points and Pick-
ings, p. 242.


The reader who feels interested to examine the authorities we have
quoted above will find that there is a remarkable similarity, in fact almost
an identity of character, among all these Pagan prophets and prophetesses
throuahout the world, and that further, if he compares these accounts with
ancient history, will find that they are of exactly the same class as the
frenzied prophets and prophetesses among the Greeks, Romans, Etruscans,
Germans, Gauls, Britons, Albanians, and other nations of the ancient world-
We intend to deal with this subject more largely at some future time, if
opportunity offers; but meanwhile would suggest to the reader who has
leisure, that it is a subject well worthy of consideration.
For some account of the Prophets and Prophetesses of Antiquity, see .
Justin’s History of the World, book 23, chap. 1.
Strabo, book 11, chap. 4; book 16, chap. 2.
Chambers’s Papers for the People, vol. 2, Art.
“ Every-day Life of the Greek.”
Cicero on Divination. (Treats of it very
fully and clearly.)
Philo Judaeus in his Treatise respecting the
Heirship to Divine Things, chap. 53, also
makes some valuable remarks, -which taken
in connection with other evidence above
referred to, will assist much to elucidate
the subject.
Virgil’s iEneid, book 6, line 70, Dryden’s
Translation.
Moor’s Pantheon, p. 247.
Bell’s Pantheon, Art. “ Oracle of Delphi.”
Thomson’s Occult Sciences, vol. 1, p. 233,
Kohlraich’s History of Germany.
Rollin’ s Ancient History, p. 44 of Pre-
face.
Mitford’s History of Greece, vol. 1, p. 89-96.
Cyclopedia Britannica, Arts. “ Demoniac
Sibyls,” and “ Delphi.”
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.




; ' • , • ■'
