

J. A.. FE RGUS ON
COLLECTING AUSTRALIANA
TO-DAY
A Paper Read Before
The Book Collectors' Society of Australia
At The Public Library of Mew South Wales
28th May, i%4


\
N \
\
jj
'sj^YDNE Y GAZBTTey > RK*tr'
WjERGUSON Coij.ectio^\|?
||[ Xatioxal Library" 1 11


.BOOK COLLECTORS^ SOCIETY_OP - AUSTRALIA
,r COLLECT ING_AUSTMLIANA_TOpAY’ f
J.A. Ferguson
A Paper read before the Society,
at the Public Library of N.S.W.
on 28th May,
1954.




September, 1954 103 rd issue Vol 7> No. 10
"COLLECTING- AUSTRAL I ANA TODAY"
J.A. Ferguson
Several books have been published in England and the
United States in which close study has been made of recent develop-
ments in book-collecting in those countries. One of these contains
discussions (inter alia) of such fascinating and intriguing subjects
as (i) definition of a book-collector; (ii) New ideas and new
methods; (iii) Patterns in book collecting; and (iv) reflections on
the present state of book-collecting.
It has ocurred to me that it might interest this Society
to examine these subjects in their application to the Australian
scene, or, in other words, the field of Australiana.
At the outset let me ask; What are the distinguishing
features of a book-collector?
In distinguishing a true book-collector certain classes of
book accumulators can at' once be placed apart. The follower of some
trade or profession who brings together books to assist him in the
pursuit of his particular calling cannot be called a collector; nor
can the writer who seeks to deal with a certain subject and brings
together books to assist him to this end, but which have no permanent
interest for him; nor is the individual a true collector, who picks
up books here and there, which appeal to him as curious, rare, or
interesting but whose collecting is quite miscellaneous and desult-
ory, after the fashion of the English magpie for its nest, or the
Australian bowerbird in selecting objects for its play-ground. +
Then there is the person who buys books, as he believes,cheaply,
which he hopes to sell at a profit. He is a book speculator or
investor and cannot be classed as a true book-collector. One test
of the true book-collector may lie in his handling of a book. To
quote; "A man’s handling of a book is as instantly revealing to the
experienced eye as his grasp on the reins of a horse.” Writer states;
11 It is always instructive to watch a collector’s face when he has
handed some treasure to a visitor; one who has expressed interest,
who may even have come well recommended, but who is not certainly
known to be initiate.” He adds; ”The collector sometimes‘hesitates
to show his books to strangers, and this by no means entirely (as is
often supposed) because he is sure they will drop them or spill
whiskey over them.”
+ (A.H. Chisholm, who is present, however, claims the
bowerbird to be a highly discriminating and not a
casual collector!)
BOOK COLLECTORS’ SOCIETY OP AUSTRALIA


It has been said people "speak and write about book-
collecting as if its essential nature were perfectly well under-
stood and its practitioners as clearly definable as pharmaceutical
chemists or officers of the Royal Navy.” This is not so. One
writer states: "If we are to define the book-collector, we must
look first for his motive source. Why does he collect?"
After a close analysis of the qualities, the interests,
the connoisseurship or taste present in the true book-collector, he
concludes: "He is a man who has a reverence for and a desire to
possess the original or some other specifically admirable, curious
or interesting edition of a book he loves or respects or one which
has a special place among his intellectual interests... Furthermore
he enjoys that exercise of his natural and intellectual faculties
which is involved in the application of observation, knowledge,
ingenuity, foresight, enterprise and persistence to the pursuit of
his quarry, its scrutiny and appraisal when found, its use and
perhpas formal description when secured." This definition may not
be perfect but as a general definition it probably embraces the chief
qualifications of a book-collector.
The objects of book-collectors f pursuit have always been
of great variety. In the Australian field we have had collectors
like D. S. Mitchell, who consciously set out to gather anything and
everything about Australia, New Zealand or the Pacific Islands and
whether of value or not. He once justified the acquisition of a
worthless publication by the reply that its presence in his collect-
ion was necessary in order to prove its owrthlessness. This class
of collector may be said to be outmoded, and perhaps non-existent
today. The omnivorous collectors of the past have disappeared, and
are not likely to reappear, for a number of very cogent reasons:
(1) the fall in the return from fixed investments and the loss of
the purchasing power of money; (2) the excessive taxation of private
incomes; (3) the great cost of rare, and many new, books; (4)
limited house room; (5) the competition of the great libraries,
whose duty it is to acquire all the publications in their field, and
who have public and trust funds at their disposal (often very con-
siderable) and whose income is not subject to taxation, and whose
storage space is extensive, perhaps unlimited.
During the years when Mr. Justice Wise, D.S. Mitchell,
Edward Petherick and other great collectors of the past were
collecting Australiana, The Public Libraries of Australia 'were not
nearly so well equipped, staffed, or endowed as they are at the
present time. They were likely to miss many items of Australiana,
not only rare material occurring in the market or elsewhere from time
to time, but current publications too.
These great collectors rendered an important service by
making us. Australiana-conscious and by saving for our nation many
treasures, which would have inevitably perished or passed to the
libraries of other countries, there to remain.
September, 195U BiblioNews V01.?,N0. 10.


Itu must not be thought, however, that public service
may not be rendered today by a collector of Australiana. Only a
collector of great wealth can now compete for the "high-spots"
appearing in English or American Catalogues of auctioneers or book-
sellers* These are the concern of the great endowed libraries such
as the Mitchell Library or the Dixson Library. But these highly-
priced items may not add greatly to the sum of human knowledge,
whereas humbler and little esteemed books, pamphlets, broadsides,
pictures, maps, newspapers and/or manuscrips may throw important
light upon local events, social tendencies, the great men and
movements of the past, parliamentary government, family history, and
the like. Many scholars have borne witness to the indebtedness of
literature, history and economics to book-collecting. "It is by the
zeal of collectors'', says A.W. Pollard, "that books which otherwise
would have perished from neglect are discovered,, cared for and pre-
served, and those who achieve these results certainly deserve well
of the community." Another eminent historian has said: "Our science
of bibliography would be sadly hampered, indeed, were it not for the
generous and largely disinterested service which private collectors
perform by buying and putting freely at our disposal books which our
public libraries cannot or will not purchase."
"Collectors", says another authority, "from the earliest
times have been preservers of books and essential contributors to
the progress of scholarship."
Instances will readily occur to the minds of some of my
hearers of the fortunate preservation of literary material which
would otherwise have perished but for the intervention of the
collector, and alas.’ other cases of the loss of valuable records.
One instance came under notice some years ago. In a farm-
house nearly 100 years old still remained the library of the original
settler, who played a part of some importance in the early history
of New South Wales. In an out-building were unbound reports,
pamphlets, maps and other records - all scattered about and neglected
for many years. The collector sensed the importance of these books
and records from the perusal of a few items and the owner was quite
ready to transfer them to one possessing the requisite knowledge and
interest to salvage, arrange, safeguard and make judicious use of
them. A few weeks after the material had been removed a fierce
grass fire reduced the buildings with all their remaining contents
to ashes.
In the Preface to Vol iii of Bibliography of Australia I
wrote: "One strange feature of this period (1839-U5) i*s the extra-
ordinary number of "ghost" books, that is, books to which a reference
has been made in some other publication but which cannot be found
today in any library or collection. The disappearance of so many
publications, particularly pamphlets, broadsides, newspapers and
magazines, may be attributed to the rough conditions of life in the
early days of settlement in Australia. Public Libraries or
September, 195U BiblioNews Vol.?, No. 10.


Universities had not been established* Many people lived a roving
or nomadic life; huts or tents often served for habitations, and the
opportunity of preserving printed matter was limited* In addition
great risk was run from fire, flood, and the ravages of insects and
other enemies of books 11 In many cases where a work has survived,
it is represented by only one copy*
My further investigations in the course of a task which
might perhaps fittingly be described as a ’'self-imposed indeterminate
sentence” or "Kathleen Mavourneen” and which has reached the year
1851 ? have furnished further proof of the great dangers, which have
always menaced our literary records* We have now, of course, very
well-equipped and active Public Libraries, Universities, Historical
and other Societies with libraries; but many of the causes- of loss
indicated in the passage quoted still persist, and in these modern
times there must be superadded the dangers of warfare, destruction
through repeated paper salvage efforts, non-compliance with the
Copyright Act, and the loss of documents from Government Departments
through the absence until recently of any archival provision.
A notable example of the public service which may be
rendered by a learned, discriminating and keen collector was afforded
by the late C.H. Bertie. During a long life, although not possessed
of more than a moderate competency, he put aside and preserved every-
thing he found of literary or historic interest, and more particular-
ly anything touching the history of his beloved city of Sydney, its
buildings and institutions, and the people who walked its streets.
As a result, v/hen his collection was dispersed last year after his
death several Australian public libraries, in addition to the
National Library, Canberra, and the Mitchell Library greatly benefited
and many private collectors filled gaps in their special collections.
IN THE foregoing I have endeavoured to discuss shortly the
first two subjects mentioned in the opening of this talk: namely (a)
the definition of a book-collector and (b) new ideas and new methods.
I pass now to submit a few reflections upon the next two
subjects mentioned, namely, (3) patterns in book collecting and (4)
refelctions on the present state of book collecting.
It has already been stated that the varieties of collecting
are countless. Furthermore, no one has any right to say what another
shall collect or set limits to his acquisitions or his expenditure.
But it must be recognised in view of the considerations
and circumstances already mentioned that in Australiana today
(strange though it may seem) there are (a) not as many good fish
left in the sea as ever came out of it and (b) much more expensive
bait must be affixed to the hook to catch the big fish that are left.
September, 1-95U BiblioNews V 01.7, No. 10.


The average Australiana collector today must he content
with catching sprats rather than mackerel, minnows rather than
marlin. Anyone who has followed closely the records of auction
sales and read intently the leading booksellers’ catalogues both
here and abroad must have been struck with the comparatively few
items of early Australiana offered. The late Mr, Fred Wymark, a
member of the firm of Angus & Robertson, always maintained that
items printed in Australia in early times must inevitably be rarer
than contemporaneous publications printed in England.
This opinion has been fully confirmed by the experience
of the past forty or more years. The occurrence of items printed
in Australia before 1850 has been very infrequent whether one has
regard to auction sales or booksellers’ catalogues or stocks. This
rarity may be ascribed to various causes including those mentioned
earlier. Probably the number of imprints made of early colonial
publications was very limited; they were for current use and when
present utility was exhausted, they were discarded. The most
valuable publications for historical research will always be our
early almanacs and newspapers. But to attempt today to establish
anything like a comprehensive collection would be about as promising
a venture as to take advantage of an open season for the shooting of
the Great Auk or the Moa, should such be declared.
Who can tell us how many copies of each issue of the New
South Wales Pocket (later Australian) Almanac of the Howes, ranging
from 1806 to 1835 were printed; or how many of Bent’s Van Diemens
Land (later Tasmanian) Almanacs 1824 - 1830, were printed in each
year, or how the circulation of the ’’Sydney Gazette” or ’’Hobart Town
Gazette” compared in numbers with, say, that of the ’’Sydney Morning
Herald” today. It is beyond question that very few copies indeed of
these early imprints were made, for delay from want of paper was
frequent and we find advertisements appearing in the contemporary
press asking to buy copies a year or two later, with what success,
if any, we know not. These early publications were, in addition,
frail, unimportant and unimpressive in appearance and often printed
on flimsy and poor paper. Fortunately the Mitchell Library has
practically complete sets of these early imprints, but the libraries
of the rest of Australia outside Sydney, have very few, and students
are often put to groat inconvenience through the absence of copies
in their neighbourhood. More and more of these publications tend to
be locked up for ever in overseas libraries and universities, which
have become more and more Pacific-conscious since World War 11.
Books and pamphlets touching Australia and printed in
England, and to a still greater extent those printed in the United
States of America, have become rarer, although generally speaking
they were printed in larger editions than early Australian imprints
and the local conditions aided their preservation to a much greater
extent than the Australian conditions.
September, 1954. BiblioNews Vol. 7? No.lo.


A recent letter from a bookish friend resident in the
South West of England and closely in touch with the current rare
book offerings runs as follows; ”1 have not added to my New Zealand
collection recently. Not only does hardly anything of interest
to me appear in the booksellers’ catalogues, but the things that come
up at Sotheby's etc. have reached such high prices that I have not
been able to secure any. I have always believed that early ''Austral-
asians” must become very difficult to find, especially anything
important* once the big English private libraries have been dispersed.
As far as I can gather, much goes to the States and into University
and Public libraries over there, so such copies are lost to the
collecting world.”
Let us not be downhearted, however. The scarcer the fish
the more knowledgeable, enterprising and active must the angler
become. In other words, the rewards in the book world of today go to
the collector who possesses a good back-ground knowledge of Australian
history, including learning in Australian literature, art, printing,
biography and bibliography; who misses no opportunity; reads extens-
ively both old and modern books, and makes friends of all the book-
sellers in his neighbourhood and abroad. It is still true that the
early bird catches the worm, but it is equally true that the worms
fall to the bird that recognizes a worm when he sees it. There is
scope,too, for amateur detective work. The age of discovery is not
yet past.
A recent note from a fellow collector in another State,
records a previously unknown item in Australians printed in so un-
likely a country as the Dominion of Canada. ”My friend” he writes,
’’picked it up for sixpence in a junk bookshop. It had a tattered
calf binding on it, with the title ’’Waifs” on the spine, hence the
fact that none of the eagle-eyed Australians collectors looked inside
until my friend took the trouble. It pays to have a peep inside the
covers of old volumes.”
In the introduction the author of this quaint item states
that this story ’’must not be looked upon as fiction. The majority of
the incidents recorded were experienced in the life of one person.
The whole of them were recounted to me by parties conversant with the
facts... The incidents concern the experiences of a young lad born
* (Here the lecturer illustrated the points hy referring to
(a) Kendall’s ’’Songs from the Mountains” with the subsequently
omitted poem ’’Ninian Melville”;
(b) Fowles ’ ’’Sydney in 18U8” (original issue in parts);
(c) Bonwick’s GOLD DIGGERS MAGAZINE;
(d) Thomas L. Mitchell (junior's) satirical poem ”To Bourke’s
Statue” (printed under the pseudonym ”Ichneumon”) and reprinted
many years later.
September, BiblioNews Vol 7? No. 10.


near Glasgow, who falling into evil ways and stealing money is trans-
ported to Van Diemen’s Land for 14 years. . ."
He arrives in Van Diemen’s Land, fights the blacks, is
praised for his bravery, and is put in charge of a small boat. One
of the crew is found with stolen goods on board, blames our hero who
is arrested, escapes, is recaptured and sent to Macquarie Harbour.
Here the convicts, including our hero, capture the pilot boat and set
sail for South America. The vessel beginning to sink, they take to
the boat after six weeks at sea. Three days later they reach land at
Valdivia in Chile.
The hero then takes ship to the United States where he
becomes an American citizen, - Surely a story packed with adventure
and good value for sixpence, even though there may be exaggeration or
even invention.
Another prize was recently described in an English book-
seller's catalogue;
"The Story of the Life of Thomas Jones. A Prisoner of
Norfolk Island, by a Prison Chaplain."
This is a new item also and these instances go to show that
we have not yet exhausted the romantic possibilities of collecting
Aus traliana.
Another very promising field open to the collector of to-
day, where small expenditure may have rich results, is the discovery
of Australian references in unlikely books, pamphlets, broadsides or
magazines, |
+ (Examples of success in finding copies of two rare works:
(a) Adam Lindsay Gordon’s "The Feud. A Ballad", printed in 30
copies at Mount Gambier in 1864*
(b) John Farrell’s ’’Ephemera: An Iliad of Albury", printed in
Albury, 18?8.
j (Here the lecturer gave a few illustrations of rare pamphlets and
books found to contain Australian reference.
(a) The pamphlet received by Dr. John Dunmore Lang from an
accused person in Victoria, throwing light on the Eureka
Stockade riots;
(b) An actor playing in Portsmouth who visited the convict hulks,
and had a most interesting interview with his former butler,
who was under sentence of transportation to Botany Bay;
(c) A writer on balloons in Cork, predicting the exploration of
Australia by air-ship.)
September, 1954. BiblioNews Vol. 7, No. 10.


A book-collector who specialises in some subject or
subjects and strives for completeness in a limited field has been
called a ''cabinet” collector.
The supreme example, in this system of collecting was
Frederick Locker-Lampson whose notable collection was confined to
celebrated English books in finest condition. To collect upon a plan
in a limited field of Australiana is to invest the pursuit with both
dignity and usefulness. The collector becomes master of his subject.
His collection may not occupy much space but will be well housed, and
the books will be in as fine condition as possible. The collector will
be wiso if he follows his own interests and does not attempt to throw
his net too widely.
Some of the English books to which reference has ‘been made
furnish lists of subjects which present interest and value to a
collector in England or America. Many of these classes could not be
pursued with much advantage in Australia. It may perhaps be regarded
as a fitting conclusion to this study to enumerate some (and some only)
of the subjects in Australiana, which may catch the interest of the
book-lover and result in a really good collection, well worthy of
permanent preservation as a unit.
(1) Early voyages such as De Quiros, Dampier, Tasman, Bougainville
and Cook, also the curious group known as "imaginary voyages” to the
Pacific. All these books are of great interest but are now very coster
in original editions.
(2) Accounts of Australian explorations and voyages. These are
often of fascinating interest, especially when read in a comfortable
arm-chair, before a cheery fire.
(3) The rise and advance of air navigation, with the accounts of
great flights and flying men and women.
(U) The progress of Australian industries such as wool, wheat and
wine, and the lives of their pioneers.
(5) Australian poetry, fiction and drama. Here there is great
scope for the selective taste and literary judgment of the collector,
especially in his estimate of new writers. To collect the whole out-
put in these classes would be a most ambitious scheme when one re-
collects that Serle in his Bibliography of Australian and New Zealand
Verse lists 2700 items up to 1925* This is by no means a complete
list, and at least 1000 items must now be added to cover verse issued
since 1925. The output in fiction and drama too has been very great,
perhaps as great. The collector will probably confine his collecting
to writers whose work is celebrated and likely to be of permanent
value. The books of these he will endeavour to acquire in good
original condition, and in autographed presentation copies if possible.
September, BiblioNews Vol. 7* No.lo.


Original letters and manuscripts will enhance the value of the
collection.
(6) The experiences of political prisoners in Australia.
This is a very interesting field of collecting, embracing as
it does the Scottish Martyrs; the Irish Patriots; the Canadian Exiles;
the Tolpuddle Martyrs; the Chartists and others *
(7) Convicts and Transportation, with the accounts of hulks, convict
ships and prisons, and the experiences of ex-convicts, who published
and sold these accounts to maintain themselves after their return to
England.
These booklets are all curious and rare.
(8) Mining in all its phases, including rushes, life on the gold-
fields, the Eureka Stockade Riots, lucky "strikes” and other thrilling
experiences.
(9) Medicine, surgery, dentistry and veterinary surgery, hospitals,
public health and related subjects, of which a most extensive
annotated bibliography is being prepared by Dr. Edward Ford, Dean of
the Faculty of Medicine in the University of Sydney,
(10) Books, pamphlets and broadsides relating to our history in a
general sense.
(11) The outback, experiences of pioneers, overlanding, early
locomotion, and transport, and the Northern Territory.
(12) The origin and growth of our cities and towns, churches and
institutions. A most extensive bibliography of "local histories" is
being prepared by Mr. Lan McLaren of Melbourne.
(13) Criminal and civil trials, "bloods", bushranging and other
crimes, police crime detection, prisons, reformation methods and
movements, lives of reformers and philantropists, etc. Detective
fiction.
(11|) The Australian aborigines, their mode of life, customs, rites,
race origin, languages, weapons, utensils, etc. The work of missions.
111-treatment in early times. Training, education and utilisation in
industry. Absorption into the community. Aborigines who have shown
themselves gifted in art, music, literature, science, etc. Thelate
Mr. L.L. Politzer was completing a most extensive bibliography of
scientific papers and books upon the aborigines when his lamented
death occurred three weeks ago.
(15) Political history, with biographies of notable political
figures and administrators. Cartoons and cartoonists.
September, 195k BiblioNews Vol. 7« No. 10.


(16) Bibliography, libraries, book-collecting, notable
collectors and collections,
(17) History of the Press, and the lives of leading journalists.
(18) Economic history, varieties of political opinion and rise of
political parties, growth of unionism and the advance of social
legislation, banking? insurance, building societies and other social
institutions.
(19) Art books, illustrated books, books issued in limited
editions, and finely printed books. This class of Australiana if
selected with taste and discrimination will probably increase in
interest and value,
(20) The sea, wrecks and other marine disasters, shipping companies,
famous ships, single-handed voyages, and inded all that pertains to sea.
(21) The wars in which Australia has been involved, the history of
Army, Navy and Air Force and auxiliary services.
(22) Art, Music and the theatre,
(23) Juveniles.
There are only a few of tho branches of Australiana, which occur
to one as well worthy of consideration. They are capable of almost
unlimited expansion, and if any one of them is followed by a collect-
or it will provide a life-long interest. A cheap and yet valuable
means of extending a '’cabinet’' collection is to add scrapbooks of
cuttings and illustrations from magazines and newpapers reinforcing
the books and pamphlets and increasing the interest and value of the
collection.
In conclusion let me say:
’’everyone to his taste, and to each and all of you good hunting!"
HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
BIBLIONEWS is issued.monthly to members of the Book Collectors’
Society of Australia to which the subscription is 10/6 per annum,
payable to the Treasurer, Box 905? G.P.O. Sydney,
The Editor will be glad to publish any checklists, bibliographical
notes, or articles relating to book-collecting. Send to Walter W,
Stone, 6k Young Street, Cremorne, N.S.W.
September, 195^4-• BiblioNews Vol. 7* No. 10.




