

Collection of Chinese and Other
far Eastern Art


1203. Description on reverse side.


Collection of Chinese and Other
far Eastern Art
ASSEMBLED BY YAMANAKA & COMPANY, INC.
NOW IN PROCESS OF LIQUIDATION UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF THE
ALIEN PROPERTY CUSTODIAN
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
194 V
680 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, N. Y.
846 North Michigan Blvd., Chicago, 111.


1203. Rare Imperial vase, superbly fashioned from fine white Ta Ch’ing
semi-eggshell vitreous porcelain; the pear-shaped body rises to a gracefully
flaring cylindrical neck with bulbous foliated mouth-rim. On a translucent
glaze of exquisite purity, to simulate glass, the artist painted the decoration
in a most delicate manner, employing only the finest opaque and translucent
enamels. The main subject portrays a Chinese princess resting on rockery,
watching two children at play. She is clothed in voluminous robes, with fan
in hand, and in her high hair-dress wears a garland of flowers; a bowl filled
with fruit and leaves rests on rockery by her side. The personage group
is surrounded by a vista of lawn, shrubs, rockery, gnarled trees, clusters of
flowers, and a rustic fence. A band of plantain leaves connected by ju-i
head motifs encircles the lip. The decoration is executed in a harmonious
combination of pastel colorings of various shades of sepia, green, rose, red,
orange, yellow, lavender, blue and black. On the obverse side of the neck
a poetic calligraphic inscription is pencilled in black with the artist’s seal
mark in red, the poem reading:
“The branches seem lit by a moon that never wanes;
The flowers are teeming with an autumn that is its own law.”
This type of perfect Chinese ceramic technique is associated with the
ware known as Ku Yiieh Hsiian (Ancient Moon Pavilion), which supposedly
is the studio name adopted by an artist known as Hu. However, it is
reasonable to assume that the decoration may be the artistic achievement
of the Italian Jesuit Father, Josephus Castiglione (known in China as Lang
Shih Ning), who acted as an advisor to the Imperial Court while stationed
in Peking during the 18th Century.
On the white glazed base appears in raised enamels the four character
mark of the period and reign of Emperor Ch’ien Lung. Height —6%"
This Imperial porcelain vase enjoys an international reputation and was
formerly in the private collection of the late Mrs. Christian R. Holmes of
New York. The vase is incased in a glass vitrinc with revolving gilded
metal stand.
(See black and white illustration 1203 for obverse side of vase)


9\.MMOMMCCWCMf
The American business of Yamanaka & Com-
pany, Inc., is now under the supervision and
control of the Alien Property Custodian of
the United States of America by virtue of
the vesting by the Custodian of 100% of the
capital stock of the three American stores of
Yamanaka & Company, Inc., located in New
York, Boston and Chicago.
Leo T. Crowley
Alien Property Custodian


Foreword
In perusing this brochure, the reader will observe that the vast majority of Oriental Art illustrated
and described therein originated in China. On hearing the name of that Flowery Kingdom,
the mind of the average occidental is conveyed immediately to the land of mystery, romance,
beauty and culture. The Chinese are a race of creative artisans. China is a country that has
carried on its tradition for over five thousand years without any break in its culture, development
of art, aesthetic enjoyment and religion. The Chinese possess an inherent artistic consciousness that
explains the exquisiteness of their art. They take pride in every opportunity to express their love
for aesthetic beauty and think nothing of the patience and toil required to accomplish that purpose.
Their daily lives typify an existence lacking completely the turmoil and haste that is so much a
part of the activities of the occidental.
During the past fifty years the civilization of the West has made greater strides in its under-
standing of the philosophy and art of China and its people than in all the preceding ages. At the
present time China and the United States of America are fighting for the same international prin-
ciples, and this democratic comradeship is bringing about in the minds of the American people a
closer sympathy for and understanding of China, its people and its great arts of antiquity. The Art
of China is one of the great arts of the world. It is for that reason that the Alien Property Custodian
adopted the policy to liquidate this important collection in an orderly manner so as to give the
museums, private collectors and those interested in articles for decorative purposes an unusual
opportunity to acquire at substantially reduced prices outstanding examples of Oriental Art from a
country that is an important ally of the United States of America.
The articles illustrated in this brochure were selected from this important collection as repre-
sentative examples of the various branches of Oriental Art involved. It will be noticed that the
collection embraces practically every branch of Chinese Art, dating from the Shang Dynasty (1766-
1122 8.C.) up to the 19th Century, including archaic bronzes and jades, potteries, stone and wood
sculptures, paintings, tapestries, and monochrome and polychrome porcelains. There are also available
several outstanding groups of Cambodian, Siamese, Indian, Gandhara and Afghanistan sculptures.
The Japanese floor screens, prints, netsuke, inro, ceramics and textiles are exceptional specimens.
The collection also includes jades and cultured pearl necklaces. Oriental jewelry, Chinese snuff bot-
tles, as well as a wide variety of modern and semi-antique objets d’art, together with lamps and other
items for interior decoration.
We have used extreme care in the preparation of this brochure to insure reasonable accuracy
in describing each article. However, it should be borne in mind that in many cases dynasty attribu-
tions should be regarded as expressing an idea or a style rather than an exact chronological
designation. For that reason the absolute correctness of authenticity of every article cannot be
warranted. However, in connection with archaic bronzes and jades it is possible in some cases to
give a definite date based on inscriptions, etc. Nevertheless, anyone interested in any of the articles


described in this brochure may have the privilege of consulting any authoritative person of his
own choosing for further verification of authenticity prior to purchase.
In dealing with archaic jades, bronzes and stone sculptures, acknowledgment is given to
Dr. Alfred Salmony, Art Director of the New York University, who has collaborated with us in a
most cooperative manner.
After you have had an opportunity to review this brochure and will indicate to us the articles
that interest you, we feel sure that the FINAL PRICES we shall submit will make it possible for you
to acquire the items selected. The articles illustrated are on exhibition in the New York Galleries;
but should it be your preference to examine any specimen before purchasing, we shall gladly send
it to you on a ten-day approval.
We respectfully solicit your inquiries, which will receive our prompt and careful attention.
ALLEN J. MERCHER
Chairman of the Board
Yamanaka & Co., Inc.
OF THIS BOOK, 10,000 COPIES HAVE BEEN PRINTED
BY THE JOHN B. WATKINS COMPANY, NEW YORK


Preface
There is prevalent in this country just now a great desire for a better understanding of
the Chinese, whose history has been recorded for more milleniums than ours has
centuries. Even in Marco Polo’s time it stretched back unbroken for 3,000 years. The
current liquidation by the Alien Property Custodian of the United States of America of
the thousands of examples of Chinese art in divers forms taken over with the huge Yamanaka stock
constitutes, along with commercial advantages, an opportunity to get better acquainted with China.
In making the necessary inventory of the stock many rarities, long forgotten in storage, have
been uncovered. Likewise, shipments from the firm’s branch houses have contributed to the concen-
tration of goods in the New York store, so that the stock is larger and better now than it has ever-
been before. Happily this immense stock will be disposed of by “private treaty,” for the Alien
Property Custodian realized that dumping such a quantity of rare goods on a limited market not
only would have upset trade conditions but would have missed an opportunity for the education
in Chinese art that is going to help us understand the Chinese people better.
UNDERSTANDING THROUGH ART
Modern civilization’s beginnings are commonly placed at the start of the Italian Renaissance toward
the end of the fourteenth century. Marco Polo’s twenty-year stay in China (1275-1295) had ended a
hundred years before. The record of his travels constituted the Western world’s only knowledge of
China for nearly two hundred years more.
The Renaissance had risen to its height and had degenerated into Raroque before voyagers
began to bring back to Europe distorted stories of China along with strange wares. Since then the
West has been learning more and more about China and added knowledge has brought added
respect.
It is an axiom that China can best be understood through its art, for China’s art is China’s
life. There never has been a time since the dim beginnings of China, maybe 6,000 years ago, when
the handiwork of the people has not been artistic. The earliest bits of pottery yet found indicate
a native aesthetic sense, which means an instinct for the beautiful. The Chinese laundryman who
makes out your ticket places his ideographs on the slip of paper so that he achieves a perfect
asymmetrical balance between the characters and the blank spaces. Apparently China started with
this sense and has never lost it.
ARTANDTIME
Now art is achieved through skill and craftsmanship, either instinctive or acquired, and time is a
minor factor. That is why Chinese art began to degenerate after the Western valuation of time was
imposed on it. English and American sea captains trading with Canton in the eighteenth century
placed orders for Chinese wares, but they must be ready at a certain date, when the captain made
a return voyage. This was contrary to Chinese instinct and habit and the ware so turned out was
too inferior in quality for use in China. In fact, it was made and decorated on a mass production
basis solely for foreign markets and was called Chinese Export Ware. A misnomer, Oriental
Lowestoft, has clung to it because the first to arrive in England entered the port of Lowestoft.


Porcelain is the form of Chinese art most commonly recognized in the West and one who has
not given thought to it may be somewhat confused at the glib use of Chinese names by collectors.
Han, Ming, K’ang Hsi—these seem worse than Greek to the layman. Most people can remember
seven names and their dates, however, and to simplify somewhat an entrance to the enchanting
realm of Chinese art, especially porcelain and pottery, I should like to call attention to seven eras
of Chinese ceramics—seven golden ages.
These are by no means all of the lush periods of Chinese art. The archaeologist’s spade and
pick have pierced the crust of rubble and tomb walls which up to the last few years have shut’ us
off from the knowledge of the Shang and Chou dynasties, golden ages also, and the civilization of
each is now understood to a remarkable extent. Pottery dating from around 2,500 B.C. has been
discovered, however, thus taking us still further back into the “Patriarchal Period,” which has
commonly been believed to begin about 4,000 B.C.
Doubtless when archaeology again has a chance to resume its enlightening work we shall find
other golden ages in China’s dusky past, the longest continuing civilization on the globe.
GOLDEN CERAMIC AGES
The seven epochs I have arbitrarily picked as golden ages are the names most often heard in
connection with Chinese ceramics. Perhaps a table might help:
Han dynasty, 206 B.C. - 220 A.D.
T’ang dynasty, 618-906.
Sung dynasty, 960-1279.
Ming dynasty, 1368-1644.
K’ang Hsi period, 1662-1722.
Yung-Cheng period, 1723-1735.
Ch’ien Lung period, 1736-1795.
The apostrophe in certain names is merely a guide to pronunciation. Without it ch has the
sound of /' and k the sound of g. Thus the ch in Ch’ien Lung is pronounced as in charity while in
Yung-Cheng it is pronounced jeng.
In the Han dynasty the pottery (porcelain was not yet discovered) was mostly made of red
clay and a green glaze was common. Somewhere about this time Buddhism was introduced into China
and this seemed to have a stimulating effect on all the arts. Painting flourished and bronzes were
inlaid with silver and gold.
In the T’ang dynasty Buddhistic art was at its height in China. The pottery was made of finer
clay and a greater variety of colors appeared in the glazes. Grave figurines of men and women
and of horses and of other animals were made in this age in great numbers, some of unglazed red
clay, others glazed in three colors, blue, yellow, green. These were substitutes for the sacrifice of
living beings, both animal and human, which ancient custom decreed must accompany the dead into
the next world. It is believed that true porcelain, the fine, translucent ware, was discovered in this
dynasty.
WONDERS OF SUNG
An age more golden than either the Han or the T’ang was the Sung dynasty. It was a period in
China comparable to the Italian Renaissance. Literature flourished, the art of painting bloomed
forth and many new types of ceramics were evolved. Delicate blue and green glazes were used
on the pottery. Crushed strawberry and other hues of red were splashed on a sky-blue ground.
White porcelain with cut design, which shows when a piece is held to the light, and many other
types of true porcelain were produced. Celadon glaze, the mild greenish gray color, was discovered
in this dynasty and the -secret of putting crackle in a glaze was learned.


In the Ming dynasty the ceramic arts took a spurt along with a minor renaissance. The famous
blanc de chine ware was an outstanding production of this period. The designs on Ming decorated
wares had a certain boldness and definiteness of conventionalized form easy to learn. An aubergine
color (grayish plum describes it best) was a favorite tint combined with shades of blue from lapis
lazuli to turquoise. In the other arts painting had a revival and jade cutting began again to be
appreciated.
Names of these eras thus far have been those of separate dynasties. That following the Ming,
T’a Ch’ing, beginning in 1644, was the last of the long line of China’s monarchic governments, for
it continued until the establishment of the Republic in 1912. Divisions of the T’a Ch’ing dynasty
are called periods, after the name of the reigning emperor. Our table includes three of these, the
K’ang Hsi, the Yung-Cheng and the Ch’ien Lung. The bulk of the porcelain collected in the West
was made in these three periods.
LATER CERAMIC GLORIES
In the K’ang Hsi period eggshell porcelain was introduced. Great proficiency was attained in single-
color porcelains —peachbloom, apple green, clair de lune (blue sky after rain), tea dust. The list
also includes sang de boeuf, Imperial yellow and mirror black. Famille verte (really five colors) was
an achievement of this period.
In the short Yung-Cheng period the outstanding ceramic accomplishment was a change in the
famille verte to the famille rose, a pink glaze. In this period European design had a certain influence
on Chinese artists, to their detriment.
The sixty years of Ch’ien Lung, from 1736-1795, were truly a golden age, for the ruler was
a man of great culture, highly appreciative of beauty, liberal in his patronage of artists and a great
collector. Porcelain making maintained the eminence it had reached in the K’ang Hsi period but
its high estate ended with Ch’ien Lung. All the arts flourished at this time. Painting was at a high
level and jade cutting reached a degree of skill never before attained.
Porcelain and pottery of these seven golden ages are illustrated in the pages which follow.
There are also examples of other periods in the Yamanaka stock as well as representative pieces of
the other arts, such as bronzes, jades and sculptures.
BRONZES A PUZZLING ART
One of the earliest and most puzzling forms of Chinese art are the ancient bronze vessels of various
types used in the ritual of ancestor worship. The puzzle lies in the fact that the earliest examples
found, dating from the Shang dynasty (1766-1122 8.C.) show an art fully developed and a skill
completely proficient.
The ornamentation of the earliest bronzes known has little kinship with Chinese design as we
understand the term. It is made up of geometric motifs strangly similar to forms found on the archaic
pottery of many peoples. With the advent of the next dynasty, however, the Chou (pronounced
Jo) the character of the ornament changed and the geometric designs gave way to animal forms,
which became more and more elaborate and involved and at the end of the dynasty were almost
indistinguishable in a complexity of scrolls and spirals.
Possibly the introduction of Buddhism, which brought into existence a golden age of new
things, hastened the disuse of bronze ritual vessels. Anyhow, the art of bronze casting disappeared
at this time. Another art which ceased at the same time was that of jade cutting. It was later
revived, but the bronze casters’ skill perished with them.


JADES AND PAINTINGS
Archaic jades contemporary with the earliest bronzes have been discovered in China and they, too,
had a ritual use. The Chinese have always considered that jade has a mystical quality and some-
times they have ascribed medicinal properties to it. A burial custom was to close each of the nine
orifices of the body with a piece of jade and most of the archaic bits collected are of this type.
Jade carving had a recrudescence in the golden age of the Sung dynasty and the art of the
jade cutter reached its peak in another golden age, the Ch’ien Lung period, for the emperor was
an ardent collector of jade. In this epoch the “paper thin” Tibetan carved bowls and other vessels
were first produced.
Those who are attracted to the simplicity and exquisite craftsmanship of Chinese painting
find that they have to help out the artist when they look at a landscape, which is not at all a
harmful mental exercise. Chinese painting has been called naturalistic, but the naturalism is not the
sort to which the Occident has been accustomed. It is there, but it is so subtly expressed that it is
only suggested by the painter. The observer has to help supply the likeness or the resemblance.
The painter’s mastery of his medium is so great that the whole scene never appears at one
glance. Continued study brings out more and more suggested details. Just as in arithmetic the lowest
common denominator results from eliminating many factors, so a Chinese painting is a reduction to
lowest terms of the myriad elements in a landscape.
The finest painting is usually attributed to the Sung dynasty but it had another flowering in the
Ming dynasty. Earlier examples are in monotone, later in color, but color follows the canons of
draughtsmanship and it is never obtrusive.
Sculpture in the Western sense, an independent expression of art, somehow was not general
among the Chinese. There are examples in the Yamanaka stock, however, of figurines carved in
stone from the Wei dynasty (386-557 A.D.) and the later Sui, T’ang and Sung dynasties. All these
periods were after Buddhism came to China and statues are mainly examples of Buddhistic art. In
this connection, the stock includes also Khmer, Siamese, Indian and Afghanistan sculptures.
CHINA CAN TEACH US MUCH
I have tried in this sketchy outline to indicate that Chinese art is not really too much for the grasp
of any who appreciate beauty and who have regard for skill. China in these seven golden ages
has been a nation to which culture was a custom, learning a lamp and beauty the breath of
existence. Chinese art in any form is as near perfection as it is possible for human beings to come.
It sets a standard and one fine bit of porcelain or bronze or jade in a home at once raises the tone
of that home.
Chinese history in its long, unbroken line includes the invention of printing from movable
types, the invention of gunpowder for fireworks displays (perverted by Western nations to uses of
war) and even the experiment of communism, which, by the way, did not work. The Chinese have
revered beauty, they have encouraged learning, they have suffered from adherence to their ethical
codes and they have a truer estimate of the value of time than the Western world.
In the time of peace to come the Chinese will want to learn from us what we can best teach
—industrialism. It is to be hoped that we shall want to learn from them what they know so well—
the value of art in daily living.
Charles Messer Stow.
Antiques Editor,
The New York Sun.


CHINESE DYNASTIES AND PERIODS
Shang-Yin B.C. 1766-1122
Chou B.C. 1122- 249
Early Western Chou B.C. 1122-c950
Middle Chou c950-c6OO
Late Eastern Chou c6OO-c249
Chin B.C. 249- 206
Former (Western) Han B.C. 206-A.D. 25
Later (Eastern) Han A.D. 25- 220
The Three Kingdoms 221- 280
The Six Dynasties 220- 589
Western and Eastern Chin 265- 419
Period of Northern and
Southern Dynasties 386- 589
North
Northern Wei 386- 535
Eastern Wei 534- 550
Western Wei 535- 557
Northern Ch’i 550- 577
Northern Chou 557- 581
South
(Liu) Sung 420- 478
Southern Ch’i 479- 502
Liang 502- 556
Ch en 557- 589
Sui 581- 618
Tang 618- 906
The Five Dynasties 907- 960
Liao 907-1125
Sung 960-1279
Northern Sung 960-1127
Southern Sung 1127-1279
Chin (Nu-chen) 1115-1234
Yuan 1260-1368
Ming 1368-1644
Hung-wu 1368-1398
Chien-wen 1399-1402
Yung-lo 1403-1424
Hung-hsi 1425
Hsiian-te 1426-1435
Cheng-t’ung 1436-1449
Ching-t’ai 1450-1457
T’ien-shun 1457-1464
Ch’eng-hua 1465-1487
Hung-chih 1488-1505
Cheng-te 1506-1521
Chia-ching 1522-1566
Lung-ch’ing 1567-1572
Wan-li 1573-1620
T ai-ch’ang 1620
T’ien-ch’i 1621-1627
Ch’ung-cheng 1628-1644
Ch’ing 1644-1912
Shun-chih 1644-1661
K’ang-hsi 1662-1722
Yung-cheng 1723-1735
Ch’ien-lung 1736-1795
Chia-ch’ing 1796-1821


JADE
Confucius once remarked: “The model man of old compared Jade to Virtue; it is of warm,
liquid and moist aspect, like Benevolence; it is solid, strong and firm, like Politeness; when
struck it gives out a pure far-reaching sound, vibrating long hut stopping abruptly, like
Music; though faulty, it does not hide its good points; when superior, it does not conceal its
defects; like Truth, it gives out a bright rainbow; it shows a pure spirit among the hills and
streams, and in the whole world there is no one that does not value it.”
CHINESE SYMBOLISMS
Practically all decoration resorted to by the Chinese is symbolical of some event or thing in connec-
tion with their religious beliefs, culture and life. In that connection there is outlined below a brief
description of the important Chinese symbolisms:
KUAN YlN—The Goddess of Mercy—The Goddess
of Maternity —The Goddess of Longevity. She is
born of the Lotus and hears all prayers.
DRAGON—The emblem of Imperial power and crest
of the Emperor; also the symbol of the beginning
of Spring. The dragon is an inseparable quantity
and is the most important and venerated figure
motif with which almost everything and anything
Chinese is connected, and which holds a remark-
able position in the history of China. The dragon
has always enjoyed the attention of the Chinese
people and is considered by them as the greatest
benefactor to mankind. Its origin is veiled by
obscurity. It is supposed to have the power to
make itself dark or luminous, subtle and thin,
heavy and thick; can shorten or lengthen itself,
and can make itself visible or invisible at pleasure.
In the Spring the dragon rises to the sky, and in
the Autumn it plunges into the water. It has
a faculty of invisibility, sustains and embraces
heaven, distributes rain and regulates the waters.
The dragon is depicted in many forms, each hav-
ing its own significance. Most often the dragon
will appear in the attitude of trying to grasp the
flaming pearl—the pearl is truth and the dragon
represents wisdom, thus symbolizing “Wisdom pur-
suing Truth.”
FENG-HUANG —This is the crest of the Empress.
It supposedly had the head of a pheasant, the body
of a peacock with spreading wings, the neck of a
turtle, the beak of a swallow, and the body of a
dragon. Its appearance heralds virtuous statesmen.
LOTUS —This is the symbol of self generation or
eternity of matter. It is also symbolical of purity
and perfection because it grows out of mud and
yet is not defiled. Its fruit is ripe when the flower
blooms, just as the truth preached by Buddha bears
immediately the fruit of enlightenment.
PA KWA—This is a system of broken and unbroken
lines; also called the mystic trigrams, by which the
Chinese philosophers were able to analyze the laws
of nature, and supposedly when handled by divin-
ers gave clues to the secrets of the existence of life.
The trigrams also symbolize the four points of the
compass and the four half-points, and these eight
points are capable of sixty-four different combina


tions. They also represent water, mist, fog, cloud,
heat, light, thunder, wind and mountains.
PEONY—This is the rose of the Chinese and the
queen of flowers and symbolizes riches, honor, and
beautiful women.
SHOU LAO—Also LAO TZU and considered the
God of Longevity.
YIN YANG —This is the duality of nature —Yin being
female and Yang male.
COCK —The bird of fame.
BAT—The herald of good fortune and love.
FLOWERS OF THE FOUR SEASONS—
Peony for Spring —riches and honor
Lotus for Summer —ever-growing and developing
Chrysanthemum for Autumn —longevity
Prunus for Winter —beauty
KYLIN—This is a mythical quadruped with the head
of a dragon, a single horn on forehead, and with
the form of a deer, scales of a fish, and tail of an
ox. It is an omen of good fortune and benevolence.
It is the incarnation of the five elements out of
which all things are made— water, fire, wood,
metal, and earth. The word is derived from Ch’i
(male) and Lin (female).
SCEPTRE JUI —“As you wish” —in accordance with
your heart’s desire. It is said to have been derived
from the sacred fungus of long life, and it is there-
fore considered an emblem of longevity.
HORSES OF MU WANG—These represent the
steeds which conveyed the spirit of the Chinese
Emperors to the realm of the Gods.
PEACH —This is the fruit of immortality, and sup-
posedly grows in the gardens of Hsi Wang Mu
(the Queen Mother of the West). She is generally
attended by a Phoenix.
DOG OF FO—This is the Chinese conception of the
lion. The Dog of Fo is almost invariably found as
companions, male and female. They are Buddhistic
lions. The Dog of Fo is Buddha’s hound of heaven,
guardian of the throne. In the Chinese home the
Dog of Fo was generally placed inside the thresh-
hold in order to prevent the evil spirits from gain-
ing entrance to the home.
EIGHT IMMORTALS —Everyone who is interested
in Oriental Art has heard about the eight im-
mortals. Painters and artists in every medium have
depicted these figures in some way or another.
They are ever present in the life of the Chinese,
and when indeed an occidental collector is fortun-
ate in acquiring even two or three figures of the
Eight Immortals, he may consider himself very
fortunate. Of course, to have the entire eight with
Shou Lao is a collecting achievement of a lifetime.
They were supposed to be Taoist immortals, and
they remained as such down to the present day in
Chinese folklore.
FLOWER AND FRUIT SYMBOLS FOR EACH
MONTH OF THE YEAR
January —Prunus
F e bruary —Peach
March —Tree Peony
April —Cherry
May —Magnolia
June —Pomegranate
July —Lotus
August —Pear
September —Mallow or Medicinal flower
October —Chrysanthemum
November —Gardenia
December —Poppy
EIGHT BUDDHISTIC EMBLEMS OF
HAPPY OMEN
Wheel —Doctrine of Buddha
The Golden Umbrella —Heavenly protection
Canopy —S overeignty
Vase or Sacred Urn —Sacrifice
Pair of Fish —Fidelity
Continuous Knot —Eternity
Conch Shell —Prosperity
Lotus Flower —Self generation or eternity of matter.
EIGHT PRECIOUS OBJECTS (Chinese Pa Pao)
The leaf of Artemisia —Fragrant plant of good
omen
Lozenge —Picture
Cash —Coin symbolizing wealth
Pearl —That which grants every wish
Open Lozenge —The symbol of victory
Pair of Books —Literature
Horn-like Objects —Containing the elixir of long
life


Hanging Stone —Justice
THE EIGHT PA PAO OF THE TAOISTS—These
are always found in the hands of the Eight Im-
mortals, and were supposed to give some remark-
able power to the immortal who possessed them;
Lotus Basket of Flowers
Sword Bamboo Musical Instruments
Pilgrim Gourd Fan
Castanets or Bones Flute
RAM—Supposedly represents the revitalizing power
of Spring.
THE FIVE ELEMENTS ARE—Water, fire, wood,
metal, and earth.
TIGER —The symbol of power and strength.
DEER—The symbol of great age.
STORK OR CRANE—The symbol of long life.
WHEEL OF LAW—Represents the crushing effect
of Buddha’s preaching upon delusions and super-
stitions, just as a wheel crushes anything it passes
over.
THUNDERBOLT—This is the emblem of the divine
force of Buddha’s doctrine which shatters all false
beliefs and mundane wickedness.
BELL—The sound of the sacred bell is believed to
disperse the evil spirits, which explains why bells
are hung on the corners of the eaves of temples
and ring when the wind blows.
SCROLL—This is the sacred text of the Buddhistic
scriptures and the story of truth.
BUDDHA’S HAND—Is the one with the index and
little finger pointing upward. It is the symbol of
wealth.
TURTLE —The emblem and incarnation of all per-
vading and unlimited strength. The earth is sup-
posed to rest on the back of the turtle according
to Chinese mythology. Also symbolizes longevity.
TWIN CARP —Symbolize conjugal felicity and love.
DUCKS—A pair of Mandarin ducks denote conjugal
affection.
MAGPIES—Two magpies are the foreboding of a
happy meeting.
FOUR LIBERAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS—Writing,
painting, music, and checkers.
THE THREE RELIGIONS OF CHINA
Confucianism —Is a system of ancestor worship, and
this religion had little bearing on the decorative
arts. It was taught originally by Confucius, who
was immortalized by his classical “sayings.”
Buddhism —This was first practised in China during
the Ist Century A.D. It had a great bearing on the
Arts of China, and its influence may be seen in
many of the decorative motifs. The Kuan Yin,
Goddess of Mercy, is the most renowned sculptural
figure of this religion. Many of the great stone
sculptures are representative of the Chinese Budd-
histic religion.
Taoism —This religion is one that has appealed more
than any other to the imagination and superstition
of the Chinese people, and for that reason has been
the foundation for most of the decorative motifs
in their works of art. It was apparently founded
by Lao Tzu in the 6th Century B.C. It was a
religion that resulted in the adoption of myths,
legends, and superstitions, and finally became part
of the daily life of the Chinese. Lao Tzu is gen-
erally depicted as an old bald-headed man riding
on a water buffalo. It is generally believed by the
Chinese, that Shou Lao, God of Longevity, repre-
sents the spirit of the founder of Taoism. It is Shou
Lao that is venerated by the Eight Immortals, a
group of figures that always have been considered
a worthy acquisition by collectors for decorative
purposes.
INTERIOR VIEW OF NEW YORK STORE AND MEZZANINE GALLERY




1. Bronze mirror with dragons and lozenges. Loyang
provenance.
Diameter —s%" Late Eastern Chou Period
2. Bronze eight-lobed mirror with four birds, four
flower stalks, clouds and central toad.
Diameter —5%" Tang Dynasty
3. Bronze six-lobed mirror with silver and gilt inlay
depicting lions, plant tendrils, two birds and toad
as knob.
Diameter —214" Tang Dynasty
4. Bronze six-lobed miniature mirror with two lions,
two birds, grape tendrils and central toad as knob.
Diameter —214" T’«ng Dynasty
5. Bronze six-lobed mirror with two lions, two birds
and plant tendrils inlaid in silver.
Diameter —2l4" Tang Dynasty
6. Bronze six-lobed mirror, silver inlay, with three
lions and plant tendrils.
Diameter —2%" Tang Dynasty
7. Bronze mirror with floral design and inscrip-
tion, bearing blue patination.
Diameter —2l4" Tang Dynasty
8. Bronze six-lobed mirror with three birds and
three flower stalks, inlaid with silver.
Diameter —2%" Tang Dynasty
9. Bronze six-lobed mirror, silver inlay, showing two
lions, two birds and plant tendrils.
Diameter —214" Tang Dynasty
10. Bronze square mirror with grape scrolls, birds,
four lions and central toad.
Diameter —4l4" Tang Dynasty
11. Bronze mirror with teeming hooks, leaves and
four “T” design. Shou Chou provenance.
Diameter —sl4" Late Eastern Chou Period
12. Bronze mirror with dragons and lozenges. Loyang
provenance.
Diameter —7l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
13. Bronze mirror with central star design. Loyang
provenance.
Diameter —7l4" Late Eastern Chou
14. Bronze mirror, spiral background with dragon
and lozenge design.
Diameter —s 94" Late Eastern Chou Period
15. Bronze mirror, “TLV” pattern with birds and
inscription.
Diameter —4l4" Han Dynasty
16. Bronze mirror with Four Immortals, four hydras,
squares with inscriptions and different tendrils.
Diameter —6" Three Kingdoms Period
17. Bronze mirror, the central disk showing six lions
and grape tendrils; birds and other animals in border,
central knob in shape of toad.
Diameter —6" Tang Dynasty
18. Bronze mirror with dragons and lozenges. Loyang
provenance.
Diameter —7l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
19. Bronze mirror with animal and tendril inter-
lacings.
Diameter —4l4" Early Han Period
20. Bronze mirror, “TLV” pattern depicting stylized
animals and flowers with inscription band.
Diameter —sl4" Early Han Period
21. Bronze mirror with teeming hook and spiral
background; superimposed with dragons and spirals.
Diameter —B" Late Eastern Chou Period
22. Bronze mirror with teeming hook and spiral
background upon which are superimposed com-
pounded cross and square with star fillings.
Diameter —B" Late Eastern Chou Period
23. Bronze mirror with spiral and volute background;
three stylized dragons superimposed.
Diameter —4l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
24. Bronze mirror with four nipples and four stylized
dragons.
Diameter —3%" Han Dynasty
25. Bronze mirror with four nipples, two stylized
dragons and toad as central knob.
Diameter —4l4" Han Dynasty
26. Bronze mirror with triangle and volute back-
ground; four leaves, four dragons and four birds, all
superimposed. Shou Chou provenance.
Diameter —7l4" Late Eastern Chou Period




27. Bronze mirror, “TLV” pattern, with birds and
inscription.
Diameter —5%" Han Dynasty
28. Bronze mirror with stylized dragons and leaf
ornaments.
Diameter —4%" Late Eastern Chou Period
29. Bronze mirror, triangle and volute background,
superimposed with eight-lobed star design, stylized
dragon and tiger ornaments. Loyang provenance.
Diameter —9V4" Late Eastern Chou Period
30. Bronze mirror, back with blue patina; archaistic
design with silver thread inlay.
Diameter —s%'' Late Eastern Chou Period
31. Bronze mirror, spiral background; in center, four
birds with flying bands; on edge, two dragons and
two tigers.
Diameter —B" Style of Six Dynasties
32. Bronze mirror, “TLV” pattern with different
animals in central field and border.
Diameter —6" Han Dynasty
33. Bronze mirror, light green patina, background of
teeming hooks and five bears in bird’s-eye view.
Loyang provenance.
Diameter —5%" Late Eastern Chou Period
34. Bronze mirror with teeming hooks and spirals
and four “T” motifs. Shou Chou provenance.
Diameter — 6%" Late Eastern Chou Period
35. Bronze mirror with three inscription bands, star
combinations and square central knob. Silver coating.
Diameter —8%" T’ang Dynasty
36. Bronze mirror with two inscription bands, “TL”
design, numerous animals, tendrils and central quatre-
foil.
Diameter —BV4" Han Dynasty
37. Bronze mirror with teeming hooks and stylized
bird design. Shou Shou provenance.
Diameter —6V4" Late Eastern Chou Period
38. Bronze mirror; grape tendrils with six large and
small lions, birds and central toad.
Diameter —B" T’ang Dynasty
39. Bronze mirror with holy mountain, lotus com-
pound, sage playing harp and Feng Huang bird.
Silver coating.
Diameter —6%" T’ang Dynasty
40. Bronze mirror, background of teeming hooks
with stylized birds and flowers. Ch’ang Sha prove-
nance.
Diameter —5Vi" Late Eastern Chou Period
41. Bronze eight-lobed mirror with two parrots,
flower stalks and strings of beads. Silver coating.
Diameter —10Vi" T’ang Dynasty
42. Bronze mirror, black surface with green patina,
showing superimposed “T” design and leaves super-
imposed on background of teeming volutes. Shou
Chou provenance.
Diameter —6%" Late Eastern Chou Period
43. Bronze mirror with interlaced dragons on spiral
background.
Diameter — 6W Late Eastern Chou Period
44. Bronze mirror with grape tendrils with four lions
and two peacocks around central knob of chimera;
the border contains bird motifs. Silver coating.
Diameter —6%" T’ang Dynasty
45. Bronze vessel with strainer base, decorated with
three bands of interlaced stylized tigers, two loop
handles held by animal masks and braid on edge.
Height —BV4" Diameter —11V4"
Late Eastern Chou Period
46. Bronze circular vessel with expanding footrim
and plain surface coated with green patina; on each
side appears tiger masks holding loose rings.
Width —9" Han Dynasty
47. Bronze libation cup (type Chiieh) with three
feet and inscribed handle; body of vessel is deco-
rated with triangular cross-section, tiger masks, rising
blades and serrated flanges; two mushroom lugs near
spout.
Height —BV4" Width —TVs" Shang Dynasty




48. Bronze receptacle for food (type Kuei); short
foot, two handles emerging from bovine heads; upper
band with tiger masks and stylized birds; near foot
simplified feather band. Inscription in base.
Height —6V4" Width —l2V4" overall
Middle Chou Period
49. Bronze pouring vessel (type Ho); drum shaped
body on four feet with long spout and handle. On
spout, tiger mask with spiral handles and scale bands;
on drum, whirl center and scale bands; on handle,
tiger head with buffalo horns and scale bands; feet
emerging from tiger heads.
Height —lo 74" Total Width —lS’A"
Middle Chou Period
50. Bronze “TLV” mirror, central quatrefoil with
nipples, two spiral bands, different animals and
tendrils.
Diameter —BVs" Han Dynasty
51. Bronze pouring vessel or so-called sauce boat
(type “I”); handle in form of tiger; on body lozenge
field with spirals and nipples; four “S”-shaped ani-
mals as feet; green and blue patina.
Height—sVl" Width— lo 74"
Late Eastern Chou Period
52. Bronze cooking vessel on three legs (Ting type,
An Yang find); band with stylized birds, lozenge
field with protruding nipples, and two inverted “U”
handles on rim.
Height —774" Diameter —6" Shang Dynasty
53. Gilt bronze globular bowl with cover, plain
surface finial knob, coated with green patina.
Diameter —674" Han Dynasty
54. Bronze mirror with spiral and triangle back-
ground with superimposed eight-lobed star; blue
patina.
Diameter —6V4" Late Eastern Chou Period
55. Rare pewter food receptacle (type Knei); the
two handles emerge from buffalo heads; upper part
of body showing two central eyes. This is one of a
set comprising articles 56 to 62 inclusive. All from
the same excavation.
Height — sV2” Width —lOV2" Early Western Chou
56. Rare pewter beaker (type Ku); tiger masks on
median band. One of a set of seven vessels.
Height —BVi" Diameter —sVi" Early Western Chou
57. Unusual lead figure of female riding the Tiger
of the West, with inhammered silver thread applique;
surface covered with white gesso.
Length — BV2" Height —7" Six Dynasties
58. Rare pewter container for liquid (type Tsun);
widely flaring mouth; on body tiger mask flanked by
two birds. One set of seven vessels; see Nos. 55
and 56.
Height —BV4" Width — B" Early Western Chou
59. Rare pewter libation cup on three feet with
handle; triangular cross section (type Chiieh); mush-
room lugs at the mouth-rim and ornamental band on
body. One of a set of seven vessels.
Height — BV2" Early Western Chou
60. Rare pewter food receptacle with cover and
handle (type Yu); on cover, band with birds; on
body, band with central masks and birds.
Total Height —loW" Width — 6V2”
Early Western Chou
61. Rare pewter libation cup (type Chiieh); three
feet with triangular cross-section; mushroom lugs at
mouth-rim and ornamental band on body.
Height — BV2" Early Western Chou
62. Bronze container for liquid (type Tsun); on
bulb, tiger mask flanked by vertical dragon.
Height —9l4" Diameter —774" Early Western Chou
63. Bronze beaker (type Ku); tiger masks on bulb
and split tiger masks on foot; green and red patina.
Height —l3V4" Diameter —s%"
Early Western Chou Period
64. Bronze cooking vessel (type Li-Ting); supported
by three feet, with two upright handles; at neck
tiger mask and birds; above feet tiger masks.
Height — lW overall Early Western Chou Period
65. Bronze libation cup on three feet with triangular
cross-section (type Chiieh); handle topped by tiger
mask; inscription underneath handle; tiger masks
with rising blades; serrated flanges; two short mush-
room lugs near spout.
Height —BV4" Width —7%" Shang Dynasty


66. Bronze container for liquid (Tsun type); in-
scribed on highly receded base; rising blades with
stylized birds, snakes with kauri shells, tiger masks,
returning and vertical dragons; flanges with “T” and
“I” pattern on bulb and foot; green and blue patina.
Northern Honan provenance.
Height — 10" Diameter — 7%"
Early Western Chou Period
67. Bronze libation cup on three feet with triangular
cross-section (type Chiieh); handle topped by tiger
mask; inscription underneath handle; tiger masks with
rising blades; serrated flanges; two short mushroom
lugs near spont.
Height — B%" Width — 7 Vs” Shang Dynasty
68. Bronze container for liquid (type Tsun); plain
surface is coated with green patina.
Height — 6Vs" Diameter —6 Vi" Shang Dynasty
69. Bronze beaker (type Ku); rising blades and
snakes on neck; tiger masks on median band; tigers
in profile and tiger masks on foot; serrated flanges
on bulb and foot; green patina.
Height — l 2%" Width — 7" Shang Dynasty
70. Bronze storage jar (type Lei); at neck, two
handles for lifting; near base one handle for tipping;
rope pattern at base and tiger mask on top of each
handle, otherwise plain.
Height — 14 Va" Early Western Chou Period
71. Bronze beaker (type Ku); on median band, tiger
mask with buffalo horns; on foot cicadas and tiger
masks with crooked horns; bulb and feet with flanges;
green and red patina.
Height — 1114" Diameter — 6Vs" Shang Period
72. Bronze container for liquid (type Hu); flattened
shape; lipband with body of tiger; on shoulder two
tubes in shape of tiger mask with ram’s horns; on
body between tubes band with birds; beneath, large
band with bodied tiger flanked by vertical dragon;
beneath, small band with tiger; main ornament on
body tiger heads with horns in shape of animals;
at base band birds are looking backwards; all orna-
ments set into finely cast spiral background; vertical
flanges on broadside. Exceptionally beautiful and
rare specimen; mottle light green and red patina.
Height —lsMj" Width —lol6" Shang Period
73. Bronze beaker (type Ku); on neck, rising blade
with buffalo heads and eyed band; on bulb, tiger
mask with buffalo horns; on foot, eyed band and
tiger mask with crooked horns; serrated flanges on
bulb and foot; inscription on base, indicating that it
was made for female member of the Fu family.
Height —11" Diameter — 6Vj" Shang Dynasty
74. Bronze container for liquid (type Hu); on shoul-
der two tiger masks with scale and spiral pattern
holding loop rings, light green patina.
Height —l2l4" Width —9" Late Eastern Chou
75. Bronze vessel inlaid with gold and silver depict-
ing a fabulous animal. The hinged cover is equipped
with a bird’s head finial.
Length —SlT' Height —6%" Sung Dynasty
76. Gilt bronze Buddha in sitting posture on draped
pedestal.
Height —614" Tang Dynasty
77. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva with halo, on
lotus pedestal.
Height —5" Wei Dynasty
78. Solid lead statuette with hammered silver; repre-
senting a horned ram.
Height —314" Length —414" Six Dynasties
79. Gilded bronze human mask with areas of green
patination showing textile impressions.
Height —8%" Width —6%" Six Dynasties
80. Solid lead statuette with hammered silver; repre-
senting a horned ram.
Height —314" Length —414" Six Dynasties
81. Gilt bronze Buddha with reticulated halo, seated
on lotus pedestal bearing beaded strings.
Height —6" Tang Dynasty
82. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva with eleven heads and
six arms carrying lotus flower, bottle and wheel.
Height —6%" Tang Dynasty




83. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva standing on lotus pedes-
tal, carrying fly whisk and bottle.
Height —sV4" Sui Dynasty
84. Bronze incense burner in form of a reticulated
bird resting on plate; nine small birds on breast,
back, wing and tail.
Height —7V4" Width —10" Han Dynasty
85. Gilt bronze applique ornament in shape of styl-
ized tiger mask.
Height —3" Han Dynasty
86. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva with large halo sitting in
position of royal ease; carried by lion.
Height —6%" Tang Dynasty
87. Pair bronze applique ornaments in form of an
owl’s head; covered with green patina.
Height —2V4" Early Western Chou Period
88. Bronze pole top —wheel shape —with open-work
rattle.
Height —6" Shang Dynasty
89. Bronze pole top —wheel shape —with open-work
rattle.
Height —4 Vi" Shang Dynasty
90. Bronze pole top —wheel shape —with open-work
rattle.
Height —6" Shang Dynasty
91. Pair bronze applique ornaments in form of an
owl’s head; covered with green patina.
Height —2V4" Early Western Chou Period
92. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva sitting in position of
royal ease, carried by elephant.
Height —s" Tang Dynasty
93. Gilt Bronze flame ornament from Buddhist altar;
pointed oval shape with lion in midst of foliage.
Height —4%" Tang Dynasty
94. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva carrying fly
whisk and bottle; lotus pedestal.
Height —9%" T’wng Dynasty
95. Gilt bronze Buddha standing on lotus pedestal;
carrying alms bowl in left hand.
Height —6%"
96. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva on square ped-
estal; carrying lotus flower in right hand.
Height —6" Sui Dynasty
97. Gilt bronze standing monk with folded arms,
standing on lotus pedestal.
Height —4" Tang Dynasty
98. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva standing on square base;
carrying fly whisk and bottle.
Height —4%" Tang Dynasty
99. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva on lotus
pedestal.
Height —4V4" Sui Dynasty
100. Gilt bronze tree with seven Buddhas of former
and present existence on square base; inscribed;
coated with green patina.
Height —B Vi" Wei Dynasty
101. Gilt bronze standing Buddha on lotus pedestal.
Height —sV4" Tang Dynasty
102. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva; square ped-
estal and large pointed halo; inscribed.
Height — 5%" Wei Dynasty
103. Gilt bronze seated Buddha.
Height —3 Vi" Tang Dynasty
104. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva on lotus stalk;
open-worked halo; carrying lotus flower and bottle.
Total height —sV4" Tang Dynasty
105. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva sitting in position of
royal ease.
Height —4%" Tang Dynasty
106. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva standing on lotus ped-
estal; carrying jewel in left hand.
Height —s%" Sung Dynasty
107. Gilt bi onze four-armed Bodhisattva standing on
lotus pedestal.
Height —10%" Tang Dynasty
108. Pair bronze applique ornaments; stylized tiger
masks holding movable ring.
Length —7%" Tang Period


109. Gilt bronze square pedestal with Buddha seated
on lotus throne, and two guardian kings.
Total height — 4%" Tang Dynasty
110. Gilt bronze applique ornament in shape of styl-
ized open-work monster mask; green patina.
Height — 4" Diameter — 4 7 /s" Six Dynasties
111. Gilt bronze Bodhisattva on square base with
open-worked halo; sitting in position of royal ease
holding lotus flower.
Height — ll" Tang Dynasty
112. Gilt bronze applique ornament in shape of styl-
ized open-work monster mask; green patina.
Height —3%" Width —s" Six Dynasties
113. Gilt bronze standing Bodhisattva; square pedes-
tal and open-worked halo; carrying fly whisk and
bottle.
Height —7%" Tang Dynasty
114. Pair bronze applique ornaments; stylized tiger
masks holding movable ring.
Length —7 3 4" Tang Period
115. Gilt Bronze Bodhisattva standing on lotus flow-
er, bottle in right hand.
Height —BVi" Sui Dynasty
116. Box with thirty carved bone and clay fragments.
Shang Dynasty
117. Bronze inlaid with gold thread tripod as canopy
stand; in three parts; spiral and floral patterns.
Overall Length — 4'4 Han Dynasty
118. Bronze inlaid with turquoise, square chariot
fitting; tiger mask in relief and stylized dragons in
turquoise inlay.
4VT square Shang Dynasty
119. Gilt bronze spearhead mounted with quatrefoil
foot.
Height — 10%" Width — 4Vs" Six Dynasties
120. Bronze human mask with green patina showing
textile impression.
Length —7" Six Dynasties
121. Bronze applique ornament in form of tiger mask
with movable rings, coated in silver, bearing red
patina. (Mate to No. 122.)
Total length — sl4" Diameter —4%"
Late Eastern Chou Period
122. Bronze applique ornament in form of tiger mask
with movable rings, coated in silver, bearing red
patina. (Mate to No. 121.)
Total length — 514" Diameter —4%"
Late Eastern Chou Period
123. Carved bone object; tiger in profile, eyed band
and blades engraved on both sides.
Length — 714" Shang Dynasty
124. Bronze applique tiger mask with granulated
background holding movable ring. Shou Chou prov-
enance.
Total height —2" Late Eastern Chou Period
125. Pair bronze chariot fittings—tube with forked
terminals.
Height —3" Han Dynasty
126. Bronze horse bit, the cheek plaques in form of
“S” combination of open-work geometrical designs
connected by a chain.
Length of plaque — 5” Length of chain —4"
Han Dynasty
127. Pair bronze chariot fittings—tube with forked
terminals.
Height —3" Han Dynasty
128. Bronze applique ornament; tiger mask with
granulated background holding movable ring. Shou
Chou provenance.
Total height —2" Late Eastern Chou Period
129. Bronze curved knife topped by elliptical ring
with three knobs; suspension loop; slit on handle;
thorn and knob at the junction of handle and blade;
chevron pattern in upper part. (An Yang find.)
Length —l 3" Shang Dynasty
130. Bronze applique ornament; tiger head with
horns.
Height —7 Vi" Middle Chou Period
O


131. Bronze lynch pin with tiger head top.
Length — 4" Middle Chou Period
132. Bronze applique ornament; tiger head.
Height — l%" Middle Chou Period
133. Pair bronze appliques; leaf-shape with cicada,
tiger and spiral ornaments.
Length — s" Width — 3" Slicing Dynasty
134. Pair applique pewter silhouettes of naked hu-
man figures.
Height — 2l4" Six Dynasties
135. Bone applique with turquoise inlay; stylized
tiger mask.
Height — 214" Shang Dynasty
136. Pair bronze applique ornaments; leaf-shape
with cicada, tiger, and spiral ornaments.
Length — 5" Width — 3" Shang Dynasty
137. Bronze foot of halberd inlaid with silver bands
in lozenge and spiral pattern.
Length — sl4" Late Eastern Chou Period
O
138. Bronze applique head of a buffalo; from the
Ordos region.
Height — l%" Wei Dynasty
139. Bronze applique in form of a fox head; from the
Ordos region,
Height — l%" Wei Dynasty
140. Pair of bronze appliques; open-work square
with vertical rows of does; from the Ordos region.
Height — 2" Han Dynasty
141. Bronze ladle with blue and green patina.
Length — 914" Height — ll 4" Six Dynasties
142. Pair of shallow cups on short feet; shape of
five-lobed flower with engraved center and engraved
bands on outside of each leaf; silver with green
patina.
Height — ll 4" Diameter — 414" Tang Dynasty
143. Bronze pole ends; stylized dragon heads at
curved end; green patina.
Length — 4%" Width — 3" Six Dynasties
-144. Pair bronze intertwined rings with spiral and
scale ornaments; green patina.
Greatest diameter — 3l4" Middle Chou Period
145. Gilt bronze belt hook in shape of a hydra; tip
in shape of bear; center in shape of a stylized bird.
Length — 7l4" Han Dynasty
146. Bone plaque; stylized tiger in relief; style of
Early Western Chou Period.
Length — 514"
147. Bronze dipper with curved handle; buffalo
heads on both ends terminating in broad flange; light
green patina.
Length — 7%" Early Western Chou
148. Bronze foot of halberd inlaid with gold and
silver spiral ornaments.
Length — 4l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
149. Bronze belt hook inlaid with silver and tur-
quoise; spiral combinations on body; animal heads at
both tips and in center.
Length — 7l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
O
150. Bronze sword with geometrical ornament on
guard; green patina.
Length — 18" Late Eastern Chou Period
151. Bronze fragment of blade; tiger with ram’s horn
in profile; green patina.
Length — 7l4" Early Western Chou Period
152. Bronze axe; on blade tiger head in relief; on
butt recessed tiger head.
Length — 8%" Early Eastern Chou Period
153. Bronze leaf-shaped lance-head; green patina
with textile incrustations.
Length— l3l4" Early Western Chou Period
154. Bronze sword with blue and green patina.
Length — 1714" Late Eastern Chou Period
155. Bronze dagger axe (type Ko); on butt tiger
profile in recess; green and red patina.
Length — 9" Shang Dynasty
156. Bronze axe with ornament on butt; light green
patina.
Length — Bl4" Late Eastern Chou Period


157. Bronze sword with green jade guard and red-
dish and bluish agate hilt.
Length —17% " Late Eastern Chou Period
158. Bronze sword with green patina.
Length —l 9" Late Eastern Chou Period
159. Bronze blade.
Length —l 3%" Late Eastern Chou Period
160. Bronze sword with green patina.
Length —lßVi" Late Eastern Chou Period
161. Bronze axe-head with primitive human figure
on each side of blade and turquoise inlay near haft.
Length —9" Late Eastern Chou Period
162. Bronze halberd head; tiger on blade; with blue
and green patina.
Length —loV4" Late Eastern Chou Period
163. Pair of bronze chariot ornaments with jingle
bell.
Length —10Vi" Han Period
164. Bronze statuette —man holding shield in left
hand, right knee on the ground.
Height —8" Early Han Dynasty
165. Bronze sword with three pairs of painted picto-
grams on each side of blade; invested with light
green patina.
Length —l 6%" Late Eastern Chou Period
166. Bronze plain sword with heavy green and blue
patina.
Length —22%" Late Eastern Chou Period
167. Bronze sword, grooved blade; on guard, finely
cut inscription; on butt, two raised rings with geo-
metrical ornaments; striated background.
Length —2oV4" Late Eastern Chou Period
168. Bronze sword; center of blade inlaid on both
sides with large piece of turquoise; light and dark
green patina.
Length —24 Vi" Late Eastern Chou Period
169. Bronze axe with ornaments on both sides of
blade; tiger mask and triangle with spiral combina-
tions; on butt, cicada and spiral combinations; all
framed by pearl band; green and red patina.
Length —7%" Width —3 Vi"
Early Western Chou Period
170. Bronze sword; guard with tiger mask on one
side and geometrical ornament on other; greyish
patina.
Length —22%" Late Eastern Chou Period
171. Bronze dagger; inscribed on one side of blade.
Length —llV4" Late Eastern Chou Period
172. Bronze sword.
Length — ll Vs" Late Eastern Chou Period
173. Bronze sword; inscription on one side of blade.
Length —l 7%" Late Eastern Chou Period
174. Bronze dagger.
Length —l6V4" Late Eastern Chou Period
175. Wall decoration composed of 13 bronze plaques
representing a demon mask.
Height of panel —29" Middle Chou Period
176. Bronze head of halberd; inscription on both
sides of butt.
Length —lOVi" Late Eastern Chou Period
177. Bronze lance-head with green and red patina.
Length —6%" Early Western Chou Period
178. Bronze head of halberd; inscription on one side
of butt.
Length —9%" Late Eastern Chou Period
179. Bronze sword with inscription in center of
blade; loop handle with spiral and volute ornaments
in gold inlay; green and red patina.
Length —2o%" Late Eastern Chou Period
180. Gilt bronze applique; green patina; rectangle
and oval; three central bands; animals in relief.
Length —3%" Height —3V4" Six Dynasties
181. Bronze three-legged cauldron (type Ting); sur-
face plain.
Height —6 Vi" Width —7%" Six Dynasties






182. Gilt bronze applique ornament; combination of
square and circle with central bands covered with
animals in relief; green patina.
Length —3Vl" Height —3V4" Six Dynasties
183. Bronze axe with grooves on blade; butt in form
of a tiger bust; red and green patina.
Length —9 Vi" Shang Dynasty
184. Bronze head of halberd with irregular spots
produced by inhammered silver; light green patina.
Length —6V4" Width —3%" Late Eastern Chou Period
185. Gilt bronze belt book inlaid with turquoise;
animal heads at both ends and in center.
Length —7%" Han Dynasty
186. Bronze chariot pole end with superimposed
tiger.
Length — 7%” Diameter —2” Han Dynasty
187. Bronze belt hook; shield with dissolved tiger
mask; light green patina; Shou Chou provenance.
Length —2Vi" Width — VA" Late Eastern Chou Period
188. Bronze Buddhist statuette with offering; green
patina.
Height —4%" T’ang Dynasty
189. Bronze miniature pouring vessel; tiger with tail
as handle and tube set into the mouth.
Length —3 Vi" Height —l%" Han Dynasty
190. Bronze foot of halberd; silver inlay in shape of
stylized birds and spirals.
Height —4%" Late Eastern Chou Period
191. Bronze applique ornament; stylized tiger mask
with ears in form of animals; two loops behind the
ears; green patina.
Height —4" Width —4%" Middle Chou Period
192. Bronze foot of halberd inlaid with silver.
Length —4%" Late Eastern Chou Period
193. Miniature bronze double-ram vessel inlaid with
gold and silver; composed of the foreparts of the two
animals and a tubular center; on the bodies, square
ornaments; on tube, stylized tiger masks and spiral
combinations.
Height —2Vi" Width — over all —2 Vi" Sung Dynasty
194. Bi •onzc foot of a halberd in shape of bovine leg
with light green patina.
Length —4 Vi" Late Eastern Chou Period
195. Bronze water vessel in form of fantastic crouch-
ing lion inlaid with gold and silver; tubular opening
in center of back and small holes at mouth.
Length —s Vi" Height —2" Sung Dynasty
196. Bronze receptacle for food with cover (type
Kuei); two handles emerging from tiger heads with
spiral horns; on cover and body, grooves and broad
figured bands; inscribed in cover and on base.
Height —9'/i" Width overall —ls"
Middle Chou Period
197. Pair of bronze chariot fittings; flattened conical
shape in three sections; decorated with cicada; one
grooved loop on each broadside and two loops on
one small side joined by link.
Height —3" Width —4V4" Late Eastern Chou Period
198. Bronze container for liquids (type Hu); inlaid
with silver, gold and turquoise; lip with meander
band; on shoulder four bird plaques and four mon-
ster heads in relief; on background animals and
meander; on body two bands with birds framing a
band with lozenges and nipples; lower part with
hooked flanges.
Height —l 3" Diameter —l 3" Sung Dynasty
199. Bronze double ram vessel inlaid with gold and
silver; composed of the foreparts of the two animals
and a tubular center; on the bodies kauri shell orna-
ments; on tube stylized tiger masks and spiral com-
binations.
Height —ll Vi" Width—over all —10Vi" Sung Dynasty
200. Pewter jug standing on spill tray; engraved with
two escutcheons, one showing an archer with land-
scaped cranes, the other with feng huang birds.
Height —l3Vi" Tang Period
201. Bronze parcel; gilded shallow bowl with en-
graved animals, cloud pattern and spirals; two tiger
masks on outside.
Height —2%" Diameter —BVs"


202. Bronze water bottle in shape of double bird, in-
laid with gold and silver; heads joined to form spout.
Height —2%" Length —2 ii" Sung Dynasty
203. Bronze open-work animal plaque; green and
red patina. Ordos provenance.
Length — 6W Height —4 V-i” Plan Dynasty
204. Bronze miniature cooking vessel (type Ting)
with gold and silver inlay; two upturned handles,
three legs and three loops on cover; spiral combina-
tions on cover and body; feet emerging from tiger
heads in profile and ending in claws.
Height —3" Over-all diameter —3%" Sung Dynasty
205. Bare pewter turtle with silver inlay.
Length —l 2%" Height —4" Six Dynasties
206. Bronze beaker (type Ku) with silver inlay; on
neck rising blades with spiral combinations; on bulb
tiger masks; on foot hanging blades and spiral com-
binations; flanges on bulb and foot.
Height —HV-s" Diameter —6" Sung Dynasty
207. Bronze receptacle for food with cover and han-
dle (Type Yii); inlaid with gold; fantastic dragons
on cover and handle; tiger heads in center of neck
and at base of handle; bird band near foot.
Height — HVi” Diameter —6" Sung Dynasty
208. Bronze cup with two handles bearing braid and
spiral pattern; at base rope pattern; on body spiral
combination over seeded ground; blue and green
patina.
Height — 2%" Width —s%" Late Eastern Chou Period
209. Bronze shallow plate with two rising handles on
short feet (type P’an); outside decorated with broad
figure band on body; scale-band on handles and verti-
cal scales on feet; triangular mark on base.
Height —4" Diameter —15%" Middle Chou Period
210. Bi •onze handle of a bell in shape of tiger; whirl
pattern on thighs and necklace with scale pattern.
Height —3%" Length —B" Late Eastern Chou Period
211. Bronze cylindrical vessel on three feet with
cover and chain handle; inlaid with gold. On cover
and neck interlaced stylized animals; on body spiral
band and hanging blades; animal masks on feet and
at the base of handles; chain supported by arch with
two tiger heads.
Over-all height — ll'/i" Over-all diameter —4%"
Sung Dynasty
212. Bronze shallow dish with green and red patina
on cylindrical base (type P’an); inside central turtle
surrounded by four fish; outside spiral combination
on body and spiral band on foot.
Height —7" Diameter — l6V/’
Early Western Chou Period
213. Bronze vessel for steaming food (type Hsien);
cauldron with two upright handles on tripod; inside
between both parts strainer movable on loops; two
ridges on body, otherwise plain; inscription inside of
cauldron.
Height — lSVti" Width —9%"
Early Western Chou Period
214. Bronze shallow dish (type P’an) with two up-
turned handles; on short base with three feet; on
body broad figured band; on foot scales with spirals;
supports with tiger mask ending in feet; inscription
inside in center.
Height —s%" Diameter —16%" Middle Chou Period
215. Bronze cooking vessel on three feet with cover
(type Ting); two bent upright handles; on cover
three hooked loops; surface plain with red and green
patina.
Height —B" Diameter —10Vi" Han Dynasty
216. Wooden head of a Bodhisattva; conical head-
dress with traces of polychrome.
Height —15" Ming Dynasty
217. Bronze cooking vessel on three feet (type
Ting); scale band on handles and body; inscription
inside of vessel; with green patina.
Height —12" Diameter —l 3" Middle Chou Period
218. Bronze stylized human mask applique; with
striated eyebrows; with green patina.
Height —9%" Width —s%" Middle Chou Period
219. Bronze container for liquid (type Hu); on neck
two tiger masks holding movable rings.
Height — lßV2” Width —l 4" Han Dynasty


220. Bronze applique; upper end in shape of tiger
mask; lower end grooved; with green and red patina.
Length —ll%" Middle Chou Period
221. Dagger axe (type Ko); mottled light green jade
as blade, mounted on bronze; upper part of blade
with stylized tiger in recess with traces of turquoise
inlay; butt in shape of bird inlaid with turquoise.
Length —ll%" Shang Dynasty
222. Dagger axe (type Ko); light green jade blade
mounted on bronze with turquoise inlay; tiger mask
on butt and stylized animal above blade.
Length — BW' Shang Dynasty
223. Light green jade with tan markings; symbol
of rank.
Length —lOMG Early Western Chou Period
224. Light and dark green jade axe, partly calcinized,
with notches on two sides.
Length — 4W Shang Dynasty
225. Dark brown and light green jade with moss-
like markings, partly calcinized; segment of disc with
four holes along base.
Length —B%" Early Western Chou Period
226. Light green and cream jade axe; notches on two
sides.
Length — 4W Shang Dynasty
227. Dark green jade chisel-shaped sign of rank.
Length — lo%" Early Western Chou Period
228. Dark green and brown jade dagger axe (type
Ko).
Length —B%" Early Western Chou Period
229. Dagger axe (type Ko); the light green and
white jade blade is mounted in a turquoise inlaid
bronze hilt; the butt is in the shape of a bird; a tiger
mask appears above the blade.
Length —B%" Shang Dynasty
230. Light green jade tongue-shaped pendant with
brown markings on one side; later inscription.
Length —6%" Han Dynasty
231. Brown and tan jade sign of rank with notches
at butt and cut out on one side.
Length —B%" Shang Dynasty
232. Dark green, brown and tan jade axe; patina
with textile impressions; notches on two sides.
Length —6" Shang Dynasty
233. Light green jade engraved plaque in shape of
human figure with brown and tan markings.
Length —s%" Style of Middle Chou Period
234. Dark and light green jade curved dagger axe
(type Ko).
Length —6%" Shang Dynasty
235. Greenish brown and cream jade dagger axe
(type Ko); partly calcinized; in front of butt lozenge
and triangle band.
Length — BV/' Shang Dynasty
236. Mottled light green and brown jade sign of
rank in shape of knife with tan markings.
Length — 9Mi" Early Western Chou Period
237. Black jade sign of rank in shape of sceptre.
Length — l 4%" Early Western Chou Period
238. Mottled light green and brown jade sign of rank
in shape of knife.
Length — lo" Early Western Chou Period
239. Grayish green and tan jade sign of rank in shape
of sceptre.
Length — 10%" Style of Early Western Chou Period
240. Black jade sign of rank in shape of knife.
Length —8" Early Western Chou Period
241. Grayish green and brown jade axe.
Length —s’4" Early Western Chou Period
242. Light green jade lance-head in shape of pointed
oval with brown and tan markings.
Length —5%" Shang Dynasty
243. Light green jade long and narrow axe with tan
markings.
Length — BVi" Early Western Chou Period
244. Light green jade narrow knife with long han-
dle; partly calcinized.
Length — l2V/’ Shang Dynasty
245. Mottled brown and tan jade sign of rank in
shape of sceptre.
Length — lo%" Early Western Chou Period




246. Grayish cream jade sign of rank in shape of
sceptre.
Length —9" Shang Dynasty
247. Grayish green and tan jade sign of rank in shape
of sceptre.
Length —ll%" Style of Early Western Chou Period
248. Mottled light green and brown jade sign of
rank in knife shape with tan markings.
Length —7l4" Early Western Chou Period
249. Black jade sign of rank in shape of sceptre.
Length —l 4%" Early Western Chou Period
250. Light green and white jade ring with grain pat-
tern; calcinized.
Diameter —3%" Late Eastern Chou Period
251. Light green and brown jade ring with spiral
ornaments; partly calcinized.
Diameter —2%" Late Eastern Chou Period
252. Light green jade ring with so-called grain pat-
tern with darker markings.
Diameter —3l6" Late Eastern Chou Period
253. Light green and white jade ring, calcinized
Diameter— 3l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
254. White jade slit ring, calcinized.
Diameter —3%" Late Eastern Chou Period
255. Mottled green and tan jade coiled dragon pen-
dant with notched border and spiral ornaments on
body.
Diameter —2%" Shang Dynasty
256. Mottled light green and tan jade ring.
Diameter —3%" Han Dynasty
257. Light green jade ring with tan markings.
Diameter —2l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
258. Light green, brown and tan jade ring.
Diameter —3%" Late Eastern Chou Period
259. Light green and tan jade arch-shaped pendant
with spiral ornaments.
Length —s%" Late Eastern Chou Period
260. Green and tan jade tongue amulet in form of
cicada; calcinized.
Length —l%" Han Dynasty
261. Light tan jade pendant in shape of a tiger with
bottle horn; partly calcinized.
Length —316" Shang Dynasty
262. Grayish green jade tongue amulet in form of
cicada with white markings; calcinized.
Length —2l4" Han Dynasty
263. Light green jade arched pendant with two tiger
masks in profile and spiral combination with tan
markings.
Length —3" Middle Chou Period
264. Light green and white jade tongue amulet in
form of cicada.
Length —2 Is" Han Dynasty
265. Light green and tan jade arch-shaped pendant
with spiral ornaments.
Length —5%" Late Eastern Chou Period
266. Dark green jade pair of pendants in form of an
‘S”-shaped dragon covered with spiral combinations.
Length —6" Late Eastern Chou Period
267. Grayish green jade ring with lighter markings.
Diameter —sls" Late Eastern Chou Period
268. Light green jade ring with so-called grain pat-
tern with black markings.
Diameter —216" Late Eastern Chou Period
269. Dark brown and light green jade ring.
Diameter —514" Late Eastern Chou Period
270. Light green and white jade calcinized disc.
Diameter —3l4" Late Eastern Chou Period
271. Light green jade symbol of heaven (type Pi)
with tan markings.
Diameter —7%" Late Eastern Chou Period
272. Light green jade ring with spiral ornaments;
calcinized.
Diameter — 2%" Late Eastern Chou Period
273. Light green and tan jade ring.
Diameter —4%" Late Eastern Chou Period


274. Mottled light green, dark brown and tan jade
symbol of heaven (type Pi).
Diameter —s%" Middle Chou Period
275. Light green jade calcinized symbol of heaven
(type Pi); on surface so-called grain pattern.
Diameter —s Vi" Late Eastern Chou Period
276. Dark green jade pendant in shape of a dragon
covered with spirals; partly calcinized.
Length —3V4" Late Eastern Chou Period
277. Green jade arched pendant with two dragon
heads and spirals; partly calcinized.
Length —2%" Late Eastern Chou Period
278. Light green and tan jade symbol of heaven
(type Pi) with brown markings.
Diameter —6V4" Middle Chou Period
279. Light green jade pendant in shape of a crested
bird; partly calcinized.
Length —3V«" Shang Dynasty
280. Dark and light green jade disc with small hole
in center; so-called grain pattern; at edge four styl-
ized birds; partly calcinized.
Diameter —s Vi" “ Late Eastern Chou Period
281. Dark green jade pendant in shape of a dragon
covered with spirals; partly calcinized.
Length —4" Late Eastern Chou Period
282. Grayish green jade ring with lighter markings.
Diameter —s Vi" Han Dynasty
283. Dark brown and light green jade symbol of
heaven (type Pi); partly calcinized.
Diameter —B" Late Eastern Chou Period
284. Light green jade symbol of heaven (type Pi);
on surface, spirals; with tan markings.
Diameter —sVi" Late Eastern Chou Period
285. Light green and dark brown jade symbol of
heaven (type Pi) with notched border; surface en-
graved with three tigers in profile; concentric circles
and lozenge band around opening.
Diameter —7Vi" Late Eastern Chou Period
286. Dark green jade symbol of heaven (type Pi)
engraved with spirals; partly calcinized.
Diameter — s%" Late Eastern Chou Period
287. Dark green jade symbol of heaven (type Pi)
with lighter markings; decorated with spiral orna-
ments.
Diameter —9" Late Eastern Chou Period
288. Light green jade dagger hilt with geometrical
ornaments; with brown markings.
Length — 2" Late Eastern Chou Period
289. Dark green jade axe with lighter markings;
notches on two sides.
Length —2'/s" Early Western Chou Period
290. Light green and tan jade dagger hilt with geo-
metrical ornaments.
Height —1%" Late Eastern Chou Period
291. Light green jade sword buckle; on surface spiral
combinations and tiger mask.
Length —4%" Han Dynasty
292. Green jade dagger hilt with brown, red and tan
markings.
Height —ll 4" Late Eastern Chou Period
293. Light green and brown mottled jade plaque in
shape of a cauldron.
Height —2'/«" Style of Han Dynasty
294. Carved bone with tiger and spiral ornaments on
both sides.
Length —3" Shang Dynasty
295. Light green jade conical link; on surface oblique
band with stylized tigers; partly calcinized.
Length —1%" Middle Chou Period
296. Brown jade sword buckle so-called grain orna-
ments on surface; partly calcinized.
Length —4" Han Dynasty
297. Light green jade sword buckle with tan mark-
ings; on surface so-called grain pattern and tiger
mask; partly calcinized.
Length —3%" Late Eastern Chou Period




298. Dark green jade pair of pendants with lighter
markings in form of “S”-shaped dragons covered
with spirals.
Length —3%" ea. Late Eastern Chou Period
299. Dark green jade pendant with lighter markings
in shape of a fish with lozenge ornament.
Length —4%" Early Western Chou Period
300. Dark green jade pendant in shape of a fish with
white markings; calcinized.
Length —3%" Early Western Chou Period
301. Light green jade pendant in form of a fish.
Length —4 W Early Western Chou Period
302. White jade pendant in form of a fish.
Length —2%" Early Western Chou Period
303. Mottled brown and tan jade belt hook; on hook,
simplified animal mask; grooves on shield.
Length — 2Vs" Late Eastern Chou Period
303-A. Green jade belt buckle; animal mask on hook;
spiral on shield.
Length — 2W 18th Century
304. Dark green jade pendant in shape of an elon-
gated fish with lighter markings. (Mate to No. 305.)
Length — 5W Early Western Chou Period
305. Dark green jade pendant in shape of an elon-
gated fish with lighter markings. (Mate to No. 304.)
Length —s%" Early Western Chou Period
306. Light green jade pendant in form of a fish.
Length —4 W Early Western Chou Period
307. Light green jade pendant in form of a fish.
Length —3" Early Western Chou Period
308. Light green jade belt buckle with brown mark-
ings; on hook tiger mask and pair of birds on shield;
geometrical ornaments on back.
Length — 2%” Late Eastern Chou Period
309. Light green and brown jade sword buckle; on
surface spiral combinations and tiger mask.
Length —3L" Han Dynasty
310. Grayish agate pair of claw-shaped pendants.
Length — 5Vs” each Late Eastern Chou Period
311. Light green jade pendant in shape of tortoise
shell with darker markings.
Length —P/i" Early Western Chou Period
312. Green jade pendant in shape of bird; partly cal-
cinized.
Length —2%" Early Western Chou Period
313. Light green jade partly calcinized pendant;
coiled dragon with spiral design.
Diameter —1 %" Early Western Chou Period
314. Bone hour-glass shaped tube with chevron pat-
tern; green patina.
Height —3" Shang Dynasty
315. Mottled light green jade pendant in shape of a
fish.
Length —3%" Early Western Chou Period
316. Light green jade partly calcinized drop-shaped
pendant. (Mate to No. 320.)
Height —l Vi" Han Dynasty
317. Mottled light green and brown jade sword
buckle with grooved surface.
Length —l%" Late Eastern Chou Period
318. Light green and tan jade sword buckle; on sur-
face tiger mask and spiral combination.
Length — IVs" Late Eastern Chou Period
319. Light green jade pendant plaque in shape of
two women; white markings.
Height — 2Vs” Style of Han Dynasty
320. Light green jade drop-shaped pendant; partly
calcinized. (Mate to No, 316.)
Height —l VC Han Dynasty
321. Mottled green and white jade archer’s ring.
Length —l%" Late Eastern Chou Period
322. Grayish green jade cylinder-shaped link with
three bird’s-heads with lighter markings.
Length —2y2" Early Western Chou Period
323. Grayish green jade pendant in shape of bird
with lighter markings.
Length — 2t4" Early Western Chou Period


324. Light green jade pendant in shape of tortoise
shell with darker markings.
Length — DA" Early Western Chou Period
325. Green jade pendant in shape of dragon; partly
calcinized.
Length —3%" Early Western Chou Period
326. Light green jade pendant in form of a bird with
lighter markings.
Length —2' - ” ' Early Western Chou Period
327. Green jade cylindrical link with lighter mark-
ings.
Length —2%" Early Western Chou Period
328. Light green and brown jade pendant in form of
a fish.
Length —3%" 18th Century
329. Light green jade pierced cylinder with raised
spirals; black markings.
Length —lVs" Late Eastern Chou Period
330. Cream jade pendant in shape of insect; cal-
cinized.
Length —2%" Early Western Chou Period
331. Light green jade pendant in form of a rabbit.
Length — DA” Early Western Chou Period
332. Light green jade statuette of a tiger with darker
markings.
Height — PA” Length — 2V*" Han Dynasty
333. Light green jade pendant in shape of a dragon
with spiral decoration with darker markings.
Lenuth —6b" Late Eastern Chou Period
O
334. Light grayish and cream jade arched pendant
with central rib; partly calcinized.
Diameter —2%" Shang Dynasty
335. Brownish agate ring with triangular cross-sec-
tion with dark markings.
Diameter —2%" Han Dynasty
336. Green and tan jade slit ring; on edge hydra and
lotus flower.
Diameter —4%" 18th Century
337. Green jade partly calcinized pendant in form
of arched dragon with notched border and geometri-
cal ornaments.
Length —3%" Early Western Chou Period
338. Light green jade partly calcinized segment of
cylinder with notched disc in center.
Length —3" Shang Dynasty
339. Light green and tan jade segment of ring with
raised center; concentric grooves on ring; partly cal-
cinized.
Length —3%" Shang Dynasty
340. New Zealand green jade flattened club with
white markings.
Length —14% " 19th Century
341. White jade statuette in form of two confronted
animals with gray markings.
Length —2L" 18th Century
342. White (so-called burnt) jade pendant in shape
of open-worked fantastic dragon.
Length —3%" 18th Century
343. Light green and brown jade lance-head in
shape of pointed oval.
Height —3%" Shang Dynasty
344. Light green and tan jade fragment of ornament
with geometrical and open-worked animals.
Length —5%" 18th Century
345. White (so-called burnt) jade pendant in form
of confronted tiger and Feng Huang bird in open
work.
Length —3" 18th Century
346. White jade plaque with two rams.
Length —5%" Ming Dynasty
347. Light green jade large hanging ornament with
brown markings; on top garuda; on body geometri-
cal carvings and incisions.
Length — IDA" Sung Dynasty
348. Light green and brown jade partly calcinized
statuette in form of a pig.
Length — 4¥j" Han Dynasty


349. Light green jade paper-weight in form of a fish
and lotus flowers; with brown markings.
Length —3Vi" 17th Century
350. Tan jade partly calcinized cylinder; one termi-
nal with spiral circle and spiral band framed by rope
pattern.
Length — TVs" Late Eastern Chou Period
350-A. Mottled grayish green and tan jade square
plaque with horse and rider in relief; calcinized.
Length —4%" Style of Han Dynasty
351. Light green jade cylinder with reddish brown
markings; on body, four stylized human masks.
Height —2" Middle Chou Period
352. Light green jade flat plaque in form of a bird.
Length —4%" 18th Century
353. Mottled brown and light green jade pendant in
shape of bearded man in wide cloak.
Length — s%” Han Dynasty
354. Mottled brown and tan jade axe-shaped pen-
dant.
Length —4%" Early Western Chou Period
355. Black jade symbol of earth (type Ts’ung) with
lighter markings.
Height —4%" Han Dynasty
356. Mottled light green and tan jade symbol of
earth (type Ts’ung); on body, two bands with
stylized human masks on each corner.
Height —2%" Middle Chou Period
357. Light green jade pendant in shape of tiger with
tan markings.
Length —s%" Style of Early Western Chou Period
358. Green jade symbol of earth (type Ts’ung).
Height —l%" Han Dynasty
359. Mottled brown agate cup with roped type han-
dle emerging from ju-i head. Exterior is carved with
“S”-shaped double snake motif in bold relief. One
side exhibits green calcinized area.
Diameter —5%" Late Eastern Chou Period
360. Mottled tan and cream jade cylinder.
Diameter —3" Late Eastern Chou Period
361. Light gray and brown jade tiger with spiral
ornaments.
Length —s%" 19th Century
362. New Zealand streaked light and dark green
jade axe, flattened.
Length — B” 19th Century
363. Mottled brown and tan jade symbol of earth
(type Ts’ung); on body four human masks.
Height — 214" Middle Chou Period
364. Dark brown and green jade symbol of earth
(type Ts’ung) with lighter markings; on body, six
bands with stylized human masks on each corner.
Height —6 'k " Middle Chou Period
365. Stone lintel used on front of a funerary table;
three projecting panels with tiger mask and two
monsters framed by spiral band and braid pattern;
on upper part 17 sectional panels with jewel of
Buddha’s teaching flanked by protecting demons and
7 animals on each side; lotus petals in upper band.
Length — Bo" long. Height —l 4"
First half of 6th Century
366. Stone bust of Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome.
Height overall —16" Sui Dynasty
367. Stone bust of Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome; in hair Buddha of meditation.
Height —l 9" Tang Dynasty
368. Stone stele with traces of polychrome; in front
Buddha and two Bodhisattvas with circular halos set
against large nimbus with flames; around central
figure are five Buddhas and six adoring figures right
and left of his body; on base are four donors wor-
shipping the jewel of Buddha’s teaching; on reverse
side Buddha sitting with two donors.
Height —19" Wei Dynasty
369. Stone head of Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome; headdress with leaf and flower motifs.
Height —l3Vi" Wei Dynasty
370. Lustrous black stone guardian lions seated on
their haunches.
Height —ll" Wei Dynasty






371. Standing stone Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome. From T’ien lung shan caves.
Height —26" T’ang Dynasty
372. Stone head of Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome.
Height —l 4" Sui Dynasty
373. Stone head of Bodhisattva from caves of Yun
Kang.
Height —B Vi" Wei Dynasty
374. Stone head of Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome.
Height —2l" Sui Dynasty
375. Stone sitting Bodhisattva with crossed legs.
Length —l 4"
Type of Wei Dynasty and Lung men caves
376. Stone head of Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome.
Height —ls" Sui Dynasty
377. Marble Bodhisattva sitting on richly carved un-
dercut lotus throne pedestal.
Height —29" Late T’ang Dynasty
378. Stone head of Buddha —with traces of poly-
chrome.
Height —15" Early T’ang Dynasty
379. Stone votive stele portraying Buddha on lotus
pedestal with circular halo set against stylized moun-
tains and trees with flying apsaras; in front, jewel of
Buddha’s teaching supported by dragon and crouch-
ing demons flanked by two guardian-kings and two
lions. Chili provenance.
Height —3l" Wei Dynasty
380. Stone votive stele with traces of polychrome;
Bodhisattva in the position of royal ease on lotus
pedestal set into niche surmounted by horse-shoe
shaped arch and stylized tree.
Height —29" Sui Dynasty
381. Stone relief of Buddha on lotus pedestal flanked
by two Bodhisattvas.
Height —2s" Early T’ang Dynasty
382. Stone fragment of votive stele depicting pro-
cession of donors and inscription.
Height—YlW Wei Dynasty
383. Wood accompanying Buddhist figure in violent
action with traces of polychrome.
Height —l6Vi" Sung Dynasty
384. Stucco standing Buddha with polychrome;
monk’s robe covering both shoulders; folds arranged
in hellinistic fashion.
Height—7" Afghanistan — 3rd to 4th Century
385. Stone model of doorway; in niche a couple of
donors framed by floral band; on tympanon Bod-
hisattva and flying apsara.
Height —25" T’ang Dynasty
386. Stone Bodhisattva in position of royal ease.
Height —15" Style of T’ang Dynasty
387. Stone head of Lohan with bulging eyes, beard,
mustache and bulging eyeballs; protruding forehead;
traces of polychrome.
Height — BV2" T’ang Dynasty
388. Stone stele of sitting Buddha with large halo.
Height —16" Style of Wei Dynasty
389. Stone head of Bodhisattva; in headdress ap-
pears Buddha of meditation. From the caves of Lung
Men.
Height —l 6" T’ang Dynasty
390. Fresco painting of the bust of Bodhisattva in
attitude of adoration. Cut out from one painting in
Turfan; expedition Le Coq.
Height —lß" Late T’ang Dynasty
391. White marble head of a Bodhisattva with traces
of polychrome. Chili provenance.
Height —l3Vi" Sui Dynasty
392. Stone head of a Bodhisattva with traces of poly-
chrome.
Height —19'/2" Sui Dynasty
393. Stone head of a Buddha with traces of poly-
chrome; headdress with central whirl arrangement.
Height —l 4" Wei Dynasty








394. Stone head of a Bodhisattva; high chignon
turned backwards.
Height— 22" Early Tang Dynasty
395. Stone grave doors, each panel 21 %" wide; in
center of each panel appears a tiger mask; above
appears a bird and below, a fish, all set against
striated background.
Height —sl" Han Dynasty
396. Fresco painting of the bust of a Kuan Yin hold-
ing lotus flower; in headdress Buddha of meditation.
Height —4B" Early Ming Dynasty
397. Rare stone sculpture of a standing Buddha
clothed in garment clinging closely to the body with-
out folds. The simplicity of the garment makes this
a most attractive specimen. Formerly in the private
collection of George Eumorfopoulos.-
Height —so" Sui Dynasty
398. Stone sculpture of a standing Bodhisattva from
the caves of T’ien lung Shan. The shoulders are well
draped and the closely fitting garment is held by a
waist band; the breast is bejeweled. Unusual ex-
ample.
Height —s 2" Early Tang Period
399. Stone sculpture of a Bodhisattva standing on a
lotus pedestal. The figure wears a jeweled beaded
necklace that extends from the neck to the knees and
the body is draped in a close-fitting and simple gar-
ment, with headdress; traces of original polychrome.
Height —48" Early Tang Dynasty
400. Four pottery panels in low relief procession
with chariot followed by horsemen and attendants.
Each tile:
Height —l 6 Vi" Width —9Vi" Style of Han Dynasty
401. Stone relief procession of donors with servants.
Length —3s" Northern Wei Dynasty
402. Stone sculpture of a Bodhisattva standing on a
lotus throne with double halo; lotus bud in right
hand; carved in bold relief.
Height —33" Early Tang Dynasty
403. Stone bas relief showing donor on horseback
with followers.
Length —l9Vi" Height —l 7" Style of Wei Dynasty
404. Very important stone sculpture of a standing
Bodhisattva on a lotus pedestal surrounded by a
double halo with lotus leaves. The body is clad in
simple garments and portrays a charming rythmic
quality. Traces of original polychrome visible.
Height —33" Early Tang Dynasty
405. Stone votive stele; in the upper part a central
Buddha seated on a draped throne is flanked by two
Lohans and two Bodhisattvas; the two pillars with
supporting demons are topped by beaded strings
partly in open work supporting lotus thrones with
central Buddha, two adoring figures and two kin-
nari. On the sides are two athletic guardians, two
flying apsaras and two guardian kings. In the center
of the lower section the jewel of teaching is flanked
by two lions, two dancers with a musical orchestra
of six and below is a procession of donors.
Height —29" Width —l 9" Early Tang Dynasty
406. Stone Bodhisattva surrounded by apsaras in
low relief.
Width —2o" Height —37" Style of Wei Dynasty
407. White marble sculpture of a standing Buddha
resting on a lotus pedestal; the figure is clothed with
a closely fitting garment of simple and graceful flow-
ing lines. Chili provenance.
Height —80" Sui Dynasty
408. Unusual wood sculpture of a Bodhisattva in a
sitting posture with traces of original polychrome.
The right arm rests on the knee of the bent leg; the
left leg is pending with the left hand resting on the
seat. On the headdress appear five lobed egrets; a
jeweled chain appears on the chest.
Height —42" Sung Dynasty
409. Wood sculpture of sitting Bodhisattva; the coif-
fure is framed by a torques; the right leg is pending
and the left leg is folded over so that the foot and
right hand meet above the right knee; the flowing gar-
ment is held at the waist by a plain belt. The entire
figure is covered with a gilt gesso.
Height —sl" Sung Dynasty
410. Stone sitting lion with traces of polychrome;
beaded string in center of chest, curls on thigh.
Height —2s" Wei Dynasty












411. Stone bas-relief; in the deep niche appears a
sitting Buddha flanked by two Bodhisattvas; on each
side of niche appears a standing Bodhisattva; the
principal Buddha is surmounted by a canopy of fly-
ing apsaras. A band of formalized lotus leaves
frames the sculpture.
Height —16" Width —l 9" Wei Dynasty
412. Unusual stone seated lion with open mouth.
Height —21" T’ang Dynasty
413. Wood sculpture of a standing Bodhisattva
clothed with well draped garment; with traces of
original polychrome.
Height —46" Ming Dynasty
414. Wooden sculpture of a standing Bodhisattva
wearing flowing robe; eyes inlaid with glass; with
traces of polychrome.
Height —37" Sung Dynasty
415. Wood sculpture of a standing Bodhisattva
clothed with well draped garment; traces of original
polychrome.
Height —46" Ming Dynasty
416. Three color pottery figure of a sitting Lohan.
Height —46" Ming Dynasty
417. Fine sculptured terra-cotta figure of Buddhistic
Priest, wearing voluminous robes with tassels and
sash band; clasped hands. The bearded head sur-
mounted by ornamented headdress; glazed in green,
ochre brown and straw-yellow; on high wooden
pedestal with central medallion of dragon. Com-
panion to No. 419.
31" high 67" overall Ming Dynasty
418. Three color pottery figure of a sitting Lohan.
Height —42" Ming Dynasty
419. Fine sculptured terra-cotta figure of Buddhistic
Priest, wearing voluminous robes with tassels and
sash band; left hand rests on knee—right hand sus-
pended; the bearded head surmounted by orna-
mented headdress; glazed in green, ochre brown and
straw-yellow; on wooden pedestal with central me-
dallion of dragon. Companion to No. 417.
31” high 67" overall Ming Dynasty
420. Pottery jar, with sides sloping to a narrow foot,
with short incurvate neck. The vessel is equipped
with two loop handles and decorated with a thunder-
bolt scroll in black pigment.
Kansu ware —circa 3,000 8.C., Neolithic
421. Grayish black terra-cotta vessel, pyramidal in
form, with short neck and wide flaring mouthrim;
encircled on the exterior with three rows of animals,
such as horses, kangaroos, bears, cocks, elephant,
deer; also double personage group; traces of the
original white and red pigments still visible.
Height —l 4%" Diameter of Base 17" T’ang Dynasty
422. Terra-cotta jar decorated with scroll pattern in
black unfired pigment, with two loop handles and
short neck.
Kansu ware—circa 3,000 B. C., Neolithic
423. Terra-cotta vase with high expanding foot-rim
and tubular neck with flaring lip; decorated in black
and red unfired pigments, portraying archaistic mo-
tifs; the shoulder bears two tiger masks.
Height —l 9%" Han Dynasty
424. Unglazed tazza-shaped incense burner; short
expanding foot with wide central drip pan, the cup
being covered by a reticulated cover with cone-
shaped finial. The vessel is formed from grayish
brown terra-cotta.
Height —l 2%" Wei Dynasty
425. Grayish black terra-cotta jar decorated from the
center to the mouth rim with criss-cross lines in
slight relief; unglazed, with earthy incrustations.
Rare specimen.
Height —20" Late Eastern Chou
426. Grayish black terra-cotta jar, ovoid in shape,
with short neck, flanged mouth-rim and straight,
short base; decorated on exterior with incised bands
of geometrical designs in slight relief.
Height —lo%" Chou Dynasty
427. Terra-cotta vase with high expanding foot-rim
and tubular neck with flaring lip; decorated in black
and red unfired pigments, portraying archaistic mo-
tifs; the shoulder bears two tiger masks.
Height —l 9% " Han Dynasty






428. Raluster-shaped vase fashioned from red terra-
cotta, with high foot, tubular neck, and flanged
mouth-rim. Around the body and lip appear con-
centric incised lines. The mock handles are in the
shape of tiger masks bearing loose rings. The vase
was originally covered with a green glaze, but
through burial in the earth has assumed a beautiful
silvery and gold iridescent patina. The base has the
remains of three spur marks.
Height — 2oW Han Dynasty
429. Green glazed terra-cotta hill censer (Po Shan
Lu) supported by three short bear-form feet, em-
blematic of strength; with dome shaped cover sug-
gesting the wave girted isle of the Taoist immortals.
Around the periphery appear galloping stags and
other animals. The original green glaze in some areas
is covered by a silvery iridescence owing to burial
in the earth.
Diameter — VA" Height —9Vl>" Han Dynasty
430. Globular jar receding into a tubular neck with
slightly flaring flanged lip, fashioned from reddish
clay. Two tiger mask loop handles protrude from the
shoulder; the brown slip covers the entire vessel
although a glaze is superimposed over the slip from
the shoulder to the mouth-rim. Three concentric lines
in bold relief, and a narrow band surround the
shoulder and neck.
Circa —Third Century A.D. Late Han Dynasty
Height —lß"
431. Pottery hill censer, with original dome-shaped
cover resting on three short feet in form of bear
masks, symbolical of strength. The periphery is sur-
rounded by concentric incised lines. Over large areas
of this jar and cover the green glaze has assumed a
patination of silvery iridescence as a result of long
burial in the earth.
Diameter — lW Height —9 Vi" Han Dynasty
432. Pyriform pottery vase on high foot, with grace-
fully expanding neck, the shoulder and body en-
circled by concentric lines, with mock tiger mask and
ring handles. The original green glaze is covered
with earthy incrustations as well as silvery iridescent
patination.
Height —l 6" Han Dynasty
433. Important statuette of a pottery rooster covered
with a green glaze exhibiting large areas of silvery
iridescence.
434. Very unusual terra-cotta bowl fashioned from
red clay, with well-formed foot, gracefully expanding
sides and flanged mouth-rim. The original green
glaze is covered with a magnificent patination of gold
and silver iridescence.
Diameter —7%" Han Dynasty
435. Terra-cotta head of a mastiff with open mouth
and pricked ears, invested with a silvery iridescence.
Han Dynasty
436. Unusual terra-cotta water dish consisting of
three joined bowls with carrying handle. Much of
the original green glaze is covered with a silver
iridescence owing to burial in the earth.
Height —7" Han Dynasty
437. Rare pottery wellhead surmounted by pagoda
roof-type finial showing pully arrangement. The
entire vessel is covered with a silvery and gold
iridescence, some areas showing the original green
glaze.
Height —l 6" Han Dynasty
438. Pottery incense burner with wide drip bowl
surmounted by a pierced conical-shaped cover. The
green glaze is coated with a silvery iridescence.
Height —5" Han Dynasty
439. A rare specimen of a sepulchral pottery model
of a farm pen housing a crane, frog, turtle and fish.
The four sides contain slits, and the vessel rests on
four stump legs. The original green glaze is partially
covered with silver and gold iridescence.
9" square Han Dynasty
440. Standing statuette of a dog with pricked ears,
open mouth and inwardly curled tail. A harness en-
circles the neck and body. A silvery iridescent glaze
covers the body, owing to burial in the ground.
Length — lWi" Height — BVz" Han Dynasty
441. Rare terra-cotta ovo-cylindrical jar fashioned
from grayish black pottery. The loop handles emerge
from archaic tiger masks in which the scrollings are




incised with geometric designs. Around the shoulder
are four incised bands comprising triangles, “S”
scrolls, etc., and on the lower part of the vessel are
animalistic figures incised in archaistic style.
Height —15" Late Eastern Chou Period
442. Deep welled pottery bowl with two loop han-
dles, exterior unglazed, interior decorated with black
unfired pigment showing radial lines.
Kansu ware—circa 3,000 B. C., Neolithic
443. Terra-cotta quatrefoil vase with body painted in
white pigment. The upper part of neck and base
reveal traces of the original unfired red pigment.
Around the body of the vase sketched in black appear
stylistic birds, and two of the sides bear a tiger mask.
Height —2l" Han Dynasty
444. Rare specimen of decorated pottery vessel in
shape of three-legged stove, the three orifices in top
surface holding circular trays.
Length —7U" Han Dynasty
445. Terra-cotta ovo-cylindrical vessel with short
neck and wide flaring mouth-rim, encircled with three
wave bands around midbody and dragon around
shoulder in relief; upper half of the vessel is glazed
and the lower half unglazed.
Height —15" Han Dynasty
446. Terra-cotta globular jar with two tiger mask
loop handles; the shoulder encircled by three tri-line
bands; traces of original glaze remain around
shoulder.
Height —ll" Diameter —12" Late Han Dynasty
447. Grayish black terra-cotta ornament with two
animalistic terminal bodies with legs, surmounted by
head of human wearing flame headdress and con-
nected by long loop-shaped body.
Length —9" Wei Dynasty
448. Terra-cotta sculpture of a legless horse, arched
neck with wide open mouth; traces of red and white
pigments.
Wei Dynasty
449. Standing statuette of dark gray pottery slightly
stooping figure with outstretched hands emerging
from large-cuffed sleeves. The garment which covers
the entire body, as well as legs, is painted in unfired
red pigment stippled with white. The hair, eyes,
and eyebrows are in black.
Height —9" Han Dynasty
450. Terra-cotta globular jar with two tiger mask
loop handles; the shoulder encircled by three tri-
line bands; traces of original glaze remain around
shoulder.
Height —11" Diameter —12" Late Han Dynasty
451. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of a horse
groom; right hand is bent and extended; left arm
close to body; hooded headdress; figure clothed in a
close-fitting garment with sash-band, and wearing
high boots; traces of original red and black unfired
pigments visible.
Height —l9'l" Wei Dynasty
452. Rare pottery three-legged cauldron, generally
known as “TUI” food vessel, with pierced strap
handles and original cover equipped with three
pierced lugs. The archaistic scroll decoration, in
grayish white and red unfired pigments, is painted
on the grayish black pate from which the vessel is
fashioned.
Height —8" Han Dynasty
453. Grayish black terra-cotta standing figure, arms
clinging to body, sandals visible —hair tied in chi-
gnon; the long closely fitting high waisted robe bears
traces of red pigment and flesh areas are parcel
coated in white slip.
Height —l 3" Wei Dynasty
454. Black terra-cotta figurine of dancing boy with
outstretched hands, clothed in short coat with waist
band and wearing turban headdress, kneeling on left
knee, right leg slightly bent.
Height —9%" Wei Dynasty
455. Grayish black pottery standing statuette, clothed
in closely fitting highwaisted robe; clasped hands
concealed by long sleeves; upturned sandals; knotted
headdress; flesh surfaces traces of white slip and
over garment are remains of original red unfired
pigment.
Height —l 3" Wei Dynasty


456. Grayish black terra-cotta box and cover painted
in white and red unfired pigments with archaistic
scroll and animal motifs, encircled by voluted con-
centric bands; interior and exterior bears earthy
incrustations.
Diameter —9" Height —7 '/T Han Dynasty
457. Grayish white pottery statuette of horse groom
with outstretched arms, clothed in three quarter
length gown with waist band and wearing long boot-
like sandals and closely fitting turban; exposed flesh
areas bear traces of white pigment, and garment is
painted in red.
Height —l 7" Tang Dynasty
458. Grayish black terra-cotta figure in the rhythmic
attitude of the dance, clothed in long garment and
high-waisted coat; the long hanging sleeves upheld
by outstretched hands —double looped headdress and
upturned sandals; traces of blue and red unfired
pigments.
Height —11" Wei Dynasty
459. Ovo-cylindrical jar with incurved neck and
gracefully flaring mouth-rim; receding towards base,
with two loop handles at shoulder; decorated on
exterior with concentric lines surrounding body;
parcel glazed.
Height —8 Vi" Late Han Dynasty
460. Grayish black terra-cotta figurine in sitting pos-
ture wearing free flowing robe, with clasped hands,
high headdress; traces of red pigment.
Height —6 W Wei Dynasty
461. Stoneware jar, baluster-shaped, short expanding
neck invested with a brownish black unctuous glaze,
terminating above foot-rim in uneven thick roll; un-
glazed surfaces exhibiting dark brown; original cover
of spiral form with wide flanged lip. Honan Ware.
Height —ITT Sung Dynasty
462. Grayish black pottery figurine in sitting posture,
clothed in high waisted robe; outstretched arms up-
holding long sleeves; high turban headdress; remains
of red pigment.
Height—GVT Wei Dynasty
463. Ovo-cylindrical jar with incurved neck and
gracefully flaring mouth-rim, receding towards base,
with two loop handles at shoulder; decorated on
exterior with concentric lines surrounding body; neck
and shoulder glazed, with glaze coagulations appear-
ing around center of vessel.
Late Han Dynasty
464. Grayish black terra-cotta figure in the rhythmic
attitude of the dance, clothed in long garment and
high-waisted coat; the long hanging sleeves upheld
by outstretched hands; two horned headdress and
upturned sandals.
Height — 12VL’ Wei Dynasty
465. Terra-cotta sculpture of a Bactrian camel, out-
stretched neck and raised head with open mouth;
overslung between two humps with tent boards,
rolled-up robes and long bag; painted in black, white,
and red unfired pigments; surface covered with
earthy incrustations.
Height —l 3%" Length —l 2" Tang Dynasty
466. Rare dark brown terra-cotta jar, resting on three
stump supports in form of archaistic bears. On the
shoulder appear four loop handles also in form of
stylized bears; four incised concentric lines surround
upper part of vessel; the short neck terminates in a
flanged lip. The entire jar is covered with a brownish
black patina.
Height —9%" Late Eastern Chou
467. Grayish black pottery hood-shaped jar deco-
rated in brown and red pigments with galloping
horses, dragons and water buffalos on sides and stag
and sceptre ju-i motifs on top; earthy incrustations.
Diameter —9" Height —7" Wei Dynasty
468. Rare circular grayish black jar with straight
sides supported by three stump feet in shape of
stylized animals; surrounded by relief bands on
mouth-rim and base. On exterior are two mock arch-
aistic tiger masks with loop handles. The original
cover with concentric bands in relief is surrounded
by three studded bosses and central medallion.
Height —6%" Han Dynasty


469. Grayish black terra-cotta equestrian group of
well modelled Bactrian horse with female rider sit-
ting astride on saddle with saddle cloth; rider wears
closely fitting long garment, hair tied in chignon,
left hand showing and right hand concealed by long
sleeve; horse and garment of rider tinted in red
pigment.
Height overall — l7W Wei Dynasty
470. Terra-cotta jar, compressed body receding to
small mouth-rim and base; the two handles in shape
of tiger masks in bold relief; around the center of
body appears a band of vertical incised lines.
Height —11" Third Century A. D.
471. Slate-colored stone Gandhara Stele depicting
Buddha sitting on throne surrounded by donors; in
niche with frieze. Unusual specimen.
Height— l 6" Width— l 7"
Second to Third Century A. D.
472. Terra-cotta jar receding to a small base and
mouth-rim with loop handles; the upper half deco-
rated in black unfired pigment with the thunderbolt
scroll.
Kansu ware—Neolithic Period —3.ooo B. C.
473. Reddish terra-cotta jar with wide open mouth
and flanged lip. Around body appears a band of
criss-cross lines in relief.
Late Eastern Chou
474. Rare legless wooden horse with loose head; the
figure is archaistically modelled and bears remarkable
traces of ancient pigmentation in tan and cream.
Length —15" Han Dynasty
475. Terra-cotta sculpture of a legless horse, arched
neck with wide open mouth; traces of red and white
pigments.
Wei Dynasty
476. Terra-cotta jar, compressed body, receding to
small mouth-rim and base; the two handles in shape
of tiger masks in bold relief; around the center of
body appears a band of vertical incised lines.
Height —11" Third Century A. D.
477. Unglazed pottery horse and rider, modelled
from dark gray clay. Rider wears gown painted with
unfired red pigment, collar in green and sleeves
white. Face, hands and neck are cream white; body
is dark gray, and saddle is white. Sculpture typifies
the powerful type of Bactrian horse. A fine compan-
ion piece to item No. 479.
Height —2s" Length —23" Wei Dynasty
478. Standing pottery figure of nobleman; exposed
flesh areas and headdress unglazed; green glaze coat
covers straw colored garment with sleeve bands in
mottled effect. Original stand in three color glazes.
Height —2814" Tang Dynasty
479. Similar in posture to item 477. Also unglazed
horse, formed from dark gray clay surmounted by
rider wearing red garment, with face, neck, hands
and legs painted cream white, sitting on saddle cov-
ered with dark red pigment.
Height —24" Length —20" Wei Dynasty
480. Photographic copy of a water color sketch exe-
cuted by Mr. S. Yamanaka, while he was a member
of an archaeological party that discovered an impor-
tant T’ang Dynasty tomb in China. The cross section
view shows the original arrangement of the mortuary
objects as they appeared when the tomb was entered.
The opening on the left side of the hill was the
entrance to the tomb. In the illustration may be
seen the Guardians of the tomb, camels, prancing
horses, musical and dancing ladies, oxen and cart,
with the sarcophagus surrounded by four priests.
481. Three-color pottery figure of an important per-
sonage, in standing posture with clasped hands. The
headdress, face and hands are unglazed. A cream
colored gown is partially covered by a green glazed
coat, the sleeve and front bands painted in brown
and green. On original pottery stand.
Height —42" T’ang Dynasty
482. Important pottery figure of a Guardian clad in
brown glazed garment, the edge of sleeve bands
painted in buff, lined in green; hands, trousers and
footwear coated with straw colored and brown glaze.
The headdress, which is ornamented with leafage
and flower motifs, as well as the face and neck are
unglazed. The pottery base supporting the figure is
covered with mottled glazes.
Height —43" T’ang Dynasty




483. Erect pottery figure of an attendant. Headdress
and face are unglazed, the lips being painted in red.
The brown colored coat is worn over a green glazed
gown, and on the sleeve bands, which are lined in
green, appear painted scroll designs. The rockery
base is glazed green.
Height —39" Tang Dynasty
484. Terra-cotta funerary model of hat rack with four
projecting curved supports, the flaring base reticu-
lated with leaf-shaped and circular apertures; long
tubular neck with flaring flanged mouth-rim; the
original green glaze has assumed a gold and silvery
patination due to burial in the ground.
Height —l 7 Vi" Han Dynasty
483. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of a horse
groom; bent right arm turned upward with down-
ward extending left arm; hooded headdress; figure
clothed in a close-fitting garment with sash-band and
wearing high boots; traces of original red and black
unfired pigments visible.
Height —19Vi" Wei Dynasty
486. Black terra-cotta figurine of rider with out-
stretched arms, wearing hood and short waist-coat.
Wei Dynasty
487. Grayish black terra-cotta standing figure of
dignitary; a short jacket with long sleeves covers the
long gown; hands clasped; sandals visible; mitred
hairdress; traces of white slip.
Height —l 9 Vi" Wei Dynasty
488. Finely sculptured terra-cotta figure of warrior
clad in armored jacket with breast plates from under-
neath which appears a long flowing robe; sandals
visible; hands, face and hood unglazed; skirt covered
with straw-colored glaze and jacket painted in green,
brown, and straw yellow.
Height —20" Tang Dynasty
489. Pottery figure of duck, unglazed.
Length —9V2" ’ Wei Dynasty
490. Terra-cotta sepulchral tripod vessel formed from
dark gray pate with flanged mouth-rim. Underneath
the mouth-rim the vessel is encircled by a twisted
rope pattern, and the three stump feet are hatched
in deeply incised irregular lines. A fine specimen of
Early Western Chou Period.
Height —4 Vi"
491. Pair of rare grayish black terra-cotta figures of
standing owls with revolving and removable heads;
clasped wings, protruding eyes and pricked ears.
Height —BVi" Wei Dynasty
492. Black terra-cotta head of horse, with wide
open mouth, distended nostrils and showing teeth.
Mounted on teakwood stand to simulated neck;
remaining traces of white pigment.
Length —7%" Wei Dynasty
493. Grayish black terra-cotta figure of Dog of Fo
resting on haunches; mane in long curls around open
mouthed head, and in flame form on back; traces of
white and red pigment. On teakwood stand.
Height —9Vi" Wei Dynasty
494. Black pottery head of neighing horse, distended
nostrils with teeth visible in wide open mouth; coated
with unfired red pigment. Mounted on teakwood
stand.
Length —7" Wei Dynasty
495. Terra-cotta jar resting on three stump feet;
stopper in shape of owl’s head; earthy incrustations.
Height —5Vi" Wei Dynasty
496. Terra-cotta sculpture of standing bird with
stylized plumage and upraised tail feathers; out-
stretched neck and curved beak. Originally covered
with a green glaze that has assumed a silvery
iridescence and earthy incrustations owing to burial
in ground.
Length —BM>" Height —7 Vi" Han Dynasty
497. Grayish black terra-cotta standing figure, arms
clinging to body, sandals visible —hair tied in chi-
gnon; the long closely fitting high waisted robe bears
traces of red pigment and flesh areas are parcel
coated in white slip.
Height —l 3" Wei Dynasty
498. Grayish black terra-cotta figure of a standing
mule with overslung baggage.
Length —B" Wei Dynasty




499. Grayish black terra-cotta female statuette wear-
ing long and closely fitting garment; left arm up-
turned and right hand holding peach; sandals
visible; traces of white and red pigment with earthy
incrustations.
Height —10% " Wei Dynasty
500. Pair terra-cotta bird statuettes with Feng-huang
head, arched rising tail; painted with white and black
unfired pigments.
501. Unusual sepulchral terra-cotta figure of rhyth-
mic dancing lady; the long sleeves upheld by con-
cealed hands; upturned sandals; hair in shape of
biscuits on each side.
Height —l 4" Wei Dynasty
502. Brown terra-cotta standing figure wearing high
waisted closely fitting long robe with arms clinging
to body; hair carefully combed and parted; serene
smiling expression; traces of red pigment.
Height —lo" Early Tang Dynasty
503. Archaistic standing bird figurine with upturned
tail-feathers; head of human wearing flame headdress;
traces of unfired pigment visible.
Height —8" Wei Dynasty
504. Grayish black pottery standing statuette, clothed
in closely fitting highwaisted robe; clasped hands
concealed by long sleeves; upturned sandals; knotted
headdress; on flesh surfaces traces of white slip and
over garment remains of original red unfired pigment.
Height —l 3" Wei Dynasty
505. Important tall standing terra-cotta figure of a
woman clothed in loosely fitting robe that flares at
the base; the clasped hands are concealed by long
hanging sleeves; a black open collar surrounds the
neck; the face exhibits a serene smiling expression;
the hair is carefully combed and tied in form of
low chignon.
Height —3o” Early Wei Dynasty
506. Important and rare black terra-cotta sculpture
of a standing horse of sturdy proportions; head with
gracefully arched neck reaching for left knee; open
mouth and pricked ears; tail docked and tied with
cord; saddle cloth underneath saddle with incised
crossing lines; an exemplary and artistic specimen
of clay modelling. On pottery stand resting in re-
cessed woodblock; traces of red pigment and earthy
incrustations.
Height —3o" Length —3B" Wei Dynasty
507. Terra-cotta standing figure of a lady-in-waiting
wearing free-flowing tightly fitting robe with long
loose sleeves; hooded headdress; right arm raised
upward: left arm fully extended downward; up-
pointed sandals; traces of original white and red un-
fired pigment.
Height —18 Tang Dynasty
508. Terra-cotta group of female circus equestrians
riding in full abandon, sitting astride in saddle with
low pummel, on a swiftly galloping horse; the long
loose sleeves upheld by outstretched arms; the hair
carefully tied in chignon; the face turned towards
observer; both figure and horse bear traces of original
white and red pigment. Companion to No. 510.
Length —14" Height —l 3" Tang Dynasty
509. Terra-cotta torso of dignitary wearing mitred
hood and clothed in long sleeved robe; clasped hands;
hair, moustache and beard in black; traces of white
and red pigment visible.
Height — 14V/’ Tang Dynasty
510. Terra-cotta group of female circus equestrians
riding in full abandon, sitting astride in saddle with
low pummel, on a swiftly galloping horse; the long
loose sleeves upheld by outstretched arms; the hair
carefully tied in chignon; the face turned downwards;
both figure and horse bear traces of original white
and red pigment. Companion to No. 508.
Length —l 3" Height —12" Tang Dynasty
511. Terra-cotta standing figure of a lady-in-waiting
wearing free-flowing, tightly fitting robe with long
loose sleeves and hooded headdress; hands extended;
up-pointed sandals; traces of white and red unfired
pigment.
Height —lß" Tang Dynasty




512. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of Bactrian
horse of sturdy proportions, with rider sitting in sad-
dle with low pummel. Horse and rider have areas of
red unfired pigment with earthy incrustations. Com-
panion piece to No. 515.
Height —21" Length —l 7" Wei Dynasty
513. Pair of terra-cotta standing figures of ladies-in-
waiting; wearing free-flowing tightly fitting robes
with long loose sleeves and hooded headdress; hands
extended; up-pointed sandals; traces of original white
and red unfired pigment.
Height —lß" Vang Dynasty
514. Grayish black terra-cotta sculptured bust of
warrior, armor clad with hooded headdress; traces of
white pigment.
Height —14" Wei Dynasty
515. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of Bactrian
horse of sturdy proportions with rider sitting in
saddle with low pummel. On horse and rider are
areas of red unfired pigment with earthy incrusta-
tions. Companion to No. 512.
Height —2l" Length —l 7" Wei Dynasty
516. White pottery horse with pawing right leg and
close-clipped mane; prominent forelock, and tail tied
with knotted cloth; attired with saddle, cloth and
triple pleated girth. The ornamental trappings and
harness are in relief, showing ponpons about neck
and pendants on back of haunches; traces of poly-
chrome.
Height —23Ms" Length —26" Vang Dynasty
517. Terra-cotta sculpture of a caparisoned charger
with long mane, arched neck and head reaching for
knee of pawing left leg; prominent forelock and
docked tail; saddle covered with incised saddle cloth
reaching to ground; horse wears bridle and orna-
mental harness with hanging side tassels; original
arched pottery base.
Length —ls" Height —10" Vang Dynasty
518. Terra-cotta horse, pawing right leg, with sad-
dle, saddle cloth and triple pleated girth. A groove
passes down ridge of neck that originally held mane
of real hair. The tail is tied with knotted cloth;
unglazed.
Height —23" Length —27" Vang Dynasty
519. Unusually rare terra-cotta sculpture of a capari-
soned Bactrian camel with arched neck and erect
head; overslung with fully laden bags, rolled tent
cloths and boards tied by ropes from which hang
wine jugs and bagged birds and squirrels; motif
apparently depicting the return from a hunting ex-
pedition. The head, neck, upper legs and two humps
are covered with a heavy growth of hair. The figure
is painted in red, mauve, grayish-black, light green
and white pigments with areas of earthy incrustations.
Height —lßl4" Length —16" Vang Dynasty
520. Pair gray pottery horses with riders; saddle and
horse blanket are painted white. The warriors are
clad in long cloaks and wear hooded headgear; on
original stand.
Height —9l4" Length —8" Wei Dynasty
521. Pottery Bactrian camel with raised head and
open mouth; bearing rider sitting astride on double
saddle cloth; the rider is clad in a long cloak and on
his back wears a rolled blanket; on original base;
unglazed.
Length —B" Height —9" Vang Dynasty
522. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of a Bactrian
pack camel, realistically modelled with haired neck
and head reared upwards; the cloth covered back
overslung between the two humps with fully laden
baskets and tent boards; body of camel tinted with
red pigment.
Height —12" Length —1114" Early Vang Dynasty
523. Rare grayish-black terra-cotta sculpture of a
standing Bactrian horse of sturdy proportions; short
cropped mane and docked tail; with female rider
wearing close fitting garment and chignon hairdress.
The saddle-cloth and garment of rider painted in
unfired red pigment; flesh surfaces of rider covered
with white slip; horse undecorated but exhibiting
areas of earthy incrustations. Mate to No. 525.
Height —1914" Length —20" Wei Dynasty


524. Unusual terra-cotta statuette of a dignitary with
clasped hands, wearing mitred headdress; green coat
overhangs a closely fitting under-dress; sandals ex-
posed; the straw-yellow, green and brown glazes
cover both the robe and the original stand; the skirt
is suffused with a silvery iridescence; face, hands and
headdress unglazed.
Length —28%" Tang Dynasty
525. Rare grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of a
standing Bactrian horse of sturdy proportions, with
short cropped mane and docked tail; seated with
female rider wearing close fitting garment and chi-
gnon hair dress. The saddle-cloth and garment of
rider painted in unfired red pigment; flesh surfaces of
rider covered with white slip; horse undecorated but
exhibiting areas of earthy incrustations. Mate to
No. 523.
Height — 19V/' Length —2o" Wei Dynasty
526. Terra-cotta sculpture of a caparisoned charger
with arched neck; the open-mouthed head reaching
for knee of left leg which is slightly bent; saddle
with long saddle-cloth; carefully combed and short
cropped mane and docked tail. Harness ornaments
in bold relief; body of horse covered with a white
slip; saddle, saddle-cloth, harness ornaments and
hoofs painted in unfired red pigment; a very spirited
posture.
Length —l 7" Height —l 3" Tang Dynasty
527. Grayish black terra-cotta figure of female with
clasped hands; the closely fitting robe spreading out
at base acts as a support; covered with white, red
and brown pigments with earthy incrustations.
Height —ls VT Wei Dynasty
528. Terra-cotta sculpture of horse with female fig-
ure sitting astride; coated with red and white pig-
ments and earthy incrustations.
Length —2B" Height —9 V/’ Wei Dynasty
529. A finely sculptured terra-cotta mortuary horse
without saddle or trappings; open mouth; docked tail;
left pawing leg; traces of red and white pigments
visible.
Height —22" Length —24" Tang Dynasty
-530. Pottery sculpture of Bactrian horse with saddle
and saddle-cloth; channel running down back of neck
originally bore real hair. The sculpture is coated with
a light green crackled glaze.
Height —2l" Length —lß" Tang Dynasty
531. Pottery pyriform vase with concentric lines sur-
rounding body; invested with an ochre-brown glaze.
Height —8 Mi" Tang Dynasty
532. Terra-cotta sculpture of the head of a horse
with ornamented bridle and well combed and short
cropped mane; head and leaf ornaments glazed
green; bridle and mane in ochre brown. Mounted on
teakwood stand.
Length —l3Mi" Height —B'/.>" Post Tang Dynasty
533. Unusual pyriform pottery vase with flanged
mouth-rim. The cucumber green glaze is suffused
with silvery and golden iridescence owing to burial
in earth.
Height —B%" Tang Dynasty
534. Terra-cotta sculpture of a Bactrian caparisoned
horse with short and carefully combed mane and
docked tail; leaf ornaments hanging from harness
and bridle. The saddle and saddle-cloth exhibit traces
of the original unfired red pigment; mane and body
trappings in light brown and the body coated with
an ochre brown glaze.
Length —2l" Height —2o'l;" Tang Dynasty
535. Pottery head of a Lohan.
Height — Yl'/T Early Ming Dynasty
536. Globular pottery jar with short incurvate neck,
concentric lines surrounding body; originally coated
with a green glaze which is now suffused with silver
and gold iridescence owing to burial in the earth.
Height —HMs" Han Dynasty
537. Pottery head of a Lohan.
Height —14" Early Ming Dynasty
538. Grayish black terra-cotta statuette of Lady-In-
Waiting; chignon hairdress; cloth hanging on left
arm; right arm extending downward; traces of red
unfired pigment with earthy incrustations.
Height —l 4%" Wei Dynasty




539. Statuette, fashioned from grayish black terra-
cotta, depicting Princess holding flower jar; short
shoulder jacket extending over free flowing robe,
exposing upturned sandals; chignon hairdress; traces
of red and white pigments with earthy incrustations.
Height —l4%'' Wei Dynasty
540. Grayish black terra-cotta statuette of Princess
with crossed arms, wearing close fitting robe; chignon
hairdress; traces of red and white pigments with
earthy incrustations.
Height —14%" Wei Dynasty
541. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of a female
clothed in closely fitting garment, concealing clasped
hands; chignon hairdress; traces of gilding, and red
and white pigments with earthy incrustations.
Length —12Vi" Wei Dynasty
542. Grayish black pottery figure of standing female,
crossed arms concealed in long sleeves; upturned
sandals; closely fitting robe; chignon hairdress; traces
of red and white pigments visible.
Height —18” Wei Dynasty
543. Grayish black terra-cotta figure of female with
clasped hands. The closely fitting robe spreading out
at base, acting as support. Covered with white, red
and brown pigments with earthy incrustations.
Height —15%" Wei Dynasty
544. Grayish black pottery figure of female wearing
long robe exposing upturned sandals, with left arm
holding unfurled scroll; head slightly leaning on right
arm; chignon hairdress; traces of gilding and red
and white pigments still visible.
Height —l 4%" Wei Dynasty
545. Grayish black terra-cotta sculpture of Lady-In-
Waiting, sash bound long robe covered by short
shoulder jacket; long sleeves concealing both hands;
chignon hairdress; traces of green and white pig-
ments and earthy incrustations.
Height —l 2%" Wei Dynasty
546. Grayish black terra-cotta statuette of female;
left arm fully extended; right hand holding vessel;
the long robe covered by small shoulder cape; chi-
gnon hairdress; traces of green, red and white pig-
ments and earthy incrustations.
Height —12%" Wei Dynasty
547. Grayish black terra-cotta statuette of Princess
holding money bag in outstretched arms; wearing
short jacket and closely fitting robe; chignon hair-
dress; traces of red and white pigments with earthy
incrustations.
Height —l 4%" Wei Dynasty
548. Grayish black terra-cotta figure of Princess,
wearing closely fitting robe exposing upturned san-
dals; clasped hands holding jar; chignon hairdress;
traces of gold, white and red pigments with earthy
incrustations.
Height —13%" Wei Dynasty
549. Fine model of a terra-cotta prancing horse with
saddle and saddle cloth with flowing ends; long
mane down on near side of horse; tail docked, fore-
lock divided and swept around ears; tassel in relief
on the quarters and on the shoulders; right leg raised
in pawing attitude; neck is flexed and mouth open.
Companion to No. 552.
Height —l 2" Length —ls %" Tang Dynasty
550. Pair of pottery horses with female riders sitting
astride; coated with earthy incrustations and red and
white pigments.
Height —9%" Length —B" Wei Dynasty
551. Sturdily sculptured terra-cotta figure of a capari-
soned horse with ornamented bridle and harness;
short cropped mane and pricked ears with docked
tail and saddle-cloth. The body is coated with a
straw-colored glaze; the trappings and ornaments in
brown and green and the saddle and saddle-cloth
exhibit traces of the original unfired red pigment;
earthy incrustations.
Length —20" Height —lß" Tang Dynasty
552. Fine model of a terra-cotta prancing horse with
saddle and saddle cloth—with flowing ends —long
mane down on near side of horse; tail docked, fore-
lock divided and swept around ears; tassel in relief
on the quarters and on the shoulders; right leg raised
in pawing attitude; neck is flexed and mouth open.
Companion to No. 549.
Height —l 4" Length —l 3" Tang Dynasty




553. Terra-cotta sculpture of a spirited caparisoned
horse with saddle and long festooned saddle-cloth;
short cropped mane; forelocks parted between ears,
arched neck and head reaching for left knee; on
original stand.
Length —14" Height — loV/’ Tang Dynasty
554. Pottery head of a Princess with chignon hair-
dress; painted with red and white pigments; hair in
black.
Height —5" Wei Dynasty
555. Terra-cotta horse, with left pawing leg, entire
body covered with blanket cloth edged with red
band, with traces of chain mail pattern in block; on
original stand.
Height— 22" Length —24" Tang Dynasty
556. Grayish black terra-cotta head of Princess—
chignon hairdress; traces of white slip pigment.
Height —5" Wei Dynasty
557. Unusual terra-cotta sculpture of a spirited horse
with well combed mane hanging over left side with
parted forelocks; the saddle covered with festooned
saddle-cloth and medallions hanging from harness
and bridle; docked tail; the figure in the attitude of
half resting on rear legs with outstretched forelegs.
Height —12" Length —l 4" Tang Dynasty
558. Pair of unusual and rare terra-cotta sculptures
of two-humped Bactrian camels with outstretched
neck and wide open mouth; coated with a streaked
and pulsating brown and white glaze.
Height —32" Length —24" Tang Dynasty
559. Important terra-cotta statuette of a dignitary
wearing a short jacket with long sleeves painted in
green, brown and white glazes. The long sleeves are
edged with a narrow band containing scroll motifs.
On the hooded headdress appears a bird in flight.
The skirt exhibits folds and the sandals are slightly
exposed. The figure stands on an original pottery
rockery stand which is an integral part of the entire
figure. The hands are clasped and the eyebrows,
moustache and beard are painted in a grayish-black.
Height —42" Tang Dynasty
560. Superb terra-cotta sculpture of a standing Bac-
trian horse of sturdy proportions; ornamented bridle
and harness with hanging trappings; short cropped
mane and docked tail. The saddle is overslung with
saddle-cloth painted brown; the harness and trap-
pings in dark brown and green. The body of the
horse is covered with a straw-yellow glaze.
Height —33" Length —34" Tang Dynasty
561. Unusual Bactrian camel which with No. 562 are
a very important group of pottery sculptures. The
oval tasselled saddle cloth bears an unfired red pig-
ment scroll design. Both the head and saddle cloth
are creamy white and all other body surfaces are
painted in brownish red. Animal rests on the original
stand.
Height —2s" Length —l 9% " Tang Dynasty
562. Pottery Bactrian camel, companion to No. 561.
A face-decorated bag and utensils are slung across
the back of the animal over an oval shaped tasselled
saddle cloth. Head and saddle cloth are creamy white
and body is painted in brownish red. Animal is sup-
ported by the original base.
Height —25" Length —21%" Tang, Dynasty
563. Pair mortuary pottery figures representing lady
musicians in sitting posture; hair tied in a chignon.
The figures are coated with a white slip glaze with
the exception of areas where original green and red
unfired pigment are still visible. One figure is in atti-
tude of playing a drum and the other holding a flute.
Height —11 %" Post Tang
564. Pair of terra-cotta musical ladies in sitting pos-
ture playing cymbals; robed in loosely fitting gar-
ments; chignon hairdress; painted in green, red and
white.
Height —9 1 //' Post Tang
564-A. Mortuary pottery statuette of a lady in wait-
ing with mitre shaped headdress; clothed in a long
robe with clasped hands; invested with brown, straw-
yellow and green glazes that have assumed a silvery
iridescence owing to burial.
Height —ls" Tang Dynasty




565. Pair of standing terra-cotta sculptures of musical
ladies, one playing the flute and the other beating a
cymbal; high hairdress; with long spreading robe;
painted in white slip with earthy incrustations.
T’ang Dynasty
565- Three-colored pottery jardiniere resting on
three monster legs; sides bearing three relief medal-
lions; vessel coated in green, brown and white glazes.
T’ang Dynasty
566. Pair pottery male musicians playing their respec-
tive instruments; painted in red and white pigment
with earthy incrustations.
Length —BM>" T’ang Dynasty
566- Unusual pottery jar resting on small expand-
ing base; wide mouth aperture; exterior glaze in vari-
gated vertical panels; glazed green, white and brown
as well as the prized blue glaze.
Height —3%" T’ang Dynasty
567. A pair of terra-cotta figures of musical ladies in
sitting posture, chignon hairdress.
Post T’ang Dynasty
567- Rare pair of sepulchral duck figurines invested
with brown, green and creamy white glazes with
large areas of the prized blue glaze.
Height —5" T’ang Dynasty
568. Terra-cotta statuette of a Princess wearing long
brown glazed robe, upturned sandals and chignon
hairdress.
T’ang Dynasty
568- Unusual terra-cotta figure seated on stool;
right leg crossed with foot resting on left knee; wear-
ing a well draped garment with long open sleeves.
The headdress is looped around the face and rests
on shoulders; hands almost joined; a recumbent fig-
ure at base; garment coated with green and golden-
yellow glazes; flesh areas unglazed.
Height —ls" T’ang Dynasty
569. Small pottery jar; exterior decorated with incised
hatched varigated lines; the shoulder bearing a band
of circular knobs in relief; entire interior and upper
part of exterior invested with ochre brown glaze;
lower part of exterior unglazed.
Height —3l6" T’ang Dynasty
570. Globular terra-cotta grain jar with short in-
curvate neck and expanding mouth-rim resting on
three legs in shape of animalistic three-clawed feet.
The exterior bears incised concentric lines and glazed
in mottled white, green and brown splash colors;
feet coated with ochre brown glaze; base unglazed.
Height —6" T’ang Dynasty
571. Standing terra-cotta figure of a lady of rank,
wearing a free flowing robe; the clasped hands con-
cealed by an overhanging sash cloth, with knotted
sash cord hanging in back. The statuette is coated
with straw-yellow, green and brown glazes with
traces of iridescence. The headdress is elaborately
coiled.
Height —15%” T’ang Dynasty
572. Terra-cotta figurine of a Princess in sitting
posture clothed in a brown bodice and cucumber
green skirt incised with pleating. A parrot rests on
the left wrist. A very choice specimen.
Height —ls%" T’ang Dynasty
573. Pottery globular grain jar with short expanding
neck; exterior decorated with vertical meandering
stripe and splash designs in white, green and brown
glazes which terminate in uneven line above foot
rim; neck painted in ochre brown glaze.
Height —8" T’ang Dynasty
574. Pottery shallow dish incised on interior with a
star shaped medallion of foliage and strap work with
three spur marks, invested with a splash glaze of
golden brown, green and white; exterior sides glazed
ochre and yellow; base unglazed.
Diameter —7Mj” T’ang Dynasty
575. Pottery cylindrical jar with straight sides, rest-
ing on three stump feet; exterior decorated with con-
centric lines in high relief; glazed greenish brown;
interior coated with greenish white glaze.
Height —6" T’ang Dynasty


576. Circular shallow terra-cotta dish, interior glazed
in ochre, green and white with formalized splash pat-
tern; exterior sides glazed ochre; base unglazed.
Diameter — 7%" Tang Dynasty
577. Globular pottery grain jar with short incurvate
neck, decorated with vertical meandering splash
design in white, brown and green glazes which stop
short of the foot rim; neck glazed brown.
Height —7%" Tang Dynasty
578. Pottery statuette of a lady-in-waiting, in sitting
posture with a smiling facial expression. The figurine
is garmented in a green skirt and a mottled brown
scarf. With the exception of the head, which is
unglazed, the glazed surface is covered with a silvery
patination; unusual specimen.
Height —l 3%" Tang Dynasty
579. Pair of unusual terra-cotta sculptures of spirited
caparisoned horses; one with short cut mane—the
other with the mane well combed over right side;
forelocks evenly parted between ears; saddle with
low pummel and long saddle-cloth; gracefully arched
neck with head reaching foreleg; the ornamented
tassels hanging from harness in bold relief.
Length —l 4" Height —10%" Tang Dynasty
580. Terra-cotta vessel in shape of amphora; the
ovoid body rises to a long cylindrical neck and
terminates in a conical shape flanged mouth-rim.
The snake-like handles connect the body with the
mouth-rim; coated with a brownish black glaze.
Height —l 3%" Tang Dynasty
581. Terra-cotta statuette of a saddled and capari-
soned horse with bobbed mane expertly modelled
and decorated with elaborate tasselled trappings.
The body is glazed brown and the saddle unglazed.
Between the hoofs a duck stands unconcernedly
ready to share the horse’s meal.
Tang Dynasty
582. Terra-cotta vessel in shape of amphora; the
ovoid body rising to a long cylindrical neck and
terminating in a conical shape flanged mouth-rim.
The snake-like handles connect the body with the
mouth-rim; coated with a straw-yellow glaze.
Height —13% " Tang Dynasty
583, Pair important terra-cotta horses, mare and stal-
lion, coated with straw colored glaze. The horses are
attired with saddle and long girth cloths. Scalloped
cloth is draped over the neck and a large ponpon is
worn in front.
Height —17" Width —ls" Sui Dynasty
584. Terra-cotta sculpture of a standing ram with
curved antlers; coated with a crackled brown and
white glaze.
Length — 1" Tang Dynasty
584- Gracefully sculptured terra-cotta figure of a
priest wearing mitred headdress and long sleeved
coat over under-dress; sandals visible; clasped hands;
entire figure invested with a straw-yellow crackled
glaze and earthy incrustations.
Height —26" Late Tang Dynasty
585, Superbly sculptured terra-cotta figure of a stand-
ing Bactrian horse with docked tail; the well combed
mane hanging over left side of neck with well parted
forelocks between pricked ears. Both the bridle and
harness are ornamented with hanging tassels and
the low pummeled saddle rests upon a festooned
saddle-cloth. The animal is decorated with straw-
yellow glaze and the trappings, saddle, etc., in green,
red and brown colors; on original stand.
Height —22V2" Length —24" Tang Dynasty
585- Magnificently sculptured terra-cotta capari-
soned Bactrian horse of sturdy proportions with short
cropped mane; forelocks evenly parted between ears;
the harness and bridle decorated with hanging me-
dallions; docked tail; the saddle with low pummel is
covered with a sheepskin saddle-cloth; covered with
straw-yellow, green and brown glazes.
Tang Dynasty
586. Terra-cotta five-legged tripod vessel resting on
shallow tray with foot-rim; decorated on exterior
with conventionalized lotus flowers; flanged lip; the
five supporting legs are in the shape of Dog of Fo
upholding the circular bowl. This is known as “agate”
or lavigated type of ware consisting of layers of
white, black and brown glazes so manipulated as to
present an “agate” effect. This combination of mixed




glazes is coated with a translucent light yellow glaze
through which the lavigated design is visible.
Diameter —6'//' Height —4%" Late Tang Dynasty
586-A. Terra-cotta sculpture of warrior clad in long
festooned skirt, overhung by short jacket with long
sleeves; concealed hands; open collar; with bird in
relief on headdress; glazed in ochre brown, green
and white; face and headdress unglazed; on original
stand in form of rockery.
Height —26" T’ang Dynasty
587. Terra-cotta sculpture of a standing Bactrian
camel with outstretched neck and head; mottled
saddle-cloth slung over the two humps; invested with
a fluctuating ochre brown glaze; the saddle-cloth
painted in green, brown and white glazes.
Height —22" Length —ls%" T’ang Dynasty
588. Pair unusual mortuary pottery figures of horse
grooms with partially outstretched arms wearing
closely fitting outer garments, tied with sash band;
glazed in cucumber green; high boots and hair
painted in black; face unglazed.
Height —17%" T’ang Dynasty
589. Terra-cotta Bactrian camel, two humps, with
erect head and open mouth; coated with brown and
straw colored glaze with greenish cast. On original
stand.
Height —20% " Length —l 4%" T’ang Dynasty
590. Bare terra-cotta sculpture of a guardian of the
tomb wearing armor clad jacket with breastplate over
a loosely fitting skirt with sash band hanging down
front; bent left arm with raised hand; right arm out-
stretched with clenched fist; animalistic ornaments
over each shoulder; open collar; head covered with
hood. Face bears moustache and beard; traces of
black, red, green and white glazes visible.
Height —32" T’ang Dynasty
591. Unusual pottery sculpture of an unbridled and
unsaddled horse of sturdy proportions with docked
tail; wide open mouth, pricked ears and pawing left
leg. Traces of white slip pigment.
Height —22" Length —24" T’ang Dynasty
592. Finely sculptured standing figure of a guardian
of the tomb wearing an armor clad short jacket with
breast and shoulder plates; waistband surrounds
loosely fitting robe exposing sandals; both arms bent,
one with clenched fist, the other with outstretched
fingers; carefully combed and knotted hairdress.
Face bears mustache and beard; traces of green,
yellow, black, brown and white pigments.
Height —31" T’ang Dynasty
593. Superb terra-cotta sculpture of a Court Lady,
wearing a short jacket over closely fitting robe,
exposing upturned sandals; left hand loosely out-
stretched on side; the bent right arm with clenched
fist; hairdress surmounted by shield-form head gear.
Companion to No. 595.
Height —22" T’ang Dynasty
594. A superb terra-cotta sculpture of a standing
caparisoned Bactrian horse on original. base with
head slightly facing observer. The well combed fore-
locks are parted between the ears, and the groomed
mane hangs over the left side partially covering the
powerful neck; the tail is docked and wound with
cloth. From the harness and bridle hang hair orna-
ments; the saddle of low pummel is overslung by a
long sheepskin saddle-cloth. The sculpture portrays
very sturdy modelling. The mane and tail and part
of the forelock are covered with a straw-yellow glaze;
the saddle-cloth, bridle and harness ornaments are
glazed green and the body exhibits large areas of
ochre brown streaked with green and light yellow.
A superb example of the finest quality of terra-cotta
modelling.
Length —24%" Height —22%" T’ang Dynasty
595. Superb terra-cotta sculpture of a Court Lady,
wearing a short jacket over closely fitting robe,
exposing upturned sandals; left hand loosely out-
stretched on side; the bent right arm with clenched
fist; hairdress surmounted by shield-form head gear.
Companion to No. 593.
Height —22"
596. Rare unglazed figure of DVARAPALA, fash-
ioned from white clay, standing upon a recumbent
bull; clad in armor with feathered headdress and por-






fraying a facial and bodily belligerent mien to
frighten away the evil spirits. Sculptures of this type
supposedly acted as Guardians of the Tomb.
Height —47" Tang Dynasty
597. Rare unglazed pottery sculpture representing
DVARAPALA, clad in armor vestments and wearing
feathered headdress, standing upon a recumbent
deer. The belligerent pose depicts the guardian of
the tomb treading down evil.
Height —4s" Tang Dynasty
Noa. 598 to 616
A group of pottery vessels in the shape of human
heads, bowls, wine ewers and small figures —origin
Rio Grande de Nazca, Peru, Southern Coast, dating
from 300 to 700 A.D. Very rare collection and each
article in pristine condition.
The first advanced culture in the western hemi-
sphere is believed to have had its origin about two
thousand years ago in the Andean region of South
America and in the highland region of Central
America and Mexico. Here grew up a high civiliza-
tion, parallel in many striking ways to that of the
Old World but probably entirely independent of it.
The cultivation of Indian com (Zea mais) was the
basis of new economy. Rich textiles, fine pottery, and
magnificent ornaments of gold, silver, and copper
were produced. Great city centers arose, with canals
and gardens and monumental temples on lofty pyra-
mids. A highly complex social organization devel-
oped, with priest emperors, standing armies, schools,
courts, and systematized religions. Intellectual pro-
gress was marked by astronomical research, the
invention of accurate calendars, and—Yucatan and
Mexico —an elaborate hieroglyphic writing.
In the Peruvian area the early Nasca and Chimu
cultures were followed by Tiahuanacan and, immedi-
ately pre-Columbian times, by the INCA CIVILIZA-
TION. Influences spread from this center across the
Andes into the Amazon Basin and down the Andes
to the Argentine region. Farther north, the Chibchan
and Chorotegan cultures occupied the intervening
area between Pern and Yucatan, where the MAYA
CIVILIZATION, the climax of native American
achievement, developed during the Ist millennium
B.C. and reached its culmination shortly before the
Spanish Conquest.
617. Deep bowl with rounded sides, mouth-rim flar-
ing slightly inward; coated on exterior and interior
with brownish black glaze, the mouth-rim covered
with a translucent slip glaze. Tz’u Chou.
Diameter — 7%" Height —3%" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
618. A Honan bowl of deep conical form, the buff
stoneware body covered with a purplish-black glaze
with coffee brown mottling in the interior and on the
upper half of the exterior, the rest being unglazed.
Diameter — 6l4" Height — 2M>" Sung Dynasty
619. A superb Chien Yao bowl, fashioned from dark
brown stoneware and decorated on the exterior and
interior with a brilliant hare’s fur glaze which on
the outside terminates in a thick uneven roll above
the foot-rim. The grooved mouth-rim, both on the
interior and exterior, is glazed dark buff, which in
the process of firing has run in streaks over the black
glaze, thus creating the prized “hare’s fur technique.”
Diameter — s'/T Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
620. Rare Yi hsing (buccaro) porcelain teapot, the
body in shape of a round melon resting on terminals
composed of various types of nuts. The spout is in
the shape of a bean and around the mouth-rim also
appear various indigenous nuts. The cover is in the
shape of a double mushroom and the handle in the
form of a bat shaped flower bulb. Around the globu-
lar body appears a Ch’ien Lung inscribed poem.
Ming Dynasty
621. Fine Chien Yao bowl, fashioned from dark
brown stoneware and decorated on the exterior and
interior with a brilliant hare’s fur glaze which on the
outside terminates in a thick uneven roll above the
foot-rim. The grooved mouth-rim, both on the in-
terior and exterior, is glazed dark buff, which in the
process of firing has run in streaks over the black
glaze, thus creating the prized “hare’s fur technique.”
Diameter — 5V4" Height — -2%" Sung Dynasty
622. A Honan bowl of deep form, covered with a
purplish black glaze decorated on interior with
barred bands in reddish brown.
Diameter — 7%” Sung Dynasty


623. Grayish black stoneware bowl with gracefully
flaring sides; coated on the exterior and interior with
a “hare’s fur” glaze; the mouth-rim encircled by a
brownish colored glaze.
Diameter —7%" Sung Dynasty
624. Rare Chien Yao bowl, fashioned from dark
brown stoneware and decorated on the exterior and
interior with a brilliant “hare’s fur” glaze which on
the outside terminates in a thick uneven roll above the
foot-rim. The grooved mouth-rim, both on the interior
and exterior, is glazed dark buff, which in the process
of firing has run in streaks over the black glaze, thus
creating the prized “hare’s fur technique.”
Diameter —s%" Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
625. Chien Yao Temmoku bowl fashioned from por-
cellanous ware invested with thick purplish black
glaze with a few fleckings of golden brown. The in-
terior exhibits a design of a skeleton leaf in golden
brown.
Diameter —4%" Height —2" Sung Dynasty
626. Deep bell-shaped bowl, coated with a cafe-au-
lait glaze with earthy incrustations on interior.
Diameter —4%” Yuan Dynasty
627. Small jar fashioned from grayish stoneware —
wide mouth with two loop handles; coated on the
exterior with a thick chestnut brown glaze and in
some areas on exterior and interior over-run with
greenish black. Honan ware.
Diameter —4" Height —3" Sung Dynasty
628. Melon shaped jar formed from buff stoneware
decorated on the exterior with vertical ribs in slight
relief that show white through the lustrous black
glaze covering the jar. Honan ware.
Sung Dynasty
629. Well shaped bowl with rounded sides fashioned
from gray stoneware, both cover and bowl invested
with a chestnut brown glaze. Honan ware.
Sung Dynasty
630. Grayish stoneware bowl with full flaring sides
coated with a thick black glaze on the exterior and
interior; with a band of cream-white slip surround-
ing the entire mouth-rim. Honan ware.
Diameter — 4V/' Height —2” Sung Dynasty
631. Dark reddish brown stoneware bowl with
rounded sides, coated on the exterior and interior with
a flocculent thick grayish black glaze; the glaze on
exterior with an orange peel texture.
Diameter —s" Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
632. Chien Yao bowl of conical form with a groove
below the lip, fashioned from blackish brown pate
resembling iron and invested with an attractive
“hare’s fur” temmoku glaze nearly reaching the small
foot on the exterior.
Diameter —s%'' Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
633. A superb Chien Yao bowl, fashioned from dark
brown stoneware and decorated on the exterior and
interior with a brilliant “hare’s fur” glaze which on
the outside terminates in a thick uneven roll above
the foot-rim. The grooved mouth-rim, both on the
interior and exterior, is glazed dark bulf, which in the
process of firing has run in streaks over the black
glaze, thus creating the prized “hare’s fur” technique.
Diameter —4%" Height —2V2" Sung Dynasty
634. Deep conical shaped bowl formed from gray
stoneware and coated on the exterior with a greenish
brown glaze suffused with buff fleckings; on the
interior with a tea-dust glaze with a bird and flower
cluster design in dark brown. Chien type.
Diameter —4%" Height — 2 V-i” Yuan Dynasty
635. A conical shaped buff stoneware Kian Yao bowl
coated on exterior with brownish black glaze. The
interior exhibits three flower clusters painted in dark
brown against a mottled greenish buff flecked glaze.
Diameter —4%" Height —2 Vi" Sung Dynasty
636. Deep bowl with rounded sides fashioned from
buff stoneware and coated on the exterior with a
brownish black glaze, superimposed over a coffee
brown slip. The interior is decorated with a graffiato
ornament of peonies and leaf scrolls incised in a
wash of white slip. On the base of the interior appear
six spur marks—Tz’u Chou type.
Diameter —l 6%" Height —s" Sung Dynasty
637. A Kian Yao bowl fashioned from buff stone-
ware, slightly grooved mouth-rim. The exterior is
glazed in black with buff fleckings, and the interior




bears three sketched flying phoenixes painted in
black against a greenish buff flecked glaze.
Diameter —6%" Height —294" Sung Dynasty
638. A conical shaped Kian Yao bowl formed from
buff stoneware. The interior sketched in brown with
three pomegranate clusters surmounted by a formal-
ized narrow panel against a mottled greenish buff
glaze. The exterior painted in dark and light buff
glazes.
Diameter —5" Height —2%" Yuan Dynasty
639. A superb Chien Yao bowl, fashioned from dark
brown stoneware and decorated on the exterior and
interior with a brilliant “hare’s fur” glaze which on
the outside terminates in a thick uneven roll above
the foot-rim. The grooved mouth-rim, both on the
interior and exterior, is glazed dark buff, which in
the process of firing has run in streaks over the black
glaze, thus creating the prized “hare’s fur” technique.
Diameter — 4W Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
640. Ovoid squatty jar with short neck and small
mouth; the buff stoneware invested with a black
glaze; around shoulder appears a continuous bold lily
design painted in reddish brown. Honan Ware.
Height —TW Sung or Yuan Dynasty
641. Honan bowl of deep conical form, with cover,
the buff stoneware body covered with a purplish-
black glaze with coffee brown mottling in the interior
and on the upper half of the exterior, the rest being
unglazed.
Diameter —6" Sung Dynasty
642. A Kian Yao bowl fashioned from buff stone-
ware, of conical form with slightly grooved rim,
coated on the exterior with a brownish black glaze
with buff markings and sketched on the interior
with three flying phoenixes painted in dark brown
against a flocculent greenish buff flecked glaze. The
glaze on the interior terminates in an uneven line
above foot-rim.
Diameter — 6 1 /*" Height — 2W Sung Dynasty
643. Ovocylindrical Mei P’ing or gallipot with short
neck and expanding mouth-rim fashioned from buff
stoneware; invested with a thick black glaze of great
luminosity and ending in thick roll above foot-rim;
base unglazed, Tz’u Chou Ware —15th Century A.D.
Height —ll"
644. A Kian Yao bowl of conical form with slightly
grooved rim, fashioned from buff stoneware; coated
with black glaze, mottled with yellowish brown out-
side; the inside with three sketched phoenixes painted
in black in a grayish buff flecked glaze.
Diameter —6%" Height —294" Sung Dynasty
645. A Honan bowl of deep conical form, with
cover, the buff stoneware body covered with a pur-
plish-black glaze with coffee brown mottling in the
interior and on the upper half of the exterior, the rest
being unglazed.
Diameter —6" Sung Dynasty
646. Ovocylindrical jar in form of small mouthed
gallipot, fashioned from buff stoneware; the interior
and exterior coated with a rich black glaze, faintly
flecked in brown; the shoulder painted with bold
lily design in reddish brown. Honan Ware.
Height —9" Sung or Yuan Dynasty
647. A rare garniture of eleven ritual altar pieces
consisting of four vases, four jars with covers, two
candle holders and one tripod incense burner; all
fashioned from buff stoneware and coated with a
blackish brown glaze. Honon ware.
Sung Dynasty
648. Ovocylindrical jar with short neck and small
mouth-rim, formed of buff stoneware and coated
with a thick lustrous black glaze; the two bands con-
taining formalized peony and leaf scrolls formed by
carving away the black glaze and exposing the buff
stoneware body. Tz’u Chou ware.
Height —ll" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
649. Pair of Mei P’ing or Gallipots, fashioned from
buff stoneware, with short neck and flanged mouth-
rim and four loop handles; coated with a brownish
black glaze.
Height — 9W Yuan Dynasty
650. Large bowl with rounded sides and flanged lip
formed from buff stoneware, invested on the interior
and exterior with a lustrous black glaze which is


suffused with silvery spots. On the base of the interior
are five spur marks. This is the type of glaze known
as “oil spot.” Temmoku Honan ware.
Diameter —13V4" Height —6" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
651. Ovocylindrical jar with two flat side loop han-
dles extending from incurvate neck to shoulder of
vessel, which is fashioned from buff stoneware. Both
the interior and exterior are coated with a brown slip
which is superimposed with a greenish brown “tea-
dust” glaze that extends over the mouth-rim and
slightly into the interior. The bulbous part of the jar
is decorated with vertical radial ribs in slight relief.
Honan ware.
Height —ll%" Sung Dynasty
652. Mei P’ing or Gallipot formed from dark gray
stoneware; the decoration depicts peony and lotus
flowers with scrolling vines incised in broad lines; the
jar is invested with a bluish-green crackled celadon
glaze.
Height —llV2” Sung-Yuan Dynasty
653. Buff stoneware “pillow” in the form of ju-i head,
sketched with conventionalized floral and leaf scrolls
in sepia and coated with a translucent slip glaze; the
green glazed base bears the maker’s name, incised.
Length —8%" Height —4" Yuan Dynasty
654. Rare rectangular gray stoneware “pillow”
sketched in sepia with cartouches on each side depict-
ing personage, peony, lotus, bamboo and floral motifs
surrounded by leaf scrolls, etc.; superimposed by a
translucent white slip; maker’s name impressed on
base.
Length —11%” Width —5%" Sung Dynasty
655. Buff stoneware “pillow” in the form of ju-i
head, sketched with conventionalized floral and leaf
scrolls in sepia and base coated with yellowish green
glaze, bearing the maker’s name, incised.
Length —8%" Height —4" Yuan Dynasty
656. Tz’u Chou ovocylindrical vase in the form of a
gallipot or Mei P’ing, fashioned from hard gray stone-
ware, with short neck and conical mouth-rim, in-
vested with a white slip which was incised with
overlapping leaf, flower and palmette motifs and
then superimposed with a colorless white, minutely
crackled and flocculent glaze. This is the so-called
“Grafiiato” ornament technique.
Height —12%" Sung Dynasty
657. Pair Cochin China stoneware gallipots (Mei
P’ing), decorated with formalized lotus blossoms
connected by undulating vine-like stems and leafage
in slight slip effect. One vase exhibits a creamy glaze
and the other a shaded stone blue, both crackled.
Height —11 W Ming Dynasty
658. Standing figure of a boy fashioned from buff
stoneware; coated in white slip and red and brownish
green glazes; eyes, eyebrows and hair painted black.
Tz’u Chou ware.
Height —7" Sung Dynasty
658- Ovocylindrical jar fashioned from buff stone-
ware, with tapering sides, the four loop handles ex-
tending from the short neck to the receding shoulder.
On the undercoating of white slip is painted in black
a galloping mythical steed amid cloud and leaf scrolls
and six concentric lines, all superimposed by a cream-
white translucent glaze; base unglazed.
Height —lo" Sung or Early Yuan Dynasty
659. Rare stoneware bowl with rounded sides,
coated with a finely crackled white glaze and painted
thereon on exterior in tomato red and green with
formalized lotus petals and flowers; on the interior
with a hexafoil medallion enclosing flying bird amid
lotus and prunus flower and leaf scrolls; surmounted
by encircling dotted band; mouth-rim enameled
yellow. Tz’u Chou ware.
Diameter —3Vi" Height —l Vi" Sung Dynasty
659- Rare Dog of Fo in sitting posture; formed
from buff stoneware and coated with a fine white slip
glaze. Ting Yao.
Height —ll %" Sung Dynasty
660. Buff gray stoneware “pillow” showing a recum-
bent child supporting lotus leaf used for headrest.
The figure is coated with yellow, green, red and black
glazes, covered with a translucent white slip.
Length —ll%" Height —5" Yuan Dynasty
660- Gray stoneware jar painted in dark sepia
with bird, flower and palm tree motifs and ju-i head


band around shoulder; coated with a white trans-
lucent glaze.
Height —7" Ming Dynasty
661. Small ornament in the shape of buffalo with
boy riding on back, undoubtedly used as a wine ewer.
Ting Yao.
Length —4” Sung Dynasty
661- Ovocylindrical Mei P ing or Gallipot, formed
from buff stoneware and coated with an unctuous and
lustrous brownish black glaze. The decoration con-
sists of floral and leaf scrolls so formed by removing
the black glaze which is known as the “Graffliato”
technique.
Height —l 3” Sung Dynasty
662. Rare gallipot or mei p’ing, fashioned from red-
dish stoneware, with high shoulder, short neck and
small mouth; on undercoating of white slip are
sketched in black three cartouches enclosing person-
age and crane motifs with two encircling bands on
shoulder and above base containing conventional-
ized flowers and connecting leaf scrolls; the entire
surface invested with a superimposed turquoise blue
glaze suffused with crazing. Tz’u Chou ware.
Height —9” Circa — l4th Century A.D.
662- Pyriform vase, fashioned from buff stone-
ware and coated with a white slip on which are
painted Chinese characters and circular bands in
sepia; finely coated with a translucent white glaze.
Height —8” Yuan Dynasty
663. Terra-cotta figure of a slightly squatting boy
coated in white slip; a flower design in black showing
through green glaze; the neck and sleeve band
painted with yellow glaze; hair, eyes and eyebrows
in black.
Height —12” Sung Dynasty
664. Baluster-shaped jar with wide mouth, fashioned
from reddish stoneware; coated with a wash of white
slip and transparent glaze; decoration painted in
black; around body appear three quatrefoil panels
with figure subjects flanked by two panels containing
leaf scrolls and four conventionalized flowers. Tz’u
Chou ware.
Height —lo” Yuan Dynasty
665. Pyriform bottle-shaped vase formed from gray-
ish-white stoneware; the globular body rises to a
narrow cylindrical neck with flanged mouth-rim;
coated with a variegated T’u Ting glaze. Ting Yao
type.
Height —7%" Yuan Dynasty
666. Octofoil shallow dish, flanged mouth-rim, with
side radial flanges, coated with a light brown and
white splash glaze to simulate marble.
Diameter —9" Yuan-Ming Dynasty
667. Deep bell-shaped bowl, fashioned from grayish
white stoneware and coated with cream-white slip
glaze, suffused with areas of buff coloring. Ting Yao
ware.
Diameter —4%" Height —4" Sung Dynasty
668. Wide mouthed jar, formed from buff stoneware
with two tiger masks and mock ring handles; below
the mouth-rim a band of studded bosses. The jar is
covered on the exterior and interior with a cream
colored white slip and superimposed by a lustrous
translucent glaze. The so-called “tear stains” are
visible.
Diameter —10% " Height —6 ¥i” Sung Dynasty
669. Pyriform vase fashioned from white stoneware
and covered with a Ting Yao glaze.
Sung Dynasty
670. Rare wine ewer, fashioned from buff gray
stoneware, short spout, two loop handles and wide
“S”-shaped strap handle connecting incurvate neck
with body of vessel; well formed flaring mouth-rim;
coated with a light colored slip and superimposed
with a greenish buff crackle glaze; base unglazed.
Yiieh ware.
Height —6%" Sung Dynasty
671. Squat ovocylindrical jar with short neck and
flanged mouth-rim, formed from grayish white stone-
ware and coated with a white slip.
Height — BV2" Sung Dynasty
672. Ying Ch’ing mei ping or gallipot with short
incurvate neck and flanged mouth-rim. The pate is
incised with two five-clawed writhing dragons be-
tween collars of floral ju-i heads and formalized plan-




tain leaves. The entire vase is covered with a pale
greenish or moonlight glaze.
Height — 16Ms" Sung Dynasty
673. Bowl with rounded sides, formed from gray
porcellanous stoneware and coated with a grayish
celadon glaze; the exterior decorated with incised
overlapping formalized lotus petals.
Diameter — 10V4" Height — 3Vi" Ming Dynasty
674. Pyriform shaped Tz’u Chou vase fashioned
from porcellanous stoneware. The decoration around
the center of the vase depicts a nobleman and lady
companion doing homage to a seated Buddha. Arab-
esque scrolls and pointed leaf motifs flank the figural
decoration. The drawing is in sepia and rosy ochre
on a warm ivory glaze.
Sung Dynasty
675. Deep conical-shaped bowl fashioned from buff
stoneware, with well formed foot, coated on the
interior with a wash of cream-colored slip, the exter-
ior invested with a brown glaze with tricklings of a
superimposed darker glaze at mouth-rim; five spur
marks visible on inside. Tz’u Chou type.
Diameter — lo” Height — 4W Sung Dynasty
676. Ovocylindrical jar formed from buff gray stone-
ware and decorated on the exterior in relief with
panels, containing a dragon, feng-huang, water
buffalo and rider and floral motifs and around the
shoulder a band of the continuous key-fret; all deco-
rated with a cream-colored glaze. Ting Yao.
Height — 18" Sung Dynasty
677. Fine Ting Yao bowl with metal rim, coated on
the interior and exterior with a cream colored glaze.
Diameter — 7V4" Sung Dynasty
678. Unusual ewer, fashioned from white terra-cotta,
the globular body rising to a long neck with pyra-
midal mouth-rim and short flanged spout, coated with
a translucent glaze.
Height —BMi" T’ang Dynasty
679. Small bowl, fashioned from porcellanous stone-
ware with impressed designs on interior and exterior
to simulate basketry; coated with a wash of white
slip. Tz’u Chou ware.
Diameter — 3M>" Sung—Yuan Dynasty
680. Pair of shallow stoneware trays with handle in
form of ju-i head, coated with white slip, glazed on
exterior and interior. Tz’u Chou ware.
Diameter —3V6" Yuan Dynasty
681. Rare twin vase vessel with two bodies, one
neck and two handles in form of feng-huang; formed
from white stoneware and coated with a crackled
cream colored glaze. Ting Yao.
Height —7" Sung Dynasty
682. Unusual gray stoneware jar in the form of a
reed basket; both the jar and cover with loop handles.
Cover is coated with a T’u Ting glaze.
Height —4V4" Early Ming Dynasty
683. Porcellanous teapot with dragon handle and
spout, fashioned from white stoneware and coated
with an ivory-white glaze. Ting Yao ware.
Sung Dynasty
684. Hexafoil shallow dish with well formed foot
and foliated mouth-rim, coated with a Pai Ting glaze,
disclosing some “tear stains.” Ting Yao.
Diameter —7%" Ming Dynasty
685. Double gourd shaped vase, fashioned from
buff stoneware and incised with peony, leaf scrolls
and continuous key-fret motifs; coated with a trans-
lucent Fen Ting glaze, exhibiting “tear stains.”
Height — IIV2" Sung Dynasty
686. Grayish stoneware figure of a Kuan Yin holding
child; seated on rockery; coated with a white slip
and creamy overglaze. Tz’u Chou type.
Height — llVn" Early Ming Dynasty
687. Semi-eggshell porcellanous box and cover,
ribbed sides, coated with an ivory-white Ting Yao
glaze.
Diameter — 2W Sung Dynasty
688. Squatting jar with receding shoulder and short
neck, formed from grayish white stoneware and
decorated with conventionalized leaf designs in slight
relief; coated with a Pai Ting glaze.
Height —4%" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
689. Small porcellanous figure of reclining boy, Ting
Yao ware.
Sung Dynasty


690. Rare ewer, fashioned from grayish-white stone-
ware, with handle, short spout, and flaring mouth-
rim; coated with a wash of white slip and a cream
glaze minutely crazed; base unglazed. Tz’u Chou
ware.
Height —B%" Sung Dynasty
691. Unusual reddish brown stoneware sculpture of
a recumbent dog, coated with a T’u Ting glaze. Ting
Yao.
Length —3%" Height —2V4" Sung Dynasty
692. Small jar formed from buff stoneware. The
globular body rising into a gracefully shaped octofoil
neck; covered with a slip glaze on which are painted
in sepia conventionalized leaf bands, and coated with
a fine translucent cream colored glaze. Tz’u Chou
ware.
Height —4V4" Diameter —s" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
693. Rare semi-eggshell hexafoil box and cover,
formed from white stoneware, modelled in the form
of a leaf and coated with a fine Pai Ting glaze.
Diameter —3 W Height —l%" Sung Dynasty
694. Beaker-shaped porcelain ewer with loop handle
and short spout covered with a white Tz’u Chou
glaze of ivory tint over a grayish pate.
Height —9%" Sung Dynasty
695. Rare figure of a Kuan Yin holding child in lap
and seated on rockery; formed from buff stoneware
and coated with a white slip and creamy overglaze.
Tz’u Chou type.
Height —12'/2" Early Ming Dynasty
696. Ying Ching bowl with incised decoration;
covered with Ying Ching or sky-blue glaze.
Diameter —6V2" Sung Dynasty
697. Rare Ko Yao pestle form vase, fashioned from
porcellanous stoneware, with short cylindrical body
and tubular metal-rimmed neck. The entire surface
is coated with a soft and unctuous grayish blue glaze
broadly crackled.
Height —6” Sung Dynasty
698. Small bowl with gracefully flaring sides and
mouth-rim formed from grayish white stoneware and
coated with a thick unctuous blue-white glaze. Ting
Yao.
Diameter —s" Height — 2Vi" Ming Dynasty
699. Conical shaped buff stoneware bowl with high
foot, coated on the exterior and interior with a
flocculent Ying Ching glaze.
Diameter — 4W Height —2" Sung Dynasty
700. Bronze form stoneware vase; the baluster body
rising to a long cylindrical neck with flanged rim;
the handles in the form of dragon heads with mock
loose rings; coated with a thick bluish white Ying
Ching glaze.
Height —9%" Sung Dynasty
701. Finely potted conical shaped bowl, formed
from buff stoneware; decorated with faintly incised
designs and coated on the exterior and interior with
a “shadowy blue” or Ying Ching glaze.
Diameter —4M>" Height —2 W Sung Dynasty
702. Tazza shaped cup; the bowl supported by a
well formed hollow foot, formed from grayish stone-
ware and coated with a white slip glaze. Tz’u Chou
ware.
Diameter —4M>" Height —3" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
703. A rare baluster shaped buff stoneware vase;
the gracefully rising neck terminating in a hexafoil
mouth-rim. The body and expanding base decorated
in relief with formalized peony, lotus and leaf scrolls.
All invested with a Ying Ching (shadowy blue)
glaze.
Height —6Vi" Sung Dynasty
704. Conical-shaped bowl, formed from grayish
stoneware, the decoration on the interior depicting
flying feng-huang and the continuous key-fret; the
exterior and interior invested with a Ying Ching or
“shadowy blue” glaze.
Diameter —6%" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
705. Shallow dish with hexafoil mouth-rim, formed
from light buff stoneware; decorated on the interior
with incised butterfly motifs and coated on outside
and inside with a Ying Ching glaze.
Diameter —6%" Sung Dynasty




706. Rare jar with original cover, fashioned from
grayish stoneware and decorated in black with panel
and concentric line designs; the finial and incurvate
base are painted in ochre brown glaze; the white slip
is covered with a crazed translucent glaze.
Height —4%" Yuan Dynasty
707. Pair of deep bowls fashioned from clear white
porcelain, with gracefully flaring sides; decorated on
the interior with writhing dragons in slight relief;
coated on the exterior and interior with a bluish-
white pellucid glaze, the mouth-rim in brown.
Diameter —4%" Early Ming Dynasty
708. Pair of small bell-shaped bowls with rounded
sides; decorated on interior with an aquatic scene,
and coated both on the exterior and interior with a
bluish-white glaze, mouth-rim brown.
Diameter —3%" Early Ming Dynasty
709. Rare Ying Ching gallipot, decorated on exterior
in relief with floral and leaf scrollings and covered
with a Ying Ching or “shadowy blue” glaze.
Sung Dynasty
710. Rare specimen of early blue and white porce-
lain in shape of “koro” or incense burner, with three
stump feet and two flat strap handles.
Height —4%" Sung Dynasty
711. Finely potted bowl, formed from buff stone-
ware and decorated on the exterior with incised floral
scrolls with the exception of a small unglazed area
around the mouth-rim; the bowl is coated with a
rare Ying Ching or “shadowy blue” glaze.
Diameter —6%" Sung Dynasty
712. Deep hexafoil bowl formed from light buff
Stoneware and coated on the exterior and interior
with a “shadowy blue” or Ying Ching glaze. Six radial
ribs appear inside of bowl—mouth-rim foliated.
Height —2'/2" Diameter —7%" Sung Dynasty
713. Deep bowl, fashioned from grayish stoneware,
with rounded sides and foliated mouth-rim, coated in
white slip with a superimposed translucent ivory-
white glaze. Sung Dynasty
714. Shallow porcellanous dish invested with an
ivory-white glaze. Ting Yao ware.
Sung Dynasty
715. Porcellanous pillow of Yii-Yao Ware bearing on
one side an ode composed by Emperor Ch’ien-lung.
Length —8" Sung Dynasty
716. Superb specimen of Ying Ching (shadowy
blue) glazed bowl; the base of the interior is deco-
rated with two flying feng-huang incised in the pate;
a metal band protects the mouth-rim.
Diameter —6" Sung Dynasty
717. Finely potted deep bowl, formed from grayish
white stoneware; decorated on the exterior in slight
relief with over-lapping conventionalized lotus leaves;
all coated with a Pai Ting glaze on interior and
exterior. Ting Yao.
Diameter —sVi" Height —3" Sung Dynasty
718. Conical-shaped bowl formed from grayish-
white pate with bird and floral motifs incised on the
interior; both the inside and outside of bowl invested
with a Ying Ching or “shadowy blue” glaze; mouth-
rim foliated.
Diameter —7" Height —3" Sung Dynasty
719. Well formed bowl with rounded sides, formed
from grayish-white stoneware and decorated on in-
terior with formalized chrysanthemum petal design
in slight relief; coated on the exterior and interior
with an unctuous Ying Ching glaze.
Diameter —7V4" Height —3" Sung Dynasty
720. Deep bowl with rounded sides, formed from
grayish-white terra-cotta and decorated on the in-
terior with formalized lotus flower and leaf scrolls;
the brown ochre glaze covers the entire interior and
part of the exterior.
Diameter —6%" Height —3" Late T’ang Dynasty
721. Well potted bowl with rounded sides and
mouth-rim tapering slightly inwards, decorated on
the exterior and interior with leaf and line scroll
motifs; the white slip is covered with a greenish-
yellow translucent glaze. Tz’u Chou type.
Diameter —6" Height —3" Sung Dynasty
722. Unusual double-gourd shaped vase decorated
on the exterior with formalized lotus flowers with leaf
scrollings and bands of continuous key-fret in slight
relief; the white slip is coated with a translucent
crackled glaze.
Height —15%" Sung Dynasty


723. Conical-shaped bowl, formed from buff stone-
ware, incised on interior with floral and leaf scrolls;
metal band to protect mouth-rim; exterior and in-
terior clothed with a cafe-au-lait glaze suffused with
fish-roe or truite crackle.
Diameter — 6%" Height —3" Early Ming Dynasty
724. Shallow circular dish with flaring sides, coated
with an evenly applied Ting Yao glaze.
Sung Dynasty
725. Deep bowl formed from light buff stoneware
with rounded sides and slightly flaring mouth-rim,
decorated on the interior with incised designs of
goose, and leafage motifs; interior and exterior coated
with a Ying Ching or “shadowy blue” glaze.
Diameter — 6W Height —3" Sung Dynasty
726. Rare lung-ch’iian ovocylindrical stoneware jar
coated with an unctuous seagreen celadon glaze. A
coiling Chih lung pursuing bird and dog surrounds
shoulder and neck and on the lower body appears a
band of sunken plantain leaves. The original cover
is surmounted by a finial in form of bird.
Height — 9V2" Sung Dynasty
727. Rare candle holder in form of mythical figure
with a facial expression to thwart off the evil spirit;
kneeling on left knee with left arm resting on raised
right knee and outstretched right arm in commanding
attitude. Face and hands painted dark brown; aper-
ture inside of head; robe and whiskers coated with
thick seagreen celadon glaze.
Height —6" ’ Early Ming Dynasty
728. Incense burner, or koro, with compressed body,
straight short neck, and flanged mouth-rim, resting on
three stump feet that are faced with tiger masks; the
vitreous seagreen celadon glaze that covers the
exterior extends over the mouth-rim partly into the
interior. Lung-ch’iian ware.
Diameter —s%" Height —4%" Ming Dynasty
729. Shallow dish with flanged mouth-rim, fash-
ioned from grayish stoneware; two carp appearing in
slight relief in the base of the interior. The dish is
invested on the exterior and interior with a pellucid
sea-green celadon glaze.
Diameter —B" Early Ming Dynasty
730. Lung-Ch’iian cauldron of bronze form, with
compressed globular body, short cylindrical neck and
flanged mouth-rim; supported on three short legs; the
entire surface covered with a pale green celadon
glaze.
Height —6" Sung Dynasty
731. Rare Lung-Ch’iian celadon standing figure of
Pu-tai Ho-Shang with laughing countenance, long-
lobed ears and outstretched right arm; the flowing
robe with long loose sleeves exposing bare abdomen;
sandals and right hand unglazed; figure coated with
unctuous bluish green glaze.
Height —7%" Sung Dynasty
732. Rare specimen of Lung-Ch’iian celadon, formed
from buff stoneware, in the shape of an ovocylindrical
jar with five tubular straight spouts, the interior and
exterior coated with a bluish-green celadon glaze;
unglazed surfaces burnt red; the original cover, with
finial in shape of elephant, similarly glazed.
Height —9" Sung Dynasty
733. Unique and perfect pair of porcellanous jars
with original covers covered with an onion green
celadon glaze. These are specimens of Ch’u-chou
ware.
Height —10” Sung Dynasty
734. Finely potted shallow dish with rounded sides,
formed from buff gray stoneware and coated with
a thick opaque onion-green celadon glaze. Ch’u Chou
ware.
Diameter — 8%" Late Sung Dynasty
734-A. Deep bowl with rounded sides and slightly
flaring mouth-rim fashioned from dark buff stoneware
and coated on the exterior and interior with a gray-
ish-blue crackled glaze turning slightly brown around
the mouth-rim; the interior exhibits a splash of
lavender coloring.
Diameter—VA" Height —3" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
735. Ovocylindrical celadon vase decorated with
incised floral and leaf scrolls, short neck with flanged
lip. (Mate to No. 737.)
Height —6" Ming Dynasty




735- Squatty jar with short straight neck and two
loop handles, formed from reddish stoneware. The
interior and exterior are coated with a vari-colored
bluish thick glaze with passage of greenish brown.
Height — 4%" Diameter — 6" Yuan Dynasty
736. Rare tazza-shaped dish in the form of a shallow
bowl supported by an expanding base, decorated on
the interior with incised gadroon motifs; fashioned
from grayish-white stoneware and coated with a
grayish-green glaze. Yueh type.
Diameter —10" Height — 4 W Sung Dynasty
736- Small bowl with rounded sides and mouth-
rim tapering slightly inwards; coated on exterior and
interior with a thick gray glaze.
Diameter — 4%" Yuan Dynasty
737. Ovocylindrical celadon vase decorated with
incised floral and leaf scrolls, short neck with flanged
lip. (Mate to No. 735.)
Height — 6" Ming Dynasty
737- Important quatrefoil bulb dish with purple
flanged lip, glazed on the interior with a milky blue,
and on the exterior in flocculent mauve, dripping
down to the four feet, in shape of ju-i heads. Numeral
“1” on base.
Length — 7" Sung Dynasty
738. Shallow dish formed from grayish stoneware,
with metal band covering mouth-rim. The dish is
coated with an unusual bluish-green crackled glaze.
Kuan Yao type.
Diameter —B%" Sung Dynasty
738- A rare small Chiin Yao porcellanous bubble
bowl with rounded sides and slightly contracted
mouth-rim supported on a small circular foot-rim. A
faintly crazed lavender glaze is enriched by three
crimson (or purple) splashes on the exterior and two
small areas on the interior bearing the same purple
hue.
Diameter —3%" Height —2" Sung Dynasty
739. J ar with gracefully flaring sides and short
straight neck with two loop handles, formed from
gray stoneware and invested with a thick opalescent
grayish-blue flocculent glaze with splashes of laven-
der on exterior and interior. The glaze ends in an
uneven line above foot-rim and the base of the
interior is unglazed.
Height —514" Diameter — 6V2" Yuan Dynasty
740. Deep bowl with rounded sides, formed from
buff stoneware and coated on the exterior and interior
with a thick bluish-gray soft Chiin Yao glaze, the
interior exhibiting two lavender splashes.
Diameter —7" Height —3" Yuan Dynasty
741. Interestingly shaped shallow dish with octofoil
mouth-rim, coated on the exterior and interior with
a grayish-blue glaze flecked in brown. Chiin Yao
type.
Diameter —9" Ming Dynasty
742. Fine example of a Chiin Yao bowl with
rounded sides, invested with a grayish-blue glaze
with lavender splashes.
Sung Dynasty
743. Small Chiin Yao porcellanous bubble bowl,
coated with a thick and bubbly lavender glaze,
splashed with plum or purple areas; brown exposed
foot-rim; both interior and exterior faintly crazed.
Diameter —3%" Height —2" Sung Dynasty
744. Rare Chiin Yao bulb bowl, supported on three
cloud scroll feet; the exterior decorated with two
bands of studs at the lip and base. The exterior and
interior surfaces are coated with an unctuous clair-
de-lune glaze and on the inside base appear “earth-
worm” markings. The greenish brown glazed base
exhibits spur marks and the incised numeral “1,”
Height — SVa" Diameter — 10" Sung Dynasty
745. A superb Chiin Yao bubble bowl, fashioned
from porcellanous stoneware with rounded sides and
slightly contracted mouth-rim with a well formed
small circular foot. Both the exterior and interior are
invested with a light lavender thick unctuous glaze
with faint crazing; areas of crimson or purple splashes
both inside and outside. The glaze on the exterior
ends in thick roll above the foot-rim.
Diameter —SVa" Height —2" Sung Dynasty


746. Deep bowl with rounded sides, fashioned from
reddish brown stoneware, coated on the exterior and
interior with a streaked grayish-blue glaze that has
turned brown around the mouth-rim; the thick opal-
escent glaze ends in a welt above the foot-rim, and
the interior shows a lavender splash.
Diameter —7" Height —3" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
747. Superb specimen of Chiin Yao, in the shape of
a deep bowl with rounded sides, fashioned from dark
gray stoneware, the unglazed areas burnt red; the
exterior of the bowl is coated with a pitted vari-
colored lavender glaze that terminates in a thick
welt above the foot-rim in a greenish-blue tint; the
interior is coated with a crackled greenish-blue or
clair-de-lune glaze with lavender splashes suffused
with green. Rare example.
Diameter — 914" Height —4%" Sung Dynasty
748. Pair of pear-shaped vases with long neck and
tubular loop handles, coated with an unctuous and
opaque onion-green celadon glaze, the unglazed
areas burnt red. Ch’u Chou ware.
Height — 6" Early Ming Dynasty
749. Deep bell-shaped bowl formed from buff stone-
ware, the original cover and bowl coated with a
grayish green celadon glaze.
Diameter —3%'' Ming Dynasty
749- Deep dish with rounded sides, formed from
gray stoneware, hexafoil mouth-rim with radial lines
and raised floral ornament on interior, coated on the
exterior and interior with a pellucid green glaze.
Diameter —8" Height — 3l4" Early Ming Dynasty
750. Eggshell bowl, fashioned from gray porcellan-
ous ware, the sides foliated into septenary divisions;
covered with a cream-colored glaze. Ting Yao ware.
Diameter — 414" Sung Dynasty
750- Circular shallow tray with flanged lip, coated
with a greenish-gray glaze and decorated in under-
glazed copper red with floral and leaf scrolls and con-
tinuous key-fret design.
Diameter — 614" Ming Dynasty
751. Rare specimen of grayish-blue crackled celadon
ware fashioned from buff stoneware; with three
stump feet and small mouth aperture. The unctuous
grayish-blue celadon glaze is suffused with a fine
crackle system. Lung-ch’iian ware.
Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
751- Superb specimen of stoneware porcelain in
the form of wine ewer with short handle and spout,
together with two small pierced loops on shoulder.
The body of the vessel exhibits vertical ribs in slight
relief and around the shoulder appear four prunus
blossoms. The vessel is coated with bluish-green
Lung-ch’iian glaze.
Height —s" Sung Dynasty
752. Miniature bulb bowl resting on four stump feet,
encircled around shoulder with studded bosses; wide
mouthed aperture; interior and exterior coated with
a flambe glaze with areas of red splashes.
Diameter — sW 18th Century
752- Bottle-shaped vase, fashioned from gray
stoneware; the small globular body rising to a long
tubular neck with slightly flaring mouth-rim. The in-
cised decoration is coated with a sea-green Celadon
glaze.
Height —l4'' Early Ming Dynasty
753. Amphora-shaped vase, fashioned from grayish-
white terracotta, the ovocylindrical body rising to a
short tubular neck with flanged mouth-rim; the han-
dles in the form of two dragons that extend from the
lip to the shoulder of the vessel, which is coated with
ochre, brown, green and straw-yellow glazes extend-
ing from the middle of the body and completely
covering the upper areas; the lower body and base
unglazed. Rare specimen.
Height —l 3%" Vang Dynasty
753- Quadrangular-shaped vase formed of buff
stoneware, decorated with two elephant head and
loose ring mock handles, receding neck and expand-
ing short base; invested with a crackled bluish-gray
thick glaze to simulate Kuan Yao ware. The glaze ex-
tends over the mouth-rim and into the interior and
ends in a thick welt above foot-rim.
Height —6l4" Sung-Yuan Dynasty


754. Stoneware ornament in the shape of leaf sup-
ported by the legs of a salamander appearing in re-
lief on under-side. The upper-side is coated with a
crackled sea-green celadon glaze, and the under-side
with a cafe-au-lait glaze suffused with a fish-roe
crackle.
Length —sV4" 17th Century
754- Shallow porcellanous tray with foliated flanged
lip, the grayish white glaze covering an underglaze
copper red central medallion depicting gadroon
motifs.
Diameter —s” Sung Dynasty
755. Small stoneware writer’s coupe, the compressed
body rising to a short small mouth-rim; coated with a
crackled grayish-green celadon glaze.
Height —2" Ming Dynasty
755- Bowl fashioned from heavy porcellanous
stoneware, with rounded sides and small base; exte-
rior plain; interior is decorated with impressed de-
signs; in three panels are horseman and attendants
with calligraphic inscriptions separated by panels
containing geometrical designs; all surfaces coated
with an onion green unctuous celadon glaze. Ch’u
Chou Yao.
Diameter —6%" Height — iV*"
Yuan or Early Ming Dynasty
756. Shallow tray with leaf scroll handle, invested
with a thick unctuous grayish blue glaze to simulate
Kuan Yao ware. 18th Century
756- Gallipot formed from gray stoneware and
decorated on the exterior in Mohammedan-blue; with
fairy goddesses surrounded by trees and rockery; en-
circling the shoulder and base are bands of palmette
lappets, lozenge and jewel motifs. This is a rare speci-
men of underglazed blue of the Early Ming Dynasty.
Height—WA"
757. Koro or incense burner, compressed body, short
straight neck with flanged mouth-rim, supported by
three pointed feet. The exterior and interior of the
vessel are coated with a luminous sea-green celadon
glaze; unglazed pate burnt red. Lung-ch’iian ware.
Diameter —6%" Height —4Vi" Sung Dynasty
757-A. Small pyriform vase with ridged neck and
wide flaring mouth-rim, a band of plantain leaves en-
circling lower body; formed from grayish stoneware
and covered with a bluish-gray celadon glaze.
Height —4%” Sung-Yuan Dynasty
758. Finely potted deep circular bowl, grey porcel-
lanous ware; interior plain, exterior carved with over-
lapping petals to simulate lotus flower; all surfaces
coated with a grayish green translucent celadon glaze.
Northern Celadon ware.
Height —3" Diameter —sVl" Sung Dynasty
759. Deep conical-shaped bowl on well formed re-
ceding foot, coated on the exterior and interior with
a crackled greenish-blue glaze suffused with brown
areas and fleckings. The base bears an incised calli-
graphic inscription of a poem by Emperor Ch’ien
Lung. The unglazed mouth and foot-rim burnt red.
Kuan Yao type.
Diameter —B" Height —3" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
760. Miniature bulb bowl resting on three ogre-mask
stump feet, the outside bearing two rows of studded
bosses; coated with a luminous sea-green celadon
glaze; unglazed circular band on base burnt red.
Superb specimen.
Diameter —6V4" Ming Dynasty
761. Small bowl, rounded sides, well formed feet,
coated with a celadon glaze.
Diameter —3" Ming Dynasty
762. Blue and white pyriform vase, flaring into a
graceful mouth. Around central body appear Feng-
huang and leaf scrolls between two collars of gad-
roons, and under the mouth rim are four plantain
leaves.
Height —10" Sung Dynasty
763. Shallow bulb bowl resting on three tiger mask
supports, the exterior decorated with two rows of
studded bosses; coated on both surfaces with a
vibrant sea-green celadon glaze, the irregular inner
and under-foot medallions exhibiting an unglazed
burnt red area.
Diameter —lo% " Height —3V4" Early Ming Dynasty




-764. Mei p’ing or gallipot-shaped vase, fashioned
from gray stoneware and coated with a white slip on
which is painted in blue corkscrew-type radial lines
with plain and scroll-type bands and around neck
concentric lines and pyramidal bands; all covered
with a translucent glaze; rare specimen.
Height —9" Sung Dynasty
765. Gallipot or mei p’ing, formed of buff stoneware
and decorated on exterior with conventionalized flor-
al and leaf scrolls with a band of plantain leaves
encircling lower part of vessel; invested with a green-
ish-brown glaze. Northern celadon type.
Height —11%" Sung-Yuan Dynasty
766. Bare quatrefoil shaped stoneware vase in form
of bronze vessel surrounded in center with a bulbous
median knop surmounted by a long gracefully ex-
panding neck with wide flaring mouth-rim; supported
by widening base; interior and exterior invested with
an unctuous greenish blue—Kuan Yao type —thick
glaze suffused with crab’s claw crackle; with areas of
brilliant blood-red.
Height —B%" Late Ming Dynasty
767. Shallow dish fashioned from porcellanous stone-
ware, conical shaped, with flanged mouth-rim, the in-
side bearing radial ribs; invested with a brilliant sea-
green glaze. Ming Dynasty
768. Ovocylindrical Kiangnin Ting Yao porcellan-
ous jar with short incurvate neck and gracefully flar-
ing mouth-rim. On the shoulders appear two tiger
masks; invested with a mellow smooth ivory white
glaze suffused with truite crackle.
Height —l 4" Early Ming Dynasty
769. Important Kiangnin Ting Yao elongated vase
with short neck, sides contracting gradually to a small
foot. The surface is invested with a light buff sha-
greened glaze in “ostrich egg” or peau d’orange style.
Height —l 9" Early Ming Dynasty
770. Pyriform stoneware Kiangnin Ting Yao vase;
the oval body rising to a long tubular neck with
flaring mouth-rim. The surface exhibits the rare
“ostrich egg” or peau d’orange surface; glazed with
an unctuous cream-colored glaze suffused with fine
fish roe crackle.
Height —16/4" Early Ming Dynasty
771. Baluster-shaped fish jar with narrow collar,
decorated on the exterior with quatrefoil panels in
which appear alternating calligraphic and conven-
tionalized peony and lotus flower motifs; a band of
plantain leaves encircles base; covered with an unctu-
ous seagreen celadon glaze.
Height —11" Diameter —13" Ming Dynasty
772. Pair rare silver standing figures of stags with
outstretched neck and head with pricked ears. The
original oblong stand is decorated with formalized
lotus leaves.
Height —ls%" Length —l 3" 18th Century
773. Bulbous porcelain-covered jar invested with a
sage green lung Ch’iian celadon glaze. The four
quatrefoil panels that enclose a single Chinese char-
acter are separated by floral motifs and around the
base appear radial ribs. The original cover is also
decorated with four characters.
Height —14% " Ming Dynasty
774. Garden seat, fashioned from porcellanous
stoneware and decorated on the exterior with car-
touches bearing floral and scroll motifs, with two
bands of studded bosses; invested with an unctuous
seagreen celadon glaze.
Height —24" Ming Dynasty
775. Stoneware porcelain jar, with original cover,
with incised decoration of formalized peonies with
leaf scrolls and plantain leaves; cover similarly deco-
rated; coated on exterior and interior with a seagreen
celadon glaze of superb quality.
Diameter —13" Height, overall —l 2%"
Early Ming Dynasty
776. Baluster-shaped porcelain jar with short in-
curvate neck, decorated on the exterior with playing
children accompanied by lady attendants on terrace
amid palm trees and rockery; band of cracked-ice
motif around shoulder, and neck with peony flowers
and rockery; all painted in underglaze blue, auber-
gine, green, yellow and iron-red; slight repair.
Height —l 3" Late Ming Dynasty
777. Bare celadon plaque, foliated flanged lip; in-
terior and exterior decorated with incised conven


tionalized chrysanthemum petals invested with a
luminous and translucent seagreen glaze of superb
quality.
Diameter —26" Ming Dynasty
778. Porcellanous jar painted on exterior with the
galloping horses of Mu Wang amid Buddhistic sym-
bols, prunus blossoms, and rockery, with wave splash
and angular design on neck, all executed in yellow,
green, underglaze blue and iron-red against a back-
ground of red swirl motifs.
Height —l 3" Late Ming Dynasty
779. Inverted pear-shaped porcelain vase invested
with a clear white glaze upon which are painted in
deep cobalt blue symbols of the writer’s desk, acha-
istic vases, ju-i heads and floral sprays.
Height —7" K’ang Hsi Period
780. Rare porcelain teapot with original cover, ex-
quisitely painted with personage, landscape and sea-
scape scenes in underglaze blue against a clear white
glaze. The cover has two bands of ju-i heads and
scrolls, with blue finial.
Height —4'4" K’ang Hsi Period
781. Rare porcelain bowl with gracefully flaring
mouth-rim, decorated with playing children sur-
rounded by tree and gadroon motifs; lozenge band
surrounds interior mouth-rim; with wave and rock
medallion in base of interior; all painted in under-
glaze blue against an unctuous white glaze.
Diameter —5" Ming Dynasty
782. Pair of semi-eggshell porcelain bell-shaped
cups; one side bearing calligraphic inscription; ob-
verse side with peony clusters emerging from rockery,
artist’s signature; all in underglaze blue against a
clear white glaze.
Height —2" Ch’ien Lung Period
783. Bell-shaped porcelain cup decorated in deep
cobalt blue with the “Three Brothers” decoration,
namely, pine tree, bamboo and lotus blossoms; in-
terior base with medallion of prunus cluster.
Height —3%" K’ang Hsi Period
784. Well-formed porcelain bowl with gracefully
flaring sides; decorated on the exterior in relief with
bamboo and primus twigs, in underglaze blue and
peachbloom.
Diameter —6" K’ang Hsi Period
785. Bell-shaped porcelain cup fashioned from clear
white porcelain, with flaring mouth-rim and short ex-
panding base; decorated in cobalt blue with moun-
tainous crags, personage and seascape motifs with
flock of geese in distance.
Height —SMi" K’ang Hsi Period
786. Finely potted bowl fashioned from resonant
porcelain, decorated on exterior in underglaze blue
with a group of scholars in meeting; with a band of
gadroons below; interior with personage medallion
and band of lozenge design.
Diameter — SW’ K’ang Hsi Period
787. Drum-shaped porcelain jar, the central band
depicting people at seascape with flying geese over-
head, flanked by studded bosses in slip, all painted in
pulsating underglaze blue.
Diameter —3%" K’ang Hsi Period
788. Rare tazza-shaped porcelain vessel; bowl-
shaped upper section supported by cylindrically ex-
panding base; decorated in underglaze blue with
wave, fabulous animal and cloud motifs against a
clear white glaze.
Height —3Mi" K’ang Hsi Period
789. Bottle-shaped porcelain vase covered with a
crackled steatitic or soft paste glaze; decoration de-
picts a mandarin on horseback with attendant carry-
ing luggage, all executed in deep cobalt blue; base
bears the six-character mark of the period and reign
of K’ang Hsi. Height —7l4"
790. Double gourd porcelain vase, lower section
coated with an even celadon glaze, the shoulder bear-
ing the peach, finger citron, and pomegranate motifs
in san ts’ai or three-color glazes; the upper part bear-
ing clusters of peaches, leafage and butterflies, with
narrow, angular line pattern —in deep cobalt blue.
Height —B %" K’ang Hsi Period
791. Compressed globular water jar, the central
band depicting archaistic bird and tiger mask motifs;
above a formalized lotus petal band surmounted by


bands of ju-i head and continuous key-fret —all
painted in underglaze blue against a steatic or soft
paste glaze.
Diameter — sVi” Yung Cheng Period
792. Quadrangular porcelain brush-holder resting
on four angular stump feet; each side painted with
landscape scene surrounded by band of V-shaped
and floral motifs in underglaze blue against a clear
white glaze.
Height —3 V/' Ch’ien Lung Period
793. Rare globular porcelain jar with short incurvate
neck and flaring mouth-rim, painted in underglaze
blue under which are discernible calligraphic inscrip-
tions and floral motifs in light blue, as are the two
concentric lines surrounding the body.
Height —3" K’ang Hsi Period
794. Pair of porcelain vases in shape of water-
sprinklers, the lower part coated with a cafe-au-lait
glaze and the upper part with underglaze blue panels
containing lozenge, Buddhistic and leaf designs.
Height —7" K’ang Hsi Period
795. Fine bell-shaped cup fashioned from sonorous,
clear white porcelain; on exterior are painted the pa
kua or eight mystical trigrams, interspersed by ju-i
heads and flanked by key-fret and gadroon motifs;
on the interior is the Yin and Yang medallion.
Height —3" K’ang Hsi Period
796. Rare porcelain vessel in shape of water-sprink-
ler; the body coated with underglaze blue and the
long tapering neck in cafe-au-lait.
Height —7%" K’ang Hsi Period
797. Semi-eggshell teacup, with original cover; fash-
ioned from soft paste porcelain and decorated on the
interior with the peach, bat and plantain-leaf motifs.
Height —3%"• Ch’ien Lung Period
798. Ovoglobular jar painted in underglaze blue
with a central band of archaistic bird and tiger mask
motifs; underneath a band of formalized lotus leaves
surmounted by two bands of circular scrolls and ju-i
heads.
Height — 4" Ch’ien Lung Period
799. Tall cylindrical brush-holder fashioned from
steatitic or soft paste crackled porcelain and painted
with a mountainous seascape showing fishermen.
Height —5" YungChSng Period
800. Compressed shallow porcelain dish with wide
wide mouth aperture, decorated with formalized
peony and scroll tendrils in underglaze blue; base and
interior undecorated.
Diameter —7" Yung Cheng Period
801. Porcelain ovoid jar with slightly flaring neck
and short foot-rim decorated in underglaze blue with
the galloping horses of Mu Wang and bison amid
floating cloud scrolls and Buddhistic symbols; ivory
cover with reticulated jade medallion.
Height — 6V2" K’ang Hsi Period
802. Squatty globular porcelain jar covered with a
crackled steatitic or soft paste glaze, upon which are
painted in underglaze cobalt blue formalized peonies
connected by tendrils surmounting a wave band near
base; around mouth-rim a band of continuous key-
fret; interior and base undecorated; under foot-the
six-character mark of the period and reign of
Ch’ien Lung; reticulated teakwood cover with jade
medallion. Diameter — lV2" Height —4%"
803. Unusual pair of porcelain bowls flaring grace-
fully into a foliated mouth-rim; the decoration of
formalized peonies, leafage and scroll work with con-
necting tendrils in reserve upon a powder-blue back-
ground; deep receding base which bears the six-
character mark of the period and reign of Yung
Cheng. Diameter —7 Ms"
804. Pair of porcelain pyriform bottles decorated
with peony and rockery motifs in underglaze blue
against a bluish-white glaze.
Height —4%" K’ang Hsi Period
805. Pair of cylindrical blue and white porcelain vases
with short incurvate neck; exterior decorated with
formalized peonies and meandering scrolls; under-
foot the six-character mark of the period and reign
of Yung Cheng. Height — SVn”




806. Imperial porcelain vase with baluster-shaped
body with long cylindrical neck flaring slightly at
mouth-rim; glazed in white and decorated around the
body with medallions depicting the “Wheel of Life”
and near the base with regal cone patterns in under-
glaze blue. .
Height —10" K’ang Hsi Period
807. Unusual porcelain bowl with flaring mouth-
rim, decorated with the Eight Immortals paying hom-
age to the God of Longevity, sitting before an incense
burner and accompanied by a crane; all decorated
in a deep cobalt blue upon a pellucid bluish-white
glaze; medallion on interior portrays the fairy god-
dess, Hsi Wang Mu, riding on the Crane of Longevity
amid cloud scrolls.
Diameter —10" Ming Dynasty
808. Heavy porcelain inverted pear-shaped vase,
ring neck and garlic mouth, painted in underglaze
blue with the formalized peony and connecting ten-
dril and leafage motifs.
Height —9" K’ang Hsi Period
809. Fine porcelain bronze-shaped beaker with me-
dian band, expanding base and gracefully flaring
tubular neck. The decoration of formalized peonies
with scrolling tendrils is painted in deep cobalt blue
against a clear white glaze.
Height —8%" K’ang Hsi Period
810. Small porcelain vase, globular body, tall cylin-
drical flaring neck with short expanding base, deco-
rated in deep cobalt blue with peony and rockery
motifs together with flying butterflies.
Height —5Vi" Ch’ien Lung Period
811. Rare porcelain rouge box with cover, the cen-
tral medallion containing peony and leaf motifs with
swastika trellis surrounded by swirl and ju-i head
band; similar band decoration at mouth-rim of box.
Diameter —3%" K’ang Hsi Period
812. Pair of porcelain blue and white Pekingese dogs
with vase-like receptacle on back for holding incense
joss sticks. On teakwood stands.
Length —5" Ch’ien Lung Period
813. Unusual porcelain gallipot, or mei p’ing, in-
vested with a vitreous white glaze upon which are
painted clusters of peaches, pomegranates, and citron
fingers connected by leafy tendrils; underneath, for-
malized plantain leaves; around shoulder ju-i heads
connected by scrolls.
Height —10" K’ang Hsi Period
814. Finely-decorated rouge box fashioned from
steatitic or soft paste crackled glaze, on which are
painted playing children on terrace with lady atten-
dant surrounded by two bands of butterfly, melon
and leaf motifs.
Diameter —3 Vi" Yung Cheng Period
815. Straight-sided vase with short expanding neck
coated with a crackled soft paste glaze upon which is
painted one of the Immortals in a pine and bamboo
rockery grove.
Height —5" CKien hung Period
816. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with short in-
curvate neck and gracefully flaring mouth-rim, deco-
rated in underglaze blue with calligraphic inscrip-
tion, the central motif depicting a bronze-shaped vase
containing prunus and peony blossoms with leafage
in peachbloom and underglaze blue, flanked by teak-
wood stand with rock motif and bench with jardi-
niere and twig design.
Height —8" Yung Cheng Period
817. Unusual porcelain bottle-shaped vase with
short expanding base, tubular flaring neck with two
tiger masks. The body is painted with formalized but-
terfly, plantain and archaistic designs, all in under-
glaze blue.
Height —9" K’ang Hsi Period
818. Porcelain shallow dish; painted on the interior
in underglaze blue portraying a scholar in the atti-
tude of meditation, seated underneath trees. The ex-
terior is decorated with the eight Buddhistic symbols.
Diameter —B" K’ang Hsi Period
819. Porcelain blue and white beaker, decorated
with reversible plantain leaves, the median band con-
taining three circular medallions separated by flower
motifs.
Height —s%" K’ang Hsi Period


871. Description on reverse side.


871. Magnificent and rare peachbloom (P’in
Kuo hung) Chrysanthemum bottle, fashioned
from pure white Ta Ch’ing kaolinic porcelain.
The ovocylindrical body gradually contracts
toward the base where it is surrounded by a
collar of upstanding conventionalized chrysan-
themum petals. From the shoulder rises a
gracefully expanding tall, tubular neck with a
flaring mouth-rim. The vase is invested with
a pulsating and beautiful warm peau-de-peche
glaze of intense luminosity, flecked with rosy
spots; upon the chrysanthemum petals appear
the prized kingfisher green fleckings of the
partially ripened fruit. In point of size, color-
ing and texture this vase is unique. The white
glazed base bears in pencilled underglaze
blue, the six-character mark of the period and
reign of Ta Ch’ing K’ang Hsi nien chih, mean-
ing “made during the reign of Emperor K’ang
Hsi of the Great Ch’ing Dynasty.” On carved
ivory stand. Height —9'/s"




820. Pair of rare porcelain bowls decorated on the
exterior with formalized lotus flower connected by
leaf and vine scrolls, the interior with a formalized
lotus medallion; all painted in underglaze blue.
Diameter —6" Ming Dynasty
821. Pair of unusual blue and white porcelain bowls
decorated on the exterior with two feng-huang flying
amid cloud scrolls above a band of ju-i heads. The
interior bears a medallion containing a feng-huang
and the border shows a band of flower scrolls.
Diameter —4%" Kang Hsi Period
822. Very important blue and white porcelain ginger
jar decorated with an aquatic scene depicting a lotus
pond with cranes, butterflies, etc. Kang Hsi Period
823. Double gourd-shaped porcelain vase; the lower
bulbous part is glazed in celadon green surmounted
by a reserve band of peaches and Buddha’s hand
citron enameled in the early famille verte colors of
the period. Clusters of peaches are painted in deep
underglaze cobalt blue. Rare specimen.
Height —B" Kang Plsi Period
824. Porcelain shallow dish painted in underglaze
blue on the interior with three writhing, five-clawed
dragons amid cloud scrolls, and two dragons on the
exterior.
Diameter —814" Kang Hsi Period
825. Rare baluster-shaped porcelain vase in the
shape of a bronze vessel, invested with a flower-white
glaze. The ground decoration, in relief, is in the
nature of formalized peonies connected by leaf and
vine scrolls. Surrounding the exterior are nine panels
in variegated shape, in which appear the flowers of
the four seasons together with birds and rockery, all
painted in underglaze blue. The white glazed base
bears the artemisia leaf symbol.
Height —l 3%" Kang Hsi Period
826. Fine porcelain gallipot, mei p’ing, decorated in
underglaze blue and peachbloom, with clusters of
peaches, pomegranate, citron finger and leaf motifs.
Height —8%" Kang Hsi Period
827. Pair of unusual porcelain candlesticks with
flaring base, tubular neck with flanged lip and wide
drip pan; decorated in underglaze blue with peonies
and leaf tendrils against a bluish-white glaze.
Height —6" Ch’ien Lung Period
828. Pair of unusual blue and white porcelain water-
sprinklers; the globular body, bearing four flower
medallions, terminates in a long, slender neck which
is decorated with flower and leaf motifs.
Height — I'/>" Kang Hsi Period
829. Rare porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) painted in
underglaze blue with peach tree growing out of
rockery. The peaches appearing on shoulder and
growing on tree are painted in peachbloom, which
presents a very unusual effect in combination with
the underglaze blue. Kang Hsi Period
830. Rare porcelain point bottle, the ovoid body ris-
ing into a long, gracefully tapering neck. Against the
white glaze is painted in underglaze blue and peach-
bloom a splashing wave design with a writhing three-
clawed dragon encircling the neck.
Height — SVY’ Kang Hsi Period
831. Rare and important gallipot (mei p’ing) fash-
ioned from clear white steatitic or soft paste porce-
lain. The well-applied glaze exhibits a peau d’orange
(orange peel) surface; the decoration, in underglaze
blue hatched lines, depicts a female Dog of Fo guard-
ing its cub that is playing with a brocaded ball;
around the mouth-rim and at the base are bands of
the continuous key-fret. This vase is from the Herbert
L. Squires collection.
Height —13%" Yung Cheng Period
832. Blue and white beaker-shaped vase, both the
flaring neck and baluster body decorated with land-
scape, seascape and personage motifs; decorated in
intense cobalt blue against a milky white ground.
Height —18" Kang Hsi Period
833. Blue and white club-shaped or rouleau porce-
lain vase decorated in deep cobalt blue with a court-
yard scene in which appear on a terrace a mandarin
and the members of his household. The flanged
mouth-rim bears a formalized leaf decoration, and
around the neck is a band of continuous key-fret.
Height —lß" Kang Hsi Period


-834. Beaker-shaped blue and white porcelain vase.
On the baluster body is painted a landscape and sea-
scape with pavilions, and a similar decoration appears
on the gracefully expanding neck.
Height —18" K’ang Hsi Period
835. Important porcelain beaker decorated in under-
glazed blue and peachbloom. The base is decorated
with medallions containing flowers and rockery sepa-
rated by flying feng-huang. On the median band ap-
pear writhing dragons with alternating medallions of
flowers. The neck bears a combination of flying feng-
huang, writhing dragons and medallions of flowers.
Near the mouth rim and at the foot-rim are bands
of V-shaped lines.
Height —18" K’ang Hsi Period
836. Gallipot (mei p’ing) fashioned from porcellan-
ous ware; decorated on the exterior with figure,
flower and tree motifs, at the base a band of plan-
tain leaves, and around the shoulder a band of
lozenge and ju-i head motifs, with Buddhistic sym-
bols around the short incurvate neck; all painted in
underglaze blue.
Height —12%" Early Ming Dynasty
837. Unusual beaker-form vase with median band.
A plum tree growing out of rockery ascends the
length of the vase, and the prunus blossoms are out-
lined in peachbloom, all against a fine celadon green
glaze.
Height —l 7%" K’ang Hsi Period
838. Pyriform vase fashioned from porcellanous
ware; the globular body, with gracefully expanding
neck and mouth-rim, rests upon a high receded foot-
rim. The central motif of feng-huang amid cloud and
flower scrolls is surrounded by two bands of gadroons;
with plantain leaves underneath the mouth-rim, and
ju-i heads on the inside of the neck; all painted in
underglaze blue.
Height —HVi" Sung Dynasty
839. Blue and white beaker-shaped porcelain vase
with median section. The decoration consists of per-
sonage and rockery motifs together with Chinese
calligraphy.
Height —lß" K’ang Hsi Period
840. Blue and white rouleau or club-shaped vase.
The marine life decoration includes ascending and
descending carp; from the water rise lotus plants
with large leaves. The flanged mouth-rim and neck
are decorated with formalized key-fret and ju-i head
motifs.
Height —18" K’ang Hsi Period
841. Unusual porcelain bottle-shaped vase with
short expanding base, tubular flaring neck with two
tiger masks. The body is painted with formalized but-
terfly, plantain and archaistic designs, all in under-
glaze blue.
Height —9" K’ang Hsi Period
842. Ovocylindrical vase with short neck fashioned
from “soft-paste” or steatitic porcelain. The decora-
tion depicts a mountainous landscape with pavilions
and seascape executed in pulsating underglaze blue.
The well-crackled glaze exhibits “ostrich-egg” texture.
Height —l 6" Yung-ChSng Period
843. Heavy porcelain inverted pear-shaped vase,
ring neck and garlic mouth, painted in underglaze
blue with the formalized peony and connecting ten-
dril and leafage motifs.
Height —9" K’ang Hsi Period
844. Rouleau or club-shaped blue and white vase.
The decoration, painted in cobalt blue against a
white background, consists of mountains and sea-
scapes. Around the neck appear ju-i head and con-
tinuous key-fret motifs.
Height —l 6" K’ang Hsi Period
845. Blue and white porcelain pilgrim bottle—full-
moon shape, short cylindrical neck and scroll han-
dle. The center medallion contains a Shou character
surrounded by continuous stellated scepter heads.
The wide circular band contains gourd, leafage and
bat motifs, emblematic of happiness and long life.
Same type of decoration on each side.
Height —17" Yung ChSng Period
846. Rare and important gallipot (mei p’ing) fash-
ioned from clear-white steatitic or soft paste porce-
lain. The well-applied glaze exhibits a peau d’orange
(orange peel) surface; the decoration, in underglaze
blue hatched lines, depicts a female Dog of Fo guard


ing its cub that is playing with a brocaded ball;
around the mouth-rim and at the base are bands of
the continuous key-fret. This vase is from the Herbert
L. Squires collection.
Height —13%" Yting Cheng Period
847. Blue and white porcelain pilgrim bottle of full
moon shape with short cylindrical neck and scroll
handle. Decoration represents umbilicus center me-
dallions, holding stellated scepter heads, surrounded
by angular fretted bands and wide radial borderings
in eight divisions, each holding a Buddhist emblem
of good omen. Same decoration on each side.
Height —19%" Mark and Period of Chien-Lung
848. Rare peachbloom water brush washer fashioned
from clear white kaolinic porcelain; of semi-spherical
shape with small mouth aperture. Around the body
of the vessel appear three delicately-incised conven-
tionalized dragon medallions. The vessel is invested
with a velvety quality of soft pinkish-red glaze (peau-
de-peche) interspersed with fleckings of the prized
kingfisher green. The white glazed base is painted with
the underglaze blue six-character mark of Ta Ch’ing
K’ang Hsi nien chih, meaning “made during the reign
of Emperor K’ang Hsi of the great Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Diameter of base —4%" Height with stand —4V>"
849. Rare peachbloom water brush washer fashioned
from clear white kaolinic porcelain; of semi-spherical
shape with small mouth aperture. Around the body
of the vessel appear three delicately-incised conven-
tionalized dragon medallions. The vessel is invested
with a velvety quality of soft pinkish-red glaze
(peau-de-peche) interspersed with fleckings of the
prized kingfisher green. The white glazed base is
painted with the underglaze blue six-character mark
of Ta Ch’ing K’ang Hsi nien chih, meaning “made
during the reign of Emperor K’ang Hsi of the great
Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Diameter of base —4%" Height with stand —4%"
850. Rare peachbloom (p’in Kuo hung) porcelain
vase in shape of a Greek amphora. The slender taper-
ing body slopes into a high-flaring neck inside of
which appear the prized kingfisher green fleckings.
The pate is invested with a delicate pink glaze that
fluctuates from pale rose to the bloom of the ripening
peach. On the high receded base the six-character
mark of the K’ang-hsi nien hao and period are deli-
cately pencilled in underglaze blue.
851. Compressed-shaped porcelain bulb bowl rest-
ing on three stump feet. The interior is coated with a
celadon glaze, and the exterior in apple-green. All
surfaces show an interesting crackle system..
Diameter —5%"
852. Rare peachbloom amphoro-shaped porcelain
vase. The slender tapering body and high incurvate
flaring neck are clothed with an even and unctuous
glaze of the ripened peach, almost bean color. The
hollow foot bears the six-character mark of the K’ang-
hsi nien hao and period, finely pencilled in under-
glaze blue.
853. Rare peachbloom water brush washer fashioned
from clear white kaolinic porcelain; of semi-spherical
shape with small mouth aperture. Around the body
of the vessel appear three delicately-irlcised conven-
tionalized dragon medallions. The vessel is invested
with a velvety quality of soft pinkish-red glaze
(peau-de-peche) interspersed with fleckings of the
prized kingfisher green. The white glazed base is
painted with the underglaze blue six-character mark
of Ta Ch’ing K’ang Hsi nien chih, meaning “made
during the reign of Emperor K’ang Hsi of the great
Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Diameter of base —4%" Height with stand —4%"
854. Hemispherical writer’s water coupe fashioned
from fine white porcelain and enameled in the raie
peachbloom (p’in kuo hung) technique. Around the
body of the vessel appear three circular medallions
containing finely-incised archaistic writhing dragons.
The glaze shoals toward the foot into the hue of ashes
of roses. K’ang Hsi Period
Height with stand —4%" Diameter of base —4%"
855. Rare peachbloom water brush washer fashioned
from clear white kaolinic porcelain; of semi-spherical
shape with small-mouth aperture. Around the body
of the vessel appear three delicately-incised conven-
tionalized dragon medallions. The vessel is invested
with a velvety quality of soft pinkish-red glaze (peau-
de-peche) interspersed with fleckings of the prized




kingfisher green. The white glazed base is painted with
the underglaze blue six-character mark of Ta Ch’ing
K’ang hsi nien chih, meaning “made during the reign
of Emperor K’ang Hsi of the great Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Diameter of base — A%" Height with stand—AW
856. Hemispherical writer’s water coupe fashioned
from fine white kaolinic porcelain and invested with
a peachbloom glaze with areas of mottled rose color
flecked with the prized green of the ripening peach.
On the exterior are visible three medallions with
archaistic dragons nebulously incised beneath a rosy
glaze. The white base reveals in underglaze blue
the six-character mark of the reign and period of
K’ang Hsi.
Height with stand —AW Diameter of base —4%"
857. Peachbloom (peau-de-peche) porcelain shal-
low water coupe, compressed body with low foot,
wide mouth-rim, invested with a soft mottled glaze
with areas of green fleckings. The white glazed base is
inscribed with the underglaze blue mark of Ta Ch’ing
K’ang hsi nien chih, meaning “made during the reign
of Emperor K’ang Hsi of the great Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Diameter —4 Vi"
858. Peachbloom chrysanthemum bottle; near the
base of the body appear formalized chrysanthemum
petals, showing green fleckings; long tubular neck;
the vase is coated with a fine fluctuating peau-de-
peche glaze.
Height —BVi" K’ang Hsi Period
859. Unusual peachbloom porcelain compressed
water coupe with wide mouth. The exterior is invested
with a delicately mottled glaze fluctuating with the
green markings of the ripening peach, the prized
kingfisher green sought after in peachbloom tech-
nique. Underfoot is pencilled in underglaze blue the
six-character mark of the period and reign of K’ang
Hsi. Diameter — A%"
860. A beehive-shaped writer’s water coupe of ex-
quisite quality, fashioned from clear white porcelain
and coated with a peachbloom glaze that is mottled
with rosy tints together with areas of the prized mot-
tled green of the ripening peach. The three medal-
lions on the surface are in the form of writhing archa-
istic dragons, incised under the glaze. Underfoot is
pencilled in underglaze blue the six-character mark
of the period and reign of K’ang Hsi.
Height with stand—AW Diameter of base —4%"
861. Rare peachbloom water brush washer fashioned
from clear white kaolinic porcelain of semi-spherical
shape with small-mouth aperture. Around the body
of the vessel appear three delicately-incised conven-
tionalized dragon medallions. The vessel is invested
with a velvety quality of soft pinkish-red glaze (peau-
de-peche) interspersed with fleckings of the prized
kingfisher green. The white glazed base is painted with
the underglaze blue six-character mark of Ta Ch’ing
K’ang hsi nien chih, meaning “made during the reign
of Emperor K’ang Hsi of the great Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Height with stand —AW Diameter of base — A%”
862. Fine porcelain pear-shaped vase invested with
a flocculent lang yao or oxblood glaze. The globular
body exhibits areas of the prized ruby color which
shoals into crushed strawberry tones with a celadon
plasma at the mouth-rim. The celadon base is suf-
fused with oxblood. The glaze ends in an even line
above the foot-rim.
Height —l 4%" K’ang Hsi Period
863. Baluster-shaped vase fashioned from clear
white porcelain and invested with a lang yao or sang
de boeuf glaze showing typically the coagulation of
the blood. The base is covered with a celadon glaze.
Height —7" K’ang Hsi Period
864. Beautiful lang yao porcelain jar, formed in the
shape of a deep round bowl receding to a narrow
base. The exterior is coated with an unctuous oxblood
glaze showing areas of congelation and crushed
strawberry tints; the glaze has a peau d’orange tex-
ture and ends about half inch above the foot-rim.
Diameter —9" Height —7%" K’ang Hsi Period
865. Important lang yao bottle-formed vase; globu-
lar body rounding into a tall cylindrical neck, slightly
flaring at mouth-rim. The body is covered with a rich
and unctuous glaze of blood-red heavily dappled in
a darker hue; the glaze is finely pitted with pinholes
and suffused with crackle. Above the well-formed
foot-rim the glaze ends in an even scroll and the base
exhibits a celadon glaze speckled with red.
Height —9" K’ang Hsi Period


866. Important lang yao porcelain point bottle. The
globular body with sloping shoulder rises to a high
tubular neck flaring lightly towards the mouth. The
vase is invested with a rich and brilliant sang de
boeuf (oxblood) glaze, thinning to a lighter or
celadon area near the lip. The glaze is crackled
throughout.
Height — ll%" K’ang Hsi Period
867. Fine peachbloom (peau-de-peche) chrysan-
themum porcelain vase —so-called owing to the deep
chrysanthemum border springing from the base. The
ovoidal body with graceful expanding neck is clothed
with a fluctuating glaze to simulate the various tints
of the ripening peach. On carved ivory stand.
Height — 8" K’ang Hsi Period
868. Peachbloom porcelain rouge box, interior
glazed white; on the exterior the peachbloom glaze
shows the prized green fleckings. On the foot appears
a finely pencilled mark of the K’ang Hsi reign and
period. Diameter —2%"
869. Rare specimen of lang yao porcelain quatrefoil
or melon-shaped bowl invested with a crushed straw-
berry glaze, the entire base showing an area of a
beautiful celadon green.
Diameter — 2%" K’ang Hsi Period
870. Rare porcelain rouge box covered with peach-
bloom or peau-de-peche glaze; the interior is covered
with a greenish-white glaze, and both the box and
cover glaze is suffused with the prize green fleckings.
The base bears a finely pencilled mark of the K’ang
Hsi reign and period. Diameter —2%"
871. Peachbloom bottle (see colored illustration).
872. Important porcelain point bottle invested with
an unusual mirror-black glaze of metallic texture.
The globular body shapes into a gracefully tubular
neck. The base is glazed white.
Height — 17%" K’ang Hsi Period
873. Superb specimen of mirror-black porcelain of
metallic lustre in shape of double gourd. Both inside
of neck and base are glazed white. Glaze terminates
in even line above foot-rim.
Height — B%" K’ang Hsi Period
874. Superb pair of eggshell shallow plates with
flanged lip, on which are painted hovering butterflies
and rouge de fer blossoms. The decoration depicts a
princess sitting on rockery in front of burning twigs,
accompanied by an attendant. The painting is done
in fine famille verte enamels on a pure white glaze. On
the foot appears in a double ring the period and reign
mark of Ta Ch’ing K’ang Hsi nien chib.
Diameter — 6"
875. Rare baluster form porcelain vase, the body
rounding into a high incurvate neck with slightly
flaring mouth-rim. The entire vase is clothed with a
brilliant and fluctuating sang de bocuf (oxblood)
glaze with ruby-color tints at the shoulder and dark-
ening into areas of coagulation toward the foot. The
pitted glaze is suffused with dark crackle.
Height — lßV/' K’ang Hsi Period
876. Rare amphora-shaped porcelain vase with
graceful incurvate neck and wide expanding mouth-
rim; coated with an iridescent mirror-black glaze
on which is painted in the original gilding a rampant
dragon amid clouds pursuing the flaming pearl.
Height — 9% K’ang Hsi Period
877. Fine ring-necked rouleau (club-shaped) por-
celain vase invested with a metallic mirror-black
glaze showing original traces of gilded floral and bird
scenes. The inside of neck and base are glazed white.
Height — l 7" K’ang Hsi Period
878. Raluster-shaped porcelain vase invested with
crackled lang yao (oxblood) glaze of subdued qual-
ity, exhibiting a rosy hue. Rase and interior coated
with a crackled rice-colored glaze.
Height — 17%" K’ang Hsi Period
879. Double gourd-porcelain vase invested with a
brilliant brownish-black glaze that is pitted with a
peau d’orange surface, and coagulates in an even line
above the foot-rim.
Height — l 7" K’ang Hsi Period
880. Pyriform stoneware Kiangnin Ting Yao vase
invested with an ivory-colored glaze, beautifully
crackled; from each side of the neck appear two ele-
phant heads from which hang mock rings.
Height — 19" Ming Dynasty


881. Unusual figure of Pu-tai Ho-shang (Hotel) in
sitting posture, holding in right hand a scepter ju-i,
the left arm resting on the left knee. The entire figure
is coated with a truite crackle.
Height — 7" Ming Dynasty
882. Pyriform flambe vase; the globular body rising
into a tall cylindrical neck with slightly flaring mouth-
rim; invested with a flambe glaze.
Height — 7" 18th Century
883. Small ovoid jar with short neck, the entire sur-
face coated with a beautiful crackled cafe-au-lait
glaze.
Height —4" Yung Cheng Period
884. Imperial yellow point bottle invested with an
even glaze.
Height —7" 18th Century
885. Fine porcelain stem cup, the exterior glazed in
pale celadon and the interior showing cluster of
flowers and Van Dyke border painted in underglazed
blue upon greenish-white glaze. (This is a mate to
No. 887.)
Height —3%" Kang Hsi Period
886. Globular jar with short expanding neck, the
decoration depicting an intertwining rope basket; in-
vested with a claire de lune glaze; on the foot the
six-character reign and period mark of Yung Cheng.
Height —6%"
887. Fine porcelain stem cup, the exterior glazed in
pale celadon and the interior showing cluster of
flowers and Van Dyke border painted in underglazed
blue upon greenish-white glaze. (This is a mate to
No. 885.)
Height — SVi" Kang Hsi Period
888. Graceful porcelain vase, the globular body
terminating in a long, cylindrical neck. The vase is
coated with a pulsating Imperial yellow glaze.
Height —7" Kang Hsi Period
889. Shallow water dish with compressed body,
coated on exterior with a liver-red glaze; interior ex-
hibiting a swimming carp in peachbloom amid under-
glaze blue water plants.
Diameter —4%" 18th Century
890. Rare porcelain wine container with short neck,
the flanged lip coated in cafe-au-lait. The body is
decorated in slight relief with formalized peonies and
leaf tendrils; around the base appears an incised Van
Dyke border; coated with fine starch-blue glaze. The
base is white.
Height —7%" Kang Hsi Period
891. Porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) coated with a
celadon glaze. The border of six ju-i heads and the
bands of key-fret and serrated lines at base are
painted in peachbloom.
Height —7" Kang Hsi Period
892. Pyriform-shaped porcelain vase, with tubular
flaring neck. Above foot-rim and under the neck ap-
pear bands of gadroons in slight relief modeled in
the paste. The entire vase is invested with a starch-
blue glaze of varying density. Underglaze blue seal-
mark of period and reign of Yung Cheng in base.
Height— lo"
893. Pear-shaped porcelain vase; globular body with
gracefully expanding neck and flaring lip coated with
a fine pistache green glaze.
Height — 7" Ch’ien Lung Period
894. Turquoise-blue porcelain vase, compressed
body, tall cylindrical neck with flaring lip; invested
with an even turquoise-blue glaze.
Height — 6V2” Ch’ien Lung Period
895. Rare claire de lune porcelain point bottle of
superb quality.
Height —s" Kang Hsi Period
896. Pair of octofoil shallow dishes resting on three
stump feet, invested on interior and exterior with an
even celadon glaze; on the foot the underglaze blue
mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Diameter —s"
897. Graceful gourd-shaped porcelain vase with bor-
dered center and slender scepter-like handles. The
vase is coated with a uniform claire de lune glaze.
The base bears the impressed period seal-mark of
Emperor Ch’ien-lung. Height —9"




898. Semi-eggshell porcelain water coupe bearing
three medallions in which appear formalized feng-
huang; invested with an Imperial yellow glaze.
Height —2" K’ang Hsi Period
899. Porcelain point bottle coated with a fine tur-
quoise-blue crackled glaze.
Height — 6 x h" Ch’ien Lung Period
900. Melon-shaped porcelain vase, with cylindrical
neck and flanged mouth-rim; peony petals on shoul-
der surmounted by two rings; entire vase coated with
an even starch-blue glaze.
Height —7" Ch’ien Lung Period
901. Imperial porcelain vase decorated with two
medallions in which appear writhing archaistic drag-
ons and scrolls executed in slight relief; elsewhere
appear fungi motifs with ju-i head symbols at mouth-
rim and key-fret at base. The entire vase is invested
with a beautiful light-colored celadon glaze. On the
foot'is painted in underglazed blue the reign mark
and period of Ch’ien Lung. Height —11%"
902. Truncated gallipot-shaped vase decorated in
formalized peonies with fine scrollings in underglaze
iron-red against a background of pulsating Moham-
medan. Rare example.
Height —9" Ming Dynasty
903. Finely-decorated ring-necked club-shaped por-
celain vase coated with a brilliant souffle powder-
blue glaze on which is painted floral and bird deco-
rations in gilt.
Height —9 %” K’ang Hsi Period
904. Unusual lang yao gallipot invested with a
flocculent oxblood glaze; areas of congelation on
shoulder and around base, with ruby tints around
shoulder.
Height —7" K’ang Hsi Period
905. Melon-form or lobed oviform porcelain jar in-
vested with a bamboo green glaze.
Height —9 1 /i" 18th Century
906. Rare porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) coated
with an even coral-red glaze; inside of neck and base
glazed white.
Height — 6%" K’ang Hsi Period
907. Small club-shaped porcelain vase invested with
an iridescent metallic mirror-black glaze which termi-
nates in an even line above the foot-rim. Lip, inside
of mouth and base glazed white.
Height —lo" K’ang Hsi Period
908. Rare porcelain ring-necked vase, ovoid body
terminating in a tubular neck with expanding mouth-
rim. On the shoulder appear two writhing salaman-
ders in bold relief. The vase is invested with a dark,
uniform tea-dust glaze.
Height —9%" Ch’ien Lung Period
909. Unusual mei p’ing (gallipot) vase coated with
an even and intense cherry-red glaze.
Height —7" Yung Cheng Period
910. Porcelain bowl coated with a flocculent oxblood
glaze, with flaring lip.
Diameter — JVY' K’ang Hsi Period
911. Rare porcelain candlestick on high foot with
wide drip bowl and high tubular neck; invested
with an even cafe-au-lait glaze. (This is a mate to
No. 913.)
Height —7%" Yung Cheng Period
912. Lang yao tripod porcelain incense burner with
short molded neck, supported by three embryonic
stump feet, invested with a pitted and fluctuating ox-
blood glaze that coagulated at the shoulder and
terminated into a celadon color at mouth-rim and
base. Inside color is grayish-buff. On teakwood stand.
Diameter —8%" K’ang Hsi Period
913. Rare porcelain candlestick on high foot with
wide drip bowl and high tubular neck; invested
with an even cafe-au-lait glaze. (This is a mate to
No. 911.)
Height —7%" Yung Cheng Period
914. Rare lang yao porcelain bowl, both exterior and
interior covered with a crushed strawberry type of
glaze to simulate coagulated blood; mouth-rim white
and above foot-rim the glaze terminates in a line of
celadon green; base also glazed celadon green.
Diameter —7%" K’ang Hsi Period


-915. Porcelain vase, body of cup shape with grace-
fully rising cylindrical neck and flanged mouth-rim,
with two formalized dragon handles. The surface is
coated with a flocculent flambe glaze of red and
bluish hues. Under foot the impressed six-character
seal mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Height —B"
916. Unusual ovoid-shaped porcelain vase with
gracefully expanding neck and flaring mouth-rim.
The vase is coated with a brilliant powder-blue
souffle glaze on which are painted panels in various
shapes containing the flowers of the four seasons,
poetic symbols, together with Chinese calligraphy,
all painted in gold.
Height —lß" Kang Hsi Period
917. Large porcelain flower bowl with gracefully
flaring sides, invested with an even Imperial yellow
metallic glaze.
Diameter —13%" 18th Century
918. Rare porcelain beaker with baluster body,
gracefully flaring neck and mouth-rim. On a founda-
tion glaze of brilliant souffle powder-blue are painted
in gilt various panels containing flowers of the four
seasons, together with formalized peonies, utensils,
etc. Rase and inside of neck glazed white.
Height —18" Kang Hsi Period
919. Large porcelain flower bowl with gracefully
flaring sides, invested with an even Imperial yellow
metallic glaze.
Diameter —13%" 18th Century
920. Rouleau or club-shaped porcelain vase coated
with a dark powder-blue glaze on which are super-
imposed variously formed panels containing Buddhis-
tic symbols and flower ornaments; inside of neck and
base glazed white.
Height —18" Kang Hsi Period
921. Powder-blue club-shaped (rouleau) porcelain
vase; ovocylindrical with low foot, sloping shoulder,
ringed neck and flanged lip. The vase is coated with
a brilliant souffle powder-blue glaze of rich quality.
The edges of the flanged lip show white glaze. (Com-
panion specimen to No. 923.)
Height —18" Kang Hsi Period
922. Superb Imperial porcelain plaque, decorated
in the well and obverse side with five yellow Imperial
dragons persuing the effulgent orb amid cloud and
flame motifs against a uniformly dark blue back-
ground.
Diameter —25" 18th Century
923. Powder-blue club-shaped (rouleau) vase fash-
ioned from fine white kaolinic porcelain. The ovo-
cylindrical body and ringed neck are invested with a
rich souffle powder-blue glaze. The edges of the
flanged lip show white glaze. (Companion specimen
to No. 921.)
Height —lß" Kang Hsi Period
924. Large porcelain jar, known as “Fah Wa” ware
because each color area is outlined with fillets of slip
in slight relief. The ground color is turquoise-blue
and the lotus pond, bird and leaping fish motif is
glazed brown, yellow and aubergine; around the
shoulder are ju-i heads with a scalloped lambrequin
band around the mouth. The original cover is in the
same color scheme.
Height 17" Ming Dynasty
925. Lang yao porcelain vase with compressed
globular body and tall tubular chimney neck with
slightly flaring mouth-rim. The entire vase is coated
with an unctuous monochrome glaze exhibiting the
characteristic mottled play of color typical of choice
sang de boeuf specimens. With a light-colored plasma
at mouth-rim the glaze shades into ruby tints over the
neck and globular body with areas of coagulated
blood effect at shoulder, and toward the base termi-
nating in a thick roll above the foot-rim. The inside
of the neck and base are covered with a rice-colored
crackled glaze. Repaired at the mouth-rim. From the
J. P. Morgan collection.
Height —l 6%" Kang Hsi Period
926. Fine specimen of Fah Wa ware in shape of
wide-mouthed bulbous jar fashioned from buff stone-
ware; around the center of the body is portrayed the
Taoist paradise with Shou Lao and followers on
horseback and sages afoot. This scene is flanked on
the shoulder by continuous ju-i heads and at the base
with gadroons. The short neck bears cloud scrolls and
the cover floral and leafage ornamentation. The deco


ration is outlined in fillets of clay slip. The San-ts’ai
or three-color glazes are surrounded by a turquoise-
blue ground.
Height —l 7" Ming Dynasty
927. Porcelain rouleau or club-shaped vase invested
with a souffle powder-blue glaze of brilliant quality,
upon which are pencilled Buddhistic symbols, “Hun-
dred Antique” motifs, quatrefoil panels containing
fish, swastiska, floral and leaf motifs in gilt.
Height —29" K’ang Hsi Period
928. Imperial porcelain vase, the globular body ris-
ing into a tubular short neck; decorated in slight
relief with archaistic tiger masks, lozenge designs,
gadroon lappets, Key' and Lei Wen fret; ju-i head lap-
pets at base; coated with a superb and luminous sea-
green celadon glaze. Under foot in underglaze-blue
the six-character mark of the period and reign of
Ch’ien Lung. Height —24"
929. Baluster-shaped porcelain beaker with high ex-
panding base and long tubular flaring neck, coated
with a brilliant souffle powder-blue glaze; interior
and base white; remains of original decoration in gilt
are discernible. Unique specimen.
Height —2B" fCang Hsi Period
930. Fukien blanc-de-chine sitting figure of a Lohan,
clothed in a well-draped robe, concealing hands.
Height —6" 17th Century
931. Globular jar with wide open mouth and well-
formed foot coated with an unctuous cream-colored
glaze with a five-character calligraphic inscription on
exterior near mouth-rim.
Height —4%" Ming Dynasty
932. Koro or incense burner in form of bronze-
shaped vessel with two Dogs of Fo handles; glazed
on the exterior and interior with an ivory-white pel-
lucid glaze.
Diameter —s" Height —3V4" 17th Century
933. Helmet-shaped libation cup fashioned from
clear white kaolinic porcelain supported by three
tiger mask stump feet; the sides bearing decorated
cartouches with loop handle and mushroom lugs at
mouth-rim; coated with a luminous clear white glaze.
Length —4" Height —2%" 18th Century
934. Tub-shaped deep bowl fashioned from buff
stoneware and coated with Ying Ching or shadowy
blue glaze.
Height —2%" Sung Dynasty
935. Superbly potted blanc-de-chine Te-hua porce-
lain vase—pear-shaped with garlic mouth-rim, en-
circled about the neck with a Ch’ih Lung holding a
spray of ju-i head-shaped leaves. The entire vase is
coated with a cream-colored glaze of great purity and
luster.
Height —lo" Ming Dynasty
936. Barrel-shaped Fukien blanc-de-chine jar resting
on three ju-i head short feet; the straight sides en-
circled by two concentric lines in slight relief, to-
gether with flanged mouth-rim, coated with an ivory-
white glaze. Te-hua ware.
Diameter —4 Vi" Height —3" 18th Century
937. Fukien blanc-de-chine coupe in shape of lotus
leaf with twig handle, invested with a superb ivory-
white glaze. Ming Dynasty
938. Koro or incense burner in form of bronze-
shaped vessel with two Dogs of Fo handles; glazed
on the exterior and interior with an ivory-white pel-
lucid glaze.
Diameter —s" Height —3l4” 17th Century
939. Elliptical-shaped porcelain libation cup with ir-
regular mouth-rim, supported by three stump feet
and coated with a superb ivory-white glaze. On one
side appears a calligraphic inscription and on the
other side feng-huang incised in medallion form.
Height —4" Length —6" Ming Dynasty
940. Fukien blanc-de-chine statuette of Pu-tai Ho-
shang standing on tied money bag and wearing vol-
uminous robes with long loose sleeves. The partly ex-
posed abdomen and smiling countenance are sym-
bolical of his designation as “The God of Laughter
and Plenty.” Exceptional specimen of Te-hua ware.
Height —6%" 17th Century
941. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of Kuan Yin, God-
dess of Mercy, accompanied by child attendant hold-
ing lotus pod. The Goddess rests on rockery and is
clothed in a well-draped robe. A jewelled necklace




rests on breast and her carefully combed hair falls
on her shoulders in strand fashion.
Height — 9V2" Early 18th Century
942. Blanc-de-chine barrel-shaped jar with cover;
two bands of studded bosses surround mouth-rim and
base; on each side appear tiger mask handles. The
cover is surmounted by a finial in peach form with
leafage. Coated with a flour-white glaze of fine qual-
ity; base unglazed.
Height —494" 18th Century
943. Ovocylindrical vase with short incurvate neck
and slightly expanding mouth-rim; decorated on the
exterior with bands of lotus flowers and scrollings,
together with gadroons and ju-i heads; invested with
a “soft paste” steatitic crackled glaze.
Height —894" K’ang Hsi Period
944. Koro or incense burner in form of bronze-
shaped vessel with two Dogs of Fo handles; glazed
on the exterior and interior with an ivory-white pel-
lucid glaze.
Diameter —5" Height —394" 17th Century
945. Blanc-de-chine water coupe, rounded sides,
wide mouth aperture, the lustrous white glaze cov-
ering a band of incised motifs around base and
shoulder.
Diameter —3" Height —1%" 18th Century
946. Blanc-de-chine statuette of Kuan Yin, Goddess
of Mercy, standing on wave form base; clothed in
well-draped robe and hooded headdress; traces of
black and red pigments on hood still visible.
Height —13" 18th Century
947. Eggshell porcelain bowl with , rounded sides
and gracefully inverted mouth-rim, with an incised
band of floral motifs around the wide mouth aper-
ture; covered with a brilliant blanc-de-chine glaze.
Diameter —3%" Height —194" 18th Century
948. Shallow dish supported by three stump feet
and decorated on the exterior and interior with in-
cised clusters of com flowers; invested with a “soft
paste” or steatitic glaze of superb quality; underfoot
the seal-mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Diameter —s"
949. Tall cylindrical vase with short incurvate neck
and slightly expanding mouth-rim with two protrud-
ing side handles in form of tiger masks; invested with
an unctuous ivory-white glaze of great purity; base
unglazed.
Height —7" Early 18th Century
950. Fukien blanc-de-chine incense burner or koro;
from compressed body emerge two side handles in
the form of dragon heads. The vessel is supported by
a high recessed foot, bearing incised continuous key-
fret design. Around the mouth-rim is a band of ju-i
heads.
Diameter —6" Height —3 Vi” 18th Century
951. Fukien blanc-de-chine statuette of a Kuan Yin
—Goddess of Mercy, in sitting posture; her left hand
resting on small table holding vase; the right hand
resting on right leg; the Deity is clothed in a free-
flowing robe and hooded headdress.
Height —7Mi" 18th Century
952. Pair Imperial Peking enameled metal bottle-
shaped vases. The globular body rises into a long
tubular gracefully expanding neck, bearing gilded
archaistic dragon handles. Against an Imperial yel-
low ground are painted in Famille rose colors for-
malized peony blossoms with scrolling tendrils; on
neck collar are four lotus lappets with black ground.
The yellow enameled base bears the four-character
mark of the period and reign of Yung Cheng painted
on a cluster of peaches.
Height —794" Yung ChSng Period
953. Sitting figure of Pu-tai Ho-shang, God of
Laughter and Plenty, dressed in voluminous robes;
Te-hua ware, made in Fukien Province; coated with
an ivory-white glaze of fine quality.
Height —6” 17th Century
954. Pyriform-shaped porcelain vase, fashioned from
clear white kaolinic porcelain and made at Ching-te
Chen; invested with a bluish-white glaze over incised
decoration; the mouth-rim in cafe-au-lait.
Height —514" K’ang Hsi Period
955. Pair of Peking enameled “millefleurs” bowls
and covers, painted in famille rose enamels with the




“Thousand Flower” design; a cluster of peaches, fungi
and corn flowers appear on inside.
Diameter —4%" Height —3%" IHth Century
956. Soft paste or steatitic porcelain globular bowl
with wide mouth. Around the body of the bowl ap-
pear undulating and scrolling branches of the Bud-
dhistic lotus. Ju-i heads surround the mouth-rim and
continuous gadroons are banded above the foot-rim.
The entire surface is invested with a soft cream-
colored glaze. A notable example of this ware.
Diameter —8%" K’ang Hsi Period
957. Blanc-de-chine straight sided cylindrical vase
with long tubular neck and wide flanged mouth-rim,
invested with a Te-hua cream white glaze. The base
bears the underglaze blue mark of the period and
reign of K’ang Hsi. Height — 5Vj"
958. Fukien blanc-de-chine porcelain figure of Pu-
tai Ho-shang with smiling countenance and exposed
abdomen; clothed in voluminous robes; both bands
and feet exposed; invested with a pellucid cream-
colored glaze.
Height —5%" 18th Century
959. Fukien blanc-de-chine Kuan Yin, Goddess of
Mercy, in cross-legged mudra with joining hands in
attitude of prayer. The deity wears a well-draped
robe with ribbon bands flowing over forearms. Her
diadem crown bears a small Buddha. The Goddess
rests on a formalized lotus petal stand; invested with
an ivory-white glaze of superb quality.
Height —9” Ming Dynasty
960. Fukien sculptured blanc-de-chine Te-hua por-
celain figure of the many-armed Kuan-Yin; the 18
arms in the attitude of making various mudras and
each hand holding a different Buddhistic emblem.
The figure is in a cross-legged sitting posture, resting
on a lotus petal stand.
Height —7 ] /2" Late Ming Dynasty
961. Rare soft paste or steatitic semi-eggshell vase
with compressed body rising into a long cylindrical
neck with wide flanging mouth-rim; underneath the
superb ivory-colored glaze appear two incised writh-
ing dragons.
Height — 5W Late Ming Dynasty
962. Pair of Peking enamelled metal plates, deco-
rated in floral motifs with famille rose colors.
18th Century
963. Blanc-de-chine double gourd-shaped vase deco-
rated on the exterior in slight relief with floral, key-
fret, gadroon, ju-i head and plantain leaf motifs. The
vase is invested with a “soft paste” steatitic glaze.
Height —l 4" Late K’ang Hsi Period
964. A miniature beaker-shaped porcelain vase with
median knop, decorated on the exterior with bands
of plantain leaves. The vase is coated with a “soft
paste” or steatitic glaze.
Height —5" 18th Century
965. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of priest in sitting
posture, clothed in voluminous robes, wearing a
mitred head-dress. The statuette is invested with a
fine ivory-white glaze; excellent specimen of Te-hua
ware.
Height —6" Ming Dynasty
966. Magnificently modelled blanc-de-chine Te-hua
porcelain figure of the Goddess of Mercy seated in a
graceful pose. The left arm rests on the slightly raised
left knee and the right hand holds a scroll. The flow-
ing robe and cowl-like headdress are beautifully
draped. The Kuan-Yin’s benign glance is directed
downwards. The entire figure is coated with a soft
ivory-white glaze of rich depth and delightful texture.
Height —B%" Ming Dynasty
967. Blanc-de-chine beaker of Te-hua ware; the me-
dian knop surmounted by a gracefully flaring neck
and mouth-rim; the base expanding to a well-formed
foot; clothed with an even and unctuous ivory-white
glaze; base unglazed.
Height —8" 17th Century
968. Fukien blanc-de-chine porcelain figure of Pu-
tai Ho-shang with smiling countenance and exposed
abdomen; clothed in voluminous robes; both hands
and feet exposed; invested with a pellucid cream-
colored glaze.
Height —s%" 18th Century
969. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of Kuan Yin in
sitting posture, resting on rockery base, dressed in


voluminous robe and hooded headdress; coated with
a soft ivory-white glaze.
Height —5%" Ming Dynasty
970. Blanc-de-chine pyriform vase with gracefully
flaring mouth-rim with a Ch’ih lung in bold relief
encircling neck; coated with a flour-white glaze.
Height —4%" 18th Century
971. Drum-shaped water coupe supported by four
stump feet and encircled by two bands of studded
bosses with mock tiger mask ring handles; covered
with a Ting Yao unctuous glaze.
Diameter —3%" Sung Dynasty
972. Baluster-shaped vase with ringed neck and
flanged mouth-rim; decorated with cartouches con-
taining continuous key-fret design; coated with a
crackled “soft paste” or steatitic glaze.
Height—SVC Kang Hsi Period
973. Drum-shaped water coupe supported by four
stump feet and encircled by two bands of studded
bosses; covered with an unctuous Ting Yao glaze.
Diameter —3%" Sung Dynasty
974. Pyriform porcelain vase incised with dragon
and wave motifs and coated with an ivory-white
glaze.
Height —4%" Ming Dynasty
975. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of Warrior with
priest attendant, both dressed in loosely fitting robes;
invested with a brilliant ivory-white glaze.
Height —6" 18th Century
976. Fukien blanc-de-chine porcelain figure of Pu-
tai Ho-shang with smiling countenance and exposed
abdomen; clothed in voluminous robes; hands and
feet exposed; invested with a pellucid cream-colored
glaze.
Height —sVi" 18th Century
977. Blanc-de-chine beaker of Te-hua ware; the me-
dian knop surmounted by a gracefully flaring neck
and mouth-rim; the base expanding to a well-formed
foot; clothed with an even and unctuous ivory-white
glaze; base unglazed.
Height —8" 17th Century
978. Blanc-de-chine statuette of Kuan Yin, Goddess
of Mercy, standing on wave form base, and clothed
in voluminous robes and hooded headdress; coated
with a blanc-de-chine Te-hua glaze of fine quality.
Height —l3 VC 18th Century
979. Fukien blanc-de-chine elliptical bronze-shaped
vase, bearing four side handles in archaistic form.
The sides of the vase are encircled by bands of
archaic tiger masks and dragon motifs, together with
continuous key-fret; invested with a flour-white glaze.
Te-hua ware.
Height —7" 18th Century
980. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of Kuan Yin, God-
dess of Mercy, sitting upon a rockery throne, clothed
in a free-flowing robe and hooded headdress, hold-
ing scroll in left hand, accompanied by bird and
three scrolls and vase on right side of deity. Te-hua
ware.
Height — ISV2" 18th Century
981. Fukien blanc-de-chine porcelain ornament in
the form of three peaches connected with twigs and
leafage; small raised bosses cover the fruit motifs;
in the shape of box and cover; coated with a superb
ivory-white glaze of great purity.
Diameter —5%" Ming Dynasty
982. Superb specimen of a standing Kuan Yin, God-
dess of Mercy, wearing free flowing robes; bejeweled
breast; well-combed hair, extending in strands over
shoulders; invested with an ivory-white glaze of fine
quality.
Height —l 7" 17th Century
983. Water coupe fashioned from Te-hua porcelain;
compressed body with wide open mouth; encircled
by a band of formalized archaistic bronze motifs;
above the foot-rim a band of gadroons; coated with
an ivory-white glaze of even quality.
Diameter —6" Ming Dynasty
984. Superb specimen of Kuan Yin, Goddess of
Mercy, in sitting posture and clothed in well-draped
robe and hooded headdress; coated with a superb
ivory-white glaze. Ming Dynasty




985. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase coated with an
evenly applied cream-colored glaze.
Sung-Yuan Dynasty
986. Fukien blanc-de-chine statuette of Kuan Yin
standing on porcelain base to simulate splashing
waves; the deity is clothed in voluminous robes and
hooded headdress with jewels both on breast and in
carefully combed hair; hands are joined.
Height —14" 18th Century
987. Pair unusual porcelain wide-mouth bulbous jars
molded in relief with four formalized dragons writh-
ing amidst tendrils and branches of Ling chih fungii.
Around the foot appear gadroons of flowers and
“pearls” and on the shoulders the octofoil scalloped
medallions containing bats and shou emblems are
surrounded by continuous tendrils. The entire deco-
ration is painted in wu-ts’ai, five color, glazes en-
hanced with gilding.
Diameter —13" K’ang Hsi Period
988. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with short in-
curvate neck and flaring mouth-rim, ruggedly deco-
rated in iron-red, green, aubergine, yellow and un-
derglaze blue against a greenish-white glaze. The
decoration shows a feng-huang standing on rockery
amid flowering trees with two flying birds.
Height —14'//' Early K’ang Hsi Period
989. Unusual pair of hexagonal porcelain jardinieres,
resting on six ju-i head feet, invested with a clear
white glaze on which are painted flower groupings,
fungi, and rockery in famille rose enamels. The in-
terior is glazed with peacock green.
Diameter —8%" Height — s" Ch’ien Lung Period
/
990. Pure white porcelain bowl with flanged lip and
well-formed foot. On the exterior appear four swim-
ming carp elegantly painted in rouge de fer. The
base of the interior contains one single fish; four-
character mark of the Yung Cheng period on base.
Diameter —6%"
991. Fine pair of porcelain figures of cocks, perched
on rockery, glazed blue, brown and green. The poly-
chromed feathers, rose-pink comb and wattles blend
harmoniously with the coral-red body that is touched
with gilding.
Height —6" Yung ChSng Period
992. Unusual shallow porcelain dish invested with
a greenish-white glaze upon which is painted in the
famille verte colors a gnarled tree supporting a
perched magpie in the surroundings of flowers and
leafage. The artist’s signature is painted in red above
the decoration.
Diameter —BV4" K’ang Hsi Period
993. Unusual famille verte bowl; the exterior di-
vided into eight compartments four of which are
painted with the Flowers of the four Seasons and al-
ternating panels depicting feng-huang, crane, stag,
kylin, phoenix, Fu Lion, hawk and horse. The interior
panel at mouth-rim contains Flowers of the four Sea-
sons and on the base of the well a feng-huang in
rouge de fer is painted in medallion form.
Diameter —6%" K’ang Hsi Period
994. Famille verte ginger jar; the two large panels
are painted with flower, rockery and bird motifs sepa-
rated by two peach blossom reserves surrounded by
leafage and containing vases with peacock feathers,
with an adjacent sceptre ju-i. The shoulder band is
reserved with flowers and formalized peonies, and a
gadroon pattern appears at the base.
Height —6%" K’ang Hsi Period
995. Beaker-form porcelain vase, with flaring mouth-
rim and expanding base and bulbous knop, decorated
in green and iron-red chrysanthemum leafage, clouds
and mountain peaks. On base appears nien hao of
Wan Li but attributed to Yung Cheng period.
Height —B%"
996. Pair Imperial famille rose porcelain rouge boxes
with cover in the shape of a ju-i head; lotus blossoms
and scrolling tendrils in a yellow ground band bor-
dered with gilding surround the box; on the cover
appear five wa wa (children) at play, beautifully
painted in famille rose enamels. The six-character
mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien-lung is im-
pressed in base. Diameter —3%"
997. Unusual famille verte semi egg-shell shallow
porcelain dish with wide flanged lip, around which
appear the eight Taoist Immortals riding crested
waves. The center medallion, surrounded by rouge
de fer angular motifs, frames an aquatic scene show-
ing mandarin ducks swimming among lotus plants.


The decoration is carried out in green, yellow, au-
bergine, and rouge de fer and underglaze blue.
Diameter —l 2%" K’ang Hsi Period
998. Porcelain vase coated with an unctuous clear
white glaze on which are superimposed iron-red and
green peaches with leafage; baluster-shaped.
Height —8" Late 18th Century
999. Rare melon-shaped ginger jar with original
voluted hat-shaped cover. The jar and cover are in-
vested with an unctuous white glaze on which are
painted floral motifs with leaf scrolling. The neck,
shoulder and base-band of the jar are coated with
alternate panels of rouge de fer and pinkish gilded
panels. The cover is similarly decorated, and is sur-
mounted by an underglaze blue finial.
Height —11" K’ang Hsi Period
1000. Fine famille verte club-shaped porcelain vase
painted with a mountainous landscape and trees aris-
ing from the sea in which a fisherman is guiding his
sampan toward the shore where other worthies are
in meeting by the pavilion. Rouge de fer clouds
entwine the mountain peaks. On the neck appear
bands of continuous circlets of ju-i heads.
Height —18%" K’ang Hsi Period
1001. Ovoidal club-shaped porcelain vase decorated
with rockery from which emerge tree trunks bearing
peonies, magnolias and other flowers with leafage;
four flying birds complete the decoration. Around the
shoulder, the lozenge pattern bears four reserves con-
taining the Flowers of the four Seasons. Flowers and
leaves are painted on the incurvate neck.
Height —l 7%" Kang Hsi Period
1002. Superb famille verte shallow dish with painted
bamboo trees, clusters of formalized flowers, sprays
of leafage growing from rockery amid which appear
hovering butterflies. The decoration is enameled in
very virile colors, giving an exceedingly fine color
effect.
Diameter —lSVa" K’ang Hsi Period
1003. Famille verte oviform porcelain vase with flar-
ing cylindrical neck. The vitreous white glaze sus-
tains finely painted rectangular and circular reserve
panels depicting clusters of plum blossom and pinks;
fisherman by a lake; a suppliant in audience before
a mandarin, and a servant driving a beggar from the
officials’ doorstep. In the shagreen ground surround-
ing the panels appear flying feng-huang amid clouds.
The four reserves on the shoulder contain the orna-
ments of the literati; flowers and a poem are painted
on the neck.
Height —l 6%" K’ang Hsi Period
1004. Remarkable rouleau or club-shaped porcelain
vase coated with a fine clear white glaze on which is
painted a group of warriors on galloping horses
guarding a riding mandarin attended by a banner
bearer. On the neck is drawn a cluster of rocks and
bamboo leafage, surrounded on the shoulder by a
foliated band of ju-i heads. The entire decoration is
executed in powerful aubergine, green, yellow, blue
and rouge de fer colors. The flanged lip bears a band
of continuous key-fret.
Height —lßVi" K’ang Hsi Period
1005. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with a long,
tubular, gracefully expanding neck and slightly flar-
ing lip. The four panels, enamelled in famile verte
colors with the flowers of the four seasons, are sepa-
rated by a gilded frog-spawn motif in which appear
ju-i heads in gold and coral red. On the neck and base
formalized plantain leaves are painted in gold. The
combination of the five colors of famille verte with
gold give a very effective color scheme.
Height —18Vi" K’ang Hsi Period
1006. Magnificent specimen of Te-hua or Fukien
blanc-de-chine porcelain sculpture of the Kuan Yin.
The statuette is clothed in beautifully-draped rai-
ments, both arms and hands concealed and the feet
only partially visible. The Goddess rests in sitting
posture upon a high rockery formation, and by her
side rest three bound scrolls on a rustic, small table.
Her hairdress ends in braids flowing over both shoul-
ders. Her breast is bejewelled. Her facial expression
and body posture are of benign serenity.
Height —l7V4" 18th Century
1007. Famille verte rouleau or club-shaped porce-
lain vase, superbly painted in the wu-ts’ai, or five
color, enamels. In a seeded green ground appear
flowers and butterflies. Mei hua, peony shrubs.




perched pheasant and magpies compose the decora-
tion on the two oblong panels; on the pomegranate
and leaf-shaped vignettes are bamboos, shellfish and
flowers. The neck is decorated with mountainous
landscapes and the diapered shoulder band is re-
served with gold fish and aquatic plants.
Height —18%" K’ang Hsi Period
1008. Pair of famille verte shallow plates decorated
on the interior with the figure of Hsi Wang Mu, the
Fairy Goddess, with an attendant guiding her chariot
drawn by the spotted deer of longevity. On the re-
verse side appear the thousand Shou characters
painted in dark red. The five color decoration is
painted on a background of pure white glaze.
Diameter —ls%" K’ang Hsi Period
1009. Very important beaker-shaped famille verte
vase, the baluster body terminating in a gracefully
expanding neck with flaring mouth-rim. The decora-
tion depicts a mandarin and members of his family
being feted by visiting noblemen, the scene taking
place on a canopied terrace. The neck portrays a
nobleman accompanied by women attendants receiv-
ing a visit from a group of warriors. The shoulder is
decorated with lozenge band bearing reserves that
contain Buddhistic symbols. All the decoration is in
the strong colors of the famille verte palette on a fine
white-glazed background. (This vase was formerly
in the private collections of Mr. Garland and Mr. J. P.
Morgan.)
Height —2B%" K’ang Hsi Period
1010. Important pair of baluster-formed potiche
shaping into a wide mouth, with original hat-form
cover with underglaze blue finial. The decoration
consists of a phoenix standing on rockery in the sur-
roundings of flowering peonies, magnolias and prunus
blossoms, with a band of gadroons around the base.
The cover is decorated with chrysanthemum and
peony blossoms encircled by a band of angular
motifs. The virile famille verte colors of green, yel-
low, aubergine, rouge de fer, and light blue are
superimposed upon a greenish-white background
glaze.
Over-all height —23%" K’ang Hsi Period
1011. Unusual famille verte five-color floral porce-
lain plaque which is invested with a vitreous green-
ish-white glaze, the decoration consisting of three
branches bearing triad clusters of formalized blos-
soms emerging from green rockery together with
grasses and bamboos.
Diameter — 15Vi" K’ang Hsi Period
1012. Pair rare famille verte ovocylindrical vases of
graceful slender form. The four compartments con-
taining clusters of the Flowers of the Four Seasons
are separated by a seeded green ground in which red
and yellow prunus blossoms are scattered. The back-
ground is covered by a translucent glaze applied
enbiscuit.
Height —12" K’ang Hsi Period
1013. Unusual cup and saucer fashioned from semi-
eggshell porcelain. On a cafe-au-lait ground color is
superimposed in famille verte enamels a band of
leafage and peony flowers with scrolls. The interiors
of the saucer and cup are also painted in famille
verte colors depicting flowers and ju-i head motifs.
Diameter of saucer — s" Diameter of cup — 3Vi"
Height of cup —2" K’ang Hsi Period
1014. Magnificent famille verte bowl; the exterior
painted with a feng-huang standing on rockery sur-
rounded by peony and hydrangea blossoms accom-
panied by two magpies and a flying phoenix. On the
interior is a cluster of three peaches, growing from
sprigs. The bowl has a well-formed foot. 1 A fine ex-
ample of the K’ang Hsi period. Diameter — BVi"
1015. Pair of conical-shaped bowls made from fine
clear white kaolinic porcelain. A princess appears on
the exterior riding a horse astride accompanied by an
attendant and is receiving homage from a mandarin.
On the obverse side a spreading tree with leafage is
growing from rockery. The interior of the bowl is
painted with three rouge de fer carp.
Diameter —3%" Height —I%'' K’ang Hsi Period
1016. Unusual ginger jar with original cover. The
two large reserves portray two worthies beside rock-
ery and a fisherman netting fish. The two small panels
contain prunus and lotus blossoms with leafage. The




four panels are separated by rouge de fer ground re-
served with formalized peonies and leaf scrolling. A
patch of green and gilding appears in the lotus pond
scene. The cover is similarly decorated.
Height —lo" K’ang Hsi Period
1017. Famille verte musical porcelain bowl, deco-
rated on exterior with lotus pond scene; among the
flowers rising from the water appear swimming fish,
fowl and birds; the interior bears floral medallions
and border.
Diameter — BV2" K’ang Hsi Period
1018. Rare famille verte porcelain libation cup. Un-
der the spout and adjoining the archaistically formed
handles are four salamanders or lizard-like animals.
Each side is painted with a flying crane holding
flowers in its beak. A Shou character appears on the
handle; the inside has a band of ju-i heads and three
hovering butterflies.
Length —6" Height —3" K’ang Hsi Period
1019. Pair of superb famille verte shallow plates
bordered on the inside with a green seeded ground
containing the flowers of the four seasons, namely,
prunus, peony, magnolia and chrysanthemum, that
separate four reserves in which appear different types
of shellfish. In the center of one plate is painted a
seated princess performing her toilette, accompanied
by a child, with books, incense burner, and vase rest-
ing on a nearby table. The center of the other plate
portrays a seated lady admiring her kitten, with
books and flower vase resting on an accompanying
table. Both plates bear the signature of the artist.
Diameter —10%" K’ang Hsi Period
1020. Famille verte bottle-shaped porcelain vase
with green hawthorn knop near mouth-rim and un-
derneath plantain leaves with ju-i-edged collar. The
globular body is decorated with leafy green tendrils
connecting formalized blue and iron-red chrysanthe-
mum rosettes.
Height —7%" K’ang Hsi Period
1021. Pair of most unusual famille verte plates
rimmed by a band of Ling Lung interlaced circlets.
The center decoration portrays two princesses watch-
ing a child in play. Very rare specimens.
Diameter —8%” K’ang Hsi Period
1022. Ovoid-shaped ginger jar with four large re-
serves separated by lozenge motifs. In two alternating
panels appear a princess admiring the jardiniere con-
taining flowers; in the two remaining panels are an
archaistically formed vase and incense burner.
Around the shoulder is a lozenge band with four re-
serves that contain Buddhistic symbols. This is an
important specimen of famille verte porcelain. The
jar is surmounted with a reticulated carved teak-
wood cover.
Height — lOV2” K’ang Hsi Period
1023. Famille verte double gourd-shaped porcelain
vase, covered with a greenish-white glaze on which
are superimposed formalized peony flowers con-
nected with tendril scrolls.
Height —7" K’ang Hsi Period
1024. Pair of famille verte baluster-shaped potiche.
The four large reserve panels portraying empirical
audience scenes are separated by a seeded green
ground in which appear Buddhistic symbols. Around
the base are eight reserve panels containing flowers
of the four seasons, and the short incurvate neck is
decorated with hovering butterflies amid seasonal
flowers. The personage and other decorative motifs
are expertly painted in the wu-ts’ai or five colors of
the famille verte palette on a greenish-white ground
glaze. Both jars are surmounted by carved teakwood
covers with finials.
Height, exclusive of cover —l 9" K’ang Hsi Period
1025. Te-hua or Fukien blanc-de-chine figure with
child in lap, wearing well-draped hood and robe and
resting upon a rockery throne in attitude of royal
ease. A group of scrolls rests on small rockery table.
The eyes are cast slightly downward and the God-
dess exhibits an attitude of beneficence. The statuette
is invested with a superb ivory-white glaze.
Height — llV2” Ming Dynasty
1026. Famille verte baluster-form beaker vase fash-
ioned from white vitreous porcelain, finely enameled.
The four large panels are painted in exquisite detail
with the flowers of the Four Seasons (lotus, chrysan-
themum, peony and prunus) and butterflies (emblem-
atic of happiness) appear in the four leaf-shaped


panels. The rouge de fer ground surrounding the
panels contains scrolling stems of flowers.
Height — l 7%" K’ang Hsi Period
1027. Blanc-de-chine Fukien or Te-hua ware of the
Kuan Yin in sitting posture with child in lap, and
vase standing on nearby rockery; the Goddess rests
on rockery throne. The eyes are cast slightly down-
ward—the face exhibits a benign expression.
Height — 13" 18th Century
1028. Beaker-shaped porcelain vase with median
band, the decoration consisting of rockery, flowers,
phoenix, all painted in virile green, yellow, aubergine,
rouge de fer, and underglaze blue colors.
Height —22" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1029. Important rouleau or club-shaped famille
verte porcelain vase. Around the body, seated in a
balcony is a lady of nobility, being feted by a group
of mandarins gathered on her terrace. On the obverse
side is drawn an interestingly-formed tree with leaf-
age and the sky is decorated with rouge de fer cloud
scrollings. The neck is decorated with a landscape
with pavilions and a seascape. The flower-decorated
seeded border contains four reserves showing Bud-
dhistic symbols.
Height — l 7" K’ang Hsi Period
1030. Famille verte baluster-form beaker vase of
superb quality, painted in wu-ts’ai or five color
enamels, with black very much in the color scheme.
The decoration portrays genre scenes in mountainous
and woodland regions. In the upper landscape farm-
ers are gathering faggots and leading a water buffalo
into a barn; beside, a man is fishing; the lower scene
depicts two scholars upon a shore and one in a pavil-
ion watching a group of fisherfolk.
Height —I8V2" K’ang Hsi Period
1031. Unusual club-shaped or rouleau famille verte
porcelain vase. A mandarin and his consort sitting in
their balcony are being entertained by spirited war-
riors sitting on galloping horses. Adjoining the ter-
raced pavilion is a splendidly painted pine tree amid
rockery. Scrolling cloud formations appear in the
sky. The neck depicts a cluster of bamboo leaves
growing from rockery. On the shoulder, the lozenge
band bears four reserves containing flowering prunus
blossoms. The decoration is carried out in brilliant
aubergine, green, yellow, black and rouge de fer.
Height —17" K’ang Hsi Period
1032. Important porcelain beaker. The median band
and lower section are painted with prunus and peony
blossoms and rockery. On the neck appears a recep-
tion scene by a mandarin on throne receiving homage
from his followers. The intensity of the aubergine,
green, yellow, iron-red and underglazed blue colors
is very pronounced. The background glaze is a green-
ish-white.
Height —2ll4" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1033. Shallow porcelain dish invested with a bluish-
white glaze upon which is painted on the interior a
writhing dragon amid cloud scrolls surrounded by
wave motifs, and on the exterior appear two similarly
drawn dragons swirling amid flowers and cloud
scrolls, pursuing the Flaming Pearl, all in green,
yellow and rouge de fer.
Diameter — 8%" Ming Dynasty
1034. Pair of San ts’ai (three color) figures of Dog
of Fo sitting on their haunches, in shape of incense
burner—the female accompanied by cub.
Height — B" K’ang Hsi Period
1035. Important porcelain figure of one of the Im-
mortals in sitting posture. The figure wears an au-
bergine robe with yellow and green flowers; the beard
and hair are in brilliant mirror-black. The pedestal is
decorated with a green and yellow lozenge pattern.
All the glazes are applied enbiscuit. (Companion
piece to No. 1038.)
Height — 6" K’ang Hsi Period
1036. Pair unusual foliated sweet-meat trays, glazed
enbiscuit in green, yellow and aubergine, depicting
a gnarled plum tree with two flying magpies amid
prunus blossoms. The obverse side is covered with
emerald-green glaze painted with bamboo leaves in
black; the base covered by a translucent wash.
Length —7" Width —s" K’ang Hsi Period
1037. Rare porcelain figure of Kuan Yin, the God-
dess of Mercy in sitting posture clothed in an apple-
green colored garment that is decorated with medal


lions of flying cranes amid cloud scrolls. The hands,
breast, face and headdress are glazed a creamy-white
and a finely-draped decorated hood covers the head.
The glazes of aubergine, green, yellow, blue and
coral-red comprise the color scheme. The left hand
holds a scepter ju-i and in the right hand rests a small
sphere. In the back of the Kuan Yin is a square hole
placed there for the reception of alms.
Height —9" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1038. Three-color biscuit figure of an Immortal in
sitting posture, resting on a lozenge-decorated ped-
estal. In the left hand appears a small bowl contain-
ing flowers. The figure is clothed in an apple-green
and brown garment decorated with the phoenix and
cloud scrolls. Unusual example. (Companion piece to
No. 1035.)
Height —6" K’ang Hsi Period
1039. Rare porcelain dish invested with an irides-
cent apple-green colored glaze, painted on interior
with three dragons pursuing the Flaming Pearl amid
flame motifs, and two writhing dragons amid flame
scrolls on exterior. Under foot the mark of reign and
period of K’ang Hsi. Diameter —B VT
1040. Porcelain beaker, in shape of early bronze
Tsun. The globular body and tubular expanding neck
are incised with scaly green dragons pursuing the
jewel amid flames. The waves above the foot-rim and
the band of ju-i heads around interior mouth-rim are
also incised and enameled green. The decorations
on the exterior and interior are surrounded by Im-
perial yellow glaze.
Height —B%" 18th Century
1041. Exceptional pair Pekingese porcelain dogs in
recumbent pose; glazed white with areas of gray and
brown.
Length — lW Yung Cheng Period
1042. Unusual porcelain figure of a Bodhisattva in
standing posture, wearing a decorated garment with
long flowing sleeves. The deity wears a hooded crown
in which a small Buddha appears. The base is in the
shape of lotus leaves and the color scheme is iron-red,
green and underglaze blue.
Height—8 x /'i" Ming Dynasty
-1043. Three-color porcelain figures of the male and
female Dog of Fo, glazed enbiscuit in aubergine and
yellow, provided with incense stick holders.
Height —4" K’ang Hsi Period
1044. Rare porcelain vase in shape of archaistic
bronze vessel with five circular apertures at mouth.
Around the neck and globular body appear groups of
serrated flanges. Decoration consists of formalized
peonies, lotus blossoms, Buddhistic symbols, plantain
leaves ju-i heads and key-fret bands; painted in un-
derglaze blue against a background of dark red
ovcrglaze.
Height —12" Late Ming Dynasty
1045. Porcelain statuette of a standing Immortal
wearing cream-colored garment decorated with cloud
scrolls in green, iron-red and underglaze blue. The
base is similarly decorated. Rare specimen.
Height —BMi" Ming Dynasty
1046. Important porcelain grotto covered with the
enbiscuit three-color glazes of yellow, aubergine and
green. The Kuan Yin in sitting posture rests on a lotus
throne supported by a twig emerging from the green
water below out of which a carp is springing. The
deity is accompanied by two attendants —one resting
on a lotus leaf and the other on a shell. The three fig-
ures are glazed white; the Kuan Yin wears a green
hood and her head is surrounded by clusters of bam-
boo leaves. The grotto is glazed in aubergine.
Height —9’/L>" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1047. Quadrilateral famille noire porcelain vase
with short incurvate neck; metal rim; decorated on
each side with ascending and descending primus
blossoms growing out of rockery.
Height —19" K’ang Hsi Period
1048. Rare terra-cotta mortuary figure of a Fu lion
in sitting posture on rockery base coated with brown,
green and straw-colored glazes. Tang Dynasty
1049. Rare group of porcelain rooster and hen in
squatting posture on rockery overgrown with fungii.
The body feathers glazed white, the tail feathers in
blue, black, coral and gold. The comb and wattles are
coral-red, the beaks gilded.
Height of hen —9%" Height of cock —11"
Yung Cheng Period




1050. Porcelain figure of dignitary in sitting posture;
the garment is coated in aubergine, green and yellow
as is the stool; sash band, headdress and beard in
famille noire.
Height—about 10" K’ang Hsi Period
1051. A rare pair of porcelain wine ewers in the
shape of a white and brown spotted deer holding a
fungi in its mouth. The handle is in the shape of a
rustic twig held to the animal’s back by pine cones
which are glazed green as is also the spout. The re-
movable cover bears the ears and horns of the deer.
Height —9l4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1052. Rare ovi-form famille verte vase with original
cover. The decoration depicts a lotus pond scene
with the flowers and leafage fully matured amid
which are flying butterflies and birds. The band
around the shoulder is decorated with the same floral
motif. A boy riding a kylin appears on the top of the
cover and on the sides rouge de fer prunus blossoms
complete the color scheme.
Height —14" Kang Hsi Period
1053. Superb specimen of double gourd vase fash-
ioned from clear white kaolinic porcelain and in-
vested with a monochrome celadon glaze.
Height —8%" Yung Cheng Period
1054. Unusual pair of resonant porcelain bowls,
gracefully expanding from well-formed foot-rim,
decorated on the exterior with three flying bees ap-
proaching a cluster of fungi and beets; painted in
black, rouge de fer, brown, green and pink; under foot
in raised enamel the six-character mark of reign and
period of T’a Ch’ing, Ch’ien Lung, nien chih.
Diameter —s%"
1055. Pair of Imperial bowls of resonant quality,
fashioned from clear white kaolinic porcelain in-
vested with a bluish-white pellucid glaze; the exterior
is painted with five dragon medallions and the in-
terior with one similar medallion —all in peachbloom.
The base is inscribed in underglaze blue with the six-
character mark of K’ang Hsi reign and period.
Diameter — s'Vi"
1056. Rare porcellanous deep resonant bowl painted
on the exterior with two rampant four-clawed drag-
ons pursuing the flaming pearl amid cloud scrolls.
On the interior appear four swimming carp. The
decoration is executed in underglaze copper-red.
Diameter —9%" Ming Dynasty
1057. Porcelain vase of point-bottle form, fashioned
from white hard kaolin. The peachbloom-colored
dogs of Fo, appearing around the globular body,
show sporadic green fleckings resembling verdigris.
Height —7" K’ang Hsi Period
1058. Unusual Imperial porcelain vase in the shape
of a mei p’ing or gallipot, decorated with scrolling
vines in brilliant underglaze blue relieved by a series
of soft red lotus and passion flowers, that are painted
in delicate rouge de fer. The shoulder is encircled by
an underglaze blue gadroon border. Above the foot-
rim appears a band of formalized palmettes. The base
is inscribed with the T’a Ch’ing Ch’ien Lung nien
chih, meaning “made in the reign of Emperor Ch’ien
Lung of the great Ch’ien Lung Dynasty.”
Height—m”
1059. Pair shallow famille verte plates with flanged
lip with four reserves containing gold and shell-fish
motifs separated by formalized peonies and leafage
on seeded green ground. The central medallion en-
closes a group of peonies and pomegranates with
leafage with magpie perched on twig. The back is
painted with four clusters of flowers and a band of
angular lines. The decoration is executed in auber-
gine, green, yellow, rouge de fer, black and gold.
Diameter —9" Kang Hsi Period
1060. Pair superbly-fashioned porcelain bowls of
musical quality coated with a clear bluish-white
glaze; both the interior and exterior bearing feng-
huang medallions in peachbloom. Under foot the six-
character mark of the reign and period of Ch’ien
Lung.
Diameter — sW
1061. Rare Imperial vase fashioned from fine kao-
linic porcelain. The globular body and tall slightly
expanding neck are decorated in slip technique exhibit-
ing formalized peony scrollings and Shou characters.
The vase is invested with a monochrome glaze simu-
lating hedge-sparrow egg tint.
Height —11" Mark and Period of Chia-Ching


1062. Quadrangular porcelain jar in the shape of a
ritualistic bronze-form tsun, bearing on each side the
pa kua or mystic trigrams, the system of broken and
unbroken lines that were used by the diviners to un-
ravel the mysteries of Nature. The surface is coated
with a superb crackled celadon glaze to simulate the
rare Ko Yao ware. The base bears the under glaze
blue seal mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien
Lung. Height —11%"
1063. Rare stoneware gallipot (mei p’ing) sketched
in black with three octofoil panels in which appear
personage, crane and rabbit motifs separated by
swirling circlets; around the shoulder is a band of
formalized peonies and continuous key-fret, and
above the foot-rim a band of floral medallions; all
decoration under a peacock-green glaze.
Height —lo" Yuan Dynasty
1064. Porcelain vase with compressed body and
long cylindrical neck invested with an oxblood glaze
of liver-red hue. Base is coated with a crackled rice-
colored glaze.
Height —3 %" K’ang Hsi Period
1065. Globular porcelain water coupe invested
with a brilliant metallic mirror-black glaze of superb
quality.
Height —3" Diameter —4" Kang Hsi Period
1066. Pair fine famille verte plates with flanged
mouth-rim bearing four reserves in which appear
gold and shell fish motifs; with four alternating
panels containing lotus flowers and leafage on seeded
green ground; the central motif depicts a pine and
plum tree with perched bird amid peony and prunus
flowers. The decoration is executed in famille verte
enamels of green, yellow, blue, rouge de fer, auber-
gine and gold.
Diameter —9" K’ang Hsi Period
1067. Rare porcelain figure of the deity Maitreya,
Goddess of Mercy, in sitting posture holding in her
left hand a scepter ju-i and wearing around her neck
a tasseled rosary. The well-scattered robe is invested
with an apple-green colored glaze decorated with the
peaches and Shou characters of Immortality. The
hood and cape are painted with the frog spawn
lozenge motifs. Enameled green, yellow, blue and
aubergine. The back bears a square aperture for the
reception of alms.
Height —9%" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1068. Octofoil melon-shaped water coupe, with
spur marks on base; coated with a fine tea-dust glaze.
Height —2%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1069. Pyriform porcelain vase coated on exterior
and interior with an iron-rust souffle glaze.
Height —s" 18th Century
1070. Unusual porcelain white vase in shape of a
gourd with square body and pyriform neck, coated
with a camellia leaf green glaze and decorated en-
biscuit in bold white relief with an Immortal and
attendant standing underneath pine tree; ju-i head,
bird and floral motifs on the neck and base.
Height —lo" Late Ming Dynasty
1071. Pair of semi-eggshell shallow plates. The cen-
tral motif depicts a pair of feeding quail surrounded
by peony, chrysanthemum, and prunus blossoms with
rockery and bamboo leaves. The flanged lip is
painted in white slip with bamboo leaves and floral
motifs; a band of formalized flowers and ju-i heads
encircle plate at mouth-rim and in well; all painted
in brilliant famille rose enamels.
Diameter —9" Ch’ien Lung Period
1072. Fine porcelain vase with compressed body,
long graceful expanding tubular neck with wide flar-
ing mouth-rim, invested on the exterior with a bril-
liant metallic mirror-black glaze; the mouth-rim in-
terior and base glazed white.
Height —6%" K’ang Hsi Period
1073. Small cylindrical bowl with wide cyma-curved
heptagonal flanged rim; invested with a fine cream-
colored soft paste glaze, with waves and ju-i head bor-
der incised in the pate.
Diameter —6%" Ming Dynasty
1074. Famille rose shallow dish, decorated on the
interior with children at play in garden terrace. The
edge of the dish is surrounded by a band of for-
malized flowers.
Diameter —12" 18th Century


1075. Globular porcelain box and cover; the exterior
in a mottled formalized chrysanthemum design in re-
lief, coated with a light greenish-white glaze.
Diameter — 6V2" Ming Dynasty
1076. Porcelain vase with compressed body termi-
nating in a long gracefully expanding neck with flar-
ing mouth-rim and expanding base. The surface is
coated with an unusual flambe glaze with a mot-
tling of blue, purple and red hues. The marbelized
brown base bears the impressed seal mark of the
period and reign of Ch’ien Lung. Height —9"
1077. Porcelain standing figure of a dog painted in
black and white; the eyes and mouth in green with
an aubergine color.
Height —4" Length —4%" K’ang Hsi Period
1078. Rare san-ts’ai or three-color biscuit porcelain
libation cup of helmet shape; underneath the spout
and on each side of the handle appear two salaman-
ders in relief; the sides are painted with archaistic
dragons and tiger masks in yellow and aubergine
against a seeded green ground; the voluted interior
is decorated in similar colors with a yellow rabbit
and green medallions.
Length —4 W Early K’ang Hsi Period
1079. Pair rare porcelain bell-shaped bowls; the
white glaze is decorated on the exterior with three
Fu lions in playing attitude, separated by sprigs of
peonies and leafage. Base of interior bears a flower-
ing peony with leafage.
Diameter —sV£" Ming Dynasty
1080. Figure of Pu-tai-Ho-Shang, the God of Chil-
dren and Earthly Joys, exhibiting his well-contented
countenance and full naked abdomen, holding in his
right hand a money bag; all flesh surfaces coated in
creamy white glaze, the garments in aubergine, tur-
quoise-blue and yellow..
Height —6" Ming Dynasty
1081. Rare famille verte porcelain helmet-shaped
libation cup. The archaistic handle is flanked by two
salamanders in green and yellow and underneath the
spout appear another pair of salamanders similarly
glazed. On each side a cluster of flowers and leafage
dangle from the beak of a flying crane amid cloud
scrolls. The mouth-rim is bordered by a band of con-
tinuous key-fret and the interior with butterflies and
ju-i heads. The entire decoration is painted in green,
yellow, aubergine, black and rouge de fer.
Length —6" Height —3" K’ang Hsi Period
1082. Three-color or San-ts-ai porcelain recumbent
figure of Li T’ai-po reclining against a peach-shaped
barrel, the vessel representing a wine ewer. This fa-
mous poet lived in the T’ang Dynasty and was cele-
brated for his poetic ability during his periods of ossi-
fication. The free-flowing gourd is decorated with
leafage and floral motifs with two body insertions
bearing flying cranes. The peach-shaped barrel is in
yellow with superimposed green leaves. The flesh
areas are white and the hair and shoes in black
enamel.
Length —7" Height — 4” Early K’ang Hsi Period
1083. Beautifully-modelled porcelain figurine of a
duck, standing astride a cream-colored rock; the
plumage is dappled and hatched in brown glaze, the
legs are greenish-yellow and the bill tinted green; the
eyes black.
Height —6%" Late K’ang Hsi Period
1084. Unusual pilgrim-shaped porcelain vase. The
flat disc-like body is surmounted by quadrangular
neck with flanged mouth-rim with two archaistic
dragon handles. The entire vase is decorated in relief
with white slip, depicting bat, peony, floral and ju-i
head motifs against a lustrous and metallic cafe-au-
lait glaze; under foot an artemesia leaf motif.
Height —6" K’ang Hsi Period
1085. Famille verte barrel-shaped teapot with origi-
nal cover bearing Dog of Fo finial. A band of studded
bosses encircles the top and base of vessel. The two
panels exhibit an aquatic scene with lotus, goose,
and feng-huang motifs and the bird of paradise
standing on rockery amid floral motifs. The cover is
painted with formalized flowers; all executed in the
brilliant famille verte colors of blue, green, yellow,
gold, aubergine and rouge de fer.
Height —4%" K’ang Hsi Period
1086. Pair porcelain dog figures resting on their
haunches, glazed in white and hatched rouge de fer
with gilt; bell dangling from green neck strap.
Height —6%" 18th Century




1087. Rare porcelain standing statuette of princess,
glazed in white, underglaze blue and green.
Height —9" Ming Dynasty
1088. Porcelain teapot with yellow glazed porce-
lain reed handle hatched with black lines. On the
shoulder are two clusters of peonies with leaf scrolls.
On body of vessel appears a princess with lady-in-
waiting; all painted in superb famille verte colors.
Height —6Mi" K’ang Hsi Period
1089. Porcelain bottle-shaped vase with garlic
mouth-rim glazed on the biscuit with aubergine,
green and yellow; base and inside of mouth-rim
glazed similarly.
Height —s" K’ang Hsi Period
1090. Baluster-shaped porcelain teapot invested
with purple and turquoise-blue splash glaze; with
original cover similarly decorated.
Height —6Mi" 18th Century
1091. Porcelain gallipot or mei p’ing with short neck
and collared small mouth and slightly flaring base.
The vase is decorated in overglaze and underglaze
colors. Around the middle and shoulder appear bands
of large peony blossoms framed in undulating green
leafy vines; painted in red, yellow, blue, aubergine
and red enamels. The two flying phoenixs on the
shoulder exhibit multicolored plumage. Above the
base the band of gadroons enclose gold ju-i heads or
jewel motifs.
Height — 2sMi" Yung ChSng Period
1092. Imperial temple jar with carved teakwood
stand. Around the body appear four scaly dragons
pursuing the omnipotent pearl of truth amid clouds
and flowers, painted in rouge de fer against a back-
ground of lettuce green. The shoulder and foot are
decorated with imbricated cusped lappets also in
rouge de fer and green. An important specimen.
Height —2s" Late Kang Hsi Period
1093. Unusual ovocylindrical gallipot coated with a
bluish-white glaze and painted with formalized lotus
and peony scrolls connected by vine-like tendrils. On
shoulder appears the continuous ju-i head motif and
surrounding the neck a band of plantain leaves.
Above the foot-rim the formalized plantain leaves
are surmounted by a band of continuous key-fret.
The decoration is painted in yellow, green, blue and
coral.
Height —24" Yung ChSng Period
1094. Fukien blanc-de-chine statuette of a deity in
sitting posture, resting on rockery throne; covered
with an ivory-white glaze.
Height — BV2" 18th Century
1095. Imperial Peking enameled incense burner,
with three stump feet and two gilded loop handles.
The three cartouche-shaped reserves of buds and
flowers are separated by peony blossoms and leaf
scrollings painted on a yellow ground. In the interior
appear the “Three Fruits.” Underfoot four-character
period mark of Ch’ien-lung. Diameter —4%"
1096. Cloisonne figure of cock; tail, wing and body
feathers in blue, red, yellow, green and orange.
Height —6" 18th Century
1097. Superb specimen of Peking enamel flattened
ovoid jar with short neck, coated on the exterior with
knotted cloth showing peach clusters, together with
medallions depicting snow crystals, all painted in
brilliant famille rose colors against a flower-white
background.
Height —4" Imperial Ch’ien Lung Period
1098. Quadrifoil shallow tray with indented comers,
coated with Peking enamels in rose du barry, green,
blue, brown and pink. The bottom side is decorated
with flying bats and the face of the tray bears genre
and landscape scenes surrounded by bands of formal-
ized floral and dragon designs. Six in set.
4" square Ch’ien Lung Period
1099. Peking enamel metal potiche or ginger jar
with original cover, decorated on the outside with
children at play in garden terrace accompanied by
two princesses; around the shoulder of the jar and
surrounding the end of the cover appear ju-i band
motifs, all painted in the colors of the famille rose
palette against a background of flower-white on the
jar and Imperial yellow on the cover.
Height —9%" 18th Century
1100. Ovocylindrical small metal jar coated with
Peking enamels depicting genre scenes.
18th Century




1101. Cloisonne figure of dove, the body, wing and
tail feathers enamelled blue, white, yellow, black, red
and green; gilded beak, legs and claws.
Height —7" 18th Century
1102. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of a princess in
sitting posture with both arms resting on gnarled tree
table, holding scroll in right hand. Her well-combed
hair extends in knotted strands that rest on shoulder.
Figure covered with an unctuous ivory-white glaze.
Fine specimen of Te-hua ware.
Height —B%" Early 18th Century
1103. Rectangular shallow Peking enamel tray with
indented corners, decorated on the interior with
peonies and “Hundred Antiques” motif, painted in
the colors of the famille rose palette. The central
panel is surrounded by bands of continuous key-fret
and vine-like scrollings.
Length —11" 18th Century
1104. Rare Imperial gilded bronze and painted
enamel incense burner with original pierced cover
with finial and two cloud-scroll handles; incised with
scrolls and enamelled in gay colors with sprigs of
blossoms and foliage. In the two vignettes appear
European landscapes with herdsmen. Six-character
mark and period of Ch’ien-lung. Height —6%"
1105. Imperial Peking enamel metal bronze-shaped
koro or incense burner, rectangular in form; sup-
ported on four cylindrical feet; serrated side flanges,
two inverted “U”-shaped handles. The sides are
superbly enamelled with archaistic tiger mask and
dragon scrollings against a lozenge background; all
unenamelled surfaces in gilt; under foot the six-
character mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien
Lung. Height —6%" Length —6"
1106. Cluster of bamboo twigs and shoots formed
from clear white kaolinic porcelain and coated with a
“soft paste” or steatitic glaze.
Length — 4%" K’ang Hsi Period
1107. Peking enamelled vase; the globular body ter-
minating in a long cylindrical mouth with foliated
garlic mouth-rim; decorated on the exterior in famille
rose colors against a yellow background; the reserves
on the body containing personage motifs.
Height —8" 18th Century
1108. Imperial Peking enamel metal box and cover,
painted with floral and leaf scrolls against an Im-
perial yellow ground; gilded finial.
Ch’ien Lung Period
1109. Water coupe in the shape of bulb; the small
circular aperture surrounded with writhing Ch’ih
lung in bold relief; coated with a “soft paste” or
steatitic ivory-colored glaze.
Length —4V-;" 18th Century
1110. Imperial enamel brushholder, Pi Tung, on
which appear four octofoil panels with figures of
Chinese ladies in pavilions and pink peonies alter-
nately. The panels are separated by scrolling lotus
arabesques on a yellow ground. The upper and lower
bands bear four reserve cartouches each depicting
landscapes beautifully painted in claret-colored
enamel. Interspersed between these panels are bands
of decoration on a pea-green ground. Four-character
mark of Ch’ien Lung and period is underfoot.
Height —4%"
1111. Peking enamel circular box and cover, the
sides painted with reserve panels containing Flowers
of the Four Seasons, separated by leaf and vine-like
scrolls and flowers painted against a yellow ground.
The central medallion on top depicts two princesses,
one standing, the other seated, under a magnolia
peony tree observing a child at play on garden ter-
race. The base is decorated with peony scrolls sur-
rounding a medallion bearing figure of a goat. The
entire decoration is executed in soft enamelled colors
of the famille rose palette.
Diameter —QW Height —5" Late 18th Century
1112. Shallow dish fashioned from clear white re-
sonant porcelain, coated with a rare and even pis-
tache-green glaze upon which are superimposed in
slight relief a cluster of two peaches on the interior
and two peaches and pomegranate on the exterior in
coral-red. Underfoot the six-character Yung Cheng
mark of the period and reign. Diameter — 6 x k"
1113. Rare pair of Imperial quatrefoil baluster-form
vases with two narrow tubular neck handles and ex-
panding neck and foot. The all-over raised slip deco-
ration depicts lotus blossoms amid symmetrical scroll-
ings hung with ornamental pendants beautifully


painted. The vases are coated with a superb pistache-
green glaze. The six-character mark of the reign is
impressed in the base.
Height —B/4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1114. Pair of foliated porcelain bowls of musical
quality coated on the exterior with a superb pistache-
green glaze; the interior is glazed white. The base
bears the six-character mark of the period and reign
of Yung Cheng. Diameter —514"
1115. Pair of semi-eggshell porcelain bowls, bell-
shaped, decorated on the interior in aubergine, green,
rouge de fer, and underglaze blue, with personage
and landscape scene together with pine tree and
rockery. Underfoot the mark of the period and reign
of Yung Cheng. Diameter — sW
1116. Porcelain tazza cup in the shape of a globular
bowl with wide mouth aperture, resting on a high,
receded foot, invested with a monochrome rose du
barry glaze with peau d’orange surface.
Height —4%" Diameter —4'4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1117. Interesting porcelain shallow dish made in the
K’ang Hsi Period, attested to by the enamel colors in
the central medallion depicting a bird on tree branch
amid peony flowers. In the Ch’ien Lung reign this
dish was decorated on the interior with a gilded
coral-red band, and the same color scheme on the
entire obverse side together with the Ta Ch’ing Ch’ien
Lung nien chih of the reign and period underfoot
when the additional decoration was added.
Diameter —7%"
1118. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with globular
receding body, incurvate neck with flanged lip, coated
entirely with a monochrome turquoise-blue glaze ex-
hibiting a truite crackle.
Height —l 2" Ch’ien Lung Period
1119. Pair rare Imperial shallow bulb bowls sup-
ported by four stump feet. The exterior is molded in
slight relief with peony arabesque motifs. All surfaces
are invested with a pistache-green glaze. The mark
of the Ch’ien Lung reign and period is impressed in
the base. Diameter —7l4"
1120. Two porcelain gallipots —the body of one is
encircled with three bands in slight relief; coated
with a monochrome bluish-gray crackled glaze;
underfoot in underglaze blue the six-character mark
of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung. On the other
vase appear incised dragons amid cloud scrolls pur-
suing the flaming pearl, with a wave motif around
the foot-rim; invested with a flour-white glaze.
Height —Bl4'' Kang Hsi Period
1121. Pair semi-egg shell resonant porcelain bowls
painted on the exterior with personage, rockery and
pine tree motifs in green, blue, yellow and rouge de
fer; on the foot the six-character mark of the period
and reign of Yung Cheng. Diameter —314 "
1122. Pear-shaped porcelain vase with flaring mouth-
rim—two rudimentary elephant head handles at the
shoulders; coated with a flocculent turquoise-blue
monochrome glaze.
Height —12" Early 18th Century
1123. Beaker-shaped vase, globular body, with
gracefully expanding neck and flaring mouth-rim
bearing two archaistic dragon handles. The exterior
and interior are invested with a robin’s-egg blue
souffle glaze.
Height —l 3" Ch’ien Lung Period
1124. Important blanc-de-chine figure of a Bodhi-
sattva fashioned from Te-hua porcelain. The figure
wears a closely fitting and well-draped robe with long
hanging sash-cord. At the breast and below the folds
of the outer garment appears a bejewelled rosary. Be-
low the bi-knotted hairdress the Deity wears a diadem
crown bearing a small Buddha. In the left hand is
a loosely folded scroll and the right hand is in a
receptive attitude. The figure stands on a ju-i head
and wave-form base.
Height —35 W 18th Century
1125. Important statuette of Kuan Yin, the Goddess
of Mercy, fashioned from Te-hua Fukien blanc-de-
chine porcelain. The figure is standing on lotus flow-
ers and leaves floating on crest of waves. Her eyes are
cast downward, and her face exhibits a benign ex-
pression. Through her knotted hairdress appears a
scepter ju-i. Her stranded hair rests on her shoulders,


and both her breast and lower garments are bejew-
elled. The entire figure is clothed in an exquisite free-
flowing robe that conceals both hands.
Height —34M:" 18th Century
1126. Important Fukien blanc-de-chine statuette of
Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mercy, standing on wave
scrolls; her hair is in swirled fashion, and her knotted
braids hang over her shoulders; her eyes are cast
slightly downward, and the beneficent facial expres-
sion is augmented by the free-flowing robe in which
the figure is clothed; in the right hand appears a scroll,
and her left hand is in the attitude of benediction.
Height —34Vi" 18th Century
1127. Pair of unusual rectangular porcelain cup
trays; in the center is a chrysanthemum medallion in
relief on a ground of molded wave pattern and drag-
ons, enclosed by raised sides. A monochrome sulphur-
yellow glaze covers the entire stand.
Length —6" 18th Century
1128. Rare pair of Imperial yellow resonant porce-
lain bowls; the exterior clothed in an even yellow
glaze; the interior in a pellucid white. Underfoot the
six-character mark of the reign and period of Yung
Cheng. Diameter —sVi"
1129. Fine eggshell blanc-de-chine hexagonal foli-
ated bowl in shape of open lotus leaf bearing incised
and relief decoration in a superb white glaze. Under-
foot the six-character mark of the reign and period of
Yung Cheng. Diameter —3 Vi"
1130. Rare specimen of porcelain table screen,
mounted on teakwood stand, made on Imperial order;
it is in the style of the celebrated glass Ku yiieh
hsiian; the background* is a milky white on which are
painted in delicate famille rose enamels the figure of
a young woman in European costume; she guides a
white hound on a leash and stands before a shrub
of white peonies. The obverse side depicts a moun-
tainous landscape with pavillions and sampans upon
a lake, all sketched in blue enamel pencilled lines.
Both sides are bordered with coral-red band in which
appear gilded archaic dragons. Both panels are in-
scribed with a poem written by Emperor Ch’ien-lung,
and also bear the seal signature of the artist.
Height —BV4" Width —5V4" Ch’ien Lung Period
-1131. Unusual blanc-de-chine semi-eggshell porce-
lain dish in the shape of a curled lotus leaf with han-
dle; a frog and leaf veins appear in relief on exterior.
Length —4VL>" K’ang Hsi Period
1132. Porcellanous jar, background painted with
interlacing vines in iron-red, with rockery, bamboo,
feng-huang, flying birds, and peonies completing the
decorative motif; all painted in underglaze blue,
green, yellow, aubergine and iron-red. With teak-
wood cover.
Height —ll'/i" Late Ming Dynasty
1133. Shallow porcelain tray, fashioned from semi-
eggshell kaolinic porcelain, painted on exterior and
interior with clusters of fruit and floral ornaments
surrounded by bands of formalized ju-i heads in blue
enamel, all exquisitely decorated in famille rose
enamels.
Diameter —6" 18th Century
1134. Rare porcelain gallipot decorated with dragon,
gadroon, floral ju-i head, shell motifs and painted in
rouge de fer; a very rare color effect. K’ang Hsi Period
1135. Porcelain circular box with cover coated with
an even bluish-white glaze upon which are painted in
the palette of the famille rose enamels, clusters of
flowers and leafage with hovering butterflies; under-
foot in nnderglaze blue, the six-character mark of the
reign and period of Yung Cheng. Diameter —7"
1136. Potiche or temple jar with original cover,
coated with a bluish-white unctuous glaze upon
which are painted in aubergine, green, yellow and
iron-red, clusters of peaches, finger citron and pome-
granate. (Repaired.)
Height —ll Vi" Late Ming Dynasty
1137. Porcelain plaque, the central medallion de-
picting Shou Lao with gnarled staff, accompanied by
the Spotted Deer of Longevity, amid flowering trees
and rockery. The surrounding band is enamelled in
rose du barry bearing conventionalized lotus leaves
with arabesque scrollings. Obverse side is painted in
rouge de fer with peony blossoms and connecting
tendrils together with Shou characters.
Diameter — 15V*” 18th Century




1138. Porcelain jar decorated with mille fleurs
(thousand flowers) in famille rose. Around the shoul-
der appear two gilded mock rings suspended from
elephant heads.
Height —17" Early 19th Century
1139. Fine porcelain shallow dish, decorated with
famille verte colors; the central motif depicts two
magpies flying amid prunus and other flowers; around
the edge appears a band of reserves with flower
clusters.
Diameter —14" K’ang Hsi Period
1140. Pair of porcelain Tibetan type figures of
Buddha in sitting posture of royal ease, resting on
lotus stand. The free-flowing robe is glazed yellow,
red and pink. The diadem crown exhibits five small
Buddhas with a ushnisha rising from the center of the
crown. In the two clasped hands is the gilded sphere
of omnipotence.
Height —l 3%" 18th Century
1141. Pair resonant bowls fashioned from vitreous
white porcelain, bearing on the exterior two rampant
green five-clawed dragons amid floating clouds in
pursuit of the flaming jewel.
Diameter — BPA" 18th Century
1142. Pair of famille rose statuettes of female figures
standing beside gnarled tree trunk bearing basket of
flowers. Ch’ien Lung Period
1143. Rare pair eggshell famille verte shallow porce-
lain plates; the flanged lip is decorated with floral
and butterfly motifs; in the center appears a princess
sitting on rockery before a burning twig accompanied
by attendant. The decoration is painted in superb
green, aubergine, yellow and black enamels and
rouge de fer. The base is inscribed in underglaze
blue with the six-character mark of the reign and
period of K’ang Hsi. Diameter —6"
1144. Three-color, san ts’ai, bisque figure of Kuan
Yin, Goddess of Mercy, in sitting posture, clothed in
well-draped robe, holding in her left hand vase con-
taining the elixir of life and in her right hand a
scepter ju-i. The hood is glazed Imperial yellow, and
hanging from neck is a beaded rosary with tassel. All
painted in green, yellow, aubergine and white enam-
els. A circular aperture in back serves as alms re-
ceptacle.
Height —8" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1145. Porcelain temple jar with original cover deco-
rated in underglaze blue with green, yellow, auber-
gine and iron-red enamels with six disporting Fu
lions; on the neck appear clusters of pomegranate
and peaches with leafage, the cover similarly deco-
rated.
Height —l 3" Late Ming Dynasty
1146. Shallow porcelain tray, the center medallion
with lotus pond scene, bearing artist’s signature,
surrounded by a seeded green ground with formal-
ized peony and scroll motifs superimposed by a band
of reticulated intertwining circlets; all painted in
brilliant famille verte enamels.
Diameter —814" K’ang Hsi Period
1147. Porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) depicting man-
darin with attendants carrying fan and scroll on ter-
race surrounded by palm trees and rockery, with
Crane of Longevity; band of floral decoration around
neck.
Height —7 A" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1148. Rare ovi-form famille verte vase with origi-
nal cover. The decoration depicts a lotus pond scene
with the flowers and leafage fully matured amid
which are flying butterflies and birds. The band
around the shoulder is decorated with the same floral
motif. A boy riding a kylin appears on the top of the
cover and on the sides rouge de fer blossoms com-
plete the color scheme.
Height —l 4" K’ang Hsi Period
1149. Porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) coated with a
bluish-white glaze and decorated with playing chil-
dren with lady attendant on terrace; in underglaze
blue, green, yellow, aubergine and iron-red.
Height —7%" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1150. Porcelain shallow famille verte tray with cen-
tral medallion containing a cluster of peonies with a
pair of birds perched on tree trunks, surrounded by a
seeded green ground containing prunus blossoms and
bamboo leaves with four white reserves showing
crickets and bees. The foliated flanged mouth-rim is


decorated with rouge de fe gadroons. The predomi-
nating color throughout is rouge de fer, which pre-
sents a very harmonious color scheme with the famille
verte enamels of green, aubergine, yellow, blue and
gold.
Diameter —9%" Kang Hsi Period
1151. Porcelain potiche, with original cover, painted
in yellow, green and aubergine enamels; the central
and predominating motifs surrounded by hatchings
and frog-spawn motifs in rouge de fer; around the
shoulder a band of foliated ju-i heads with leaf scrolls
and formalized chrysanthemum petals. The four car-
touches around body contain angular floral motifs
flanked by bands of ju-i heads. The cover is decorated
with clusters of peaches in similar colors.
Height —13Vi" Early Kang Hsi Period
1152. Deep porcelain bowl with rounded sides,
decorated on the interior and exterior with an aquatic
motif in underglaze blue, the fish painted in under-
glaze copper-red.
Diameter —7%" Height —3 Vi" Late Ming Dynasty
1153. Pair white glazed porcelain bee-hive water
coupes with small incurvate neck, bearing underneath
the glaze three incised dragon medallions.
Diameter —5"
1154. Porcelain ovocylindrical ginger jar with short
incurvate neck, painted in superb famille rose enam-
els. Two of the white glazed reserve panels are painted
with animalistic designs of goats, rams, spotted deer
and birds amid pine and bamboo trees, flowers and
rockery; the alternating two reserve panels contain
motifs emblematic of the “Hundred Antiques,” such
as vases, incense burners, scrolls, jars with peacock
feathers and scrolls, etc. The four panels are sepa-
rated by flower motifs and leaf scrolls. Around the
shoulder are alternating lozenge panels with white
reserves containing flowers. The short neck exhibits
peony flowers with interlacing scrolls. On the foot
the six-character mark of Ch’ien Lung. Height — IOV2"
1155. Deep circular bowl with rounded sides, in-
vested with blue-white glaze and decorated in un-
derglaze copper-red with conventionalized peony
and leaf scrollings, with bands of continuous key-fret
at mouth-rim and base.
Diameter —9" Height —s" Ming Dynasty
1156. Potiche or temple jar fashioned from kaolinic
porcelain coated with a bluish-white glaze and
painted in green, underglaze blue, red and yellow,
with leafage and flower designs together with naked
wa-wa wearing red sash band, holding vine-like in-
terlacing scrolls; original cover with conventionalized
lotus and tendril motifs.
Height —ll" Early K’angHsi Period
1157. Pair rare resonant porcelain bowls covered
with a flour-white glaze. The interior and exterior
decoration of a gnarled tree and branches of haw-
thorn blossoms (symbol of Spring) is applied by
means of white slip.
Diameter — 7W Ch’ien Lung Period
1158. Porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) incised with
five-clawed writhing dragons pursuing the flaming
pearl amid cloud scrolls. Around shoulder and base
appear bands of continuous key-fret and ju-i heads,
coated with a light seagreen celadon glaze.
Height —12" 18th Century
1159. Porcellanous jar with short neck, painted on a
clear white ground glaze with children at play with
lady attendants on terrace surrounded by palm trees,
rockery, and clouds; around shoulder a band of
cracked-ice motif; the neck with clusters of peonies
and rockery; in wu-ts’ai five-color enamels of blue,
red, green, yellow and augbergine.
Height —13" Early Kang Hsl Period
1160. Imperial baluster-shaped porcelain vase, glob-
ular body in melon form with two vine-like handles
extending from incurvate neck; base and mouth-rim
flaring gracefully; coated with an even greenish souf-
fle teadust glaze. Under foot the Imperial six-char-
acter mark of the period and reign of Yung Cheng.
Height — lsVi"
1161. Unusual porcelain high-shouldered Buddhis-
tic temple jar with cover enamelled with the wu-ts’ai
or five colors of the period. The diapered circular
and octagonal pendant plaquettes center a leaping




carp and Fu lion alternating with strings of Bud-
dhistic symbols amid flames and tendrils. The shoulder
bears peonies and leafage and the hat cover is deco-
rated with playing wa-wa.
Height —12" Early K’ang Hsi Period
1162. Famille rose Mandarin vase with original
cover fashioned from clear white semi-eggshell por-
celain. This is a specimen of the Oriental Lowestoft
type. The red and gold honeycomb diaper pattern is
reserved with small panels of birds and landscapes;
the four foliated reserves on the shoulder contain
birds perched on twigs in iron-red and sepia. On the
body appear two oblong panels, beautifully framed
showing group of ladies and an official on a pavilion
terrace. The cover is surmounted by a gilded Dog
of Fo.
Height —l9Mi" Ch’ien Lung Period
1163. Porcelain temple jar with original hat cover
fashioned from porcellanous pate; high shoulder with
sharply contracting sides. Iron-red diaper ground
separates the foliated panels that contain swimming
carp amid marine plants, and the ju-i head lappets
around shoulder and base; similar decoration on hat
cover. The color scheme embraces the wu-ts’ai or
five-color enamels.
Height —12" Late Ming Dynasty
1164. Ovoid-shaped porcelain vase with flaring
trumpet neck, covered with a monochrome teadust
glaze of fine quality.
Height —14%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1165. Pair Imperial rose-verte porcelain plaques ex-
hibiting floral motifs delicately painted on a greenish-
white ground glaze. Coral-red and white chrysanthe-
mums, green foliage and hovering butterflies appear
on one plate and the other exhibits a gnarled tree
bearing pinkish-white prunus blossoms with a spray
of coral-red peonies. On both plates the decoration
continues over the rim and spreads out on the under-
side. The six-character nien hao of Yung-cheng and
period appears in underglaze blue in the base. Both
plates rest on gilded bronze dore stands finely chis-
eled with ajoure rococo ornaments and leaf scrollings.
Diameter —19% "
1166. Important Imperial porcelain vase; the ovi-
form body terminates in an incurvate cylindrical neck
with expanding mouth-rim and on shoulder appear
two red and gold Dog of Fo mock ring handles. The
decoration consists of floral clusters, scroll tendrils
and bands of key-fret, gadroons and ju-i heads, all
painted in yellow, green, underglaze blue and iron-
red colors. The base is inscribed with the mark of the
period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Height—W//'
1167. A pair of conical-shaped porcelain bowls with
slightly flaring lip. The interior shows a medallion
with a pair of butterflies and a floral spray. On the
exterior are four floral medallions depicting the
Flowers of the Four Seasons. The medallions are
separated by scrolling motifs and the entire decora-
tion is executed in green, yellow, red and blue colors.
The base bears the six-character mark of Yung Cheng
in underglaze blue.
Diameter —8%”
1168. Shallow porcelain bowl with round sides,
decorated on the interior and exterior in underglaze
copper-red.
Diameter —4" 18th Century
1169. Fine example of Yi Hsing stoneware (buc-
caro) fashioned in the shape of a rustic teapot, choco-
late-brown in color; the base bears the signature of
the artist.
Length — sVi” 18th Century
1170. Pair semi-eggshell Imperial bowls fashioned
from fine white vitreous porcelain painted in famille
rose colors to simulate the Ku yiieh hsiian glass. The
interior is white and the exterior is enamelled with
shaded rose and iron-red peonies and white mag-
nolias. Under foot appears the six-character Ta Ch’ing
Yung Cheng nien chih in underglaze blue.
Diameter —5%"
1171. Semi egg-shell bowl fashioned from clear
white kaolinic porcelain. Decoration consists of two
stalks of the peach tree extending from the foot-rim
up over the mouth-rim and into the well of the bowl.
Four full-ripened peaches with blossoms and leafage
appear on the exterior, and the interior reveals two


more peaches with blossoms and leafage. Over the
bowl are scattered five flying bats, the symbol of love,
and the peaches are emblematic of immortality. On
the underfoot is the underglaze blue mark of T’a
Ch’ing Ch’ien Lung nien chih meaning “made in the
reign of Emperor Ch’ien Lung of the great Ch’ing
Dynasty.”
Diameter — 5 1 //' 18th Century
1172. Rare Yi hsing (buccaro) porcelain teapot, the
body in shape of a round melon resting on terminals
composed of varied types of nuts. The spout is in the
shape of a bean and around the mouth-rim also ap-
pear various indigenous nuts. The cover is in the
form of a double mushroom and the handle simulates
a bat-shaped flower bulb. Around the globular body
a Ch’ien Lung poem is inscribed.
Ming Dynasty
1173. Porcelain figurine of a squatting duck; the bill
and legs are glazed yellow and the feathers black.
Length —4’/a" 18th Century
1174. Rare hexagonal famille verte porcelain flower
jardiniere depicting the Fairy Goddess, Hsi Wang
Mu, with attendants, accompanied by cranes and
deers, symbolical of long life; one panel with a god-
dess riding in deer-drawn chariot.
Length —13" Height —5%" K’ang Hsi Period
1175. Foliated circular bowl in shape of lotus leaf,
decorated on exterior with underglaze red hatched
lines. On ivory stand. K’ang Hsi Period
1176. Pair rare peach plates fashioned from pure
white kaolinic porcelain, decorated with the eight
peaches and five bats. Two twigs of a peach tree,
bearing three peaches in bloom spring from the un-
derside of the plate and continue over the edge into
the well where five large peach blossoms and leafage
are delineated on a white glazed surface. The entire
decoration is accompanied by five coral-red peaches
which hover amid the foliage. These two plates are
exquisitely enamelled in the varied tints of nature.
The base bears the underglaze blue mark of Ch’ien
Lung. Diameter — BV*"
1177. Eggshell porcelain dish in shape of folded
lotus leaf, coated with a pellucid clear white glaze.
K’ang Hsi Period
1178. Shallow porcelain dish in the shape of a
peach. The handle comprises a small peach with leaf-
age and twig; covered with a souffle robin’s-egg blue
glaze.
Length —9” Ch’ien Lung Period
1179. Eggshell porcelain dish in shape of folded
lotus leaf, coated with a pellucid clear white glaze.
Length —4" Width—2l6 " K’ang Hsi Period
1180. Rare conical-shaped square porcelain dish
coated with a bluish-white glaze upon which are
painted in underglaze copper-red flowers of the four
seasons.
1%" High 2%" Square Ming Dynasty
1181. Octagonal famille verte porcelain jardiniere,
decoration consisting of land and seascapes.
Length —ll Vi” Height —4%" K’ang Hsi Period
1182. Unusual porcelain vase, baluster-shape with
straight short neck, moulded all over in diaper pat-
terns and glazed red; both the shoulder and band
near base are decorated with lappets. The artist that
fashioned this vase succeeded in simulating the tech-
nique of cinnabar lacquer.
Height — 9Vi" Ch’ien Lung Period
1183. Pair Imperial blue-verte plates of clear bluish-
white porcelain. The peonies, plum blossoms, butter-
flies and chrysanthemums (appearing in medallion)
and the exterior are enamelled in famille rose colors
and underglaze blue. The base bears the nien hao
of Yung Cheng period. Diameter —Bl4"
1184. Globular porcelain alms jar, invested with a
clear white glaze on which is painted in famille rose
colors the Fairy Goddess, Hsi Wang Mu, in conver-
sation with Laotzu, accompanied by the Crane of
Longevity, the double gourd containing the elixir of
long life; together with basket of flowers and bronze-
shaped jar. Superb example. Under foot the six-char-
acter mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Height — 7" Diameter — 1"
1185. Very important porcelain vase, globular body,
with elephant head handles; invested with a rose
du-barry glaze of peau d’orange —orange peel texture.
The interior of the neck and base are glazed white.
Height —8%" Ch’ien Lung Period




1186. Quadrangular porcelain vase coated with an
even and crackled celadon glaze. Under foot the six-
character mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien
Lung in underglaze blue. Height —9%"
1187. Pair of porcelain oblong jardinieres invested
with a brilliant clear white glaze; the four sides are
painted in famille rose with prunus, pomegranate and
melon motifs. Very fine quality. On teakwood stand.
Length —9%" Width —6"
1188. Rare baluster-shaped porcelain vase in form
of archaic bronze vessel; two loop handles; serrated
flanges on shoulder and plain flanges on neck and ex-
panding base. The decoration of formalized peonies,
vine scrolls, leafage, ju-i heads and gadroons is
painted in deep underglaze cobalt-blue against a
background of Imperial yellow. The white glazed
base bears the six-character mark of the period and
reign of Ch’ien Lung. Superb example. Height —13%"
1189. Cylindrical porcelain vase bearing on exterior
concentric grooved channels; invested with an even,
unctuous celadon glaze; under foot six-character
mark of the period and reign of Yung Cheng in un-
derglaze blue. Height —10 %"
1190. Unusual flattened quadrangular vase of
bronze form, bearing salamander handles in coral-
red. The two reserve panels are painted with female
figures engaged in playing games and musical instru-
ments. The vase is clothed in a robin’s-egg blue glaze
upon which are painted formalized peonies and leaf
scrolls, together with key-fret, lei Wen fret, and ju-i
heads; under foot the six-character mark of the
period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Height—VA"
1191. Porcelain bowl of resonant quality, painted on
the exterior with four medallions containing pine
trees and peony flowers; the interior with medallions
of prunus blossoms and clusters of peaches; in green,
rouge de fer, brown and iron red.
Diameter —4" 18th Century
1192. Pair of unusual porcelain ornaments, depict-
ing a gnarled peach tree bearing peach blossoms and
the ripened fruit, with two perched magpies; painted
in famille rose enamels.
Height —l 7%" 18th Century
1193. Pair of Imperial famille rose bowls fashioned
from resonant kaolinic porcelain. The exterior is
decorated with a cluster of peony and other flowers,
with leafage growing from gnarled trees; painted in
the style of Ku Yiieh Hsiian glass.
Diameter —s’/a" 18th Century
1194. Very important porcelain figure of a cock
standing astride on a rock. The body of the fowl is
covered with incised feathers in a milk-white ground
and the plumage of the wings and tail feathers are
glazed in blackish-green, brown, yellow, rose and
blue. The wattles and comb are covered with a rose
glaze and the beak is glazed in yellow.
Height — l 2" Ch’ien Lung Period
1195. Pair Imperial porcelain bowls, fashioned from
clear white vitreous porcelain of resonant quality,
superbly made in the style of Kii Yiieh Hsiian glass.
On the exterior appear a gnarled tree with clusters
of camellias, cornflowers and peonies springing from
rockery. A poetic description of the beauties of
nature is painted on one side. The base bears the
six-character nien hao of Yung Cheng within a dou-
ble ring in underglaze blue. Diameter —s%"
1196. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase of quatrefoil
form; the decoration of archaic dragon motifs and
floral cartouches executed in raised fillets of kaolin
to simulation cloisonne. The color scheme is lapis-
blue and gold. Unusual specimen.
Height —B%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1197. Pair of rare Imperial shallow bowls invested
with monochrome lemon-yellow glaze. The moulded
decoration on both the interior and exterior depicts
lotus petals radiating from the central thalamus. The
base is glazed in white and bears in underglaze blue
the mark of Ta Ch’ing Yung Cheng nien chih, mean-
ing “made during the reign of Emperor Yung Cheng
of the Great Ch’ing Dynasty.” Diameter —ll%"
1198. Pair of unusual standing figurines of Ladies-
in-Waiting. The well-draped garments are invested
with flocculent famille rose colors. On the famille
noire headdress rests a lotus-shaped dish and the
statuette is supported by a porcelain stand decorated
with famille rose flowers against a black background.
Height —10" Ch’ien Lung Period




1199. Imperial porcelain vase coated with a rich
coral-red ground on which are superimposed leaf
scrolls in gilt. The two reserve panels contain a group
of small boys exquisitely enamelled in famille rose
colors. Both the base and inside of neck are glazed
robin’s-egg blue. On the foot-rim appears the red
seal mark of Ch’ien Lung period. Height —6"
1200. An unusual monk’s cap jug (Seng-Mao-Hu)
probably used in ritual ceremonies. The globular
body is surmounted by a wide neck and terraced
mouth-rim with pointed lip spout, flat loop handle.
The entire jug is invested with a pulsating peacock-
green glaze.
Height —12" K’ang Hsi Period
1201. Gourd-shaped porcelain vase, coral-red, deco-
rated with gilded Flowers of the Four Seasons. The
interior of the neck and base are covered with a
robin’s-egg blue glaze and the red seal mark of the
Ch’ien Lung reign and period is underfoot.
Height —6%"
1202. Rare Chinese chest coated in black, brown
and red lacquer, each side bearing a foliated car-
touche in which appear dragons and feng-huang in
medallion form. Behind a removable front, the chest
contains a series of drawers equipped with original
brass pull handles. The interior is similarly lacquered
and decorated. The chest rests on a high stand of
later origin. Ming Dynasty
Size of Chest —14Ms" deep; 19" high; 20" long
Size of Stand —29M>" high; 24" long; 17" deep
1203. See colored cover illustration for description.
This illustration shows obverse side of vase.
1204. Large and rare famille rose porcelain shallow
plaque, exhibiting in center a pair of birds of para-
dise perched on rockery and surrounded by peony,
chrysanthemum, lotus, and corn flowers with hover-
ing butterflies. The wide flanged lip is decorated with
a group of connecting formalized ju-i heads, bearing
similar flowers surrounded by green leaves against a
pink glaze background.
Diameter —22%" 18th Century
1205. Straight-sided cylindrical vase with incurvate
neck, coated with a clear white pellucid glaze on
which is painted in superb famille rose colors a
gnarled tree, sampan riding waves amid rockery
seating Hsi Wang Mu, the Fairy Goddess, with lotus
flower in left hand, accompanied by three female
attendants, one standing upon floating lotus leaf,
offering the peach of immortality to the Deity; on
obverse side gnarled pine trees growing from rockery.
The neck exhibits a fungus plant with twig of bam-
boo leaves.
Height —YJW Yung Cheng Period
1206. Large Imperial famille rose porcelain plaque;
the white glaze exhibiting a peau d’orange surface on
which are enamelled interlacing branches of pink and
white peonies and two passerine birds. The decora-
tion which carries over the rim to underneath side,
depicts blue, pink, iron-red yellow and green peonies
together with exotic butterflies. On base appears the
six-character period mark of Yung Cheng.
Diameter —l 9% "
1207. Straight-sided cylindrical porcelain vase re-
ceding into an incurvate neck with flaring mouth-rim.
Two flying birds are hovering over a cluster of peony,
chrysanthemum and corn flowers with leafage; all
painted in superb rose verte colors. The neck bears
a fungus plant with cluster of corn flowers and bam-
boo leaves.
Height — \IW Yung ChSng Period
1208. Pair of unusual famille rose Cantonese por-
celain bowls with gracefully flaring sides, decorated
on the interior and exterior with reserve panels de-
picting genre scenes and floral, bird, butterfly and
fruit motifs. The panels are connected by floral and
vine-like motifs with hovering butterflies. Around the
mouth-rim, both on the interior and exterior are
bands depicting butterfly, floral and fruit motifs,
The entire decoration is painted in superb famille
rose enamels against a gold background.
Diameter — lSW Height —7" 18th Century
1209. Porcelain shallow plaque painted with a cen-
tral medallion containing three love birds perched
on gnarled plum tree with flowering prunus, sur-
rounded by four medallions containing vari-colored
conventionalized peonies, twig and leaf motifs; the
obverse side decorated with lotus flowers containing




seed pods connected by vine-like tendrils and leaf-
age; the base glazed white.
Diameter —15V4" Tung Cheng Period
1210. Pair of temple jars or potiches with original
covers, decorated in five-color enamels of blue, green,
yellow, red and aubergine, depicting a terrace scene
with an assemblage of mandarins, attendants, and
fan bearers; around the neck appear Buddhistic sym-
bols, and on the covers children at play.
Height —l 7" 18th Century
1211. Rare quadrilateral porcelain jardiniere coated
with an undulating bluish-green glaze. The sides
bear mountainous landscapes indicative of the four
seasons of the year. Decoration throughout is painted
in exquisite famille verte colors in a manner typifying
nature’s seasonal conditions.
16” Square 10" High Kang Hsi Period
1212. Pair of Imperial porcelain vases painted in
underglaze blue and famille rose colors upon a white
background. The seascape includes towering moun-
tains, trees, boats, pavilions, and personage motifs;
at the base a band of plantain leaves; around the
shoulder, bands of key-fret and ju-i heads. The in-
curvate neck is decorated with formalized lotus
flowers and connecting scrolls with a band of ju-i
heads under the gilded mouth-rim. The handles are
in the form of dragons. The interior and base are
glazed peacock-green, and on the foot in a square re-
serve appears the six-character mark of the period
and reign of Ch’ien Lung. Height —l 4"
1213. Quatrefoil flattened baluster-shaped vase dec-
orated under the superb celadon glaze with gadroons,
formalized lotus flowers and leaves and ju-i heads.
The two reserve panels are outlined in gold, in which
appear playing children on terrace. The gilded han-
dles are in form of dragons. Under foot, mark of the
period and reign of Ch’ien Lung. Height —IIV4"
1214. Pair of Imperial celadon porcelain bowls of
resonant quality, the interior and exterior coated with
a sea-green celadon glaze outlined with five flying
bats, symbol of love, painted in underglaze copper-
red. The base bears the six-character mark of the
period and reign of Yung Cheng in double circle.
Diameter —6"
J 215. Pyriform porcelain vase with wide Hanged
month-rim. Six vari-colored concentric narrow bands
encircle the shoulder and neck, and the surface of
the vase is decorated with peonies and lotus flowers
with leafage, together with feng-huang; all executed
in the famille rose colors of green, coral, yellow and
purple.
Height —13V4" Yung Cheng Period
1216. Imperial famille rose reticulated (ling lung)
double vase, the inner vase revolving with the move-
ment of the collar neck of the outer vase. The side
medallions are pierced with dragon and scroll motifs
through which is visible the inner vase enamelled
with the figures of the eight immortals. Surrounding
the pierced medallions and on the neck appear for-
malized peonies, arabesque scrollings, ju-i heads, bats
and Shou emblems.
Height —17% " Mark and Period of Ch’ien Lung
1217. Pair of rare porcelain potiche painted in
famille rose colors, portraying the bird of paradise
perched on rockery beckoning mate, together with
peony, lotus, chrysanthemum, pomegranate and
prunus blossoms growing out of rockery. The base is
surrounded by a band of false gadroons. On the
shoulder appear four reserves containing symbols of
learning, separated by alternating seeded green
ground with clusters of flowers and around neck are
groups of peonies. The oroginal cover is decorated in
like manner.
Height —17Vi" 18th Century
1218. Pair Imperial porcelain vases painted in the
typical famille rose colors of the period. The central
median band is exquisitely sketched with panoramic
mountain landscapes and pavillions. Both the incur-
vate neck and slightly expanding foot bear enamelled
formalized peony and lotus scrolls in Imperial yellow
ground. The handles, in shape of flying bats, are
painted in red and gold. Seal mark of period and
reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Height— 13V4"
1219. Imperial famille rose vase with straight-sided
central band painted with mountainous landscape,
pavilion and personage motifs against a white
ground; the receding base and long expanding neck


painted in formalized lotus and peony flowers with
scrolling tendrils against an Imperial yellow ground;
around mouth-rim, band of ju-i heads; interior and
base glazed robin’s-egg blue; under foot six-char-
acter mark of the reign and period of Ch’ien Lung.
Height —l 3 Vs"
1220. Pair of unusual porcelain plaques painted
with gnarled plum and peony trees bearing their re-
spective blossoms; the decoration starting on back
continues over mouth-rim and spreads out in well of
plaque with hovering butterflies amid blossoms; in
famille rose colors against a brilliant clear white
glaze.
Diameter —20" 18th Century
1221. Fine gallipot (mei p’ing) painted with five-
clawed scaly dragons encircling the vase amid leaf-
age and flower motifs; at base a band of gadroons
and on neck-rim plaintain leaves. The decoration is
executed in green, blue, yellow enamels and rouge
de fer. Yung Cheng Period
1222. Pair unusual porcelain water sprinklers in-
vested with an even cafe-au-lait glaze with white ( re-
serves painted in underglaze blue with formalized
peonies.
Height —7" Ch’ien Lung Period
1223. Pair of blanc-de-chine dishes with rounded
sides, decorated with swimming carp in underglaze
copper-red.
Diameter —6" 18th Century
1224. Quadrangular miniature wine cup with flaring
mouth-rim coated with cafe-au-lait glaze upon which
is painted in green and aubergine a five-clawed scaly
dragon. Interior white.
1%" Square 18th Century
1225. Pair sonorous porcelain bowls with flaring
mouth-rim decorated on exterior with writhing drag-
ons, in famille verte colors.
1226. Pair of semi-eggshell bowls with rounded
sides, decorated with flower clusters in underglaze
blue, green, yellow and aubergine.
1227. Porcelain point bottle invested with an even
turquoise-blue glaze, exhibiting fish roe or truite
crackle.
Height —9V4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1228. Pair porcelain shallow dishes decorated in
green, yellow, aubergine, underglaze blue and iron-
red, showing lotus pond scene with swimming geese;
similarly decorated on obverse side.
Diameter — 6 x k" 18th Century
1229. Porcelain bottle-shaped vase invested with a
brilliant turquoise-blue glaze exhibiting fish roe or
truite crackle.
Height —5%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1230. Pair shallow porcelain dishes invested with a
fine celadon glaze; decoration consisting of incised
fungi with leafage. The base bears the six-character
mark of the period and reign of Yung Cheng painted
in underglaze blue.
Diameter —4%" Yung Cheng Period
1231. Unusual porcelain jardiniere, ovoglobular, in-
vested with a rare peacock-green crackled glaze.
Teakwood cover Ming Dynasty
1232. Porcelain brush holder (Pi t’ung) in shape of
gnarled tree trunk carved in bold relief with stag and
doe together with pine and peach trees with hover-
ing bats; invested with a crackled turquoise-blue.
Height —4l4" 18th Century
1233. Rare potiche or temple jar with original cover,
coated with a seagreen celadon glaze upon which is
painted in underglaze-blue pine trees; surrounded
by Shou lao seated on rockery watching attendant
beckoning to spotted dear. A long-beaked crane is
perched on pine tree; cover similarly decorated.
Height —l 3%" Kang Hsi Period
1234. Pair porcelain ginger jars decorated around
body with five-clawed dragons amid clouds pursuing
the flaming jewel; at the shoulder with the symbols
of the “Hundred Antiques” and near the foot-rim
with false gadroons; all enamelled in green upon a
white ground.
Height —B W Tao Kuang Period


1235. Pair Imperial porcelain bowls, fashioned from
clear white vitreous porcelain of resonant quality,
superbly made in the style of Ku Yiieh Hsiian glass.
On the exterior appear a gnarled tree with clusters
of camellias, cornflowers and peonies springing from
rockery. A poetic description of the beauties of nature
is painted on one side. The base bears the six-char-
acter nien hao of Yung Cheng within a double ring
in underglaze blue. Diameter —s%"
1236. Porcelain bowl with metal rim painted on the
exterior with the eight Immortals in underglaze blue
against a peach bloom wave motif.
K’ang Hsi Period
1237. Baluster-shaped vase with two tiger mask
handles protruding from shoulder and coated with a
cream-colored crackled glaze to simulate Ko Yao.
Height —l 3%" 18th Century
1238. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase decorated in
relief with gadroons, Pa-kua or trigrams, lozenge,
ju-i head and key-fret motifs. At the shoulder appear
elephant-head handles bearing mock rings; all in-
vested with a light seagreen celandon glaze.
Height —l 4" 18th Century
1239. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with com-
pressed body rising to a tall tubular neck with flaring
mouth-rim coated on the exterior and interior with
an even souffle teadust glaze. The base bears the
impressed mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien
Lung. Height —l3V6"
1240. Rare san-ts’ai, three-color, shallow plate, deco-
rated with clusters of green, yellow and aubergine
pomegranates and peaches; incised in the porcelain
appear writhing dragons.
Diameter —9%" Mark and Period of K’ang Hsi
1241. Porcelain bottle-shaped vase, compressed
body, cylindrical neck, coated with a dark souffle
teadust glaze. Under foot the impressed six-character
mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung.
Height —l 3"
1242. Porcelain gallipot (mei p’ing) decorated on
the exterior in relief with gadroons and plum trees
bearing prunus blossoms, underneath a flocculent
and crackled sage-green glaze; under foot the six-
character mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien
Lung. Height —l 4"
1243. Important Imperial temple altar garniture
comprising a three-legged koro or incense burner
with two “S”-shaped lug handles; pair candlesticks
with deep central grease trays; a pair of trumpet-like
beakers with median band, and a pair of flaming
halos; with the exception of the flaming halos, the
other objects are decorated with the lotus, ju-i heads,
vine-like tendrils and Buddhistic symbols in the
colors of the famille rose palette against a gilded
ground. The flaming halos are decorated in relief
with floral, cloud and lotus scrolls completely gilded,
excepting the central reticulated medallion which
contains enamelled bead-like formations to simulate
the sacred jewels. The Imperial Ch’ien-lung seal
mark in red appears in surface panels on the five
large pieces and on the base of the “flame” screens.
Height, Candlesticks and beaker—l 4% "
Incense burner —IP/i"
Flaming halos—11" Ch’ien Lung Period
1244. Rare porcelain fish bowl coated with a green-
ish-white glaze upon which are superimposed, vases,
utensils. Buddhistic symbols, etc. in bold relief,
painted in famille verte enamels. Around the mouth-
rim and base are bands of formalized flowers.
K’ang Hsi Period
1245. Rare gallipot (mei p’ing) invested with an
even and superb light clair de lune (color of the
moon) glaze covering two five-clawed scaly dragons,
one pursuing amid cloud and fire scrolls the Pearl of
Omnipotence, and the other emerging from the
waves; all carved in slight relief. Unusual example.
Height —29" K’ang Hsi Period
1246. A large famille rose fish bowl painted with
bird, tree and floral motifs in brilliant colors of the
famille rose palette. Bands of gadroons and ju-i heads
in intertwining circlets surround the mouth-rim and
base.
Height —l 7" Diameter —18" 18th Century
1247. Pair of large fish bowls coated with a flower-
white glaze, etched with writhing dragons amid
cloud scrolls; on high teakwood stands.
Diameter —2B” 18th Century
1248. Majestic Imperial blue and white vase painted
in underglaze blue with a group of five-clawed Im-
perial dragons amid flower and cloud scrolls, some






pursuing the Omnipotent Flaming Pearl, and others
emerging from the waves. At base is a band of false
gadroons and around the shoulder the ju-i head
motif. The neck is decorated with leaf and hanging
jewels with a band of ju-i heads underneath the grace-
fully expanding mouth-rim. On each side is a dragon
handle in full relief. This vase was undoubtedly made
for an important marriage feast.
Height —so" Ch’ien Lung Period
1249. Rhinoceros-horn libation cup; the carving on
exterior depicting the Taoist Paradise, showing tree,
rockery and personage motifs; interior with pine and
plum trees undercut in bold relief.
Height —4" Length —6" Ming Dynasty
1250. Unusual rhinoceros-horn octagonal-shaped li-
bation cup; the exterior carved with key-fret and
tiger masks; carved strap handles.
Diameter — 4V*" Height — 2%" 17th Century
1251. Trumpet-shaped rhinoceros-horn libation cup.
Central band showing tiger mask motif; underneath
flaring lip and at base plantain leaves; strap handle
surrounded by a group of writhing salamanders;
interior also bearing a salamander in bold relief.
Height —s%" Length —sl4" 17th Century
1252. Rhinoceros-horn libation cup depicting the
Goddess of Mercy in sitting posture holding in left
hand a rosary and in right hand a vase pouring the
elixir of life; child attendant in attitude of adoration.
Length —4" Height —3” 17th Century
1253. Rhinoceros-horn libation cup, oval-shape, re-
ceding toward base; handle in shape of gnarled pine
tree; also seascape surmounted by rocky crags.
Height —4V4" Width —6" Ming Dynasty
1254. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with incur-
vate expanding base; large tubular neck with flanged
rim; coated with souffle powder-blue glaze. The sur-
face exhibits traces of the original gilding of the
thousand Shou characters with the continuous key-
fret around the mouth-rim. Interior glazed white.
Height —14" K’ang Hsi Period
1255. Rhinoceros-horn libation cup in the form of
recumbent Dog of Fo; rare.
Length —4 1 /4" Height —3%" Ming Dynasty
1256. Pear-shaped porcelain vase invested with a
souffle glaze to simulate iron rust (t’ieh-hsui). The
entire surface of the vase exhibits a brilliant metallic
brown and black-speckled glaze.
Height —lo" Ch’ien Lung Period
1257. Unusual-shaped rhinoceros-horn libation cup
in the form of a ewer with strap handle emerging
from tiger mask; the base depicts Li T’ai-po reclining
against his wine jug, surrounded by children in play-
ing attitude; carved in bold relief; elsewhere archais-
tic motifs, ju-i heads, stud bosses and Yin-Yang
symbols.
Height —4%" Ming Dynasty
1258. Baluster-shaped porcelain vase with two con-
centric lines encircling shoulder; the handles in the
shape of rudimentary elephant heads; coated with
brilliant mazarine-blue glaze.
Height —14 V*" 18th Century
1259. Pair of semi-eggshell shallow dishes painted
on the exterior and interior with rockery, leafage,
and flower motifs in underglaze blue, green, coral
and yellow. On the base appears in underglaze blue
the six-character mark of the reign and period of
Yung Cheng. Diameter —B"
1260. Pair of quadrangular porcelain vases fash-
ioned from clear white kaolinic porcelain in shape of
bronze ritual vessel (tsun) symbolical of the earth.
The corners show a system of broken and unbroken
lines. The vase is invested with an even celadon green
glaze.
Height — 7Vi" Ch’ien Lung Period
1261. Pair of rare porcelain jars, baluster-shaped,
coated on the exterior and interior with a superb
grayish-green glaze to simulate the color of Sung
Kuan Yao ware. One jar exhibits crab’s-claw crackle;
the other is uncrackled; on the foot the underglaze
blue six-character mark of the reign and period of
Yung Cheng. Height — s¥j"
1262. Porcelain bowl with gracefully flaring sides,
painted on the interior and exterior with aquatic
scenes depicting fish swimming in lake from which
grow lotus plants. The decoration is executed in the
famille verte colors of green, aubergine, yellow, iron-
red and underglaze blue.
Diameter—TVC K’ang Hsi Period


1263. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of seated Kuan
Yin, Goddess of Mercy, the voluminous robe conceal-
ing hands; Deity wears a well-draped hooded head-
dress; coated with a fine ivory-white glaze.
Height —9%" 18th Century
1264. Semi-eggshell porcelain shallow dish invested
with a flower-white glaze, exhibiting on the exterior
and interior nut and leaf motifs connected by vine-
like twigs, together with hovering butterflies, the
decoration on the underside carrying over the mouth-
rim to the interior. Superb specimen.
Diameter —7" K’ang Hsi Period
1265. Mallet-shaped octofoil porcelain vase with
flanged lip and compressed body, coated with an
even celadon glaze. The body bears groupings of
vertical channels crossed by two concentric lines on
shoulder with two lines encircling neck. The high
receded base bears the underglaze blue mark of the
period and reign of Ch’ien Lung. Height —7"
1266. Blanc-de-chine porcelain Kuan Yin, Goddess
of Mercy, in sitting posture, wearing a well-draped
robe and hood; left hand concealed; right hand rest-
ing on knee; entire figure exhibiting position of royal
ease. Te-hua ware Fukien province.
Early 18th Century
1267. Three coalescent porcelain gourds, covered
with a bluish-green crackled celadon glaze, simulat-
ing Kuan Yao ware; under foot the six-character
mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien Lung in un-
derglaze blue. Height —BV4"
1268. Superb shallow porcelain dish coated with a
clear white glaze upon which are painted on the in-
terior and exterior in delicate famille verte colors
hovering butterflies with nuts and leafage connected
by vine-like tendrils; the decoration continues over
the edge of the plate onto the obverse side. Superb
specimen.
Diameter —6" K’ang Hsi Period
1269. Fukien blanc-de-chine figure of a princess
sitting on a floating lotus leaf; the well-combed hair
extends in knotted strands over shoulder; coated with
a fine ivory-white glaze.
Height —9%" 18th Century
1270. Important globular vase with short tubular
neck invested with a flocculent peau-de-peche
(peachbloom) glaze, the surface exhibiting peau
d’orange texture, with areas of bluish-green celadon
at base and shoulder. The interior is glazed bluish-
green, and the brown glazed base bears the impressed
six-character mark of the period and reign of Yung
Cheng. Height —2o%"
1271. Fine porcelain marine jar of bulbous shape
with short straight neck. An aquatic scene with ma-
rine life and iron-red fishes appears on body bordered
with scrolling vines, sharp-pointed leaves and gad-
roons. With the exception of the swimming fishes the
decoration is painted in Mohammedan underglaze
blue. Mark and period of Chia Ch’ing (Ming) on
base. Height —11%”
1272. Globular jar with short tubular neck coated
with a bluish-white glaze, decorated in underglaze
blue and peachbloom with three five-clawed writh-
ing dragons pursuing, amid cloud and fire scrolls,
the sacred pearl. At foot-rim a band of splashing
waves; below mouth-rim a wave band containing the
apocryphal mark of Hsiian Te.
Height —19" K’ang Hsi Period
1273. Imperial pyriform vase fashioned from stone-
ware porcelain and coated with a bluish-white glaze
upon which are painted a five-clawed scaly dragon,
emblematic of the Emperor, and a flying feng-huang,
symbol of the Empress, both amid conventionalized
peony and lotus flowers connected by scrolling ten-
drils; around base band of gadroon lappets. Painted
in aubergine, green, yellow, red enamels and under-
glaze blue.
Height —3l" Yung Cheng Period
1274. Superb famille rose potiche with original
cover and gold finial. The six reserve panels, out-
lined in gold, depict genre and personage scenes.
Around the reserves and in the gilded background
panels at base and shoulder appear floral, butterfly,
and fruit motifs. Exquisitely painted in the brilliant
colors of the famille rose pallette. The cover is simi-
larly decorated. A very important specimen.
Height —2s" Ch’ien Lung Period




1275. “Tibetan” carving of camphor-white jade; in-
terior showing radial ribs of lotus leaf and corn
flower stalk with grasshopper and darning needle in
high relief; exterior with plum tree prunus blossoms
and rockery. Diameter —s'/4"
1276. Pair of “Tibetan” carved grayish-white jade
bowls with formalized chrysanthemum leaf foot-rim,
the exterior bearing three Kuan Yins in a setting sur-
rounded by lotus flowers and leaf scrolls; interior
plain. Height — 2W Diameter —4%"
1277. “Tibetan” carved camphor-white jade vase;
the ovoid body rising to a long tubular neck from
which protrude scroll-like handles; from the body
hang two loose rings held by vine-like twin loop
handles. Height —4 %"
1278. “Tibetan” jade carving in form of baluster-
shaped vase with body rising into a long cylindrical
neck, bearing loop handles in form of flower clusters
bearing loose rings; the cover is surmounted by a
comb-like reticulated finial. Height — 6%"
1279. “Tibetan” jade carving of eggshell thinness;
side loop handles which bear loose rings in form of
floral and leaf scrolls. Height —4''
1280. Grayish-white carved jade shell form ellipti-
cal dish with pierced foliated handle bearing cluster
of six blossoms; the exterior decorated with similar
type flowers and plantain leaves with band of con-
ventionalized blossoms around mouth-rim.
Length — 6V2" Height —3"
1281. Superb specimen of carved camphor-white
jade in form of deep bowl with gracefully flaring
sides, the handles in form of formalized lotus blos-
soms from which hang loose rings; exterior is carved
in slight relief with dragon, feng-huang and pine-tree
motifs accompanied by children waving banners; the
band around the mouth-rim contains groupings of
conventionalized dragons and birds; around foot-
rim appears a band of tiger masks; interior plain; the
flocculent jade is suffused with areas of emerald
green.
Length —10%" Diameter — B" Height —3”
1282. Miniature white jade carving in the form of
a teapot with spout and undercut leaf handle; deco-
rated on each side with Kuan Yin in sitting posture
surrounded by leaf scrolls; the cover surmounted by
undercut conventionalized lotus flower.
Length —4" Height —3%”
1283. Carved greenish-white jade quatrefoil ellipti-
cal dish, the overhanging sides reticulated with ling-
lung design of lotus flowers and leafage; around the
base a band of gadroons; the formalized lotus-flower
handles bear loose rings. (Mate to No. 1290.)
Length—7%” Width— 4"
1284. Ling Lung carved mutton-fat jade Koro on
three stump feet, with wide reticulated flanged lip;
handles in form of lotus blossoms from which hang
two large loose rings; two other small loose rings
hang underneath flanged mouth-rim; the pierced
cover with prunus and scroll design is surmounted
by a hollow and reticulated globular finial.
Length —5" Height —4"
1285. “Tibetan” carved quatrefoil elliptical jade
bowl with foliated sides; carved on exterior with con-
ventionalized lotus flowers, plantain leaves and vine-
like scrollings; the base with a radial chrysanthemum
petal pattern; short receding foot-rim.
Length —9" Width — 7%" Height —2%”
1286. Greenish - white jade flattened quatrefoil
bronze form vase; the broad sides reticulated with
angular motifs surmounting an archaistic tiger mask
spear-head shaped panel; the incurvate neck with
formalized lotus flower and scrollings bears two loop
handles in shape of ram’s head holding loose rings;
the cover similarly decorated, with finial in shape of
hollow peony blossom; on finely-carved jade stand.
Height — B"
1287. “Tibetan” carving of camphor-white jade in
form of elliptical shallow dish with undercut floral
designs underneath mouth-rim; the handles in form
of lotus pod and leafage supporting loose rings. The
mouth-rim and interior bear designs of convention-
alized lotus flowers with scrolling leafage.
Length — 8%" Width— s"




1288. A pair of unusually carved camphor-white
jade eggshell bowls with gracefully flaring, voluted
sides in the shape of conventionalized chrysanthe-
mum petals, superimposed with lotus flowers and leaf
scrollings; well-formed serrated foot-rim.
Diameter —4%" Height — 2'A"
1289. “Tibetan” carving of jade Tazza cup with
cover and floral side handles, bearing loose rings with
many undercut areas.
1290. Carved greenish-white jade quatrefoil ellipti-
cal dish, the overhanging sides reticulated with ling-
lung design of lotus flowers and leafage; around the
base a band of gadroons; the formalized lotus-flower
handles bear loose rings. (Mate to No. 1283.)
Length —7%" Width —4"
1291. “Tibetan” jade carving of superb quality, in
shape of bronze-form vase, the sides reticulated in
ling-lung fashion, the two loop handles in shape of
dragon motif, bearing loose rings; reticulated cover
with mushroom-type finial. Height —s"
1292. Pair of grayish-green jade shallow dishes,
carved on exterior and interior with formalized chrys-
anthemum petals in radial form; loose rings hang
from side handles in form of undercut and reticulated
leaf and flower motifs; the jade is suffused with areas
of green, brown and grayish-white.
Diameter —8%"
1293. “Tibetan” carving of bluish-green jade of ex-
quisite quality and polish in the shape of bronze bowl
resting on four undercut floral decorated feet; the
carved flanged lip bears two undercut handles of for-
malized chrysanthemums and leafage with two dang-
ling loose rings. The Ling Lung two tier cover is
decorated with conventionalized chrysanthemums
and scroll-like leafage; pierced finial hears three loop
handles with loose rings. Height —sVl>"
1294. Imperial “Tibetan” carving of camphor-white
jade consisting of Tazza resting on high reticulated
base with octofoil wide foliated flange separated by
“S”-shaped ridges; a deep receptacle finely carved in
relief with spear-carved dragon medallion to hold
superimposed bowl that is carved on exterior with
female equestrians riding feng-huang, dragons, dip-
per and Buddhistic motifs amid cloud scrolls; the
cover bearing two conventionalized dragons in bold
undercut relief; a band of “Shou” characters and al-
ternating flower motifs appear in band around mouth
rim; finial in shape of open lotus flower.
Height —s%" Diameter — SVz"
1295. “Tibetan” carving of greenish-white jade in
the shape of flattened dish with carved flanged lip
from which protrude four lion mask handles bearing
loose rings; undercut foot rests. The Ling Lung re-
ticulated cover is surmounted by a crown-like finial
enclosing a revolving reticulated sphere; unusual
example. Height —5 Mi"
1296. “Tibetan” carving of mutton-fat jade in form
of flattened bronze vase receding gracefully toward
incurvate base; the narrow sides bear archaistic
scrolls with bird and flower motifs. From incurvate
neck protrude two handles in shape of feng-huang
holding two loose rings. The cover carved in relief
with Dog of Fo motifs; finial depicting tiger masks.
Height — BV2"
1297. Pair of unusual, carved bell-shaped camphor-
white jade eggshell cups on short chrysanthemum-
type foot-rim, the sides bearing in slight relief for-
malized lotus flowers with leaf scrollings; interior
plain.
Height —3%" Diameter —3%" 18th Century
1298 “Tibetan” carving from camphor-white jade in
form of deep bowl with gracefully flaring sides, deco-
rated on the exterior in relief with floral and leaf
scrolls. Diameter— 6"
1299. Superb specimen of mutton-fat jade in shape
of three-legged incense burner or Koro, with original
cover. The three stump feet bear lion masks; from
the shoulder extend dragon handles holding loose
rings; the cover is surmounted by two Dogs of Fo.
Height —8" Ch’ien Lung Period
1300. “Tibetan” carved camphor-white jade bowl
decorated on the exterior in slight relief with the
playing children’s festival scene, flanked by two bor-
ders containing floral motifs; the base of exterior and
interior exhibits radial lines in form of continuous
chrysanthemum petals; egg-shell quality jade of su-
perb texture. Diameter —s%" Height— 2l4"




1301. “Tibetan” carving of grayish-white jade ellip-
tical vase carved in relief with two reticulated han-
dles extending from shoulder in shape of lotus leaves
bearing loose rings; lower body decorated with four
spear-shaped panels enclosing figures of Deities, sur-
mounted by bands of formalized lotus and prunus
blossoms with leafage; cover bearing design in re-
lief of umbrella-like floral finial; four-legged stand
also carved with floral motifs in relief.
Height —9" Width —s 94"
1302. “Tibetan” carving of greenish-white jade in
the shape of shallow bowl with pierced flanged
mouth-rim from which extend two Ling Lung ju-i
head handles with loose rings; supported by lace-
like base with six incurvate feet; the two tier reticu-
lated cover bears groups of lotus and leaf motifs and
the hollow finial is decorated with pierced leaf and
scroll tendrils. Height —6" Length —994"
1303. Pair of Imperial camphor-white jade shallow
plates of eggshell thinness, bearing on the inside cal-
ligraphic poetic inscription in gilt of poem by Em-
peror Ch’ien Lung.
Diameter —594" Ch’ien Lung Period
1304. Magnificent specimen of greenish-white jade,
carved in the form of an incense burner depicting a
conventionalized lotus flower resting on three under-
cut leaf supports; the side handles in the form of
undercut rose blossoms with leafage, bearing loose
rings. The sides of the vessel and cover exhibit six
foliated voluted petals, and underneath lotus cluster
finial is a band composed of eight formalized lotus
leaves. The base of the cover is so carved as to fit
snugly into the V-shaped mouth-rim receptacle of the
bowl. A very rare specimen of jade representing the
acme of lapidary technique.
Height —7" Diameter —7" 18th Century
1305. “Tibetan” carving of bluish-gray jade incense
burner supported by lace-like attached stand with
ju-i head motifs bearing six scroll-like feet. Body of
the bowl exhibits band of conventionalized lotus
leafage and tendril motifs; reticulated and undercut
side handles in form of lotus flowers hold two loose
rings. The Ling Lung cover with pierced flower and
scroll design is surmounted by spreading lotus flower
with pod and two undercut conventionalized lotus
flower handles bearing loose rings.
Length —9" Height —s 94"
1306. Pair of rare camphor-white jade vases in
shape of flattened bronze vessel, carved in slight re-
lief on exterior with conventionalized lotus flowers
and scrollings; from incurvate neck extend dragon
heads with loose rings; finial in shape of Dog of Fo;
vases suffused with areas of lavender, green and
grayish-white. Height —9 94"
1307. “Tibetan” carved camphor-white jade shallow
octofoil dish with lace-like reticulated flower handles
bearing loose rings; interior decorated in relief with
formalized lotus flowers and scrollings; of superb
quality—brilliantly polished texture. Length —794"
1308. Pair of circular camphor-white jade bowls with
gracefully flaring sides, carved on the exterior with
palmette, flower and leaf motifs in slight relief; in-
terior plain; well-formed foot.
Diameter —494" Height —l%"
1309. Magnificent specimen of semi-eggshell mut-
ton-fat jade chrysanthemum bowl; the exterior and
interior decorated with formalized chrysanthemum
petals terminating in a voluted mouth-rim.
Diameter —694" Height —2%" 18th Century
1310. “Tibetan” carved hexafoil camphor-white jade
dish supported by three stump feet; handles in form
of butteries with loose ring handles; decorated on
exterior in relief with palm-shaped panels bearing
bird, Dog of Fo and deer motifs; base on interior
bears a formalized lotus and scroll medallion.
Length —B” Width —294"
1311. Pair of unusual grayish-green jade flattened
vases, bearing two oval-shaped panels enclosing fig-
ures of the Eight Immortals surrounded by scrolling
vines; the neck bearing four serrated flanges in shape
of conventionalized dragons, with lambrequin design
extending below mouth-rim. The plain cover is con-
nected to the vase with original jade chain which fits
and disappears into the vase when cover is mounted.
On teakwood stand. Height —794"




1312. Bulb bowl carved from pork fat white jade.
On the outside appear flowers and tendrils carved in
bold relief.
Length —9'/4" Imperial Ch’ien Lung Period
1313. Superb specimen of luminous greenish-white
jade in form of bronze-shaped koro with reticulated
strap handles and supported by three cylindrical legs
carved with tiger masks; around the body of vessel
appears a band containing archaistic dragon motifs;
interior plain. Height — 6V2” Diameter —3%"
1314. Circular white jade bowl supported by four-
tiger mask stump feet connected by reticulated cir-
cular stretcher. On the sides appear panels contain-
ing conventionalized peony flowers with scrollings
interspersed with continuous key-fret; interior in-
cised with pentacle geometrical design containing
lotus flowers with angular and scroll-like vines.
Diameter —7 V*" Height —3"
1315. Superb carving of fei-ts’ui jade with long han-
dles extending from base to mouth-rim in form of
gnarled tree in bold relief, bearing berries with
perched birds amid undercut leafage; cover sur-
rounded by undercut feng-huang and leafage; magni-
ficent specimen; on teakwood stand.
Height —BV4"
1316. Carved mutton-fat jade koro or incense
burner, on three stump feet, bearing tiger masks; with
“S”-shaped strap handles; the sides of bowl and cover
exhibit serrated flanges separating tiger mask motifs;
the cover is reticulated with a coiled dragon pursuing
the flaming pearl. Diameter —5" Height — 4V>"
1317. Quadrangular koro supported by four col-
umnar feet partially decorated with the T’ao T’ieh
mask. The periphery is decorated with the entwined
rope pattern, and the handles are in the shape of two
carved lugs. The original cover, similarly decorated,
is surmounted by a Dog of Fo. The entire vessel is
carved from an exquisite specimen of fei-ts’ui jade.
Height —7%" Width —s" Depth —2V4"
1318. Mutton-fat jade incense burner resting on
three short feet in shape of lion mask. Around the
shoulder appear leaf scrollings together with medal-
lion containing the Pa Kua or Trigrams with the Yin
and Yang symbol. Both the handles and the finial are
in the shape of Fu lions.
Height —4 %” Width —714" Ch’ien Lung Period
1319. Superb specimen of fei-ts’ui jade vase deco-
rated on exterior with relief and undercut design of
cherry tree on which birds of paradise are perched
amid fruit and leaf motifs; finial and cover sur-
mounted by bird and undercut leafage and fruit
design. Height —914"
1320. Pair of fei-ts’ui jade cylindrical vases of
bronze form with median band; carved on exterior in
relief with ascending and descending plantain leaves
and formalized peonies with leafage; suffused with
areas of the prized emerald green. Height —ll"
1321. Pair unusual fei-ts’ui jade plain bowls with
original cover; gracefully flaring sides; well-formed
foot and short incurvate finial; on teakwood stand.
Diameter —5%"
1322. Unusual carved fei-ts’ui jade statuette of the
Fairy Goddess, Hsi Wang Mu, wearing attractively
draped robe with long sleeves; bearing in left hand
a cluster of peonies in emerald-green, and in right
hand a fly whisk. The Deity is accompanied by a
standing feng-huang holding in its mouth a blossom-
ing twig with leafage; the jade is suffused with un-
usual areas of the prized kingfisher green.
Height —loV4"
1323. Pair mutton-fat jade circular table screens—
one slightly larger than the other—both carved on
one side with a mountain retreat and pavilion de-
picting a Taoist Paradise. On the obverse side of the
smaller one appear two cranes amid bamboo and
pine trees. On the obverse side of the larger table
screen appears a mountainous landscape with two
deer.
Size of Smaller One, Diameter —7%" Height —14"
Size of Larger One, Diameter —8%" Height —15"
1324. Unusual specimen of carved jade shallow dish
with over-hanging mouth-rim in form of pomegran-
ate bearing underneath and around sides a scrolling
of stems and leafage undercut and in bold relief.
The jade is suffused with large areas of the prized
amethyst and kingfisher green colors.
Width —6V4" Length —5' 4"


1325. Unusual carved greenish-white jade suffused
with brownish veins in form of archaistic bronze li-
bation vessel supported by three curved spear-shaped
legs; flat handle emerging from monster’s head with
two mushroom lugs at mouth-rim; exterior carved
with tiger heads and other archaistic motifs.
Height —l 4"
1326. Elliptical-shaped fei-ts’ui jade dish with over-
hanging lip bearing on one side a cluster of prunus
blossoms, leafage and insects undercut and in bold
relief. Length —6%" Width —5%"
1327. Pair of important shallow plaques carved from
flocculent fei-ts’ui jade.
Diameter —ll%" Height —l%"
1328. Small bronze-shaped mutton-fat jade vase
with loop handles, bearing loose rings; carved on the
exterior in bold relief, and undercut with lotus leaves
and flowers and a goose resting on inverted lotus leaf;
the cover with bird finial connected by original loose
chain to vase. Height —5"
1329. Carved jade figure of Kuan Yin, Goddess of
Mercy, holding rosary in left hand and bird in right
hand; with gnarled tree and leafage on side growing
from rockery; the figure is clothed in a well-draped
free-flowing robe and hair is carefully combed in
form of a flattened swirl; the jade is suffused with
areas of grayish-white, light brown and greenish-
blue. Height —ls"
1330. Superb specimen of greenish-white jade, bril-
liantly polished, in form of drum-shaped bronze ves-
sel with angular lug handles supported by three
stump legs decorated with tiger masks; exterior en-
circled by two concentric lines in slight relief, other-
wise undecorated. Diameter —3%" Height —3%"
1331. Mutton-fat jade shallow bowl—handles in
shape of bats, bearing loose rings; the exterior is
carved in slight relief with the Eight Buddhistic sym-
bols; four stump feet; on interior appear a pair of
carp and musical stone with a double joy symbol,
also carved in relief. Diameter —7%"
1332. Circular shallow jade dish, the wide flanged
mouth-rim and protruding handles carved with clus-
ters of berries and leafage, otherwise undecorated;
hanging from side handles and flanged mouth-rim are
fourteen loops bearing loose rings.
Diameter — 6V/' Height — lVz"
1333. Unusual foliated elliptical dish carved from
grayish-white jade with two scroll motifs on interior;
the exterior carved with undercut clusters of four
salamanders bearing fungi and a group of five geese
—both groups in light brownish jade; under foot the
six-character mark of Ch’ien Lung.
Length —9%" Width —7%" Height — 2W
1334. Superbly carved fei-ts’ui jade semi-eggshell
elliptical bowl, the exterior carved in bold relief ribs,
with short, pointed foot-rim; the base bears a conven-
tionalized lotus-petal motif; the front side exhibiting
a twig extending from interior over mouth-rim to ex-
terior with a cluster of chrysanthemum flowers and
leafage. Length —9" Width —s%"
1335. Mutton-fat jade bowl carved in high relief
with a pair of carp, the symbol of conjugal felicity.
Diameter — BV2” Ch’ien Lung Period
1336. Pair of Imperial plain pork-fat white jade
bowls.
Diameter —7" Height —3l4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1337. Greenish-gray carved jade koro or incense
burner with fungi side handles bearing loose rings;
decorated on exterior with archaistic dragon motifs;
a border of feng-huang and gadroons surround cover,
which is surmounted by an expanding finial bearing
on top a ling-lung reticulated writhing dragon.
Diameter —sM>" Height — 4W
1338. Finely-carved jade twin vase with “S”-scroll
handles; suffused with areas of light amethyst and
emerald green. The rockery, floral and leaf motifs so
carved as to give most prominence to the natural
color of the jade. The two original covers with Fu
dog finials almost entirely in emerald-green jade.
Height— s" Width— 3l4"
1339. Important carved mutton-fat jade tripod liba-
tion cup (Chiieh) of ancient bronze form, supported
by three-lance form legs. Outside of vessel is encir-
cled by two bands of up-pointed lappets, with mon-
ster-head loop handle and two mushroom lugs at
mouth-rim. Height —9"


1340. Superb carving of clear white jade represent-
ing a statuette of Kuan Yin clothed in a free-flowing
robe and hooded headdress; the right hand in atti-
tude of benediction holding a fly whisk and a rosary
in the left hand; brilliant texture. Height — 6"
1341. Imperial carved mutton-fat white jade koro
with original cover. The two handles are in the shape
of tiger mask handles and around the body appears
a Lei-Wen fret pattern. The cover is carved with a
large tiger mask design surmounted by a fluted-
shaped finial. Ch’ien Lung Period
Diameter —594" Height —3%"
1342. Imperial carved mutton-fat bronze-shaped
vase; serrated flanges on wide sides which are carved
with archaistic dragons and tiger mask motifs. The
incurvate neck bears two elephant-head handles from
which hang loose rings; the cover and finial similarly
decorated.
Height —9" Ch’ien Lung Period
1343. Ovocylindrical bronze-shaped vase carved
from mutton-fat jade; from incurvate neck protrude
four dragon loop handles with loose rings; the cen-
tral band bears archaistic tiger mask with a band of
gadroons above foot-rim; the cover, with band of
gadroons, is surmounted by a Fu dog carved in full
relief. Height —9"
1344. Unusual white jade carving in form of festival
boat with wind - blown fully - extended sail, and
manned by children; all carved in undercut and Ling
Lung technique. Length — QVs"
1345. Superb specimen of carved white jade in
form of flattened bronze-shaped vase with key-fret
panels, decorated on front with child standing on
rockery and bearing scepter ju-i, and curling Chih
lung emerging from rockery and extending up one
side of the vessel; the receding cover is surmounted
by angular finial. Height — 1W
1346. Mutton-fat jade vase, the edges being out-
lined with reticulated leaves and flowers carved in
bold relief. The original cover is similarly treated.
From the dragon handles on the incurvate neck hang
two loose rings.
Height —ll%" Width — 6V2" Ch’ien Lung Period
1347. Greenish-gray mutton-fat jade vase in shape
of archaic bronze vessel, the long flaring neck sepa-
rated from the expanding base by a prominent me-
dian band; around one side of the mouth-rim appears
an archaistic dragon, undercut and in bold relief.
Height —9 Ms"
1348. A mutton-fat jade ornament in form of moun-
tain retreat, carved on all surfaces in bold relief with
personage, pine tree, pavilion, and mountainous crag
motifs; around the base appear splashing and swirl-
ing waves.
Height —5%" Length — 8W 18th Century
1349. Muttomfat jade carving of a Mountain Re-
treat showing deity with attendant; the obverse side
depicting two cranes emerging from cave.
Height —10" 18th Century
1350. Mutton-fat jade carving of mountain retreat,
showing Buddha in grotto.
Height —10 W 18th Century
1351. Bronze-shaped mutton-fat jade vase carved in
high relief with formalized lotus flowers and leafage
with plantain leaves on neck and base; the median
band with vine-like scrollings and conventionalized
peony blossoms; on interior of mouth-rim band of
leafage. Height — BM>"
1352. Pair mutton-fat jade beakers with median
band carved in relief with dragon motifs. Height —12"
1353. Superbly carved mutton-fat jade figure of
Buddha in sitting posture with crossed legs, joining
hands holding the patra or alms bowl; short cape
hanging from shoulder is covered by robe extending
from right shoulder around waist; the breast is be-
jewelled and the head with long-lobed ears sur-
mounted by hairdress in form of ushnisha.
Height —794"
1354. Superbly carved white jade dish in form of
curled lotus leaf surrounded by cat-tail, fish, bird,
leaf and citron finger motifs, undercut and in bold
relief. Length —11" Width —4Mi"
1355. Greenish-white carved jade figure of sitting
Kuan Yin with crossed legs, resting on integral lotus
form stand and holding in both hands a small vase




supposedly containing the elixir of long life; the
hooded headdress covers a finely draped robe.
Height — IV2"
1356. Pair Imperial carved camphor-white resonant
jade dishes, superbly carved with four concentric
circlets of chrysanthemum petals of many foliations.
Diameter —11"
1357. Finely-carved white jade three-legged koro or
incense burner with reticulated flanged mouth-rim;
the two side handles in shape of lotus flowers hold-
ing two loose rings; underneath flanged lip are two
loop handles with loose rings; the hollow finial as
well as cover are pierced in Ling Lung technique
exhibiting formalized flowers and scrolling vines.
Diameter —3%" Height —4"
1358. Very important carved-jade pagoda-form in-
cense burner, consisting of three pieces. The bronze-
form koro rests on three ogre-mask feet and from
each side protrudes a stylistically carved feng-huang
from which hang two loose rings. Four of the eight
wall panels of the middle section are reticulated and
the entire incense burner is surmounted by a double
octagonal pagoda type tile roof with finial edged by
ju-i heads. The eaves of the roof bear a carved
Fu lion and from the underneath side movable jade
bells are suspended. The entire vessel is carved from
an exquisite specimen of mutton-fat jade. Around the
periphery appear archaistic tiger masks.
Height— l4V/' Width— ll"
Imperial Ch’ien Lung Period
1359. Small carved-jade shallow dish, with flanged
lip bearing handles in form of pomegranate with
loose rings; the flanged mouth-rim and band around
edge of reticulated cover contain formalized lotus
and leaf scrollings; finial in shape of hollow-carved
lotus flower inlaid with four turquoise fragments, as
are side handles. Diameter — 4W Height —2V6"
1360. A finely-carved bird statuette representing the
feng-huang standing on rockery and holding in beak
twig with peony blossom; cluster of fungi extending
from rockery to breast; the grayish-green jade is
suffused with areas of the prized kingfisher green.
Mate to No. 1366. Height —9 Vi"
1361. Magnificently “Tibetan” carved elliptical wine
ewer of brilliant quality with undercut elongated
leaf handle; both spout and body of vessel carved in
high relief with Buddha and dancing Deity sur-
rounded by prunus trees and flowers; carved cover
surmounted by formalized lotus flower growing from
scrolling leafage. >Height — sVa”
1362. Interestingly carved grayish-green jade figure
of Dog of Fo with removable head; body decorated
with archaistic scroll motifs and gadroons; up-curled
tail, near which is perched a small bird; ponpon at
neck in shape of loose bell; suffused with areas of
emerald-green. Height —4V4" Length —3 Vi"
1363. Imperial tripod incense burner supported by
two short feet bearing the T’ao T’ieh mask. From the
lion mask handles hang loose rings. The original
cover is surmounted by the female Fu lion with cub.
Height —B" Width —B" Ch’ien Lung Period
1364. Unusual green-white carved jade ornament in
form of archaistic feng-huang with dragon head
motif protruding from between two legs; removable
cover in form of bird’s head; plumage carved in high
relief. Height —3%" Length —3Vi"
1365. “Tibetan”-carved jade ovoid elliptical-shaped
vase rising to broad shoulder bearing two loop han-
dles with loose rings; carved in relief with plantain
leaves containing conventionalized flowers; the shoul-
der surrounded by archaistic feng-huang and geese
motifs amid leaf tendrils; cover with vine-like tendrils
and lotus-pod finial. Height —6Vi"
1366. A finely-carved bird statuette representing the
feng-huang standing on rockery and holding in beak
twig with peony blossom; cluster of fungi extending
from rockery to breast; the grayish-green jade is
suffused with areas of the prized kingfisher green.
Mate to No. 1360. Height —QVi"
1367. Superbly carved Imperial fei-ts’ui jade vase
of bronze form, the entire surface carved with archa-
istic motifs and around the base a band of gadroons.
On each side of the neck appears Chinese calligraphy,
and the two handles are done in conventionalized
dragon form. The original cover bears a lotus-form
finial connected by dragons.
Height—llW Width —5%" Ch’ien Lung Period




1368. Fine pair of spinach-green jade tall vases with
median band; the gracefully-flaring neck uncarved;
on teakwood stand.
1369. Quadrangular carved-jade incense burner
supported by four tiger mask legs; tiger masks and
serrated “T” flanges appear on median band; two
strap handles with rudimentary elephant-head loops
bearing loose rings extend from sides; a group of
fungi, undercut and in bold relief, extends from
mouth-rim to median band; the receding cover also
bears serrated “T” flanges with stag motif in center of
each side; the cover surmounted by finial represent-
ing feng-huang holding peony blossom; while the
primary color is grayish-green suffused with brown,
there appear several areas of the prized kingfisher
green. Height —9Vi"; 4Vi" Square
1370. Unusual mutton-fat jade ornament in shape
of scepter ju-i, the ju-i head carved in slight relief
with bamboo and primus blossoms and perched bird;
the extremity of handle with jardiniere bearing
flowers. Length —ls%"
1371. Bronze form vase carved from fei-ts’ui jade.
Down the center of the vase and around the edges
appears a rope pattern. The two central bands indi-
cate archaistic dragons. From the two tiger mask han-
dles hang loose rings. The original cover, similarly
decorated, is surmounted by a writhing dragon com-
pletely pierced in Ling-Lung style.
Height —l 2% " Ch’ien Lung Period
1372. Pair of unusual fei-ts’ui jade table screens, de-
picting land and seascapes with mountains and pavil-
ions; sailing on the water is a sampan containing the
Eight Immortals; the jade is suffused with many areas
of the prized kingfisher green; on teakwood stands.
Width —7V£" Height —10" Ch’ien Lung Period
1273. Pair rare statuettes of Princesses carved from
water-green jade; the freely flowing robes are su-
perbly carved in undercut technique; standing on
ivory base.
1374. Imperial Ch’ien Lung mutton-fat white jade
koro or incense burner supported by three ogre mask
feet. The two handles are in the shape of a dragon
head from which hang two loose rings. The original
cover is surmounted by Dog of Fo.
Height —10" Width —11V4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1375. Unusual grayish-white jade figure of Kuan
Yin (Goddess of Mercy) with areas of emerald-
green; clothed in loosely-fitting robe; left hand con-
cealed and right hand holding pomegranate; well-
groomed hair in coiled fashion. Companion piece to
No. 1377. Height —23"
1376. Rare specimen of fei-ts’ui jade in form of flat-
tened hanging vase suspended from long horseshoe-
shaped handle connected to loose rings which en-
circle the reticulated side handles in form of feng-
huang. Around the body of vessel appear bands of
plantain leaves and archaistic dragons and gadroons.
A loose ring bearing a perched bird, is held by loop
handle projecting from base; the vase is suffused
with many areas of emerald-green; suspended from
teakwood stand.
Height —13" Ch’ien Lung Period
1377. Unusual carved fei-ts’ui jade statuette of
Kuan Yin (Goddess of Mercy). The long right sleeve
extends to ground, concealing right hand; left hand
holds a cluster of peony flowers; eyes cast slightly
downward; face portraying a benign expression; the
well-dressed hair in form of knop. (Companion piece
to No. 1375.) Height —23"
1378. Spinach-green jade koro or incense burner,
with two dragon motif handles protruding from
rounded sides; the carved original cover is sur-
mounted by a mushroom-type finial; the base in form
of lotus leaf. Height —9"
1379. Shallow circular spinach-green jade dish
carved on exterior with tiger masks; two loose rings
hang from reticulated handles in shape of conven-
tionalized lotus blossoms. Length, overall — 6%"
1380. Superbly carved moss-green jade statuette of
a princess clothed in a free-flowing robe, holding in
left hand a basket with adjoining cluster of fungi
growing from rockery, and in right hand a scarf that
extends around neck; the well-dressed hair is done in
swirl fashion. Height —8%"




1381. Finely-carved light spinach-green quatrefoil
shallow dish with butterfly handles bearing loose
rings, the underside and interior decorated with for-
malized lotus flower with leaf ribs.
Length —B" Width —4%"
1382. Blackish-green jade koro with strap handles,
carved on the exterior with archaistic tiger mask and
dragon motifs and band of continuous key-fret; the
ling lung or pierced cover is similarly decorated, and
the finial is surmounted by a coiled chih lung.
Height —5V4" Diameter —sV4"
1383. Pair of very unusual wine ewers carved from
exquisite quality of spinach-green jade. The spout is
in the shape of a dragon-head and the handle repre-
sents the dragon’s tail. The decoration consists of
tiger masks, dragon and plantain motifs.
Height —7%" Diameter —4" Ch’ien Lung Period
Width, with spout and handle —6"
1384. Pair of circular moss-green jade undecorated
shallow dishes of superb quality and luminosity.
Diameter —6%"
1385. Pair emerald-green jade necklaces each con-
sisting of 91 graduated beads of superb quality and
polished texture.
1386. Pair of semi-eggshell undecorated spinach-
green jade dishes of sonorous and luminous quality.
Diameter —9%" Height —294"
1387. Circular spinach-green jade shallow dish sup-
ported by five short stump feet, bearing on interior
in bold relief group of prunus blossoms and leafage.
Diameter —6"
1388. Unusual spinach-green jade ornament in the
form of a hippopotamus, supporting a bronze-shaped
jade vase. The animal is carved with leaf scrolls, and
the vase with tiger mask and plantain leaves.
Height —7%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1389. Circular spinach-green jade dish bearing “S”-
shaped strap handles, decorated on exterior with
archaistic dragon motifs and on interior with two
swimming carp, emblematic of conjugal felicity.
Diameter —6%"
1390. Unusually carved moss-green jade elliptical
ewer, with spout representing a feng-huang with
wings surrounding vessel; the handle in shape of a
writhing dragon, undercut and in bold relief; plain
cover surmounted by finial knop carved with cloud
scrolls. Height —9 Vi"
1391. Shallow grayish-green jade vessel, elliptical in
form with two tiger mask handles; suspending loose
rings; interior carved in bold relief with a pair of
carp emblematic of conjugal felicity.
Length —10" Width —7"
1392. Carved spinach-green jade vase in form of
flattened bronze vessel with scroll handles extend-
ing from incurvate neck; the central band exhibits
archaistic feng-huang and tiger masks with plantain
leaves on neck and continuous key-fret panels at
mouth-rim and base; cover, bearing tiger masks, is
surmounted by mushroom-type finial.
Height —11%" 18th Century
1393. Dark green jade quatrefoil elliptical dish in
shape of conventionalized lotus flower, carved on
exterior in bold relief with leafage and insect motifs,
undercut and in bold relief.
Length —9" Width —5%"
1394. Important spinach-green jade tazza cup, the
foliated bowl supported by a long stem rising from
two-tiered high receded base; both inner and outer
surfaces are carved in relief with conventionalized
chrysanthemum petals and gadroons; around the
bowl and stem appear nine leaf-shaped loops bearing
loose rings; a choice specimen.
Height —7%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1395. Pair Imperial carved spinach-green jade vases
with cover; the jade is richly mottled with darker
areas; arabesque scrolls and lotus blossoms appear
over the surface of the vase together with a loose
ring suspended from a peony blossom on lower body
and two loose rings hanging from serrated bird-head
loops. The incurvate domed cover is surmounted by
a lotus finial. Apocryphal Wan Li mark but assigned
to 18th Century.
Height —l 2%"


1396. Pair of rare deep spinach-green jade double-
joining octagonal dishes with two undercut dragons
in bold relief appearing in outer center; two side
handles in form of dragon heads with suspended
loose rings, and on side four tiger masks in bold relief
bearing loose rings; resting on six short key-fret sup-
ports; unusual specimens.
Length — 11W Width —6%"
1397. Magnificently carved bronze-shaped vessel
fashioned from spinach-green jade; globular body
rising to short tubular neck from which protrude two
tiger masks bearing loose rings; bands around body
and neck exhibit archaistic tiger masks with rising
and descending plantain leaves at base and mouth-
rim; cover with loose ring finial surrounded by three
recumbent Dogs of Fo.
Height —ll%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1398. Superbly-carved lavender jade figure of a prin-
cess in the attitude of the rhythmic dance, wearing
free-flowing robes, the loose sash-band being held by
both hands. The jade is suffused with large areas of
lavender and green, with a small section of the sash-
band containing a blackish-brown coloring; of mag-
nificent quality and luminosity. Height —10"
1399. Pair of spinach-green jade bowls, the exterior
carved with three reserve panels containing floral
and bird motifs separated by formalized lotus and
scroll motifs; the foot-rim surrounded by a band of
gadroons; interior plain. Diameter —614"
1400. Pair of rare carved fei-ts’ui jade cylindrical
boxes with original covers, decorated on the exterior
with conventionalized lotus blossoms with leaf scroll-
ings, the cover bearing an eight-pointed radial lotus
leaf. Height —2%" Diameter —3"
1401. Tsun-shaped mutton-fat white jade vessel. The
incurvate and expanding neck is carved with palmette
leaf motifs and around the body appear Shou char-
acters and tendril scrolls.
Height —3%" Imperial Ch’ien Lung Period
1402. Finely-carved mutton-fat jade flattened vase
in shape of archaic bronze vessel; bearing on sides
serrated “T” flanges; the wide surface exhibiting a
central band with tiger-mask motif, flanked by bands
of plantain leaves; from the incurvate neck protrude
handles in form of conventionalized feng-huang from
which hang loose rings; the cover is similarly deco-
rated with mushroom-type finial. Height —10"
1403. Pair of carved spinach-green jade bronze-
shaped vases, the median band decorated on four
sides with tiger masks, the neck and base with key-
fret surrounding the flanged mouth-rim and foot-rim.
Height —9%"
1404. Pair Imperial spinach-green jade plain bowls
that bear on the base the carved mark of T’a Ch’ing
Ch’ien Lung nien chih meaning “made in the reign of
Emperor Ch’ien Lung of the great Ch’ing Dynasty.”
Diameter —8 %"
1405. Spinach-green jade bronze-shaped flattened
vase, decorated on the exterior with archaistic tiger
mask and bird motifs. A band of plantain leaves
encircles the neck and base and around the shoulder
appears a band of ju-i heads. From the incurvate neck
extend two elephant-head handles holding loose rings.
The mushroom-type finial on the cover bears two
reticulated handles in form of archaistic feng-huang
also holding two loose rings.
Height —lo% " 18th Century
1406. A rare specimen of malachite in form of shal-
low unevenly-shaped tray, carved on the exterior and
extending into the dish with pine trees, undercut and
in bold relief; on the mouth-rim appear two spiders
in relief.
Length —9" Width — 6V2" 18th Century
1407. Superb specimen of undecorated spinach-
green jade shallow dish of elegant quality and
brilliance.
Diameter —9" 18th Century
1408. Unusual luminous spinach-green jade quatre-
foil shallow dish, undecorated on exterior, the interior
bearing a cluster of berries and cherry blossoms with
leafage growing from twig; undercut and in bold
relief. Length— 7%" Width—s%"
1409. Group of ten spinach-green jade oblong
plaques, incised on each side with calligraphic in-
scriptions; end pieces with five-clawed ascending
dragons; all etched in gilding.
Size of plaque — iVs" Width —9%"


1410. Unusually carved lapis-lazuli figure of sitting
Buddha with crossed legs, resting on jade lotus
pedestal. Height — 5Vs"
1411. Rare specimen of natural amber reticulated
and carved in bold relief, the one side depicting the
Taoist paradise with an assemblage of the Eight
Immortals in a rocky retreat and Shou Lao riding his
mule; on obverse side a pine tree grove in which
appear birds, deer, monkey, and hanging bell.
Length —9" Height — 6V2"
1412. Unusual specimen of golden amber vase in
shape of gnarled tree-trunk, the handle in form of
fungus with over-crawling dragon bearing loose ring;
the sides encircled by feng-huang, deer, monkeys,
and Shou Lao on mule with two attendants.
Height— 3%" Width— 3%"
1413. Large grayish-green ovocylindrical jade vase
of great solidity, with short neck and flanged mouth-
rim, carved on exterior in relief with lotus pod and
leaves, heron and carp motifs, and on obverse side
with dragon ascending from rockery into clouds in
which appears a pagoda-type pavilion. In carving this
specimen the artist took advantage of the natural
colors of the jade; base is inscribed with the four-
character mark of the period and reign of Ch’ien
Lung. Height —llV2"
1414. Bronze-shaped vessel carved from refined
reddish-brown clear amber. The incurvate neck is
surrounded by four tiger-mask loop handles bearing
loose rings, with continuous key-fret band around
mouth-rim. The two sides of the flattened vase are
decorated with panels of formalized peonies and leaf
scrolling. The cover is surmounted by Dog of Fo
and also bears two tiger-mask loop handles with loose
rings; unusual specimen. Height —l 3"
1415. Unusual specimen of carved lapis-lazuli de-
picting Kuan Yin, Goddess of Mercy, in sitting pos-
ture, wearing well-draped robe and holding scroll in
left hand; a standing attendant is in the attitude of
offering to the Kuan Yin a vase containing the elixir
of long life; the head of the deity is surrounded by a
halo of bamboo trees and rockery on which appears
a kneeling child with extended hands, paying homage
to the Goddess of Mercy, with a flying bird holding
rosary in beak. Height —15"
1416. Superbly carved coral group depicting two
princesses standing in front of gnarled tree on which
a feng-huang is perched; at the base of the left figure
appears another feng-huang with outspread wings.
The two figures are clothed in free-flowing robes with
long sleeves; tassel hangs from the left hand of one
figure; unusual specimen. Height —lo%"
1417. Superb coral carving of child wearing flowing
robes, with fan in left hand, standing on back of
feng-huang roosting on rockery.
Height —7" Width — 1W
1418. Carved coral figure of standing princess hold-
ing in left hand a flowering blossom with leaves; the
right hand is grasping two free-flowing sash cords.
Height —7"
1419. Rare specimen of carved coral in the shape
of two feng-huang with outstretched tail feathers,
roosting on rockery and facing each other.
Length —ll"
1420. Standing figure of princess carved from brilli-
antly polished pink coral; the outstretched right hand
supports a long sleeve; a flower is held in each hand;
superbly attired in well-draped robe. Height —7%"
1421. Finely-carved statuette of girl wearing hat,
and holding fan in left hand and flowers in right
hand. Height —6"
1422. Carved coral statuette of Princess leaning
against gnarled tree growing from rockery, with right
hand resting thereon; the left arm with fan in hand
encircles the same tree; the hair in chignon form
bearing two flower ornaments. Height —B%"
1423. Extremely rare coral sculpture typifying a
type of carving in which the artist has taken advan-
tage of the natural growth of the coral. The group
depicts a Princess beautifully robed in the attitude
of the rhythmic dance surrounded by one male and
two female attendants; the principal figure supports
its long sleeves with outstretched hands; the visible
right hand holds a small quadrangular bowl; the left
hand and arm entirely concealed. The male figure, in




kneeling position, is submitting an offering, and the
two lady attendants are in the attitude of bracing the
dancing Princess.
Height —l 4" Ch’ien Lung Period
1424. Finely-carved coral statuette of a Princess in
the attitude of the rhythmic dance; the upswung left
arm supports a voluminous sleeve; from the well-
draped garment hang sash cords.
1425. Carved coral statuette of a female musician
playing upon a lute in form of a slender figure,
wrapped in voluminous garments with tasseled girdle.
The coral is a deep rose of brilliant quality.
Height —14"
1426. Rare specimen of natural amber carved in the
form of the Goddess of Mercy standing on wave-like
base; clothed in a free-flowing robe, the elaborate
rosary extending from breast to the feet; the hood
covers a diadem in which appears a small Buddha;
entire sculpture, including base, carved from dark
honey-colored amber.
Height —9%" 17th Century
1427. Standing figure of Princess carved from fine
and lustrous coral; right hand with feather fan; left
arm and hand concealed by long flowing sleeve which
rests upon free-swinging cash cord. Height —B"
1428. Slender figure of Princess in the attitude of
the rhythmic dance, leaning slightly forward and
holding in both hands a basket containing flowering
peonies; the hair beautifully combed and hanging
down back. Length — QVi"
1429. Imperial Ch’ien-Lung carved coral ornament
in the form of three vases, the cover of one being
connected with a loose chain to the body. The spout
is in the shape of a feng-huang that also serves as
the base for one of the three vases. In carving this
ornament the artist took advantage of the natural
growth of the coral, resulting in a very stylistic effect.
Height — 12M" Width —8%" Ch’ien Lung Period
1430. Rare Imperial painting on glass, depicting the
annual children’s festival scene in a mountain and
lake retreat. The children carry their individual toys
and banners and are playing on a large terrace sur-
rounded by pagoda-type pavilians with moon gate
and connecting bridge. The panoramic scene is beau-
tifully painted in subdued famille rose colors and
sepia. The upper part of the painting has the mirror
reflection; framed in original teakwood of the period;
the bronze picture holders in the form of flying bats.
This Imperial glass painting is supposed to have hung
in the reception room of the Imperial Palace in
Peking during the reign of Emperor Ch’ien Lung.
Dimensions , including frame:
Height —3B" Length —s 6"
1431. Small Chinese painting on silk depicting a
Princess in the attitude of the rhythmic dance, wear-
ing voluminous and free-flowing robe.
13" Square Ming Dynasty
1432. Japanese painting of Buddha descending from
heaven on lotus cloud accompanied by two Bod-
hisattvas also supported by lotus clouds; the figures
are in gilt and the lotus clouds in subdued pink and
green; framed in glass. 18th Century
Overall dimensions: Width —12%” Height —21"
1433. Chinese painting on silk depicting a mandarin
on horseback returning to home in mountain retreat;
painted in sepia, black, and subdued blue; framed
in glass.
14" Square overall Ming Dynasty
1434. Chinese painting on silk showing clusters of
flowers and leafage with insects and hovering butter-
flies and bees; framed in glass. 15" Square
1435. Chinese painting on paper depicting a range
of mountains ascending from lake; pavilion in dis-
tance; rockery, trees and sampan in foreground;
framed in glass.
15V*” Square Ming Dynasty
1436. Chinese painting on silk showing a cluster of
bamboo leaves with calligraphic inscription.
15" Square Ming Dynasty
1437. Chinese painting on silk showing a cluster of
pomegranates with leafage; painted in brownish-red,
sepia, and green; framed in glass.
16V2" Square Ming Dynasty






1438. Superb Chinese painting on silk depicting a
group of scholars in meeting, the facial expressions
beautifully executed in single brush-strokes; framed
in glass. Yuan Dynasty
1439. Chinese painting on silk showing a lotus flower
in pink with green leafage; magpie perched on twig;
framed in glass.
17'A" Square Yuan Dynasty
1440. Chinese painting on silk showing a mountain
retreat, mandarin and attendant with pavilion under-
neath pine trees; framed in glass.
14 1 /4" Square Sung-Yuan Dynasty
1441. Chinese painting on silk with mandarin sitting
on gnarled throne, the terrace surrounded by screen,
warriors and male and female attendants; framed
in glass.
17‘A" Square 18th Century
1442. Chinese painting on silk depicting bunches of
grapes, leaves, and tendrils surrounded by hovering
butterflies; painted in green, plum-red, brown, black
and white.
15" square Sung-Yuan Dynasty
1443. Ancestral painting of a mandarin in green
robe with simulated gold brocade insert; the head-
dress with hanging jewels.
Height —3o” Width —28" Ming Dynasty
1444. Oblong Chinese painting on silk depicting
princess with two attendants and two children, in
mountain retreat. In the upper right-hand corner
appears a minute calligraphic inscription of a poem;
framed in glass.
Height —1614" Length —34" Ming Dynasty
1445. Small Chinese ancestral painting on silk of
dignitary wearing high-formed hat with two side-
brims. Ming Dynasty
1446. Small Chinese ancestral painting on silk of
princess with bejewelled headdress. Ming Dynasty
1447. Chinese painting on silk showing two prin-
cesses resting on rug and reclining against red lac-
quer table, watching hen with her chicks; rockery
and palm leaves in foreground; framed without glass.
Width —26" Height —32" Late Ming Dynasty
1448. Pair of Chinese lacquered chests on support-
ing table, with three drawers and shelf stretcher. The
chests are equipped with movable shelves and elec-
tric lighting; the hinges and pull handles in carved
gilt bronze. The cabinets and supporting tables are
painted in subdued famille rose colors against black
background, depicting lotus flowers, pomegranate,
chrysanthemum, prunus blossoms, peonies and leaf-
age, together wtih birds of paradise, cranes, butter-
flies and love birds. The drawers, legs, and outlining
panels of cabinet decorated with archaistic and floral
scroll motifs.
Overall dimensions:
Width— 42l4" Height— 7l" Depth— l9V 2 "
1449. Chinese painting on silk portraying a Lohan
clothed in free-flowing robe and underskirt, with long
sleeves, his hands in the meditation of prayer. The
deity stands on a cloud scroll, and the head and
shoulders are surrounded by a circular halo; painted
in black and white. Ch’ien Lung Period
1450. Chinese painting on silk, portraying a Man-
darin clothed in voluminous red robe and holding in
hand the Tablet of Authority; the high headdress
with side-flaps is tied to head.
Length —6s" Width —3s" Ming Dynasty
1451. Chinese painting on silk in subdued sepia col-
orings, portraying a white Bactrian horse being
groomed by attendant. Sung Dynasty
1452. Large Chinese painting on silk, depicting a
spotted deer gazing upward at a gnarled prunus tree.
17th Century
1453. Chinese painting on silk of mandarin, sitting
on throne, clothed in bluish-green robe held together
by brown and green sash-band; the large sleeves and
robe are outlined in black. The figure wears a black
headdress and the shoes and covering of throne are
in red.
Width —38" Height —50" Ming Dynasty
1454. Chinese painting on silk of mandarin in sit-
ting posture, wearing a red robe with white neck-
band and across the breast an insert bearing a flying
white feng-huang amid cloud scrolls. The hands are
concealed by the voluminous sleeves and the big












wood chair is covered with a decorated green cover-
ing. The head is covered with a black three-pointed
headdress.
Height —so" Width —3B" 17th Century
1455. Important Chinese painting on silk, depicting
a mountainous landscape and pavilion with Princess
and attendants observing the panoramic vista;
painted in green, brown, red and other subdued
colors.
Length —52" Width — 24'A" Ming Dynasty
1456. Chinese painting on silk showing three chil-
dren on terrace, gazing upwards at prunus blossoms.
Width — 34Vi Height —67%" Ming Dynasty
1457. Chinese ancestral painting on silk of a prin-
cess wearing a red and blue gown and floral head-
dress from which hang strings of pearls.
About 32" Square Ming Dynasty
1458. Chinese ancestral painting on silk portraying
a dowager clothed in red garments wearing a narrow
cape that is decorated with flying phoenix. From the
peacock-type headdress hang strings of pearls.
About 35" Square Ming Dynasty
1459. Chinese ancestral painting on silk of a prin-
cess wearing a green robe with embroidered insert.
From the ears hang short pearl strings.
About —3s" Square 17th Century
1460. Unusual Chinese painting on silk of a deer
seeking food in a dense forest; in tones of sepia and
brownish-black.
Length —55" Height —39" Late Ming Dynasty
1461. Framed Chinese painting, representing an
aquatic scene with two mandarin ducks on rockery
amid lotus flowers and leaves. Ming Dynasty
1462. Magnificent Chinese painting on silk with two
flying geese in midair and a pair of geese resting in
water; amid bamboo and peony trees, with two mag-
pies in foreground.
Length —73" Width —4l" Ming Dynasty
1463. Rare coromandel twelve-fold lacquered floor-
screen, the central motif depicts a mountainous re-
treat with pavilions in which appear mandarins.
priests, warriors, fan bearers, and male and female
attendants, all paying homage to their Emperor. Each
panel shows a different type of activity during a meet-
ing of important personages assembled in a temple;
each panel bears a calligraphic inscription. The cen-
tral group painting is surrounded by three panels,
one containing flying cranes, another Buddhistic sym-
bols, and the outer panel formalized dragon motifs.
A detail of the technique involved in each panel is
indicated by illustration No. 1464,' which is an en-
largement of one of the panel scenes. On the obverse
side of the screen appear medallions in various floral;
vase, fan, and other shaped reserves, all bearing clus-
ters of flowers, birds, deer, etc. The screen is painted
in brick-red, blue, brown, green, eggshell-white, gold,
rose, and aubergine against an intense black lacquer
background. Kang Hsi Period
Each panel is ISMs" wide by 110" high
1464. See No. 1463 for description.
1465. Framed Chinese painting on silk, showing a
pair of white geese resting on edge of water with
marsh leaves in background.
34" Wide 71" Long 18th Century
1466. Chinese painting on silk portraying a pair of
white cranes standing on rockery, one looking sky-
ward, the other with downcast head. Brown bills and
black legs.
Width — 24W Height —50" 18th Century
1467. Superb Chinese painting on paper with a
group of blackbirds perched on gnarled plum trees
with prunus blossoms.
35" Square 18th Century
1468. Finely-executed silk painting depicting a five-
colored parakeet perched on a plum tree bearing
pink-colored prunus blossoms. This painting is attri-
buted to Hsu Chung-ssu of the Sung Dynasty.
About 38" Square
1469. Rare Chinese tapestry woven of K’o Ssu tech-
nique portraying Shou Lao accompanied by the
spotted deer (symbol of longevity); in the right hand
he carries the pomegranate of immortality presented
by the attending child; the left hand carries a gnarled
staff from which hangs a flowered double gourd sup-












posedly containing the elixir of long life. The colors
of blue, green, gold and aubergine are harmoniously
blended against a green background. The free-flow-
ing and well-draped garments of the two figures bear
decorated motifs such as cloud scrolls, formalized
peonies, chrysanthemums, scrolling tendrils, ju-i
heads, swastika, key-fret combinations and medal-
lions with swirling phoenix, bats and archaistic
dragons. Both the deer and child carry the fungi of
long life. A bat is hovering over the group. This
tapestry is mounted in kakimono form.
Size of Actual Tapestry; 66" long 31" wide 102"
Ch’ien Lung Period
1470. Rare Chinese K’o Ssu tapestry depicting the
eight Immortals with accompanying spotted deer,
huddled in a group and looking skyward at the ap-
proaching Laotse (God of Longevity) riding on a
crane. In the distance appear mountain peaks rising
above cloud scrolls surmounted by the sun. The Im-
mortals are surrounded by rockery and bamboo trees.
This tapestry is mounted in kakimono form, with
underglaze blue rod finials.
Overall length —108" Early 18th Century
Actual size of woven tapestry: 29" wide 42" long
1471. Pair of very important Buddhistic devotional
panels depicting a Bodhisattva. An inscription bears
a date corresponding to the year 685 A.D. and estab-
lishes these panels as rare dated monuments of
T’ang Dynasty Buddhistic painting. They are be-
lieved to have come from the cave temples of Tun
Huang in Kansu Province, where archaeological
expeditions led by Sir Aurel Stein and Professor Paul
Pelliot discovered quantities of paintings in a room
which had been walled up since the Eleventh Cen-
tury. These paintings are done in Chinese technique
on a coarse fabric, but note the Indian style and the
Central-Asian costume.
Left Panel —Tempera on linen, the weft-threads
being bound by the woof-threads in an interlacing
arrangement known in modern technique as a leno
weave; standing Bodhisattva with circular head and
body halo; left hand holding flower; right hand in
gesture of argumentation; in front, one four-armed
and one two-armed Bodhisattva; near base, apsara;
behind, three Bodhisattvas and one lohan; in lower
panel, two female donors facing inscription bands;
on top and below, geometrical ornaments.
Right Panel —Tempera on linen, the weft-threads
being bound by the woof-threads in an interlacing
arrangement known in modern technique as leno
weave; standing Bodhisattva with head and body
halo; right hand holding flower; left hand in gesture
of argumentation; in front, two Bodhisattvas in front
of temple building, and one apsara; behind, three
Bodhisattvas and one lohan; in lower panel, one fe-
male donor facing inscription-bands; on top and be-
low, geometrical ornaments.
Width—including frame —38" 7"<mg Dynasty
Height — including frame —62" 7th Century
1472. Imperial eight-fold pietra-dura floor-screen
with carved teakwood frames, the lower panels bear-
ing archaistic dragon and floral motifs in relief, the
upper panels with the eight Buddhistic and double-
joy symbols. The oblong panels are formed from
carved brick-red lacquer superimposed in relief with
carved jade and semi-precious minerals depicting
clusters of rockery, bamboo, prunus, gourd, and other
floral designs, together with bird of paradise, roosters,
ducks, love birds, quail, feng-huang and eagle. The
artist in making this Imperial screen selected and
carved the proper stone mediums so that when as-
sembled they portray a realistic bird sanctuary sur-
rounded by floral, rockery, and gnarled-tree motifs.
A truly great work of art. Ch’ien Lung Period
Each panel is 18" wide and 81" high.
1473. Rare stoneware fish-bowl, globular in shape,
with rounded mouth-rim, glazed on exterior in buff
and brown and encircled by the horses of Mu Wang
in various attitudes, flanked by bands of key-fret and
spearhead lappets; on original cream-colored reticu-
lated pottery stand. Ming Dynasty
Diameter —2B" Height—including stand —2s"
1474. Fukien blanc-de-chine statuette of Kuan Yin,
Goddess of Mercy, standing on a lotus throne, clothed
in a free-flowing skirt and robe and wearing a diadem
headdress containing a small sitting Buddha in relief.
The deity wears on breast strands of beaded jewels,
and from her waist hangs a beaded rosary; her sash-
cord with loose tassel extends down center; the right








hand is in attitude of benediction; her eyes are cast
slightly downward, and the face exhibits a benign
expression. The entire statuette is coated with a
flower-white glaze of superb quality.
Height —3s" 18th Century
1475. Superb blue and white porcelain lamp sur-
mounted by tasseled golden silk shade with lapis-
lazuli finial and gilded stand. The porcelain vase, of
the K’ang Hsi Period, depicts mountains rising from
the sea with several worthies approaching their pa-
vilion; with sampans nearing the shore.
Height —4o"
1476. Superb Chinese lamp formed from an old
wood sculpture depicting a Bodhisattva wearing long
flowing robe and standing on lotus pedestal; quad-
rangular pagoda-type shade.
1477. Very important jade lamp, the vase in bronze
form, carved in relief with archaistic designs and
bearing six tiger-mask loop handles with loose rings;
cover with mushroom-type fei-ts’ui jade finial; ivory-
white silk shade. Height —3o"
1478. Superb lamp; baluster-shaped vase coated
with a crab’s-claw crackled celadon glaze; pagoda-
type green silk shade with spinach-green jade finial.
Height —29" Vase of the Ming Dynasty
1479. Extremely important lamp formed from a
superb Lang Yao or oxblood porcelain vase with
areas of the prized ruby color, the glaze near the base
shoaling into a lighter plasma; the tasseled shade
made from golden brocaded silk; the finial in the
form of a reticulated lotus pond scene with cranes.
Overall Height —37" Vase of the K’ang Hsi Period
1493. Rare oblong Chinese painting on silk on
which appear an array of vases, containing flowers
and also bowls of fruit, jardiniere with flowers,
incense-burners, etc., executed in red, green, blue,
yellow, white, aubergine and other colorings har-
moniously blended.
Height —51" Width —10" Early 18th Century
1494. Finely-embroidered silk Mandarin robe fea-
turing eight gold thread five-clawed flame-pursuing
Imperial dragons amid cloud and butterfly scrolls;
neck and sleeve bands similarly decorated; base en-
circled by band of rainbow, mountain, and wave
motifs on which float Buddhistic symbols.
Length —ss"
1495. Embroidered Imperial Mandarin robe with
maroon ground color, superimposed with five-clawed
gold thread Imperial dragons, cloud scrolls, bats of
happiness, peonies, the twin carp of conjugal felicity,
and Buddhistic symbols floating on crest of waves.
The base is encircled by oblique bands to simulate
rainbow motif caused by sun shining on wave
splashes. Eight gold-embroidered five-clawed Imper-
ial dragons appear over entire garment; long sleeves;
gilded buttons. Length —s 4"
1496. Finely-embroidered silk Mandarin robe fea-
turing eight gold thread five-clawed flame-pursuing
Imperial dragons amid cloud and butterfly scrolls;
neck and sleeve bands similarly decorated; base en-
circled by band of rainbow, mountain and wave
motifs on which float Buddhistic symbols.
Length —ss"
1497. Elegant midnight-blue silk Mandarin robe
embroidered all over with' eight flame-pursuing five-
clawed dragons in various attitudes surrounded by
clouds and bats; around the base appears a sumptu-
ously-embroidered rainbow motif with iridescent
qualities surmounted by waves bearing the Bud-
dhistic symbols, such as the endless knot, the closed
umbrella, the canopy, etc. The collar-band is simi-
larly treated. The two bands of the long sleeves, bear-
ing dragon and cloud motifs, are separated by en-
circling narrow-woven vari-colored lines. The entire
robe has a brilliance and opalescence due to the
beautiful blending of green, blue, gold, coral, yellow,
and purple silk threads. Length —55"
1498. Superb crimson-silk princess robe decorated
with medallions containing butterfly and floral motifs.
The central flower is executed in Peking knot stitch.
Around the base appears the typical band of Meru
Mountain, splashing waves, and rainbow motifs. The
long sleeves are exquisitely embroidered with Peking
knot-stitch flowers as well as the long-line embroidery
technique depicting leafy scrolls, butterflies, bats,
and flowers; neck band is decorated in a like manner.
Length —54"






1499. Superbly-embroidered Mandarin robe with
dark-blue background, the decoration consisting of
eight gold thread five-clawed Imperial dragons amid
bat, cloud scroll, Buddhistic, and flaming pearl
motifs; encircling the base are Meru Mountain,
splashing waves and rainbow motifs; collar similarly
decorated. Length —s 4"
1500. Rare green gauze princess robe featuring bro-
caded medallions in which appear writhing five-
clawed Imperial dragons, in gold thread, amid cloud
and bat scrolls. The base is encircled by Meru Moun-
tain, wave, and rainbow motifs. In each medallion
appears the circular long-life symbol. Apparently this
robe was worn on the occasion of an important birth-
day. The long sleeves bear two bands treated in the
same manner with gold five-clawed dragons and bro-
caded cloud-scroll and wave motifs including Bud-
dhistic symbols. Length —s 4"
1501. Rare dark blue silk princess robe adorned
with medallions featuring flying feng-huang amid
flowers and leaf-scrolls, base decorated with rain-
bow, Meru Mountain and splashing waves with Bud-
dhistic symbols, all done in K’o Ssu (tapestry) tech-
nique. The colors of yellow, blue, green, red and pink
are harmoniously blended. Length —55"
1502. Superbly-embroidered aquamarine princess
coat bearing medallions in which appear butterflies,
conventionalized lotus flowers, peonies; in long and
Peking knot stitch; with clusters of peonies and butter-
flies surrounding the medallions. The long sleeves are
decorated in their entirety with the same colorful
symbolical motifs; around the base a band of moun-
tain, wave and rainbow motifs. A magnificent speci-
men of highly artistic embroidery technique.
Length —53"
1503. Magnificent crimson princess robe featuring
medallions bearing cranes, butterflies, and flowers,
the long joined collar with black background deco-
rated in a like manner. The base is surrounded by
rainbow, Meru Mountain, and splashing waves on
which float Buddhistic symbols with rising dragon-
forming fish; all executed in the rare K’o Ssu (tap-
estry) technique, in a superb blending of various
tints of purple, green, red, orange and gold colorings.
Length —s 3”
1504. Exquisite dark blue silk princess robe deco-
rated with embroidered medallions containing but-
terflies; both the edges of the long sleeves and the
base of the robe are decorated with the Meru Moun-
tain, wave and rainbow motifs. The embroidery is
done in a superb combination of famille rose colors.
Length —54"
1505. Cobalt-blue silk embroidered Mandarin robe
featuring eight gold-threaded five-clawed Imperial
dragons. Amid the cloud scrolls appear the Flaming
Pearl, Buddhistic symbols, and crane medallions, the
sleeve ends with dragon, bat and swastika motifs.
Around the base of the robe appear mountain, wave
and rainbow motifs. Length —s 4"
1506. Finely-embroidered sage-green princess robe
decorated with peonies depicting butterfly and melon
designs with a formalized central peony flower in
Peking knot stitch. Separating the medallions are clu-
ters of flowers, and the black ground collar-band is
embroidered with melon, floral, and butterfly motifs.
The robe is surrounded at base with rainbow, Meru
Mountain, and splashing wave motifs together with
Buddhistic symbols. Length —53"
1507. Cobalt-blue silk embroidered Mandarin robe
on which appear eight five-clawed gold-threaded
dragons in various attitudes pursuing the Flaming
Pearl. Around the dragons are cloud scrolls, fungi,
cash, bat and Buddhistic symbols. On the crest of the
waves float the Eight Precious Objects, underneath
which is a rainbow band. The exceedingly long
sleeves in part are made from undecorated dark-
brown silk, the cuffs embroidered with the Imperial
dragon and cloud scrolls; neck-band similarly treated.
Length —ss"
1508. Rare K’o Ssu (tapestry) Mandarin robe on
which appear eight Imperial gold thread dragons in
various attitudes flying amid cloud-scrolls, bats and
Buddhistic symbols. This garment was undoubtedly
worn on the occasion of a marriage feast because the
double-joy symbol appears throughout the decorative
scheme. The collar is embroidered with groups of
dragons, cloud-scrolls, flaming-pearl and double-joy
symbols. The base of the robe depicts the rainbow
motif in finely-executed vari-colored oblique lines.








The ground color is a soft blue. The long sleeves are
decorated in like manner. Length —70"
1509. Unusually fine Mandarin robe done in K’o
Ssu (tapestry) technique, featuring eight flame-pur-
suing five-clawed Imperial dragons amid cloud-
scrolls, flying cranes and bat motifs in a background
of the continuous key-fret design; neck and sleeve
bands similarly decorated. Length —55"
1510. Short jacket with background of emerald-
green color upon which is embroidered in gold thread
a pair of ascending dragons on front panel as well as
on sleeves and back. The dragons surmount wave
motifs upon which float Buddhistic symbols. The
bands surrounding base of jacket and arm sleeves are
in the form of ju-i heads. The dragons are surrounded
by cloud-scrolls, and the long sleeves are encircled
by waving narrow bands in various colors. Imperial
Lamist Buddhistic Theatrical Robe of the Ch’ien
Lung Period. Length —32"
1511. Short jacket decorated with gold, the front
embroidered with a pair of ascending dragons with
a large writhing dragon on back pursuing the Flam-
ing Pearl and dragon formations on the sleeves, all
against a background color of rose-red. The embroid-
ered panels are outlined in metal-studded bosses.
The long sleeves are encircled by narrow brocaded
bands, and the outline of the jacket contains swirl
motifs. The dragons are in the act of ascending from
splashing waves, and in the back appears the Meru
Mountain motif against which the waves are splash-
ing. Imperial Lamist Buddhistic Theatrical Robe of
the Ch’ien Lung Period. Length —32"
1512. Theatrical actor’s robe to simulate armor. The
front-hanging full-length panel is decorated with a
tiger mask together with gold-thread panelling,
studded with semi-precious mineral and glass studs,
encircled by metal gilding; the panel entirely sur-
rounded by a band of formalized ju-i heads. On the
forearms appear four stuffed tiger-masks separated
by simulated gilt armor, also bearing glass studs, and
the forearms are encircled by waving bands of bro-
caded silk. The ends of the sleeves are finely em-
broidered in conventionalized lotus flowers with
green leaf scrollings. The colors are gold, green, rose,
yellow, and black, all harmoniously blended. Im-
perial Lamist Buddhistic Theatrical Robe of the
Ch’ien Lung Period. Height —52"
1513. Imperial actor’s robe with tiger-mask motifs
on shoulder separating areas of gold thread to simu-
late armor. The forearms of the sleeves are embroid-
ered in vari-colored floral designs against a rose back-
ground, as is the central sash which bears Dogs of Fo
playing with the brocaded ball. The vertical panels
below sash, in front and back of garment, are deco-
rated with tiger masks against a background of coral
thread simulting armor. The panels around base of
robe contain archaistic feng-huang with hanging
lambrequins. Throughout the garment the panels are
of conventionalized lotus leaf. Imperial Lamist Bud-
dhistic Theatrical Robe of the Ch’ien Lung Period.
Height— s 2"
1514. Three-quarter-length Imperial brocaded jacket
with rose-colored background, the garment bearing
in the back two ascending five-clawed dragons sur-
mounted by a writhing dragon pursuing the Pearl of
Omnipotence. The front of the jacket is adorned with
two rising Imperial five-clawed dragons, and the bot-
tom of the jacket depicts waves splashing against
Meru Mountain with Buddhistic symbols floating on
the crest of the waves. The dragons appear amid
cloud and star motifs. Length —3B"
1515. Three-quarter-length silk sleeveless jacket, the
predominating color being cafe-au-lait, brocaded
with two ascending five-clawed dragons, executed in
gold thread, grasping the Flaming Pearl amid cloud
scrolls; the large dragon covers entire back, simi-
larly brocaded. The colors of green, coral red, auber-
gine, gold and gray are harmoniously blended with
the background color. Length —34"
1516. Three-quarter-length Imperial brocaded jacket,
the front portraying two full-length five-clawed rising
Imperial dragons grasping the Flaming Pearl, and on
back a large writhing dragon pursuing the Flaming
Pearl amid cloud and star motifs. A wave band sur-
rounds bottom of jacket. The color scheme of green,
gold, coral, blue and yellow is most effective.
Length —36"






1517. Unusual specimen of Chinese brocaded
woven textile with a central Imperial five-clawed
dragon holding the Flaming Pearl, and in each corner
a five-clawed Imperial dragon pursuing the Flaming
Pearl. The ground motif depicts lotus, peony and
other floral motifs in medallion form. The predomi-
nating color is Imperial yellow and the medallions
are woven with vari-colored thread.
Width— 4B" Length —37"
1518. Japanese wood-sculpture of Buddha standing
on lotus throne, clothed with closely-fitting garment,
holding in right hand staff of authority and left hand
in attitude of benediction. Long-lobed ears.
Late Kamakura Period ( circa — 13th-14th Century)
Height —44"
1519. Japanese wood-sculpture of Bodhisattva with
knotted hairdress, slightly downcast eyes, with long-
lobed ears.
Height —16" Kamakura Period ( 1192-1333 A.D.)
1520. Japanese wood-sculpture of Buddha with up-
right raised hand, hairdress bearing small Buddha;
figure wearing well-draped robe with arms clinging
closely to body. Height —13%"
Early Fujiwara Period ( circa — 9th-10th Century)
1521. Japanese wood-sculpture of standing Amid-
dha Buddha with outstretched right forearm, wear-
ing festooned garment. Traces of original gilding.
Early Fujiwara Period (circa — 9th-10th Century)
Height —1314"
1522. Japanese wood-sculpture of standing Amid-
dha Buddha with outstretched left forearm. Traces of
original gilding visible. Height —15"
Early Fujiwara Period ( circa — 9th-10th Century)
1523. Japanese carved-wood image of Amiddha
(Buddha Amitabha). This Deity is said to have his
“Land of Bliss” in the western quarters whither he
leads all those who believe in him and live in accor-
dance with his laws. Amiddha is represented in nine
forms.
Height —34%" Kamakura Period (1192-1333 A.D.)
1524. Six-fold Japanese floor-screen decorated in
clusters of varying flowers and leafage in subdued
coloring against gold background, surrounded by
narrow embroidered band.
Early Fujiwara Period ( circa — 9th- 10th Century)
Height —3s" Length —loB"
1525. Six-fold Japanese floor-screen decorated in
vari-colored growing and overhanging flowers against
gold background, surrounded by an embroidered
panel. Attributed to Artist Korin, whose signature
appears on screen. Height —3s" Length —loB"
1526. Japanese six-fold floor-screen, depicting Prince
Genji with a lady companion in a boat.
17th Century
1527. Two-fold Japanese floor-screen depicting a
scene with court figures and attendants in mountain
palace retreat surrounded by pine trees and clouds,
painted in subdued shades of green, brown, black,
pink, white and gold.
Height —68" Width —74" Tosa School
1528. Six-fold Japanese floor-screen depicting two
important dignitaries accompanied by princess rest-
ing underneath flowering cherry tree beside a travel-
ling two-wheeled Imperial cart furnished with em-
broidered and gilded trappings. Nearby is a lotus
pond scene. The decoration is painted in a harmoni-
ous grouping of subdued colors against a superb gold
background. The painting is surrounded by a bro-
cade panel in blue and gold. Very important and un-
usual specimen.
Height —68" Length —150" Early 18th Century
1529. Very important Japanese floor-screen, the cen-
tral motif depicting a group of flowering chrysanthe-
mums, asters, and cherry blossoms growing out of
large basket-type jardiniere. On each side of jardi-
niere appears a wall scene over which are growing
vine-like plants. The painting is panelled with a gold
and blue brocade. Unusual specimen.
Height —68" Length —150" Early 18th Century
1530. Two-fold Japanese floor-screen, depicting two
dancers with fans. The dancer on the left is wearing
a kimono with checked design in colors; the dancer
on right is wearing a kimono with medallion design
of golden crest.
Matahei School, 17th Century A.D.
Height 66" Width of Each Panel 35"


















1531. Unusual two-fold Japanese floor-screen show-
ing a woodland and mountainous landscape with a
grouping of galloping and feeding horses, all painted
in subdued colorings of black, green, brown and
sepia. Exemplary specimen.
Height —68" Length —74" 18th Century
1532. Six-fold Japanese floor-screen of Tagasoda
painting, including embroidered garments, kimono,
inro, netsuke, and sash bands, as well as books, writ-
ing brushes, ink, quill, and lacquer box resting on
teakwood table; apparently the personal wardrobe of
an Imperial personage. The decoration is painted in
brilliant colors of red, green, rose, black and white
against a beautiful gold background.
Height —66" Length —148" 17th Century
1533. Two-fold Japanese floor-screen, on which ap-
pear thirty-six famous poets painted in colors on
ground of gold leaf. 17th Century
Height —64" Width of Each Panel —3s"
1534. Three-fold Japanese floor-screen showing
Court Figures on terrace of mountain pavilion; gold
background; Tosa School. 17th Century
1535. Japanese print of landscape scene with high
appearing mountains and snow-capped Fujiyama in
distance; ladened pack-horses accompanied by trav-
elers in foreground. By Hokusai
1536. Japanese print of red boat with wind-blown
sails; Fujiyama in distant horizon; a superb example.
By Hokusai—l76o-1849 A.D.
1537. Superb Japanese print of the “Horse Washing
Falls” named for the great warrior Yoshitsune, who
washed his horse at this waterfall as he passed in the
mountains of Yoshino. By Hokusai — 1760-1849 A.D.
1538. Japanese print portraying Princess sitting on
table alongside smoking articles and holding pipe in
hand; accompanied by female attendant; excellent
impression. By Harunobu
1539. Japanese print of people crossing arched
bridge and carrying umbrellas laboring against driv-
ing rain; solitary man pushing a raft across the stream
and in the dark distance the shore of the Honjo
district. By Hiroshige — 1797-1858
1540. Remarkable Japanese triptych print, one of
the great sets, Kanazawa Hakkei, picturing landscape
and lake on a bright moonlight night; wild geese in
flight across the face of the full moon.
By Hiroshige — 1797-1858 A.D.
1541. Excellent example of Japanese primitive print
depicting Princess in sitting position making obei-
sance over incense burner; accompanied by lady mu-
sician with musical instrument. Artist Unknown
1542. Fine example of Japanese print depicting a
white heron flying above bamboo and marsh leaves.
Artist—Hiroshige
1543. Excellent impression of Japanese print depict-
ing Princess reading to accompanying child.
By Buncho
1544. Excellent impression of Japanese print with
travelers on horseback and afoot; the snow-capped
Fujiyama appearing through cluster of pine trees.
By Hokusai
1545. Excellent impression of Japanese print por-
traying seascape with the snow-capped Fujiyama in
distance. By Hokusai
1546. Land and seascape depicting travelers afoot
meandering up steep mountain; two sampans on
lake and Fujiyama in the far distance. By Hokusai
1547. Rare Japanese print of landscape with Fuji-
yama appearing in distance and a group of five stand-
ing cranes and two cranes aflight. By Hokusai


SUPERB JAPANESE INRO WITH NETSUKE AND OJIME
CIRCA—l7th to 18th Century
1548. Six-sectioned black lacquer inro with super-
imposed chrysanthemums in gold and silver; ivory
masque netsuke and ojime.
1549. Five-compartment inro, with two spotted
deers and gnarled pine tree in black and gold lac-
quer upon cafe-au-lait ground; netsuke in shape of
bee; porcelain ojime.
1550. Five-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
land and seascape showing sampan and bridge; dou-
ble red-disc netsuke with stone ojime.
1551. Six-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
flower and leaf decoration; ivory-masque netsuke
with ojime.
1552. Five-compartment inro, black and gold lac-
quer, dragon in silver inlay; double-figure netsuke
with ojime.
1553. Five-sectioned inro, stippled black lacquer
with bird perched on gnarled tree; on obverse side,
bird on hanging trapeze; gilded carved-wood netsuke
with metal ojime.
1554. Five-sectioned inro, black and gold lacquer,
with dragon head on each side; metal ojime.
1555. Six-compartment inro, black and gold lacquer,
with hanging kimono and half-moon design; ivory
netsuke in form of cat; carnelian ojime.
1556. Six-compartment inro, gold lacquer, prunus
and lotus flowers on one side, pair of standing cranes
on obverse side; ivory netsuke and ojime.
1557. Six-sectioned gold lacquer inro decorated with
Thousand Shou Characters; ivory pierced-dragon
netsuke in medallion form; carved fruit-stone ojime.
1558. Superb black lacquer, six-sectioned inro bear-
ing on each side a perched eagle with Buddhistic
symbols in gold lacquer; metal netsuke with key-fret
design; carnelian ojime.
1559. Five-compartment inro, black and gold lac-
quer, showing waterfall and flowers on one side, stag
and doe in landscape scene on the reverse side; wood
netsuke of sitting figure.
1560. Six-compartment inro, gold lacquer, moun-
tainous landscape with pavilions in relief decoration;
hexagonal, reticulated and hollow netsuke with three
monkeys, also barrel-shaped ojime.
1561. Five-compartment inro, gold and silverized
lacquer, peony flowers and hovering butterflies front
side; similar decoration on obverse side; ivory netsuke
of Pu-tai Ho Shang; metal ojime.
1562. Five-compartment inro with demon on each
side, lacquered red and gold against a speckled
brown and gold background; carved-wood netsuke of
Fu Dog; metal ojime.
1563. Five-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
Shou Lao riding crane on one side and child resting
on gnarled staff with fan on obverse side; carved-
ivory netsuke of boy; wood ojime.
1564. Five-sectioned gold and black lacquer inro
depicting land and seascapes; ivory netsuke of sit-
ting boy with ivory ojime.
1565. Five-compartment inro, black and gold lac-
quer, with personage, buffalo and bird motifs amid
landscape and pavilion background; ivory netsuke in
shape of devil-fish.
1566. Five-compartment inro, black and gold lac-
quer, showing pine trees and pavilion; ivory netsuke
of female carrying child; metal ojime.
1567. Five-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
children at play and flying banner on one side, and
elephant with silverized tusk on obverse side; ivory
netsuke of large figure carrying infant; metal ojime.
1568. Five-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
prunus blossoms inlaid with mother-of-pearl; black
lacquer carved double-gourd netsuke; metal ojime.
1569. Unusual seven-compartment gold lacquer inro
fitting into outer covering in shape of telescope; deco-
rated with floral motifs; metal netsuke in form of
scroll; metal ojime.


1570. Five-sectioned gold lacquer inro decorated on
one side with bird of paradise silverized; on obverse
side is henbird; ivory netsuke in form of man with
wicker basket.
1571. Five-compartment inro in metallic-like lacquer,
bearing on one side water buffalo carrying fagots,
being led by attendant etched on reverse side; metal-
inlaid ivory netsuke with carnelian ojime.
1572. Four-compartment inro, gilded lacquer, super-
imposed with mother-of-pearl inlays with ojime.
1573. Five-compartment inro, black, gold and red
lacquer; right side, reclining figure with face appear-
ing through fan, garment slightly inlaid with mother-
of-pearl, in sleeping position underneath tree; ob-
verse side, processional of banner-men carrying im-
portant dignitary with flying banners; reticulated
arabesque-ivory netsuke with metal ojime.
1574. Five-compartment inro, black and gold lac-
quer, pine-tree and cloud motifs on one side and
Taoist Deity in sitting posture on obverse side; ivory
netsuke in form of female; stone ojime.
1575. Five-compartment inro, gold and black lac-
quer, depicting Pu-tai Ho Shang in black and gray
lacquer robes riding in small-wheel carriage drawn
by two children appearing under pine tree on reverse
side; ivory netsuke in shape of figure holding wicker
basket; stone ojime.
1576. Three-sectioned, gold lacquer inro with
gnarled weeping willow trees; carved cinnabar-lac-
quer square netsuke with amber ojime.
1577. Five-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
flower and feng-huang in medallion form; lacquer
netsuke in form of shell; red lacquer ojime.
1578. Four-compartment inro, gold lacquer, with
pine tree and pomegranate in relief; ivory netsuke
with red lacquer double-faced ojime.
1579. Four-compartment pottery inro, painted with
two demons floating in clouds against ivory-white
crackled glaze; pottery netsuke and ojime.
1580. Four-sectioned pottery inro coated with ivory-
white crackled glaze upon which are painted clustery
flowers; pottery netsuke in shape of chrysanthemum
flower; also pottery ojime.
1581. Four-sectioned pottery inro, painted with
pine clusters on crackled ivory-white glaze; pottery
double-gourd netsuke; pottery ojime.
1582. Four-sectioned pottery inro, the crackled
ivory-white glaze painted with groups of sitting lit-
terati in famille rose colors; pottery netsuke in shape
of double gourd; pottery ojime.
1583. Rare blue and white porcelain inro decorated
with the figures of the Taoist Worthies floating their
hats downstream, all in the surroundings of pine
groves with pavilions; wood netsuke inlaid with por-
celain plaque decorated with pines and bamboo;
ojime bearing signature of artist.
1584. Four-compartment flattened octagonal porce-
lain inro, spotted deer on one side and Shou Lao on
obverse side; glazed ivory-white, orange, blue, brown
and black; octagonal pottery netsuke; pottery spher-
ical ojime.
1585. Four-compartment pottery inro, glazed black,
continuous design of elephant on both sides in ivory-
white, orange, green, yellow and pink; pottery net-
suke in form of Fu dog; pottery ojime.
1586. Four-sectioned, flattened octagonal pottery
inro, coated in black and ivory-white glaze, painted
with tree and floral motifs; netsuke in form of pottery
clam; with pottery ojime.
1587. Unusual pottery four-sectioned inro coated
with crackled ivory-white glaze upon which are
superimposed pine cones and pine twigs; carved-
wood netsuke of boy with barrel; carved-bone ojime.
1588. Five-sectioned carved red cinnabar-lacquer
inro with pine, bamboo, and lotus trees one side and
kingfisher perched on marsh leaves on obverse side;
netsuke in form of nut.
1589. Five-sectioned black lacquer inro inlaid in
mother-of-pearl with personage motifs; ivory netsuke
with elder and two child attendants; cloisonne ojime.
1590. Pottery, flattened octagonal, four-sectioned
inro decorated with fan-shaped reserves in which ap-
pear bamboo, pine, and lozenge motifs painted in
orange, green, blue and sepia on ivory-white crackled
glaze; pottery ojime.




1591. Spherical tree-sectioned pottery inro, gray-
white background painted in black with bamboo and
oak leaves; netsuke in form of crackled pottery rabbit;
pottery ojime.
1592. Very important five-sectioned ivory inro by
the famous artist Shibayama, with personage decora-
tion inlaid with mother-of-pearl and semi-precious
stones; amber netsuke in form of chrysanthemum
cluster by Kaigyokusai.
1593. Spherical, three-sectioned pottery inro, painted
with dragon amid cloud scrolls in aubergine, green,
orange, blue, and purple on crackled ivory-white
glaze; quatrefoil pottery netsuke with blue and white
pottery ojime.
1594. Four-sectioned pottery inro, painted in black,
blue, and orange with three cranes; octagonal pottery
netsuke; pottery ojime.
1595. Four-sectioned red lacquer inro with warrior
and attendant holding arrow and boy; decorated in
gold, red, and mother-of-pearl, carnelian ojime.
1596. Five-sectioned inro decorated with perched
crows on tree silhouetted against moon on one side
and two flying crows on obverse side against a stippled
gold and black lacquer ground; ivory netsuke of
reclining boy; with carnelian ojime.
1597. Six-sectioned black and gold lacquer inro
decorated with cranes feeding in marshes; netsuke in
form of roosting crane; crystal ojime.
1598. Two-compartment black lacquer inro deco-
rated with geese and marsh leaves in relief in mother-
of-pearl, gold, black and brown lacquer; ivory
netsuke in form of crab; jade ojime.
1599. Superb example black lacquer inro, decorated
with animalistic figures in gold and silver, super-
imposed by dragon curling over top in surroundings
of fauna and flora, in gold lacquer.
1600. Four-sectioned gold lacquer inro with ojime
decoration with landscape and pine tree.
1601. Five-sectioned black and gold lacquer inro,
with leaf and flower motifs; ivory netsuke of person-
age with outstretched arms; metal ojime.
1602. Five-sectioned inro painted with flying and
perched cranes in black, gold, and silver lacquer;
ivory netsuke in form of Fu dog with brocaded ball;
metal ojime.
1603. Five-compartment inro, black and gold lac-
quer, on one side two birds of paradise on rockery,
obverse side with flowering peonies; two-figured
ivory netsuke with red ojime.
1604. Elongated black lacquer seven-sectioned inro
decorated in relief with mother-of-pearl inlaid and
gold lotus leaves with connecting tendril; ivory net-
suke in shape of fish; ivory ojime.
1605. Five-sectioned black and red cinnabar lacquer
inro; ivory netsuke in form of sitting figure; with
wood ojime.
1606. "Four-sectioned gold lacquer inro, decorated
in relief on one side with figure of lady; face and
hands inlaid in mother-of-pearl; the reverse side with
floral ornaments also inlaid with mother-of-pearl;
black-lacquer netsuke in shape of water-buffalo;
coral ojime.
1607. Fine four-sectioned gold lacquer inro with
one side decorated with crane resting on back of
turtle, the obverse side with crane flying across red
lacquer sun; netsuke with rat motif; ivory small boy
ojime.
1608. Afghanistan stucco head of Buddha with
traces of polychrome.
Height —7" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1609. Afghanistan stucco Hadda head of Buddha
with polychrome.
Height — 7Vi” Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1610. Afghanistan stucco Hadda head of Buddha
with polychrome.
Height —6Vi" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1611. N. E. India sandstone head of Vishnu.
Height — 1W 11th to 12th Century A.D.
1612. Afghanistan stucco Hadda head of Buddha
with polychrome.
Height — 6V>" Third to Fourth Century A.D.




1613. Afghanistan stucco Haddo head of Buddha
with polychrome.
Height —7%" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1614. Afghanistan stucco head of Buddha with
polychrome.
Height —7V4" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1615. Afghanistan stucco head of Bodhisattva with
polychrome.
Height —B" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1616. Afghanistan stucco head of Bodhisattva with
polychrome.
Height —7V4" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1617. Afghanistan stucco head of Bodhisattva with
polychrome.
Height —BMi" Third to Fourth Century A. D.
1618. Afghanistan stucco head of Buddha with
polychrome.
Height —714" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1619. Afghanistan stucco head of Bodhisattva with
polychrome.
Height —814" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1620. Afghanistan stucco head of Bodhisattva with
polychrome.
Height —B" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1621. Standing Bodhisattva; in front of base two
large flowers and one on one side; typifies Greco-
Indian Art.
Height —21" Gandhara Region — Third Century A.D.
1622. Afghanistan stucco head of Bodhisattva; traces
of polychrome; modelling of locks and features of
face reflect a strong Hellinistic influence.
Height —14" Third to Fourth Century A.D.
1623. Bluish slate stone standing sculpture of
Buddha; circular halo; at base Guardian and Wor-
shipper flanking bowl; typifying Greco-Indian Art.
Height— 24"
Gandhara Region—Second Century A.D.
1624. Figure of Vishnu with 4 arms; carrying as
symbols three heads, three apsaras, human boar and
lion. N. E. India — Circa 11th to 12th Century
Height— l 9"
1625. Afghanistan stucco sculpture of Buddha sit-
ting in attitude of meditation; hands clasped and
resting in lap. Very important specimen.
Height —l 9" 4th Century A.D.
1626. Siamese bronze head of Buddha with hair
spirally curled in spiked stylization; eyebrows arched
and modelled in relief; ears long-lobed and pointed
in the upper tip. Height —l 6"
Lopburi — 13th to 14th Century A.D.—Ayuthia Siam
1627. Indian stone head of Buddhistic Deity, with
richly adorned crown. Height —lsV4"
Frim Bihar — loth to 13th Century A.D.
1628. Siamese bronze head of Buddha with hair
spirally curled in spiked stylization; eyebrows arched
and modelled in relief; ears long-lobed and pointed
in the upper tip. Height —15"
Lopburi — l3th to 14th Century A.D.—Ayuthia Siam
1629. Bronze standing figure (Siam Ayuthia) with
side skirt; body bejeweled; arched eyebrows; flat-
tened headdress.
Height —17" Circa — l6th Century
1630. Sculptured stone Buddha in sitting posture,
with circular halo; typifying Greco-Indian Art.
Height —9V4" Gandhara 2nd Century A.D.
1631. Slender form of standing Buddha; the head
bears a serene expression and is crowned by a diadem
of two rows of prayer beads reaching his long ears of
wisdom. A belt fashioned to a loin-cloth passes be-
tween his breast.
Height —29" Siamese — l3th Century A.D.
1632. Sculptured bluish slate stone seated Buddha
with circular halo; typifying Greco-Indian Art.
Height —ll" Gandhara — Second Century A.D.
1633. Siamese bronze sculpture of Buddha; head
and torso.
Height —lß" Lopburi — l4th Century A.D.
1634. Sculptured sandstone head of Buddha, crowned
with a high ushnisha; long-lobed ears; eyebrows in
high relief. Height —lOMs"
Cambodian Khmer—Circa 14th Century A.D.




1635. Cambodian Khmer sculptured grey sandstone
head of Buddha, crowned with a high ushnisha; the
ears are long-lobed, the eyebrows in raised relief;
supported by black marble base.
Height of Head —l 2" 11th or 12th Century A.D.
1636. Siamese bronze head of Buddha; the upper
part of the ushnisha is missing. The ears are long-
lobed; the eyebrows are in relief and highly arched.
Greenish patina.
Height —B%" Siam Aynthiu — l4th Century
1637. Sculptured sandstone head of Buddha —hair
is plaited and arranged in two tiers; eyebrows in low
relief. Height —12"
Khmer Lopburi — l2th or 13th Century A.D.
1638. Stone head of crowned Buddha, with elabo-
rate diadem with three points. The hair on the ush-
nisha, which ends in a bald cone, arranged in three
plaited rows, the lower row projecting from the one
above it. Ears are long-lobed and have flower ear-
rings. Height —lo"
Khmer Lopburi — 12th or 13th Century A.D.
1639. Head of Deity with three-tiered headdress ex-
tending downward behind ears to shoulders.
Height —l 3" Cambodian Khmer — l2th Century A.D.
1640. Rare bronze Cambodian head of Bodhisattva
with ornaments on ear lobes; headdress in front in
horizontal rows.
Height —14" 12th to 13th Century A.D.
1641. Sculptured stone head of Deity.
Height —l 4" Cambodian Khmer — l2th Century A.D.
1642. Stone head of Deity —cylindrical headdress;
snake motif in center surrounded by vertical grain
bands topped by rosette. Height —l 6"
Cambodian Khmer —Circa 12th to 13th Century A.D.
1643. Stone bust of bearded Deity with richly-
adorned cylindrical crown and collar. Important
specimen. Height —19"
Cambodian Khmer—Circa 13th Century A.D.
1644. Head of Siva, because of third eye; arrayed in
a high and elaborate crown with serpent in center;
ears long-lobed with jewelled earrings; red sandstone.
Height —ls"
Cambodian Khmer — llth to 12th Century A.D.
1645. Cambodian Khmer stone sculpture bust of
Bodhisattva; in headdress, image of Buddha in medi-
tation. Height —l 3"
Cambodian Khmer — 11th to 12th Century A.D.
1646. Four-armed figure of Vishnu with two female
concierges with followers and animals; Indian.
Height —26" Circa 12th to 13th Century
1647. Stone sculpture of head of a Deity crowned
with high diadem (ushnisha bhusana) the matted
hair dressed high in conical form; the ears long-
lobed and mustache is indicated.
Height —13" Cambodian Khmer — 12th Century A.D.
1648. Buddha sheltered by the expanded hood of
the Naga Mucalinda. The hair is plaited. The ush-
nisha has three tiers of plaited hair growing over it.
The ears are long-lobed and the eyebrows raised in
relief. The back of the Mucalinda has the lotus in-
cised on the Naga hood. Height —16"
Khmer Lopburi — l2th to 13th Century A.D.
1649. Stone sculptured bust of Buddha; Brahmanical
head and bust; the hair is braided and coiled, circu-
larly looped on top of the head and dressed high (jata
mukata) secured by a broad band carved with ovals;
ears are long-lobed. White marble.
Height —20"
Cambodian Khmer — l2th to 14th Century A.D.
1650. Stone head of Buddha sheltered by Naga
Mucalinda. Hair is plaited with flat jeweled band;
diadem binding the hair over the forehead. Ears are
long-lobed.
Height —25" Khmer Lopburi — l3th Century A.D.
1651. Rare Korean painting on textile; in center,
Buddha flanked by two Bodhisattvas; in front of
throne two kneeling figures, one old and one young.
To the right and left of the central figure are two
additional Bodhisattvas, with the images of the doner
and his wife in extreme upper corners.
Width —lo' 2" Length —9' 9" Korean — l6th Century
1652. Rare Korean textile painting; the center motif
portrays the Buddha seated on throne and surrounded
by groups of Bodhisattvas, Guardian Kings, Monks,
Disciples of Buddha and male figures; painted in










harmonious color scheme of black, red, green, blue
and white.
Width —B' Height —ll' Korean — l6th Century
1653. Carved granite “Yukimi” lantern, supported
by a four-legged base, with hexagonal mushroom
type roof and pointed finial.
Height —37" Diameter —23"
1654. Carved granite “Uekomi” lantern.
Height —3l"
1655. Carved granite “Yukimi” lantern, resting on
three scroll legs; surmounted by circular mushroom
type roof with three lugs and flattened finial.
Height —34" Width —28"
1656. Granite rectangular water basin.
Length —16V2" Width— l 3%"
1657. Carved stone seated Lohan with clasped hands;
long-lobed ears. Height —2l"
1658. Carved granite dog in sitting posture.
Height —23"
1659. Marble “Kasuga” lantern supported by colum-
nar and lotus leaf pedestal; hexagonal gallery; lantern
and pagoda-type roof with upturned eaves and gourd-
shaped finial. Height —77"
1660. Carved granite hexagonal “Yukimi” lantern
with wide spreading hexagonal roof and finial.
Height —4s" Width —33"
1661. Granite “Kasuga” lantern; the hexagonal gal-
lery supported by columnar and lotus leaf type pedes-
tal; pagoda-type roof with angular lugs at eaves;
mushroom-type finial. Height —sl"
1662. Carved granite quadrangular “Rinto” pagoda,
memoriam stone type; on lotus-shaped base rests a
quadrangular plinth with calligraphic inscription,
supporting an umbrella-shaped canopy with oval
plinth. Height —3s"
1663. Carved stone Korean “Shoro”-shaped pagoda,
consisting of three rectangular plinths supporting a
stone-type lantern with pagoda roof and spirally-
fluted finial. Height —70"
1664. Carved stone Korean quadrangular pagoda;
the upper stones in shape of a mitred crown.
Height —47"
1665. Six-story carved granite pagoda lantern in
pyramidal form; each reticulated section bearing
wide, flaring roof. Height —B6"
1666. Very important carved stone Korean lantern;
the base is in the form of splashing waves; the rising
column is encircled by two bands of ju-i heads and
plantain leaves; the gallery also in wave motifs; rest-
ing on the hollow lantern holder is a pagoda-type
roof with wave motifs in relief surmounted by a long
fluted finial bearing overlapping ju-i heads.
Height —7s"
1667. Three-tiered Korean stone pagoda with gal-
leried quadrangular lantern holders surmounted by
tiled roofs with wave and Dog of Fo motifs; the flat
finial is carved with conventionalized ju-i head.
Height —70"
1668. Brown stone quadrangular Korean “Shoro”-
shaped pagoda with lotus design on pedestal; gallery
surrounds reticulated lantern holder that supports a
pagoda-type roof with serrated flanges; overhung
with drapery motifs and surmounted by fluted and
carved finial bearing ju-i head motifs. Height —7o"
1669. Carved stone figure of Buddha holding the
peach of Immortality in left hand; supported by lotus-
leaf shaped base. Height —39"
1670. Carved marble round water bird bath; this
basin will fit pedestal No. 1675.
Total height with pedestal —38% "
1671. Carved stone figure of standing Kuan Yin
holding a basket; with hooded headdress and stand-
ing on lotus pedestal. Height —12"
1672. Carved brown granite columnar pedestal with
base and gallery in form of lotus petals. Height —47"
1673. Pair Ming carved marble dragon garden-seats,
encircled by writhing dragon amid cloud scrolls.
Height —2o"










1674. Conical-shaped marble water basin standing
on original pedestal. Height — 12 1 A"
1675. White marble pedestal; the base and gallery
surrounded by conventionalized lotus leaves and
bands of leaf and key-fret motifs. This pedestal will
fit water basin No. 1670.
1676. Rare Ming carved-marble basin; the square
base supports a curled lotus leaf, on which rests a
globular wide-mouthed marble jar that is carved on
the exterior in relief with lotus blossoms and scrolling
leafage. Height —27" Diameter —lB"
1677. Pair of Ming carved marble Dogs of Fo on
original pedestals. Height —33"
1678. Ming bronze seated Kuan Yin (without pedes-
tal); covered with a greenish patina and traces of
original gilding; the Deity is in sitting posture wear-
ing a voluminous robe and bejewelled necklace; the
hooded headdress bears a small sitting Buddha.
Height —4o"
1679. Pyramidal-form three-section pagoda with in-
scription; supported by a square base bearing con-
ventionalized lotus petal. Height —60"
1680. Carved stone Kangaroo in sitting posture.
Height— 26" Width— l 6"
1681. Pair carved stone recumbent dragons on origi-
nal base; the female dragon with cub and the male
dragon clawing a brocaded ball. Length —42"
1682. Pair of Ming carved granite Dogs of Fo on
original base; the female playing with the cub and
the male with a brocaded ball. Height —37"
1683. Pair of Korean carved granite figures of rams;
realistically sculptured; standing on oblong base.
Length —42" Height —36"


PHOTOGRAPHY BY KOSHIBA STUDIOS
DIRECT COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY BY POWERS ENGRAVING CORPORATION
