





COLLECTION OF PAPERS
concerning
The NAVIGATION, WINDS, and WEATHER,
at
The French Islands
by
Aalrymple.
1794.
LONDON:
Printed by GEORGE BIGG, 1794.
MAURITIUS and BOURBON.
Published at the Charge of the Caff Indis Company,


South
Eaft
height
Latitude.
Longitude
above the
fr. Greenwich.
Sea in toifes.
Summit of the Ifland, called Parafol . •
! 9 ?
48/
55*
57?
46:
10"
83
D? ... D? ... I. Ronde
19.
S o.
3+
57-
45-
6
165
D? . . . D? . . . Coinde Mire
•9-
S 6.
12
57-
34-
37
81
Gunner’s Point •
19.
59*
Jo
57-
30.
49
E. Point <f the Great I. d’Ambre . . .
20.
2.
9
57.
40*
28
Rocky Point
20*
2.
39
57-
29.
»3
Foot of the Flag-Staff, of the Look-out 1
20.
44
57-
•
»4
134
< where Veffels are firft feen ... J
0.
35-
D? . . D? . . . of Long Mount
20.
7*
5 6
57-
29.
5 1
89
The Front of the New Church, at Port Louis
20.
■9-
45
57*
28.
O
Point Flac
49
57-
44-
5
Foot of the Flag-Staff of the Look out at 1
Port Louis J
20.
10.
8
57-
2 7-
IO
166
Summit of the Mountain called Pieter-Both
20.
II.
21
57*
30.
48
420
Summit of the Rock, tailed the Pouce 1
(or Thumb) J
20.
II.
40
57-
29.
*5
416
S? Point of the Entrance of Little River
20.
12.
49
57-
21.
14
Summit of the Piton de la Fayance . .
20.
'4-
28
57-
39-
'3
223
D? . Mountain of the Corps-de-Garde
20.
«S-
22
S7-
26.
48
369
Pjton in the Middle of the Ifland . . .
20.
*7-
9
57-
33-
10
302
Rocky Iflot, at water’s edge in the Entrance ]
of the Eaft Channel of Port Bourbon j
20.
l 7:
26
57-
47-
8
Summit of the Rampart Mountain . .
20.
18.
2
57-
23.
a 3
39 6
The higheft Point of the Three Paps . .
20.
18.
28
57-
24-
42
342'
Summit o/’Bambou Mountain . . . .
20.
18.
57
57-
42.
46
322
D? . of the Hill * of Little Black River
20.
20.
40
57-
20.
*3
CO
Ik)
D? . of the D? * . of Port Bourbon
20.
. 21.
29
57‘
, 41.
*4
249
Flag Staff of Port Bourboa
20.
22.
20
57*
4 1 *
9
Middle of I. Marie-Anne
20.
22.
34
57*
45-
3
D? . . Paffage I Hand ’ .
' 20.
3 3*
44
57-
43-
Si
Piton of Little-Black-River Mountain
20-
24.
18
57-
, 22.
7
424
Summit of the Mountain de la Porte . .
20.
26.
5°
57-
19.
27
309
D? . . . Hill * Brabant ....
20.
27.
I
57-
J7-
I I
283
L? . . . Savana Mountain . . .
20.
3 7-
2
57-
27.
.30
355
SW Point of the Ifland
20.
27.
50
57-
16.
8
Table of the Geographical Portions of the mod remarkable Points
of L'Jjle de France, or Mauritius, with the height of the
Mountains above the level of the Sea, deduced from geome-
trical operations in 1753, by Abbe de la Caille.
* Morne.


“ Extradl of a Letter from Captain John Blake , of the Skip
Hallifax, dated the 19th July 1738, at Mauritius, concerning
that Port, and manner of failing into it.
(t /-T“V
X HIS is a mod commodious Port, where Ships may
refrefh, or repair, at a fmall expence, and with great expedition;
this Place being a Magazine of all forts of Materials and Stores,
that can poffibly be wanted, for that purpofe; good Beef is
to be had at 4 Sous French pound, Fifh at 1 Sous D? Stag
at the fame price, Turtle is plenty, they have them, from
Diego-Rais, where they keep a Houfe, and 8 Men for that
purpofe, which 1 the rather mention, in cafe any of our Ships
in making this IJland, and feeing a Houfe, Smoke, &c. fhould
think they are people call away, and fhould lofe time, by
endeavouring to take them in, as I fhould have done, had
I feen either; believing the IJland to be uninhabited. The
Ships that come here, endeavour to make it, and though
our Charts lay the Rocks 5 leagues off, they are not two.
“ I made the body of the IJland [Mauritius ] at Sunfet the
24th June, bearing WNW 14 leagues, had 16? 30' Weft
'Variation, flood in for the NE part of the IJland, ’till I made
the two Round IJlands, which I kept clofe aboard, going without
all the IJlands, keeping about two miles off them, ’till I came
to Hang-Rock, which makes like a Gunner's Quoin, and That,
I was not a mile’s diftance, from. The French Captains here
inform me, it is quite Jleep, and that you may go fo near, as
to throw a bifcuit ajhoar. After paffmg the Quoin, I hauled in
for the Land SWbS, and SSW, ’till I made a Reef of Rocks,
lying off Long-Point, about two miles, at the moft, from the
fhoar, but you may come within a mile of them, without
danger; I had no ground at 60 fathoms 2 miles off, after
you pafs thefe, there is no danger. You then fee the Town,
A and


and Peter Butt's head, which is a very remarkable Peak, with a
Knob on the top like a Man's head, and is the mark for the entrance
of the Harbour by bringing it open with a Gap in the Land.
“ After you are pall the Reef, abovementioned, keep
clofe in with the Land, becaufe the Wind is off Shoar. You
may anchor in 15 or 20 fathoms, but the ground is not
very good, ’till you come near the Harbour. I mention this,
left any one ftiould be fearful to fail in the night, that they may
not lay to; for the Current is very Jlrong, efpecially near the
IJlands, and will fet you fo far to leeward, before day light, as-
will oblige you to ftand to the Eajlward, to fetch in again.
“ There is no danger between the Reef and the Harbour, fb as
you don’t come under 12 fathoms, you may fail as well in the
night as in the day. Whoever comes here, as foon as they are
paft the Reef, and got in with the Land, Ihould hoift their Colours r
and fire two guns (if in the night make lights) and a Pilot will
come rff, bringing fome proviftons, vegetables, &c along, with
him, and he carries you to the Harbour's-mouth, where the
Captain of the Port , comes on board, with Boats, Warps, &c
to aflift the Ship, and to moor her, before he leaves her.
“ You are, for the moft pan, obliged to warp in, the Wind
being right out, and the Channel narrow, but their affiftance of
long Warps, See makes it eafy, generally getting in and
moored in one day. We had the good fortune to fail in direttly,
having a favourable wind, but it is not very common.
“ I mull alfo obferve, that there is a very good light, kept on-
the top of a very high Hill, for your guide in the night, where
they hoift a Flag in the day. The French Ships always come be-
tween Hang-Rock and Long-Ifland, keeping Hang-Rock, which makes
like a Quoin, clofe aboard, to avoid a Reef, off Long-IJland, which.
runs


runs off about two miles ; but there is a very good Channel, and no
danger. They fall in with the Land as we did, make Round
If ends, and then fall in for Hang-Rock, or Quoin, make the Reef
off Long-Point, and follow the directions, as before. I had never
been here before, nor any one on board, and our Charts are very
deficient, not mentioning any thing about the pajfage between the
IJlands ; therefore as I was a ftranger, I did not care to venture on
an uncertainty, but I advife it as the bejl and furejl pajfage, for,
by going about the IJlands, you may find a difficulty in fetching in
with the Land. In cafe you cannot pafs Hang-Rock, time enough
to get beyond the Reef off Long-Point before night, it is beft to
ftand to the Eajlward, making trips till morning ; for if you lye
to, the Current will fet you to leeward, and oblige you to run to
the Eajlward to fetch in again; and whoever fhould come here,
need not be under any apprehenfions of danger, there is none but
what plainly appears, and may come within two miles of; lam the
firft EngliJh Ship that has vifited this If and, fince the French have
been in poffeffion of it, and I meet with great civilities.”
On a MS Map of Mauritius, is the following Note figned
I. B. fuppofed Capt. John Blake.
“ The Body of the IJland lyes in 20? 10' S. [2O? 20']. 1 It is
about 20 leagues long and 15 broad; it is inhabited by the
French, and is the general Rendezvous for refrefhing, and
watering, their India-Ships both outward and homeward bound.
It is alfo defigned, and is well fituated, for Ships of War and
Privateers to refrelh, careen, and refit, [at} &c; as alio to
intercept, and annoy, the India-Trade of other Nations, in time of
War. The Town and Harbour, a fine Port on the NW part of
the If and, being a Magazine of Naval Stores, Sea Provifions, &c.
fo that it may [juftly] be reckoned of equal confequence to the
French
• [ ] From another copy of the fatne Map; Abbe de la Cattle makes the
Eland extend from ao? o' S to 20? 28' S, fo that the Middle will be in ao? 14' S.


French , in the Eafi Indies, as Mahon is, to the Englijh , in the
Mediterranean ; and in time may prove a Thorn, in the Eaft India
Trade, to other Nations. It is a fine Country, adorned with Trees
of all fizes; The fVefi Side, from Port Louis to the Savannah, is
mountainous and rocky; abounding with Wild Goats and Hogs:
From Port Louis Eaft ward to the Savannah, is a fine Country.
About Flac, it is level and free from Stones, with an infinite
number of Rivulets [and abounding with Deer.]
“ The Port is fituated about the Latitude of 19? 50' [ls'] S,*
and is very remarkable by the Mountain, Peter Butt, which you
muft bring to bear SEbS, and fteer for the Entrance of the
Harbour, to the Point of the Reefs ; the mark for running in,
or anchoring in the Road, is to bring Peter Butt, and the little
Peak, under it, in one, and the Gap, open to the IVefiward.
You have no Soundings till well in, firft 40. 30. 20. 10. to 9 fathoms,
where you may ride, till you have an opportunity to warp in,
which you are obliged to do, the H'inds, for the moft part,
being off the Hills, and the Channel narrow. After you are in,
you lye, fecure from Wind and Weather, at the upper part of
the Harbour, in about 4or 4I fathoms. You moor with BB
to the ENE, and SB to the WSW, fo as to ride between
both to the SSE winds, which blow frefh, in flurries. You
alfo lay your ftream to the NW aftern, to prevent your Ship
tending to the Sea-Breeze, as the Harbour is narrow. I. B.”
SE Port on Mauritius, called by the French,
Port Bourbon.
“ This Port is fituated about the Latitude 20? 30' S. b It
has two Entrances, and a good deep Channel, though narrow,
the Wefi Entrance is the befi: in coming in, you keep the little
IJland, [on the Bank, ] clofe aboard, and after you are round it,
you
■ There is a great miftake herein the Latitude; The New Church at Port
Louis is in 20? to'S by Abbl de la Cat lit. JQ)
‘ Abll dt la Caille 20? 22* S. J 2)


you haul to the Eaftward, to avoid the Point of the Weft Reef,
where you may in the Bafon, in 25 or 30 fathoms. If
you are for the Harbour, you may perceive the Channel, by the
Colour of the Water ; there being no danger but what plainly
appears. The Harbour is defended from all Weather, by a
Reef, which is a great part dry at low water, there is a little
Bafon at A, in which Ships, of any burthen, may careen. At
the foot of the Reef is 41 fathoms. It is difficult to get out,
by reafon of the Trade-Winds fetting in, except about full and
change, when it is fubjedt to variable winds, and often fine
Land Breezes.”
On a Plan of the Port, without name, are the following
Directions, for Sailing into the NWHarbour of Mauritius.
“ Coming from the Eaftward, the firjl Land you’ll make,
will be a / mall If and, bearing about WbS of you, providing that
you make it in about the Latitude of 20? 5' S. and foon after
that, you will fee the NE part of the main If and, with the fame
bearings, run on boldly to the Wefward, till you bring Long-
Ifland to bear NE about 3 miles, at which time the Gunner's
§lyoin will bear South, about 1 mile; give the latter a pretty good
birth to the Eaftward, then luff in with the firft low Point of
Land, upon the main If and, from which fteer SW (if the wind
blows off the Land) but if the Sea-breeze comes in, fteer more
Weferly, on account of the fwell, it commonly brings in with it,
untill fuch time you bring the Fort, upon the Starboard-hand,
going into the Harbour, to bear South, or rather 'to the Eafward ;
then you are abreaft of the firft warping-buoy, which will be clofc
along fide, upon your Larboard-hand going in, fo ftand on, and
when the NW Point of Cooper’s If and bears SE, then you are
abreaft of the fecond warping-buoy, from which fteer SSE untill
the Fort upon the Point, on ftarboard-hand, bears SSW, then fteer
B SEbS,


SEbS, untill the faid Fort bear WbS, and the NW Point of Cooper’s
IJland due E, then you have juft entered the Harbour s Mouth,
and obferving to take your Sails in judicioufly, having but little
ground to run on, you may ftand on, and having good anchorage,
in 4 fathom water, black muddy ground with much fmall weeds
and young Coral. —The Bearings as follow, viz. the Fort upon
the Point, on the Starboard - hand going in, NWbWjW,
Bullocks Fort SWbW, the firjl Windmill, on the Starboard-hand
going in, SSW, the fecond D? upon the fmall Ifland SbE, Fort
St. Barb SEbS, Peter Butt's head SEjS, the NE angle of the
Magazine Wall SE' E, the SE point of Cooper's IJland N-fE,
Bourdiniers NbW, the Wejlermoft Point of Cooper's IJland NNW.
“ The Soundings are pretty regular in this Harbour, but in
general very ftiallow, I thought it the moll exact method to
mark the depths of water in feet, inftead of fathoms, as I did my
line on the fame account. During the time we lay In this Harbour,
which Was from the 15 June 1752 O. S. untill the zeth October
following, we had frequent Sea breezes blowing for the fpace of
five or fix hours, and I’ve obferved it to keep veering, from the
W to the NVV, for two or three days upon a Stretch, and
fometimes you’ll have no Sea-breeze, for 10 or 15 days running;
(in that cafe) y®u can come to an anchor in Turtle-Bay, in 30 or 35
fathoms water, when Hang-Rock, or the Gu ners Jf;oin, will bear
NEbE of you, Brows-bay about 1 SSE, and the North End of
Cooper's IJland SSW about 4 miles, the Wejlmojl Land in fight
SWbW, then you arc ready for the firft Spurt of Wind, that
offers, to blow you in, and befides obferving the above mentioned
directions, be fure to keep your lead conftantly going on both
tides, the channel being very narrow, in and about the Harbours
Mouth."
On


On a “ Plan of the North Weft Harbour, and Forts, on the TJland
ot Mauritius, in 20? 05' South Latitude, 54? 55' Longitude
Eaft of London by Charles Kelly , ” are the following Directions,
to fail into the Road.
“ If a Fleet going from Europe to 'Mauritius, it would be
proper to make the SE part of the IJland firft, and round it, fo
as to have the Eajl fide fairly open, then fteer about WbN, till
you get into the Track of the Shrewjbury Eafi-Indiaman, keeping
at 2 miles diftance from the Shoar. * The Shrewjbury anchored
in the Rood in 8 fathom water. The Flag-fiaff bearing SEbS,
and the Extremes of the Land, from SWbW to NE, diftance
from the Flag-fiaff about 3 miles. By feveral Sights in the
Road, I found the Variation to be 15? 17' W. The IJland lyes
in
• Mr. Charles Kelly's Journal of the Shrewjbury, Indiaman, 1769.
“ 23d June. At 6AM Kariatkn, 2 azimuths, 14? 57' W [then in fight
of Mauritius. ]
At Noon, Lat. O. 19? 56' S.
The Extremes of Mauritius • SJW to WbNJN [WbSjS ?]
difiant 3 leagues,
{[Hang-Rock] WbS
[Long Idand] NbW
[Round I(lands] |
H. Weather. Winds. Courfe. K. F.
1 « Cloudy . SSE . WSW . 4*2
At l PM, Faffed letiuecn the /we Wejlernmoji IJlands about mid-channel, «»
foundings 30 fathom.”


in the SE Trade, and has frequent Sea-Breezes, and feldom mifles,.
about the full and change of the Moon, to blow frefh from S to
SW, for 3or 4 days together. If a Fleet, at fuch a time, was
bound in, I think, they may run down the Weft fide, at a proper
diftance, and into the Road, with Safety, without being annoy’d
by any Battery, till they open the Road: Whereas, in coming in
from the Eaftward, they muft pafs a chain of Batteries. —l was
informed by the Pilot, that they had lately fixed a chain, or
boom, that reaches acrofs from Cooper's IJland to the Point of
Fort Royal. In .rounding the Eaft Side of the Road, I faw
feveral Staffs with white Flags on them, in the water, arranged,
as I judged, near the edge of the Sand, fufpedting a deception, I
ventured in the night to examine into it, and pulling up one of
them, I found the Staff was fixt in the Buoy, and the rope of fuch
a length to float the Buoy within about 2 feet of the Surface. I
dropt the hand-lead and found 8 fathoms water.”
Meteorological


Meteorological Journal
at
MAURITIUS, OR ISLE DE FRANCE,
1768 and 1769.
From “ Voyage a I’lfle de France, &c.” 1773, 8?
1768, July. “ During this Month, the Winds prevailed in
the SE quarter, from whence they blow almoft the whole year.
The Sea-Breeze is very frelh *in the day; in the night calm.
Although this is the dry feafon, rain often falls; it comes in
pretty violent fqualls, of Ihort duration. The air very cool. k
Cloth Cloaths can fcarcely be difpenfed with.
Augufi. “It rained almoft everyday. The top of the Moun-
tains covered with vapours like fmoak, which defeend to the Plain,
accompanied with gufts of wind. Thefe Rains often form Rainbows
on the fides of the Hills, which nevcrthelefs are not lefs black. c
September. “ Same weather and fame wind. This is the
Harveft. If Heat and moifture are the only caufes of vegetation,
why does nothing (hoot in this feafon ? It is not lefs warm
than the Month of May in France.
OBober. “ Same temperature, the air a little warmer ; it is.
always cool in the interiour of the Ifland. At the end of this
Month they fow their Wheat, in four months they reap it; then they
fow Maiz, which is ripe in September. Thefe are two Crops
from the fame Field; but this is not too much for the Pefts
with which this Land is defolated.
November.
• La brife eft forte, ! trb frais ; qui n’en font pas moins noire.
c


November. “ The Heats begin to make themfelves felt, the
Winds variable, and fometimes come round to the NW; Squalls
of rain fall * No Veflels from France, no Letter: It is melancholy
to wait from Europe, fome portion of its bleffings. b
December. The Heats arc oppreflive, the Sun in the Zenith,
but the Air is tempered by the abundant rain. It Teems to me
that I have experienced greater heat in fome days of the Summer
at Peter/burgh. At the commencement of the Month, I heard
Thunder for the firft time fince my arrival.
“ 23d. In the morning, the Wind being at SE, The Weather
threatened a gale of wind. c The Clouds gathered together at
the tops of the Mountains, they were olive and copper-coloured ;
above was obfervable a long flreak that remained immoveable ;
The lower clouds flew very rapidly. The Sea broke with great
nolle on the Reefs. Many Sea-Birds came, from the Offing, to
take refuge at land.
“ The Domeftic animals appeared uneafy. The Air was heavy
and hot, although the Wind was not fallen.
“ As all thefe figns prognoftirated a Hurricane , every one
haftened to prop his Houfe with Supporters, and flop up all the
Openings.
“ Towards 10 o’Clock at night The Hurricane, came on. It
was terrible puffs, followed with moments of frightful calm, when
the Wind feemed to be regaining its ftrength. It continued
thus encreafmg during the night. My Cabin giving way
I pafled
* Se tombe des pluies orageufes.
* d’attcndre de I’Europe quelque portion de fon bonheur.
* 1c temps fe difpofa k un coup de vent.


I pafled to another part of the Dwelling. My Hoftefs was
drowned in tears, with the fear of feeing her Houfe deftroyed: No
body went to bed. Towards Morning, The Wind having ftill
redoubled, I perceived that a whole front of the Palifade, of the
Compound, was falling; and that a part of our Roof was riling at
one of the Angles: I repaired the damage with fome Planks, and
ropes. In eroding the Court to give fome Orders, I thought
feveral times that I Ihould have been blown down., I faw, at
a diftance, Walls falling, and the Shingles of Roofs flying about,
like a pack of cards.
Towards 8 o’Clock in the morning, Rain fell, but the Wind did
not abate. It was driven horizontally, and with fo much violence,
that it was like fo many Spouts, where ever there was the fmallell
openings. It fpoilt part of my papers.
* c At 11 o’Clock, the Rain fell from the Heavens in Torrents.
The Wind lulled a little, all the Ravines of the Mountains formed on
every fide prodigious Cafcades. Pieces of the Rock broke loofe with
noife like Cannon, in rolling down they made great lanes in the
Wood f. 4 The Rivulets overflowed into the Plain, which was like a
Sea; neither Dikes or Bridges were to be feen.
At i o’clock after noon, The Wind flew round to the NW. It
threw the foam of the Sea, in great clouds upon the Land, It
threw the Ships, that were in the Harbour, upon the (hoar, they
fired guns in vain; for no afliftance could -be given them. By
thefe new (hocks, the Buildings were (haken the otherway, and
almoft with as much violence. Towards Noon the Wind
changed to Eqft, then to South. It thus made the circuit of the
horizon in the four and twenty hours, as it ufually does; after
which all was calm.
“ Many
* dies formoient en roulant de larges trouees dans les bois.


“ Many Trees were blown down. Bridges carried away; Not
a leaf remained in the Gardens: Even the Grafs, this flubborn
dogs-grafs, appeared in fome places Ihorn to the furface of the-
ground.
“ During the tempefl, a good-Citizen, named Le Roux, fent
his Black-Workmen every where to offer their alfiltance gratis .
1 his Man was a Joiner. Good - aflions fhould never be puffed
over in oblivion : efpecially here.
“An Eclipfe of the Moon at 4 ra- in the evening was
predidled, but the bad weather prevented the Oblervation.
“ The Hurricane comes every year regularly in December:'
fometimes in March , as the Winds go all round the horizon
there is is no vault [or cave] where the Rain does not enter.
It deflroys a great number of Rats, Grafshoppers, and Ants,
and it is fometime before they are feen again. It has the place of
Winter, but Its ravages are more terrible. That of 1760 will
belong remembered: an Outjiie-Shut ter was carried'in the air,
and darted like an arrow againfl a. Roof. The lower mafts of a
64 gun Ship, which were without yards, were twilled and broken.
There is no Europe-Tree that is able to refill fuch violent
whirlwinds. We have fecn how Nature has defended the Forells
of this Country.*
1769, January. “ Weather rainy, hot and heavy, very
violent fqualls, * but little Thunder. As the Gulls of Wind are
violent at this Seafon, the Navigation ccafes from December
to April.
" All
* This refers to a remark made before, “ that the Trees here, were
not high, the heads not much branched, very heavy, and fo connedled'
together with creepers, as to enable them to refill the Hurricanes, which
would prefently blow down the Oak and the Fin," JSJ)
* grands orages.


All the Meadows are green again, the Country is more
gay but the Sky more difmal.
February. “ Stormy Weather, and violent gufts of Wind.
The Boat VHeureux , difpatched to Madagafcar , perilhed ; as well
as the Ship Favori from the Cape.
“ 25th of this Month the Clouds, gathered together again
by the NW Winds, formed a long immovable band, from the
Fla%-Staff Mountain to Cooper’s IJland t a prodigious quantity of
thunder-claps iffucd from it, the Storm lafted from 6 o’Clock
in’ the Morning to Noon. The Lightning fell a great many
times. A Grenadier was killed by one flafh, a Negro-Woman
by another, as well as an ox on Cooper’s IJland, A Mufquet
was melted in -the houfe of an Officer. The People here fay
there is no example of Lightning having ever fallen in the Town ;
for my part I never heard fuch violent Thunder. It feemed
like a Bombardment. I believe if cannon had been fired, the
explolion would have diffipatcd thefe immoveable clouds.
March. “ The’ Rains a little lefs frequent. The winds
always at SE, the Heat fupportable.
April. “ The Weather fine. The Grafs begins to dry,
and, when fet on fire, it leaves, for feven ’ months, a Country
painted black.
May. “ Towards the end of this Month, the Winds changed
to the Weft and NW, as is cuftomary. This is the dry feafon. *
I was at the Plains of William, where I found the Air of a very
agreeable coolnefs.
June.
* nous voila dans le faifon feche.
D


June, “ The Winds are fixed at South, where they arr*
almoft always. The little Squalls with Rain, recommence.
“ There is no malady particular to this Country; but people
there die of all the difeafes of Europe. I have feen death by
apoplexy, final 1-pox, complaints in the Stomach, and obftrudtions
in the Liver, which arife more from chagrin, than from the
quality of the water, as they allege. I have feen a Stone larger
than an Egg extracted from a native Blackman. I have feen
Paralytiques, and gouty perfons in great torments, Perfons fubjedl
to Epilepfy, feized with their fits. a Infants and the Blacks are
very fubjedt to Worms: The Venereal difeafc produces vermin h
in the laft: They are from painful cracks in the foies of
the feet. The Air there, is good like Europe; but it has no
medicinal quality, 1 do not even advife gouty .people to come
there; for 1 have feen fuch remain, more than fix months at a
time, confined to their.bed..
“ The Conftitution is fenfibly affedled by the change of
Seafon. Bilious Fevers are prevalent, and the heat alfo occafions
ruptures, but, with temperance and bathing, health is preferved.
I obferved however that the Inhabitants of cold Countries enjoy
a more robuft health and more adtive fpirit: it is very remark-
able that Hiftory makes no mention of any celebrated Perfon,
born between the Tropicks, but Mahomet."
Short
' de» epileptiques faifis de leurs accfcs. k des crabes.


Short Account of the Hurricanes, or Gales of Wind, at Bourbon,
from 1733 to 1754.
From Mem. de I’ Academic des Sciences, 1754.
Abbe de la Caille, tells us, that having been at Bourbon during
the rainy Seajon, and only remained there forty days, he could
not give, from his own knowledge, a circumjiantial Defcription
of that IJland : he adds
“ Although larger than Mauritius, it is however only a
great Mountain, in a manner cloven through the whole height, in
three different places. Its Summit is covered with Wood, and
uninhabited, and its declivity, which extends down to the Sea,
is cleared, and cultivated in two thirds of its circuit: The
remainder is covered with La-a of a Volcano, which burns
gently and without noife : It only appears a little violent* in the
rainy Seafon.
<£ The IJland Bourbon has no Tort; it only has two Roads';
the one very near the and little fafe, it is in the Diftridt
of St. Denys: the other, n a great fandy bay, b where the Sea
is pretty fmooth, but the landing difficult; this Place is called
the Diftridt of St. Paul.
“ For want of a fafe Port, the Veffels .do not chufe to
remain at anchor, at the IJland Bourbon; efpecially during the
rainy Jeafon, when this IJland is fubjedt to terrible Hurricanes,
which expofe them to great danger. It is nev'erthelefs at this
feafon they are obliged to go there, on their return to France,
as well for provifions, as to load the Coffee; which is the
principal commodity of this IJland.
“ Thefe
* il ne paroit me me un peu ardent que dam la faifon des pluies.
* grand anfe de fable.


“ Thefe Hurricanes, which our Mariners call gales of Wind ; k
are alfo felt at Mauritius, but commonly with lefs fury, and
damage, whether it is that the Volcano in Bourron cncreafes
their violence, or that this IJland being higher, and formed of
one Jingle Mountain, which has only three breaks, c and not
compofcd of feveral Chains like Mauritius , the Torrents formed by
the Rains, which bring the Hurricanes, make the greateft
devaluation, becaufc they are not feparated by a great number of
Valleys, and becaufe they are more rapid, in their fall, by
coming from a greater height.
“ The Hurricanes are not cuftomary to happen but from
December to the end of April ; They are more particularly dreaded
at full and change of the Moon. At this Seafon the Veflels don’t
chufe to at Bourbon, e .cept four or five days after the New, or
Full Moon: they don’t remain more than five or fix days, or even
lefs, in fear of being caught in the neighbourhood, at thefe two
dreadful Phajes. This precaution, though prudent in regard to
the Ihorteft ftay poflible, is not always infallible for efcaping the
gales of wind, or Hurricanes, as will be feen by the Lift of Thofc
that have happened for twenty years. It was given tome by M.
Brenier, Counfellor-Commandant at the IJland Bourbon, who has
kept an exa£l Regifier lince his refidence in this IJland. I have
added to the dates of thefe Hurricanes, the day and hour of the
neareft Phafes of the Moon, as well as that when It had pafled
the apogee or perigee.
1733, The night between the 10th. and nth. December 1733,
there was a great gale of wind d at North: the veflels
that were in the Road of St. Paul put to Sea, and returned
a few
‘ coups de vent.
1 crevaflei.
d grand coup de vent.


J 733*
a few days after, without damage; one only remained fafc
at A Ship and a Boat which were at St. Denys ,
were driven aftioar; nine perfons perifhed. New - Moon
the 6th, s’ 11 30“. P. M. ift Quarter 14th, 1 i b * 3o m • A. M.
p apogee 4th.
22d December, there was a gale of wind, at South: Full-
Moon 21 ft, at 3 hi 15 1 ”’ A. M. p perigee 20th.
1734. 9th January, there was a gale of wind, at Fuji, which
continued, with a few hours intermiffion, till the
15th, the wind changed to Wejl ; a Veffel that was at St.
Denys put to Sea. New-Moon sth at n h * A. M. Ift Quarter
12th at 10 P. M. 5 perigee 14th.
25th. The night between the 25th and 26th January of
the fame year, violent gale of wind, which continued, with
the rain, to the .
29th. Laft Quarter 27th at i fc * i$ m ' A. M. p apogee 29th.
13th March. Gale of wind, at fea,* pretty hard at Mauritius.
A Veffel that was at St. Paul put to fea. xft Quarter 12th
at i h- 45"* P. M. p perigee nth.
1735. 26th Janurary. There was a gale of wind, which at 4
P. M. began at IVeJi; it changed to Eajl, and blew all the
27th. New-Moon 24th at 6 tu A. M.- p apogee 22d.
zzd January,
• coup de vent au large.
E


*736* nd January, there was a gale of wind, which lafted till
the 25th; the rain did not ccafe till the 30th. ill Quarter
21ft jo 01 ’ A. M. 1) apogee 15th, perigee 29th.
sth February, inceflant rain , to the 10th inclufive.
7th gale of wind* Lad Quarter 4th at o h * 15“* A. M.
5 apogee i ath.
1737. 28th January, violent gale of wind, from Noon to next
day at SA. M.; it blew from SW. New-Moon 31ft at
o*. off 0 ffl * A. M. 5 perigee 20th.
4th April, gale of wind at St. Paul's, from 3 A. M. to next
day at Noon ; it was felt to the Eaftward of the Ifland from
the Ift of the Month. New-Moon 31ft March Noon, ift
Qaurter Bth April at Il h, 30“’ A. M. i apogee 31ft March.
1738. 13th February, gale of Wind, which began at SE,. at
ix 4, A. M. it veered to South and SW round to North, the
14th A. M. Lajl-Quarter nth at 8 h * P. M. 1 perigee 10th.
1739. 12th January, a middling gale of IVind, from 8 h * P. M. to
Midnight; it was at Weft. New-Moon, 9th January, at
9 h 'P. M. 5 perigee 7th.
22d March, gale of Wind, at North: continual rain, to the
26th. Full-Moon 25th at 8 h * 45 *• A. M, <t perigee 30th.
1740. 21 ft. January, gale of wind, from South to NE, it began
at 3 k> A. M. and continued to the next day at Noon. . Loft-
Quarter 22d at 4 h, 45“' C apogee 15th.
28 th..


174°*
28th February, gale of wind, at St. Denys, which was onTy
perceived at St. Paul, by the great fwell. New-Moon zpsh
at io fc> A. M. <1 perigee 25th.
13th March, gale of wind, at South, which began at S’*' A.M.
and continued all the day and all the night. Full-Moon
13th at 4 h * P. M. d apogee 9th.
1742. 10th January, gale of wind, at North, from'7*.- P. M.
to n b * A. M. New-Moon 7th at i h * 45 ,B • A. M. 1 perigee
12th.
1743. Bth March, gale of wind, at South, at Bk>8 k> P. M..to next
day at 4 P. M. It did more mifehief at Mauritius, than at
Bourbon. Full Moon icthac 2 k - P. M, <1 perigee 3d, apogee.
17th.
1744. 9th January, The night between 9th and 10th, gale of
wind, at North; the 10th at Noon the wind fortunately
changed to South, by favour of which a Veflc! going on the
„ Coaft was faved, * and put to Sea. Lajl-Quart 6th at
io k * P. M. C apogee 13th.
1745. 12th February, gale of wind, at North,, from 3P. M. all
next day; the rain continued to the 19th.
9th at io** P. M. H perigee and full 16th.
1746. 19th January, violent gale of wind, which began in the
morning at Eaft, changed to North and continued all
night ; after a little Calm, it veered to Weft, to Eaft, and
to South : it did not end ’till the 22d in the evening.
New-Moon 21ft at Bh>8 h> P. M. i apogee 27th.
16th
? qui alloit a la cote «’eft rclcve.


1746. 16th February, in the night between the 16th and 17th,
gale of wind, which lafled but a little time, though it very
much damaged the Maiz, Nezv-Moon 20th at o h> 4 j" 1 * P. M.
J at mean diftance.
6th April, terrible gale of wind, at North, the violence of
which lafted from 6 A. M. to 6 P. M. A Portuguefe
Ship, without rudder and reduced to one majl, was wrecked
on the beach -, b twelve perfons perilhed. The wind having
changed to South in the evening, the Sea became all at
once ftill, the Ship remained dry upon the beach, where it
had bed-ed itfelf. Thofe who remained aboard were faved.
Full-Moon 6th at 4 hl 43”' A. M. sin perigee .
5747. nth January at 7P. M. gale of wind, which began at
NE and continued all night veering to South. New-Moon
nth at 5 h * i$ m ’ A. M. D perigee 6th.
3748. 2ift January, gale of wind, from 4 P. M. all night.
LaJ-Quarter 23d at 3 h * jo” 1 P. M. T> perigee 27th.
28th March, violent gale of wind, at South; it com-
menced at i h - P. M. and ceafcd after Sunfet, after a calm
of one hour about 5 o’Clock : much r'ain this day and the
following, during which were felt fome hard puffs of wind.®
New-Moon 29th at 6 h ’ 30 m * A. M D perigee 22d.
3750. 31ft January, gale of wind , during the night which
preceded the ift February; it was at North, and violent at
St. Denys; at St. Paul's it was not fo hard d and at SW.
Lajl-Quarter 30th, at 8 h ’ 45 m- P. M. j apogee 26th.
4th March, middling gale of wind. New-Moon Bth at
1 x h * A. M. 5 perigee Bth P. M.
18th March.
‘ fable.
f quelqucs fortes bouffees dc vent.
* moins fort.


175°. 18th March, gale of ’wind, more violent than the preceding;
it lafted till
20th, at A. M. Full-Moon 23d March at 4 h * go"’ 1 A. M.
D apogee.
1751. 26th March, in the night between 26th and 27th, there
was the moft terrible Hurricane that any perfon living on
the IJland ever faw ; It was at Eaft, and made dreadful
ravages from the Eaft to St. Paul. Nezv-Moon 27th at
Noon, j perigee 29th.
1752. 4th February, gale of wind, at ENE which was not
general over the IJland. Lajl-Quarter 7th at 30”’ A. M.
apogee 9th.
21ft December, gale of wind, at North, and great rain;
two Boats were wrecked. Full-Moon 21ft at 4*“- A. M.
5 perigee 22d.
1 753. 12th March, gale of wind, at North, which endangered
one of The Company’s Ships. Firjl-Quarter 12th at
7 h * P. M. j perigee 14th.
26th March, a kind of gale of wind, which obliged a
Ship to put to fea. Lajl-Qi;arter 26th at io’ 11 P. M.
]> apogee 28th.
1754. 10th January, a kind of gale of wind, which began at
NE, refted at NNW and veered to SW. Full-Moon 9th
at 6 ,, • A. M. D perigee nth.
19th!
20th tApril, gale of wind and Hurricane, which made
2 1 ft J great devaftation on the IJland; I have only the
report, without any detail. New-Moon 22d at 6 fc * I5 m • P. M.
ji apogee 18th.”
F An


An account of a Hurricane at Bourbon in 1770.
From “ Voyage a I’lfle de France, &c.” 1773, 8? Vol. 2, P. 8.
“ From the 25th to 30th November 1770, the Sea-wind was
fo frefh that few Boats, from the Veffels in • the Road, came
afhoar. Our Captain took a favourable moment to return aboard,
where his bulincfs called him, but the bad weather prevented
his coming back.
“ This Sea-Wind, which always comes from SE, fprings up
at 6 A. M. and dies away at 10 P. M. At this feafon it continues
day and night with equal violence,
“ill December the Wind fell, but a monftrous Swell came
from Sea, and broke upon the (hoar with fuch violence, that
the Centinel, on the Bridge , was obliged to quit his poll.
“ The Top of the Mountains was covered with thick clouds
without motion. The wind ftill blew gently from SE, but the
Swell came from the Weft. Three great-Waves inceflantly followed
each other, they were vifible along the Coaft, like three long
Hills, they threw up from their tops Ipits b which formed a
kind of hair. They drove upon the Ihoar, forming an Arch
which rolling over, rofe in Foam above fifty feet high. 1
“ Rcfpiration was difficult, the air heavy, the /ky obfeure,
flocks of ( corbigeaux ) and Tropick-Birds came from Sea and
took refuge on the Land. The Land-Birds and animals appeared
uneafy. Even Man felt a fecrct dread at the profpeft of a fright-
ful ftorm, in the midft of a Calm-
“ The
* Jet* d’eau.
• Elies fur le rivage, en formant vine route, qui fe roullant
fur clle mime e’eleroit en £cume, Sic.


“ The 2d m the morning, The wind fell at once, and the
{well encreafed ; The waves were more numerous and came from
a greater diftance. The Shear beaten by the Waves was covered
with a white froth like Snow, which got in heaps like bundles
of Cotton. The Veffels in the road laboured very much at
“ There was no doubt this was a Hurricane , they drew well-
in upon the Land, the Pirogues that were on the pebble-beach;
and every one haftened to fecure his houfe with ropes and
props.
“ There were at Vlndien , le Penthtevre, I'Amitie,
f Alliance, le Grand-Bourbon , le Gerion , a gaulettc and a fmall
boat. The Coaft was lined with people drawn there by the
appearance of the Sea, and the danger of the Veffels.
“ At Noon the Sky became prodigioufly charged, and the
Wind began to frelhen from SE, there was an apprehenfion
then, that it would change to the Weftward, and that it would
drive the Veffels on the Coaft. b The fignal was given, from
the Battery, for their putting to fca, by hoifting the Flag and
firing two guns with (hot. Immediately they cut their cables
and made fail, le Penthievre left her boat, which could not
get on board again. I’lndien , at <+*} farther out, went away
under her four principal fails. The others got away fucceflively.
Some Blacks, who were in a Boat, took refuge on board I’Ami tie.
The little Boat and the Gaulette were already in the Waves,
where they difappeared from time to time; they feemed to be
afraid of putting to fea; at laft they got tinder fail, with the
anxious
* on craignoit alors qu’il ne tournat i I’orient, U qu’il ne jettit les vaifleaux
fur la cote.


anxious prayers of all who faw them. In two hours all this
fleet were out of fight to the NW in the midft of a black
horizon.
“ At 3 P. M. The Hurricane came on with a frightful noifc;
and all the Winds blew fucceflively. The Sea beaten, agitated
in all direftions, threw on flioar clouds of Foam, Sand, Shells,
and Stones. Some Boats repairing, at fifty paces from the (hoar,
were buried under the pebbles ; The Wind carried away a part *
of the roof of the Church, and the Colonade of the Governmcnt-
Houfe.
“ The Hurricane continued all night, and was not over ’till
the 3d in the morning.
“ The 6th, the two firft Veflels that returned, were the little
Boat and k the Gaulette; they brought a letter from the Pen-
thievre, which had loft its main topgallant mail. 1 hey them-
felves had met with no accident.
“ The Bth Le Gerion appeared, it had gone to Mauritius,
by it we learnt that the Storm had there wrecked the King’s
Flute, La Garonne , at °f-^.
“ In ftiort till the 19th fucceflively accounts were received
of all the Veflels except I'Amitie and /’ lndien. The ftrength and
fize of the laft Teemed to Tenure her againft any accident, and
it was not doubted ftie had purTued her voyage to the Cape
Good-Hope, and from thence to France; befidcs I knew this to
be the Captain’s intention.”
In
* un pan de la courerture.


In “ Voyage a Madagafcar, &c.” by Abhi Rochott,
“ Difcours Preliminaire,” P. XXVIII, he has given Ibme
account of an Hurricane at Mauritius , he fays
“ It is ncccffary to have been in an Hurricane to form an idea
of this dreadful meteor. The Hurricane is almoft always accom-
panied with rain, thunder and earthquake', the atmofpherc is
on fire, the wind blows with equal violence in every diredlion;
an Hurricane is a kind of water-fipout, that threatens to deluge
that part of The Earth on which it falls. It is at leaft under
this appearance, that Mariners fee it at a diftance, and the Ships
often lye becalmed, at a little diftance from the Places, where
thcfe terrible ftorms burft with moft violence. If the velocity
of the Wind exceeds 150 feet in a fecond, • nothing can refill
its force; the largcft trees are torn up by the roots, the moft
fubftantial-built houfes are blown down, nor can the heavieft
anchors, the ftrongeft cables, nor the beft-holding-ground,
enable veffels to ride our, the wind drives them aftioar, and
wrecks them, unlefs they make a Bed for themfelves in the
mud.
I have feen the main top mail of the Mars, a 64 gun-Ihip,
when ftruck, carried away fhort off, clofe to the cap, b in the
Hurricane of March 1771, and this Hurricane was not, by any
means, near fo violent as that in February of the fame year.
Intelligent Mariners can judge of the force that could carry
away a maintopmaft, when ftruclc, clofe to the cap ; and, after
that fadl being eftablifhed, they will not think I exaggerate the
•velocity of the wind, in reckoning the moft violent puffs at 150
feet a fecond. The extraordinary changes of the Barometer
in the Tropical Regions are the only figns, hitherto had, to forefec
the Hurricane a few hours before it commences.
“ At
• About 88 miles per hour.
k rornpu auras du chourpiet,
G


“ At the time of the Hurricane in February 1771, thefudden
finking of the Mercury raifed an apprehenfion in me, as well as
in M. Poivre, it was at 4o’clock in the evening, M. Poivre fent
for the Captain of the Port; this Officer, who was eye-witnefs
to the Hurricane in 1761, was not alarmed, like us, at the change
of the Barometer , he faid there were more certain tokens: * tvventy-
* four hours, added he, before the Hurricane, you’ll fee the
* Blacks come down from the Mountain, and announce the Hunt-
* cane. Befides the fetting of the Sun, will determine me what
‘ meafures to take, to prevent, as far is in my power, the
‘ accidents unavoidable, in thefe dreadful ftorms.’ M. Poivre's
perfuafion, and my obfervations, were not effectual to convince
him; He defired us to wait till the Sunfet. The Sky was clear
and ferene, but the Mercury continued finking in the Tube
of the Barometer; the Sun fet clear. The Captain of the Tort,
who had long ferved in The India Company’s Veflels, left us
very well fatisfied, and quite fecure, in his judgment, againft the
difafter that threatened: He feemed to pity us for putting fo
much faith in a Barometer. It feldom happens that the obfti-
nacy of a mere practical Seaman, can be got the better of,
when he has adopted the abfurd notion that all Theory Is
ufelcfs. This race of men is unfortunately very common; and
no doubt, he who would undertake to point out all the ills that
ignorant and prefumptuous Chiefs have done, and do occafion,
would not make a collection ufelefs to mankind.
“ The Hurricane began at 7 o’Clock in the evening, that is
to fay, an hour after Sunfet. Before 9 o’Clock all the Veflels
were driven alhoar, except the Flute Ambulante, and a fmall
Corvette, named Verd-Galand; In a whirlwind this Flute was
carried to fea, and the Corvette, attached to her by a Hawfer,
was foundered.
. “ The Ambulante without (ails, without rudder, without pro-
vifions for the crew, and for a detachment of the Irifh Regiment
of


of Clare, on board this Ship, was for more than n hours at the
mercy of the winds; the changing of the wind carried them
quite round the IJland, and at laft, almoft miraculoufly, drove
her afhoar, at the only place in fo violent a ftorm, the
Crew could fave themfelves. What renders thefe difafters the,
more afflidling is the impoflibility of giving mutual affiflancc.
A man muft remain immovable, in the midft of ruins which
furround him, waiting his fate, without a poflibility of pre-
venting and efcaping it: The violence of the wind and the
ftrength of the torrents forbid leaving the (belter chofen, or the
place where you happen to be.
“ The Hurricane laded 18 hours, without interruption, with
equal violence, the heavy rain, the thunder and lightning did
not abate in any degree the force of the wind: but at 5
o’Clock, the Mercury that had funk 25 lines, remained a few
minutes ftationary, foon after it rofe again; from that time the
whirlwinds ceafed; the wind became more fixed; at laft, at 6
o’Clock in the evening it became practicable to give aid to the
unfortunate people who were (hipwrecked. In thefe terrible
durations, men overwhelmed with the overpowering weight of
neceflity feem to have loft all fenfibility : They wait in a kind
of ftupor the ftroke that is to deftroy them. They bear in
filence without murmuring the evils that afiliCt them.
“ During this Hurricane the Communication between thedifferent
parts of the Land was (topped by the fall of Trees, and by the
floods; it was three weeks before news arrived of the Ambulante ;
which was (hipwrecked at a Place only fix leagues from Port Louis,
AH the Crops were destroyed.”
M. Le


M. he Geniil (“ Voyage dans les Mcrs de I’lnde,” Vol. 2,
P. 632) fays
“ There are four Seafons at IJle de France (or Mauritius.)
The firjl comes in May with the SE winds; then, all over
the JJland, are frequent fquails with rain; thefe rains are of
great ufe to the corn, but fometimes alfo they injure them.
“ The Second Seafon commences when the firjl ends, in
September or OEtoher, which is the termination of the SE, and
beginning of the NW winds. This is a dry feafon ; then the
Sun approaching the Zenith of the Ifiand, begins to heat the
Atmofphere, and to bring on the Squalls of rain * and Hurricanes,
which commence, commonly, in December,
“ The duration of this 3d Seafon extends to about March.
“ After which comes the 4th Seafon, this laft does not laft
above 6 weeks and is a dry Sea/on.
“ Thisdivifion of the year has more relation to the culture
of the Land than to any thing elfe; for to fpeak truth, there
are but two Seafons at Mauritius, that of the winds from SE to
South, and that of the winds from NE to North and NW.
The two intermediate Seafons, of April and November,
are occafioned by the revolution in the air, in the
kind of Monfoon from SE to NE. The SE winds are
ftrong and violent, but they are not dangerous to Ships, for
when they have reached their point of velocity they do not
exceed that. The NE winds on the contrary are faint, inter-
mixed with Calms; this is what they call the rainy Seafon , of
forms and of Hurricanes , or in Ihort the winter, although it is
then the warmeft time of the year; but this appellation of
Winter is given, as well bccaufe the Ships do not chufe to
expofc themfelves at Sea in this feafon, as becaufe they cannot go
to India but by purfuing a very long and troubiefome courfe.
“ The
* les pluies d’oragee.


** The SE wind is very healthy, but nothing thrives in it, in
the Places efpecially which are too much cleared; this is the
reafon why fruit Trees are produced at Pamplemoufes with fo
much difficulty, a Diftridt entirely cleared, and where wood is
very fcarce. The Orange-Trees and Citrons are thofe which fuffer
mod from SE winds, and which have moil occafion for fheker;
and it has been remarked that Thofe growing in the woods, grow
fine and lofty, whilft thofe in the Plain don't .thrive at all. This
Wind is fo deftrudtive to the Trees, that fuch as it ftrikes diredtly,
bear no fruit on the fide they are ftruck, none are to be found but
on the oppofite fide.
“ Other Trees are to be feen with only half a head, and that
very thin, the reft having been deftroyed by the Wind; Other
Trees a little more dickered, (hew at a diftance a fine round head,
and it would be fuppofed, at a diftance, that the Trunk occupied
the Center; it is quite aftonifliing, on approaching it, to fee the
■Trunk, or Body of the Tree, at the extremity of the Head, or
bulky part, expofed to the wind. The Tamarind Trees are not
fo delicate, they brave the malignity of the wind, fo that they
would be a good Shelter for a fruit Garden, but at Mauritius ,
they advance with the utmoft fiownefs, and have hitherto neglected
the cultivation of this valuable Tree.
“ At the Cape of Good-Hope , the laborious and induftrious
Dutch have learnt to (belter their fruit Trees from this fame wind,
by-interfedting their Gardens with crofs Hedge-Rows of Oak.
“At Maurilins there is no ground to hope for any (belter, but at
the end of a long feries of years, for the Trees grow very (lowly
on this Ifland. In place of Tamarinds , the Natives have planted
Bamboos, which grow very faft, and produce a pretty good effedt,-
but which themfelves injure the Gardens ; This Reed extends its
H roots.


roots, like Flax, to fo great a dlftance from the Stem, and part
of its roots are fo near the furface, that nothing grows within 12,
15, or even 20, feet diftance round them; Often thefe roots run even
farther : it is true that this is remedied by digging a trench 2 to 3
feet deep, and about the fame breadth, but this injures the Bamboo ,
which is not fo fine, and does not break the wind fo well, befides
a dry Land is not at all fit for them—in this cafe they do not
thrive, and are of no ufe againft the wind.
The Nights are almoft always very fine at Mauritius, parti-
cularly in the feafon of the NE winds. In this Seafon , the Sun
generally rifes very clear; towards 10 o’Clock little Clouds gather
and accumulate without appearing to denote any thing : the Clouds
occupy but a fmall extent, and have no motion, fome drops of
water fall, and then the rain is certain; for, in an inftant, the Sky
is infcnfibly quite overcaft, without any appearance whence the
Clouds come, The Rain at the fame time encrcafes, and in lefs
then 5 or 6 minutes becomes foprofufe, that often one cannot foe*
at forty toifes diftant. Thefo Rains continue about two hours,,
and only happen when the wind comes from the foa; and when it
ceafes, the Vapours then afeend from the Sea, and the Mountains
Hop them.
“ In the Seafon of the SE winds on the contrary one often foes,
particularly in the evening, a fmall rain fall, although to appearance
there is the fineftSky imaginable, and the Stars appeared brilliant.
It is alfo at this feafon that often, in the bottom of the Par/,
Jtainbvm made by the Moon, are feen, a Phenomenon rare at
Paris.”


CHART of the ARCHIPELAGO
to the
Northward of MAURITIUS
Laid down in 1776 by M.le Vic.te Grenier
Lieut in the French Navy.
All that is not shaded, in this Chart, as Isle de France,
Malha &c.are the Shoals and Hlands misplaced in the
Old Charts, which are here laid down, under the same
names, in their proper Latitude & Longitude.
a. Belle Poulle feb.4 1775.M. le Chevalier Grenier.
b. Thelemaque A n.st 1770.M'.le Corre.
c . I'Heure du Berg Dec.T 1770 M.du Roflau.
d. Bien venu Feb.4 1773 M.Violette.
e. Diore A u.st 1773 M.Panon du Hazier.
f. Fernai Au.st 1772. M.Benard.
g. Cer f July 1756. M.Morphy.
h. Belle Poulle July 1773. M.le Chevalier Grenier.
i. I'Etoille du matin O ct 1771. M.la Billicre
References to the Tracs marked on this Chart .
k. Colubry Au.st 1773. M.Larche.
l. Catherine July 1773. M.Duclos.
m. I'Isle de France June 1771 M.Coetivy.
n. Digue Sep.T 1769. M.Chemin.
o. Petit Choifeul Au.st 1768. M.de la Carriere
p. Belle Poulle Oct.T 1772. M. le Chevalier Grerier.
q. I’Amiral Bofcawen July 1748
r. Diligente Sep.T 1767. M.Marion.
s. Cheval marin Apr.l 1774. M.Des Chiens.
t. Goelette le Favbri April 1775 . M.Rousie.
v. I'Henre du Berger June 1769. M.le Chevalier Grenier.
X. Tartane Flizab . th Dec.T 1743 & April 1744.
y . Fortune Sep.T 1771. M.Kguelin.
z . L'Iris Sep.T 1773. M.Simon.
J 3 ctr/tizjvtsnf ffjf *h»7-


ftiblifhrd ■oonrdiiij' «o An of I'ferlUmmc by Alvx T N<ttT i^j).
