

This pamphlet is a verbatim report of a LBOTURE delivered by the Rev
A. C. Hoggins, of St. Barnabas’, Ithaca, at the Trades Hall,
Turbot-street, Brisbane, under the auspices
of the Trades Hall Board, on
June 1, 1895.
Printed at the “Worker” Office, Trades Hall, Turbot Street.


Collectivism
A LECTURE DELIVERED BY REV. A. 0. HOGGINS
IN THE
TRADES HALL,
BRISBANE,
JUNE 1, 1895.
In describing the progress of science in poli-
tical economy vve found the various theories
culminating in the new political economy,
which is in some sense a combination of all
these various lines, and which, because it builds
itself upon a consideration of all the ideas and
theories of the past, is frequently called the his-
torical school, which is really the survival of
all the various teachings of the past, the
weaker and less valuable having been crushed
out while these remain.
So there is a new Socialism.
I described various forms of this doc-
trine in last lecture —State Socialism,
ancient and modern ; Communism of various
kinds, scientific Anarchism, the scientific
Socialism of (Germany, Social Democracy,
Christian Socialism of various kinds, co-opera-
tion and the like.
The New Socialism has drawn from all
these which still exist a series of ideas
which are gradually combining into a de-
finite scheme, which is known as “ Collect-
ivism.”
This may be defined as “the collective
ownership of land and capital as the means
of production, together with a distribu-
tion of products amongst all workers, produc-
tive or unproductive, according to the work
done,” this work done being measured, accord-
ing to the strictest views, by the hours of
labour bestowed upon it, and it is generally
added that skilled or specially disagreeable
labour is to be rated as a multiple of common
labour.
No fully worked-out statement of this
scheme has yet appeared—it may perhaps be
best considered in the works of those who
write against it.
The best compendium and defence of it is
perhaps the small book—Schaffio’sQuintescence
of Socialism.
But before considering the nature and prac-
ticability of Collectivism, it will be convenient
briefly to state the present position of Social-
ism in the chief countries of the world.
It will be seen that while the numerical
strength of Socialists has grown vastly,
revolutionary Socialism seems very gene-
rally to have passed away, and a spirit
of inquiry and practical watching of events
and opportunities to have taken its place.
The present seems thus to be a period of rest-
ing while the movements of the future are
carefully considered and prepared.
But one result of the present policy has been
a great division of forces.
Nearly all the great leaders have seen
that a policy of activity is necessary to
bind men together, and that has tended, as
in the case of Lassalle, to make many of them
revolutionary when otherwise they would not
have thought of being so.
However, amidst all divisions, we shall see
a very definite policy gradually emerging, es-
pecially in Germany, and being steadily and
often successfully pursued.
In this inquiry, we naturally turn first to Ger-
many as being the seat of the earliest and most
vigorous developments of Socialism.
Here the bulk of Socialists are gathered into
what is called the Socialistic Labour Party.
The form of Socialism adopted by them is
generally called Social Democracy—that is
Collectivism in which all government and au-
thority comes from the people themselves.
It is necessary to mention this because large
numbers of more thoughtful Socialists of Ger-
many—many of the professors of the universi-
ties, &c., “Socialists of the Chair” as they
are called—advocate a form of Collectivism
in which the executive shall still rest with
the Imperial and other existing authorities.
Roscher (late) was the greatest of these;
Schaffle, to some extent, would, I think, advo-
cate this view, and Lassalle himself, in late
years, advocated National Socialism to be
built on the existing conditions of each
country.
The Christian Socialists, too, are numerous,
founded by Bishop Ketteler of Mayence, and
organised by Canon Moufang of the same
place.
Bishop Martensen, also a great theological
writer, is a strong advocate of Socialism, and
among Lutherans, Todt and Stocker.
But the Social-Democrats are the body which
is chiefly connected with the movement and by
which the Parliamentary agitation is carried
on.
Their programme was drawn up at the Gotha
congress in 1876, after the union of the fol-
lowers of Marx and Lassalle, and as it is the
accepted creed of Social-Democrats throughout
the world with very little change to the present
day, it will be well to quote it in full. It is as
follows : (1) Labour is the source of all wealth
and civilisation, and since productive labour
as a whole is made possible only in this society
the entire produce of labour belongs to society,
that is, it belongs by an equal right to all its
members, each according to his reasonable
needs, upon condition of a universal obligation
to labour.


In existing society the instruments of labour
are the monopoly of the capitalist class; the
dependence of the labouring class which results
therefrom is the cause of misery and servitude
in all its forms.
The emancipation of Labour requires the
conversion of the instruments of labour into
the common property of society, and the
management of labour by association, and the
application cf the product with a view to the
general good and an equitable distribution.
The emancipation of Labour must be the work
of the labouring class, in relation to which all
other classes are only a reactionary mass.
(2) Starting from these principles, the
Socialistic Labour Party of Germany seeks, by
all lawful means, to establish a free State and
a Socialistic society, to break asunder the iron
law of wages by the abolition of the system of
wage-labour, the suppression of every form of
exploitation, and the correction of all political
and social inequality.
The Socialistic Labour Party of Germany,
although at first working within national
limits, is sensible of the international character
of the Labour movement, and resolved to fulfil
all the duties thereby laid on working men in
order to realise the brotherhood of all men.
The Socialistic Labour Party of Germany
demands, in order to pave the way for the
solution of the social question, the establish-
ment by State help of Socialistic productive as-
sociations under the Democratic control of the
people.
Productive associations for industry and agri-
culture should be created to such an extent
that the Socialistic organisation of all labour
may arise out of them.
The Socialistic Labour Party of Germany
demands, as the basis of the State ;
1. Universal, equal, and direct suffrage, to-
gether with secret and obligatory voting for all
citizens over 20 years of age, in all elections in
State and Commune. The election day must
be a Sunday or holiday.
2 Direct legislation by the people ; decision
on peace or war by the people.
3. Universal liability to military service;
militia instead of standing army.
4. Abolition of all exceptional laws, es-
pecially laws interfering with the liberty of the
press, of association, and of meeting; in
general, all laws restricting free expression of
opinion, free thought and free inquiry.
5. Administration of justice by the people.
Gratuitous justice.
6. Universal, compulsory, gratuitous and
equal education of the people by the State.
Religion to be declared a private affair.
The Socialistic Labour Party of Germany
demands, within the conditions of existing
society:
1. The utmost possible extension of political
rights and liberties in the sense of the above
demands.
2. The replacement of all existing taxes, and
especially of indirect taxes which peculiarly
burden the people, by a single progressive in-
come tax for State and Commune.
3. Unrestricted right of combination.
4. A normal working day, corresponding to
the needs of society; prohibition of Sunday
labour.
5. Prohibition of the labour of children and
of all labour for women that is injurious to
health and morality.
6. Laws for the protection of the life and
health of workmen. Sanitary control of work-
men’s dwellings. Inspection of mines, fac-
tories, workshops, and home industry by offi-
cers chosen by working men. An effective
Employers’ Liability Act.
7 Regulation of prison labour.
8, Entire freedom of management for all
funds for the assistance and support of work-
ing men.
The words “ by all lawful means ” were ex-
punged in 1880 at Wyden Congress after the
promulgation of the anti-Socialist laws, but
those laws being now either repealed or in-
operative, the general feeling is that the words
should be restored.
With this exception the Gotha programme
is still the platform of Social Democrats
throughout Europe, though some of its clauses
would certainly not now meet with general ac-
ceptance, and some are crude and vague, and
it will be seen that they conflict in several
points with the Collectivist’s ideal. Neverthe-
less, spite of the opposition of extreme men
and of the private opinion of some of the
leaders, as Bebel, work, is being vigorously
carried on on these lines.
The leaders are Liebknecht, Bebel, Volkmar
and Singer, and last year in elections for the
Imperial Diet they returned 44 members by
1,700,738 votes, an increase of 349,440 since ’9O,
and one-fourth of the total votes polled. They
possess 22 daily and 48 weekly newspapers—
circulation about 300,000. There is also an
Anarchist division under Most and Hasselman,
expelled from the party in 1880,
In France it was said in ’69 by Molinari that
of the more intelligent workmen nine out of
ten were Socialists. But work is hindered by
disunion.
There are some five divisions which have
tried, but never succeeded, in being able to
work together.
The largest is the “Workman’s Party”
founded by Guesde; they are followers of
Marx ; they have 450 branches, 300,000 mem-
bers, and 20 members in the Chamber of Depu-
ties.
The Possibilists are a strong division
founded by Brousse and Alleman, but organ-
ised only in Paris, and lately divided into two
portions, the Proletaire group and the Parti
Ouvrier.
There is also the Socialist Republican Party
with its organ, the Petite Bepuhlique.
And the revolutionary followers of Blanqui,
who declare themselves to be “ atheist, mate-
rialist, transformist, republican, revolutionist,
communist, and finally internationalist.” Their
organ is the Parti Sociale ; they call themselves
Communists, and number 10,000.
Here let me express my surprise that any
one should have been led by the similarity of
name to confound the Commune and Com-
munists of Paris at the close of the Franco-
German war with Communism in its Socialistic
meaning.
Some of the leaders (7 out of 70, I believe)
of that movement were Socialists, and later on
their followers adopted a Socialistic pro-


gramme, but the name simply refers to the In- There is but one revolutionary society of any
dependent Republican Government they de- strength among English speaking races, the
sired to establish —commune in French being “International Workman’s Association,” num-
sired to establish —commune in French being
nearly equivalent to parish with us, and the
movement was the outcome of the resthss, un-
quiet spirit which pervaded France at the
time, which felt that things were generally
wrong and the best thing they could do was to
overturn all existing institutions, trusting to
chance to supply something better in its place.
There are still many revolutionary Anarchist
associations in France anxious to work or
destroy on the same lines.
In November, ’94, five deputies in Parlia-
ment broke away from the main party and
formed an Anarchist Party there called the
“ Revolutionary Socialist Labour Party.”
There are also in France two schools of Chris-
tian Socialists, one under the Franciscan Father
le Basse and two Jesuit priests with the Count
Albert de Munn and the Marquis de la Tour
de Pin Chambly had 450 clubs or branches in
1880.
Christian Socialists are strong also in Switz-
erland and Belgium as well as in England.
It may be mentioned here that a congress of
these Socialists (third of its kind) was held in
1890 in Liege, when 1500 delegates from Ger-
many, Poland, Austria, Spain, France, and
England attended, of whom eight to ten were
Bishops and many statesmen and peers.
In Belgium 29 deputies to Parliament were
returned in October, 1894, chiefly among Wal-
loons.
In Austria there are two distinct parties.
And here a congress was held last March at
which 150 deputies attended.
In Denmark there is a Social-Democratic
Federation, and a small revolutionary section.
In Norway there are 56 unions with about
6000 members.
In Sweden there is one Socialist member
of Parliament, Dr. Brunkhorst.
In Italy there is greater division than else-
where. There is an Italian Democratic So-
ciety, and a Lombardy Labour Federation—
but the bulk of the agitation is among the
revolutionary school, the so-called Anarchists.
The same may be said to a large extent of
Spain, and in Russia, where the spread of
some form of Socialism is very wide, it mostly
belongs to the school of Anarchism known as
Nihilism.
In the United States there are many or-
ganisations. I have already spoken of the
Communistic Societies; their history is very
interesting and very suggestive. Noyes has
given account of 47 failures and Nordhoff of 72
successes among them. The failures are all
due to the difficulty of getting men to give
their best work without either a selfish or re-
ligious motive. The possession of capital has
had nothing to do with it. The successful
ones have mostly started without it. The 72
successful communities mostly belong to the
Shakers, who count for 57 of them, and the
Rappists, who possess strong though very pe-
culiar principles and are celibates. But even
they find that a hired man commonly does
twice the work of one of their own members.
Total members, only 5000. There is one, but
only one, Russian commune in California.
bering 15,000; but there are many German
societies. The Boston Anarchists are not
Socialists ; still less can the Chicago and other
“ Anarchists ” be so called. The “ United
Labour Party” follow Mr. George. The
“ Nationalists ” are really State Socialists. The
Socialistic Labour Party belongs to the Social
Democracy ideal, and had, in 1883, 38 branches
and some 20,000 members —with about sixteen
newspapers. Perhaps the most interesting
recent event in America is the founding last
year of a College of Sociology-—the first of its
kind, with many professors of special subjects
—at Hartford, Connecticut, conferring degrees
of Bachelor of Sociology.
In England there is the Social Democratic
Federation, with 91 branches and 4500 mem-
bers ; the Socialist League and the Hammer-
smith Socialist Society, the Fabian Society, the
Independent Labour Party, the Christian
Socialist Society (small but active), and the old
Christian Socialists, who favour co-operation.
Unions between these have been formed from
time to time, but the effects have not been
permanent. The Fabian Society is so called
because its principle is to bide its time and
wait for and seize opportunities as they come—
which is practically the policy now adopted by
the Social Democrats of Germany.
Not much has yet been done in Australia,
and authentic information is lacking. To sum
up, it would seem that the Social Movement
has reached everywhere a definite stage—a
stage where it may pause while it considers the
steps to be taken in the future. Its main
principles have been almost universally adopted.
Everyone feels that a new stage in human
progress is to be entered upon ; the old ideas
were right in their time and place ; there is
much in what Kidd says about each develop-
ment having its own work and having done it
by re-action bringing about the next by the
mischief it does when it has outlived its
utility. Individualism had its use ; but it is
now grown old, and what we have to consider
is what exactly is to take its place and how we
may the best accommodate ourselves to the
coming change.
Collectivism, I have already pointed out, is
the name given to the ideal of the future state
which is most commonly held at the present
time. But the revolutionary method is dis-
credited and generally discarded. But by Act,
step by step, it will come like every other
change in nature or society ; and so I said that
some day in the future men will rub their eyes
and say we have been working for socialism
and wondering when it would come, and lo !
here it is ; suddenly and unexpectedly we find
ourselves in the very midst of it. When this
will be it is idle to ask. Some speak airily of
a couple of generations. Rodbertus said five
centuries, and Lassalle two. Some fix the
year 2000 as the beginning of the social mil-
lenium. All this is nonsense. It has begun ;
we are in the Socialist state now ; how long it
will be before it is finally developed, or on what
lines that development will proceed, no one can
tell till he has lived in it and seen it. Why
then trouble about it? “Some of you,” says


Karl Pearson, “ cry out in astonishment. But State first, and then to the relief of the poor,
what is the use of working for such a Socialism ? If the land rental of England be about 70
We may never live to see it. We shall never
enjoy its happiness. Quite true, I reply, but
there is something nobler than working for
ourselves; there is a higher happiness than
self enjoyment—namely, the feeling that our
labours will have rendered our children free
from the misery through which we ourselves
have had to struggle.”
Bet us consider, then, some of the main
features of the Collectivist ideal with a view to
ascertaining what parts of it are practicable at
the present time and what must be postponed
for a period or altogether discarded. All land
and capital is to belong to the State —all
labourers nre to be servants of the State. The
whole product of labour is in some way to be
divided among the producers less only that
portion which is necessary for the general
service and for the support of non-productive
labourers—the managers or industrial leaders
to be appointed according to the Democratic
view directly by the people—these are the
main features of the ideal Collective state.
Let us take them each in turn.
The nationalisation of land and capital is no
doubt entirely practicable and, indeed, is being
very rapidly brought about at the present
time. The question is whether anything would
be gained by attempting to hasten the process.
Just a few words as to Mr. Henry George’s
proposal to nationalise land, only leaving
capital as it is in private hands. Hitherto we
have not mentioned Mr. George, which is
hardly fair, because in the beginning the move-
ment owed very much to him ; he is an honest,
powerful, attractive writer, and recognises as
strongly as anyone the Socialistic nature of
Christianity. But his proposal is altogether
unequal to the work he proposes it should ac-
complish. His teaching is that all the indus-
trial trouble comes from the exaction of rent.
Rent he takes to be, according to Ricardo, the
surplus profit—that is all that is earned above
what it would cost to grow the same crops on
the poorest soil —and he argues that whatever
improvements are made the result will be only
larger rent. But rent depends upon what the
farmer will pay-; under competition he will
often pay very much more than the surplus
profit. But the opening up of new countries
and the extension of trade has given him
power to decide for himself what portion of his
profit shall go to the landlord,. Thus rent has
for a considerable time shown a tendency to
decrease in European countries. Thus in Eng-
land figures taken in 1689, 1779, 1843, and the
present time, show that aerricultural rent was
in the first period 25 per cent of the total
product, in the second and third periods 26 per
cent. At the present time, according to some
70 millions out of 270 millions, that is 26 per
cent again, but according to Mulhall not more
than 58 millions or 2T| per cent. Besides, if it
be true that rent is the grand oppressor, op-
pression seems to have agreed very well with
the great middle class capitalists who have
sprung up during the century, for Mr. George
says all classes exeepjj the landowners have
equally suffered. The remedy, he says, is to
gradually crush out the landowners and ap-
propriate the rent of land to the service of the
millions and the cost of government 90 mil-
lions it dot s not appear that there would be
much left for the second object—the relief of
the poor. Bat supposing the thing done : the
great) capitalists remaining as they are now,
could there be any improvement in the con-
dition of the labourer ? Those who rent the
deer forests of Scotland and thus keep waste
for their amusement large tracts that might
produce food for thousands of souls the
American railway kings and English brewers
and the lik —are not the owners of the land ;
they might still rent their deer forests from
the State, and if rent were reduced the evil
would be greater. Nor would money be spent
on the improvement of the land as it is now by
private owners ; it has been shown that there
was pent on the Sutherland estates in the
years ’53 to ’B2 £250,000 more than was re-
ceiv< d in rent and dues. Mr. George is
equal : y wrong in supposing the productiveness
ot the soil to be unlimited, that if all land were
nationalised the greater the population the
more would the land produce to feed it. No
doubt land will produce vastly more than it
generally does, but the best stimulus to high
production is at present private ownership.
And if it be urged, justly, that every man born
into a country has a natural right to such share
of the soil as will suffice for his support, that
right will only become more valuable by every
provision that will tend to increase the pro-
ductiveness ot the soil. The fact is Mr.
George wrote his book in California at a time
when California was very much less densely
peopled than it is now, when in fact the con-
ditions were very similar to those existing
araongs f us now in Queensland. No doubt
there axu great evils connected with the land,
but it is not the question of rent that troubles
us. Our great evil is the absorption of land
for speculative purposes, which is allowed to
lie idle while agricultural settlers must travel
long distances to find vacant land for cultiva-
tion. Land nationalisation would meet this
d fficulty, but it can also be met much more
simply by a heavy land tax on unimproved
value. What is really required, as most
present day writers declare, is to appropriate
to the use of the State the unearned increment,
that increase in the value of land which comes
from no exertion, sagacity, or labour on the
part of its owner. And next to combine the
stimulus of private ownership with the ac-
knowledgment of the superior right of the
State: This might be accomplished in new
countiies by selling only long leasts of land
either for a lump sum or an annuity spread
over the term of the lease. In old countries
it must come about much more slowly, only by
heavy taxes on increased values derived from
increase of population. The betterment
principle is a step in this direction, and by the
growth of a social spirit leading to a recog-
nition of the authority of the State. Whole-
sale confiscation, direct or indirect, would be
impossible, or if possible disastrous. Mr.
George’s solution of industrial problems can-
not then be accepted, though he has done good
service in drawing attention to the social right
to the land and to the necessity of emphasising


this and remedying abuses by taxes on the locomotion within the municipality, parks,
land itself. hospitals, asylums, houses for the poorer
The nationalisation of capital is really a
simpler matter than the nationalisation of land
and the two together could be brought about
much more simply than the nationalisation of
land alone. But it is necessary here to be
certain how far the nationalisation of capital is
to be carried, for while the nationalisation of
land lies in the far distant future the nationali-
sation of capital is very close—it has indeed
begun. But for two things the world is not
yet ready—nor will be for perhaps centuries to
come; it is not ready for socialistic consump-
tion, not for universal socialistic production,
which would inevitably lead to the other.
Eugene Richter, in his celebrated skit on the
Socialistic S.ate, has made merry over the
social ownership of the means of enjoyment.
Prince Krapotkine, writing quite seriously
from his Anarchic standpoint, says that no
doubt one of the first steps that would be taken
by the Socialistic State in London, for in-
stance, would be requisition of all the large
mansions and villa residences to provide
lodging for the homeless and those whose
homes were unfit for habitation. There cer-
tainly seems a substantial sort of rough justice
in this at first sight; but each confiscation
must be general, and then we may consider
how we should receive it ourselves. Richter
gives a good illustration. One of the social
leaders returns to his home after the day’s
work. The officers of the State have just
arrived. You have a child’s cradle here, they
say. Yes, cries the old wife ; the cradle in
which all the children have lain—in which the
one we lost was lying when he died ; we keep
it always beside our own bed —it is our ten-
derest memorial. Ah, well, the officers reply,
we have nothing to do with that, there is a
demand for babies’ cradles ; you have. no use
for it, and we must have it. And so it goes in
spite of tears and protestations. No, as men
are now, there must be private ownership in
the means of enjoyment. Centuries hence I
believe men will be so much more perfect that
an absolutely common life may be possible and
desirable—but not yet. For similar reasons
the family life must be maintained as the
sacred centre from which afi the best emotions
rise, and where the best civic virtues may be
cultivated. As a Christian Socialist I feel very
strongly upon this point; but I think I shall
here command the sympathy of most of you,
and I do not propose to say more upon the
subject. Then, in addition to the private
ownership of the means of enjoyment, it is
clear that we are not ready for universal collec-
tivism. If the whole production of any parti-
cular article of consumption were in the hands
of the State, the State must control the con-
sumption of that article; if all articles of
consumption were produced by the State, the
supply of them would be entirely in the dis-
cretion of the State, and the consumption of
them could no longer be at the discretion of the
consumer.
How, then, can we say that nationalisation
of capital has begun? In three ways. The
most important is, perhaps, what may be
called the municipalisation of capital; this has
gone far and will go much farther; gas, water,
classes, homes as recently started in Glasgow
for widows and widowers, where children can
be cared for during the day, rational amuse-
ment for the people (as again in Glasgow),
where concerts of high class music are provided
by the city for Id. admiotance, or some charge
almost as trifling ; in an infinite number of
ways the great towns can nationalise or muni-
cipalise capital. And, further, by fixing fair
rates for their employes, they can probably
raise the rate of wages throughout their dis-
tricts, though this must be done cautiously, for
if the rate of wages be raised higher than par-
ticular industries can pay, then no good but
rather harm will be done to the labourers.
Then the State itself may assume industries, as
it has in the case of the post office, the tele-
graphs, the production of naval and military
stores, and the like. It may assume the means
of locomotion as it has the railways in the
colonies and partially in Belgium and Ger-
many. Education in all its branches, which
would of course, include religion, science,
philosophy, &c., should become the affair of
the State, as well as insurance for old age, and
provision against accident and sickness, as is
already done in Germany.
And there is a third way. The amassing of
capital in the hands of an individual is clearly
opposed in every way to Socialism. But
manufacturing businesses have now grown so
large that private capitalists can no longer find
money sufficient for them—thus the syndicate
has arisen, and by means of the syndicate
many comparatively poor men are able to be-
come part owners in very large concerns. In
fact, the income tax returns of almost all
countries show that the very large incomes
have ceased to grow while small fortunes are
largely increasing in number. Thus, in thirty
years,"ending 1879, while population increased
by 22 per cent, incomes liable to tax increased
161 per cent. Further, it was shown that
while incomes of £lOOO and upwards increased
165 per cent, those of £l5O to £4OO increased
256 per cent. Mr. Goschen, in 1887, showed
that, in ten preceding years, incomes of £lOOO
had decreased 2"4 per cent, those between £5OO
and £lOOO had remained stationary, while those
between £l5O and £5OO had increased 21'4 per
cent. And in joint stock companies the share-
holders had increased 72 per cent in number,
while the average holding had decreased from
£443 to £323. But now we have in like manner
got beyond the syndicate, and we see in
America the rise of the Trust.
To take an example, the Oil Trust of
Pennsylvania has absorbed into itself by pur-
chase or union all the oil production of the State.
By careful management and uniform conditions
it has so improved the production that it has
been able to lower the price of oil to the con-
sumer and increase the wages of the employes,
while obtaining much larger profits for its
shareholders. The dislike of monopolies in any
form make us fear these Trusts, but they
appear to be working excellently, so far. The
temptation to use their power to tax the con-
sumer may be too gre&t some day ; but, then,
| their very size and power will compel the State
to step in—it could never tolerate an imperium


in imperio taxing its own people. The State possibility of progress; and it is a law of
would take over the concern as it was paying nature that where there is not progress there is
the officers and managers their salaries, giving
a fair interest to the shareholders and using
the extra profits gradually to buy them out.
There is nothing to hinder this being done, and
the fear of it will probably for a long time be
sufficient to prevent its being dtme. But it is
clear that in this as in the two former ways the
nationalisation of capital is gradually preparing
for its accomplishment.
But now we come to the great difficulty of
collectivism. When the State has nationalised
all the land and capital how are the products
to be distributed? Very simply, say some—
value everything according to the hours of
labour spent in producing it; give every man a
labour cheque representing the hours he has
laboured and let him exchange it at his own
pleasure for commodities whose value has been
so ascertained. Well, let us find out the value
of a cloth coat. First, the wool has to be
grown, and you must count in the share of
labour contributed by the shepherd, the fencer,
the'boundary rider, the rouseabout, the sorter,
the presser, the cook, the carrier, the porters at
the railway, the railway officials, the lumpers
at the dock, the sailors and ship’s officers, those
who handle it at its destination, then for the
cloth, the agents, the factory hands, more
carriers, railway officials, &c., the cutters-out,
the measurer, the tailor, the selling clerks, the
bookkeeper, the porter who carries the goods
home, and a few more whom I have left out.
Every one of these has contributed something
to the value of the coat, and in justice his
share in its production should be credited to
him and debited to the coat. I do not doubt
that all this can be done, and that on a large
scale it will become very much simpler ; but,
in any case, it will absorb an enormous amount
of labour and an enormous number of clerks,
and I imagine the price of the coat will, in
consequence, be very much increased and the
value of increased wages very much discounted.
In short, though I believe the rewarding of
everyone in proportion to his work is what we
are tending to in preparation for the still
higher stage when each will receive only
according to his need, yet I think it is quite
impracticable for a long time yet to come.
But this is not the only difficulty connected
with distribution in the collectivist ideal. Are
all rewards to be uniform ? Are servants to be
allowed ? How is unproductive labour to be
rewarded ?
Schaffle and most authorities allow inequality
in reward —the manager, the inventor, the
skilled worker must be paid more than the
ordinary worker, or he will not exercise his
special gifts for the benefit of the community,
men being such as we know them to be. There
are two kinds of work which no one will care
to do—how are men to be persuaded to under-
take this while the rate of remuneration is the
same for all ? Some will have the labour supply
drilled and disciplined as an army of soldiers,
and each told off to the work for which he is
most fitted in the opinion of his superiors—
that is, all spontaneity, all freedom is to go;
that is just what a good many opponents of
collectivism think will be its necessary result.
Under such circumstances there would be no
retrogression. Here, then, comes in the tyranny
of Socialism so often spoken of, and it is on
the supposition of this loss of liberty that Pro-
fessor Pear on foretells that the future of
Europe is, first, Socialism, and then gradual
relapse into barbarism. And if these leaders,
who have thus the lives of the community in
their hands, are, according to the democratic
principle, chosen by the whole people, we shall
have the very worst form of the tyranny of the
majority, of the mob, that the world has yet
seen. This method is, then, impossible. Others
would, somewhat after the plan of Rodbertus
already described, rate every occupation ac-
cording to its agreeable or disagreeable charac-
ter or the intensity of labour it demands ; so
that, while the reward remains the same, the
duration of the labour will vary inversely as its
painfulmss. But this, again, would involve
much labom—unproductive labour which has to
be paid for—-md would h-ad to many special
evils of its own—such a s * jealous}? and irritation
on the part of those who work longer hours,
and excess of demand for the b.iefcr though
harder tasks. On the whole, the only practi-
cable solution seems to be inequality of reward.
But probably in the future conditions a very
much less inequality will be sufficient than
seems to be demanded now. Indeed, it may
be said that it is not the inequality of incomes
that troubles us now but the greatness of the
inequality. The tendency, I have already
shown, is even how to the lessening of this, and
I think I may say that herein lies really the
practical problem of to-day.
Inequality of income will tend to accumula-
tion —that Schiiffle recognises, and he and
other modern writers would permit not only
this but inheritance also. Only interest in any
form is to be entirely forbidden, so that accu-
mulations would lead only to personal gratifi-
cation and could never be very great. There
would be no money, no stocks, no shares, &e.,
so that property could consist only of houses
(not lands, for they would be rented from the
State), pictures, works of art, and, perhaps, to
a slight extent luxuries of consumption, such as
wines. Such accumulations would be for the
benefit of the community, and they might be
accumulated for several generations without
much danger of excess.
Then will servants be allowed ? A few say
no, but most permit them. Obviously there
are certain domestic duties which must be per-
formed, and the State must find labourers to do
them. But the great question is: Should a
man with great powers of invention or organisa-
tion spend time in making his bed, brushing
and mending his clothes, &c., when that time
could be used with so much more advantage to
the State ? The answer must be no. Such a
man must have servants, and even several. It
may even, as Schaffle says, be to the advantage
of the State that its leaders should have suffi-
cient servants to enable them to keep up some
degree of splendour. The only question then
remaining is: Should these servants be re-
warded by the State or by the persons on
whom they are to attend ? If there is to be
inequality in reward no doubt the latter would
be the case and the reward of the leaders


would be so calculated as to allow for the pro-
vision of one or more servants.
Then, as to unproductive labour. This is
comparatively simple. The productive labourers
such as the physician, the priest, the lawyer
(for the lawyer can never be entirely abolished
however much his occupation may be limited),
the artist, the organiser, the public entertainer,
may be either a charge on the State or on (he
individual to whose needs they minister. Pro-
bably there will be a combination of the two
methods. The abolition of private rewards
might lead to bribery ; payment by the State
would be most satisfactory, but might lead to
the suppression of individual talent. In any
case, we have here at least one instance in
which the action of the Collectivist State
cannot fail to be an improvement upon the
present system. The last question I shall treat
of in the Collectivist State is the appointment
of its leaders. This is, perhaps, as great a
difficulty as any we have touched upon. And
it is remarkable how reticent collectivist writers
generally are about it. In Plato’s “ Republic”
the wise were to rule, the brave to protect the
community. More, in the “Utopia,” placed
the wisest at its head. The St. Simonians
selected those who showed a capacity for
government. Many German Socialists would
retain an hereditary monarchy, and the German
Emperor himself seems to have some such
thought in his mind. Bismarck declared that
the traditional policy of the Hapsburg monarchy
was Socialistic; and it really seems as if the
present policy of the German Government
would bear out the contention. But of course
Social Democracy will hear of nothing but
direct election by the people. And here, as
men are, the scheme would wreck. Men must
improve very much, as in fact I believe they
will, before direct election of their rulers by
the people is possible. For what would there
be to prevent the popular man, as now, ob-
taining a majority of votes quite independently
of his ability to govern ? What is to prevent
him, when elected, acting so as to gain sup-
porters to secure his re-election ? How, in
short, under a system of direct popular election
are we to prevent all the evils of the present ?
The answer will, of course, be the greater in-
telligence and devotion to the State of the
people; and the answer, I admit, is sufficient
when that greater intelligence and that greater
devotion to the State has been obtained. But
not yet. Many methods have been suggested
to avoid this difficulty. Groniund would have
all [ romotion come from immediately below,
the workers choosing the foremen, the foremen
the managers, and the managers the rulers, but
each would be removable only by his superior,
so that obedience and discipline might
be maintained. Fourier would have elected
heads of departments called Omniarchs,
who, together, should form the executive
government. Carlyle had much the same idea
as Groniund —his managers he called captains
of industry ? For the higher offices Groniund
proposes that all the managers or chiefs in a
given district should elect a district superin-
tendent, the district superintendents from all
parts a bureau chief in each trade, and the
bureau chiefs in connected industries a
of department, the chiefs of departments forc-
ing the executive government. There is to be
no individual head, yet there must of neces-
sity be a chairman, and it is easy to see what
power such a man could wield. Let the term
of cffice be ever so short, let a Caesar or Napo-
leon once gain the position, and with the
almost infinite power of bribery and favourit-
ism at his disposal, how long would it take him
to establish an absolute monarchy with himself
at its head ? While human nature is what it
is, here is the great difficulty of Democratic
Socialism. Of course a revolution might estab-
lish Collectivism in a month’s time, but when
established would there be any assurance of
permanence in it ? Doubtlessly it is coming,
but the world is not ripe for it yet, and we
have all much to learn. To study, to learn,
and to teach —that is our work for the present.
These difficulties, and others, I have had no
time to refer to —such as the freedom of
opinion, and of the press, books, &c., very
serious and important questions, will solve
themselves in the light of further knowledge
when the time for their solution arrives.
For myself, I believe the ultimate destiny of
the human race will be realised in the form of
a pure Anarchic Communism —that is a com-
munism both of production and consumption,
where there will be no need of rulers, for every-
one will desire to do only what is right and to
help and please his neighbour. A well-known
mediaeval story tells of two monks who tried
to quarrel and found it was impossible. That
will be the condition under the future Com-
munism—the new heaven and earth that is
promised. But you can judge for yourselves
how far that is possible now. I do not think
that working men as a rule really desire Col-
lectivism as yet —there is very much learning
and teaching first to be done. But when the
mass of men really desire it, when the world is
ready for it, then it will come, and other pro-
gressive steps after it. Meanwhile we must do
what English and German Socialists with much
common sense are doing—wait -and watch our
opportunities, seizing every chance that pre-
sents itself to advance the glorious, but as yet
distant, end we have in view.
