

?GTH
R»EXig/o us
PA hp, ©ox <3
5(5M
COLONIAL CHURCH LEGISLATION
AN ENQUIRY
INTO THE
ECCLESIASTICAL LAW
OP THE
COLONIES AND DEPENDENCIES OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND INTO THE
BEST MEANS OF REMEDYING ITS DEFECTS.
HENRY VENN, B. D.,
Prebendary of St. Paul’s.
WITH OBSERVATIONS BY THE
LORD BISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
SEELEY, JACKSON, AND HALLIDAY, FLEET STREET ;
AND B. SEELEY, HANOVER STREET.
LONDON : MDCCCLVI,
Price One Shilling.




AN ENQUIRY,
&C., &G.
In the discussions which have taken place upon the
subject of Colonial Church Legislation, it has been too
often taken for granted that Ecclesiastical Law is the same
in all the Colonies of Great Britain; and that one general
Church Constitution may be provided for all, by an Act
of the Imperial Parliament.
The following observations are intended to show that
this is an erroneous view of the subject; and to assist an
enquiry into the laws Ecclesiastical, which govern the
members of the United Church of England and Ireland, in
the different Colonies and Dependencies of Great Britain :
—as well as to suggest the mode in which a remedy may
be best applied to the difficulties which have arisen
in the regulation of Church affairs, in several Colonial
Dioceses. *
The proposed enquiry will consist of three branches :
1. What legislation. Imperial or Colonial, has
already taken place in respect of the Church in the
Colonies ?
What portion of the Ecclesiastical Law of
England is of force in the Colonies?
3. What remedies may be applied to the
alleged defects of Colonial Ecclesiastical Law?
The first measure of the Imperial Legislature in respect
of the Church in the Colonies, appears to have been in
the case of Nova Scotia , under which name the whole
of the North American Colonies were then comprised, in


the year 1791, consequent upon the establishment of a
bishopric for that Province. This was the first of the
Colonial Sees, and had been erected a few years previ-
ously, in 1787, by Letters Patent, These Letters Patent
recite a local Act of an earlier date, which had established
the Church of England in that Province—'“ Whereas, by
an Act passed in the year 1758, by the Governor, Council,
and Assembly of the said Province of Nova Scotia, it is
enacted that the sacred rites and ceremonies of Divine
worship according to the Liturgy of the Church estab-
lished by the laws of England, shall be deemed the fixed
form of worship within the said Province.”
The Act of the Imperial Parliament (31 Geo. 111., c.
31, 1791), commonly called, “ The Constitutional Act of
the Canadas,” enables the Governor to form parsonages,
rectories, &c., and to present to every such parsonage
or rectory an incumbent or minister of the Church of
England, who shall have beten duly ordained according
to the rites of the said Church*, and to supply, from time to
time, such vacancies as may happen therein; and that
every person so presented tto any such parsonage or
rectory, shall hold or enjoy' the same, and all rights,
profits, or emoluments, thereumto belonging, or granted, as
fully and amply, and in the saime manner, and on the same
terms and conditions, and liable to the performance of the
same duties as the incumbent (of a parsonage or rectory in
England.” (Sec. 39.) “ That ewery such presentation of an
incumbent or minister, to any such parsonage or rectory.
and also the enjoyment of any such parsonage or rectory,
and of the rights, profits, and emoluments thereof, by any
such incumbent or minister, shall be subject and liable to
all rights of institution, and all other Spiritual and Eccle-
siastical jurisdiction and authority, which have been
lawfully granted by his Majesty’s Royal Letters Patent to
the Bishop of Nova Scotia, or which may hereafter by His
Majesty’s royal authority be lawfully granted, or appointed


to be administered and execuited within the said provinces*
or either of them respectively by the said bishop of Nova
Scotia, or by any other persom or persons, according to the
laws and canons of the Chmrch of England, which are
lawfully made and received im England.” (Sec. 40.)
The next instance of Imp«erial Legislation, appears to
have been in the case of thie East Indies . An Act was
passed in 1813 (53 Geo. 111. cc. 155,) which recites, that if
it shall please His Majesty tto constitute a bishopric, the
bishop shall not have or use any jurisdiction, or exercise
any episcopal functions whattsoever, either in the East
Indies or elsewhere, but only/ such jurisdiction and func-
tions, as shall or may, from tirnie to time be limited to him
by His Majesty by Letters Patent under the Great Seal
of the United Kingdom. (Sec;. 51.)
“ That it shall and may be dawful for His Majesty from
time to time, if he shall thinlk fit, by his Letters Patent
under the Great Seal of the saiid United Kingdom, to grant
to such bishop, so to be nominated and appointed as
aforesaid, such ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the exercise
of such episcopal functions within the East Indies and parts
aforesaid, as His Majesty shall think necessary for the
administering holy ceremonies, and for the superintend-
ence and good government of tthe ministers of the Church
establishment within the East Indies and parts aforesaid,
any law, charter, or other mattier or thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.” (Sec. 52.)
“ That when and as often ass it shall please His Majesty
to issue any Letters Patent respecting any such bishopric
or archdeaconry as aforesaid, or for the nomination or
appointment of any person theereto, the warrant for the
bill in every such case shall be countersigned by the
President of the Board of Comimissioners for the affairs of
India.” (Sec. 53.)
In the West Indies two bishoprics were erected by
Letters Patent in the year without any previous


Act of the Imperial Parliament. But in the next year,
1825, an Act was passed to provide salaries for a certain
number of bishops, archdeacons, ministers, and catechists.
The first section of this Act (6 Geo. IV. c. 88,) recognizes
the Letters Patent in these terms, "Whereas His Majesty,
by his several Poyal Letters Patent has been graciously
pleased to direct and appoint, that the Island of Jamaica,
&c. &c., should be and become a bishopric and the diocese
and see of a bishop of the United Church of England and
Ireland, as by law established, to be called, &c. &c. be it
enacted that the persons who shall from time to time ex-
ercise and enjoy the several dignities and offices herein-
after mentioned, under or by virtue of His Majesty’s
Letters Patent, or authority, shall receive the seveial sa-
laries, &c. &c.”
This Act relates merely to salaries and pensions, and
does not define the authority o>f the bishops, or the status
of the clergy.
In the case of one of the West Indian Colonies, the
Bahamas, an Imperial Act was passed, prior to the fore-
going, (6 Geo. IV. c. 12,) giving the Bishop of Jamaica
jurisdiction within the Bahamas, and " all laws, ordinances,
and canons ecclesiastical, which are now in use and force
in England, are to be in force over the clergy in the Ba-
hamas.” It is noticeable, that a former Act of Parliament
(40 Geo. 111. c. 2,) had enacted that the Common Law
of England, except as to Ecclesiastical affairs, and some
other specified matters, should be in force in the Bahamas.
After the erection of the West Indian bishoprics.
the Colonial Legislatures in each island passed nume-
rous laws relating to the jurisdiction of the Bishops,
and to ecclesiastical affairs. The case is thus referred
to by Sir James Stephen : “ I hold that all our Colo-
nial Legislatures are already competent to adapt the
Ecclesiastical Law to their respective local exigencies.
In proof of that conclusion, I refer to the Statute


boobs of the West India (Colonies, in which will be
found a long series of enactments of that nature, com-
mencing with the year 18825, and continued to the
present time.” (Letter to tlhe Earl of Harrowby.)
In the case of the CJoloyixqs , no Imperial
Act has been passed in rmspect of the bishoprics, or
of the Ecclesiastical Law. TThe Act (9 Geo. IY. c. 83,)
being the Constitutional Acfc for New South Wales and
Van Diemen’s Land, declares, that all the laws and
statutes in force within the realm of England, at the
time of passing the Act, slhall be applied in the ad-
ministration of justice in tthe Courts of New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s respectively, so far as
the same can be applied within the said Colonies;
and if any doubts shall arise as to the application of
any such laws or statutes, the Governors and Legis-
lative Councils are to dechare by ordinance whether
such laws and statutes shall be deemed to extend to
such Colonies. (Section 24.) These general terms, even
if stretched to apply to Ecclesiastical Law, are only the
enunciation of a principle respecting the transfer of British
Law into British Colonies, to which reference will be sub-
sequently made.
The Colonial Legislatures in Australia, have passed
laws to regulate the temporal affairs of Churches and
Chapels of the United Church of England and Ireland,
but these acts do not touch the question of what Eccle-
siastical Laws are in force in those Colonies.
A question has arisen respecting the power of Royal
Letters I atent to convey jurisdiction and legal autho-
rity to a Bishop. The care taken in the case of Nova
Scotia and of the East Indies, to strengthen the Letters
Patent by Acts of Parliament, raises at least a pre-
sumption that the royal authority is insufficient in itself
to do more than assign territorial limits to a Diocese,


and to designate the individual for the See. Dr. I hil-
limore, indeed, remarks in his edition of Burns’ Eccle-
siastical Law (Vol. i. p. 415, mm in). _ . .
“In order to ascertain the authority and jurisdiction
which may he exercised by any Diocesan of a Colo-
nial See, the patent of his appointment must be con-
sulted; but, generally speaking, he is empowered to
exercise personally, or through his Commissary or Com-
missaries, the same ecclesiastisal jurisdiction and autlio-
rity as may be exercised according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws and Canons of England.”
The soundness of this doctrine was brought to the
test by the Bishop of Tasmania, who claimed to exer-
cise such jurisdiction, and who pleaded the words of
his patent to that effect. The members of the Scotch
Presbyterian Church in the Colony, and the Estab-
lished Church in Scotland, presented Memorials to
the Government denying the pmwer of the Queen to
grant any such jurisdiction, andl prayed that such part
of the Letters Patent might be (cancelled.
The matter, after much correspondence, was submitted
to the Law Officers of the Crown * who gave their opinion
that Her Majesty has no authority, by Letters Patent,
to create such Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the Letters
Patent were altered, with the Bishop’s consent, to a more
general form, which has been since adopted in other
patents, giving the Bishop power ££ to perform, all the func-
tions peculiar and appropriate to the office of a Bishop
within the said Diocese And especially to give in-
stitution to benefices, to grant licences to officiate, to visit
all ministers in holy orders resident within the Diocese;
as also to call them before him, and enquire as well
concerning their morals as their behaviour in their said
offices and stations respectively.” (See Pari. Papers, 175,
25th March, 1850.)
It seems therefore that the Royal Letters Patent can


convey no authority and power to the Bishop beyond
that allowed by the Laws Ecclesiastical in force in the
Colony.
The foregoing review wiill show that the Ecclesiastical
Laws and Canons of Englland have been imported by
express legislation, to a greaiter or less extent, into various
Colonies. In such cases, tlhe state of the Ecclesiastical
Law depends upon the construction of Statutes. But
where there has been no Imiperial or Colonial Legislation,
the question arises, how fair the members of the United
Church of England and Irceland carry with them their
Ecclesiastical Law into the dlependencies of Great Britain.
In pursuing the proposedl enquiry, two points present
themselves as involved in tlhe question.
1. How far the Colonist® of Great Britain carry with
them the Ecclesiastical laws in force in the mother coun-
try, which are not expressly restricted to any one part
of the United Kingdom.
2. What part of the Ecclesiastical law of England is
so restricted.
1. The general principle which regulates the transfer
of the law of England into tthe British Colonies is thus
stated by Blackstone, in a paxssage quoted by Dr. Philli-
more, in his edition of “Burns’ Ecclesiastical Law,”
under the title, “ Church in the Colonies, General Prin-
ciples relating thereto.”
“ It hath been held that if an uninhabited countrv be
discovered and planted by English subjects, all the
English laws then in being, which are the birthright of
every subject, are immediately there in force. But this
must be understood with veery many and very great
restrictions. Such Colonists carry with them only so


much, of the English law as is applicable to their own
situation, and the condition of an infant Colony; such,
for instance, as the general rules of inheritance, and of
protection from personal injuries. The artificial refine-
ments and distinctions incident to the property of a
great and commercial people, the laws of police and
revenue (such especially as are enforced by penalties),
the mode of maintenance for the established Clergy, the
jurisdiction of spiritual courts, and a multitude of other
provisions, are neither necessary nor convenient to
them, and therefore are not in force. What shall be
admitted and what rejected, at what times, and under
what circumstances, must, in case of dispute, be de-
cided in the first instance by their own provincial judi-
cature, subject to the revision and control of the King in
council $ the whole of their constitution being also liable
to be new modelled and reformed by the general super-
intending power of the legislature in their mother coun-
try. But in conquered or ceded countries that have
already laws of their own, the King may indeed alter and
change these laws, but till he does actually change them,
the ancient laws of the country remain, unless such as are
against the law of God, as in the case of an infidel country.
Our American plantations are principally of this latter
sort, being obtained in the last century, either by right
of conquest, and driving out the natives (with what
natural justice I shall not at present enquire), or by
treaties ; and therefore the Common Law of England,
as such, has no allowance or authority there, they being
no part of the mother country, but distinct (though
dependent) dominions. They are subject, however, to
the control of the Parliament, though (like Ireland, Mann,
and the rest,) not bound by any Acts of Parliament,
unless particularly named.”—(Blackstone’s Com., Introd.
iv. p. 190.)
The question before us is one of difficulty. The state


of Ecclesiastical Law in England is confessedly, in many
particulars, imperfect and uncertain ; and if the Colonies
have further to enquire what part of this law is appli-
cable to their own circumstancces, the investigation will
become a complicated one. It seems especially question-
able how far the Canon Law,, and the Canons of 1603,
are in force in the Colonies. Upcon one part of Blackstone’s
statement there can, however, Ibe no doubt, namely, that
“ the jurisdiction of Spiritual Cteurts ” is “not in force ”
in the Colonies: although in tlhe East Indies Consistorial
Courts have been established under the provisions of
the Act of Parliament alreadyr referred to. Generally
speaking, also, no provision lhas been made to supply
this want of Ecclesiastical Courts, in which charges
against a clergyman may be judicially enquired into and
adjudged. This is a most irmportant requisite in the
Colonial Church System. Hitherto it has been less
urgent in those Colonies in which most of the clergy-
men have been supported by Societies which have the
purse strings under their control. But as the Colonial
Church becomes settled, the need of such means for
exercising discipline becomes more and more manifest and
imperative.
If the application of Blackstone’s doctrine to Ecclesi-
astical Law, generally, be disputed, yet this need not em-
barrass the present enquiry, which is instituted upon the
supposition that the members of the united Church in
any Colony continue such, and desire to carry out their
Church system, and to retain as close a connexion with
the Mother Church as their circumstances will allow of.
The Bishops and Clergy have also all entered into
solemn declarations and oaths at their consecration and
ordination, “ always so to minister the doctrine and Sacra-
ments, and the discipline of Christ as the Lord hath
commanded, and as this Churclh and realm hath received
the same, according to the commandments of God.*’


In all practical questions of ritual or discipline, refe-
rence should be had to the general tone and spirit of
the Church of England as a Protestant and reformed
branch of the Church of Christ. There should be no
going back to Popish times, or to the scanty and un-
certain records of patristic precedents. The Church of
the Reformation, as established, and as gradually ma-
tured in the reigns of King Edward the Sixth and
Queen Elizabeth, will afford the best precedents for an
Episcopal Church, which is to win the hearts and cordial
co-operation of British subjects, and to perform the great
ecclesiastical duty of gathering souls into the fold of
Christ, and of building them up in their most holy
faith.
2. There is less perplexity in respect of Statute Law :
much of which is restricted in terms to England and
W ales.
Many statutes have been, passed by the Imperial
Parliament for the regulation! of the Church, which
do not extend to the Church in Ireland, and which
cannot be regarded as laws of the United Church of
England and Ireland, of which every Colonial Church is
a branch.
Among these may be mentioned, as important to our
present enquiry, the Clergy Discipline Act, under the pro-
visions of which discipline is now exercised in the Church
of England, which has no force in the Colonies, being
for England and Wales. (3 & 4 Vic. c. 86, a.d. 1840.)
So also the Acts which now regulate the status of
stipendiary curates in England.
The most important enquiry, however, under this head
respects the Acts of Uniformity. Uniformity of Common
Prayer, and service in the Church and administration
of the Sacraments is enjoined by two Acts —viz., 1 Eliz.
c. 2, a.d. 1558; and 13 & 14 Car. 11., c. 4, a.d. 1662.
The former Act binds “ All and singular ministers in


any Cathedral or parish Church, or other place within
this realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the
same or other the Queen’s dominions.”—(Clause 8.) —
And the last clause enacts, That all laws, statutes,
and ordinances, wherein or whiereby any other service,
administration of Sacraments, or Common Prayer, is
limited, established, or set fortlh, to be used within this
realm, or any other the Queen’&s dominions or countries,
shall from henceforth be void amd of none effect.”
The second Act of Uniformitty, though it confirms the
former Act of Elizabeth, substtituting the new Prayer-
book in the place of the former: edition, yet in respect of
the new subscriptions which it iimposes, and in respect of
certain other particulars, only binds, “All and singular
ministers in any Cathedral, Colllegiate, or parish Church
or Chapel, or other place of pmblic worship within this
realm of England, dominion of Wales, and town of Ber-
wick-upon-Tweed.” (Clause and in subsequent
clauses the provisions of the Act are restricted to ministers
and places of worship “ within this realm of England, or
places aforesaid.”
It is easy to point out reasons of this restrictive lan-
guage : for the Episcopal Church was established by law
in Scotland from 1660 to 1668, but encountered so much
resistance that it would have been impossible to attempt
the introduction of such an Act into that part of the
King’s dominions. Several of the American Colonies also
were the refuge of the Republicans and Non-Conformists,
and it was the policy of the Government rather to encou-
rage their emigration than to check it, by introducing the
provisions of the Act into those dependencies. Neither
were the provisions of this Act transferred to Ireland till
three years after it had been adopted in England, viz.,
Stat. 17 & 18 Car. 11. c. 6 (Ireland), a.d. 1665, and then
in a modified form, and after a consultation with the two
Houses of Convocation in Ireland. On these grounds it


is presumed that the second Act of Uniformity does not
necessarily extend to the Colonies, unless imported into
them by express legislation.*
Now, it is to be observed, that it is only the
second Act which enjoins upon beneficed Clergymen
* A few historical references to the Colonies which existed at the
time of passing this Act will serve still farther to illustrate the
subject.
Virginia had been settled many years before this date, and had
its own Legislative Assembly. Its governor, Berkeley, returned
to Yirginia after a visit to England at the close of 1662, and took
with him Instructions from the Crown, which directed that —“ the
Book of Common Prayer as it is now established, be read each
Sunday and holiday, and the blessed Sacrament administered
according to the rites of the Church of England.” . . . . “ That
no minister be preferred by you to any ecclesiastical benefice in
that our Colony, without a certificate from the Bishop of London
of his being conformable to the doctrine and discipline of the
Church of England.” . . . . “ And because we are willing to give
all possible encouragement to persons of different persuasions in
matters of religion, to transport themselves thither with their
stocks, you are not to suffer any man to be molested or disquieted
in the exercise of his religion, so he be content with a quiet and
peaceable enjoying it, not giving therein offence or scandal to the
government. But we oblige you in your own house and family
to the profession of the Protestant religion, according as it is now
established in our kingdom of England ; and the recommending
of it unto all others under your government, so far as it may con-
sist with the peace and quiet of our said colony. ( ( Histoiy of the
Colonial Church,” Anderson, Yol. ii. p. 548.) The manifest contra-
riety of this language to the Act of Uniformity, passed a few months
previously by Parliament, is striking j and shows that the Act was
not supposed at the time to extend to the Foreign Dependencies of
the Crown.
The first Charter given to South Carolina is dated March 24,
1662-3, about ten months after the passing of the Act of Uniformity.
It conferred the government and possession of the country to eight
Lords’ Proprietors, including the Lord Chancellor Clarendon, the
Duke of Albemarle, the first Lord Shaftesbury, then Chancellor of
the Exchequer, and others. The language of this Charter, in respect
of uniformity, is still more remarkable. The third article enjoins
churches to be built, and “to be dedicated and consecrated accord-


the declaration of “ unfeigned assent and consent, to
all and everything contained in the Book of Common
ing to the ecclesiastical laws of omr kingdom of England.” But
the 18th Article declares —“ And because it may happen that some
of the people and inhabitants of thee said province, cannot in their
private opinion conform to the pulblic exercises of religion accord-
ing to the Liturgy, Forms, and (Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or take and subscribe tllie oaths and articles made and
established in that behalf, and for (that the same by reason of the
remote distances of these places, will, we hope, be no breach of
the unity and uniformity established! in this nation. Our will and
pleasure therefore is, and we do by these presents for us, our heirs
and successors, give and grant umto the said Edward, &c., their
heirs and assigns, full and free licsence, liberty, and authority, by
legal ways and means as they shaill think fit, to give and grant
unto such person and persons, inlhabiting and being within the
said province, or any other part thtereof, who really in their judg-
ments and for conscience’ sake, camnot or shall not conform to
the said Liturgy and Ceremonies, amd take and subscribe the oaths
and articles aforesaid or any of tlhem, such indulgences and dis-
pensations in that behalf, for and during such time and times, and
with such limitations and restrictions, as they, the said Edward,
&c., shall in their discretion think fit and reasonable; and with
this express provision and limitathon also, that such person and
persons, to whom such indulgences, shall be granted as aforesaid,
do, and shall from time to time desclare and continue all fidelity,
and loyalty, and obedience, to us, omr heirs and successors, and be
subject and obedient to all other, the laws, ordinances, and con-
stitutions of the said Province, in aill matters whatsoever, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, and do not in any wise disturb the peace
and safety thereof, or scandalize amd reproach the said Liturgy,
Forms, or Ceremonies, or anything reelating thereunto, or any person
or persons whatsoever, for, or in irespect of his or their use or
exercise thereof, or his or their obediience or conformity thereunto.”
(“History of the Colonial Church..” Anderson, Yol. ii. p. 517.)
The Province of New York was conquered from the Dutch in
1664, and a Charter was granted tto the Duke of York, and the
Colony was governed from 1664 to 1683, by a code known as the
Laws of the Duke of York, the IFourth Section of which runs
thus — u That no minister shall be aallowed to officiate within the
government, but such as shall producce testimonials to the governor


Prayer 5, ~which declaration, though it may be shown to
be justly interpreted, as only declaring assent and con-
sent “ to the use of the book,” yet has been a stumbling-
block and hindrance to a large body of conscientious
members of the Church of England.
The second Act of Uniformity, also, first declared the
necessity of Episcopal ordination to the holding of any
benefice or preferment in England, which caused a large
body of persons who had received Presbyterian ordination,
to be ejected from their preferment.
It is, therefore, a question whether a Bishop of the
United Church of England and Ireland, in certain
Colonies, has not the power to give a licence to a
Presbyterian minister, upon his conformity to the Church,
without Episcopal ordination; but even if this point
be doubtful, a great barrier would be removed against
the reception of many who would willingly unite with
the Church, if the other requirement of the second Act
of Uniformity be removed.
At all events, such Colonies as have not imported
into their codes of law, the whole of the Ecclesiastical
Law of England, are at liberty to determine how far
provisions made in England under the very peculiar
state' of things in 1662 are “ applicable to their own
situation : 99 and whether the Church in the Colonies
should not stand in the position which it occupied in
England after the Restoration, and before that fatal Feast
of St. Bartholomew, in 1662, which unhappily excluded
that he hath received ordination either from some Protestant
Bishop or minister within some part of his Majesty’s dominions,
or the dominions of some foreign Prince of the reformed religion :
upon which testimony the governor shall induct the said minister
into the parish that shall make presentation of him as duly elected
by the major part of the inhabitants, householders.” Similar pro-
visions were afterwards embodied in Local Acts. (Hoffman’s Law
of the Episcopal Church of America, p. 17.)


Note, p. 14, line 11.
The statement in the text refeirs only to the Acts of Uniformity.
Uut the Preface to the Ordinatican Service in the .Book of Common
Prayer expressly requires Episcojpal ordination.


from its pale many of the brightest ornaments, and
most useful ministers of the Church of Christ.
111.
The foregoing statements wiill show that Ecclesiastical
Law in the Colonies is uncertaiin and defective, and that
a remedy is needed. It has Ibeen shown, also, that the
state of things in different Colonies is so varied, that
the remedy must he varied acccording to the existing state
of Ecclesiastical Law in each Colony. The same state-
ments will further indicate the imode in which the remedy
is to be sought and applied, mamely, by the joint action
of Imperial and Colonial Legislation : and will suggest
an answer to the practical qucestion. How may a remedy
be best applied to the defecttive state of the Church
system in the Colonies ?
Eor the resolution of this qucestion, it is necessary, first
to notice certain abortive attemipts already made in Par-
liament, and then to point out another and safer course,
and also to show that the Australian Colonies have in fact
made much progress in the course suggested.
(1.) It was first proposed to pass an Act of Parliament,
to give power to the Bishops,, Clergy, and laity of any
Colony to meet together, and tto make whatever Ecclesi-
astical regulations they might dteem necessary : maintain-
ing, however, the standards off faith and worship, and
the supremacy of the Crown.
The chief objection to this comrse was, that the Eegula-
tions made by such an Assembly would have the force,
in the Colonies, of Imperial Law r , in virtue of the proposed
Act; that is, it would confer umdefined legislative power ,
in respect of Church affairs, upom these conventions of the
Clergy and laity. It will sufficiently appear from the
foregoing review that such a comrse would be at variance
with all past legislation, and woudd over-ride the Colonial
Legislatures. Such powers hawe not been given to any


other religious communities. They are not, in fact, pos-
sessed by the members of the Church of Scotland, or by
the Wesleyan Methodists: they are assumed only by
Independents, whose congregations form no part of any
organised Church. Such powers are inconsistent in prin-
ciple with the supremacy of the Crown in all causes
Ecclesiastical, as well as with the powers hitherto exer-
cised by the local Legislatures in every British Colony.
And it is impossible to predict what changes might be
introduced into the constitution of the Church, hy such
legislative action, notwithstanding the proposed checks.
Hence, no less a number than four successive Bills, framed
upon this principle, have been rejected hy Parliament;
having been opposed hy those who object to give ex-
clusive privileges to the Church, and by those, on the
other hand, who desire to maintain the integrity of the
United Church of England and Ireland abroad, and who,
therefore, deprecate its dismemberment by opening the
door to a variety of local Church constitutions.
(2.) In order to avoid these difficulties, a second proposal
has been made to give, by an Imperial Act of Parliament,
legal sanction to the holding of Diocesan Conventions
by the Clergy and Laity, but to deprive their decisions
of the force of law. The Bishop of Oxford proposed,
in the House of Lords, upon the debate on the Austra-
lian Government Bill of 1850, clauses to this effect, pro-
viding “ that no such Regulations shall have any other
force or effect than the Regulations, Laws, or Usages of
other Churches or religious communities in the said
Colonies.” These clauses were not adopted. In the
Session of 1854, a Bill was introduced into the House
of Commons by the Solicitor-General, to sanction such
meetings, but contains a clause: “ Provided always, that
such meetings, or the regulations, agreements, or arrange-
ments that may he made thereat, shall not obtain any
force or authority -from the enactments hereby made.”


These words being thought aimbiguous, since they seemed
to contain a lurking meaning tihat such regulations would
have legal force from some otlher source than the present
enactments, it was proposed, Iby Mr. Dunlop, to add the
words, “ and shall not have amy legal force or authority
other than that which may ariise, according to the law of
the Colony, from consensual coimpact express or implied
among the members, clerical <and lay, of such Churches
in the Colonies as aforesaid,” This Bill did not reach
the stage in which this amencdment could be proposed,
but it will serve to illustrates the distinction between,
meetings for mutual agreement, and synods or conventions
possessing legislative powers.
The objections to this propcosd were, that it was too
indefinite, that it might revive old ecclesiastical preten-
sions, and that it stopped shoirt of the necessity of the
case. Such voluntary agreeiments would not bind dis-
sentients or successive Bishops. Though the Bill pro-
fessed to provide a remedy for certain acknowledged
deficiencies, it would have still left the main defects
untouched.
(3.) There is, however, a third course open to the
Church in the Colonies, clearly indicated by the course of
previous legislation, of which the Diocese of Melbourne
has set an example, namely, to obtain a legal sanction for
ecclesiastical arrangements through the Colonial Legis-
latures. Let the Bishops, and Laity meet toge-
ther to prepare such measures as> may seem necessary for
adapting the laws of the Church to their local necessities,
and for perfecting their Church constitution. Let the
measures so prepared be proposed for the adoption of the
Colonial Legislatures ; and, ultimately, for the sanction of
the authorities at home.
And since doubts have whether such meetings
can be properly held by the Bislhops and Clergy of the
United Church, and also whether 9 Her Majesty will have


the power of giving her consent to such measures as may
be adopted by the Colonial Legislatures in respect of such
Colonial Legislation, an Act of the Imperial Parliament
should be obtained, to authorize such meetings, and to
enable her Majesty to give her consent to the measures so
sanctioned by the Colonial Legislatures: providing, also,
that the measures should be submitted by the Home
Government to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for his
observations upon them, before they receive the final
approval of the Crown.
The objections which have been fatal to former Colonial
Church Legislation Bills, would not apply to the course
now suggested. It does not propose to give legislative
powers to conventions, but only power to propose legis-
lation to the Colonial Legislatures. The Church would
have the initiative of the measures. Its consent would
be the foundation of the proceeding.
The proposed course would be a safe course for all the
interests involved. The Church in the Colonies is best
acquainted with its own local exigencies, and best able
to suggest a specific remedy. The Colonial Legislature
will take care that nothing is done at variance with Colo-
nial policy. The Archbishop and the Home Government
will guard Colonial measures against any departure from
the essential principles of the Church at home, or the
prerogatives of the Crown. It claims for the United
Church of England and Ireland no exclusive legislative
advantages; but may be equally followed by other reli-
gious communities. The Colonial Legislatures will thus
maintain their principle of treating the Churches of
England and Scotland, and other Christian societies, upon
terms of civil equality.
It may be shown, also, that upon the soundest Ecclesi-
astical principles a Diocesan Synod can claim no powers
of legislation. The functions of a Diocesan Synod are
thus described and limited by Johnson, a writer of


authority as a Canonist, in Hiis “ Clergyman’s Yade-
mecum.” “ Diocesan Synods aare the assemblies of the
Bishop and his Presbyters to (enforce and put in exe-
cution Canons made by Generral Councils, or National
and Provincial Synods, and to consult and agree upon
rules of discipline for themselves.”
Should it be thought right, iin any Colony, so far to
depart from the principle here laxid down as to give the
Convention of the Clergy and Lcaity a measure of Legis-
lative action, it will be at least ncecessary that this action
shall be restricted to the management of the temporal
affairs of the Church, and to thie exercise of discipline
over the Clergy.
It has, indeed, been sometirmes asserted, that the
Church of England is placed im so disadvantageous a
position in the Colonies, relatiwely to other religious
bodies, that it may fairly claim greater legislative privi-
leges. So much mis-statement and confusion has ex-
isted upon this part of the subject, that it is important
to enter into a fuller explanation of the case. The alle-
gation that the Church is in this dlisadvantageous position,
may be traced to the fact that thie constitutions of other
bodies are more adapted for the chrcumstances of Colonists
than that of the Church of Englamd, especially in respect
of the maintenance of discipline. The Church of Eng-
land in the Colonies has no Ecclessiastical Courts, for en-
forcing its discipline. Its Ecclesiastical Courts are all
at home, its bishops and clergy are) dispersed in all parts
of the world. Whereas in the Prcesbyterian Church, and
among the Wesleyan Methodists, tlheir means of enforcing
discipline lie in Synods, Presbyteiries, and Conferences,
which can be held wherever a few' ministers and laymen
of their persuasion meet together.
Again, other religious commmnities have .secured
ftieir discipline by vesting theiir Chapels and other


property under Trust Deeds, which insert their doc-
trines and regulations of discipline in their declara-
tions of trust: and thus, even without express local acts,
they are enabled to enforce the ejection of any minis-
ter from their churches and houses of residence, by an
appeal to the Civil Courts, if he violates their established
rules. In this way the whole of the trusteeship of
the property of the Wesleyan Methodists, in all parts of
the world, is vested in trustees, under the provisions of a
Poll-Deed, executed by Wesley, bearing date 28th Feb.,
1784, enrolled in the High Court of Chancery, reciting
the distinctive principles and discipline of Methodism.
Thus they have been enabled to keep up their uniformity
of doctrine and discipline, throughout all the Colonies of
Great Britain ; and have frequently had recourse to the
civil courts of the Colonies where any resistance has been
made to their exercise of such discipline.
A similar course is open to the members of the Church
of England, of vesting their property under Trusts. Such
a scheme was drawn out by the Church Missionary
Society, under legal advice, in respect of their property
in Sierra Leone, which was approved of by the late
Bishop of Sierra Leone, by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and by the Bishop of London, and will be shortly carried
into effect. And so, whenever in the Colonies property
either in churches, houses, or glebes, is conveyed to
trustees, which is the usual tenure, a Declaration of Trust
might be adopted, declaring the conditions under which
ministers hold the same.
Still further, it remains to be shown that the Church
in the Colonies of Australia has already taken some
important steps in the course which it is the object of
these Observations to recommend. The facts to be ad-
duced in confirmation of this remark will throw light
upon the whole subject under consideration.


In New South Wales, a Lcxcal Act was passed in 1836,
entitled—“ An Act to promote? the Building of Churches
and Chapels, and to providle for the maintenance of
ministers of religion in New Scouth Wales.” (7 Will. IY.
No. 3.) This Act equally applies to all denominations of
Christians. It provides for making grants of money
to places of worship and houses of residence, on certain
specified terms, whenever one hiundred or more adults shall
subscribe a declaration of theiir desire to attend the place
of worship, and “to give stipends towards the support of
the ministers of religion, duly aappointed to officiate in any
Churches or Chapels to be erected in the manner
aforesaid.” (Clause 2.) Stipemds to be withheld, “if it
shall appear to the said Governor and Council that the
said duties have been culpably and wilfully neglected.”
The property to be vested in not less than three or five
trustees approved of by the Go vernor.
Consequent upon the passing of this Act, all the
chief religious communities in the Colony procured sepa-
rate Local Acts for the regulation of their affairs, in
conformity with the provisions of the general Act.
(1.) An Act for the United Church of England and Ire-
land, was passed, 6th September, 1837, entitled “An Act
to regulate the Temporal affairs of Churches and Chapels
of the United Kingdom of England and Ireland in New
South Wales. (8. Will. IY. No. 5.)
This Act makes various provisions for the election
of trustees and of churchwardens, and allows the
Bishop to be elected as a sole tr ustee. It also enacts that
no person shall be allowed to officiate in any consecrated
Church or Chapel, unless he be first approved, and
thereunto licensed by the Archbishop of the province, or
the Bishop of the Diocese. (Clause 19.)
“ And it shall be lawful for the clergyman in holy
orders, of the United Church of England and Ireland, who
shall be duly licensed by the Bishop to officiate in any


Church or Chapel under this Act* to have free access to
the church, to exercise his spiritual functions therein, and
to have possession of the house and glebe; provided that
he shall have no such rights after the licence of such
clergyman shall have been withdrawn, cancelled, or re-
voked by the Bishop of the Diocese, upon cause shown.”
(Clause 20.)
(2.) An Act was passed 9th September, 1837, entitled
“ An Act to regulate the Temporal affairs of Presbyterian
Churches and Chapels connected with the Church of
Scotland in the Colony of New South Wales.” (8 Will.
IV. No. 7.) This Act makes provision for the election
and duties of trustees, and enacts that a clergyman duly
inducted by the Presbytery into any church or chapel
under this Act, shall have free access to the chapel,
and enjoy the dwelling-house; and shall have no such
rights “ after he shall have been removed from his office by
the decision of the Presbytery.”
This Act was amended 4 Vic. No. 18, 7th October,
1840, by an Act constituting a Synod in the said Colony,
which was to have the powers granted to the Presbytery
by the former Act. “ Provided always that the several
powers, privileges, and advantages conferred by this Act
upon the said Synod of Australia, shall cease and
determine, unless the said Synod shall continue its
adherence to the doctrines of the confession of faith,
and to the other standards and formularies of the estab-
lished Church of Scotland, and in the .exercise of disci-
pline shall follow the laws of that church.”
(3.) An Act was passed 17th August, 1838, entitled
« An Act to regulate the Temporal affairs of the Religious
Societies, denominated Wesleyan Methodists, Indepen-
dents, and Baptists.” (2 Vic. No. 7.) This authorises the
trustees appointed under the former Act to transfer the
property to other trustees to hold the real estate “to the
use of such Society, upon the trusts stated and set forth


in a Model Deed of such Sociiety, to be enrolled in the
Supreme Court of New Soutlh Wales within two years
after the passing of this Act, rafter the same shall have
been proved to the satisfaction of his Excellency the
Governor and the Executive Council, to be a deed recog-
nized and established by the usaiges of the religious society
to which it professes to belong.''”
These Colonial Acts place the question of the re-
lative freedom of action possessed by the Church and
by other religious communities in a clear light. We
here find that they all had {the same opportunity of
making regulations for their temporal affairs, including
their Ecclesiastical discipline, provided that such dis-
cipline should be presented to the Legislature in some
recognised form and substance, ras in a Model Deed.
It has been reserved for this stage in our observations,
to remark upon a very common but erroneous notion,
that the British Colonies have generally cast off all con-
nexion between Church and State, and have therefore
precluded themselves from all claim to legislate for the
Church. The history of the New South Wales, Tas-
mania, and Melbourne Acts, shows that in some of the
most important Colonies the local governments have
pursued a very different course. They have not cast off
their connexion with the Churclh, but they have entered
into the same relations with otheir Christian bodies whose
principles and constitution they can approve of. They
have conferred inestimable benefits upon those countries,
by the encouragement and pecuiniary support they have
given to religious teachers, as well as to education.
Ihey have therefore not forfeited their inherent claim to
be, within their respective governments, the sole source
of legislation.
We may now advance a step further in the investigation


of the subject, and show that the alleged difficulties of the
Church in one special case, has been owing to an error
in Colonial Legislation, to which it was itself a party. It
is a common assertion that the clergy of the Church of
England in the Colonies are necessarily under the arbi-
trary power of the Bishops, and therefore require the pro-
tection of legislative Synods. In confirmation of the
assertion, reference has been generally made to the case of
Tasmania, as illustrated in a mass of Parliamentary
Papers (25th March, 1850, 174, 5.) A reference to these
documents will show that the alleged arbitrary power of
the bishop, was based upon the terms of a Colonial enact-
ment. An Act similar to the general Act of New South
"Wales was passed by the Legislature of Van Diemen's
Land, making the clergymen of certain churches dependent
upon the bishop’s licence. A bishop's licence is a vague
term. In the Church of England, the licence of the bishop
has a very different legal quality, according as it is a
licence to a stipendiary curacy, or a licence to a perpetual
curacy. In the one case,, the licence may be refused
by the bishop without cause assigned, and may be can-
celled with an appeal only to the archbishop. In the
other case, it cannot be refused or withdrawn without a
cause assigned, the validity of which may be enquired
into by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts.
The Bishop of Tasmania withdrew his licence from one
of the clergy of the Colony, and refused to assign the
cause. The clergyman appealed to the Supreme Court,
to compel the bishop to restore the licence. The question
at once arose, as to the nature of the bishop’s licence,
and the status of the clergy: and the two judges differed
widely in their opinion. It turned out at last that the
clergyman had never been actually licensed, and that his
Church did not come under the Act, so the Supreme
Court dismissed the application.
This history shows the error of the Legislature of Van


Diemen s Land in making the status of the clergyman
depend upon the naked ass?ertion of a licence from the
bishop, which led the bishiop to act arbitrarily. The
Colonial Act should have mmre fully explained the nature
of the licence, or have required also the assent of a
Church Commission, or Comimittee, as in the case of the
recent Melbourne Act: or iit might in many other ways
have given protection to the cclergyman, and laid restraints
upon the bishop.
It is clearly the part off the Church in Tasmania
to seek a remedy, by submittting to the Colonial Legisla-
ture an amended Church /Act, as the Scotch Church
did when they needed a Sjynod in Australia. But let
them also follow the examjple of those loyal sons of
a Mother Church, who declaired that their powers should
cease if they should deviate from the principles of the
Church at home.
Reverting to the course of proceeding which has been
suggested, namely, of an Act of Parliament, authorizing
the Bishop, Clergy, and laity- of any Colony, to meet to-
gether and prepare Ecclesiastical regulations, to be sub-
mitted for approval to the Colonial Legislatures, and
ultimately to the authorities] at home i —it is conceived
that such an Act would conffer great and immediate ad-
vantages upon the Church in tlhe Colonies, by enlisting the
co-operation of the laity, andl by giving encouragement,
direction, and confidence, to tthe efforts of its zealous and
energetic friends for perfecting* its system. There will be
much work of a preparative kiind, before measures can be
sufficiently matured for procuring legislative sanction.
Plans may be tried, and improved ; they may be acted
upon by mutual consent, and dheir adaptation to the wants
of the Colony may be thus tested. If they should prove
satisfactory to the members off the Church generally, no
Colonial Legislature could lomg withhold the legislative


sanction required to make them effectual and permanent,
after an Imperial Act has been passed in favour of this
course of proceeding.
In all meetings for the regulation of Church affairs,
care should be taken to secure a full and bona-fide repre-
sentation of the laity. It is very desirable that the deli-
berations, should be conducted by the clergy and laity
conjointly, though they may vote separately. The division
of votes should not go beyond this. In the United Church
of England and Ireland there is no precedent for giving
the bishop of a diocese a separate vote, on questions in
which the whole Church is interested. In the Convo-
cation, there is a House of Bishops as well as a Lower
House : but this can form no precedent for giving a veto
to a single bishop. The power of dissolving such
assembly should rest with the whole body, for if given to
any one party, it gives, in effect, a veto to that party. In
the Episcopal Church of America the bishop has no sepa-
rate vote. The matter is thus described in a work of
authority : “ The right which existed in former ages of a
full negative upon the act of any Diocesan Synod or
Council, has been by the consent of the Bishops of our
Church, in almost all the Dioceses, renounced. I know
but of one partial exception to this. By the constitution
of Kentucky, should the bishop express his disapprobation
of any canon, regulation, or resolution, it shall be returned
to the Convention for re-consideration, when a majority of
two-thirds of both orders shall be necessary for its adop-
tion. The same was the regulation in Missouri, but it
is changed, as appears in the Constitution of 1847.”
(Treatise on the Law of the Protestant Episcopal Church
in the United States , hy M. Hoffman , Esq . New York,
1850.)
The most pressing need in every Colony is the institu-
tion of some standing Ecclesiastical Committee or Council,
for the correction or removal of clergymen who offend


against law, or neglect thenr duties, in the place of Eccle-
siastical Courts in the Chiurch at home. Such a Council
should also have some power analogous to that of Courts
at home, of inquiring intco the reasons and legality of a
bishop’s refusal to admit ;a clergyman to any church to
which he may have been cduly appointed. It is most im-
portant that in any provision made for judicial proceed-
ings, there should be an Assessor or Judge, skilled in
law. This provision is tine great safeguard of the rights
and liberties of the Chur chi of England. In all matters of
evidence, as well as of interpretation of documents, a
lawyer has the advantagce of a professional education,
which gives the best secmrity for right decisions. The
clergy may properly take the chief part in drawing up
Articles of faith and formularies of devotion; but
when these are once adopted by any church as the recog-
nized standard of faith ancd worship, then it is the proper
province of men skilled iin the law to decide upon the
true interpretation of those formularies, upon the general
principles applied to the interpretation of all written
documents.
The Church Council or (Committee which may have to
decide upon cases of discipline, must decide according to
the Ecclesiastical laws in iforce in each Colony. And if,
in those Colonies in whicch conventions of the Clergy
and Laity may be empowered to make local regula-
tions, the range of such Regulations be restricted to the
two heads of the manage3ment of the temporal affairs
of the Church, and the exercise of discipline over the
clergy, there can be no cdeparture from the standards
of faith and worship, as esstablished in the Articles and
Formularies of the Unitedl Church of England and Ire-
land. All questions of interpretation also can be decided
authoritatively only in conistituted Ecclesiastical Courts,
with an appeal to Her Majesty in Council. It would
not, therefore, be competent in any such Church Council,


or by any regulations under the proposed Act, to put
such authoritative interpretation upon the declared doc-
trines of the Church.
These observations cannot be closed without noticing
a fact which must have struck all who are fully informed
of the religious circumstances of the Colonies of Great
Britain. There is a great variety in respect of the influ-
ence and numbers of the members of the Church in dif-
ferent Colonies, and in the disposition manifested by the
Local Legislatures to protect and assist the interests of the
Church. The advantage in these respects has been in pro-
portion as the genuine spiritual Protestant and evangelical
principles of our Church are manifested in the ministrations
of the Bishops and Clergy. In such cases there is no
lack of local support or encouragement, either from the
community at large, or the Legislatures. But should
there be presented unhappily in any Colony the predomi-
nence of Ecclesiastical assumptions, above zeal for the truth
of the Gospel, and for the salvation of souls, there dis-
trust ensues, the Church is watched with jealousy by
the authorities, and local pecuniary support is withholden.
It is not surprising if in such cases an outcry should
be raised for independent synodical action, and for a free
Episcopal Chapel in the Colonies, at the same time
that there is a sincere desire to retain all titles and
prestige of a State Church in England. It is earnestly
hoped that the authorities at home, may never be induced
to legislate upon such cases, but to adhere to the prin-
ciples of constitutional law as they have been heretofore
applied to Colonial Church Legislation, and to the preser-
vation of the integrity of the United Church of England
and Ireland, throughout the Colonies and Dependencies of
Great Britain.


This Statement having ibeen submitted in print to the
Bishop of Melbourne, he has permitted the following
Extracts from his remarks ujpon the paper to be appended
to them. The Author glacdly avails himself of this per-
mission, as he is anxious to have the sanction of such an
authority to his general liine of argument, though in
some of the details the Bislhop takes a somewhat different
view from himself.
Remarks by the ESishop of Melbourne.
“ With respect to the rellative position of the Church
and other religious commumities in the Colonies, lam
not quite sure whether thie “Enquiry” will convey a
correct impression to the general reader ;—although the
extracts from the Acts of (Council of New South Wales,
which are given in pp. 211-23, will, if read attentively,
show what it really is in tlhat province and in Victoria.
Erom those Acts it appear's, that the power of licensing,
and withdrawing the licence of ministers, including prac-
tically the whole power of government,—which other reli-
gious communities, in accordance with their ecclesiastical
system, have vested in Synods or Conferences, the Church
of England has chosen to vest in the Bishop, thereby
giving to him an authority which no English Bishop pos-
sesses;—and depriving thee laity of that interest in the
affairs of the Church whiclh is essential almost to its exis-
tence in its present unendowed state. The great problem
to be solved is ; How can a portion of the power thus
given to the Bishop be resumed by the Church, and by
whom and in what manner, should it be exercised, so as to
secure, under the blessing of God, the spiritual life and
progressive faith of the Chiurch? It does not represent
the fact correctly, to say, tlhat the Church system in the
Colonies is ‘•defective;” —it is a positively bad system,
which needs not merely to Ibe added to, but to be changed.
The Church has not neglected to avail itself of the aid


of the Colonial Legislature; but it has used that aid to
establish virtually an Episcopal despotism, for which it
now desires to substitute a constitutional government.—
How is this to be done ?
“ The author of the “ Enquiry,” states his plan in
part (III.) pp. 15, &c. In the first great principle which
he lays down, that the proper mode of proceeding is not
by framing one general Colonial Church Constitution by
Act of Parliament, but by obtaining a legal sanction for
ecclesiastical arrangements through the Colonial Legis-
latures, I entirely agree with him. The recognition
of this principle, would at once remove the chief diffi-
culties with which the subject is beset. An Act founded
upon it would be free from all the objections which have
been urged against the various measures successively in-
troduced into Parliament, and which are noticed in the
“Enquiry,” pp. 15-18. After the passing of such an
Act, it would belong to the members of the Church
(Bishops, Clergy, and laity) in each particular Colony
to determine upon that scheme for their own self-govern-
ment (not inconsistent with the principles of the Church
of England,) which they considered most suitable for
their own wants, and then to submit it to the Local
Legislature. Thus they might either frame at once a
series of regulations respecting the admission and re-
moval of clergymen, the vesting of Church property,
&c., and ask the Legislature to give a legal validity
to all the details of their scheme; or they might ask
of the Legislature authority for an assembly of Church
members, constituted in a particular manner, to make
regulations, and modify them from time to time at
their own discretion.
“The Author of the “Enquiry” appears (p. 18,
&c.) to recommend the former of these two modes
of proceeding, although he refers with apparent appro-
bation to the course pursued in the Diocese of Mel-


bourne, where the Church lhas adopted the latter. The
decision between them, togeether with all details, ought,
in my opinion, to be left to the Church in each par-
ticular Colony; but I may/ state the reasons for which
I decidedly prefer the lattcer.
(1) It is extremely doubttful whether a Colonial Legis-
lature, at least in any provimce of Australia, would enter-
tain a Bill containing a seeries of ecclesiastical regula-
tions. It would be said, thaat the members of the Church
of England, like other religious communities, must settle
such matters among themselwes.
(2) All ecclesiastical arraangements In a Colony, ought,
as the writer of the “Emquiry” intimates, p. 25, to
be, at the first, tentative, ancld capable, from time to time,
of modification and improvemient.
(3) As great and immediiate advantages would be con-
ferred upon the Church im the Colonies (see p. 25,)
“by enlisting the co-operaation of the laity,” so it is
desirable to perpetuate those advantages by always re-
taining their co-operation, which can only be done by
the establishment of a permanent Church Assembly, in
W T hich they should occupy tEaeir proper place.
“ There is an apprehension! in the minds of some excel-
lent men, lest such an assemibly should abuse the 44 legis-
lative ” powers conferred ujpon them; but we may adopt
the language of the 44 Emquiry ” (pp. 19, 27), and
say, that, if the exercise of tihose powers 44 be restricted to
the two heads of the management of the temporal affairs
of the Church ” (including* therein the appointment of
ministers,”) 44 and the exearcise of discipline over the
clergy,” 44 there can be no departure from the standards
of faith and worship as established in the Articles and
Formularies of the United Clhurch of England and Ireland.
Nor would it be competent in any such Church Council,
or by any regulations undeir the proposed Act, to put any
authoritative interpretation mpon the declared doctrines of


the Church.” I entirely concur with the writer in the
necessity for such a restriction, and would express my
earnest hope that, not only “the authorities at home,”
but also the Bishops, Clergy, and laity of the Church
“throughout the Colonies and Dependencies of Great
Britain, may direct their efforts, as well to the preserva-
tion of its integrity, as to its adaptation to the new position
in which it is placed.”
(Signed)
“ C. MELBOURNE.”
Bee. 31, 1855.
T, C. Johns, Printer, Wine-office-court, Fleet-street.
