

hiji
LECTURES
DELIVERED BEFORE
THE DUBLIN
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
IN CONNEXION WITH THE
Winxitis of mb Jnknfr:
DURING THE YEAR 1864.
COLONIZATION AND COLONIAL GOVERNMENT,
By JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES, A.M., Professor of Juris-’
prudence and Political Economy, Queen’s College,
DUBLIN:
HODGES, SMITH AND CO., 104 GRAFTON STREET,
BOOKSELLERS TO THE UNIVERSITY.
' 1865.


PRINTED BY POKTEOUS AND GIBBS,
WICKLOW STREET.


xvA -IS,
Calculation anb Colonial Cctemnent:
A LECTURE
JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES, A.M.,
Professor of Jurisprudence and Political Economy, Queen’s College, Galway.
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
DUBLIN YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
IN CONNEXION WITH THE
UNITED CHURCH OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.
THE METROPOLITAN HALL, OCTOBER the 26th, 1864.
THE RIGHT HON. JAMES WHITESIDE, M.P.,
IN THE CHAIR.




COLONIZATION
COLONIAL GOVERNMENT.
I propose to invite your attention this evening to the subject
of colonization and colonies. I have selected this subject
because it seems to me to offer, at the present time, some as-
pects of more than usual interest. It is no exaggeration, I
think, to say that this country —indeed that the world—has
arrived at a critical epoch in colonial affairs. In the progress
of colonizing enterprise we have reached, or almost reached?
a point at which further progress in the same pursuit must
become impossible, for the sufficient reason that the field for
its exercise will soon cease to exist. The earth, indeed, is
still very far from being full; but glance over the map of the
world, and outside tropical regions say where the country is
to be found which has not already been occupied and settled
by man—in which, at least, the germ of political society has
not been planted. I think you will find that North-Western
America is now about the only considerable space of which
this description can, with approximate truth, be given, and
already the work of colonization is busy there : “ A region,”
says Mr. Merivale, in the last edition of his important work,
of no small interest to observers of our times, as affording
the last open field for European emigration. The remainder


of the extra tropical world is now filled up [occupied ?]. No
other site is left for the foundation of future empires. Its
occupiers will be the latest adventurers in that vast work of
European colonization which began scarcely four centuries
ago. The duty left for future time will be only to fill up
the outlines already traced in days of more romantic ad-
venture.”*
But again, in a political point of view also, we have arrived
at a critical stage in colonial history. You are probably
aware that within the present year the British colony of
Canada has taken a step which is virtually an act of sove-
reignty. It has undertaken, of its own motion, without con-
sultation with the mother country, to reform, in the most
radical and sweeping fashion, its political system, and, not
content with this, it makes overtures to all the other Ameri-
can colonies to enter with it into a single grand federation—
a federation, the mere magnitude of which, should the plan,
as seems probable, take effect, must, one would think, effec-
tually unfit the new state for the position of even nominal
dependence.! Indeed, as regards this point, the promoters of
the scheme—though they have quite recently somewhat
changed their language];—have made no secret of their
* “ Colonization and the Colonies.” By Herman Merivale, A.M.,
Professor of Political Economy. New Edition, 1861, p. 116.
f “ British North America will become the fourth maritime power
in the world. England, France, and the United States will alone
have a marine superior to ours. Isolated from one another, we could
claim only a very low place among nations; hut bring us together,
and there is no country, save England, to which we owe birth—save
the United States, whose power is derived from the same parent
source as our own—save France, from whom many of those here
present have sprung, can take rank before us.”—Colonel Grey at the
Montreal dinner.
] See post, pp. 317, 318


aspirations. “ Whether the day for its accomplishment has
yet arrived,” said Mr. Brown, the minister who originated
and has taken the most prominent part in bringing forward
this grand scheme —“ whether the day for its accomplishment
has yet arrived is a fit subject of inquiry; but, assuredly, no
Canadian has a claim to the name of statesman who has not
looked forward to the day when all the British portion of this
continent shall be gathered into one. ... We must look
forward to the day when the whole of British America shall
stand together, and, in close alliance and heartiest sympathy
with Great Britain, be prepared to assume the full duties and
responsibilities of a great and powerful nation.” Such are
the plans now formally promulgated, and such is the language
now publicly uttered by the leading men of Canada. The
tone adopted towards Great Britain is indeed respectful, and
even cordial. There is no formal defiance of her authority :
there is only the quiet assumption that she will, as a matter
of course, acquiesce in the nullity of her own supremacy.
And Great Britain does acquiesce. From no British states-
man of the least mark, from no political party here of the
slightest weight, has any sign proceeded of opposition, or
even of protest, against the impending revolution.
It seems, then, that, both as regards the external conditions
of colonization and the political principles on which colonies
are ruled, we have reached a critical stage in colonial history;
and it has therefore occurred to me that a brief retrospect of
the past course of colonial enterprise and government might,
at the present time, possess some interest for this Society.
Such a retrospect can, of course, only be—if for no other
reason, because of the limitations in point of time which an
address of this kind imposes—of the most imperfect and
summary kind: still I venture to hope it may not prove
altogether uninstructive. When a great and pregnant change


is approaching, there is an advantage in reverting our gaze
from the present and future to the past, and in tracing the
causes, many of them perhaps scarcely perceived at the time,
which have at a distance prepared and led up to the catas-
trophe. The crisis, thus regarded, shapes itself before our
mental eye in its true proportions. We can appreciate its
meaning and drift, and are enabled to estimate at something
like their real value the importance of the issues it involves.
And here, to mark in some degree the limits within Avhich
I propose to confine myself in this address, it may be well if
I state at the outset the sense in which I use the word
“ colony.” I take the definition given by Sir G. C. Lewis :
“ A colony properly denotes a body of persons belonging to
one country and political community, who, having abandoned
that country and community, form a new and separate society,
independent or dependent, in some district which is wholly
or nearly uninhabited, or from which they expel the ancient
inhabitants.”*
You will observe that, according to this definition, whole-
sale migrations of entire peoples—such as took place on a
great scale on the breaking up of the Roman Empire—do not
constitute colonization ; for here it is not a body of people
belonging to a political community who abandon their original
country, it is the community itself. Again, the definition
excludes from the category of colonies such dependencies as
British India, where the bulk of the inhabitants have never
migrated from any given political community, but are a com-
posite body, made up partly of the aboriginal people, and
partly of immigrants who have reached the country at various
times and from various quarters, the English forming quite
an inconsiderable fraction of the whole. For the same
* “ Essay on the Government of Dependencies.” By G. C. Lewis,
Esq , 1841, p. 170.


reason, all mere military stations, such as Malta and Gibraltar,
must be excluded from the category of colonies proper. On
the other hand, the definition does not exclude cases which
some people might regard as inconsistent with the idea of
a colony. The body of persons who migrate and form
the new society may be either “ independent or dependent.”
In modem times, indeed, the idea of political dependency
has come to be very generally associated with the conception
of a colony ; but it is no necessary part of that conception ;
nor was the word so understood in ancient times. All the
more celebrated colonies, for example, of the Greeks and
Phoenicians, the two greatest colonizing nations of antiquity,
were, in a political sense, absolutely independent of the mother
state. In short, if you desire to form a true idea of a colony,
you have only to follow the fortunes of a swarm of bees.
The swarm leaves its parent hive—the original community—
it coheres in a distinct society; it settles in a new locality,
either previously unoccupied, or from which it has expelled
the former inhabitants : what may be the nature of its further
connexion with the mother hive it is not necessary to con-
sider : whatever this be, the swarm is not the less a true
image of a colony proper. Such were the colonies founded
by the Greeks and Phoenicians in ancient times on the islands
and along the shores of the OEgoean and Mediterranean Seas;
such, in modern times, were those founded by Spain, France,
and England in the New World; and such are those
which we are even now building up in Australia and New
Zealand.
Having thus determined the proper sense of the word
“ colony,” we now proceed with our review, taking as its
starting point what may be regarded as the opening of modem
colonization, the discovery of America. That supreme event
had no sooner happened than the leading nations of Europe—


Spain, Portugal, France, England, the Dutch Republic—
hastened to the scene of action, eager to assert, each for
itself, a right to a place in the greatest field ever thrown open
to human energy and ambition. The numerous enterprises
which followed are among the most striking and picturesque
episodes in history, and are, doubtless, familiar to most of
those whom I address, associated as they are with the well-
known names of Cortez, Pizarro, Cabot, Drake, Raleigh,
Gilbert, and, in later times, the Pilgrim Fathers, William
Penn, and others. The movement, begun in the sixteenth
century and continued to the present time, has now, as I
have just remarked, all but completed its work of scattering
the seeds of political society over the habitable globe.
The career of modern colonization has thus extended over
nearly four centuries. We shall find it convenient to divide
this term into three periods—the first extending from the
conquest of the New World down to the American War of
Independence ; the second, from the date of that event to the
year 1830 ; and the third, from the year 1830 to the present
time.
Contemplating the first of these periods—that which extends
from the conquest of the New World down to the American
War of Independence—we are struck with the predominance
of the purely commercial, or perhaps it would be more cor-
rect to say, the purely monetary, spirit of its colonization—a
feature which distinguishes it alike from the present age and
from the age of Grecian and Roman colonization which
had preceded it. The spirit of that epoch is, I say, dis-
tinct from that of the present age ; for, although doubtless
commerce has not been absent from the aims of colonizing
adventurers in recent times, and although, in the event,
colonial enterprise has powerfully promoted commercial ex-
pansion, still if we look to the motives of the actual emigrants


—still more if we look to the legislation of Parliament—we
shall find that commerce has occupied, in connexion with
recent schemes of colonization, quite a secondary place. The
true character of that movement, as I shall hereafter show,
has been industrial and social—its chief aim being to provide
an outlet for the surplus population and capital of the old
country —a motive which, by a singular coincidence, it shares
with the earliest historical colonization—that of Phoenicia and
Greece. As for the colonization of Rome, it was, as is well
known, essentially military and imperial; the colonies of
Rome having little of the character of industrial and trading
settlements, and being, in truth, mainly garrisons planted in
the countries which she had conquered.
What, then, distinguishes the colonization of the first
period of modern colonial history, is the intensely commer-
cial, or, rather, as I have phrased it, monetary spirit in
which it was conceived.* The impulse under which the
discovery of the New World took place may typify for us
the motives under the influence of which its subsequent colo-
nization, for at all events two centuries, was carried on.
That impulse had its source in an intense thirst for the
precious metals; for, as you will remember, the voyage of
Columbus was undertaken in the hope of finding a passage
by a western route to the East Indies—then supposed to be
of all the world the region richest in gold and silver. The
desire for metallic wealth, strong at all times, seems at this
particular epoch to have been exceptionally powerful. Not
only did it inspire the adventure which resulted in the great
discovery; it was among the principal causes which hurried
* It ought to be observed that there are to this statement some
notable exceptions, more particnlarly in English colonization. With
New Englanders, for example, it was always a boast that “ they were
originally a plantation religious, not a plantation of trade.”


across the Atlantic the eager emigrant crowd who peopled
the western world when it was found. And when at length
settlements were established, and the business of colonial
legislation began, we find the same passion governing with
no less powerful sway the councils of statesmen and
princes.
The passion for the precious metals was thus, at this period
of the world, for whatever reason, driven to excess; and, as
sometimes happens, the prevailing crave was exalted into
a dogma. It was proclaimed on high authority, that all
wealth, properly so called, consisted in gold and silver.
The doctrine found a favourable audience ; it was accepted ;
and for some two centuries held its ground—held its ground,
not as the tenet of a sect, or as the belief of a particular
people, but as a truth, adopted in good faith, and systemati-
cally acted on by all the leading nations of Europe.
Wealth was thus held to consist in the precious metals;
and wealth was power. It followed that the great object of
statesmanship should be to increase in the statesman’s coun-
try the stock of gold and silver. Colonial policy was moulded
under the influence of this view. Colonies were valued, not
for their social advantages, as opening a new career to a
superabundant population at home—indeed superabundance
of population was, according to the notions of that time, an
impossible contingency—not for the economic gain of sup-
plying our wants at cheapened cost, not even for the impe -
rial reason, as extending the range of national power,—but
simply and solely as they could be made the means of in-
creasing the nation’s supply of gold and silver.*
* “ The maintenance of the monopoly has hitherto been the princi-
pal, or, more properly, the sole end and purpose of the dominion
which Great Britain assumes ;over her colonies.”— Wealth of Nations,
p. 277 (M‘Culloch’s Edition).


Let me here endeavour to convey, in as few words as I
can, a general idea of the nature of the expedients by which
it was attempted to give effect to this view. They would
naturally vary according to circumstances. Where the colo-
nies were themselves productive of the precious metals, the
legislator would go direct to his object; on the one hand
encouraging mining pursuits, on the other excluding foreign
nations wholly from the colonial trade. In this way, while
he developed the “ wealth” of the colonies to the utmost, he,
at the same time, secured to the mother country its entire
appropriation. Where this was not the case —where the
colonies did not yield gold or silver—then a more circuitous
course would be necessary. Foreign trade would not here
be proscribed (for it was only through foreign trade that
colonies, which did not themselves contain the precious
metals, could perform the function required of them); it
would be “ regulated” —exportation would be encouraged,
importation controlled, so as on the whole to make debtors
of foreign nations, and leave a “balance” of gold and silver,
which might be directed to the home country.
But it will be well to observe somewhat more in detail the
actual working of the system. And to this end we may take
the cases of Spain and England. For the purpose of reaping
the promise of the accepted creed the position of Spain was
the most favourable which it is possible to conceive. The
portion of the New World which fell to her lot was rich in
the precious metals beyond former experience. It was also
an advantage of her position, regarded from the same point
of view, that her government was despotic, as thus no con-
stitutional obstacle could stand in the way of her statesmen
to hinder them from giving the fullest elfect to their policy.
They availed themselves of this liberty to the utmost. All
intercourse of foreigners with the colonial subjects of Spain


was interdicted under capital penalties.”* The intercolonial
trade was placed under the severest restrictions. Not only
was the industry of the colonies excluded from many branches
of manufacture carried on in the mother country, but even
the culture of the vine and the olive was prohibited under
severe penalties; and in this way capital and industry were,
from lack of other channels, forced into mining pursuits.
Lastly, by a regulation, which, for its mischievous absurdity,
has, I think, scarcely a parallel even in the history of com-
mercial legislation, the whole colonial trade, the better to
bring it under the eye of the Spanish Government, was
required to pass through a single port in Old Spain. And
what was the result of this thoroughgoing application of the
principles of the commercial system to conditions so singu-
larly favourable for the experiment ? It is written in the
early arrest of all healthy progress in the Spanish colonies,
and in the rapid decline, so long as the system was persisted
in, of the trade and power of Spain. “ Sixty years after the
discovery of the New World,” says Robertson, “the number
of Spaniards in all its provinces is computed not to have
exceeded fifteen thousand.” More than two hundred years
afterwards—that is to say, about the middle of the seven-
teenth century, “ when,” according to the same authority,
“ the exclusive trade to America from Seville was at its
height,” the freight of the two united squadrons of “ galleons ”
and “ flota,” as they were called—the sole medium by which
the legal traffic of Spain with her colonies could be carried
on—the freight, I say, of these uni led squadrons did not
exceed 27,500 tons less than a twentieth part of what
England now sends to the single port of Melbourne—scarcely
* Subsequently commuted to imprisonment for life. “ They even
shunned the inspection of strangers,” says Robertson,” and endea-
voured to keep them from their coasts.”


more than the burden of a single vessel, the Great Eastern ,
now in the mercantile marine of England.
This was the extent of the legitimate trade of Spain with
her colonies when the old colonial policy had reached its
height: it by no means, however, represented the whole of
her colonial trade. By much the most important portion
was carried on by the smuggler. “ The contraband trade of
the Spanish colonies,” says Mr. Merivale, “became in the
early part of the last century [some fifty years previous to
the culminating period of the exclusive system just referred
to] the most regular and organized system of that kind which
the world has ever witnessed. The English led the way in it.
The Dutch, French, and other nations seized on their
share of the spoil. Jamaica and St. Domingo became com-
plete entrepots for smuggled commodities, whence they were
transported with ease to the continent Buenos Ayres
rose from an insignificant station to a considerable city, merely
from being the centre of the contraband traffic between
Europe and Peru. The Spaniards guarded their coasts with
an expensive maritime force, while they resorted in the inte-
rior to the strange measure of making smuggling an offence
cognizable by the Inquisition. But all such efforts were
fruitless to check the force and violence of the ordinary trade.
The flotas and galleons sank to insignificance; and their
owners were glad to make these licensed squadrons serve for
introducing the contraband commodities of other nations. *
Such was the apotheosis of the commercial system in the
instance of a nation, fitted above all others, by extraordinary
privileges of position, for realising in an eminent degree the
benefits which that system promised, and which stopped at
no interference with the industrial freedom of its subjects,
however extravagant or however violent, which seemed adap-
* “ Colonization and the Colonies.” pp. 15, 16.


ted to give to it practical effect. Let ns now turn to England,
not less a stickler than Spain for exclusive principles in com-
mercial policy, but differing from Spain in this respect, that
she did not command the same advantages for their practical
enforcement.
For, in the first place, there was this capital circumstance
distinguishing the colonies of England from those of Spain :
the English colonies were destitute alike of gold and silver
mines. England, therefore, could only hope to accomplish
the great end at which all colonial legislation then aimed—
the augmentation of her stock of the precious metals, by indi-
rect methods. The expedients which she actually adopted
for this purpose may be summed up under the four following
heads:—
First: She reserved to herself the monopoly of all those
colonial staples which served as raw material for her manu-
factures. By this means she expected, in. cheapening the
cost of her manufactures, to undersell foreigners, to extend
her exports, and thus to draw to herself gold and silver
through the balance of trade.
Secondly: She excluded from the colonial markets all
foreign manufactures and other products which came into
competition with her own.
Thirdly: She prohibited the colonists from engaging in
any manufacture which was carried on in the parent-state :
according to the oft-quoted remark of Lord Chatham, the
colonists had no right to make so much as a nail for a horse-
shoe.
On the other hand, in compensation for these restrictions
on the commercial liberty of the colonists, the mother coun-
try was content to impose some fetters on herself, giving to
the colonists the monopoly of her markets as against foreigners
for such commodities as she in her wisdom permitted them


to produce. By this means it was expected that mother
country and colony would play into each others’ hands, reci-
procally support each other, and, at the expense of the
foreigner, draw boundless wealth to themselves through the
balance of trade.*
Such was the general scope of the English colonial system.
The restrictions it embodied were indeed sufficiently vexa-
tious and mischievous: nevertheless, if we look to the sub-
stance rather than to the form—to the practical effect rather
than to the theoretic purpose, of her regulations, we shall be
disposed to say that the colonies of England enjoyed —at all
events by comparison—a very goodly amount of commercial
freedom. No attempt, for example, was made by Great
Britain to exclude her colonies from the trade with foreign
nations; it was only sought to “ regulate ” that trade ; nor
did she forbid her colonies from trading freely with one
another. Further, the absurd expedient adopted by Spain
of requiring her whole colonial trade to pass through a single
Spanish port, had no counterpart in the colonial system of
England, which at least left open the trade, under whatever
restrictions, to all British subjects upon equal terms. Besides,
not a few of those restrictions, which looked harsh on paper,
were found in practice to be sufficiently harmless, often pre-
scribing to the colonists a course which would have been
equally adopted without any such prescription. Of this cha-
racter were the laws directed against colonial manufactures—
laws which, of course, the colonists never thought of violating
while they had more profitable means of employing their
capital in other pursuits. “ Such prohibitions,” says Adam
Smith, “ without cramping their industry, or restraining it
from any employment to which it would have gone of its
own accord, are only impertinent badges of slavery, imposed
* “ Wealth of Nations.” Book IV, Chapter VII, Part 111.


upon them without any sufficient reason by the groundless
jealousy of the merchants and manufacturers of the mother
country.”*
But between the colonization of Spain and that of England
there was a difference deeper and more radical than gold and
silver n ines, or any mere commercial legislation —powerful
as no doubt these causes were—could bring to pass ; a dif-
ference, which did far more than any incidents to which I
have yet referred, to produce that broad contrast in the
subsequent colonial careers of the two countries which is one
of the most striking facts in the history of that time.
The government of Spain was a highly despotic and cen-
tralized system : the government of England was popular and
free, and gave scope to local institutions; and these charac-
teristic attributes of their respective governments were trans-
ferred, in even an exaggerated form, to the possessions of the
two countries in the New World. The colonial government
of Spain stands out a singular and portentous phenomenon in
history. At its head the Royal Council of the Indies, an
autocratic body in which the king presides, having its seat at
Seville in Old Spain, exercises supreme control in the last
resort over every department of colonial administration.
Under the Royal Council come the Viceroys of Mexico and
Peru, governing through a strongly organized bureaucracy
nominated by themselves, and composed exclusively of na-
tives of the mother state—within their own precincts, says
Robertson, as despotic as the monarch of Spain himself. The
government thus constituted, the Feudal System and the
Romish Church take their place side by side in the full matu-
rity of their mediaeval pretensions—the Feudal system, with
its narrow maxims, its strict entails, its various anti-commer-
cial and anti-industrial incidents; —the Church, served by a
* “ Wealth of Nations,”p. 261.


hierarchy of numerous orders, the great majority of whom
are, by a preposterous policy, consigned to spend their time
in religious houses, consuming in celibacy and idleness the
wealth of a country which calls aloud on all sides for popu-
lation and the hand of labour. By a curious—l imagine a
unique—act of condescension, the Church in the American
possessions of Spain acknowledged the supremacy of the civil
power ;* but not the less is she impelled by her old instincts,
and acts her old part. In fine, to complete the picture, the
Inquisition is seen to rise, scowling, with ill-omened aspect,
from its gloomy portals, over the nascent civilization of the
New World, f
And now contrast with this the broad features of popular
liberty disclosed in the early charters of the English colo-
nies—meagre but unanambiguous witnesses of the genius
which there presided. The first Charter of Massachusetts
“ gave power for ever to the freemen of the company to
elect annually from their own number a Governor, Deputy-
Governor, and eighteen Assistants, on the last Wednesday of
Easter Term; and to make laws and ordinances—not repug-
nant to the laws of England—for their own benefit, and the
government of persons inhabiting the territory.”+ The Con-
necticut Charter is drawn up upon the same model; its
framer being charged to comprise in it “ liberties and pri-
vileges not inferior or short to what is granted to the
ln the southern colonies, though the form
of government is different, the spirit which animates it is the
same. Thus Lord Baltimore, the founder of Maryland, is
authorized “by and with the advice, assent, and approbation
* “ Robertson’s History of America,” vol. iv., pp. 45-46.
t “ Robertson’s History of America,” book viii.
| Palfrey’s “New England,” vol. i, p. 291.
§ Ibid, vol. ii, p. 573.


of the freemen of Maryland, or the greater part of them, or
their delegates and deputies, to enact any laws whatever,
appertaining either unto the public state of the said pro-
vince, or unto the private utility of particular persons,”* and
so of the others. In not a few of those early charters,
indeed, representative government is not expressly men-
tioned ; but, as Mr. Merivale points out, only because this
was “ assumed by the colonists as a matter of right.” In
these cases, “ houses of representatives” used—to borrow the
quaint language of a historian of the time—to u break out”
in the colonies on their settlement; f the doings of which
houses, although without warrant in any written consti-
tution, were, as a matter of course, recognised by the govern-
ment at home. Political powers of the most extensive kind
—often without any limit whatever, other than those implied
limits which the fact of allegiance involved —were thus
freely conferred on the early English colonists. Nor did
they remain unexercised. Whether “ breaking out,” or
established by formal authority, the colonial assemblies
from the first assumed to themselves, in all that related to
their internal interests, the most complete powers of govern-
ment.
That this was so is indeed obvious on the most cursory
reading of the colonial history of these times. The most
striking fact connected with the early English colonies is, the
extraordinary variety of political institutions which prevailed
in them. Take, for example, the subject of religion—a
subject in reference to which it was a grand object of the
governments of England at this time to enforce uniformity.
* “ The Art of Colonization.” By Edward Gibbon Wakefield,
p. 229,
f As, for example, in the settlement of Providence. See Palgrave’s
“ New England,” vol. i, pp. 423-25.


In the colonies there are as many religions predominant as
there are religious denominations amongst the colonists.
Thus, in the New England colonies, we find Puritanism in
the ascendant; in Virginia and Carolina, the Church of
England is established by law ; in Pennsylvania, Quakerism
prevails; while for Roman Catholics, Maryland is the land
of promise. Whatever in effect was the religious belief
prevailing in a colony, that was reflected in its legislative
assembly, and embodied in its laws. And, as it was with
religion, so it was with all other matters connected with the
colony’s internal concerns ; for example, with the laws of
inheritance, and with what has been made the subject of so
much discussion in late times—the disposal of its waste
lands, and the mode of dealing with native tribes. In the
regulation of their external commerce, indeed, the colonies,
as you will have gathered from what I have already said,
were content to submit to the central government; but in
all else they were their own masters. Like the Corcyroeans
of old, they could boast that they relinquished their country,
“ in order to be equal in right with those who remain, not to
be their slaves.”
It was these things still more than the discrepancies in the
commercial codes of the two countries, which brought out
the broad contrasts between English and Spanish coloni-
zation. From the first, the Spanish colonists fell under the
blight of an all pervading despotism ; while the colonists of
England—whom the tyranny of Charles and Laud never
reached—masters of their persons and property, thought
and spoke, laboured and traded, under the inspiring con-
sciousness of liberty. Hence it happened that, while the
colonies of Spain, albeit embracing the richest portions of
the New World—rich with the products of the tropics, as
well as with that on which she set more store, the precious


metals—languished in the midst of their marvellous re-
sources, and never prevented, or even for a moment retarded,
her decline, the colonies of England, almost from their first
establishment, steadily progressed, exhibiting at the close of
their dependent career an example of rapid and brilliant
progress, such as the world had not hitherto witnessed;
and finally, on their severance from the mother country,
taking rank among nations almost at once as a first-class
power.
So far, then, as to the first period of colonial history which
I proposed to examine. Henceforward I shall confine myself
exclusively to the examples of colonization and colonial
policy furnished by Great Britain. I have taken the Ame-
rican War of Independence as an epoch ; because, while it
terminates the political connexion of Great Britain with her
most celebrated colonies, it also marks a change of vital
moment in her colonial policy. Up to that time, the colonies
of England, though controlled in their external commerce,
yet as regarded their internal affairs—in all that related
to their most intimate concerns—were emphatically self-
governing. Thenceforward, until quite recent times, the
government of the colonies was carried on in England
through the Colonial Office, a department of State con-
ducting its affairs through an organization analagous to that
employed by the Royal Council of the Indies. A cen-
tralized bureaucracy thus took the place, in English colonial
affairs, of the municipal system of the earlier period. It
will be worth while to consider here what the causes were
which led to this remarkable change.
In the first place, then, the War of Independence, and its
unlooked-for issue, produced in England a feeling of pro-
found mortification—an exacerbation of temper, which natu-
rally lent itself to arbitrary measures. England—so the case


was put by her statesmen —had conceded to her North
American colonies almost complete self-government. Under
her liberal treatment and fostering care, those colonies had
grown in population and wealth with unexampled rapidity—
had in a century and a half attained to the stature of a
nation. And what was the result ? What was the return made
to England for this liberal treatment ? That the moment
these dependencies were invited to contribute towards a reve-
nue, from the expenditure of which they had profited scarcely
less than the mother country heiself—a revenue which had
more than once been spent in wars waged for their de-
fence, and which had resulted in their aggrandisement—
that moment these favoured dependencies repudiated the
just demand, rebelled against their indulgent protector, and
asserted their independence. It was thus that the question
of colonial government presented itself to the mortified
spirit of Englishmen after the loss of a colonial empire, on
the retention of which, it was at that time very generally
thought, England’s rank in the scale of nations depended.
It was, then, not unnatural, that the resolve should be taken
to tighten the bond of dependence in the case of such colonies
as still remained ; nor were other events wanting about this
time to strengthen this disposition.
The French Revolution was, as you know, on the point of
breaking out. The catastrophe no sooner came than a vio-
lent reaction in English political opinion set in—a reaction
which has left deep traces on the political history of that
time. The liberal party, as favourers of the French Revo-
lution, were stricken with hopeless unpopularity. The Tories,
led by Pitt, now scared from his liberal creed, were carried
to power by immense majorities. The whole thought and
passion of the nation were exhausted in antagonism to
France and French principles, and whatever in any way


favoured popular right was looked on as infected with the
fatal taint. Colonial Government could not but follow the
general tendency. In the colonies, as elsewhere, liberal
institutions fell under discredit, and the rights of the colo-
nists receded before the pretensions of the central power.
But there was one cause more potent for this result than
all the rest. It was about this time that England founded
her first convict colony. The practice of transporting crimi-
nals to remote dependencies a practice not unknown to
antiquity—had indeed been adopted by Great Britain, in
common with other European countries, in the times ante-
rior to the American revolution; but it was then confined
within narrow limits. In Maryland, for example, which in
those times was one of the principal receptacles of this class
of emigrants, the proportion of convicts to the whole popu-
lation did not, in the middle of last century, exceed two per
cent.* The practice, however, did exist. Now, by the result
of the revolutionary struggle, this outlet for the criminals of
England was suddenly cut off; and this at a time wdien, no
doubt in consequence of the same event, the prisons of Eng-
land w r ere extraordinarily full. A pressing practical problem
was thus presented to the statesmen of England —a question
which, much as it has since been discussed, cannot yet be
said to be fully solved —how is England to dispose of her
criminals? In an evil hour the idea suggested itself of
establishing a penal settlement. The connexion of the two
events is sufficiently indicated by their chronological sequence.
The peace of Paris, by which the independence of the United
States was recognised, was signed in 1782. The first penal
colony of England was founded in New South Wales in 1788.
Ere many years had passed, there was witnessed, for the first
time in history, the unedifying spectacle of a community in
* “ Colonization and Colonies,” p. 350, note.


which the bulk of the population were felons serving out the
period of their punishment. From that time until quite
recent years, the practice of penal colonization became a
settled portion of the policy of Great Britain.
Now, I need not tell you that this use of colonization was
quite incompatible with the idea of colonial self-government.
Colonies in which the majority of the inhabitants were felons
of the deepest dye clearly could not be trusted with political
rights. And the precedent established in those cases, as you
will readily understand, quickly reacted upon the general
system of our colonial government.* The establishment of
the Colonial Office, which took place in 1794, may be re-
garded as the external symbol of the change, j"
The practice of penal colonization, concurring with the
other influences I have mentioned, thus definitively deter-
mined the course of English colonial policy in the direction
of centralization and absolutism; and this was about the
least serious of the evils wdiich that system entailed. It
brought colonization itself into disrepute. It corrupted the
whole tone of English thought on the subject. It may be
doubted if even yet we have fully recovered from its effects.
* “It is a remarkable fact, that until we began to colonize with
convicts towards the end of the last century, the imperial power of
England never, I believe, in a single instance attempted to rule locally
from a distance a body of its subjects who had gone forth from Eng-
land and planted a colony.”—Wakefield’s “Art of Colonization,’
p. 228.
f Previous to this time the business connected with the colonies,
which was almost exclusively commercial, had been assigned first to a
Board, and afterwards to a permanent Committee of Privy Council,
which had the management of “ Trade and Plantations.” Eor a short
interval, indeed, during the American struggle—from 1768 to 1782 —
a Secretary of State for the American Department existed : it was the
office of this functionary which Burke’s Bill abolished. See Lewis’s
“ Government of Dependencies,” pp. 160-62.


The plan of penal colonization, it is true, presents certain
obvious advantages of an economic kind: let us, by all
means, recognize them. It secures to the colony an ample
supply of that of which colonies have most need —labour; it
secures to it also, besides this, cheap means of production—•
cheap to the colony, but very far from cheap to the taxpayers
of the mother country, who bear the expense of transporting
and guarding these promising emigrants—it secures, I say,
to the colony, in addition to this cheap means of production,
a market for its products in the large government expendi-
ture which the military and police establishments, indispen-
sable to such settlements, always entail. It confers these
advantages, and by this means it galvanizes into a precocious
prosperity the settlements which are the victims of the
loathsome patronage. But what an idea must our statesmen
have had of the art of colonization—of what Bacon calls
“ the heroic work ” of building up new nations—when they
turned for the materials of the structure to the hulk and
gaol! “ Imagine,” said Dr. Hinds, “ the case of a house-
hold most carefully made up of picked specimens from all
the idle, mischievous, and notoriously bad characters in the
country! Surely the man who should be mad or wicked
enough to bring together this monstrous family, and to keep
up its numbers and character by continual fresh supplies,
would be scouted from the society he so outraged—would be
denounced as the author of a diabolical nuisance to his
neighbourhood and his country, and would be proclaimed
infamous for setting at nought all morality and decency.
What is it better, that, instead of a household, it is a whole
people we have so brought together, and are so keeping up ?
—that it is the wide society of the whole world, and not of a
single country, against which the nuisance is committed ?”
But the evils of convict settlement did not end here. We


know that the existence of slavery in a country is able, by
its vile associations, to degrade honest industry, and make
men ashamed of useful occupations: in like manner, the
practice of convict settlement brought discredit upon the
whole art and business of colonization. That “ heroic work ”
became associated in men’s minds with ideas of infamy and
crime. This aspect of the case is brought out, not less
strongly than quaintly, by Charles Lamb, in a letter addressed
to a friend in the “ Hades of Thieves ” —the upper world alias
for New South Wales. He thus describes, in his grotesquest
vein, the conditions of a society in which, not in theory but
in fact, la propriete est le vol. “ I see,” he says, “ Diogenes
prying among you with his perpetual fruitless lantern. What
must you be willing to give by this time for the sight of an
honest man ! You must have almost forgotten how we look.
And tell me what your Sydneyites do ? Are they th—v—ng
all the day long ? Merciful heaven ! what property can stand
against such depredations ! The kangaroos—your aborigines
—do they keep their primitive simplicity un-Europe-tainted,
with those little short fore-puds, looking like a lesson framed
by nature to the pickpocket. Marry, for diving into fobs,
they are lamely provided a priori , but if the hue-and-cry
were once up, they would show as fair a pair of hind-shivers
as the expertest locomotor in the colony. We hear the most
improbable tales at this distance. Pray, is it true that the
young Spartans among you are born with six fingers, which
spoils their scanning ? It must look very odd, but use
reconciles. For their scansion it is less to be regretted ; for,
if they take it into their heads to be poets, it is odds but
they turn out, the greatest part of them, vile plagiarists. Is
there any difference to see between the son of a th—f and
the grandson ? or where does the taint stop ? Do you bleach
in three or four generations ? I have many questions to put,


but two Delphic voyages can be made in shorter time than
it will take to satisfy my scruples. Do you grow your own
hemp ? What is your staple trade ?—exclusive of the na-
tional profession, I mean. Your locksmiths, I take it, are
some of your great capitalists.”
Now observe the effect of this state of opinion on coloniza-
tion. In early times the best families in England did not
disdain to bear a part in colonizing enterprises. Sir Humphry
Gilbert, Sir Walter Raleigh, Lord Baltimore, William Penn—
a courtier as well as a Quaker —were all identified with the
cause of colonization. Cromwell, Plampden, Pym, Vane,
were eager to try their fortunes in the colonies.* The
watchword of the most enterprising spirits in those days was,
“ Westward. Ho !” In the present day colonization has
again acquired something of its ancient prestige; and if our
aristocracy do not now emigrate with the same eagerness as
in the Elizabethan and Carolan times, our middle classes at
least—the sons of our landed gentry, our trading and pro-
fessional classes—show no reluctance to embrace a colonial
career. But in the half century which followed the American
war of independence, respectability in every form shrank
from colonization as from assured disgrace. Was it strange ?
The founders of our colonies during this period were no
longer the Raleighs, and Baltimores, and Pilgrim Fathers of
the early times, nor yet the Wakefields, and Torrenses, and
Godleys of a later day, but escaped convicts, expirees, and
ticket-of-leave men, the reckless and profligate in every rank
* “ Settled history has made another mistake in leading us to sup-
pose that the Puritan emigrants belonged chiefly, like the Cameronians
in Scotland, to the humbler classes at home: most of the leaders, on
the contrary, were of the gentry class, being persons of old family, the
best education, and considerable property.”—“ The Art of Coloni-
zation,” p. 160.


of life, or paupers “ shovelled out ” on the colonies by the
overburthened parishes of England.
Such was the depth of degradation to which the practice
of colonization had sunk in this, the second, certainly the
most inglorious period of its history. It may be briefly cha-
racterized as the period of convict settlement, pauper emigra-
tion, and Colonial Office supremacy.
The American war of independence served to mark for us
the termination of the first period of our colonial history.
That which I shall take as our next land-mark is an event as
obscure as the former is famous; and yet, unconspicuous as
it is, it is no less the forerunner than the other of momentous
changes in our colonial history. This event is the formation
of the Colonization Society. It was established in 1830,
“an unknown and feeble body,” says Mr. Wakefield, “ com-
posed chiefly of very young men, some of whose names,
however, have long ceased to be obscure, while others are
among the most celebrated of the day.” The Society, as
such, had indeed a brief existence ; but its principles took
root; its members long continued to act together; and recruits
of the highest promise quickly joined them. Foremost among
such recruits was one whose name in this place naturally recurs
to us ; but in no place could the name of Whately be omitted
from the story of colonial reform without ignoring one of its
most important pages. In 1832 appeared his “Thoughts on
Secondary Punishments,” a work in which, with that vigorous
logic and homely satire in which he was so great a master,
he exposed and denounced —going at once to the root of
colonial evils—the convict system. “It was a wicked and
unblessed thing,” he used to say, adopting the language of
Bacon, “to take the scum of people and wicked and con-
demned men to be the people with whom you plant.” This
was to plant the land with “ nettle-seed.” The defenders of


transportation pleaded that it conferred a double benefit—at
once a relief to the mother country and a boon to the colony.
Whately replied that it was doubly cursed, demoralizing
mother country and colony together—the former by accus-
toming her to meet temporary exigencies by a recourse to
radically vicious expedients—expedients which, opening to
criminals an almost assured road to prosperity, involve a
permanent encouragement to crime; and the latter, by cor-
rupting their national life at its source. In the wide range
of that great man’s intellectual activity there is surely no
topic on which his remarkable powers have been exerted
with more signal success, or been productive of greater or
more lasting utility.
Colonization had, as I have said, at this time reached the
nadir of its decline. The colonial reformers proposed to
rescue it from its degradation, and re-establish it in the
grandeur of its true proportions before the English people.
Since the subject had last seriously attracted the attention of
political thinkers, Political Economy had taken rank among
the sciences. The most eminent of those who took part in
the new movement —Wakefield, Torrens, Charles Buller, Sir
William Molesworth, Whately—had mastered the new know-
ledge, and approached the subject of colonization with all the
advantage which this acquisition conferred. For the first
time something like a sound and complete theory of coloniza-
tion was put forth—sound at least, I do not hesitate to say,
in all its essentials. The theory has now little more than an
historic value: still the large space which it for many years
filled in colonial politics, and the great practical results which
have flowed from it, will perhaps justify an attempt to state
briefly its leading principles.
The fundamental cause, and the justification of coloniza-
tion are to be found in the laws of population and capital.


In old countries population and capital tend to become re-
dundant. Of this there is abounding proof. The redun-
dancy of capital in old countries is evinced by many obvious
circumstances—for example, by the difficulty of employing
advantageously —by the low rate of profit which it brings—
by its constant exportation for investment to other lands.
The redundancy of population is even a more patent fact.
Which of us has not painful experience that “ all the gates
are thronged with suitors,” that “all the markets overflow” ?
As to the facts, therefore, there can be no doubt. The cause
has been traced by Political Economy to the limited quantity
and capacity of that agent from which ultimately the ele-
ments of subsistence and the materials of wealth are drawn
—the land of the country. Now, in new countries these
conditions of production are exactly reversed. Fertile land
exists there in abundance, while capital and labour are scarce.
Seen in this light, the true remedy for our evils at once ap-
pears. It is, that what is in excess in each should be brought
to supplement what is deficient in each ; in a word—that we
should colonize. “When I ask you,” said Charles Buller, in
that great speech which gave an earnest of future statesman-
ship which the gifted orator was never destined to fulfil,
“ when I ask you to colonize, what do I ask you to do, but
to carry the superfluity of one part of our country to repair
the deficiency of the other—to cultivate the desert by apply-
ing to it the means that lie idle at home ; in one simple
word, to convey the plough to the field, the workman to his
work, the hungry to his food.”
But at this point I fancy I hear the familiar ring of a well-
known objection What! encourage the bone and sinew,
and industrial enterprise, and accumulated wealth of the
country, to leave it! Well, I will meet the objection frankly.
I would by all means encourage the bone and sinew, and


industrial enterprise, and accumulated wealth, of old countries
to leave them for the purpose of colonization; and I would
do so in order to increase in those very countries, bone and
sinew, and industrial enterprise, and accumulated wealth.
If you think this paradoxical,* I will ask you to consider a
familiar case. The United States are colonies of England,
founded by the exportation thither, some two centuries ago,
of those elements of material prosperity which I have named.
Do you think that England is now the poorer for that ex-
portation? Suppose this argument against exporting bone
and sinew had prevailed in the seventeenth century, and that
the British American Colonies had never been planted, do
you think that the England of our day would support, in
consequence, a larger population in greater affluence ? It is
surely unnecessary to remind you that the colonies of Eng-
land—l mean the countries planted and peopled by England,
whether now politically connected with her or not —are as
necessary to the support of her people as the soil on which
they tread. It is an obvious fact that England, from her
own soil, is physically incapable of giving subsistence to the
human beings who now cover her surface; and that if she
has been rendered capable of supporting her present immense
population, and supporting them in such comfort as they
enjoy, this is due principally to the fact that she has for
centuries been a colonizing country. She has sent abroad
her sturdy and enterprising sons to countries abounding in
all that she has needed; and the descendants of those emi-
* The paradox, still so mysterious to many people, was propounded
and solved by Franklin a century ago. “ There are supposed,” he
said, “ to be now upwards of one million souls in North America ; . .
and yet, perhaps there is not one the fewer in Britain, hut rather the
more, on account,” he adds, “ of the employment the colonies afford
to manufacturers at home on account, we should now prefer to say,
of the cheapened subsistence with which they supply them.


grants are now at once the most constant customers for her
products, and the surest caterers for her wants. She has
parted with her bone and muscle, and industrial enterprise,
and accumulated wealth, and the result is she has multiplied
indefinitely all these elements of her greatness. Colonization
thus confers a double benefit: it relieves the old country
from the pressure of its superabundant population, and gives
a field for its unemployed capital; while, at the same time,
by opening up new lands, and placing their resources at her
disposal, it widens indefinitely the limits which restrain her
future growth.
Well, this point having been made good —a basis for their
activity having been found in the nature of the case—the
colonial reformers had next to deal with the practical ques-
tion, How is colonization to be carried on? By what means are
men and capital to be transferred from one end of the globe
to the other—men, that is, of the right quality, in the right
proportions, keeping in view always the great ultimate end—
the founding of a new nation ? The solution of this problem
propounded by the reformers was as follows:—First, they
maintained that the lands of a new colony, instead of being
granted away gratuitously with lavish profusion, as had been
the almost universal practice of the English governments up
to that time, should be sold, and sold at a substantial and a
uniform price.* Secondly, they insisted that the proceeds of
the land sales should be employed as an emigration fund to
assist the poorer classes in emigrating. Thirdly, they urged
* The reader, who desires to inform himself on the doctrine, once
so warmly debated, of a “ sufficient price ” for colonial land, is re-
ferred to Wakefield’s “ Art of Colonization,” Letters xlvii.-lii.; and,
on the other hand, to Merivale’s “ Colonization and the Colonies,”
Lectures xiv.-xvi.; also to Mill’s “ Principles of Political Economy,”
book i., chap. viii.


that this assistance should be given with discrimination that
is to say, that the emigrants should be selected —the condi-
tions of age, sex, health, respectability, &c., being taken ac-
count of with a view to the needs of new colonies. And,
fourthly, they contended for the principle of colonial self-
government, Thus, to recapitulate—the sale of wild land at
a uniform price, the application of the proceeds to assist emi-
gration, the selection of the emigrants, and self-government
for the colonies —these may be taken as the cardinal points
in the reformers’ charter. They did not indeed comprise the
whole programme of the reformers —at least of the more
sanguine of the group, in whose fervid imaginations the art
of colonization grew rapidly into a wonderfully elaborate and
complete system. For these visionaries—as I think I may
now venture to call them—the ideal of an English colony
was England herself in little, transferred to the other side
of the globe—an epitome, perfect in all its parts, of the
society from which it issued—England, with its capitalists
and labourers, its hierarchy of ranks, its hereditary aristo-
cracy, its landed gentry, and, of course, its Established
Church* —transferred complete, as by the enchanter’s stroke,
to the pastoral wilds of Australia ! The idea was a taking,
perhaps a noble one; unfortunately it has not proved prac-
tical. The progeny is, in fact, turning out something very
different from the parent’s image. In place of feudal subor-
dination there is democracy; in place of a high electoral quali-
fication, manhood suffrage; in place of primogeniture, equal
* This was, I believe, the original idea, which however in the end
developed into something more reasonable as well as more liberal —
“ that of established churches.” “As a colonizing body,” says Mr
Wakefield, “ composed, like the legislature, of people differing in
creed, we determined to assist all denominations of settlers alike, with
respect to religious provisions. We have assisted Roman Catholics
according to their numbers, and the Church of Scotland on the same


division of property; in place of state churches, voluntary
religious associations. In fact, the ducklings are rapidly taking
the water; but if they are, it is scarcely, methinks, for us to
act the idle part of the nursing hen moralizing from the
brink,*
principle.” He adds the following creditable anecdote. “ Among the
first emigrants to New Zealand were some Jews, wdio asked as, ‘ with
bated breath and whispering humbleness,’ if a priest authorized to kill
animals for meat according to Jewish custom, could have accommo-
dation in the ships. We treated the inquiry as a request, and granted
it with alacrity, taking care besides that every arrangement should he
made to satisfy their religious scruples. The Jews of England have
since done the Zealand Company’s settlements more than one
service.” —“ Art of Colonization,” pp. 56, 57.
* “ And even supposing this aristocratic reverie capable of being
accomplished, what interest have the English people in its accom-
plishment? Why should they desire to plant among the communities
of the New World a hostile outpost of feudalism and privilege, the
source of division, jealousy, and war ? What reason have they to fear
the sight of great commonwealths based on free reverence for equal
laws, and prospering without lords or dependents ? Why should they
look with jealous malignity on the mighty development of the Anglo-
Saxon race, emancipated from Norman bonds, over a continent which
its energy and patience have made its own ? Why should they desire
to thwart the manifest designs of Providence, which has willed that a
new order of things should commence with the peopling of the New
World? ....
“ By the issue of their enterprise, victorious though chequered, vic-
torious though now wrapped in storm, man has undoubtedly been
taught that he may not only exist, but prosper, without many things
which it would be heresy and treason to think unnecessary to his exis-
tence here. It is a change, and a great change; one to be regarded
neither with childish exultation nor with childish fear, but with manly
reverence and solicitude, as the opening of a new page in the book of
Providence, full of mighty import to mankind. But what, in the course
of time, has not changed, except that essence of religion and morality
for which all the rest was made ? The grandest forms of history have
waxed old and passed away. The English aristocracy has been grand
305
COLONIZATION AND COLONIAL GOVERNMENT.


But leaving these refinements of political speculation, re-
specting which opinions will naturally differ, the four posi-
tions which I have stated furnished at least a sound basis for
practical work. Sustained as these positions have since been
by fuller discussion, as well as by the severer test of actual
experiment, they may now be taken as the admitted and ap-
proved groundwork of the colonizing art.*
The colonial reformers of 1830, I have said, propounded
a theory: they were, however, very far from being mere
theorists: their aims were essentially practical; and they
were eager to proceed from speculation to action.
and beneficent in its hour, but why should it think that it is the expi-
ring effort of creative power, and the last birth of time? We bear,
and may long bear, from motives higher perhaps than the public
good, the endless decrepitude of feudalism here; but why are we
bound, or how can we hope, to propagate it in a free world?” —“The
Empire,” by Goldwin Smith, pp. 142-145.
* “ Let us divest it ” [the modern scheme of systematic coloniza-
tion] says Mr. Merivale, “of the too exact form in which it has been
presented by some of its supporters; let us dismiss all idea of a pre-
cise proportion between land labour and capital, an exclusive employ-
ment of the land fund on emigration, and of a ‘ mathematically ’
sufficient price; let us consider its principles as confined to the sale
of land at as high prices as can reasonably be obtained, and the strict
devotion of the proceeds to a few essential purposes, among which the
supply of labour holds the principal place; let us consider it, moreover,
as chiefly applicable to colonies raising large quantities of exportable
produce, and perhaps also to other colonies so distant from the mother
country, that the stream of emigration needs to be artificially directed
to them; let us, I say, subject the theory to all the qualifications I
have suggested, although not all of them with equal confidence, and
we cannot then fail of being struck with its simplicity, its facility of
adaptation, its high practical utility. Never was there a more remark-
able instance of the success of a principle against all manner of mis-
apprehension—against the fear of innovation—against corrupt inte-
rests —against the inert resistance which all novelty is sure to encoun-
ter.” —“ Colonization and the Colonies,” pp. 427, 428.


Among their first converts was Lord Howick, the present
Earl Grey, who early in 1832, before he had been a year in
office, took the first great step in the right direction, by pro-
mulgating regulations whereby, in the principal colonies of
England, the sale of waste land was substituted for the
irregular practice of gratuitous grants ; and whereby further,
in two important colonies—New South Wales and Van Die-
man’s Land—the purchase money thus obtained was directed
to be used as a fund for assisting emigration. This was the
first victory of the reformers ; the second occurred some four
years later. It consisted in the appointment—made while Earl,
then Lord John, Russell held the seals of the Colonial Office
—of the Land and Emigration Commissioners, as a machinery
for superintending and generally promoting emigration.
These were important achievements ; but the reformers
naturally desired some fairer field for the trial of their prin-
ciples than settlements already saturated with the dregs of a
convict emigration. They aspired to be themselves the founders
of colonies. The site which they selected for their first experi-
ment was South Australia. In 1836, the Act of Parliament
was passed by which that model colony* was founded.
* I say “model” colony; for, although it is true that the Wakefield
School were far from satisfied with the degree of recognition obtained
for their views in the original constitution, it is beyond question that
it embodied the most important of their characteristic doctrines: on
the whole, too, and notwithstanding the first break down, they have
no reason to be dissatisfied with the result of the experiment. “Not-
withstanding,” says Mr. Wakefield, (“ Art of Colonization,” p. 50)
“this grievous mistake, and the numerous mistakes into which the
Commissioners fell, the plan worked even better than its authors now
expected. A fine colony of people was sent out; and, for the first
time, the disposal of waste land, and the emigration of shipfulls of
labourers to the other side of the world, was managed with something
like system and care.” And see Merivale’s “ Colonization,” &c. New
edition, Lecture xvi. and Appendix,


From this point the new principles steadily gained ground.
In 1837, the New Zealand Association, with Mr. Baring,
afterwards Sir Francis, at its head, was formed for the purpose
of colonizing New Zealand in conformity with the new doc-
trines. After a prolonged controversy with more than one
government, it at length succeeded, in 1846, in obtaining
from Parliament charters for the settlement of Wellington,
Nelson, and New Plymouth. Within a few years Canterbury
and Otago were added to the achievements of the Association in
the same region. Meantime the principles of the reformers
respecting the disposal of the public land and the trans-
mission of emigrants, modified, it is true, to meet the views
of successive Colonial Secretaries, were adopted for all the
Australian colonies. Thus rapidly were the fortunes of
English colonization retrieved. In 1830, the colonies were
spoken of in leading reviews as “ unfit abodes for any but
convicts, paupers, and desperate and needy persons.” Before
five years Had passed, the best minds in England' had iden-
tified themselves with the cause of colonization; within
twenty years a whole group of new colonies were founded,
which are now amongst the most interesting and promising
which own allegiance to the British Crown. The Coloniza-
tion Society had done its work.*
It had, perhaps, done more than its work—more, at least,
than many of those who took part in its early delibera-
tions had consciously aimed at. Among the numerous
)
* “Like most projects based on theory,” says Mr. Merivale, “how-
ever far-sighted and comprehensive, the so-called South Australian, or
Wakefield scheme of colonization, took in practice a different course
from what its inventors anticipated, and its results were in many
respects curiously divergent from those with a view to which it was
constructed. But it would be a great error to infer on that account
that it was unsuccessful; on the contrary, there are in history very
few instances to be found in which a system, devised in the closet by


reforms comprised in the programme of the colonial refor-
mers, self-government for the colonies occupied a principal
place. In this, too, the reformers have succeeded—succeeded
beyond their hopes—succeeded, it may yet prove, beyond
their wishes.
During that period in which the colonies were ruled
through the Colonial Office—that is to say, from 1794 down
to quite recent times—there was maintained in many of the
colonies a make-believe of self-government. The colonies,
many of them at least, received so-called “ constitutions.”
These constitutions, however, notwithstanding that they in
general comprised a representative assembly, in fact signified
extremely little. The representative assemblies had no sub-
stantial functions. The real powers of government lay in
an Executive Council —a council of which the members,
nominated directly or indirectly by the Colonial Minister,
and holding office during his pleasure, were entirely inde-
pendent of the representative bodies, and might, and fre-
quently did, set them at defiance, and govern in direct oppo-
sition to their views. This was the state of things which
prevailed in the so-called “ representative colonies” of Eng-
land down to 1846. But in that year a change took place :
the reformers were strong enough to carry a measure, by
which representative government in Canada was converted
from a sham into a reality. The principle, once made good,
was rapidly extended ; and I believe, at the present time, the
Cape of Good Hope is the only considerable English colony
studious men, and put in execution in a new and distant world, which
those men had never seen, has produced such extensive and beneficial
results.” “It is not too much to say,” he adds, “that the
success of our Australian colonies is in a very great measure attribu-
table to their lessons.” —“ Colonization and the Colonies.” New
edition, 1861, p. 470.


in which responsible government, in the fullest sense of the
word, does not prevail.*
The mode in which this pregnant change was effected is
deserving of attention, as illustrating the vast consequences
which, in political affairs, sometimes depend upon apparently
trivial circumstances. Formerly, on the nomination of mem-
bers to the Executive Council, the appointment was made
u during pleasure”—the pleasure, that is to say, of the Colo-
nial Office; the practical effect being that the members held
office during life. But from the time that the new measures
came into force, the words “ during pleasure” were omitted;
and instead, the members were appointed on the under-
standing, that they should hold their posts only so long as
they retained the confidence of the colonial assemblies. The
change, almost infinitessimal in appearance, amounted in its
consequences to a revolution | for it at once brought the
executive into subordination to the legislature. Power and
patronage passed in a moment from the Colonial Office to the
the colonial assemblies. The Council might still be appointed
by the Home Government; but it could only exercise its
powers in conformity with the views of the local body. In
this way, after the lapse of a century, has Great Britain
come round in her colonial policy to the point from "which
she started. In early times self-government used, as we
saw, to “break out” in the English colonies—the natural
outcome where two or three Englishmen met together to
build up society in a new land; and now, after much
groping amongst other systems, the country has returned
to its primitive faith. Reason and experience have set their
seal on what was at first prompted by the instincts of
free men.
* “ Colonization and Colonies.’ Appendix to Lecture xxii.


And now, availing ourselves of the light which we derive
from this rapid survey of the past, let us endeavour to appre-
ciate the character of the crisis in our colonial history in the
midst of which at the present moment we find ourselves.
One inference forces itself upon us at the outset. Of the
reasons which have in former times prevailed for holding
colonies in subjection, not one can now be considered tenable.
One after another, the objects for the sake of which our
colonial empire was created have, with the progress of eco-
nomic and political knowledge, been given up. Let us glance
at these objects in succession ; and first, tribute may receive
a passing mention. Tribute—for which, with ancient states-
men, dependencies of all kinds were chiefly valued, and
which has been enforced in modern times by some European
nations —never filled a large place in the colonial programme
of England. Once indeed she made the attempt to tax her
colonies for her own benefit ; but the result of that experi-
ment has not tempted her to repeat it. At present it is
scarcely necessary to say, that the idea of obtaining tribute
from a British colony is one which has no place in the
thoughts of any British statesman. So far from this, the
tables have been turned: it is we who pay the tribute—a
tribute amounting, in average years, to some £4,421,000
annually ;* what it will reach this year, when the New Zealand
war bill is paid, is what I will not venture to conjecture.
* “ Having reference to the expenditure of 1857, which is the latest
account in a complete form we have in our possession, we find the
imperial cost to have been £4,115,757, and the average of five years
previously £4,421,577; but we should not forget that this amount,
large as it may appear, is only some important portion of the whole
sum. The colonies have shared, in no inconsiderable measure, in the
£12,608,000 we have expended on the navy, and one million on the
packet service.” —“ Our Colonies, their Commerce and their Cost, by
Henry Ashworth, p. 8.


On the other hand, commercial monopoly, was long, as we
have seen, a leading object with those who built up and
maintained our colonial empire. u The only use,” said Lord
Sheffield, in a debate during the American War of Inde-
pendence, “the only use of the American colonies is the
market of their commodities and the carriage of their pro-
duce and on this basis was erected that complicated system
of prohibitions bounties and differential duties, of which, in
a former part of this address, I attempted to sketch the out-
line. But free trade has wholly and for ever removed the
ground from this elaborate and time-honoured structure.
We do not any longer ask—we certainly do not receive—
from our colonies any commercial advantages which are not
equally open to the whole world, which we should not equally
command though the political connexion were severed to-
morrow.* The commercial reason for holding colonies in
subjection, therefore, like the financial one, has passed away.
But another use for colonies was in progress of time dis-
covered : they might be turned to account as receptacles for
the criminals of the mother country —convenient sewers for
her moral and social offscourings. I have shown you what
was the result of this elevated and hopeful view of the colo-
nizing art. I will only now add, that penal colonization,
long condemned by the best minds of the nation, as well as
by a disastrous experience, has of late years —less, it is morti-
fying to think, from an enlightened policy than under stress
of necessity—been in practice abandoned. One example,
indeed, of a penal colony under British dominion still exists—
Western Australia; but this remaining blot, thanks to the
* “ No one now really doubts,” says Mr. Merivale, “ notwithstand-
ing the hostile tariff of the States, that the separation of our North
American colonies has been, in an economical sense, advantageous
to us.”


rough lesson we have just received from a precocious pupil
in the art politic,* it seems probable will soon be removed.
Well, the object of finance , the object of commercial mono-
poly, the object of gaol convenience —all those objects, in short,
which had served in former times as reasons for our colonial
empire, had one after another been given up; yet the struc-
ture remained—remained, not only without support from any
grounds of solid reason, but charged with an extraneous
burthen of £4,500,000 sterling, spent annually in keeping it
in repair. People began to ask cui bono ? Various answers
were returned. One writer said we took out the value in
prestige.]" According to another, the colonial empire was to
be regarded as a great political gymnasium, in which the
people of this country might practice the art of governing
nations, and cultivate the “ imperial sense ” —an endowment,
which, it was alleged, was worth the money. + Just two years
ago, a high authority propounded a more tangible doctrine.
The political connexion was justified by Mr. Merivale on the
* “ A sinister system of education, under which the tutor tries to
force upon the pupil moral and social poison, which the pupil struggles
to reject.”—Prof. G. Smith in Daily News.
f “ The ablest of my critics tells me in good plain English that
what he thinks so valuable and wishes so much to preserve is * appa-
rent power.’ . . . When we see through the appearance of power,
and coolly own to ourselves that we do see through it, will not our
enemies have the sense to do the same? Wooden artillery has been
useful as a stratagem in war ; but I never heard that it was useful, or
that anything was risked by a wise commander to preserve it, after the
enemy had found out that it was wooden.” — The Empire, p. 32.
J The following is, perhaps, the neatest statement of the imperial
doctrine of noodledom. “ There is not [in Canada] a grievance to be
alleged or even whispered against the Imperial Government, the purely
nominal hut beneficent suzerainty of which keeps the political machinery of
the colonies in working order." — Times' American Correspondent.—So
much virtue, it seems, there is in a name.


ground that colonies are valuable as a field for emigration ;*
the implication, of course, being that the condition of depen-
dency constitutes an attraction for emigrants. In the keenly
felt need of a working theory of empire the idea was eagerly
taken up. The Times , of course, welcomed the opportune
discovery. Even the cautious Economist became enthusiastic
in contemplating “ the amount of vivifying hope inspired in
our working classes here by the knowledge that they can at
any moment take refuge in a world of comparative plenty
within the limits of the British Empire.” The theory wanted
nothing but a basis, in fact: in this, however, it was
deficient.
The emigration returns give no evidence of the alleged
preference of our emigrating classes for countries which are
still under British rule : on the contrary, the immense majo-
rity of those who emigrate from the British isles pass, by
choice, outside the limits of the British empire. Even of
those who emigrate, in the first instance, to British depen-
dencies, a large proportion subsequently leave them, and pass
into independent countries. The stream of emigration from
Canada to the United States has lately become so large, that
the Canadian people, like ourselves, have become apprehen-
sive of depopulation, and only the other dayf a select com-
mittee was appointed by the Canadian Legislative Council to
report on the best means of at once attracting emigration
and stopping this drain. Now, we may explain these facts as
we please; but facts they are; and in the presence of such
facts, it does seem somewhat preposterous to put forward the
preference of our emigrating classes for British rule as a
reason for maintaining our colonial empire. Would there
* Paper on “ The Utility of Colonization,” read before the British
Association, 1862.
f 16th May, 1864.


not, in truth, be more colour of reason in the converse of the
argument ?
We have not yet exhausted the motives to imperial rule.
The change in our commercial policy has, as we have seen,
disposed of one—the principal—ground on which, in modem
times, the theory of colonial empire has been sustained —the
supposed advantages of commercial monopoly. But is it
certain that this change, while removing one, has not fur-
nished us with another and a more valid reason for main-
taining our supremacy ? If empire were justifiable on the
principles of commercial monopoly, is it not, now that those
principles are exploded, justifiable for the enforcement of
free trade ? Having adopted free trade for ourselves, have
we not a right —is it not our duty as an imperial nation—to
see to it that the same beneficent principle which we have
established at home, shall also be the law throughout the
widely scattered regions over which we have planted our
race ? There is no doubt that, some twenty years ago, as
the approaching triumph of free trade menaced the founda-
tions of the received colonial doctrines, this view presented
itself to the minds of some of our most enlightened states-
men ; * and eminently just and reasonable as the end aimed
* “ This advantage,” said Sir C. Lewis, writing in 1841, “ is at
present a substantial one; but it is an advantage which is founded
exclusively on the perverse folly of independent states in imposing
prohibitory and protective duties on one another’s productions
When civilization shall have made sufficient progress to diffuse gene-
rally a knowledge of the few and simple considerations which prove
the expediency of the freedom of trade, and when consequently inde-
pendent states shall have abandoned their present anti-commercial
policy, the possession of dependencies will no longer produce the
advantage in question. The advantage consists in possession of a
specific against the evils arising from an erroneous system of policy.
Whenever the errors of the policy shall be generally perceived, and
the system shall be exploded, the specific against its evil effects will be
valueless.” —“ Government of Dependencies,” pp. 229-230.


at is, and holding out, as it does, the prospect of large bless-
ings to the community of nations, such an object might seem
not altogether unworthy of being made the logical basis of
imperial rule. But here we are met by another principle
equally reasonable, equally just, and far more imperative—a
principle which also, after full consideration, we have delibe-
rately adopted —the principle of colonial self-government.
Are we prepared, frankly and in good faith, to give effect
to this principle ? If so, the question seems to be resolved.
Self-government means government in accordance with the
views of the persons governed. If the colonists, therefore,
desire a free trade policy, under a regime of self-government,
free trade will be adopted, whether they are nominally our
subjects or not. If not, then, our imperial pretensions not-
withstanding, free trade will be set at nought, and protection
will be established. This is, in fact, what in some instances
has happened. Canada has employed the legislative powers
which she received from Great Britain to lay protective
duties on British manufactures. Canada has led the way,
and Australia bids fair to follow in her steps.
And now I think we may see where it is that the course
of our colonial history has at length landed us. People are
asking whether we are to retain or part with our colonies.
It appears to me that to discuss this question now is much
like discussing the propriety of locking the stable door after
the steed has gone forth. No doubt, the British colonies
still, in strict constitutional doctrine, owe allegiance to the
British crown: to withhold this allegiance would be rebel-
lion. But bring the question to any practical test, and let us
see what the value of this much prized supremacy amounts
to—in what tangible circumstances Great Britain impresses
her will upon her colonies; and, on the other hand, what
the attributes of sovereignty are which these communities do


not possess—which they do not at this moment actually exer-
cise.
I have just adverted to our failure to maintain in them
the principle of free trade—so just and reasonable a claim.
Again : in conceding to them self-government, it was hoped
that the mother country might yet reserve to herself the control
of the colonial waste lands—“ territories,” said Mr. Wake-
field, “ which the nation had acquired by costly efforts, as a
valuable national property, which we have every right in
justice, and are bound by every consideration of prudence,
to. use for the greatest benefit of the people of this country.”
But one of the first uses which the emancipated legislatures
made of their newly acquired power was to possess them-
selves of this national property— a possession in which they
have not been since disturbed. Once more, it was thought
not unreasonable that, having undertaken their defence, we
should have a voice in determining the amount of military
force they should maintain. But here too our expectations
have been falsified. For the last two years the Home govern-
ment, backed by the Times, have in vain employed alternate-
entreaties and threats to induce the Canadians to augment
their military force. Thus in their commercial policy, in
their territorial policy, in what we may call their foreign
policy (since the view taken of their military requirements
would depend upon their opinion as to external dangers) the
colonists, in the teeth of example, advice, and remonstrance
—remonstrance rising sometimes almost to menace—have
deliberately pursued their own way.
And noAv look at what is going forward in British North
America. Some half-dozen colonies have appointed deputies
to meet and decide upon a constitution under which they
propose to coalesce into a nation, lhat, in a word, is the
scope of this movement j and if that be not an act of the


highest sovereignty, then it is difficult to imagine what sove-
reignty means. The Canadian leaders indeed assure us, as I
observe from intelligence quite recently received, of their
firm purpose that the North American colonies shall remain
integral portions of the British Empire; but they do not tell
us in what particulars they are prepared to defer to imperial
authority. They will probably be content, as hitherto, to
receive our advice, on the condition of being permitted to
decline it when it happens not to coincide with their own
views, and they will doubtless have no objection to receive
our assistance in fighting their battles. On these or some
tantamount terms, they are content to remain for ever loyal
subjects of the British Crown. But what does a good cause
gain by professions of “ ironical allegiance ?”* Disguise it as
they will, under whatever constitutional figments and sound-
ing phrases, the work on which they are engaged is the same
work which some eighty years ago was consummated on no
remote scene —when the thirteen united colonies, having
achieved their independence, met together to do that which
is now the business of Canadian statesmen —to make them-
selves a nation.
My case might seem here complete; but within the last
week intelligence has reached this country which furnishes a
fresh illustration of the nature of our imperial rule so appo-
site to my present theme, that, though at the risk of pro-
* Howmuch more really dignified is language like the following:—
“ We have come to feel that we can no longer call upon the people of
England to tax themselves for our benefit; we have arrived at that
time of life when it is humiliating to have everything done for us, and
when we ought to assume burdens and not shrink from responsibilities
of a national character. Out of this Union a colossal power will arise
on the American continent, with one foot on the Pacific, another on
the Atlantic.”—The Hon. Mr. Archibald, leader of the Opposition in
Nova Scotia at the Montreal dinner.


longing unduly this address, I am unable to resist the tempta-
tion of bringing it before you.
I just now stated, as you will remember, that Western
Australia formed at present the single instance among all our
colonies of a convict settlement. For some years this
circumstance has been a source of constant discussion be-
tween the Home government and the other —that is to say
the Eastern—Australian colonies. As I have already re-
marked, transportation from a certain point of view has
undoubtedly something to recommend it. The mother coun-
try by its means certainly gets rid of a very undesirable
portion of her population ; while for the emigrant, if his
object be simply to make a fortune with all convenient speed,
and return to his native country or migrate elsewhere, it is
beyond doubt an advantage—more especially in a very
sparsely peopled country —to be assured of a constant sup-
ply of able-bodied labour. On the other hand, if the colonist
intends to make the colony his country and home, it seems
equally natural that he should object to the practice of let-
ting loose periodically upon the infant community gangs of
the picked ruffians of the parent state. Whether the former
considerations have influenced the Western Australians I do
not undertake to say; but it is certain that a large number
amongst them have welcomed this species of immigration.
On the other hand, the Eastern colonies have long vehe-
mently protested against transportation in every form. Now,
here perhaps it will occur to you that, the case being so, there
is no reason that both parties should not be satisfied ; but at
this point a hitch occurs. The Eastern colonies, two of which
are the gold-producing districts of New South Wales and
Victoria, offer far greater attractions to the convict class—as
to other classes—than the bare and unpromising desert to
which the convicts are sent; and, accordingly, so soon as the


term of their sentence is expired, large numbers migrate to
the Eastern colonies. The colony which profits by their ser-
vices is thus, so soon as those services cease to be profitable,
relieved of their presence —a circumstance which we may
well believe does not detract from the popularity of the sys-
tem in this colony. It seems that, according to the evidence
of Mr. Newlands and Mr. Torrens, both for a long time
magistrates of Southern Australia, and the latter a member
of the Legislative and Executive Councils, “ within three
years after the resumption of transportation to Western
Australia, over one thousand conditionally pardoned and
ticket-of-leave men found their way from that colony to
Adelaide, and the result was a rapid increase of violent
assaults, robberies, and burglarious crimes.”* Now I think it
must be confessed that such a state of things constitutes a
very substantial grievance. But sentiment is also mixed up
with the opposition of the Eastern Australians to the contin-
uance of this system. “ Generations,” they say, “are spring-
ing up which will call Australia their birthplace, and will
make it their home. To them it is fatherland, and they see
clearly enough that a great career lies before it.” “ For this
reason,” adds an eloquent colonial writer, “we are jealous
of the fair fame of the land; and we are unwilling that
colonies which contain within themselves the seeds of great
nations, should have their name and history associated with
convictism in any form. We ask, and we have a right to
ask, why should we in this colony, who from the first have
strenuously resolved that the convict element should have
no place here, have the scum of England’s moral impurity
thrown down at our next door?” The outside world will
make no nice distinctions between Eastern and Western,
free and penal, Australia. They will only know that convicts
* Letter of Mr. M‘Arthur in the Daily News.


are deported to Australia, and the word for them will cover
all the colonies. “ Therefore,” say the colonists, “we suffer in
reputation by even the remotest contact with the evil thing.”*
! I confess it seems to me that language such as this does
honour to the people from whom it proceeds, and expressing,
as it does, the unanimous feeling of communities which do
not number less than a million and a-half of people, ought
to have weighed for something against the eager demand for
convict labour of a few thousand Western Australians!
hastening to be rich. But it seemed otherwise to the British
Government, Last summer the determination was taken to
continue transportation to Western Australia on the same
scale as formerly. The Home Government and the people of
the Eastern colonies have thus been brought into distinct
collision; and now I beg you to observe the illustration this
has furnished of the value of our imperial rule.
By the last Australian mail a minute has arrived from the
Victorian Government, in which its Chief Secretary, after
premising that it has been forced upon the attention of him-
self and his colleagues that further remonstrance is useless,
goes on to say—“ The time has arrived when it is incumbent
upon us, in the exercise of our powers of self-government, to
initiate legislation, in connexion with the colonies whose in-
terests are alike affected, for our common protection.” He
then announces that the Victorian Government has invited
the co-operation of each of the other colonies interested, with
a view to framing a measure “ prohibitive of all intercourse
whatever with Western Australia,” “in order that her posi-
tion as the only convict colony may be distinctly marked ;”
The South Australian Register , 26th March, 1864.
f The number of inhabitants in Western Australia, excluding con-
victs and their families, is, according to Mr. Torrens’ computation
six thousand.


further, he gives notice that the Victorian Government will,
at the expiration of six months from the Ist November, cease
to contribute to the annual mail packet subsidy, unless upon
the condition that the packets shall not touch at any port in
Western Australia.
Such is the point at which this painful controversy has
arrived. And now, can any one doubt what will be its ter-
mination ? Absolute unanimity, it seems, prevails on the
subject in all the eastern colonies. Under these circum-
stances, is it conceivable that the Home Government should
persist in forcing on a quarrel with our own kindred in such
a cause —that they may have the privilege of discharging at
their doors the scum of our criminal population ? Of course
no such fatuous act will be committed. Of course the Home
Government will succumb. Hut what a comment does this
supply on “ the beneficent suzerainty ” ! In North America
the British colonies have initiated action among themselves
to form a new state. This may be an act of sovereignty, but
it is, at all events, a neutral act; but how shall we charac-
terize a proceeding in which colonies meet together to concert
measures distinctly and avowedly to nullify the policy of the
imperial state ? Supposing these colonies were formally in-
dependent, what other course would they, in like circum-
stances, pursue than that which they are now actually pur-
suing—namely, look out for alliances amongst communities
similarly aifected to counteract a policy which aggrieved
them ?
Look, then, at the position in which we stand. We have
abandoned all the objects for the sake of which our colonial
empire was founded. We are unable to impress our will
upon our colonies in any particular, however in itself reason-
able, or just, or apparently necessary for their safety or ours.


Wholly irrespective of our wishes, they enter into alliances,
unite and separate, dispose of their lands, recast their consti-
tutions, and even combine for the avowed purpose of thwart-
ing our designs. When things have reached this pass, it
seems rather idle to ask —Are we to retain our colonies ?
Retain our colonies ! What is there left to retain ? Retain
the privilege of spending yearly £4,500,000 sterling on their
protection, and receive in requital prohibitive tariffs and
“ ironical allegiance ” ! But I shall not be guilty of the pre-
sumption of venturing further into an argument which has
already been exhausted by the writer who has made this
subject his own. Two years have just passed since Professor
Goldwin Smith, in a series of letters, which in argumentative
ability, masculine eloquence, and satiric verve , have rarely
been equalled in the literature of politics, forced this subject
on the attention of the people of this country —forced it on
their attention, let me say, with true patriotic boldness, at a
time when “ leading ” journalists thought only of tabooing it
as an inconvenient topic, and judicious politicians gladly
avoided a question from which, while no political capital was
to be reaped, much unpopularity might easily be incurred.
Professor Smith may congratulate himself upon a triumph
speedier and more complete than often falls to the lot of
political innovators. Before six months had passed, the
lonian Islands, if not in deference to his teaching, at all
events in perfect conformity with the policy he had just pro-
pounded amid the all but universal protests of the Press,
were conceded to Greece amid the not less general applause
of the nation. This, it must be owned, is a singular testimony
to political forecast; and the whole course of events in the two
years that have since elapsed, has but served to strengthen
it. Already some ot our statesmen of greatest promise have


given in their adhesion to his views ;* and the “ leading
journal,” which attacked him with even more than its wonted
insolence, now, with characteristic effrontery, adopts his
opinions as those “ which have constantly found utterance in
the Times.” \
* For example, Lord Stanley, in his recent speech at King’s Lynn,
thus expressed himself: —“ In British North America there is a strong
movement in progress in favour of federation, or rather of union in
some shape. In Australia I believe the same feeling exists, but not
so deeply, and though it has not assumed a practical form, I think
that tendency ought to be encouraged in both one and the other case
(hear, hear). We know that those countries must before long he inde-
pendent states. We have no interest except in their strength and well
being.”— Times , 20th October, 1864.
f “ The power we desire to exercise [over the North American
colonies] is entirely a moral one , and, strong or weak, the dependency
that wishes to quit us, has only solemnly to make up its mind to this
effect. . . The Admiral was severe on those who entertain the
opinions which have constantly found utterance in the Times , that the
colonies and the mother country will cease to be united when the
common interest ceases.” — Times , 15th October, 1864.
A union between political societies, based upon community of in-
terest, to be dissolved at the wish of either party, and to be enforced
exclusively by moral sanctions —this (by whatever name it may be
called) constitutes in fact an alliance between independent nations,
not the relation of an imperial to a dependent state. (See Austins
Jurisprudence, vol. i., pp. 208, 209, and Lewis’s Government of Depen-
dencies, pp. 2,3). Such was the relation subsisting between the states
of ancient Greece and their independent colonies; such is that into
which any two sovereign states of Europe may at any time enter
without derogation from the sovereignty of either; and such, in fine,
has been that which has been contemplated and distinctly described
by those who have advocated “ colonial emancipation.”
The form in which, two years ago, the above opinions “ found ut-
terance in the Times ” was as follows “We may as well declare at
once, for the benefit of Americans and Spaniards, Russians and lonians,
Sikhs and Sepoys, that England has no thought of abandoning her


The British Empire—let me here state for what it is worth
the conclusion to which serious reflection has guided me —the
British Empire, such as it has hitherto been known in the
world, has reached its natural goal, lhat British power, or
that the influence of British ideas, will in consequence suffer
declension, is what at least I, for one, do not believe. Con-
templating our career as a whole, it seems to me that we
have out-grown the restraints and supports of our earlier
state, and are now passing into a new phase of existence.
Instead of a great political, we shall be a great moral, unity ;*
bound together no longer indeed by Imperial ligaments sup-
plied from the Colonial Office, but by the stronger bonds of
blood, language, and religion —by the common inheritance of
laws fitted for free men, and of a literature rich in all that
can keep alive the associations of our common glory in the
past. Thus sustained and thus united, each member of the
great whole will enter without hindrance the path to which
transmarine possessionsand then, with a delicate allusion to the
moral force doctrine, “So far from believing in her own decline,
England believes that she was never more powerful than now, or more
capable of holding what she has won.”— {Times, 4th Feb., 1862> It is
true the writer, at the conclusion of a long tirade conceived in this
spirit, adds the remark:—“No one, we believe, in this country desires
to keep them against their will.” But this is merely a specimen of
the self-stultification into which writers fall, who, without any clear
and self-consistent view, charge themselves with the task of finding
arguments in defence of prevailing prejudices.
* “ If people want a grand moral unity, they must seek it in the
moral and intellectual sphere. Religion knows no impediment of
distance. The dominions of science are divided by no sea. To re-
store, or pave the way for restoring, the unity of long-divided Chris-
tendom, may seem the most chimerical of all aspirations, yet perhaps
it may be less chimerical than the project of founding a world-wide
state.” — The Empire, page 86.


its position and opportunities invite it; while all will co-
operate in the same work of industrial, social, and moral
progress; exchanging freely —let us hope, in spite of some
present indications to the contrary —exchanging freely our
products and our ideas—in, peace good friends and customers,
and firm allies in war.
326
COLONIZATION AND COLONIAL GOVERNMENT.




