

COLONIES AND COLONIZATION.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED IN THE HALL OF THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE
AT AUCKLAND,
WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO
NEW ZEALAND,
JAMES BUSBY, ESQ.
A U C K L-A N D:
PRINTED BY PHILIP KTJNST, AT THE ‘SOUTHER N CROSS’ OFFICE,
18 57.




LECTURE.
Mu. Chairman : Ladies and Gentlemen
The observations which I am now to have the honor of
addressing to you will form rather a continuation of a Lecture,
formerly delivered in this Hall, than a complete Lecture in itself.
On the former occasion I proposed to take a Tapid survey of
the Colonies of the ancient world, as well as of those of modern
times : to advert to the motives which led to their settlement,
and to the political and social institutions, and the agricultural
and commercial statistics of such of them as might furnish to us
lessons of instruction or of warning. And, finally, to bring our
observations nearer home, to take a view of our own prospects as
colonists; of the political institutions which the Mother Country has
given us, and of the use which we have made of those institutions,
as well as of the agricultural and commercial capabilities of this
land of our adoption. On the former occasion, as some of my
present auditory who then honored me with their attendance
may possibly remember, we passed in rapid review the history of
ancient colonization. We saw the hives of ancient Egypt throw-
ing off their swarms upon the Islands and Continent of Greece,
and the Countries of Greece becoming in time too strait for their
inhabitants, and sending out colonies to people the shores of Italy
and Sicily. We saw the thirst of gold stir up all Europe to ex-
plore and colonize the newly discovered shores of America ; and
the sufferers under religious persecution finding there a peaceable
refuge.
We advertevi at more length to the neighbouring Colonies of
Australia, which have attained, under our own eyes, to such un-
paralleled wealth and prosperity, by the golden fleece of their
native pastures, and the treasures of literal gold buried beneath
those pastures. It remains for us to turn our attention^to those
islands which it has fallen to our own lot to colonize.
The first beginnings of the Colony of New Zealand, and the
circumstances which attended its settlement, are of a different
character from any which the pages of history have recorded.
Its pioneers were a small band of Christian missionaries, who,
trusting in the only protection to which they could 100k —that of
Divine Providence, disembarked their families upon its shores,
not to search for gold or other material riches, but to impart to its
benighted inhabitants the unsearchable riches of the Gospel of
Christ. All early accounts of the New-Zealanders concur in


'describing them as at once the most ferocious and the most intel-
ligent of savages : and the first missionaries were continual wit-
nesses of the brutality of their manners, and the ferocity of their
passions. Nor were some of the earliest amongst them ignorant
that it had been seriously debated amongst the natives whether it
would be more profitable to sacrifice them at once, in order to
possess themselves of their property, or to protect them, in order
that they might continue to bring supplies of English commodities
to their shores.
When we consider the character of the New Zealanders at that
time, and the total absence of all authority to restrain their un-
bridled passions,—when we consider that war, with all its revolting
circumstances, scarcely ever ceased amongst them—we cannot
but recognise in the contained safety of the missionary families,
the realization of the promise contained in the commission to the
first and all future missionaries : “Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every creature, and no I am with you always,
even to the end of the world.”
1 ears elapsed before the missionaries had any evidence of the
softening of the character of the natives, not to speak of their
conversion. It was not till they had made themselves familiar
with the Maori language, and had printed the New Testament in
that language, that their message began to produce its effects.
It is not easy for us, who have been from infancy familiar with
the Scriptures, to form an idea of their first effects upon the un -
tutored minds of the natives. To many of them, they were a
subject of absorbing interest, —their study by day, and the theme
of their discouse and meditation by night. It was besides their
•one book , and they looked upon its contents with all the avidity
with which we may imagine a man born blind opening his eyes
for the first time upon the visible objects of creation. In those
days the schools were crowded with people of all ages and degrees :
the chief joined with his slave, the father placed on the
same form with his children. The scholars in their turns became
teachers, and carried to their own villages the acquirements they
had made, and the disposition to impart those acquirements to
others. So that at the time the British Government was estab-
lished in New Zealand the ability to read and write was probably
as common amongst the New Zealanders as in the most favored
districts of England. The knowledge of the New Testament was
universal, and the peaceful influence of its doctrines was mani-
fested in the character, even of those who made no profession of
Christianity.
From the time of the first persecution of the Church at Jeru-
salem, when “they who were scattered abroad went everywhere
preaching the word,” it has often been remarked that the persecu-
tion of Christians has extended the knowledge of the Gospel.
But in New Zealand the bonds of slavery were silently dissolved
by the influence of the Gospel upon the hearts of the master and
the slave. The captive taken in war was allowed to return


to his native village, and to carry with him that Gospel which-
had made himself free. The first native missionaries of Chris-
tianity were those whom Christianity had delivered from bondage.
The security with which the Mission families resided in New
Zealand encouraged the settlement of traders in various parts of
the Country, and they were everywhere welcome. The civilizing
influence of commerce was joined to that of Christianity: and
whatever wars Avere raging in the Country, the persons and pro-
perty of the traders Avere almost invariably respected. Indeed,
when the character and conduct of many persons Avho found a
refuge in New Zealand are considered, the patience and forbear-
ance of the natives towards them, affords matter for wonder.
The first connexion of the British Government with Ncav
Zealand was one of a diplomatic character. It Avas supposed that
a functionary representing the British Government, of a similar
character to the Residents of the East India Company at the
Courts of the native princes, might acquire such an influence
the Maori chiefs, as Avould not only afford security and protection
to British subjects settled amongst them in the pursuit of their
lawful avocations, but lead, eventually, to the establishment of the
Institutions of civilized Government,, and the dominion of luav
amongst the natives themselves.
A functionary of that character was consequently appointed,
Avho landed at the Bay of Islands in May, 1833, nineteen years
after the arrival of the first missionaries, and resided there in that
capacity until the year 1840.
The rapid immigration of British subjects, during that period,
had, however, brought about a state of affairs Avhich Avould have
made a native Government impossible, even had there anywhere
existed a recognized authority upon which it could have been
established.
Unlike many Islands of the Polynesian Groups, where there
appears to have always existed a recognized authority in the
chiefs, and a willing obedience in the people, these Islands were
inhabited by a people Avithout a ruler, and Avithout a law. The
Nbav Zealander Avas the genuine son of Ishmael—“his hand Avas
against every man, and every man’s hand against him.”
Whatever moral influence may have been exerted by the
elders or chiefs from hereditary or personal claims to respect, no
man, who was not a slaA r e taken in Avar, admitted the existence of
any right in another to interfere Avith or control his actions. The
idea of authority as a right, or of obedience as a duty, had no
existence in their minds.
The British Government, as Avell as the other European poAvers
Avhich colonized America, took possession of that country by Avhat
was called the right of discovery, leaving it for those of their re-
spective subjects to Avhom the land Avas granted, or to the Gover-
nors appointed to represent the European Sovereign, to conciliate
the nati\ r es, or buy off their opposition, by a nominal purchase of
the soil, as in the case of British America; or to clear the Avay for


the European race, by the extermination or slavery of the abori-
gines, as in the case of the Spaniards in Mexico and Peru.
The anomalous position of so large a number of British sub-
jects as were residing in different parts of New Zealand, amount-
ing, as has been estimated, to nearly 2000, in 1839, subject to the
penalties,* and yet beyond the protection of British laws, impe-
ratively required the interference of the British Government both
for their protection and their control. But as all pretensions to
seize upon the Sovereignty or the soil of New Zealand, on the
ground of discovery, had been solemnly disavowed both by Wil-
liam the 4th and Queen Victoria, it became necessary to obtain
by treaty that Sovereignty which had, in the settlement of Ame-
rica, been assumed as a right.
The treaty of Waitangi was concluded at the Bay of Islands on
the 6th of February, 1840, between Capt. Hobson and the princi-
pal chiefs of the North : and the adherence of the principal chiefs,
throughout the Islands, was shortly afterwards obtained. By this
treaty the rights of Sovereignty were ceded to the Queen of
England; and the Queen of England guaranteed to the Chiefs
and people the possession of their lands, with this proviso, that
they should, thenceforward, sell what they were disposed to part
with, only to the Queen, through agents appointed by her autho-
rity to treat with them. The natives were, at the same time, ad-
mitted to all the rights and privileges of British subjects. But
these rights have their corresponding duties, to which the New
Zealanders have as yet shewn but little disposition to submit.
The protection of law can only be afforded where there is a
willing obedience, or a constrained submission to its dictates.
The Seat of Government was fixed at Auckland, and New
Zealand, was for a time, governed as a dependency of New South
Wales ; but was, as soon as practicable, declared a separate
Colony.
Nearly simultaneously with the establishment of British So-
vereignty, was the settlement of the New Zealand Company’s first
Colony at Wellington. That of Nelson followed shortly after ;
and the other three Settlements at successive periods. The form
of Government which was first instituted for New Zealand, was
modelled after that of the Convict Colony of New South Wales,
rather than that of the free colonies of America. The Legisla-
ture consisted of the Governor and his principal official function-
aries, with the addition of three private persons, all of whom held
their seats at the will of the Governor.
Each of the New Zealand Company’s Colonies consisted, in
some sense, of an organized community, who had interests in
common, and who were held together by certain theoretical prin-
ciples, an adherence to which they considered necessary to their
success as settlers, and to their prosperity as a community.
* By the “ New South Wales Act," which gave the Supreme Court of
that Colony jurisdiction in offences committed by British subjects in New
Zealand and the Polynesian Islands.


Auckland was settled by a fortuitous collection of individuals*
each pursuing his own interests in his own way, without any
combination amongst themselves, or regard to the general wel-
fare.
There could have been no greater mistake than the attempt to
govern as one those six separate Colonies, so disunited by physi-
cal impediments, and by theoretical systems. No Colony, ever
planted by British subjects, was better entitled to self-government
than was each of the Six Colonies of New Zealand; and there
could have been no means more effectual for creating discontent
and disaffection than the attempt to unite interests so irreconcil-
able.
The first change in the form of Government was made by th e
creation of a subordinate Government in the South ; a Lieutenant
Governor and separate Legislature having been appointed for
the Southern Provinces, but still in subordination to the Gover-
nor-in-Chief. Then came a Constitution with representative in-
stitutions, which was enacted by Parliament, but suspended on
the representation of the Governor.
Of so complicated a piece of machinery as our present Consti-
tution, it would be difficult to give even an outline, without ex-
ceeding the limits to which our time restricts us. When we look
to its elaborate and multifarious provisions, we would be tempted
to suppose that its contrivers considered that the perfection of the
institutions of Government consisted in their complexity.
The perfection of mechanics is to produce the greatest results
by the most simple machinery; but to judge from our Constitu-
tion, the perfection of the institutions of Government would
appear to be the application of the greatest possible amount of
machinery in producing the minimum of good government; as if
the institutions of Government should exist for the sole purpose
of multiplying public officers, and public functionaries, in order
that they might create employment for each other, and keep
the machinery in motion, were it only by unravelling, in the
upper floor of the factory, the tangled web which had been put
together on the floor below ; amusing the people by an appear-
ance of business, as Penelope is said to have amused her visitors
by unravelling, during the night, the web which they saw her
weaving during the day.
Why was it that the Pilgrim Fathers found no difficulty in
laying the foundations of their government on a basis which has
produced, by the simplest means, all the highest results of good
government ? It was because their eye was single—they were of
one heart and one mind—they sought not power for ambitious or
selfish objects. Their institutions were simple, because they
were intended to serve no other ends than the true ends of
Government —the peace, safety, and prosperity of the people.
They had to guard against a watchful enemy without, and against
the violence and injustice of interlopers within their community.
To the attainment of these and the other objects, indispensable to the


public welfare, each member of the community lent his willing
assistance, without fee or reward. And, indeed, to this day, the
same spirit pervades the administration of public affairs in the
Commonwealths of New England : the offices of Government are
imposed upon the citizens as a duty, and the lowest remuneration
which affords an equitable compensation for the time necessarily
given up to the public, is assigned to each office. Every village
lias its local administration; every town and city has its munici-
pal corporation, with powers adapted to its duties; every man
understands too well the duties which are required of him as a
citizen, and the duties of those to whom the public affairs are en-
trusted, to allow of the offices of Government being abused to the
purposes of gain, or of selfish ambition.* I speak not from
my own knowledge and observation alone.
We have the testimony of some of the most eminent publicists
of the age, that the actual result of the Governmental Institution s
of New England, is to secure in the greatest degree the ends of
good government at the least possible expense.
We need not, I think, go far for the proofs of an opposite state
of things in New Zealand. Doubtless the world is changed since
Governor Bradford, after having been nine times elected Governor,
was, “by reason of his importunity,’ ’ let off from serving the
tenth year, without being fined.
In New Zealand there is certainly no need of penalties to in-
duce our leading men to take upon themselves the functions of
Government. There is no lack of zeal to serve the public. It
may, indeed, be doubted, whether our complex Constitution, and
the zeal of our citizens, have not created a governing classs, in
office, or in expectation of office, so numerous and influential, as
by themselves and their connexions, by the patronage of office,
and by the disposal of the public money and the public lands, to
outweigh and overrule that portion of the community, which
wants nothing of the Government but to see it administered with
justice and economy.
Has all this machinery of Government, with all its expensive
administrations, produced the fruits of good government ?
Whether we consult what are called the organs of public opinion,
or listen to the sentiments of every man we meet, we will, I think,
find that if there is one point on which all opinions are agreed, it
is this—that public affairs have hitherto been badly administered.
Some, of course, blame what they call one “scheme of policy, 79
and others another scheme of policy, but all are agreed that good
government has yet to have a beginning amongst us.
Instead of securing, as in New England, the mostvaluable ends
of good Government by the least expenditure of means, we would
seem to have lost sight of the true ends of Government altoge-
* This observation must be understood to apply exclusively to the States
Governments, and not to the Institutions of the General Government of the
Union, existing in each State, but not subject to the jurisdiction of the
States in which they exist.


ther. Forgetful of themselves as individuals, the Pilgrim Fathers
found Government an easy task, —they saw clearly and accom-
plished effectually what the public good required. They founded
their institutions of Government upon a basis which cannot be
shaken, unless corruption, following in the train of wealth, should
altogether obliterate amongst their descendants the severe virtues
of the Pilgrim Fathers.
Were we, indeed, to look to the past history of the world, we
might be inclined to adopt the words of a great poet, who says,
in contemplating the rise and fall of the great empires of anti-
quity,—
“Here is the moral of all human tales—
’Tis but the same rehearsal of the past—
First freedom, and then glory , when that fails,
Wealth, vice, corruption, barbarism at last.”
But Byron wrote of empires which arose and fell in succes-
sion before the light of Christianity dawned upon the world. We,
I trust, may cherish better hopes and better prospects for the des-
cendants of the Pilgrim Fathers, who sought freedom in the waste
howling wilderness, whose glory was not that of conquest, or ex-
tended dominion, but that wisdom and knowledge which we trust
will be the stability of our times. Their wealth has not been the
plunder of conquered cities, but the peaceable fruits of industry
and enterprise, with security of person and property, attained less
by the administration of wise laws, than by the universal training
of the people in the knowledge and practice of their duty to God
and to their neighbour.
If it should appear to any of my hearers that—in this and the
preceding lecture—l have dwelt too long upon the history and
condition of the New England States, I again beg it to be consi-
dered, that it is because I believe that in no part of the world is
there so perfect a condition of human society—a condition which
has been attained by industry, frugality, and enterprise, and by
the practice of the social virtues, in spite of a barren soil and a
severe climate—a condition to which the people of this more fa-
voured land might, by imitating their virtues, attain with much
greater rapidity, without enduring their sufferings and privations.
I have been led into a larger notice of our political institutions
than I intended, not that I would undervalue the influence of
these upon the public welfare. Far be it from me to utter a word
which would tend to diminish the little of true public spirit there
is amongst us. I refer not to that party spirit which will go any
length to attain the objects of party, but to that rarer quality
which is forgetful of self, and looks only to the general welfare,
disdaining to descend to unworthy means even to accomplish what
would appear to be the most desirable ends.
Turning away from politics, we have now to look at our own
individual prospects as colonists, and to the means of prosperity
afforded us by the land of our adoption. And when we regard
what industry, frugality, and enterprise have already accomplished,
and may again accomplish, we may congratulate ourselves upon


another proof of what experience has elsewhere shown : that such
is the inherent energy of a young community, settled in a fruitful
country, that scarcely any amount of bad Government will prevent
its rapid progress to wealth and prosperity.
“How few of all the evils we endure
Are such as kings or laws can make or cure.”
Each individual settler’s success depends more upon his personal
qualities than upon all other considerations together.
Seasons of commercial distress there will be, for such is the
temptation to get into debt, or to speculate beyond his means,
whether to a man engaged in trade or in country pursuits, that in
a country with limited capital it cannot be otherwise than that pe-
riodical checks to speculation should occur. But the progress of
the Colony, as a whole, is but little affected by these.
I do not agree with those who speak of this country as if it
were the garden of the earth, unsurpassed by any other land in the
fertility of its soil, as well as in the excellence of its climate.
Those who so describe it can have seen little of other countries,
or are less careful than they should be to adhere to the truth.
Soils of the first quality are indeed scarcely at all to be found in
New Zealand ; or, at best, they are to be found to a very limited
extent. From the nature of the case it must be so. The soils which
are most capable of producing heavy crops, for a succession of years,
are invariably those which are found in the neighbourhood of large
rivers, which have been for ages depositing their alluvion on the
sides of the valleys through which they flow. The soils thus depo-
sited contain every variety of mineral and vegetable matter, in a
state of the greatest comminution.
The richness of the soils, on the banks of rivers, is generally
in proportion to the extent of country through which they flow,
collecting, as they proceed, every variety of mineral substance and
decayed vegetable matter. Now in New Zealand we have no very
considerable rivers, and such as they are, they generally flow
through a hilly country, which affords only inconsiderable flats to
be benefited by the alluvial matter which they bear down in
their course.
Our best soils, therefore, will scarcely bear a comparison with
those to be found on the banks of the Nile, or of the great rivers of
the New World, which flow through a course of 2000 miles. Even
granting that the virgin soils of our volcanic districts were equally
fertile, it cannot be denied that a very few crops will exhaust their
strength, and that they can, thenceforward, only be cultivated with
advantage with the aid of manures. Whereas even on the banks of a
river so inconsiderable as the Hawksbury in New South Wales, we
are told that the same soils have borne crops for forty years, without
manure, and without any diminution of their fertility,—the over-
flow of the river adding, from time to time, fresh alluvion, and
when that fails, it being only necessary to go an eighth of an inch
deeper with the plough, in order to bring up a fresh stratum of
rich soil.


Bat if our soils are, in general, incapable of rewarding the la-
bours of their cultivators with such abundant returns as reward
the labours of those who cultivate the alluvions of the Nile or the
Mississippi and its tributaries, it is scarcely possible to over esti-
mate the value of our climate, whether we compare it with that of
the neighbouring Colonies, or with that of the Colonies of North
America.
In the one case, it is no uncommon thing for the most luxuri-
ant crops to be arrested in their growth by want of moisture, or to
be cut off in a day by the blighting effects of a hot wind. I have
myself known, in New South Wales, the same land—land of the
richest quality—sown for five successive seasons, and yield but two
harvests for its five successive sowings. Here we have no such ca-
lamities to fear. We are altogether unvisited by hot winds, and it
is a rare thing that there is less rain than is necessary to bring the
crops to perfection.
When, again, we look to North America, we see the labours of
agriculture altogether suspended, for four or five months of the
year, by frost and snow. The same causes make it necessary to
cultivate fool for live stock, while vegetation is suspended, and the
surface of the earth is concealed by the snow, and provide
houses to protect them from the cold ;so \hat a settler in those
Colonies cannot possess even a cow or a sheep until he has pro-
vided warm housing and food for the winter.
How differently is New Zealand, or at least this Northern por-
tion of it, situated in this respect. Every one knows that vegeta-
tion is scarcely stopped in winter by the cold, or in summer by the
heat ; and that, provided the laud is not overstocked, the cattle
can provide for themselves all the year round, without the assis-
tance of artificial food or shelter from the weather. Now, as I have
before said, it is not easy to over estimate the advantages of such a
climate as this, were it only for the time saved by not having to
provide winter housing and winter food for the live stock ; and for
the comparative certainty that the former and the latter rain will,
in their due seasons, make the grain to spring, and bring the ripe
ear to perfection.
When we compare our situation in these respects with that of
the first colonists of New England, what reason have we not to
congratulate ourselves. Our soils, though not of the first-charac-
ter, are far superior to theirs ] our climate will produce every
luxury which is produced in the most favoured climates of the tem-
perate zone. We have a year of twelve months to employ in pro-
ductive labours, instead of having our land locked up by frost for
four months out of the twelve, and having to employ two months
more in providing winter food and shelter for our cattle. Again,
who can be insensible to its effects upon health and happiness ?
Even the sensual pleasure derived from climate is perhaps the
greatest because the most enduring of enjoyments. No Colony, on
2


the whole, was ever planted under more favourable circumstances
for the production of the necessaries and comforts of life.
But in tne present state of the world, when luxuries which a
century ago but few could purchase, are now in common use, and
are counted as necessaries by all classes of the community, we re-
quire to look abroad for a supply of those luxuries, and to bestir
ourselves to produce something to be sent out in exchange for them.
In other words, as we cannot do without imports, we must create
an export to pay for them. We cannot produce our own tea and
sugar, or if we do so, they will cost half a dozen times the price for
which we can import them from countries where labour is cheap
and capital abundant. We cannot make our own cloths and cot-
tons but with a similar result.
No doubt if we were content to live as our forefathers did, be-
fore commerce introduced foreign luxuries, we should find that the
soil and climate of this country would yield to industry everything
which is necessary to healthy existence, and innumerable comforts
which our forefathers knew not.
There is no land in which our lot could have been cast whore
we could more easily attain to those conditions of happiness de-
scribed by the poet, should we make up our minds to be contented
with them :
“ Happy the man whose wish and care,
A lew paternal acres bound ;
Content to breathe his native air,
On his own ground ;
Whose fields with bread, whose herds with milk,
Whose flocks supply him with attire,
Whose trees in summer yield him shade—
In winter fire.”
But whatever moralists or poets may say or sing, history and
experience alike teach us, that it is only by the division of labour
that a high degree of civilization can be attained; or that those
arts can flourish, which adorn life and extend its enjoyments.
The farmer does not make his own shoes or his own furniture
—if he did, his shoes and furniture would be badly made, and his
farm would be badly cultivated. He finds that he gets better shoes
by buying them of the shoemaker, who, by confining himself to
the manufacture of shoes, is able to make them both better and
quicker. While, by giving his whole time to his farm, the farmer
employs his industry more profitably in raising wheat and
other produce, by the sale of which he can obtain shoes and
other needful things, on more profitable terms than he could make
them himself.
In like manner, there is a division of labour amongst dif-
ferent countries, as well as amongst different individuals, or classes
of individuals in the same country. One country has facilities for
raising raw produce ; another for manufactures In one climate
are produced the necessaries, in another the luxuries of life. In
thickly peopled countries, those who live by their labour find it
difficult to obtain employment, even at low wages, while capital is


abundant. In thinly peopled countries, those who live by their
capital find it difficult to obtain labour, even at high wages. In
the former, the abundance of labour and capital, more especially
when joined to other advantages, such as abundance ot coal and
iron, enables manufactures of all kinds to be produced at a cheap
rate and of the best quality. In the latter, it is necessary to take
advantage of what the country spontaneously produces, or what it
has peculiar facilities in producing, in order to employ labour and
capital with profit.
No doubt it is so ordered by Divine Providence, to the end that
the whole earth and the almost innumerable Islands of the beat,
may be peopled with intelligent beings, knit together by bonds
of mutual interest, whose chief happiness should be found, as it
always will be found, in the right exercise of those intellectual and
moral faculties with which he has endowed them.
In old countries, the land is all occupied,—what is fit for cul-
tivation is under cultivation; and what is only fit for pasture is
covered with flocks and herds. In new countries, it is possible to
cultivate only a very small portion of the soil ; and before any ot
it can be cultivated, it is necessary to expend capital, in oleaun
and enclosing it. Besides, the farmer must have his buildings and
his implements, all which require the expenditure of much more
capital than in old countries, in proportion as labour is so muen
better remunerated. . . , .
The problem to be solved, then, in new countries is this
labour being scarce and land abundant, so to occupy the land or
turn its natural productions to account, as that the least labour
may be employed in obtaining the greatest produce. Lord Bacon,
as we saw in our last lecture, recommends “ to consider first what
commodities the soil where the plantation is doth naturally yield,
and we cannot adopt a wiser rule. . ,
In the neighbouring colonies of Australia, for instance, the
soil is naturally covered with grass, upon which it is only neces-
sary to send forth sheep and cattle, in order to obtain the most
valuable commodities of commerce at a very small expenditure ot
labour. Fifty years ago, Australia yielded nothing to Lugland.
Its pastures were unoccupied, save by the Kangaroo and the Mu.
At this day, it would not, perhaps, be too much to say that one-
third of the inhabitants of the British islands are warmed by the
fleeces of the sheep which roam over its hills and plains. 'We may
therefore well call it the golden fleece of Australia, whether we
look at the quality of Australian wool, compared with what was
generally employed in the manufacture of cloth, before the intro-
duction of the Merino and Saxon sheep into that country, or
whether we look to the quantity in which it is produced, which is
now sufficient to employ a large fleet in its conveyance to England,
and to enable almost every man in England to wear a coat ot as
fine a texture as could with difficulty be obtained, fifty years ago,
by the noblest and wealthiest in the land. The Southern I ro-


vinces of these islands would also appear to have natural pastures,
of which the colonists have not been slow to avail themselves, but
here we have not that advantage. There can be no doubt of
the capacity of this country to maintain live stock and to yield a
fleece at least equal to that of Australia Indeed the same extent
of ground will, on an average of years, yield much more pasturage
than is afforded by the pastures of Australia. It is estimated that,
in Australia, four acres, on an average ot years, are required to
maintain one sheep. In many cases, it has been proved that here
one acre will maintain four sheep. But the laud requires
first to be cleared of the fern and brush, which prevent the
growth of the grass j and this can only be done by a considerable
outlay of capital. Grass can scarcely be called a natural product
of this Province, for it seldom makes its appearance until the land
has been under cultivation j and what little pasture is yielded by
the country, in addition to what has been laid down by the settlers,
has grown upon spots recently under cultivation by the natives,
before the brush and feru had had time to resume the place which
nature has accorded them.
It follows that, although a few sheep may be maintained in the
uncultivated wilderness, and that sheep farming will gradually
extend with the extending cultivation of the soil, we cannot for
many years to come calculate upon any considerable export of wool.
Nor are our other exports, though not without their value, to
be relied upon as permanent, or as likely to become of such mag-
nitude as to constitute Auckland a thriving commercial colony.
The neighbouring colonies generally produce timber in such
abundance as to require but little from us; and our distance from
more populous countries is so great that, with the exception of a
few valuable spars, which are purchased exclusively for the Royal
navy, such a bulky commodity is ill adapted to bear the expense
of transport and to compete in the general markets of the world,
with the timber of the Baltic, where labour is cheap, or with that
of North America, where a large amount of capital is invested in
saw mills, and where the trade is prosecuted with characteristic
energy and enterprise.
The consumption of our gum is limited, and the trade can easily
be overdone ; but, were it otherwise, the quantity which the soil
contains will soon be exhausted, and it cannot be reproduced.
The heavy outlay which must precede the production of wheat
makes it impossible for any farmer, who is dependent upon hired
labour, to raise it at a price which will make it pay as au export.
It is not but that we might compete with the farmers of the
neighbouring colonies, where labour is quite as expensive as with
us, and where the climate is more uncertain. But, thanks to the
rapid communication of intelligence, and to the clipper ships of
the present day, the markets of the Gold Colonies are as open to
the farmers of the alluvial bunks of the Mississippi as to ns. The


flour of South America, where labour is cheap, is also constantly
supplied to the Australian markets.
The extraordinary circumstances in which the neighbouring
colony of Victoria, which has never produced bread for the majority
of Its inhabitants, was placed, by the arrival of 80,000 people,
within a few months, upon its shores, created a demand for human
food to such an extent as, for a time, to afford a market at famine
prices, for all the potatoes which this colony could produce. For-
tunately there existed, along with the demand, the ability to pur-
chase whatever necessity required, or luxury could desire. Hence
arose a trade of no small importance while it lasted \ and equally
profitable to th' fanner and the merchant But the price realized
for a time could not be permanent} because, great as were the
profits of the gold diggers, it was soon ascertained that the profit
to be derived from the raising of potatoes at the gold diggings,
would be greater still, even though sold at a loss price than it cost
to convey them from this colony, or from the neighbouring colony
of Van Dieman’s Land. This trade therefore had but a short
existence. Such a concurrence of circumstances as raised potatoes
to famine prices, is never likely again to occur: and, though it is
probable that they may, in the majority of years, be to some ex-
tent exported with profit, the demand will always be uncertain ;
and the commodity is of so perishable a character that its production
as an export cannot be otherwise than a precarious pursuit If there
is any truth in these observations, and I think their justice will be,
more or less, acknowledged by every man of observation and experi-
ence, it follows that we have not yet succeeded in obtaining an article
of export, which can be procured with little labour,and tor which there
is at the same time a permanent demand, and an unlimited market.
The attention of the Colonists has been directed by the con-
tributors to the public press to various articles which it is thought
might supply this grand desideratum. But the question after all seems
to be but little understood, even amongst those who consider them-
selves the thinking men of the Colony. One gentleman for
example gravely proposes to cultivate the Mulberry, and to rear
the silk worm in order that New Zealand might compete with
Italy and China in supplying the British market with Silk. That
this is possible there can be no question. Our climate is probably
as favourable as any other, for the growth of the the
rearing of the Silk Worm. But in China and in Italy, where most
of the Silk of commerce is produced, the labour employed in its
production can be procured for fourpence or sixpence a day. Now
as it is the cost of the labour which constitutes the greatest part of
the expenditure in the production of the Silk, it follows that what
can be produced in Italy and China, at 12s. or 15s. a pound, could
not be produced here under 50s. or 60s. a pound. The probability
is that it would cost much more.
Again it has been proposed to cultivate the common flax of
Europe, and here the same objection holds, though not to the


same degree. The disproportion between the cost of labour in this
Colony, and its cost in Ireland, where flax is chiefly produced, or
in Russia and the Countries bordering the Baltic, which most
of the hemp of commerce, is so great that no person could grow it
here with a profit at a price which would pay the expense of its
export to Europe.
Considerable discussion has lately arisen, whether or not hops
would be a profitable production. There can I think be no doubt
whatever that there is abundance of soil in this Country capable of
producing hops of the best quality ; and that the climate is at
least as favourable for their cultivation as that of England. But
again, the cultivation and preparation of hops require immense
labour. And even in the not distant neighbourhood of London
where most of the hop plantations are situated, it is in favourable
seasons difficult to obtain sufficient hands to gather the hops, with
the rapidity which is required to secure them in a state of perfect-
ion.
On the other hand there is a peculiarity about the hop which
would, on a small scale, and in certain circumstances, probably
make it a profitable production here, if not for export, at least for
domestic consumption.
The finost ales can only be made from new hops, because that
tine aroma which gives so delicious a flavour to the finest ales is so
evanescent, as to disappear when the hops are kept for any length
of time. The hops which are imported into this Country from
England probably retain all their bitterness, but the fine aroma
is altogether gone
Thirtv years ago, I myself cultivated a small plantation of hops in
New South Wales, and the brewer to whom I sold them in Sydney
afterwards assured me that a pound of them was Worth double, I
rather think he said quadruple, the weight of any English hops he
had seen imported to that Country.
I think therefore where there is a large family able and willing
to exert themselves, few agricultural products promise to be more
lucrative than hops, if the plantation is not more extensive than the
family can themselves manage. But under other circumstances,
I think they must be classed with those productions which the
dearness of labour precludes from profitable cultivation.
And this is the test to which all commodities must be brought.
It is useless to attempt the production of any article in this
Country, which requires much labour, and for the production of
which the climate and circumstances of other Countries are favour-
able, in which labour is cheap.
There is a natural production of the soil, which seems to unite
in itself all the most important qualities of which we are in search,
the well known Phormium tenax, or New Zealand flax. It is
almost peculiar to these Islands. It grows naturally over probably
millions of acres, and is generally accessible to water carriage. It
yields-a fibre the value of which has long been known, and which


is applicable to the finest fabrics as well as to the strongest
cordage; and it can be exported in almost any quantity
without overstocking the market Here then is a com-
modity which the soil doth naturally yield, which seems to
have been planted by the hands of nature in these Islands
in order to join them by a profitable commerce with the rest of
the Globe. It is certainly remarkable that hitherto no processdias
been adopted for separating the fibre from the mucilage in which
it is enveloped, upon a scale sufficiently large to make it available
as an export. It is not but that many persons have given their
attention to the subject, and indeed it is one of those commodities
which has struck every intelligent person as likely to afford an
extensive and valuable export. It was the first commodity in
which a trade to these Islands was opened. And indeed a consider-
able trade was carried on in it, in the days when a Maori Chief did
not hesitate to keep his female slaves at work for several days
upon the production of as much flax as he would sell to the traders
for a fig of tobacco. While the dressed flax could be procured at
so cheap a rate, it could not fail to be profitable to the Trader
and the Merchant, and the export was considerable. It was used
to a large extent for rope making at Sydney, and considerable
quantities were also transhipped at Sydney for the English market.
It is now more than a quarter of a century, since I myself visited
some of the principal seats of the flax and hemp manufacture in
Scotland, carrying with me specimens of the phormium tenax,
in order to recommend it to the attention of persons skilled in the
mechanism necessary for the preparation of textile materials.
I was on that occasion not a little surprised at the indifference
with which the subject was regarded, by those whom I should
naturally have expected to take the warmest interest in it. But
my surprise ceased, when I learned that the successful preparation,
and introduction of New Zealand flax into Scotland, would have
occasioned the probable ruin of expensive establishments, main-
tained by the Scotch manufacturers on the shores of the Baltic.
From that day to this I have never ceased to regard the New
Zealand flax as the only commodity which was ever likely to make
New Zealand a commercial Colony of any importance; and I have
never for a moment doubted that it would eventually become so.
But at the same time I have felt persuaded that it was an enter-
prise which the Colonists must work out for themselves
It is probable that the Maori women look upon the preparation
of flax as a memento of slavery, and regard it with aversion from
the reminiscences which it brings. If it were not so, they could
at its present price earn larger wages by its preparation than in any
other pursuit. But in order to prepare it in such quantities as to
make it important as an export, some more effective machinery is
required than the muscle shell, and the fingers of Maori women.
That suitable machinery will be brought into operation as a result
of the liberal rewards offered by the Government, I have no doubt


whatever —and in no way could a portion of the public money be
in my opinion more beneficially expended.
Should this anticipation be realized, there can be little doubt
that we shall have acquired a staple export of permanent value, and
of such extensive consumption that all we can export is not like-
ly to exceed the demand, nor is it likely to be driven out of the
market by similar materials from other Countries an export
sufficient at once to raise the Colony to commercial importance.
It is time that we should turn our attention, more specifically to
a branch of our subject, which is of itself of sufficient importance
to deserve a separate lecture the disposal of the Public Lands,
and the encouragement of immigration. These two questions have
always been inseparably connected with each other.
In the settlement of the early English Colonies in America, it
was customary, as we have seen, for the Crown to grant a territory
to an individual or to an incorporated association, and to allow the
original grantees to dispose of the land to individuals in the way
which they might consider best adapted to encourage the settle-
ment of colonists and to promote their own interests. Of later
years it was customary for the Crown to make grants to individual
settlers, at the discretion of the Governors of Colonies, subject to
regulations approved by the Secretary of State.
In the year 1822, Mr. Wilmot Horton, then under Secretary
of State for the Colonial Department, brought the subject of emi-
gration before Parliament, and published a series of papers shewing
on the one hand, the distress which prevailed amongst the working
classes at home, and the increased difficulty which persons of all
ranks in society found in settling their rising families in the old
Country, and on the other hand, the abundance and indepen-
dence which might be secured by a transfer of the redundant
population of England to her Colonics. He endeavoured to con-
vince the proprietors of land in England, that independently of the
relief which would he afforded to individuals and families of the
pauper population, it would in a pecuniary sense, be beneficial to
the landlords themselves to raise money on the security of the
parish poor rates, with which to convey to the Colonies those who
from want of employment were burdensome to their parishes at home.
Mr. Wilmot Horton’s propositions were in advance of his time.
The masses of a community like the inhabitants of England are
not easily moved to an enterprise which involves the rupture of all
those ties which bind men to the land of their birth, and the
thousand associations which surround the domestic hearth. Little
was at that time known in the villages of England even of the
Colonies of America, and a removal to those of Australia was
looked upon as little else than incurring the penalty of crime
without the guilt of crime. The idea was not that of emigration,
but of banishment.
Nothing in history is more remarkable than the increase of
emigration from the old countries of Europe since the date to


which I have referred. The establishment of new colonics and
the occupation of new countries has proceeded, during that period,
upon a scale which may well be termed gigantic, whether we com-
pare it with what Lord Bacon calls the heroic works of ancient,
or of more modern times.
In the year 1825, the number of free immigrants who arrived
in New South Wales was only 485. In the same year the number
of British subjects who emigrated to Canada was 8,741, and to the
United States 5551.
During the next 10 years, the average annual emigration from
the British Islands was, to the Australian Colonies 1860; to
Canada 40,060 ;to the United States 37,630. During the seven
years ending with 1851, which included the failure of the potato
crop, and the famine in Ireland, and the discovery of Gold in
California, the average annual numbers were, to the Australian
Colonies 14,521; to Canada 47,560 jto the United States 192,349.
In the year 1852 the discovery of Gold in New South Wales be-
came known in England, and the emigration from the United
Kingdom to the Australian Colonies in that year, was 87,424, of
which the greatest portion was to New South Wales. The dis
covcry of Gold in the Province, or rather Colony of Victoria fol-
lowed ; and the emigration from the United Kingdom for sometime
thereafter averaged 1,000 a day. And this enormous emigration
did not after all exceed the increase of population in the United
' Since the days when the children of Israel were delivered from
the bondage of Egypt, there has probably been no more remark-
able manifestation of the will of God to prevent the crowding o
human beings in one spot of earth, and to drive them forth to
people the wide lands which were gradually being prepared for
their habitation, than the blight which fell upon the potatoes ot
Ireland. The plagues of Egypt, which led to the Exodus of the
Jews, were scarcely more opposed to the ordinary course ol nature
than that which fell upon Ireland. The finger ol God w r as scarcely
less manifest in the one case than in the other. Nor were the
events which occurred in this part of the world less strikingly
indicative of the intention of the Almighty to direct a large stream
of emigration to the peopling of the wastes of Australia.^
While millions were dragging out a miserable existence in
over-peopled Ireland—subsisting upon the lowest description of
human food, the pastures of Australia were covered with sheep and
cattle for which no consumers could be found. But at the very
time that the last staff was broken upon which the peasantry oi
Ireland could lean, the golden treasures of Australia were un-
locked ; not only presenting the most powerful of inducements to
those who possessed the means of emigrating, to emigrate, but
enabling the colonists of Australia to provide the means of immi-
gration to thousands and tens of thousands.
The effects of the wealth created by the gold diggings, was m
nothing more manifest than in the extension and improvement o


shipping. The voyage from England to the Australian Colonies
is now a less serious and a less dangerous undertaking than was
the voyage to America 50 years ago. Floating palaces are now
provided to carry the passengers at a speed of 12 and 15 miles an
hour. And the mechanic and labourer can now make the voyage
with nearly as much comfort, and with far less danger to life and
health, than any amount of money could have insured, 50 year s
ago, to the most wealthy.
The immense size of the vessels allows this to be done with
economy, as well as comfort. In point of expense, it is a very
different thing to sail one ship of 2000 tons to what it was to sail
five ships of 400 tons—which, till within these few years, was the
ordinary size of ships engaged in the Australian trade—with five
captains and the necessary proportion of officers and men. Two
voyages can now be made in the time which one voyage formerly
occupied. The ship earning two freights instead of one ; and
carrying two sets of passengers, with but little more expenditure
of provisions and stores, than was formerly incurred in carrying
one set of passengers. Nor is it to be doubted that greater speed
and greater economy may yet be obtained. Every year brings its
improvements, and each later improvement seems only to point
the way to greater improvements still.
With all these improved and improving means of relieving the
old countries of the world from their redundant
and conveying that population to fresh fields and plentiful homes,
there are considerations which would seem to secure, not the con-
tinuance only, but a progressive increase of emigration.
It is not only that the golden fields of Australia have allured
such numbers to leave their native land, and that the wealth
which has been gathered from these fields has increased the means
of communication between the mother country and the Australian
colonies. It is of the very nature of the case that each increase in
the number of emigrants is followed by a greater increase, and
that emigration proceeds in a constantly accelerating ratio. It is
probable that there is now scarcely a village or hamlet in the
British Isles which has not its representative in the colonies j
scarcely a family which has not now the means, through their own
relations, or connections, or acquaintances, of knowing what are
the real advantages to be obtained by emigration. Fears as to the
dangers of the voyage, and doubts as to the success of the enter -
prise, which formerly induced thousands rather to bear the ills
they had, than fly to tbers that they knew not of, have given
way before the evidence that their own friends have encountered
the dreaded voyage, and attained the desired success. Nor is this
all. hose who have gone before have the ability, and in most
cases the inclination to assist those who were left behind, to fol-
low. A home has already been prepared in the new country for
thousands who are about to take leave of the old; not to make a
plunge in the dark—not to cast themselves amongst strangers,


dbub'tfdl of their reception, doubtful of their success—but Knowing
that kindred beauts are yearning to welcome, and open hands wait*
iog to assist them. . U i
Every arrival of immigrants is an addition to the wealth ot
those who preceded them. It creates the best of all markets—a.
domestic market—for agricultural produce; and extends the trade
of the colony, by adding to its exports as well as to its imports.
To speak of the prosperity of a colony, and the increase ot its
population, is, in ordinary circumstances, to express the same Bung
in different terms. The question is so well understood that it has
always been the first study of colonists to induce others to join
them. Nor have statesmen and merchants been insensible to the
advantage of at once relieving the mother country from the pressure
of a population increasing faster than employment could be found
for it, and providing in the colonies an extended market for the
manufactures of the mother country. ~
The system of giving free grants of land, in the Australian
Colonies, as an encouragement to immigration, was put an end to
by an Act of the Imperial Parliament, in 1852, called the Aus-
tralian Land Sales Act, which fixed the minimum at which public
lands should be offered to sale. The effect of this was to put an
end to the purchase of land for pastoral purposes. But the owners
of flocks and herds, which were pastured on the public lands, re-
ceived leases of their runs, on paying a license fee for the occupa-
tion of the land, and an assessment upon the stock which it
maintained. The proceeds of the sale of colonial lands were thence-
forward made a fund for the conveyance of emigrants from the
mother country and for local improvements. ~ ,
With the Representative Institutions of Government, which
have been granted to the Australian Colonies, the British Govern-
ment relinquished all control over the public lands, leaving this
important branch of administration to the local authorities. J. e
first instance being that of New Zealand.
It requires no demonstration to prove that those who are en-
trusted with such a duty are bound to administer it as a sacred
trust, with an exclusive regard to the advantage of the commu-
nity, and independently of all personal or party interests. It is a
fund committed to them for the public welfare, and they are
bound to make it appear in all cases, and in every case, that t ey
have regarded the public welfare alone.
But this is not all ; it is a duty which demands wore than
right motives. To administer it aright requires extensive know-
ledge and sound judgment. The most extensive injury may be
suffered by the Colony through the hasty adoption of a theoretical
system, suggested perhaps by some one, who, like Sam Slick s
“spooney patriot,” “thinks this world can be reduced to squares, like
a draftboard, and governed by systems.” The administrators ot
the public lands ought to know what systems have been tried else-
where, and what have been their results ; they ought, in a word.


to study the lessons of. experience, and not the systems of theo-
rists ; above all, they ought to avoid making this a question to be
decided by what is called public opinion, or the suffrage of num-
bers; for no amount of ignorance and inexperience will ever result
in knowledge and sound judgment.
About twenty-five years ago, much discontent was created in
Canada, by the circumstance that a large tract of land had been
withheld from settlement for what were called clergy reserves.
1 he emigrants to Canada at that time found that before they could
reach their locations, they had to travel over these reserves,which
were left in a state of nature, separating them from a market for
their produce, and entailing various expenses and inconveniences,
which would have been avoided had the settlement of the land
proceeded without interruption.
Upon this was founded an ingenious theory, that the true se-
cret of success in colonizing was to prevent, as much as possible,
the spread of the colonists. dhat by their concentration upon a
limited space they would enjoy the advantages of united labour
and mutual assistance. That this, besides, would give a value to
land to which it could never attain while it was distributed in
liberal grants, or allowed to be purchased at a low price. It was
proposed that lands should be sold at a high price, a certain pro-
portion of which price was to be expended in carrying out labour-
ers to cultivate the land, and in giving it that value which, it was
said, population gives to land. This theory was set off by much
eloquent reasoning and fanciful illustration, and having been con-
tinually kept before the British public, it became for many years
the received creed of all persons who knew nothing of colonies or
colonial life, beyond what they had read in books and newspa-
pers.
Nor was it without its influence in the Colonial office, for Sir
Richard Bourke, the Governor of New South Wales, was directed
to conform his regulations to its principles, and to confine the
population to a limited space, by preventing the acquisition of
lands even in the interior of that eminently pastoral colony.
Fortunately for the colony under his Government, Sir Richard
Bourke had had sufficient experience of colonies to have an
opinion of his own in the matter. He replied to the Secretary of
State, that to prevent the spread of the colonists was beyond the
power of Legislation ; and, were it otherwise, the attempt to do
so would prove a death blow to the prosperity of the colony.
Now, in order to make this theory practicable, it would be
necessary that all countries and colonies, where public lands are
to be disposed of, should adopt it; and that the labourers who
were carried out to give value to the land by their labour, and by
increasing the population, should be adscripti glehce —subject to
compulsory labour, and incapable of leaving the colony. For it
is not to be supposed that capitalists would in one colony or
country £2 or an acre for land, when land as good, and with
equal or perhaps greater advantages, might possibly be procurable


jn another colony or country for one half, or even one-eighth of
the money; or that labourers should be induced to remain in
one colony, when they might possibly double their earnings by re-
moving to another colony. It is not to be denied that the value
of land, in any country, will increase with the increase of its
population. But to assume that, in a country where there is
ample room to spread, you can fix the value of land, or raise its
price by preventing its occupation, shews an entire ignorance of
the principles which regulate the value of commodities, and which
are universal in their operation. We see, indeed, that in places
which must necessarily become the sites of towns, a certain por-
tion of land will always command high prices; but land, under
such circumstances, is, in every sense of the word, a monopoly.
The places nearest to the wharves and the principal thoroughfares
possess advantages for commerce, which are not possessed by
those at a distance, and the prices rise in proportion to these ad-
vantages. But every spot of land cannot be the site of a town,
nor can every district acquire the advantages which the neigh-
bourhood of a town affords, until the land becomes thickly peopled,
and loses the character of a new country.
With the exception, therefore, which I have mentioned, the
value of land in all new countries is regulated by the same pnn-
ciple which regulates all other commercial values, the return
which it will yield for capital invested upon it. ,01
We are all aware that the New Zealand Company s Settle-
ments were founded upon the theory to which I have referred;
but experience in due time corrected the fallacies of theory. Ihe
settlers found, to their loss, that it was not by keeping # together
they would thrive. Those who imagined that the cultivation of
an estate of a few hundred acres would support a gentleman, soon
found that by its cultivation they were sinking their capital beyond
hope of a return. The expression of some of them that
they were strewing sovereigns and gathering shillings. Ihey
became convinced, by dear bought experience, that to cultivate
land with hired laoour could not be profitable : inasmuch, as the
wages of labour far exceeded the value of the returns which the
land would yield ; and that the only means of obtaining a return
for capital was to invest it in live stock, and spread themselves
over the country. Fortunately for the Company’s settlers, there
was land suitable for pasturage accessible from their principal
settlements, and their exports of wool are the best evidence of
their prosperity —a prosperity achieved by an entire departure
from the theory, or principles, as they were called, of colonization
upon which their settlements were founded.
As trustees for the disposal of the public estate, it is as much
the duty of the administrators of the public lands to dispose of
them to the best advantage, as it is the duty of a land agent to
do the best he can for his employer. But this advantage may be
secured by other means than by a sale for money. The elements
of public prosperity, as well as of private wealth, are labour and


capital: and the land may be disposed of as advantageously to the
public by disposing of it in exchange for labour and capital as for
money—that is, by inducing labourers and capitalists to settle
upon it. But to do this with advantage requires great judgment.
Labourers must have employers. There must be capitaf to set
labour to work. A man without capital cannot become a culti-
vator of land already fit for the plough ; much less can he bring
waste lands into cultivation. “ The husbandman must first be
partaker of the fruits.” T.hat is, he must have the means of
living until the seed which he sows has produced its increase.
Capital and labour are absolutely indispensable to each other.
The hand cannot say to the head, I have no need of thee ; nor the
head to the hands, I have no need of you. If you could secure
the settlement of immigrants possessed of capital, and the invest-
ment of their capital upon the land, by offering the land cheap,
you could not make the land too cheap for them. The invest-
ment of their capital on the land would be the best return the
Colony could obtain from them. But the difficulty is to sell the
land cheap to immigrants; and not to sell it cheap to those who
are already proprietors of more land than they can cultivate, and
who only buy on speculation to sell again at an enhanced price.
In the United States of America, where there are always mil-
lions of acres surveyed in advance, it is possible to sell land cheap,.
because there is more than enough for everybody. The survey of
fresh territories is always going on : and fresh land is periodically
brought into the market. The price fixed by law is about ss. an
acre ; but no land is sold at ss. an acre until it is first ascertained
that nobody will give more for it.
The President gives public notice that, on a certain day which
is always sufficiently distant to allow of the land being explored
and examined, he will cause certain blocks of land to be offered
for sale by public auction, at the land-office nearest to the land
which is to be offered. The upset price for ordinary land is ss.
an acre, and every one who wishes to purchase can secure any
allotment he may have fixed upon, by bidding an advance on the
upset price, and by outbidding other competitors, should there be
any.
The highest bidder is of course the purchaser, and thus the
sale of the land is conducted with perfect impartiality ; whatever
is not sold above the upset price is thenceforward open for sale
to the first comer at that price. He has only to proceed to the
nearest land office to the allotment he has selected, ascertain, by
a reference to the map of the district, that it has not been previ-
ously disposed of, pay his ss. an acre, and receive his patent or
title to the land. He may select inferior land nearer to the seats
of population, or, in order to obtain a first choice, he may go
many hundreds of miles, to the far, far West; but wherever he
goes he meets with no difficulty. Nor has the settler in Austra-
lia more difficulty in making a selection. Should he be disposed
to settle within the boundaries of the settled districts, he can


■make his choice there at 20s. an acre ; or should he prefer to be-
come a squatter in the far interior, he is entitled to a lease of any
run he may select, as soon as he can procure the Commissioner to
visit it, in order to ascertain that it has not already been leased
to another. But in this province we have not the almost unlimit-
ed backwoods of America, nor the far distant pastures of Austra-
lia. The greater part of the land, which is of any value, is still
in the hands of the natives; and the choice of settlers is ex-
tremely limited. To sell the land cheap is therefore impossible.
You cannot sell land at 10s. an acre to one person, when another
person is willing to give 155., or another still perhaps 20s. for it,
without gross partiality and injustice.
It must be admitted that this province presents but few attrac-
tions to the large capitalist. There are no large pastures like
those of Australia, or those of the Middle Island ) neither can we
point to any other means of investment so attractive as sheep
farming.
It is true that our mineral resources are still unexplored.
It is true that hope points to the accomplishment, at no distant
day of the long cherished expectation that the Phormmm
Tenax would yield a golden fleece to New Zealand. But as
matters stand, at present, this is the working man s country-not
the gentleman’s. If the New Zealand farmer would thrive he
must put his own hand to the plough. To this class of settlers—
that is, to farmers who possess sufficient capital to pay for then
land, to purchase the stock, and implements necessary to its pro-
fitable cultivation, and to maintain their families until
their own and their families’ labour have made their
land productive, this province presents advantages which, taken
altogether, are not to be exceeded —scarcely perhaps equalled in
in any other country. A .•
But there is no more fatal error, nor one likely to be productive
of more loss to the public, or to those individuals who fall into it,
than that all the poor man wants to establish him in the world is
a piece of land. Indeed, for an industrious man without capital
to be placed in possession of a piece of land, on the condition tha
he should settle upon it and bring it into cultivation, could not,
if its consequences were foreseen, be considered otherwise than a
Those who are best acquainted with agricultural affairs in
England, consider that there are few cases m which a tenant
farmer can enter with advantage upon the cultivation of a farm,
with a smaller capital than what is equivalent to £5 an acre.
Now in New Zealand, before a settler is placed in circumstances
equally favourable as those of a tenant farmer in England, he
must incur a large expenditure in fencing, and breaking up his
land, not to speak of the erection of a house—-however humble.
He has then to provide working stock, and implements, and seed,
and to maintain himself and his family, if he have one, till the time
of crop comes round. So that if it requires a capital ot £5 an


acre to occupy with advantage a farm in England, we cannot esti-
mate a less capital per acre as necessary to enter with advantage
upon the occupation of an allotment of unreclaimed land in New
Zealand. The difference between the cultivation of land with
sufficient capital and without capital, is nothing less than the dif-
ference between civilization and barbarism. A farming man in
England, with the means and appliances to profitable farming, can
manage 30 acres of land in due proportions of crop and pasture ;
a farming man, without capital, in New Zealand, could hardly
raise himself above the condition of a Maori, even if he got as
much land as he could wish for nothing. I do not dispute the
possibility of a man of industrious and frugal habits (and industry
and frugality should always be esteemed the cardinal virtues of
the settler) —I do not dispute the possibility of such a man not
only holding his ground, but gradually bringing a small piece of
land into cultivation, by the mere strength of his arm. But for
one who succeeded, even thus far, how many would get into debt,
from which they could only retrieve themselves by the sale of
their land and improvements together. But supposing it other-
wise—how different would be the position, at the end of ten
of the most successful settler, who commenced without capital,
to what it would have been had he continued to work for wages
till he should have saved enough to have substituted the plough for
the spade, and the strength of the ox for the strength of his arm.
In a new country, where land is abundant, labour is always in
demand, and the advantage is always on the side of the work-
man. He is generally better remunerated for his labour than the
capitalist who employs him is for his capital; and this is apt to lead
inexperienced persons to adopt and express such opinions as some
of the Southern settlers lately expressed on the occasion of a
great meeting at Liverpool, which was held for the purpose of in-
augurating the commencement of a new line of packets for New
Zealand. They told the shipowners of Liverpool that “ all New
Zealand wanted was labour—that they could not send out too
many labourers.” Now, they could not have led the shipowners
of Liverpool into a greater error: Experience has invariably
proved, even in colonies more advanced and more wealthy than
this, the necessity of caution in increasing the number of immi-
grants who are dependent upon their labour for their living. If
they increase faster than the means of employing them increase,
certain distress is the consequence. Where there are more work-
men seeking employment, than masters to employ them, wages
will fall as a matter of course. But in this country wages can
never be permanently low, because they will always be regulated
by the earnings of the gold digger in the neighbouring colonies.
If therefore the land fund of this colony should be employed in
increasing the working population faster than capitalists to em-
ploy them come to the colony, or capital is produced in the
colony, our land fund will be expended in increasing the popula-
tion of the neighbouring colonies.


To sum up, in a few words, what has been said upon the dis-
posal of public lands, and the application of the funds derived
from them.
The lands should be sold in such manner as not only to re-
move all suspicion of abuse, but to make, so far as that can be
done, abuse to be impossible. This can only be done by an open
sale by auction, after a lengthened public notice, giving every
person who wishes to purchase, ample time to examine the land,
and making the highest bidder the purchaser: anu. after its having
been once offered by public auction, leaving, of course, the land
open to the first applicant, at the upset price.
A close auction, allowing only persons to bid for a lot who
have previously made application for that lot in puts it
into the power of a few persons, who may make a business of
speculation in land, to combine not to oppose each other, and to
obtain the most valuable lots at their own prices. Worse than
this, it is a great discouragement to the new immigrant, for it
leads him to suppose, and not without reason, that his interests
are sacrificed to the interests of those who are better acquainted
with the country than himself.
Of the land fund thus created, as much as possible should be
employed in assisting the immigration of persons who have friends
here willing to become security for the repayment of their pas-
sage, or a part of it. This is the most valuable class of immi-
grants, because they have already a kind of stake in the country,
and are more likely to remain than those who have no family ties
to bind them to it.
Next to these, persons purchasing land should be entitled to
have a free passage for the immigrants of their own selection, to
the amount of at least half the purchase money of their land. In
this case also there is some security to the colony that persons
brought out at the expense of the land fund, will be such as are
likely to remain.
As an encouragement to the immigration of persons possessing
capital, every immigrant who arrives in the colony at his own
charge, should be entitled to a remission in the price of any lands
he might purchase, to the amount of the passage money paid for
himself and his family. It might even be profitable to give a re-
mission of double their passage money to persons coming from
England, who are more likely to become permanent settlers, than
those from the neighbouring colonies.
The great object to be kept in view, is to induce persons having
capital to settle. You may bring out work-people with the land-
fund ; but unless you can also induce employers of work-people
to settle upon the land, your land-fund will soon be at an end, and
the progress of the Colony with it. It is well to employ a part
of the laud-fund in public works; but it is of little use to invest
capital in public works, unless it is also employed in productive
labour.


Above all, it is the duty of the administrators of the public
lands to afford every possible facility and encouragement to im-
migrants on their first arrival. Most of those who have settled
here, have themselves been “strangers in a strange land,” and
should know “what is in the heart of a stranger.”
Few persons immigrate to the colonies without having had
their hopes and expectations highly excited; and the difficulties
and disappointments they must all more or less encounter before
they get settled are sufficiently depressing, without their having
to encounter official neglect, or formalities and obstacles which
might be obviated by foresight and arrangement.
It is to be regretted that the Government has, in this Province,
hitherto failed in procuring land of sufficient extent to afford a
more ample choice. But for this I can see no remedy but patience
and perseverance.
Bad as matters now are, I believe most of those who are best
acquainted with the natives, will agree that not only would they
be much worse, were private individuals allowed to purchase
direct from the natives, but that such a system would lead to
inextricable confusion, if not to serious disturbances and bloodshed.
Worst of all would be any attempt to set aside the Treaty en-
tered into with the natives, by the British Government, in the
name of the Queen. It is much to be deplored that the Govern-
ment should ever have acted as if this Treaty were less binding,
than a Treaty entered into with a powerful country, more capable
of enforcing its obligations. Had the Treaty of Waitangi been
always adhered to in its letter and spirit, not only would the
native war which desolated the first British Settlement, have been
avoided, but the difficulties which now exist in obtaining land
from the natives would never have been heard of.
In the case of communities, as well as in that of individuals,
sudden wealth and an appearance of outward prosperity may often
be acquired by breach of faith, and injustice. But the divine
Providence of the Great Ruler of the Universe seems to be so or-
dered, in relation to communities, as well as to individuals, that
sooner or later retribution will follow in the footsteps of injustice.
Wrong never brings forth right, and gain unjustly acquired is
productive of loss in the end.
Those who are unacquainted with the New Zealanders, could
fall into no greater mistake than to suppose that, if they refuse to
sell land voluntarily, they can be compelled to part with it.
Doubtless it is in the power of the British Government to send out
a military force which could drive the natives to their woods; but
scarcely any force could secure to the Queen’s native born subjects
a peaceable occupation of the country. If the natives should be
driven to the woods and kept there by the English, the English
would be driven to garrison towns and kept there by the
natives, and colonization would be at an end. Ultimately, no
doubt, physical force and superior knowledge might exterminate
the native race, and add one record more to the past history of


aboriginal tribes, which, like the scroll of the prophet, is written
within and without in characters of “Lamentation, and mourning
and woe ”
But setting aside the injustice of all this, where would be the
gain ? If Auckland is in any degree a commercial colony, to whom
but to the natives are we indebted for the exports we possess. Of
the ships which, from time to time, leave our shores freighted with
the productions of New Zealand, how small a portion would be
filled, without their labours: and of the imports, how few could
find a market were it not for their consumption by the natives and
the trade carried on with them. How suicidal then would be any
attempt to enforce measures which could produce their hostility,
and bring this trade to a close. And how unutterably to be
deplored, that British connexion with New Zealand, begun
by preaching to them the Gospel of peace, should end in writing
their future destiny in characters of blood.
In conclusion, I feel that a few words of apology and explanation
are due to my auditors, for the imperfect manner in which I have
filled up the outline which I proposed at the commencement of my
former Lecture. Some may probably feel disappointed that I have
made so little reference to the history of the colony, in relation to
the transactions of the Government. To such I would suggest
that these transactions are too recent to be treated with impar-
tiality, especially by one who has been in no little degree affected
by them. On some of the topics which I have endeavoured to
illustrate, I could have wished, if time had permitted, to enter
more at large, although some of my fair hearers will, I have no
doubt, think they have had quite enough of the dry bones of politi-
cal economy. I shall not pay to any of them the poor compliment of
expressing regret, that the subject of my lecture should have been
one of an useful rather than of an entertaining character, but I
will say, that, for their sakes I should have wished for that enviable
talent which has power to throw around the least attractive sub-
jects, the charms of fancy and the graces of eloquence.


