

(iofcmior of Jfofo Jsfoutl] Jfcles
IBID -1821




Extract from “The Bulletin,” 21st June, 1939.
®omh.
An admirer revisits it:
Lachlan Macquarie had a reverence for tombs. To the end of
his life he had the burial-place of his first wife, in Bombay, with
its large black marble slab, tended with care. His own tomb on
his estate at Gruline, in Mull, Scotland, once called Jarvisfield, was
an imposing affair, inscribed in the florid compliments with which
the Regency age was wont to bury its dead.
But the Clan Macquarie has left its native haunts. None of its
name remains on Ulva or Mull. Jarvisfield is in the hands of
strangers, and the tomb is crumbling. Nothing would hurt Mac-
quarie himself more than the thought of that, and this country
owes him a little consideration, since not only its first institutions
but its very name were born of his initiative and his period.
Macquarie was the first Governor to fight for the establishment
of free British institutions in N.S. Wales —the first to advocate
the jury system and courts independent of the executive
authority. He was the first to support Australian literature and
art. When he made a journey he took the artist Lewin with him;
when at home he gave Lewin employment, money, encouragement
and a place in which to work. He was the first administrator to
encourage the people of New South Wales to civic effort —within
three years of his coming they were forming subscription lists to
raise civic buildings.
Macquarie founded the first country towns, built the first
country churches, encouraged the first private Australian manu-
facturers, and gave preference to them in buying Government
supplies. He laid down the first roads into the interior after
opening the way by official explorations. He built the first light-
house on the continent, introduced the first real pilotage system.


appointed Sydney’s first police magistrate, its first police. He
replanned Sydney and named most of its principal streets, gave
it its parks and gardens, the first Australian shows, its first monu-
ment, picked and baptised the sites of its two cathedrals. Also,
he initiated the first real policy of closer settlement, preferring
always the little man. He established our first organised school
system.
He was the first Governor who really conceived that Australia
might be a nation governed by Australians. He mitigated
the cruelties of the earlier years and reprobated corporal punish-
ment. Young Australians found him a warm friend. Without his
encouragement, it is doubtful whether William Charles Wentworth
would have flowered as an Australian patriot.
Macquarie left behind him a flood of youngsters whom he
patronised and who a few years later were among the continent’s
first Cabinet Ministers, Parliamentarians and industrialists. When
he founded Bathurst he created a precedent by reserving half his
first grants for young Australians born.
The Australian modern economic system sprouted in Mac-
quarie’s time. He founded the first bank —the ’Wales —against
Colonial Office opposition, stood behind the first Government Sav-
ings Bank when it was founded by Barron Field, and helped to
colonise New Zealand.
He reigned longer than any other Governor —12 years,
Most of what he did was upon his personal initiative, and the
effort broke and killed him, carried through as it was against the
opposition of a clique of colonists who waxed fat while he lost
everything.
Macquarie’s name lives and will never be forgotten. At the
same time, it is a paltry thing to grudge him the price of the
upkeep of his tomb. A public subscription is being raised to
repair it. That is disgraceful. The amount regularly needed is so
little that it is a shame that the N.S.W. Government or the
Commonwealth Government should need to be asked to undertake
the responsibility.


One of those Governments should make sure that Macquarie’s
own sentiment about his resting-place is not forgotten. It would
not even be too much if the small Mull estate, which he knew
he could never enjoy for long and which he lovingly nursed for
his “posterity” (it went out like a candle), were bought and
presented to the Scottish Realm, along with the price of its upkeep,
as a thanks-offering to the little 30-mile circle round Beinn More
which gave Australia nearly 1000 names upon its map, apart from
its Macquaries, Macleans, Campbells, Camerons and Blacks.
It would be a useful gift if a tourist-house were built upon it.
It is the heart of the country which Dr. Johnson visited, near to
tourist Staffa and Ulva’s Isle. It would be easy to find wardens
to take care of it. The Duke of Argyle, descendant of Macquarie’s
friend and landlord; Lord Perth, descendant of his executor’s
family; the Black Watch, battalions of which both Macquarie and
his brother commanded, or the Clan Maclean Association —nearly
every Macquarie marriage for 200 years has been to a Maclean or
a Campbell—would make appropriate trustees. Maclaine of Loch-
buy was Macquarie’s uncle and guardian.
Over the gateway of the estate they might carve his words
announcing the departure of Lieutenant King to “survey the
Western Coast of Australia . . . which I hope will be the name
applied in future ... to this immense continent.”


