

COLONIZATION CIRCULAR.
part in.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
This portion of the Colonization Circular is pub-
lished separately, for the use of those who do not
desire to purchase the information relating to other
Colonies.
mmms
&frnm m
/<
PRINTED UNDER THE SUPERINTENDENCE OF HER
MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
AND SOLD BY
E. STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS.
[Price 1 d.]
*
W.:




WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia was first settled in 1829. The colony in-
cludes all that portion of Australia situated to the westward of
the 129° of east longitude.
The population on the 31st December 1878 amounted to 28,166,
of whom 16,409 were males, and 11,757 females.
The colony is divided into 12 districts, viz., Perth, Fremantle,
Albany, Champion Bay, Grreenough and Irwin, Murray, Roeburne,
Sussex, Swan, Toodgay, Wellington, and York.
An important settlement has been found in the neighbourhood
of Shark’s Bay, a large inlet, and in the small islands which
abound in this locality extensive banks, covered with the true
pearl oyster, have been discovered.
Many tracts of the vast territory of Western Australia have
been found to be richly auriferous; it is known that quartz reefs
traverse the colony from south to north. Lead and copper exist
in large quantities.
The greater extent of the seaboard is separated from the
interior by low ranges of hills running parallel to it, and covered
with forests, principally of jarrah, which is in great demand for
railway sleepers, for building purposes in countries invested by the
white ant, and for all kinds of marine construction.
In addition to its fisheries, the north-west coast, formerly
known as the Victoria or Port Gregory districts, has been found
to possess extensive tracts of land admirably adapted for pastoral
purposes.
The climate of Western Australia is delightful and healthy.
From the northern to the southern extremity it varies considerably;
the southern temperature is somewhat similar to that of England ;
the northern is hot but not unpleasant, being tempered with cool
breezes, and the climate of the central portion of the colony is like
that of Southern Italy and parts of Spain. The regularity of the
sea breezes in the summer, which are rarely intermitted, enables
one to bear without discomfort the power of the sun. The mean
of the barometer is about 30 inches, and of the thermometer
about 65°. The seasons are divided into wet and dry, the former
commencing in April and lasting till September : a greater part of
this time of year, however, is bright and clear. The dry season is
occasionally, but rarely, visited by showers or a thunderstorm.
The severe droughts and heavy floods experienced in the other
Australian colonies, are unknown here.
Flowers and fruits from all parts of the world flourish luxu-
riantly, The vegetables of England grow to great perfection, and
may be cultivated at almost any season of the year. Amongst the
fruits are, oranges, apples, pears, peaches, nectarines, apricots, figs,
almonds, bananas, and pomegranates. Strawberries also grow well
in the southern districts.
Q 5247. Wt. 12952. A


The climate seems to be peculiarly suited to the vine, and the
raisins dried here are as fine as any in the world. Wine is also
manufactured and finds a ready market in the colony. It is of
superior quality, and would probably acquire a character in foreign
markets, were it made by persons of experience in the trade.
No disease can be said to prevail here; influenza visits the colony
occasionally and is at times severe, especially among the aboriginal
population. Epidemic diseases are unknown, and the climate is
favourable to consumptive persons.
The chief products are wheat, barley, oats, and hay. The crops
are generally fine, and hay is produced in considerable quantities,
even self-sown fields return good crops.
The value of the imports into the colony during the year
ending 31st December 1878 was 379,049/. 12s. 2d. ; the exports
during the same period were valued at 428,491/. 35., wool being
the larger item. Next to tins came sandalwood, pearl shells,
and jarrah timber. The pearl fishery year by year becomes of
greater value, and wheat is now being exported to this country.
The rate of wages in 1878 were as follows :—Predial labourers,
18/. to 50/. per annum, Is. to 7s. per day ; domestic servants, 18/.
to 50/. per annum; carpenters, 7s. to 10s. per day; masons, 75.;
printers, 6s. to Bs., blacksmiths, 7s. to 10s. ; gardeners, 65.;
saddlers, 7s. to 10s.; boatbuilders, Bs. to 10s.; brewers, 6s. to Bs.;
coachbuilders, 7s. to 10s.; navvies, 75.; and painters, 7s. to 10s.;
tailors and shoemakers by the piece.
The average prices of various articles of use or consumption,
are, —wheaten flour, per bag of 200 lbs., 1/. 155.; wheat, per
imperial bushel, 6s. 6d.; wheaten bread, per lb., 2d.; horned
cattle, per lb., 3d.; horses, each, 51. to 25/.; sheep, each, 135.;
goats, each, 1/.; swine, per lb., 6d. ; milk, per gall., 25.; butter,
fresh, per lb., 25.; butter, salt, Is. B^/.; cheese, Is. 6d.; beef, 6d.;
mutton, 5d.; pork, 10 d.; rice, 3d.; coffee, Is. 6d. ; tea, 25.;
sugar, 5d. ; salt, Id.; wine, imported, per gall., 1/. and upwards;
wine, colonial, per gall., 4s. and upwards; brandy, per gall.,
1/. 10s.; beer, imported, per gall., draught, 45., bottled, 75.;
beer, colonial, per gall., 35.; tobacco, per lb., 4s.
The quantity of land alienated is 1,469,691 acres. The quan-
tity in cultivation is estimated at 51,674 acres. Country land
in lots of not less than 40 acres are sold at a fixed price of 10s.
per acre. Town and suburban lots are sold by auction, the size
and upset price being fixed by the Governor.
Free passages are granted to the nominees of residents in the
colony of the following classes: —
Agricultural labourers, female servants, shepherds, millers,
woodcutters, gardeners, farriers, teamsters, and ploughmen, of
ages ranging from 18 to 40, able-bodied and healthy.
Emigrants pay 205. each for bedding and mess-kit.
After two years’ residence in the colony each adult emigrant is
entitled to select, from any unimproved rural Crown lands open
to selection, 50 acres of land, and each emigrant between the ages
of 16 and 21, 25 acres of land, not to exceed 150 acres in all for
any one family. After three years occupation, the land becomes
2
Western Australia.


Western Australia .
the property of the selector, provided certain improvements have
been made on it
For further particulars application may be made to the Emi-
gration Agents for the colony, Messrs. Felgate and Co., 27,
Clements Lane, London, E.C.


LONDON s
Printed by George E. Eyre and William Spottiswoode,.
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
Eor Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
[12952. —-1,000. — 2/81.]




