

ryt
r I W


Special Notice to Advertisers.
The “Centennial Number” has been published
so as to reach the influx of visitors to Melbourne
during the Great Centennial Exhibition, many of
whom will doubtless pay a visit to Tasmania via
the North-West Coast.
All ray other “ Guides” having been disposed of
in the other colonies, has induced me to make
special arrangements with my Melbourne Publishers
to issue other editions during the Exhibition.
HOWARD HAYWOOD.


CONTENTS
Page
C ircular Head 4
Wynyard ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Somerset ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Emu Bay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Captain Patterson ... ... ... 14
Mount Bischoff ... 15
Wivenhoe ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Penguin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Watcombe House ... ... ... 30
Ulverstone ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Forth ... ... ... ... 36
Spreyton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Formby ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
Torquay 42
The Mersey River ... ... ... ... ... 44
Latrobe ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Visiting Places near Latrobe 52
New Ground ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
Railton 54
SUNNYSIDE ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
New Bed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Sheffield ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Kimberley's Ford 62
Deloraine ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Chudleigh Caves 63
Westbury and Longford ... ... 64
Evandale 65
Launceston ... ... ... ... ... ... 65
Lakes .... 66
Launceston to Circular Head by Steamer ... 70
Launceston to Hobart by Train 71
New Norfolk 72
Advertisements 74-104


Errata. —Royal Hotel, page 48, line 12, should read :
“Visitors to Latrobe would find the * Royal * very com-
fortable, as all is done by Mr. J. T. Bramich, the proprietor,
assisted by his sister, to make the hotel pleasant and at-
tractive with good quarters and an excellent table, besides
having in his service careful and obliging servants, which
render a sojourn at the ‘Royal* very acceptable.” The
“Royal” is a favorite hostelry, patronised by our Go-
vernors, Supreme Court Judges, and most of the distin-
guished visitors who go to Latrobe.
Australian Seasons. —Autumn begins March 20d. llh.
41m. p.m., when the sun enters Aries. Winter begins
June 21d. Bh. 25m. p.m. (the shortest day), when the sun
enters Cancer. Spring begins September 23d. lOh. 40m.
a.m., when the sun enters Libra. Summer begins De-
cember 22d. 4h. 29m. a.m. (the longest day), when the sun
enters Capricornus.
Shooting and Fishing Seasons. —This year there will be
no quail or wattle bird shooting, as the close season has
been extended until May Ist, 1889, for quail, and until
May 24, 1889, for wattle birds. Wild duck, teal, widgeon,
plover, emu, black swan, ground dove, and Cape Barren
goose shooting begins January 11, ends July 31 ; pigeon
shooting begins February 11, ends July 31; kangaroo
hunting begins January 31, ends July 31; opossum hunt-
ing begins April 1, ends July 31; English perch fishing
begins January 1, ends July 31; salmon ani trout fishing
begins August 11. ends April 30. Native white magpies
must not be killed, nor eggs destroyed, and they must not
be bought nor sold, under a penalty of 20s.
TASMANIA.
* NTENDINGr SETTLERS should write to
J(
Henry Cooper,
“Jlprmiy' ||aml
When valuable information could be obtained res-
pecting “ WHERE AND HOW TO SELECT
LAND FOR FARMING PURPOSES.”
Bush Farms, Improved Farms, and Open Farms To
Let or For Sale.
Post Address HOME FARM, KENTISHBURY,
NEAR RAILTON.
For information respecting farm work see page 60.


FROM
Australia to ipasmaijia
A. TRIP to the North-west Coast of Tasmania is a treat
in store for those who admire the beautiful and
romantic, for on all sides can be seen such scenes as
are few and far between in any other part of our Aus-
tralian lands. Visitors from the mainland, or the southern
portion of the island, would find in this part of Tasmania,
much to interest and please them, besides being a more
acceptable locality wherein to spend the Summer holidays,
than in the chief towns of the colony. Sea-side places are,
in Tasmania, famous for their beauty, besides being handy
to the shipping communication of Australia; and also coach
and rail to all parts of Tasmania. From Launceston to
Montagu, ma Circular Head, there are so many charming
spots, that it is a difficult task to refer to one more lovely
than another, so that, in very truth, it would be well to see
for oneself, and so decide according to taste. Launceston,
with its Cataract Gorge, beautiful river scenery, and
favorite walks, are each attractive enough, yet there are so
many country and sea-side pleasure resorts, that it would be
well that our visitors should become acquainted with them.
This then is the great object of the “North-west Coast Guide”
to bring more prominently before our visitors and intend-
ing settlers from other parts of the world, the real beau-
ties of the Coast, and place before them such particulars
concerning the North-west Coast as would be useful and
instructive, showing that there are other places besides
Hobart and Launceston which are worth seeing in the fair
island of Tasmania. All that can be done has been done
by those who undertake to provide for the travelling
public, for without doubt the hotel accommodation is equal
to that obtained in the other parts of the colony, in fact
equal to any part of Australia. Each township has its par-
ticular charm, with a hundred and one objects of interest
within easy reach of the hotels.
Fishing, boating, bathing, and romantic scenery, with
noble rivers and sparkling waterfalls, hunting, riding, and
driving, each and all rank amongst the pastimes of a so-
journ on the Coast, so that the tourist or visitor would be
stubborn indeed if unable to enjoy a few weeks’ holiday
with profit and satisfaction. If once visited, I feel dis-
posed to say that many would make the North-west Coast
their regular rendezvous during the summer months.
Bidding farewell to the great Australian cities, the
tourist who is bent upon the trip secures a comfortable
berth on board one of the well-appointed steamers, belong-
ing to the Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company, which
run regularly from Melbourne and Sydney to Launceston
and all ports along the North-west Coast. We will
sysssr//


suppose then that the steamer first calls in at Circular
Head, which is the oldest town on the Coast, situated about
midway between Cape Grim and Table Cape, in the county
of Wellington, which is in the North-west corner of the
Island, and was discovered in 1798 by Bass and Flinders,
two noted navigators of the last century.
Circular Head
S the most singular and striking object on the whole
i\ North Coast, joined to the mainland by a narrow,
?* low isthmus, and its curious, isolated, rocky citadel is,
except in that one spot, wholly surrounded by the ocean.
Its height is about 500 feet, with about eighty acres of
good land on the summit. The sides of this remarkable
projection are nearly perpendicular, and in all very steep. In
1825 a grant of 250,000 acres passed the Home Government
to the Y.D.L. Company ; and in 182 G their first settlement
was formed by one Edward Curr, at Circular Head. In days
gone by, and during the life time of the unfortunate
blacks, this place was a favorite resort, where they de-
lighted to assemble in great numbers to enjoy themselves,
and pass away a few weeks. At one time the agent of the
Y.D.L. Company used to reside at the Head, and was
looked upon as a sort of Governor of the North. The
headquarters of this company are now removed to Emu
Bay, where they possess thousands of acres of good land, for
which the Directors require no small sum per acre, with
such provisions that very few care to accept of them. To
fence other folks’ property is no joke to the settler, yet one
has only to visit Burnie to see and understand the policy
of the Y.D.L. Company. The township of Circular Head is
called Stanley, situated on a flat lying east of the cliff,
facing a safe and commodious bay. The population is be-
tween 300 and 400, and distance from Launceston 142 miles.
There is now a daily mail via Formby, Emu Bay, and Eocky
Cape, carried overland, the road being a good one all the
way through. The mail contractor is Mr. Jesse Wiseman,
a gentleman who has done his best to make the
overland route a popular and pleasant one, with good
horses and comfortable coaches, the whole route from
Circular Head to Formby, through all the town-
ships along this most romantic road, which is in
itself, a charming trip, especially after passing the Black
Eiver toward Eocky and Tables Capes, thence to Emu Bay,
Penguin, Leven, Forth, Don, and Formby. The visitor
will find Stanley and its surroundings very nice,. with
numberless places to visit, and if desirous of finding out,
what has been done, and is still being done by the settlers,
could well spend a couple of weeks in the Circular Head
district, paying Montagu, The Forest, Duck Eiver, and
Irish Town a visit. The accommodation on the township is
all that can be desired, and if the tourist is in search of a
really nice comfortable home, where every attention is paid,
and a good table kept, let me recommend the Commercial
Hotel, which is at the top end of the township from the
Pier, and opposite the new English Church. This house is


kept by Mr. E. T. Breheney, and ably assisted by his
sisters, who are most painstaking in their management,
doing their best to make their patrons comfortable during
the time that a sojourn is made there. There are well fur-
nished bed and sitting rooms, for private use, with use of a
good piano, as also a number of other rooms, with public
dining room suitably furnished for all requirements. A good
billiard table is kept, with other means of enjoyment, also a
nice garden, with fruit, vegetables, and choice collection of
flowers. The hotel is within a few chains of the sea, where there
is a good and attractive beach, with a number of convenient
spots for bathing. Boating and fishing parties are orga-
nised by Mr. Breheney, so that a stay at this well-known
hotel could be a most enjoyable and profitable one. The
visitor should not forget to explore the summit of the
mountain, as much could be seen of an interesting charac-
ter. The base of the mountain stretches far away to the
well-cultivated lands of the forest settlers, whose farms are
a credit to those who own them, with nice cottages built
thereon, and w r ell-stocked garden around with every variety
of plant and flower. The climb is pleasant because of tho
beautiful panoramic scene, also the lovely wild flowers
which grow so thickly along the slopes. On the top is a
grand icey spring of water, which is so refreshing after a
good climb up the mountain side. This is easily found,
and needs no asking for. The view here obtained of the
sea and Coast line is of nnsurpassing beauty, only to be
understood by actual observation. Stanley has its public
hall and Institute, with reading-room for the public ; State
school, several churches, and a number of stores, besides a
chemist’s shop, which latter is owned by a gentleman who
is able to impart a fund of useful information respecting
the whole district, he having lived there for a number of
years. Mr. Edwards, too, who keeps the post and telegraph
office, is able to afford the stranger some particulars of
the place, as well as steamer and coach arrangements.
Visitors seeking information should place themselves in
the hands of Mr. Breheney, of the Commercial Hotel, who
is most obliging, and ready to do his best for the traveller.
The coach for Emu Bay starts from his house, and all par-
ticulars respecting the road can be obtained from him.
Assuming that the traveller wishes to quit the steamer,
rnid now make Ihe journey to Formby by the overland
route, we will leave Circular Head, in Company with Mr.
Breheney, who ha< the mail from the township of Stanley
tc* the Detention Diver, which is not far from Rocky Cape.
1 he coach starts at 730 in the morning, passing on its
way the edge of the forest, thence to the Black River,
keeping the sea in view almost all the way. The road is
very good in some parts, although somewhat heavy on ac-
count of the sandy nature of the soil. Of the scenery
little can be said, till the Detention River is reached, when
the whole scene changes, both as regards land and timber,
for a time the sea is lost sight of whilst dashing along
merrily through the bush, which reminds one of those
grand forest roads which are so often seen in New Zealand
or Gippsland. The different kinds of trees are of great


number, chief of which are the mighty blackwood, blue
gum, and stringy bark, which lift their mighty heads high
into the air, being indeed true giants of the forest. As one
is driving along this portion of the road it is impossible to
leave unnoticed the cold sharpness of the air, which has a
charm about it of a strange character after so many months
of too sunny sultriness in Australia.
The undergrowth, with thousands of great ferns, en-
twined with all kinds of creepers, and wild flowers of all
colors attract the attention as the coach spins on its way,
and should the traveller be fortunate enough to secure a
box seat the journey would be thoroughly enjoyed. At the
Detention River a short stay is made, after which the jour-
ney is continued through thickly timbered country for
many miles, when suddenly a most remarkable change is
seen with regard to the character of the land and its
barrenness, the road being very heavy and scenery wild in
the extreme, with little or no timber to he seen. This
portion of the journey is desolate in the extreme, with
tussocks and speargrass in great quantities, the wind is
keenly felt whilst travelling over the downs, so that a good
stout wrapper comes in very handy to keep out the cold.
Over the downs when the wind is up.
We'll hurry with panting breath ;
Quaffing new wine from a perfumed cup.
Distilled from the purple heath.
Over the Downs 1
Over the Downs ! and our cheeks shall bear
A flush that would make the wild rose stare
At a tint with which it could not compare,
A tint which the cheek can only wear.
Over the Downs!
Some massive ranges are here met, which are a great study
to the visitor. By some they are known as the Two Sisters,
past which many a weary traveller had in days gone by to
go ; and when roads were not thought of, a more wretched
piece of country, I feel sure, could not be found in any other
part of the colony. Not a living soul is to be seen ; sheep,
horses, nor cattle could find a bite to munch on the road.
Just before reaching Boat Harbor, at the top of the hill,
the scene again changes from the weird and wild to the
beautiful, which is so throughout the journey. Whilst
travelling along from Boat Harbor, and through the
prolific Flowerdale district the tourist cannot fail to notice
the well-kept farms, which is a convincing proof that these
pioneers have not eaten the bread of idleness dux-ing their
occupation of the land. One farm I shall here xxxention,
that is the “ Running Water Farm,” belonging to Mr.
White, whose homestead is in close proximity to the state
school. This well-arranged and carefully cultivated farm
is well worth a visit, for there, on all sides, can be seen the
fruits of perseverance. Everything that a farmer could do,
has been done to nxake this a pattern farm. Mr. White has
gone in extensively for Berkshire pigs, which are well
housed, and carefully attended to, giving him good returns
in splendid bacon and hams. His dairy, too, is exceedingly


well arranged, and the produce thereof is of the highest
quality. Poultry has not been forgotten by Mr.
White, in fact he has on his” farm everything that a
good and careful farmer should have. The situation of his
homestead is all that could be desired, for from the win-
dows can be seen the greater portion of the estate,
beside many a charming landscape, with the mighty
ranges in the far distance. The house, garden, and stead-
ing are kept in such order that it is difficult to believe that
there is a large farm to be looked after. The garden is
one of great beauty, and a sight to look at when the
flowers are in full bloom. A kitchen garden also is there,
and well stocked with remarkably fine vegetables. The
carriage drive is on the top of a natural rise, which, if
planted with trees, would be the finest in the Island.
Through the estate flows the noble Flowerdale River, which
is teeming with all kinds of fish, which come in very handy
at times when the family wish a change of diet. Near the
river is a fine orchard, which is cram full of all sorts of
delicious fruit, so that taking this place altogether it can be
called a really comfortable and valuable property. Mr.
White is well assisted by his sons, who have in their time
done good work on the farm, as can be seen by that which
has been already accomplished. Mrs. White with her
daughters have, of course, the house and dairy to attend
to, which is managed in such style that one might say the
whole work is done to perfection. Like most of our farmers
in Tasmania, they are very hospitable, always ready to
entertain the stranger. Leaving this district, we now pass
on to Table Cape, the township being called
Wynyard.
township is in the midst of good agricultural and
4i timber country, with a moderate shipping port; black-
wo°d of excellent character is obtained from this local-
ity, and shipped in the log to other colonies, Messrs. Moore
and Quiggin being the principal shippers. These gentlemen
have large sawmills some little distance from the township,
employing a large amount of labour. On the township of
Wynyard are several comfortable hotels, and a well-con -
ducted coffee palace, where every attention is paid to the
guests; the coffee palace is under the management of Mrs.
Byrne, who formerly kept the Bischoff Hotel at the
Mount. There are great improvements noticeable in this
place, which shows that in a very few years to come, this
part of the Coast will be one of very great importance,
especially when the road from the Mount Bischoff tin
mines is completed. Wynyard can boast of a nice public
hall, with library and reading room, several places of
worship, well filled State school, good business houses,
wheelwright, blacksmith, bootmaker, &c., &c. One
feature is the large building used for agricultural
and other exhibitions, which is used regularly every year by
ths farmer’s club, who offer handsome prizes for cattle
horses, sheep, &c. This show is year by year increasing
in size and popularity, so that in a few years to come, is
will be able to vie with that of Longford, which is famout


throughout the colonies, reflecting great credit upon the
district, and the energetic secretary, T. E. Arthur, Esq.
Visitors fond of Ashing can well employ their time whilst
staying in this part of Tasmania, for the Inglis and flower-
dale rivers are full of all kinds and sizes of fish; then there
is the sea for those who prefer salt water fishing. Boating
and bathing can also be indulged in, with other sport that
can be easily found in the back country. Whilst the
visitor is in this district, it would be well to pay a visit
to the saw mills belonging to Messrs. Moore and Quiggin,
besides, a run round to the many well-kept farms in the dis-
trict. Intending settlers, who are in search of farms to let or
for sale, might, without much difficulty, be able to find some-
thing suitable. Perhaps it would not be out of place for
me to here mention that if a call is made upon Mr. J. C.
Koss, who keeps the Jiotel facing the esplanade, much
useful information concerning the place could be
gleaned. The coaches start from this house, so
that in any case the visitor should call and have a chat
with Mr. Eoss, Lovers of sea-side rambles will be able to
find much to amuse them whilst walking along the beach,
which skirts the Wynyard and Table Cape portion of the
Coast, shells of all sorts can be found, besides sponges, and
fine specimens of seaweed. Of scenery there is a great
deal that could be written, but which at present would
occupy too much space, so shall this year leave the visitor
to penetrate the lovely spots, (which are easily found,
within easy walking distance of the township), for them-
selves, yet would remind them that in so doing the country
around the saw-mills should not be overlooked. Another
twelve miles brings us to that really beautiful and pleasant
township called Burnie. About eight miles from
Wynyard—it should not be overlooked—is the small town-
ship of
Somerset.
t N the banks of the Cam Eiver, this tiny little place has
in it one church (which also serves as a State school),
post and telegraph office, police station, store and
several neat cottages; there may be several small coasting
vessels in the river, receiving cargo (timber) for the other
colonies, or, may be, Launceston. During the summer
season this is a favourite spot for tourists, and the towns-
folk of Burnie, because of the fishing and boating. Just
above the bridge, and to the right from Wynyard is the
Cam Eoad, which takes the visitor to a fine and productive
farming centre, which is becoming’ more and more open
every year. The work of the settlers has been of an
enormous character, which but few city peopl 3 can well or
properly understand. Eespecting the land, its value, etc.,
all particulars could be obtained from Mr. King, who owns
the store close to to the bridge, and oppoisite the shipping.
Not far from the Cam river is the farm of Mr. C. O’Calla-
ghan, which has many attractions, besides being
the home of a genuine and hearty son of the
Emerald Isle. This farm, like others that it has
been my pleasure to visit, and owned by Irishmen,


is one which would astonish our friends in far,
far-off Ireland, who, many of them, would do well to come
amongst us, more especially if possessed of a little capital.
Many good farms tilled and cultivated by Irishmen take a
leading position in this and the other colonies, which is a
capital and decided answer to those who credit the noble
sons of that far-off land, with little or no energy. This
farm reminds me of one I had the pleasure of visiting
■whilst in the Glengarry district, near the Tamar Kiver,
known as “ Clifton Farm.” Its owner, Thomas Connolly,
a native of Galway, Ireland, has pi nted in the midst of an
almost unpenetrable forest, a home, which it would be
difficult to eclipse in any part of the island. “ Labor, like
a mighty magician, has walked forth to this region of dark-
ness and waste, and turned it into an abode for the worthy
sons of toil,” which abode is the very picture of clean-
liness and comfort. Of this and other farms I purpose to
write more fully very soon, so that our friends in the lands
of our “ fathers ” may see or read some facts respecting the
work accomplished in these wild lands by those who, if yet
at home, would not be enjoying those comforts which
industry and perseverance give to colonists. Mr. O’Cal-
laghan’s farm is easily found, and the homestead seen from
a good distance. The house is in a valley, close to a clear
running stream which flows through the greater portion of
the land —a great and welcome acquisition to such a valu-
able property. There is a nice garden, with orchard close
by, which has been carefully laid out, so that the owner
finds this portion of his property giving him rich and wel-
come returns. The farm offices are close by, with barns
and other out-buildings within reasonable distance of the
house. The cattle and horses find plenty to eat in the
well-grassed meadows, and the visitor may be sure of a
welcome if a call is made. Mr. O’Callaghan is brother to
the Kev. Father O’Callaghan, of the Bay, whose residence
is at Wivenhoe, near the bridge which spans the Emu
Kiver. Leaving the Cam district and its many farms, neat
homes, flowing creeks, and commodious river, we travel on
towards the Bay, about four miles distant, passing cn route
the saw-mill and brick-yards of Mr. William Jones, also
his private residence will be noticed. The sea, it should be
remembered, is in sight the whole distance from Flower-
dale to Emu Bay, thence to Formby. Within a few
moments of passing the last-mentioned property we reach
Ein ii liav.
first large house on the left hand side of the road
is the Church of England Parsonage, that on the
idght. with flag-staff in the grounds, “ Strathmore,”
a favorite summer residence for the reception of visitors.
This large and roomy establishment is kept by Mrs J. W.
Smithies, who has done all in her power to provide for such
visitors as prefer private accommodation to that of an
hotel. Visitors with families could not fail to be well
suited at “ Strathmore,” as there is every needful conveni-
ence in this handsome marine residence, it faces the sea,
and has close to its doors a splendid beach, so that all who


wish to enjoy a dip in the briny blue sea can do so with
every privacy. The owner of this house has been able to
cultivate an excellent flower garden, as also a profitable
kitchen garden with every kind of vegetable. The children
are also well provided for, as there is erected in the grounds
two substantial swings, upon which they could thoroughly
enjoy themselves. As a sea-side residence “ Strathmore’’
stands without a rival this side of the Blythe Eiver and
Circular Head. Visitors from the other colonies, who
desire to enjoy their holidays in a comfortable house, close
to the beach, within easy reach of the township, pier, and
main coach road to Formby, could not do better than by
putting up at “ Strathmore House,” Burnie, Tasmania.
Mr Smithies is to be found any time during the day
at his office on the wharf, he being Customs officer,
agent for the steamship Devon, (which runs regularly from
Launceston to Emu Bay and Circular Head) and commission
agent. He has a thorough knowledge of the coast, its
trade, and other matters of interest. From “ Strathmore ”
our coach winds round the western way to the township
proper, which faces the breakwater and shipping harbor,
and which presents a remarkable contrast to the other
centres of population already visited. It has a charming
beach, which of itself is a strong and powerful recommenda-
tion to the family-man who desires a place for his children
to enjoy the benefits of sea-side life. Emu Bay is a
favored spot and should in course of time become the most
popular of watering places on the North-west Coast. The
formation of the land upon which the houses are built, is
such that it adds materially to the beauty of the township.
From the beach it rises gently till it reaches an eminence
of some hundreds of feet, from which point the visitor has
one of the grandest and most picturesque landscape and
marine views that it is possible to obtain in the island. As
one looks down the whole scene appears like one vast
amphitheatre, with terraces and steps from seaboard to
summit. The land hereabout has been built upon in all
directions, the cottages, and some fine brick mansions
go far ts enhance and beautify this enchanting and
romantic, seaside, health, and pleasure resort. As our
coach dashes onward through the township, many new and
imposing structures rivet the attention, for within the last
year or two so much has been done and added to Burnie
that it would be vain to attempt in any way to hide the fact.
It is a really prosperous settlement, in spite of the great
drawbacks which are ever before the settlers, and seem
likely to be for years to come. I mean the V.D.L. Com-
pany’s system of selling their land. Of this Company a
great deal could be written, which would show that no
greater blunder or misfortune ever befel Tasmania than
the giving to a parcel of gentlemen the gift of no less than
330,000 acres of land, with the understanding that certain
improvements, such as roads, bridges, etc., should be done,
which, if not done as yet, will probably be in the far, very
far, future. One might ask, where is all this land to be
found ? So, for the edification of the tourist, I will give the
particulars—loo,ooo acres at Woolnorth; 20,000, Circular


Head; 50,000, Emu Bay; 10,000, Hampshire Hills;
and 150,000 on the Surrey Hills; and all this valuable
land given away by the then Home Government, through
perhaps that kind and generous-hearted Governor,
Colonel George Arthnr. Speaking of the colonel, reminds
one of the practice that once prevailed, but which during
Arthur’s governorship was brought to a close, of granting
to favoured folk, large areas of land. “ Many of the limits
of the grants had been defined by an expedient, said to
have been practised in Ireland. A string was tied to a
dog’s tail, and when the dog stopped running, that was
taken to be a mile ! Thousands of acres had thus been
measured off, and endless confusion resulted, until finally,
in 1831, the Caveat Board rectified the claims made.” This
Board had two members, George Frankland and James
Simpson, Esqs., Justices of the Peace for Van Diemen’s
Land, Passing along on the coach through the township,
the visitors will observe that there is a division in most
instances, between the buildings already erected, and most
of the corner allotments left unocupied, and on looking
into the next street, the section running in line with the
one just written of as unoccupied, the visitor will see has
been sold. This has a two-fold effect, firstly, to add
greater value to the section (unsold), and secondly, an
inventive one indeed, worthy of so rich a company, the
fencing in of the three sides of the vacant allot-
ment, by the owner of the one sold, which the
buyer does at his own expense, and free of cost to the
company. The prices put upon these vacant allotments are
far in advance of that already paid for those sold in the
first instance, so that not till Burnie becomes a very
flourishing and rich settlement, is there a likelihood of this
land being sold, thus banishing from sight one feature of
ugliness which disfigures the pretty township. To see every
other allotment vacant, overrun with weeds, and a sort of
receiving depot for rubbish, has indeed an injurious effect
upon the place, which the company, that is, its manager,
should attend to, and thereby help to improve the condition
of the place. Leaving the great eyesore, we will still
continue the journey, and make for the hotel, and coaching
stables, where
. . . . Both men and boys
Gather round with bustling noise.
Few moments serve —the harmless bands
Are flying off as by magic hands ;
The loosened nags are panting hard.
Seeking the well-known stable yard.
Leaving the coach w'c seek the Bay View Hotel, which
faces the bay, and which has a far famed name for its com-
fortable interior, well appointed and neatly fur-
nished rooms, suitable for all kinds and conditions
of people, with every attention given to the most
minute matter. It does not require a long account
to be written of this hotel, for it is so well-known, and has
been so extensively patronised by visitors and commercial
gentlemen from all parts of the know n globe that this fact
speaks for itself, and Mr. Thomas Wiseman is so popular a


landlord that he, and his house, is known by every visitor
coming to our shores. His popularity certainly follows
him, and those who have once shared the hospitalities of
his well-spread board do not fail to come again. On the
walls of the dining room, on the front room mantelpiece,
and in other parts of the house can be seen tokens of the
great respect his fellow-countrymen have for him, which is
a more substantial proof of his worthiness than pages of
printed matter could suggest. From the balcony the view
is superb, and commands a truly magnificent and extensive
range of the North-west Coast, with many a noted land-
mark within sight. At the rear, and turning sharp to the
right from the back door, is the billiard room, -with one of
“ Alcock’s ” best tables, under the management of an
obliging and civil marker, also two large sample rooms.
Visitors to this house who require saddle horses or vehicles
can soon obtain them by making their wants known to Mr.
Thomas Wiseman, as his brother, Mr. Jesse Wiseman, mail
contractor, and coach proprietor, keeps the stables in con-
nection with the Bay View Hotel, Emu Bay. Information
respecting Mount Bischoff can ,be got from Mr. Thomas
Wiseman. Mr. Jesse Wiseman has every kind of vehicle on
hand, with good horses, which are always to be had on hire
at any hour both during the day and night. Careful
grooms are in his employ, so that visitors may rely upon
proper attention being given to horses, etc., left in the
charge of Mr. Wiseman.
Passing round the township the visitor will find many
well-stocked business houses. Mr. Wheeldon, the
draper, has his premises next door to the Bay View Hotel,
to the right, just past the entrance to the stables of Mr.
Jesse Wiseman. He has in it a large and choice selection
of goods, which it would be well worth the visitor’s time to
inspect. Garments for bathing purposes are kept at this
store for both ladies and gentlemen, besides other articles
which visitors often require. Tasmanian-made articles,
which are manufactured in the woollen mills of the colony
from pure wool, are also kept in stock, and should find a
ready sale amongst visitors from the other colonies, who
should possess them as mementoes of their visit to fair
Tasmania. Mr. Wheeldon is well conversant with the
tin-mines of Mount Bischoff, having been in business there
for a considerable time. The large building just above
this store is the bank, with the manager's private resi-
dence. On the opposite side of the road to the bank is the
shop of Mr. Evans, boot and shoe maker, who has been es-
tablished in Burnie during the past six years. He has
always a fair share of trade with customers far and wide,
from Woolnorth to Latrobe. Five workmen in all are
engaged on the premises, who very seldom lose any time,
their employment being regular. Mr. Evans is a native-
born, as were his father and mother before him. They
were at one time settlers on Norfolk Island, which at the
time was under the control of the Governor of New South
Wales. These settlers were, by order of the Home Go-
vernment, requested to vacate the island, which they did,
and were conveyed, some to New South Wales, and others


to Van Diemen’s Land, at the public expense, and had
grants of land given to them double the amount of their
former possessions, with cattle on loan, and were rationed
at the public stores as new settlers. The majority of these
settlers came to this island and founded settlements,
naming the places New Norfolk and Norfolk Plains, the
latter in the north and former in the south of the colony.
Mr. Evans, 1 should mention, was born in Hobart, and
learnt his trade there, but afterwards left for the North-
west Coast, taking up a sheep station on Bobbin’s
Island, which is to the west of Circular Head. Although
settled there he still carried on his trade, and has done so
successfully up to the present time. Intending colonists
should endeavor to give him a call if in quest of informa-
tion regarding the Coast. Not far from here is the Town
Hall, Church of England, and other churches, besides a
number of comfortable cottages, lieturning to the coach-
ing house, we next visit the large and handsome brick
building (which has three storeys) of Mr. William Jones,
who is an old and respected settler of long standing. This
handsome structure is well and substantially finished, pre-
senting, both from the sea and coach road, a most promi-
nent appearance. Each storey has a balcony, from which a
capital view of the country is obtained. As a store, there
is not another in the whole of the country like it. The
ground floor is fitted up as a general store, and contains
every kind of requisite suitable for the district ; to the left
are offices used in connection with the store, and several
agencies which are held by Mr, Jones, at the back is the
store-room, crammed full of merchandise from floor to ceil-
ing. In the yard, too, is another large building, wherein
are stored all kinds of hardware, &c., &c. The second
storey is just now being used as a skating rink,
and the third one converted into bed and sit-
ting rooms, splendidly furnished, with the finest
look-out from the windows along the Coast ; for
the use of visitors staying at the Bay View Hotel. These
rooms are brought into communication with the hotel,
which is next door to the large store, by a gangway
between the two places. Besides the store, Mr. William
Jones has sawmills, brickyards, auctioneer’s business, the
steamer Cambria, which trades along the Coast and to
Launceston. He is also agent for the Tasmanian Steam
Navigation Company’s steamers to Melbourne and Sydney,
besides being the representative of several industries
carried on in the colony. Next door to Mr. Jones’ is the
Commercial Hotel, which is, like the Bay View, in a good
position, and within easy distance of all the public offices,
shipping (being the nearest house to the pier), and Mount
Bischoff railway, and post and telegraph offices. The
private entrance is shut off from the bar, so as to ensure
complete privacy. To some visitors the house may be
familiar; to others, whose visits to this port date back a
few years, a great and important change will be observed,
as additions have been made to the front, by top storey,
handsome balcony, and new northern wing, the whole
thoroughly renovated, and furnished throughout with the


most modern furniture. As it is now, there are thirty-
one well ventilated rooms, including bath and
spacious sample rooms for commercial men. Private
suites of rooms can be had for those desiring
the same with every attention. Good stabling, with
loose boxes, traps and saddle horses always on hand. The
coaches call at the “ Commercial ” to pick up passengers for
Circular Head or Formby ; and the proprietor, Mr. W. H.
Lane is prepared to make up picnic and fishing parties for
his guests, that is W.P., and time given for the same. Like
others in the Bay, Mr. Lane has a knowledge of all the
fevourite spots for fishing, wherein are plenty of herring,
black.fish, trout, eels, crabs, lobster, Ac., not forgetting the
saltwater fish. It may be here mentioned, that all along the
Coast, the hotel and boardinghouse keepers are doing their
very best to provide good, clean, comfortable, and firstrate
accommodation for the public, and with a knowledge of
this fact alone, one so essential to the prosperity of the
Coast, it is a pleasure to recommend to my readers the
places herein mentioned. Once upon a time I heard a good
man read,“And Moses struck the rock and water gushed out,”
or words to this effect; so on this occasion I will write —
“ That Captain Patterson, of Emu Bay, struck the rock
upon which he has built his house, and behold flowers of
every size, colour, and character, with vegetables of
innumerable numbers, sprung up, transforming the once
barren spot, to one of exequisite beauty.” Those who have
visited the captain can fully understand what is meant,
and with me give to him that praise which he so justly
deserves. To write of his garden in ordinary terms, would
not be paying him that tribute which is due to him, as he
has so well managed to cultivate that which I venture to
maintain no other person, be they ever so industrious, or
fond of flowers, would attempt to do. Seeing is believing,
and what he has accomplished cannot be properly under-
stood unless seen. Captain Patterson is a thorough genius,
possessing a wonderful depth of thought, which is brought
into play upon this rock, whereon it was said nothing
could be grown, also the beautiful marine residence, which he
has had built, overlooking the road to the wharf and the
beautiful ocean; yes this home is so situated that the
captain may oft recite :
Beautiful Ocean, how I loved thy face.
When mine was fresh and sparkling as thine own.
When my bold footstep took its resting place.
To see thee rise upon thy rock-piled throne.
I stand ! again beside thee as I stood.
In panting youth, watching thy billows break ;
Fixed by the strong spell of thy headlong flood;
Even as the bird is charm-bound by the snake.
Emu Bay needs not my praises, for as a summer resort it
is all that one could desire. The country around Hie
township is but slowly progressing towards cultivation,
because of the blunder already spoken of. There is a good


jetty, and is an open roadstead, with ample anchorage,
having four fathoms of water at low tide. The next place
the traveller should visit is
Mount Bischoff,
seat of the most extensive tin mine that Tasmania
has. To reach this remarkable seat of industry the
tourist takes the railway that has been constructed
by the company, and may be honestly termed the only
important work that has been carried out by the Direc-
tors of the Van Diemen’s Land Company, and with it
they are able thoroughly to monopolise the whole of the
carrying trade between the Bay and the mines. Advance
Tasmania ! What misplaced words, to be sure, when used
in connection with this company’s method of advancement.
There is this one great feature, and a truly satisfactory
one too, that the rich deposits of tin found by the Hon.
James Smith, M.L.C., are outside the company’s grant, on
the Surrey Hills, of 150,000 acres.
To inform the visitor that the trip is a grand one woidd
be but poor information, so I shall satisfy my readers with
this fact, that he has before him a pleasant and wonderful
mountain journey, the like of which is not to be had in any
other part of beautiful Tasmania.
Waratah
* _S the name given to this mountain township, which is, I
believe, close upon 3000 ft above the sea level. It covers a
'?'■ large area of ground; the streets well formed, and houses
constructed in a substantial manner. The inhabitants are
counted by hundreds instead of tens, what were once barren
mountain slopes are now dotted with comfortable houses,
hotels, business houses, schools, churches, hospital, public
hall, and institute, and other institutions of a useful
character. What a wonderful change has taken place on
this mountain top during the last few years. From this
one great mine alone over .£BOO,OOO has been paid in divi-
dends to the fortunate shareholders. Had this property
been part and parcel of the Yan Diemen’s Land Company’s
what a loss it would have been to the colony. I often have
pictured to myself the state of feeling that came over the
minds of these “ muchly” interested flock, who are no doubt
drawing a fine income from lands that they have never
seen, and, may be, never will, when they heard the news of
so rich a tin mine being discovered. Only fancy, these
good people have missed pocketing the .£BOO,OOO that has
already been paid to the shareholders. The general verdict
is “ serve them right.” What a grand thing it would be if
the colony were able to throw off the double incubus with
which it is borne down, viz., the “ Main Line Kailway
Company” and “ Yan Diemen’s Land Company.” Neither
company do any great good for the colony. The visitor
has a great deal to see whilst at the Mount, to spend but
one day would be a folly, a week would not be lost time.
On application to the manager of the mine the visitor will


place himself in the hands of one of the officials, and make
his way to the top of the mountain, or the very commence-
ment of the works. Mr. Hill, who has charge, is most
obliging, and explains everything to the visitor in such a
manner that the work of the inspection is a real treat.
From the xxpper portion of the works, the visitor is next
handed over to Mr. Linklater. and so on to the next in
charge} till all has been seen, when, it may be, the visitor
returns to the office, thanks Mr. H. W. F. Kayser, and feels
satisfied that he has seen the most wonderful mine in the
world —one which is so worked that very little tin is lost.
I shall try now to give some particulars of this great mine,
which will most likely be acceptable to the reader, and
those who have already visited the Mount, as also the
shareholders, at a time when the advance in the value of tin
is taking so prominent a portion in the estimation of the
mining community. Mount Bischoif and its mines must
possess a peculiar interest, and an account of the great
mine on this mountain must be read by thousands, both
far and near, with some degree of pleasure, and particulars
of this wonderful tin mine be acceptable to all who take an
interest in mining, and the advancement of our mineral
industries. Visitors from all parts of the world are now
finding their way to Mount Bischoff, bent upon an inspec-
tion of the mines, and willing to gain all the information
upon the subject that it is possible to obtain by a personal
visit. The visitor has a great advantage over others, who
cannot, through many reasons, find an opportunity of
making the trip, and such visitor is able to return home
with the satisfaction of having inspected one of the
greatest wonders of the age in mining. Then to the large
class who are unable to make the trip, the following remarks
respecting Mount Bischoff will no doubt prove interesting.
Mount Bischoff is a granite peak protruding through the
slate rocks on the ridge between the valleys of the Waratah
and Arthur rivers, which are situated on the north-west
corner of Tasmania, about 50 miles inland from the coast,
in an almost direct line from Rocky Cape. On the east,
north, and west sides, it descends precipitously, but on the
south side, a broad tableland presents itself, and on the
edge of this tableland is built the now famous town known
as Waratah.
On this mountain several companies are at present
carrying on active operations for the production of tin,
the principal company being the “ Mount Bischoff ” company,
which is without doubt the grandest tin mine in the world.
It is on the summit of the mount, with a large extent of the
northern and eastern slope. Originally it comprised two
eighty-acre sections, commencing about the saddle, and
connecting the mount with the tableland, running from
there over the top, and half way down the northern slope.
To this area has been added, by purchase, eighty acres,
formerly the property of the Waratah Company, which
gives access to the river of that name, where its bed is
about 1000 feet below the top of the mountain, or 700 feet
below the present working level of the “ red face,” which is
sometimes called the “ Brown Face.” The difference of


position between the “Red Face” and this point is not
more than half a mile, so that it could be easily worked to
that depth by means of an adit, thus it will be seen that
there are no great difficulties in the way of working the
mine to that depth withoiit the use of pumping ma-
chinery.
The tin deposits now being worked present some
peculiarly noteworthy features, which are most interesting
and instructive. What is known as the “ White Face ”
occupies the southern slope of the mountain, and is
doubtless the debris of landslips from the high ground.
This debris or wash, as it is called, is of a porphyritic
character, and contains a varying proportion of tin, which
has hitherto paid well for extracting, and to all appear-
ances will for a long time to come.
Climbing about 200 ft. from the saddle, we come to a sort
of basin, in which is the celebrated “ Red Face.” On the
west a steep slope leads up to the highest peak of the
mountain ; about 300 ft. above, on the east, a gentle slope
leads up to a ridge, capped by rugged masses of porphyry,
at an elevation of about 100 ft. On the north, connecting
the two, is the “Red Face,” which is now about 150 ft. high
in the loftiest part, and which is an entire mass of stanni-
ferous material. The eastern slope belongs to the Stan-
hope Company, and is of a porphyritic character, in that
respect bearing some resemblance to the “White Face,”
and being evidently derived from the degradation of the
tin bearing porphyritic dykes. The “ Red Face ” on the
other hand is a mass of ferruginous matter, which cannot
be traced to any other source, and which can only bo
accounted for by supposing that it is the outcrop of a lode.
From the immense size of this outcrop, it is no easy matter
to determine its character, and although it has been
explored to a considerable extent this is not yet decided.
The formation is unique and opinion much divided as to
its origin. I therefore would advise each visitor to
examine carefully and form his own judgment, rather
than accept any opinions here expressed, which,
however, I may say have been gathered from those
possessing some knowledge of the subject. The
formation has been pierced by two tunnels, one from
the present working or open level, which goes right through
the ridge and comes out on the northern slope of the
mountain. This tunnel, at a distance of 250 ft. in, strikes
the slate foot wall, which underlies to the south-west at a
low angle—3s to 40 degrees. Continuing on, the tunnel
encounters another lode, small compared to the great
outcrop, but remarkably rich, and enough of itself to make
the reputation of a mine anywhere else. There is a stange
fact about this footwall, which tends to show' that the
“Red Face” is a lode, that is, it is I’ichly impregnated
with tin. This is a peculiarity of this tin lode, in that the
ore beds are not divided from the barren country by well
defined walls or parting, but emerge into the country rock
to determine the character imperceptably. This alone
would be sufficient to account for the “Red Face” for-
mation, as it clearly shows that the forces to w hich lodes
owe their origin have been at work there.


The second tunnel has been driven from the “White
Face ” at a level about 80ft. lower, and after passing for
a distance of 523 ft. through slate traverses a mass of iron
pyrites and porphyry carrying tin, after which it passes
through the tin-bearing gossan for about 200 ft. before it
strikes the slate foot wall at 823 ft. from the entrance. For
a thickness of 14ft. from the foot wall it is wonderfully
rich —25 to 30 per cent. —and the bulk of the gossan is
estimated to be considerably above the average of the
surface ore. From where the level strikes the foot wall
drives have been put in, which prove its course to be
north-west, from which would be gathered that its strike
is from south-east to north-west. As the 30ft. level makes an
obtuse angle, both with the strike and dip of the foot wall, it
is evident that the distance of 300 ft. it is driven through the
tin-bearing porphyry and gossan is more than the real
middle. A line at right-angles to the strike and dip
would probably not be much more than half that length,
say, 150 ft. to 200 ft., and that is not impossibly great for
a lode. The Old Man Reef, at Climes, and the Victoria
Reef, at Sandhurst (in Victoria), are both, I believe,
instances of a lode being 100 ft. thick. The bonanzas on
the Comstock lode greatly exceed that, as did also that
well-known mine in Belgium, and the Parry’s mine in
Anglesea. So the fact that the “Red Face” deposit is
150 ft. to 200 ft. thick is one proof that it is a lode. On the
southern side of the “ Red Face” is what is called the “ Slaugh-
ter-yard Gully Face.” This presents features resembling the
“ White Faces,” and, like them, appears to be the debris
that has rolled down the hill from the summit. As
porphyry boulders show all the way to the top, it is not
at all improbable that this tin-bearing debris extends all
the way to the top or crest of the mountain. In the angle
between this face and the “ Red Face ” is a mass of slate,
in which the most elevated of the dams has been excavated.
This body of slate is pointed out by some sages as marking
the limit of the “ Red Face,” but from close examination
it indicates just the reverse.
The drive from the 30ft level is abreast of this dam, and
the slate foot-wall, instead of turning sharp round to the
south-west as it should do if the “Red Face” deposit were
cutting out, is veering round to the north. This system is
consistent with the supposition that the “ Red Face ”
is a lode underlying the slate in which the dam is excavated
but not with the supposition that it is only a circular de-
pression filled wthgossan. This slate is also rich in tin,
many o he tiers being covered with crystal of
pure tin, and this, as pointed out above, is in
accordance with the supposition of the proximity of a lode.
However, owing to this deposit existing on a peak elevated
several hundreds of feet above the adjacent country, the
ordinary methods of dressing employed at other tin fields
proved quite inapplicable here, and special contrivances
had to be adopted. A number of large dams were con-
structed at different elevations for the conservation of
the rain water; in very rainy weather the supply is
abundant, but in average weather the supply has to be
economised. Thus the most elevated dam supplies the


sluices in the “ Slaughter Yard Gully Face,” the tail water
from which is trapped in turn to supply the sluices in the
“ Red Face,” then again to the “ White Face,” and so on.
Before the water is lost on these wonderful works it is used
11 times. The tail-water from the lowest sluices is finally
trapped and sent on to the “ Ring Tail ” Dressing Sheds
on the Waratah River, where it passes over some jiggers,
rotating tables, and buddies extracting whatever tin may be
carried with the muddy water. By th is means a quantity of tin
is saved which otherwise would be lost in its passage down
the valley. Owing to the elevation the supply of clean
water that can be stored is insufficient to treat the tailings
satisfactorily, and thus have been constructed an extensive
range of works on the Waratah River which is about half-
a-mile distant, so that this work may be done more satis-
factorily. These works, known as the “ Ring Tail ”
Dressing Sheds, give facilities for treating large
quantities of stanniferous clay which cannot be manipulated
in the sluice-boxes. This clay, rolling along for half-
a-mile over a steep and rocky channel is ground up in-
to slime, thus reducing it to a condition in which it can be
thoroughly treated when it reaches the works on the
river. By this means it is found that a very
large quantity of tin is saved, which is an important
matter in these works. Partly owing to the deficiency of
water, and partly to the presence of impure ore that re-
quires crushing, and fine sluice tin requiring very skilful
treatment, the ore is only partially dressed in the sluice-
boxes. To be finished it is taken from the sluices and
sent down in trucks to the sheds at Waratah, where it is
put through several processes, and thus brought to a fit
state for market. The stanniferous debris, when it leaves
the faces, is (after all sizeable masses of tin-stone are re-
moved) run through the sluice boxes, by which it is partly
concentrated, and by the agency of a locomotive is taken to
the dressing sheds. Thus the ore is classified into coarse that
requires stamping, and fine which only wants dressing.
The stamping mills, of which there are two —the old one
of 15 heads, and the magnificent one of GO heads—resemble
the old quartz crushing mill. The crushed ore is passed
through gratings with 144 holes to the inch, and then
through the triangular double troughs, by which means it
is classified, the coai'se ore going to the Jigger's, and the
‘ slimes” or very fine to the rotating tables. The waste tailings
from both are treated in Munday’s buddies by which the
ore is nearly all removed, leaving only a very small propor-
tion of exceedingly fine slime tin. All these machines are
continuous and automatic in their action. The jiggers and
rotating tables are also self-discharging, and require no
manual labour except one man in attendance to prevent
any mishap taking place. The Munday buddies "require
emptying by manual labour.
The ore after it leaves these machines is treated in hand
buddies and tossing tubs by manual labour to extract a
remnant of refuse, after which it is ready for market.
Communication with the mine from the township of Wara-
tah, which is about a mile distant, is maintained by aline of
railway. Formerly the company shared a wooden tram-


way with the Stanhope Company, which was worked by
horse power, but this being- too slow for the manager, who
is ever ready to improve and make more useful the means
of working the mine, an iron line was constructed, which
was at first worked with horses, but now with a locomotive.
That this outlay is justified may be judged from the fact
that the cost of carrying the ore to the sheds, crushing and
dressing ready for the market, does not exceed Is 5d per
ton. The cost of running the locomotive is about 3Gs
par day for a delivery of about 300 tons. Crushing and
dressing costs is 2d per ton.
To say that this mine is a marvel of perfection might
appear to some absurd, yet let such make a visit, and after
doing so, if inclined to admit the truth, such visitor would
most surely agree with me. In Cornwall (England) there
is one mine which approaches Mount Bischoff; that is the
Dale oath, the management of which is supposed by
Cornish miners to surpass everything on earth —or, it may
be, in heaven. By a report of this said company it seems
that they employ 1100 persons, of whom 250 to 300 appear
to be first-class underground miners ; of the balance, 500
are said to be employed in the ordinary dressing sheds,
who produce 150 tons of clean ore per month, being at the
rate of Gcwt. for each tin dresser per month. Dalcoath is
a first-class mine, and the percentage of tin must be up to
the Cornish average of 2 per cent. At the Mount Bischoff
sheds there are only about 50 hands employed, who turn
out on the average of at least nine months in the year 250
tons per month, being at the rate of five tons for each person
employed. In fact, the most surprising thing the visitor
sees at Mount Bischoff sheds is a maze of machinery-
stampers and jiggers moving up and down, and tables and
buddies rotating, with streams of water running about in
an incomprehensible manner, with but a sprinkling of men
and boys about who appear to the uninitiated eye to have
little or nothing to do.
The narrative of the inception and completion of these
works forms an interesting chapter in the history of this
marvellous mine.
When the Mount Bischoff Company was first formed in
1873 the directors appointed Mr. Crosby as their manager
for the mine, who had a difficult task before him, Mr. Eddy
having charge of the dressing. The shares were sold at a
very low rate—in fact, no one at the time cared to buy, as
the company seemed to have before them great difficulties,
with little chance of any return for their outlay. At this
time there were those at the Mount who declared that the
mine would never pay a dividend. This did not improve
matters, and at length, after a struggle of about 15
months, the directors decided upon a change, and placed
the mine under the management of Mr. 11. W. E. Kayser,
who was appointed on high scientific recommendations. On
his taking charge he found that the cost of dressing the tin
per ton was close upon <£23, a ruinous figure, so he at once de-
cided to introduce machinery alone. This proceeding would
have been quite satisfactory, but he went further, and pro-
posed to introduce those automatic German inventions that
do the work of the tin dressers, and so leave them with little


else to do but walk about and keep their eyes upon the
machinery. At that time there were some 55 or GO persons
at work in the dressing sheds, and with the present output
hundreds would have been required. This innovation
accordingly caused great and bitter opposition on the part
of the work people and their friends. Some of the share-
holders joined hands with these in their opposition against
the manager, and insisted upon saying that such extrava-
gance would ruin the undertaking, and place the company
in greater dificulties than those already experienced. This
condition of affairs lasted a long time, till at length a
meeting of the shareholders was held for the purpose of
hearing the whys and the wherefores. At this meeting,
the majority were in favour of the new manager, Mr.
Kayser, which had the good effect of casting aside the
heretofore existing ill-feeling that disturbed both workmen
and shareholders. Mr. Kayser’s innovations were greatly
impeded by the fact that owing to the financial condition
of the company, it was not desirable to stoj) the works and
begin them over again, which it was thought would have
been the most pleasant course for the manager. Instead, he
had to effect a couqdete change in the dressing sheds, at the
same time keep the works going, and pay all expenses from
current output. Having put up a 15-head battery, and got
a set of jiggers and rotating tables attached, the manager
launched his company into a career of prosperity.
About three years after taking charge, he gave the
company their first dividend. Since then there has been
paid in dividends the enormous sum of .£850,000, besides
which, ,£IBO,OOO at least has been sunk in permanent
improvements, and a heavy overdraft paid off. The
quantity of tin raised since the commencement is 29,000
tons, of which all but some 700 tons have been raised by the
present manager, the market value of which at say .£IOO
per ton would be nearly three millions 1 and upon which
the Van Dieman’s Land Company have received from £5 to
£3 per ton in freight. This, I am sure, will be readily
admitted is no bad result from a mine, of which, it was
said, it would never pay, or give a dividend. These results,
then, are mainly due to the systematic manage-
ment introduced by the present manager, Mr. Kayser, who
has overcome all difficulties, and given to the world
satisfactory proof that in spite of all opposition, he has
done his duty. This question is, I believe, with many, a
sore one, yet it must be confessed that at present good
returns are given, the mine in full working order, no debt
upon the plant, and a good balance to their credit, and
every indication of a long and profitable run.
With regard to the workpeople who are employed on
these extensive works, the rate of wages paid to them is
good, although they are fully worth it, when the condition
of the climate is taken into consideration. During the
winter months the atmospheric influences are most trying,
and do not fail to leave their mark upon the miners, some
of whom I fairly pitied as I stood by looking, not at their
work, but at them. In the fine weather —very little of
which is enjoyed on this mountain top—the work is well
enough. The boys engaged at the sluice-boxes are paid


Os Bcl per day, and the wages for men is from 7s Od to Os 2d.
The hours of labour are from 7 in the morning till 4in the
afternoon, an hour being allowed for dinner, but this they do
not take, as, wishing to knock off early on Saturday, they
give a quarter of an hour each day from their dinner hour.
Their social condition is most creditable, and one im-
portant feature, which the visitor cannot fail to note,
is the absence of all show of larrikinism. Their amuse-
ments are many, so that, although isolated, with no nice
walks or townships close at hand, they do not fail to pass
the time profitably. As all the world knows, miners are
very hospitable, so that the visitor in going to Mount
Bischoff is made to feel quite at home. Visiting
several homes, it struck me that the miners knew well how
to employ their spare time, for gardening had not been
neglected. One place, 1 will here mention, exhibited very
visible signs of industry in leisure times. This belonged
to Mr. Walter Winter, who is assisted by a young friend,
who “ batches ” with him. Between them they are able
to grow all kinds of vegetables for themselves, as also for
their neighbors.
Should the visitor happen to have good weather at the
Mount, he has a treat before him, and having already
made a tour of the works, can employ the rest of his time
in a ramble round the mountain village. From the station
towards the mount is the business portion of the place, and
if on the look out for good accommodation, it will be found at
Lawson’s, or Alford’s Hotel. Mr. Wm. Law son’s house is the
first on the road up, and was formerly in the hands of Mr.
Pearce. Since Mr. Lawson has taken it in hand, it has
undergone many improvements, ranking amongst the best
of our hotels in the island. With the able assistance of
Mrs. Lawson, the landlord has been successful in giving
to the visitor and commercial man a really comfortable
home, with careful attention, a good well-spread and liberal
table, with all the dainties it is possible to obtain, in so
remote a region. The sitting, dining, smoking, and bed
rooms are scrupulously clean and comfortable, which is an
important feature in hotel management, and one that is
greatly appreciated by experienced travellers, who are often
obliged to take what is called “pot luck.’’ This sort of
“ luck ” is oftimes very dear, so that in this “ Guide” the
visitor will be kept clear of such “ hot-ells,” and their
doubtful comforts. Visitors may rely upon only the best
houses being recommended to them, so that their holidays
may be all the more enjoyable. The Lawson family are all
well known maitres-des-hotels in the colony, and their
houses very popular, so that our host at the Mount is not
behind his brothers in providing comfortable quarters for
his guests, where all would sure to be well pleased, and
admirably suited. Close to Mr. Lawson’s Hotel is the “ Em-
porium,” belonging to Mr. C. H. Hall, who is well-known
on the Coast, and was for a long time assistant mining
manager at the Mount Bischoff Tin Mining Company’s
mine. This fine business establishment has a bold and
attractive frontage, with double entrance. The interior is
well stocked with every kind of merchandise, suitable for
miners and others, at wholesale and retail prices. A large


assortment of miners’ and prospectors’ tents, flys, tools, boots,
clothing, and other requisites are always kept in stock, so
that persons intending to work in the district, or along the
West Coast, could not fail to be well supplied at the
Emporium. Mr. C. H. Hall is so well acquainted with the
Mount and West Coast that miners and others seeking
information respecting the mines could not do better than
give him a call, when much of a useful and valuable
character would be gained. Mr. Hall is also well acquainted
with the mineral resources of the Coast and districts sur-
rounding Mount Bischoff, and is ready to thoroughly equip
prospectors and others going out. Arrangements may also
be made with him for packing goods and procuring saddle
horses to the mineral fields of the West Coast.
Besides being well stocked with the above appliances,
this large store has in it all kinds of choice drapery, boots,
shoes, gentlemen’s clothing, ironmongery, etc., whilst one
portion of the store is fitted up with all kinds of groceries,
teas, and fancy goods of the choicest character. Carpenters’
and builders’ materials are to be obtained from the
Emporium —in fact, Mr. C. H. Hall has given his attention
to the requirements of the district in every particular, so
that customers can rely upon getting their wants supplied.
Mr, Hall is also ready to accept agencies for prospecting
associations on the West Coast, or in the vicinity of
Bischoff. This fact will no doubt be useful to some of my
readers, who could, if wishing to communicate with him,
do so by letter or telegram, his telegraphic address being
“ Hall, Bischoff.” From Mr. Hall’s we next visit the Bischoff
Hotel, which has always been a favorite resort for visitors
from far and wide. Mr. E. W. Alford, who is now pro-
prietor, having succeeded Mr. Murray, has caused great
changes in the arrangement of the hotel, and instituted a
number of judicious improvements which have had the
effect of quite transforming this admirable hotel, and
making it a most desirable place wherein to seek rest
whilst on the Mount. This fact shows that the public
interests are well looked after, and the proprietor is
determined to make his house as pleasant and attractive as
any other in the colony. A bath room has been added to
this establishment for the use of all who like to accept of
the same, two fine sample rooms for commercial gentlemen,
and a roomy, well-lighted and ventilated dining room.
The sitting rooms are in the front of the house, and from
the windows the visitor is able to look out upon a grand,
yet mysterious, expanse of country, with mighty and
rugged mountains in the distance, whilst in the foreground
are the Mount Bischoff Company’s dressing sheds,
etc. Of the other rooms in this hotel nothing’need be
said, as they are replete with every comfort, and give
evidence of great taste on the part of Mrs. Alford, who has
the household management in her hands, and whose
desire it is to give satisfaction to all her guests, so
that they may let others know how well they were treated
at the Bischoff Hotel. Both Lawson’s and Alford’s hotels
are so well conducted that it would be out of place for me
to speak more highly of the one than of the other; they
are the best houses on the Mount, and can be highly


recommended to the travelling public. There was one
feature of interest 1 noticed whilst in the bars. The
spirits, wines, beers, ales, etc., which were placed in good
order upon the shelves, clearly showed that the landlords
respectively had in their establishments none but the
very best brands, from well-known and noted houses. This,
1 think, speaks for itself, and those who know how to use
the “gifts sent us” will find quality a leading trait at
these hotels. Mr. Alford is a well-known resident at
the Mount and is so thoroughly acquainted with the place
and the West Coast that no one could go astray in his
hands, for he is competent to give all kinds of useful hints
and information concerning this wonderful and famous lo-
cality. He was one of the first to open a store at the Pieman,
against great odds, when few indeed cared to travel that
way ; he also “ packed ” his own goods and was fortunate
in his enterprise, for after a time he found that so soon as
he arrived at the store with his supplies, so soon were they
bought of him, thus keeping him constantly on the track
“ packing.” Such persons as Mr. Alford are best able to
talk of hard times, hard lines, and “ fearful travelling,”
for it was no joke to make the journey to and from the
Pieman when he first undertook the task. Visitors, then,
will find in Mr. Alford an experienced traveller, one who is
most familiar with the track, and ever ready to help the
traveller. Speaking of the traveller reminds me of another
resident who would prove of great assistance to those
seeking information of the colony. I mean Mr. James Kernp-
ling, who has the “ Excelsior Stores,” some few doors from
the hotel. He has travelled far and wide over Tasmania, and
is able to impart [information respecting the colony of a
very valuable character, he being conversant with all parts
—a knowledge gained whilst in pursuit of his busi-
ness. The Excelsior Store is three doors from the local
bank, and has in it a large and useful stock of merchandise,
just such as would be found in any shop in Launceston or
Hobart. Prospectors, or miners, or surveying parties can
be well provided for here with all the appliances of their
trade ; picks, shovels, dishes, etc,, are kept in great numbers
to suit customers who would find it impossible to be better
served elsewhere. Mr. Kempling has also every class of
goods suitable for the district, both for ladies and gentle-
men. Teas, groceries, and other provisions are kept in
stock, so that one might well say when visiting the fine
stores on the Mount it would be impossible for the in-
habitants to run short whilst the storekeepers keep such a
large and useful stock of provisions. Passing along from
Mr. Kempling’s, and turning to the left, we have on the
next eorner, opposite the Belmont Hotel, the large
drapery store of Mr. A. W. Johnston, who, like
his fellow-tradesman, has so good, valuable, and
well-chosen stock of goods that it would be difficult
for the good people of Bischoff to be better pro-
vided for. Mr. Johnston’s store is on the corner of Hall
and Ritchie streets, in a direct line to the Pieman Track,
so that miners and others have to pass his door, and should
they require goods for their journey the same could be ob-
tained at the “ Bon Marche ” Store. 1 need not particularise


the contents of this store, yet may remind the reader that
it is like the others, well-stocked and an acquisition to the
place. At the rear of the “ Bon Marche ” is the skating rink,
which is in the hands of a company, and equal in size to any
in the colony. Everything has been done to make this rink
attractive and pleasant, so that there should be a good and
prosperous future in store for those who have undertaken
the establishment of so useful a place of amusement. The
frontage and main entrance has been well arranged, and
forms one of the most attractive features in the town.
Leaving this part of the town the visitor retraces his
steps, crosses the bridge, visits the reading-room and insti-
tute, then passing on reaches the private residence of Mr.
Kayser. This is a little palace of itself —spacious, roomy,
and neatly furnished with exquisite taste, and surrounded
with a well-kept garden wherein are lovely flowers choice
and rare. Mr. Kayser is very hospitable, and extends to
the stranger those courtesies which mark the gentleman,
lie has a great mine in his hands and has given every sat-
isfaction. Dividends which amount to ,£850,000 means
positive success, and must convey more to the reader than
pages of written matter could do, showing the shareholders
and directors that in Mr. Kayser they have one who has
done his duty, and that well. Before leaving the Mount I
would recommend visitors to interview Mr. F. A. Horne, the
accountant at the offices of the Bischoff Tin Mining Company,
and who would assist the visitor in many matters respect-
ing the mines, and so advise that all of interest would be
seen. Before leaving this remarkable place 1 would
strongly advise the visitor to climb to the summit
of the mountain, and, should it be a clear, fine day, he will
there see a sight which will thoroughly rivet the atten-
tion and most likely bring forth expressions of delight and
admiration whilst feasting his eyes upon the beauties
around him. Mountain after mountain in quick succession
meet the eye as one looks round, and bring to mind the
following lines :
O, sacred forms, how proud you look !
How high you lift your heads into the sky !
How huge you are ! How mighty, and how free !
Ye are the things that tower, that shine —whose smile
Makes glad—whose frown is terrible —whose forms
Kobed or unrobed do all the impress wear
Of awe divine !
Departing from Bischoff we return to Emu Bay by the
railway, where Mr. Haywood is found in readiness to con-
vey passengers and their goods to the hotels. Visitors to
Burnie (Emu Bay) wishing to hire saddle horses, buggies,
or wagonettes could do so from the livery stables of Mr.
Thomas Haywood, who has always on hand good vehicles
and first-class horses. Mr. Haywood’s stables are noted
for his handsome pair of ponies, which are great favorites
•with the visitors, who find it a pleasant pastime to take
these pretty creatures in hand and with them drive to all
the pleasant nooks and corners of the Coast. Mr. Hay-
wood is prepared at any time to meet gentlemen coming to
the Coast who may require horses or buggies, as also


commercial gentlemen who with their samples desire to be
taken from town to town. All steamers to the Bay are
waited upon, so that visitors and others calling in at the
Bay can be sure of getting their goods taken on to their
destination.
The tourist cannot go further in this direction with
anything like comfort. Mount Bischoff and surrounding
country having been visited, and the pleasant sojourn at
the Bay much enjoyed, other scenes and places must now
be visited. So off we start for the Penguin; our coach is
ready, with our affable friend Mr. Jesse Wiseman on the
spot, seeing that all is ready, each passenger well seated,
when
Forth come the wheelers —glossy black—
v With bit in mouth, and cloth on back :
'Quick ! bring the leaders —two bright roans
As ever spurned the wayside stones;
Each buckle tight —’tis done, “ All right! ”
The steeds are ready for their flight;
And old friend Templar once again
Swings up to rule the whip and rein.
Onward we hie, like shooting star
That runs all dazzling—fleet and far ;
And worthy sight for king to see,
Are Wiseman’s bold coursers, fast and free.
Prancing along, we skirt the beach, leaving behind the
favorite township with all its attractions, trusting that at
some future time it may be re-visited. About a mile from
the coaching station is the Emu Biver, spanned by a well
constructed and useful bridge. On the other side is a little
hamlet called
Wivenlioe.
A. S yet but in its infancy, yet having a promising
future in store. The largest house of the group,
with flower garden in front, is the home of the
Bev. Father O’Callaghan, who for many years has had
under his charge a large and important district, which he
has seen grow from an almost deserted wilderness to the
prosperous centre of agriculture and mining it now is.
The reverend gentleman being an old friend I gave a long-
promised call only a few days ago, when what was a great
and pleasing surprise to me may be of interest to others, to
find that Father O’Callaghan had with him his father, a
venerable gentleman full of health and strength, possess-
ing full enjoyment of good sight and hearing, able to con-
verse upon almost every topic, with newspaper intelligence
of the latest date to discuss with those willing to join him.
This gentleman has past the alloted time given us, of four
score, and was at the time of my visit in possession of
perfect health. His son, the Eev. Father, is no young
man, he having, if I remember rightly, past three score
years. Of early times, and the history of the colony,
Father O’Callaghan has a vivid recollection, so that a chat
with him means instruction as well as pleasure. He has done
real pioneer work along the Coast with such hardships as we
in our day can but poorly understand. As in the North, so in
the South and East have I met with the pioneer Catholic


Missionary, and more fit and suitable companions in this
work could not be found than Fathers O’Callaghan,
Murphy, of the Huon, and Mary, of George’s Bay. Leav-
ing earnest, true, and honest friends behind in this
sequestered spot to enjoy long life and happiness, vre will
again continue our journey, along a road which cannot
possibly be eclipsed for its smoothness, and the enchanting
surroundings. Spot after spot of matchless beauty, ever
and again pass before the vision, thus preparing one for
other lovely sights on the coach road. The rocky and
precipitous hills that skirt the road, and are watered with
sparkling cascades, which flow from the hundred and one
springs, have a character worth studying. They are not
like the eastern hills, jagged and broken, rising in walls of
granite, and capped by peaks or turret-like rocks, but rise
from the land in vast columns, fringed by herbage of every
lovely colour. Here and there along this route can be seen
mighty hills, standing mostly apart from their neighbours,
though close to them, and attended, as it were, by smaller
hills, which form real objects of study. So many grand
features of an imposing nature meet the gaze on the
Penguin Road, that it is a work of no easy sort to decide
upon the most fascinating, so I have considered it best
policy just now to leave the decision to my readers and
patrons. After an invigorating and delightful drive, our
Jehu brings up his horses at the inn, which is on the
township of the
Penguin.
—A HE Penguin is so unlike all other villages along the
Coast, that I fully believe there will be many who
Y' agree with me as to the acceptable and pleasant
change, where all may “ breathe a second spring, redolent
with joy and youth,” with abundance to admire, both on
the sea-board and back inland, where the sweet-scented
air is surely as sweet as the perfume of Araby’s shore.
There is a magic about this pretty little village which 1
cannot explain, with the deep blue water stretching out to
sea, dotted with massive rocks, upon which the “ Penguin ”
oftimes find a resting place. Inland are mighty heights,
from which the visitor can look down upon such varied
beauty below as would fill the mind with pleasant
recollections, may be of happier times in the long, long
past. These gigantic and, in most instances, perpendicular
heights are so close to the village that an hour’s gentle
walking will enable an idle stroller to ascend them from
Watcombe House, or any part of the village, and return
to the beach, stopping to bathe in the placid water that
kisses the fascinating sandy beach, which faces the town-
ship. At the Penguin there are numberless nooks and
corners, which each have their attractive and special
charms. And here too are numerous spots which those
happiest of all travellers, vigorous young men, without
encumbrance, except knapsacks, may traverse in a long
summer’s day. A really jolly life can be spent in this part
of the Coast by young gentlemen from this and other
colonies, especially those who do not mind a few miles
walk per day. In fact, the best of all methods, to my


mind, in spending a holiday is to do the whole journeying
on foot in an island like Tasmania. Penguin has been
chosen by many as an holiday resort, and especially by
true lovers of the country, who are willing to make robust
exertions to enjoy it. Of the Penguin too much cannot
be written, for it has so much to recommend it to the
pleasure-seeker, naturalist, botanist, geologist, and those
in search of health. It is a quiet, peaceful region of
beauty, where the sick can find relief and breathe the
purest of air, and day by day feel the effects of the
salubrious climate. The over-worked and weary business
man from the crowded cities of Australia can leave his
office, cross the Straits, and find at the Penguin that
repose which is so welcome. The artist can find work for
the pencil and brush ; the bridegroom with his sweet bride
could hardly find a sweeter or dearer spot in which to pass
and enjoy the happy and blissful days of the honeymoon.
Parents blessed with happy, joyous, laughing, romping
children would do well to make the Penguin their resting-
place during the midsummer holidays.
In the village are excellent places of accommodation,
where every hospitable device to receive you is made, with
the clean and neat chambers, cosey and attractive sitting
rooms which face the sea, receiving into the whole
premises the pure invigorating breezes that come from off
the sea. As the coach enters the village, the first place of
call is “The Neptune Hotel,” kept by Captain C.
Anthon, who has purchased a roomy house, with lofty
and light rooms throughout, replete with every conveni-
ence, billiard room, which has been fitted up on the latest
improved principle, and indeed everything that is possible
to create comfort, and give satisfaction. Prom the balcony
a splendid view is obtained, with every object of interest
in sight, the distant ranges with mighty giant timber
towering high into the air, the rocky cliffs along the beach,
the winding coach road, the natty little pier, and the
broad expansive sea. Captain Anthon may well remark
that it is one of the best resorts for visitors who come to
recuperate in the tight little island. Not far from this
hotel is the museum, as yet in its infancy, yet suggesting
in the not far future, an institution worthy the district,
which is without doubt the very commencement of a prolific
and extensive mineral country. It was only a few days
ago that my attention was called to abed of fine clay; this
clay is of the best quality, exceeding fine and remarkably
free from grit, just such a clay as would be most welcome
to owners of pottery works. The colour is a deep brown,
its nature very plastic, and should be easy to work, with
little need for refining. This bed of clay is within a few
chain of the main road, and in a most suitable place for
pottery works. From what I heard, it is the intention of
some gentlemen in the district to bring the clay into use
by forming a company to work it. Advance Penguin, fihe
more industries the greater the population, which is to
Tasmania so great a want. This clay is equal to any I
have a* yet seen in the colony, and far more superior in
character than that found at Penrith (New South Wales),
where there are extensive pottery works. An industry of


this nature at Penguin would be most welcome, besides
giving an impetus to trade along the Coast. This fact of
a local industry being planted in the midst of a vast
agricultural district remind me of a fact which I feel fully
able to mention here, without the least fear of contradition;
that is, the folly of young men objecting to engage them-
selves in business in the country. The longing to be in a
large town where life and activity is the order of things is
quite natural, yet with all, there is a greater field onen for
some in the country than in cities, where they would get
good wages, able to save far more, enjoy good health, with
host of favourable opportunities in store, which it is im-
possible to have in the overgrown towns and great centres
of trade. This being so, there are many employers of
labour who can ill afford to carry on an industry, because
the labour is scarce, and that which he is able to get is of
the most common rate character, although I admit there
are exceptions to the rule. Now let me point out one
glaring instance, which came under my notice only a few
days ago. A gentleman from Gippsland (Victoria) bought
a business ; he has a good demand for the article manufac-
tured, which after a few months will undoubtedly be
sought after from the furthermost part of the island. Yet
his hands are tied because of obtaining good and useful
labour. One who he has (or had) in his service did just
about what he pleased, cursed and spoke to his employer in
such a manner that could only be expected from the most
depraved creature living. Ilis pipe stuck in his mouth
from morning till eve, and although drawing good pay
with a comfortable home to live in, treated his employer as
a mere machine. This conduct, too, in the presence of
strangers, and when I stood by and heard such it fairly
took my breath away. There are those who howl when an
increase of population is spoken of, but let such creatures
be pestered by the like of him I have just written then
this howling would cease, and the Government of the
Colony more willing to seek an increase of population from
the Mother Country.
Lower down is the “ Penguin Hotel,” which olfers first-
class accommodation for visitors; Mr. It. E. Mead, the
proprietor, has boats for the use of his patrons, who are
able to enjoy many pleasant trips on the sea during their
sojourn in this well-favoured spot. Pishing in abundance
is a characteristic of the Penguin, both in salt and fresh
water, and those who are enthusiastic disciples of Izaak
Walton could scarcely fail to enjoy themselves whilst
under the guidance of Mr. Mead, the genial and popular
landlord of the “ Penguin.” Traps for hire, with excellent
roads to travel upon, romantic scenery, and fresh air is
indeed an inducement to spend the holidays in this portion
of the Devon. Mr. Mead has always a sumptuous table,
and willing at all times to prepare meals for the traveller.
Friends wishing to go picnicing need not fear as to what
provisions to take with them, because mine host is an apt
and experienced caterer, able to produce a dainty spread
which could be packed into a basket, convenient enough to
carry to any chosen spot. Visitors, too, have every facility
offered them for enjoyment from the “Penguin Hotel.”


The apartments are in keeping' with all other arrangements,
thus showing- that Mrs. Mead, who has charge of household
matters, does all in her power to make the guests feel quite
at home, and at ease. Mr. H. G. K. Wells, the chemist of
Ulverstone, has an establishment on the Penguin, which is
not only of use to the people in the district, but often to
visitors who may have come over, seeking health after
sickness, and still require their medical advisers’ prescrip-
tions dispensed.
“ Watcombe House ” is to those in search of a refined
home healthily situated, standing in its own beautiful
grounds, with pleasant surroundings, and a splendid view
of the sea, a desideratum, and deserves unreserved recom-
mendations, for within are comforts of every kind, the
rooms being furnished throughout with all that is
necessary to suit the most fastidious. This first-rate house
is the rendezvous of many who seek private life, and
desire to enjoy the quiet and seclusion so appreciated by
the overtaxed business man. The visitors’ book of Watcombe
House shows that Queenslanders, New South Wales and
Victorian gentlemen, with their families, have made it their
home from time to time, and our own colonists from the
south (Hobart) side —in fact, the whole of the colony—find
“ Watcombe House ” a desirable resting place. Hotel s ! are
very desirable where life can be made pleasant, still there
is one great feature which is wanting, and which is so
seldom met in connection with hotels, and which too would
be a great attraction. I refer to a garden. Where invalids
and children are concerned, a garden is a potent and
precious adjunct to the residence ; this then is one of Mr.
Thomas Sullock's studies, so that there covers the whole of
the space from the gate to the house a garden rich in
flowers such as adds lustre to the well-arranged mansion.
Go to Watcombe House whatever day you will, winter or
summer, it has always a pleasant and cheery appearance,
i nd its site is one which recommends it to medical gentle-
men as a fitting haven for such as are seeking rest after
months of hard work, or delicate health. Mr. Thomas
Sullock, of Watcombe House, being a colonist of long
standing, is one of the best gentlemen to come in contact
with by those seeking general information. Intending
colonists, who may read this Guide, whether living in the
Old World or other colonies, would not make any mistake,
if, wishing to correspond with any one in the colony
respecting the land, its resources, farming or mining, by
dropping Mr. Sullock a line, as he would, I feel con-
fident, give useful and reliable information. Before passing
on it should be mentioned that the breakwater, which
has been extended, affords ample accommodation for vessels
of considerable tonnage, so that intercolonial steamers and
trading vessels are able to be brought alongside. There
are also near the Penguin some charming places worth in-
spection, and if on horseback, or driving, the trip could be
made doubly pleasant. As has already been mentioned
there is ample hotel room, etc., at the Peno-uin, each work-
ing well together for the comfort of visitors. There is an
old saying, “ Two of a trade can never agree.” It is
curious, and in most cases highly gratifying, to see how


many of these sayings of our ancestoi*s are becoming falsi-
fied by the great advances made of late years in social
feeling and arrangements. It was pleasant when visiting
the Penguin to find that a good feeling predominated with
those who provide for the visiting public, showing an
earnest desire to enlarge the sphere of good understanding
and reciprocal fair-dealing in mattfrs of business, and thus
to supersede the tad feeling and injury of greedy rivalries
and selfish antagonisms. Amongst the additions to the
township of the Penguin is the large store of Mr. Taylor,
who has a well-chosen stock of merchandise for his cus-
tomers to select from, and has every sort of drapery, boots,
and fancy goods of the latest fashion. This store is on the
Main street, and could easily be found, it being a prominent
feature along the coach route. From the Penguin the
visitor has an interesting trip to accomplish before
reaching
Ulverstone (Leven River),
A ITUATED on the Leven River, which is one of the
finest bodies of water flowing through the County of
Devon. Fi'om Mount Cripp, in Russell, this river
appears to take its source, rolling onward through majestic
gorges and gullies, thence along the foot of the Cattley
Range to the north of Mount Tor, winding suddenly to
the east, bearing somewhat south-east till it reaches the
foot of the Three Brothers Mountains, whence it rushes
past Gunn’s Plains and away through thickly-timbered
country till the Dial Ranges are. past, when it pours into
the sea at the busy town of Ulverstone. To pass this
river our coach is driven over a fine bridge which has a
safe path fenced off for the use of those on foot. Just
before reaching the town there can be seen the comfortable
residence known as “ Longlee,” the home of Mr. Robert
Taylor Robson, who has resided in the place for a number
of years, thus gaining a great knowledge of Ulverstone and
the countiy winch abounds the Penguin River, the Castra,
Gawler, and other farming centres. Persons who desire
to seek a home in this portion of the Devon could not do
better than write to, or call upon, Mr. Robson, as he being
an agent has often in the market allotments for sale,
houses to let, improved farms to let or for sale on easy
terms such as would suit hundreds in the old country who
are just now wondering where to settle because of the high
rents asked by their landlords and poor returns obtained
from the land. Persons from the other colonies, too, might
find it to their advantage to place themselves in communi-
cation with him. He (Mr. Robson) has been the means of
causing a number of retired military officers from India
and other parts to settle in the colony, who have now very
comfortable homesto live in. The visitor on reaching this
town may well be told that it is a beautiful fertile and ro-
mantic district, lying as it were between the Coast ranges
and the sea, for on the east the mighty hills spread away
till they are divided oy the waters of the Wilmot; to the
west are the Dial R ges, and at the rear, which is the
south, are the uplands of the Castra, Gawler, and Motton,
whilst at the foot of the town is the sea. The surrounding


country is noted for its geological formation, which in
many parts—especially along the Leven Eiver —is very
rough and rugged, with massive perpendicular rocks rising
to a height of hundreds of feet, clothed with vegetation
wherever such can find root-hold. The waters flow-
ing along at the base make up a picture not easily
forgotten. Much of the country around Ulverstone
is undulating, vei-y heavily timbered, with an ex-
cellent soil. As a farming district it is second to none,
where the settlers have done wonderful work to bring the
land to that state of perfection in which one now finds it.
Our coach draws up at the Ulverstone Hotel, which is in
the hands of mine Host Webb, who is evidently
an earnest advocate for comfort and ease, believing that
first-class provision is the most judicious means of
attracting visitors to his hotel. For a long time this
hotel has been a real favorite with our friends from across
the sea —so much so, that during the last season or more
the worthy landlord has found a difficulty to accommodate
his patrons, so to meet this demand he has had some
extensive alterations, which will doubtless be a means of
overcoming past difficulties. Eight new bedrooms have
been added to the upper storey, with a bath-room, besides
sundry other offices. Each bed has been fitted up with
the latest improvements, such as is sure to be appreciated
by his guests; and the light, buoyant, spring beds, which
have taken the place of the old-fashioned, will materially
conduce to additional comfort and cleanliness. The sitting
and drawing-rooms are so. fitted up that one must indeed
be hard to please who cannot feel thoroughly and well
provided for. From the balcony the visitors are able to
feast their eyes upon many grand sights, as this hotel
stands in a capital position. From it a full view of the
sea is had, with passing ships clearly in sight. The steamers
to and from Melbourne, Sydney, Launceston, Hobart, and
coast ports, call in at Ulverstone, and the wharfs are within
a stone’s throw of the hotel. Attached to the premises is
a pretty flower garden, where the visitor might spend some
little time; also a kitchen garden and a well-kept grass
paddock. One of Alcock’s best billiard tables is kept, and
facing on the yard are two roomy sample rooms for the
use of commercial men. These rooms can without any
trouble be converted into a large and spacious chamber, big
enough to hold a great number of persons. It is the best
room for the purpose for which it is intended to be seen
along the coast. Complete stables with careful groom is
another feature of note belonging to this well-ordered and
attractive house, and it can be honestly stated that the Ulver-
stone Hotel is provided with everything that capital and
laboxxr is able to demand, and where the most distinguished
visitor to our island would find everything tout-ensemble.
From this hotel parties are made up for fishing and boat-
ing excursions, so those who stay here will be made
acquainted with the favourite localities so attractive to
anglers. Intending visitors to Ulverstone wishing to
secure rooms at the Ulverstone Hotel would receive a
prompt reply to letters or telegrams. On looking round
this busy town there is much of interest to rivet the


attention, for on all sides are fine and handsome buildings
which speak volumes for the prosperity of the settlers.
On Keibey Street the buildings are as a whole commodious
and convenient, being regular and uniform, with handsome
fronts to the shops. The class of buildings, too, reminds
one of larger towns, and on calling upon Messrs. Catto and
Co., tea merchants and grocers, who have a store in this
street, I felt that the class of establishment under their
control was far in advance of any that I had as yet met
with along the coast. The interior is as well fitted up as
any city house with a choice selection of goods, such as
could be found in the best houses in the colony. One
special feature well worth drawing attention to in this
business is that Mr. A. Catto has followed an excellent plan,
one which would, if more generally followed, be of great
benefit to our growing townships, that is having one busi-
ness only, like that of Launceston and Hobart. A. Catto
and Co’s., tea merchants and family grocers, Reibey Street,
Ulverstone, is an establishment which ranks amongst the
leading places of business worth a visit. On the main road
towards Formby are several local industries deserving
special mention. Mr. C. Pearl, the saddler, has been in
business at Ulverstone since 1876, when the appearance of
the village little indicated such rapid strides has have been
made. When Mr. Pearl first settled here he had some
rough roads to contend with, for at that time the main
road did not extend much further than Elizabeth Town,
which is about four miles from Deloraine on the Latrobe
road. What has made Ulverstone is the back settlements,
and if the selection of land beyond the present selection is
still pursued at the same rate as of the last two years
Ulverstone will be an extensive town, and what with the
shipping and the railway its future is most promising. Mr.
Pearl is a tradesman of long standing and one thoroughly
acquainted with the town. There is no doubt he would, if
called upon, afford much information to the visitor. He
has in his shop a well-assorted stock of goods, suitable to
the requirements of the country, so that there is no won-
der he has an extensive trade," besides being deservedly
popular. Mr. Pearl has under his charge the Public Hall
and Reading Room, with a well-stocked Library. This
Reading Room is close to Mr. Webb’s Hotel and is open to
the public from morn till eve, free of charge. On the other
side of the road, and not far from the saddler’s, is the boot
factory of Mr. H. Frith, where a good article is manufac-
tured from the best material procurable. He has a steady
staff of men, and being a practical tradesman himself the
goods turned out can be well taken as representing only a
first-class article. Besides the boot business it may be
well for visitors to know that he has hairdressing, shaving,
and shampooing rooms under his care, besides a circulating
library, and he is able to secure the repair of sewing
machines without having to send them away from the
place, thus saving loss of time and use of machine. Mr.
Frith Is agent for the Australian Widows’ Fund Life
Assurance, and also newspaper agent. Within a stone’s
throw of the last-mentioned establishment is the Carriage
M orks of Messrs. C. and P. Nalor, formerly of Oldham,


near Manchester (England). These gentlemen have, dur-
ing their residence in Ulverstone, done a fair share of
business, giving satisfaction to their customers, who have
liberally supported them. Every description of carriage
work is executed on the premises, and judging from the
vehicles standing in the workshop and those already in use
amongst the tradespeople and farmers, their work is
appreciated, which is a satiefactory guarantee, apart from
prize taking. Speaking of prizes, this firm were the most
successful at the last Farmers’ Club Spi’ing Show, held at
the Leven, when against all comers, including Hobart car-
riage builders, they took first prize for a double-seated
buggy, which was very neatly finished, and far in advance
of any other vehicle sent for exhibition or competition.
Good practical tradesmen are as much required in the
country as in the large towns, for the wear and tear is
greater and the roads far heavier, so that the Ulverstone
settlers may consider themselves very much favoured by
having competent tradesmen amongst them who have
spent most of their lives in a city (Manchester) of skilful
manufactures. Returning to the wharf by way of Main
Street we Jpass the handsome and neatly fitted establish-
ment of Mr. H. G. K. Wells, dispensing and family chemist.
This shop has not its equal in the same profession along
the coast, and the interior arrangements may be described
as perfect. Mr. Wells has a branch establishment at
the Penguin, where, as at Ulverstone, he follows the pro-
fession of surgeon-dentist.
Almost opposite Mr. Wells’ are the old-estab-
lished stores of Messrs. G. and A. Ellis, gen-
eral merchants. These brothers started business on
the Leven ten years ago, and consequently have passed
through some very hard times, yet withall have held their
ground against all comers, andnowown, without exception,
the most extensive business outside of Launceston. They
arc merchants in the true sense of the word, and possess a
most varied stock of merchandise. A walk through the
premises shows that they have the latest style and fashion
of drapery in the best of material; groceries, ironmongery,
crockery, furniture, lime, builders’ materials of every
character, timber (New Zealand, American, and Tas-
manian), doors, window* sashes, reaping machines, farmers’
implements of every sort and size, the famous stump
extractor for removing from the land those ugly stumps
which cover the land which would otherwise be under cul-
tivation. This extractor is in great demand on the
Australian side, where good work has been accomplished
with it, so that after a time we may expect to see it at
work on our own farm lands. Messrs. G. and A. Ellis are
cash buyers for all kinds of colonial produce, and have had
built large stores for grain, potatoes, oats, hay, sheepskins,
hides, Ac., &c. Although these premises are very large,
yet they are too small tor present use, and it is the inten-
tion of the owners to add other buildings to those already
in use. Besides being in business as merchants, they have
large areas of land in their possession, so that persons
vishing Ulverstone in search of land would find G. and A.
Ellis well able to direct them in all matters respecting the


laud, and placed in this position they are often aide to
learn of farms to let or for sale. Dr. McCall, who has a
large and extensive practice along the coast, and whose
dispensary is in Reibey Street, has a private hospital under
his care, which is a great boon to the caast settlers, as the
nearest institntion of this description is the one at Mount
Bisdioff and another at Launceston. For a considerable
period the doctor had the Mount Bischoff Hospital under
Ids sole charge, where he gained a considerable amount of
experience and gave general satisfaction to all concerned. JI e
has a deal of property hereabouts and takes great interest
in the advancement of the township, as also the well-being
of the settlers, does his best at all times to assist in carrying
out such works as will add to the value of the town. I t is
well that in our colony such gentlemen are to be found who
will use their influence to further the interests of the
places they live in, because it keeps settlers alive to their
wants, and brings to a successful issue improvements which
would otherwise be left undone. Of the public institutions
in Ulverstone it may be well to ennumerate them, as the
visitor might possibly be interested. There is the Town
Hall with Reading Rooms attached and a spacious hall for
public entertainments, the Farmers’ Club, which takes first
place of all others in the colony, its members doing their
best to encourage the farming industry of the Leven, and
all such trades as are dependent upon them. The late
Spring Show, which was so very successful is an outcome
of their work, and this by itself shows that they have
amongst them men of the right stamp. Their meetings
are held weekly. Just completed are the Public Baths,
which will lie welcomed by both visitors and settlers. The
Racing Club, whose course is situated between the Leven
and the Forth, close to the main road and the Ulverstone
Railway. There are several churches, one State school,
and several private educational establishments. Taking
the place as being but yet in its infancy there is every
reason to believe that a bright future is in store for it, and
that when another half-dozen years have been and gone,
Ulverstone will rank as one of the largest towns in Tas-
mania. Before the visitor leaves the Leven he should wait
upon Mr. T. W. Margetts, importer, auctioneer, and general
merchant, also estate agent. He has several clients who
wish to dispose of landed property, such as farms and town-
ship allotments ; also the letting of a number of farms
along the coast and elsewhere. His business premises arc
at the corner of Cross and Reibey Strets, opposite the Post
and Telegraph Offices.
Continuing our coast journey, we now make for the
Forth, which is about six miles distant, over an excellent
road, with the sea in sight almost all the way. Several
very comfortable houses are passed on the way, which have
good flower and fruit gardens attached to them. To the
left, just outside the town boundary, is the tannery of Mr.
Button, and further still on the right is the fine residence
of Anthony Raymond, Esq., known as “Westella.” This
beautiful place stands on elevated ground and commands a
splendid view of the country round and also of the sea. Its
position is unique, the hills in the background being an


admirable moans of shelter from the cold winds. What
promises to be a prolific orchard in the course of a few
years will be noticed on the right side of the house. The
area laid down in fruit is twelve acres. “ Westwood Farm ”
comes next, the entrance being at the side of Mr. Scott’s,
which is close to the Clayton Rivulet. “ Westwood ”
belongs to the Hon. James Smith, M.L.C., and founder of
the great Mount Bischoff Tin Mine. The farm is managed
by Mr. Bottriell. Brick-making is carried on here, the
demand being very great and the clay iised of first-class
quality. On the opposite side of the road is the flour mill
of Mr. James Scott, whose property is worth a visit if time
should permit. As the coach dashes along, the traveller
will notice to the right the home of Mr. John Templar, an
old colonist, and who was for 25 years post master of the
Perth Post Office. He is a native of Devonshire (England),
but, like most old colonists, prefers to live in these free and
happy lands. Mr. Templar is full of anecdote, so that if a
call should be made the time would be profitably spent, as
he is able to recall many incidents of gone by days. We
are now close to the Forth township, and looking to the
left the course of the river and also the heads
will be plainly observed. The road now winds
down to the right, and is all down hill,
when the traveller has before him a very pretty picture.
There are hills on all sides, and the little town nestles
below in the valley, with the clear waters of the river pass-
ing through, over which is a fine bridge. We are now at
the
Forth.
+ f HERE the coach is brought up to a standstill, and a
jl l change of horses made, whilst the travellers refresh
themselves at the Bridge Hotel, which is now kept
by Mr. C. S. King, who has so arranged his home that he
can accommodate travellers in first-class style, and his old
customers, who visited him while at Table Cape (Wynyard),
will find a welcome in the usual manner. Mr. King has
done much to make his hotel comfortable and attractive,
the bar and business portion of the house being closed from
the private. Each room has been suitably furnished, irres-
pective of cost, so that visitors may be sure of a welcome,
with every attendance and good quarters. The hotel over-
looks the river, which is teeming with fish, such as herrings,
blackfish, English trout, mullet, and black salmon. Then
at the mouth of the river is the salt-water fishing grounds.
Mr. King has a boat of his own for the use of his guests,
so that he intends to leave nothing undone that will
enhance the pleasure of those who patronise his hotel.
Fishing, boating, and shooting parties are made up for the
entertainment of his guests, as well as picnic parties for
those who desire to ramble amongst the hills and in the
dales and valleys which are in easy range of the charming
valley of the Forth. Mr. King is a landlord of the right
sort, and has already given a tone to his house by his
readiness to accompany his guests to fishing grounds and
hunting fields, thus giving to his patrons ungrudgingly
his valuable time, thereby rendering the stay both accept-


able cand pleasant. With the aid of Mrs. King, this house
is fast becoming a favourite rendezvous for anglers and
those in search of the beautiful. Mrs. King spares n<> time
or trouble in making those who stay at the Bridge Hotel
comfortable and happy and perfectly at ease. Commercials
Avill find ample and roomy sample rooms for their use, and
also good stables.
Opposite the Bridge Hotel is the store of Mr. Biggs,
who has been in the district a long time and is
thoroughly conversant with the coast and well able to give
Hie stranger all particulars as to the district. Like most
of our country stores, this one is brimful of all the
requisites for the community, and a glance round will show
that good taste and judgment has been used in the selec-
tion of the stock. Groceries, ironmongery, drapery,
crockery of the best kind are always kept in store, and
very few need leave the store without the goods required.
This establishment is well arranged throughout, and has
much to recommend it to the visitor. In connection with
this establishment is another on the other side of the river,
which is under the careful superintendence of Mrs. Biggs,
who has an excellent display of millinery, fancy goods,
children’s clothing, &c.. which is a great acquisition to the
Forth, thus supplying articles of the finest quality to cus-
tomers, equal in every way to those obtained in Launceston.
Next to Mrs. Biggs’ is the Town Hall and Public Beading
Boom, which is a most useful institution, well used by the
inhabitants. The Forth is an exceedingly pretty place,
and might fairly be termed the most picturesque spot
along the road from Circular Head to Launceston. The
scenery of the adjacent country is remarkable, the soil is
as fertile as any in the country, and the climate as health-
ful as that of any other part of the colony. Whilst
visiting the Forth the tourist should not fail to walk down
the road alongside the river to the wharf, and if bent on
an hour’s fishing should call at the store next to the hotel,
owned by Mr. Cato, who has all kinds of fishing materials
on hand, and would no doubt point out some of the good
places where fish do congregate and sport is the order of
Hie day. Whilst in the well-stocked store of Mr, Cato
the visitor will observe that its interior shows a well-
assorted class of goods, which displays good taste and a full
knowledge of the requirements of the people in the district.
The outfitting department contains goods which could not
be surpassed by any Hobart or Launceston establishment,
with garments of the latest fashion and most acceptable to
the tastes of the residents. Carpets, rugs, oilcloths, fancy
goods, ironmongery, dairy, farming, and agricultural im-
plements are veil and liberally represented, thus placing
the store of Mr. Cato in the front rank of the coast. Mr.
Cato is also a buyer of all kinds of products, besides being
ready to make an exchange by giving goods for products.
Beturning to the river it must be acknowleged that a more
delightful walk could not be selected as that which leads
from Mr. Cato’s store to the heads. The vegetation along
the side of the river is very varied and beautiful, with many
kinds of creepers and wild flowers, which would prove to
the botanist a real paradise. In the spring the clematis is


seen winding its way amongst the shrubs and trees, and in
the morning sun appears like a mantle of snow sparkling
and dazzling. The comesperma clusters and tangles over
the brake ferns, looking at a distance like a cloak of azure
silk dropped upon them. Pyramidal daisy trees gleam
forth in a constellation of stars, while the yellow goodenia,
the ever-lovely tea-tree, epacridae of every tint from white
to crimson, pimeleas, correas, and countless other flowering-
shrubs fringe the path by turns, and ferns, mosses ami
lichens of wondrous beauty lurk in every dim green dell to
delight the explorer. At the heads and along the beach
the visitor would find plenty to admire and much to do, so
that a visit to this really pretty place would be a pleasant
break in the journey along the coast and an acceptable
resting place. Besides the fine stores of Messrs. Riggs and
('ato, there is another over the bridge, which is in the
hands of Mr. Cutler, where a large stock of merchandise is
always kept in store, besides the latest fashions of drapery,
Ac. Mr. Cutler is a wholesale dealer in ironware, gro-
ceries, clothing, fancy goods, and stationery, in books, pic-
tures, jewellery, in tea, coffee, spices—in all the articles
that are necessities or luximes of our modern civilised life.
All the stores are convenient of access to dwellers in the
town, and shoppers from the surrounding country.
Close to Mr. Cutler’s, on the main road, is the smithy
and workshops of Mr. John Dawes, wheelwright and general
blacksmith, where all kinds of farming implements and
vehicles are made. The district surrounding the Forth
township being in the hands of farmers, means an extensive
trade to Mr. Dawes, whose works are centrally situated.
Another four miles brings us to the Don bridge, close to
the Don Hotel, which is now* in the hands of Mr. Edward
Cleaver, late of the Devon Brewery, Spreyton. The Don
Hotel has undergone what it sadly needed, a regular
douching and scraping, in fact “ a change has come o’er
the place,” so that the visitor can now enjoy the comforts
of a clean bed,with tidy surroundings, and good palatable food
together with civility and attention from the landlord and
his good wife. All coaches stop at the Don Hotel, which is
about three miles from the Formby Railway Station. Not
very far from Mr. Cleaver’s Hotel, on the Latrobe road, is
the Devon Brewery, now owned by Mr. Richard Jamieson,
late of Sale, in Gippsland, Victoria. This brewery is close
to the railway gates, in the so-called township of
Spreyton,
A. BOUT two miles from the Don Hotel, on the main road
to Latrobe—a poor miserable-looking spot, with little
or nothing to please the eye, except it is the brewery
and public school with residence. Why this nice school, etc.,
was built, goodness knows, for although new, and erected
within the last 12 months, it is standing empty, unused—
aye! unswept, and a monument of somebody’s folly—
whose y Had the powers that be built a school on the top
of the Cradle mountains, or in the chasm of the extent
volcano, to the west of Mount Claude, there may have been
some sense in it, for there on the mountains some arch-


angel might find a good look-out and resting place, and.
in the chasm the demons of darkness, a house of call. The
cost of this folly was £503. As just mentioned, the
brewery is the only place of interest in Spreyton, where
there is a grand supply of sparkling water, which is being
used by Mr. Jamieson for brewing purposes, who is turn-
ing out an article like that which made his name famous
throughout the whole of Gippsland. The water on the
ground is all that Mr. Jamieson can desire —its quality
gives him a good heart to carry on his business, and he is
confident that within a short time he will be able to supply
his patrons with a beer that will not find its equal in the
island. Mr. Jamieson has already found favour with the
hotel proprietors, who have tested his brewing, and found
it all that can be wished for. Mr. Jamieson has on several
occasions taken prizes against all-comers for his ales in the
colony of Victoria, besides a number of certificates of
merit. As a brewer, Mr. Jamieson has had English as well
as colonial experience, so that he is .an adept at his trade,
thoroughly understanding the most minute details of the
same. Hotel-keepers and those who like a good brew and
wish to favour him with an order should give him a call,
test the liquor, and help to push along an industry which
is now well planted in our midst. In connection with the
brewery, he has a steam aerated water and cordial manu-
factory, with appliances of the latest invention.
Returning again to the Don Hotel, the coach is then
taken on to Formby, over the last part of the grandest
journey in the colony.
Away ! away ! —one lingering look
At valley, cottage, herds and brook
And, bowling on, we gain the hill.
Onward the tiny hamlet conies ;
The village nest of pleasant homes.
The old man and the maiden stand
With staring gaze and idle hand ;
The maiden, smiling, nods her head
To the blithe fellow donned in red;
No matter what they have to do.
They all must see the mail go through.
Formby
* S reached, and is a compact little sea-side village that
'll has grown into general favour with the travelling
?*■ public, and visitors from the Australian continent
each year add to the numbers, who leave the hot winds and
burning sun across the Straits to recuperate on the shores
of fair Tasmania. A marked change has taken place in
Formby during the last two years that could hardly be
credited except one knew the village well. Large hand-
some buildings are seen on every side, such as hotels,
coffee palaces, stores, and private houses, with many neat
little cottages in the numerous streets which have been


formed of late. The side paths Arc kept in good order, as
also the roads running through the place, so "that little or
no difficulty is experienced in taking a walk round.
Amongst the many attractions are some well-kept flower
gardens, which are in the very heart of the village, chief
amongst which is that belonging to Mr. Lewis Grant, in
Stewart-street. This garden, although small, is an ex-
quisite sight, wherein are almost every kind of flowers, and
so planted that each and all can be easily seen. The
verandah of the house is literally covered with flowers, and
the taste displayed clearly shows that the lady of the
house, Mrs. Grant, has a refined and perfect taste for that
which is noble and beautiful.
Not far from this beauty spot is the popular and
noted Sea View Hotel, which is kept by Mr. J. F.
Goslin, and is, without doubt, the leading house
in the place —furnished throughout with every re-
quisite which contributes to the comfort of visitors.
Suites of rooms can be had by those who so desire it, with
every attention given as would be obtained in a private
house—in fact, home comforts can be enjoyed, which is a
great item in hotel life. The situation of the hotel is
unique, for from its windows and balcony perfect scenes of
beauty attract attention, as in whichever direction the
visitor looks loveliness abounds. Sitting on the balcony
is a real treat to those who can appreciate the romantic,
for with almost uniform combination can be seen the
grassy slopes of the valleys, dotted here and there with
comfortable cottages; the open sea with its refreshing
breeze that is so invigorating, and the distant hills clothed
with tall timber trees. Fishing, boating, and bathing can
be indulged in, the sea being close to the hotel, and lovers
of the rod can, I believe, find all the necessary tackle on
the premises. Since the opening of this hotel it has been
patronised by visitors from all parts of the world, and
many now make it their home during the summer months
who used at one time to visit Hobart only. The situation
is nice in the extreme—one which it woidd be difficult to
surpass. Year after year old faces are seen at this trystiug
place, seeking over and over again the comforts of this
hotel, and the delights of so charming a locality. His
Excellency Sir Kobert G. C. Hamilton, the Governor of
Tasmania, with Lady Hamilton and family, stay at the
Sea View Hotel whenever they visit Formby, as also do all
the distinguished visitors who visit the Coast. The landlord,
Mr. J. F. Goslin, has been highly complimented on the
excellence of bis house and its management. It must not
be forgotten that there is a splendid billiard table in the
house for the use of visitors, smoking rooms, reading
and commercial rooms. There is also good stabling for
those who require the same. Since Mr. J. F. Goslin has
taken over the house he has, with Mrs. Goslin, thoroughly
renovated it and made it equal to any house in the colony,
and, it can well be added, a most inviting place to stay at
whilst enjoying the summer holidays. The coach for the
Coast towards Emu Bay stays at this hotel, and the chief
buildings are close to it, also the post and telegraph office,
railway station, and wharves. Masonic and other banquets


ure held in this house, the proprietor being noted as a
first-class caterer. A large staff of servants are engaged,
so that every care and attention is bestowed upon those
who reside therein. On looking round Formby several
handsome buildings will attract the attention, chief of
which are the Don Trading Company’s new stores and
offices, which have been most elaborately finished, and arc
without exception the best building in the town,
and the open space in front gives prominence the
structure. Close to these buildings is the Formby Coffee
Palace. Here the most particular attention is paid to the
general comfort of the guests. The Palace is well furnished
from top to bottom, the rooms lofty and well ventilated ;
good balcony, overlooking the main road. The public
dining-room is well arranged, and equal to any out of
Launceston; its sitting-rooms are cosy, with a regular
supply of newspapers and books. Private suites for
families, with attendance, can be secured, which renders
the Coffee Palace one of the most complete sea-side resi-
dences in the North-West. Great additions have been
made recently, and every improvement conducive to com-
fort has been strictly attended to. It is situated within
two minutes walk of the railway and wharves and Victoria
Ferry. The coaches pass the door; in fact, the Formby
Coffee Palace is in a real good position. Miss Paxley, the
proprietress, has since taking over this house done her
best to make it a pleasant resort and a popular rendezvous
for all seeking the sea air and rest during their holidays.
Good stables with careful and efficient groom is an im-
portant feature, so that none need hesitate in staying at
the Formby Coffee Palace. Passing back to Stewart-street,
we find ourselves in the principal business centre, with the
well-furnished shop of Messrs. Innes and Tilley, drapers,
clothiers, and ironmongers, where the best and newest of
goods are kept in stock. Fishing tackle and bathing
clothes can be purchased from this store, besides many
other useful articles required by the visitor. One of the
first to settle in Formby and erect a substantial building
was Mr. H. A. Pratt, who had an idea that Formby would
before long be an important and popular watering place,
one which would be sought after by the visitors who
who crowded to our shores during the summer time. At
first he had great difficulties, but now he has overcome
them, and has a large trade in his hands. Mr. Pratt, who
is a butcher, is not dependent on Formby alone, but does
a considerable business with Queensland, which colony he
regularly supplies with bacon and hams, and is open to
trade with any of the other colonies. These hams, etc.,
are mostly shipped away in pickle, so as to enable the
merchants to receive them in good order, as also render
them cheaper in price. Ships coming into this port can
always rely upon being provisioned on the shortest notice,
as Mr. Pratt has always a good stock of goods on hand.
The curing house is well arranged with all the latest im-
provements and as cold as ice, even on the hottest day in
summer. The Imperial Store, kept by Mr. Charles
Hawkins, comes next, and should be visited. He has
everything that a good grocer should have on hand.


including general furnishing ironmongery, besides being
a seed and provision merchant. The Formby Bakery is in
Stewart-street, and, like in large towns, the proprietor is
able to turn out all kinds of fancy bread, confectionery,
and biscuits, and cater for banquets or tea meetings. In
connection with the bakery, Mr. John Hardstaff has a large
stock of drapery, groceries, crockery, etc., always on hand,
and is under the immediate attention of Mrs. Hardstaff.
Mr. Chapman, the bootmaker, has his workshop in close
proximity to the bakery, he is a noted tradesman, and his
customers are found both far and near. As in all parts of
the colony, there should be someone to whom the visitor
or stranger might apply for advice and information, so I
think it well to invite my readers to pay Mr. Duke, the
land and estate agent, a visit, as he is able to impart a
fund of information which would be useful, especially to
those seeking houses or farms. Many persons come into
the colony seeking information of the country, but after
spending most of their time and capital in the cities, leave
our shores without attaining their object, so that should
anyone reading this “ Guide ” be in search of information
whilst at Formby let such person call upon Mr. Duke,
whose office is next door to Messrs. Innes and Tilley’s
store, in Stewart-street. Another gentleman upon whom
the intending settler or others seeking land or farms
might call is Mr. A. S. Phillips, auctioneer, land, estate,
and general commission agent, whose office is close to the
railway station and wharves. I must not forget to call
attention to the Railway Store, opposite the Post-office,
where ladies who wish to purchase drapery or millinery
will doubtless find goods suitable to their tastes. The
proprietor, Mr. Sydney Griffiths, invites visitors to Formby
to inspect his well-assorted stock of goods, which have been
selected from the best houses. Yachts are also built to
order on these premises, and a visit to the workshops
would well repay the trouble taken. Formby has a
number of useful institutions, of which 1 shall not now
trouble the visitor, but leave for the other side of the
Mersey River by the Victoria Ferry, which is in the hands
of Messrs. G. P. and W. Innes.
Torquay
S on the east bank of the Mersey on the one side, and
‘3| facing the open sea on the other. It is a charming
spot, with many attractions. From the residence of
Captain Friend, which is on Mount Beulah, a capital view
of the two townships are seen, with the surrounding
country, for miles around plainly in view, forming a most-
interesting and captivating picture, such as would charm
the artist, and give him an admirable subject for his
canvas. The little church of St. Pauls stands in a pro-
minent position, and belongs to the followers of the
Anglican Church, the minister being the Rev. William
Hogg, of Latrobe, who has a large and scattered district
under his charge. Just below is the Catholic Church, and
like the English Church, has its headquarters in Latrobe,
with the Rev. Father Noone at its head. The very large


and handsome building to the left is the residence of the
Wesleyan clergyman, a palace, indeed the most handsome
private house in the whole district, furnished with such
splendour as would suit the home of a king. The Wesleyan
chapel, which is close to the house, is a miserably poor
building when contrasted with the house. The visitor
will also notice another fine and roomy building, with plate
glass frontage to the ground floor, and an extremely artistic
balcony above. This is occupied by Mr. Grubb, late of
Lefroy gold mines, and formerly of Barnstable, England,
lie has a most extensive assortment of goods in his store,
from a needle to an anchor, and is in a position to execute
a large order as easily as a small one, at a moment s
notice. On the other side of the street is the
Town Hall, a massive building, with a well seated hall
capable of holding 800 persons, with ante rooms at the
back of the stage, with such arrangement as would be most
acceptable to theatrical companies, who would find this
handsome building equal to any in the island for their
purposes. The interior is fitted up in first-class style,
every means being used to make it suitable for concerts,
public meetings, and theatrical performances ; its aeon;tic-
properties are next to perfect, so that to sit in the place
during an entertainment is a pleasure, so seldom experi-
enced in the so-called halls of the colony. Persons wish-
ing to engage the building for entertainments, &c„ &c.,
should apply to Mr. Bishston, secretary, Torquay. I
should also add, that the directors have purchased a grand
piano, which has no equal in the island. Looking towards
the Mersey Heads are other buildings of interest, such as
the Post and Telegraph Offices and the Mersey Hotel, a com-
pact and comfortable establishment with every comfort
for those seeking accommodation. The whole of the house
is well furnished throughout, and each room has been so
arranged that the most fastidous could not fail to be
pleased with the order and arrangements made. Cleanli-
ness is indeed the study of the landlord and his wife, who
are determined to make their house one of the most attrac-
tive along the Coast for visitors and travellers. The hotel
is within easy reach of the Victoria Ferry and Launceston
railway, with good fishing and bathing grounds close to
hand. Boating too, can be thoroughly indulged in, as the
landlord, Mr, T. Farrell, has boats of his own, which he
has had built for the use of his patrons. He has also
fishing tackle on hand, so that one ought thoroughly to
enjoy a visit to Torquay whilst enjoying their summer
holidays. The bedrooms are natty chambers, with ample
light and ventilation, and very pleasant; so are the sitting
and dining rooms. It is the intention of Mr. Farrell at
some future date to add other rooms to his house, so as to
accommodate a greater number of visitors, who year after
year visit this queen of watering places. The Mersey
Hotel is a great improvement on the old house, which like
all things of the past, had its time and use, but is now in
ruins. Of the Mersey Hotel I would express myself con-
fident that visitors who patronise the house will find it a
nice place, and should they revisit the district, would again
make the Mersey their home. The private entrance faces


on the street which loads to the beach, where, those who
have children with them during the holidays, may pass
away many an hour on one of the best beaches of the
Coast. A more healthy and safe beach could not be chosen
by the visitor for quiet enjoyment. During the visitor’s
stay it would be well, if in search of information, to give
Mr. George Tucker a call, who has for a number of years
been a resident in the district, and thoroughly conversant
with the whole locality, and his acquaintance with Tor-
quay, Ac., is of long duration, some thirty years and more,
so that the visitor has in Mr. Tucker one who is in a good
position to render every help. He is an obliging gentle-
man, and those who would like to call upon him would find
his store close to the Post Office. Speaking of the Post
Office reminds me of the Torquay Hotel on the other
corner, which has recently been built, and at the last meet-
ing of the Licensing Bench, Mr. Alfred 0. Williams was
granted a license, so that visitors will find since their last
trip, that additional quarters has been provided. The
proprietor has for some time been in business on the town-
ship as a storekeeper, so that he should be in a position to
know the requirements of the place, therefore, one may
surmise that having this knowledge, he has made up his
mind to provide the necessary accommodation, Mr.
Williams has done his best to make this new house all that
it should be, and whilst on a tour of inspection I noticed
that all care possible had been bestowed upon the equip-
ment of each room, so that when once in working order it
will be a serviceable addition to the township. On the
front of the hotel is a balcony which extends the whole
length, and has an extensive range of country in view. Of
the Mersey and its many attractions a volume could be
written, so shall close my remarks so as to add those of one
whose account will be read with pleasure.
The Mersey River.
x OMING in from Bass’ Straits on board the steamer
<4¥. “ Devon,” with perhaps a north-west gale blowing, the
traveller is struck by the sudden contrast, for in less
than ten minutes of moderate steering he finds himself
transported from a tempest-tossed sea to a placid lake, and
looking astern it appears to be completely land-locked.
On the eastern bank of the river lies the snug little
village of Torquay, and on the western side is situated
Formby, both places growing into note, and rivalling each
other as seaside resorts.
Torquay may be said to possess most of the natural
advantages, as it has a fine and noble beach, which is
doubtless an acquisition of no small moment to a marine
pleasure resort, where picnic and pleasure parties are con-
cerned. It also lies near a good agricultural district,
whilst Formby, being the terminus of the Launceston and
Western Railway, is more conveniently sitmrted as a busi-
ness town, and as such is rapidly growing in importance.
Torquay and Formby are connected by a ferry, consisting
of a punt for horses and vehicles, Ac., with comfortable and
roomy boats for passeng'ers. The punt is worked in aiiovcl


hut safe manner. The. punt is moored by blocks to a wire
stretched across the river, and so soon as all is ready word
is given to that effect, when the ferryman in charge slacks
off'one end of the punt till it makes an angle of 45 degrees
with the wire, when the rapid current, which otherwise
might prove an impediment to navigation, is made to work
the punt across, for by swerving against the side it forces
it along the wire to the other side of the river, where the
punt is again hauled up to the wire and its freight landed.
This ferry is open for traffic from six a.m. till midnight.
After passing Formby and Torquay the river widens out
into broad reaches, which abound in fish, the most common
kind being mullet, bream, salmon, trout, flat head, rock-cod,
flounder, Ac. As there is a great rise and fall
of tide in this river (about 12ft.), it tends to keep the water
pure and wholesome, being mostly clear and glassy-like, a
striking contrast to the Tamar and other colonial rivers.
Boating is indulged in by the residents to a large extent,
and children of all ages may be seen rowing and sailing in
boats of all descriptions. Accidents are very rare. This
may be accounted for by the absence of sudden squalls or
gusts of wind which make the navigation of some rivers so
dangerous. No matter how strong the gale in the Straits,
the placid waters of the Mersey are seldom disturbed,
owing to the river being partly shut in by hilly country.
Bowing is a favourite pastime among the residents, and
visitors come from all parts of the colonies to witness the
Mersey Eegatta, which is usually held on the first day of
the year, when boats fiom the different seaports in the
colony are entered for competition. As Tasmania is con-
sidered the sanatorium of the Australasias, visitors who are
bent upon a rest and change of scene make Tasmania their
rendezvous. The North-West Coast, which is the sani-
torium of Tasmania, should receive a fair amount of atten-
tion, and at no distant date it is thought that Torquay and
Formby will rival Launceston or Hobart for population.
Visitors may obtain the use of a steam launch for fishing
or picnic purposes, with a man to manage her, from Messrs.
I nnes and Innes.of the Victoria Ferry, for about liOs. per day,
also all description of rowing and sailing boats, with fish-
ing tackle, may be obtained at the ferry houses at Formby
or Torquay, the usual charge being 2s. an hour per boat,
with man in charge. Beautifully clear shingly beaches
slope down to the water’s edge on either side. Landing is
everywhere easy, as there is no swell or roaring surf to wet
the feet. At either Torquay or Formby one can have all
the enjoyments of a country seaside residence without any
of the inconveniences which often attach themselves to
residence in the country, for as steamers call regularly
every week from Melbourne and Sydney the hotels and
boarding houses are kept plentifully supplied with the
necessaries and luxuries of city life, whilst the visitors can
enjoy the cool sea air, sea bathing, and aquatic sports, and
also the pleasures of a ramble in the country lanes, where
blackberries and wild flowers abound.
As there is plenty of competition in hotel and boarding-
house keeping, the charges are very moderate and compare
favourably with those of country towns in other colonies.


Warehouses and stores are being erected where a few
years ago all Avas a Avilderness, and as the river is navig-
able for vessels of large tonnage the shipping interest is
considerable, and during the winter months the wharves
present a very busy scene, and immense quantities of
potatoes and grain are shipped to all parts of the colonies.
The scenery cannot be surpassed in the Southern Hemis-
phere, and no one visiting Tasmania should fail to pay a
visit to the Mersey, a favorite watering place of the
“ tight little island.’' Here hot winds are unknown, as the
north wind is the sea breeze and the south wind blows
from the snow-clad mountains, where this noble river
takes its rise, rendering them cool and refreshing in the
summer season
The traveller has now parted company with the coach,
and in continuing the trip to Launceston has now to take
the train. The first and most interesting spot on this line,
Avhere the “ iron horse” draws up, is
Latrobe.
is the third town in the colony, with a
Aw large and productive agricultural country around it,
. which has very naturally caused Latrobe to become
an important centre of trade, commerce, and population.
Latrobe has recently been declared a municipality, so that
in the near future we may expect to see a considerable
change for the better in the place. The railway-station is
centrally situated, and within a few chains of the chief
buildings and hotels. Latrobe has in it a number of fine
buildings, which would stand creditably side by side with
those of Hobart or Launceston, and if (as has been the
case during- the last year) other shops and storehouses are
erected on the vacant allotments facing the main street,
Avhich is known as Gilbert-street, the town will present a
city-like appearance. The introduction of gas is a, feature
of considerable interest—one which must add to the com-
fort of the people, and have a tendency to urge on other
improvements which will enhance the value of the town
and bring it more prominently before the world. Latrobe
has a great deal to do, and it behoves all concerned in the
advancement of the toAvn to fight manfully for their
rights, and stand shoulder to shoulder in all matters that
may have a tendency to improve and make more valuable
the town they live in. Let us pass on, and from the
station go to the far end of the street —that is, towards the
recreation ground and Devon Hospital —and from the hill
at the rear of the Catholic Church take a bird’s-eye view
of the town. From this hill the visitor has a grand pano-
ramic view before him, such as is seldom met with in the
colony. Hills to right, hills to left—in fact, hills on all
sides attract the attention, whilst below are seen the open
flat lands with well-kept farms and comfortable homesteads
sheltered from the Avinds by handsome English trees,
which are a welcome contrast to many of the native trees,
rich grass paddocks, with sheep, cattle, and horses dotted
over them; the noble Mersey River flowing gracefully
through the land, which is a striking addition to the


landscape. This river is noted for its fish, and is much
sought after by the townspeople, who are able to enjoy
many a day’s sport, either in fishing, boating, or bathing.
Visitors to Latrobe would find many a sweet spot to while
away the time if bent upon an easy time of it, for following
the river along towards Railton the scenery is truly ro-
mantic, with interesting subjects of study on every side.
Looking directly below is the town itself, which is gradu-
ally extending in size, so that ere long we may expect to
see what, in Maoriland, is called a “ City of the Plains.”
Showing the interest taken in the town it may be well for
the visitor to know that an Improvement Committee has
been formed, whose duty it is to do their best in making, or
causing to be made, all such improvements as will beautify
the town and add to the comfort of the people and its
prosperity. Passing now round the town we first have our
attention called to the Recreation Ground and Devon
Cottage Hospital, which is on the right hand side of the
street going towards the station. Close by is St. Patrick’s
Church and School belonging to the Catholics, both build-
ings being neatly finished and well worth a visit. The
church is very beautifully arranged, showing good taste on
the part of those concerned in its management. By the
side of the church is the presbytery, where the Rev. Father
Noone, parish rector of Latrobe, resides. This house is,
without doubt, one of the most complete in the country,
and has been built with the best of material, and is a most
substantial ornament to the street. The interior far
exceeds the exterior, with perfect arrangements for venti-
lation. The several rooms are well furnished and cosey,
especially the library, where a grand collection of valuable
books are to be seen. The rev. rector is a genial gentle-
man. and most popular with the people, irrespective of
creed or calling. He has been in Latrobe 25 years; and it
is, I am sure, the earnest desire on the part of the people
that he may always be with them. The district under
his care is an extensive one, embracing the Penguin,
Forth, Torquay, Formby, and Latrobe. Father Noone
has indeed seen Latrobe rise from a mere wilderness to the
fine town it is now, and well remembers the time when
churches were little thought of, and service was con-
ducted in old barns and outhouses ; in fact, wherever it
was possible. As an old resident, he must often soliloquise
on the past, remembering the old days when travelling
facilities were not as they are now.
The next large building is Bramich’s Royal Hotel, an
establishment which has a well-deserved popularity. It is
pleasantly situated and convenient, for close to it arc the
sale yards, where Messrs. Bell, of Launceston, and A. S.
Phillips, of Formby, hold their sales, the Recreation
Ground, Cottage Hospital, Catholic Church, State School,
and Public Reading Room. It is also within easy access
of the railway, banks, and principle stores and public
institutions. Every means has been taken to make the
“ Royal ” attractive and inviting with all the comforts
that are generally found in first-class hotels. The lower
portion has been so divided that the residential part is
entirely private. There arc two halls and staircases com-


municating with the rooms above, where the bedrooms are
located. These rooms are pictures of cleanliness and well
ventilated, with plenty of daylight let into them. Along
the centre of the upper storey is a passage with windows at
each end, the bedrooms being on either side. With the
bedroom doors and wdndows opened, as also those in the
passage, a current of air can be thrown throughout the
whole floor, thus keeping all the rooms sweet and whole-
some. Below are dining, sitting, and smoking--rooms,
where visitors can entertain their friends with every degree
of freedom, at the same time enjoying the benefits of
private quarters. Visitors to Latrobe would find the Royal
very comfortable, as all is done by Miss Bramich, who is
the proprietress, assisted by her brother, to make the hotel
pleasant and attractive, with good quarters and an excel-
lent table, besides having in her service careful and obliging
servants, which renders a sojourn at the Royal very accept-
able. At the rear of the hotel are the stables, which are
exceedingly compact and clean, with every attention paid
to the comfort of horses left there, as careful and experi-
enced grooms are engaged. Each stall is admirably
arranged, with plenty of room. There are six loose boxes.
The floors of the stables are so perfectly planned that they
are always dry and free from smell. In a word it can b 1
well written that the stables at the Royal are comme ilfaut.
Beyond the stable yard is a nice garden, which is yet in
its infancy, but has been well laid out, so that in a few
years there will be a good supply of fruit from it. There
is, I learn, some movement on foot, which, if successful,
will be a boon to the public, viz., the formation of a new
racecourse on the Deloraine-road.
Opposite the Royal Hotel are the Latrobe Livery Stables,
under the management of Mr. R. A. Dargaville, where
horses and conveyances may be hired by those who wish to
ride or drive to many of the charming- spots within a few
miles of the town. A few doors from the Royal is the
Vulcan Foundry and Carriage Works of Mr. G. A. Wake-
ham. These works were founded in 1871, simply as a
blacksmith’s, but 18 years having past away, it has been
shown what perseverance and industry can accomplish. At
the start Mr. Wakeham was both master and man, but
now has about 20 men working for him. The area of land
on which his works now stand is nearly an acre, and the
wages paid amount to about =£2,000 annually. The work
executed at these works is of the best character, so much
so that he has customers all over the country. Coaches,
buggies, pagnals, chaises, wagons, drays, and other vehicles
are manufactured to order, as also are all kinds of farming
implements. Visitors travelling along the coast will notice
that the vehicles, where built at the Vulcan Works, reflect
great credit on the maker. The smiths’ shop, which fronts
on Gilbert-street, is a large and roomy building, with four
furnaces, which are in constant use —two for coach work
and two for implement making, shoeing, jobbing, Ac. The
most modern appliances are used in the shop, the bellows
being fitted with water tube, there being also a hand and
steam drill of the most improved kind, and sundry other
mechanical contrivances suitable for the smith’s shop.


None but the best mechanics are engaged. • In this shop
is stored a large quantity of material, such as steel, iron,
and requisites for the various articles manufactured by the
Yulcans. The wood shop comes next, where a number of
vehicles are in course of construction, whilst there are
others ready for the painters. On looking round, a fair
knowledge can be obtained of the work turned out, and the
interior of this portion of the works are equal to any in the
colony. The visitor will notice in this shop a splendid
stock of timber, which has been imported direct from New
Zealand and America, consisting of spokes, rims, hubs, and
hickory planking, a large quantity of Kauri pine, shafts,
bars, and other timber used in the factory. The paint and
trimming shops contains every appliance for the economic
and speedy conduct of the work. A large stock of paints,
etc., are kept on hand in this department, besides carpets,
American leather cloths, floor cloths, leather, patent leather,
and plushes of various colors. The show room, in which
finished work is exhibited, occupies the left hand side of
the large room where the painting and turning is executed.
Here vehicles are seen in every stage of completion, from
the first paint to the finished article. When visiting it
lately, this room was crowded with vehicles, very elegant
in style, and designed also with the view of affording the
greatest possible ease to their occupants. Mr. Cr. A.
Wakeham has received first prize at every show at which
he has exhibited, and the shop record is between 50 and GO
first prizes and two second awards. This establishment is
the largest and most important one out of Launceston,
with a good repute for its owner, whose goods are to be
seen in all parts of the island and in the most out-of-the-
way farming districts. Such local industries are well
worth visiting, as they go far to show that even sleepy Tas-
mania has some spirited aud enterprising men in it.
From the foundry we next find our way to the Public
Reading Room, which is close to the railway crossing. As
yet this institute is but in its infancy, so that it is pardon-
able to those under whose care the place is if the visitor
finds the table strewn with old papers dating some 18 or 20
years back. Still, it is somewhat refreshing to read old
news ;it is like meeting with old friends. From here we
step into the Coffee Palace, which is on the corner of the
next block, with a red lamp hanging over the ground floor
window. This coffee palace is under the care of Mrs,
Whitaker, who has furnished the house throughout to suit
all parties. Visitors coming from the railway station
should have no difficulty in finding the place, as it is
situated directly opposite the railway gates, with the main
entrance down the little street. At the corner, it should
be noted, are the offices of Mr. Sykes, solicitor, so that
the visitors should remember this is the Coffee Palace, with
the entrance further down, as before mentioned. As a
resort for visitors this Coffee Palace is all that can be
desired, so that all in search of a clean and comfortable
home would find it here. It is close to all the public
institutions, banks, etc. Visitors may have private suites
if so desired, or attend the table d’hote. Visitors arriving
by the evening train from Launceston will find tea on the


table, which is a welcome and refreshing meal after a long
journey. On the same premises are the printing and pub-
lishing offices of the Devon Herald, a bi-weekly journal of
agriculture, politics, and commerce. It is published every
Tuesday and Friday evenings, and has a wide circulation.
Till recently it was the only newspaper published outside
of Launceston ; now there are two others. The publisher
and proprietor of the Devon Herald is Mr. William
Whitaker, a well-known and respected townsman of
Latrobe. Two or three doors below the Coffee Palace is the
shop of Mr. White, who has a well-arranged assortment of
books, stationery, fancy goods, etc. Mr. White is also
agent for numerous journals, newspapers, etc. The Club
Hotel is next of note, kept by Host Gillespie. He has good
accommodation for visitors and commercial travellers, with
an excellent billiard table. This house is also close to the
railway station, besides being handy to the wharf. As has
already been noted, the hotel accommodation in the North
is all that can be desired, and experienced travellers to
Latrobe and our Coast towns who from time to time come
along this beautiful part of Tasmania, cannot fail to see
the great and acceptable change that has taken place
within the last few years. Indeed, hotel proprietors seem
to vie one with the other to make their respective houses
the best, so that to make more of one than the other in this
guide is hardly fair, and for one to be able so to write is
more pleasant. The Club Hotel, then, is no exception to
the rule, the landlord, D. Gillespie, having done his best to
meet the requirements of the public. As in other towns,
Latrobe has its boot factory. The proprietor, Mr. Innes,
has been established on Latrobe about 12 years, xxieeting
with a fair share of suppoi't. Visitors who require leggings,
or boots and overalls for shooting, should not fail to be well
suited at his establishment. Below the factory is the No.
1 Coffee Palace, and situated exactly opposite the offices of
the North-Western Chronicle, so that a visitor cannot fail to
see it. Messrs. E-. Bohmann and R. Kreissig are the pro-
prietors, and during the time they have been in business
they have done their utmost to make the No. 1 Coffee
Palace comfortable and attractive. Boarders in this house
have all the atti’actions of a comfortable home found them,
such as piano, draughts, chess, and a grand billiard table,
which table has been pronounced, by those who are com-
petent to judge, as the best on the North-West Coast.
There is also a comfortable private srtting-room in the
Coffee Palace for ladies. The charges are very moderate,
being is. per day, special arrangements are made for
permanent boarders, or those stopping by the week. Next
to the Palace is the tobacconist’s shop, kept by the same
firm, who import most of their goods direct from Germany,
and have always on hand the best brands. Colonial, Ameri-
can, English, and German papers are kept at the No. 1 Coffee
Palace. Messrs. Bohmann and Kriessig have recently
further shown their enterprise by purchasing the hairdres-
sing business of Mr. E. Creswell, of Gil here-street, which
they have transferred to their extensive premises, the
saloon being at the rear of the tobacconist shop, and is
comfortably fitted up, with a first-class barber in attend-


ance. From the Coffee Palace the visitor next finds his
way to the Wharf, on the east bank of the beautiful Mersey
Elver. At some seasons of the year this part of the town
presents a busy appearance, as much of the produce grown
in the district, and bought by the merchants, is shipped
away to the other colonies. There are two bridges spanning
the river at this spot-one for ordinary traffic, the other for
railway purposes. If the visitor wishes to obtain an
interesting and charming bird’s eye view of the river, street,
town, and surrounding country, let such visitor go to the
hotel close by, which almost faces the bridges, and stand
on the balcony of the said hotel. The view cannot but
both charm and please the beholder. Clear’s Hotel stands
in a most prominent position, and is a noted farmers’ house,
and, like the other hotels on the town, is very clean and
comfortoble. In fact, it is all that can possibly be desired,
with moderate charges, good attendance, and civility.
From here we now pass on to the other side of the street,
till we reach the North-Western Chronicle Newspaper Com-
pany’s Office. This newspaper has recently been started,
and is edited by Mr. Thomas Cook Just, who is also
Managing Director of the company. The Chronicle is a tri-
weekly journal, and issued every Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday.
Next door to this office the visitor will notice the busi-
ness premises of E. and W. L. Bartlett, wholesale and
family grocers and provision merchants, etc., which,
although surpassed in size by a few structures of the kind,
is inferior to none in Latrobe in artistic beauty and in
adaptability to the uses for which it was designed. The
frontage has an imposing appearance, with massive plate-
glass windows on either side of the main entrance. Its
architecture is pleasing and tasteful, and its lo nation gives
it a great advantage over other buildings that must be
viewed from the opposite side of the street. This fine shop
is convenient of access to dwellers in the town and shoppers
from the country. The interior is well arranged, with
counters on both sides, from which customers can be
readily supplied with all they desire, whether it is drapery,
groceries, or other articles with which the shop is stored.
The counting-house is at the rear of the shop, and is in
keeping with all the other parts of this establishment.
The Latrobe Hotel is higher up the street, and is now in
the hands of Mr. W, E. Lucas, who has done his best to
cater for the public, and whose house is well known by
visitors to the Coast and commercial travellers. Mr.
Lucas is thoroughly conversant with the Southern portion
of the island, especially the Huon district, so that should
any of my readers wish to obtain information of the South
all they have to do is to call upon host Lucas, who would
be happy to render every assistance and impart a fund of
useful information. Hurrying from this spot, we will still
follow up the street, past a number of fine shops, the
banks, and other places of note, which at present must be
passed over, as time is of great consequence, the printer
calling impatiently for copy. Turning to the right after
crossing the railway line, that is, beyond the station, we
notice the Wesleyan Chapel, a fine and imposing structure.


solid in character, and an ornament to the street in which
it is built. From here, we notice at the next corner is the
English Church. It is a wooden building, and has for a
number of years served its purpose, and, if 1 remember
rightly, will soon be replaced by a more substantial and
roomy building, towards which the Building Committee
have considerable funds in hand, and should any reader
wish to aid in this work, and so help to beautify the town,
let him or her correspond with the Rev. William Hogg, the
incumbent, who would be glad to avail himself of any out-
side assistance. The Rev. Mr. Hogg used formerly to be
at Holy Trinity Church, Launceston, and was some few
years ago removed to Latrobe, where he has been ever
since, getting around him a large circle of friends and
well-wishers, who find in him a gentleman and scholar.
There is one more place that it would be well for the
traveller to visit, that is, the State School, which is almost
opposite the Royal Hotel. Mr. Low is the head-master,
and has under his charge a number of children, who
attend school neatly dressed and very tidy In appearance.
Mr. Low has in his time done his share in educating the
ri ing generation, and must look back with pleasure to the
pa«-t, now that he sees on all sides old scholars who are
Taking a foremost part in trade and commerce in the town
and along the Coast. It may be interesting to the visitor
who visits Latrobe to know it was in this town, which is
the most important centre of population on the North-west
Coast, where the English cricketers were invited to play a
match with a combined team of players representing the
North-west Coast. This was a plucky challenge, seeing
that on no other occasion had it been done, and so far as
the English team had gone had already taken all before
them. When it became known that the Englishmen had
accepted the invitation of the North-west Coast people
there was great excitement amongst the folk along the
Coast, as in this case it was a risk of no small importance,
such as no other settlers in the colony would dream of
incurring. “ Nothing venture nothing have,” says the
Devon Herald, “ applies in this case, as in many others, and
we think the people of the North-west deserve to succeed
when they are so willing to run risks such as no other
part of the colony would think of doing.” Ix-respective of
the expense of bringing our English friends to the Coast,
the people treated them right royally, extending to them
such hospitality as they little thought of receiving.
Visitors to our colonies are always treated thuswise, and
find a hearty welcome everywhere they go.
Visiting Places Near Latrobe
RAILTON,
•fT HIGH is eight miles from Latrobe, over a fair road
most of the distance. It is a real bush drive, so
that the visitor must not expect to meet with any
kind of houses en route after passing Sherwood, which is
about two miles from the Latrobe Hotel. Looking to the
left, and almost opposite the old saw-mill, the visitor will


notice the farm of Mr. Thomas Hainsworth, who is an old
and respected resident of the north, and a close observer
in all matters respecting the geological features of the
island. His opinion is of times sought by geologists,
miners, prospectors, and others, when intricate questions
arise concerning new discoveries of minerals or metals.
Away past Mr. Hainsworth’s the drive is exceedingly
invigorating and pleasant, and the lay of the country
passed over being somewhat even the trip is rendered all
the more acceptable. About a mile from East’s Hotel,
Railton, on the left, the visitor will, no doubt, notice the
lime-kiln, which is being worked, producing a good article,
and as it becomes better known will be in greater demand,
more especially as a fertilizer. Those who have used it
for the land have spoken very highly of it, so that it is to
be trusted that in time these works will become very
extensive. Just above the kiln will be observed on the
hill side a track, which winds its way upward till the top is
reached ; here stands the comfortable cottage home of Mr.
and Mrs. Blinkhorn. The visitor should by all means
climb this hill, and if in company of others it is all the more
pleasant. The extensive range of sight and the charming
beauty of the picture which spreads out before the on-
looker is more than possible to explain—it is unique.
Whilst looking down upon the scene there is no doubt that
the visitor will express surprise that Mr Blinkhorn should
select such a spot upon which to build his home, more
particularly so when we consider the fact that he has a
wife to share the seeming isolated home on what can well
be termed the mountain top. But should such visitor be
favored with a peep into the home just mentioned all
surprise would vanish, for there on the walls, around the
fireplace, on the tables—in fact, in every nook and corner—
will be seen works and signs of the picturesque, lovely, and
romantic, thus showing that the home is in keeping with
the locality, and the spot quite in accord with the tastes of
those who dwell there. Mrs. Blinkhorn is an artist of no
mean order, and if judging her work side by side with
noted and renowned artists, it has to be confessed that we
have in the colony one who is perfect in the art of painting
and drawing, with a most accurate knowledge of color in
flowers, ferns, and foliage. Leaving this paradise, we
retrace our footsteps, and continue the journey until the
hotel is reached, which is convenient to the railway. At
East’s Hotel the visitor may rely upon proper attention
both to self and horse, so that in staying the visitor finds
himself in good hands. The return journey should be
made before dark, and if so arranged will prove most
enjoyable.
NEW GROUND,
A noted farming district, about four miles distant from the
town, with a grand road all the way. Much of interest is
to be seen that will compensate the party for time and
trouble, besides being able to ply the rod in the many
water courses which flow through the land. Whilst on this
road the visitor would very likely find time to go still
further on ; if so, the road should be followed till


GREEN'S CREEK
Is reached, where there is a little village, with church,
school, police office, hotel, &c. The Creek is noted for its
hsh, although till recently has not been sought after. A
good day’s sport is in store for those who find angling a
pleasure, and the landlord of the hotel would doubtless
render some assistance to the visitor, in seeking the
favourite spots where the fish abound.
NORTHDOWN
Is another pleasant locality, with much to captivate and
charm the traveller along the road. It is well that the
whole of these places should be visited, as they are agricul-
tural centres, wherein many well kept farms are met,
and which gives one an idea of the work done, and how our
bush farms are worked in Tasmania.
SASSAFRAS.
To reach this place the visitor has about five miles of a
journey along the Deloraine road, past seveial well kept
and compact farms, with fine homesteads and neat out
offices. Every visitor to the North should take a look
round the Sassafras, if bent upon acquiring an insight
into the process of actual bush farming, where the timber
has acquired such proportions that on first sight, the new
chum feels that to remove such stahvart monsters would
require more labour than would be required to shift
Dublin Castle or Buckingham Palace. Besides the crops
looking well, the pasturage is also good and abundant,
and the farms generally have a comfortable well-to-do
look about them. This drive is a pleasant one.
Bailton,
A. TOWNSHIP seven miles from Latrobe, by the railway,
which is rapidly increasing in size and popularity.
Till within the last few months there has been no
hotel accommodation, so that visitors going to the place
had to travel another eight miles before an hotel could be
found. Close to the station is “ East’s Hotel,” a roomy
and commodious building. Like all good hotels, this one
has been furnished to meet the requirements of the times,
and the landlord, Mr. Janies East, has done his best to
make it an attractive and homely one. Mr. East is an old
and favorite servant of the public, having been in the
public lire fora number of years at Latrobe and Deloraine,
and before the “ iron horse ” took the road handled the
ribbons on her Majesty’s Royal Mail between Launceston
and the north, and was also the first to drive a coach and
four to the Chudleigh Caves, when his Excellency Gover-
nor Du Cane and Anthony Trollope visited them, in com-
pany with several of the Government members of the day.
Visitors and colonists will find a welcome at this hotel,
which is a boon to the travelling public. A few yards
further on is the “ Little Wonder” Store, a recent addition
to the township, and, it may be added, a welcome one.


Each addition to this little village is hailed with delight,
as for years past the place has been at a standstill, with
little or no prospect of its being anything worthy of
note. The railway passing through has given it an
impetus of the right sort, so that in a few years time
Railton may be of some importance. The “ Little Won-
der” Store is the property of Mr. W. D. Tune, who for a
number of years had extensive stores in Queensland and
New South Wales. His store here is replete with every-
thing that is required for the district, a large and varied
stock being always kept on hand, embracing almost every
article of trade found in a family grocers, tea merchants,
or ironmonger’s i tore ; also drapery, china, glass, earthen-
ware, and garden pottery. Besides being a storekeeper,
Mr. Tune has introduced an industry which is likely to
prove remunerative to him and give to Railton a name as a
seat of industry. He has commenced the manufacture of
vinegar, which has already been pronounced by those who
have given it a trial to be of A 1 quality. Two kinds are
now ready, plain and spiced. The latter kind must prove
very useful to store and hotel keepers, as they have only to
place the vegetables in it, without the addition of anything
else, as the required ingredients have already been added to
it. There is no doubt as this vinegar becomes more known
it will be in great demand, because of its quality and use-
fulnesss. Both brands will stand the test of the most per-
fect connoisseur, and will no doubt find their way into every
household in the colony. In fact it might almost be writ-
ten, once used always used.
Before passing onward it will be well to draw attention
to the fact that beyond Railton some eight miles is the
Kentishbury Plains, a most interesting country, with many
fine farms, of which more will be written in the next chap-
ter. From this district there flows through Railton to
the station en route to market large quantities of wheat,
oats, potatoes, and also timber of every kind, thus helping
to make the village of Railton what it is. Besides the
Kentish there is also the New Bed, Sunnyside, Shadyside,
and Beulah districts, which help to bring trade to the vil-
lage. Hence the stranger is from these remarks able to
understand that although the road passed through does not
speak wonders and the land for a few miles is very indiffer-
ent, there is a fine country around, which somewhat sur-
prises the stranger. Although the visitor does not see
many homes near the station to constitute a township, yet
on going further up the road the old township is met with.
Here is the post office, with money order department and
savings bank. The post office is under the control of Mr.
J. J. Winter, who has also the most commodious private
residence on the township. Next to his house and the post
office is Mr. Winter’s new store, which has a commanding
frontage, with a good verandah on two sides. The store,
like the private house, is a prominent feature in the town-
ship. The store is well stocked with goods suitable to the
lequirements of the district, and as Mr. Winter is an old
and respected resident he has no reason to complain, beino-
well patronised by the settlers. The interior of his shop is
very spacious, and is stocked with all kinds of merchandise.


so that customers have a choice variety of goods to select
from—groceries, drapery, ironmongery, cutlery, boots, sta-
tionery, Ac., Ac. On the other side of the road stands the
Wesleyan Chapel, which is a nice building, but the grounds
around are so thoroughly neglected that they are an eye-
sore instead of an ornament. A post and rail fence would
greatly improve it. At the rear of the post office—that is,
a little to the left—on the brow of a hill, stands all that is
left of the old mill by the stream, and it brings back to
memory the old song—
And is this the old mill-stream that ten years ago
Was so fast in its current, so pure in its flow,
Whose musical waters would ripple and shine
With the glory and dash of a minature Rhine ?
Yes ! here was the miller’s house, peaceful abode!
Where the flower-twined porch drew all eyes from
the road;
Where roses with jasmine embowered a door
That never was closed to the wayworn or poor.
The mill is in ruins. No welcoming sound
In the mastiff’s gruff bark and the wheels dashing
round;
The house, too, untenanted- -left to decay—
And the miller long dead. All I loved passed away.
Although the flour mill is a thing of the past there yet
stands near it the saw mill, where several hands are
employed, and is just now occupied by Mr. Evans. Speak-
ing of saw mills, it may be worth while here to draw atten-
tion to the fact that there are two other mills within gun-
shot of the village; one is known as the China Mill,
worked by Mr. Evans, and the other the Dilverton Mill,
under the control of Mr. Blinkhorn. Both these mills are
worth visiting.
The State School and residence is on the right side of the
road, and its position is an excellent one, being on rising
ground overlooking the road to station and the township.
A visit to the school would not be time thrown away, as
the tourist could then form an idea of the schools which
Tasmania has for the children brought up in the bush.
The children of the Railton School are well cared for by
their teacher, who has a first-class attendance, whose
appearance speaks well for their parents, who send them to
school clean, tidy, and neatly dressed. All kinds of sports
are indulged in by the youngsters, who appear to be
thoroughly contented with their school life. There is an
old saying, kindness begets kindness, which is in this
instance amply shown by the scholars to their teacher.
Everything is supposed to be done by our Tasmanian
teacher to make school life pleasant and attractive so as to
make the schools popular, and this is done by the lady who
has charge of the Railton school hence the large attend-
ance.


The immediate surroundings of Railton do not at all
impress the visitor as being of any agricultural importance,
the land looking very poor, and which in very truth it is ;
but on penetrating inwards some little distance from off
the road the change in the quality of the soil is soon
apparent, and must be admitted as equal to any in the
colony.
There are many people who declare that we have no
room in Tasmania for a greater population than that of
the present time, and that there is no land to be obtained
worth having. This is said by persons who appear to be
blind in the one eye and lop-sided in the other, with no
knowledge of the country they live in. For my part I
would here state that we have yet to take up the richest
portion of the island.
Of land for occupation there is ample, so in this portion
of fair Tasmania the intending settler should be informed
that there is for sale a number of farm allotments, varying
in area from 04 up to 159 acres, which land is well watered
and of excellent quality, within easy reach of the progres-
sive town of Sheffield and the railway station at Railton.
There is one portion so well known that it is scarcely
necessary for me to w rite in praise of it; I mean the
Dooley’s Plains section, which must in the near future
become an important farming centre, where handsome
returns would no doubt be given to those who would farm
as a farmer should do. Writing of farming reminds me of
a fact which I venture to assert could not be contradicted,
viz., that there is a class of farmers in this as in the other
colonies who are everlastingly grumbli ig of bad times and
disrating the country in which they live. There is in our
colonies h set of lazy devils who are a curse to their neigh-
bours, a danger to the district, and a burden to themselves.
They mostly get hold of other peoples’ land at a low rate
of rent, with comfortable cottage and decent outbuildings,
where for a time they vegetate, doing but little to improve
the property that is icnted by them, A job is obtained on
the road or other work that may be doing, which will bring
them in a little, whilst the farm which shoidd occupy all
their attention is left to look after itself. A few “ spuds ”
might be put in and a pig might be kept, but beyond this
the so-called farmer is unable to go, thus destroying the
value of the farm and depriving the landlord of his rent
and the chance of a good tenant. There are hundreds in
the Old Country who would be glad to get hold of the
farms that are to let in this colony, and who would indeed
prove useful colonists, and help to give the country that
impetus which the farming community is so well abletodo.
The trustees of the Foster’s Estate would do well to
advertise their property in the Old World, for it is well
suited to practical men, who could not fail to get a hand-
some living, besides being able to put by a little for a
rainy day. The farm lands of this estate, which face on
the Dasher river, are of first-class quality, and within easy
reach of railway and a good market, besides being well
watered. Each farm is accessible by reserved roads, so
that persons taking up this land are well favored, and
unlikely to undergo the hardships that many have to face


who are miles back in the bush and from the main or even
district roads.
Purchasers are at liberty to pay cash for their selections
or a deposit of ten percent., and take credit for the balance
up to live years, the interest charged being at the rate of
six per cent.
Should any of my readers wish to get other particulars
respecting this line piece of property, they can do so by
writing to the trustees at Hobart, or to Mr. Henry Murray,
at Latrobe, Tasmania.
From the school grounds the visitor will notice hills on
both sides. That on the opposite side is called
Sunnysitle.
1 HERE are a number of nice farms here that might be
visited. The Sunnyside-road is plainly seen from the
school. There is at its corner a mighty gumtree standing,
which one cannot fail to see. About a mile along the road
is Mr. Riley’s little farm ; then further on comes the home
of Mr. John Silvester Nottage, a gentleman whose name is
a household word in Tasmania. Mr. Nottage is an author
of long-standing and has given to the Australian world
such tales as “ A Haunted House and its Inmates,” “ Mr.
Thorneycroft’s Will,” “Little Mrs. Lightfoot,” Ac., Ac.
The next farm is Mr. T. Week’s, which is a well cultivated,
with every trace of industry and perseverance on the part
of its owner. Mr. Matthew Maloney’s place is adjoining
the latter farm, and has on it much that would interest
the visitor, because the land when first taken lip by the
owner was covered with massive timber, that stood
so high that it almost prevented the daylight from pene-
trating below, and quite shut out the warmth of the sun
from the ground. Here then can be seen the work of man’s
hands, and Mr. Maloney has now a farm of which he can
well be proud. “ Rome was not built in a day,” nor was
this farm cleared of its timber in a day, and the visitor on
looking round can see that during the fifteen years which
Mr. Maloney has occupied it he has not been idle. The
farm is now worth a great deal of money, considerably over
.£lOOO. It must not be overlooked that Mr. Maloney has
been ably assisted by his sons in the work of clearing, Ac.
These young men are of the right stamp, and right good
workers into the bargain, and it must be very gratifying to
the father to see his sons following in his footsteps, they
being most energetic and industrious young men. Mr. W.
Jones has a farm further along the road on the same side
as the last mentioned, and like all the holdings on this
side shows that men of the proper stamp have made their
homes on this fine piece of table-land. The homestead is
comfortable and compact, with sundry out offices within
easy access of the house. A splendid view of the country
is obtained from his place, and the sea is plainly visible on
a. fine day. Returning to the main road, and following it
along the side of the teacher’s residence, the visitor is able
to reach the


Nov Bed.
r HIS is a grand piece of table-land overlooking Kailton.
The fanners on this side have one very great
drawback, that is the want of a road, which is a
shameful piece of neglect on the part of the Government.
Still this state of things is not to last for ever, for Parlia-
ment in its bountiful goodness did manage last session
(1887) to grant a vote of a few- hundred pounds. On the
New Bed the traveller can find plenty to do, much to
occupy the time, besides enjoy a trip to one of the most
romantic spots this side Formby. As the traveller winds
his way up from the road there will come to view several
scenes of beauty. One which will be sure to give pleasure
is the bird’s-eye view of the village below, which appears to
be in a valley with snug little hills on all sides. The
road or track that turns off to the left, after passing the
little bridge, leads to the farms of Messrs. Hughes, Robin-
son, Midgley, and William Scanlon, and bearing a little to
the right along the foot of Badger’s Range, is Mr. James
Powlett’s farm. This farm has not been in his hands very
long, yet for the time it has there are many noticeable
improvements that show Mr. Powlett does not intend to
let the grass grow under his feet whilst looking on, wonder-
ing what is to be done. A neglected farm is a great eye-
sore, and much difficulty is experienced by one who takes
over such. This must have been the case with farmer
Powlett, who has overcome all the obstacles and has now a
good field before him, so that in course of time he will be
the holder of a good farm. The dairy attached, which he
has built, is beautifully cool, and admirably suited to the
purposes for which it was constructed.
Next to his place is without doubt the best farm in the
district, and it is owned by Mr. Charles Bourke, who is
a farmer of no mean order, and had we more like him in
Tasmania there would be no need for grumbling about
hard times if a chance bad season came in the way. Far-
mer Bourke is always inclined to look at the bright side of
things, leaving the grumbling to others. He has 200 acres
of land, of which 100 is under careful cultivation. The
visitor would notice that so soon as the dead timber falls
over or a branch is blown down it is removed, thus keeping
the land clear and free from rubbish. The homestead is
nicely situated, with barns, sheds, and dairy close by, and
an ever flowing spiing of water within easy reach. The
farm is well supplied with all kinds of agricultural imple-
ments, such as ploughs, rollers, chaff-cutter, scarifier, and
reaper and binder of the latest invention. The stock, too,
is of the best, and farmer Bourke can be complimented on
the staunch and bonnie teamsters he has for his farm
work. The cattle look the picture of health, and well they
might, when it is told that on this fine farm there are>
several good grass paddocks the like of which are not seen
anywhere else in the district. Besides the above, farmer
Bourke has a number of well-bred pigs. These creatures
have a fine time of it, for they look remarkably well —real
broad-siders. Fowls, ducks, and geese swell the catalogue
of stock that is found on the farm. The whole of the farm


is divided into eighteen paddocks, well fenced, and that
portion of the land which is in crop has been most care-
fully cleared of every piece of loose timber, thus rendering
it perfectly clear, although the reader should be informed
that there are yet hund/reds of mighty stalwart trees tower-
ing to the sky, waiting their turn for removal as oppor-
tunity may occur. is a farm from which it was said
a living could not be got\for a bandicoot, but which in the
hands of a competent and experienced farmer is made to
give handsome returns to the owner, besides feeding a large
family of good workers, and providing for eight horses,
several cattle, numerous pigs, &c., &c. To find such a farm
close to Railton would no doubt surprise the stranger, but
so it is, and a more persevering and industrious family
could not be found in the district. They have transferred
this waste and neglected land into a most prolific farm,
where almost everything can be made to grow. Industry
is seen on every side, father and sons work hand in hand
together with the great object in view—success —which
they must gain in the long run. Each do their work with
a willingness which it is cheerful to see, and as settlers
Tasmania might well be proud of them. Here we have a
a man, who, if he had stayed in old Ireland, could never
have been in possession of (unless left to him) 200 acres of
land, with farming implements and stock, which cannot be
valued at less than ,£3OOO. He from the old world has
made this his home and the home of his children, leaving
the toils and troubles behind, and in this land is dismayed
by no difficulty, shrinking from no exertion, exhausted by
no struggle, but ever eager for a new effort to accomplish
an end, which is success. Work is no commonplace w ord
with farmer Bourke and his sons, but has in it a significant
meaning. May be they think of the following lines :
Work ! and pure slumbers shall wait on thy pillow ;
Work ! thou shall ride o’er care’s coining billow ;
Lie not down wearied ’neath woe’s weeping willow,
But work with a stout heart and resolute will!
Work for some good, be it ever so slowly.
Work for some hope, be it ever so lowly;
Work : for all labor is noble and holy !
From Mr. Charles Bourke’s the visitor must now return
and again strike the main road, which leads to Sheffield.
On this road there are many choice objects, such as ferns,
water falls, flowers, &c., &c. About a mile from the school,
and on the left, the visitor will notice a very nice substan-
tial house, which has recently been erected. Here lives an
old pioneer, one who has done more to open up the country
than any other man in the colony. Mr. Henry Cooper is a
thorough bushman, one who could hardly be beaten, and it
is quite certain that no other man living has accomplished
the same amount of work as he has done. The farm which
he now occupies is called the “ Home Farm, and well he
might so call it after all the farms he has made, cultivated,
and sold. Mr, Cooper has occupied most of his time in
selecting land, clearing it, and partly cultivating it, then
selling the same as “ an improved bush farm,” giving the
purchaser an opportunity of beginning work at once, with-


out first of all going through the laborious task of clearing
from the land timber which is so thick, so tall, and so hard
that many a new chum is obliged to abandon all hope of
doing anything with his selection. Mr. Cooper’s first
efforts were at Breadalbane, which is near Launceston,
then at the White Hills, Sherwood, followed by the “ Folly
Farm,” which he named after his father’s place, which is at
Farringdon Town, in the county of Berk, England. He
then visited the Nook district, which is close to Sheffield,
and opened up no less than ten farms, which are all occu-
pied and in regular cultivation. From the Nook he next
started his leviathan work in the Kentishbury, and
managed to set going in good working order twelve farms,
besides the one he now lives upon. Each farm had built
upon it a good dwelling-house, with sundry out offices, and
is blessed with a permanent flow of water closo to the
houses. From a knowledge of these farms lam able to
inform the reader that quite two-thirds of the land on
each farm opened by Mr. Cooper is under cultivation, thus
showing that no time has been lost in making useful these
heavily-timbered lands. Here we have indeed one who
has gone forth and cleared the forest, drained the morass,
and made the wilderness rejoice and blossom as a rose.
His labor has given the tiller an opportunity to plough the
land, scatter the seed, and reap the harvest, and like a
mighty magician he has prepared the regions of desolation
and waste for his fellow man. To intending colonists, or
those in search of useful information respecting bush life,
I would sincerely advise a chat with Mr. Cooper, who would
be found ready to help the stranger and advise on all mat-
ters respecting farm work. He is thoroughly conversant
with the whole of the Kentishbury and its farming
interests. Leaving the “ Home Farm ” we push on over
the bridge to the rapidly rising village of
Sheffield.
is the centre of a large agricultural and mining
district, the combined interests of which are causing
t' the place to advance with remarkable rapidity, and
we may in the near future expect to see its prospects
further enhanced by a closer railway communication. A
number of good farms are to be seen, and the same can be
said of this part as is said of the Sassafras, with the excep-
tion that it is mostly in the hands of Scotchmen, who were
farm servants in the Old Country, and came to this colony
under the auspices of the St. Andrew’s Society. It can be
said to their credit that they have got on exceed-
ingly well, and with an infusion of other but Scotch blood
there is every prospect of Sheffield being a large and pros-
perous place. The minerals found hereabouts aregold and
tin, and promise to be firm and lasting. Some distance
beyond Sheffield, at the rear of Mounts Claude and Roland,
large deposits of tin have been discovered, and there is
every indication of other deposits coming to light, which
will give to Sheffield a great impetus. All the business
premises are on the front street or, rather, road, which
winds its way to Barrington. The public school, a brick


building, faces the road, as does the Wesleyan Chapel,
police office, hotels, banks, and flour mill. There
are a number of stores in the place, chief of which
is that of Messrs. York, Smidt, and Co., who have the largest
trade connection in the district. Their store is equal to
any along the north-west, with almost everything in it that
it is possible to find in a well-equipped establishment.
Messrs. York, Smidt, and Co. would, I am sure, be glad to
afford the stranger every information respecting the dis-
trict, as they are through their business connection con-
versant with almost every settler in the district, and are
thus well able to give the stranger or intending settler
every information respecting lands, crops, roads, &c., etc.
Of the scenery a deal could be written, as this locality
abounds in the beautiful, romantic, and captivating. The
mighty mountains, at times covered with snow, add
materially to the picture, and is a most fitting subject for
the artist. Time will not admit of other particulars just
now in respect to the Kentish, as more will be written in
the next edition, so I shall pass on. The coach meets the
trains to and from Launceston. The distance to Sheffield
from Railton is about eight miles.
Leaving the Railton railway station we next travel
through part of the Foster’s Estate, which property is in
the market, which could soon be cleared and made ready
for use. Nothing of a striking character is here met with
till the
Kimberley’s Ford
* S reached, where the visitor will again see the noble
3| Mersey River. At present this spot is but a siding for
those who are engaged on the railway by the Govern-
ment. Its future can almost be foretold, because the site
for a township is well situated and convenient to the line,
besides the land being of good quality. This portion of the
Kimberley belongs to the same estate, and the allotments
are in the market for sale, and should be readily sold. A
good road is b eing made from this spot to Deloraine, so
that the settler has the choice of two routes, viz., the road
and the railway. Good fishing is to be had at Kimberley.
Leaving this place and its many attractions, we next make
for
Deloraine,
+ HIGH is on the banks of the Meander river. This
111 river is to anglers an attractive spot, there being
''TT large quantities of all kinds of fish in it. The banks
of the river present a lovely appearance, covered with
massive shrubbery of the richest variety in great profusion.
Deloraine has bold and impressive surroundings, the twin
mountains Gog and Magog being prominent features in the
landscape, besides other mountains of considerable eleva-
tion. Gog and Magog are separated by a most remarkable
and mighty gorge, which is a sight to look upon. The
scenery on'all sides is of a romantic character, and the
dark ranges in the distances, which the greater pai’t of the
year are clothed with a pure mantle of snow, with magnifi-
cent forests at their base, cannot fail to delight the


traveller as he journeys on, and cause him to feel that the
time has not been misused in visiting this part of the
tight little island. Deloraine has a number of fine
buildings in it and is in the heart of a large and prosperous
farming community. The stores are large and handsome,
with bold frontages to them. The principal one is that of
Messrs. Hart Brothers, whose business has been long
established in the town, and whose patrons come from
miles around the country. The interior of this fine store
is well worth seeing, as the arrangements are in keeping
with the class of goods therein. One portion is used for
groceries, all kinds of provisions,, choice teas, and general
merchandise; the centre for fancy goods, carpets, and
household requisites, and the other for millinery, drapery,
and gentlemen’s clothing, besides boots, shoes, travelling
bags, rugs, etc. It is a well stocked store, with almost
everything that one can wish for in stock. Persons
desiring fishing tackle can be well supplied by Messrs.
Hart Brothers, who are gentlemen well acquainted with
thedistrict, and who would be willingto impart information.
They have an extensive business, which brings them in
contact with most of the farmers, and they would be
able to advise the intending settler as to the value of the
land, the distance from market, and many other matters
which are of interest to those in search of holdings. The
usual institutions to be found elsewhere are also to be
found in Deloraine, such as schools, churches, public hall,
&c., &c. There is in Deloraine ample hotel accommodation.
The Bush Hotel, near the station, being very comfortable
and clean, is well worth recommending. It is also handy
and well suited for travellers and visitors generally. Com-
mercial gentlemen will find large sample rooms for their
use, and if desiring to drive round the country can obtain
good horses and traps. Mr. J. C. Goodridge is the pro-
prietor, and does all in his power to make his guests com-
fortable. The charges are moderate. There are many
places of interest close to Deloraine, chief of which is Chud-
leigh and its wonderful caves. Mr. Smith meets the train
every morning on arrival from Launceston, and on getting
the mails starts direct for Chudleigh, Mole Creek, and
Caveside.
A isitors wishing to visit the caves have to make special
arrangements with Mr. Smith, who has horses and traps,
and who is also able to procure a guide to pilot tourists
through.
CHUDLEIGH CAVES.
The visitor leaves the Deloraine Station by coach, which
starts on arrival of the first train from Launceston. The
road is a good one, with a vast amount of nice scenery on
all sides. If the traveller is fortunate to secure a box seat
he will be well pleased with the trip, as the mail-driver is
obliging and willing to explain the chief points of interest.
Mr. Smith has placed good coaches on the road, with
spanking horses, that add a great deal to the pleasure of
the journey. On the township of Chudleigh there is an
mn. The greater portion of the houses aie on the main
road : two stores, post and telegraph office, public school,


English, Scotch, and Wesleyan churches. In summer
time the distinct presents a most pleasing sight, surrounded
by majestic ranges, thickly studded with all kinds of tim-
ber trees, with numberless farms on all sides. Mr. Picket,
at the inn, has horses for the use of those who desire to
make an inspection of the caves. They are six miles from
the inn, over an excellent track, through country teeming
with the beautiful. Close to these caves is a mountain of
variegated marble, which extends several miles. Proceed-
ing by a fine creek of clear water you reach a huge stone,
in form like a round table, and, fancying yourselves its
knights, it is well to refresh here before you light your
candles and enter. The appearance of the stalactites is
very beautiful; they are of all sizes and diameters, from
that of a wheaten straw to that of a man’s thigh. The
former are snow white and depend in thousands from the
roof ; the latter are generally united to the stalagmites,
originating from the ground and growing upwards until
they meet and coalesce with the stalactite from above.
The latter are hollow, and are increased by the deposit of
particles of lime at the extremity, at the moment the di*op
of water proceeding from the roof falls from the lower* end
of the stalactite; they cluster by thousands, and are
generally from three to five feet long, presenting a scene
like iairy land. After tracing half a mile of bewildering
cavern of stalactites you come to what is called the “ Light
Hole,” and where is a stream of water having a rise and
fall, running across the cave. Here the gentlemen, if
there are any ladies in the party, must evidence their gal-
lantry by carrying the ladies across. Two hundred yards
beyond this is the “ Pulpit,” so called because here the
cave is domed like a cathedral, and here is its greatest
magnificence, for the walls appear as if dotted with glow
worms or sparkling with gems. A little further on and
the “ Register Office ” appears, a huge stone pillar on
which visitors usually autograph their names. There are
other caves in the district, but I think those just mentioned
will prove quite enough for my readers.
Leaving Deloraine behind, the train speeds on to Exton,
thence to
Westbury,
4 ITUATED upon the Quamby Brook. For miles round
the country presents a grand appearance, the Western
™ Ranges forming a splendid background to the picture.
Westbury, like Deloraine, has in it some fine buildings,
which should be visited. From Westbury we must now
pass on to Launceston by way of
Longford,
* CHARMING town, with a grand track of open country
Cl on all sides, backed up by the Western Ranges and
the ever noble Ben Lomond. This town is one of the
oldest in the colony, and could not fail to please the visitor.
The places worth visiting are the English Church, State
school, and public library. Outside the town there are
many fine estates, good drives, and pleasant walks, with a


line river dose by which is a great favorite with
the settlers, and where safe boating and bathing can be
enjoyed. Longford is noted for its healthy position, and
pleasant surroundings, and for good hotel accommoda-
tion. From Longford we now steam on to
Evandalo Junction.
A, OME of the best land, and by far the prettiesc land-
scape view to be seen on this route, is in the vicinity
of Evandale. Here the country is undulating, and
both hill and dale arc covered with a mantle of green, the
dark shade of the hawthorn hedges pleasantly contrasting
with the lighter ones of the field. These beautiful fences,
which are both cheap and serviceable and cannot be sur-
passed, are clearly distinguishable as far as the eye can
range. Such a landscape as this is not to be seen in South
Australia, for in that colony the landscape consists of level
plains fringed by low hills, and under the fierce rays of a
sub-tropical sun, and the furnace-like blast of the hot
winds, the grass is dried, and nearly everything elso
scorched up by the end of November. Here the crops arc
as verdant at Christmas-time, as they are in the best
parts of South Australia in the early part of
October. I must confess that I am quite taken up with
the appearance and climate of Tasmania, and consider it
offers far greater inducements and advantages to tho
settler than any of the colonies of continental Australia.
Leaving Evandale Junction, a run of eleven miles brings
us to Launceston, on approaching which, the fine residences
on Windmill Hill open to view, and the traveller feels that
he is nearing an important centre of population. Crossing
the railway bridge over the broad stream of tho North Esk
Kiver the train arrives at the head station.
Launceston.
HIGH now brings the traveller to the end of a long
and pleasant journey, where the comforts of a rest
. t would most likely be thoroughly enjoyed and appre-
ciated, so passing out of the railway station into the Inver-
may-road we turn to the left and cross the bridge leading
to Tamar and William streets, where on the corner
to the right, and opposite the Bischoff Tin
Smelting Works, stands the Terminus Hotel, a fine hand-
some building of three storeys, very conspicuous among its
neighbors on account of its size and artistic exterior. The
main entrance is in Tamar-street, easily found, and on
entering the hotel the visitor will find a welcome, *and
within a few minutes be shown to his room. All ’busses
from this station, it w'ould be well to know, pass this hotel.
The hotel is not only close to the two railway stations, but
also the wharves and public offices.
The Terminus Hotel is a favorite resort for country
visitors from the North Eastern and Western districts, and
the mining community, who find it pleasantly situated,
comfortable, and convenient. Persons who are travel-
ling for pleasure will now find this hotel everything
that a good house should be. It has lately undergone


extensive alterations and additions, thus adding to the
architectural beauty of the exterior, besides affording ad-
ditional comfort within. Every room has been nicely
furnished, so as to meet the tastes and requirements of the
public. The rooms are spacious and lofty, well ventilated,
clean, and cosey. Sitting and drawing-rooms, with
pianos, are provided for boarders, where those so inclined
can enjoy a game of chess, draughts, etc. In fact, the
worthy landlord, with his good wife, has done his utmost
to make this hotel one of the most attractive in the town
of Launceston. From the bed-room windows a grand view
of the town is obtained, which is very pleasant and
agreeable. A large staff of servants are kept, who are
under the superintendence of Mrs. Tynan, who does her
best to study the comfort of her guests and the good order
of the hotel, thereby ensuring civility and attention to all
who sojourn at the Terminus Hotel. Mr. John Tynan has
spared neither time, trouble, or expense in making this
hotel complete with every convenience for the travelling
public, and deserves every patronage. He has a well
furnished and comfortable billiard room, equal to any in the
colony, with lavatory attached, and an excellent table for
the use of his patrons, natty little parlors and smoke rooms.
Hot, cold, and shower baths, with closets approximate to the
bedrooms. A number of newspapers are taken in for the use
of his guests, and the landlord is a gentlemen well able to
give general information to his patrons respecting the
mines, and the n orthern part of the island. A good table
is kept, and the charges are very moderate. From per-
sonal experience I am able to honestly recommend this
hotel to my readers, and assure them that it is a pleasant
abode for the visitor during a sojourn in the town of
Launceston. Visitors who have their own horses will find
at the rear of the hotel clean and roomy stables of recent
construction, with all the modern appliances of a well-
fitted stable, besides careful and experienced grooms, in
whose charge the visitor need have no fear of leaving their
horses. The terms are moderate and within reach of all.
After a rest the visitor will find much to see and do
in- Launceston. It is a very pretty town, with a population
of some 20,000 people. For other particulars respecting
the town, I shall recommend the visitor to purchase one of
“ Howard Haywood’s ” Illustrated Guides through Tai-
mania, with particulars of all parts of the colony, “ where
to go, how to get there, and what it will cost,” which can
be obtained at Walch Brothers and Birchall, Brisbano-
street, and Fitzgerald Brothers, stationers, George-street,
Launceston.
To the Lake Country of Tasmania,
Yia Tunbridge.
AHESE lovely and beautiful Lakes are the grandett
JJT features of interest in the whole colony, and equal
i n every way to those of New Zealand (in the north
island). The Tasmanian lakes are situated on the top of
the Western Eanges, which are between 2000 and 3000 feet
in height, and on looking at the map the visitor will notice


are in the counties of Somerset, Westmorland, Lincoln, and
Cumberland. A start should be made early in the morning
so that by the afternoon the first two lakes could be
reached. To writ® ©f the journey, which is from the Tun-
bridge railway station, on the Main Line of railway, 50
miles south of Launceston and 74 miles north of Hobart, as
being a grand ore would but poorly represent its true
character, so shall in this case leave it to the visitor to sum
up its beauties, and press onward, taking the road to the
west, directly opposite the station, past several fine estates,
up to the base of the ranges, and so on, climbing upward
till the Alma Pass is reached, then comes a good stretch of
level walking through most captivating country.
LAKES SORELL AND CRESCENT
Are the first which comes in sight, and from the road pre-
sent a truly beautiful picture, which is most pleasant to
look upon, besides suggesting to the tourist that for the
day the journey is nearly at an end. The many difficulties
which have for a number of years prevented visitors from
making a tour through this marvellous portion of the
colony have been swept away, yet there are still impedi-
ments in the way which tempts me again to be very “ soft ”
respecting advice with regard to this trip. Chief among
these reasons are—the want of accommodation, distance
from one lake to another, and need of better tracks. As a
holiday trip it is one of the most enjoyable that can be
taken, providing that the visitor can walk his 18 miles per
day over hills and mountains, bowlders, rough tracks, and
swamp lands. The chances of the weather is another great
drawback to the journey, there being no “pubs” on the
line of march in which to seek shelter. The weather
is exceedingly changeable, and the only recognised
place of accommodation at all is at the bridge between Lakes
Sorell and Crescent; this is kept by Mr. Brownie, who,
with his wife, does his best to make everything pleasant.
The two lakes can be teen from Brownie’s cottage, and are
connected by a narrrw stream of water, which is bridged
over, and the spot called Interlaken. To the south-east of
Lake Crescent is a remarkable eminence, known as the
Table Mountain, which can be seen for miles along the
Lake Country. Lake Sorell has high land close to its
shores, and presents a pleasing appearance. Boats are
kept for the use of visitors, but they are, like friend
“ Brownie,” rather old and somewhat the worse for wear,
not to be trusted on smooth or rough water. Whilst stay-
ing at old friend Brownie’s the visitor must not forget to
make a trip to the Diamond Beach, where all kinds of
beautiful and valuable stones are to be found, such as have
brought to .some of the shepherds good returns, as they
(the stones) have been forwarded to Melbourne, fetching a
fair price.
From these Lakes it is close upon 12 miles to the next
place of call, which is known as the
STEPPES,
A Police Depot. Sergeant Wilson lives here. He is most
obliging, ever ready to put the visitor on to the right


track where th* most enjoyabla night® are to be
seen. Mr. Wilson is known far and wide for his hospitality.
His cottage is the picture of cleanliness, and ho has a good
library with books to suit any taste. Mr. Wilson’s garden
has in it almost every kind of flower, from the tiniest to the
largest and most choice. His neighbors all speak well of
him, and I am sure they hare reason to do so. Ho is a
great reader; his weekly budget of paper* *how it. He
makes good in* of his paper* by lending them to the shep-
herds. who appreciate his thoughtfulness. He is thoroughly
acquainted with all the lakes, and there is no one in the
Lake country who can afford more useful information than
Mr. Wilson. Only recently a party of tourists, wishing to
visit the Lakes, wrote to me for particulars respecting the
trip, and on their return journey dropped me a line to say
that “we found Mr. Wilson a good-natured Scot, very
willing and ready to help the traveller. He is a jolly good
fellow, one of the right sort, who would be well appreciated
by all for his truly genial and kindly spirit.” About live
miles from Mr. Wilson’s cottage, in a north-easterly direc-
tion, and off the Great Lake Road, are the
ARTHUR’S LAKES,
Approached through the sheep run of Mr. Burbury, whose
shepherd is very kind, and would assist the visitor to find
his way to the lakes above mentioned. One feature which
will attract attention is the bai’cness of the timber, the
trees on all sides looking like so many mighty skeletons
towering up to the skies. This is accounted for by the
shepherds, who ought to know, thuswise—that some few
years ago, during the winter, a fearful snowstorm took
place, with mighty winds, accompanied by terrific frosts,
which blasted every tree within range of the Lakes. These
trees must attract the visitors’ attention, because of the
novelty. Of the Lakes little need be written, as they are
perfect, and would be sure to afford pleasure. Returning
to Mr. Wilson’s, the traveller may, if lie so desires, leave
the Lake country by the road close to Mr. Wilson’s, which
leads straight into Bothwell, distance about 25 miles.
This, of course, would curtail the Lake trip, which I think
the tourist does not desire, so instead of leaving for Both-
well, the Great Lake road should be followed, which is in a
line with Wilson’s cottage. A tramp of about twelve
miles brings the tourist to Swan Bay, on the south side
of the
GREAT LAKE,
Which lake is about fifteen miles long by five
broad, but the deep and continuous indentations of
its shores give it a circumference very dispropor-
tionate to its limits, and conjectured to bo little less than
150 miles ; its depth, which is extremely variable, is esti-
mited differently, but in no case with any pretensions to
accuracy ; its height above the level of the sea is 3SS2 feet.
There are five islands in the lake covered with a species of
cedar and numerous shrubs. The country in the vicinity
is not thickly wooded, but composed of alternate marsh and
hills, offering many tracts available for sheep and cattle
runs, while in the distance the landscape abounds in the


picturesque adj uncts of mountain and forest. A local his-
torian, Mr. David Burn, speaks of its woody islands and
glittering bays with rapturous admiration. England, he
said, may vaunt her Windermere; Scotland chant the
beauties of Loch Lomond ; Ireland proclaim the graces of
Killarney; but not with purer and prouder tongue than
Antipodean Tasmania may boast the mountain glories and
glowing waters of her own sweet lakes, than which none is
fairer and sweeter than the majestic Great Lake. The lee
shore of the lake is protected by a singular natural break-
water from the fury of the winter winds, and the causeway
is nearly as regular as if constructed by masonic art. The
Shannon emerges a full grown river from the broad expanse
of Great Lake, whose waters nevertheless, in some parts,
overflow their borders, even during the warm months;
after rain they of course rise considerably, and during
tempestuous weather they occasionally wear a very turbu-
lent aspect, quite at variance with their ordinary tranquil
beauty.
At Swan Bay is the home of Constable Early, whose cot-
tage faces the Great Lake. Anglers visiting this lake have
a grand time of it, for tho fish actually crowd together,
waiting not the hook and the line, but, as the constable
says, almost to be ” speared.” At the Bay is to be found an
ardent lover and deciple of Tzack Walton. I mean Mr.
Becket. lie, with his good wife, is always ready to wel-
come the stranger, and afford rest to the weary pedestrian.
Too much praise cannot bo bestowed upon the good people
who dwell on the mountain tops, for their hospitality is
of so ready a character that to refuse it would show bad
taste on the part of the visitor.
Before leaving the Lake Country I would advise the
tourist, if there is time, to pay a visit to
LAKE ECHO,
Which is about ten miles from the home of Constable
Early, Lovlicr scenery could scarce be imagined. The
shore is high and covered with heavy timber to the water’s
edge. The lake is clear, deep, and blue, and several miles
from side to side. This beautiful lake cannot f til to charm
the traveller, so picturesque are its surroundings. Belts of
forest and wooded spurs, enclosing a succession of bays and
inlets, are its peculiar characteristics. There are two
islands to the north of this lovely lake, which are called the
“ Haywood ” and “ Ash,” both of which are thickly wooded
and add considerably to the beauty of this lake. Lake
Echo with its fairy islets, its flowery banks, and clear blue
water, is far more attractive than any of the other lakes.
Within easy reach of the lake is the hut of the Honble. N.
J. Brown’s shepherd, who has succeeded an old friend (Mr.
"William Cushion, a real good, hearty fellow, who has a
wide-spread name for hospitality and’thoughtfulness), and
from the general run of the shepherds there is no doubt
that our new friend is of the same inclination and order.
Leaving this hut and lake, the visitor, if continuing the
journey, has a long journey before him of nearly forty
miles before ho reaches the lowlands, where Bothwell, a


good-sized town is situated on the banks of the Clyde river,
where good roads and hotel’accommodation is again met
with.
From the Great Lake, the tourist would perhaps like to
return by way of the Western Ranges, which overhang the
Longford, Westbury, and Deloraine districts. If so the
eastern side of the Great Lake must be taken, and when
about six miles from Constable Early’s the hut of Mr.
Bomford is reached. He is a shepherd for Mr. Headlam,
whose run he has under his care. Mr. Bomford will
extend a welcome, and, as my friends who wrote a little
while ago made remark, the visitor will find that hospitality
is (never seen to greater perfection than among the good-
natured mountain shepherds. Mr. Bomford is so well
known by all who have visited the Great Lake, so I will
rest contented by saying that at his little hut the weary
one is sure of an invite. Another six miles, mostly through
groves of waratah. From Headlam’s Point to the Sand-
bank Tier, is Mr. Flexrnore's run, where the aid of a guide
(shepherd) is needed across the flat to the head of the tiers
(Western Ranges), when the traveller has before him a
rough-and-tumble journey, all down hill, past Weston’s
rivulet, a beautiful cool flow of clear water, then to Mr.
Dan Tubb’s house. “ Genial Dan, always a welcome.”
remarks a recent traveller, where a rest is had for the
night, thus bringing to a close a journey of twelve miles
from the Sandbanks. Another tramp of twelve miles
through sheep runs and cattle stations brings the pedes-
trian to the pretty little village of Cressy, where there are
two hotels which afford ample accommodation. The coach
for Longford Railway Station is found here, at the Cressy
Hotel, which is owned by Mr. Goss, who also runs the mail
coach to the Launceston and Western Railway. It should
not be forgotten that besides fishing there is also abun-
dant sport for the gun, &c. xilong the journey can be
seen the beautiful and truly graceful cider gum tree, which
if tapped (hole made in it) gives a most refreshing drink.
This brings our Lake rrip to an end.
LAUNCESTON TO CIRCULAR HEAD
VIA GEORGE TOWN, THE HEADS, FORMBY,
TORQUAY, LEVEN, PENGUIN, EMIT BAY,
TABLE CAPE, &c
BY THE STEAMSHIP “DEVON.”
* HIS trip from Launceston to Circular Head along the
JJr north-west coast in the good ship Devon is to those
who are fond of the sea an(i its g lories an agreeable
change from overland travelling and would prove to many
a thorough treat, especially if the weather should be fine
and calm. The steamer Devon is very comfortable,
and everything is done by the captain and his officers to
make the trip a pleasant one, besides being exceedingly
obliging and civil to their passengers. Leaving the Laun-
ceston wharf in the Devon, with Captain Tait as compagnon


de voyage, we steam down the river Tamar, which is the
finest river in Tasmania, and empties itself into Port Dal-
rymple. As the visitor may know, the town of Launceston
is situated on its banks, just at the junction of the North
and South Esk streams, which unite here and fall into the
Tamar. Just before reaching the bend a capital view of
the town is obtained, which has quite a charming appear-
ance, and well repays the visitor for his trip down the
river. The valley through which the Tamar flows is nar-
row, with sides steep and woody. In some places reaches
are wide and the hills recede. Many charming sights are
noticed, with comfortable homes along the route. Not far
from the town, on the left hand side, will be noticed the
pretty and substantial mansion, with well-fenced grounds
around, known as “ Cormiston,” the home of John Thomp-
son, Esq., an old and respected colonist, who at one time
was a member of the Legislative Council. This has from
the river a pleasing appearance, and is seen to very great
advantage, the house occupying a very prominent position
in the picture. The lands of this fine estate reach the
water’s edge, and extend far away over the hills, where
many nice spots are to be found. Next to “Cormiston” is
“ Longley,” the property of Robert Proctor Beauchamp,
Esq., a gentleman who is known far and wide for his
famous drawings and paintings. Like other places along
the river, “ Longley ” has its attractions, and is well worth
a visit. Further down, and on the opposite bank, is the
little hamlet of Windermere, with its church, which, reflect-
ing in the water, imparts a strange feeling to
the visitor. The mansion, too, at the rear goes far to make
up a very pretty and impressive picture. Still continuing
the journey, George Town is reached, an old and compact
little place, where many visitors spend their holidays.
The heads come next, after which the open sea is gained,
and our steamer steams off the land, but keeps it in sight
all along the coast. The sight is very beautiful and enjoy-
able, their being much to attract the visitor’s attention.
This coast is remarkable for its gentle rising banks, which
show off to perfection the many farms and homesteads
along the route, and the massive peaks that form part of
the picture, and are plainly seen. Formby and Torquay
are first visited, then the Leven, followed by the Penguin,
Emu Bay, Table Cape, and Circular Head, all of which
places have already been noticed. This trip, then, should
form part of the visitors round of excursions, and if want-
ing other particulars a call should be made at the Laun-
ceston and North-West Coast Steam Navigation Company’s
Offices, Cimitiere Street, where all information would be
given by the manager, Lindsay Tulloch, Esq.
FROM LAUNCESTON TO HOBART.
A*-N order to reach the capital the visitor takes his seat
al * n . one carriages on the Main Line Railway,
which leave at 8.30 a.m., 3 p.m. (express), and 8.30 p.m.
During the trip the following places are passed, viz. —St.
Leonard’s, a pretty little village four miles from Launces-


ton; Evandale, where the visitor will observe several
beautiful landscapes which cannot fail to call forth expres-
sions of admiration; the Corners, where a line branches
off to the East Coast, via Pingal, Campbell Town—distant
from Launceston forty-two miles ; Ross, the seat of many
large and valuable sheep stations, noted for its college
(Horton). On the other side of the line and almost oppo-
site the college is Mona Yale, with its fine mansion, “Tun-
bridge,” which is the most direct route to the Lake District.
Parratah is next, where a stay is made for refreshments,
and where the branch line to Oatlands is met. Jerusalem,
a large farming district; Campania, where visitors going
to Swansea (East Coast) take the coach; Brighton, another
coaching station (Bothwell) ; Bridgewater Junction, which
is on the north side of the Derwent River, and where pas
sengers going to New Norfolk change carriages. For par-
ticulars of the New Norfolk district see further on. From
this junction the train passes over the Derwent river,
hence to O’Brien’s Bridge (Glenorchy). New Town comes
next, then the sweet-smelling gardens of the Royal Society,
close to which can be seen Government House, with well-
kept grounds, walks, carriage drive; then turning the bend
a full view of the Bay presents itself, with Bruni Island in
the distance, and Mount Nelson, and lastly, as if by magic,
a full view of the beautifull City of Hobart suddenly
attracts the attention of the tourist, and brings to a close
a pleasant tour from one end of the island to the other.
Three trains leave Launceston daily (except Sunday) for
Hobart, Fares: First-class—3os. single ; 455. return.
Second-class—2os. single; 30s, return. Distance 133
miles. Return tickets are available for eleven clear days,
or two weeks for the whole journey The trains leave
Hobart for Launceston at 8 a.m. (express), 10.30. a.ra., and
8 p.m. For other particulars respecting places worth visit-
ing in the south, see “ Haywood’s Guide through Tas-
mania,” which can be obtained from Walch Brothers,
stationers, Wellington and Macquarie Streets, and also at
Hood’s stationery establishment, Liverpool Street. Hohart.
All particulars are given in this guide of Port Arthur,
Huon, Sorell, Campania, George’s Bay, Gould’s Country,
Scottsdale, &c., &c.
NEW NORFOLK
* S a most romantic spot, situated upon the banks of the
gi Derwent River, which river rises in the central
Y* plateau, and flows southward into the sea at Storm
Bay. The course of the Derwent up as far as New Norfolk
will compare favorably with a corresponding portion of the
Rhine, while the dismantled fortresses and ruined towers
which crown the heights of that romantic river seem to be
reproduced by the fantastic rocks and jutting knolls which
flank the waters of the Derwent. Every curve of the
broad stream begets a feeling of admiration and surprise.
The accidents of light and shadow, varying with the
position of the sun and the motion of the clouds, impart a
character of endless variety to this picture. The situation
of the township is very beautiful, and the view presented
from the river is both pleasing and varied. From the


Under the patronage
the Governors
of their Excellencies
of Tasmania
And Neighboring Colonies
BUSH HOTEL,
IS'cu? Iv'oifolU.
The above well-known and favorite Hotel is beauti-
fully situated on the banks of the River
Derwent, commanding some of the
Grandest Scenery in the Aus-
tralian Colonies.
All the appointments of a First-class Hotel.
ALSO,
Large Garden , beautifully laid out with Flowers
and Fruit Trees.
BOATS, BAIT. FISHING TACKLE, ETC.,
For the use of Visitors.
Visitors are respectfully requested to communicate
direct with the Proprietor, as some self-interested people
are in the habit of saying the house is full when such is
often not the case.
Telegrams and Letters promptly attended to.
Carriages wait the arrival of steamers to convey
visitors to and from Hotel , free of charge.
TERMS—IUs, per day, or j 63 3s. per week. Private
Sitting-room extra.
O. BLOCK EY - ‘ - - Proprietor.


W. T. BELL & CO.
Have FOR SALE
AGRICULTURAL LAND
Two (2) Miles South of Sheffield. Also
TOWNSHIP LOTS
In Railton, and will shortly have Township Lots to
offer in Kimberley, now under survey.
LOTS OF FIRST-CLASS AGRICUL-
w • TURAL LAND, varying in area from
64 up to 159 ACRES.
Some of these form part of “ Dooley’s Plain,” and
several front on the Dasher River, and are within
easy distance of the Railway. All are accessible
by reserved roads.
Purchasers may pay Cash in Full,
Or 10 per cent, deposit, and take credit for the
balance up to five (5) years.
Interest 6 per cent.
Certificates of Title under TORREN’S System
will be given to each buyer upon payment of sums
varying from £2 Bs. upwards, regulated upon a
sliding scale of value, based upon the
“OFFICIAL FEES ONLY
Lithographed Plans may he obtained
from the Auctioneers,
CHARLES STREET, LAUNCESTON,
Mr. Henry MURRAY, Latrobe,
and the
TRUSTEES, at Hobart.


Bush Hotel an extensive view of rich plains backed by
massive ranges is the most prominent feature. It is
difficult to imagine anything more varied and beautiful
than the aspect of these hills, or ranges, when illumined by
the sun, or enveloped in clouds. Close to the hotel are some
nice walks or drives, and at the bottom of the hotel garden
the visitor is able to enjoy, if so inclined, a few hours’ fish-
ing. The visitor will notice (if going by the river or train
to New Norfolk) the Bush Hotel, which stands just upon
the rise, on the other side of the bridge, and opposite the
wharf and railway station. This hotel has been for a long
time tho favorite rendezvous of visitors, who from the
mainland have from time to time made New Norfolk their
resting-place. The worthy landlord, Mr. O. Blockey, has
earned for himself a wide-spread reputation as an hotel-
keeper, he ever being ready to introduce the latest improve-
ments into his house, and add to the comfort of those who
favor him with their patronage. Our Governors have
chosen this hostelry wliilst visiting the district, as have
also all our distinguished visitors, who from time
to time visited the colony. Everything in this hotel
is of first-class order and quality, so that visitors can rely
upon being well provided for. The staff of servants
are civil and obliging, ever to be found doing
their duty and attending to the wants of the
guests. The hotel is beautifully situated upon the banks
of the noble Derwent river, away from the township, yet
within easy reach of station, wharf, port and telegraph
offices, and other places of interest, so that the visitor
making this hotel his resting place can feel as if he is
indeed away from the busy world, where nothing can dis-
turb his rest or comfort, thus enabling him to enjoy his
holiday to perfection. Traps are always in waiting at the
station or whai-f to convey passengers to the hotels or town-
ship, and the hotel charges range from j£2 2s per week and
upwards.
At the Bush Hotel visitors will find boats, fishing tackle,
with bait, etc., etc., for their use, so that no difficulty
would be experienced in this matter, which is of some
moment to impatient sportsmen, who do not like to lose
time in looking after “ bait.” The gardens of the hotel are
well laid out with flower beds, where choice and sweet-
smelling flowers grow to perfection, giving to the locality a
gay and fertile appearance. Without a doubt the attrac-
tions at the Bush Hotel are many, and cannot fail to please
the visitor, as has already been proved by the fact that
year after year old faces are seen in the garden enjoying
comforts provided by Host Blockey. The telegraphic
address is “ Blockey, New Norfolk.”
THE END.


TERMINUS HOTEL,,
LAUNCESTON
(CORNER OF TAMAR AND WILLIAM
STREETS ; within five minutes’ walk
of Railway, Wharf, and Public
. Offices).
The above HOTEL having undergone Extensive
Alterations, Improvements, and Additions,
is now REPLETE WITH EVERT COMFORT
AND CONVENIENCE.
Smoking A Reading Rooms, Comfortable Sitting
Room & Piano.
HOT, COLD, AND SHOWER BATHS
on the First and Stcond Floors, with Clouts.
THE BEDROOMS
art Lofty, Cheerful, and Wtll Ventilated.
WINES and SPIRITS of the Best
Brands procurable, and Direct
from the Bond.
BILLIARD ROOM, with one of ALCOCK’S
BEST TABLES.
Gentlemen’s Lavatory attached.
VISITORS may rely upon Civility, Attention,
and Punctuality.
FIRST-CLASS STABLING,
With Careful and Experienced Grooms.
ALL LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY
ATTENDED TO.
JOHN TYNAN, Proprietor.


STEAM TO THE NORTH WEST COAST.
LAUNCESTON AND NORTH WEST COAST
Steam Navigation Company, Limited.
THE S.S. DEVON
Leaves Launceston every Tuesday, calling at George
Town, the Mersey, Leven, Emu Bay and
Circular Head.
RETURNING ON SATURDAY.
Particulars as to Freight, Passage Money, &c.,
may be learned on application to
LINDSAY TULLOCH, Manager.
WISEMAN’S ROYAL MAIL COACHES TO
THE NORTH WEST COAST.
Leave Formby daily (giving time for passengers to
obtain luncheon on arrival of train from Laun-
ceston) for the Don, Forth, Leven, Penguin,
Emu Bay, Table Cape, and Circular Head, and
also to train that leaves Emu Bay for the
Mount Bischoll Tin Mines.
FARES REASONABLE.
JESSE WISEMAN,
Proprietor.


" STBATfiMOBE,"
EMU BAY.
Visitors to the North West Coast will find all the
comforts of a home at this Charming Sea-
side Resort.
Situated within a few yards of one of the finest
beaches on the Coast.
ALL LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS
PLEASE ADDRESS
Mrs. J. W. SMITHIES
WISEMAN’S
BAY VIEW HOTEL,
Burnie, Emu Bay,“Tasmania.
First-class Accommodation for Travellers and
Commercial Gentlemen.
Best Brands of Wines. Spirits, &c., always on hand.
Good Billiard Table.
Coaches to and from the Formby and Western
Railway twice daily.
Letters and Telegrams receive immediate attention.
THOMAS WISEMAN, Proprietor.


X ±
o m m t y c i a I 1
EMU BAY.
THIS HOTEL IS REPLETE WITH EVERY
COMFORT.
THE FINEST QUALITY OF WINES , SPIRITS,
ALES, cjv.
First-class acconiino:lation for Visitors.
Splendid Sea View.
P.S.- —Picnic, and fishing parties arranged.
W.P.—Good Stable and Loose Boxes.
Letters and Telegrams attended to.
AY. 11. LAKE
Proprietor.
SL SP.
BURN lE, EMU BAY, TASMANIA,
CUSTOMS. SHIPRING, COMMISSION, AND
FORWARDING AGENT.
Agent for the,Launceston and North West Coast
Steam Navigation Company.
Office at the Wharf.
Orders punctually attended to.
District Agent for Mutual Assurance Society of
Victoria, Limited.


LAWSON’S HOTEL,
MOUNT BISCHOFF, TASMANIA.
THIS HOTEL IS CLOSE TO THE RAILWAY
STATION, AND OPPOSITE THE
OFFICES OF THE MOUNT BISCHOFF TIN
MINE COMPANY.
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION FOR
VISITORS AND COMMERCIAL
GENTLEMEN-
Suites of rooms, Piano, and every con-
venience for visitors.
Table cFITote Daily.
Charges Moderate.
Visitors from the other colonies may rely
upon every comfort and attention.
THE VERY BEST BRANDS OF WINES,
Etc., Etc., always on hand.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS
RECEIVE EVERY ATTENTION.
LAWSON
Proprietor.


ALFORD’S
iUsdjoff Woid,
TASMANIA.
COMMERCIAL TRAVELLERS and VISITORS
TO THE FAMOUS
MOUNT BISCHOTT TIN MINES,
Will find Excellent ' Accommodation at the above
Hotel.
Every attention paid to Visitors , their
comforts and requirements.
GOOD SAMPLE ROOMS.
VERY BEST BRANDS OF LIQUORS
Direct from the Bond.
R. W. ALFORD,
proprietor.
Telegrams and Letters addressed as above will
receive prompt attention.


WILLIAM JO'NES,
EMU BAY, TASMANIA,
CUSTOMS , SHIPPING, -
WARDING AGENT.
Goods forwarded to Mount Biscboff, or any part of
Tasmania.
AGENT
For the TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION
COMPANY’S STEAMERS, to and from Mel-
bourne and Sydney.
S.S. CAMBRIA,
DERWENT and TAMAR INSURANCE Cot.
The “ EXCELSIOR ” STEAM CARRIAGE,
BUGGY, AND AGRICULTURAL IMPLE-
MENT FACTORY, HOBART (NICHOLS,
Proprietor).
Auctioneer and General Merchant,
Having always a Large Stock of
GROCERIES, IRONMONGERY, Ac., for Sale.
SAW-MILLS, BRICK YARD, Ac
SALE HELD WEEKLY. Consignments of all Goods
received for Auction Sales. Prompt Returns.
Letters and Telegrams Promptly Attended to.


The Emporium,
WABATAH, MOUNT BISCHOFF.
* ' tp*
C. tt. ttAIL
Late Assistant Mining Manager Monnt Bischoff Tin
Mining Company, Registered,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
IRONMONGER,
CLOTHIER,
GROCER, &c
A Large Assortment of Miners' and
Prospectors' Tents , Flys , Tools , Boots ,
Clothing , tmcZ Requisites of every
description at the Lowest Prices
All information afforded re the Mineral Resources of
Bischoff and Surrounding Districts, and ar-
rangements made for Packing Goods,'and
procuring Saddle Horses to the
Mineral Fields on the West Coast.
a* ,r
Agencies accepted for Prospecting Associations on
the West Coast, or vicinity of Bischoff.
s— »:«■ *
Telegraphic Address’;— HALL, BISCHOFF.


Belmont Biofd.
Mount Bischoff.
HOTEL, having changed hands,
has been thoroughly Renovated, and
the Proprietor is now prepared to accom
modate the Public at
MODERATE CHARGES
Miners, and Others
visiting the West Coast Mineral Dis-
tricts will find this House Conveniently
Situated.
CHOICEST WINES, SPIRITS, &c., &c.
ALL LETTERS ADDRESSED TO THE
PROPRIETOR WILL RECEIVE IMMEDIATE
ATTENTION.
EVERY INFORMATION GIVEN RESPECTING
THE WEST COAST.
Thos. King, Jr.,
PROPRIETOR.


X -*•
Commercial
STANLEY.
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION.
Wiseman’s Royal Mail Coach leaves here every
morning at 7 o’clock, and arrives at *2 p.m.
SADDLE HORSES <Sf TRAPS ON HIRE.
This Hotel has a Grand Sea View, and is known ns
one of the best on the North-West Coast for
Priva t i: Accommodation.
BATHING. FISHING. BILLIARDS.
E. T. BREHENEY,
PROPRIETOR.
W. WHUEDON,
MELBOURNE HOUSE, EMU BAY,
DRAPER, CLOTHIER & BOOT IMPORTER,
BEGS to acquaint the inhabitants of Emu Bay and Sur-
rounding Districts, also the Travelling Public, that
he has the LARGEST STOCK of
DRAPERY, CLOTHING, and ROOTS
Outside of Launceston, which Goods being bought well
enable him to SELL at MELBOURNE PRICES.
Sole the Address —
W. WHTJLDON,
MELBOURNE HOUSE,
EMU BAY.


BON MARCH
HALL & RITCHIE STREETS,
WAUATAH.
A. W. JOHNSTO
DU A FEB.
Best Value given for money in the Trade. Prospe
and Diggers should give a call.
E. it EVANS
BUKNIE, EMU BAY
IMPORTED AND MANUFACTURER OF
KINDS OF ROOTS, SHOES, & LEGGING
Particular Attention paid to Pepairs, §'c.
■HAYWOOD'S
COMMISSION, LIVERY & BAIT STAR
BUGGIES. PHAETONS, WAGONETTES, Sf SAD
H OESSS on Hire at the Shortest Notice.
Horses Carefully Broken to Saddle and Ha:
WEDDING PARTIES SUPPLIED.
All Steamers waited upon, also the Trai
Rischoif Tin Mines. Every care taken o:
Passengers’ Luggage.
SPECIAL NOTICE ! —Commercial Genii
wishing to he conveyed , icith their samples
Ike Coast, may rely upon punctuality
carefulness.
All Letters and Telegrams will receive prompt att
THO-MAS HAYWOOD, Fropriet
EMU hay, TASMANIA.


AMES KEMPLING,
Excelsior Store,
MAIN STREET,
fAEATAH, MOUNT BISCHOFF
(Three Doors from the Local B*ak).
PROSPECTORS AND MINUS
Are reminded that they can Procmra
TS, FLYS, PICKS,
SHOVELS, PROSPECTING DISH IS.
Etc., Etc. Also
GROCERIES, BOOTS, CLOTHING, AT
LOWEST RATES IN THE TRADI.
JAMES KEMPLINd, Main Street.
EUGUITJ ftOTEi,
NORTH WEST COAST
(Facing the Sea).
COMFORTABLE ACCOMMODATION
For Visitors and Travellers.
Every Attention Paid.
dies from Emu Bay and Formby pass twice
daily each way.
Is Brands of Liquors only. Saddle Horses
for Hire. Good Stabling.
BILLIARD TAB L E
Fishing Parties Organised
letters and Telegrams from Intending Visitors
Promptly Attended to.
Proprietor.


motel,
PENGUIN, TASMANIA.
HIS HOTEL, being New, is in Excellent
Order, and Furnished to suit
all tastes.
LARGE AND ROOMY BILLIARD ROOM,
With one of Alcock’s Best Tables.
Best Spirits, Wines and Ales kept in Stock.
Good Stabling.
—o —
Captain C. ANTIION, Proprietor.
H. FRITH’S
Boot mi a xt,
MAIN STREET, ULYERSTONE.
All Colonial Goods Manufactured on the Premises.
HAIRDRESSING-, SHAVING, & SHAMPOOING.
CIRCULATING LIBRARY,
Sewing Machines Repaired. Newspaper Agent, and
Agent for the Australian Widows’ Fund Life
Assurance.
CHEAP CASH STORES, PENGUIN.
x 4, i.
3) nipt <5. anil
GENERAL STOREKEEPERS, TIMBER
AND PRODUCE MERCHANTS, & INSURANCE
AGENTS.
Foreign Timber, Galvanised Iron, Nails, Locks,
Hinges. All Kinds of Building Materials to
Order. Best Tamar Lime, Cement, Plaster
of Paris, to Order. All Orders Promptly
Attended to.


WEBB’S
LEY EN HOTEL,
NORTH-WEST COAST , TASMANIA.
Visitors and Commercial Gentlemen will find this
Hotel replete with every convenience; All
coaches pass the door.
Bath-room. Spacious Sample Rooms.
Excellent Billiard Table.
Good Stabling, with careful grooms. . .
Fishing and Picnic Parties arranged
This Hotel is well furnished throughout with the most
modern appliances. Letters and telegrams receive im-
mediate attention.
WEBB, Proprietor
LEYEN STORES,
ULVVRSTONK
G. & A. ELLIS,
DRAPERS, GROCERS, IRONMONGERS,
—AND—
GENERAL MERCHANTS.
CASH VCTERU OF COLONIAL FRODUCE


C. & P. NAYLOR,
Carriage Works.
ULVERSTONE.
CARRIAGES BUILT TO ORDER.
Repairs and re-painting neatly executed.
fJTEA jyj'ERCHANTS
AND
FAMILY GROCERS.
We respectfully invite public attention to
OUR STANDARD TEAS,
Which we confidently recommend for Rich
Fragrant, Full-flavored Liquors, of great
Strength and sterling all-round drinking
quality.
The Largest Assortment of Indian and China Teas
on the North-West Coast.
All sizes of packages and all qualities to select from.
Every requisite in the Grocery Department. The
Finest Goods at Lowest Prices.
SAMPLES Sc PRICE LISTS ON APPLICATION.
A. CATTO & COT.,
REIBEY-STREET, ULYERSTONE.


H. G. K. WELLS,
JBPENSISG AND FAMILY CHEMIST'
SURGEON DENTIST.
reicriptions and Family Medicines accurately
diepenstcl.
:rders promptly attended to.
ULVERSTONE AND PENGUIN.
Ci fthtl,
SADDLER,
TJLVERSTONE.
(ESTABLISHED 1876.)
LAND AGENCY.
(Established over Eight years.)
Robert Taylor Robson,
RIVER LEYEN.
'i’arms of everj description for sale ; also, Township
Allotments in Riverstone.
S. W. MARGETTS,
IMPORTER, AUCTIONEER, AND GENERAL
MERCHANT,
Estate and Commission Agent.
CJOSS AND PiFIBY ST., ULVEBSTONE,


EL KLGGrS,
X X
amt <scncral
MERCHANT,
HAMILTON-ON-FOKTH
the Largest, Best, and Cheapest Assort-
‘ ment of GROCERIES*, IRONMONGERY,
DRAPERY, CLOTHING, BOOKS, FURNI-
TURE, MILLINERY, STATIONERY, FANCY
GOODS, CROCKERY, PATENT MEDICINES,
Ac., &
FAMILY GROCER PROVISION DEALER'
ALSO
|||amiUon
(Next to the Town Hall.)
Under the supervision of MRS. RIGGS, where
customers and visitors will find
A CHOICE AND WELL SELECTED
STOCK OF
DRAPERY, MILLINERY, HOSIERY, LADIES’
AND CHILDREN’S UNDERCLOTHING,
MANTLES, BOOTS AND SHOES, and
every requisite for ladies
INSPECTION IS CORDIALLY INVITED


1- ®atte,
. cadi
HAMILTON-ON- FORTH,
FAMILY GROCER,
PROVISION AND TEA DEALER,
AND
GENERAL DEALER.
A LARGE Sf VARIED STOCK OF GOODS ON HAND.
Ironmongery, Drapery, Clothing, Crockery, Boots,
Millinery, Carpets, Flannels, &c., &c.
Dairy Utensils, and all kinds of Tinware.
Cash Buyer of all kinds of Farm and Dairy
Produce.
Visitors to the district can be supplied with all
sorts of fishing tackle of the best quality.
NOTE THE ADDRESS
NEXT to KING’S, BRIDGE HOTEL,
And facing the river.


Bridge Hotel,
J-JAMILTON-ON-pORTH.
Having Purchased the above Hotel , I
am in a position to Accommodate
Travellers in
FIRST-CLASS STYLE
Old Customers will find a JVelcome in
the Usual Manner.
NONE BUT
4. 4. 4.
ir♦; t - <ri as s 3E in no ik
r t T
KEPT.
Scaling, Insning, and SHooting "parlies
arranged for.
C. S. KING,
PROPRIETOR.


B. CUTLER,
GINEBAL STOREKEEPER AND COMMIS-
SION AGENT,
HAMILTON-ON-FORTH
Superior Teas and other Groceries, also Iron-
mongery, Crockery, Glassware, Ac.
Latest Novelties in Millinery , Drapery ,
and Fancy Goods.
JO-ffN DAWES;
WHEELWRIGHT & GENERAL
BLACKSMITH,
lITER FORTH,
HAMILTON.
The Don Hotel.
Hotel is replete with every comfort, and
Travellers and Visitors from all parts may rely
upon Civility and Attention.
Best Brands of Spirits, Wines, Ales, <Sfc.
i.ll Coaches to the Coast stop at this Hotel.
EDWIN CLEAVER, Proprietor.
BELOKAIXE,
J. C. GOODRIDGE - - Proprietor.
♦
EVERY ACCOM ALOE A TIOX FOR
TRAVELLERS AXE FAMILIES.
— * —
SAMPLE ROOMS. GOOD STABLING.
HORSES AND TRAPS FOR HIRE.


FORMBY
corns paiace,
MISS YAXLEY - -
PRIVATE ROOMS FOR FAMILIES-
EVERY ACCOMMODATION FOR
T R A V E LIERS-
Good Staldes and an Efficient Groom.
Terms Liberal.
\£ER S E Y MPOR I U M
3umc. & (So..
DRAPERS, CLOTHIERS, IRONMON-
GERS. FANCY GOODS,
STATIONERY, Etc.
STEWART STREET (Opposite Sea View Hotel),
FORMBY,. TASMANIA.
0, HAWKINS,
FAMILY GROCER,
GENERAL AND FURNISHING -IRONMON-
GER, SEED AND PROVISION
MERCHANT,
Imperial Store,
STEWART STREET, FORMBY.


h, a, mrr,
FAMILY & SHIPPING BUTCHER,
FORMS Y,TASMANIA.
r*
(» " a)
XXX I
H)am A* factor,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL.
All Intercolonial Orders specially
attended to.
H. A. PRATT also executes Commissions
for India and the Queensland trade.
LEWIS GRANT,
Pi ioduce Dealer
AND SHIPPER,
STEWART STREET, FORMBY.
Isaac Chapman,
3?)oot and -SBh Weaker
Ready-made Boots kept in hand.
Stitched Boots made to order. Repairs neatly
executed. Just received a nice assortment
of Ladies’ Shoes.
STEWART STREET, FORMBY.


Under the Patronage
the Governors
of their Excellen
of Tasmania.
SEA YIE v
HOTEL,
FORMBY, TASMANIA
The above Hotel is Convenient] y Situated, dost
Wharf and Railway, commanding a good vie
of the Mersey River and the open Sea,
besides some very beautiful scenery.
All the Appointments of a First-Class Hot
Private Suites oe Rooms may
Engager upon giving Notice r
Letter or Telegram.
'First-Class Sample for Sommer
(scenll eraen.
Best Wines, Spirits, Ales, &c., &c
Every attention given to all who visit t:
Hotel.
To Suit Passengers going by early Tr
SITBTJ'EK
On Arrival of the Coach.
GOOD STABLES. EXPERIENCED A
CAREFUL GROOMS.
J. F.
Groslin,
Froprl


F. E. DUKE,
FOEMBY, T
XX x
|£amt, anil general
COMMISSION AGENT.
ILLOTMENTS for SALE in the rising town of
Formbij , £25 and upwards , on the most
reasonable terms.
Also , FARMS to LET and SELL on the Earth
West Coast.
Correspondence strictly attended to.
A, $. P-HIUIFS,
AUCTIONEER,
LAND, ESTATE,
AND
GENERAL COMMISSION AGENT,
TORMBY. TASMANIA.


SYDNEY GRIFFITHS,
Railway Store,
FOB MB Y,
fta s on Sale Drapery, Grocery, and Ironmongery of
every description ; also Boots and Shoes, Fancy
Goods, and Crockery.
Visitors to Forwby would do well hy inspecting the well-
assorted stock of Goods, which has been selected from the
best English and Australian Houses.
N.B.—YACHTS BUILT TO ORDER.
JOHN HARDSTAEE,
Jformbij p|akjZF]j,
STEWART STREET, FORMBY.
CONFECTIONER, FANCY BREAD AND
BISCUIT BAKER.
English and Scotch Confectionery and Biscuits by Best
Makers only kept in Stock.
A Large Stock of JJrapery, Grocery, Crockery, Boots
and Shoes, and General Merchandise always
on hand.
§torquap
Visitors to Torquay will find this Hotel
eery comfortable, where every care
and attention is given.
THE FINEST QUALITY OF WINES, SPIRITS,
ALES, Etc.
FISHING TACKLE AND BOATS KEPT FOR
THE USE OF VISITORS.
Telegrams and Letters receive prompt
attention.
ALFRED 0. WILLIAMS,
Proprietor.


Mersey Hotel,
TORQUAY, TASMANIA.
(Close to the Victoria Perry.)
FASHIONABLE SEASIDE RESORT.
FISHING, BOATING, AND PICNIC PARTIES
made up. Fishing Taekle always on hand.
MEALS AT ALL HOURS.
BEST BRANDS OF MINES AND SPIRITS.
GOOD STABLING.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY
ATTENDED TO.
T. FARE JELL, Jun,
Proprietor


X I
if). ff n c U c r r
ESPLANADE STORE & BAKERY,' TORQUAY,
Wishes to draw the attention of the public generally
to his Splendid Stock of
GENERAL STORES,
Which he is prepared to offer to the public at VERY
REASONABLE PRICES.
All Goods are of the Finest Quality. Country customers are
invited to inspect his stock.
G. TUCKER.
ESPLANADE STOKE, TORQUAY.
DEVON BREWERY,
SPBEYTON, TASMANIA.
+ x
Jamieson
(LATE OF SALE, GTp'pSLANJJ, VICTORLA)
R R E W E R.
STEAM CRATED WATER AND CORDIAL
MANUFACTORY.
Patronised by
His Excellency
the late
(Late Governor of Tasmania.)
Visitors to the North-West Coast of Tasmania
will find
JBRAMI CITS
ROYAL HOTEL,
LATBOBB,
VERY COMFORTABLE. FIRST-CLASS AC-
COMMODATION FOR FAMILIES,
TRAVELLERS AND BOARDERS.
Choicest Wines and Spirits in Stock.
Good Stabling* and Careful Grooms.
Letters and telegrams promptly attended to.


•I. A. WHIT E.
GILBERT STREET, LATROBE.
BOOKS, STATIONERY, FANCY GOODS
CRICKETING MATERIAL,
TOBACCONISTS’ WARES,
NEWSPAPERS & PERIODICALS.
Musical Instruments of all description.
Produce Merchants and Direct Importers.
E. & W. L. BARTEETT,
GENERAL STOREKEEPERS.
DEPARTMENTS —Drapery (in all its branches), Grocery,
Fancy Goods, Stationery, Ironmongery, Saddlery, China,
Glass, Sec.; Grain, Flour, and General Farm Produce.
Cheapest, Largest, and best Assorted Stock on
North-West Coast.
Purchasers of Farm Produce in any quantity.
|£afrolic irerg
(OPPOSITE BRAMICH’S HOTEL.)
Wagonettes and Saddle Horses on hire at the
shortest notice.
WEDDING PARTIES SUPPLIED.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to
Horses and Conveyances Bought and Sold on
Commission.
R. A. DARGAYILLE,
COMMISSION AGENT,
PROPRIETOR.


0, A, WAKE-HAM
STILL MAKES—
BUGGIES, PAGNALS,
CHAISE CARTS, WAGONS,
DRAYS, PLOUGHS, &c.
ENCOjURAGE LOCAL INDUSTRY.
YU LOAN WORKS,
GILBERT STREET, LATROBE,
TASMANIA.
INNIS’S
BOOT FACTORY,
GILBERT STREET, LATROBE.
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
Repairs neatly executed on the shortest notice.
CHARGES MODERATE.
Please Note the Address.
CLUB HOTEL,
latrobe, N.W. Coast, Tasmania.
A. GARDINER (Late Gillespie)
Has Good Accommodation for Visitors and Commercial
Travellers.
Two minutes' walk from Railway-station.
Wines and Spirits of the Best Brands always in
Stock. TERMS MODERATE.
A. GARDINER, Proprietor.


No. 1 Coffee Palace
LATROBE.
R. BOHMANN & O. KREISSIG,
PROPRIETORS.
Every comforts of home. Piano, Chess, Draughts. The
BEST APPOINTED BILLIAKD TABLE
On the North West Coast. Special arrangements for
permanent boarders. Good Stabling.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
C L E A HS
(Late EAST’S)
FAMILY mm,
GILBERT STREET, LATROBE.
last’s Wotei,
OPPOSITE THE RAILWAY,
RAIL T 0 1N T ,
TASMANIA
Tills Hotel is replete with every comfort. Eight
miles pleasant drive from Latrobe.
The Finest Quality of Wines, Spirits, Ales, Ac-
Good Stabling.
JAMES EAST, PROPRIETOR.


ZTAff
3/gUQ
•ffO&olb m
fvW. D. TUNE,
LITTLE WONDER STORE,
RAILTON, TASMANIA,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL STOREKEEPER,
FAMILY GROCER,
PROVISION AND TEA DEALER,
DRAPERY, IRONMONGERY, CROCKERY, AND
BOOTS, &c.
Special notice to visitors. —All hinds of
Fishing Tackle kept on hand.
All kinds of Colonial Produce Long!it or
exchanged for goods at
HIGHEST RATES.
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO STOREKEEPERS
AND OTHERS.
Yinegae Manufactory
THIS VINEGAR HAS BEEN PRONOUNCED BY THE
CONNOISEURS AS EQUAL TO “ CHAMPIONS’ n
BEST. ONCE USED ALWAYS USEO. NO
FAMILY SHOULD BE WITHOUT IT.
■yy. D. TUNE - - Manufacturer*


J. J. Winter.
STOREKEEPER AND GENERAL DEALER,
RAILTON
A Large Stock of DRAPERY, GROCERY,
CROCKERY, BOOTS and SHOES
always on hand.
Cash Bayer of Dairy Produce, Grain'and Timber.
COACHES,
FROM CHUD LEIGH TO DELORAINE AND
BACK DAILY.
( -'hvdleigh * > .80 a.m. for Deloraine, returning on
arrival >: first train from Launceston
S. — iV;i il taken to Mole Creek and Caveside on after-
noon. ref o ning same day to Chudleigh. Horses and
hit es to lot. Visiters to the Caves should
respond with the proprietor and mail
contractor.
SMITH - - - Proprietor.
ESTABLISHED 33 YEARS
DELORAINE PANTECHNETHECA.
J. JR. & N. HART,
GENERAL IMPORTERS.
DELORAINE AND CHUDLEIGH.
«HE Largest Establishment in the District, and
supply at Lowest Prices every Household
Requisite, Drapery, Grocery, Ironmongery, Farm_
ing Implements, Machinery, &c., &c.
AGENTS FOR
THE MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE OF TASMANIA
THE AUSTRALIAN MUTUAL PROVIDENT SOCIETY
Messrs. HOPVVOOD & JAMES, and Messrs. WALCH
A R IRC HAL L, News Agents, etc.
N.B —Jnly best quality Goods kept at this
Escao ishment.


PENGUIN,
To Tourists and Yisitors
Do not fail to visit the Penguin, the healthiest,
prettiest, and most delightful place on the Coast
in the Colony.
WATCOMBE HOUSE,
Close to the sea y a lovely beach , surrounded by a
large fruit and flower garden (two acres).
Visitors will find every comfort they can wish for.
CHARGES MODERATE. Quite accessible by
coach and steamer. Boating and fishing (salt and
fresh water) to be had in the neighborhood.
Extract from Visitors’ Book :—“ January 2, 1888. —This
is our third visit to Watcombe House, and as before
we have had reason to be more than satisfied with the
attention shown us by Mr. and Mrs. Sullock. —Mr. and
Mrs. Fox, Horton College, Tasmania.”
Letters and telegrams promptly attended to.
F. SULLOCK - - - PROPRIETOR.
