

OLONISATION
IN i 876
Yf
Price One Shilling.
■■ • ' -■*" ■ •• •
<Sg*me}):
TURNER AND HENDERSON, HUNTER STREET.
3NDERSON, HUNTER STREET.
0 I
MDCCCLXXVI.
.. A




lONISATION
fv4s Published in the Sydney Morning Herald, September and
<Ssincg:
TURNER AND HENDERSON, HUNTER STREET,
MDCCCLXXVI.
October , 1876 J


4
Pamphlets by the same Writer—
BUSH ESSAYS. Adam and Charles Black, Edinburgh, 1872.
THE SQUATTING SYSTEM OF AUSTRALIA. Bell and
Bradfute, Edinburgh, 1875.
BUSH ESSAYS.—“A vigorous monograph, by ‘ Capricornus,’ is
well worth the attention of all interested in emigration
questions.”—Westminster Review, January 7, 1873.
The Rev. Dr. Lang refers to these essays in his History of New
South Wales, page 133, vol. 2.


I f i
W' W* *1
COLONISATION IN 1876,
Above the dust and smoke-raised by last year’s debate on the
Amended Land Act, there loomed a Phantom, shadowy and
unnoticed no doubt by the public men of the day, busy as
usual with their engrossing trade of politics, but in the eyes
of those who had leisure to look and to reflect, the vision rose
dark and menacing.
Our land administration had resulted in the growth of two
hostile interests, both represented by large number of settlers.
Legislation had endowed these classes equally with a title to
the national soil, and, consequently, the necessities of exist-
ence prompted them to mutual destruction.
Increased wealth and population daily stimulated the
enmity of the two factions, till Parliament was shamed into
interference. The result was the late Act, which applied
superficial remedies to some of the symptoms of disorder, but
left the real disease, the source of discord, unhealed.
An overflowing Treasury had been filled by the contest.—
Centralisation poured money into Sydney till it filled the
streets with new buildings, and filled every tavern with new
customers.
Such prosperity had never been seen before, and moreover
good seasons and high prices gave their guarantee for its
permanent continuance.
But still the shadowy warning points forward to the dim
future, and those who can look back and remember the past
may perhaps read the interpretation.
If there is evil ahead, it will not come from niggard
nature, sterile soil, or bare pastures.
Our fair Australia, “ the grassy wilderness ’mid summer
seas,” if blessed with the guidance of common sense might
still be all and more than has been limned in the visions of
the poet, or shadowed in the dreams of the patriot; might
still offer plenty and welcome not only to millions of our


countrymen at home, but might restore to healthy and hardy
life thousands of families now fading away in the back slums
of our towns.
Though scorched with the nearly year-long drought, see
how smilingly she still yields her increase, and how bounte-
ously she has repaid the little that has been done to help her
through her trouble !
But the warning tells of other evils, against which nature’s
bounty provides no protection. It points to the dry rot of the
nineteenth century, the symptoms here as elsewhere being
commercial dishonesty and corrupt government. In mockery
of our “ prosperity,” it pictures the fool’s Paradise of the
prodigal living on the sale of the children’s heritage, and
feeding litigation and usury with waste and strife. It shows
an excessive town population, unproductive, reckless, and
needy, struggling round a Treasury chest filled with black
mail and tribute money.
Our increasing numbers do not filter quietly and naturally
into the hundred channels of wholesome rural life ; but we
find the progress of settlement marked by a yearly widening
circle of discord and chicanery on the one hand, and on the
other are to be seen the youth of the colony crowding into
the towns to become stock-jobbers and billet-seekers, leaving
behind the forest and the plain, the axe and the saddle, to
cook ledgers and scramble for public money.
Facts and figures show alike that since free selection has
been in operation, the town population as compared with the
rural, is proportionally greater than it was in 1861 ; a strong
proof of an unwholesome and one-sided growth.
But there are not many of us who care to watch the signs
of the times. The day’s work is enough for most; and
whether public matters are right or wrong, few either know
or care, so long as the pocket is not touched. Folks say,
“ Things as they are will last our time, and those that come
after may look out for themselves.” A good many take one
side or the other in the agrarian feud carried on between
squatter and selector, and a good many more, influenced by
the growing patronage and expenditure of Government, look
upon the Crown lands mainly as a means for raising money
to be spent in Sydney. Such are the political opinions of
New South Wales.


But all such views must be alike distasteful to those
who wish well to the cause of true colonisation, as distinct
from the chaos of strife and confusion in which we are
now bewildered, and through which we search in vain for
light. Without a pole star to steer by, we have drifted
clear away from pristine settlement, with its youthful vigour
and simple abundance. No longer are our ways those of
the pioneers who subdued the wilderness, but prematurely
senile, we have too faithfully repeated the lessons of “ that
artificial drudgery miscalled civilisation,” till our work as
colonists has lost all distinctive meaning, and the habitudes
and trickeries of great cities, with their wealth and their
poverty, their speculations and insolvencies, have become as
our daily food.
But the colony now approaches a stage in her career
which will be memorable. Before long the permanence of
that prosperity which has enriched her will be tested.
Already clouds are gathering which presage a time of trouble
certain to come, with changes periodical in their recurrence.
When that day of trial comes, then the facts of our wasted
territory and misapplied resources will be forced on the
attention of thousands, and many will then ask if we are,
after all, on the right track. If the question is seriously
looked into, it will be seen that the past history of the colony
discloses facts in numbers, which show clearly enough the
direction in which sound policy and safety are to be found, a
knowledge that might aid to throw light on the dark and
tangled future.
The following reflections, gleaned from various sources,
are now offered in the hope that they might excite interest,
and prompt inquiry, possibly tending to some good results.


CHAPTER 11.
Few colonists, even though engaged in public life, know
or care much for the doings of the early days, but some can
go back fifteen years.
At that time, when free selection became law in New
South Wales, a generation had passed since squatting first
became an institution. Although not the earliest form of
settlement adopted in Australia, still squatting was the only
form of land-occupation known to the bulk of the colonists in
iB6i. In its thirty years of life, it had seen the wool-export
rise to a value which before would have been thought fabu-
lous ; it had seen a commercial city grow on the shores of
Port Jackson, and it had faced and survived the gold dis-
covery.
Some few of the colonists remembered the days when
Major Mitchell with his bullock-teams tracked the Western
rivers, and prophecied the time when freehold farms and
villages would dot the valleys of the Namoi and Karaula, as
they even then covered the plains on the Wambool.*
The old explorer, as he pointed out the lines of future
settlement, discoursed wisely and well of the dangers of land
monopoly ; but his prophecies became void, and his wisdom
was thrown away, for in 1861 most of the people of New
South Wales knew only of the squatters’ stations and the
diggers’ camps, and had never heard either of the adven-
turous Major, or of the old system of colonisation which he
represented.
But, during this thirty years, squatting, from being in its
infancy, had advanced till it founded a dominion of its own
which shadowed the whole colony ; stations in numbers had
been formed, sold, and bought; rises and falls of prices had
made and lost fortunes ; interests and customs had become
encrusted; the possession of station property had become as
thoroughly recognised by the State as house property in
George Street, and all the resources, hopes, and duties of
hundreds of families were moulded in this legalised groove.
So far as many of those concerned knew, it had been so
Upper Macquarie.


from time immemorial, or since the colony began ; and the
echoes which at times reached their ears from the towns and
diggings, telling that their lands would be wanted by-and-bye
for other people, seemed only like the envious radicalism of
those who neither would nor could work for themselves.
But to those few who knew the facts of the past, the Agra-
rian Revolution which took the form of Free Selection could
not have been unexpected.
The argument first used in justification of squatting, when
it superseded the original freehold system of settlement, was
that the chronic condition of the interior was drought and
starvation.
“ What was the use of granting land or settling population
where nothing would grow—where for years there was no
water in many of the creeks and rivers—and where the
squatter, a nomad by necessity, could keep his stock alive
only by moving them about ?”
But this logic had long ceased to have weight. Most of
the “nomads” had never found occasion to shift their home-
steads since they first went out.
Though every local and temporary scarcity of grass or
water was appealed to in proof of this early theory, still
experience showed yearly that the country was very unlike
the original estimate, and each new disaster served only to
develop unsuspected capabilities. From the first day that
the sheep and cattle of the pioneer tread down the grass;
from the time that the first dray-wheel cuts the surface of the
wilderness, and the first axe lops open gaps in the forest, a
change in soil and herbage begins. The consequence is
nearly always more grass and more water —the pasture
thickens, dry creeks fill, and swamps become standing
lagoons.
“Wiradgery” was taken up as able to carry only four
thousand sheep, there being only one small waterhole in the
middle of an ocean of dry grassy plains. In fifteen years the
owner had sold one-half of the run, stocked, for and
had thirty thousand sheep on the other half.
As this was the history of many and many a station, the
opinion began to gain ground that the inland wastes were not
so worthless as was at first believed, and it became clear to
all who could understand what was going on, that a country


which unfolded such resources under mere squatting occupa-
tion, must show greater capabilities still under regular settle-
ment, with the systematic improvements sure to follow.
These facts as they came to light, told in complete refuta-
tion of the theory on which the squatting tenure rested, and
there could be no question that on national grounds it was
desirable to apply an organized method of settlement to the
squatting country; but there was this obstacle—the lands
had been already disposed of, and law, custom, and vested
interests alike forbade a change.
Still it was clear now that the mode of allotment first
adopted on the Hunter and Upper Macquarie would do
equally well on the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee, Of those
inland pastures one acre was worth three of the poorer
country to the eastward ; and if water was scarce on the
back runs, there were miles and miles of frontage to running
rivers and wide-spreading reaches and lagoons, fringed with
huge gum trees and dark green casuarina, as fit for farms and
homesteads as Yass Plains or the Wollondilly.
The form of settlement aimed at by the early Governors
was one of freeholds and villages, the properties being of all
sizes, from the estate of thousands of acres down to the
labourer’s allotment of forty or fifty. By a graduated scale
of distribution, neither altogether favouring the large nor the
small settler, both were provided for, and the method suited
those also who were neither capitalists nor labourers, thus
avoiding the marked contrasts now shown everywhere, and
the unbridged chasm that divides our two classes of holdings
—the station and the selection.
The frontages to rivers and main roads were economically
allotted according to survey rules, and the unsold back
country was left open in an easy way, so that the settlers
might get the use of the grass for their stock at small cost.
This method could not be said to have the merit of per-
fection ; but there is proof that it allowed full scope to all
rural industries ; it economised the land, and it decidedly
favoured the wholesome growth of population.
Thus this early policy seems, it may be accidentally, to
have in some measure, hit a fair middle course between the
extreme views now held by squatter and selector. The
modern squatting theory looks upon population as objection-


able, except in the form qf vagrant labour, and pins its whole
faith to the production of wool and live stock. The selector’s
theory, on the one hand, aims mainly at the settlement of
population, but disregards the natural tendencies of country
and climate, and professes (a profession seldom put in prac-
tice), to occupy the whole interior in small arable farms.
With our present light it is easy to see to what extremes
either one policy or the other, having full scope, would lead
us. Carrying out the squatter’s theory without check, we
would have a regular plantation system, with absentee pro-
prietors and no country population ; in fact not a country or
a nation in any sense at all, but a second West Indies, ruled
by attorneys, bankers, and overseers. On the other hand, if
it were possible to carry out the selector’s theory (which
practically is seldom attempted), we would have a community
perhaps able to live, but producing nothing marketable, and
consequently without a revenue, and unable to make railways
and other public works.
Our present combined or rather antagonistic methods of
squatting and selection act like opposing forces let loose
without restraint or foresight. The machinery works at the
cost of immense waste, public injury, and private suffering,
ruining equally squatters and selectors, wasting the territory,
and above all effectually obstructing colonisation. Under the
old system there was only the one tenure, and that was the
freehold grant. The early legislators seem to have known
that human flesh and blood were as valuable staples as wool
and tallow, and so without straining theory in either direction
they often’succeeded, though in a patchy and imperfect way,
in founding what turned out to be wholesome and durable
settlement.
In this no foregone theories laid down, that the man with
thousands of acres alone was to graze stock, and the man
with tens or hundreds was to follow the plough. One uni-
versal tendency asserted itself then as at the present day, and
consequently grain was grown only where special induce-
ments appeared, while all and sundry then as now put every
farthing they had into stock. For once, in the history of
New South Wales, settlement was allowed to follow a natural
bent, and there being no vested interest then in possession of
the pastures, the immense area of unoccupied territory served


to solve, then, as it might, rationally used, solve now, all
questions between the big and the small settler, between
the large squatter who now can never get enough of land,
and the selector who, at times, needs to be a clever fellow
to get any at all.
The Queensland Act of 1868 is perhaps proving, more fully
than any other legislation in Australia, the possibility of
reconciling grazing with the existence of population. It is
remarked in the districts where this Act has come into force,
that a substantial class of grazing farmers is springing up
equally distinct from the selectors of the other colonies and
from the squatters. In this the Queensland law resembles the
old system in New South Wales; the population is not
divorced from the standard industry of the country, and also
in another important respect the resemblance appears—the
land is not wasted by being cut up by competing claims and
overriding tenures.
There is an element of wealth in solid freehold settlement
that does not show in the columns of staple exports, but
which is not less real and tangible. This is shown in many
of the old settled districts by the steady increase in the value
of land, and in the large numbers of well-to-do families sup-
ported on small holdings. A dozen of such families may
often be seen living within an area less than one good squat-
ting station —and last, not least, it is proved in their freedom
from the loafer or tramp, as compared with the greatly richer
western districts.
A trip up the Hunter, over any of the coast country, or
along the western watershed, will show instances of density
of settlement combined with substantial prosperity unlike
anything to be seen in the best of the squatting districts.
The preliminary survey under which these lands were first
allotted has proved a safeguard against many evils, and the
result appears now in striking contrast to the modern system
of selection before survey, under the early method, conflict-
ing claims being nearly unkown, and all waste in distribution
prevented.
Modern legislation, on the other hand, prompts both
squatter and selector to pick the eyes out of the country, and
thus has been inaugurated a system of attack and reprisals
as wasteful of the lands as it is hurtful to the union and


welfare of the people; and from this source, mainly, is de-
rived the enormous land revenue now coming into the Trea-
sury. Swarms of politicians and officials live on the fruit of
this discord, and many a Ministry has reaped a harvest of
place and patronage, and enriched the coffers of the State,
by threatening one interest and cajoling the other. If the
purpose of our land administration is to colonize New South
Wales, then there is much to be said in favour of the early
method ; if, on the contrary, we want to choke settlement,
and to get a large revenue to spend in Sydney, then our
present arrangements are admirable ; for while the law
encourages the selector to harass the squatter it also supplies
means to the squatter to extinguish his adversary. This can
generally be managed by spending money freely, though
indeed the ultimate result is occasionally fatal to both sides.
Such then was the first form of settlement aimed at, and,
as its remains show, with some success; but in 1861 the
system had for a generation been displaced by squatting
occupation. By this time the squattages had largely got into
the hands of owners to whom all these changes of pasture,
policy, and tenure were as old fables. Few of them knew
anything of former times. Unlike the first squatters, who
took possession of their runs without either paying or asking
leave, they had paid heavy prices for stock and stations.
Ostensibly, they were great proprietors, but being heavily
weighted with high prices and interest, many of them were
working merely for the chance of reversion, and consequently
they had no views on land policy except such as were imme-
diately practical and personal to themselves.
To the general public, the right interpretation of the
squatting tenure might be an open question; but to station
owners, handicapped as they were, any law that did not
make their lands their own absolutely, the same as their
sheep and cattle, simply involved ruin, and they might in
consequence, be turned out of their stations any day pen-
niless.
Squatting had, in fact, to a large extent been sucked into
the machinery of commerce. Legislation had done all it
could to facilitate transfer and mortgage, in very marked con-
trast to its ordinary delay and apathy ; and this end was
served so effectually that it is much easier at the present day


to get the transfer of a squattage of half a million of acres
than to get a freehold grant of a plot of ground to make a
garden.
Necessarily it followed that all those views favourable to
real colonisation which marked the early policy were virtually
abandoned.
But those who could recollect the days of the overlanders
and the opening of Port Phillip, and who observed the
changes described, had little doubt that some revolution in
the land law must come.
Under these circumstances free selection arose. It was
the instinctive protest of the multitude against what was, as
it affected them, national confiscation; but, unguided by
reason, it struck not against the system, but against a class ;
and worked by faction, the evils it has caused more than
balance the good it has done.
Thus, under one law, large grazing properties had been
formed on which for over thirty years the labours and earn-
ings of thousands of people were sunk, chiefly, moreover,
because there was no other opening for them. New people
came on the stage, views of policy changed, and the public,
who had' certainly been landless and homeless from mis-
government, but not by the action of those who had carried
on the great industry of the colony, were by law incited to
invade, spoil, and seize the lands already under lease ; either,
as they might choose, to acquire homesteads, or to levy black
mail by impounding, or otherwise to practise extortion.
Such was the inheritance of the colonists in 1861. Our
standard industry, as legally constituted, was made hostile
to popular settlement, while legislation at the same time
prompted the people to root out and destroy that which, in
the absence of a better method, had hitherto given the work-
ing people of New South Wales food and employment.
Destruction, not reform, was the policy of the day.


CHAPTER 111.
It was not to be expected that the squatters would submit
tamely to the action of free selection, after law and usage had
for a lifetime condoned titles, and guaranteed possessions,
often acquired at heavy cost. Now the fruits of their labour
and outlay were liable at any moment to be torn from them
by the operation of a law avowedly framed to encourage
agricultural settlement, but really far better adapted to
suggest and incite wanton spoliation.
While admitting this much, and moreover maintaining
that the present strenuous resistance of the squatters to
selection is perfectly justifiable and absolutely necessary in
their peculiar position, it is by no means argued that squatting
is, of itself, a good system for using our grazing country, any
more than that the opposing system of selection is a good
arrangement for the settlement of population.
It must equally, in fairness, be admitted that the landless
public, with perfect right and justice, looked to the law of
selection to get them that share in the national inheritance
which is the birthright of every colonist, and which is always
offered to the immigrant as the prime inducement to come to
a new country; but, at the same time, the power given to
the selector by law to enter upon the holding of the squatter,
and spoil it at his pleasure, is revolting to all natural sense of
right.
A stranger versed in the ways of mankind, and familiar
w th the practices of government elsewhere, might well ask
how such a system of strife could be legalised by any civilized
people. He would wonder at the prominent features of the
two opposing methods of occupation, and he might possibly
remark that the selection law gave evidence of a strong vin-
dictive feeling, and an utter absence of public integrity,
while squatting, as a system, appeared utterly incomprehen-
sible in connection with any plan of national colonisation,
and exhibited an audacity almost unparalleled in its claim to
the lands. He would naturally ask, how such a state of
things could have arisen, and whether there was no way to
do justice to both factions without setting them at each
others’ throats.


He would be told in explanation, that the squatters merely
got the use of the lands until they were needed for cultiva-
tion ; and that they were expected to resign their holdings
quietly, whenever they were wanted by the people. In the
meantime, they were assessed for the pasture and granted
transferable leases, subject to the selector’s intrusion.
Experience of Government and of human nature would
alike lead him to condemn the institution of such a temporary
or imperfect title, for the reason that no tenant, after obtain-
ing possession, would ever willingly yield up an acre of his
holding to any claimant, and the more prosperous his tenancy,
the less yielding the tenant would certainly be ; and our
visitor would moreover point out that there was double deal-
ing involved in making such a conditional tenure transferable
for valuable consideration. It was, in fact, providing a way
for entrapping buyers under pretence of a legal title, which,
under due pressure, would, to a certainty, be treated as waste
paper.
He would have denounced the whole arrangement, first for
placing one class in the odious position of monopolists, and
then afterwards treating them like outlaws ; first handing
them over the pastures of the colony, and then, after they
had expended their means and labour on them, prompting
and inciting their plunder; the whole tending to black mail
being paid in millions and lawsuits without number, enriching
the Treasury and the capital, and surely destroying large
numbers of the opposing classes. He would point out that
the common talk of the selfishness of the squatter and the
villainy of the selector, was merely feeble and shallow railing;
but that the real evil that ground down both, was a system
that strengthened centralisation and political jobbery, and
sacrificed both sides to enrich a town population of politicians,
money lenders, and publicans.
But while he could hardly fail to be struck with the short-
sighted avarice by which we see only a source of wealth in
that which is really a public misfortune ; and while he would
look with interest on the intense vitality which we display in
a scramble for public money, he could not fail to observe our
apathy and ignorance in matters of public policy, where
neither ready cash nor popular faction were concerned.
As the people, so have been their rulers, and the action of


that branch of administration of all others the most important
in a ) T oung country, must indeed appear wonderful to such an
experienced observer.
In the occupation of these colonies, almost every step in
advance has been taken without the sanction, and often
without the knowledge of Government.
The colonists push on, doing as they think fit, The
Government lags in the rear, straining at gnats and swallow-
ing camels, and when legislature comes to deal with facts,
often too late, it is sure to be meagre and narrow, entirely
wanting in statesmen-like foresight, often dictated by some
clique or some subordinate official, and adopted without an
effort at observation, actual knowledge, or careful study.
When the great squatting migration began forty years
ago, the authorities were no more prepared to meet it than
their successors would now be ready to deal with an earth-
quake or an invasion. There was no want of warning. The
increase of live stock flowing westward, and the pressure of
the leading free settlers towards the frontier, told of what was
coming. The spirit of adventure was rising, and every man
who had fifty pounds was putting it in sheep or cattle. It
was clear as the sun that grazing was to be the standard
industry of Australia ; but the vigilance which should have
foreseen, and the wisdom which should have directed, a
natural and inevitable tendency, were equally wanting. In
its infancy, this new-born power might, blended with the
original policy of settlement, have been reconciled with the
growth of population ; but the authorities were too busy to
think of such matters. They had just found a mare’s nest.
The Wakefield scheme had been introduced, and they were
raising the price of land and surveying townships on the
coast. Meanwhile the plains and rivers of the western interior
were occupied by the pioneers. Squatterdom was founded,
and the first step was taken towards the great land feud.


CHAPTER IV.
The squatting body has always held on the defensive,
watchful, and separate from the community. Though its
members have been the pioneers of nearly all Australia, and
though they represent the most powerful interest in the
country, still they never have been part and parcel of the
Australian people. When prosperous, they are toadied to as
great proprietors ; when hard up, they are abused as public
robbers. Legislation with one hand treats them as outlaws,
and with the other helps them to pick the eyes out of the
country, but at no time are they met as fellow-citizens on
the common ground of mutual confidence and well defined
rights.
The position of squatting is like that of a foreign power
rooted in the country, living on the common territory, but
with all its sympathies apart. It has become so, not from
any peculiar characteristic distinguishing its members, or
from any deliberate policy of legislation, but from the circum-
stances which gave it birth.
With an outward resemblance to the feudal tenure, shown
in the marked pre-eminence given to a class of crown tenants,
it is equally obstructive to general progress ; but it contrasts
disadvantageously with that older form of tenancy in its
complete isolation and want of all local and personal attach-
ments.
Squatting happens to exist in an age of peace and law—
indeed it could not stand a day in other circumstances; but
even with this security it is a miserable failure as compared
with the tenure of the middle ages, so far as the support and
benefit of a population are concerned. A feudal community
was rooted in the soil, and welded together by kinship, pos-
sessing cohesion that bound it together like a chain of steel.
It really inhabited the country it occupied, and if the times
were rough, they were favourable to forming strong family,
social, and national ties.
A squatting community, on the other hand, is few in
numbers. It holds the wilderness unpeopled ; its members
are mainly weekly men and managers ; its chief and pro-


prietors are often, except financially, mere shadows ; it has
little family life, and no local or tribal interests or attach-
ments ; in fact being only a dry money interest, it is socially
litt e more than a vacuum in the State, and as adding to the
national strength, it is a rope of sand.
Moreover in every other aspect, both industrial and social,
the system is for the country a blunder and a misfortune.
As a producing industry, it is hampered by insecurity
which involves constant risk and loss, and at the best it is
but a scheme to enable the lucky to make money to spend
elsewhere.
It narrows down the enjoyment of the soil practically to a
mere microscopic fraction of the people, and it wholly prevents
the growth of local wealth and substantial improvement.
The large fortunes made at times by the periodical fluctuation
of prices, but poorly counterbalance the hundreds of lives
wasted in its labours, and afford no substitute' for the real
strength and wealth of a country which cannot exist along
with it —namely, a people living in cheap independence and
rural health and plenty.
Besides, the isolation of the squatting body has undoubt-
edly caused its members to contract class views, which it is
not unfair to call narrow and unsympathetic.
When their voice has been, heard in legislation, it has
generally been in favour of obstructive measures, showing an
unmistakeable craving to choke national growth. Twenty-
five years ago the squatters raised a posthumous wail for the
resti ration of convict labour, and for a return to direct
Crown government, and still some of them have a lavourite
opinion, confidentially whispered at times, “ that education
is the curse of the country.” On the whole system there is
the stamp of caste and privilege, strongly imprinted, the mark
of bygone times and ideas, strikingly out of place when
exhibited in the persons of the present sta*ion-owners, who,
in character, education, culture, and origin, have nothing
whatever to distinguish them from any other class of colo-
nists. But with the peculiar institution the traditions of the
order have been handed down, and are now maintained by
men who do not know how they got them.
To see the real germ from which this anti-national growth
sprang, we are led back to the old times when the community


consisted of a small privileged caste of free settlers and
officials in the midst of hordes of bondsmen. The policy
of the Government about the year 1820 encouraged a
superior class of immigrants to come to the country, with the
really wise and worthy motive of giving a higher tone to
colonial life, and in the following years hundreds of the class
wanted came to New South Wales. The circumstances of
a penal colony necessarily placed those new comers at once in
the position of a privileged class.
If discipline pressed heavily on the convict and the common
soldier, gentlemen did very much as they liked. Their
comings and goings were looked upon with favour; they got
welcome and honourable treatment from the authorities, and
substantial assistance was given to them at first, till their
number became too great to be easily satisfied, and then, that
which might have been made a source of strength became the
root of discord. The usual apathy and want of foresight
inherent in the Government failed to provide means for the
absorption of this valuable element of population, and conse-
quently that happened which our countrymen have never failed
to do when their wants were disregarded. They helped
themselves.
The administration of the lands was throughout irritating
and inconsistent. Grants had been at first freely given
according to rule; then they were bestowed capriciously.
Once when the local Government had adopted a reasonable
policy, the Imperial authorities interfered and raised the price
of land too high for settlers to buy. At one time the feeding
of stock beyond the official frontier was p-ohlbited; then
one Governor legalised squatting, and the next tried to crush
the squatters with assessment; and all this official action
pressed especially upon the members of this one class, who,
after being invited to settle in the colony at their own ex-
pense, could not but feel galled and exasperated at the vexatious
meddling which confronted them always from the official side.
So they turned their backs on rules and regulations, and com-
mitted their fortunes to the wilderness.
A new-comer wanted to put his money into sheep and
cattle, and get pasture for them, as he had been advised to do
when he left home, so he would apply to the local officials for
advice. He was perhaps told that he might buy town lots at


£lO per acre, suburban at £2, and country lands at £1 by
auction. The regulation answer was always a riddle ; but he
found a fraternity of adventurers on the western rivers and
plains, and he joined them and did as they did, though their
doings were scarcely recognized by the functionaries at head-
quarters.
Contempt for Government rules, a strong esprit-de-corps,
and unlimited self-confidence naturally followed.
Thus the squatters rose and grew in strength, depending
on their own right hands for protection. Fearing nothing so
much as official interference, and justly proud of the pioneering
work they were doing in opening new country, they would not
have been human, if a certain tone of self-sufficiency and
arrogance had not been developed. At the same time their
footing was so precarious that to abate a jot of their preten-
sions might be to lose all. The result was not the growth of
that spirit which rears new nations in the wilderness, and
founds cities in the desert. It was rather like the gripe of the
feudal chief on the soil, or the daring and dash of the soldier
of fortune, who claims all that his right hand can seize, and
owns no duty except to his comrades.
This characteristic can be clearly traced in the high-handed
doings of the pioneer squatters, in their disregard of the colo-
nial government, in their hardy and adventurous spirit, in the
code of honour generally observed in their dealings with each
other, while they ridiculed the idea of the commuity outside of
their class having any claims or rights whatever.
But perhaps their self-assertion was best illustrated by the
effrontery with which they made a claim on the Imperial
Government for fix ; ty of tenure, and at length fairly brow-beat
them into giving them what was actually a present of their
runs in spite of the remonstrance lodged by some of the colo-
nists at home at the time.
No American or Continental Government, whether repub-
lican or monarchical, could then, far less now, have been
bamboozled into such a concession by a handful of adventurers.
To transfer the pastures was to give away the country, for the
land had no productive value except from the grass, then as
now, and there was no earthly reason for the course adopted.
No great amount of thought or foresight was required to give
the squatters all that they really needed to protect them in


grazing their stock, without signing away a transferable title
of all the grazing country then known. A good freehold grant
for a part, and a yearly license to graze for the rest, would
have satisfied every one, and in fact it would have been better
eventually for most squatters than the tenure they got; for the
possession of an absolute transferable lease of large areas of un-
stocked country, in numberless cases, has tempted the owner
to incur debt to buy sheep and cattle, and the fluctuations of
the market and cost of accommodation too often have led to the
successive stages of mortgage, foreclosure, and extinction.
The history of the “ Orders in Council,” the Act of the
Imperial Goverment which confirmed the squatting title,
should be engraved in granite.
There is food for reflection in the supposition that a sleepy
Cabinet Council may have heard the “ Orders ” read on a
sunny afternoon, and when the Secretary’s voice stopped—
“ Where is New South Wales ?” “ Who are the squatters ?”
“ I suppose somebody has talked to the people who were here
about it.” “Asked Sir G. G. what he thought about it. Can’t
make head or tail of him, or of the letters from Sydney either.”
“ There, don’t suppose its of much consequence”—and the
fatal signature is appended.
Not of much consequence, your lordships ! You have by
that afternoon’s work sown seeds of evil which will grow with
the growth, and strengthen with the strength of the colonies.
You have prompted a young nation in class hatred and in the
practice of fraud and perjury, while you professed to teach
them justice, truth, and righteousness, and you have started
in aggravated bitterness, economic and social questions need-
ing peculiar care in handling, which your grandsons will see
moie of at their own doors, in the days when there will be ten
millions of people in Australia.
From such exceptional circumstances alone, could squatting
have arisen. It needed a convict colony, with a purblind local
Government; Imperial authorities uninformed and careless,
but accessible and sensitive to social sympathies, and a privi-
leged caste, bold, shrewd, and adventurous. They partitioned
Australia as they would have partitioned the Deccan or the
Land of Egypt with just as little scruple, and with an equal
amount of consideration for future public interests, or for the
good of their countrymen—or humanity generally.


The men are not the same now in the least degree, and the
whole system has crystalized into correct business form,
guarded by official rule, and made respectable by the impri-
matur of banks and capitalists ; but a look at squatting, even
as it is yet, will show that it could not have arisen from any
well-considered public policy, but that it must have grown as
it did from chaos, chance, and the lawlessness produced by
neglect of Government functions, success only bringing it
social approval and official sanction.
CHAPTER V.
The occupation of new territory thus begun forty years ago
has continued ever since. Of unstocked country there is
plenty yet in Australia, and any person can take possession of
it, secure as much as he likes, and offer it for sale under a
legal title in the market. Pioneering is always going on more
or less. As a pursuit k ebbs and flows with times and seasons,
as in the migration across the Murray in the early days, or the
rush to Central and Northern Queensland fourteen years ago,
and lately, on a smaller scale, to the Diamantina and other
western rivers ; but still along the extensive open frontier
there is always something of the kind either going on or in
prospect. As among the old stocked stations, the talk is
mainly of the price of wool and fat bullocks, so towards the
sparsely-peopled frontiers the topic is of new country, back
blocks, waterless plains, spinifex, and mulga scrub. The
horrors of the interior wilderness are purposely dwelt on by
the initiated for reasons easily understood. In the outside
districts there is always hanging about a sprinkling of popu-
lation which partakes in some degree of the character of the
original squatters. They have inherited their hardihood and
love of adventure, and they like no life better than finding new
runs and droving stock to them. Among these the hidden
inland wastes form the study by day and the dream by night.
The prizes of pioneering are at times good. It is on the cards
that the finder of a piece of good country may get a monied
partner, and, if things go well, a handsome competence may


be gained. In any case the sale of a run at a good time may
realise some hundreds or even thousands of pounds. The
risks and adverse chances, of course, are many, but they are
not reckoned much of at the beginning of an expedition.
After many a night’s talk under the calm starlight of the
bush, three young fellows with half-a-dozen pack horses, the
needful equipment, and two black boys, will ride up the last
branch on the right bank of the river, which is known as the
Ultima Thule of the day, and which forms the gate of the
north-western wilderness. They reach the last occupied spot
—the station in the gap. They call of course. Politeness and
diplomacy are both practised in the wilds. The proprietor
gives them the usual welcome. He is glad to see them, as
neighbours are few; but he knows well what their errand is,
and he does not want them to settle too near him. Still he
might sell them a horse or two. They want to pump him
about country, and they will be lucky if they get anything
out of him. Perhaps he may never have been ten miles
beyond the scrub to be seen from his paddock fence, but
what he gives them is the stock information kept for all
inquirers, “ There’s nothing good that way ; no water within
fifty miles, and I don’t know how much further—sand and
scrub you may wander through for weeks.” So they go on
not much the better. As to official sanction, no official knows
anything about their doings, and indeed neither the Survey
Department nor any other Department has even got a name
for the tract they are entering. New districts have been
occupied with stock years before they have been officially
known.
Our pioneers push on nevertheless, and generally with the
same result. After a few weeks’ tussle through undergrowth
and over grassless shingle, threading their way among broken
ranges and through sandy thickets, and sometimes without
water, they drop into a valley very like to the one they left,
and follow down tributary creeks ending in a river of the
same character.. Some days are spent in riding up and down
the main river and the branches, until they have roughed out
a plan of the country, and then they begin to divide. A giant
blue gum tree, growing at a central junction, is fixed upon as
the boundary mark. “ Now, who’s got a coin ? Spin for the
first pick,” and thus “ Berber and Ismael divide the soil.”


Spur wins, and takes the upper portion with the head
creeks, about twenty miles each way. Snaffle takes twenty
miles frontage on the right bank. The depth must be nearly
the same, as may be seen by the distant blue barrier range to
the westward, and Hobbles gets the left bank, seemingly as
large and as good. All are pleased except the aboriginal
proprietors, who cower in the scrub across the river, and
watch the intruders marking their initials deep into the gum
tree with whirling tomahawk.
Yes, you may well peer through the leafy screen of the
brigalow, dusky warriors of the Kamilaroy. Your title has
lapsed. The power that should have protected you has
abandoned that function of government, as well as its proper
function, in the disposal cf the country. You had better take
your women and children up the pine-covered mountains to
the vine-brushes and reedy lagoons in the fastnesses where
no squatter wi.l come. Leave the plains and open woodland
and visit them no more, for there will be a cattle camp here
in another year, and woe betide you if you are found near it.
But it will all end as usual, and in ten years the remnant of
you will be wearing old clothes, and begging tobacco on the
lands of your fathers.
In this way three large properties are formed—Gondary,
Malowra, and Yandoril —each being in extent about a quarter
of a million of acres, not indeed very large stations, but any-
way good estates. The official formula which gives the
country to the applicants is not complicated, expensive, or
tedious, and the title is transferable at once. In fact, they
are copyhold estates, subject to quit rent, and until selection,
such tenures were considered no more liable to resumption
than private property would be under special legislation.
The further fortunes of our three pioneers we may as well
follow, as they fairly indicate the average of success usually
attained. Spur got a partner with mone}q and after twelve
years sold out with a large fortune and left the colony;
Snaffle and Hobbles went to an eminent financing firm, and
got an advance to buy cattle. The first lately died at a bush
public-house, of disappointment, hard work, and bad brandy,
and the last is droving at £3 per week. The three stations
are all very valuab’e, and largely stocked, and the periodical
fluctuations of prices happening about every seven years,


make and mar new buyers and sellers. Owners are generally
overweighted with debt, and their earnings chiefly go to enrich
banks and financing agents. Tin re is every likelihood that
all three stations will ultimately remain the property of some
Melbourne or Sydney firm. Although these stations are
utterly unconnected with any work of colonization or settle-
ment, and indeed are mere factories for the production of
wool and meat, the labour employed on them becoming less
and less yearly as the country becomes improved, still as
properties they are becoming more and more consolidated,
and the grasp of the money power tightens as land is bought
up. In fact these large tracts of country are exactly in the
position of West India plantations, worked for the behoof of
Lond on speculators and money-lenders.
This then is the goal to which all squatting enterprise
tends. “ The squatters” are often spoken of as a fixed body,
while probably there is no class of men so fluctuating. Every
change in prices shows a completely new set of proprietors
on three-fourths of the stations, and this is more particularly
the case in the frontier districts.
Besides the large numbers of unlucky pioneers, every
advance in fencing, saving water, and other experiments has
been marked by the wreck of those in the front rank. The
pushing, adventurous, and intelligent usually open the way
for a class that has lived upon them and follows in their
footsteps.
Such occurrences as the following often take place. A
splendid piece of country without water is taken up. The
first occupant sinks all he has in making a dam. For years,
though the work is well done, the dam does not hold, the
spongy porous soil drinks up the water, and the owner broken
down and in debt, is sold up and disappears. In a few years
more the change has taken place ; the dam holds, and a
magnificent sheet of water covers what used to be called
“ Brown’s Folly,” and the station belongs to a great-capitalist,
who is making a fortune rapidly by it. All the neighbour-
hood rings w.th the “ pluck, capital, and enterprise” of the
successful man, who very likely has hardly been on the
station at all, but poor Brown is barely rpmembered. The
few who mention him say that he was an abominably bad
manager, not a practical man. The capitalist who bought


the station for an old song just before prices rose, had a small
country store at the time, and was really saved from insol-
vency by the transaction. Such chances are always in the
way of people in trade who have the handling of money —
whether their own or not, of course it does not matter.
As squatting has thus gone on to the present day, it has
assumed more and more the character of speculation, and
has shown even less of the nature of settlement. Among the
symptoms of this change there are to be seen on every side
enormous properties formed of stations clubbed together,
worked in the interest of speculators and money lenders ;
and runs stocked much over their capability, to the perma-
nent injury of the pastures, and placing the stock at certain
seasons, as of late, in great danger of starvation. Debt and
gambling are the shadows which attend sales at high prices.
“ The run that carries twenty thousand sheep will pay better
with thirty thousand;” the sheep are paid for-with a bill
bearing heavy interest; the flocks starve, and the run is
destroyed. Thus, the flow of the tide leads at times to fortune,
but the ebb always shows the wrecks of squatterdom, soon to
be covered in the drift of time, and too readily forgotten.
Those who have seen all this from the beginning, do not
hesitate to condemn present arrangements, but as they
would not have a chance of being listened to. either by the
squatting body or the public, they have generally remained
silent.
Their opinion, often privately given, is this, that our
grazing industry might be placed on a much wider and
sounder basis, with great advantage to the public and to the
squatters themselves, with enlarged means of improving both
country and stock, and finally with greatly increased produc-
tion of all our staples.
The injury felt by the public, and the incentive to
gambling—the bane of the squatter —are from one and the
same cause, that is, the transferable lease, which creates and
perpetuates a corporate interest opposed to colonization, and
at the same time tempts many a squatter to waste his life in
learning the sad truth that “ the borrower is servant to the
lender.”
A sound tenure and smaller holdings would make grazing
a safe and popular pursuit. There would be less debt and


speculation, but the most would be made of both land and
stock, and a field practically unlimited would open for enter-
prise and population. But while we maintain the existing
tenure, each change will only tend to make squatting a
greater farce still in respect to settlement, leading to mam-
moth stations, less labour employed, larger proprietors and
ewer of them —while the selector, hemmed in by Volunteer
orders, and the other weapons of the squatting magnate, will
eat his bread earned in bitterness by the sweat of his brow,
and will rear his children in hatred of those who should be
his friends and neighbours.
Such then is squatting, plainly not the offspring of
statesman-like foresight, or practical observation, but the
growth of chaos and Government neglect; in its unwisdom,
only equalled by its twin rival Selection, which appears to have
been born in Bedlam, and inspired by the Furies. The two
systems are pitted against each other like cat and dog, there
is no more truce between them, than between the petroleum
of the Commune and the holy water of the Apostolic Church.
Meantime, their strife pours nearly two millions a year
into the Treasury, and the Minister for Lands said lately that
“ no man whose opinion was worth listening to, wanted any
material change in the land laws.”
Blessed country ! wise, high-minded Statesman !
The general results of our land system can be seen all over
the colony, but there is one district where, from position and
natural resources, all the features are brought out in higher
relief, and everything is to be seen on a greater scale.
Possessing the finest sheep-country in Australia, the soundest
pasture, and the best climate, Riverina is only a step to the
Victorian market, the great beehive of the gold-fields, while
the only navigable rivers of the continent flow through its
territory. An area of land that elsewhere yields only two
pounds of wool yields four pounds in Riverina, and within a
few days of being shorn the eeces are offered in the magnifi-


cent wool marts of Melbourne. While grass-seed, fluke, and
worms harass the sheep owners of the northern and Queens-
land districts, a happy combination of soil and climate saves
Riverina. The drought that has scorched the coast and every
valley and plain between the Lachlan and the Condamine,
has left almost untouched the wide pastures of the Murray
and the Murrumbidgee.
This region has been a very paradise for squatters ; one
crop after another of fortunes has been taken off the stations,
and with every periodical rise of prices, the Riverina squat-
tages are those most favoured, most run after, and sold for
fabulous sums. Management in its perfection has added its
quota to the general result; the stimulants of debt and enter-
prise have brought into combination thorough technical
knowledge with business method, and the result is the largest
possible produce with the smallest possible outlay,'the best
sheep, the heaviestfleeces, the most systematic improvement
of stock and runs, and, as the necessary result of thorough
squatting management, a country uninhabited and resolutely
held against the ingress of population. “ Squatting and
settlement cannot go together—money must have the land.”
So say the Riverina squatters.
But, as adding to this paradox, the other side, the
selectors, had found that Riverina was the country exactly
suited for them also. New South Wales gives something
more by her Selection Act than the two southern colonies.
She gives a grazing-right of three times the area of land
purchased. This right over-rides the squatting tenure, but
is otherwise on the same footing. By going up the Murray,
or crossing from the south bank, a freehold farm, sometimes
with a small run attached, could be got on easy terms, not
among granite ranges or mallee thickets, but of open plain
and forest, with deep loamy river flats, and rich volcanic
soils, stretching away north to the dim wastes of the salt-bush
country.
This is the site where the land feud is being fought out; it
is the Flanders of Australia, and Sydney and Melbourne both
watch the contest.
Twelve years ago, the inhabitants of the Riverine district
in number then only about twenty thousand, were galled out
of patience by the action of a Government, which was, so


far as they were concerned, nothing more than a stomach to
absorb revenue for the nutrition of Sydney. They petitioned
the Legislature for administrative separation, along with
certain modifications of law, intending, on refusal, to claim
from the Imperial Government the erection of their territory
into a separate colony. Victoria and Queensland had both
been erected into separate Governments within the preceding
thirteen years, and the grounds on which separation was
claimed by these colonies were precisely the same as those put
forward by the petitioners. The ground of objection, too,
was and has invariably been the same —“Your country be-
long to tis, the electors of Sydney or New South Wales, and
we will not part with our property.” Such is ever the voice
of centralisation; but the result of separation has invariably
been in proof of the soundness of the policy of local govern-
ment —the same story ever repeated of more vigorous life
from the new centre, of new fields of action, new men, and
new ideas.
However, the Riverina movement failed. The remedy of
some flagrant abuses, and a trifling concession from the
revenue, wrung from Macquarie-street by threats, appeased
popular discontent, and the leaders of the project had to
abandon it from want of support.
The policy aimed at by the Riverine delegates was
avowedly on a purely squatting basis, and there is no doubt
that the squatters intended to keep as much of their runs as
they could; but one provision that they proposed to introduce
into the land law affords strong proof of the facility with
which local government will assimilate its measures to the
public necessities, and it is most interesting to mark that
long before the action of the Act of 1861 had been anticipated
or understood, these Riverina squatters, by their proposal, hit
the very point which all men must recognise as the main
difficulty of the present time.
If their wishes had been met, there is little doubt that a
large body of freehold graziers would by this time have been
established in Riverina, while the scandalous discords which
have disgraced that district would have been averted.
The clause was as follows :
“That in lieu of a pre-emptive lease of an area thrice that of the land
conditionally bought, the conditional purchaser may be granted an indefeasible
lease of fourteen years, with an absolute pre-emptive right over an area of


thrice that of the land conditionally bought; but that the land purchased by the
conditional purchaser, and held by such pre-emptive lease, shall be securely
fenced within two years from the date of such selection, and that until such
fencing be made and completed, no power of impounding off such land by such
purchaser shall exist or be allowed.”
This clause, read by modem experience, stands in marked
contrast to the corresponding provisions of the law now in
force. For a mere grazing-right liable to encroachment, it
was proposed to substitute a valid lease of fourteen years’
duration, with a right of purchase without competition during
that term. The conditions of compulsory fencing, and the
abolition of the impounding right on unfenced land, could not
be objected to by any honest man, or by any one who wished
to see permanent wholesome settlement. Another provision
which would have tended much to the peace and welfare of
the country, proposed to define certain areas for selection; in
fact, if honestly carried out, the result would have been some-
thing like the operation of the Queensland Act of 1868, a
state of things immensely better for both selector and
squatter than has ever been in New South Wales.
It would certainly have made one great difference to the
Sydney people, though it might have been much better for
the people of Riverina. There would have been a much
smaller land revenue. This two millions a year of black mail
and tribute forms the burden of our statesmen’s paeans of
victory. Still the apples of Sodom turned to ashes, and
money may be bought too dear. Centralisation clings to
vested abuses like the limpet to the rock, but it needs no
prophet to see that an income raised from class discords must
bring with it a crop of evils. We may not be able to define
their precise form, but this much is certain, that before the
land revenue falls to zero, many people will be led to think of
the times of the Australian Bank and the Queensland squat-
ting rush.
Meantime, Riverina’s cry for separation has ceased in the
throes of a sterner conflict. The cleavage has shifted; it is
no longer vertical but horizontal; no longer between Sydney
and the interior, but between the two hostile camps, which
are disputing foot by foot the choicest lands of Australia.


CHAPTER VII.
What form Australian settlement might take under favour-
able circumstances we have no means of knowing. Of
squatting we have seen all that can be known. Selection
may be dismissed from consideration, since it was never
framed as a comprehensive scheme to cover the whole ground
of colonisation, but was merely introduced as a counteracting
power to squatting. Moreover, selection has this essential
weakness ; in all but one colony it suffers from the fallacy of
being founded on the cultivation of the soil, while its sup-
porters have persisted in dealing with grazing merely as a
transitory occupation, refusing to recognise it as a permanent
national industry.
Of all the unsound crotchets that have befogged the land
question, this one chiefly stands pre-eminent. It assumes
that the two branches of industry absurdly distinguished as
agriculture and grazing must be carried on apart. This idea
did not form part of the original policy, which simply
established uniform freehold settlement, without any reference
to any producing interests, or indeed to any special use of the
soil. Neither did the idea in any way lead to the adoption
of the squatting system, but it was brought forward after
squatting had established itself in order to provide an
explanation for that phenomenon. Nowhere but in Australia
has it been * attempted by legislation to divorce these two
branches, or to treat them as separate interests, and indeed
over most of Europe neither could well be carried on without
the other. Along with this notion, the theory has become
rooted among us, that settlement is possible only in agricul-
tural form, and the quantity of produce, and especiall} T of
wheat grown, is continually cited in proof of the success or
failure of the Act of 1861. This absurdity is maintained too
in the teeth of the fact familiarly known to all acquainted
with bush life, namely, that the daily industry of all classes
of settlers differs little except from the peculiarities of tenure
and the extent of land occupied; in fact, that in nine districts
out of ten in all these colonies the grass is the mainstay of
the whole rural population, squatters, freeholders, selectors,


and even sometimes of dwellers on gold-fields and in country
townships, while wheat and other crops are grown merely
under favourable circumstances, such as suitability of soil,
nearness to market, for household convenience, or other
special reasons.
Whether this arises from the climate and soil altogether, or
in some degree also from the character of. our population,
the fact nevertheless is uniform in its occurrence.
But, in the face of this inevitable tendency, legislation has
in most of the colonies been equally misdirected as public
opinion, and the universal result now, patent to all men,
justifies us in putting forward as an axiom that “ No settle-
ment thrives that is not based on the use of the grass.”
Evidence as to the success of selection in New South
Wales is most contradictory, but it is not difficult to see that
the results follow the above rule. The pre-lease or grazing
right, when secured, often leads the selection to develope into
a grazing farm. In some districts, such as Monaro and New
England, these are numerous; but it is equally marked that
the mere cultivator fails or tires of his occupation. Great
numbers never fulfil conditions, and hundreds sell whenever
they get the opportunity. One form of successful selection is
indeed in all respects a benefit to the selector and to the
community. It is shown in the cheap homesteads made
accessible to working men, carriers, road makers, shearers,
and others, tempting this large class away from townships
and public-houses to domestic life; but this application of the
law has nothing to do with agriculture, or grazing either, and
indeed the want might have been supplied more readily and
better by another law than by that of selection. Still- the
value and importance of this feature can hardly be overrated,
though these homesteads have no proper productive character
whatever, consisting usually, as they do, of merely a hut, a
paddock with a few cows, and a small garden.
In Victoria, selection being solely on an agricultural basis,
without any use of the grass, the failure has been more general
than in New South Wales, and for the last few years there
has been a wholesale migration of farmers across the Murray
to secure selections in Riverina. The Age, of Melbourne, in
an article headed “ Land Monopoly in Victoria,” shows the
steady decline of agricultural settlement in that colony, and


the obsorption of farms in large freehold estates, which are
growing in area in exact ratio with the depletion of inhabi-
tants. Farms of from 320 to 3000 acres are constantly bought
up by owners of 10,000 to 12,000 acres, while these are
steadily absorbed by the owners of 50,000 and 100,000 acres.
Country roads, being no longer wanted, are closed ; there is
no trade in the towns, and the business people wish them-
selves elsewhere. The writer in the Age of course points to
the “ Monopolists ” as the parties to blame, and seems to be
wholly unconscious that the result arises directly from the law
of selection, no doubt framed to prevent such a result, but
actually tending to it.
If land is artificially made expensive and difficultto acquire,
in order to restrict its use, its possession will necessarily fall
into the strongest hands. If, in their zeal for the “ poor man,”
he Victorians had cut up their whole territory into forty-acre
lots, the capitalists would have secured it all the faster.
That settlement will stand, if founded on natural conditions,
anyone can see who will look at Bathurst Plains or any other
of the old settled districts. On the Upper Macquarie, so far
from absorption having taken place, such as is reported in
Victoria, there are more freeholds now than ever there were ;
and the same truth promises in due time to be illustrated in
Queensland under the Act of 1868, which distinctly recognises
grazing as a permanent industry, and sells tracts of 2560 to
7680 acres of pastoral land at from ss. to 10s. per acre.
Victorian experience, after all, if read by the light of these
facts, fails to prove that they suffer from any unusual love of
acquisition, or that their landowners are at all different from
their fellow-men ; but it brings out very clearly that a stool
will not stand on one leg, and it affords strong evidence in
favour of the soundness of our axiom.
To return to our main topic,—the fact of the insufficiency
of the two opposing tenures each by itself, coupled with the
great waste caused by their mutual friction, confirms us in the
impression that we have no means yet of knowing what can
be done with the country.
The comparative success of the original freehold settle-
ments of New South Wales in establishing a vigorous
population in the very poorest corners of the colony, is
remarkably suggestive, when contrasted with the almost total


failure in the same direction which has attended the joint
systems of squatting and selection in its richest districts.
But popular rural industry and improvement are, in the
settled districts as elsewhere, so tardy that their progress is
hardly perceptible. The ordinary selector or farmer from the
Snowy River to the Severn follows the same course. He lays
out his money on cows, lets them feed where they can, buys
all that his family lives on from the nearest store, and sells a
beast to pay the account. When the drought comes, he lets
his stock starve; even though he may be one of the few who
grow some hay or other crop, he will not give them a mouth-
ful ; and whenever he has £2O he lays it out in more land.
He neither saves water, fences, nor puts in grasses. His
great problem is to pick a waterhole out of a neighbouring
run, and his daily work is a scramble for calves with his
neighbours. When urged to improve, he refuses, stating,
with idiotic profanity, that he trusts in Providence.
Still, with all this, selectors are not universally of the same
kind, and there are at times to be seen some gleams of light
that promise better things.
On all sides, isolated instances bear proof of resources
that must remain sealed till higher intelligence and enlightened
public interest have dispelled narrow ignorance and class
bickerings. Besides the well-known results of fencing and
grass culture, applicable at present only in a very limited
measure, there are dozens of improvements waiting only for
the right time to be applied. Among others, near Araluen, the
adoption of the Lombard mode of irrigation on a hill-side
has shown how to grow tons of grass where pounds only grew
before. A western selector has proved that stall-feeding is
quite possible, by growing a large crop of turnips during the
late drought, and silk-growing, and the various branches of
arboriculture are waiting only to be thoroughly tested and
engrafted on our standard industries, when we get a large
independent class of land holders with means and leisure,
neither of which essentials seem to be at the command of
either our squatters or selectors.
The following remarks from the Town and Country Journal,
written by no follower of vain theories, show that the need of
a change in land tenure in this direction is becoming more


and more recognised under the pressure of each successive
disaster:—
“Should the next ten or twenty years prove as dry as the previous period
has been moist, we think that the occupation of much pastoral country would
have to be begun again, and grow up under some different principle to that
now existing. The country can only be profitably and permanently occupied
when water is provided for all contingencies, fodder stored for scarce times,
drought enduring plants and trees naturalised, and perhaps smaller holdings.”
The change necessary to make such results possible must
be determined by a power above faction or interest, and
therefore must wait till the necessity is admitted by the de-
liberate intelligence of the nation.
These words, quoted from the pen of an experienced
practical observer, contain the key not only to the satisfactory
solution of the squatting question, but to the settlement of
all our agrarian difficulties.
When these perplexities are cleared up, then the vice of
trying to allocate settlement under a system of opposing
interests will be apparent. Then it will be seen that the
production of every staple is best stimulated by the wide
diffusion of property in land, and that the manifold experi-
ments and endless experiences of thousands of proprietors,
each spending day after day on his homestead, will best
develop not only those branches that we call agriculture and
squatting, but also every other method of turning the soil to
account.
It is not from making special laws for particular pursuits,
that real durable wealth is produced. It is from free access
to the land and security of possession, that every branch of
production will grow in luxuriance, while from the interlacing
of interests and traffic born of local settlement, that far more
permanent form of wealth will grow which distinguishes the
settled country from the plantation, which bears as fruit
thousands of domestic hearths and happy households, and
which, on the basis of healthful natural affections, forms
national character and national strength.


CHAPTER VIII.
If the warning of the Phantom be justified by a coming
re-action with a half-empty Treasury, and stations selling
again at the prices of iB7o, then our depopulated lands and
hollow prosperity may bring forcibly home to thinking colo-
nists, the need to set their house in order.
But while the chink of coin overflowing the Treasury
chest is heard, and while our politicians continue “to
improve the shining hour,” exhilarated by the bewildering
fumes of jubilant banquets, “ the voice crying in the wilder-
ness” may cry, but no one will listen. It wants the iron hand
of necessity to touch us and open our vision.
But, whenever honest people proclaim that they are
wearied and disgusted with the discord and chicanery now
going on—whenever the common-sense of the country
demands that real settlement shall displace the present farce
of run-jobbery and money-lending, with its insane recurrence
of mania and ruin—whenever the industrious public show a
wish to have their savings, the deposits in the banks, invested
more safely and legitimately than in strangling colonisation—
whenever the squatter finds out that it is a losing game to
fight free selectors with borrowed money, and that though he
may save his run, he may yet lose his station —whenever the
selector sees that it would be better to get a well-defined
secure holding, than a selection snatched at his peril from
the heart of a squatter’s run —whenever the valiant army of
touts, political toadies, and office-seekers, find that the springs
of patronage and plunder have run dry with the evaporation
of the two millions surplus, —then, but not before, a plan of
adjustment like the following may be offered with some
chance of acceptance.
The first step must be the commutation of the squatting
tenure ; this is absolutely necessary before any real settlement
can be attempted. This squatting-right, a misfortune and a
blunder though it has been, nevertheless has grown up under
legal sanction, and it has repeatedly changed hands, for
valuable consideration, with every recognition and approval
that legislation and established custom could give it. There-


fore, if it is necessary for the public welfare to extinguish the
title, it must be done equitably and legally. The only just
way and the only possible way to accomplish this is by
buying up the right and paying for the same in freehold land.
For example, we have Yandoril to deal with—
! 160,000 leasehold j
60,000 pre-lease > with 40,000 sheep,
20,000 freehold )
and the ordinary improvements.
Sales of stations in the same district, similarly stocked
and improved, have during the last five years averaged fifteen
shillings per head, with purchased land at cost price. The
average value of sheep stock for the same term has been
eight shillings. The value of the tenure, including improve-
ments, will then be seven shillings per head on 40,000
sheep =^14,000 ;at twenty shillings per acre = i 4,000 acres.
The next necessary step will be the consolidation of all
purchased land. The 20,000 acres purchased are in twenty
different lots, by auction, Volunteer land orders, &c., scattered
all over the run. When these lots are not counterminous
with the land granted as compensation (the 14,000 acres),
they must be resumed, and an equivalent area of land suitably
situated given in exchange. It is most essential to avoid
future mischief, that all properties should be brought into com-
pact rectangular form, as nearly as natural features will permit,
and that there should be no straggling purchases allowed,
wasting the country. The lessee of course will be inclined to
claim a much higher rate of compensation for many of these
lots, but this is because they had their value from spoiling
the adjoining country for settlement. Under the new method
of allotment they can have 'no more value than any other
land.
The lessee of Yandoril would therefore retain on commu-
tation of his lease a. freehold estate in one block of 14,000
acres plus 20,000 acres=34,ooo acres, and he would further
receive a license subject to a fee of ten shillings per square
mile per annum for the remaining portion of the run, until
otherwise assigned. The license would be non-transferable;
it would be subject to cancelment at three months’ notice, and
the licensee would be bound to keep the fences up while he
used the paddocks resumed.


12 grazing farms of 3000 to 6000 acres
54,000 acres
24 ordinary ditto under 3000 acres
36,000
48 homesteads of x60 acres ... .i.
7,680
xoo village lots of three acres, commonage 2560 acres..,
2,860
In all ...
100,540 acres
The result of this would be that the licensee would be quite
as well able to work his stock, indeed better than he was as
lessee under selection ;he would have the option of using all
the run free from intrusion, at a very moderate rental, until it
came to be, bit by bit, purchased and occupied, as shown
further on. The only difference in his position would be that
he would not have the run to sell; but in lieu of the
extinguished title, he has received the compensation of 14,000
acres freehold land.
Then as to settlement the arrangement would be as follows
—ln the first place, abolish free selection, and establish pre-
liminary survey.—The allotment of the country would naturally,
so far as we see, come under four heads—
1. Grazing farms.
2. Mixed and ordinary ditto.
3. Homesteads.
4. Villages.
The survey on each large squattage should include all four.
On Yandoril this could readily be done, and yet leave a good
portion unsurveyed for the temporary occupation of the licensee
and for future allotment. Thus say—
This survey would in ordinary cases provide amply for
some years demand, and in the meantime the remainder,
105,460 acres, would be a much safer feeding ground for the
licensee than it ever was in the days of selection.
The whole of this survey should be in one piece, compact,
and taking frontage and depth in fair proportion, and the
different allotments, whether farms, homesteads, or village
areas, should be strictly conterminous, leaving not one inch
of vacant ground to raise disputes. The farms should be laid
out according to natural features, fairly apportioning the good
and the bad, and in all cases advantages of position, soil, and
timber should be as generally distributed as possible.
In the case of villages and homesteads, water should be
always permanently-reserved. Grazing farms should always
be surveyed in agreement with the resumed fencing, so far as


is possible, and the cost of fencing, dams, and wells, included,
which has been paid to the lessee, should be charged to the
purchaser. As to water for grazing farms, there is no need
for these to take up a large width on main frontages; in fact,
they should mainly be on back country. The owner of 6000
acres should be able readily to save water.
Condiiions of practical settlement should he imposed and
rigidly exacted, accompanied with fencing within a period not
exceeding three years. A Board of three members resident in
the district, one being official and two laymen, should supervise
and control the working of the Act, and a surveyor and
inspector should act under their orders. All decisions and
business of the Board should be in open Court, and proceed-
ings should be kept in writing, open to the public. With
regard to the surveys of resumed lands on runs, conditions of
residence and fencing, or other matters requiring examination,
the Board should have full discretion in taking any steps
thought necessary to arrive at satisfactory conclusions, and
the members should be repaid their expenses from the land
revenue.
The mode in which the lands would be divided would be
the principal responsibility of the Board. No intending buyer
should in any case be allowed a voice in the allotment
Price is the last question, and it is a matter of difficulty.
It is hard not to have a land revenue, but it is worse to kill
the goose that lays the eggs. There is one suggestion that
might be offered to the people of New South Wales, but it will
prove worse than worthless unless the integrity of settlement is
rigidly maintained. However, here it is. You want a land
revenue ; you want likewise to make the land tempting to
occupants ; and you can see the advantage of giving them an
absolutely secure title as well as a favorable price. Now, you
can do all these. Adopt the Scotch feu system in your land
law, and charge sixpence per acre per annum in perpetuity.
The rental now got from Yandoril is something less than one
pound per square mile, say £370 per annum ; and the £20,000
got for the land sold, “ the eyes of the run,” is spent long ago.
Under the feu you would have £5OOO a year for ever , and
there is not the least risk but that at sixpence per acre per
annum it would all be taken up, every inch-, before many years,
if you had it fairly and judiciously surveyed. Mark this also,


the advantage to the settler in not being stripped of his capital
to pay for land the first year would be immense ; and he would
all the sooner make his farm productive.
In fine, if you the electors and rulers of New South Wales
—are men enough to do a bold thing, a generous thing, and a
far-sighted thing, you have the chance now; and it is only by
such a chance that you can come level with Queensland —a
colony which, thanks to separation, grasped such ideas before
you ever heard of them.
But, whatever we do, whether we grapple with the question
now, or whether we wait contentedly to see what will turn up,
the present state of things can hardly go on long. If we do
not solve the problem, it will solve itself.
One-third of our population has already assembled on the
shores of Port Jackson to share in the tribute raised from lands
that promise to revert to their primeval solitude. Arejwe, then,
to remain content as we are, with a huge town populace
subsisting on public pay and public expenditure ; troops of
hangers-on oscillating monthly between Government clover
and insolvency; a few capitalists fattened up for export when-
ever good times come round ; and covering all, a huge net-
work of money-lending, sucking all manhood and independence
out of the people ?
And are these, after all, to be the boasted fruits of eighty
years' colonisation ?
Turner and Henderson, Publishers, Sydney.


