

[ Transmitted with the Compliments of the Council ]
COLONIAL
PENNY POSTAGE;
A STATEMENT OF THE
FACTS AND ARGUMENTS
PRESENTED AND DISCUSSED AT A RECENT MEETING OF
THE SOCIETY OF ARTS.
PUBLISHED BY THE
COLONIAL AND INTERNATIONAL POSTAGE ASSOCIATION,
SOCIETY OF ARTS, ADELPHI;
AND SOLD BY
SAUNDERS & STANFORD, COLONIAL LIBRARY, CHARING CROSS, LONDON.
1853.
Price Threepence.


LONDON;
Printed by G. Barclay, Castle St, Leicester Sq.


ASSOCIATION
TO
Promote a and Unifrom System of
COLONIAL AND INTERNATIONAL POSTAGE.
OFFICES—SOCIETY OF ARTS, ADELPHI, LONDON.
IBresiUent.
THE RIGHT HON. EARL GRANVILLE,
fyc. Sfc. Sfc.
Countil.
His Grace the Archbp. of Dublin.
Lord Ashburton.
C. B. Adderley, Esq. M.P.
Sir J. P. Boileau, Bart.
W. Brown, Esq. M.P.
Sir J. Burgoyne, G.C.B.
Elihu Burritt, Esq.
H. Cole, Esq. C.B.
Professor Daubenv, F.R.S.
Chevalier De Burg (Austria').
C. W. Dilke, Esq.
C. Wentworth Duke, Esq.
Baron C. Dupin (France).
Right Hon. T. M. Gibson, M.P.
Professor Hancock (Dublin).
William Hawes, Esq.
J. C. G. Kennedy, Esq. (America).
J. S. Lefevre, Esq. C.B.
Chevalier Lencisa (Sardinia).
Dr. Bindley, F.R.S.
Sir John W. Lubbock, Bart.
G. Moffatt, Esq. M.P.
E. A. Moriarty, Esq.
Sir R. I. Murchison, F.R.S.
Sir S. H. Northcote, Bart. C.B.
Capt. Owen, R.E.
Rt. Hn. Sir J, S. Pakington, Bt. M.P.
Dr. Lyon Playfair, C.B. F.R.S.
W. C. Redfield, Esq. (America).
Col. Sir W. Reid, K.C.B. F.R.S.
(Malta).
Baron Lionel de Rothschild,
M.P.
Col. Sykes, F.R.S.
Matthew Uzielli, Esq.
Herr Von Viebahn (Prussia).
Right Hon. C. P. Villiers, M.P.
Don Manuel de Ysasi (Spain).
Don Manuel de Ysasi, Honorary Secretary.
G. W. Yapp, Secretary for Correspondence.
A 2


LOCAL COMMITTEE
FOR
THE CITY OF LONDON.
THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD MAYOR, M.P.
F. Le Breton, Esq.
T. H. Brooking, Esq.
Andrew Caldecott, Esq.
E. W. Crawford, Esq.
John Dillon, Esq.
J. P. Gassiot, Esq.
Alexander Gillespie, Esq.
Samuel Gregson, Esq, M.P.
Samuel Gurney, Jun. Esq.
Thomson Hankev, Juu Esq.
Kirkman Hodgson, Esq.
W. S. Lindsay, Esq.
T. A. Mitchell, Esq. M.P.
George Moffatt, Esq. M.P.
John Diston Powles, Esq.
Baron L. de Rothschild, M.P.
John Ingram Travers, Esq.
Matthew Uzielli, Esq.
Local Secretary for the City of London. Mr. Samuel Brown,
19 Bucklersbury.
The Council of the Association have resolved :
“ That the first object of the Association is to extend the
system of uniform Penny Postage, already in operation between
the United Kingdom and the Channel Islands, to the whole of
the British Colonies and possessions. The total amount of
postal revenue derived from all the Colonies does not exceed
£200,000 a-year. The whole, obviously, could not be sacrificed
by the measure proposed; but it would be sound national policy
to abandon even the whole to promote in so eminent a degree
the commerce, education, freedom of communication and friendly
relations between the Colonies and the mother country.”
IV


The main principles of the Association are indicated by the
following Resolutions of the 10th of August:—
1. “ That it appears to this Association that all the arguments used by
Mr. Rowland Hill in favour of the justice of an uniform rate of Post-
age in the United Kingdom, apply certainly to Colonial, and probably
to Foreign correspondence.
2. “ That the cost of conveyance, as was proved by Mr. Rowland Hill, is
regulated far more by the number of letters sent than by the distance
they are conveyed; and that, therefore, an uniform rate for all dis-
tances appears most just.
3. “ That the Association welcomes the recognition of this principle in the
recent adoption of uniform rates for printed papers to some of our
Colonies,
4. “ That Prepayment, with its simplicity and convenience, applies to
Colonial and Foreign as well as to Inland correspondence.”
The first List of Subscriptions will be published shortly,
containing the names of those who shall have subscribed 1/. or
more.
The Treasurers of the Society of Arts have consented to
receive the Subscriptions; and the Auditors of the Society will
examine the accounts.
Drafts and Money-orders may be made payable to Sir John
Burgoyne, G.C.B.


Local Honorary Secrearies.
The following Gentlemen, most of whom acted as Local
Secretaries for the Great Exhibition, have consented to act as
Local Honorary Secretaries of the Association
Ashborne. John Bamford, Esq.
Bath. J. Tunstall, Esq. M.D.
Belfast. C. B. Hancock, Esq,
Beverley. W. Crosskill, Esq.
Bideford. Henry Tardrew, Esq.
Birmingham. E. S. Payne, Esq.
Bradford. P. Passavant, jun. Esq.
Bridport. Thos. Colfox, Esq.
Burslem. W. Machin, Esq.
Cheadle. John Catlow, Esq.
Cheltenham. W. H. Gwinnett, Esq.
Chesterfield. Alfred T. Blythe, Esq.
Coggeshall. J. A. Clemence, Esq.
Collumpton. A. W. Leigh, Esq.
Cork, G. C. Feath, Esq
Cricklade. J. W. Lovett, Esq.
Dover. J. Poulter, Esq.
Dublin. James Haughton, Esq.
Dumbarton. R. G. Mitchell, Esq.
Dunmow . F. Morris, Esq.
Edinburgh. W. T. Thomson, Esq.
Exeter. C. Brutton, Esq.
Falkirk. Patrick Gentleman, Esq.
Falmouth. W. W. Rundell, Esq.
Famham. Benjamin Nichols, Esq.
Fleetwood. J. Stewart, Esq.
Glasgow. W. Johnson, Esq.
Glastonbury. John Clarke, Esq.
Glosscp. John Ball, Esq.
Hastings. J. Rock, jun. Esq.
Helstone. Frederick Hill, Esq.
Hemel Hempstead. S. Stallon, Esq.
Horncastle. G. Weir, Esq.
Huddersfield. W. Hastings, Esq.;
Fred. Greenwood, Esq.
Hull. John Foster, Esq.
Huntingdon. Sam. Ed. Cooch, Esq.
Leeds. Martin Cawood, Esq,; S.
Humble, Esq*
Manchester. Hugh Fleming, Esq.
Merthyr Tydvil. J.C. Woolrige, Esq.
Middlesborough. E. Gilks, Esq.; W.
Fallows, Esq.
Newcastle. J. Watson, Esq.
Newbury. J. W. Roake, Esq.
Nottingham. W. Vickers, Esq.
Oxford. Joseph Plowman, Esq.; Mr.
Alderman Spiers.
Plymouth , Devonport, and Totness.
Henry Seaman, Esq.
Reading. George Lovejoy, Esq.
Rotherham. J. Barras, Esq.
Runcorn. John Simpson, Esq.
Saffron Walden. Thomas Spurgin,
Esq.
Sheffield. S. Plimsoll, Esq,
Southampton. Robt. G. Basset, Esq.
Spalding. Henry Watkinson, Esq.
Stirling. A. Boyd, Esq.
Stonehouse. J. P. Mann, Esq.
Sudbury. J. Gooday, Esq.
Sunderland. J. Candlish, Esq.
Swansea. G. Turton Stroud, Esq.
Taunton, E. White, Esq.
Tewkesbury. J. Thomas, Esq.
Tiverton. W. J. Forwood, Esq.
Truro. H. H. Davis, Esq.
Tunbridge Wells. N. E. Stevens,
Esq.; J. Colbran, Esq.
Walsal. J. W. Newman, Esq.
Wareham. F. Filliter, Esq.
Waterford. H. N. Nevins, Esq.
Wisbeach. William Dawbarn, Esq.
Worcester. E. Webb, Esq.
Yarmouth. C. J. Palmer, Esq.
Yeovil. R. Short, Esq.
VI


The Council has addressed the Ambassadors and Ministers
of Foreign Powers, and has received the most gratifying and
encouraging replies from the following representatives of:—
Austria Belgium Brazil Bremen France Greece
Holland Lubeck Mecklenburg-Schwerin
New Granada Oldenburg Portugal Prussia Russia
Sardinia Spain Sweden and Norway Switzerland
Turkey United States.
The Council has also opened correspondence with the fol-
lowing places abroad, and has appointed the Gentlemen named
below as Honorary Corresponding Members. The answers that
have been received show that the deepest interest is felt abroad
in the success of the Association.
Aarau. Dr. Bolley.
Adelaide. Capt. Freeling, R.E.
Amoy. F. D. Syme, Esq.
Antigua. James Gordon, Esq.
Athens. Lucas Ralli, Esq.
Baden. M. F. Odernheimer.
Batavia. Bonhote, Esq.
Berlin. Dr. Von Hermann.
Prof. W. Wedding.
G. B. Wilkinson, Esq.
Berne. Dr. Schneider.
Bolivia.
Boston, U. S. Barnabas Bates, Esq.
Brazils.
Bremen.
Brussels. M. de Brouckere.
M. L. A. J. Quetelet.
M. Corr Van der Maeren.
Cape of Good Hope. J. Fairbairn,
Esq. Cape Town.
Alfred Essex, Esq. Graaf-Reinet.
Charlevoix. M. Ferdinand Spitaels.
Chili.
Constantinople. Ishmael Pacha.
M. Lafontaine.
Copenhagen. M. Garlieb.
Prof. Hummel.
Costa Rica.
Delf.
Dresden.
Ecuador.
Florence. Le Chevalier Baldaseroni.
Signor Corridi.
Geneva. Prof. M. Colladon.
Genoa.
Georgetown , British Guiana, W.
W. Campbell, Esq.
James Edward Roney, Esq.
Ghent. M. Grenier Le Fevre.
Grenada. Agricultural and Horti-
cultural Society.
Guatemala.
Hague. M. J. Pols, Director of the
Post in the Netherlands.
Halifax, Nova Scotia. Matthew
H. Richey, Esq.
Hamburgh.
Hanover.
Havannah . Crawfurd, jun. Esq.
Hayti.
Hesse, Grand Duchy of. M. Hec-
tor Roessler.
Hobart Town. Royal Society of
Van Dieman’s Land.
Hong Kong. A. Shortrede, Esq.
Ilvaldeme, near Frederikshall, Nov
way. J. W. Goodchild, Esq.
Kingston, Jamaica. H. I. Kemble,
Esq.
W. Girod, Esq.
La Plata.
Liege. M. Felix Capitaine, Presi-
dent of the Chamber of Com-
merce.
C. de Roscius Orban.
Lisbon. Don Ribiero da Sa.
Lubeck,
Madrid. Don Melchor Ordonez.
El Almirante Duque de Veragua.
Malta.
Manilla. Wood, Esq. (Messrs.
Constable, Wood, and Co.)
Mauritius. Rawson W. Rawson,
Esq.
Mecklenburg.
Melbourne. Lieut. Tyler, R.E.
Mexico.
Montreal. A. D. Parker, Esq.
A 3


Munich. Dr. Schafhault.
Naples.
Nassau.
New Bedford, South Australia.
Lieut Crossman, R.E.
New Granada.
New York. James Brown, Esq.
Horace Greely, Esq.
Nicaragua.
Oldenburg.
Panama. Smith, Esq. (Messrs.
Smith and Lewis.)
Paris. M. Legentil, President of
the Chamber of Commerce.
M. Horace Say, Secretary of the
Chamber of Commerce.
Comte de Kergolay.
Baron C. Dupin.
Col. A. Morin.
Gen. J. V, Poncelet.
M. A. Dufrenoy.
M. Arles Dufour.
M. Wolowski.
Parma.
Peru.
Port Phillip. Leslie Forster, Esq.
St. Francisco, Jos. de Puisaye Green,
Esq.
St. John's, New Brunswick. Dun-
can Robertson, Esq.
St. John's, Newfoundland. George
T. Brooking, Esq.
St. Petersburg. M.Brock.
M. C. de Beyne.
St. Thomas. J, W. Dunlop, Esq.
Saxe Weimar.
Schwarzburg.
Singapore. A. Logan, Esq. Secre-
tary to the Chamber of Com-
merce.
Stockholm. M. D. C. de Skogman.
Count A. de Posen,
Stuttgard. Dr. Steinbeis.
Sydney. R. A. A. Morehead, Esq.
Tobago . James H. Kems, Esq.
Tunis. Gen. Sidy Mahmoud Ben-
yad.
Sy Hamda Elmkadden.
Moses Santillana, Esq.
Uruguay.
Venezuela.
Verona. M. Antonio Radice.
Verviers. M. Armand Simonis.
Vienna. Chevalier De Burg.
Herr A. von Baumgartner.
Comte F. E. Von Barrack.
Prof. Carl Roesner.
Vigo. Don S. Olozaga.
Don J. Alphonso.
Washington. C. F. Stansbury, Esq.
Patent Office.
Prof. Spencer F. Baird, Smith-
sonian Institution.
Prof. Henry, Smithsonian Insti-
tution.
Prof. Jewitt, Smithsonian Insti-
tution.
Western Australia. Capt. Hender-
son, R.E.
The Association is also in communication with the following
Local Associations; and in every case the Directors have
already given, or have promised their assistance, towards the
accomplishment of the objects in view.
Belfast Chamber of Commerce.
Social Inquiry Society.
Blackburn Commercial Association.
Bradford Chamber of Commerce.
Bristol Soc. of Merchant Venturers.
Chamber of Commerce.
Cork Chamber of Commerce.
Royal Society.
Cuvierian Society.
Dover Chamber of Commerce.
Dublin Chamber of Commerce.
Statistical Society.
Dundee Chamber of Commerce.
Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce.
Merchants' Company.
Glasgow Chamber of Commerce and
Manufactures.
Greenock Chamber of Commerce.
Hanley Chamber of Commerce.
Hull Chamb. of Comm. & Shipping.
Leeds Chamber of Commerce.
Leith Chamber of Commerce.
Limerick Chamber of Commerce.
Liverpool Chamber of Commerce.
American Chamber of Commerce.
Manchester Chamber of Commerce.
Commercial Association.
Newcastle Chamber of Commerce.
Commercial Association.
Southampton Chamber of Commerce.
Sunderland Trade and Commerce
Committee.
Waterford Chamber of Commerce.
Worcester Chamber of Commerce.


COLONIAL PENNY POSTAGE.
An extraordinary meeting of the Society of Arts was held at the
Society’s house, John Street, Adelphi, on Tuesday, the Bth of Febru-
ary, to receive and take into consideration the proposals of Postage
Reform, put forth by the Colonial and International Postage Asso-
ciation. Sir John Peter Soileau, Bart., Vice-President, in the Chair.
Amongst the company, which was very numerous, were George
Moffatt, Esq., M.P.; F. H. Brooking, Esq.; J. D. Powles, Esq.; Henry
Cole, Esq., C.B. ; Captain Owen, R.E. ; W. Girod, Member of the
Assembly, Jamaica; Alexander Gillespie, Esq.; John Dillon, Esq.;
C. Wentworth Dilke, Esq.; Leslie Forster, Esq., Legislative Council of
Port Phillip, Australia ; T. A. Mitchell, Esq., M.P., and Mrs. Chisholm.
The Chairman observed, that he was sure the Meeting would not
expect him to make any lengthened address, as he had been very
unexpectedly called upon to take the chair; having only been a few
hours in London. - He hoped, however, he should not be travelling
beyond his duty, if he expressed the cordial and anxious interest
which ,he felt in the subject about to be considered, and his strong
conviction that, whether they considered the happiness of their
colonies, towards which so large an amount of emigration was turn-
ing, and the happy intercourse of those colonies with the mother-
country, or whether they considered the happiness of the world at
large, the time had come when they should all make the most
strenuous efforts in their power to carry out a system of cheap
International and Colonial Postage. (Hear, hear.) This important
subject would be brought forward in a Paper which they were all
invited to discuss, and nothing could tend more to advance a great
and good object than a free expression of the opinions of intelligent
persons. (Hear.) He regretted that the Earl of Carlisle was unable
to take the chair, but his lordship had written a very kind letter,
expressing his entire concurrence in the object of the meeting. The
late Colonial Secretary, Sir John Pakington, had also written a letter,


which he would read. That right hon. gentleman said :—“ I fear I
shall not be able to attend the meeting on the Bth instant; but I
greatly desire to see a system of cheap postage between this country
and our colonies. When I was in the Colonial Office, I pressed upon
the Postmaster-General my opinion of the great importance of con-
ceding this boon. (Cheers.) If I had continued in office, it was my
intention to use every exertion to effect it.” Sir John went on to
say, “ I shall be happy to co-operate with your Council in any manner
in my power, and I trust the present Government may be induced
to attach as much importance to the subject as I did. I consider it
to be a subject of great and daily increasing national importance.”
(Cheers.) He had also a letter from a most zealous promoter of the
object for which they had met, Mr. Elihu Burritt, which he would
also beg leave to read :
Dublin, February 7th, 1863.
Dear Sir, — I have just received here the circular note of invitation to
the Meeting of the Ocean Penny Postage Association, on the Bth, which
you have kindly addressed to me. Most gladly should I have attended this
important meeting had I been in London, or within any reasonable dis-
tance from it. But I have just arrived, en route to all the considerable
towns in Ireland, for the purpose of presenting the project of cheap or
Penny Ocean Postage between Great Britain and all other countries on the
globe. As I had developed this subject in public meetings in nearly all
the large towns in England and Scotland, I felt it desirable that the people
in this part of the kingdom should be interested in the question, which is
of peculiar importance to their well-being. At the conclusion of every
meeting, a petition to Parliament in favour of Ocean Penny Postage is
adopted and signed. I have now presented the project in this way in about
120 of the most considerable towns of Great Britain, and it has been
received with great favour everywhere. We have a large number of peti-
tions ready for presentation to Parliament, all asking the simple boon of
an Ocean Penny Postage. Mr. T. M. Gibson has agreed to bring forward
a motion in the House of Commons in behalf of this measure, and Mr.
Adderley has engaged to second it. I hope that your magnanimous and
magnificent scheme of Colonial Postage may be harmoniously blended in
Mr. Gibson’s motion, so that both may be fully and advantageously in-
cluded in it; so that it may be asking the establishment of an Ocean Penny
Postage between Great Britain and all foreign countries, and the exten-
sion of the present inland penny postal system of the home country to all
the colonies and dependencies of the British empire. Thus all our opera-
tions may be concentrated upon one motion. I earnestly hope that this
may be agreeable to the members of your powerful Association.
Yours truly,
ELIHU BURRITT.
Other letters had been received from J. Walter, Esq. M.P.; Wm.
Ewart, Esq. M.P.; Wm. Scholefield, Esq. M.P.; Wm. Brown, Esq.


M.P.; Baron Lionel de Rothschild, M.P.; Eight Hon. E. Strutt, M.P.;
S. Morton Peto, Esq. M.P.; Matthew Uzielli, Esq.; Joseph Locke,
Esq. M.P.; Lord Dudley Stuart, M.P.; William Hawes, Esq.; and Sir
James Duke, Bart. M.P.; in every case expressing great interest
in the subject, and assigning satisfactory reasons for their absence.
(Cheers.)
Mr. Yapp then read the following paper: —
There are few subjects of interest to a larger number of people
than that of postage. It cannot be said to be exclusively a com-
mercial, a literary, or a scientific question. It appeals to all classes
of society, whether engaged in commerce, literature, or the arts.
It appeals to our feelings as well as to our interests. It is a matter
which deeply concerns the manufacturer and the merchant, and it is
no less interesting to all who are united by ties of affection or sym-
pathy to others from whom they are separated by distance.
Facilities of communication of all kinds are sure tests of the
progress of civilisation, and of the developement of the resources of
a country. Seventy years ago the mails were carried through Eng-
land on horseback, at the rate of three miles and ar-half an hour ;
and when Mr. Palmer (the Rowland Hill of that day) proposed the
establishment of the mail-coach system, the Post Office authorities of
the time thought that the pace was quite as fast as was requisite,—
they could not see the use of hastening the mails.
The mail-coach system was, however, established, after much
discussion ; and there were few things that Englishmen were prouder
of than the mail-coaches which, from 1784, commenced running
in all directions from St. Martin’s-le-Grand.
Railways have superseded the mails ; and the letter that used to
be a week or even a month reaching the remote parts of our own
country and cost 16c/., now flies there while we are in bed, and costs
us but one penny.
The progress in this matter has undoubtedly been great; but
other things also have not been standing still, and there is much
to be done yet before our postal arrangements can be said to be
in accordance with the growth of our trade and the demands of
society.
In 1838, when Mr. Rowland Hill’s startling project was discussed,
the postage on single letters within the United Kingdom varied,
according to distance, from 4 d. to 16c/.
The proposal to establish, in place of these varying rates, an
uniform charge of a penny for a single letter, irrespective of distance,
was at first received as the dream of an enthusiast, and met with as
much ridicule as applause.
The idea was new, or, at any rate, it was new to the public, and


the project laboured under a difficulty which fortunately no longer
exists. No positive data then existed by which to test the soundness
of the scheme ; now, we have the benefit of the experience which has
resulted from the working of the penny postage system, and can
advocate cheap and uniform colonial and foreign postage on the
grounds of the great success and immense national advantages which
have followed the adoption of the system in this country.
To form any notion of the effect of penny postage, it is necessary
to take a glance at the Post Office previous to the alteration of the
system.
By reference to the Third Report of the Committee of 1838, page
11, it will be seen that for seventeen years previous to the inquiry,
although the population and trade of the country had been increasing
rapidly, the revenue of the Post Office had been nearly stationary.
And, in fact, from 1815 to 1823, it had been on the decline, the gross
revenue in the former year having been 2,323,835/., while in the
latter it only reached to 2,071,503/. {See Returns, 421 of 1848.)
At page 11 of the Report is a return showing the gross income
for two periods of six years each, viz. 1816 to 1820, and 1832 to 1837 ;
the first period having yielded 13,143,683/., the latter 13,508,647/. ;
an increase, in seventeen years, of only 60,827/.; equivalent to an
annual increase of 3578/., or only 3s. per cent per annum.
Such was the rate of increase previous to the establishment of
penny postage.
The twelve years of the new system exhibit results which contrast
remarkably with the above. The gross revenue of the Post Office in
1840, the first year of penny postage, was 1,359,466/. ; that of 1851,
2,422,168/.; making an increase of very nearly 100,000/. aryear, and a
larger total by some thousands than had ever before been obtained
in one year from postage.*
This same rate of increase, if continued to 1860, will give a gross
income of 3,292,646/. per annum.
£ s. d.
* Year ending 5 January, 184] - - 1,389,466 9 2
„ „ 1842 - - 1,499,418 10 Ilf
„ „ 1843 - - 1,878,145 16 7J
„ „ 1844 - - 1,620,867 11 10
„ „ 1845 - - 1,705,067 16 4
„ „ 1846 - - 1,887,576 18 Ilf
„ „ 1847 - - 1,963,857 9 9f
„ „ 1848 - - 2,181,016 16 -f
„ „ 1849 - - 2,143,679 19 6
„ „ 1850 - - 2,165,349 17 9f
„ „ 1851 - - 2,264,684 5 3f
„ „ 1852 - - 2,422,168 4 If
{Return 502—1852).


To complete this slight sketch of the growth of the income of the
Post Office, it must be noted that a very large proportion of the
expenses of management is caused by newspapers (amounting in 1849
to 65,600,000) which pass through the post, without contributing
anything to the funds of that department.
The 350,289/. collected in newspaper stamps ought, in fact, to be
carried to the credit of the Post Office ; and if so, the net revenue
for 1851 would amount to nearly a million and a half, and the gross
income to nearly three millions sterling.
It is unfortunate that the commercial and social effects of the
penny postage cannot be shown with the same clearness as the finan-
cial effects ; but it is quite impossible to exhibit by figures what cheap
postage has done for the trade and commerce of the country, or to
estimate the influence which it has exerted upon literature, science,
art, education, and, in short, upon all those great and important items
which together constitute civilisation.
Some idea of these effects may, however, be derived from the fact,
that whereas in 1838 only 75,907,572 letters passed through the
Post Office, in the year 1851 the number was 360,647,187, and in
1852 must have been 400,000,000, or more.
So that in fourteen years the number of letters passing through
the Post Office has increased nearly six-fold.
But we are not confined to our own country for proofs of the im-
portance of cheap postage. Nearly all the civilised world have fol-
lowed our example, either entirely or in part.
France, Spain, Holland, Belgium, Prussia, Bavaria, have all made
great reductions in their postage charges.
Bussia has for some years established an uniform rate (equal to
about id. of our money) over the whole extent of that enormous
empire. The United States charge 3 cents (equivalent to about
three-halfpence) for a single letter, for any distance not exceeding
3000 miles ; and we find by the Report of the Postmaster-General,
that the number of letters has increased from 24,267,532 in 1843, to
83,252,000 in 1850 ; while the income of the Post-Office department,
which for ten years previous to the reduction had fallen short of the
expenditure, for the five subsequent years yielded a balance to the
revenue of the country.
In our own possessions in India, a reduction equivalent to about
50 per cent was made in 1839. The effect of this reduction, as we
find by the Report of the Commissioners appointed by the Indian
Government to inquire into the subject, was to cause an increase of
the number of letters, during the first year of 100 per cent, and in
nine years of 150 per cent.
That Report recommended the adoption of an uniform system
of about |d. for a single letter, which recommendation, it is said,


has been adopted by the Indian Government, and ordered to be
carried into effect.
Since the establishment of the penny postage in the United
Kingdom, the internal trade of this country has greatly increased ;
so also has our export trade, and to an extent not contemplated by
the most sanguine speculators: the exigencies of this multiplied
commerce have been partially met by the establishment of ocean
steamers, which have practically reduced the distance, and strength-
ened the bonds between us, our colonies, and our neighbours ; and
it has been for some time the opinion of practical men that the
principle of low and uniform postage charges is equally applicable to
ocean as to inland postage ; and would, if applied to foreign and
colonial correspondence, produce similar results to those which have
flowed from its adoption in the former case.
With this object in view, an association was formed within these
walls in 1851, including the representatives of many foreign nations
at the Great Exhibition, which had shown to enlightened men of all
nations how much each might learn of the other, and of what
vast importance it was to remove all obstacles to free communi-
cation.
After mature consideration of the course to be pursued, the
Association, looking at the greater difficulties which stand in the
way of an alteration of foreign postage arrangements as compared
with colonial, and feeling that example in such matters is infinitely
more efficacious than precept, have resolved to give their attention
for the present to that portion of the subject which relates to our
own possessions abroad.
There is another and most important circumstance, also, which
has helped to this decision, namely, the extraordinary emigration
which is now carrying 1000 of our countrymen daily from our
shores to the antipodes. Such a migration is without parallel in
history; and the growth of the colonies, towards which this vast
tide of human beings is directed, is equally extraordinary.
A colonisation so unprecedented calls for extraordinary means
of correspondence; and nothing can be of more importance in ce-
menting the interest of the colonies and of the mother country than
such a postal system as shall make the cost of a letter no impediment
to its being sent upon the most trifling occasion, not only by the
merchant and tradesman, but by the poorest emigrant just landed on
the Australian shore, or by the anxious mother, wife, or sister, of
him whom the ocean separates from them for a time, and, perhaps,
for ever.
At present the postage on a letter to our foreign possessions
vanes from B d. to Is. 1 0d., the average being about Is. There are
two rates to each colony, according to whether the letter be sent by


private ship or by packet; in some cases the letters must be pre-
paid, in others it is optional; while from some of the colonies letters
cannot be prepaid under any circumstances. And, lastly, there is
this vexatious fact in addition, that whatever the amount paid on
this side, a writer knows not how much more his correspondent will
have to pay before the letter will be given up to him.
The printed accounts relative to colonial, as distinguished from
foreign letters, are very meagre ; but it may be seen, by a statement
obligingly furnished to the Association by the Postmaster - General,
and printed in the Journal of the Society of Arts of the 10th of
December, or more readily by reference to an extract from that
return, published in the Journal of the 14th January,* that the total
gross income from colonial correspondence is less than 200,000/. per
annum; thus, supposing the average postage to be Is., we have less
than 4,000,000 of colonial letters, or only one-hundredth part of the
total number of letters passing through the Post Office during the
year. That 4,000,000 of letters are all that pass annually between
the United Kingdom and the whole of the British possessions
abroad, India included, is quite incredible; it is perfectly well
known, indeed, that the number of Tetters which are conveyed to
the colonies by other means is very considerable, amounting, accord-
ing to some estimates, to four times as many as go through the
Post Office.
* “ The amount of revenue derived from the Colonies is extracted front
the MS. return obligingly furnished by the Postmaster-General at the
request of the Council of the above Association, and printed at length in
our Journal of the 10th December. In that return the income from Trans-
marine Colonial Postage, by each line of packets, stands as follows•
French Mail ----- ,£16,016
Belgian 630
Prussian ----- 1,636
Dutch 766
Hamburg ----- 1,548
American - 33,937
West Indian ----- 23,884
Cape 5,115
Peninsular ----- 3,627
India via Southampton - 42,605
India vid Marseilles - 36,413
Sydney, &c. - - - - 5,730
Africa 383
Intercolonial Postage - 15,016
Red Sea Postage - 6,405
£103,011”


That the postage should be reduced, and a remedy found for
the anomalies, inconveniences, and evasions that exist, is admitted
by every one; although there will, doubtless, be some diversity of
opinion as to the exact plan to be adopted.
But the satisfactory results of the Inland Penny Postage system
would seem to point at once to the adoption of a very low uniform
rate, together with prepayment, or, in other words, to Colonial
Penny Postage and the use of stamps, as in the United Kingdom.
If it be objected that it would be unjust to charge the same for a
letter going to Australia as for one going into the next town, or even
into the next street, the answer is, that it is quite impracticable to
arrange the charge in exact proportion to the distance travelled and
the duty performed—that the extra cost incurred by distance is so
small as to be scarcely appreciable, while the preparation of the
mails and the delivery of the letters is the same in all cases—that
the proposed rate of Id. per half-ounce would be equal to 300?. per
ton, supposing all the letters were full weight—and, lastly, that the
simplicity of an uniform penny rate would be of such great practical
importance as to outweigh all other considerations.
Such a rate of postage to the Colonies would not be without
precedent; it would not be so low, indeed, as has already existed.
For it will be seen, by reference to the Second Report of the
Committee of 1838 (Appendix, p. 135), that, from the year 1819 to
1838, the postage to Ceylon, Mauritius, the East Indies, or the Cape
of Good Hope, by private ship, was only 2d. for a letter up to three
ounces in weight, or three times cheaper than the proposed rate of
Id. for a letter not exceeding half an ounce.
It must be remembered, also, that booh, pamphlets, and even
manuscripts, can be sent at the rate of 6d. for eight ounces to nearly
all our colonies, and that a two-ounce pamphlet, or a newspaper of
any weight, can be sent to the United States of America for Id.
In the discussion of this subject, frequent reference is made to
the fact that Government expends 800,000?. a-year for the packets in
which part of the ocean mails are carried, and it is argued that,
therefore, a lower postage is not advisable on financial grounds’
It is well known, however, that the subsidies are paid for other very
important objects besides the conveyance of the mails, and conse-
quently the whole cost of these packets is charged by Government,
as it ought to be, not to the Post Office account, but to that of the
Admiralty. The arrangements, also, being made by the latter de-
partment quite irrespective of the former. If the packets were
maintained solely for the purposes of the Post Office, the sum of
240,000?. per annum would certainly not be paid for the West Indian
packets, which do not, and could not have been expected to, earn
more than a tenth part of that sum !


In a financial view, the point to be considered is—How would the
proposed alteration affect the actual income from colonial letters ?
That has already been stated as being less than 200,0001 per annum,
about equal to the increase in the net income of the Post Office in
1851 as compared with 1850.* This is the whole amount that could
possibly be endangered by the change.
What portion of this is likely to be sacrificed by the reduction of
the colonial rate to a penny 1 The experience of inland penny
postage promises a large increase of letters upon the reduction of the
rate, and the rapid developement of our colonies at the present
moment strengthens the expectation. The fact that three thousand
registered letters came in one mail, the other day, from Australia,
gives some idea of the tendency to an increased colonial corre-
spondence. But this was a special exception ; which penny postage
would, it is believed, at once convert into a rule.
Looking at all these facts, is it reasonable to suppose that the
amount of colonial postage would be reduced one-half, or 100,0001. ?
And that sum is less than the average annual increase maintained in
the general income of the Post Office for the last thirteen
Such a deduction could not be looked upon as an actual sacrifice of
revenue, but at the worst only a temporary check to a rapidly-
growing increase of that revenue.
This fact does away entirely with the important objection that
exists against many proposed alterations; namely, that, however
desirable they may be in themselves, they are inexpedient in a
financial point of view.
Besides, it must not be forgotten that revenue is not the object of
the Post Office. This is very clearly and satisfactorily set forth in the
Third Report of the Committee of 1838, as follows
“ The declared object for which the Post Office was established,
as appears from the Act, 12th Charles 11., was ‘ the advantage of
trade and commerce.'
“Lord Lowther, in a Report in ‘Prices Current,’ after quoting
from the said Act the preceding words, adds, ‘The direct revenue to
be derived from the Post Office was not the primary consideration.’
« The Commissioners of Post Office inquiry now sitting observe,
in their Tenth Report, that ‘ the safe and speedy conveyance of letters,
for the hemfit of trade and commerce, was the primary consideration
* Net income from Post Office for the year ending sth day of April
1853 - - - £ 1,056,000
1851 - - - 861,000
Increase - £ 195,000
(jff. of C. Returns } No. 68 of 1853.)


with the Government in the establishment of the General Post Office.'
This principle is recognised in the preamble of the different postage
acts which were passed from the time of the Commonwealth down
to the tenth of Queen Anne, when the English and Scotch offices
were united under one Postmaster-General.
“Such” (says the Report) “were the objects for which the Post
Office was established, and such are the objects which, in the opinion
of your Committee, ought to be kept in view in the management of
that department.”
This was the reasoning of the Committee of 1838, and the
adoption of penny postage was the result.
Is not the demand for a Penny Colonial Postage equally logical
and practical, when it is seen that its establishment could not
possibly cause any reduction in the present net revenue of that
department ?
The Chairman said, that after the admirable manner in which
the history of the subject had been treated by Mr. Yapp, and after
his arguments to show that the system of cheap postage might safely
be extended, at all events to the colonies, he would only advert to
one point which had not been mentioned by that gentleman, namely,
the great cultivation of the moral virtues and domestic affections
which must arise from such a system. The effect of Penny Postage
in that respect had been most remarkable. In bygone days domestic
servants, being taught to read and write in their different parish
schools, were sent perhaps one hundred and fifty miles away to
service ; but owing to the heavy expense of postage, children who
had left home with every feeling of domestic affection in time almost
forgot that they had parents, because they were entirely unable to
maintain a correspondence with them. The cause of education like-
wise suffered ; because persons in that position were disposed to
question the benefits of the education which they had received;
whereas the facilities of correspondence on the cheap postage system
showed them the advantages of education, and encouraged them to
maintain and extend their knowledge. (Hear.) So many observations
of a similar kind naturally occurred to the mind in connexion with
this subject, that he must not pursue it farther; but would rather
call upon some of the gentlemen present, who had given more
attention to the question, to address the meeting. (Cheers.)
Mr. G. Moffatt, M.P., said that it was fortunate that Mr. Yapp’s
able Report had spared the Meeting many of the figures in connexion
with this question. The idea now propounded was by no means
new. When Mr. Rowland Hill first contemplated the reduction of
postage, his scheme was intended to have been an Universal Penny
Postage. That scheme was carefully considered by a certain number


of the merchants and traders of London, acting in connexion with
distinguished members of the House of Commons. They considered
that the subject divided itself into three branches : first, the Inland
Postage ; secondly, the Colonial Postage; and thirdly, the Foreign
Postage : and considering the magnitude of the work they had under-
taken, and the extreme importance of its success, it was thought
desirable not to attempt too much ; but rather to confine their efforts
entirely to inland postage. But at the same time they never relin-
quished the idea of extending the penny-post system to the two
other branches—colonial and foreign. (Hear.) Mr. Yapp’s paper
showed the success which had attended the cheap and uniform system
in Great Britain. They had been told that the entire revenue would
be lost; but, on the contrary, they had the satisfaction last year
of finding that the gross revenue of the Post Office was somewhat
larger than ever had been previously known. Before 1839 the greatest
gross revenue was 2,346,000£, but in 1852 it was 2,422,000£. (Cheers.)
And the increase in January 1853, over the corresponding month in
1852, was something very considerable. The time, therefore, had
arrived for those who had been active in postage reform to achieve
the second great division of the subject by extending it to the colo-
nies. The financial objections which before had to be surmounted
could not now apply. The same accommodation should be given to
the colonies, in regard to the transmission of letters, as the mother-
country possessed ; quite irrespective of the question whether it
would pay or not, pecuniarily. There were far more weighty con-
siderations involved in the subject than the mere financial question,
The principle was admitted by Government, and by all who un-
derstood facts and figures, that it was well worth incurring a
further small expense to secure that free and unlimited interchange
of thoughts and ideas between England and the Colonies which
a low rate of postage must produce. The utmost it would cost the
revenue would probably be 100,000 b a-year ; but his own belief
was that, at the end of five years, it would cost nothing. (Hear, hear.)
A much larger gross revenue than at present would probably be
realised. The letters now passing through the Post Office to all the
British colonies did not exceed three millions and a-half in a year,~
being less than the number posted in this country in one week,
(Hear.) As Mr. Yapp had stated, the rate of postage in India—-
from Cabul to Cape Comorin —from the east to the west of that
great peninsula—had lately been reduced to f d. ; whereas a letter
from England to India would cost a sum varying from Is. to 2s. 3i i.
The East India Company would not have made this great reduction,
unless they had been thoroughly convinced of the benefits to be
derived from a cheap, uniform, and superior system of postage.
(Hear.) Some instructive facts were also afforded in reference to


Ireland. The number of letters passing through the Irish Post Office,
as compared with the whole postage of the United Kingdom, was
something like one-tenth
the letters going to the Canadas, no less than one-third of the whole
number went from Ireland; which country had, in fact, no trade
with Canada. And this notwithstanding a postage of Is. and Is. 2 d. ;
shofvmg that the ties of social and domestic affection only required
to be developed, to assume a much more striking manifestation.
(Cheers.)
The Chairman observed that Mr. Abbott Lawrence, the American
Minister, stated that four-tenths of the postage between the two
countries was paid in Ireland, and that that proportion was steadily
increasing. (Cheers.)
Mr. Mofpatt said that made the fact still more striking. An-
other important consideration was to be found in the change in the
commercial policy of the country. They had said to the colonists,
“We do not bind you to our marketsand therefore the trade of
the colonies was freely opened to foreign competition. Every one
who reflected on the subject must acknowledge the importance
of attracting these colonies by every possible means to the mother-
country ; and that object could not be more effectually accom-
plished than by a cheap rate of postage. (Cheers.) Now, with so
vast a tide of emigration to Australia, it was notorious that every
individual took with him a number of letters, either of intro-
duction or affection —his pockets or portmanteau were probably
filled with letters, sent in that way on purpose to evade the law
(Hear, hear): the first lesson given to the emigrant being, therefore,
how he might successfully evade and break down the law. Certainly
the number of letters passing to and from Australia by the Post Office
was quite insignificant compared with those which came by private
hand. In the year 1848 only 100,000 letters came by post from
Australia; and although that number was no doubt now greatly
increased, still the amount of fraud and evasion, which would be
prevented by cheap postage, would almost make up the 100,000?.
which the Government might have to lose. (Hear, hear.) The
example set by England had been followed by other nations in their
own territories ; and he believed there was a strong disposition on
the part of the United States and Prance to join with England in a
cheap international system. To facilitate this object, the best plan
was to set those countries again the bright example, and to show
our own confidence in the principle by at once extending it to the
colonies, even although its success might there be more precarious,
in regard to the rapidity of increase, than in our own inland postage.
England, he had no doubt, would be true to her high renown ; but
it was the nature of all governments to need a great deal of pressure.


He was much gratified with the strong expressions used by Sir John
Pakington. The question must he pressed upon the Government
again and again, by every town in England, if they really sought to
obtain for their brethren in the colonies the great boon which they
had obtained for themselves. (Cheers.) He had much pleasure in
being permitted to move the following Resolution :
“ That it would be sound national policy to abandon, if necessary,
even the whole of the present postal revenue derived from the
colonies and the British possessions, which is about 200,000 f.
per annum, in order to promote the commerce, education,
freedom of communication, and friendly relations between the
colonies and the mother country.” (Loud cheers.)
Captain Owen, R. 8., said he had great pleasure in seconding the
Resolution, and he might, perhaps, take the opportunity of giving a
brief account of the steps by which the Association had arrived at
the position of advocating the adoption of a Penny Colonial Postage.
The Association was established during the Great Exhibition, and
mainly with a view to simplify the complicated system of foreign
postage ; it originally consisted of gentlemen connected with the
Exhibition, and many of the Foreign Commissioners on that occasion.
It was from daily intercourse with those gentlemen that he was him-
self drawn into taking an interest in the subject. The great diffi-
culty of simplifying foreign postage had caused them to be regarded
as visionaries ; but a scheme had been put before the Association by
which even that object might be effected by the adoption of Mr.
Rowland Hill’s principles of prepayment, uniformity, and cheapness.
Uniformity, however, might be relative as well as absolute. All
countries had not the same weights and measures, nor the same
money, nor was it likely that they would have in our days ; but if
they agreed to the principle of prepayment, it was not necessary
that each country should adopt the same rate of postage. The
French and English rates might be different, but it should be agreed
that in all cases the rate should be levied in advance ; that the
French should deliver our letters free on condition that we delivered
theirs free ; and this system might be commenced by any two coun-
tries without the aid of others. In that case, instead of the present
complicated postage treaties, which if printed would fill a number of
folio blue-books, a few simple words would be sufficient. At present
he understood a postage treaty to be made in this way: after a
great deal of discussion, a rate was fixed as to the cost—or, rather,
the tax —to be levied upon a letter going from one country to
another ; and then the diplomatists, who were supposed to be the
cleverest people in each country, set to work to over-reach each
other, and to see which country should get the greatest share of the
money and the least share of the work. If the sum were lOJtf.,


all their exertion was to see which country should get s \d. and
which only 5 d., and the odd halfpenny was the test of successful
diplomacy. (Cheers and laughter.) This might look like business,
but between gentlemen who were always talking of their friendly rela-
tions, and of peace and good-will towards each other, it appeared to
him to be a very selfish, grasping, disgraceful sort of thing. (Cheers.)
Now it had been thought if a simple treaty could be made with
France such as he had suggested, France would say, “ You must un-
dertake to deliver our letters in all parts of your dominions for
although we drew a great distinction between India, Australia, the
Falkland Islands, and the Hebrides, France would say, “ These are
all parts of your dominions.” And, therefore, it appeared to the
Association that, before they began to preach reform to their neigh-
bours, it was absolutely necessary first to perfect our own postal
arrangements, and to put the whole British empire upon the same
footing. (Cheers.) Now it had been urged that it was absurd to
think of sending a letter to the antipodes for a penny ! A gentle-
man had just told him that freight to Australia was up to 157. a ton,
being four or five times the ordinary rate; but even at that enor-
mous rate, inasmuch as it would require 71,680 half-ounce letters
to make a ton, the freight of each letter would be no more than
one-twentieth of a penny,—certainly not more than the cost of
sending the letters of this Society from the Adelphi to the
post-office at Charing Cross. (Cheers.) As to the present outlay of
800,0001. a-year for the packet-service, that was, in fact, a subsidy for
other national purposes ; and it was a debateable question whether
that money was well laid out, and whether the service would not be
much better performed if it were thrown entirely open. (Hear,
hear.) With regard to Colonial Penny Postage, it was most import-
ant that the rate levied should include everything, to the delivery of
the letter at the door of the hut in Australia, at the back part of the
island of Jamaica, or up the country at the Cape ; for if the British
Government undertook to convey the letter to the main port of
the colony, that colony ought, at least, at its own expense, to under-
take to deliver it in any part of the colony. (Cheers.)
Mr. Samuel Sidney (Author of “ The Three Colonies of Aus-
tralia ”) said, the Australian colonies had now assumed a position
which they never held before. Many emigrants who had been car-
ried out at the expense of the Colonial and of Government funds,
since the year 1831, who had been selected from the poorest classes,
now shared in the prosperity of the colony, had become inde-
pendent, in some cases wealthy, and through the instrumentality
of a lady (Mrs. Chisholm) whom he was happy to see present
(Cheers), had been able to renew their connexion and communication
with relations long forgotten. Since the discovery of the gold fields


the labouring classes of Australia had taken the trouble to discover
people with whom they had had no communication for ten, fifteen,
and even twenty years, because before that discovery nothing had
happened to them to justify the great expense of postage. Accus-
tomed as the inhabitants of this country had become to penny
postage, they could have no idea of the feelings of a labouring man,
starving upon 7s. a week, when the postman presented a letter,
which, perhaps, he could not read, and asked him for Is. Docu-
ments sometimes addressed from the colonies to members of par-
liament, the postage upon which amounted to 41. or 5/., were often
refused, and the papers sent back ; but 51. was not so much to a
man of 7007 a-year as Is. to the labourer at 7s. a-week. (Hear, hear.)
When he was conducting his “Emigrant’s Journal” he had paid the
postage of letters addressed to agricultural labourers, in order to
obtain them for publication. He (Mr. Sidney) had paid the postage
in many cases for these poor people ; and it had more than once
often turned out that the letter was from some forgotten son,
brother, or cousin, who had sent over for his relations to share his
prosperity. An extraordinary number of letters of this description
had been received of late. In order to raise the funds necessary for
proceeding to the gold-diggings, one or two members of a family
were frequently sent out by the joint-stock contributions of the rest.
In many cases the relatives thus left behind became dependent on the
workhouse. The people of England would soon have to pay largely
for the support of the wives and families of gold-diggers; to mitigate
that evil it was their duty to help on and assist those great plans for
the union of families, so successfully carried out by Mrs. Chisholm.
(Cheers.) In no way could that be better done than by the esta-
blishment of a cheap system of ocean postage. (Cheers.) The
feeling of the Government was favourable, 'and nothing was needed
but the “pressure from without.” In 1848 the amount of postage
derived from the Australian colonies was only 5700?.—a sum quite
insignificant in comparison with our colonial expenditure. He
had confined his remarks to the social view of the question, and
would say no more on that point, as he hoped the meeting would
hear a few words from Mrs. Chisholm on the importance of this
great colonial question. (Cheers.)
Mr. 0. Wentworth Dilke would venture to ask Mrs. Chisholm
one question, namely, whether she had any knowledge of a great
number of letters having been transmitted to the colonies by hand,
irrespective of postage, and solely on account of the expense 1
(Cheers.) The very great experience of Mrs. Chisholm would give
the utmost value to any information with which she might favour
the meeting. (Cheers.)
Mrs. Chisholm expressed (through Mr. Dilke) her wish that Mr.


Forster, who had lately arrived from Australia, should in the first
place, be allowed to address the meeting. (Hear.)
Mr. Foester said that he quite coincided with all the preceding
observations, and especially with those of Mr. Sidney. As a colonist
he wished to see a goodly stream of emigration kept up to Australia:
and no means would be so effectual for that purpose as a system of
cheap postage, as it would give the poorer classes of this country
the most authentic information as to the advantages of emigration.
With respect to Capt. Owen’s suggestion that the colonies should
deliver letters from their arrival at the port, it would be necessary
that the Association should place itself in communication with the
Colonial Post-offices, which were bound by their local acts; and
without the co-operation of which it was not in the power of the
British Government to carry out the project. (Hear.) Unless this
kind of communication was opened, objections might be made, both
by the British and the Colonial Governments, that the measure could
not be carried out by either, because the other would not co-ope-
rate. (Hear.) No doubt could be entertained of the benefits which
would arise from the intended measure; and having resided many
years in Australia, he could assure the meeting of the hearty sym-
pathy and co-operation of the colonists there. (Cheers.)
The resolution was then put, and carried unanimously.
Mr. J. D. Powles proposed the second resolution. They were
met to perform a duty and an act of justice to their brethren in the
colonies, and, indeed, to account to them for having so long withheld
the benefits of cheap postage which they enjoyed themselves. Mi-
nistering, as the colonies did, to the prosperity of this country, and
forming part and parcel of the empire, upon what ground could it be for
a moment pretended that they were to be deprived of those benefits ?
Australia was as much a part of England as the' Isle of Wight, and
what substantial difference was there between Scotland and Canada ?
From the Land’s End to the extremity of Scotland a letter was con-
veyed for Id., a distance of nearly 1000 miles ; whilst from England
to Canada, not much more than 2000 miles, the charge was
Is. 2 d. It was high time that a more just and rational plan was
adopted, and it was impossible to do too much to bind the colonies
to the mother-country by the cords of love and affection. If the Go-
vernment should raise any objection on the ground of the expense,
the answer was, What right had they to deny to the colonies the
benefits enjoyed by ourselves ; especially when, in five years’ time,
the increase of correspondence would be so great that it would not
cost the country a farthing more than at present 1 The number of
letters from the colonies by post was not more than one from each
individual annually; and the amount of indirect communication
was enormous. All this would be discontinued if there was only


a penny to pay, and the results would be an immense benefit to
the colonists, without any damage to this country; and even if
damage did occur in a financial point of view, it was the duty of the
Government to meet it. (Cheers.) The resolution which he had to
move ran as follows; —
“ That the system of a uniform penny postage already in operation
between the United Kingdom and the Channel Islands ought
to he extended to the British colonies and possessions.”
Mr. John Dillon seconded the resolution. Never was there so
large an experiment so soon tried and so successfully established as
the penny postage in this country. He agreed that the question
divided itself into three branches, and that the time was come to
extend to the colonies the benefits enjoyed here. If there had before
been no reason for this measure, the present position of Australia
definitely settled the point. It was impossible that the community
there established, and their friends in this country, could be left
without the means of cheap and easy communication. That com-
munity would be the means of supporting our wealth and greatness ;
and for political reasons, for the convenience of commerce, and for
the preservation of the moral and social virtues, the proposed mea-
sure was essential. What was wanted was a cheap and uniform
rate of postage. The amount he was not prepared to enter upon.
We should deliver letters to the colonies. How they would deal
with them must, like many other matters, be left to their discretion ;
but it was his decided opinion that the time had come for pressing
upon the Government a measure which he felt assured they would
not reject. (Cheers).
Mrs. Chisholm, at the request of the Chairman, next addressed
the meeting. She said:—We are working for a vast moral and
social improvement, and we have the Government with us. If the
Government do not work, it is because we do not give them work
to do. Were I one of this Committee, I should accept the letter of
Sir John Pakington as a vote of censure; inasmuch as he assures
them that he was quite ready to effect their object, if he had only
been pushed on. If no Society had undertaken this duty, petitions
would have been signed by every emigrant that left this country ;
but you have undertaken the task, and you must not he slow in
performing it. The colonists with whom I have conversed seem to
think a penny postage will not pay in the colonies ; that it won’t
meet the expenses; but I think we must not look at the mere
expense of postage. Postal communication is a great moral machine,
which must be set working, and kept continually going, to do any
really substantial good. Eighteen or twenty miles seem a great
distance to send a letter, and many of the sheep-stations are that
far distant from any post-office. After the mail has been conveyed


a considerable distance on the highway, perhaps 200 miles by the
regular route, it may seem a great distance to send the postman on
horseback twenty miles farther to convey a letter to a station. But
still I think that any regular system of cheap postage, whether it
be \d. or 2d. } will pay; and I believe a penny would pay, and pay
as well at the sheep-stations as at any other place. It is at those
sheep-stations that designing men will be at work. I have some-
times found in one hut a party of young men, reading and writing
in the evening, after attending the sheep in the day ; in another I
have found grog-drinking, and a state of perfect carelessness and in-
difference. The only chance I had with these latter young men was
to say a word or two in behalf of their mothers. “ Have you written
to your mother No.” “But you must write.” —“I can’t
write ; I am ashamed to write : I will write when I have saved
money.’ “ But you must write at once. Here is paper, pen, ink,
and an envelope. Sit down and write. Only say, lam well.” Now,
although he was perfectly indifferent about writing a line, I knew,
the moment I got him to put his pen to paper that I had raised a
feeling in his bosom to work and do good. Having conveyed the
paper and the pen and ink to him, for no other reason than to try
to rouse his home feelings, I think you will agree with me, that
it would never have done for me to have .said, “ If you will give me
the shilling I will pay the postage for you.” I should have imme-
diately laid myself under the imputation, or at least the suspicion, of
doing what I did for money. I preferred, therefore, doing what
seemed to me, under the circumstances, a plain duty,—doing as
much as I could in supplying the means, and inducing a com-
munication with those parents who were in this country; and I
do think that the few sheets of paper and the few pounds I
expended in that way were attended with a greater moral blessing
and benefit than anything I ever did. (Cheers.) Again, women
in this country are daily coming to me, deserted in many cases, but
in others voluntarily separated from their husbands. I find them
with a young family, and without the eightpence or the shilling to
pay for colonial postage ; and they ask me to write their letters
and to try and keep up the home feelings. All of you must admit
that the kindlier and better feelings, to do good, must be kept con-
stantly daily and hourly—at work. You know well that men are
not to be trusted beyond a certain distance, and but for a limited
period, from domestic influences. (Cheers.) At present, in order to
save these poor women the expense of ocean postage, I adopt the
plan of writing upon a small scrap of paper the name of the wife,
her residence, or where she expects she may be : I generally ask
what parish she belongs to ; I mention whether she is in distress
and furnish the state of her health. I frequently enclose as many


s.
d.
1852. March 8. Two letters from the Cape
1
i
July 17. One letter from Port Phillip
0
H
Sept. 27. Two ditto
2
0
Dec. 12. One ditto
0
8
Dec. 25. One ditto
1
i
And three letters written by herself to her
emigrant children .....
3
0
Total .
9
0
as ten or fifteen of these little scraps in one letter, addressed to my
husband, who then makes inquiries, as far as he can ; and endea-
vours to get those men to send assistance to their wives and families.
(Cheers.) The difficulties attending communications with the colo-
nists are at present very great. Letters sent from the diggings must
be prepaid there (either threepence or fourpence) and cost eightpence
here. I hold in my hand a letter from one of those very useful men,
the City Missionaries. Some very eligible families were selected by
him, and the money was lent them to emigrate. In one case the
father and mother were left behind ; the father at that time in good
health, and with every prospect of living for years. He died shortly
afterwards, and this letter shows the expense to which the survivors
have been put for postage :
My deab Madam,— Knowing the great interest you take in everything
connected with emigrants and their relatives, I wish to call your attention
to the very heavy charges for postage incurred by ’ poor relatives who
receive letters from the Cape and Australia; and with this view I give you
the following particulars and items. You can call to mind a numerous
party of emigrants whom you sent out hy the Athenian, amongst whom
were a brother and sister, both married, H. and E. A . While yet on
their journey to Australia their father died, leaving his widow, with a
young family to support. Now, since that time she has had to pay the
following sums in postage out of her own and her children's scanty
earnings. I give the dates and the items, as follow :
I have little douht that this pretty fairly represents the ease of many other
poor people; and I trust that you will make it known to the proper authori -
ties, and use your great influence to induce some change in a system of
charges that presses with so much severity on the poor.
Now, in bringing this matter to your notice, you must see that the
party interested cannot continue to pay the postage, even for the
few months that may be necessary. The mother’s address probably
becomes lost; the children will write one or two letters, but the
mother will hear nothing of them; and the consequence will be,
that this widow and her young children will become chargeable to
the parish. Now, if you give them penny postage, so that letter


may follow letter qniddy, .jon may be assured that the children will
not have left this country many months before money will be sent
home. The great is the eightpence on this side. lam
anxious that you should understand that particularly. These poor
women find it a difficult task to pay the money for postage conse-
quent upon that correspondence which is absolutely necessary to
keep up those feelings which I am sure you will all agree are neces-
sary for the domestic happiness and comfort of a family. (Cheers.)
How important is it to the young men who are now going out in
thousands from this country that letters should quickly, I may
almost say daily, follow them. A clergyman told me that he had
received four letters; that the postage was about two shillings
each; that he had frequently paid the postage for the poor people,
but that he was really too poor to do so any longer. A letter
came ; it was sent back to the colony. In the meantime the poor
woman for whom that letter was sent died in the workhouse; and
in that letter was enclosed 2 51. for her support. Within the last
month a poor woman received a letter from Australia, postage
3tf. 2 d. She went to two or three of her friends, but could not
raise so large a sum. Her cloak and her shoes were pawned ; and
two of her neighbours assisted her, in order to pay the postage.
Inside the letter was a money-bill. (Hear, hear.) As another en-
couragement for you to persevere, I will mention that about 80CKU
has recently been sent over to assist poor people, aged parents, and
relatives ; very few of the senders being able either to read or write.
That has been done entirely through the industrial exertions of
one individual in the colony, connected with a society in this
country. (Much cheering.)
The second resolution was then put, and carried unanimously.
After a few words from Mr. Shocking and Mr. Gillespie, the
meeting separated.
London Printed by G. Lahciay, Castle St.’Leicester 84.
