

CATALOGUE
OP THB
sir m
|;f f
QUEENSLAND COURT,
iTMATIONAL EXHIBITION,
ami
13425-'! ‘VVX ij
i mm ,
ill
SYDNEY, 1879.
WITH SHORT ESSAY DESCRIPTIVE SR:
.ruiiJl alWKfl ill I 0 i I (
OF THE COLONY OF [|
QUEENSLAND,
QUEENSLAND,
/
|lg/M
PHii
|ii*
Bp KB'iPM' I WI |
mHmB ii §ff|p- ■


Printed, at the Gov^
'! Engraving, & Lithographic Office. Brisbane.. Queensland .


QUEENSLAND,
Its Resources and Prospects
* s at P mes difficult to write a detailed description
of an Australian colony in such a manner as to
W enable readers at a distance to realize that which is
4
described. Not merely the superficial differences so often
insisted upon —the trees that shed their bark instead of
their leaves, the hot Christmas and cool July—but the
fundamental characteristics of this continent are so different
from those of European countries, that it would be necessary
to cumber every statement with so many explanations that
the wearied reader would fail, after all, to grasp the meaning
so elaborately conveyed. In these pages, therefore, it is
proposed to give a comprehensive sketch, laying down the
strongly marked outlines, and omitting the puzzling details
of the picture.
In describing Queensland, the first point to be noted is
the vastness of its area. Within its boundaries are 669,520
square miles. These figures in themselves give no tangible
idea. That can only be obtained by comparison. The
great Indian Empire contains an area, 935,307 square
miles, only about one-fourth larger than that of Queensland.
A territory as large as the whole Dominion of Canada as
originally formed, including the provinces of Ontario
121,260, Quebec 210,020, New Brunswick 27,105, Nova
Scotia 18,660, British Columbia 213,000, Manitoba 14,340,
Prince Edward Island 2,173, and Newfoundland 40,200 sq.
m. could be taken out of this one colony and yet leave a
remnant 22,762, two-thirds of the size of Ireland behind it.
, f • '-V s .,
\


•The above areas are taken from Cbanioer's Encvclopcedia, edit-on of 1874. Trie
Dominion of Canada has been greatly enlarged in gross area bv tne annexation of
the Noith-west territory since 1870, but it is yet an open question how much of
that territory is litted by climate for settlement
We could spare enough land to make up the Cape Colony
200,610 sq. m., and Natal 16,145, find room for France
201,600, and the German Empire 208,613, pick out corners
for Denmark 14,560, Belgium 11,300, and Holland 13,584,
and still squeeze in, say Montenegro, and two or three
German principalities. Finally, we could take out the area of
England and Wales, 58,300, eleven times and nearly have
enough left for Scotland.* And almost the whole of this
great territory is available. We have here no forbidding
tracts of dismal swamp, cold and barren, no ice-bound rivers,
no expanses of lingering snow, while our mountain ranges
conceal no volcanic fires, and are for the most part clothed
with vegetation to their very summits. Even the persistent
myth of an interior desert has been chased beyond the
furthest boundary of Queensland. There are sterile tracts
certainly, and districts badly supplied with water, but the
fuller knowledge, which the continued exploration and
pioneer settlement of the last ten years has given us, reveals
the fact that the colony contains an unusually small pro-
portion of country unfit for use, and that the greater part of
it is remarkable for the extreme richness and fertility of its
soil.
This great colony, stretching as it does from the nth
o Jl ~ wv
to the 29th parallels of south latitude is subject to a variety
of climatic conditions, but one remarkable feature pervades
them : their wonderful suitability to the European constitu-
tion. In saying this, of course, we do not pretend that an
Englishman can safely live and work in the Cape York
peninsula, under the nth or 12th parallel, precisely in the
same manner as he does in Southern Queensland, but it is
very remarkable that in our most northern settlements, at
Cooktown and Townsville, on the 16th and 19th parallels,
and at the sea level, European workmen build houses, make
streets, construct jetties and perform hard manual labor, in
QQ


the hottest season of the year and working under the full
blaze of the midday sun, with apparent impunity. It may
not be a wise proceeding on their part, but it is not less a
curious fact that they should continue doggedly to observe
the same working hours as in cold climates, and that this
defiance of the tropical sun, which in a similar latitude in
any other part of the world would expose them to the risk of
disease and probable death, is in this colony followed by no
consequences that we can trace through our carefully
collected vital statistics. Even sunstroke, or heat apoplexy,
is rare in northern Queensland. It would almost seem
that our climatic conditions were arranged so as to enable
the white man to fix his permanent home in the very
midst of all the teeming abundance which nature' pours
forth in the tropical zone, and not as in other lands, be
compelled to regard himself merely as a temporary resident.
For, if no excessive sickness or mortality prevails in northern
Queensland now, although settlement is in its first and
most primitive stage, and men have not, as yet, taken
the trouble to surround themselves with the safeguards
usually adopted by Europeans in tropical countries, and
although the rough pioneers indulge freely in the coarsest
ana most nery stimulants, it may justly oe assumea mat in
time to come the sanitary records will tell an even more
and most fiery stimulants, it may justly be assumed that in
favorable story than they do now.
In Appendix B the official figures bearing on this part
of the subject will be found, but a few words may be added
to give an idea of how the Queensland climate affects the
colonist—a point on which thermometer readings throw
very little light. The summer in the southern coast
districts is hot, and occasionally oppressive; though the
temperature and the elasticity of the air vary very much in
different localities. But the heat is not continuous, it is
interrupted by days, and even weeks, of* cool breezes,
and cloudy skies. In the northern coast districts, the
heat is most unpleasant during the commencement of
the well defined wet season, beginning in January, but


it is always mitigated by the strong trade wind, salt-laden
from the sea. In winter, the climate along the coast
of southern Queensland is often delightful, and always
pleasant and bracing —the invigorating cold weather lasting
for several months, and extending far beyond the tropical
line as marked on the map. In the inland districts of the
colony the climate is even more suitable to the European
constitution, there is a wonderful elasticity in the air,
especially when the western plateaus are reached, and the
stirring breezes sweeping over the endless downs and prairies
ot the interior seem charged with some invigorating property
that sends the blood tingling through the veins of the
traveller when he first encounters them. This dry, pure,
invigorating breeze serves to brace up the European constitu-
tion to endure with perfect impunity a sun heat which
appears excessive when measured by the thermometer, and
also cools the night air rapidly, so that few bushmen
dispense with their blanket even in the middle of summer.
The winter, also, in the inland districts of Queensland, is
sharp and bracing—with dry frosty nights, and days of blue
sky, cool breeze, and temperate sun. On these healthy
uplands—and our description applies to nearly two-thirds of
the territorial area of Queensland, disease is rare in man or
beast, and there are now in the colony scores of men in the
full enjoyment of health and vigor, who years ago dragged
bodies nearly worn out by the wasting effects of tubercular
consumption, into this pure dry atmosphere.
As has been already stated, there is really very little
unavailable country in Queensland, but the varying climate
determines the manner in which it can best be utilized, and
for that reason we propose to divide it into Tropical and
Sub-tropical districts, and to sub-divide the latter again into
what may be, for the purposes of this paper, called the
moist and dry regions, which, speaking generally, lie in belts
parallel to the coast. It must, however, be understood
these divisions are to a great extent arbitrary, the one
extending into the other, as mountain ranges, and other


physical features of the country, determine the amount of
rainfall and the frequency of the showers. It is yet a moot
point with the colonists how far inland crops, depending on
their growth for natural falls of rain, can be grown; but it is
not denied that this would be impracticable in the country
lying near to the south-western border of the colony. And
in making the divisions necessary for a detailed description
of the resources of the colony, we shall ignore the administra-
tive districts into which it has been divided, and follow the
natural grouping indicated by the watersheds of the principal
rivers.. With this preliminary explanation we will take first
Sub-Tropical Queensland.
In this division is included by far the larger moiety of
the colony, and it may be said to begin between the 21st
and 22nd parallel of latitude, although the line is a purely
arbitrary one, and the boundary between the two divisions
is vague, fluctuating and indefinite. Frosts, however, occur
in winter south of the line chosen and never north of it,
except on the table lands in the interior, where they are
everywhere experienced, and in the northern division the
tropical wet and dry seasons are pretty well defined.
Following the divisions already indicated, we will take first
the moist region and that part of it of which
BRISBANE,
the capital, forms the natural port, the oldest
settled and most thickly peopled district of the colony. The
town itself containing, with its suburbs, about thirty thousand
people, is situated on a river of the same name, and a
smaller town, Ipswich, with over five thousand people, has
been built at the head of tidal water. The district
surrounding these two towns stretches from the slopes of the
niaru dividing range to the coast, an average distance of
from seventy to eighty miles. The climate is healthy,
showers are frequent, and cultivation is largely carried on.
The scrub, or jungle, lining the rivers and streams, has been,
or is in course of being, cleared away, and the rich mould


it has left used for the growth of sugar-cane and maize, as
well as bananas, pine-apples, sweet potato, arrowroot, and
other tropical crops. The ordinary potato is cultivated and
gives a profitable return, oats, and lucerne are grown for
hay, and the latter is also laid down in paddocks for
depasturing stock. It is in this part of the colony that the
greatest variety of trees and plants have been introduced.
Denizens of the tropics, as well as of the temperate zone
grow, and many of them reach their fullest perfection.
Nearer the slopes of the range, the more purely tropical
plants are not cultivated; maize, potatoes and fodder plants
of all descriptions are substituted; while in the neighbour-
hood of Ipswich vine growing is carried on largely, and a
considerable quantity of wine made, (see Appendix D.)
The various species of pine, which abound in some of the
scrubs, are felled for timber; cedar also is found, and several
steam-mills and a number of men find profitable employment
in prosecuting this industry.* Traces of gold have been
found near Brisbane; but, as yet, no profitable reef has been
worked. Coal is abundant. The Brisbane river cuts
a large coal basin, and a number of mines are in operation,
(see Appendix C.)
As might be supposed, settlement has been pretty
widely spread in this part of the colony; townships are
springing into towns, and towns into cities. But even here
the uncleared land predominates, and it is only in the
immediate neighbourhood of towns that the work of
man is visible, and that the primeval forest does not reign
supreme. From Brisbane a railway has been constructed,
which passing through Ipswich climbs the plateau of the
DARLING DOWNS.
This district, which its inhabitants proudly call “The
Garden of Queensland,” is watered by the Condamine,
•The timber scrubs, or forests, are generally on the banks of rivers, but there
are localities in which these cover wide-stretching areas of country. Such an area
occurs in the neighbourhood of Ipswich. On the coast, between this district and
the one next described, there is a great tract of timber country, surrounding a
string of picturesque shallow lakes. The timber from Noosa, as this place is called,
is brought round by sea to the capital.


Upper Moonie and Weir rivers, all tributaries of the
Darling. The soil is volcanic and rich, the rainfall is
moderate, and sufficiently distributed to allow of agriculture.
Large deposits of coal occur, and the tin-fields of Stanthorpe
in the southern part of the district are well known to metal
buyers in London. Elevated as it is above the level of the
sea, the cold is much sharper in winter, than in the neigh-
bouring district at the foot of the hills. Wheat and maize
flourish, and all crops grown in the temperate zone arrive at
great perfection. The European fruits, apples, pears,
peaches, plums, and a number of others have been acclima-
tised, and are doing well; vines grow to great perfection;
and the olive has been planted, and thrives. The grazier
finds in the native grasses of the Darling Downs sufficient
nutriment to fatten every description of stock, there being
1,770,998 sheep in this district alone, according to last year’s
stock returns; while the farmer sees his crops reward the
trouble he has taken to unlock the treasures of the soil.
Under such favorable circumstances it is hardly necessary to
say that several important towns, Toowoomba, Warwick,
Dalby, Roma, and Stanthorpe have been formed; and a
number of smaller townships are rapidly coming to the front.
•The first three towns mentioned are connected by rail with
Brisbane, and the line is being extended from Warwick in
the couth to Stanthorpe, near the New South Wales border,
and from Dalby in the west, to Roma on the very confines
of the dry pastoral region beyond it. With that region we
will deal in its proper place, at present we will take the next
group of river basins in the moist littoral, that of which
MARYBOROUGH, BUNDABERG, and GLADSTONE
are the ports. The first named town contains about six
thousand inhabitants, and is situated on the navigable
portion of the Mary river; the second is a small, compara-
tively new township on the Burnett; and the third is an old
settlement, on a fine land-locked sheet of water, which in
spite of its favorable situation has never attained the


importance to which it seemed destined, because the
surrounding broken country cuts it off from inland traffic.
Throughout this region the rainfall is well distributed
and the climate favorable for agriculture. On the Mary
river sugar growing is largely carried on and the yield is a
profitable one. Steam mills,, with the latest scientific
appliances, are in operation, and a large refinery at a place
named Yengarie, not merely works up the low class sugars
locally produced, but, by a patent process, the owners
neutralize cane-juice produced on outlying farms, and bring
it from long distances to be transformed direct into high
class refined sugar. Maize is largely grown on the banks of
the Mary, and to a very considerable extent on the lower
Burnett; the settlers also raise potatoes, lucerne, and oaten
hay. Although an agricultural population of several thou-
sand people find employment on the existing settlements,
these form but a small portion of the total area contained in
this region. There are many million acres of the richest
soil, capable of growing the most prolific crops, as yet
untouched by hoe or plough, and still unalienated from the
crown. This land is held under pastoral lease by squatters
who fatten sheep and cattle on the natural grasses, but the
leases are nearly expired, and the whole will soon’be open
to selection, under the liberal land laws of the colony, by
whoever desires to acquire it.
This district is rather remarkable for its timber, even in
so well timbered a colony as Queensland. On the flanks
of the mountain ranges, which form the watersheds of its
rivers, on the sea-coast, and on a large sandy island, about
seventy miles long by an average of twelve wide, which lies
near to the mainland, are innumerable timber scrubs. In
some of these, particularly on the watershed of the Mary
river, the valuable pencil cedar is found; the trees are felled
by lumberers who roll the logs into the watercourses, waiting
until the summer rams fill them and drift their Contents into
the river. But the lumberers, or timber getters as they are


called, find permanent employment in felling the splendid
pines which abound in the scrubs, hauling the logs to
navigable water and rafting them to the steam saw mills of
Maryborough and Bundaberg. These establishments not
only supply all the timber for the wooden houses of their
immediate neighbourhood, but of most of the coast towns to
the north, where pine cannot be got so cheaply; they export
also a large quantity of pine to New South Wales, and of
cedar to Victoria.
It is not, however, for its timber, or its agriculture, that
this district is so remarkable as for its store of minerals. In
the southern part of it the Gympie goldfield, the first, and
until lately, the most important in the colony, continues to
support a large population and affords every prospect of
continuing to do so, (see Appendix H.) To the north of
Gympie, and at about the same distance from the coast, is
Neardie where large deposits of antimony occur, and the ore
is being raised and shipped from the port of Maryborough.
Further inland the mountain ranges which separate the
waters of the Mary from those of the Burnett are literally
seamed with minerals; copper, gold, galena, and cinnabar
occur in the most wonderful profusion; in places the three
first named metals forming a singular mixture or conglom-
erate. The ores have been mined in one or two places, but
the long and expensive land carriage to port hardly allows a
sufficient margin of profit. It is, however, hoped that a
railway, now in course of construction from Maryborough to
Gympie, will remedy this defect.
Crossing from the watershed ot the Mary to that of
the Burnett river, we come to another large and far extended
mineral deposit of which the centre is Mount Perry, a copper
mine which has been worked for some years and during that
time returned in profit two or three times the amount of
cash capital invested in it. Here again the long and costly
land carriage will be diminished by a railway from the port
of Bundaberg, of which the construction has been authorized


by Parliament. Around Mount Perry, for the distance of
many miles, are other large and promising copper deposits,
and at a yet greater distance antimony deposits, gold-bearing
quartz reefs, and lodes containing small percentages of
bismuth have been found.
Going on still northward we come to a mass of ranges
and broken country in the neighbourhood of Gladstone.
Here again copper, gold, silver and other metals occur, but
in rather disturbed formations. On the whole the area that
we have been describing is most wonderfully rich in
minerals, the lode bearing strata forming a rough semi-
circle inland from south to north, while the sea-coast is
apparently a great coal basin. This last named mineral is
being successfully worked on the banks of a small stream
called the Burrum, a short distance to the north of Mary-
borough.
The next area we intend to describe is the basin drained
by the affluents of the Fitzroy river, of which
ROCKHAMPTON
is the chief port. This town, the second in the colony in
point of importance and trade, is situated almost on the
tropic of Capricorn. Its climate cannot, however, be called
strictly tropical, very decided hoar frosts occur in winter
sometimes, and the succesion of wet and dry seasons is not
clearly marked. Some agriculture, and a good deal of
dairy farming is carried on in its neighbourhood. There
are some gold-bearing quartz reefs which are moderately
profitable, and some promising copper lodes have been
opened in its vicinity.
The area drained by the Fitzroy and its tributaries is a
very large one. Roughly speaking it extends over four
degrees of longitude and five of latitude. The basin of its
southern affluent lies chiefly behind the district just
described, while its northern tributaries run almost entirely
inside the tropical line, and rise on the verge of the purely
tropical division of the colony. On the whole this great


area may be described as good pastoral country. There are
portions of it which are sandy and barren, but on the other
hand there are stretches of black soil volcanic downs which
cannot be surpassed for fertility, and which with their thick-
springing native grasses resemble huge wheat-fields. Most
of the country is yet held by pastoral lessees, and one
portion of it—the Peak Downs—contains some of the
“crack” stations of the colony, properties of which the
stock, improvements, and lease are worth and
upwards. Although drier than the districts we have
previously described, or, to speak more correctly, with the
rainfall less evenly distributed, the climate of a large portion
of it is suitable for agriculture, and it is probable that when
the railway now being pushed westward from Rockhampton
reaches the inland volcanic downs, the free-selectors will try
whether they cannot replace the thick grass sward with as
prolific crops of wheat and maize. Even now, in the im-
mediate neighbourhood of the inland townships—Springsure
and Clermont —small cultivation patches are found to
succeed admirably, vines also are grown, and fruit trees thrive.
The best known mineral deposit in Queensland, the
Peak Downs copper mine, is in this district, on one of the
northern affluents of the Fitzroy, and in the middle of the
excellent pastoral district to which reference has already
been made. The developement of this mine has always
been hindered by the crushing carriage rates to port, but the
Rockhampton railway will greatly diminish this item of
working expense. When carriage is reduced we may expect
that the original mine, which is far from being worked out,
will have a new lease of prosperity; and some neighbouring
deposits, now lying idle, will probably be worked. A coal
basin exists near the railway line, and a seam has lately been
discovered which appears to be quite large enough for
profitable working.
The area just described is only a portion of the country
from which produce finds its way to the port of Rock-


hampton. That town divides with Brisbane the trade of the
WESTERN PASTORAL RECxION
of the colony, which we propose to describe next. This
great region extends from about the 149th parallel of
longitude to an indefinite distance westward, the boundary
of the colony being the 138th. In the southern portion of
it there are no marked physical features dividing it from the
agricultural district of the Darling Downs, but further north
the land rises visibly from the coast until it reaches the
elevation of the great plateaus which form this district. It is
essentially a land of sheep and cattle. For hundreds of
miles it is almost unbroken prairie; in some places stretching
in apparently endless plains, while, in others, interminable
downs roll to a vanishing point on the horizon. In this
wilderness of pasturage there are many watercourses marked
by fringing belts of timber, but these are not running streams.
Dependent almost entirely on surface drainage, they are for
a few weeks, or even days, during the short and rare periods
of rainfall, swollen and turbid torrents, often spreading over
a width of one or two miles. But the torrent soon subsides,
the stream shrinks within its channels, dwindles to a trickling
thread and dies away, leaving the creek or river bed occupied
by a chain of pools, or, as the Australians unromantically
call them, waterholes, which vary in size from mere puddles,
dry in a month, to huge sheets of water miles long and
capable of lasting years without replenishment.
This description applies generally to the pastoral region,
though in so great an area of country there are many and
varied features. Some of it, indeed, on the Western
border, has only recently been occupied and is imperfectly
known. There are mountain ranges and broken country,
timbered tracts and scrubs, the last differing in a marked
degree from the jungles of the coast, the trees composing
them being generally of a different species, more stunted
and gnarled in growth, and not entangled with lianas and
vines. But throughout the great pastoral district of
Queensland open plains and downs predominate. These


prairies are covered with grass and herbage, generally of
species different from those growing on the coast, but all
highly nutritious, and among them are many varieties of
saline herbs, which add greatly to the value of the pasturage.
Sickly flocks and herds recover health and vigor on these
breezy plateaus, and stock fattened there are despatched
to all parts of Australia, “carrying their fat” for journeys
extending over many hundreds of miles.
The climate of this region is favorable alike to man
and beast. The dry pure air, the dewless nights, the
continual breezes sweeping over the downs and plains
dissipate all miasmatic vapours, and temper the extreme heat
of the summer sun. As is usual in such a rarified atmosphere
the nights are cool, and after the hottest summer day the
bushman is glad to roll himself in a warm blanket when he
lies down to sleep; while the sharp frosts and keen dry
winds of winter serve admirably to brace the constitution
relaxed by the heat of summer. On the agriculturist only
does nature frown. The rains fall often at long, and always
at uncertain intervals, and they generally come down in
torrents. The indigenous grasses and herbs are suited, by a
remarkable process of adaptation, to these climatic con-
ditions, but ordinary crops will not grow without continued
irrigation. The squatter, however, sees without dismay the
tufts of native grass whitening and apparently withering, for
he knows that the dry dead looking pasturage contains the
nutriment necessary for his flocks and herds. He knows
also the magical change that will come over the face of the
country when the long delayed downpour sets in. For no
sooner will the rain-clouds have cleared away and the sun
shone forth than a tinge of green, almost imperceptible at
first, but strengthening daily, will creep over the swells of
the downs or the long flat miles of plain. From every
withered ■ grass stalk tender green blades will sprout, the
dormant life in the dead looking tufts waking to sudden
activity, while every brown patch of bare earth will throw up
sweet green herbs in the most lavish profusion. In a week,


almost, the transformation will be complete; the bare
looking desert, hardly redeemed from an appearance of utter
sterility by the thinly scattered tufts of dead grass, will be
covered with a carpet of vivid green, the dusty solitude, of
which the silence was only broken by the bleating of thirsty
flocks, will be teeming with active and happy life, and the
sheets of water glittering among the creek timber will
happily replace the sullen, stagnant pools that threatened to
vanish in their beds.
A considerable portion of this area has only been
lately explored, and most of it is only partially stocked.
Within the last two or three years a number of wealthy
squatters have taken up country there, and have spent, and
are spending large sums in stocking and improving it,
especially in storing the water, which in rainy weather now
rolls idly away down to the sandy deserts and huge swamp
lakes of South Australia. It is not improbable that in a few
years this area will rank as the most wealthy and important
pastoral district in Australia, and its productions will be
largely increased when the railways now being pushed west-
ward from Brisbane and Rockhampton reach its borders.
This concludes our description of the country lying
beyond its verge, and we come next to
Tropical Queensland,
Here again there is some difficulty in laying down an
exact boundary, but we shall not be far wrong in taking, on
the east coast, the 1 ioneer river, between the 21st and 22nd
parallel, and continuing about the same line westward,
following the northern watershed of the rivers draining the
pastoral region just described, and the source of the streams
running in an opposite direction into the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Tropical Queensland contains by far the smaller moiety
of the colony, but in some respects it is perhaps the most
important. It contains the most extensive goldfields yet
discovered in Northern Queensland, and although it has


been only partially explored and “prospected,” some
wonderfully rich deposits of other minerals have been found.
That portion of it which has been called Carpentaria lies
immediately to the north of the pastoral region just described,
and at its southern verge partakes of the same character,
except that minerals have been found in several places, and
in one locality, the Cloncurry mine, there has been found
what is perhaps the largest deposit of native copper and rich
ore in Australia, although too far from port to be utilized at
present. The downs and plains of Carpentaria change in
character as they descend towards the hot shores of the
Gulf —-the most thoroughly tropical part of Queensland —
where the wide stretching flats are transformed into muddy
lakes during the wet, and are either arid sweltering
deserts, or covered with rank vegetation during the dry
season. However, as the base of the Cape York Peninsula
is reached, the country rises and changes, indications of
minerals become frequent and gold workings are common.
It may be fairly said that the whole of this country is
auriferous, and in many places contains other metals besides
gold. The northern digger, however, wanders over the face
of the country, and only settles down to permanent work
where the reefs are plentiful, and rich enough to hold together
a population sufficiently numerous to induce the Government
to open up roads for them from the nearest port; and the
difficulties with which he has to contend, the costly carriage
of food, the treacherous climate, the fierce determined
hostility of the aboriginal savages, have led to the temporary
abandonment of several fields which are in themselves quite
payable, and which will no doubt be worked profitably in
the not very distant future.
This part of Queensland is also subdivided by the main
coast, or dividing range of the colony, which at first runs
some distance inland and then gradually approaching the
shore, at last sends its spurs down to the beach. Taking
the southern portion of the eastern section, we have first the
town and port of


MACK AY,
situated near the mouth of the Pioneer river, and the chief
centre of the sugar industry of the colony, (see Appendix
E.) The light rich loamy soil on the banks of the Pioneer
is particularly favorable to the growth of the sugar cane,
which is here not liable to be touched by the hoar frosts
prevalent further south, and has an uninterrupted growth
throughout the year. The plantations are worked with the
latest scientific appliances, and very large sums have been
expended on them. In 1877, 7,643 tons of sugar were
manufactured in this district, and it is expected that in this
year, 1879, the produce will be nearly doubled. Coffee
thrives well; the pine-apples grown in the neighbourhood of
the town are famous for their size and flavor; cocoa-nut
palms have been planted and some are now fruiting; in fact
every tropical tree and plant thrives in the genial climate
and fertile soil. Mackay is not dependent alone on
agriculture for its future prosperity, as very promising
copper deposits are now t being explored in the neighbour-
hood.
Going northward, there is a very large tract of country
drained by the Burdekin river and its various tributaries,
and enclosed by the dividing range, which here makes a wide
bend towards the coast. There are also some inconsider-
able streams taking their rise from minor watersheds near
the shore, and on two of these are situated the towns of
BOWEN, and TOWNSVILLE.
Of these, Bowen is a small town on one of the most
beautiful sites in Queensland, and possessing for a harbor a
huge sheet of water completely land-locked by a semicircle
of picturesque islands. Enjoying, as it does, besides its fine
harbor, a most delightful and genial climate, Bowen has
nevertheless made little headway, and is chiefly known as
the northern legal centre, and a sanitorium to which people,
prostrated by the fiercer heats which sometimes prevail in
other parts of this portion of the colony retire to recruit


their health. Agriculture is, however, successfully practised
in the neighbourhood of Bowen, and orange orchards thrive
remarkably well. Coal basins of considerable extent occur
in its vicinity, and cattle stations are formed all along the
coast.
But the wealth of this district is chiefly mineral. On
almost every tributary of the Burdekin river gold-bearing
reefs are found, and these have been successfully worked in
many places. At present the chief centre of operations is
the field known as Charters’ Towers, which supports a town
of four or five thousand inhabitants. Mining is there
carried on in a scientific and permanent fashion. The
returns from this field are increasing, and it promises to
maintain in future an even larger population than at present,
(see Appendix I.)
The trade of this field goes to Townsville, a seaport of
rising importance, situated on Cleveland Bay, a little to the
south of the 19th parallel of latitude, and enjoying a fairly
salubrious climate. Tin has been found in the district, and
traces of copper; while if agriculture is neglected, it is rather
because the settlers have found gold mining a more agree-
able industry, than because either soil or climate is
unsuitable. In fact, the volcanic downs of the interior
are exceedingly rich, and the cattle of the pastoral settlers
are almost lost, in some seasons, in the rich thick springing
grasses that cover them. Water is also abundant, the
plentiful rains of the tropical wet season supplying a store of
moisture which fills innumerable lagoons, and feeds the
running streams. The scrubs too bear evidence to the
fertile soil and forcing climate, in their close matted
vegetation, and the wilderness of creeping canes and
entangled runners, which make them veritable tropical
jungles.
Still proceeding northward, and passing the little
mountain-bound port of Cardwell, and the rich valley of the


Herbert river, where sugar cultivation has been established,
we come to the east coast of the
CAPE YORK PENINSULA.
Before proceeding to describe this, it will be well to
mention that the whole east coast of tropical Queensland is
sheltered from the rollers of the Pacific ocean by a con-
tinuous line of reef, known as the Great Barrier, by
innumerable groups of islands, and islets of the most varied
and picturesque shapes. As Cardwell is neared, these
islands, many of them bearing the names originally given by
their discoverer, Captain Cook, approach the coast more
closely, while the ranges, clothed to their summits by the
thickest vegetation, rise abruptly at a short distance inland.
At intervals of only a few miles, short, swift rivers descend
from the mountain slopes, carving out valleys for them-
selves as they wind in and out on their way to the sea.
Many of these valleys contain soil of most wonderful fertility,
as is evidenced by the rank growth of vegetation which
almost chokes them. In these jungles, also, much valuable
timber exists, especially the highly prized cedar, and bands
of lumberers penetrate their gloomy recesses for the purpose
of felling the trees and rafting the logs for export. It is
calculated that from two of these rivers, known as the
Mossman and Daintree, four million feet of cedar had been
exported between November 1874 and April 1878, and that
three million feet were at the last named date lying ready
for shipment, besides another lot of half-a-million feet at the
Johnstone river. The market value of cedar in the log is
from 35/- to 40/, per 100 feet in Melbourne. The value of
this minor industry therefore can easily be calculated.
Much of this coast is practically unexplored, and settle-
ment has only taken place at three points: at Cairns, and
Port Douglas, in Trinity Bay, and at the mouth of the
Endeavour river; the localities having been chosen because
they gave access through, or over, the coast range to the
goldfields of the interior of the Peninsula. Of these the
most important is


COOKTOWN,
formed nearly five years ago at the mouth of the Endeavour
river, and in the locality where Captain Cook careened his
vessel during his famous exploring voyage a century ago.
This town, which at one time contained fully four thousand
inhabitants, owes its existence to the fact that the valley of
the Endeavour affords a good and gradual ascent to the
interior plateaus of the Peninsula, and the extensive gold-
fields on the heads of the various tributaries of the little
known Mitchell river, which falls into the northern portion
of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The first of these fields to be discovered was an
extensive alluvial deposit on the Palmer river, which
attracted a tremendous “rush” from the other colonies, and
created the town of Cooktown as if by magic. The white
men soon ran over the wide spread but shallow deposits in
the beds of the rocky valleys of the Palmer, discovering as
they did so that the hill sides were seamed with reefs.
While the easily won alluvial gold is to be got reefing does
not attract the diggers; but on the Palmer they were soon
driven to this more laborious occupation by incoming hordes
of Chinese, who had heard the fame of the “Golden Hills,”
and who came over in thousands from Hong Kong, till at
last the colony adopted special legislation to check their
influx, (see Appendix K.)
While the white men attacked the Palmer reefs,
wandering prospectors brought in the intelligence that they
had discovered a new reefing field, said to be of unsurpassed
richness, on a southern tributary known as the Hodgkinson.
The excitable miners flocked to this new Eldorado, leaving
the alluvial workings to the plodding labor of the Chinese,
who swarmed over the field, and created almost a town of
their own at the port of Cooktown.
In writing of both fields it is impossible to speak in
definite terms. The reports of dispassionate goldfield
officials, the Government Wardens as they are called, (see


Appendixes K and L), may be relied on. There can be no
doubt that both fields are of an extent almost unparalleled
in Australia, and contain hundreds, perhaps thousands, of
payable reefs. But here, as elsewhere, continued labor and
skilful expenditure of capital is needed in order to win the
hidden treasures of the lodes. It is rarely that the dream
of the roving digger, the sudden wealth, won almost without
exertion by a lucky discovery, is realized to its fullest extent;
but in most parts of the huge auriferous areas of Northern
Queensland, and especially in the two fields just named,
there is an ample and certain reward for the expenditure of
capital and the employment of labor.
The discovery of the Hodgkinson led to the desire for
a more direct and speedy route to the coast, and the
formation of two small coast towns in Trinity Bay, named
respectively Cairns and Port Douglas. These places owe
their existence to the needs of the field behind them, and
are languishing now, as the excitement of the first rush has
died away. But they will doubtless revive, when steady
industry takes the place of the feverish, speculative activity
of the past year or two, and the reefs are systematically
worked. There is also good agricultural land in their
neighbourhood, and some little attempt at cultivation has
been made. It should also be mentioned that considerable
deposits of tin ore have been found in the country inland
from Cooktown, and a coal basin of unknown extent exists
in its vicinity.
The rest of the Peninsula is almost unknown, but much
of the country is supposed to be metalliferous, and doubtless
many more gold-bearing areas will be found, and towns
spring, mushroom like, into existence. In tact the mining
pioneers may not inaptly be compared to children in a
confectioner’s shop strajdng from one case of sweets to
another. In time they will have no more northern fields to
discover, and as they will then probably settle steadily down
to develope its manifold resources it is almost impossible to


estimate the degree of importance to which this part of the
colony may attain, and the wealth it may produce. Not the
mainland only but the waters of Torres Straits, the innumer-
able islands, reefs, and banks which stud them teem with
wealth. Fleets of small craft, making their head-quarters at
the Harbor of Refuge, at Thursday Island, are engaged in
procuring the valuable pearl-shell. Other fisheries, of beche-
de-mer, employ a number of people; sponge of good
marketable quality has been found; and it is hard to say
what new industry may not, from day to day, be established.
There are many magnificent possibilities before this part of
Queensland, but as yet they are for the most part veiled in
the haze of the future.


PROSPECTS OF THE COLONY.
In entering on this final branch of our subject vve are
entitled to look back over the records of the past to forecast
the future. In iB6O, Queensland had a population of 28,000;
in 1870, it was 115,000; in 1877, it had reached 203,000.
The receipts at the custom houses indicate very fairly the
prosperity of the people. Without any noticable increase
in tariff the income from these duties has risen from-
in iB6O, to in 1877. This increase has
been due to no sudden and overwhelming attraction, like
that exercised by the famous goldfields of New South Wales,
Victoria, and even New Zealand. Our alluvial fields have
been comparatively small and poor, and they have lasted
only a short time as centres of attraction for Europeans.
Quartz reefing areas of great size and exceptional richness
exist in the colony, but these attract no “rush,” they are
mined in the ordinary fashion, and require time and capital
for their developement It is by the variety of her resources
that Queensland has drawn so many additions to her people;
and it is a remarkable fact that the arrivals from other
parts of Australia have been always and considerably in
excess of the number of departures from this colony. A
reference to Appendix A will show that the exports last year
reached a total equal to ,£2O/4/1 per head of population,
and the calculation takes no account of the value of stock
sent overland to other colonies. And this great wealth does
not fall into the hands of a few great capitalists or employers,
it is enjoyed by all classes of the population. The Govern-
ment has established public savings banks, for the encourage-
ment of thrift among working people. The official report
for the year 1877 shows a total amount in these banks of
£702,312, divided among 14,383 depositors. Of deposits


not exceeding ,£IOO the total amount was ,£313,382; not
exceeding ,£2OO, and not exceeding £3OO, it
was £99,303; the rest being made up in a few larger sums.
The public officer in charge of these banks, says in the
beginning of his report, “Although, during the past year, the
colony has suffered from a drought of almost unprecedented
severity, it is satisfactory to find that the business of the
savings bank has not been materially affected. The deposits
show a steady increase as compared with the previous year,
and the withdrawals do not indicate that anything unusual
in the circumstances of the people has taken place.” It will
thus.be seen that, secure in the number and variety of her
resources, Queensland can endure the losses of a drought,
always a calamity in a pastoral and agricultural country,
without diminishing, or even stopping, the increase in the
accumulation of savings made by the more thrifty section of
the laboring population.
But, indeed, it is hardly possible to over estimate the
resources of this colony. Within its area of 669,520 square
miles deposits of almost every known description of ore
have been found. It is not too much to say, that if the
supply of copper and tin in all other countries were
annihilated, Queensland could furnish the markets of the
world with a sufficiency of both metals. The goldfields of
the colony are large enough to give employment for
several generations, to a population of miners many times
greater than that at present engaged on them. Antimony,
lead, and zinc are known to exist in quantity, and will
probably be worked when the cream has been skimmed off
the more costly metals; silver ore and bismuth have also
been found. The coal basins of the colony equal in aggregate
area a good sized European state; and iron ore is known to
exist in quantity sufficient to keep in blast all the furnaces of
Great Britain Around these metalliferous areas lie the
hundreds of millions of acres of fertile soil, bearing native
grasses and herbs that afford the finest conceivable pasturage
to the flocks and herds of the pastoral settler, and invite the


plough of the farmer. All these advantages occur in a
country over the greater part of which the pure blooded
European can select a home, certain of enjoying the most
vigorous health, and of rearing children who will not, in
physical or mental vigor, fall short of the parental standard.
Over this vast region a little handful of people are
scattered. They are living in the midst of one of nature’s
treasure houses, but their hands are too few, their means too
slight, to do more than glean the riches that lie scattered on
its surface. If their numbers and the capital at their
command were multiplied an hundred-fold, the whole would
yet be unequal to the task of properly utilizing the resources
of their territory; but before that period arrive Queens-
landers are justified, by the record of the past, and the
experience of the present, in saying that their colony would
stand in the first rank of British possessions for its wealth
and prosperity. There is room in the colony for all who
like to come to it, and success lies within the reach of any
man. The capitalist who brings his money to it will find
the widest conceivable choice of investment, and if he
troubles himself to study the nature and conditions of the
colony, a certainty of profit. The laborer who brings nothing
with him, but the skill of his trade and the strength of his
arm, has an equally assured career. There is work in
Queensland for all who are men enough to face the changed
conditions of colonial life, and who will go to the bush and
not cling round the skirts of the towns. Here the laborer
can settle down, assured that bread will never be lacking for
his children or himself. Here he will find a career such as
he never could have hoped for in the crowded States of the
old world. The vigorous growth of the colony will carry
him upward with it, if only he will exercise the commonest
prudence and self control. No genius, no special talents
are required to enable a workman to hold his position, or
even to rise in the social scale. Every condition of the
society that surrounds the industrious laborer is in his favor,
and not against him; he has but to do faithfully the work


that comes to his hand, and his future is secure. The
allotment of land which he may buy for a mere trifle, saved
out of his wages, in the township which happens to be the
scene of his labor, doubles, quadruples, centuples in value,
as the township becomes a town, the town a city. Or if he
settles on the land, the farm which he has taken up in a
far-away corner of the bush, cleared with his labor and
manured with his sweat, not only supports him with its
produce, but becomes a valuable estate, as the civilization
from which he has stepped aside follows and surrounds him.
While this is going on, while he is growing in substance, in
comfort, and in years, his children, who in the old world
would inherit the same ceaseless round of toil as himself, are
thriving also. Not only do their bodies grow apace,
nourished with abundant food and breathing wholesome air,
but every facility is offered to him to train them as he
himself was never trained; so that in his declining years he
may see them aspire to social rank and station such as in
his fondest dreams he never hoped to attain. And so in
ever increasing circles the life of the colony expands. Men
and women may come to Queensland from every crowded
town, every over populated district in the old world, and they
will not only find room themselves, but make room for others.
And when the grandchildren of the present generation of
colonists are greybeards, we may reasonably hope that they
will still find the resources of their magnificent territory
opening, growing, and expanding to give food, shelter, and
wealth not only to those born in it, but to all who may
come from abroad to seek a home within its borders.
R. S. Hews & Co., Steam Printing Works, Brisbane.


APPENDIX.


m
u
oS
<v
QC
<D oo
£
JS
O g
<M
s t
Si 4)
® B
.1
a S
PM
. SP £
* .3 fi
a#
5
M £ S
s -1
fc c £
” O H
M o -5
* o -s
& -
; 25
+3 <u
A
3 5*
p _,
«S "3
r 3 c
S §
U c v
g,|
X ®
M «*
a
® 2
o fc
3 '*■'
S
o
PH
OO
. 0> Z£>
t-, O
5: co c*i i> zo cT o' oo oT co <o oT V co ®»
O o o
(M »—< CO *—< *-H '-rf C<lr-f
*—• *-H 04
O WHO)CiHH«Dr-05WG0 O O
, O T}( to lO
ZD CO W O 05 *>s lO M lfs « W CD H 03
£: zo o «c°
i 05 t> Tp
r-T rf *« 2
00 h IS'-'
, CO M
io im <m— i «
Si ’■* q{ i-T ao oo oo oj>to co n«o oo »5 2
”3 ao i-h 05 r- 1 t> M «D iO O if o
i-t >-h IM CO hh co —.
X - of *« 2
cq oo t>
. oo
cooc»o«o co q oo t> o
Si co «aoJtod co ce O cr? od oo w o 2
co io
rH I—t « CO rH
•» *\ •» QJ c^l
1-t 00 <M
o ioohno o 'sco
. CS O
CO CO COtOOQOCO «SXOSO)<N 00
Si co « d coV ®d i> d c?« d «o 2
00 rfi O ■>? rH r#< <35 fn ITS 1> CO 00 no
'“' r- * Oi t- COCO rH rH
r-T CO N
CO M-tcOSIMCDISHHOH CO «!>
. uO Nt'OOCO'. hhONWO <M
o> ws t-jt^eoooaOQOQO(M»>^'^'^ > o.
51 co a*} t-i 05 o' Ih CO os' as O CO* 1 t-i 00" 10 04 2
52 CO **OUS 50 CO OCOO*3 CO O CO
-I H (M CO H
rH O) rH
CO OO <M l> CO 04 CO rH CO O rH CO ’■gO
Hfi (M O N ® COOD-HTfiO 00
rH OCOO3C> 04 _OOrHOO «0 rH r^
J> «5 cooJoi'cfircocc':oc?ar‘Csooo •h*' w® 5
*> oq I— rH r-l O « tr HI CO
r-l rH rHCO HH rH-J<
rH- <n' 2
h O W 00
ZO co JC CO Q 't CC co O iO CO 00
Q 10 iO o l- CO
tr IO C*i CO 05 O : CO t-i 00 rH- O CO •»*'
CO rH co ao "(NOCOCOGO o
1-H rH H)< O rH O .
r " -v> f'
rH N T H
CO oco 03 05N N (0 'sN
. US o (H OOCJN >0
, o *s
iS 00 off : -<jf • : •’ -f oo* •ao co =c^
00 55 1 • X • ’4nh avi (M
>—* 'f 1 10 qo
•h”
• co . . oW w • • : : 03
::•: : w : :
pj c 3 ® fl oJ JJ
c* • ..S'So a • •£ §
<n c cg o Sh : :S o m m
fl h _|®|J S.
0 O .-So«r2 .12 s -0 04
*r? • o C 3 O
1 Fiji's a
PL, Pr+H S*
f 2 W


APPENDIX B.
Proportion of Births,
Marriages,
from the
and Deaths,
to every
to 1877
Thousand of Population,
inclusive.
years 1867
(From the Registrar General’s Statistics of the Colony.)
Births.
Marriages.j Deaths,
16-21
40-70
Note. —The death rate from 1874 to 1876 includes an excessive
and unusual mortality among diggers who “rushed” the far
northern goldfields in the middle of the wet season, and were
exposed without shelter, and almost without food, to the inclem-
and almost without food, to the inclem-
ency of the weather. It has also been swelled by an unusual
mortality among Polynesian laborers employed on sugar planta-
tions, a feeble race who die in great numbers from dysentery
and other diseases.
APPENDIX C.
Export of Coal from the Port of Brisbane.
(Colonial Treasurer’s Statement.)
1873 —To New South Wales 300 tons
Victoria ... 400
South Australia 50
750 tons.
1874 —To United States of America ... 1,201 tons
Singapore ... 51 „
India 288
1,540 tons.
1875—T0 New South Wales ... 229 tons
Victoria 558
South Australia 340
Hong Kong 900 „
Penang 431 „
Guam 250 „
2,708 tons.


1876—T0 New South Wales 710 tons
United States of America ... 739
1877 —To New South Wales 70 tons
South Australia ; 448
Tasmania 492 „
New Zealand 200 „
Hong Kong 3,695 „
Calcutta ... 1,192
Ceylon ... 700 „
Mauritius 105 „
Shanghai 1,763
China 133
United States of America ... 384
APPENDIX
Wine Made in the Colony.
(Registrar General’s Statistics.
1871— Number of Gallons made 16,762
1872 do do do 21,227
1873 do do do 41,479
1874 — do do do 70,425
1875 — do do do 77,404
1876 do do do 82,792
1877 do do do 87,272
APPENDIX E
in the Colony of Queensland; together with the
during the Twelve Months ending 31st March, 1878.
(Registrar General’s Statistics.)
Sugar Mills.
DISTRICTS.
No. of’ Quantity of Quantity of | Number
Sugarj Sugar Molasses of
Mills. - Manufactured. Manufactured. I Distilleries.
Mackay ... .
Central District
Cardwell ... .
Southern District
Tons. Gallons.
285,490
3.258 111,270
180 20,000
1,905 93,9*0
Total
61 I 12,243-i ’ 510,260
Hong Kong 300 „
1,749 tons.
9,182 tons.
Number of Sugar Manufactories and Rum Distilleries
Quantity
of Sugar and Molasses Manufactured and Rum Distilled,
Distilleries
Quantity
of Rum
Distilled.
Gallons.
95,898-8
54.439-8
45,662-5
196,001


APPENDIX P.
Wheat
Returns.
Acreage Reaped Free
from
Rust,
(Registrar General’s Statistics.)
Grain.
Average
per Acre.
1870 1 1,100
1871 2,682
1872 I 3,324
1873 3,233
1874 3,248
1875 : 4,166
1876 I 4,455
1877 i 6,835
500
1,101
670
1,613
4.960
7,966
5,970
7,645
Bushels.
24,263
51,641
76,101
78,187
68,320
95,286
91,170
86,614
Bhls. lbs.
22 3
19 15
22 53
24 11
21 2
22 62-»
20 28
12 40i
Acreage
Affected
Rust.
Average
per Acre.
Acres.
1,124
282
316
242
207
157
897
874
814
879
369
1,130
5,958
Bushels.
15,524
3,785
2,633
2,974
3,403
2,114
9.641
6,327
Bhlg. lbs.
13 45
13 25
8 2
12 17
16 26
13 28
8 16
5 10f
1.165 5,958
1,222 8,270
1877
APPENDIX
Live Stock of the Colony at 31st December, 1877.
(Registrar General’s Statistics.)
Number Horses 140,174 ] Number Horned Cattle 2,299,582
„ Sheep 6,272,766 | „ Pigs 52,371
APPENDIX H
Gympie Goldfield.
Goldfield Warden Gill reported to the Minister for Mines, for
the twelve months ending 31st December, 1877. He stated that
during the year mining machinery to the value of >£lo,ooo had
been added to the stock on the field, and the yield of gold had
increased by 4,339 oz». The average return of gold, also, had
increased from 1 oz. 11 dwts. 15 grs. in 1876, to 2 ozs. 5 dwts. 8 grs.
in 1877, per ton of quartz crushed. He adds “this increased yield
does not appear to be entirely owing to heavy patches, or deposits,
struck in particular claims, but is apparently the result of an
improvement in several of the lines of reef at the deeper levels.


APPENDIX 1.
Charter’s Towers Goldfield.
Warden Charters, in his annual report for 1877, says, “the
quantity of stone treated during the year, as returned by the mill
owners, amounted to 36,030 tons, being less than the quantity
treated during 1876 by 3,433 tons, while the quantity of gold
obtained from the stone crushed during 1877 exceeded the quantity
obtained from the stone crushed during 1876 by 6,435 ounces. The
average yield for 1876 was 1 oz. 10 dwts. 10 grs., while the average
yield for last year was 1 oz. 16 dwts. 22 grs., being an increase of
6j dwts for every ton crushed, or a total of 11,709 ozs. obtained
during 1877 more than was obtained from a similar quantity of
the stone crushed during 1876.” In another part of his report the
Warden says, that there are over 200 distinct gold-bearing quartz
reefs registered in the books of his office, of which only a portion
are being worked. At least as many more reefs exist, which have
never been registered, because the first crushings did not prove
payable. He mentions, also, a number of outside reefing centres,
the Broughton, I'ashton. Seventy-mile, and Dreghorn, which have
never been properly tested as yet. Of the claims on the main
field two are specially mentioned, the St. Patrick’s block, on a reef
varying in thickness up to 12 feet, which yielded in the year
13,732 ozs. worth ,£46,000, besides a quantity of pyrites, requiring
separate treatment, and expected to yield from .£lO,OOO to £15,000
more ; and the Queen line of reef, with a thickness up to 6 feet,
which gave 18,020 ozs., worth about £58,00.0. The concluding
remarks in the Warden’s report are noticeable. He says, that
Charter’s Towers, though within the tropics, is from its elevated
situation very healthy, and the nights are always cool. The death
rate during the year was only 14 per 1000, and the birth rate was
38-5.
APPENDIX K
Palmer Goldfield.
Warden Selheim in his report for 1877 states, that the quantity
crushed for the year amounted to 4,949 tons, for a yield of 11,811
ozs., which at an average value of £4/3/- per oz. gives a value of
£49,016. But on this field the quartz reefs are not as yet largely
worked, and the alluvial ground returned most of the gold for 1877,
The Warden reports that the total quantity of gold which passe 1
through the Cooktown custom house was 154,979 ozs., and adds,


“if I make allowance for the probable amount the Chinese,
according- to their habit, keep about them, and for the gold that
has left the district without passing entry, the total yield cannot
fall short of 180,000 ozs.
APPENDIX L
The Hoclgkinson.
Warden Mowbray in his annual report, the first since crush-
ing mills had been erected on this field, complains of work having
been greatly retarded by a prolonged dry season. The quantity of
quartz crushed was 13,218 tons, giving 29,818 ozs. gold, at an
average value of £3/7/10 per oz. There is hardly any alluvial
ground on the field, and the yield from it is only estimated at 4,000
ozs. But the extent of quartz-bearing country is thus described.
“The main belt of reefs appears to course from the extreme north-
ern end of Mount Mulligan, commencing at the Robin Hood reef,
and extending in a south-easterly direction to the Belfast reef —a
distance of not less than 46 miles, with a width of sometimes 4
miles. Another smaller and more irregular belt of reefs runs
along the western watershed of the Eastern Hodgkinson, and then
parallel with the granite range, having a total length of about 16
miles.
R. S. Hews & Co., Machine Printers, 154 Elizabeth Street, Brisbane.


QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA.
CATALOGUE
OF XHE
QUEENSLAND COURT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL
EXHIBITION
SYDNEY, 1879.
WITH SHORT ESSAY DESCRIPTIVE OF THE COLONY OF QUEENSLAND.
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
VDCCCIXXIX.




QiiiiplaiiiL |
DEPARTMENT I.
MINING, METALLURGY, & THEIR
PRODUCTS.
GROUP. — Minerals, Ores, Building Stones, and Mining
Products.
Class 100. Minerals, Ores, &c.—Samples of Eeef and
Alluvial Gold, and Associated Minerals ; Ores of
Silver, Copper, Tin, Antimony, Lead, Nickel, Zinc,
Cobalt, &c., with Associated Eocks; Collections
of Minerals, systematically arranged ; Geological
Collections ; Gems and Precious Stones.
1 APLIN, DYSON, Stantliorpe. Stream Tin, in rare forms of
occurrence.
2 AURELIA GOLD-MINING COMPANY, Gympie. Gold in
quartz and ealcspar, with diorite and pyrites of copper
and iron.
3 AURELIA GOLD-MINING COMPANY, Gympie. Specimens
of rich Gold-bearing Quartz.
4 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Manganese Ore, from Queensland
and New Caledonia.
5 EARTLEA, N., Brisbane. Cobalt Ore, from New Caledonia.
6 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Nickel Ore (silicate), from New
Caledonia.
7 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Alluvial Bismuth, from Queensland,
showing free gold.
8 BARTLEY, N.< Brisbane. Zinc Blende, from New South Wales ,
and Queensland —the former showing free gold.
9 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Wolfram, from Victoria and Queens-
land—the latter auriferous. ”
10 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Iron Ores, from the Island of Elba,
Tuscany, Cornwall, Tasmania, New South Wales, New
Caledonia, and Queensland ; some of the New South
Wales and Queensland ores showing free gold.
11 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Marmatite, from Italy.
12 BARTLEA, N., Brisbane. Carbonate of Lead, very fine crystals,
pure and white, from Peelwood, New South Wales.


13 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Reef Gold in every form of occur-
rence, in thread and in leaves, and in combination
with tourmaline, agate, chrysocolla, Iceland spar, silurian
shale, calcite, zinc, limestone antimony, malachite,
azurite bismuth, mimetene with oxides, sulphides and
carbonates of copper, galena, wolfram, pumice stone,
&c., &c.; and from the various goldfields of New
Caledonia, New Zealand, Tasmania, Victoria, and
New South Wales; and from the following
rivers in tropical Queensland, viz., the Barron, the
Normanby, the Palmer, the Hodgkinson, the Etheridge,
the Gilbert, the Burdekin, the Cape, the Broughton, the
Fitzroy ; from Gympie, Talgai, Canning Downs, Port
Denison, the Calliope, the Boyne, Morinish, Ridgelands,
and other gold-fields in Queensland.
14 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Pink Topaz from Liberia ; Emeralds
from Brazil and Ireland; Amber from Prussia.
15 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Red Granite of the Gilbert, and
Green Granite of Ravenswood goldfields.
16 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Idocrase, from Piedmont, Italy ;
Epidite, from ditto; Garnets and Diopside, Southern
Alps.
17 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Noble Opal in matrix rock, in massive
blocks, from Barcoo River, Western Queensland; also,
from the Bulloo River and Cooper’s Creek, and from
New South Wales.
13 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Noble Hyalite or “ Dewdrop” Opal
(a new gem), Springsure ; Matrix of the Noble Hyalite,
Springsure ; Red Chrysolite (a new gem), from Nanango ;
green and brown ditto.
19 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Aquamarine Topaz, from Mada-
gascar ; ditto, gigantic variety; Aquamarines, from
Queensland; White Topaz, Queensland; ditto, Flin-
ders’ Island, Bass’ Straits ; Cairngorms, from Mada-
gascar, Aberdeenshire, Victoria, and Queensland.
20 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Amethysts, from Germany, Victoria,
New South Wales, and Queensland.
21 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Yellow Topaz, from Brazil; Beryl,
from Sfanthorpe ; Rubies, from New Caledonia ; Sap-
phires from New South Wales.
22 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Diorite Greenstone (or Lowleude),
20-Mile Creek, Gilbert gold district.
23 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Antimony Ore, from New Caledonia,
New Zealand, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queens-
land ; that from Victoria and New South Wales showing
free gold. >
24 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Cinnabar or Sulphurite of Mercury,
in granite, calcspar, and sandstone, from New South
South Wales and Queensland.
25 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Galena, from Western Australia,
Italy, South Australia, New South Wales, and Queens-
land ; the latter showing free gold.


26 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Molybdenum Ore, from Ipswich,
Queensland.
27 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Chrome Ore, from New Caledonia.
28 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Agates, Jaspars, Cornelians, Onyx,
Chalcedony, and Sardonyx, from the Victoria River (of
Stokes) in N. Western Australia, the rivers of
Northern and Western Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria, Tasmania, Isle of Man, Bohemia, &c.
29 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Alabastar (a satin spar), Italy ;
Green Tourmaline, in white dolomite, from Mount St.
Gothard.
30 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Stone Axe (extinct), aborigines of
Darling Downs.
31 BARTLEY, N-, Brisbane. Oxides, Silicates, Sulphides, Car-
bonates, and Chloride of Copper and Native Metal, from
various parts of England, Europe, New Caledonia, New
Zealand, all parts of Queensland, New South Wales,
South A ustralia, Victoria, and Western Australia; many
of the Oxides, Silicates, and Carbonates from Queens-
land and New South Wales showing free gold. Also,
Malachite, with gold and without it, from Queensland
and New South Wales.
32 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Fossil, from carboniferous sandstone,
quarried near Brisbane.
33 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Bone Fossil (encrusted with lime
crystals), from the Bone Caves, Mount Gambia, South
Australia.
34 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Lode Tin in various forms, from
Bohemia, Cornwall, Tasmania, New South Wales,
Victoria and Queensland.
35 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Spinifer, Gympie; Actinocrinite,
Dawson River; and Corals, Broken River.
36 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Fossils (supposed to be the roots of a
reed), Logan River.
37 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Oriental Agates of the ribbon, drop
fortification, banded, and other varieties; Onyx and
Sardonyx, Bloodstone and Cornelian, from the Burnett
and Gilbert Rivers.
38 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Matrix of the Burnett River Agate.
39 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Quartz Pebbles from Stanthorpe;
and Rock Crystal from New Caledonia.
40 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Yellow Sapphire, Burmah ; Onyx,
black and white ; Queensland Sardonyx ; red and white,
ditto, ditto.
41 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Gold in calcspar and diorite,
Gympie.
42 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Golden Pyrites, from Gympie,
Charters Towers, Morinish, &c.
43 BENNETT, Captain, Red Oxide Copper, Mount Perry.
44 BENNETT, Captain. Copper Regains, Mount Perry.
45 BENNETT, Captain. Chalcopyrites, Mount Perry.


•46 BENNETT, Captain. Collection of Copper Ores, from Mount
Perry.
47 BEARDMORE, F. J. W., Cooktown. Tin Ores, from Granite
Creek, Palmer River.
48 CRITCHLEY, R., Gympie. Antimony Ore.
49 CHARTERS, W. S. E. M„ Warden, Charters Towers. Twenty
Bags Tailings of Mundic and Gold, Charters Towers,
Tropical Queensland.
50 CLARKE, DODD S., Cairns. Samples of Tin Ore from the
Palmer District, Cape York Peninsula.
51 DAWSON, J. 8., Boyne River. 30 lbs. Auriferous Tailings,
from the Boyne River, Gladstone.
52 DEPARTMENT OF MINES, Queensland. Ores of Antimony,
Galena, Chrome, Manganese, Cinnabar, Bismuth, &c.
53 DOCTOR’S REEF, PROPRIETORS, Gympie. Specimens of
Mundic Stone.
54 DRAPER, Rev. W., South Brisbane. Two Pebbles, Derbyshire.
55 ELDRED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Collection of Cinnabar or
Sulphuret of Quicksilver, in granite, sandstone, and
calcspar, from his mines, Kilkivau, Wide Bay district,
Queensland.
56 ELDRED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Cinnabar’, in sandstone and
calcite, from his Kilkivau mines.
57 ELDRED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Cinnabar, with carbonates
of copper in quartz and otherwise, from his Kiikivan
mines
58 ELDRED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Cinnabar in Quartz, from
his Kiikivan mines.
59 FRIEND, HENRY, jun., Gladstone. Sample of Tailings, from
the Gladstone district.
60 GUNN, DONALD, Pikedale. Collection of Peacock Copper
Ore, and of Silver Ore.
61 GLANMIRE, NORTH, GOLD-MINING CO., Gympie. Ten
Tons of Rich Auriferous Quartz.
62 GUTHRIE, JOHN, Brisbane. Tin Ores of Queensland, in all
varieties.
63 GYMPIE COMMITTEE. 16 Samples Pyrites, from Gympie.
64 GYMPIE COMMITTEE. Rock Cores, extracted by the Dia-
mond Drill at Gympie.
65 HODGKINSON,W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge River.
Geological Collection.
66 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George'Town. Geological
Suite, from the Etheridge River, Tropical Queensland,
showing the formation, etc., of the gold bearing reefs of
that District.
67 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. 75 lbs. Average Stone, Papa Prospect Claim,
Etheridge River; taken from 38 tons, which yielded
2 ozs. 16 dwts. of gold per ton. Reef, Ito 3 feet wide ;
i mile from George Town.


68 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town. 85 lbs. average.
Mundic Stone, Spero Meliora Claim ; taken from 10
tons, yielding 4 oz. gold to the ton. Reef, 1 to 2 feet
wide; 1 mile from George Town.
69 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town. 79 lbs. average
Raw Stone; from 38 tons, yielding 2 ozs. 11 dwts. gold
to the ton : City of Glasgow Prospect Claim. Reef, Ito
2 feet wide ; 8 miles from George Town.
70 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town. 79 lbs. Tail-
ings, Papa Reef; 94 lbs. ditto, Spero Meliora; 95 lbs.
ditto, City of Glasgow ; 86 lbs. ditto, “ Burdans Pan,”
City of Glasgow ; 90 lbs. Blanketings, Spero Meliora.
71 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town. 144 lbs.
Average Stone, Better Luck Prospect Claim; 85 feet
level; former crushings, 2j up to 7 ozs. gold per ton.
Widtli of reef, from 4 to 20 inches ; £ mile from George
Town.
72 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. 135 lbs. average Mundic Stone from Lord Bjron
Reef prospect claim, at 130 feet level, crushings varying
from IS dwts. up to 5 ozs. gold per ton. Reef from
10 inches to 5 feet wide.
73 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. 108 lbs. average Stone, Cumberland Reef
prospect claim. Latest crushing was 1,921 ozs. goldform
760 tons of this stone. Reef from 2to 5 feet wide j 16
miles from George Town.
74 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. 78 lbs. Blanketings from Cumberland Reef, as
above.
75 HAYS, W., Townsville. Copper Ores from the Star River, fifty
miles from Townsville. .
76 HILL, W. R. 0., Warden, Ravenswood. Collection of Galena
and Silver Lead Ore.
76 JACK, R. L., Townsville. Collection of Fossils, Tropical Queens-
land, viz. —Devonian and carboniferous fossils from Star
River, Canoona, Broken River, Bowen River coal-
field, the latter equivalent to the '* Lower marine
beds,” “ Low'er coal measures,” “ Upper marine beds”
of N.S.W. coal field. Also, from the upper or tertiary
series of the Bowen River coal field, equivalent to the
“ Upper coal measures ” of Newcastle, Wollongong,
and Bowenfels of New South Wales.
77 JONES, D. M., May town. Gold Specimens, from the Palmer
River.
78 LONDON EXTENDED CLAIM PROPRIETORS. Two-
Mile, Gympie. Specimens of Rich Gold-bearing Quartz,
containing 35 ozs. gold.
79 LADY MARY, SOUTH, No. 5, GOLD-MINING CO., Gympie.
Ten Tons of Rich Auriferous Quartz.


80 MAYTOWN RESIDENTS (Per P. E. Sellieim, Warden).
Emblematic Column, representing the exact bulk and
volume of gold, of the highest purity, extracted from the
I Palmer River goldfield, on Cape York Peninsula,
Tropical Queensland, between the dates of November,
1873, and July, 1879, amounting to 946,716 ozs., of the
value (exceeding £4 per oz.) of £3,948,500 sterling.
81 MILLER, H. C., Etheridge. Massive Specimens from the
prospect claim, Lord Byron Reef, Etheridge district,
6,000 tons of which yielded 12,000 ozs. of gold.
82 MILLER, H. C., Port Darwin. Agates from Cave Creek,
Gilbert River.
83 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Collection of Ores of Silver,
from Nevada, California, Italy, Europe, Queensland,
Western Australia, New South Wales, and South Aus-
tralia.
84 MILLER, H. C., Port Darwin, Queensland. Collection of Gold
bearing Ores, of Copper, Lead, Iron, including Galena,
Cerusite, Malachite, Mundic, etc., from the various reefs
of the Etheridge District.
85 MILLER, H. C., Port Darwin, Queensland. Rock Specimens of
Granite, &c., from various reefs in the Etheridge District.
86 MORGAN BROTHERS, Charters Towers. Rich Gold Speci-
mens, containing 70 ozs. 10 dwts. gold ; Caroline Prospect
Claim,
87 THE NICHOLLS LEASEHOLD PROPRIETORS, Gympie.
Gold in Quartz.
88 PALMER, E., Cloncurry River. Minerals and Aboriginal Curios.
89 PEARIN, JACOB, Brisbane. Rich Gold Specimens, from Nos. 7
and 8 Monkland Reef, Gympie.
90 QUEENSLAND COMMISSIONS KS. Emblematic Column,
springing from a base of auriferous quartz, representing
the exact bulk and volume of Gold, both alluvial and
from quartz, raised within the Colony of Queensland
between the years 1868 and 1879 inclusive, amounting
in all to 3,244,777 ounces, of the value of £11,762,316
sterling (Eleven million seven hundred and sixty-two
thousand three hundred and sixteen pounds.)
91 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Auriferous Specimens,
containing Ores of copper, iron, lead, and zinc,
from Tropical Queensland ; from the Fanny Fern, Aus-
tralia Felix, Cross Course, Napoleon, Melnaner, Politi-
cian, Sunset, Bristol, Lone Star, Lighthouse, Papa,
Overland Telegraph, St. George, Connaught, General
Grant, Carpentaria, Golden Crown, Spero, Durham,
Mary, and other reefs at the Etheridge, Ravenswood, and
other goldfields.
92 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold in various forms
of occurrence, and gold in quartz, in decomposed mundic,
limonite, and thread gold ; gold in calcspar and
galena from Gympie, Ravenswood, the Gilbert and Cape
Rivers. Also, gold in granite, from Ravensvvood.


93 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold and Zinc, Black Jack
Reef, Ravenswood.
94 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Sections of Gold
and Quartz.
95 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Sections of
Limonite, Quartz, and Gold.
96 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Rich Gold “ Leader ” in
Quartz, Tropical Queensland.
97 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Granites—red, grey, and
green, polished and crude—from the goldfields of the
Gilbert (red), Ravenswood (green), and the Etheridge
(grey), in Tropical Queensland.
98 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Sections of Ores,
containing gold, sulphide of copper, &c.
99 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Alluvial and Reef Casing
Gold from the following places in Tropical Queensland,
viz.:—Upper Cape River; 20-Mile Rush, Gilbert
River; Marengo, Port Denison; Percy River; Talbot
Creek, Gilbert River; Paddy’s Gully ; Evening Star
Reef; Australian Reef, Upjipr Cape River; Bucha-
nan’s Creek, Ravenswood ; Stephens’ Lead, Cape
River district; Union Lead, Cape River; Dee
River, Westwood; Western Creek,;Gilbert district;
Specimen Gully, Cape River district ; Kroombit Creek ;
Overlander Reef, Ravenswood ; Nigger Creek; Herbert
Creek, Rockhampton.
100 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Massive Block of Anti-
mony, from the Neardie mine, Burnett district,
101 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Massive Block of Galena,
122 ozs. silver to the ton, and slightly auriferous, from
the Yarrol mine, Dawes’ Range.
102 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Block of Cin-
nabar and Calcite.
103 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Carboniferous Sandstone,
from Ipswich Coal Measures.
104 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Red Oxide and Copper
Ores, also Native Copper from the Cloncurry River.
105 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Copper Sulphide with
Zinc Blende (two massive specimens), from the Kennedy
district.
106 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished section, Chaleo-
pyrites.
107 QUEENSLAN D GOVERNMENT. Malachite and Chalco-
pyrites, Mount Perry.
108 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Black Oxide and Green
Carbonate of Copper, Mount Perry.
109 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Antimony Ore from
“ Hungry Hill.”
110 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Dendritic Oxide of Man-
ganese, Star River.
111 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Silicate of Iron, from Esk-
dale, Burnett district.


112 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold in Quartz, from
Gympie Reefs, viz.: Alma, Caledonian, New Zealand, &c.
113 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Malachite, Peak Downs.
114 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Copper Ore, of Rawbelle
district.
115 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Copper Ore, Lynd River,
Gulf of Carpentaria.
116 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Golden Pyrites, Charters
Towers.
117 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Trappean Rock, Tropical
Queensland.
118 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Basalt and Serpentine
Rock, Broken River, Tropical Queensland.
119 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Potters’ Lead (non-argenti-
ferous), Ravenswood.
120 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Galena, Etheridge district.
121 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Coal and other Fossils.
122 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Oxide Tin, Mica, Calcite,
and Quartz, from the Cape York Peninsula.
123 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Agates in the Matrix Rock,
Gilbert River district; some specimens polished in sec-
tions and some crude.
124 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Large rough Agate.
125 ROBERTS, W. 8., Pikedule. Tailings from Pikedale Gold Reef,
Darling Downs.
126 SELLHEIM, P. F., Maytown. Stream and Load Tin from the
Etheridge district.
127 SELLHEIM, P. F., Warden, Maytown. Micellaneous specimens
of Ores and Rocks —comprising Lode Tin from Cannibal
Creek; Gold Quartz from Try Again, prospect claim;
Tailings and Blanketings from the British Lion, Ida,
Queen of the North, prospect claims. Stream Tin from
Chow Lee’s workings, Lower Granite Creek. Slate from
the Palmer River Gold Reef; Instrusive Rocks from
same locality: horizontal sandstones, topping the slate in
places from Hell’s Gates, Jacob’s Ladder, Lone Star, &c.
128 SELLHEIM, P. F., Maytown. Gold in quartz from Palmer
River, viz :
1 Queen of the North, 50 lbs.
2 Ida, lease 14, 10 lbs.
3 Do. do., 5 lbs.
4 Do. do., 10 lbs.
5 Queen of the North, No. 1 South, 39 lbs. (lease 20).
6 Do. do., 8 lbs. (lease 20).
7 Owners of the North, P.C., lease 4, 8 lbs.
8 Do. do. do., 8 lbs.
9 Do. do. do., 17 lbs.
10 Smithfield, No. 1, 2 lbs.
11 Caledonia, P.C., 22 lbs.
12 Smithfield, P. C., 7 lbs.
13 Victoria, P.C., 3 lbs.
14 Lady Hamilton, 1 lb.


139 SELLHETM, P. F., Maytown. Collection of rich Golden
Quartz Specimens, showing gold of high Assay, from the
Palmer River reefs, Cape York Peninsula.
130 SUTTON, J. W., Brisbane. Collection of Queensland and
Foreign Mineral Ores, including gold, silver, lead,
copper, tin, antimony, bismuth, nickel, cobalt, platinum,
magnesium, palladium, uranium, mercury, sodium,
arsenic, iron, &c.
131 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. 2 Diamonds, Stan-
thorpe ; 2 Blood-red Garnets, 1 Polished Opal, 1 Crystal
of Topaz.
132 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Diorites and Ser-
pentines, of Queensland.
133 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Native Copper,
from Cloncurry and Keelbottom mines, in Tropical
Queensland.
134 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Stone Axe (abori-
ginal), from Kangaroo Point, Brisbane; and one in-
cipient and unfinished ditto, from Port Denison.
135 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. 5 Paloeozoic Coal
Fossils.
136 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. 1 Lepidodendron,
Clarke River.
137 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Section of Fossil
Tree.
138 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Ammonites, from
Walsh River, Cape York Peninsula.
139 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Hyalite, from Darl-
ing Downs ; Crystal of Calcite.
140 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Chrome Iron Ore,
Haematite, Tin Specimens, Copper Pyrites, eight pieces
of Malachite, three of Azurite, two of Ruby Copper,
Bismutli from the Cloncurry Biver.
141 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Matrix Rock of
Bismuth, Stanthorpe.
142 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Opal, from the
Bulloo River ; Semi-Opal, from Springsure.
143 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Amethyst, from
Logan River ; Garnets in chlorite slate, Cloncurry River.
144 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fossil’ Wood
(polished). Tropical Queensland.
145 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Collection of
Copper Ores, some gold-bearing ; Malachite, with red
tile ore ; Chrysocolla, dioptase, &c., from Rockhampton,
Peak Downs, Mount Perry, and other parts of Queens-
land.
146 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Amethyst, from
Logan River.
147 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Garnets and
Chiastolite, Cape York Peninsula.
148 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAD MUSEUM. Gold in oxide of
bismuth, Cloncurry River.


TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Hoematite (Magnetic
Iron), Molybdenite, and other ores.
TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Paloeozoic Fossils
asunder: —Favoites, (specimen 2), Talgai; Fenestella
fossula, Rockhampton; Productus Cora, Gympie;
Spirifera bisulcata, Gympie ; Enomphalus, (specimen 2),
Mount Wyatt; Enomphalus, Clarke River; Actino-
crinites, (specimen 2), Dawson River (3 specimens) ;
Productus Cora, Bowen River ; Productus Clarkii, Bowen
River ; Lepidodendron Nothum, Clarke River; Lepido-
dendron Nothurn, Clarke River, east; Stigmaria ficoides,
Clarke River ; Glossopteris'Browniana, Dawson River;
Glossopteris Browniana, Bowen River (2 specimens) ;
Glossopteris Browniana and Sphonopteris alata, Dawson
River.
TRUSTEES QUEENSLANU MUSEUM. Metallic Copper,
Cloncurry River ; Felspar, Stanthorpe ; Green Carbonite,
Leichhardt River; Copper Ore, Mount Esk, Brisbane
River ; Crude Antimony, St. John’s Creek, Burnett dis-
trict : Serpentine Rock, near Chrome Deposits, Ipswich.
TRUSTEES'QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fossils from the
Cretaceous formation, as under : —Rib Bone of an
Ichthyosaurus, Walsh River ; Crioceras, specimen 2
(small specimen), Walsh River; Hamites, (specimen 2),
Walsh River; Hamites, (specimen 2), Flinders River ;
Ammonites clypeiformia, Walsh River ; Belenmites,
(specimen 2), Walsh River ; Crustacea (name unknown),
Walsh River; Cyprina expansa, Maryborough;
Cyprina expansa (young specimen), Maryborough ;
Cucullea robusta, Maryborough ; Panopcea plicata,
Pelican Creek, North Queensland ; Inoceramus
multiplicatus, Marathon, North Queensland ; 2 speci-
mens. Leredo, Walsh River; Cyprina, Walsh River ;
Byssoarca, Walsh River; Hinnites, Walsh River ;
Aircula Hughendenensis, Flinders River.
ALLUVIAL FOSSILS.
TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fresh water Shells,
Melinia, Physa, &o. These shells are found with our
extinct animals, such as Diprotordon, &c., Queensland.
TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fresh water shells
of the present day, representing the same genera, if not
species, of the above-mentioned fossil shells, Queensland.
TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Rock specimens as
under -.—2. Melaphyris with amygdaloid siliceous de-
posits in the hollows. This mineral forms principally the
black soil of the Darling Downs and other districts.
1 Slate (surface specimen), North Pine River; 1
Porphyry, Gilbert Ranges; 1 Serpentine, near Rock-
hampton ; 1 Porphyritic, Green Stone, London Reef ;
1 Decomposed Porphyry (Claystone Prophyry), from
Brisbane; 1 Stoneaxe, found near Brisbane; 2 Stone-
axes, found near Bowen (half finished).


156 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fossil wood, largo
trunk, from Springsure; Lepphites, from Walsh River,
Cape York Peninsula; Crioceris, from Walsh River,
Cape York Peninsula; Metallic Copper, Cloncurry
River.
157 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Copper Ores from
Mount Perry, Peak Downs, and Toromeo.
158 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Galena, from Ravens-
wood, Queensland ; Oxide Manganese, from Gladstone ;
Antimony, from Neardie, Wide Bay district ; Garnets,
in glasses ; Gold Specimens from the Cape River, Gil-
bert River, Ravenswood, &c.; Clay Iron Ore'(with iron
smelted therefrom with Ipswich coke), from Goodna,
near Ipswich.
159 TYREL, J. de POIX, M.L.A, Stream and Lode Tin Ore.
Class 101. Mineral Combustibles. —Coal, Anthracite,
Semi-bituminous and Bituminous Samples o£ Coal,
showing thickness of seams; Coal Waste and
Pressed Coal, Coke, Albertite, Asphalt and
Asphaltic Eocks, Bitumen, Mineral Tar, Crude
Petroleum.
160 BOWEN MUNICIPAL COUNCIL. Block of Coal from the
Ddiintree Seam, Bowen River, Leichhardt district, with
plan of seam attached.
161 GREGORY, .A-C., C.M.G., Brisbane. Collection of Specimens
*■ of Coal from various districts'of Queensland as irnder :
Burrum Mine, Maryborough.—Analysis : Volatile in coking,
31.5 ; fixed carbon, 64.0; ash, 4.5. Total, 100.
Thomas’ Mine, Bundamba, near Ipswich.—Analysis:
Volatile in coking, 29.8; fixed carbon, 59.2 ; ash, 11.0.
Total, 100..
Jones’ Mine, Bundamba, near Ipswich.—Analysis : Volatile
in coking, 28.9; fixed carbon, 61.5 ; ash, 5.6. Total,
100.
Waterstown Mine, Ipswich.—Analysis : Volatile in coking,
25.2 ; fixed carbon, 62.0 ; ash, 12.8. Total, 100.
Comet River, Rockhampton.—Analysis; Volatile in coking,
25.0 ; fixed carbon, 65.3 ; ash, 9.7. Total, 100.
Tivoli Mine, Ipswich.—Analysis : Volatile in coking, 26.7;
fixed carbon, 66.4; ash, 6.9. Total, 100.
Walloon, West Moreton. —Analysis ; Volatile in coking, 41;
fixed carbon, 42 ; ash, 17. Total, 100.
162 MOFFATT, D. & J., Brisbane. Waterstown Coal.
163 SIMPSON, ALLAN, Clifton, near Warwick. Specimens of
Cool.
164 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Specimens of Coal-


165 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Coal Fossils as
under :—Pecopteris odontopteroides, Tivoli ; Pecopteris
australis, Fassifern ; decopteris odontopteroides (end of
a leaf; Precopteris Sphenopteris elongata ; Precopteris,
2 specimens, Ipswich ; Sphenopteris elongata, Ipswich ;
Sphenopteris elongata, 2 specimens, Ipswich ; two fossil
plants (name not known) ; Foeniopteris Dain-
trees, Collinton, Queensland; 1 specimen containing
Foeniopteris, 2 specimens ; Sphenopteris, Elongata, and
Pecopteois odontopteroides.
Note.— (For coal fossils see also It. L. JacTc's general collection
in class 100).
165 a WHITLEY, W., Maryborough. Section of Coal representing
-seam from Burrum coalfields.
Class 102. Building Stones. —Marbles, Slates, &c., rough,
hewn, sawed, or polished, for buildings, bridges,
walls, or other constructions, or interior decora-
tions, or for furniture.
Marble. —White, black, or coloured, used in buildings,
decorations, statuary, and monuments, or furniture,
in blocks or slabs, not manufactured.
166 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Statuary Marble, Carrara, Italy.
167 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Polished Statuary Marble, Ravens-
wood.
168 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Polished Black Fossil Marble, from
the Broken River, Tropical Queensland.
169 COMMITTEE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Gladstone.
Marble Font of varieties marble found in the vicinity of
Gladstone.
170 HUNTER, Captain R. M., Rockhampton-. Specimens of varie-
ties Marbles from his quarry Northumberland Group.
171 ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Six specimens Marble,
from Percy and other islands on the Queensland Coast.
172 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Four specimens
Polished Marbles.
173 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Specimens of Rose,
White, Black, Yellow and other Marbles, from Calliope
River, Gladstone.
174 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Specimens of
Black and White Statuary Marbles, from Warwick.
Class 104. Clays, Kaolin, Silex, and other materials for
the manufacture of porcelain, faience, and of glass
bricks, terracotta and tiles and tire brick. Kefrac-
tory Stones for lining furnaces, sandstone, steatite,
&c., and refractory furnace materials.
175 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Steatite, Kilkivan.


I Queensland,
15
176 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. China Clay (Kaolin), New South
Wales,
177 SIMPSON, ALLAN, Allanton Pottery, Clifton, Darling
Downs. Cement.
178 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Steatite. Brisbane.
179 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. China Clay (Kaolin),
Stanthorpe.
180 WILLS, K. H., Mackay. Clay.
Glass 105. Graphite, crude and refined, for polishing pur-
poses, for lubricating, electro-typing, photography,
pencils, &c.
181 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM Plumb**© Stan-
thorpe.
Class 106. Lithographic Stones, Hones, Whetstones,
Grindstones, Grinding and Polishing Materials,
Sand, Quartz, Garnet, Crude Topaz, Diamond,
Corundum, Emery in rock or pulverised, and in
assorted sizes and grades.
182 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Turkey Stone, from Dungog,
New South Wales.
183 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Turkey Stone far hones, etc., from
the Paterson River, Dungog, New South Wales.
184 SMELLIE & CO., ROBERT R., Brisbane. Moulding Sand.
185 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND-MUSEUM. Garnet Sand, Cape
„ York Peninsula. Impalpable Silicious Powder—a sub-
stitute for emery —Brisbane.
186 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Tw® Diamonds,
from Stanthorpe ; two Red Chrysolites, from Nanango.
187 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Basaltic Matrix of
Gilbert River Agates.
188 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Three Specimens
of Topaz, from Stanthorpe.
Class 107. Mineral Waters, Artesian Well Water, Natu-
ral Brines, Saline and Alkaline Efforesceuces and
Solutions. Mineral Fertilizing Substances, Gyp-
sum, Phosphate of Lime, Marls, Shells, Coprolites,
&c., not manufactured. *
189 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Native Salt, Her-
bert River, Tropical Queensland.
190 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Calcspar, from
Gympie and Kilkivan.


191 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Common Salt, from
Mulligan River, Cape York Peninsula. Queensland.
(97 per cent, pure Chloride of Sodium.)
192 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Native Soda, from
Warrego River, Western Queensland (containing 56 per
cent. Carbonate of Soda).
193 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Gypsum, from the
Warrego, Western Queensland (Plaster of Paris can be
made from this).
194 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Calcspar from
Kilkivan. ■'
GROUP. —Metallurgical Products.
Glass 112. Tin and Copper in ingots, bars, and rolled,
with specimens illustrating its various stages o£
production.
195 QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Trophy of Queensland Tin
in ingots and other forms, Stanthorpe.
196 QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Trophy of Queensland Cop-
per in cakes and other forms.
197 TYREL, JOHN de POIX, M. L. A., Stanthorpe. Stick of
Smelted Tin, Stanthorpe.
Class 113. Lead, Zinc, Antimony, and other Metals,, the'
result of extractive processes.
198 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane, Antimony Regulus, Yietoria.
199 QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF MINES. Refined Lead
and Antimony.
GROUP. —Mine Engineering, Models, Maps, and Sections.
Class 121. Models of Mines, of Veins, &c.
200 TYREL, JOHN de POIX, M.L.A., Stanthorpe. Section show-
ing the strata of alluvial Tin mine at Stanthorpe to scale.


DEPARTMENT
MANUFACTURES
GROUP. — Chemicals.
Class
Class
200. Chemicals, pharmaceutical preparations :
Mineral Acids and the methods of manufacture ;
Sulphuric, Nitric, and Hydrochloric Acids. The
common commercial Alkalies, Potash, Soda, and
Ammonia, with their carbonates. Salt and its
production. Salt from deposits —native salt, salt
by solar evaporation from sea water. Salt by
evaporation from water of saline springs or wells;
Rock Salt; Ground and Table Salt. Bleaching
Powders and Chloride of Lime. Yeast Powders.
Baking Powders.
CLARKE, DAYID, Warwick. Baking Powder.
STAIGER, K. T., P.L.S. Samples of Pyroligneous Acid ;
Acetic Acid; Methyllated Alcohol; Wood Tar; Crude,
refined, and commercial Acetate of Soda; Kerosene;
Parffine, made from Darling Downs coal.
YEO, C. H. F., Brisbane. Crystal “ Giant” Cement.
YEO, C. H. E., Brisbane. Baking Powder.
201. Oils, Soaps, Candles, illuminating and other
Gases. Oils from mineral, animal, and vegetable
sources ; Refined Petroleum, Benzine, Naptha, and
other products of the manufacture. Oils from
various seeds, refined, and of various degrees of
purity —Olive Oil, Cotton-seed Oil, Palm Oil.
Animal Oils, of various kinds in their refined state.
Oils prepared for special purposes besides lighting
and for food, —Lubricating Oils, Soap and deter-
gent preparations—-Candles, Stearine, Glycerine,
Paraffine, &c., Spermaceti. Illuminating Gas and
its manufacture ; Oxygen Gas, and its application
for heating, lighting, metallurgy, and as a remedial
agent. Chlorine and Carbonic Acid.
BERKLEY, TAYLOR & CO., Brisbane. Dugong Oil, refined.


Oil of Orange ( Citrus aurantium, Linn).
Oil of Citron ( Citrus medico).
Oil of Lemon ( Citrus Lemonum).
r
Hr
BERKLEY, TAYLOR & CO., Brisbane. Dugong Oil, un
refined.
BOLDEMAN, W., Rockhampton. Sample Block, plain soap.
BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. ESSENTIAL OILS,
TINCTURES, &c., prepared by L. Carmichael, Chemist.
The numerous varieties of Eucalypti, Melaleuca, Acacia,
Leptospermum, &c., besides flowering shrubs and plants
to be found in large quantities in the colony, have been
preved to be capable of producing, not only many
essential oils and essences, unique in themselves, but
also tinctures possessing medicinal qualities, that have
been recognised by the faculty and freely prescribed by
our' leading medical men, especially for complaints
peculiar to the colony. It is a matter of surprise that
a more general attention has not been paid to this pur-
suit that offers such profitable results.
Oil of Limes ( Citrus Limetta ) ; used as an antiscorbutic,
and is in fact concentrated Lime Juice.
Essence of Lemon ; used for flavoring cordials, pastry, effer-
vescent drinks, &c.
Essence of Orange Flowers.
Essence of Acacia ( Acacia farnesiana). The flowers of
this variety possess an exceedingly odoriferous quality,
the essence from which amalgamates freely with oil or
fat, and is extensively used in the manufacture of
pomade.
The Oil of Cassie is produced by macerating the flowers in
olive oil.
Essence of 'Eucalyptus citriodora (Hook), or citron-scented
gum. The leaves of this tree, when ruhbed, emit a
strong odour of citron, and the essence is a very
powerful perfume.
Essence of Jasmine ( Jasminum grandifiorum , Linn.)
Essence of Tuberose ( Polianthes tuber osa, Linn.)
Tincture of Camomile ( Anthemis nobilis), used as a powerful
tonic or an emetic.
Tincture of Calendula ( Calendula officinalis), Marigold, used
as a tonic.
Tincture of Orange, used for flavouring purposes.
Essence of Yerbena. This beautiful scent is obtained from
a species of Eucalyptus (not named) discovered on the
Palmer River, and excels in delicacy of perfume any
other extract obtained from the Myrtaceae.
Tincture of Alstonia constricta, F.M. The bark of this tree
produces an intense hitter, and is said to partake of the
same qualities of quinine. The tincture is considered
efficaceous in fever and ague cases.


Class
Class
and Tooth Powders.
GROUP.— Ceramics , 'Pottery, Porcelain, Sfc.
Glass
Tincture of Crab tree ( Petalostigma quadriloculare, F.M.).
A powerful bitter is extracted from the bark, which ia
said to contain the same properties as Peruvian Bark
(Cinchona officinalis)
Tincture of Gelseminum ( Gelseminum nitidum , Mieh.), used
as a therapeutic and in cases of neuralgia.
Orange Peel. Lemon Peel. Orange Flower Water. Sjrup
of Orange. Orange Wine. Castor Oil ( Ricinus com-
munis, Linn.) Ipecacuanha ( Cephdelis Ipecacuanha,
Rich.) Croton Oil ( Croton Tiglium, Linn).
Manufactured by J. H. Boreham : —Brisbane Chutney, 3
bottles ; Tomata Sauce, 3 bottles.
STAIG-ER, K. T., F.L.S. Essential Oil, made from the leaves
of the Eucalyptus citriodora, found near Gladstone.
STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S. Essential Oil, from leaves of Iron
Bark tree on the Palmer River —not yet named. Samples
of the leaves therewith.
RUDDELL, R., Bundaberg. Sample bars first quality Soap.
STILLER & CO., Amity Point, Moreton Ray. Dugong Oil.
202. Paints, Pigments, Dyes, Colours, Turpentine,
Varnishes, Printing Inks, Writing Inks, Blacking.
STAIGER, KARL T., F.L.S. Chrome Colours, prepared from
Ipswich ore, by exhibitor.
203. Flavoring Extracts, Essences, Perfumery,
Pomades, Cosmetics.
BAKER, THOMAS, Maryborough. Glass case, containing
Coraliue, surmounted by coloured Carboys.
CLARKE, I)., Warwick, Collection of Essences, Perfumes,
YEO, C. H. F.. Brisbane, Collection of Essences and Perfumes.
STAIGER, K, T., F.L.S. Essence made from the leaves of the
ironbark tree on the Palmer River (not yet named).
Samples of the leaves therewith,
STAIGER, E'.. T., F.L.S. Essence made from the leaves of the
Eucalyptus citrioda , found near Gladstone.
206- Bricks, Drain Tiles, Terra Cotta, and Archi-
tectural Pottery.
STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S., Brisbane. Collection of Firebricks
(soft) ; will stand heat exceedingly well, but not tests
of being heated and thrown in fire and water con-
secutively. Their merit lies in their property to cement
together when walled in, like in roofs of puddling fur-
naces, roasting furnaces ; also for the flooring.


Class 207. Kre Clay Goods, Crucibles, Pots, Furnaces,
Chemical Stoneware,
220 SIMPSON,'ALLAN, Clifton, Darling Downs, Fire-clay Goods,
Crucibles, Retorts, Bricks, Ac.
GEOUP. —Furniture and Objects of General Use in Con-
struction and in Dwellings.
Class 217. Heavy Furniture —Chairs, Tables, Parlor and
Chamber Suites, Office and Library Furniture,
Vestibule Furniture,"Church Furniture and Deco-
ration.
221 BOWDEN, W., St. Helena. Inlaid Writing Desk of Woods
grown on St. Helena,
222 BOWDEN, W., St. Helena. Round Inlaid Table of Woods
grown on St. Helena.
223 CAREY, J, W., Brisbane. Dutch Wardrobe, Queensland
Pine. £4O.
224 CAREY, J. W t , Brisbane. Sideboard, Cedar and other Queens-
land Woods. £5O.
225 CAREY, J. W., Brisbane. Trophy of Wood Turnery and
Fret-work, including Curtain Poles and Rings. £5O.
226 CAREY, J. W., Brisbane. Cedar Show Case, in two parts, con-
taining Messrs. P, W. Wilson & 00. s exhibits of Biscuits,
designed for centre or wail space.
227 CAREY, J W., Brisbane. Show Case, in form of Octogon
Column.
228 CAREY, J W., Brisbane. Saddlers’ Show Cases (3).
229 HARDY, T. P. : Brisbane. Bookcase made of 18 varieties of
Queensland Woods. £B4.
230 HARDY, T. P.. Brisbane. Cedar Telescope Dining Table, with
case for spare leaves to form a Sideboard or Hall Table.
£4O.
231 HARDY, T. P., Brisbane. Large Chest of Drawers, made of
Noosa Pine, Tulip Wood, and Cypress Pine. £l4 10s.
232 HARD\, T„ P., Brisbane. Large Chest of Drawers, made of
Noosa Pine, Tulip Wood, and Cypress Pine. £l4 10s.
233 HARDY, T. P., Brisbane. Double Washstand, made of Noosa
Pine £5.
234 HARDY. T. P., Brisbane. Single Washstand, made of Noosa
Pine. £4 10s.
235 HARDY, T. P., Brisbane. Invalids’ Couch, made of Noosa
Pine, Cypress Pine, and Yellow Wood. £l2.
236 HARDY, T. P., Brisbane. Portable Writing Desk, made of
18 varieties of Queensland Woods, with secret drawers
and lockers.
237 HARDY, T. P., Brisbane. Cedar Library Folding Chair, to
form steps. £2.


HARDY, T. P., Brisbane. Cedar Library Folding Chair, to
form steps. £2.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. One Drawing-room Suite, com-
prising one centre Ottoman with four seats, one Settee,
one Ladies’ Chair, one Gents’ Chair, six small Chairs (all
with springs—frames made on the premises), of Queens-
land oak, stained black and gold, handsomely upholstered
in creton and draped with silk cord. £6O.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. One Drawing-room Suite, compri-
sing one Couch, one Ladies’ Chair, one Gents’ Chair, six
small Chairs (all with springs—frames made on the
premises), of Queensland wood, richly upholstered in
green creton and mounted with silk cord. £3B.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. One Ladies’ Work Table, two
decks, Queensland Yellow' Wood, made on the premises.
£2 10s.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. One Ladies’ Work Table, two
decks, Queensland stained Walnut Wood, made on the
premises. £2 10s.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. One Ladies’Work Table, two decks,
black and gold, made on the premises. £2 10s.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. Ladies’ Work Table, two decks,
Queensland wood (stained Walnut), made on the pre-
mises. £2 10s.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. Ladies’ Work Table, two decks,
black and gold, made on the premises. £2 10s.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. One Wirldow Pole, black and gold,
one set White Muslin Curtains, one set Green Tollerton
Curtains, with fittings complete.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. Glass Fire Screen, ornamented
with Colonial Feres. £B.
HISLOP, J. & J., Brisbane. Window Cornices, comprising
one brass cornice, one set valance, set of curtains in
creton, lined with pink llama, fitted with laths and
French rods, to open and shut with cords, made on the
premises. £l3.
HODGSON, HENRY W., Brisbane. Two Patent Roller
Enamelled Venetian Blinds, in cedar show case.
£7 10s.
KASCH, J., Rockhampton. Inlaid Table, showing varieties of
timbers grown in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton.
PETTIGREW, Hon. W., M.L.C., Brisbane. Cedar Hall Door,
with side panels, complete. £4O.
STURGESS, H., Rockhampton. Hall Chairs made from
varieties of timber grown in the Rockhampton district.
THOMLE, P., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Inlaid Table, 60
varieties of Queensland wood. £l2.
THOMLE, P., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Jewel Cabinet, inlaid
with air-tight drawers and secret receptacles. £BO.
THOMLE, P., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Automatic Boy,
entitled “ The Successful Beggar.” £l5.


Class 227. Manufactured Parts of Buildings, Sash Blinds,
Mantels, Metal Work, &c.
256 PETTIGREW, Hon. WILLIAM, M.L.C., Brisbane, Cedar
and Pine Mantel Piece. £l7.
257 PETTIGREW, Hon. W., M.L.C., Brisbane. Trophy of
Mouldings, illustrative of varieties of Queensland woods.
GROUP. —Yarns and Woven Goods of Vegetable or Mineral
Materials .
Class 229. Coarse Fibres, of Grass, Rattan, Cocoanut,
and Bark. Matting, Chinese, Japanese, Palm-leaf,
Grass and Rushes. Floor-cloths of Rattan and
Cocoanut Fibres, Aloe Fibre, &c.
258 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. Collection of FIBRES. The
indigenous Fibre-yielding plants in this colony are very
numerous, and experiment has shown that they can be
profitably utilised to a considerable extent, but as yet
the industry has not taken a practical turn. Some of
the samples produced have excited great attention, both
for their excellence as products and their commercial
value. The Sida retusa (Queensland Hemp) is about
the only kind that at present is manufactured in any
thing like practical quantity.
Comparatively speaking, there is but little cotton now grown
in Queensland, arising from the fact, ascertained after a
long and exhaustive trial, that the labor and expense
consequent upon its growth and picking is too great to
allow a margin for profit, and the ceasing of the Govern-
ment bonus was the signal for discontinuance by the
larger planters. West Moreton still produces a small
quantity, principally grown by small farmers with
families.
Jute, Cor chorus capsular is, Linn.; Jute, Cor chorus olitorius,
Linn.; Russian Hemp, Cannabis saliva ; Rosella Hemp,
Hibiscus sabdariffa, Linn.; Sunn Hemp, Crotalaria
juncea, Linn.; Pita Hemp, Agave americana, Linn.;
Mexican Hemp, Fourcroya gigantea, Yent.; Indian Rose
Hemp, Hibiscus mutabilis, Linn.; White Mulberry,
Morus alba, L.; Queensland Hemp, Sida retusa, Linn.;
Yacoua or Screw Pine, Pandanus utilis, Bojer ; Fibre
made from aerial Roots, Agave, sp.; Adam’s Needle
Fibre, Yucca gloriosa, Willd ; Silk grass fibre, Yucca
aloefolia, Linn.; Dracaena draca, Linn. ; Cuba Bast,
Paritium datum, Don; Bowstring Hemp, Sanseviera
Zeylanica, Willd; Flax, Linum usitatissimum, Linn.;
New Zealand Flax, Phormium tenax, Forst; Cordage


made from Binum usitatissimum, Litm,; Cordage made
from Queensland Hemp, Sida retusa, Linn.; Short Staple
Cotton, Gossypiutn herbaceurn , Linn.; Sea Island Cotton,
long staple, Oossypium Barbadense , Linn.
259 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Textile Fabric,
made from the Inner Bark of the Ficus macrophylla.
GROUP. — Woven and Felted Goods of Wool and Mixture
of Wool.
Class 235. Card Wool Fabrics, Yarns, Broadcloth, Doe-
skins, Fancy Cassimeres, Felted Goods.
260 QUEENSLAND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURING COM-
PANY, Ipswich. 37 Pieces Tweed, various patterns,
manufactured from Queensland Wool.
Class 236. Flannels —Plain Flannels, ! --N, opera and
fancy.
261 QUEENSLAND WOOLLEN MAM »■ TURING COM-
PANY, Ipswich. Piece White Flannel, manufactured
from Queensland Wool.
262 QUEENSLAND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURING COM-
PANY, Ipswich. Piece Red Flannel, manufactured
from Queensland Wool.
Class 238. Combined Wool Fabrics —Worsteds, Yarns,
Dress Goods for Women’s wear, Delaines, Serges,
Poplins, Merinos.
263 QUEENSLAND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURING COM-
PANY, Ipswich. Piece Blue Serge, manufactured from
Queensland Wool.
GROUP. — Clothing , Jewellery , and Ornaments —Travelling
Equipments.
Class 251. Hats, Caps, Boots and Shoes, Gloves,
Mittens, &c.; Straw and Palm-Leaf Hats, Bonnets
and Millinery.
264. SHIELDS, N., Gympio. Collection of Boots and Shoes.
Class 255. Fancy Leather Work, Pocket Books, Toilet
Cases, Travelling Equipments, Valises and Trunks.
265 LADE, N., Brisbane Assortment of Portmanteaus, Queensland
leather, made by exhibitor.


GROUP. — Paper, Blank Books , and Stationery.
Class 260. Printing Paper for Books, News-pap )rs, &c. ;
Wrapping Paper of all grades, Cartridge and
Manila Paper, Paper Bags
266 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Specimens of
Paper made from Sida ritusa, Ficus macrophylla, and
tea-tree bark.
Class 261. Blank Books; Set of Account Books; Speci-
mens of Ruling and Binding, including Blanks,
Bill Heads, &c.; Bookbinding.
267 BEAL, J. C., Government Printer, Queensland. Specimens of
Commercial, Law, and Library Binding, executed at the
Government Printing Office, Brisbane.
268 BEAL, J. C., Government Printer, Queensland. Specimens of
Ruling.
GROUP.— Hardware, Edge Tools, Cutlery and Metallic
Products.
Class 282. Metal Holloware, Ornamental Castings.
269 SMELLIE, R. R., & Co., Brisbane. Collection of verandah
railings with pilasters, spandrils, railing and frieze (en
suite), cast and finished in Brisbane by exhibitors.
270 SMELLIE, R, R., & Co., Brisbane. Collection of ornamental
castings for house decoration, cast and finished in Bris-
bane by exhibitors.
Class 283. Hardware used in construction, exclusive of
tools and implements —Spikes, Nails, Screws, Jacks,
Bolts, Locks, Latches, Hinges, Pulleys, Plumbers’
and Gasfitters Hardware, Furniture Fittings, Ships’
Hardware, Saddlers’ Hardware, and Harness Fit-
tings and Trimmings.
271 TINLEY & Co., Brisbane. Horse shoes and saddle trees.
GROUP. — Fabrics of Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral
Materials.
Class 288. Ropes, Cordage.
272 FORSYTH, A., & CO,, Kangaroo Point "Works, Brisbane.
Collection of Brisbane made Rope.


GEOTJP.— Carriages, Vehicles and Accessories. (For Farm
Articles and Failway Carriages, see Departments of
Agriculture and Machinery.)
Class 291. Pleasure Carriages.
273 JONES, T., & CO., Rockhampton. “ Stanhope ” Phaeton and
Waggonette combined ; built by exhibitors. Made to be
used as single seat, double seat, or three seats.
274 M'LEAN, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Whitechapel Cart, to
show suitable Queensland woods ; varnished. £2O.
Class 293. Vehicles for Movement of Goods and Heavy
Articles—Carts, Waggons, Trucks.
275 MORRIS, G. R, Bowen. Model Waggon, made by exhibitor’s
apprentices.
Class 294. Carriage and Horse Furniture, Harness and
Saddlery, Whips, Spurs, Horse Blankets, Carriage
Eugs, &c.
276 CHUTE, R., Brisbane. Two Scotch Dray Collars.
277 CHUTE, R., Brisbane. Set Scotch Dray Harness.
278 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Lady’s Side-Saddle,
buckskin and hogskin, quilted all over, hand sewn, No.
1. £l4.
279 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Gent’s Fancy
Worked Buckskin and Hogskin Saddle, No. 2. £ll.
280 HILL, JOHN. Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Gent’s Plain Ilog-
skin Saddle. No. 3. £7 7s.
281 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Gent’s Hunting
Hogskin Saddle, No. 4 £7.
282 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Stock Saddle, cap
knees, hog seat, and extra gullet plate, No. 5. £5 10s.
283 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Stock Saddle, rough
all over, bag hide (rough), extra gullet, No. 6. £5.
284 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Queensland Horse
Breaker, extra gullet, No. 7. £6 6s.
285 HILL, JOHN, Kedron Brook, Brisbane. Collection of seven
Saddles, as enumerated above—made by the exhibitor.
286 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Set of Pair Horse Fancy Carriage
Harness. £63.
287 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane, Fancy worked Side Saddle, made
by exhibitor’s own hands. £2l. *
288 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Gents’s fancy Hogskin Saddle,
fawn color, doeskin seat. £9 9s.
289 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Gent’s fancy stained Hogskin
Saddle, with fawn colored doeskin seat. £8 Bs.


290 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Gent’s best plain Hogskin Saddle.
£8 Bs.
291 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Gent’s Hogskin Saddle, English
shape, flaps. £7 7s.
292 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Gent’s all-over Stock Saddle, with
knee and thigh caps. £6.
293 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Gent’s fancy worked Hogskin
Saddle, doeskin seat and pads. £lO 10s.
294 JARMAN, R. E., Brisbane. Collection of Seven Saddles and
one set of Carriage Harness, as enumerated above ; made
by exhibitor.
295 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gent’s Hogskin
Saddle, with solid flaps. £7 ss.
296 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gent’s Smooth
Saddle, with solid flaps. £4 7s. 6d.
297 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Stock saddle
with solid flaps, round knees, thigh pads, and extra
gullet plate. £4 7s. 6d.
298 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Rough stock
saddle with hogskin seat and extra gullet plate. £5 7s 6d.
299 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gents’ rough
saddle with solid flaps. £4 ss.
300 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gent’s smooth
saddle with hogskin seat. £5 7s. 6d.
.301 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gent’s all-over
bag leather saddle, low knee pads. £5 ss.
302 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gent’s light
hogskin saddle. £7 10s.
303 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Steeplechase
hogskin saddle. £7 ss.
304 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Gent’s light
hogskin saddle with solid flaps. £5 ss.
305 MICHAEL, H, T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. All-over rough
stock saddle, extra gullet plate. £5 ss.
306 MICHAEL, H. T., Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Boy’s hogskin
saddle, solid flaps £4 ss.
307 MICHAEL, H. T , Bald Hills, near Brisbane. Collection of
twelve saddles, as enumerated above, made by exhibitor.
308 YAUGHAN, WILLIAM, Rockhampton, Stock whip by ex-
hibitor.


DEPARTMENT 111,
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE.
GROUP. —Educational Systems, Methods, and Libraries.
Class 306. School and Text Books, Dictionaries, Ency-
clopoedias, Gazetteers, Directories, Index Volumes,
Bibliographies, Catalogues, Almanacs, Special
Treatises, General and Miscellaneous Literature,
Newspapers, Technical and Special Newspapers
and Journals, Illustrated Papers, Periodical Litera-
ture.
309 THORNE, W., Brisbane. Pugh’s Almanac, bound.
GROUP. — Scientific and Philosophical Instruments and
Methods.
Class 311. Optical and Thermotic Instruments and Appa-
ratrs. Mirrors, Plane and Spherical. Lenses and
Prisms. Spectacles and Eyeglasses, Eield and Opera
Glasses, Graphoscopes and Stereoscopes. Cameras
and Photographic Apparatus. Microscopes.
Telescopes. Apparatus for Artificial Illumination,
including Electric, Oxyhydrogen, and Magnesium
Light Stereopticons. Photometric Apparatus.
Spectroscopes and Accessories tor Spectrum
Analysis. Polariscopes, &c. Thermotic Apparatus.
310 WEABER, HENRY, Brisbane. Collection of Spectacles, made
by Exhibitor.


GEOUP.— Engineering, Architecture, Charts, Maps, and
Graphic JRepresentations.
Class 319. Topographical Maps. Marine and Coast
Charts. Geological Maps and Sections. Botanical
Agromomical and other Maps, showing the extent
and distribution of Men, Animals, and Terrestrial
Products. Physical Maps. Meteorological Maps
( and Bulletins Telegraphic Eoutes and Stations.
Eailway and Eoute Maps. Terrestrial and Celes-
tial Globes. Eelief Maps and Models of portions
of the Earth’s surface. Profiles of Ocean beds
and Eoutes of Submarine Cables.
311 BEENLEIGH STATE SCHOOL, Logan River. Two Maps,
by Otto Danth, age 13£ years.
312 DEPARTMENT OE MINES, Queensland. Collection of
Geological Maps.
313 FOX, H. W., Survey Office, Brisbane. Specimen of School Map
of Queensland, lithographed by exhibitor.
314 KNIGHT, W., Government Engraver, Brisbane. New School
Map of Queensland, lithographed by H. W. Fox.
315 MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, Bowen. Plan of Daintree Coal
Seam, Bowen Eiver, accompanying block of coal there-
from.
EXTEA.
316 ALDEE, ANTHONY, Brisbane. Natural history grouped—
Laughing Jackass and Carpet Snake, mounted by exhi-
bitor. Motto—“ No laughing matter.”
317 BEEGEE, Dr. CHAELES EOE, Toowoomha. Specimen of
comparative anatomy —Physiology, Pathology of the
vegetable and animal kingdoms.
318 BLAKENEY, C. JBrisbane. Autographs of Celebrated
Men.
319 BOYD, A. J., Brisbane. Collection of Aboriginal Curios.
320 CLARKE, JOHN, Brisbane. Two Boxes of Insects.
321 COXEN, Mrs. CHAS., Brisbane. 1 case of Six Birds
{Ptilorhis paradisea). Rille Birds ( Ptilorhis Victoria ).
Queen Victoria Rille Bird—male and female. Craxpe-
dophera magnified (Magnificent Rifle Bird)—-male and
female, and young male. —The above are contained in
yellow wood and cedar cases, and were mounted by the
late Charles Coxen, C.M.Z.S. £25 for any single case,
or £BO for the four.
322 COXEN, Mrs. CHAS., Brisbane. One Case Male and Female
Bower Birds and Playground ( Chlamydodera nuchalis).
323 COXEN, Mrs. CHAS., Brisbane. One Case Spotted Bower
Birds ( C. mainlula) —2 males, with playground.


324 COXEN, Mrs. CHAS., Brisbane. Regent Birds (Sericulus
melonus) ; two males in full plumage—two young males
and one female with them—bower and ornamentation.
325 DIGGLES, S., Brisbane. Cabinet Collection of Queensland
Beetles and Butterflies. £250.
326 DIGGLES, S., Brisbane. One Case Foreign Beetles.
327 DIGGLES, S., Brisbane. Two volumes —“ Birds of Australia.”
328 GULLIVER, T. A., Thornborough, Collection of Native Birds
from the Norman River (£100), as under :
1 (Strix Sp.)
2 (Stridella Sp.)
3 (Hallastur Sp.)
4 ' Maminea minor
5 Gannett
6 Falco Melanocephalus
7 Spur-winged Plover
8
(Anas Sp.)
Nycticorax Caledonians
Podiceps Australis
Ordicnemus Grallarius
(Falco Sp.)
10
11
12
13 Black Ibis
14 Swamp Pheasant
15 Pheasant
16
17
18 White Egret
19 Pink-eared Duck
20
Nettapus Pulchella
Dacelo Leachii
Malacorhynchus Membranaceus
Cacatua Galeata
21
22 Brown’s Wren
23 Blue Wren „ Lamberti
24 White-throated Honeyeater Melithreptus Albogularis
25
26 Swallow Dicceum
27 Sun Bird
,28 Austral Sun Bird
Herodius Ficata
Malums Cruentatus
Pardalotus TJropigialis
Dicceum kirundinaceum
Nectarinis Australis
29 Red-throated Honeyeater JEntomophila Bnbugularis
30 White-eared Grass Finch Poephila leucotis
31 Banded „ „ Cincta
32 ' 1 „ Atrophygialis (Higgles)
33 Banded Honeyeater Myzomela Pectoralis
34 V M o\v-bellied Smicrorinis Smicrorinis Jiavescens
35 Medium Grass Bird
36 Speckled-winged Dove ( Geopelia Sp.) \
37 Black Pantail Flycatcher (Shepherd’s Companion) '*■
38 Ban Thickhead P. Falcata
39 Plain Honeyeater
40 Small Fantail - A Jthipidura ruppins /
41 Little Mioroeca
42 Yellow-breasted Robin
43 Kingfisher
(Mioroeca Sp.)
Eopsaltria Australis
Podirhampkus pyrrhopygia


44 Peaceful Dove
45 Tawny-grass Bird
46 Horsfield’s Bush Lark
47 Ground Lark
Geopelia tranquilla
Sphenurus galeatus
Mir afro, Hor'sfeildi
Mirafra Bronmii
48 White-rumped Wood Swallow Artamus Albiventris
49 White-shouldered Campephaga Campephaga humeralis
50 Lunated 't hickhead
51 Black Shafted Robin
52 Small Cuckoo
53 Tree Climber (medium)
54 Pigeon
55 Sordid Friar Bird
Pachycephala Simplex
Lamprococcix
Climacteris Melanocephahu
Sophophaps plumigera
Trapidorhynchut Sordid**
56 Temporal Pomatorhinus Pomotorhinus temporaiu
57 Ptistes Qoccineopterus
58 -ft* Graculus pavirostris
59 Barred-shouldered Dove
60 Galar
61 Eed-knee’d Dottrel
62 Spotted Bower Bird
63
66 Topknot Pigeon
67 Yellow-bellied Sphicorthens
68 “ Dollar,” or Roller Bird
Geopelia humeralis
Erythogonys ductus
Ghlamydera Maculata
Pitta Strepitans
Clamydodera Cerviventris
Ptiloris paradisens
Lephalaimus Antarcticus
Coracias pacific a
69 Magnificent Fruit Pigeon. Ptilinopus
70 Black Cockatoo
71 Cockatoo
72 Plain Turkey
73
74 Radjah Shiel Drake
75 Curlew Sand-piper
76 Boobook Owl
77 Bronze-wdng Pigeon
78
79 Australian Bee Eater
80
82 Bicheno’s Pinch
83 Crimson Finch
84 Red-tailed Finch
85
Il'miantopus leucocephalus
Tadorna Radjah
Athene Boobooh
S tamiopera Unicolor
Met ops ornatus
Para Jacara
Sitella striata
Estrelda B ehcnovii
Artamus minor
Donacola Casta neothorax
87 White-shafted Fantailed Flycatcher
88 Fan tailed Reed Warbler
89 Shrike
90 White Goshawk
91 King Lory
phaeton
rufieauda
92 Orange-fronted Ephthiamira
93 Beautiful Grass Finch
94 Australian Shoveller
95 (Rare)
Aprosmictus Scapulatus
Poephila mirahilis (rare)
Spatula Rhynehotis
Zoster ops Gnlliverii


t
342
JAMIESON; J. T., Ipswich. Collection of mounted specimens
of Natural History, contained in thirteen cases.
HAETMANN, C. H., Toowoomba. Box constructed of Seeds
and Seed Cones.
HAETMANN, C. H., Toowoomba, Collection of Insects inju-
rious to trees and plants.
JOHNSTONE, E., Sub-Inspector, Herbert Eiver. Collection of
Aboriginal Weapons and Utensils.
LASCELLES, E. M , Brisbane. Seventy Engravings of British
Birds, colored to nature in water colors, by exhibitor.
MAESHALL & SLADE, Glengallan, Darling Downs. Four
Earns’ Heads (preserved and mounted by A. Alder,
Taxidermist, Brisbane).
PALMEE, Hon. A. H., M.L.A., Colonial Secretary of Queens-
land., Collection of Native Implements and Aboriginal
Curios.
PALMEE, Hon. A. H., Colonial Secretary of Queensland.
Collection of New Guinea Curiosities.
PILCHEE, G. L., Secretary School of Arts, Eockhampton. Six
Cases Entomological Specimens, found near Eookhamp-
ton ; preserved by exhibitor.
EOBINSON, W. E., Toowoomba. Queensland Scrub Birds,
one case; mounted.
SLATEE, G., Brisbane. Photographic Copy of Swedenborg’s
Bible, with annotations.
STAIGEE, K. T., F.L.S., Brisbane. Collection of Queensland
Spears, Shields, Swords, Nullah Nullahs, and other
Aboriginal Curios.
STILLEE & CO., Amity Point, Moreton Bay, Queensland.
One Stuffed Male Dnjronsr or Sea Cow (Halicore
Australis) , estimated to be 40 years old when caught.
UTHEE, S. H., Brisbane. Model for a Town Hall, designed
and executed by the exhibitor.


DEPARTMENT IV,
AET.
GROUP.— Sculpture.
Class
GROUP. — Fainting. .
406. Paintings in Oil, on Canvas, Panels, &c.
Class
WHEELWRIGHT, J. H., Brisbane. “ A Quiet Lagoon.”
Class
HOBDAY, J. M., Brisbane. “On the River Liedr.”
WEBSTER & Co., Brisbane. Eight Water-colours.
GROUP. — Engraving and Lithography.
410. Drawings with Pen, Pencil, or Crayons.
Class
355
356
402. Medals, pressed and engraved; Electrotypes
of Medals,
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL
ASSOCIATION OP QUEENSLAND, Brisbane.
Silver and Bronze Prize Medals, issued as prizes by
the Association. Dies cut in Brisbane by R. Capner.
BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. “ Landscape with Cattle.” £25.
BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. The “ Opportunity ” for Elopement.
£2O.
BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. “ Stable Scene,” by Woollett, 1856.
£lB.
CLARKE, J. A., Brisbane. Original Oil Painting by Exhibitor,
“ A Bush Scene near Brisbane.”
DIGGLES, SILVESTER, Brisbane. Copy of Raffaelle’s
“ Transfiguration ” in oils, painted by exhibitor.
WEBSTER & CO., Brisbane. Four Oil Paintings.
WHEELWRIGHT, J. H., Brisbane. “ A Bush Hut.”
407. Water-colour Pictures—Aquarelles, Minia-
tures, &c.
AUSTIN, W., Brisbane. Water-colour Picture, View on
Brisbane River.
BUGNION, Bishop, Gladstone. Design for Table Cover or
Altar .Cloth.
NORMAL SCHOOL, Brisbane. .. .v elve Drawings in Crayon.


Class 411. Line Engravings from Steel, Copper, or Stone.
357 CLARKE, J. A., Brisbane. “ Creek Crossing at Ashgrove,”
near Brisbane j original etching.
GROUP. — Photography.
Class 415. Photographs on Paper, Metal, Glass, Wood,
Fabrics, or Enamel Surfaces.
358 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. “Auld Lang Syne,” “ Heads of the
People,” Sydney, 1857 (each figure numbered ; a key to
the names at back of the picture).
359 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. “Auld Lang Syne” —explorers,
pioneers, early colonists, celebrities of Queensland and
Australia.
360 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. Natives of Brisbane (white), aged
three and seventeen years (colored photographs, four
cabinets in diamond shaped frame).
361 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. PHOTOGRAPHS; Six
Enlarged Photographs of Views taken in the Gardens by
. the Imperial Photo. Company, George street, Brisbane.
Enlarged Photograph, Platycer'mm Hillii (New Fern).
361 a PAVENC, ERNEST, Brisbane. Sketches made on Queenslander
Transcontinental Expedition
361 b LUKIN, GRESLEY, Brisbane. Plan of route of Queenslander
Transcontinental Expedition
362 MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, Bowen, Photographic Views of
Bowen.
363 NORTON, A., M.L.A., Brisbane. Nine Photographic Views of
Gladstone.
GROUP. — Industrial and Architectural Designs, Models
and Decorations.
Class 419. Industrial Designs.
364 DE JERSEY, Madame, Brisbane. Glass Shade of Crepe
Flowers.
865 DE JERSEY, Madame, Brisbane. Glass Shade of Fish Scales
and Shell Flowers.
Class 420. Architectural Designs—Studies and Fragments,
Representations and Projects of Edifices; Resto-
rations from Ruins, and from Documents.
366 UTHER, S. H., Brisbane. Model of Hospital, designed and
executed by exhibitor.
GROUP. — Decorations with Ceramic and Vitreous Materials,
Mosaic and Inlaid Work.
Class 427. Miscellaneous Objects of Art.
367 THOMLE, PETER, Brisbane. Automatic Theatre.


DEPARTMENT V.
MACHINERY
GEOUP. — Machines and Tools for working metal, wood,
and stone.
Class 510. Planing, Sawing, Veneering, Grooving, Mor-
ticing, Tonguing, Cutting, Moulding, Stamping,
Carving, and Cask-making Machines. Cork-
cutting Machines, &c.
368 MOFFATT, R. H., Indooroopilly. Improved Fret Cutter, for
steam power.
369 TRATTLES, M., Hill End, South Brisbane. Improved Machine
for turning Broom Handles, invented by exhibitor.
370 TRATILES, M., Hill End, South Brisbane. Improved Saw
Sharpener, invented by exhibitor.
GEOUP — Railway Plant, Rolling Stock, and Apparatus.
Class 562. Carriages, Waggons, Trucks, Cars, &c.
371 LOCOMOTIVE DEPARTMENT, SOUTHERN & WEST-
ERN RAILWAY, Ipswich. Double Saloon Bogie
Carriage, manufactured at the Government workshops,
Ipswich, in July and August, 1879. Length of body
outside, 32ft ; width, 7ft- Gin. ; height, 6ft. lin. ; length
over buffers, 35ft. 2in.; diameter of wheels, 2ft. lin. ;
wheel base of bogie trucks, sft. 6in.; total wheel base,
26ft. Gin. Every part of the above carriage was made
in Queensland, excepting wheels, springs, and buffer
heads. The following timbers used ir construction, all
grown in the neighbourhood of Ipswich :—Framing—
Bogie trucks, ironbark ; main under frame, ironbark and
spotted gum. Body—Pillars and bottom sides, cedar ;
outside panels, cedar; inside lining, cedar and beech;
roof, pine; ventilators, beech and honeysuckle.
Class 666. Station Arran gem ents, Signals, Water Cranes,
Turn Tables, &c.
372 DENHAM, J. S., Toowoomba. Invention for Opening and
Closing Railway Gates at a level crossing.


GROUP.— Aerial, Pneumatic, and Water Transportation,
Class 581. Boats and Sailing Vessels. Sailing Vessels used
in Commerce. Sailing Vessels used in War.
Yachts and Pleasure Boats. Rowing Boats of all
kinds. Life Boats and Salvage Apparatus, with
Life Rafts, Belts, &c. Submarine Armour, Diving
Bells, &c. Models and Drawings.
373 MORRIS, C. S., Townsville. Model of Boat.
EXTRA.
GROUP. —Machines used in Preparing Agricultural
Products ,
374 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Appliances for
Dressing Rice.
375 MAY & DaHL, Brisbane. Model of Sewing Machine and
Model of Human Leg.


DEPARTMENT VI.
AGRICULTURE.
GROUP. —Animal Products , Land and Marine, used as
Food.
Class 600. Pish, Flesh, Fowl, Game, Eggs, &c., tinned,
salted, dried, or otherwise preserved; Animal
Extracts.
376 DAVIS, F. R., Brisbane. Two Tierces of Beef, cured by
Morgan’s Infiltration Process.
377 STILLER & CO., Amity Point, Moreton Bay. Dugong Bacon.
378 STILLER & CO., Amity Point, Moreton Bay. Dugong Lard
(a sovereign remedy by outward application and absorp-
tion for all forms of defective nutrition).
379 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Turtle Soup, in
1 lb. tins, from Moreton Bay Turtles.
380 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Collection of
Spiced Luncheon Beef, Tongues, &c., in tins.
381 WHITEHEAD & CO. (Limited), Rockhampton. Assort lent
of Preserved Meats, comprising tins of Fitzroy Luncheon
Beef, Rounds of Beef, Roast Sirloin, Compressed Sand-
wich Beef, Liebeg’s Extract of Meat, and Ox Tongues.
382 WHITEHEAD & CO. (Limited), Rockhampton. Assortment
of Fitzroy Luncheon Beef, in 2,4, and 6 lb. tins ; Com-
pressed Sandwich Corned Beef, in 2,7, and 14 lb. tins;
Rounds Corned Beef, in 12 lb. tins ; Roast Sirloin Beef,
in 6 lb. tins ; and Leibeg’s Extract of Meat, in 2 oz. and
4 oz. pots.
Class 601. Dairy Produce—Milk, Cream, Butter, Cheese,
&c.
383 LILLY BROS., Bowen Island, Gladstone. Cheese.
384 ORR, WILLIAM, Ayrshire Park, Rockhampton. Cheese.
Class 602. Oysters, Mollusks, Clams, Crustaceans, Echino-
derms, Beche-de-mer, &c.
385 BEARDMORE, F. J. W., Cooktown. Assortment of B&che-
de-mer, preserved in spirit from Reef Fishery, 10 miles
from Cooktown.
386 BEARDMORE & OLIVE, Cooktown. Collection of Beche-de-
mer, dried.


387 HARTLEY, W. J., & Co., Cooktown. Collection of Beehe-de-
mer, from Barrier Reef.
388 LAKE, Captain, Sydney. Specimens of Beche-de-mer, preserved
in spirit, from the Barrier Reef, 30 miles E.N.E. from
Cooktown.
389 MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, Bowen. Collection of Beche-de-
mer, dried.
390 SKINNER, B , Brisbane. Moreton Bay Turtle, preserved with
shell complete.
391 STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S., Brisbane. One jar Beche-de-mer, in
spirits of wine.
GROUP. —Animal Products , Land and Marine, used as
Material.
Class 604, Skins, Hides, Leather of all kinds, tanned,
curried, and dressed ; Morocco, Basils, Shagreen,
Hogskin, Chamois, and prepared for Gloves and
Parchment.
392 McGLYNN, J. & P., Kelvin Grove Tannery, Brisbane. Col-
lection of Marsupial Skins, tanned with hair on.
393 HATTON, W., Maryborough. Specimen of Dugong Leather.
394 MORTIMER, W., Stanthorpe. Collection of Kangaroo and
Wallah}' Skins.
395 ROSSITER, E., Bulimba, Brisbane. Collection of Rugs and
Mats, manufactured from marsupial skins.
396 WHICHELLO, S. H., Black Gully Tannery, Toowoomba.
Collection of Skins, tanned with hair on, consisting of
Wild Horse, Kangaroo, Wallaroo, Native Bear, Opos-
sum, Dingo, Squirrel, Native Cat, Emu, Black Swan,
397 WHICHELLO, S. H., Black Gully Tannery, Toowoomba.
Collection of Leather, comprising Harness, Bridle, Bag,
Grain, Kip, Cow tweed, Horse tweed, Calf, Kangaroo
tweed, Kangaroo memel grain, Kangaroo polished grain,
colored morocco, and hogskins.
Class 609. Shells, Coral, Pearls, Sponges, Sea "Weeds, and
other Marine growths used in the Arts.
398 COXEN, Mrs. Charles, Bulimba, Brisbane. Pair of Nautilus
Shells, carved ; also Cowries.
399 CRATE, J. S., Brisbane. Collection of Vegetable Sponges,
Colyandoth or Bitter Cucumber; also seed of same.
400 HERON, Mrs., Bowen. Collection of Coral from the Great
Barrier Reef.
401 HERON, Mrs., Bowen. Collection of Shells.


402 M'KENNY, MICHAEL, Rockhampton. Specimen of malfor-
mation in Pearl Oyster contained in Louis XIY Tortoise-
shell in-laid Snuff Box.
403 PARBURY, LAMB & KNOX, Sydney. Collection of Pearl
Shell from the Torres Straits Fisheries.
404 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Collection of
Conchologic Specimens as follows, viz. : 3 Cyprcea
tigris, Moreton Bay; 2 C. Mauritiana, Bowen; 2 C.
Yitellus, Moreton Bay; 2 C. Arabica, ditto ; 4 C. Anulus,
ditto ; 2 C. Eburna, ditto ; 2 C. Caurica, ditto; 2 C.
Lynx, ditto ; 2 C. Crosa, ditto ; 3 C. Lirnacina, ditto ;
1 C. Zanthodon, ditto ; 3 C. Caput Serpentis, ditto;
3 C. Helvola, ditto ; 3 C. Moneta, ditto ; 3 C. Clandes-
tina, ditto; 3 C. Macula, ditto ; IC. Subviridis, ditto ;
2 C. Ventriculus, ditto ; 3 C. Errones, ditto ; 2 Avula
ovum, ditto; 1 Yoluto Magnifies, ditto ; 2V. Lineata,
ditto; 2 Y. Zebra, Keppel Bay ; 1 V. Ruckeri; IY.
Morrisii; IV. Maculato, Bowen ; 1 Conus Capitaneus,
Moreton Bay ; 2 Cliva Porphyritica, ditto; 2 Hydatina
Physis, ditto ; 4 Turbo Petholatus, Bowen; 2 T. Por-
phyreads, Moreton Bay; 1T- Laimmiferus, ditto; 2
Chrysostoms Nicobarica, ditto; 1 Umbrella Indies, ditto ;
1 Scalaria Pretiosa, Keppel Bay; 1 Nerita Maxima,
Moreton Bay; 1 N. Annulata, ditto; 1 N. Plicata,
ditto ; 1 N. Grossa, ditto ; 1 N. Costata, ditto; 2N.
Lineata, ditto ; 3 N. Brugeri, ditto; 2 N. Atro-purpurea,
ditto; 2 N. Atrata, ditto; 2 N. Delphinula, ditto; 1
Pluronectia Japonica, ditto ; 1 Venus Sculpta, ditto; 1
Y. Lamarkii, ditto; ' V. Puerpera, ditto; 3 Tapes
Litterata, ditto; 2T. Turgida, ditto; 1 Crassatella
Cumingi, ditto; 3 Asaphis Rugosa, Cape York ; 2 Felix
Cunninghamii, Moreton District; 2F. Infonnis, Mackay ;
2F. Pachystyla ; 2 F. Rawnsleyi; 3F. Rainbirdii ;3 F.
Coxi; 2 F. Bloomfieldi ; 2 F. Maconelli, Durundur;
1 F. Falconari, Brisbane ; 2 F. Bipartita, Cape York ;
2 F. Croftoni; 3 F. Yulci; 3F. Imei; 3F. Whartonij
2 F. O’Connellensis ; 2 F. Gratiosa.
Class 610. Beeswax, Shellac, Cochineal, and other Insect
Secretions.
405 BAILEY, W. 8., Pimpama. Beeswax.
406 RAINBIRD, W. H., Bowen. Collection of Marine and Land
Shells.
407 SANDROCK, G. F., Bowen. Collection of Coral and Shells.


GEOUP. —Arboriculture and Forest Products.
Classes 613 and 614. Timber and Trunks of Trees,
entire or in transverse or truncated sections, with
specimens of Barks, Leaves, Flowers, Seed Vessels,
and Seeds ; Masts, Spars, Knees, longitudinal sec-
tions of Trees, Eailway Ties, Ship Timber, Lumber
roughly sawn, as Planhs, Shingles, Laths and
Staves, split or sawn. Timber and Lumber pre-
pared in various ways to resist decay and combus-
tion, as by injection of Salts of Copper and Zinc.
Ornamental Woods used in Decorating and for
Furniture, as Veneers of Mahogany, Eosewood,
Ebony Walnut, Maple, and Madrona.
408 BOTANIC GARDENS. COLLECTION OF QUEENS-
LAND TIMBERS, collected and arranged by Walter
Hill, Colonial Botanist, and Director of Botanic
Gardens, Brisbane.
The various collections of Timbers indigenous to this colony,
exhibited here and in the various courts of England,
Vienna, America, a¥d Paris,have excited general admira-
tion, not only for their adaptability for ordinary com-
mercial purposes, but many of them possessing peculiar
qu lities suitable to particular climates and situations of
country.
The Eucalyptus, in all its many varieties, has found its way
to the four quarters of the globe; and the demand for
seed from those countries where its qualities are special
is considerably in excess of the supply from Queensland.
Central Africa will be the scene of its cultivation
shortly ; and India and the Continent of Europe have
both succeeded in its acclimatisation. Some of the
species are more adapted for swampy grounds; some
possess high medicinal qualities; most are useful for
building and fencing purposes, and all of them worthy
of something better than consumption for firewood.
The Red Cedar (Cedrela Toond) scrubs are still very ex-
tensive in the colony, especially to the far north, but the
wholesale despoilage that has taken place, arid is still
going on, goes so far to diminish the supply, as to
make it a grave question whether some more stringent
measure should not be at once framed for a system having
for its object the conservance of our timber forests
generally.


The Moreton Bay Pine scrubs, principally situated along the
coast line, are having (to use a colonial phrase! “ their
eyes picked out,” and, unless under revised regulations,
the cutters will not only take the best of the timber
but will make no provision for the future in the way of
recuperation. This question occupies the attention
of the Australian colonies generally at the present time.
On a recent tour of inspection, undertaken by the direction
of the Government, to Frazer’s Island by the director of
the Botanic Gardens, it was found that the Kauri pine
scrubs there had suffered from the same system of
reckless indifference referred to above.
The Hardwoods, in the timber-producing districts of the
colony, are not only in great variety but at present, so
far as can be estimated, are in full supply. The same
remarks, however, apply to these as to the pine
and other soft woods.
The present collection has been made with the view of exhi-
biting as far as possible the various timber obtainable
over a large extent of country —from the far north to
the boundary of the colony on the south and west-
ward ; and from the particulars attached to each sample,
as to uses, habitats, &c., it will be seen that Queensland
has been particularly favored in this respect —probably
more than any other of the Australian colonies.
Irrespective of an immense home consumption, which it is
impossible to estimate, there is a large export trade in
cedar and pine logs—exceeding £60,000 per annum.
With the view of initiating a system of forest conservancy
in the colony, the Government have devoted some
thirty acres of ground in the vicinity of Brisbane to
a nursery, in which many thousands of plants (30,000
of cedar alone) have been raised, and are now distri-
buted free of charge to those whose attention has been
v called to this most important matter, and who have
exhibited great interest on the subject.
MELIACEJL
1. Cedrela toona, Boxb. (Red Cedar). —Diameter, 24 to 75 inches;
height, 100 to 150 feet. This magnificent deciduous tree is found in
scrubs along the coast, and occasionally extending inland for a con-
siderable distance. It puts out large branches, the junctions of which,
with the stem, furnish those beautiful curled pieces of which the choicest
veneers are made. The timber is light, very durable, easily worked,
and is largely employed in house-joinery and furniture-making; in fact,
whenever lightness and durability are required. It is an article of great
commercial importance, and is largely exported to the other colonies.
The market value at the present time is from 20s. per hundred superficial
feet, according to colour and size.
2. Flindersia australis, R. Br. (Flindosa). —Diameter, 36 to 48
inches ; height, 80 to 100 feet. A robust tree of general occurrence in
the scrubs on the banks of rivers. The timber is hard, close, and of
great strength and durability, and would make excellent timber for


railway purposes. It shrinks very little in drying, and does not rust
iron. It has long been known to timber merchants as being a very
hard timber and difficult to cut with the saw, and for that reason little
attention has been paid to procuring it.
3. Flindersia Oxleyana, F. M. (Light Yellow-wood). —Diameter,
24 to 42 inches ; height, 80 to 100 feet. This fine tree is found in the
same situations as red cedar. The timber is strong, durable, fine-grained,
and of good colour, used in boat-building, cabinet-work, and for many of
the purposes to which cedar is applied. It also possesses dyeing pro-
perties. The present market value is from 7s. to 9s. per hundred
superficial feet.
4. Flindersia maculosa, F. M. (Spotted Tree of the Colonists).
—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches; height, 36 to 40 feet. A middle-sized
tree ; the trunk spotted by the falling off of the outer bark in patches.
Timber used for shingles and staves of tallow casks and pick handles.
5. Flindersia Bennettiana, F. M. (Bogum Bogum). —Diameter, 18 to
26 inches; height, 70 to 90 feet. This large tree occurs in most of the
coast scrubs; the timber is close-grained, but is seldom used. It splits
well; might, probably, be valuable for staves.
6. Flindersia Schottiana, F. M.—Diameter, 18 to 30 inches ; height,
30 to 60 feet. This moderate-sized tree extends from the boundary of
New South Wales to the Daintree Eiver. It is confined generally to
forest gullies. The timber is hard, close-grained, and prettily marked.
7. Owenia venosa, F. M. (Sour Plum). —Diameter, 9to 36 inches ;
height, 30 to 40 feet. A moderate-sized tree, common in the Brigalow
scrubs. Its great strength renders it suitable for many purposes.
8. Owenia cerasifera, F. M. (Rose Apple). —Diameter, 9to 36 inches;
height, 25 to 60 feet. A small but very beautiful tree ; timber hard,
and of a dark-red colour, finely marked, and takes a very high polish.
9. Amoora nitidula, Benth.—Diameter, 18 to 30 inches ; height, 70 to
90 feet. A large-sized tree of frequent occurrence in scrubs bordering
the coast. Qualities of the timber not much known.
10. Synoum glandulosum, A Juss. —Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height,
40 to 60 feet. A moderate-sized tree of very general occurrence;
t imber firm and easily worked.
11. Dysoxylon Muelleri, Benth. (Pencil Cedar).—Diameter, 20 to 40
inches ; height, 70 to 80 feet. A large-sized tree inhabiting the rich
alluvial scrubs upon the banks of the rivers in the district of Morcton
Bay and Wide Bay. Timber of a rich color, used for cabinet-making
and window w r ork. When fresh cut the timber has much the smell of a
Swedish turnip. Market value, from 6s. to 6s. 6d. per hundred feet.
12. Dysoxylon rufum, Benth. (Bastard Cedar Pencil Wood). —
Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet. A slender tree, occur-
ring in many of the scrubs on the coast, and also in the interior.
Wood is nicely grained, and used for various purposes, but principally
for cabinet work.
13. Melia composita, Wild. (White Cedar). —Diameter, 15 to 24
inches; height, 40 to 50 feet. An elegant, deciduous tree, never ranging
very far from the coast . Timber soft and easily worked /'not in very
good repute, though undeservedly, as the timber from a well-matured
tree is found to be very durable.
Tr~ r '377T^'


CONIFERS.
14. Araucaria Bidwilli, Hook. (Bunya Bunya.)—Diameter, 30 to
58 inches ; height, 100 to 200 feet. A noble tree, inhabiting the scrubs
in the district between Brisbane and the Barnett Rivers. In the 20th
parallel it grow s thickly over a portion of country, in extent about 30
miles long and by 12 broad. The tree has a very singular appearance;
the trunk is quite straight; its bark is thick and smooth ; the branches
are produced in whorls of six, seven, or eight; they are horizontal, in-
flexed, and ascending at the extremities. From the style of growth,
singular foliage, and peculiar fresh colour, when surrounded with other
trees of a different habit and greyish tint, it produces a fine effect,
from the striking contrast presented by its rigid growth, and fresh
green lance-shaped leaves. The wood is not only very strong and
good, but it is full of beautiful veins, and capable of being polished and
worked with the greatest facility. The cones produced on the
extreme upper branches, with their apex downwards, are large, mea-
suring 9 to 12 inches in length, and 10 inches in diameter ; on coming
to maturity they readily shed their seeds, which are 2 to 2£ inches long
by 1 inch broad, sweet before being perfectly ripe, and after that re-
semble roasted chestnuts in taste. In accordance with regulations issued
by the Government, the tree is not allowed to be cut down by those who
are licensed to fall timber on the Crown lands, the fruit being used as
food by the aboriginals. The trees produce some cones every year, but
the principal harvest happens only every three years, when the blacks
assemble from all quarter’s to feast on it. The food seems to have a
fattening effect upon them, and they eat large quantities of it, after
roasting it at a fire. Contrary to their usual habits, they sometimes store
up the Bunya nuts, hiding them in a water-hole for a month or two.
Here they germinate, and become offensive in taste to a white man’s
palate, but are considered by the blacks to have then acquired an im-
proved flavour. The taste of the Bunya when fresh has been described
as something between a chestnut and a raw potatoe.
15. Araucaria Cunninghamii , Ait. (Moreton Bay Pine). —Diameter,
36 to 60 inches; height, 150 to 200 feet. This majestic tree is, without
exception, the most ornamental and useful tree in Queensland. Its beau-
tiful regular pyramidal form, and the sombre green of its awl-shaped
foliage, command general admiration. It covers immense tracts of land
along the coast, and in the interior. It overtops all other trees,
whether growing on the alluvial banks near rivers, or upon the steep
and rugged mountains in the interior. Its branches are produced in
whorls from six to eight, horizontally and spreading. The bark is
thick and brownish. The timber is an article of great commercial im-
portance, and is used extensively in this colony. The wood is strong
and durable when kept dry, but soon decays when exposed to alter-
nate damp and dry. When procured from the mountains in the interior
it is fine-grained, and is susceptible of a high polish, which excels that
of satinwood or bird’s-eye maple. The resin which exudes is very re-
markable ; it has all the transparency and whiteness of crystal, and that
portion of it which adheres to the trees hangs from them in the shape of
icicles, which are sometimes 3 feet long, and 6to 12 inches broad. The
sawyers receive at the present time 6s. 6d. to 7s. per hundred superfi-
cial feet, some trees yielding as much as 10,000 feet of saleable timber.


16. Dammara robusta, Moore. (Kauri or Dundathu Pine). —Diameter,
36 to 72 in. ; height, 80 to 130 feet. This huge tree inhabits the alluvial
banks on the rivers near the coast in the Wide Bay District; also in the
moist and sheltered valleys on Frazer’s Island. It has a smooth-barked
trunk, of a lead colour ; the branches are produced in whorls from 5 to
10, distant, spreading, and of a large size. The wood is fine-grained, free
of knots, and easily worked. It is, however, not a plentiful tree. At the
present time the sawyers are receiving 7s. 6d. per hundred superficial
feet, some trees yielding as much as 25,000 feet.
17. Frenela Endlicheri, Parlat, F. M. (Cypress Pine). —Diameter,
20 to 40 inches ; height, 50 to 70 feet. This tree forms vast tracts
along the coast, growing on barren sandy soils. The timber is an article
of great importance ; it is durable, fine-grained, fragrant, and capable of
a high polish ; it is used for piles of wharves and for sheathing punts
and boats; it resists the attacks of cobra and white ants, and the root
is valued by cabinet-makers for veneering purposes. The market value
at the present time is 10s. per hundred superficial feet.
18. Frenela rhomboidea, Endl. (Cypress Pine). —Diameter, 12 to 18
inches; height, 40 to 50 feet. A handsome tree, scattered through the
brigalow scrubs and sand ridges on the Darling Downs District. The
timber is much used for telegraph posts, and by settlers for building
purposes.
19. Frenela Parlatorei, F. M. (Mountain Cypress Pine). Diameter,
12 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet; timber much valued for cabinet
purposes.
20. Podocarpus elata, R. Br. (She-pine).—Diameter, 20 to 36 inches ;
height, 50 to 80 feet. A very beautiful tree, trunk rarely cylindrical,
timber free from knots, soft, close, easily worked; good for joiners’ work,
and used for spars. It occurs very frequently in the scrubs along the
coast. The market value at the present time is about 7s. per hundred
feet superficial.
CASUARINEiE.
21. Casuarina equisetifolia , Forst. (Swamp Oak.) —Diameter, 12 to
24inches; height, 50 to 70 feet. Found growing in great abundance
near salt water marshes and inlets. The wood is coarse-grained, and
beautifully marked, it is used for purposes where lightness and tough-
ness are required.
22. Casuarina torulosa, Ait. (Forest Oak or Beefwood.) —Diameter,
9 to 18 inches ; height, 30 to 40 feet. A small tree occupying large
tracts of land in the open forest. The timber is much used for fuel ;
it is close and prettily marked, and gives handsome veneers.
23. Casuarina glauca, Seib. (The River She oak.) Diameter, 24 to
36 inches ; height, 70 to 90 feet. A robust tree of general occurrence
on the borders of rivers and creeks. The timber is strong and tough,
used for staves, shingles, &c.
24. Casuarina Cunnmghamiana , Miq. —(Scrub She oak.) —Diameter,
6to 12 inches; height, 20 to 36 feet. A small but' handsome tree;
timber hard, close, and prettily marked.
RUTACEiE.
25. Bosistoa sapindiformis, F.M. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches; height,
15 to 20 feet. A small but very handsome tree, abounding in most


of the scrubs near the sourees of the Logan and Albert Rivers, Wood
close and light.
26. Citrus australis , Planch. (Native Orange.)—Diameter, 6 to 14
inches; height, 20 to 30 feet. This small and handsome tree grows
in abundance on the borders of scrubs, both on the coast and in the
interior. The trunk is erect, with many diffused branches, armed with
auxiliary straight thorns of about half an inch long. The fruit is about
one and a-half inches in diameter, almost globular; an agreeable
beverage is produced from its acid juice. The wood is hard, close-
grained, and of a fine light-yellow color.
27. Citrus australasica, F.M. (Native Lime.) —Diameter, 6to 10
inches ; height, 15 to 20 feet. A low-sized and beautiful tree, growing
in the scrubs on the Brisbane and Pine Rivers. The trunk is erect
and well diffused, with small branches bearing fruit about two inches
long, and of an oblong form. The wood is close-grained, hard, and of
a yellow color.
28. Atalantia glauca, Hook. (The Native Kumkuat.) —Diameter,
2 to 6 inches ; height, Bto 15 feet. A small tree or shrub, armed with
straight or incurved axillary spines of a quarter of an inch long upon the
branches. The jfruit is globular, about half an inch in diameter, and
produces an agreeable beverage from its acid juice. The wood is close-
grained, and takes a fine polish. Found in great abundance in the
Darling Downs and the Maranoa districts,
29. Glycosmis pe.ntaphylla, Corr. —Diameter, 4 to 6 inches ; height,
Bto 14 feet. A small tree occurring sparingly in the scrubs at the
entrance of the Mary River. Wood, close-grained.
30. Acronychia Baueri, Schott. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
16 to 24 feet. Small-sized tree, found in the scrubs bordering the
coast. Wood close-grained, but not used.
31. Acronychia imperforata , F.M.—Diameter, 12 to 15 inches;
height, 20 to 30 feet. A handsome shady tree, occurring in the scrubs
on the coast. Timber fine-grained, easily wrought, but not much used.
32. Acronychia laevis, Frost. —Diameter, 15 to 18 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. A tall, slender tree ; timber not used.
33. Pentaceras australis , Hook, (Scrub white Cedar of the colonists).
—Diameter 12 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet. Occurs principally
in the scrubs near the coast. The timber is close grained, tough, and
firm.
34. ZantJioxylum brachyacanthum. F. M. (Satinwood). —Diameter,
6 to 12 inches; height, 20 to 30 feet. Found in small quantities in
most of the coast scrubs of Queensland. The timber is close-grained,
of a yellow color, and sucseptible of a high polish.
35. Geijera parijlora, Lindl.—Diameter, 6to 12 inches ; height, 20
to 30 feet. Tree occurring in many of the brigalow scrubs. Timber
hard and close-grained; it is, however, apt to split in seasoning.
36. Geijera Muelleri, Benth (Balsam Capivi tree).--Diameter, 12 to
13 inches; height, 40 to 60 feet. This handsome and glabrous tree is
dispersed through the brigalow and Araucaria scrubs in the East and
West Moreton districts. The timber is nicely marked, and of agree-
able fragrance when green.
37. Geijera salicifolia, Schott.—Diameter, 10 to 15 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. The long slender drooping branches with their long


narrow leaves, have a very beautiful appearance. It occurs in brigalow
scrubs on the coast, and in the interior; wood is hard, close-grained,
and nicely marked.
38. Fvodia micrococea, F. M.—Diameter, 10 to 15 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. A small-sized tree, of no great beauty ; met with in the
scrubs on the banks of the rivers in the Moreton district.
CELASTINiE.
39. Celastrus dispermus, P. M.—Diameter, 3 to 5 inches ; height, 12
to 16 feet. A small-sized glabrous tree of some beauty when not over-
crowded with other trees ; wood close-grained, and takes a fine polish.
40. Siphonodon australe, Benth. —Diameter, 10 to 24 feet; height,
40 to 50 feet. A handsome scrub tree of frequent occurrence; wood
close-grained, of a yellowish color.
41. Denhamia pittospor aides, F. M.—Diameter 6 to 8 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Slender tree found on the borders of scrubs inland ;
timber is hard, fine grained, and takes a good polish.
42. Denhamia obscura, Meisn. —Diameter, 3 to 4 inches ; height, 12
to 15 feet. Small tree, found in brigalow scrubs near Ipswich ; wood
fine grained, and tough.
43. FAceodendron australe, Yent. —Diameter, 4to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Slender-growing, glabrous tree; timber, close-grained,
and prettily marked.
RHAMNEiE.
44. Alphitonia excelsa, Reissek (Mountain or Red Ash). —Diameter,
18 to 24 inches; height, 45 to 60 feet. This valuable tree is plentiful
in the forest and in the scrubs, both on the coast and in| the interior.
The timber is hard, close-grained, and durable; takes a high polish,
and is suitable for gun-stocks and a variety of other purposes.
PITTOSPOREtE .
45. Pittosporum rhombifolium, A. Cunn.— Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ;
height, 40 to 55 feet. A fine tree with glossy foliage ; found in the
scrubs on the Brisbane River. The wood is of a white color ; not used.
46. Pittosporum bicolor, Hook. Diameter, 6 to 12 inches; height,
20 to 46 feet. Found in open forest ground in West Moreton and
Darling Downs Districts. Wood close-grained, of a white color.
C APPARID JE.
47. Pittosporum phillyrceoides D.C. —Diameter, 4 to 6 inches ; height,
20 to 25 feet. Met with in brigalow scrubs ; wood close-grained, and
of a white color.
48. Cappans nobilis, F.M. (Native Pomegranate!. —Diameter, 6to
14 inches; height, 20 to 25 feet. A small tree. The timber is hard
and close-grained.
49. Capparis Mitchelli, Lindl. (Small Native Pomegranate).—
Diameter, 6to 12 inches ; height, 14 to 30 feet. This much-branched
small tree is very plentiful in the brigalow scrubs in the Darling Downs ;
wood very hard. \
50. Apophyllum anomalum, F.M. Diameter, 6to 16 inches; height,
20 to 30 feet. A shrub or small tree, almost leafless, with cylindrical,
often pendulous branches; occurring in the brigalow scrubs in the
Darling Downs District. Wood very hard.


STERCULTACE.
51. Sterculia quadrifida, R. Br. Diameter, 18 to 2 i inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. A moderate sized deciduous tree; wood soft and
spongy ; the bark is used for nets and fishing lines.
52. Tarrietia argyrodendron, Benth (Silver Tree.) —Diameter, 18 to
30 inches; height, 40 to 60 feet. A large tree growing in great quantities
in the scrubs bordering the banks of the river Brisbane; the timber is
not much used.
53. Tarrietia, Sp., F. M.—Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, 60 to
70 feet. Plentiful in the coast scrubs ; timber is tough and close-
grained, but seldom used.
54. Commersonia echinata, Frost.—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. A tall shrub or small tree, of general occurrence on the
banks of rivers; the aboriginals use the fibre of the bark for kangaroo
and fishing nets ; timber not used.
LTNEE.
55. JErythroxylon australe, P. M.—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. This shrub or small-sized tree occurs in considerable
abundance in the brigalow scrub near Ipswich; wood hard, fine-grained,
it takes a good polish, can be used for cabinet work.
SAPINDACE.
56. Harpullia pendula, Planch (Tulip-wood).—Diameter, 14 to 24
inches; height, 50 to 60 feet. Found in some abundance on the
alluvial banks of rivers. The timber is close grained, firm, and beauti-
fully marked, and is much esteemed for cabinet work.
57. Cupania xylocarpa, A. Cunn. —Diameter, 12 to 24 inches; height,
40 to 50 feet. Moderate tree in good situations. Timber close grained
and hard, particularly so when dry.
58. Cupania serrata, F.M.—Diameter, 8 to 14 inches; height, 20
to 30 feet. Plentiful in the scrubs on the banks of rivers. Timber close
grained.
59. Cupania anacardioides, A. Rich. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches;
height, 30 to 40 feet. Slender tree in considerable abuudunce on the
alluvial banks of rivers. Timber seldom used.
60, Cupaniapseudorhus, A. Rich.—Diameter, 14 to 20 inches ; height,
30 to 50 feet. Tree of moderate size; growing in great abundance in
the scrubs bordering the coast. Timber fine grained and beautiful.
61. Cupania semiglauca, F.M. —Diameter, 10 to 18 inches; height,
30 to 60 feet. Middle-sized tree, wood soft, and as yet of no recognised
value.
62. Diploglottis Cunninghamii, Hook (Native Tamarind). —Diameter,
12 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 55 feet. Timber seldom used, though
compact and durable.
63. Satonia pyriformis , Benth.—Diameter, 10 to 18 inches ; height,
30 to 45 feet. Moderate-sized tree ; timber firm and close grained.
64. Nephelium tomentoswm, F.M.—Diameter, 10 to 15 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. Small sized tree. Timber not used.
65. Heterodendron diversifolium, F.M.—Diameter, 4 to 6 inches ;
height, 10 to 15 feet. Common in brigalow scrubs ; wood of a reddish
colour. Its great strength renders it fit for pick handles.
66. Dodonaea triquetra, Audi. (Hop Bush). —Diameter, 3to 4 inches;
height, 10 to 12 feet. Branching shrub ; wood hard, close grained.


67. Atalaya salicifolia , Blume. —Diameter, 14 to 22 inches ; height,
30 to 50 feet. A handsome glabrous, green or somewhat glaucous tree,
occurring in the alluvial scrubs on the coast. Timber close grained,
hard, and takes a good polish.
AN AC AR D 1 ACE
68. Rhus rhodanthema, F. M. (Dark Yellow-wood). —Diameter, 18 to
24 inches ; height, 50 to 70 feet. A picturesque tree, of general occur-
rence in (he scrubs on the banks of rivers; the trunk is of moderate
size, covered with a rough scaly bark ; the branches are small and
numerous, the leaves are pinnate, the (lowers are red. The wood is
soft, fine-grained, and beautifully marked, and is much esteemed for
cabinet work. At the present time the sawyers are receiving 10s. to
12s. ptr hundred feet.
69. Spondias Solandri, Benth.—Diameter, 24 to 36 inches; height,
40 to 60 feet. A moderate-sized tree of rare occurrence in the coast
scrubs. Wood soft when cut, but afterwards becomes hard and tough ;
not as vet used.
akaliace^;.
70. Panax eLegans , F. M. —Diameter, 12 to 16 inches ; height, 30 to
40 feet. A singular, moderate tree, with magnificent, large, simple, or
doubly pinnate leaves, occurring in dense scrubs. Wood light, soft,
and of little durability.
RUBIACEAE.
71. Sarcocephalus cordatus, Miq. (Leichhardt’s Tree). —Diameter,
24 to 30 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet. A handsome and beautiful
moderate-sized tree, found on the alluvial banks of the Don River, Port
Denison, Ac., &c. Its wood is soft, close-grained, and takes a good
polish ; often used for building and other purposes.
72. Ixora Pavetta, Rox.- —Diameter, 2 to 4 inches; height, 8 to 10
feet. A beautiful flowering shrub found in the borders of scrubs; wood
very hard and fine-grained.
73. Hodgkinsonia ovatiftora, F. M.—Diameter, 5 to 10 inches;
height, 12 to 20 feet. Small slender tree; wood close grained.
74. Canthium lucidum, Hook and Arn. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches;
height, 20 to 30 feet. Small tree ; wood hard and close grained, and
takes a good polish.
75. Canthium oleifolium, Hook. —Diameter, 5 to 10 inches ; height,
25 to 30 feet. In brigalow scrubs, near Ipswich; wood hard, close-
grained, and capable of a high polish.
76. Canthium vacciniifolium, F M- —Diameter, 1 to 4 inches j height,
6to 10 feet; wood, close-grained, used for walking sticks.
MYRTACEjE.
77. Eucalyptus pilularis, Sm. (Blackbutt). —Diameter, 48 to 96
inches ; height, 60 to 80 feet. A large tree, with a dark-colored rough
and somewhat furrowed persistent bark, at least on the trunk and on
the main branches, that of the smaller branches smooth and deciduous ;
furnishes excellent timber for house carpentry, or any purpose where
strength and durability are required. Market value, 7s. to Bs. per
hundred feet.
78. Eucalyptus haemastoma, Sm. (Spotted Gum). —Diameter, 24 to
28 inches; height, 60 to 120 feet. A very large tree, with a smooth
deciduous bark, leaving a spotted or ■ variegated trunk ; considered a


first-class timber for shipbuilding, and much used for wheelwrights’
work and other purposes. Market value, from 7s. to Bs. per hundred
feet.
79. Eucalyptus microcorps, F. M. (Peppermint Tree). —Diameter,
18 to 36 inches ; height, 60 to 80 feet. A tall tree, with a persistent
furrowed fibrous bark, occurring in the forest near the Brisbane River;
timber strong and durable, used by wheelwrights for naves, felloes, and
spokes.
80. Eucalyptus hemiphloia, F. M. (Yellow Box). —Diameter, 20 to 40
inches; height, 50 to 60 feet. A moderate-sized tree, producing an
excellent timber, famous for its hardness, toughness, and durability.
Market value, from 7s. to Bs. per hundred feet.
81. Eucalpytus siderophloia, Benth. (Ironbark). Diameter, 20 to
40 inches; height, 70 to 100 feet. A tall tree, with a hard, persistent,
rough and furred bark. Occupant of many ridgy, stony, forest lands in
East and West Moreton and Darling Downs districts. This timber has
the highest reputation for strength and durability, and is used for large
beams in building stores for heavy goods, railway sleepers, and other
purposes where great strength is required. Market value, 7s. to Bs. per
hundred feet.
82. Eucalyptus maculata, Hook. (Spotted Gum). —Diameter, 20 to
36 inches ; height, 60 to 80 feet. A lofty tree, with a smooth bark falling
off in patches so as to give the trunk a spotted appearance. It is a very
valuable timber, highly prized for many purposes on account of its strength
and elasticity, used for buggy shafts, cogs of wheels, &c. In bridge-
building it is used for members under tension, and is found to have the
highest constant strength of any of the Queensland timbers. Market
value, 7s to Bs. per hundred feet.
83. Eucalyptus saligna, Sin. (Grey Gum). —Diameter, 24 to 40 in.;
height, 60 to 90 feet. A tall tree with a smooth silver-grey shining
bark, shedding in thick longitudinal strips. Of frequent occurrence on
the forest ridges near the Brisbane River. Useful timber ; in good re-
pute for rails in fencing, as it does not readily take fire, and building
purposes, being both strong and durable. Market value, from 7s. to
Bs. per hundred feet,
84. Eucalyptus resinifera , Sm. (Red Mahogany).—Diameter, 20 to 30
inches; height, 60 to 70 feet. A tall tree, with- a rough persistent
bark on the trunk but more or less deciduous on the branches. The
timber is much prized for its strength and durability, and is used for
piles, as it is said to resist the action of cobra. Market value, from
7s. to Bs. per hundred feet.
85. Eucalyptus corymbosa, Sm. (Bloodwood). —Diameter, 24 to 30 in. ;
height, 50 to 60 feet. A fair-sized tree, with a persistent furred bark ;
timber subject to gum veins, but very durable, principally used for posts,
does not readily take fire or suffer much from white ants. Market value,
from 7s. per hundred feet.
86. Eucalyptus botryoides, Sm. (Blue Gum) —Diameter, 30 to 50 in.;
height, 70 to 100 feet. A lofty spreading tree, with a rough furrow’ed
persistent bark. Of frequent occurrence both upon the coast and in
the interior; a valuable timber, hard, tough, and durable. The only
timber used for felloes of wheels, and one of the finest timbers for ship-
building. Market value, Bs. to 9s. per hundred feet.


87. Eucalyptus tereticornis, Sm. Eed Gum). —Diameter, 18 to 38
inches ; height, 60 to 90 feet. A fair-sized tree ; timber used in fencing,
building, plough-beams, poles and shafts of drays, and also in ship-
building. Market value, from 7s. to Bs. per hundred feet.
88. Eucalyptus Stuartiana, F.M. (Turpentine-tree, or Tee-tee of Fra-
zer’s Island) —Diameter, 24 to 40 inches ; height, 60 to 90 feet. A tree
attaining a considerable elevation ; the bark of the branches smooth and
deciduous, that of tine trunk rough and rigid and somewhat stringy ; of
common occurrence. Its timber is considered excellent for ship planks,
is hard and is said to be exceedingly durable underground, and is difficult
to burn; used for sleepers and many other purposes. Market value,
from Bs. to 9s. per hundred feet.
89. Eucalyptus fibrosa, F.M. (Stringybark). — Diameter, 18 to 36
inches ; height, 40 to 75 feet. Timber much prized for flooring boards,
and of considerable strength and durability. Market value, from 6s. to
7s. per hundred feet.
90. Eucalyptus tesselaris, F.M. (Moreton Bay Ash). —Diameter, 14 to
21 inches; height, 30 to 60 feet. Timber of a brownish colour, not
hard but tough ; highly spoken of for building purposes in the northern
parts of the colony. Market value, from 7s. to Bs. per hundred feet.
91. Eucalyptus melanophloia F.M. (Silver-leaved Ironbark). —Diame-
ter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, .oto 70 feet. Middle-sized tree, with
a blackish, persistent, deeply-furred bark, the foliage more or less
glaucous or mealy white ; timber usedf or railway sleepers, and for
fencing and other purposes. Market value, from Bs. to 10s. per hun-
dred feet.
92. Eucalyptus crehra, F.M. (White narrow-leaved Ironbark). —Diame-
ter, 20 to 36 inches ; height, 70 to 90 feet. A fair-sized tree, with a hard,
blackish, rough persistent bark ; producing an excellent timber —hard,
tough, and durable —valuable for building purposes. Market value, from
Bs. to 9s. per hundred feet.
93. Eucalyptus leptophleha, F.M.—Diameter, 18 to 36 inches; height,
50 to 80 fee't. Moderatersized or large tree; timber hard and durable.
94. Eucalyptus citriodara, Hook (Citron-scented Gum). —Diameter,
18 to 34 inches ; height, 40 to 70 feet. A middle-sized tree with a
smooth bark. The’foliage emitting a strong odour of citron when rubbed.
Timber hard and durable ; used for house carpentry.
95. Eucalyptus acmenioides, Schau.—Diameter, 18 to 30 in.; height,
40 to 60 feet. Of frequent occurrence in the forest on the coast.
Timber heavy, strong, and durable ; has been found good for flooring-
boards and other purposes.
96. Eucalyptus Flanchomana. F.M. Diameter, 18 to 80 inches ;
height, 50 to 80 feet. A tall tree, producing an excellent timber ; valu-
able for wheelwright and other purposes.
97. Eucalyptus Baileyana, F.M.—Diameter, 20 to 30 inches ; height,
40 to 70 feet. A moderate-sized tree, with a furred and fibrous Vandyke
brownish coloured bark. Of the quality of the timber hardly anything is
known.
98. Callistemon lanceolatus, D.C. (Bottle Brush Tree.) Diameter, 12
to 18 inches ; height, 30 to 40 feet. Small tree, growing in or near the
beds of rivers ; wood, hard and heavy ; is used for ship-huilding, wheel-
wrights, and many implements, such as mallets, &c.


99. Callistemon salignus , D.C. (Broad-leaved Tea Tree.) —Diameter,
18 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet. 1 Wood, hard and close-grained ;
very durable underground.
100. Melaleuca genistifolia , Sin.—Diameter, 20 to 24 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. Moderate-sized tree, wood close-grained, hard, and durable.
101. Melaleuca leucadendron, Linn. (White Tea Tree.) —Diameter,
24 to 40 inches; height, 40 to 80 feet. Moderate-sized tree, timber
hard and close-grained, excellent for posts in damp ground and piles for
wharves, and is said to be imperishable underground.
102. Melaleuca styphelioides, Sm. (Prickly-leaved Tea Tree.) —Diame-
ter, 4to 10 inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Small-sized tree, timber
hard, close-grained ; stands well in damp situations. It has been said
that this timber has never been known to decay.
103. Melaleuca linariifolia, Sm.—Diameter, 10 to 14 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. Small-sized tree ; timber hard, close, and durable.
104. Melaleuca nodosa. (Tea Tree.) —Diameter, 10 to 20 inches;
height, 30 to 40 feet. Small tree, qualities same as 102 and 103.
105. Tristania coiiferta, R.Br. (Box.) —Diameter, 35 to 50 inches ;
height, 80 to 100 feet. A large spreading tree, with a smooth brown de-
ciduous bark, and dense foliage; very generally distributed on open
forest ground. The timber is much prized for its strength and durable
qualities. Market value, from Bs. to 9s. per hundred feet. Used in ship-
building ; ribs of vessels from this tree have lasted unimpaired thirty
years and more.
106. Tristania neriifolia, R.Br.—A small but handsome tree, found
along the banks of fresh water streams timber very close and elastic ;
used for carpenters’ mallets and cogs of wheels in machinery.
107. Backhousia myrtifolia, Hook and Harv.—Diameter, 12 to 18
inches ; height, 20 to 40 feet; small tree; timber, close-grained, and
prettily'’marked.
108. Backhousia citriodora, F.M —.Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Small-sized tree, wood hard and fine-grained; useful for
several purposes. *
109. Myrlus acmenioides, F.M. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches; height,
30 to 40 feet. Small tree, frequent in the scrubs ; timber, close-grained ;
not much used.
110. Myrtns Hillii, Benth. (Scrub Ironwood.) —Diameter, 6to 12
inches ; height, 20 to 40 feet. Small-sized tree ; wood remarkably hard.
111. Rhodamnia trinervia, Blum.—Diameter, 10 to 18 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Small tree ; wood, close-grained and firm.
112. Rhodomyrtus psidioides, Benth. Diameter, 12 to 20 inches;
height, 30 to 40 feet. Frequent in the scrubs ; wood, close-grained; not
much known.
113. Rhodamnia argentea, Benth. —Diameter, 15 to 22 inches ; height,
40 to 60 feet. Found in great abundance in moist low scrubs ; wood
tough and firm.
114. Myrtus Bidwillii, Benth.—Diameter, 6 to 10 inches; height,
15 to 20 feet. Timber, close-grained ; not much known.
115. Eugenia Ventenatii, Benth. —Diameter, 18 to 20 inches ; height,
40 to 60 feet. Of frequent occurrence in moist scrubs ; wood close-
grained, and of a pinkish hue.


116. Eugenia Smithii, Poir. (Lilly Billies.)- —Diameter, 12 to 18
inches; height, 30 to 40 feet; wood close, but apt to split in seasoning.
117. Eugenia grandis, Wight.—Diameter, 20 to .36 inches ; height,
40 to 70 feet. A large and handsome tree ; timber* close-grained; not
much known.
118. Eugenia *ngophoroides, F.M.—Diameter, 12 to 18 in.; height,
30 to 40 feet. Small-sized tree ; timber but little known.
119. Syncarpia laur'Jolia , Ten. (Turpentine or Pearbbie of Frazer’s
Island.) —Diameter, 48 to 96 inches ; height, 70 to 100 feet. A mag-
nificent tree, with a rough persistent bark on the trunk, but more or
less deciduous on the branches. Timber valuable for piles and posts
for timber fences; very durable underground, and said to resist the tesido
navalis in salt water. Market value, 7s. to Bs. per hundred feet.
120. Lysicarpus ternifolius, F.M.—Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height,
40 to 50 feet. A middle-sized tree, with a soft thick fibrous bark.
Timber is hard, heavy, and elastic, prettily marked ; used for cabinet
work, but more particularly for piles, bridges, railway sleepers, &c.
PROTEACEdH.
121. Grevillea rolusta, R. Br. (Silky Oak).—Diameter, 30 to 40
inches ; height, 80 to 100 feet. A lofty tree, of frequent occurrence in
the scrubs along the coast, and for a considerable distance in the in-
terior. The wood is extensively used for staves for tallow casks and is
in much repute for cabinet work. At the present the sawyers are
receiving at the rate of Bs. to 9s. per hundred feet.
122. Grevillea Hilliana , F. M.—Diameter, 10 to 18 inches; height,
40 to 60 feet. A beautiful tree, found in dense scrubs on the banks of
the Logan and Albert Rivers Wood easily wrought; not used.
123. Grevillea gibbosa, R. Br.—Diam 8 to 12 inches; height, 20
to 30 feet. A small tree, occurring in l '*- forest ground on the bank of
the Don River. Wood fine-grained and nicely marked.
124. Grevillea polystachya, R.Br.—Diameter, 12 to 18 indies ; height,
30 to 45 feet. A handsome tree; timber strong, durable, prettily
marked ; used for cabinet work, &c.
125. Macadamia ter nifolia, F. M. (Queensland Nut). —Diameter,
3to 12 inches ; height, 30 to 50 feet. A small-sized tree with a
very dense foliage. Found in dense, moist scrubs on the banks of
rivers; wood firm, fine-grained, and takes a good polish. This tree
bears an edible nut of excellent flavor, which is relished by the white
colonists as well as by the aborigines. It forms a nutritious article of
food to the latter, and, in consequence, the same restriction with regard
to this tree, as in the case of Araucaria Bidwillii (Bunya Bunya),
is made in the licenses issued for cutting timber.
126. Stenocarpus sinuatus, Endl. (Tulip Tree). —Diameter, 18 to 30
inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet. A charming, moderate-sized tree, with
dense, bright, glossy foliage. It occurs often in scrubs, some distance
from the coast. The wood is nicely marked, and would admit of a
good polish.
127. Stenocarpus salignus, R. Br. (Beefwood). —Diameter, 18 to 24
inches ; height, 30 to 50 feet. A middle-sized beautiful tree. Timber is
red-colored, close in the grain, hard, and splits easily; valuable for the
finer kinds of cooper’s work.


128. Orites excelsa, R. Br.—Diameter, 6 to 14 inches ; height, 30 to
40 feet. Of frequent occurrence in the scrubs bordering the coast.
Timber hard, nicely marked, and takes a good polish.
129. Banksia integrifolia, Linn. (Beefwood).—Diameter, 8 to 12
inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Occurring on sandy ridges near the coast
and for a considerable distance inland.
129 a. Banksia aemula, R. Br. Diameter, 9to 15 inches; height, 20
to 30 feet. Small-sized tree, found on sandy ridges on the coast; wood
prettily marked.
130. Xylomelum pyriforme , Knight. (Native Pear). —Diameter, 3 to
6 inches ; height, 12 to 18 feet. Small-sized tree, occurring on sandy
ridges; wood nicely marked.
RIIIZOPHOREiE.
131. Bruguiera Rheedii , Blume. (Mangrove).—Diameter, 6 to 12
inches ; height, 12 to 20 feet. Small tree; timber handsome; bark is
astringent and used for tanning purposes.
SANTALACEiE.
132. Exocarpus latifolia, Br. (Broad leaved Cherry-tree).—Diameter,
6to 9 inches; height, 15 to 25 feet. Small tree, of frequent occurrence
in scrubs on the coast; the timber is very hard and fragrant; excellent
for cabinet-work.
133. Exocarpus cupressiformis, Labill. (Cherry-tree).—Diameter, 4 to
Binches; height 10 to 16 feet. Small tree, found sparingly on open
forest ground. The wood is close-grained and handsome.
134. Santalum Icmceolatum, R.Br. (Sandal Wood). —Diameter, 3 to 6
inches ; height, 15 to 25 feet, A small tree sparingly distributed through
the brigalow scrubs. The wood is close-grained, and takes a good polish.
MYOPORINE2E.
135. Eremophila Mitchelli, Benth. (Bastard Sandalwood). —Diameter,
6to 12 inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Small ti’ee, of frequent occurrence
in open forest land in the Darling Downs District. Timber very hard,
beautifully grained, and very fragrant; makes handsome veneers for
cabinet-work.
136. Myoporum acuminatum , (Var parviflorum), R. Br. —Diameter,
4to 9 inches ; height, 12 to 15 feet. Timber soft and light.
137. Myoporum platycarpum, R.Br.—Diameter, 12 to 15 inches;
height, 15 to 25 feet. A small tree, wood close-grained, not used.
VERBENACE2E.
138. Ameennia officinalis, Linn. (Mangrove).—Diameter, 19 to 24
inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Round on salt water estuaries; timber
used for knees of boats, stonemasons’ mallets, etc.,
139. Omelina Leickhardtii, E.M. (Beech). —Diameter, 24 to 42 inches ;
height, 80 to 120 feet. Found in the scrubs bordering the rivers on the
oa-4. A very useful timber, strong and durable, and easily worked ; it
do js not expand by damp or contract by dry weather; much prized for
th * decks of vessels and the flooring of verandahs.
140. Vitex lignum-vitae , A. Cunn. (Lignum Vitae). —Diameter, 20 to
24 inches ; height, 50 to 70 feet. A tree of general occurrence in the
moist low scrubs bordering the coast. The timber is hard, close-grained,
nd of a blackish color, used by cabinet-makers, &c.


MONIMIACEJS.
141. Eaphnandra micrantha, Benth.—Diameter, 18 to 80 inches ;
height, 60 to 80 feet. Moderate-sized tree, occasionally found in low
moist scrubs. Timber quite yellow when fresh, takes a fine polish, and
is easily worked.
LAURINEiE.
142. Endiandra puhens, Meissn. —Diameter, 19 to 24 inches ; height,
40 to 70 feet. Moderate-sized tree, of general occurrence in the scrubs
on the banks of the Brisbane and Albert Rivers. Timber not as yet
used.
143. Tetranthera ferruginea , R. B. —Diameter, 14 to 20 inches;
height, 30 to 40 feet. Wood close-grained, not used.
144. Cryptocarya patentinervis , F. M.—Diameter, 12 to 20 inches ;
height, 30 to 40 feet. A small-sized tree ; timber of apparent value,
but not used for any purpose.
TILEACEiE,
145. Elaeocarpus oiovafus, G-. Don.—Diameter, 12 to 20 inches ;
height, 30 to 40 feet. A tree common in the scrubs on the banks of the
Brisbane River ; wood fine-grained, not yet used.
146. Elaeocarpus grandis, P. M. (Callhun). —Diameter, 24 to 36
inches; height,Bo to 90 feet. This tree is frequent in the moist low
scrubs along the coast, the trunk is erect, the bark smooth, the branches,
with their thin, bright-green, glossy foliage, are thinly scattered over its
lofty head ; the wood is soft and easily worked, it is likely to be service-
able for breaks for railway carriages.
CORNACLE.
147. Marlea vitiensis , Benth. (Musk Tree). —Diameter 6to 12
inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. A small-sized tree, generally with a gouty
trunk ; bark dark-coloured, rough and scaly ; wood bright-yellow, with
a fine undulating appearance, black at the centre ; found in moist low
scrubs.
JASMINES.
148. Olea paniculata, R. Br. (Native Olive). —Diameter, 18 to 24
inches ; height, 50 to 70 feet. A moderate-sized tree, of frequent occur-
rence in the scrubs both on the coast and also in the interior; timber
close-grained, hard, and durable.
149. Notelaea ovata , R. Br. (Dunga Vunga.) —Diameter, 6to 12
inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. A slender tree, found in scrubs ; wood
close-grained.
150. Notelaea longifolia, A^ent. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. A small tree ; timber hard, close-grained.
151. Notelaea microcarpa, R. B.—Diameter, 9 to 12 inches; height,
30 to 45 feet. A tree of frequent occurrence on the border of scrubs on
the coast; wood hard and close-grained.
EUPHORBIACEiE.
152. Mallotus claoxyloides, Muell. —Diameter, 9 to 16 inches ; height,
15 to 30 feet. Occurring both in moist low scrubs and in dry rocky
places. Timber white, hard, and close-grained.
153. Mallotus philippinensis, Muell.—Diameter, 6 to 14 inches;
height, 30 to 45 feet. Small tree, generally found in rich scrubs. Wood
close-grained and very tough.


154. Mallotus nesopbilus, F. M.—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches; height,
35 to 45 feet. Of frequent occurrence in low and moist scrubs on the
coast. Wood of a uniform white color, soft and easily worked.
155. Petalostigma quadriloculare, F. M. (Crab-tree). —Diameter,
12 to 18 inches; height, 40 to 50 feet. Found in great abundance
growing on poor sandy soil in the open forest. The timber is hard and
fine-grained, and promises to be useful to the cabinet-makers.
-* 156. Fxeaecaria agallocha, Linn. (River Poisonous tree). —Diameter,
6to 18 inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Found on the estuaries of salt-
water creeks and rivers. Produces by incision in the bark an acrid, milky
juice, which is so volatile that nobody, however careful, can gather a
quarter of a pint without being affected. The symptoms are an acrid
burning sensation in the throat, sore eyes and head-ache ; a single drop
falling into the eyes it is believed will cause loss of sight. The natives
of Eastern Australia, as well as those of New Guinea, Fiji, &c., use this
poisonous juice to cure certain ulcerous chronic diseases (Murrell’s
testimony). Wood fight, white, and soft; will answer for carving and
marqueterie.
157. Briedelia exaltata, F. M. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches; height,
30 to 45 feet. Not unfrequent in moist low scrubs on the coast.
Timber hard and close-grained.
158. Dissiliaria baloghioides, F. M. (Teak). —Diameter, 18 to 30
inches; height, 40 to 60 feet. Moderate-sized tree, found in great
abundance in the coast scrubs. Timber hard, close-grained, and durable.
159. Mallotus discolor, J. Mull.—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches ; height,
35 to 45 feet. Of frequent occurrence in low moist scrubs along the
coast. Wood of a uniform white color, soft, and easily worked.
160. Croton Verreauxii, Baill. (Cascarilla). —Diameter, Bto 12 inches;
height, 30 to 40 feet. A small-sized tree, bark gray and rough, with a
red sap. Wood of a yellowish-white color ; wood soft, and of no value;
the bark contains an agreeable bitter.
161. Baloghia lucida, Endl. (Scrub Bloodwood). —Diameter, 8 to 16
inches ; height, 30 to 40 feet. A small-sized tree, abundant in the coast
scrubs ; timber not used.
URTICEiE.
162. Celtis ingens, F.M. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height, 25 to 35
feet, A small tree of frequent occurrence in the coast scrubs. Wood
white, soft, and pliable ; used for hoops for casks.
163. Aphananthe philippinensis, Plan. —Diameter, 4 to 12 inches;
height, 20 to 40 feet. This species abounds in moist scrubs. Timber
not used.
164. Faporteaphotiniphylla, Widd. (Nettle-tree). —Diameter, 15 to
24 inches; height, 30 to 50 feet. A beautiful tree ; wood soft, spongy ;
the bark is used for making fishing nets. *
165. Ficus asper, Frost (Rough-leaved Fig).— Diameter, 9 to 18
inches ;height, 30 to 45 feet. Timber of no apparent value.
166. Morus calcargalli, Gunn. (Cockspur Thorn). — A rambling thorny
climber; Duramen or Heartwood. Dark-yellow color, hard, and used
in dyeing yellow and brown.
SAPOTACEiE.
167. ILormogyne cotinifolia, D.C.—Diameter, 6 to 9 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Small tree, wood close grained.


168. Chrysophyllum pruniferum, F.M.—Diameter, 12 or 20 inches ;
height, 30 to 70 feet. Moderate-sized tree, sparingly distributed over
moist low scrubs. Wood of a uniform pale yellow color, close-grained.
169. Achras Pohlmanniana, F.M.—Diameter, 8 to 18 inches ; height,
20 to 60 feet. Small tree, frequent in moist scrubs. Timber hard and
close-grained
170. Achras myrsinoides , A. Cunn.—Diameter, 8 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 35 feet. Small tree, frequent in low moist scrubs. Timber hard
and close-grained.
171. Achras olovata, F.M.—Diameter, 8 to 12 inches; height, 20 to
35 feet. Small tree, frequent in low moist scrubs. Timber hard and
close-grained.
EBENACEiE.
172. Cargillia australis, R.Bv. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches; height, 30
to 40 feet. Timber very tough and firm, and likely to be used for many
purposes.
173. Mala fasciculosa, F.M.—Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, 60
to 80 feet. Of common occurrence in the scrubs bordering on river
banks. Wood tolerably close-grained.
174. Mala geminata, R. Br.—Diameter, 9 to 12 inches; height, 50
to 60 feet. Slender tree, found growing in scrubs. Wood soft and
tough.
175. Diospyros hehecarpa, A. Cunn.—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches;
height, 30 to 50 feet. Handsome tree, occurring in moist scrubs on the
coast. Timber soft, elastic ; used for pick handles, &c., &c.
SAXIFRAGES.
176. Ceratopetalum apetalum, Don. (Coach-wood.) —Diameter, 24 to 36
inches; height, 70 to 90 feet. A beautiful tree, with long cylindrical
stem. Wood soft, light, tough, and close-grained, of agreeable fragrance ;
good for joiners and cabinet work ; often in request for coach building.
APOCYXEiE.
177. Alstonia constricta, F.M. (Fever-bark.) —Diameter, 6 to 20
inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet. This tree is of frequent occurrence in
low moist scrubs, as well as in the dry brigalow scrubs. Bark thick
yellow, deeply fissurated, of intense bitterness. It is said that this bark
possesses the same properties as quinine.
LEGUMIXOSAS.
178. Acacia falcata, Willd.—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height, 20 to
30 feet. Small tree ; wood hard, and much prized for making stockwhip
handles.
179. Acacia glaucescens, Willd. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches; height,
30 to 45 feet. Of frequent occurrence both in the scrubs and in open
forest lands, wood close-grained, and prettily marked.
180. Acacia Cunninghami, Hook.—Diameter, 9 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Small-sized tree, wood close-grained, and takes a good
polish ; found on the banks of the Brisbane.
181. Acacia salicina, Lindl. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height, 30 to
40 feet. Found on scrubuy land in the Darling Downs district; timber
close-grained, and nicely marked.
182. Acacia implexa, Benth.—Diameter, 12 to 16 inches ; height, 30
to 40 feet. Small tree found on open forest ground ; wood hard, and
close-grained.


183. Acacia harpophylla, F. M. —Diameter, 12 to 20 inches ; height,
40 to 70 feet. A tall erect tree of general occurrence in the Rosewood
scrubs ; timber hard, heavy, and elastic, of a dark color, giving a strong
odour of violets.
184. Acacia excelsa, Benth. (Brigalow).—Diameter, 20 to 30 inches ;
height, 50 to 80 feet. This species covers immense tracks of rich scrub
land ; wood hard, close-grained, of a dark color, used for building
purposes, fencing, &c.
185. Acacia doratoxylon, A.Cunn. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 35 feet. In scrubs and open forest ground, wood hard, and close-
grained.
186 Acacia deevrrens (var. mollis.), Lindl.—Diameter, 6to 10 inches ;
height, 30 to 40 feet. This species is of very frequent occurrence
through the Darling Downs.
187. Acacia pendula, A. Gunn. (Weeping Myall).—Diameter, 6 to
12 inches ; height, 20 to 35 feet. Small weeping tree, well known for
its violet-scented wood, which is hard, close-grained, and beautifully
marked ; used by cabinet-makers and turners; in high repute for
tobacco pipes.
188 Acacia stenophylla , A. Gunn (Tronwood). —Diameter, 15 to 24
inches; height, 40 to 6 ) feet. On open forest ground on the Darling
Downs. Timber is very hard, heavy, close-grained, dark, beautifully
marked, and takes a fine polish.
189. Acacia neriijolia , A.Cunn. —Diameter, 6 to 18 inches; height,
40 to 50 feet. Found on the Albert River ; the trunk is beautifully
streaked with green and white. The duramen is of a light-yellow color,
not unlike yellow-wood, but somewhat harder.
190. Acacia penninervis. Sieb.—Diameter, 2 to 10 inches ; height, 6
to 12 feet. Scattered through open stony ridges.
191. Acacia macradenia. Benth. (Myall or Toney).—Diameter, 2to
12 inches ; height, 30 to 50 feet. In scrubs and open forests ; beautiful
black hard, and close-grained wood, taking a very high polish.
192. Acacia farnesiana , Willd. (D£ad Finish). —Diameter, 3 to 6
inches ; height, 12 to 18 feet. Wood ciose, heavy, taking a good polish.
193. Acacia culltnformis, A. Gunn. —Diameter, 2 to 3 inches ; height,
12 to 18 feet. Wood soft, nicely marked.
194. Acacia linifolia , Willd.—Diameter, 4 to 6 inches ; height, 12 to
18 feet. In more or less open forests; wood soft and elastic, suitable for
axe handles.
195. Acacia fasciculifera, F. M,—Diameter, 6 to 15 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Timber very hard, heavy, tough, and close-grained.
196. Acacia Gnidium, Benth.-—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height, 12 to
25 feet. Wood close-grained, black, hard, and takes a good polish.
197. Albizzia canesceus , Benth.—Diameter, 15 to 20 inches ; height,
30 to 50 feet. A beautiful spreading tree, found in open forests ; wood
close grained and tough.
198. Albizzia pracera , Benth.—Diameter, 18 to 24 inches; height,
30 to 60 feet. A very ornamental tree; timber is close-grained, easily
worked, and in use for building purposes.
199. Albizzia Thozetiana , F. M.—Diameter, 12 to 30 inches; height,
40 to 60 feet. A tree of common occurrence in stony scrubs in the


Kennedy District. Timber very hard, heavy, tough, and close-grained.
May prove useful for gun stocks, &c., &c.
200. Peltophorum ferruigineum, Benth. —Diameter, 24 to 30 inches ;
height, 40 to 80 feet. A large and handsome tree, in the open forest
ground on the banks of Muckay ; the timber is much in request for
cabinet-work, &c., &c.
2UI. Erythrina vespertilio, Benth. (Coral Tree). Diameter, 12 to 15
inches; height, 30 to 40 feet. Bather frequent both on the coast and
in the interior ; a beautiful tree when in flower ; wood soft, and is used
by the aborigines for making their shields.
202. Casianospernum australe, A. Gunn. (Moreton Bay Chestnut.)
Diameter, 24 to 36 inches ; height, 80 to 90 feet. A magnificent orna-
mental tree, with large pinnate, green glossy leaves ; of frequent
occurrence on the banks of rivers, etc. The timber is dark and prettily
grained, not unlike walnut; occasionally used for cabinet work, for
which purpose it seems to be well suited.
203. Barkleya syringifolia, F.M.—Diameter, 12 to 18 feet; height,
40 to 60 teet. A handsome and beautiful tree, with dense bright-green
glossy foliage ; on fertile banks and flats of rivers ; also on basaltic ridges.
204. Cassia Brewsteri, F.M. —Diameter, 3 to 6 inches ; height, 30 to
50 feet. A small tree, of frequent occurrence in the Brigalow scrubs ;
wood fine-grained.
205. Galactia tenuijlora , Willd. —Diameter, 3to 9 inches; height, 200
to 300 feet. An immense woody climber, outgrowing the tallest trees
in the moist scrubs; the trunk is often found coiled on the ground like a
huge serpent; the wood is dark-brown, soft, spongy, and pervaded with
numerous capillary tubes ; apparently of little durability.
ROSACEiE.
206. Pdrinarium nonda, F. M. (The Nonda tree of North-east
Australia), Diameter, 18 to 24 inches; height, 50 to 60 feet- Avery
ornamental spreading tree, with pendant foliage. The aborigines use the
esculent drupes as food. Timber is soft, close-grained, and easily worked.
COMBRETACAS.
207. Terminalia discolor, F. M.—Diameter, 3 to 6 inches ; height, 10
to 15 feet Very plentiful in the scrubs near Rockhampton ; wood
close-grained and tough.
208. Terminalia melanocarpa, F. M —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches;
hei, lit, 15 to 25 feet. Occurring in the forest land near Port Denison ;
timber hard and tough, splitting freely.
MALVACEAE.
209. Lagunaria Patersoni, Don. —Diameter, 18 to 30 inches ; height,
40 to 60 feet. Found .on the alluvial river banks of the Don River,
Port Denison; timber white, close-grained, easily worked, and used for
building purposes.
TILIACEiE.
210. Greiuia latifolia, F. Br.—Diameter, 6 to 8 inches ; height, 10 to
20 feet. Wood hard, close-grained, and takes a good polish.
EPACRIDE^E.
211. Trochocarpa laurina, F.M. —Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Very plentiful in the cedar scrubs ; also upon the sandy
ridges upon Frazer’s and other islands. Wood hard, close-grained,
tough ; useful for turning, &c.


212. Leucopogon lanceolatus , R. Br.—Diameter, 3 to 6 inches ; height,
12 to 15 feet. Very abundant on Stradbroke and Frazer’s Islands;
wood hard, close-grained, and beautifully marked. ,
URTICEjE.
213. Ficus, Sp. (Poison Tree.) —Diameter, 12 to 14 inches ; height,
40 to 50 feet. A slender-spreading tree, frequently met with in
Brigalow scrubs; the wood is soft, fine-grained, and elastic; the juice of
it is pure-white and nauseous; a single drop falling into the eye will
injure the sight.
214. Ficus vesca, F.M. (Clustered Fig Tree.) —Diameter, 18 to 48
inches; height, 50 to 80 feet. Found on the alluvial banks of rivers and
creeks. The fruit, which is of a light red colour when ripe, hangs in
clusters along the trunk and on some of the largest branches, and is used
by the aborigines.
215. Ficus macrophylla, Desf. (Moreton Bay Fig).—Diameter, 36
to 76 inches ; height, 50 to 100 feet. A large and magnificent wide-
spreading tree; yielding its milk-sap copiously for caoutchouc.
PALMJB.
216. Livistona australis, Mart. (Cabbage-tree).—Diameter, 12 to 18
inches ; height, 40 to 80 feet. The lofty stem is covered with leaves in a
pense mass, orbicular in circumscription when fully out, 3 to 4 feet dia-
meter. The young leaves can be plaited as a material for hats.
217. Livistona inermis, R. Br. (Partridge Wood). —Diameter, 12 to
15 inches ; height, 14 to 40 feet. A beautiful and handsome tree ; the
outer portion of its trunk is very hard, beautifully marked, and takes a
good polish.
218. Ptychospcrma elegans, Blume. (Banualowjv—Diameter, 6to 12
inches ; height, 60 to 80 feet. A lofty magnificent feathery-leaved palm
tree ; its wood is used for rails for fences. It is destined to take here a
prominent position in decorative plantations.
PANDANEiE.
219. Pandanus pedunculatus, R.Br. (Screw Pine). —Diameter, 6 to
12 inches ; height, 18 to 30 feet. This singular and stately plant for
scenic group planting occurs in great abundance on the coast lands. The
fruit is eagerly used by the aborigines.
FILICES OR FERNS.
220. Alsophila australis, R. Br. (Tree Pern). — Diameter, 3 to
9 inches ; height, 20 to 50 feet. This beautiful tree is frequent in
shaded ravines and permanently damp woods under Mount Lindsay ;
wood prettily marked.
MYRTACE./E.
221. Leptospermum Jlavescens, Sm.—Diameter, 8 to 5 inches ; height,
15 to 20 feet. Frequent about freshwater creeks ; wood hard and close-
grained.
222. Eucalyptus platyphylla, F.M. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches;
height, 40 to 50 feet. A handsome tree, with a light green foliage and
smooth white deciduous bark. The timber is dark, close-grained; excel-
lent to put in damp places.
223. Owenia acidula, F.M. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches ; height, 30
to 50 feet. A handsome small tree, occurring in the brigalow scrubs
near Ipswich ; wood close-grained, and nicely marked.


224. Acacia Bidwilli, Benth.—Diameter, 10 to 16 inches : height,
20 to 30 feet. A small-sized tree; timber hard, close-grained, and
takes a good polish.
225. Ixora trijlora, R.Br.—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches; height, 20
to 30 feet. Small tree ; wood hard, close-grained, and capable of a high
polish.
226. Hibiscus tiliaceus, Linn. —Diameter, 6 to 8 inches ; height, 20
to 50 feet. Of frequent occurrence on the coast; wood soft; the bark
is used for nets and fishing lines by the aborigines.
227. Cadellia pentasiylis, F.M.—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
30 to 50 feet. Wood hard, close-grained, and used for mauls.
228. Careya arborea, Box. —Diameter, 12 to 20 inches; height, 30
to 50 feet. A very beautiful tree, occurring on the banks of rivers of the
northern coast. Wood fine-grained, and nicely marked.
229. Cryptooarya obovafa, R.Br.—Diameter, 12 to 20 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. Found in moist and sandy scrubs on the coast; wood
soft and lough.
230. Fusanus acuminatus, R.Br. (Quandong)—Diameter, 10 to
14 inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Timber seldom used.
231. Evemophila bignoniaefolia , F.M. —Diameter, 6 to 9 inches ;
height, 20 to 30 feet. A small tree, sparingly distributed through the
brigalow scrubs. The wood is white, close-grained, and takes a good
polish.
232. Eucalyptus rosfrata, Sch. (Flooded gnm.)—Diameter, 40 to 48
inches ; height, 80 to 100 feet. A majestic tree, inhabiting the rich
alluvial flats upon the banks of the rivers, and in such localities has a
pillar-like trunk clear of branches for three-fourths of its entire height.
The timber is of high repute for strength and durability. The
market value at the present time is from Bs. to 9s.
SCANTLINGS,
3 feet long and 3 to 1 inches thick.
233. A.lpitonia excelsa. (Mountain or red ash.)
234. Melaleuca leucadendron. (White tea tree.)
235. Sarcocephalus cordatus. (Leichhardt tree.)
236. Melia composiia. (White cedar.)
237. Grevillea striata. (Silky oak )
238. Araucaria Cunninghamii. (Moreton Bay pine.)
239. Frenela Endlicheri. (Cypress pine.)
240. Oioenia venosa. (Sour plum.)
241. Otvenia cerasifera. (Rose apple.)
242. Eucalyptus corymhosa. (Bloodvvood.)
243. Eucalyptus melanophloia. (Silver-leaved ironbark.)
244. Eucalyptus siderophloia. (Ironbark.)
245. Eucalyptus eitriadora. (Citron-scented gum.)
246. Eucalyptus tereticornis. (Red gum.)
247. Eucalyptus botryoides. (Blue gum.)
248. Eucalyptus rostrata. (Flooded gum.)
249. Flindersia australis. (Flindoste.)
250. Flinaersia Oxleyana. (Light yellow wood.)
251. Harpullia pendula. (Tulip wood.)
252. Podocarpus elata. (She-pine.)
253. Cedrela toona. (Red cedar,)


254. Grevillea robusta. (Silky Oak.)
255. Omelina Leichhardti. (Beech.)
256. Dammar a robusta. (Kauri or Dundathu pine.)
WALKING STICKS.
(Prepared by W. S. Mackay, Albert-street, Brisbane.)
257. Ptychosperma Alexandrae, F.M. (The Alexandra palm.) —
Diameter, 6to 9 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet. An extremely hand-
some feathery-leaved palm tree Its wood is very beautifully marked,
and is in much favour for walking sticks.
258. Kentia Minor, F.M. (Slender walking stick palm.)—Diameter,
itoi an inch ; height, 4to 6 feet. This species of palm forms elegant
tufts, crowned with twelve to six teen leaves or fronds. The stems
are in great repute for walking sticks.
259. Kentia monostachya, F.M. (Walking stick palm.) —Diameter,
Ito 1£ inch ; height, 6to 12 feet. The stems have been exported
to England for umbrella handles and walking sticks.
260. Flagellaria indica, Linn—A tall glabrous climber, ascending to
the tops of large trees ; occurring in great abundance in the moist
scrubs extending from the southern borders of Queensland to Cape York.
409 GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND. ORNAMENTAL
STAND with turned and polished Cups and Drops,
illustrating 133 varieties of timber, indigenous to the
Colony. The lower part of the stand and pillar are of
turned beech {Gmelina Leichhardti). The .upper por-
tion and pillar turned from red cedar ( Cedrela
toona, Rox.) The upper shelf of Cypress pine,
{Frenela Endlicheri, Parlat), and the urn of dark yellow
wood (Rhus rhodanthema). The turnery by D. Hen drey,
in the employ of Hon. W Pettigrew :
Cup No. 1 Acacia farnesiana, Willd. (Dead Finish). 2 San-
talum lanceolatum, R. Br. (white sandal wood). 3
Syncarpia laurifolia, Ten. (Turpentine tree, or Pcarbbie,
of Frazer’s Island). 4 Tristiana conferta (brown box).
5 Grevillea polystachya. 6 Ficus, Sp. (poison tree).
7 Eucalyptus saligna, Sm. (Grev Gum), 8 Stenocarpus
sinuaftus, R. Br. 9 Eucalyptus resinifera Sm. (Red
Mahogany). 10 Citrus australis, Planch. (Native
Orange). 11 Dissilaria baloghoidesor caaworibra
(Teak), 12 Eucalyptus corymbosa, Sm, (Bloodwood),
13 Canthium lucidum. 14 Eucalyptus pilularis,
Sm. (Blackbutt). 15 Maba fasciculosa, F.M. 16
Acacia salicina. 17 Eucalyptus•crebra, F. M. (narrow-
leaved Iron Bark). 18 Chrysophyllum pruniferium,
F.M. 19 Alstonia constricta, F. M. (Fever Bark). 20
FlindiT da mamulosa, F.M. (Spotted Tree). 21
Eucalyptus botryoides, Sm. (Blue Gum). 22
Eucalyptus Planchomana, F. M. 23 Stenocarpus salig-
nus, R. Br. 24 Tarrietia argyrodendron (Silver Tree).
25 Acacia pendula (Weeping Myall). 26 Teminalia
latifolia. 27 LagunariaPatersoni, Don. (White Hibiscus).
28 Banksia integrifolia (Honeysuckle). 29 Acacia Cun-
ninghamiana, Hook. 30 Sarcocephales cordata, Mig.


(Leichhardt Tree). 31 Acacia fasciculifera, P. M 32
Oanthium lucidum., Hook. 33 Myrtus acraenoides.,
F. M. 34 LeptOspermum flavescens, Sm. 35 Albizzia
canescens , Benth. 36 Owenia venosa, F. M. 37 Acac a
neriifolia, A. Can. 38 Eugenia grands, Wright. 39
Acacia harpophy 11a. F. M. 40 Frenela rhomboidea,
Endi. (Cypress Pine). 41 Achonychia Bauerii, Schott.
42 Acacia glaucesens. A, Cun, 43 Trocharpa laurina,
R Br. 44 Hormogyne cotinifolia, Sm. 45 Exocar-
pus cupressiformes. Lab. (Cherry Tree). 46 Briedelia
exaltata, FM. 47 Pethlophorum ferrugineum, Benth.
48 Endindra puben, Meissn. 49 Casuarina Cunning-
hami (She Oak). 50 Eugenia Yentenatii, Benth. 51
Cryptocarya patentiervis, F. M. 52 Petalostigma quadri-
loculare, F. M. (Crab Tree). 53 Grevillea Hilliana,
F. M. 54 Notelaea microcarpa, R. Br. 55 Daviesa
arborea (Queenwood). 56 Grevvia latifolia, 57
Livistonia australis, R. Br. (Cabbage Tree). 58
Rhodamnia trinervia (Bi) 59 Harpullia pendula,
Planch (Tulip Wood) 60 Cupania serrata, F. M.
61 Callistemon lanceolatws, D.C. (Bottle Brush Tree).
62 Carey a arborea, 63 Geijera Muelleri. 64 Dammara
robusta (Kauri Pine). 65 Leucopogon lanceolata, RBr.
66 Rhus rhodanthema, F. M (Yellow Wood). 67
Dammara robusta, Moore (Kauri Pine) 68 Frenela
Endiichen, Parlot. (Cypress Pine). 69 Myrtus Hillii,
Benth. (Ironwood). 70 Bruginera Rheedii, Blume
(Mangrove). 71 Acacia Gnidium, Benth. 72 Acacia
decurrens. 73 Casuriua torulosa (Forest Oak). 74
Pandanus peduneulatus. R. Br. (Screw pine.) 75
Eucalyptus corymbosa, Sm. (Bloodwood). 76 Glyeos-
mus pentaphylla Corr. 77 Alphitonia excelsa (Moun-
tain Ash). 78 Acacia falcata, Willd. 79 Acacia
glaucescens, Willd. 794 Harpullia pendula, Planch
(Tulip wood.) 80 Exacaria agallocha, Linn. (River
Poison tree). 81 Stenocarpus sinuatus (Tulip tree).
82 Casuarina equesetifolia, Frost. (Swamp oak). 83
Acacia•limtblia, Sm. 84 Acacia harpophylla, F. M. 85
Cappris Mitcheili. 86 Eucalyptus corymbosa (Blood-
wood). 87 Acacia excelsa, 88 Eucalyptus botryoides,
Sm (Blue Gum). 89 Acacia Cunninghami. 90 Acacia
Saliciina, Lindl. 91 Acacia cultriformus. 92 Cupania
serrata, FM. 93 Eucalyptus microcorys, P. M. 94
Eucalyptus saligna (Grey Gum), 95 Owenia cerasifera
(Rose Apple) 96 Eucalyptus terminalis, F.M. 97
Eucalyptus botroides, Sm. (Blue Gum), 98 Xylomenum
pyreforroe, R Br. (Native Pear), 99 Emerophylla
Mitcheili. Benth. (Bastard Sandal Wood), 100 Badksea
serrata (Honeysuckle). 101 Maba germinata, R. Br.
Deop No. 1 Myrtus Bidwilli, Benth. 2 Acacia far-
nesiana, Willd 3 Rhodomyrtus psideoides, Benth. 4
Eucalyptus resinifera. 5 Yitex Liginuu-vitae, A.


Cunn. (Lignum-vitse). 6 Millotus philippensis, F.M.
7 Casuarina equesitifolia, Frost. 8 Cupania serrata, F.M.
9 Petalostigma quadriloculare, F. M. (Crab-tree). 10
Myrtus aomenoides, F. M 11 Flindersia masculosa,
F. M. 12 Eugernia grandis, Wight. 13 Chryso-
phyllura pruniferum, F.M. 14 Myrtus Hilli. Benth,
15 Yitex lignum-vitse, F. M. (Lignum-vitse). 16
Leptospermum flavescens, Bm. 17 Yitex ligunum-vitae,
F. M (Lignum-vitse). 18 Acacia farnesiana, Willd.
19 Grevillea robusta, R. Br. (Silky Oak). 20 Eugenia
Smithi, Poir. 21 Terminalia latifoMa. 22 Rhus
rhodanthema. F. M. (Dark Yellow-wood). 23 Back-
housia citridora, F. M. 24 Rhodauunia trinervia
(Blume) 25 Celtis ingens, F.M. 26 Dissiliaria
baloghioides, F. M. (Teak) 27 Sarcocephalus cordatus,
Miq. (Leichhardt-tree). 28 Callestemon sa'ligna, D. C.
29 Flindersia australis. 30 Acacia farnesiana, Willd.
GOVERNMENT OP QUEENSLAND. ORNAMENTAL
STAND, with 142 Cups turned and polished, illustrating
the varieties of Timber indigenous to the Colony, Base-
ment of Red Cedar (Cedrela toona) with mounting of
Tulip Wood (Harpullia pendula) ; 2nd shelf, Kauri Pine
(Dammara robusta) ; 3rd, Beech (Gmelina Leichhard.ti) ;
4th, Cypress Pine (Frenela En'dlicheri) ; pillars, White
Wood (Ligunaria Patersoni), Tree Fern (Alsophila
australis, R. Br.) ; sur-base, Kauri Pine (Dammara
robusta) ; 2nd shelf, Red Cedar (Cedrela toona) ; 3rd
shelf, Cyress Pine (Frenela Endlidheri) ; 3rd tier,
Caaworibra (Dissilaria baloghoides) , the vase, Acacia
harpophylla (Rose wood). The turnery by W. S. Mackie,
Albert and Elizabeth streets, Brisbane.
1 Dissilaria baloghoides (Caaworibra or Teak).
2 Alstonia constricta F. (Fever bark), 3 cups.
3 Pentacheras Australis, White Cedar of the Colonist.
4 Grevillea polystachya.
5 Casurina equisetifolia (Swamp Oak).
6 Maba geminata (Ebony).
7 Ratonia pyriformis.
8 Pandanus pedunculatus (Screw Pine).
9 Xylomelum pyriforme (Native Pear).
10 Grevillea robusta (Silky Oak).
11 Grevillea Hilliana.
12 Grevillea gibbosa
13 Grevillea striata.
14 Macadamia ternifolia (Queensland Nut).
15 Stenocarpus sinuatus (Tulip tree).
16 Stenocarpus salignus (Beefwood).
L 7 Yitex lignum vitae (lignum-vitae).
18 Acacia glauceeens.
19 Acacia pendula (Weeping Myall).
20 Acacia netrifolia
21 Petalostigma quadriloculare (Crab tree).


22 Lysicarpus ternifolia.
23 Acacia macradenia.
24 Acacia cultriformis.
25 Albizzia Thozetiana.
26 Albizzia procera.
27 Acacia pennirervis.
28 Castanospermum australe.
29 Acacia pendula (Weeping myall).
30 Acacia farnesiana (Dead Finish).
31 Acacia linifolia.
32 Acacia doratoxylon.
33 Acacia excelsa (brigalow).
34 Casuarina equisetifolia (Swamp Oak).
35 Harpullia pendula (Tulipwood),
36 Canthium oleifoliura.
37 Eucalyptus Steuartiana.
38 Exocarpus latifolia (Broadleaved Cherry Tree).
39 Casuarina torulosa (Forest Oak or Beefwood).
40 Eucalyptus pilularis (Blackbutt).
41 Cupania xylocarpa.
42 Alpitonia excelsa (Mountain Ash).
43 Owenia veuosa (Sour Plum).
44 Notelea ovata.
45 Livistonia inermis (Partridge Wood).
46 Sarcocephalus cordatus (Leichhardt tree).
47 Hormogyne cotinifolia.
48- Canthium luaidum.
49 Carya arborea.
50 Flindersia australis (Flindosa).
52 Apophyllum anomalum.
53 Dammara robusta (Kauri Pine).
54 Myrtis Hilli (Iron Wood).
55 Gmelina Leichhardtii (Beech).
56 Cappris nobilis (Native Pomegranate).
57 Frenela Parlatorei (Mountain Cypress).
58 Atalantia glauca (Native Kum-kuat).
59 Eucalyptus creba (White Narrow-leaved Ironbark)
60 Podocarpus elata (She Pine).
61 Cupania Cunninghami (Native Tamarind),
62 Citrus auslralasica (Native lime).
63 Exacaria agallocha (Poison tree).
64 Acacia decurrens.
65 Eucalyptus acmenioides.
66 Flindersia Schottiana.
67 Heterodendron diversifolium.
68 Santalum lanceolatum (White sandal wood).
69 Atalaya salicifolia.
70 Frenela rhomboidea (Cyprus pine )
71 Eucalyptus corymbosa (Blood wood.)
73 Euoalyptue melanophloia (Ironbark, g-rey).
73 Eucalyptus fibrosa (Stringy bark),
74 Tristanea conferta (Box.)


75 Backhousia citriodora.
76 Rhodomyrtus psidoides.
77 Acacia harpophylla.
78 Citrus australis (Native orange).
79 Bosistoa sapindiformis.
80 Araucaria Cunninghamii. (Moreton Bay pine).
81 Dysoxylon rufum.
82 Flindersia Bennettiana (Bogum bogum).
83 Syncarpa laurifolia.
84 Eucalyptus siderophloia (Ironbark).
85 Eucalyptus Planchoniana.
86 Eucalyptus tesselaris.
87 Myrtis trinervia.
88 Orietes excelsa.
89 Callistemon lanceolatus. (Bottle-brush tree).
90 Eucalyptus citriodora (Citron-seented gum),
91 Callistemon salignus.
92 Eremophila Mitchelli (Bastard sandal wood),
93 Backhousia myrtifolia.
94 Eucalyptus maculata (Spotted gum).
95 Meleuca nodosa.
96 Myrtus Bidwilli.
97 Eucalyptus botryoides (Blue gum).
98 Exocarpus cupressiformis (Cherry tree).
99 Rhodomnia argenta.
100 Banksia aemula.
101 Acronychia imperforata.
102 Acronychia Baueri.
103 Rhus rhodanthema (Dark-yellow wood).
104 Spondis Solandri.
105 Eucalyptus leptophleba.
106 Geijera Muelleri.
107 Acronychia laevis.
108 Geijera salicifolia.
109 Evodia micrococca.
110 Casuarina suberosa.
111 Daphnandra micrantha.
112 Parinarium nonda.
113 Termioalia discolor.
114 Grewia latifolia.
115 Trochocarpa laurina.
116 Leucopagon lanceolatus.
117 Peltophorum ferrugineum,
118 Barkleya syringifolia.
119 Briedelia exaltata.
120 Mallotus discolor.
121 Mallotus nesophilus.
122 Diospyrus hebecarpa.
123 Cargillia australis.
124 Nephelium tomentosum.
125 Cupania serrata.
126 Cupania pseudorhus.


127 Erythroxylon australe.
128 Panix elegans.
129 Tarreitia argyrodendron.
130 Denhamia pittosporoides.
131 Eugenia Yentenatii
132 Olea paniculata (native olive).
133 Flindersia Oxleyana.
134 Castanospernum australe.
135 Morns calcar-galli (cockspur thorn),
136 Canthium vacciniifolium
137 Cedrela toona (red cedar).
138 Marlea vitiensis (musk tree).
139 Tristanea neriifolia.
140 Melia composita (white cedar),
141 Daviesa arborea, W. H. (Queen wood.) Diameter 6to 12
inches ; height 15 to 30 feet—a very ornamental spread-
ing, drooping tree, with bright green foliage ; occurring
upon the Darlington ranges. Its wood is hard, close-
grained, with beautiful pink streaked lines, and takes
a beautiful polish. It is destined to take a prominent
position with cabinet-makers, also for decorative plan-
tations.
411 CAREY, J. W., Brisbane. Trophy of Wood Panels, polished,
shpwing varieties of Queensland timbers.
412 M'GHIE, LUYA, & CO., Brisbane. Cross section of Queens-
land Kauri Pine, grown at Noosa ; eut 12 feet from the
ground.
413 ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Collection of Indigenous
Timbers of the Rockhampton district ; 50 varieties,
polished.
414 SPENCE, D., Cairns. Collection of Indigenous Woods.
415 STURGKEBS, HENRY, Rockhampton. Trophy of Turnery
Work, executed to display indigenous timbers.
Class 615. Dyewoods, Barks, and Galls, for Colouring
and Tanning.
416 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. BARKS, Medicinal and
Tanning.
Bark of the Blue Gum {Eucalyptus lotryoides, Sm.). Used
in decoction as a domestic remedy for dysentery.
Bark of the Ironbark {Eucalyptus sideropholia, Benth). Is
in great estimation for its tanning qualities, and can be
obtained in any quantity.
Mangrove Bark {Bruguiera Rheedii, Blume). Used for
tanning purposes, also as an astringent in medicine.
Green Wattle Bark ( Acacia mollissima, Willd.) Used for
tanning purpose*.
Black Wattle Bark ( Acacia decurrens, Willd.) This bark is
much prized for tanning purposes, containing from 18
to 33 per cent, of tannin when dry.


Fever Bark ( Alstonia constricta, F.M.) Used in cases of
fever and ague, having most of the properties of
quinine.
Crab-tree Bark ( Petalostigma quudriloculare, F.M-.).
Possesses a powerful hitter, and qualities somewhat
similar to Peruvian bark.
417 STATGER, K. T., F.L.S. Extract from Bark of a Northern
tree, not named ; for tanning purposes.
Class 616. Gums, Resins, Caoutchouc, Ghitta Percha,
Vegetable Wax.
418 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. GUM RESINS,
Bunya Bunya Gum (. Araucaria Bidwilli' Hook).
Blood wood Gum {Eucalyptus corymbose) . Contains valu-
able tanning properties. With the assistance of this
gum resin, the collection of photographs were taken by
Mr. R. Daintree, illustrative of Queensland.
Cypress Pine Gum ( Frenela Endlickeri, Parlat). The ex-
udation from this tree resembles that of the Sandrac
pine of the Mediterranean.
Catechu. This is obtained from the Eucalyptus fibrosa,
F.M. It is a powerful astringent, and is supposed to he
very efficacious in cases of diarrhoea.
Grass-trec"*Gurn ( XantJiorrbaea arhorea, R. Br.) Similar
if not identical with Benzoin. A spirituous varnish
can he manufactured from it, and it has also been used
as a dye for calico, and in the manufacture of sealing
wax.
Bottle-tree Gum ( Sterculia rupestris, Benth). Exudes
freely from the tree, and somewhat re*semhles Traga-
canth.
419 WICKHAM & HAMMICK, Herbert River. Specimen of
Gutta-percha.
GROUP.— Pomology.
Class 621. Fruit of temperate and semi-tropical regions
—as Apples, Pears, Quinces, Peaches, Nectarines,
Oranges, Apricots, Plums, Grapes, Cherries,
Strawberries, and Melons.
420 SANDROCK, G. F., Bowen. Bengal Quinces.
Class 622. Tropical Fruits and Nuts, Oranges, Bananas,
Plantains, Lemons, Pineapples, Pomegranates,
Figs, and Cocoanuts,
421 ARCHER & CO., Gracemere, Rockhampton. Assortment of
Fruits, comprising Chinese Date Plum, Tamarinds,
Smooth-leaved Pines, Queen Pines, Dates, and Custard
Apples.


422 BARNARD, A., Rockhampton. Collection of Fruit, including
Dates, Limes, Bananas, Cayenne Pine Apples, and Queen
Pine Apples.
423 BARNES, J. G., Mackay. Collection of Tropical and Semi- '
tropical Fruits. |
>424 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. COLLECTION OF
FRUITS :—Bunya Bunya (Araucaria Bidwilli), Sweet
Sop (Anona Squmosa), Chinese Date Plum (Diospgros
KakiJ, Jack Fruit (Artocarpus integrifolia) , Monster
Granadilla {Passiflora macrocarpa), Granadilla
(Passiflora quadrangular is) , Pineapples, six varieties,
viz. : Smooth-leaved Cayenne, Black Jamaica, Queen,
Enville, and Prickly Cayenne (Plrriblica officinalis);
Oranges, four varieties, Citrons, Native Limes, Lemons,
(two varieties), Mammoth Citron, Bengal Citron, Cone ■
Araucaria Bidwillii, &c., &c. R. Barnes, Mackay, ;
Cocoanuts ; ditto, ditto, Pine apples (3 varieties); Plants :
Thea Bohea Black Tea Tree; Coffee Arahica (Coffee
Tree). . j
425 BRAND, H. BROS., Bowen. Tropical and Semi-tropical
Fruits.
225 a CAPORN, W. G., Rockhampton. Granadilla, two varieties |
(Passiflora macrocarpa, Passiflora quadrangularis) ; ; ,
and Cavendish Bananas.
426 CROSS, E., Rockhampton. Collection of Pine Apples.
427 EDGAR, J. S., Botanic Gardens, Rockhampton. Collection of
Tropical and Semi-tropical Fruits. i
428 FERGUSON, J., Rockhampton. Assortment of Fruit; Queens-
land Nuts, Tamarinds, Cayenne Pine Apples, Queen j
Pine Apples, Mangos (varieties), Custard Apples, and ;
Limes.
429 GOSSET, A. P., Rockhampton. Collection of Fruit, including
Mangos (varieties), Bananas (varieties), and Custard 1 (
Apples.
430 HALBEN STADTER, A., Rockhampton. Collection of Fruits,
comprising West Indian Limes, Matingola Plums,
Jujubes, Mangos, Pine Apples, Bananas, Grapes, and
Papaw Apples. _ I
431 JARDINE, G. W., Rockhampton. Variety of Fruits, including
Mangos, Custard Apples, &c.
432 JONES, H., Rockhampton. Varieties of Fruit, including Pan-
danus (Screw Pine), Tamarinds, Pine Apples, Guavas
(varieties), Custard Apples, Dates, and Mangos (va-
rieties).
433 JOEBET, J., Rockhampton. Assortment of Fruits, inlcudmg
Papaw Apples, Bananas, Pine Apples, &c. .
434 KYLE, JOHN, Bowen. Tropical and Semi-tropical Fruits.
435 LEE, CHEE, Bowen. Tropical and Semi-tropical Fruits.
436 LUCAS, E. S., Rockhampton. Collection of Fruit, comprising
’ Mangos, Papaw Apples, Granadilla, Passion Fruit,
Pine Apples, and Custard Apples
437 M'MILLAN, A. C., Bowen. Tropical and Semi-tropical Fruit.


438 ST. GEORGE, HOWARD, Cooktowa. Collection of Tropical
and Semi-tropical Fruits.
439 THOZET, Madame, Rockhampton. Varieties of Fruit: Ju-
jubes, Papaw Apples, Oranges, Grapes, Bananas, &c.
440 WILLIAMS, ALFRED, Eight-mile Plains, Brisbane. Collec-
tion of Fruits, including Chinese Date Plum, Pine
A pples, Mangos, Guavas, Citrons, Limes, and Lemons.
441 WILSON, J. W., Bowen. Tropical and Semi-tropical Fruit.
GrROUP. —Agricultural Products.
Class 623. Wheat, Oats, Barley, Maize, and other
Cereals.
442 BATTEN, CHARLES, Nerang Creek. Rye.
443 BATTEN, CHARLES, Nerang Creek. Red Cob Maize.
444 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane
G. M. Beid, Don River, Bowen.—Yellow Maize, 60 bushels
per acre.
J. Gordon, Glen Gordon, Bowen. —Yellow Maize.
M. Donald, Meringandan Road, near Toowoomba.—Yellow
Maize, 40 bushels to the acre.
445 COX, Mrs., Pocket, Warwick. Red Wheat; average of crops,
30 bushels per acre; weight, 68 lbs.
446 COWLEY, CORNELIUS, Swan Creek, Warwick. Red Wheat,
18 bushels per acre.
447 DUNTNEY, CHARLES, Rosewood. Large Yellow Maize.
448 ECKHAKT, GEORGE, Sandy Creek, Warwick. White
Wheat; average of crop, 19 bushels per acre.
449 FREE, ADDISON, Green Hill Farm, Warwick. White Wheat.
450 FRANKLIN, HENRY, Sarah Yale, Tambourine. Large
Yellow Maize.
451 HORWITZ, J,, & CO.. Swan Creek, Warwick. Red Wheat;
average of crop, 23 bushels per acre.
452 HORWTTZ, J., & CO., Swan Creek, Warwick. White Wheat;
average of crop, 21 bushels per acre.
453 HAYES, W. & C., Warwick. Wheat, grown near Warwick.
454 HAYES, W. & C., Warwick. Maize, grown near Warwick.
455 HENDERSON, JAMES, K bighorn, Tambourine. Durra Corn,
grown by exhibitor.
456 KATES, F., M.L.A., Allora. Red Wheat.
457 KELLY, JOHN, Allora. Large Yellow Maize.
458 KELLY. JOHN, Allora. Large Yellow Maize.
459 M'DOWELL, WILLI AM, Oxley. Large Yellow Maize.
460 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Trophy of Rice
in Sheaf, grown near Brisbane, by exhibitor. These
varieties take 3,4, 5, and 6 Queensland summer months
to ripen. Average crop, 68 bushels to the acre.
461 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Paddy Rice.
462 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Dressed Rice,


463 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER. Brisbane. Glass Case, con-
taining varieties of Rice in Kars, and sample of Grain.
464 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Eye.
465 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Broom Millet,
grown by exhibitor.
460 O’REILLY & PIOOTT, Mount Thabor, Warwick. Red
Wheat, average of crop, 16 bushels per acre.
467 PITMAN, CHAS., Indooroopilly. White Cob Maize.
468 STERLING, ROBERT, Pocket, Warwick. Red Wheat,
average of crop, 19 bushels per acre.
469 STRONG, J., Oxley. Large Yellow Maize.
469 a DYER. T. S., Laidley. One Bag Maize —Large Yellow.
470 STRONG, JAMES, Oxley. Cob Maize, new variety.
471 STRONG, JAMES, Rocky Waterholes. Large Yellow Maize.
472 TULLOCH, W., Glencairn Farm, Warwick. White Talavera
Wheat, grown on heavy black soil ; yield, 31£ bushels
per acre ; sown first week in May, reaped first week in
December.
478 WILSON, J. T., Cottage Swan Creek, Warwick. White Wheat.
Glass 624. Leguminous Plants and Esculent Vegetables.
474 BRAND, W., BROS., Bowen. Collection of Vegetables.
475 KYLE, JOHN, Bowen. Collection of Vegetables.
476 LEE CHEE, Bowen. Collection of Vegetables.
Class 626. Tobacco, Hops, Tea, Coffee, Spices, Herbs,
and Condiments.
477 ACHESON & ALLEN, Rockhampton. Chutney.
478 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. COLLECTION OF
MANUFACTURED TOBACCO (Nicotiana Tahacum).
The cultivation of Tobacco is decidedly on the increase, and
now that experience in its growth and proper mode
of manufacture has been attained, the quality of the
article shows considerable improvement upon the earlier
efforts to introduce it as a staple manufacture of the
colony, and the general result has proved profitable to
the grower’s. The yield averages from eight cwt. to half-
a-ton per acre, but in some instances amounts to con-
siderably more. Most of the American varieties are
successfully grown, amongst which the Virginian appears
to be the favorite and most generally cultivated. The
newer and more esteemed kinds, such as Shiraz, Nicotina
persica, La+akia, and varieties from Bhilsa and Ispahan
are also succeeding well. There are five establish-
ments in the colony for the manufacture of Tobacco —
namely, Brisbane, Ipswich, Logan, Mackay, and Rock-
hampton ; and the amount manufactured for the year
1877 is stated at —Tobacco, 42,616 lbs. ; Cigars, 85,000 ;
and Snuff, 300 lbs. The present season has been a
favorable one, and the above results no doubt will be
added to considerably.


R. Bridgman, Rocklcigh, Mackay.—Manufactured Tobacco ;
twist. \
11. Bridgman, Rockleigh, Mackay. —One box cigars. There
arc about six acres of land under tobacco cultivation on
this estate and twenty-six acres in all in the district,
most of the produce from which is purchased by Mr.
Bridgman in leaf, at an average of about Is. per lb., and
manufactured by him at his establishment. The ordi-
nary rate realised being from 2s. Bd. per lb. upwards.
JR. Soegaard, Bcaudesert, Logan River.—Manufactured
Tobacco; plug. Manufactured Tobacco; twist.
Tobacco leaf.
F. G. Walker, Sherwood, Coomera River.—Tobacco leaf.
BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. COLLECTION OP
DYEING MATERIALS.
The growth of both madder and indigo has proved successful
in many parts of the colony, but they are not extensively
cultivated. Many of our indigenous plants also possess
valuable dyeing qualities, among which may be num-
bered Laportea gigas &c., ; Logwood, ( Haematoxylon
Campechianwm, Linn), Cockspur thorn, ( Morus calcar
galli A. Cunn). The Pipturus propinquus, Madder
(Bahia tinctorum, Linn), Turmeric (Curcuma long a,
Linn), Indigo (Indigofera tinctoria, Linn).
BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. TEA, COFFEE,
SPICES, &c. r-
There are many districts in the colony where the cul-
tivation of both tea and coffee could be carried out with
success, but up to the present time no special interest
seems to have been manifested regarding either. Coffee
commences to bear in the North at about two years old,
and on the Herbert River it grows to considerable per-
fection, but it is only cultivated in such quantity as to
meet local requirements. In the southern parts of the
colony the tree takes six years to come to maturity.
Without proper appliances it is extremely difficult to
divest the bean from a pulpy substance, which is very
adhesive. Tea has not yet got beyond its experimental
stages, although it might be cultivated with both advan-
tage and profit on the higher lands of the colony—
such as the Darling Downs.
In many of the Northern districts, cocoa (Theohroma cacao),
nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves, and other spice-bearing
plants, are all doing well, and give great promise of
future success.
Botanic Gardens. —Black Tea ( Thea bohea, Linn.)
Coffee Leaves (Coffea arabica, Linn.), pre-
pared as tea.
Paraguay Tea (Ilex Paraguariensis, St.
Lik.)
Coffee (Coffea arabica, Linn.)


Tinnevelley Senna ( Cassia acutifolia,
Dohi).
Aleppo Senna ( Cassia obovata).
Rosella, dried {Hibiscus sabdariffa,
Linn.); prepared in this manner, the
flavour is retained for a number of
years.
* Nelumbium Leichhardti, W. H. (Pink
Water Lily).
* Macrozamia Douglasi, W. H. (Coul-
bine).
* Macrozamia Miqeli, F. M.
* Castanospermum australe (Moreton
Bay Chestnut).
* Millittia megasperm, F. M.
* The whole of the above art used as food by
the aborigines.
Bunya Bunya ( Araucaria Bidwilli,
Hoot). This nut is a favorite article of
food with the aborigines, who eat large
quantities roasted.
Queensland Nut ( Macadamia iernifolia ,
F. M.)
Cycas Media, R. Br. This is also used by
the aborigines as food. Ah excellent
farina is prepared from it.
Cinnamon ( Laurus cinnamonum, Linn)
Allspice ( Pimenta vulgaris).
Cayenne Pepper {Capsicum baccatum,
Linn). Bird’s Eye.
Cayenne Pepper {Capsicum grossum,
Willd). Bell pepper.
Cayenne Pepper {Capsicum annuum,
Linn). Spanish pepper.
Cayenne Pepper {Capsicum bicolor).
Ginger (Zingiber officinale)
Black Ginger {Zingiber zerumbet).
Cappers {Cappapis spinosa).
Turmeric {Curcuma longa).
Turmeric {Curcuma rotunda, Benth).
Mesquit or Algaroba Bean. This tree is
celebrated for its pasture shade qualities
as well as the excellent cattle fodder it
produces. The beans, which are borne
in great profusion, are eaten eagerly by
all descriptions of cattle, including sheep
and goats. Packed in barrels they will
keep for a length of time, and can be
used when herbage is scarce.
Colomba root {Coculus palmatus) . Used
as a tonic or stomachic, also most useful
as a medicine in cases of dyspepsia,
diarrhoea, dysentry, &c.


481 BRIDGMAN, R., Mackay. Collection of Tobaccos, manufac-
tured from leaf grown in Queensland.
482 CHUBB, C. F., Ipswich. Olives, bottled.
483 COURTEN, W., Glenora, Rockhampton. Tobacco, grown and
manufactured by exhibitor.
484 COWLEY, ALFRED S., Bemerside, Herbert River. Cayenne
Pepper.
485 HOCKER, J. H., Kangaroo Point, Brisbane. Tobacco Leaf.
486 HOCKER, J. H., Kangaroo Point, Brisbane. Collection of
Tobaccos, manufactured from leaf grown in Queensland.
487 HOCKINGS, A. J., & SON, Brisbane. Varieties of Coffee,
growTi in Brisbane.
488 JONES, A., Cawarral, Rockhampton. Tobacco Leaf.
489 KING, G., Maitland, Mackay. Coffee Beans.
490 MACDONALD, JOHN, St. Helena. Olives, Bottled.
491 SOEGAARD, HANS, Logan River. Collection of Tobaccos
manufactured from leaf grown in Queensland.
492 THOZET, Madame, Rockhampton. Samples of Coffee grown
in Rockhampton.
493 WILLIAMS, ALFRED, Eight-mile Plains, near Brisbane.
Cinnamon Bark, from four-year-old trees.
494 WILLIAMS, ALFRED, Eight-mile Plains, near Brisbane.
Coffee Beaus.
Class 627. Seeds and Seed Vessel*.
494 a BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. Indigenous Pasture
Grasses and Fodder Plants.
The gradual extinction of our Native Grasses, proceeding
principally from a system of overstocking which has
obtained in this colony, has rendered necessary the in-
troduction of new varieties, which from their peculiar
habits would, when cultivated, ensure a supply of pas-
turage throughout the year, and especially at those
seasons when the indigenous grasses are in an inactive
state. At the same time there are many varieties found
in Queensland which, when sown with due regard te
climatic influence, have been found to flourish exceed-
ingly well. The serious attention of our graziers has
been drawn to the subject, and large quantities of seed
have been distributed and grown with success.
Andropogon annulatus, Forsk. (Blue Grass). —An excellent
summer grass of an upright habit of growth, good pas-
ture, hut is not very productive during the winter
months.
Andropogon erianthoides, F. M.—Found on the Darling
Downs. It is a very superior grass, and stock are consi-
dered to thrive better upon it than upon most other
grasses. It produces a heavy crop of rich succulent
herbage, much relished by all descriptions of stock. It
spreads from the roots, and also seeds freely.


Andropogon OryUus, Linn.—An excellent pasture grass,
easily recognised by its golden beard. It produces a
large quantity of feed during the summer months, and
is met with throughout Queensland, generally upon
high land.
Andropogon halepensis, Sib.—Tall growing perennial grass,
valuable for both hay and pasture, is an excellent
cattle grass, though not much sought after by sheep.
In the Northern districts it grows strong and succulent,
resembling a cultivated sorghum. There are several
varieties of th;s line grass.
Andropogon montanus, Roxb.—A tall, strong-growing, coarse
grass, deep-rooted, and of stoloniferous habit, found on
the Darling Downs, and is partial to rich flats. The
flower panicles possess a peculiar perfume.
Andropogon nervosus, Rott. (Rat-tail Grass). —An upright-
growing grass ; found throughout the colony, rather
coarse, but yields a fair amount of feed, which is readily
eaten by cattle.
Andropogon pertains, Willd. —Good pasture grass, .very
generally distributed, stands drought well and- is a fair
winter grass if the weather is not too severe. It may
be recognised by the little pit upon the glume.
Andropogon refractus, R. B. (Kangaroo Grass.) —An excel-
lent grass for either pasture or hay, common in open
country in the southern parts of the colony. It is a
very productive summer grass, but makes little growth
during the winter unless upon sheltered forest land.
Its roots have a strong aromatic flavor.
Andropogon rottboelloides, Steud. —A large grass found on
the rivers of Northern Queensland. Its culm rises to
the height of Bft. It yields a large quantity of fodder,
as its culm, seed, and foliage, together with the base of
its thick stem are eagerly eaten by cattle and horses.
Andropogon triticeus, R. B. —A robust perennial and one of
the tallest of our tropical grasses. The flower-stalks
attain a height of 9ft., and are hard and cane-like; but
a quantity of leafy feed is produced at their base. Its
strong and wiry roots penetrate from two to three feet
into the ground. Cattle and horses are extremely fond
of this grass.
Anthistiria australis, R.B. —(Common Kangaroo Grass). A
tall, perennial upright-growing grass, often 3 feet in
height. The roots are strong, fibrous, and penetrating.
It is found in all parts of Australia, forms but few
perfect seeds, and these do not germinate freely. It is
one of the finest and most useful of the indigenous
grasses. It remains green during the summer, but turns
a little brown in the autumn, when its nutritive qualities
are at the highest. Horses keep in better condition on
this grass, doing hard work, than on almost any other
species of native grass.


Anthistiria avenacea, F.M. —(Darling Downs.) Oat grass ;
one of the most productive grasses in Australia, and
unlike other kangaroo grasses, it possesses the advantage
of, being a prolific seeder.
Anthistiria ciliata, L.— (Kangaroo Grass of Northern
Queensland.) This is an excellent grass for stock, and
makes a larger amount of bottom feed than the other
kangaroo grasses.
Anthistiria memhranacea , Lindl. —(Barcoo Grass.) One of
the best pasture grasses in Queensland. This grass is
exceedingly brittle when dry; stock are found licking
the broken parts from the ground.
Arundinella nepalensis, Trin. A grass well adapted for
hay. On the Darling Downs, under cultivation, has
been cut three times during the season.
Chloris divaricata, R.B.— (Dog-tooth Star Grass.) An
early grower, and although the stalks appear dry, yields
a quantity of nutritious feed.
Chloris ventricosa, R.i'.— (Blue-star Grass.) An erect
quick-growing species, found along the borders of
scrubs, and produces a large quantity of leafy feed.
Cynodon Dactyl on, Pers. (Couch or Indian Doub Grass.)
This is generally considered an introduced grass, but is
indigenous to Northern Australia. It is found through-
out tho colony, and is a good pasture grass, especially
when mixed with white clover.
Danthonia pectinata, Lindl.—(Mitchell Grass.) This is a
valuable perennial desert grass, resisting drought, and
sought with avidity by stock.
Danthonia lappacea, Lindl.—This grass, although of rather a
coarser nature than the preceding one, possesses the same
characteristics, and from the well-known fattening and
drought-resisting qualities of both species, they are de-
serving of cultivation. Seed has been sent to America
for trial in the Southern States.
Fleusine indica, Gr*rt.—ln the southern districts this is a
strong succulent pasture grass m summer; but further
north it affords good pasture through ut the season, and
may be recognised by its deep green color, strong stalks,
and star-like panicle, the spikclets of which are flat and
broad.
Festuca Billardierii, Steud. —Perennial grass; grows about
two feet in height, does not perfect its seed well, pro-
duces plenty of tender foliage, and is not much affected
by dry seasons, or easily injured by over-stocking. It
is a valuable grass, and may be considered one of the best
of our winter grasses.
Helopus annulatus, Nees (Early Spring Grass). —This grass
stands well during the winter months, ’ ’akes early spring
growth, and is valuable as a species yielding feed
throughout the year.


Microlcena stipoides, R. B. —Perennial grass of quick growth,
producing abundance of seed, keeps green during the
driest summer, and vegetates freely during the winter,
and may be considered a good cattle grass.
Fanicum leevinode, Lindl. —This very excellent grass was dis-
covered by Sir Thomas Mitchell, during his exploration
in 1831. It was considered by him the best grass met
with during his journey. It is used by the natives as
an article of food, and is gathered by the women in
large quantities, and the seeds pounded between stones,
mixed with water,' are formed into a kind of paste
or bread.
Fanicum parvifiorum, R.B. —A fine pasture grass, generally
met with on ridges. There are two varieties —one with
fine spreading panicles, and the other having only one
or two very long erect spikelets in its panicle Both
of them are excellent grasses, and worthy of culti-
vation.
Fanicum crus-galli, Linn. —A strong growing grass that
affords a large amount of feed to cattle in seasons of
scarcity, and is much improved by cultivation.
Fanicum decompositum, R.B. —One of the most valuable of
the Darling Downs grasses. Under cultivation this
grass has yielded in one season over 3 tons of hay per
Fanicum mrgatum, Linn.—A good pasture grass, abundant
on open downs country. The seeds of this grass are
used at times as an article of food by the natives.
Fanicum italicum, L.—This grass, notwithstanding its spe-
cific name, is of Indian origin, and is also a native of
Northern Australia. It is a good pasture grass, and
possesses fattening properties, and thrives well upon
poor dry soils. Although it is an annual, it increases
quickly, from being an abundant seed-bearer. The
seeds, when pounded, mixed with water, and baked,
are used as food by the natives.
Foa Brownii, Nees. —There are several varieties of this fine
pasture grass, common on both rich and poor soils,
producing an abundance of foliage ; bears hard feeding,
and is one of the best grasses to stand both winter and
summer.
Foa coespitosa, Nees. —(Weeping Polly Grass.)—A fine
grass, with rather a tufty habit of growth. Generally
met with upon rich soils, where it produces freely.


Poa parvijlora, R.B.—Very abundant annual grass, and
affords good feed to stock throoughout the season.
Poa Chinensis, Koenig.—Excellent pasture grass. Much
relished by stock.
Perotis rara, R.B. —Good pasture grass ; quick grower,
and affords succulent feed.
Sporobolus indicus, R.B. —An excellent pasture gress, gene-
rally found upon alluvial soils, and resists drought
well.
Sporobolus elongatus, R.B.—Fine open pasture grass, found
throughout the colony. Its numerous penetrating
roots enable it to to resist severe drought.
Stipa Dicke/achue, Steud. —One of the best winter grasses ;
quick grower and abundant seeder.
Slipa rarnosissirna, Sieb.—(BambooGrass.) —Though apparently
a hard grass, it is highly spoken of as horse-feed, and
produces a very large quantity of fodder.
Daucus brachiatus, Sieb. —(.Native carrot.)
Apium lepiophgUum, F.M.— (Wild parsley.)
Plantagu varia, R.B. (Native Plantain.) This and the
two preceding plants are relished by stock.
Rhagodia parabo/ica, R.Br. — (Salt-bush.)
Atriplex semibaccata, R.B.—(Salt-bush.)
MACPHERSON, A., Brisbane. Collection of Seeds of Indige-
nous Grasses. 91 varieties, as follows :
1 Andropogon intirnedius, R.Br.
2 Sp'i'-obolus elongatus R.Br.; also Nos. 3 and 5, forms
of same
4 isporooolus indicus, R.Br.; also No. 6
7 Dichelachne criuita, Hook ; also Nos. Sand 36, forms of
same
10 Arundinella nepalensis, Tri. ; also Nos. 15 and 23, forms
of same
11 Andropogon eriauthoides, F.M.
12 Panicum, Sp.
13 Anthistiria Australis, R.Br.; also No. 14
16 Aristida ramosa, R.Br.
17 Panicum parviflorum, R.Br.; also Nos. 18 and 39, forms
of same
19 Leptochloa chinensis, Nees.
20 Chloris truncata, R.Br.; also No. 66
21 Sporobolus virginicus, Var pallida, F.M.
22 Panicum trafchyrhachis, Benth.; also No. 77
24 Panicum effusum, R.Br.
25 Eragrostis teptostachya, Steud. j also Nos. 82, 35j *7B,
and 87, forms of same
26 Briza minor, Linn.
27 Perotis raro, R.Br.
28 Chlorus divaricata, R.Br.; also No. 43
29 Eragrostris pilosa, Beaur.; also No. 43.
30 Panicum Macractinium, Benth.; also No. 67
31 Sporobolus diander, Beaur.


54 Anthistiria membranacea, Lindl.
55 Selaria glauca, Beaur
56 Eriochloa punctata, Hamilt.; also No. 73
57 Hemarthria compressus, R.Br.; also No 81
5S Panicum flaridum, Retz.
60 Panicum Sanguinalo, Linn.
61 Andropogou refractus, R.Br.
62 Andropogon lachnatherus, Benth.
63 Andropogon Siricens, R.Br.
64 Andropogon pertussus, Willd.
66 Andropogon affinis, R.Br.; also No. 92
68 Eleusine indica, Goert.
500
33 Ischcemnm Australe, R.Br. ; also Noe. 44 and 83. Forms
of same
34 Eragrostis Brownii, Nees. ; also Nos. 47, 49, 86, 89, and
90, forms of same
37 Leersia hexandra, S.’M.
38 Panicum Mitchellii, Benth ; also No. 51
40 Eragrostis Brownii, var interrupta
41 Kyllinga intermedia, R.Br. (A. Sedga)
42 Pennisetum compressum, R.Br.
45 Aristida vagans, R.Br.
46 Imperata arundinacea, Cyr
48 Cypirus Sp. (A. Sedge)
50 Panicum crus galli, Linn.; also No. 79
52 Agropyrum scabrum, Beaur.
53 Chrysopogon parviflorus, Benth ; also Nos. 59 and 71,
forms of same.
69 Panicum foliosum, R.Br.
70 Sorghum halpense, Pers.
72 Panicum colonum, Linn.
74 Astrebla titricoides, E.M.
76 Ischoemum toeum, R.Br.
80 Paspalum Scrobiculutum, Linn.
82 Bromus arenarius, R.Br.
84 A young growth of Anthistiris membranacea, Lindl.
85 Lapago racemosa, Schreb.
88 Eragrostris, Sp.
91 Panicum indicnm, Linn.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Collection of
Queensland indigenous Grasses, dried and mounted on
frames by exhibitor.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Specimens of
Queensland indigenous Grasses, growing in tubs.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Perennial Rye
Grass, two varieties of New Zealand Grasses, Red Clover,
Prairie Grass, and Italian Grass, grown by exhibitor.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Specimens of
dried Prickley Comfrey and White and Grey Millet, in
8llG«lV0S.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Varieties (2) dried
Jute plants: Corchorus capsnlaris, 13 feet long ; Cor-
chorus oliotaris, 14 feet long.


501 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Jute Seed, two
varieties —Cor chorus capusularis and Cor chorus olio tar is
502 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER/ Brisbane. White Millet
Seed.
503 TULLOCH, WILLIAM, Glencairn Farm, Warwick. Lucerne
Seed, grown on heavy black soil.
504 TURNER, FREDERICK, Acclimatisation Society’s Gardens,
Brisbane. 100 varieties of Queensland Indigenous
Fodder Grasses, dried and mounted by exhibitor.
Andropogon erianthoides, F. v. M.—A moat superior grass,
highly relished by stock. It produces a .-heavy crop of
sweet succulent herbage. Darling Downs.
Andropogon sericeus, R. Br.—The blue grass. One of the
best pasture grasses; yields enormously during the
summer months. Found all over the colony.
Androgogoc affinis, R. Br. —A good open pasture grass, will
stand close feeding. Moreton district.
Andropogon pertusus, Willd. —A good pasture grass, stands
the drought well, and will yield a fair amount of fodder
during winter. Southern aind Western Queensland.
Andropogon intermedius, R. Br. —A strong erect growing
grass, yields a quantity of feed during the summer
months. North Queensland.
Andropogon bombycinus, R. Br.—A valuable pasture grass,
highly spoken of by stock owners, and said to be very
fattening. Condamine River and north-western districts.
Andropogon schcenanthus, var martini, Linn. —A strong
growing northern grass.
Andropogon refractus, R. Br.—Kangaroo grass of Southern
Queensland, a very productive summer grass,"and will
make excellent hay. Yields a fair amount of feed dur-
ing winter in sheltered situations.
Andropogon lachnatherus, Benth. —Produces a heavy crop of
grass, relished by stock, found on low wet soils. Bris-
bane River and the,coast districts.*.
Anthistiria ciliata, Linn. —An upright growing species, yields
a quantity of feed highly‘relished by stock, lut perfects
very little seed. Australia.
Anthistiria mernbranacea, Li'ndl. —Landsborough grass ; a
quick growing summer species, very brittle when dry,
stock are said to lick the broken parts off the ground, they
are so fond of it. Barcoo district.
Arundinella nepalensis, Trim—ln some districts this grass
yields a fair amount of fodder, in others it is of dry
coarse nature. Found throughout Queensland.
Astrella elymoides, F, v. M.—Mitchell grass. This is one of
our best pasture grasses, springs from every joint after
rain, will stand well through the droughts, and is highly
spoken of by all stock holders.
Astrebla triticoides, F. v. M.—A strong-growing grassj the
flowering spike resembling ears of wheat, said tb have
highly fattening qualities. Dawson and the Warrego.


Astrebla var triticoides, F, v M. —Not such a strong grower
as the last but its qualities are praised by stock holders.
Warrego.
Astrebla pectinata, F. v. M.—This is a valuable grass, stands
the drought well and is sought greedily after by stock.
Warrego.
Aristida arenaria, Yaudieh. —A dry wiry grass bad for sheep
on account of its seeds. King’s Creek.
Aristida leptopoda, Benth. —A grass yielding a fair amount of
fodder, found growing on rich soils. Darling Downs.
Aristida calycina, R. Br. —A dry, wiry grass, not relished by
stock Darling Downs and Peak Downs.
Aristida vagans, Car. —Superior grass to A. calycina. Keeps
green in the winter. Moretou district.
Athraxon ciliare, Beaur.—A broad-leaved creeping grass,
met with about the swamps of the Darling Downs. It
is a rare seeder.
Agropyrum scabrum, Beaur.—This grass is one of the best
winter species we have, and much in favour with stock-
holders. Stands the drought well. Moreton district.
Bromus arenarius, Sabill. —An annual grass, very rare in
Queensland. Makes its growth during winter and early
spring.
Cynodon tenellus, E. Hr.—This is one of the creeping grasses.
It makes a quantity of feed during summer. Stock are
fond of it. North-West Queensland.
Cynodon dactylon, Pers.—Couch grass. This a valuable
grass. Where land is cleared it makes a splendid pas-
ture. Sheep are very fond of it. Indigenous to Northern
Queensland ; but in the southern portion of the colony
it covers thousands of acres.
Chrysopogon parvitlorus, Benth. —A coarse grass, being of
too dry a nature to be of value for fodder. Found on
rich flats all over the colony.
Chloris diraricata, R. Br.—Star grass. The flower panicles
give it an uninviting appearance, but it gives a quantity
of fodder. Southern Queensland.
Chloris var. dirancate, E. Br. —A strong, upright growing
grass, yields a quantity of feed during the summer.
Northern Queensland.
Chloris ventrioosa, E. Br. —Blue Star grass. A tall, quick
growing grass, produces a fair amount of feed. Bowen
Downs.
Chloris truucata, E. Br.—An erect species found on the
Condamine River.
Danthonia longifolia, E. Br.—White topped grass. This
grass is of a wiry nature on the Darling Downs, but on
tire coast, yields a fair amount of fodder. Southern
Queensland.
Deyenxia forsteri, Kunth. —An excellent winter species, its
herbage sweet and succulent; also abundant, but dies
on the approach of summer. Southern Queensland.


Dichelachne crinita, Hook. —A good winter grass, grows quick
and bears abundance of seed. Moreton district.
Diplachne fusca, Beaur. —This species is found on low wet
ground, it yields a succulent herbage, relished by stock.
North and South Queensland.
Diplachne coliiformis, F. v. M—A good pasture grass, of
slender habit. South and Western districts.
Eriochloa punctata, Huinb. and Kunth. --This is one of the
finest grasses of the colony, both for summer and winter ;
a rapid growing, sweet succulent grass, and greatly
relished by stock. North and South Queensland.
Eriochloa annulate, Kunth A Enum.—A quick growing suc-
culent c:ra«?, highly relished by stock. North and South
Queensland.
Eragro» tis icuella, Beaur.—An erect tufted annual, a fine
productive grass for a sheep run. Northern Queensland.
Eragrostis pilosa, Beaur. —An erect tufted annual, a very pro-
ductive grass. It grows all the year round, and seeds in
abundance. North and South Queensland.
Eragrostis leptostaehya, Steud. —A slender growing grass
—yields a fair amount of fodder. Moreton district.
Eragrostis rar chcetophylla, Steud. —A wiry close growing
species, of little value for feed. Mitchell district.
Eragrostis Brownii, Nees.—A fine pasture ; yields an-
abundance of feed both summer and winter. North
and South Queensland.
Eragrostis Brownii var interrupta, Nees. A stronger grower
than E. Brownii, but its qualities are much the same.
North aud South Queensland.
Eriachue squallola, E. Br.—An erect growing species—a good
pasture grass. North Queensland.
Eriachne obtusa, K. Br. —A variable grass, makes a quantity
of feed, and is a good pasture vai-ioty. North Queensland.
Echiuopogon oratus, Beaur. An erect glabrous grass, found
plentifully throughout the winter months along the
banks of rivers and creeks. Moreton district.
Elensine a;gyptica, Pers.—This is a fine dwarf succulent open
pasture grass, highly'apoken of by sheep owners. North-
west Queensland.
Elensine indica, geetn. —A coarse erect tufted succulent pas-
ture grass, grows quick, producing of feed.
Moreton district.
Elionurus citreus, Munro.—A leafy grass, with slender stems,
bearing spikes of a strong citron scent. North Queens-
land.
Hemarthria compressa, E. Br. —A strong hard grass, with
creeping roots, found on wet sour soils, and useful for
covering land of such description. Moreton district.
Imperata arundinacea, Cyr. Blady grass. This grass is
usually met with on rich alluvial flats ; it yields a fine
succulent feed for several months after being burned off.
Found all over the colony.


Heteropogon insignis, Ther. A robust growing plant,
from 8 to 12 feet high ; flower stalks hard and cane like,
but yields a quantity of feed. Horses are extremely
fond of it. North Queensland.
Heteropogon contortus, Roem.—The spear grass. A splendid
grass for a cattle run, as it produces a great amount of
feed, but dreaded by the sheep owner on account of its
seeds. South and West Queensland.
Ischsemum pectination, Tri.—This is a fine growing grass,
forming dense tufts of herbage. Moreton district.
Ischsemura laxum, R. Br.—An upright slender-growing
species; yields a fair amount of feed, which is readily
eaten by stock. North-West Queensland.
Ischsemum australe, R. Br.—This species is found near rivers
and swamps ; it has a creeping underground root, from
whioh it springs up quickly, yielding a good deal of
fodder. Moreton district.
Sappago racemosa, Willd.—An annual, found on ridges. A
good grass for winter and early spring. North and South
Queensland.
Searsia hexandra, Swartz.—Rice grass. A rough-leaved
species, common along the water courses of Queensland.
Stock are remarkably fond of it.
Septochloa chinensis, Nees—An excellent pasture grass ;
grows from 2 to 3 feet ; herbage relished by stock.
North aud South Queensland.
Mierohena stipoides, R. Br. — A valuable perennial species,
found in damp places ; grows quick, producing a quan-
tity of feed, and seeds abundantly. Southern Queens-
land.
Oplismenus compositus, Beaur.—This is a useful grass for
covering ground under the shade of trees. Not much
use for fodder, as stock seldom touch it. Moreton
disrrict.
Pappophorum nigricans, R. Br.—The flower-spikes of this
species are of a wiry nature, but it yields a fair amount
of leafy fodder at the base, and is relished by stock.
North Queensland.
Perods rara, R. Br.—This is a slender growing species, as-
cending to 1 foot, is a quick grower and succulent, stock
are fond of it. North Queensland.
Peunisetum compressum, R. Br.—A strong growing coarse
kind of grass, found on the margins of swamps, of little
value for fodder. Southern Queensland.
Paspalum scrobiculatum, Linn. —An erect, cearse, quick
growing pasture grass, stands through the winter well,
and will bear close feeding. North and S. Queensland.
Paspalum aistichum, Linn.—A creeping, rapid growing suc-
culent grass, found growing in swampy ground, some-
times in water, producing in the summer months a
quantity of feed, is a poor grass for making hay as it
turns black in drying. North and South Queensland.


Paspalum brevifolium, Pliigg.—Stems erect and slender from
a creeping root, will stand on high laud, produces a fair
amount of feed and plenty of seed. North and South
Queensland.
Panieum macractinuom, Benth.—This species produces im-
mense dry and spreading panicles ; it is a fine grass
for feed. North West Queensland.
Panieum sanguinale, Linn.—A creeping quick growing grass,
a great pest to farmers and called by them summer
grass. North and South Queensland.
Panieum indicum, Linn.—A grass usually found in wet soils
and swamps; produces a fair amount of feed during
summer. North and South Queensland.
Panieum foliosum, R. Br.—A grass with broad hairy leaves,
usually found on ground that has been cultivated; yields
a fair amount of feed. North and South Queensland.
Panieum repens, Linn. —Stems from a creeping and rooting
base ; too small a grass to be of value for feed, but will
grow well under a dense shade. North Queensland.
Panieum pygmseum, R. Br.—A small species, creeping and
rooting at the nodes ; will grow well under a dense shade.
North and South Queensland.
Panieum marginatum, R. Br. —A rigid coarse grass, found on
hard strong ground; of little value for fodder. Southern
Queensland.
Panieum melananthum, P. v. M.—An annual, with a creeping
stem ; yields a fair amount of feed during the summer ;
ihis species is easily distinguished by its large panicle of
dark-coloured seeds. Moreton district.
Panieum effusum, R. Br.—An erect growing grass, making a
good pasture ; is a free seeder, and a favourite among
stock-owners. North and South Queensland.
Panieum parvifiorum, R. Br.—An erect growing grass, very
productive during summer, stands the drought well and
produces plenty of seed. North and South Queensland.
Panieum leucophceum, H. B. et R.—A very good pasture
grass, produces an abundance of feed during winter,
also a good seeder. North Queensland.
Panieum semilatum, R. Br.—This species produces a quantity
of feed from thick nodes at the base ; stock are fond of
it; will stand drought well. North and South Queens-
land.
Panieum flaridum, Retz.—This is a fine succulent grass ; when
growing on alluvial flats the panicles are often prostrate
from the weight of seed; a good winter species.
Western Queensland.
Panieum distaehyum, Linn.—Stems creeping and rooting at
the joints ; an immense yielder; it is grown for hay in
the northern districts. North Queensland.
Panieum colonum, Linn.—Stems erect, from 2 to 8 feet, very
succulent. The panicles are used by the natives as an
article of food. The seeds are pounded between stones,


mixed with water, and formed into a kind of bread.
North Queensland.
Panicum crus-galli, Linn.—A very coarse succulent grass,
from 1 to 8 feet; found in swamps. The panicle is
strongly bearded; herbage much relished by stock.
North Queensland.
Panicum Mitchelli, Benth. —An erect growing perennial grass,
nearly allied to P. effusum but of stronger growth, a
quick grower, yielding a great amount of feed, highly
relished by stock. North-western Queensland.
Panicum decompostum, R. Br. —A semi-aquatic species—a
tall, coarse, succulent grass, producing an abundance of
feed, greatly relished by stock. South - western
Queensland.
Panicum traehyrachis, Benth.—A valuable open pasture grass
of quick growth, producing a great amount of feed
during summer; is also a free seeder. South and North-
western Queensland.
Panicum prolutum, F.Y.M.—An erect, rigid growing species,
producing a quantity of feed daring the summer months,
and a free seeder. Southern Queensland.
Pollinia fulva, Benth. —The sugar grass of colonists, so called
on account of its sweetness ; a highly productive kind,
and praised by stockowners. South-western Queensland
Sorghum halepense, Pers.—A strong, erect growing species,
varying from two to ten feet high, succulent when
young, a splendid grass for a cattle run, and a free
seeder. Coast of Queensland. (This species is named
S. fulvum on the specimen).
Setaria glauca, Beaur. —An erect-growing annual grass of
quick growth, producing an abundance of succulent
herbage, highly relished by stock ; is also a free seeder.
North Queensland.
Setaida var-glauca, Beaur. —A more slender grower than
S. glauca, and has not that glaucous appearance on the
leaves as the last-named. Is a fair yielder, and pro-
duces plenty of seed. North Queensland.
Setaria macrostachya, H. Bet. K.—Found along the banks of
creeks, but will also stand on any ground. Produces a
great amount of feed, of which cattle are exceedingly
fond. North and South Queensland.
Sporobolus virginicus, var-pallida, Kunth.—A fine grass,
found near salt marshes, possessing highly fattening
qualities. Coast of Queensland.
Sporobolus indicus, R. Br. —An excellent tufted pasture
grass ; stands the drought well, and is greedily eaten by
stock. North and South Queensland.
Sporobolus Lindleyi, Benth.—A slender-growing species ;
makes a quantity of growth during winter. W Queeus’d.
Sporobolus elongatus, R. Br.—A good pasture grass ; yields
a fair amount of fodder, and stands the drought well.
North and South Queensland.


505 WAY, E., Director, Queen’s Park, Toowoomba. Collection of
seeds of indigenous grasses —55 varieties, as follows.—
Agrostis Solandri, Andropogon acicularis, Andropogon
aunulatus, Andropogon annulatus variety, Andropogon
erianthoides, Andropogon halepensis, Andropogon mon-
tanus, Andropogon nervosus, Andropogon triticens,
Andropogon chrysocephillus, Andropogon elongatns,
Andropogon ischsemum, Anthistiria avenacea, MEgylops
cylindrica, Aristida calycine, Arundinella nepalensis,
Bromus avenarius, Brornns Orientalis purpuieus, Chloris
divaricata, Chloris ventricosa, Cinna ovatn, Daucus
brachiatus, Dantlionia triticoides, Dauthonia pectinata,
Eleusine Indica, Eieusine digitata, Eleusine„ caracana,
Eestuca billardieri, Helopus annulatus, Lappago race-
mosa, Microbena stipoides, Panicum devaricara, Panicuin
brownii. Panicum spectabilis, Panicum virgatum, Pani-
cum parviflorum, Panicum coenicolum, Panicum brizoides,
Panicum maxima (Panicum miliare shamay), Moha
Hungarian, Poa csepitosa, Poa orientalis, Pennisetum
•orbpressum, Pennisetum glaucum, Penicillaria spicata
cumbo pedda, Sporobolus elongatus, Sporobolus pul-
chella, Stipa ramosissima, Stipa silacea, Stipa dichelacline,
Setaria macrochseta, Tricholaena rosea (red grassa of
Natal), 2 varieties of Rhagodia (salt bush).
GE.OUP. —Vegetable products, used as foods or ’ materials.
Glass 629. Plour ; crushed and ground Cereals ; deoorti-
cated grains.
506 BOTANIC GARDENS. COLLECTION OF FARINAS.
Wheaten Floub and Meal (Triticum sativum,
Lawson) :
W. Sf C. Hayes, Warwick.—Silk Dressed Wheaten Flour,
manufactured from wheat grown on the Darling Downs.
W. <%■ C. Hayes, Warwick.—Wheaten Flour.
Neden Brothers, Darlington Mills, Toowoomba, Darling
Downs. —White Wheaten Flour ; first.
Heden Brothers, Darlington Mills, Toowoomba, Darling
Downs.—Whole Wheaten Meal.
Horwitz S$ Co., Warwick. - White Wheaten Flour; silk-
dressed.
Horwitz Sf Co., Warwick.—Red W beaten Flour ; silk-dressed.
Horwitz'Sf Co. —Whole Wheaten Meal.
F. Kates, Allora. — White Wheaten Flour.
F. Kates, Allora. — White Wheaten Meal.
F. Kates, Allora.—White Wheaten Meal.
Hon. Wm. Pettigrew, Brisbane. — White Wheaten Meal.
507 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. MAIZE MEAL (Zea Mays,
Linn.)
Horwitz Sf Co., Warwick.—Yellow Maize Meal.
Hon. Wm. Pittigrew, Brisbane,—Maize Meal.
F. Kates, Allora.—Maize Meal.


508 HAYES, W. & C., Warwick. Superfine silk-dressed Flour;
manufactured by exhibitors from Wheat grown in the
district of Warwick.
509 HORWITZ, J., & CO., Warwick. W'v'aten Meal; manu-
factured at Warwick steam flier mills, from Wheat
grown in the district of Warwick ; £l3 per ton.
510 HORWITZ J., & CO.. Warwick. Maize Meal; manufactured
at Warwick steam flour mills from maize grown in the
district of Warwick ; £l2 per ton.
511 HORWITZ, J., & CO., Warwick. Superfine silk-dressed Flour;
manufactured at Warwick steam flour mills from red
wheat grown in the district of Warwick ; £l5 per ton.
512 HORWITZ, J., & CO., Warwick. Superfinesiik-dressed Flour;
manufactured at Warwick steam flour mills from white
wheat grown in the district of Warwick ; £l5 per ton.
513 KATES, FRANCIS, M.L.A., Allora. Superfine silk-dressed
Flour, manufactured by exhibitor from wheat grown in
the district of Warwick.
514 KATES, FRANCIS, M.L.A., Allora. Second quality Flour,
manufactured by exhibitor from wheat grown in the dis-
trict of Warwick.
515 KATES, FRANCIS, M.L. A., Allora. Maize Meal, manufactured
by exhibitor.
516 KATES, FRANCIS, M.L. A., Allora. Wheaten Meal, manufac-
tured by exhibitor.
Class 630 Preserved Vegetables and Fruits, dried or in
cans or jars.
517 BAKER, THOMAS, Maryborough. Preserved Potatoes.
518 BOTANIC CARDENS, Brisbane. Jams and Jellies manu-
factured by Mrs. Carmichael, Queen-street; —
Jellies —Mango, Cuava. CuavaStrawherry, Cuava Gooseberry,
Guava Aj)ple, Apple, Green Apple, Pine Apple, Orange,
and Grape.
Preserves —Melon, Jack Fruit, Lemon Marmalade, Queens-
land Orange Marmalade, 4 jars Preserved Fruits, 3
bottles Orange Wine, 3 bottles Orange Bitters, 1 bottle
Orange Syrup.
Olives (preserved)—E. Marwede, Toowoomba.
519 HAYES, W. H.. Ipswich Road, Brisbane. Collection of Jams
and Jellies.
520 HAYES, W. H., Ipswich Road, Brisbane. Collection of Pre-
served Fruits, in syrup
521 MARWEDEL, E., Raceview, Toowoomba. Orange Marmalade,
1-lb. Tins, Scotch fashion.
522 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley. Brisbane. Collection of Fruits
in syrup —Pine Apple, Limes, Cumquat, Cape Goose-
berry.
523 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Yalley, Brisbane. Collection of Jams.
524 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Collection of Jellies.
525 SKINNER, B , Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Marmalades.


Class
ROOTS
Ground Nut (Arachis hgpogcea).
East Indian Arrowroot (Canna edulis).
ARROWROOT, &c.
arundinacea).
631. Starch, Arrowroot, and similar products.
BAKER, THOMAS, Mary boro’. Arrowroot, white and purple,
BAKER, THOMAS, Maryborough. Collection of Starches
from wheat, maize, arrowroot (2 kinds), potatoes (3
kinds), rice, plantains, and yams.
BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. COLLECTION OE
West Indian Arrowroot (Maranta arundinacea) .
Brazilian Arrowroot (Manihot janiphaj.
Brazilian Arrowroot (Manihot utilissima)
Sweet Potatoes ( Batalis edulis), four varieties —namely,
tuber alba, tuber lutea, tuber rubra, and tuber purple.
Yams, three varieties (Discorea saliva).
Ginger, two varieties (Zingiber officinale, Zingiber zerumbet).
Taro ( Colocasia Macrorhiza).
BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. COLLECTION OF
The cultivation of arrowroot has been very successful in
various parts of the colony, more particularly in the
Logan district, from whence the principal supply is
received ; although some of the best samples are pro-
duced from near Brisbane. The quantity manufactured
is greater than the demand in this colony, and a con-
siderable export to other colonies takes place, but it
is very doubtful if it realises a fair profit on its cost of
culture. In 1877 the quantity returned amounted to
208,996 lbs. against 293,670 lbs. for the previous year.
G. 8. Grimes. Boggo.— West Indian Arrowroot, white
(Maranta arundinacea).
Thomas Shorrock, Bundaberg.—West Indian Arrowroot,
white (Maranta arundinacea).
Thomas Shorrock, Buudaberg.—West Indian Arrowroot,
purple ; yield, tons per acre.
Satanic Gardens. —West Indian Arrowroot, white ( Maranta
East Indian Arrowroot, purple ( Canna
edulis).
Arrowroot, manufactured from Batatas
edulis var tuber — white, red, rubra,
purple
Cassava, sweet (Manihot janipha, Pohl.)
~ bitter ( Manihot utillissima,
Pohl),
Tapioca ( Manihot utillissima, Pohl.)
Zamia flour, prepared from the Micro-
zamia spiralis, Miq., used as an article
of food by the aborigines.
East Indian Arrowroot {Canna edulis,
Ker.)
Son. W. Pettigrew. —Ground Rice {Oryza sativa, Linn.)


Class
632. Sugar and Syrups.
Sugars —Vacuum Pan boiled ; not refined.
Sugar —Open Pan boiled.
BURNETT, J., Brisbane. Sample of Tapioca.
CASTLES, WILLIAM Castlevale, Pimpama. Purple Arrow-
root, in bulk.
CASTLES, WILLIAM, Castlevale, Pimpama. Purple Arrow-
root, in packets.
CASTLES, WILLIAM, Castlevale, Pimpama, White Arrow-
root, in bulk.
GRIMES, G. & S., Coongoon, near Brisbane. Purple Arrow-
root, in | and 1 lb. packets.
HENDERSON, JAMES, Kinghorn, Tambourine. Corn Flour.
LA HEY & SONS, Pimpama. Purple Arrowroot.
M'CREADY, ROBERT, Pimpama Purple Arrowroot.
MACDONALD, JOHN, Superintendent, St. Helena. Trophy
of Sugars and Sugar Canes. Sugars include the follow-
ing samples, viz. : —Noyeau plantation, Beenleigh, 4
samples ; Bundail. Nerang Creek, 3 ; Foulden, Mackay,
5 ; Eatonvale, Maryborough, 1 ; Antigua, Maryborough,
1 ; Benowa, Nerang Creek, 2 ; Helensvale, Coomera, 2 ;
Pleystovve, Mackay, I; River Estate, Mackay, 1; Tekowi,
Mackay, 1; Meadowlands, Mackay, 2; Balmoral,
Mackay, 1 ; Alexandra, Mackay, 1; Mooloolah, Moo-
loolah, 2 ; Inverness, Mackay, 2 ; Morayfield, Cabool-
ture, 1.
VINCENT, J. E. M., & Co., Brisbane. Sample of Sugar made
by Victor horsepower mill.
CANNY & MORETON, Eaton Vale, Maryborough.
CANNY & MORETON, Eaton Vale, Maryborough.
COULDEBY, W. H., Agestou Plantation, Beenleigh. White
Sugar.
COULDERY, W. H., Ageston Plantation, Beenleigh. Yellow
Sugar.
COWLEY. ALFRED S., Bemerside, Herbert River. Counter
Sugar, Cheribon Cane.
DART, W., Coleridge Mills, Brisbane. White Sugar.
DUVAL, LIONEL. N ebia Plantation, Mackay. White Sugar,
from Rose Bamboo Cane.
McCREADY, HUGH, Tekowai Plantation, Mackay.
McCREADY, HUGH, Tekowai Plantation, Mackay.
MONCKTON, H., Nevada, Mackay.
MUIR. ROBERT, Nerang Creek. By the Icery-Muir process.
NEAME & CO., Dungeuess, Herbert River White Sugar.
NEAME & CO., Dungeness, Herbert River. Yellow Sugar.
COWLEY, ALFRED S., Bemerside, Herbert River. Counter
Sugar, from Cheribon Cane.
GARTSIDB, JOHN, Ottmoor, Coomera.


GARTBTDE, MUIR, & BLACK, Noyea Plantation, Albert
River.
GARTSIDE, MUIR, & BLACK, Noyea Plantation, Albert
River. .
GARTSIDE,* MUIR, & BLACK, Noyea Plantation, Albert
River. From Rappoe Cane.
HOLLAND, MISKIN & CO., Bundall Plantation, Nerang
Creek. Cminter Sugar ; Ribbon and Rappoe Cane.
KING, G. MAITLAND, Branscombe Plantation, Mackay.
KING, G. MAITLAND, Branscombe Plantation, Mackay.
LOGAN SUGAR FACTORY COMPANY. Counter Sugar.
LOGAN SUGAR FACTORY - COMPANY. Counter Sugar.
LOGAN SUGAR FACTORY COMPANY. Counter Sugar.
McLEOD, E., Cleveland. Counter Sugar.
SPILLER, JOHN, Pioneer Estate, Mackay. 2 Bags White
Sugar.
SPILLER, JOHN, River Estate, Mackay. 1 Bag White Sugar.
MUIR, ROBERT, Benowa Plantation, Nerang Creek. From
Rappoe and Meera cane, 10 months old, grown on scrub
land; yield, tons to the acre—clarified by the leery-
Muir process.
WATT, ALEXANDER, Bannockburn, Beenleign. By common
lime process.
WATT, ALEXANDER, Bannockburn, Beenleigh. By common
lime process. Molasses Sugar.
Open to Vacuum Pan Sugar Boilers only.
CANNY & MORETON, Eaton Vale, Maryborough.
DUVAL, LIONEL, Nebia, Mackay ; from Rose Bamboo cane.
MUNE, W., Ageston Plantation, Beenleigh.
Open to Open Pan Suirar Boilers only.
COWLEY, LEWIS J., Bemerside, Herbert River. Counter
Sugar, from Cheribon cane.
MORRIS, C. A. M , Bnndall Plantation, Nerang Creek.
Counter Sugar, from Ribbon and Rappoe cane, grown
on scrub land.
EXTEA.
BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. ORDINARY COMMER-
CIAL SAMPLES TAKEN FROM BULK.—
SUGAR.
The progress which this industry has made in Queens-
land, has been perfectly astonishing, and each year
brings its record of large increase, both in the number
of acres under cultivation and yield Commencing in
1868, with a yield of 609 tons, we find that in 1877
there were 8,043 acres of cane crushed, producing 12,243
tons of manufactured sugar, 510,260 gallons of molasses,
and 196,001 gallons of rum. From returns compiled
to the end of December, 1878, the increase for one
year is still more noticeable, there being at that date


16,584 acres under cultivation, 11,005 acres of which
were crushed, and 16,490 tons ofsugar produced. The
quantities of rum and molasses manufactured necessarily
increased in the same ratio. The total quantity of
sugar produced in the colony, up to the last mentioned
date, so far as can be ascertained, will come up to fully
75,000 tons, which, taken at a low average of £24 per
ton, brings £1,800,000. There are several districts which
have hitherto abstained from experimentalizing in sugar
growth, but are now anxious to give it a fair trial;
Rockhampton for example, where a plantation of from
30 to 50 acres is in the course of preparation. The
growth of this most important product has so firmly
established itself, that it would not be an exaggerated
idea, that with the almost illimitable area eminently
suitable for its cultivation we have at command, our
vield will be double the present in a very few years.
Unfortunately the early period at which the opening
of the Brisbane Exhibition was necessarily fixed, has
precluded many samples from reaching in time for entry,
but there is every probability of their arrival in time for
inspection and being forwarded to Sydney. In the
compilation of the statistics of the colony for 1877,
the Registrar-General divides the su ar producing
districts as follows: Maekay, Central, Cardwell, and
Southern.
Mack at.
This is by far the largest sugar producing district in the
colony. On the 31st of March, 1878, there were sixteen
mills at work, producing during the season 6,900 tons
of sugar, 285,490 gallons of molasses, and, with 3
distilleries, 95,898 gallons of nun.
The situation of the country where the principal cultivation
is carried on is peculiarly adapted for the purpose,
being on rich alluvial flats on the south side of the
Pioneer River, seldom or ever visited by frost, being
protected on the north side by high ground of volcanic
origin.
The following are the samples received from the district; —
Pioneer Plantation, W. iSpiller. —Produce this season esti-
mated at 1,100 tons, from 900 acres of cane. The
process is vacuum pan mono-sulphide, and the plant is
capable of turning out 1,200 tons during the season.
There are in all 2,160 acres on the plantation, and in
connection therewith, is the River Plantation of about
the same ext ent, estimated to yield about 1,000 tons.
Alexandra Plantation, J. E. Davidson. —Flat battery,
Wetzell pan lime process. The produce this season
may r be estimated at from 600 to 800 tons.
Palnioral Plantation , Hyne and Co. —Flat battery, Wetzell
pan, lime process. The produce this season may be
estimated at from 600 to 800 tons.


Nebia Plantation, Lionel Duval, from Rose Cane.
Bamboo Plantation —Vacuum pan, three varieties, Nos. ‘fQ
65, 66.
Branscombe Plantation, Gr M. King.—White sugar, No. 67.
Telcouii Plantation, Hugh McCreadie. —White sugar, unre-
fined, No. 69.
Nevada Plantation, H. Monckton.—White sugar, No. 63.
Central District.
In this district there is also a large amount of sugar pro-
duced, in fact, second only to Mackay. It includes
Maryborough, Bundaberg, and the Burnett; the total
yield of sugar for the year ending 31st March being
3258 tons ; 111,270 gallons of molasses, and 54,439
gallons of rum. In addition to the crushing mills,
Messrs. Tooth and Cran have an extensive refining
establishment at Yen gat ie, where a large quantity of
sugar of the best qualities is made, a considerable
portion of the juice to produce which is supplied by
the small growers.
In the neighborhood of Maryborough, the formation is
Devonian, consisting of clay, slate, and shale , Yengarie,
coal formation; Bundaberg, alluvial deposits, based
upon conglomerate the undisturbed formation is
calcareous and carboniferous ; Burnett, on the lower
part of the river, Serpentines, Devonian slates, lime-
stone, and trap rocks.
Eton Vale, Maryborough, Canny and Morton. White
sugar, open pan ; ditto ditto, vacuum pan ; ditto ditto,
unrefined. Nos. 72, 73, and 74.
Yengarie, Tooth & Cran.—Refined sugars, this season’s crop,
marked 75a B. & C., quoted at £32 10s., £34 10s., and
£37 per ton respectively.
Cardwell, or Herbert River District.
There is a large quantity of land suitable for sugar cultiva-
tion in this district, but as yet there has not been much
land taken up for the purpose. Some of the sugars
grown here took prizes at the Paris Exhibition. Possess-
ing peculiar advantages, both as regards soil and
climate, there can be little doubt but that this will
become eventually one of the most important sugar
districts in the colony.
Bemerside, Herbert River. A. J. Cowley.—Sugar from
Cheribon cane, three varieties, Nos. 60, 61, and 62.
Southern District.
In this are included the Logan, Albert, Pimpama, Coomera,
Caboolture, and Nerang districts, and in which, in
March, 1878, there were 28 mills at work, producing
1,905 tons of manufactured sugar, 93,500 gallons of
molasses, and 45,662 gallons of rum during that season.
The plantations are situated principally upon the rich
alluvial flats on the Logan, Albert, and Coomera Rivers,
Nerang Creek, &c. The soil in the neighborhood fo


Beenleigli (the principal township), is principally sand-
stone, alternating with schist, and occasional patches
of quartz. Coomera and Nerang are Devonian, con-
sisting of clay slates and shales, conglomerates in the
upper beds, crystalline limestone in the lower.
Ageston Plantation, Logan River, W. H. Couldery.—Vacuum
pan boiled, refined.
Ageston Plantation, Logan River, W. H. Couldery.—
Vacuum pan boiled, unrefined.
Noyea Plantation, Albert River, Gartside, Muir, and Black.
—Common or lime process, open pan boiled.
Noyea Plantation, Albert River, Gartside, Muir, and Black.
Open pan boiled, lime process.
Bannockburn, Beenleigli, Alexander Watt.—Counter sugar
from Meera Cane; open pan and common lime process,
no patent used, No. 70.
Benovia Plantation, Nerang Creek, R. Muir. —Counter, open
pan, direct from battery ; no steam boiler.
Benoioa Plantation, Nerang Creek, R. Muir.—Ration sugar,
open pan, direct from battery ; no steam boiler.
Helen's Vale, Coomera, White & Robinson.—Counter sugar,
leery’s process, No. 75.
Cleveland, E. McLeod —Counter sugar.
St. Helena, manufactured on the island, No. 58.
JBundall, Nerang Creek, Holland, Miskin & Co. —Counter
sugar from Ribbon cane, No. 59.
Beenleigli , Davy & Gooding.—Open pan, not refined, No. 68.
SUGAR CANE.
The increasing importance of the cultivation of Sugar Cane,
and the necessity that is found after a few years for
the substitution of new blood, has led to the intro-
duction of several varieties of the best producing
canes to be obtained. Many valuable additions have
lately been made to the collection at the Nursery
Reserve, at Oxley Creek, under the superintendence of
the Director of the Botanical Gardens. The following
is a list of twenty-one varieties, planted about eleven
months ago, and all of which have proved to be well
adapted to the colony :■ —Guingham, Malabar, Salangore,
Lahania, Chigaca, Djioegdjiceng, Meera, Ouatamite,
Troeboe, Mina, Lielien, Socrat, Potei, Diard rose, Muir
No. 1, Rappoe Schiemei, Guingham Queensland, Diard,
Rappoe Var, and Bourbon.
GROUP — Wines, Spirituous, Fermented, and other DrinJcs.
Class 635. Wines of all kinds.
574 CHUBB, C. F„ Ipswich. Espar, 1877. In stock, 100
dozen; Red, full-bodied. 20s. per dozen, 10s. per
gallon.


575 CHILDS, D. J., & SON, Toombul Vineyard, Brisbane. 1877;
Bed, dry and full-bodied.
576 CHILDS, D. J., & SON, Toombul Vineyard, Brisbane. 1877 ;
Bed, dry.
577 GERLEB, C. T., & SON, Carlsburg Vineyard, Brisbane. In
stock, 4,000 gallons ; Bed, light, and dry. 7s. per gallon.
578 OEBLEB, C. T., & SON, Carlsburg Vineyard, Brisbane.
In stock, 3,000 gallons ; Bed, sweet. 18s. per dozen.
579 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assraanshausen, Warwick. Verdeilbo,
1876. In stock, 50 gallons ; White, light, and dry.
9s. per gallon.
580 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Salvina,
1878. In stock, 550 gallons; White, light, dry.
6s. 6d. per gallon.
581 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Verdeilho,
1877. In stock, 100 gallons ; White, light, dry. 9s.
per gallon.
582 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Hermitage,
1877. In stock, 90 gallons j Bed, Light, and dry.
9s. per gallon.
583 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Mataro,
1878. In stock, 3.000 gallons ; Bed, Light, and dry.
6s. 6d. per gallon.
584 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Mataro,
1877. In stock, 200 gallons; Bed, Light, and dry.
6s. 6d. per gallon.
585 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Hermitage,
1876. In stock, 50 gallons ; Bed, Light, and dry.
9s. per gallon.
586 KIBCHEB, JACOB, Assmanshausen, Warwick. Hermitage,
1875. In stock, 30 gallons; Bed, Light, and dry.
9s. per gallon.
587 LADE, J. J., Surrenden Vineyard, Samford, Brisbane. Isabella,
1879. In stock, 800 gallons. 18s. per dozen.
588 LADE, J. J., Surrenden Vineyard, Samford, Brisbane. Her-
mitage. 1879. White and dry, full-bodied.
589 BOMEB, CONRAD, Canning Downs, Warwick, Black Spanish,
1879. In stock, 1,400 gallons ; Red, full-bodied. 16s.
per dozen.
590 BOMEB, CONRAD, Canning Downs, Warwick. Tokay-
Reisling, made from two parts Tokay and one part
Eeisling, 1876. In stock, 800 gallons; W T hite, Light,
and dry. 18s. per dozen.
591 BOMEB, CONRAD, Canning Downs, Warwick. Tokay-
Reisliug, made from two parts T >kay and one part
Beisling, 1879. In stock, 1,200 gallons ; White, Light,
and dry. 16s. per dozen.
Class 636. Ale, Porter, and other Beverages made from
Cereals.
592 FITZGERALD, QUINLAN & Co., Castlemaine Brewery, Bris-
bane. Castiemaiue Ale, in giass.


FITZGERALD, QUINLAN & Co., Castlemaine Brewery, Bids-
bane. Castlemaine Porter, in bulk ; half hhd.
FITZGERALD, QUINLAN & Co., Castlemaine Brewery, Bris-
bane. Castlemaine Stout, in glass.
FITZGERALD, QUINLAN & Co., Castlemaine Brewery, Bris-
bane. Castlemaine Ale, in bulk ; half hhd.
Class
596
637. Cider, Perry, and other Fermented Drinks.
DARK & STALKER, Brisbane. Ginger Beer.
Class
633. Brandy and other Alcohols, Spirits, Bum,
' Whisky, Gin, &c.
BERTHEAU, C. Z., Bundaberg. Assortment of Cordials,
comprising Absinthe, Kummel, Aniseed, Curagoa, Golden
Water, Silver Water, Yanella, Chartreuse, Perfect Love,
Cherry, Black Currant, Pineapple, Rum Shrub, Rasp-
berry, Extract Sarsaparilla, Orange Bitters, Stoughton’s
Bitters.
BERTHEAU, C. Z., Bundaberg. Assortment of Syrups, com-
prising Ogeat, Gooseberry, Raspberry, Peppermint,
Cloves, Lime ,Tuioe, Ginger Wine.
COULDERY, W. H., Ageston, Beenleigh. Rum.
COULDERY, W. H., Ageston, Beenleigh. Gin.
GARDNER, OWEN, Normanby Distillery, near Brisbane.
Rum.
HEWITT & Co., Pleystowe, Mackay. Rum.
MILTON DISTILLERY Co., Brisbane. Sample of Rum,
from bulk, contained in glass barrel.
MILTON DISTILLERY Co., Brisbane. Sample of Rum, in
bottle. No. 1.
MILTON DISTILLERY Co., Brisbane. Sample of Rum, in
bottle. ’No. 2.
MILTON DISTILLERY' Co., Brisbane. Sample of White
Spirit, in glass barrel.
RAFF, GEO., Moray field, Caboolture, near Brisbane. Rum,
10 years old.
GEOUP. —Textile Substances of Vegetable or Animal Origin.
Class 639- Wool of Sheep in Fleece, carded and baled.
Division A. Mrhino Wool in Grease.
Sub-class 1. Fine Combing Wool in Grease. First prize,
Silver Medal; second prize, Bronze Medal.
608 MURPHY', Sib FRANCIS, & SON, Northampton Downs,
Tam bo Five Fleeces, bred by exhibitors, and one by
Mr. John Wilson, Gata, Victoria ; paddocked ; natural


Sub-class 3. For the best Six Ewe Fleeces, unskirted. First
prize, Silver Medal ; second prize, Bronze Medal.
609 MARSHALL & SLADE, Glengallan, Darftng Downs. Aus-
tralian Merinos, aged 2 years ; paddocked. AA
610 MARSHALL & SLADE, GUengallan, Darling Downs. Aus-
tralian Merinos, 412 days’ growth ; age of sheep, 2 years;
paddocked. AA s *
Sub-class 4. For the best Six Ewe Hoggets’ Fleeces, un-
skirted, first shearing. First prize, Silver Medal;
second prize, Bronze Medal.
611 SAKDEMAN, Hon. GORDON, M.L.C., Burenda, Roma
(Western Slopes of Queensland). Greasy Combing
Wool from Ewe Hoggets
Division B. Steong Combing Wool in G-eease.
Sub-class 7. For the best Six Ewe Fleeces, unskirted. First
prize, Silver Medal ; second prize, Bronze Medal.
612 FISHER, C. B , Headington Hill, Darling Downs. Growth of
wool, 350 days; Fisher blood on both sides ; age of
sheep, 3 years BL
613 FISHER, C. 8., Headington Hill, Darling Downs. 350 days’
growth; age of sheep, 3 years ; Fisher blood on both
sides ; housed
Sub-class 8. —For the best six Ewe Hoggets’ Fleeces, un-
skirted, first shearing. First prize, Silver Medal;
second prize, Bronze Medal.
' 614 FISHER, C. 8., Headington Hill, Darling Downs. 12 months
old, 10 months’ growth. Fisher blood on both sides ;
housed 4 months. D. M.
615 FISHER, C. 8., Headington Hill, Darling Downs. 12 months
old, 10 months’ growth. Fisher blood on both sides ;
housed 4 months.
Division C.—Clothing Wool in Gleease.
Sub-class 10. —For the best six Earn Hoggets’ Fleeces, un-
skirted, first shearing. First prize, Silver Medal;
second prize, Bronze Medal.
616 MARSHALL & SLADE, Glengallan, Warwick. 12 and 131
jmonths old; grown from stock'imported by the late
J. Deuchar. Bred by exhibitoi'S.
Sub-class 12.—For the best six Ewe Hoggets’ Fleeces,
unsfeirted, first shearing. First prize, Silver
Medal; second prize, Bronze Medal.
617 MARSHALL & SLADE, Glengallan, Warwick. 12 and under
131 months growth; bred by exhibitors from stock
imported by the late J. Deuchar. *


D ivision D. —Merino Wool, Washed.
Sub-class 16. —For the best six Ewe Hoggets’ Fleeces, un-
skirted, first shearing. First prize, Silver Medal;
second prize, Bronze Medal.
618 SANDEMAN, Hon. GORDON, M.L.C., Burenda, Roma
(on the north-western slopes of Queensland).
Division E. —Clothing Wool, Washed.
Sub-class 23—First prize, Silver Medal; second prize,
Bronze Medal.
619 GDNN, DONALD, Pikedale.
Division G. Wool in Grease from any other variety
of Sheep other than Merinos.
Sub-class 25. —For the best 6 Ram tieeces, unskirted. First
prize, Bronze Medal; second prize. Certificate
620 FISHER. C. B , Headington Hill, Darling Downs. Growth of
Wool, 330 days ; by Lincoln Rams from Lincoln Ewes ;
3 years old ; paddocked ; brand, El.
621 FISHER, C. 8., Headington Hill, Darling Downs. Growth,
350 days ; 3 years old ; paddocked ; by Lincoln Rams
from Lincoln Ewes.
Division I. Bales Merino Wool.
Sub-class 37 —Forlhe best bale of Scoured W ool of not less
than 250 lbs. Excellence of scouring and condition
to be the test. First prize, Silver Medal; second
prize, Bronze Medal.
622 HARRIS, GEORGE, & CO., Ekibin. Scoured bale, washed
with soft soap ; brand, JD.
Sub-class 38. For the Best Bale of Fellmongered Wool, not
less than 250 lbs. First prize, Silver Medal;
second prize, Bronze Medal.
623 HARRIS, GEORGE, &CO , Ekibin.
Division K, Extra Exhibits.
Sub-class 39.
624 BELL, Hon. J. P., M.L.C., Jimbour, Darling Downs. Three
Fleeces, scoured by Alderson & Sons, Brisbane.
625 BELL, Hon. J. P., M.L.C., Jimbour, Darling Downs. Three
Fleeces, scoured by F. Schofield, Maryborough.
626 HARRIS, GEORGE, & CO., Ekibin. Collection of Scoured
Wool in bales, cases, &e., to show variety.
627 HAMMOND, HENRY W. Currawillinghi. Small samples of
Combing and Clothing Wool, Ewes, Wether* and
Hoggets ; Ewes, 12 months and 2 days growth. To
illustrate some of the types of wool from the Western
slopes of Queensland. ' The sheep are station bred, the
progeny oi Collorov Rams. Ihe station is situated in
Long. 147° E., Lat, 29" S.


Class
growing.
Class
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Jute Fibre.
Class
643. Silk in the Cocoon and Eeeled,
GrEOUP. —Land Animals.
650. Birds.
Class
641. Cotton in the Stem, in the 8011, ginned and
baled.
CRIBB & FOOTE, Ipswich. Sample of Cotton, ginnsd, grown
near Ipswich.
CRIBB & FOOTE, Ipswich. Sample of Cotton, in the 8011,
grown near Ipswich.
CRIBB & FOOTE, Ipswich. Specimens of Cotton Plant
642. Hemp, Flax, Jute, Batnie, &c., in primitive
forms, and in all stages of preparation for spinning.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Flax Fibre.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Roseila Hemp
Fibre.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER. Brisbane. Sida Retusa Fibre.
MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Collection of
Queensland Fibres, grown and prepared by exhibitor,
as follow : —Ficus macrophylla, Ficus ruhigmosa,
Curchorm capsular is, Sida retusa (S. rhomb ifb Ha), Hibis-
cus tiliaceus, Hibiscus sorbifoiia, Hibiscus muiabiles,
Hibiscus heterophyllous, Hibiscus splendens, Phormium
tenax, Heroics long folia, Agave Americana, Agave
Americana variegata, Fowcroya gigantea, Abutilon
oxycarpmn , Dracaena draco, Dracaena Australis, Pan-
danus utilis , Pandanus spiralis, Yucca aioefolia, Yucca
gloriosa, Kerandrenia hookeriana, Agave dwarf, v.,
Ananassa sativa, Ananassa saliva, 8., Musa maeulata,
Musa superha, Musa purpurea, Seaforthia elegans ,
Maphia ruffia, Canersonia echinata, Bamhusa arundi-
nacea, Canna edulis, Gahnia aspera, Hxerotis brownii,
Cordyline cannaefolia, Dianella caerulea, Cymbidium
sauve, Flagellaria indica, Juncus communis, Abroma
augusta, Dombeya master ti, Linum usitatissimum, Linum,
C, Laportea gigas, Abutilon, Sps, Sanseviera cylindrica,
Cor chorus olitorius.
CHUBB C. F , Ipswieh. Collection of reeled Silk, grown by
exhibitor.
CHUBB, C. F., Ipswich. Silk materials, showing process from
the grain to the manufactured article ; grown in Queens-
land, and manufactured at Macclesfield.
TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. One pair of Aquita
Andax (wedge-tailed Eagle), mounted by A. Alder, Bris-
bane.


Class 652. Wild Animals.
639 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Two Native Cats,
1 Water Rat, 2 Scrub Wallabies, 1 Opossum, 1 Sugar
Squirrel, 1 Kangaroo, 1 Koala (native bear) with young,
1 Koala (native bear), 2 Rock Wallabies, 1 Kangaroo
Rat (male), 2 Rock Wallabies —mounted by A. Alder,
Brisbane.
GROUP— Machines , Implements, and Processes of Manu-
facture.
Class 653. Tillage, Manual Implements, Spades, Hoes,
Rakes, Animal Power Machinery, Ploughs, Cul-
tivators, Horse-hoes, Clod-Crushers, Rollers,
Harrows, Steam Power Machinery, Breakers.
640 McLEAN, A., Brisbane. One Two-Horse, Double Wheel
Plough, made by exhibitor.
641 STIRLING, J,, Toowoomba. One Plough. £8 10s.
EXTRA.
642 ARCHER & CO., Gracemere, Rockhampton. Samples of Sugar
Cane.
643 BAKER, THOMAS, Maryborough. Annato.
644 BAILEY, E. M., F.L.S., Brisbane. Herbarium of Queensland,
in 4 volumes.
645 COULDERY, W. H., Agestion Plantation, Beenleigh. Variety
of Sugar Cane.
646 CANNY & MORETON, Eaton Yale, Maryborough. Assort-
ment of Sugar Cane.
647 COATES, J. K., Brisbane. Collection of Cordials.
648 COATES, J. K., Brisbane. Collection of Aerated Waters.
649 DART, WILLIAM, Coleridge Mills, Brisbane. Assortment of
Sugar Cane.
650 DUVAL, LIONEL, Nebia, Maokay. Collection of Sugar Cane.
651 IVORY, J., Ipswich. Brooms made from Millet.
652 KING, G. MAITLAND, Bramscombe, Mackay. Samples of
Sugar Cane.
653 MURE AD Y, HUGH, Tekowai Plantation, Mackay. Samples
of Sugar Cane.
654 MACDONALD, J., St. Helena, Moreton Bay. Varieties of
Sugar Cane, grown at St. Helena.
655 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Varieties of
Sugar Cane, grown near Brisbane.
656 MACPHERSON, ALEXANDER, Brisbane. Specimens of
Fibre-producing Plants, growing and dried —Sida
retusa, Rosella, &c.
657 NBAME & CO., Herbert River. Samples of Sugar Cane.


658 ROEBUCK, G. W., Maryborough. Living Specimen of the
Ceradotus Forsterii, found in the Mary and Burnett
Rivers, having reddish colored flesh; is called the Bum ett
Salmon. The Ceratodus, which is the link between the
fish and the lizard, having gills and also one lung, is
the only living animal whose ancestory can be traced to
the cretaceous formation. The gills only are used when
the water is good, but when, through the rotting of
organic matter, the water is bad, the animal rises to the
surface and inhales fresh air through the lung. It is
capable of travelling some distance overland, when the
lung only is used.
659 SPENCE, D., Cairns. Bag of Scrub Soil, from Tropical
Queensland.
660 SPENCE, D., Cairns. Bag of Forest Soil, from Tropical
Queensland.
661 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Stuffed Specimen
of Ceratodus Forsterii, with preserved lung and con-
tents of stomach.
662 WILSON, J. W., Bowen. Varieties of Sugar Cane, grown in
Tropical Queensland.
DEPARTMENT VII.
HORTICULTURE.
GROUP.— Hothouses, Conservatories, Graperies, and their
management.
Class 711. Emit Trees under glass.
663 BARNES, J. J., Mackay Collection of Tropical and Semi-
tropical Fruit-bearing Plants and Trees, including
Cocoanut Trees, Bananas, Coffee, Tea, Pine Apples
(varieties), Rose Apples, Mangos, Custard Apples,
Brazilian Cherries.
664 HOCKINGS, A. J., & SON, Brisbane. Collection of Coffee-
bearing Trees.
Class 712. Orchids aud Parasitic Plants.
665 FITZALLAN, EUGENE, Bowen. Collection of Orchids.
EXTRA
666 QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Collection of Tropical and
Semi-tropical Plants, Shrubs, Trees, &c., from various
districts of Queensland.




Maps, &c 28
Maize 69
Machinery, &c 34
Malachite 6, 10
Malachite 6, 10
Marble 14
Marble 14
Marsupial Skins 37
Millet 69
Millet 69
Minerals ... 4—16
Model of an Hospital 33
„ Human Leg 35
Mines 16
Sewing Machine 35
„ Town Hall 31
N.
Natural History, Specimens of 28, 29, 30
0.
Olives 72
Oils, Essential 18,19
Orchids 98
Orchids 98
Ores 3
P.
Paintings, Oil ... 32
„ Water 32
Paper 24
Pepper, Cayenne 72
Photographs 33
Plants. Tropical 98
Ploughs 97
Plumbago 15
Porter 93
Porter 93
Potatoes, Preserved 85
Precious Stones 4,5, 11. 15
Precious Stones 4,5, 11, 15
Preserves 85
Preserves 85
Preserved Meats 36
Pyrites 6
Q.
Quicksilver, Sulphuret of 6
R.
Rams Heads 31
nams neaus
Rice, Appliances for Dressing 35
Rice 68
Rice, Ground 86
Rocks, Trappean, &c, 10
Roots, Collection of 86
Roots, Collection of 86
Rope 24
Ruling, Specimens of 24
Rum 93
INDEX
Saddlery 25, 26
Saddle Trees 26
Salt 15. 16
Salt 15,16
Sand, Moulding 15
„ Silicious, &c 15
„ oiucious, «c 10
Seeds, Grasses, &c 72
UvjDUO) VjldoSCSj Ooly. ..a ... ... ... I A
Sewing Machine 35
woniug iuauumc oo
Shells 12
KJUCiIO
Silk 96
„ Materials 96
Skins, Preserved 37
oivuao, rrcscrvtJU o/
Soap 18, 19
Soda 16
Soils 98
Specimens, Auriferous 8, 9
„ Ores, Rocks, &c. ... 10, 11
Spectacles 27
Spices 70
Spinifer 5
Spirits 93
Sponges 37
Stands, Ornamental Woods 39
Starches 86
Stentite 14
Stentite 14
Stones, Turkey 15
Sugar 87
Swedenborg’s Bible, Photo of 31
T.
Tea 70
Tailings 6,7, 10
Tapioca 87
Timbers, Collection of 39
Tin, Lode 5,6, 10
~ Stream 3,6, 10
„ Smelted 16
~ Trophy 16
Tobacco 69, 72
Tobacco 69, 72
Tongues (tinned) 36
Trophy Cups (indigenous woods)... 62
Trophy, Panels, woods 65
Tropical plants, &c 98
Turtle 37
Turtle 37
„ Soup 36
Tweeds, &c. Colonial 23
V.
Vegetables 69
Vehicles 25
W.
Walking Sticks 60
Wheat 68
Wild Animals 97
Wines 91
Wines 91
Wood Trophies 39
Wool 93, 95
Woollen fabrics 23


QiWpklle
IB IR. IR, T .A. .
The following list of typographical errors in the names , <fc., of
exhibits belonging to the vegetable kingdom has, by request, been prepared
by F. M. Bailey, F.L.S., Botanist, Queensland Museum -.
DEPARTMENT 11.
Page 19, class 201, exhibit 208, 2nd item from top, read Gelsemium,
(Gelsemium nitidum, Mich.)
Page 19, class 203, exhibit 218, E. citriodora. Page 22, exhibit 258,
4th line from bottom, read Dracsena draco, Linn.
Page 24, class 260, exhibit 266, read Sida retusa.
DEPARTMENT VI.-AGRICULTURE.
Group. —Arboriculture and Forest Products.
Page 44, classes 613 and 614, exhibit 408, item 35, G. parviflora, Lindl.;
item 38, E micrococca, E. v. Muell. Page 45, for Celastinse read
Celastrinese. Page 45, for Capparidse read Capparidete. Page 46, for
Sterculiacse read Sterculiacea?. Page 46, for Sapindacre read Sapindacese.
Item 66, for Andi. read Andr.; item 81, Eucalyptus; item 96, E.
Planchoniana, F. v. Muell; item 119, for tesido read Teredo. Page 53,
for Tileaceae read Tiliacese; for Cornacse read Cornaceae; item 156,
Excaecaria; item 159, for J. Mull read P. von Muell; item 164, for
Widd read Wedd; item 165, F. aspera, Forst; item 197, A. canescens,
Benth ; item 198, A. prooera, Benth ; item 200, P. ferrugineum, Benth ;
item 202, Castanospermura ; for Combretacae read Combretacese ; item
211, for F.M. read R. Br. ; item 231, Eremophila bignoniseflora,
F. v. Muell; item 233, Alphitouia; item 245, E. citriodora; Page
60, exhibit 409, cup No. 4, Tristauia; 11, Dissiliaria baloghioides,
F. v. Muell.; 18, C. pruniferum, F. v. Muell. ; 20, F. maculosa, F. v.
Muell. ; 22, E. Planchoniana, F. v. Muell.; 26 (?) Terminalia; 29, A.
Cunninghamii, Hook. ; 30, Sarcocephalus cordatus, Miq. ; 33, M.
acmenioides, F. v. Muell. ; 38, E. grandis, Wight.; 41, Acronychia;
42, A. glaucescens, Willd. ; 43, Trochocarpa; 45, E. cupressiformis,
Labill. ; 47, Peltophorum ; 4-8, Endiandra pubens, Meissn.; 51, C.
patentinervis, F. v. Muell.; 57, Livistona ; 65, L. lanceolatus, R. Br.;
70, Bruguiera ; 73, Casuarina; 76, Glycosmis ; 80, Excsecaria ; 82, C.
equisetifolia, Forst.; 85, Capparis; 90, A. salicina, Lindl.; 91, A.
cultriformis, A. Cunn.; 97, E. botryoides, Sm.; 98, Xylomelum pyri-
forme, Knight; 99, Eremophila; 100, Banksia; 101, M. geminata,
R. Br. Drop No. 3, R. psidioides, Benth.; 5, V. lignum-vitae, A.
Cnnn. ; 6, Mallotus philippinensis, Muell. Arg.; 7, C. equisetifolia, Forst.;


10, M. acmenioides, F. v. Muell.; 11, F. maculosa, F. v. Muell.; 12,
Eugenia ; 15, for F. M. read A. Gunn.; 17, V. lignum-vitse, A. Gunn.;
23, B. citriodora, F. v. Muell. ; 24, Rhodamnia; 28, Callistemon salignus,
D. C. Exhibit 410, third shelf, read Cypress pine; also, Dissiliaria
baloghioides, F. v. Muell. ; No. 1, Dissiliaria baloghioides, F. v. Muell.;
3, Pentaceras ; 5, Casuarina; 18, A. glaacescens ; 20, A. neriifolia ; 37,
E. Stuartiana; 42, Alphitonia ; 44, Notehea ; 45, Livistona ; 49, Careya ;
54, Myrtus ; 56, Capparis ; 59, E. crebra; 63, Exceecaria ; 70, Cypress
pine; 74, Tristania ; 76, R. psidioides; 83, Syncarpia; 88, Orites; 95,
Melaleuca; 99, Rhodamnia argentea; 104, Spondias ; 116, Leucopogou ;
128, Panax ; 129, Tarrietia; 134, Castanospermura ; 139, Tristania.
Class 615, exhibit 416, 2nd item, read E. siderophloia, Benth ; exhibit
424, 2nd item, read A. squamosa; exhibit 480, page 71, for Miqeli,
read Miquelii; for Millittia megasperm, read Millettia megasperrna,
F.M.; also read Laurus cinnamonsum ;at bottom of page, read Columba
root, Cocculus palmatus. Exhibit 495, No. 1, A. iutermedius, R. Br. :
25, E. leptostachya, Steud; 27 P. rara, R. Br.; 28. Cbloris; 29, Eragrostis
pilosa, Beauv. ; (Note —in Nos. 495 and 504, Beaur, is always put for
Beauv.—Palisot de Beauvois, the French botanist) ; —37, for S. M. read
Sw.; 41, for A. Sedga, read a Sedge; 48, Cyperus ; 55, Setaria; 57, H.
compressa, R. Br.; 58, P. flayidum, Retz.; 60, P. sauguinale, Linn. ;
63, A. sericeus, R. Br.; 64, A, pertusus, Willd.; 70, S. halepense, Pers.;
74, A. triticoides, F. v. Muell.; 76, I. laxum, R. Br.; 84, Anthistiria;
85, Lappago ; 88, Eragrostis. Exhibit 500, at bottom of page 77, read C.
olitorius. Exhibit 501, C. capsularis and C. olitorius. Exhibit 504,
3rd, Andropogon ; page 78, last but one, Astrebla; page 79, 3rd, for
Vaudich, read Gaudich ; 7th, Arthraxon ; 9th, for Sabill., read Labill.;
13th, C. divaricata, R. Br.; last on page 79, Deyeuxia. Page 80, 3rd,
D. loliiformis, F. v. Muell.; 12th, E. squarrosa, R. Br.; 14th, E. ovatus,
Beauv ; 15th, Eleusine ajgyptiaca, Pers.; 16th, Eleusine indica, Gscrtn.
Page 81, Ist, for Ther., read Thwaetes; 6tb, Lappago; 7th, Leersia;
Bth, Leptochloa; 13th, Pennisetum ; 15th, P. distichum, Linn. Page
82, 2nd, P. macractinium, Benth ; 13th, P. semialatum, R. Br. ; 14th
P. flavidum, Retz. Page 83, 3rd, P. decompositum, R. Br.; 4th, P.
trachyrhachis, Benth. Exhibit 505, 9th, A. triticeus; 10th, A. var.
chrysocephalus ; 14th, ; 15th, A. calycina ; 17th, B. arenarius ;
21st, C. ovata; 31st, Microlaena; 32nd, P. divaricatum; 39th, P.
maximum ; 49th, S. setacea.
f ; r
p*. v
Class 631, exhibit 528, 6th, read Batatas ; 7th, read Dioscorea; Bth,
C. macrorrhiza. Exhibit 529, Botanic Gardens, 4th exbibit, read M.
utilissima, Pohl, this also applies to the next exhibit; 6th, read Macroz-
amia.
Class 642, exhibit 635, Queensland Fibres; 7th, H. mutabilis; 11th,
Xerotes ; 22nd, Keraudrenia; 31st, Commersouia ; 35th, Xerotes.


|i|aq@2i pllfiii it»
EEBATA.
NOTES.
—♦—
No. B.—After a partial diagnosis of this tree at page 386, of Yol. 1,
Flora Australiensis, Mr. Bentham adds the following note : —“ Until the
flowers have been seen, this species must remain, in some measure,
doubtful.” Shortly after the publication of the above, about fourteen
years ago, the energetic botanist, Baron von Mueller, receiving further
and more complete specimens, determined the tree to be a Spondias,
naming it S. pleiogyna, Fragm. IY., and by this name it should have
appeared in this list.
46.—Probably the collector’s mistake. The tree is not known to
inhabit Queensland ; it belongs rather to Yictoria and Tasmania.
88. —A southern tree, and, so far as at present known, doubtful if
found in Queensland.
89. —There is a doubt about- the species Baron von Mueller designated
E. fibrosa, which will be rectified in the excellent work, Eucalyptographia,
which he is now engaged with.
102,106,137, and 176, are trees belonging more to the southern colonies.
If found in Queensland, must be quite on the border. Perhaps a mistake
of collector.
There are other minor errors, such, for instance, as the dropping or
misplacement of a letter in some of the abbreviations, etc.; but it is
hoped the majority will be found corrected by this list.






