

COLONIZATION
INDIA AND AUSTRALIA
COMPARED.
Ilepmrteb, fortlj from
“ THE INDUS AND ITS PROVINCES.”
By W. P. ANDREW,
AUTHOR OF “INDIAN RAILWAYS AS CONNECTED WITH THE POWER AND STABILITY OF
THE BRITISH EMPIRE IN THE EAST.”
ETC., ETC., ETC.
LONDON:
Wm. H. ALLEN & Co., 7, LEADENHALL STREET.
1858.
fsyev


EQUIVALENTS IN INDIAN AND ENGLISH CURRENCY.
12 Pie = 1 Anna = lid.
16 Annas = 1 Eupee = 2s.
100,000 Rupees = 1 Lac = £lO,OOO,
100 Lacs = 1 Crore = £1.000,000.
EQUIVALENTS IN INDIAN AND ENGLISH WEIGHTS.
80 Tolas = 1 Seer = 2 lbs.
40 Seers = 1 Maund =BO lbs.
2$ Maunds = 2240 lbs. == 1 ton.


to - 5 -■ y«^
COLONIZATION IN INDIA AND AUSTRALIA
COMPARED.
ENGLISH AGENTS, WANT OF. —PUNJAUB COTTON. KUMAON
IRON. —PLAINS UNFIT FOR EUROPEAN SETTLERS. —MINE-
RAL AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTS. HIMALAYAN AND IN-
TER-HIMALAYAN REGIONS. OFFSPRING OF EUROPEANS.
EAST INDIANS. RESOURCES AND CAPABILITIES.
KANGRA. TEA CULTIVATION. AUSTRALIAN IMMIGRA-
TION , ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF. INDIAN
IMMIGRATION, ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF.
SIMLA. KOTGUR. KUSSOWLEE. SOOBATHOO. IN-
DIAN AND COLONIAL IMMIGRATION CONTRASTED.
EFFECT OF INCREASE OF EUROPEANS ON TRADE OF
CEYLON. —EUROPEAN TROOPS CANTONED ON THE HILLS.
—LANDOUR. MARMA RANGE. MILITARY COLONIES
OF TIME-EXPIRED MEN. —SOLDIERS* CHILDREN.*
The partial colonization by Englishmen of the fertile
valleys and slopes of the lesser Himalayas which abut
upon and bound to the north, the Punjaub and Upper
India, is a subject well worthy the attention of statesmen.
Although we have occupied and ruled India with our
armies for more than a hundred years, we have made no
attempt as a people, to go and possess the land, and dwell
and plant homesteads as elsewhere. A European, until
comparatively recent date, was not even allowed to settle in
* In the preparation of these pages I have aided my personal
knowledge of the Himalayas and Upper India, by recent informa-
tion contained in Indian papers, particularly the “Lahore Chronicle.”


India. Having gained India by the sword, we have
ruled by the sword, and held her with a mailed hand,
and have hitherto only been in military possession—
encamped in the country. Now, however, the dawn of
a better era is at hand, the late rebellion has aroused us
with a voice of thunder to the performance of duties too
long delayed, or only partially and reluctantly performed.
The rebels might say nous avons change tout cela. In
their devilish devices they have unwittingly laid the foun-
dation of the real power of Britain in India. They have
been the instruments, bloody indeed, of the system that
will render England in truth the mistress of the East.
Every man possessed of common sense knows the value
of efficient communication not only in a commercial, but
in a country like India, in a political point of view. It
cannot be denied that with adequate steam navigation and
railway communication, a great economy in troops can be
effected, and that the revenues of a province must be
increased to a vast extent; it is, therefore, surprising that
this immense empire should have been so long left in the
background. <,
The telegraph and the rail will speedily give us such a
grasp of India as will render invasion from without
hopeless, and prolonged rebellion within impossible ; but
those symbols of knowledge and power will do more, they
will not only impart that necessary element to progress —
security—but they will directly promote in the most pow-
erful manner, commerce and general enlightenment.*
# “ Never since its discovery has the electric telegraph played so
important and daring a role as it now does in India. Without it the
Commander-in-Chief would lose the effect of half his force. It has
served him better than his right arm. By it he is enabled to direct
the march of his battalions, the movements of his artillery and


I am strongly impressed with, the belief that when the
means of intercommunication are improved in India, that
Manchester and other great manufacturing towns will be
induced to send English agents into the interior of the
country to purchase the raw materials, especially cotton, on
the spot where they are produced, instead of receiving as
cavalry, to receive news of their successes, to survey, as it were, at
any one time the whole position of his army and of its auxiliaries, to
communicate with the Governor-General and with his subordinate
generals, to sift the truth from the falsehood of native information,
to learn what posts are likely to be threatened, where the enemy
are in force, to spare his staff and his messengers, and yet to send
messages with clearness and despatch. So much for its importance.
As to the daring action of the telegraph, which includes, of course,
those who direct it, I need only observe that in this war, for the first
time, a telegraphic wire has been carried along under fire and through
the midst of a hostile country. Pari passu, from post to post it has
moved on with our artillery, and scarcely has the Commander-in-
Chief established his head-quarters at any spot where he intended to
stay for a few days when the post and the wire were established also.
The telegraph was brought into communication with, the Governor-
general at Allahabad, with Outram at the Alumbagh, with Calcutta,
Madras, Bombay, and the most remote districts over which the
system is distributed. It is mainly to the zeal, energy, and ability
of a young officer of the Bengal Engineers, Incutenant Patrick
Stewart, that these advantages are due. He is assisted, it is true,
by a few men, but he it is who devises and superintends the execu-
tion and the extension of the line from place to place. At one time
las men are chased for miles by the enemy’s cavalry—at another
time they are attacked by the Sowars, and they and the wires are
cut into pieces—again, them electric batteries* are smashed by the
fire of a gun, or their cart knocked to pieces by a round shot, but
still they work on —creep over arid plains, across watercourses, span
rivers, and pierce jungles, till one after another rude poles raise
aloft their slender burden, and the quick needle vibrates with its
silent tongue amid the thunder of the artillery. While Sir Colin Camp-
bell was at Cawnpore he could learn from Sir James Outram the
results of an attack before the enemy had disappeared from the field.
As he advanced towards Lucknow, the line was carried with or soon


at present the goods at the port of shipment through the
slow, expensive, and inefficient system of barter of the
native traders, and that other persons of intelligence may
be induced to settle in a country possessing every variety
of climate, and producing indigenously every product
necessary or agreeable to man. India, unlike our colonies,
is a densely peopled country, and labour is abundant and
cheap, an able-bodied labourer is paid 3d. per diem, and
after him; a tent was pitched near his, a hole was dug in the ground
and filled with water, and down dropped the wire from the pole
stuck up in haste, dived into the water otter-like, the simple magnet
was arranged, the battery set in play, and at once the steel moved
responsive to every touch. Owing to the extreme dryness of the
atmosphere and the power of the sun—which at this season bakes
the earth like a brick, the insulation of the current is nearly com-
plete. The wire is thick, and is not protected by non-conducting
coatings of any kind ; it is twisted round the top of a rude pole, 15
or 16 feet high, and, under ordinary states of the atmosphere, it is
found to answer perfectly. We had not been very long in the
Dilkoosha ere we saw, in dim perspective, the line of posts advancing
towards us, and soon the wire was slipped into one of the drawing-
room windows, and now it is at full work, surrounded by all the
shattered splendor r of the palace, inquiring after the Ghoorkas,
asking for more of something or other, exchanging ideas between
Sir Colin and Lord Canning, or flurrying along a newspaper message
to yourself, amid the whistle of the bullet, the roar of the round
shot, and all the feverish scenes of war.”—“ Times’ Special Corre-
spondent,” before Lucknow, 9th March, 1858.
“ What a glorious ihing it woidd have been, had the Euphrates
Yalley Pailway and the Scinde and Punjaub Pailway been accom-
plished facts at the time of the present insurrection. How it would
have ‘ astonished the Natives ’ to have seen a gallant British Army
landed at Lahore, within a month of the outbreak taking place!
and yet such a thing would have been possible, supposing the
Electric Telegraph to have been also completed so as to establish an
electric messenger between the Indus and the Thames.”—“Lahore
Chronicle.”


it is computed that three able-bodied men do as much in
the field as one good labourer in this country.
“ Such a country as this (India), with a fertile soil, and
navigable rivers, and a teeming population, may be a very
suitable field for enterprise of that description which we
may, for want of a better term, name f plantations .’ But a
plantation is widely (oh, how widely!) different from a
colony. In the former, the European is a director ; in the
latter, all ranks are European.”
In India there is no field for the bone and muscle of
the English peasant, what is wanted is the capital, the
enterprise, the skill of England to direct the many millions
of willing hands hanging listlessly in idleness to explore
the resources of a country known to he rich in mineral
treasures, and possessing a soil capable of returning three
harvests in the year to the most rude and inefficient
husbandry.
“ The harvest in the Punjaub this year,” says a local
paper, “ promises to be one of extraordinary richness.
The waving fields of golden wheat that meet the eye in
every direction, naturally suggest the question—what is
to be done with these bountiful crops ? The cultivator
will not benefit by them. A rich harvest is no advantage
to him, but rather the contrary, because, for to ant of the
means of transport, he is compelled to part with his produce
at ruinously low prices to meet the calls of the money
lender who eats into his very vitals. It may be set down,
and as Captain Cuttle would say, f made a note of,’ that
in the present state of traffic communications, a good har-
vest is detrimental to the cultivator !”
It is stated in a Punjaub Report that —“ In the Chapter
on Land Revenue, the enorinous and increasing produc-


tion of cereals beyond the present consumption, the pro-*
bable surplus produce amounting to a quarter, perhaps
half a million of tons annually, the quantity of unre-
claimed land capable of production, the great productive
power of the people, were demonstrated. Wheat of
excellent quality is grown, and this is eminently a corn-
producing province. Sugar-cane of first-rate quality is
already grown. Indigo of similar quality can be pro-
duced ; it is already exported to a considerable extent,
though at present of inferior quality, owing to the de-
fective mode of manufacture. It has been recently proved
that good linseed in considerable quantities can be raised.
If sufficient pains be taken, many hundred tons of fibre
can be prepared. From some parts good hemp could be
exported. From many thousand square miles, the saline
nature of the soil offers unusual facilities for the manu-
facture of saltpetre, which is even now largely made to
meet a foreign demand ; and from the same soil, carbonate
of soda could be profitably made. The numerous flocks
of sheep in the extensive pasturage of the central districts,
and in the hilla and valleys of the North, yield a wool
that is already exported, and which might become an ex-
port of magnitude. There are various articles of manu-
facture fit for exportation, such as the shawls, stuffs, silks,
and carpets of Umritsur, Lahore, Mooltan, Noorpore, and
Loodhiana. It were in vain to specify the amount which
might be exported by the rail, but none acquainted with
the Punjaub could doubt that the aggregate would be
enormous.”*
When addressing the Shareholders of the Scinde Kail-
way, in February, 1857,1 made the following observations
* Punjaub lleport, 1854 to 1856.


regarding the growth of cotton in the Punjaub, and the
use of Indian iron for Indian railways :
“ He (the Chairman) proceeded to draw attention to an
important production of the Punjaub which had not at-
tracted the attention which it merited. He alluded to the
growth of cotton. In a work which he published last year,
embodying his views in reference to the Scinde Railway,
the adaptation of the banks of the rivers of the Punjaub
for the growth of acclimated American cotton was parti-
cularly adverted to, and specimens which had been sent to
Manchester had been pronounced the finest of any grown in
India, and worth from 6d. to 6|d. per lb. This was a most
important subject, and deserving the most serious attention.
Cotton had been grown on the five rivers of the Punjaub
from time immemorial, and the extensive cultivation of
cotton might ultimately prove of national interest [hear,
hear]. This reference to the cotton of the Punjaub, natu-
rally brought him to the question to which he drew their
attention at the previous meeting—namely, the production
and manufacture of native iron. It was impossible to
separate the utilisation of the two materials ; for, as the
cotton could not be reached except at a great distance,
and the cost of transport affected the question of the prac-
ticability of its being brought profitably into the market,
every economy which could be effected in the cost of the
material of the iron way, must of necessity affect the cost
of production of cotton. They would never be able to
export cotton in any quantity from India, until they made
long railways ; and they never could construct long rail-
ways in India, until they could use native iron. The
reports which had been published by the Government in
reference to the iron of the north of India, were especially


interesting, as proving the abundance of all the elements
necessary to its manufacture—the ore, the clay for furnaces,
the lime for flux, and timber for fuel. Mr. Sowerby, the
engineer employed by Government, reported that there
were ample opportunities in the north of India for the
manufacture of 1,080,000 tons of iron a-year—a quantity
equal to the annual iron produce of Scotland. Nothing,
in short, was wanting but British capital and British en-
terprise to make the region from the Ganges to the Sarda,
the Staffordshire of India. From the report of this gen-
tleman, it appeared that excellent iron stone, in inexhaus-
tible quantity, was found lying on the surface, and in beds
of immense thickness, from, the Ganges to the Sarda river
—a distance of 135 miles; iron made at the experimental
works, which had been brought over to this country, had
been tested, and pronounced by all competent authorities,
to be of the very best quality, and especially adapted for
Railway purposes.”*
“ The production of iron in India, and the practicability
of its manufacture and applicability to engineering works,
is a point of great public interest and importance. The
manufacture of native iron for rails is second only in
importance to the construction of railways themselves in
India. From the recent researches of Lieutenant-Colonel
Drummond, there is now no doubt that iron, in every way
suited for rails, might be raised in any quantity at the foot
of the Himalayas, where iron ore is found in vast masses,
and where there is also abundance of fuel for smelting, lime
for flux and fire-clay for furnaces, with the advantage of
good roads, and navigable rivers, and canals for transport.
'* Proceedings of Second Annual General Meeting of Scinde
Railway Company, Feb. 18, 1857.


Thus, the great difficulty and expense of procuring materials
from Europe for Indian railways might be avoided; and
we may look forward to the day, and that not distant,
when the railways of the Punjaub and North-west Pro-
vinces would be made of native iron, and wrought by native
manufacturers. Hallways can never he constructed in India
on the extensive scale demanded hy the wants of the country ,
until Indian rails are made of Indian iron.
“ In the latter part of 1854 the Home authorities sent
to India, on my recommendation, a commission of mining
engineers and smelters to aid Colonel Drummond in
his important mineralogical researches in the provinces
of Kumaon and Gurhwal, and the foundation of the first
blast furnace in Northern India was laid on the 22nd
of November, 1855. The locality chosen is easy of access,
surrounded with enormous surface deposits of ore of the
finest quality, with abundance of fuel, lime, clay for fire-
bricks, and water power close at hand. India has now
a fair prospect of manufacturing her own iron ; we shall
therefore hear no more, we hope, of iron suspension
bridges being sent out from this country to span rivers
and ravines, whose sides are composed of a far superior
ore to that from which the bridge itself was made.*
Now that the experiments at the coal fields at Kotree
have proved so successful, it behoves the Government, or
the Scinde Railway Company, with the permission of Go-
vernment, to make explorations higher up the country,
where coal was discovered some twenty years ago.
In February, 1838, Sir Alexander Burnes reported to
Government the result of his enquiries for coal on the
* Tramroads in Northern India in connection with the iron mines
of Kumaon and Gurhwal. By W. P. Andrew.


borders of the Indus and the neighbouring countries.
Specimens of the coal were also forwarded, but whether
Government took any further notice of the subject since,
we are not aware. Veins of coal have been found in the
following places :
At Shukandra, near Kalabagh, about fifteen miles from
the Indus. It was found in abundance half way up a
hill, two miles north of the village, at the base of the hill
amongst sandstone, also three miles south of Shukundra,
and nearer Kalabagh, in a fissure of the rock. At Kohal,
and at Jamoo, in the Punjaub, near the Chenab.
Lieutenant J, Wood, 1.N., reported in July of the same
year, that coal was to be found on the east bank of the
Indus between Pinde Hadun Khan and Kalabagh, in the
neighbourhood of Joa, Meeala, and Nummul. In every
instance the discovered localities are the banks of deep
torrent courses. From Joa, westward to the Indus, coal
is well known to the inhabitants, and celebrated for its
medicinal qualities In cases of sprains and bruises, its
powder, taken internally, is a grand specific. But though
aware of its combustible nature, they are ignorant of its
use as a substitute for fuel.
Lieutenant Wood is also of opinion, that were the salt
range east of the Indus examined by a geologist, there is
ample reason to believe that discoveries of value to the
Government would be the result.
Regarding the existence of gold in the lesser Himalayas,
a recent correspondent, writing from the spot, affords the
following information:—“ It is, perhaps, not generally
known that gold is found in all the rivers of the Punjaub
before they leave the lower ranges of the Himalaya. At
Dekun, on the Sutlej, Nadown on the Beas, and Aknoor on


the Chenab, goldwashing is carried on to some considerable
extent. A few years ago, while travelling through the
Kangra Valley, I accidentally came upon a party of gold-
washers at a spot on the left bank of the Beas, about four
miles below the town of Nadown, and about six distant
from the famous Hindoo shrine of Jowalla-Mookee. Being
interested in the subject, I remained some time with the
people, watching their proceedings and asking them
many questions about their trade, all of which they
answered without the slightest reluctance. The spot
they selected was the junction of a small tributary
stream with the main rivers. It was very evident that the
metal had not come from the Beas, but had been carried
down the tributary in solution in the shape of the finest
dust, and precipitated at the confluence of the two waters.
At this spot the washers scooped up the sand and gravel
with their hands, placed it in a dark wooden platter, some-
thing like a shield, and subjected it to several washings.
A few minute specks of gold, hardly visible to the eye,
were generally the result. The whole process was rude
and clumsy in the extreme, yet in this way they generally
contrived to get (from a shroff in Nadown, who no doubt
cheated them) from two to four annas a-day. The
washers declared that they had never seen the gold in any
other shape than that of minute dust, and never found
it in any other place than at the junction of streams. In
their search for the metal they merely scraped the surface,
never going beyond the depth of 12 inches, seldom so
deep. It is just possible that the gold found in those
streams only exists in the shape above described; but it is
equally possible that it may yet be found in lumps, or at
all events in auriferous earth, in quantity sufficient to pay


for a more perfect method of washing. A people notorious
for their greed of the precious metals held California for
300 years in perfect ignorance of the treasures buried
under their feet; a California prospector, a man utterly
ignorant of geology, discovered in Australia that gold
which the Government geologist had reported was no-
where in existence. Should the above lines meet the eye
of any practical gold seeker, let me recommend him to
proceed to the hills, turn the course of one of those auri-
ferous streams, and sink a shaft. The result may richly
reward him for his trouble. 5,#
Much discussion has recently taken place in Parliament
and elsewhere regarding the European colonization of
India; and a Committee of the House of Commons has
been appointed to investigate the subject—this is signifi-
cant, but much more attention is at this moment concen-
trated on the impending changes in the form of the Home
Government of India ; but the consideration of the future
of India ought not to be dwarfed to mere questions of the
machinery of the administration. It has been well re-
marked that “ There ought to be another movement, the re-
sult of which may create an influence in that possession of
the Crown only second to that which may be expected to
result from good government, and that is, the throwing
open of India to British enterprise—in short, the begin-
ning of the colonization of that country. We have occu-
pied India, we have ruled it, well or ill, as the case may
be, but we have never thoroughly endeavoured to inocu-
late it with our commercial spirit. We have never sought
to apply to it the principle which has actuated us in our
dealings with our colonies; we have never sought to
colonise. Arguments, weighty enough in their way, have
* Lahore Chronicle.


been used against the adoption of this principle, and which
go to show the impossibility of establishing a large Euro-
pean population in India, owing to difficulties connected
with climate and habits. But with a view to working out
a system of colonization, such as can alone be adopted in
India, it is not indispensable to hare a large European
population. It is not European labour that is wanted in
Hindostan in order to develop its vast resources, but it is
the European, and, above all, the English mind that is
required for that purpose. It is knowledge, capability of
teaching the native cultivator of the soil how best to avail
himself of its productiveness ; it is the application of Euro-
pean science and skill to the art of production that is needed
to bring the growth of cotton, indigo, sugar, and tea of India
into relative proportion with its acres and its capabilities,
You dot the whole of that country with European admi-
nistrators, magistrates, judges, residents, and soldiers.
Why for every Englishman in the service of the Govern-
ment should there not be three or four representatives of the
English capitalist, in the shape of scientific agriculturists
and commercial agents ? There is nothing to prevent the
training and transmission from this country at an early
age of a class of men of this description, who would be
able to meet the climatic difficulties of life in India quite
as well as civil servants and military men; and, if due
attention be paid to quality, there need be no necessity for
numbers in such a system of colonization. Something of
this kind was done in our West Indian possessions, where
a comparatively few European supervisors of African
labour created colonies which in their day sent home
millionaires who used to rival the nabobs of the golden
time of the pagoda-tree. It is not, therefore, so very rash


an assertion to say that, by means of an intelligent and
well-directed European colonization, a new era may be
inaugurated in India which would gradually ameliorate
the condition of the native population, act favourably
upon the existing tenure of land, and operate on our
establishment in India by those moral and commercial
influences which will tend more surely and more readily
to amalgamate her with our empire than the presence of a
million of soldiers, or the most perfect machinery of
government which the art of man can devise.”
The plains of India are unfit for European settlers,
further than as masters of labourers; but in the capacity of
coffee, indigo, and, above all, cotton planters, zemindars,
manufacturers, clerks, master artificers, contractors,
men, there is room for an enormous increase of numbers,
and every encouragement ought to be given to their settling
in the country.
“ The European cannot be a hewer of wood, and a
drawer of water, in the same field with the Asiatic. Here
his function is to govern and to war, to instruct, direct
and educate, to root out the baneful superstitions and
noxious errors of the native mind; to unfold the beauties
of our creed, and propagate its life-giving truths through-
out the indigenous millions, and generally to develope
the grander spectacles of Science, Politics, and Commerce,
before the children of the soil. He may not descend into
the rough field of common labour, by the side of the black
man, nor earn his daily bread with the daily sweat of his
brow, in the same field of emulative toil with his coloured
brother. This is no theatre for the lower European in-
dustry, or the modest arts and toils of humbler European
life.”


(e Wc would not be understood to imply that, in this
quarter of the globe, man, simply because his skin is fair,
is exempt from the common ban of his race, from the ever-
lasting doom of “ labour and sorrow,” pronounced by
Divine lips on our fallen family. This is far from our
intention. All that we desire to express is, that in this
peculiar field, the labour and the sorrow meted out to us,
though haply nowise lighter in degree than that awarded
to our darker native brethren, differs from theirs essen-
tially in kind. We, as well as they, have our allotted
tasks, —but our allotted tasks are different and distinct
from theirs. An enquiry into the nature of those tasks,
nay a glance at their very designations as above recited,
would hardly fail to show that, however comparatively
brilliant ours may be, they are proportionately all the
more arduous and responsible. What they may gain in
attractiveness and eclat, they lose in facility and lightness.
We are not, by any means, exempt from exertion. We,
too, have our duties to perform; and it will be well for
us if, in the day of reckoning, we shall be deemed to have
accomplished them. To us much has been given; and
from us much, doubtless, will be required. But as the
talents we have received differ, at once in kind and in
degree, from, the talents bestowed upon our Indian fellow-
subjects, — so our labours and exertions, while they are
assuredly intended to be fully equal in degree to theirs,
are manifestly intended to be widely different in kind.
Occupying, as we do, so different a position in the scale
of civilisation and enlightenment from the natives of this
country, it were surely illogical to suppose that here our
occupations are to be similar to theirs. Not for this, we
may be sure, not for this were we led by the designs of


Providence across a pathless ocean to this distant land.
It was not for the performance of ordinary toils, and
common drudgery, that we were summoned from the
extremity of the globe, to a country which already pos-
sessed a population fully equal, in numbers and intelli-
gence, to such an ordinary task.
“ No, a tropical region, with a dense coloured popula-
tion, is no theatre for European colonising efforts, properly
so called.
“ In such a country, the European is called, as above
observed, to a higher role than that of common toil.
Here, he must be a master, a teacher, an instructor. He
is the officer of the indigenous ranks”'*
“ Difficulties are not insurmountable, and with the vast
extent of hill territory that bounds Hindostan to the west,
north and east, as well as the elevated lands that are to be
found in the mountainous districts of the Peninsula itself,
there is ample room for such an European population as
would be quite adequate to exercise a marked and irre-
sistible influence upon this country and its destinies.”!
The Himalayan and Inter-Plimalayan regions are
wonderfully adapted for the European constitution.
They are as salubrious, and generally cooler than a
great portion of Australia. Europeans can, if they
choose, work in the open air, in proof of which it is
stated that the strongest built house at one of the hill
stations was constructed entirely by European soldiers,
without any native aid whatever.
The offspring of pure European parents brought up in
the hills does not degenerate. Ample proof exists in
many fine young men and women now in the country.
* Calcutta Ueview, March, 1858.
f Indian Empire.


East Indians do not degenerate in the hills; on the con-
trary, they improve. Those not confined to the desk have
often a fine colour in their cheeks.
In Australia, there is no navigable river with the ex-
ception of the Murray, to a limited extent, few running
streams, no water power, very little fertile soil, the climate
is arid, the whole continent does not produce one single
indigenous edible fruit, root, or grain, the very timber is
so heavy and hard that it sinks in water, and turns the
edge of carpenters’ tools not specially made for the purpose.
The Kangra and many other valleys of the Himalayas
are of great fertility. In them we see the astonishing
spectacle of the productions of the temperate and torrid
zones growing side by side, the creeping rose intertwining
its branches with the bamboo, and the wild violet
and tulip flowering round the roots of the plantain.
Further in the interior, there are inexhaustible forests
of pine ; a rich vegetable loam, on which all the fruits
and vegetables of Europe will thrive in perfeetion.
In Kanawur, the vine unpruned, uncultivated, growing
like a bramble in the hedges, yields a grape unequalled in
the world. Water power everywhere abounds. The
wool trade might be increased to any amount. Gold is
found in fine dust, but only at the confluence of certain
streams. What is still more valuable than gold,—iron
and coal exist in the hills; the former in extraordinary
abundance. Following the lead of the Government, Eu-
ropean enterprise has already made some progress in the
cultivation of the tea plant in the hilly regions of India.
Along the Himalaya range, there is not a hill slope from
3,000 to 6,000 feet in elevation, which is not more or less
adapted for tea cultivation. India can, and will, one day,
supply the world with that commodity.


From Deyrah to Kashmcre, various localities present
themselves in every sense calculated for the growth of the
tea plant. Simla and Kussowlie, already possessing during
the summer a considerable number of residents, would
afford a limited market on the spot. The vegetation here
resembles that of the locality where the plant is found
growing spontaneously, and the climate is, in my opinion,
from a considerable experience, not to be surpassed.
The great drawback to investments in the cultivation of
the tea plant is the circumstance that no return can be
expected for the first five years, the plant requiring that
time to arrive at maturity. Those having other resources
might, however, venture with every prospect of obtaining
a profitable return. Located in these favoured regions
and surrounded by all the charms of rural life, a few Euro-
peans might in time become holders of extensive tracts of
land, which would, by improved modes of irrigation and
cultivation, enable them to realise considerable profits.
Government is always ready to facilitate the settlement of
European families at any point of this extensive chain of
mountains ; and some measures, we believe, have been
adopted by the government of the Punjaub for affording
Europeans every assistance in settling down near Kangra,
or in the lesser ranges, where the fir, chestnut, and plane
abound.
The number of chests of tea brought to the hammer at
Almora in December, 1855, amounted to 908, containing
9,612 lbs. and 6 ozs. Of these, 537 chests were purchased
by Europeans, and 371 by natives. One hundred and
three chests were bought by residents in the Punjaub,
where the new teas are especially appreciated; 96 for the
North Western Provinces ; 16 for Nainee Tal ; and 322
for Almora and its visitors. The natives who bought were


High.
Low.
Aver.
Gunpowder ..
. . Rs. 4 12 Rs. 4
8
Rs. 4 8
2
Young Hyson
..,,48
1
8
99
2 14
5
Hyson skin . .
..,,0 7
0
5
99
0 8
20
Souchong
.. „ 2 15
1
1
99
2 9
11
Pouchong
.. „ 1 11
99
0
14
99
1 2
10
Bohea ..
..,,09
99
0
7
99
0 7
10
all residents of Almora or Naince Tal. Three kinds of
green tea (gunpowder* young Hyson, and Hysonskin) and
three kinds of black (Souchong, Pouchong, and Bohea)
were sold at Almora, and fetched per pound : —
The quantity sold at Deyra amounted to 308 chests,
containing 3,588 lbs. 8 ozs., of which 290 chests were
bought by Europeans, and 18 only by natives. None but
black tea (Souchong and Pouchong) was offered, and
realized very high prices, viz.;—
Sigh. Low. Aver.
Souchong .. Rs. 5 4 0 Rs. 2 4 0 Rs, 2 8 11
Pouchong.. „ 2 12 0 „ 1 5 0 ~ 1 10 2
Nearly all the second class or cheap teas were purchased
by natives, showing that all that is wanted are sufficiently
low prices to create a great demand. Those that now rule
are still too high for natives, and must continue to be called
“fancy” ones, so that the speculation must pay hand-
somely.
The Kangra teas were disposed of at Hoosheearpoor in
the month of January, 1856.
The following information regarding the cultivation of
tea in the Kangra Hills is taken from the Report of the
Administration of the Punjaub for 1855-56 :
“ The cultivation of tea by Government in the Kangra


Hills is flourishing under the superintendence of Doctor
Jameson; the article is of good quality, and is eagerly
bought up at high prices. The following is the result of
the sales (held in the spring) for the two last years: —
lbs. Us. A. P.
1854-55 . 1.628 3,140 10 8
or £ 314 0 0
1855-56 . 5,077 6,854 3 10
or £ 685 0 0
Rs. A. P. £ s. d.
Average price per lb. . 1 5 7 , 0 2 8|
Expenditure .... Rupees 8,502 or £B5O per annum.
There is a large quantity of land in the Kangra district
fit for this culture, and efforts are being made to induce
the peasants to undertake the cultivation.” #
It is exactly seventy years since the first settlers landed
on the shores of Sydney Cove. They had for many years
to struggle against a host of troubles. Amongst other
difficulties, they were frequently threatened with starva-
tion. Aged men tell the stranger how, in their boyhood,
the inhabitants of Sydney were placed on a daily allowance
of biscuits and salt pork, how tea was sold for its weight
in silver, the silver being put in one scale and the tea in
the other.
How then does it come to pass that Australia has become
the most valuable of our colonies ; that she exports more
wool than all the rest of the world put together ; that she
has immense vineyards and hop gardens ; that she is culti-
vating cotton with success ; that she has glass houses and
potteries ; that she manufactures woollen fabrics; while in
that part of India most fit for colonization, the traveller
meets with few marks of European civilization ?
* Respecting Grants of Land vide Appendix.


The reason is simply this, that in Australia emigration
lias been encouraged and rewarded by Government, while
in India it has been until lately dreaded and repressed.
In Australia, up to the year 1830, every free immigrant
who could show that he had brought out to the colony
money, or property of any description, to the value of
£5OO, received a free grant in perpetuity of a section of
640 acres of land. After a certain lapse of time, all im-
provements, such as clearing, stumping, fences, building,
&c., wnre valued; if of £5OO valuation, he received another
section of the same size; if of £l,OOO, two sections ; and
so on. He likewise received convict labour free of all
charge, except the ordinary rations; and many other
advantages. Many half pay and retired officers of the
army and navy were made Magistrates, or received small
appointments under Government, which brought them in
from £lOO to £3OO per annum.
In India, up to the year 1833, no white man could settle
without a license from the East India Company. The
license was removable, and the holder subject to deporta-
tion at the will and pleasure of Government. This law,
I am told, still applies, although never enforced, in our
newly acquired provinces, viz., the Punjaub, Nagpore,
Burmah, Oude.
So recent is our acquaintance with those portions of our
widely-extended dominions best adapted for the residence
of Europeans that at the neighbouring stations of Bareilly,
Moradabad, and Shahjehanpore, the existence of the beau-
tiful lake at Nainee Tal was as much a mystery, up to 15
years ago, as were the sources of the Niger.
Perhaps there is no part of India which approximates so
much to a European colony as Simla, which is about
8,000 feet above the level of the sea, and situated on the


lower Himalayas, overlooking the extensive plains watered
and bounded by the Sutlej and Jumna.
As we ascend the first elevation towards Simla,flowers and
shrubs of our own land surround us till we descend the
precipitous road to Sabathoo. Here the fir-fringed forests,
which form so striking a feature in the Kussowlie Hills,
disappear; and we pass through barren rocks here and there
dotted with some solitary specimen of the vegetable world.
Approaching Simla, the shades and appearances of the
vegetation which abound at Kussowlie, with slight varia-
tions, again appear; and as we enter Simla, nothing can
exceed the pleasing variety which greets the traveller from
the plains. Varieties of the pine, including the gigantic
deodar or Himalayan cedar, the oak, and many other
timber trees —the apricot, the apple, the cherry, and
other fruit trees are natives of the soil, interspersed with
black currant and raspberry bushes, and amongst the
flowering shrubs, the rhododendron is the most conspicu-
ous, which here attains to the size of a tree, and in the
months of April and May, covered with large crimson
blossoms, and growing in groves along the hill-sides, adds
at once a novel and beautiful feature to the scene. Simla
is a paradise as to climate compared with the heat of the
plains between April and June. There, amid cloud
and the grateful shade of fir-fringed elevations, the ex-
hausted frame inhales the fresh breeze from the broad snow
belt of the Hindoo Koosh, and one insensibly forgets all
about the fever heat of Delhi or Agra. The bazaar at
Simla is well supplied at all seasons ; and living, although
expensive compared to the cheapness of the Dooab, is less
than one-half the sum at which similar comforts could be
secured in Europe. The scenery during a fine day is
magnificent, the


distance, appear like a map, while the devious course of
the river Sutlej is discernible as far as the eye can reach.
Fields and villages appear distinctly marked out in
the landscape. Here and there a blue line of mist, fol-
lowing the irregular course of the lateral ridges which
extend into the plain, marks the course of some pure spring
whose sweet waters are pouring down to cool the parched
sufferers below. From the sub-Himalayan range, the great
Saul Forest descends into the plain of Bengal, and affords
another quarter inviting enterprise. The area of this forest
has been roughly estimated at fifteen hundred miles. This
is truly a land of promise, looking to the demand for timber
for the Punjaub and other Bail ways, and the steady
market throughout the year for local requirements.
At Simla, a resident pays much more in yearly ground
rent for his land than he could buy it for, out and out,
in many of the English colonies, and is hampered by
many restrictions as to cutting down timber on his own
estate; and pays for labour at a rate much above what
it not only costs in the neighbouring native states, but
in the adjoining British possessions.
“ Simla is at present the most important of the hill
towns, and is so far metropolitan that it has been the fre-
quent residence of governor-generals, lieutenant-governors,
commanders in chief and high authorities. Like most of
these sanitaria, it is perched on a narrow ridge of moun-
tains, with dwellings scattered on every available spot,
often of narrow area. It was only in 1819 that the first
English dwelling was erected here by Lieutenant Boss,
but by 1841* it had become a regular English town, and
* Many years prior to 1841, Simla had become a place of great
resort by the English.—W. P. A.


has since much increased. Sometimes some twenty thou-
sand persons are temporarily assembled, when the Gover-
nor-General takes up his abode in the town. In Simla
and the neighbouring towns and villages, are to be found
many residences. Christchurch is a costly edifice with an
organ. There is a Baptist chapel. There are boarding-
schools for boys and girls, and five district schools of the
Church Missionary Society. The local governor, called a
commissioner, is provided with numerous functionaries
and establishments. This is one of the few places in India
which has a municipality, and the only one which has an
English municipality, an institution which it is to be hoped
will rapidly extend throughout India. There are an ob-
servatory, large dispensary, bank, library, hotels, assembly
rooms, type, copper-plate, and lithographic printing-house,
and many shops.
“ Boileaugung is a village near Simla, named after a
distinguished engineer officer. General Boileau.
“ Juttogh is the military station near Simla.
“ Kotgur is a town 50 miles north of Simla. Here are
a Church Mission, a boys’ and girls’ school of the Church
Missionary Society, a school of industry, and station of
the Moravian Missionary Society. In the districts are
five boys’ schools. The Moravian Missionaries have
chosen this as a temporary residence, in order to penetrate
the interior from this point, and establish missions among
the Tartars and Mongols. The tea cultivation has been
successfully introduced in this district.
“ Kussowlee, in the Simla district, is a sanitary station,
having large establishments, but suffering from the want
of water, which has to be brought from a mile and a
quarter distance. The buildings are distributed around a


hill of five miles in circuit. There are a church and
Roman Catholic chapel. Here is the residence of another
Commissioner. A brewery has been successfully estab-
lished here likewise.
“ Sanawur, near Kussowlee, is the seat of a most inter-
esting establishment, the Lawrence Military Asylum. This
was founded by that great man Sir Henry Lawrence, and
is one of the munificent foundations of that noble family.
In 1856, it contained 200 boys and 200 girls, orphans of
English soldiers, who, among other employments, are
taught printing, bookbinding, and electro-telegraphy.' It
is likewise the Military Normal School for training school-
masters for the Bengal army.*
“ Dugshaie in the same region is a station of Sirmoor,
having an established church and a Roman Catholic
church. In the district a hill regiment is raised. The
place is 16 miles from Simla.
“ Soobathoo, another of these towns, is by some pre-
ferred to Simla, The population is chiefly composed of
native immigrants and refugees from the hill states. There
are a church, American Presbyterian chapel, Roman
Catholic chapel, and Masonic Lodge. It is a sanitarium,
and one of the most healthy stations for troops. In the
neighbouring valleys and steep mountain sides, cultivation
is industriously carried on, the produce being rice, maize,
wheat, barley, millet, ginger, cotton, opium, tobacco, oil-
seeds, red pepper, hemp, vegetables, apricots, peaches,
walnuts, apples, wild pears, raspberries, strawberries, and
*' Up to 31st December, 1857, the number of children admitted
into the Asylum was 552; viz.:—girls, 244; boys, 308. At the
close of 1857, there were in the Asylum—girls, 143; boys, 198:
total, 341.—W. P. A.


Field Officers, of 25 years’ service
£600
0
0
Do. do. of 20 „ ...
500
0
0
Do. do. of 15, or less
400
0
0
Captains of 20 years’ service, or upwards .
400
0
0
Captains of 15, or less
300
0
0
Subalterns of 20, or upwards
300
0
0
Subalterns of 7, or upwards .....
200
0
0
melons, being the varied growth of several climates in
close neighbourhood.
“ To Simla and Soobathoo a railway has been proposed
from the main lines, but it languishes at present in con-
sequence of the disturbed state of the neighbouring parts
of India. Railway communication, however, once estab-
lished, these military regions would pour down large sup-
plies of troops, fresh and vigorous, as they have done
small bodies for the wars on the frontier and for the pre-
sent intestine war.”*
It is a strange anomaly that the East India Company
should, with their usual liberality, have obtained for their
officers privileges in regard to land in certain of the Eng-
lish colonies, which privileges they partly withhold in
their own dominions. By general orders of the Governor
General in Council, dated the 18th January, 1854, a
remission in the purchase of land is granted according to
the following scale :
In a little work called “ The Settler’s Home,” the price of
land is stated as follows in the under-mentioned colo-
nies :
* Paper by Mr. Hyde Clarke, in the “Journal of the Society of
Arts,” May 21, 1858.


£ s. d.
Nova Scotia per acre. ... 019
Cape Breton „ ... 0 1 9
New Brunswick „ ... 0 2 8
Canada „ ..,,050
The Cape „ ...020
Natal ~ ...020
New Zealand „ ...200
Australia „ ...100
Van Dieman’s Land „ ~100
The upset price in Ceylon is also £1 per acre ; and in
the United States of America, it is a dollar.
In India, however moderate the nominal price of land
might be, while the purchase in fee-simple is impossible,
the number of Englishmen of capital and enterprise will be
comparatively few who will select the most highly favoured
regions for their Lares and Penates, where neither they
nor their descendants could ever become the undoubted
lords of the soil they themselves might reclaim from the
wilderness.
“ Mr. Ewart’s motion for a Commission of Enquiry into
Indian Colonization, seems to have created an attention
not usually bestowed on Indian inquiries. The defenders
of the old policy of course resist, aware by instinct that
the presence of a hundred thousand settlers would bring
that regime to a close. Its opponents are favourable,
seeing that the opposition to interlopers may be made a
strong locus standi for attack. Both parties, however, fall
into one mistake. The one, exaggerating the difficulties
of climate, bluntly declares colonization in India a dream.
The other, softening down all those difficulties, talks as if
the settlement of hand-labourers were only impeded by
the Company.


“The popular impression about the climate is only par-
tially correct. To say that Europeans cannot work in
India, is to make an assertion refuted by every planter and
engineer in the country. Is ifr they, with their brown
faces and strong frames, or the whitened men of the desk,
who enjoy health in India? Yet the one class is constantly
exposed to the sun, the other as carefully secluded from
its influence. Seven millions of white men in the Southern
States live and work under a sun as fierce, and amid a
miasma as deadly, as that of Bengal. At the same time,
while we believe Europeans can work, we do not believe
the plains are fitted for colonization in that sense. The
profit which contents a native, would be destitution to a
European. No Englishman, working with his hands at
unskilled labour, could in the plains hope even for enough
to eat. It is different in the hills. There, relieved from
competition, and devoted to cultivations the native has
never attempted, the settler might enjoy a rough plenty
preferable to English city life.
“Even in the hills, however, we recommend no coloniza-
tion of this kind. There is a wider field for such labour,
in Australia, in a better climate, (?) and amid a community
free from the vices of the Asiatic. To plant English
colonies properly so called in Kumaon, might be well for
India, but it would be a waste of power for the remainder
of the empire. It is not as a labourer but as a captain of
labour that the European must attempt to colonize. It is
by the union of his intelligence and enterprise, with the
patience, industry and numerical power of the native that
the improvement of India is to be secured. That in such
a position he can realise a competence not only for him-
self but for his men, has long since been proved. A hun-
dred ryots are starving on a square mile of jungle in


Cachar. A European settles among them, clears the
land and plants tea. He makes a reasonable income,
which in a few years he carries away, but the ryots mean-
while have been trebly paid. The fortune is not made
out of them, but out of the soil, which English knowledge
has applied to new uses, and invested with a new fertility.
The only result of Mr. Ewart’s Committee, if it have a
result, must be to ascertain the obstacles which prevent
this species of colonization. Are there any ?
“Ve believe there are two, to which all others may be
ultimately reduced. The one is the want of a title to the
soil, the other of a protection against perjury. European
improvement is vain, unless the European can by some
sacrifice or some expenditure of money be made a proprie-
tor in fee. At present he cannot. In some form or
other, he must be always a leaseholder, a man paying rent
to a zemindar or to government. Moreover, he must be
a renter with his right to his land depending on the pay-
ment of that rent. Government will not seize his pro-
perty, distrain his goods, cut down his trees, or in any
other way realize the rental for themselves. They take
the estate itself with all its f betterments,’ and put it up to
auction among men combined to keep down the price. It
may be argued that with low rents this can be of no im-
portance. It is. In America or Canada, Australia or
New Zealand, the new settler, from prejudice or wisdom,
we care not which, will not rent. In New York you may
tell the three counties held by the Rensselaers, who for
generations would not sell, at a glance by the absence of im-
provement. In India the desire to own is doubly strong.”
“ And there is a perhaps unreasonable distrust of agency of
all kinds. No man, therefore, will invest capital in property
of which he may be deprived in a day by a mere failure to


pay up to the hour. This is the first grand obstacle to be
remedied, and we would ask Mr. Ewart to ponder a single
fact. No man in India, by any sacrifice, or any exertion,
or any payment can obtain one inch of ground in fee
simple. The f Saturday Review,’ with its usual contempt
for truth, says we ask for exemption from the land rent.
We do not. We ask simply to be allowed to capitalize
the land rent, to be permitted to pay down once for all a
sum that shall relieve us of insecurity.
“ The second obstacle is the danger to which we are
exposed of losing our own laws. It is useless to say the
Legislature has abandoned the Black Act. The Legisla-
ture is distrusted—and with reason. If Lord Canning
ordered them to pass an act placing every European under
Mahommedan law, it would be passed without a word.
They did pass without debate an act exposing every Euro-
pean owner of book or newspaper property to confiscation
without trial, and the confidence then lost can never be
regained. We need an act of Parliament, providing that
no European shall be tried criminally save by a jury of
not less than seven other Europeans, and by no other law
than that in force in Great Britain. This provision, fol-
lowed by a clause compelling Government to sell all wild
lands at thirty shillings an acre, would soon settle the
question of colonization. In ten years, mines, tea planta-
tions, coffee farms, horse breeding estates, would attract a
hundred thousand Englishmen who, though they love a
free press and hate official interference, do not mutiny.”*
But even under existing circumstances cotton-planters
and agents would find in the plains profitable occupation—
while tea-planters, timber-merchants, and dealers in wool
# Friend of India.


would have in the hills an ample scope for their capital
and energy.
The policy of the East India Company was no doubt
dictated formerly by a praiseworthy and benevolent desire
to protect the mild Hindoo from European oppression, and
also perhaps, they had the example of the rebellion of the
United States of America before their eyes.
It is now admitted that the extensive introduction of
railways and other improved means of communication are
essential not only to the defence and peaceful possession of
India, but to the development of her resources, and the influx
of Europeans of capital and enterprise would, it is appa-
rent, vastly increase the value of these modern improve-
ments, and enhance the power of the state to overawe the
disaffected, and to encourage the well-affected and indus-
trious. This was recently well illustrated, by the conduct
of indigo planters, railway engineers, and others, not con-
nected with the Government, in Bengal and the North-
west Provinces, who, under the most trying circumstances,
afforded the most valuable assistance to the civil and
military authorities.* The railways would make the action
* As an illustration, I would point to tlie following graceful tribute
to the memory of Mr. Venables, an Indigo planter, by the Governor
General, the value of which, will be fully appreciated by the com-
munity of which he was the representative man. The glowing patriot-
ism, noble sacrifice, and manly heroism of Mr. Venables, have made
his name a household word in India. It now remains to be seen
how our non-official countrymen treat the memory of one who was
pre-eminently an honour to his class :
“ It is with deep regret that his lordship has to announce the sub-
sequent death of Mr. Venables, of Azimghur, from the wound re-
ceived by him while gallantly assisting in the pursuit of the rebels,
under Kooer Singh.
“ Mr. Venables, although bound to the service of the State by no


of government, whether for punishment or protection,
equally prompt and efficacious, while the moral influence
of the skill and enterprise of the European settlers would
powerfully promote the development of the resources of
the soil, and the progress of the people in commerce and
civilization.
As connected with the increase of Europeans in Ceylon, a
local paper of recent date speaks with pardonable exultation
of the progress of the export and import trade of that
colony during the last seven years. “In the periods under
review, our exports of goods, the produce of Ceylon, have
more than doubled ; the value, in 1857, being £1,983,091,
against £993,482, in 1851. The value of produce ex-
ported from Ceylon, in 1857, is thus close on two millions
sterling, or at the rate of 255. a head for the population. If
India exported at the same rate as Ceylon, the value would
be about two hundred and twenty-five millions, instead of
about forty millions as at present. But then, in the period
between 1887 and 1857, the independent Europeans in
Ceylon increased from about sixty to more than 600,
Although at present we have only one European regiment
in Ceylon, yet it appears that to an Asiatic population
of about 1,690,000, we have 2,500 Europeans, and 4,000
East Indians. The proportion seems small enough, but
about 2,000 of the Europeans being adult males, it is quite
sufficient. Having now obtained the finally corrected
figures from the Custom House, we are able to say that,
instead of 34,000 cwts. of coffee worth £106,000, which
tie, save his courageous and patriotic spirit, had rendered the most
valuable assistance to Government from the commencement of the
mutinies, and had been greatly distinguished by his intrepidity and
energy, tempered with a singularly calm and sound judgment.
“ The Governor General records, with much sorrow, his sincere
respect for the memory of Mr. Venables.”


Ceylon exported in 1887, when the independent Euro-
peans did not exceed 60; the export of the same article in
1857, with 600 independent Europeans in the island, was
602,000 cwts., worth as closely as possible 1J million
sterling. In 21 years the value of the trade of Ceylon
(notwithstanding a great fall in the price of one staple
article, cinnamon), has increased as nearly as possible
eightfold.*
Europeans can live anywhere in India, but in the
Himalayan regions alone can they live and enjoy life as
they do in England. Railways once properly established,
one hundred thousand Europeans located in the hills
might alike defy native treason at Delhi, and Russian ag-
gression from the steppes of Central Asia. Many European
officers and soldiers, men with large families are willing to
spend the remainder of their lives on the Himalayan
slopes. Give them but the same privileges granted to
them in the colonies, and all difficulties in the way of
colonization will speedily disappear.
The saving of life, and therefore of money, that would
accrue by having the reserve of the European army
cantoned in the hills is evident.
A resident at Landour, in the month of January last,
states that “ the weather up here, so far, has been superb,
and uncommonly mild all December, and within the last
day or two, when we have had very sharp frosts, and a
shower of snow on the 20th. Yesterday morning the
thermometer stood at 29, and ice of nearly an inch thick.
Rain or snow is much wanted, and if the dry weather con-
tinues, the puharees apprehend a famine. I have seen by
the papers, that Government contemplate cantoning eight
European regiments in the hills; as a resident here, I can
* Ceylon Observer.


give some information of several eligible sites in this
locality. First, there is a fine situation for one or more
corps about sixteen miles east of Landour, on a continu-
ation of the same ridge called Dunoultee, averaging 7,000
feet above the sea, well supplied with wood and water,
and with a good deal of table-land all along the top of the
ridge, and not much further from the Doon than this place;
the ridge running nearly parallel with it, from N.W. to
S.E. a good road could be made from the foot of the hill
to Dunoultee, not exceeding nine miles ; and from the
base to Deyrah would not exceed an ordinary march of
twelve or fourteen miles. Much nearer this is another
eligible site on the edge of the new Rajpoor road, about
half-way between the terminus of the road at the Mus-
soorie bazaar and Rajpoor, about five miles from the latter
place; it is a spur of nearly level land, projecting out into
the valley which runs down from the centre of Mussoorie
to the Doon, and at its broadest part; well open both to
the Doon breeze during the day and the northerly wind
at night blowing down the valley. The site is occupied
by a village called Bhatoo, and there is a good deal of cul-
tivation on the level ground adjoining it. A copious
spring of water runs across the road on almost the same
level, and within a short distance. The new road men-
tioned, is available for carts or trucks to and from Rajpoor,
and a great convenience for the conveyance of regimental
stores, and a short branch road would connect the place
with the old Rajpoor road which runs above it. This site
is higher than Jeripanee, and must, I should say, be as
much as 5,200 feet above sea level, as high as Almorah.
There is also a fine level site, of some extent, on the
Jeripanee ridge, half way up to this from Rajpoor, looking
down upon the Doon, and well wooded ; but it labours


under one great want; water has to be procured from
some distance. This is about 5,000 feet above the sea.
“ Further in the interior is a magnificent site, which
might accommodate a brigade; but the distance might be
an objection. It lies along the highest part of the Marma
range (called Tyne), the nearest part about twenty-five
miles from this. It extends from below the peak of Tyne
for above six miles in a westerly direction; for about two
miles it is nearly level, from 9,000 to 8,500 feet above the
sea; and thence slopes gradually down the shoulder of the
range to the village and valley of Roree, a fine broad
valley, about 5,500 feet above the sea. On the east side
of the peak of Tyne the range also stretches away several
miles, and from 9,000 to 8,000 feet in height. The whole
of this range is well wooded with fine forest trees, chiefly
oak, and the lower slope abounds with fine cedar trees ;
water must be plentiful, also, for a spring gushes out on
the table-land at a height of near 9,000 feet, and some fine
streams rise in it and find their way through the Roree
valley to the Jumna, not far distant. A good road could be
easily constructed from Mynporee via Roree, at the foot of
the range, and not twenty miles from the Waverley Hill” #
On a recent occasion, a General Officer who had filled
the important post of Chief Engineer in the Punjaub, gave
the following opinion as the result of his experience.
“ One great deficiency in India was the almost total
absence of trustworthy and well instructed European sub-
ordinate agents, which was the first difficulty to be
encountered in the prosecution of any enterprise, or the
execution of any great works in India. The author pro-
posed that this defect should be remedied by training the
children of the European soldiers in India in industrial
* Delhi Gazette.


establishments, to be formed in the Himalayas; and he
showed that thousands of English soldiers continually
perished in India, without adding to that very element
in the settled population of the country which recent
events had shown to be so much required. Those children
who were born in the barracks died in the plains, in
the ratio of four out of every five. There were at this
moment 900 children of soldiers at the station of Hum
Hum, near Calcutta, most of whom might be saved and
be turned into useful overseers, trained agriculturists, and
teachers of various branches of skilled industry, if they
could be removed to the hills. The author also proposed,
with a view to increase the European population, and the
settling in India of the lower and middle classes, that the
permission for the marriage of soldiers going to India, should
be extended beyond its present limit of 12 per cent,”*
Great good would also result from settling in the hill
regions, time-expired men of European regiments. The
veteran soldiers who as invalids perform garrison duty in
the plains, and end their days at such places as Buxar
and Chunar, in comparative idleness and discomfort, might
lead pleasant and useful lives in the hills, where not only
would their own existence be prolonged, but their children
might be reared to supply the place of their fathers in the
effective ranks of their countrymen.
Should the passing cloud of the Sepoy mutiny have
aroused the heart and mind of England to the greatness
of her mission in the East, the blood of our countrymen
will not have been shed in vain, and greater and more
enduring triumphs will be achieved than even the capture
of Delhi or the relief of Lucknow.
* Paper by Major General Tremenhere on “Public Works,”
read before the Institution of Civil Engineers, May 4th, 1858.


APPENDIX.
GRANTS OR LAND—CONDITIONS OR—TOR
TEA CULTIVATION.
Grants of land,, on conditions similar to those recently
conceded for tea cultivation in the province of Kumaon,
would rapidly extend in the country of the five rivers, the
cultivation of cotton, wheat, tea, flax,* hemp, and the
mulberry. What these terms are the following official
document will show.
Conditions of Grants of Land for Tea Cultivation.
Revenue Department , 2Qth Sept., 1855.
Notification.—Grants of land for tea cultivation, in the
Kumaon and Gurhwal districts of the Kumaon province,
will be made on the following conditions, on application to
the Senior Assistant Commissioner of the district.
2nd.—Each grant will be of not less than 200, or more
than 2000 acres. More than one grant may be taken by
one person or Company, on the applicant's satisfying the
local authorities, acting under the usual control in the
revenue department, of their possessing sufficient means
and capital to undertake an extended cultivation and manu-
facture of tea.
* Linseed. Eleven hundred bags of Punjaub linseed were sold
at Kurrachee on the 26th September, 1855. The average price was
4rs. Ba. a raaund. Seven hundred bags, not yet arrived, were sold at
4rs. 10a., and an offer to sell all that might arrive before October,
brought 4rs. sa. a maund. A quantity of Scinde linseed was also sold
at 4rs. 6a. a maund. These prices are extremely profitable to the
growers.


3rd.—One-fourth of the land in the grant will be given
free from assessment, in perpetuity, on fulfilment of the
conditions below stated.
4th.—The term of first lease will be for twenty years.
For the first four years, the grant will be rent-free: in the
fifth year, one anna per acre will be charged on three-
fourths, or the assessable portion of the grant; two annas
per acre in the 6th year; three annas in the 7th year, and
so on, one more anna being added in each year, till, in the
last year, the maximum rate is reached, of one rupee per
acre.—The full assessment, on a grant of 2000 acres, will
thus not exceed 1540 rupees per annum.
sth.—The following are the prescribed conditions of
clearance:—
At the close of the sth year, from the date of grant, a
twentieth part of the assessable area; at the close of the
10th year, one-fifth of the assessable area; at the close of
the 15th year, half of the assessable area; and at the close
of the last year, three-fourths of the assessable area is to be
cleared, and well stocked with tea plants.
6th.—ln the twenty-first year, on the fulfilment of the
above conditions, the proprietary right in the grant, and
the right of engagement with Government, shall vest in the
grantee, his heirs, executors or assigns, under the conditions
generally applicable to the owners of estates in Kumaon;
and the rate of assessment on the lands in the grant, in
whatever manner cultivated, shall never exceed the average
rate on grain-crops in lands in the same locality.
7th.—On failure of payment of the prescribed assess-
ment in any year, or of any of the above conditions, (the
fact of which failure shall, after local enquiry, conducted by
the Senior Assistant Commissioner, be finally determined


by the Sudder Board of Revenue,) the entire grant shall
be liable to resumption, at the discretion of the Govern-
ment, with exception to the portion of the assessable area
which may be bona fide under tea cultivation, and to a
further portion of land which shall be allowed in perpe-
tuity, free of assessment, to the extent of one-fourth of
such cultivated area. The portions, so exempted, will
remain in the possession of the grantee, subject to the
usual rates and rules of assessment in the district.
Bth. —Grantees shall be bound to erect boundary pillars
at convenient points round the circuit of a grant, within
six months from its date, failing which, such pillars will
be put up by the Government officers, and the cost thereof
shall be recoverable from the grantee, in the same manner
as the regulated rate of assessment.
9th. —No claim to the right and interest in a grant on
any transfer by the original grantee will be recognised as
valid, unless on registry of the transferee in the office of
the Senior Assistant Commissioner.
10th.—So long as Government establishments for the
experimental growth and manufacture of tea shall be main-
tained in the province, supplies of seeds and plants will be
given gratis to grantees, on application to the Superinten-
dent, Botanical Gardens, North Western Provinces, as far
as may be in his power.
By order of the Honourable the Lieutenant-Governor,
North Western Provinces.
(Signed) W. MUIR,
Secretary to the Govt. N. W. P.
LONDON : LEWIS AND SOX, PEINTEES, PINCH LANE, COENHILL.


Just Published, pice Sixpence,
TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
WITH INDIA.
Wm. H. ALLEN & CO., LEADENHALL STREET.
Price One Shilling,
EUPHRATES VERSUS SUEZ;
WHICH IS THE SHORTEST ?
BY A BARRISTER.
“The rapidity with which this (the connexion between England
and India, via the Euphrates) can be carried out, the smallness of
the outlay required, and the fact of the Route being 1,000 miles
shorter than that of the Red Sea, are unanswerable recommenda-
tions.”—The Times.
EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
Price One Shilling,
LONDON TO LAHORE;
THE EUPHRATES, SCINDE, AND PUNJAUB
RAILWAYS.
EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
