



COLONIAL REFORM;
ITS PROSPECTS, MEANS, AND PRINCIPLES.
A LETTER
TO THE
RIGHT HON. WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE,
HER MAJESTY’S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR THE COLONIES.
“ I know well, that the loss of the American Colonies was owing to the ignorance of ministers."—
Letter of Lori Macartney to Mr. Burke.—Burke's Correspondence, vol. iii., p. 27.
1846.
Price Sixpence.
by
S. Bannister
LONDON:
WARD AND CO., 27, PATERNOSTER ROW,
SMITH, ELDER, AND CO., CORNHILL,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


LON Dors- ;
J* R 1>'TT) by G. H. WARD AND CO.,
)(v BEAR ALLEY


TO THE
RIGHT HON. WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Sm, . «
There is growing up a strong expectation ot ex-
tensive colonial reforms; and credit is already given to you for
what is in itself a great change in the Secretary ot State lor
the colonies—active attention to colonial business. Other signs
iustify this expectation. Numerous proceedings in the House ot
Commons in the last two years, concerning the colonies, begin
to assume the definite purpose belonging to a great reform,
whilst vour personal character supports the opinion that you
are capable of appreciating its importance. The conviction is
besides universal, that an improvement m our colonial policy,
as well as in our colonial administration, is one of the urgent
wants of the times. Several strong grounds of doubt, however,
exist already as to the course you mean to pursue on colonial
affairs; and so striking has been the recent disappointment ot the
sanguine in like cases, that it would be a mark of weakness on
our parts, to be lulled into inactivity by the fairest ground of
hope. Quite as much as is promised now, was looked tor wnen
Lord John Russell became Secretary of State for the Colonies;
and his lordship did effect a change in forming the Land and
Emigration Board. But two serious detects m its original
scheme, and still more its being allowed to dwindle soon into a
mere section of the colonial office, proved that the master s hand
was speedily withdrawn from that important work; and it is
certain that Lord John Russell, at last, left colonial affairs
generally to his subordinates. Eor this the price paid by him,
and by us, was the continued and gross mismanagement of Lie
colonies by those subs, as scandalously exemplified in the cases
of South Africa and New Zealand. So again, as men expect to
have what they earnestly want, there was a strong opinion in
favour of Lord' Stanley, your immediate predecessor, who for at
least six months resisted undue influence, and displayed some-
thing like habits of official activity. His lordship then aban-
doned his duties to others, and was fitly punished by the mor-
tification of being universally declared to be an incapaole
colonial minister. The public evil was, tnat colon\ aftCi eOi0.uy
B


fell into increased disorder under this thorough revival of the
old system. The colonies are still a millstone round Lord Stan-
ley’s neck, so as to cast a doubt on his general aptitude for
business.
It is however more in a spirit of caution, than of suspicion or
disrespect, that this attempt is made to stimulate you to a more
successful perseverance than that of your predecessors, in the
way of colonial reform, which they opened as zealously as you
seem to have done.
How much this reform is wanted may be inferred from nu-
merous proceedings of the highest authority, namely, from the
debates, reports of committees, petitions, papers and notices of
motions in parliament in 1845 and 1846, respecting a change
in our colonial policy, and in favour of improvements in the ad-
ministration' of affairs in the colonies, in India and China.
These documents, relating to almost every branch of our colo-
nial affairs, are the fruits of bitter experience, to which influ-
ential members of the legislature thus bear practical testimony ;
and they indicate, (more especially the notices of motions,) that
at length the time is really come for changes and for reforms,
without which our vast Colonial Government must continue to
be no less a disgrace to ourselves than a scourge to the millions
whom it oppresses.
The objects of the parliamentary motions referred to, and
the names of the movers, will sufficiently explain the character
of the reforms, of which the early accomplishment may be safely
anticipated; and the variety of the inquiries which these motions
have in view, proves satisfactorily, that a principle of the greatest
importance is likely to prevail throughout this work.
That principle was vindicated in the last century by Mr.
Burke, who would have saved America to Great Britain, had
his counsels been listened to; and who insisted earnestly upon
the necessity of studying the diversity of the countries we
govern, in order to apply our laws wisely to their respective
circumstances.
‘ I was never wild enough,’ said he, ‘ to conceive that one
method would serve for the whole of this mighty and strangely
diversified Empire—that the natives of Hindostan, and those of
Virginia could be ordered in the same manner, or that the
Cutchery courts and the grand jury of Salem could be regu-
lated on a similar plan.’*
This great principle implies an intimate acquaintance with
the various institutions to be respected; and along with a sketch
of the existing parliamentary proceedings in favour of colonial
* Burke’s letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol, 1777. Works, vol. iii. p. 182.


reforms,* it will shew what is still needed to complete these re-
forms. ’ The very first step to them is, more knowledge.
The general subject of such reforms is opened by Mr. Hume,t
in a motion for the production of a code for the admuiistration o
colonial affairs, issued by Charles n., in the year 1670. At that
period much practical knowledge of colonization had been
gained in an experience of one hundred and seventy years,
from the days of Sebastian Cabot, its great leader in the
sixteenth century, so ably followed by the settlers; ot Virginia
and Maryland, the pilgrims of New England, and the planters
of the West India Islands ; and the document in question con-
taining the instructions given to the Plantations Committee by
King Charles must have proceeded from the labours of the
Earl of Clarendon, who is known to have deeply studied colonial
affairs.! This document contains a system of colonial adminis-
tration at home; and it forms an extensive basis of what ought
to be the practice of the colonial office in Downmg-street; ot
which it is really the forgotten law. It is the more valuable, as
it is universal in its objects and equal in its scheme not sever-
ing whites from blacks, or colonists from aborigines ; but aiming
at the good of all, as an amalgamated body, and by adherence
to the rules of justice— according to the degree in which various
classes of men were, in those days, held to be entitled to it; for
it recognises the right of having slaves. Its main principle was
that our administrators should obtain knowledge of colonial ac s.
The next important parliamentary document is last year s
report of a committee on colonial accounts, in very practical sup-
port of which comes this year a string of motions by Mr. Hume
for the production of public colonial defaulters papers. Dr.
Bowringf the chairman of this committee, has given notice of a
motion for the further examination of the subject.
Another motion applicable to all the colonies was made last
year by Mr. Hawes, on official appointments. Prosecuted with pru-
dence,'this inquiry might advantageously give fresh vigourto the
good old law of Richard the Second, against seeking public posts
by favour. It must lead also to a proper system of supervision and
• The various motions referred to in the text were made m 1845 and 1846
o;, R Peel Mr Hume, Mr. Hawes, Mr. Puller, ivir. uwan,
O’Connefi' Mr. Tuffnell, Mr. Forster, Mr. Trelawny, Mr. Aghonby, Dr
t> ■ Mr P M Stewart Mr M. Gibson, Mr. Masterman, &c., &c. In
these members, the New Zealand
debates" contain remarkable speeches on principles of.colonial
hv Mr Ellice Mr. Colquhoun, Lord Howick (now Lari Grey,) Lord J
Russell^and foureen other Members of the House of Commons.
+ H of C vo'tesf 3rd of April, 1846. One MS. copy of this document is
' n l^onl 1 of tire Barbadoes case, in the Privy
Council, is most valuable.


protection of public officers. At present they either act without
any responsibility themselves; or they are subject to the des-
potism of their superiors without appeal. Mr. Hawes may
pursue this topic with great effect. Let the wrong motives for
appointing inefficient men to colonial offices be fully exposed;
and the worse motives for excluding efficient men from colonial
employments be fairly stated; and such a case of mal-adminis-
tration for many years past, will be brought home to the
colonial office, as must compel reform.
Mr. Forster has given notice of an important motion for the
establishment of a better system for the internal government of
our settlements in West and East Africa; and for their more
suitable intercourse with the neighbouring tribes. He has
also obtained papers respecting the members of the colonial
legislatures, in colonics where there is no elective popular
assembly, whilst Mr. O’Connell has obtained papers on New
South Wales; and Mr. Tuffnell others on Ceylon.
Mr. Trelawny has moved for a return of the names of the
agents of the Crown colonies, their emoluments, and duties;
details already laid before a commission on colonial finance,
which made several valuable reports fifteen years ago.
The motions of Mr. Ewart and Mr. C. Buller, respecting
convict transportation ought to excite deep interest. A more
cruel act of legislation was never passed than that which
founded a convict colony in 1786; and the efforts of these
gentlemen will deserve all honour if they stop the new project of
extending the fatal establishment of European crime in the
neighbourhood of the populous islands of the East. On this
occasion it should not be forgotten, that the intervention of the
House of Commons in 1784, stopped a similar frightful blunder
in the proposed dispersal of convicts in Western Africa.
The late melancholy wreck in Bass’s Straits has led to the
production of papers, on the motion of Mr. Hume, respecting
light-houses on those coasts; a subject calling loudly for
serious attention in regard to all the dangerous shores fre-
quented by our shipping, as shown by the Light-House Com-
mittee of 1845 ; and Sir Robert Peel has opened another great
maritime question by moving for papers against a tax proposed
for colonial built ships.
These and other propositions of 1845, and 1846, had intelligible
precursors; of which Sir Robert Peel’s declaration of 1844, that
the colonies must be henceforth dealt with as integral parts of
the empire was received with delight in its remotest regions.
Most specific prospects of realizing that principle were dis-
tinctly traced in the determination of Sir George Murray, in
1829, to revive annual colonial budgets for the House of Com-
mons; —in Mr, Ward’s Colonial Crown-lands Committee of


jggg. i n Mr. Buxton’s Aborigines Committee of 1835, 1886,
and 1837;—in Sir William Molesworth’s transportation in-
quiry arid m the series of annual motions of Mr. Smith
O'Brien upon grants of land in the colonies. In the same
spirit of reform, the late Lord Bathurst sent commissioners of
inquiry to the eastern colonies, to the West Indies, and to
Western Africa; and about the same time the late Sir B. Wilmot
Horton originated parliamentary proceedings of great im-
portance respecting emigration, followed up with unequal suc-
cess by Mr. Baring’s excellent bill of 1838, and by Mr. Wane-
field’s extraordinary efforts,—marred by his powerful party
having trusted the Colonial Office in 1840.
Mr Hume has made the most strenuous efforts to urge the
realization of Sir 11. Peel’s just principle; more especially by
claiming free trade and self-government for the colonists.
In the House of Lords, also, the subject has not been neg-
lected. The Duke of Wellington, and the Marquis of Lans-
downe, have strongly urged the need of a system to regulate our
new colonial and commercial intercourse with China; the want
of which must have occasioned great disasters but for Sir Henry
Pottinger’s admirable conduct.
The unsatisfactory state of the Privy Council, the great court
of colonial appeals, has often been complained of in the House
of Lords, during the last twenty-four years ; and their Loid-
ships now possess in Earl Grey, one who by his frank avowal of
a great error in colonial policy, and by his acute perception oi
its cause, has shewn qualities calculated to correct that great
error by a radical change in the present practice. I allude
to the speech of Lord Howick, now Earl Grey, upon the dis-
asters in New Zealand—a subject for the Privy Council restored
to its legitimate jurisdiction. . . . ~
These proceedings evince a considerable activity in parlia-
ment in regard to our colonies. But it would be a great
mistake to suppose that nothing more remains to be done. On
the contrary, two topics of paramount importance are not
touched upon at all in the motions actually before parliament,
namely, the question of a representation of colonists m the
House of Commons; and that of a body of delegates in the
nature of a colonial council to represent the interests of the
colonies in connexion with the Secretary of State. A third
topic which will also demand the gravest consideration, was
seriously examined by Mr. Ellice alone, or all the speakers m
the New Zealand debate last year, namely, the absolute neces-
sity of introducing free legislative assemblies, on the main
principle of self-government, into all our Crown colonies. Ims
last topic was discussed at some length in a number oi tne


' Eclectic Review/ * where the novelty of such Crown colonies
was proved from the uniform tenor of our colonial history.
Much more is wanting—and most urgently wanting, than
all this. Earl Grey said truly, that a great error in colonial policy
has arisen from our ignorance of colonial facts. His lordship as
truly declared, from his own official experience, that this de-
plorable ignorance is shared by the ministers of the Crown.
The proofs of the correctness of these observations are but
too flagrant; as can be seen in our very recent experience
in regard to one quarter of the world—Africa, the favourite
object, for very good reasons, alike of popular, of philanthropic,
and even of court and ministerial sympathy.
Yet undeniable it is, that the climate of Africa, the produc-
tions of Africa, and the warlike capabilities of Africans, have
been in these latter days so entirely sealed, even to the Colonial
Office, that great calamities have arisen from its ignorance of
things which might easily, and certainly ought to have been
familiarly known.f
How fatal did our ignorance of the fevers of the Niger prove !
Equally productive of injury to the industry and civilization of
the natives of western Africa, has our ignorance of their coffee%
proved; and last year, to our no small disgrace and damage,
a combined squadron of English and French ships attacked a
town in Madagascar, in ignorance of the existence of its for-
midable fortifications; and really because both governments,
our own as well as the French, have rejected the proffered diplo-
matic intercourse of the queen of the Hovahs. Worse disasters
still have been the results of this ignorance in the case of Natal
—an example, which deserves a careful statement, as part, and
part only, of the case of the South African interior, now in a most
alarming state, notwithstanding Sir P. Maitland’s great efforts.
In December, 1845, the colony of Natal was formally esta-
blished with its due array of authorities, civil and judicial;
when it appeared that the great mass of the white population
had settled in the interior; and it is believed that many of the
whites who remain, will also go thither. That is to say, thou-
sands of British subjects prefer incurring all the casualties of a new
African emigration, with the prospect of a probably unhealthy
climate, to remaining in a British colony, although cheap and
valuable land is abundant; although its institutions are not un-
suited to their habits ; and although the climate is unquestionably
♦ In the article on Franklin’s Works, by Mr. J. Sparks, July, 1843.
t Five centuries ago, Roger Bacon urged the importance of knowledge
of such things : Cognitio locorum mundi valde necessaria esf vei public®,
&c. —Opus Majus , 1733—p. 189.
J House of Commons Papers, 1839.N0. 528, p. 4.


good. It is, at the same time, capable almost of demonstration,
that an ordinarily prudent management of the affairs of South
Africa, would even now make these people content with their
lot in Natal, or elsewhere, under British sovereignty.
Already extremely bloody conflicts have taken place between
these emigrants, the black natives, and ourselves; the emigrants
having, since 1836, lost more than six hundred men, women,
and children, by the sword, the blacks more than twelve thou-
sand ; and our troops having also suffered in a pitched battle
with our own subjects.
These evils may reasonably be attributed to the ignorance of
the colonial office; and there has been even an unusual reserve
of parliamentary documents on this whole case. From 1837,
not a line has been published for parliament upon it, except a
few meagre and incorrect incidental notices, in the reports of
the laud and emigration commissioners, although, at least, one
call has been made in the House of Commons (by Colonel Fox)
specially for Natal papers. So that a new colony is adopted by
the Crown without the cognizance of parliament, contrary to
the express recommendation of the Aborigines Committee.
The delay in settling the government at Natal, has done
enormous mischief; and is solely attributable to the colonial
office. When, at length, this body of 800 English, and 1500
Dutch colonists, with 100,000 natives, were rescued from anarchy,
so great had become the general despair, that, says the local news-
paper, ' hope deferred had made the hearts of the people sick;
and when the news arrived of the landing of the lieutenant
governor, many refused to believe, to them, so improbable a
fact/ * Yet, three years and a half ago, when a reconciliation
was made with the Cape emigrants, the military officer who
negotiated with them, solemnly pledged himself, that in a few
months, as might have been easily accomplished, a regular govern-
ment should be provided for them.
This is one of the cases, indeed, which, for its past bad
effects, and its present extremely dangerous position, ought
to be immediately inquired into by parliament; and such mis-
feasance, and non- feasance of official duty be signally punished,
unless we mean that the government of the colonies shall con-
tinue to be a mockery.
Respecting the Caffre frontier also, a scene of the extremest
interest, in hope to the philanthrophist, and in principle to the
statesman, not a line has been laid before parliament since 1837,
although treaties of great importance were made there in pur-
suance of the advice of parliament, and although the articles of
those treaties have been formally altered, whilst the colonists have
lately been deeply agitated with rumours of invasions, perhaps
* Cape Frontier Times, 13 January, 1846.


exaggerated rumours, but certainly most disquieting, from our
ignorance of preceding facts, which have been shamefully
neglected.
At the present moment a correct view of the whole alfairs of
South Africa would do more for the civilization of its tribes, and
for the advancement of British interests to the tropics, than the
most sanguine speculator on the good progress of humanity
could venture to state in detail. A vast portion of that whole
region is fit for fine-woolled sheep; * which are increasing with
surprising steadiness and rapidity there; and every problem
of philanthropy might easily receive its safe and satisfactory solu-
tion under our hands in the same region, if its administration
were conducted on sound principles, as dictated by the consti-
tution. Neglect is here an enormous scandal to the British
name.
Another case is also of extreme interest, and the ignorance
of the Colonial office on this subject, must be an occasion for
impeachment, if so many secretaries of state ivere not concerned
in it. It involves the question of penitentiary discipline, and
that of the administration of a convict colony. In the debate
in the House of Lords upon the Van Dieman’s Laud petition.
Lord Stanley, the late Secretary of State for the colonies, founded
an apology for the deficiencies of a new plan of penal discipline
he had devised, upon the distance of the colony from England.
‘There was no subject,’ said his lordship, ‘ which had given him
more anxiety than this ; no subject to which he had more constantly
and systematically directed his attention with a view of finding out
some remedy for these acknowledged inconveniences. But it took a
long time to establish perfectly a system of convict discipline, where
all the arrangements to be carried out were to be made between
parties at such a distance from each other, and where such a great
lapse of time as twelve months necessarily intervened between a
communication and a reply.’ f
This is a melancholy instance of the slovenly discharge of
its duty by the Colonial Office. By an act of parliament
framed upon the most able report of the late Mr. John
Thomas Bigge, not an offence of the lightest character can take
place in our convict establishments, without such a record being
kept of it as marks the precise extent of criminality in the popu-
lation. Transcripts of those records are sent to the Colonial
* The increase of fine wool from South Africa stands thus: —in 1843,
the export was lbs, 1,700,000; in 1844, it was lbs, 2,270,000; and in 1845,
it was lbs. 3,G00,000, —the price hewing exceeded that of the best Austra-
lian wool. This is a great triumph to the industrious South Africanders;
and it deserves to be recorded that the foundation of this success was laid
by a Dutch na ice of the colony, now enjoying his reward in an honoured
cfd age.—This is Michael Breda, a member of council at Cape Town,
t Morning Herald, 4th March, IB4C- so the Times.


Office. They were on one occasion, through the zeal of the
then member for Surrey, Mr. Briscoe, brought before the
House of Commons.
Proper analyses, of these invaluable records would present
such a picture of the morality, or immorality of the people,
that the working of every change of system could be judged of
with unerring certainty.
The discreditable fact is, that Lord Stanley was unprovided
with these materials to enlighten him, or he could not have talked
of a twelve month’s correspondence, and of the aid he received
from the attorney general and the secretary of New South
Wales, who happened to he in London.
It is probable, too, that in the Colonial Office, nothing what-
ever is known now of this act of parliament —of these records
—or of their transcripts.
If the case of the Canadas is now more hopeful, the price we
have paid for better prospects there, is somewhat too high ; and
these better prospects are sadly counterbalanced by the set-
off of our Oregon perplexities, distinctly traceable to “the
chapter of accidents ” of the Colonial Office. The renewal of the
Hudson’s Bay Company’s charter, a few years ago, was effected
with so little parliamentary inquiry, that it is only from a paper
of six pages, moved for by Mr. Hume, that the existence and
curious conditions of this charter are at all known.
- This absence of colonial intelligence is the first thing to be
removed ; and the old journals of parliament furnish an excel-
lent way to remove it. In vol. xii., p. 70, 425, and 440; vol.
xv., p. 420, 436; vol. xvi., p. 536, etc., etc., etc., may be seen
periodical reports on all colonial affairs, printed for the House
of Commons; and their value will be enhanced by the fact of
Lord Somers having originated these reports.
The affairs of India do not, in all respects, need the same
reforms as the colonies. Nevertheless they would be benefitted
by a better system of intelligence on our part as to the views
of our Asiatic neighbours; since the peace of India would cer-
tainly be promoted by more exact knowledge of us being con-
veyed among our neighbours. A striking illustration of the
latter point may be seen in an interesting narrative of the visit
of a French traveller to the Sikh Rajah Ghoolab Singh, at this
moment, perhaps, the main instrument by whom peace will be
restored to India.
‘ GUoolab-Smg,’ * said M. Jacquemont, in 1831, ‘ is a soldier of
* This is the s .mc chief of whom the Governor-General of India in his
despatch of the ilith February, says
1 I told the Rajah, thus I recognised the wisdom, prudence, and good
feeling evinced by him in having kept himself separated from the unjustifi-
able hostilities of the Sikhs, and I was prepared to mark my sense of that


fortune, a sort of usurper. He is a lion in war—a man of forty,
very handsome, with the plainest, mildest, and most elegant man-
ners. He took me to see the salt mines.
‘ Europe, in the most common details of its civilization, is a wonder
to these people. They will listen to you all day, with pleasure, when
talking of it.
‘ Two arm chairs were sent on before us; and if we passed near
a shady tree, or when I had bundles of plants to tie up, the Rajah
and I sat down. He made his two secretaries dismount, and write
down what I said.
‘ These people, above all things, like to hear the political statistics
of Europe. They have no idea of them, of our population, of the
strength of our armies —of the product of our public revenue—of our
civil and criminal laws—and, lastly, of the results of science, applied
to the arts.
‘ In the mines I taught Ghoolab Singh a little geology.’*
The lessons of the lively traveller were not the only oppor-
tunities which the Sikh chief has had of judging correctly of our
power; and proper means may be devised for the general in-
dulgence of this inquisitiveness, which is really a mark of ca-
pacity for higher civilization. So that whilst our tranquil rela-
tions with this people may be secured through their knowledge
of our superiority, their progress will be promoted by a more
intimate acquaintance with our means of attaining wealth and
with our superior general resources.
Some illustrations of good treatment of the wilder natives
may be found in the history of Indian legislation. For ex-
ample :
‘ The case of the various Hill people of India refutes the opinion
that savages cannot be improved. A single document, of so old a
date as 1822, will conveniently open that case. It is entitled “ A
Regulation f for exempting the Garrow mountaineers and other
rude Tribes on the North-eastern Frontier of Rungpore from the
operation of the existing Regulations ; and for establishing a special
system of Government for the tract of country occupied by them, or
bordering on their possessions.” It states the case as follows;
There exist in different parts of the territories subordinate to the
Presidency of Fort William, races of people entirely distinct from
conduct in the proceedings which now must be carried through. I stated,
in the most marked manner and words, my satisfaction that he who had not
participated in the offence, and whose wisdom and good feeling towards
the British Government were well known, has been the person chosen to
negotiate the means of atonement; and the terms on which the Sikh Go-
vernment might be rescued from impending destruction, by a return to
amicable relations with the British Government.’ His subsequent elevation
to the protected sovereignty of the ceded portion of the Pnnjaub, seems to
be a measure in the nature of those recommended by Warren Hastings, in
his better days—namely, measures to extend our superiority by the free
annexation of friendly stales in the east.
* Jacquemont’s Letters from India, vol. ii. p. 3.
f House of Commons papers for 1824, No. 114.


the ordinary population, and to whose circumstances, therefore, the
system of government established by the general regulations is
wholly inapplicable. Such were the mountaineers of Bhaugulpore,
for the reclaiming of whom to the arts of civilized life special ar-
rangements were made by Government with the chiefs, some time
before the introduction of the present system. These arrangements
still subsist, having been incorporated into the code by the provi-
sions of Regulation I. 1796, under which an entirely distinct system
has been established for the administration of justice amongst the
inhabitants of that mountainous tract. Savage tribes, in some respects
similar, exist on the north-east frontier of Rungpore, of which the
race denominated Garrows, and occupying the hills called after them,
are the principal. As yet little has been done to reclaim or civilize these
people. The reciprocal animosity which subsists betw’een them and
the inhabitants of the cultivated country, prevents any extensive in-
tercourse of a specific nature ; while, on the contrary, their mutual
injuries have produced feuds leading frequently to disturbance and
bloodshed. The zemindars of the frontier have, there is reason to
believe, usually been the aggressors, by encroaching on the indepen-
dent territory of the Garrows and similar rude tribes, until, despairing
of other resource, the latter are driven to seize occasions of private re-
venge and retaliation. These encroachments having been of long
standing, several zemindars were, at the time of the perpetual settle-
ment, in the receipt of incomes derived from cesses of various kinds
levied from the tribes, and hence a portion of the tract of country
occupied by them has been considered to lie within the operation of
the general regulations, as forming part of the zemindarees. This,
however, instead of conducing to reclaim the tribes to civilized
habits, has rather had a contrary effect, the system being totally in-
applicable to their savage and secluded condition, and being calcu-
lated to leave them at the mercy of the zemindars, rather than to
offer any substantial means of redress. The condition of the Garrow
mountaineers and of the other rude tribes on that frontier has, for some
time past, attracted much of the attention of the Governor-general in
council, and the circumstances which have conduced to check the progress
of civilization amongst them have been fully investigated and ascertained.
With a view, therefore, to promote tne desirable object of reclaim-
ing these races to the habits of civilized life, it seems necessary that
a special plan for the administration of justice, of a kind adapted to their
peculiar customs and prejudices, should be arranged and con-
certed with the head MEN, and that measures should at the
same time be taken for freeing them from any dependence on the
zemindars of the British provinces ; compensation being of course
made to the latter for any just pecuniary claims they may have over
them.’ .
* This narrative, (which is only one of several) displays the views
entertained for many years by the Indian government on the subject.
With a large experience, that government concludes, that the savage
may be civilized by a system of justice and conciliation ] and it is to
be expected that the new spirit shown by the House of Commons in
the late debates, will lead to a full inquiry as to the fittest way to


introduce such a system universally * Si'-cK experience has
PROVED ITS VALUE.
Indian history has, also, just added a second example of Bri-
tish magnanimity in refusing to appropriate a country won by
the fortune of war. In the first case, that of Caffreland, in
South Africa, in 1836, the distinguished general, Sir Harry
Smith, saw the dawn of a new system of humane policy, of
which he may, perhaps, be destined to witness the complete
developement in every part of the British world— a policy that
will permit the unlimited peaceful extension of our dominions,
provided it violates no rights, and is followed up with the mea-
sures calculated to impress the border barbarians ivith respect for us.
In order to realize so large a view of colonial greatness, it
would be necessary to enter deeply into every separate head of
colonial affairs ; and into the affairs of every colony separately.
At present the case of New Zealand is, perhaps, the grand
source of the interest taken in favour of colonial reform.
In fact, in June and July last, a revolution was begun in
British colonial policy, upon the occasion of the affairs of New
Zealand being examined by the House of Commons; when,
for the first time since the Canada debate of 1791, or even since
the old American war, serious attention was given in parlia-
ment to great colonial topics. In the New Zealand case, almost
forgotten in the greater interests which now absorb attention.
Sir R. Peel set Lord Stanley and the Colonial Office aside,
because he perceived that public opinion condemned them
both, and would speedily compel Parliament to condemn them.
The result can hardly fail to be good, unless they who ob-
tained the victory, are losing its fruits by neglecting the oppor-
tunity which it offers for the introduction of reforms upon every
branch of our colonial policy,— upon the administration of
colonial affairs at home, in the Colonial Office, in the Privy
Council, and in Parliament; and in the colonies themselves,
both in reference to their internal affairs, and their relations
with- border tribes. Emigration and government titles, the
settlement of colonial lands, and the claims of philanthropy
must in all points be thoroughly examined.
The New Zealand case is important, whether looked at in refer-
ence to the rights of the natives, with whom the wretched system
of our Colonial Office has brought us into a fearful conflict ;—or,
in reference to the extensive success of the missionaries, who, if
not corrupted by being made political instruments, may still con-
tribute largely to peace with the natives; —or, in reference to
British interests and British honour, both deeply concerned in
the establishment of a system of government capable of conci-
• Introduction to the ‘ Classical Sources of British History,’ by S. Ban-
nister, formerly Attorney General of New South Wales, p. 105.


listing our colonization of New Zealand with the natives’ rights.
But m reference to the opening of a new policy for all our
colonies, which the result of the debates of June and July clearly
promised, their importance cannot he exaggerated. They were
distinguished, too, by several memorable circumstances In
the first place, they were in no sense whatever party debates
The most earnest arguments in favour of a new system, and
the severest condemnation of the present practice, proceeded
from firm friends of the ministers. Again, the various topics
incident to the case were discussed in unusual detail by several
groups of speakers, as if their respective parts had been care-
fully cast in concert; although it was plain, that the whole
was unpremeditated. All the members, with perhaps the na-
tural exception of the mover, Mr. Charles Buller, obviously
spoke unprepared, and all without exception from honest con-
riction. In some instances, indeed, as in those of Mr. Roebuck,
and Sir R. Peel himself, the knowledge of the subject was
remarkably small, and the conclusions hasty to rashness. Taken
however, as a whole, these debates form an excellent pomt oi
departure for the consideration of the great change, which is
indispensable in this branch of our public affairs.
Three of the speakers fully explained the causes of our colonial
misfortunes in a very few words; and satisfactory remedies may
be suggested for the evils, the sources of which were thus
clearly pointed out. „ ~
Mr. Milnes said he had found the subject of colonies odious
to all parties, even to those statesmen to whom is entrusted the
dutv of administering them. He himself had to struggle agains
a strong prejudice in resolving to support the proposed inquiry,
notwithstanding the fatal and shameful indifference of more
experienced men. . , . ,
Lord Howick (now Earl Grey), said, that our present colonial
policy is essentially erroneous, and that the error arises from
ignorance.* Having once filled a post in the Colonial Office,
his lordship founded this double reproach upon personal ex-
gave, if possible, severer testimony against the
practices of that office ; and his testimony was that of one who
frankly acknowledged the courtesies he had himself received m
it but who reluctantly declared its practice to be opposed to all
sound principle, and guided solely by a degrading expediency;
and bv what is called a seesaw, between contending parties.
The chain is complete. Indifference to colonial affairs charged
by Mr. Milnes upon the eminent leaders of all parties, then
crowded about him in the House of Commons, necessarily pro-
• This ignorance in colonial affairs is not, new: Lord Macartney attri-
buted the loss of America to it —Burke's Correspondence, vol. in., p. ■


duces the ignorance which Lord Howick admitted himself to
have shared; and indifference and ignorance together, as neces-
sarily generate the error which his lordship, last summer, warmly
and successfully appealed to Parliament to renounce; whilst
such indifference, ignorance, and error, could not fail in their
turn to carry the government headlong into the system of tergi-
versation and shuffling, reproved by Mr. Barkly.
Sir Robert Peel deserves the credit of seeing the force of the
combination thus formed against Lord Stanley from every shade
of party; and he wisely gave way before an overwhelming
resistance to the Government, without even pretending to
understand the subject under discussion. His speeches were
striking examples of that ignorance of facts, to which Lord
Howick correctly attributed a great error in our colonial
policy; and of that violation of correct constitutional princi-
ples, which is one of the most dangerous results of that error.
Sir R. Peel even assumed against all authority, as good colonial
law, that the discovery of a savage country by British subjects
entitles the Crown to the sovereignty of that country, without
the consent of the natives. He went further, adding that
the true way of settling difficulties in New Zealand from the
first was to have acted upon this title; and he even regretted
that such a course had not been pursued. But seeing, that
the sincerity of Sir Robert Peel’s declaration in Exeter Hall
several years ago,—that he was a true, although a recent phi-
lanthropist,—is not to be doubted, he _ will gladly reconsider
positions opposed as much to our old law, as to the dictates of
philanthropy;—and which are sanctioned only by a modern
practice, that becomes destructive according as the British
nation becomes more enlightened and powerful.
Positive authority of a peculiar character, is not wanting
in favour of the humane view of native rights on this head;
for the instructions to Captain Cook, on his third voyage, issued
in compliance with the strongly expressed sentiments of the
times,* required the consent of the natives as the condition
precedent to the occupation of their country by British autho-
rity ; and our Indian law, cited above, recognised the principle.
The instructions here alluded to, were introduced in Cook’s
last voyage, in compliance with public opinion. The period
was that in which Granville Sharp (the real originator of our
modern philanthropy, and the precursor of Clarkson and Wil-
berforce, Macaulay and Buxton,) began his marvellous efforts
in favour of slaves and of free aborigines. Afterwards the latter
were neglected in our exclusive vindication of negroes. That is to
* Dr. Johnson and Adam Smith joined warmly in the public reproval of
the massacres of natives in Captain Cook’s first voyage. Dr. Hawkes-
worth lost the post of historiographer to the subsequent voyages for in-
serting an apology for these massacres in his first book.


say, at a period when the extension of our colonies in the South
Seas was looked upon as a proper object of British policy, the
ministers held it to be their duty to insert in the document
originating our acquisition of new countries there, a substantial
acknowledgment of the right of the rudest savage to indepen-
dence. The history of our old colonies is consistent with this
solemn act of authority. The rule was afterwards disregarded,
at a period when almost every other incident to safe colonization
was renounced. Despotic governments were established in all
the new colonies on various grounds. Convict settlements were
formed at first to the exclusion of free colonists, and at last to
the neglect of every good principle of colonization. Mission-
aries were long discountenanced; and the natives were every-
where more or less oppressed and often exterminated.
The result was, that colonies fell into great public disfavour.
The jobbing, and enormous waste of money which they caused,
induced some economists, such as those of the Parnell school,
to call for the abandonment of colonies, instead of insisting
loudly upon the reform of their abuses. The philanthropists,
also, instead of demanding colonial reform, as a means of pro-
tecting the natives, had long f leaned to the opinion, that
their only protection was to stop colonization, utterly regard-
less of the impossibility of doing so. At the same time a
sense, of incapacity to govern extending colonies, springing from
neglect of the subject, led successive ministries to make the
same vain attempt.
In the mean time, old colonists required fresh lands for their
increasing families and flocks; and a new emigrating population
from home after the general peace, of course required fresh fields
of enterprize. From both causes, arose an immense extension
of our colonial territory in all quarters, in spite of the resistance
of the government, which indeed, after many struggles, adopted
at random, vast regions it had refused to acquire upon a rational
and humane system. That refusal constituted the error confessed
by Lord Grey; which is only to he corrected by a knowledge of
facts. But besides being ignorant, our colonial office in Downing-
street is governed by principles, and it pursues practices, which
must inevitably, from the nature of things, bring disaster upon
all within their range. They oppress private men; they destroy
•f The Jesuits acted on this opinion in Paraguay. Eliot did so in New
England. John Newton and Wilberforce agreed, before New South Wales
was founded, that no colonization at all ought to be begun in New Holland,
when they should have joined the party which opposed the wretched colo-
nization of convicts there. The philanthropists are at length changing
their views. Lord Ashley seconded Mr. C. Buller’s motion for a new
system of colonization; and Mr. Gurney and Sir Edward Buxton supported
that new system. It remains for them to support colonial reform.
c


public prosperity; and by a just reaction they expose, degrade,
and ultimately ruin those by whom official authority is thus
abused. To them Lord Glenelg owed his expulsion, and Lord
Stanley his defeat.
This is the effect of a picture drawn of those principles and
practices by one of the subordinate members of the colonial
office itself; who writes, he says, from experience, not from theory.
We quote Ids charge, word for word; and leave the topic to the
reader’s indignant reflections :
' By evading decisions where they can be evaded ; by shifting
them on other departments, where by any possibility they can be
shifted ; by giving decisions upon superficial examinations ; by con-
ciliating loud and energetic individuals at the expence of such
public interests as are dumb, or do not attract attention; by sacri-
ficing what is feeble and obscure to what is influential and cognizable,
by such means and shifts as these the Secretary of State may reduce
his business within his power, and obtain the reputation of a safe
man without any other reproach than that which belongs to men
placing themselves in a way to have their understandings abused
and debased, their sense of justice corrupted, their public spirit
and appreciation of public objects undermined.’ — The Statesman,
1836, p. 152. By H Taylor, Esq ,(a Clerk in the Colonial Office).
Hence an intriguer in the Colonial Office, taking advantage of
single points, is enabled to ruin honourable men, if their general
good conduct is no protection.
Sir Robert Peel has recently put this point strongly, in
reference to the case of the Governor General of India: —
‘ I will say,’ he declared, ‘ that it will be destructive of the cha-
racter of the nation, it must be a fatal check upon the energies of
public men, if you once establish the precedent that you will not
allow the general conduct and services of a public man, who may be
acting at a distance of five thousand miles, to be pleaded against a
single act of indiscretion.’ *
But what if the facts as to one alleged indiscretion are dis-
puted, and if in the colonial office a hearing he refused, and
the secretary of state prevents the Queen referring claims to
the privy council, to decide the dispute upon good evidence and
just principles ? Then, indeed, we may say, that Bentham was
right when he declared that ‘ abominable intrigue must blind
ministersand if the system does not make them base, as Mr.
Taylor asserts it does, it renders them subservient to others who
are base, which is worse. Such a denial of a hearing is directly
against the constitution, and it has the worst consequences; for
this practice of great injustice leads to great national calami-
ties. Our colonial empire stands upon the ruins of three which
have fallen; and most remarkable it is, that in all three—
* House of Commons, 9th Feb. 1843.


those of Portugal, Holland, and France signal injustice
marked and preceded their decay.
Camoens says of Portuguese India, that it had become ‘ the
step-mother of honest men, but a nursing parent to villains/
Tavernier says of Dutch India, that once the Dutch govern-
ment most scrupulously heard appeals against their distant
governors ; but in his time the protection of great men only
could secure a hearing to the best cause. And another French
writer has drawn a picture of the practice of that government,
whose hideous features have to the minutest line been repro-
duced in our days in England.
‘The Dutch establishments in India,’ says Raynal, ‘ were now in
the extremest bad order; but their reform was the more difficult,
since things were as bud at home as abroad. The ministers for the
Dutch colonies, instead of being men of business and colonial expe-
rience, were usually taken from powerful families which monopolised
the great offices. These families were busy, some with their political
and party intrigues, some with tiie more general concerns of the
state; and they looked to colonial affairs either to advance the power
of their party, or to get places for their connexions ; or from worse
motives of pecuniary interest. The real business of the colonies, its
details, discussions on all points, and with all the men actually en-
gaged in them, and the greatest enterprizes were turned over to a
secretary, who, under the title of counsel to the office, got everything
into his own hands. The ministers came only occasionally to the
office, especially during the intervals of the more pressing public
calls of business; so that they lost sight of its connecting links.
Consequently they were compelled to trust implicitly to the counsel.
It was his business to read all the dispatches from the colonies, and
to frame all the replies to them. He was generally acute—often
corrupt —always dangerous as a guide Sometimes he was known to
lead his superiors into terrible difficulties of his own contriving ; and
at other times to leave them in scrapes created by their own errors.’
—Raynal. Histoire Philosophique, &c., &c., Vol I. p. 466.
This extremely striking passage furnishes a warning to us.
This system of administration is ours almost to the letter; and,
as Lord Shelburne said, it lost us old America. The Dutch
would not abandon corruptions, which hastened their fall. It
remains to be seen, whether some attempt cannot be made to
add to the stability of our new colonial empire, by the timely
reform, which our better popular elements admit of.
In France it took twenty years before Daily Tollendal could
obtain the acknowledgment of the innocence of his murdered
father. The fall of French India, if owing to our superiority,
was at least attended by the notorious injustice which enfeebles
-integrity, and invigorates every mischievous passion.* We are
* Lord Mahon’s History, Vol. IY. p. 543.


now pursuing this last career, of refusing to be just: and if the
vigour of the national character arising from other influences
goes far to counteract the effect of this canker, it is not to be
doubted that it paralyzes the vigour -which would ensure public
prosperity. You have begun to follow your predecessors on this
point.
The cure is—to open the Privy Council of right to all Ap-
pellants within its jurisdiction—but at least to hear all com-
plainants.
There are remedies indeed for all colonial evils; and surely we
are not so base a people as willingly to sit down in despair under
corruptions that admit of cure. The monuments of art springing
up all about us, and the astonishing results of our mercantile in-
dustry and mechanical ingenuity, and the heroism of our seamen
and soldiers, are not the only wonders which are to do honour to
our time. Our civil triumphs may and must he extended to our
laws and administration abroad and at home. The debates of
last year on New Zealand, proved that we have statesmen
among us aware of existing evils; and the wise way to Colonial
Reform now taken by Mr. Hume through the examination of
our Colonial History, justifies a sanguine hope that a future
is coming to us in which the lessons of that history, by its
warnings so frightfully neglected, will produce for us and for
all who are under oor influence, peaceful and prosperous days.
Such happy results, however, cannot be secured without a
searching inquiry into all that concerns our colonial administra-
tion ; without securing to the home authorities a complete know-
ledge of colonial facts; nor, finally, without resorting to the
good old English plan of calling into that administration, as
legislators, those who are affected by public measures —in one
word, without establishing self-government for our colonists; to
the very utmost extent to which it can be carried, whilst colonies
are connected -with the mother country.
That great principle of self government abroad, introduced
with its necessary limitations, is consistent with an institution
for which we are now ripe at home; —namely, an institution to
be formed, of colonial, Indian, and home members of high rank
and extensive experience, analogous to a combination of the
old plantation committees of the Privy Council; of the present
colonial agents, and colonial associations; and of the French
colonial delegates sitting in Paris. It would exceed the proper
limits of this letter to set forth the entire composition and
attributes of this body; but if it were duly established, si-
multaneously with elective assemblies in all the colonies;
and with the admission of colonial members into the House of
Commons, it would go far to settle all colonial difficulties, and
to place this country in the position it ought to occupy.


The scheme of such a colonial council in London, is ably de-
scribed by Mr. Porter, in the Progress of the Nation, vol. iii.
p. 317. It was proposed in a petition to the House of Commons
in 1835, by Mr. Montgomery Martin.
The arguments in favour of colonial members in the House of
Commons, were originally stated by Baron Maseres, in 1776.
They have lately been forcibly urged in a pamphlet by Mr.
Thomas Bannister, of the Temple.
Measures like these, will make our colonies one with us; and
call forth from the whole empire, its best strength for the
general good. They will also save us from new losses, such as
those of the thirteen American colonies, seventy years ago—
from the mortification of being expelled from Canada, or ex-
cluded from Oregon by the superiority of our neighbours in a
great art of statesmanship—colonization. They would extin-
guish such bloody migrations as those of South Africa in the
last nine years, such wars as those of West Africa, and that
of New Zealand, —and the more disgraceful, unceasing mas-
sacres throughout the Australias, —all attributable to what Sir
Thomas Powell Buxton too mildly stigmatised as the ‘ Chapter
of Accidents’ of the colonial office.
What this vast colonial empire really is, may be seen to some
extent from a paper printed last year by the House of Commons
on the motion of Mr. Hume,* which shows our forty-one colo-
nies to have a population of 4,674,333 souls; to have exports
and imports worth £37,400,000 sterling ; and to employ 5865
ships, of 1,171,763 tons burthen.
These figures do not include India or China, —nor do they
extend to the millions of coloured people, who are really de-
pendent on our policy in every quarter of the globe.
The army, navy, and ordnance estimates, shew the distribu-
tion of our soldiers and sailors throughout the colonies. The
papers of the Geographical Society trace the progress of our
science; whilst the wider and more important influence of
Christian civilization is marked by the missionary stations.
On the head of geography, very much remains to be done
for the colonies. Such maps as the excellent Colonial Chart,
and the still more useful collection of missionary maps, pub-
lished by Mr. Wyld, of Charing Cross, ought to be distributed
largely by the government throughout all the colonies, and at
home, as school books. Great efforts are making by particular
individuals to advance the means of geographical knowledge;
but they must fail, if not supported vigorously by government.
The ancients placed maps on a vast scale upon the walls of their
temples and colleges, to teach the people, and especially the
young. A map of the old world, five feet in diameter, was
* House of Commons Papers, 1845.—N0. 49.


exposed for centuries as an altar-piece of the cathedral at Here-
ford. A map of the world, by the famous Cabot’s own hand,
was long to be seen on the walls of the old palace at Whitehall.
The elements of such instruction by the eye are most abun-
dantly at our command. Not to mention Cook’s South-sea
treasures in the British Museum, and similar treasures in all
Missionary United Service Museums, we have had recent proof
of the extent of such resources, in the invaluable collections of
Dr. Andrew Smith, for South Africa: of Mr. Catlin, for the
Indian of North American ; of Mr. Dunn, for China; and of
Mr. Angas, for New Zealand and Australia.
The collection of Mr. Angas is a valuable introduction to the
volumes announced by this ingenious young traveller, and along
with Mr. Gatlin’s, and others, it might be rendered instrumental
to the establishment of the system of humane policy, for which
our ample materials now only require the master hand of a
secretary of state, of decisive and enlightened views. A com-
mission of the French Institute has made a satirical suggestion
on an analogous geographical subject, which deserves your
serious attention. In warmly recommending the Georarna\ihe
surface of the whole earth, seen from the centre of a vast globe),
this commission insists upon the advantage of placing the cabi-
net of a colonial minister within such a globe; in order to re-
ceive in it lessons in geography, too often proved by the colonial
policy to be wanting. The hint is worth a minister’s serious
notice.
These lessons are not the least important of many now impe-
riously called for in order that our colonial career may become
worthy of our rank among nations ; and if the walls of Parlia-
ment were covered with adequate descriptions of that career in
a series of colonial maps, upon a vast scale, they would prove
persuasive mentors against many a fault at present.
The original merit of the French Georama belongs to the late
M. Delanglard, of Paris. Like him, M. Guerin has been eulo-
gised by the institute of France for a work of the same kind.
M. Sanis, of Paris, has produced maps of another kind, in re-
lief; and a model of France, on a large scale. Captain Ship-
pard’s beautiful paintings of geographical scenes, and his large
maps, ought to be adapted by the government. Along with
those of M. Sanis, and Mr. Gatlin’s museum of mankind, they
would prevent ignorance too often ruinous to individuals, dis-
astrous to the public, and subversive of the claims of humanity.
That you, sir, may be destined with such, and other helps, to
commence effectually a wiser and a happier course, is the sin-
cere wish of a witness, and a victim of corruptions which are
the inevitable consequences of that ignorance—itself the fruit
of a bad system, still flourishing in rank vigour. All your


predecessors, for the last twenty-five years, without excepting
the ablest of them, Lord Bathurst, Lord John Russell,
and Lord Stanley,'—adopted the old system, including its worst
point, the delegation of their- official duties to a subaltern, and
they did so with the worst result. Let your promise of a better
policy be realized ; and you will have a success, boundless as our
colonial world; and, at the same time, as beneficial in its effects
as the blind neglect of official duties by our colonial ministers,
has hitherto been productive of evil to all under its influence.
For this end, not only must you change the system of your
office, but you will fail if you do not also change the leading
man in it, the Under Secretary of State, Mr. James Stephen,
with some others, who should be pensioned off at once.
The vices of the system have already destroyed their moral
sense. They are even so deeply imbued by its corruption, that
they do not perceive that what their writings recommend are
iniquities. For instance, the very same language and images in
which honest old Bunyan holds up certain actions to the scorn
of the good and true, is employed by tbe author of the Statesman,
Mr. Taylor, to express a sober precept how to regulate ordinary
official conduct. ‘ I am for w aiting for wind and tide/ says
Bunyan’s type of all worldly scoundrelism, Mr. By-ends, of the
town of Fair-speech, who had become ‘ a gentleman of good
quality; yet his great grandfather was but a waterman, looking
one way, and rowing another.’ Honest John adds significantly
of By-ends, that he got most of his estate by the same occupa-
tion.*
Mr. Taylor’s view of the same matter bears a curious analogy
to this; but he does not agree with Bunyan in reprobating the
By-ends school. ‘ln this country, says he, and in these times,
the questions of political consistency are exceedingly perplexing;
and the snares with which a statesman’s integrity is beset, are
many, and very inveigling. . . . He should steer by the
compass, but he must lie with the wind. ... A young man
may sometimes adopt opinions for the purpose of playing apart.
. . . and he may find an escape from the difficulties of a change
of opinion at a future time. ... In a considerable proportion
of tergiversations, the insincerity, if the truth were known,
would be found to have been as much in the previous opinion
as in that which supplants it.’f
This volume from the pen of a respectable writer, the author
of Van Artavelde, and a clerk in your office, is a melancholy
illustration of the extent to which the basest principles prevail
in that office. A tory critic said of it at the time of its appear-
ance, that the reading of it had made his very teeth chatter, at
• Pilgrim’s Progress, 673 —678. Bagster’s edition with engravings. 1835.
t The Statesman, p. 124. —Chapter on consistency in a Statesman.
Longman and Co. 1836.


the abominations it justified, as well as at those it censured.
You must reform this.
Let it next be considered whether the future composition of the
Colonial Office cannot be improved. At present, in the selection
of its members there is a studious exclusion of the men who
have served in the colonies; as if the late Mr. Mill’s paradox
about a colonial historian being likely to be the more successful,
in proportion as he should be unacquainted personally with the
country he is writing about, were practically adopted in our
colonial administration. On the contrary, not only should new
clerks, under-secretaries, and law advisers at home be taken
from ex-governors, and other ex-officers of colonies; but it
would be an useful step to send at once the present personnel of
the office to the colonies—some, for punishment, to bad climates,
and all for practical instruction.
Such a course would contribute materially to the establish-
ment of those colonial reforms, in every branch of our colonial
affairs, in matters of emigration, government, and philanthropy,
proved by every-day’s experience to be indispensable.
The post of law adviser to your office, was commented on last
week, in the House of Commons; and Mr. Stephen, its late
occupant, has, by the neglects of your predecessors, really
governed our colonies for more than twenty years. So the
topic is of capital importance. The Chancellor of the Exchequer
says, the whole Colonial Office is to be "remodelled.’ He adds,
that "Mr. Stephen pointed out the necessity of having a person
to look after colonial statutes.’ Therefore " a lawyer 5 is at last
found for that duty.
On these facts, I ask, whether Mr. Stephen is the only indi-
vidual who thinks about such "a necessity;’ and whether colo-
nial statutes are the only things in the Colonial Office for a
lawyer "to look after.’ There are good reasons for these
questions. Mr. Stephen was long legal adviser to the Secretary
of State, until he became under secretary. The post was of a
century’s date—a branch, indeed, of the good old post of Attor-
ney-General. On what grounds it was suspended, is a question
that concerns Lord John Russell. But you are deeply con-
cerned in two other questions,—namely —as to what Mr.
Stephen’s present position is ? and as to the plan on which your
office is to be " remodelled ?’—both of which involve considera-
tions of extreme importance to the public, and also of some
moment to you. Mr. Stephen’s administration of 30 years
HAS ENDED IN LETTING THE FRENCH MINISTER CITE OUR EXAM-
PLE OP 1846, TO JUSTIFY THE MISGOVERNMENT OP ALGIERS.
Moniteur, and other French papers, 11th June, 1846.'
S. BANNISTER,
Formerly Attorney-General of New South Wales.


