

COLONEL GEORGE GAWLER.
A SKETCH.




H33SS/ r v
COLONEL GEORGE GAWLER:
A SKETCH.
A gentleman and a soldier lias died, of whom
England should be proud. That his memory may
not pass from recollection, a tribute is offered by
one who intimately knew his desire for usefulness
and his intense, enthusiastic yearnings for some
degree of fame, that “last infirmity of noble
minds.” Only a sketch of his life and character
will be attempted ; for that part of his career,
belonging to South Australia, has passed into
almost distant history, and there has subsequently
been little of importance to impart to these memo-
rial lines any but a slender public interest.
(George (Lawler, born in 1796, was early destined
for the military service. No time was lost in
the rudimentary branches of education, it being
more common than at present to enter mere lads
for regimental duties. Lie accordingly joined the
52nd Light Infantry in November, 1811, and
served to the end of the Peninsular War in 1814.
He was present at Badajoz, where he led the ladder
party of the 52nd stormers ; at the battles of'Yera,
Vittoria, Nivelle, Orthes, and Toulouse, besides
various minor affairs. As the war drew to a close,


he moved with the Duke of Wellington; and
at Waterloo commanded the right company of the
52nd. The campaigns were not without their
dangers, for he was wounded below the right knee
at Badajoz and in the neck at San Munos. For
his services in the field he received the war medal
with seven clasps. After the restoration of peace
he continued with his regiment, displaying that
zeal and intelligence which have largely dis-
tinguished the officers of the 52nd, and assisted
in making the regiment among the best in the
service. His active military career soon closed,
although he continued as a half-pay officer until
1850, when he sold his commission, and he thus
took a step which severed, with no ordinary
feelings of pain on his part, a long and pleasant
connection, but it was from urgent family reasons
and from a sense of imperious duty to himself.
As a civil officer of the Crown, his career com-
menced in a highly responsible position, which he
occupied only a short time, but long enough to
establish strong claims upon the Government.
His illustrious Commander-in-Chief, the Duke of
Wellington, interested himself in his advancement,
urging his claims by asserting that Gawler could
not act other than wisely for he never did a foolish
thing in his career. His merits were recognised
in 1888 by the higher appointment of Governor
of South Australia, not because it was an office of
comfortable ease or great emolument, still less be-


cause the Imperial authorities favoured the principle
upon which the colony was founded. The fact is,
the ruling classes failed to encourage, even if they
understood, the disinterested labours of those who
succeeded in affording, for the toil-worn sons of
England, a home unstained by convictism, and
another market for its exports. There were ob-
stacles to overcome sufficient to deter ordinary
men, and while much of the practical part was left
to Colonel Crawler, the theories were grappled with
by master minds, which have helped to render this
century famous, —the Grotes, the Bullers, the
Wakefields, and those like Torrens, Angas, and
Molesworth, who did good service to colonisation.
It will always be a turning point in the history
of South Australia to know the influence Colonel
Gawler had upon its early struggles. What, then,
did he accomplish ? what were the difficulties he
overcame ? what the effects of his policy ? He had
the no light task to bring order out of the chaotic
materials of the early expeditions. There was
little or no authority among those who attempted
a settlement between 1836 and 1838. They were
disappointed because the land was not surveyed
for them to occupy ; they were without a pro-
tecting force either of military or police ; the ad-
ministrative officers were for months disagreeing
about their duties and responsibilities ; and not
only was the Government destitute of offices, but
the small population may be described as nomadic


rather than as having “ house and home ” be-
coming Englishmen. Colonel Gawler, by his
military knowledge and experience, promptly
brought the settlers under discipline. When he
left, the Government departments were in a state
of good order; there was a highly efficient police
corps ; public works and offices had been urgently
advanced, and an intricate country about 150 by
50 miles had been surveyed, a large portion being
immediately allotted into 80-acre sections. He
found only a population of 5,000. He left it with
a population of 15,000. He believed it capable
of receiving 20,000 further if required by any
emergency. Such results were not to be achieved
by any man, whatever his powers, without conside-
rable experience, which was the advantage Colo-
nel Gawler possessed. Although, upon his own
confession, called hastily to the Government of
the colony, without being able to enter into
minute calculations, he accepted his instructions
because he knew he was to act under a strong
conviction that an “ emergency clause ” would
always permit and justify expenses of a special or
extraordinary nature, without previous authority,
when delay would be productive of serious injury
to the public service. How that the colony is an
established success, it is worth while to inquire
what would it have been if these emergency
powers had not been liberally given and ex-
tensively acted upon ?


He, however, met with no public approval in
England; his hills were dishonoured; his policy was
denounced ; while in the press and in Parliament
all parties withdrew their support and countenance.
It followed immediately after his recall, that a Com-
mittee of the House of Commons investigated the
consequences of his large but not lavish expen-
diture. The result was a loan from the Con-
solidated Fund of £155,000 towards the temporary
relief of the colony, which has long since been
repaid. This measure removed the anomaly
pointed out by Giibbon Wakefield, the great
authority on economical colonisation, when he
said—“ I cannot imagine the possibility of found-
ing a colony without obtaining money for its
first expenses from some source other than itself.
At first it has no existence at all; and one might
as well propose to manufacture cotton goods with-
out the outlay for the factory, the machinery,
and the raw materials with which the goods are
manufactured.” After the temporary relief was
afforded, the policy of Colonel Crawler rapidly
developed itself. The land yielded its increase
not only in rich and abundant crops, but in mines
of silver and copper ; the settlers grew wealthy
and independent ; self-government became a
necessity; and now, within the generation which
yet bears in age and honour some of the early
pioneers, there is a young nation fairly started
without any cost to England; able to boast that


not by the arts of war and conquest, bnt by those
of peace and industry, another member has been
added to the great federation which surrounds the
Imperial Government.
Colonel Gawler underwent many anxieties from
an attempted defence of his Governorship ; but the
committee’s labours being closed, Parliament was
virtually unable to re-open the business, and various
ministries from year to year shelved the question,
and sheltered themselves behind their official re-
sponsibilities. Wearied and disgusted with routine
and red tape, Colonel Gawler exercised the right of
petition direct to her Majesty, and on one occasion
actually presented a memorial at a levee, which,
of course, received no other response than a bare
acknowledgment through the Secretary of State.
As it was obvious he intended to weary the Govern-
ment by his importunities, there were inquiries
instituted whether some title or dignity would be
acceptable! An official, high in rank, intimately
acquainted with Downing Street, actually was sent
to inspect and report on his domestic establishment.
Like that of Andrew Marvel, his home was hum-
ble and his table scant. The official visit was not
resumed; and nothing was done ! When he him-
self applied for some honorary title in reward
for his long and faithful services, it was absolutely
refused, and Colonel Gawler years after said, in
the bitterness of his heart, “So they keep their
guilt and their dignities.” The grand old soldier—


like many before him, as well as many to follow,
who love their country “ not wisely, but too well ”
—had but little to wrap himself in but his martial
cloak and a “ conscience void of offence.”
With an active mind and well-trained habits of
industry, the idleness of a retired military officer
or the “ unattached services ” of an ex-Governor
were irksome in the extreme to Colonel Gawler.
It would be curious to follow him in his efforts for
employment—writing to newspapers, speaking at
religious meetings, compiling the narrative of his
old regiment, entering into the geographical and
other scientific societies with the zest, the earnest-
ness, and the general intelligence of no mere
disciple, but rather of a learned professor, with
his theories, his discoveries, his battle-fields of
many a well-fought conquest. Probably the most
curious of his labours is to be found in an advo-
cacy of Jewish Emancipation, not simply in a
political or social sense, although these doctrines
he urged when they were unpopular, even derided,
hut actually as a relief to European states. He
recommended a settlement in Palestine, with civil
and military government and all the appliances
of western civilisation. The “ primary considera-
tions ” for carrying out the scheme he published
in 1845, the pamphlet being an excellent illus-
tration of his sagacity as an administrator of Govern-
ment, and still more of his utopianism when philan-
thropy or religion were concerned. Looking at the


project as a scheme of colonisation, it is scarcely
credible that such a man could for a moment be-
lieve that it “ was the duty and interest of Great
Britain to stand forward and contribute liberally
towards the unavoidable and extraordinary ex-
penditure required for the formation of Jewish
colonies in Palestine !” He urged it, however,
because “ there were inducements of the highest
order for the Crown, Government, Legislature,
and Nation to enter upon the work with their
combinations of power and resources.” He sin-
cerely believed that the great European states
would look with complacency upon the Turkish
Government acceding to the proposition, and that
the Jewish people themselves would gather from
all nations to settle in Palestine to make a new
Jerusalem “ their happy home!” About the
period he publicly avowed these opinions he ac-
companied Sir Moses Montefiore in one of his
benevolent missions to the Holy Land, which
strongly confirmed his views and furnished him
with new arguments. He again advocated the
“ emancipation ” question in 1847; and to the
close of his life was sincerely attached to the
Jewish race, who regarded him as their devoted
friend. Had there been an army to march to
Armageddon, and a leader to be appointed, no
such cormnander as Colonel Gawler could have
been selected for the undertaking, which his genius
and piety would have brought to a successful issue.


Sincerity, earnestness, and religion marked his
career. There were fine qualities of mind to re-
deem the errors of his judgment, which, although
at times conspicuous enough, would have been
modified and controlled by greater contact with
society, by bringing his opinions to the test ren-
dered necessary by deliberative assemblies or prac-
tical measures. He was endowed with a singular
combination of those features which marked Sir
Henry Havelock’s character, and had Colonel
Gawler been placed on the Indian service he
would unquestionably have added to his own
renown, and to the list of those great men who,
in fighting their way inch by inch with English
tenacity and bravery, yet hold out the “olive
branch ” to raise a nation from the degrading
influences of Oriental barbarism to the blessings
of modern civilisation. He was a true friend to
the aborigines of Australia ; their remembrances
of him being singularly associated with the military
character he loved to display, and which to the end
of his days he cherished with pride. Among the
latest productions he published, were letters on the
claims of the New Zealand tribes to the land alien-
ated to the British settlers. His last public appear-
ance in London was at the dinner to Sir James
Fergusson, previous to his proceeding to the
Governorship of South Australia. He then spoke
more than once with a vigour which charmed those
present, and with Refreshing enthusiasm upon the
substantial progress of the colony since his time.


'Tfyrp
BiSUO
f ; ' '■ ■' 12
H
Seated as they were near to each other, the
idea was present to the mind that the armour
reluctantly taken off by the old soldier was to be
assumed with ardour by the young Governor ; and
that the victories the one had achieved would incite
the other to equal determination and the same
successful results. The lines quoted by Colonel
Gawler on the occasion may well adorn this bio-
graphical sketch: —
“ What constitutes a state ?
Not high-raised battlement or laboured mound;
Thick wall or moated gate;
Not cities proud, with spires and turrets crowned;
Not bays and broad armed ports,
Where laughing at the storm rich navies ride;
Not starred and spangled courts,
Where low-browed baseness wafts perfume to pride.
No ! men, high-minded men,
Who know their rights, and knowing dare maintain;
Prevent the long aimed blow,
And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain.
These constitute a state;
And sovereign law, that state’s collected will,
O’er thrones and globes elate,
Sits empress, crowning good, repressing ill.”
A standard not less high was ever present to his
mind; and although his true worth was not
largely and publicly recognised, it is through
such sons England has reared her empire,—that
her influence, the wide world over, is regarded as
just, wise, and beneficient. It was on the 7th
May, 1869, at Southsea, that Colonel Gawler died;
and his most enduring monument will be the colony
of South Australia, of which he laid the found-
ations and lived to witness a permanent success.
