





Coi<o]\flST£
ILLUSTRATING GOLDFIELDS AND CITY LIFE
IN AUSTRALIA BETWEEN 1851 AND 1870.
GILBERT ROCK.
“ How quiculy Nature falls into revo
When gold becomes her object.”
—Henry IV. .Part S.
Dunedin, N.Z.:
J. WILKIE AND CO., PRINTERS AND MANUFACTURING STATIONERS, PRINCES STREET.
1888




PREFATORY NOTE.
“Oh!” sighed the most patient of men, “that mine adversary had
written a book!”
With a re-echoing of the sigh, I announce that I have written the
following pages.
They are cast upon the floor, to be rended by foes, or pitied by friends.
Oh ! that the former will purchase before condemning, and that the
latter will not borrow to read.
May, 1888.
GILBERT ROCK.




I DEDICATE
THIS WORK OF HEAD AND HAND
TO THE COMPANION OF
MY HEART.




IHSTCIEIDIEXsrTS.
CHAPTER
I. The Nugget and Murder
11. The Oath of Vengeance
111. The Conspiracy and Accusation
IV. Bearding the Lion in his Den
V. The Robber Robbed
VI. Conscience at Work
VII. Another Conspiracy
VIII. The Neglected Son
IX. A Picnic
X. Setting Traps
XI. The Oath Recalled
XII. Death Ends All
XIII. Conclusion
“ Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,
Our fatal shadows that walk by us still.”— John Fletcher.




CHAPTER I.
“ How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
Makes ill deeds done !”
—King John.
In the good old days of the early “ fifties,” but after the
first flush of excitement occasioned by the wonderful gold
discoveries in Australia, the “ diggings ” at Mount Alex-
ander and Bendigo had become so far historical that
thousands upon thousands of gold-seekers were flocking
there from all parts of the world. Men, whose fortunes had
suddenly taken a reverse turn “ at home,” went off to the
diggings as a matter of course, “to try their luck.” Clerks
and servants who had got into some difficulty sought fresh
fields in these parts; and criminals decided that on the
goldfields there were increasing opportunities for their
“ enterprise.” Melbourne had not then become the ren-
dezvous for thieves and robbers, the field where many
and seriously disappointed gold-seekers sought to better
their chances and find solace for their disappointments in
divers undesirable ways, to the no small detriment of the
increasing and peaceably disposed population.
In those days, when the “ gold fever ” was the all-
absorbing complaint, and sometimes known as the “ yellow
fever,” was “carrying off” its thousands, there had come
to the goldfields at Bendigo, Harry North, and Alice his


wife, a true woman, whose destiny it was, she recognised
and declared, to be beside her husband in the midst of all
his joys or sorrows, no matter where the scene of these
might be.
When misfortune had come to them through the default
and misdeed of a partner in business, and a settlement of
their affairs had left them with but a scanty hoard to start
afresh, when the suggestion was made that Harry should
go to Australia try on the goldfields there what energy,
perseverance, and hard work would do towards opening up
a brighter future, Alice at once said she must go with him
and help him in all she could. Nothing would turn her
from her purpose : her place was with her husband, and
whatever befell him in this far-distant land she must share.
To leave her “ at home ” in comparative luxury and idle-
ness, while he had to “ rough it ” and suffer in the bush
and on the diggings, was, she said, “ positively cruel ” to
her, and, albeit reluctantly, her husband had to give way.
Together, therefore, they left the old country; together they
saw and experienced the first of colonial life in Melbourne;
and together they performed the rough journey to the
Bendigo.
In those days, the appearance of a lady amongst the
diggers was quite a circumstance, and many were the good
offices performed for Mrs. North by the better class of men.
Diggers, upon whom the refining influence of the female
presence is not thrown away, vied with each other in their
desire to do services for Mrs. North ; and many of them
owed it to her influence that their nights were not spent in
drinking and carousal at the numerous sly-grog shanties
or drinking resorts of the district; for at this time there
existed many such, which the police were either powerless
to cope with, or bribed to leave unmolested.
*******


In the sheltering shadow of a piece of rising ground,
surmounted by a crown of thick trees and undergrowth,
fringing the most populous part of the township, and not
far from “ Golden Gully,” at the head of which their claim
exists, North, with the help of his mates, has built a rude
hut for the accommodation of his wife and himself. The
hut is built of logs, placed horizontally one above the other,
the interstices being tilled up with clay and turf, while the
roof is formed of the same material with the addition of
strips of bark; the whole forming, when completed, a tole-
rably comfortable cot, free from draughts or like inconve-
niences. It is divided into two compartments, one of which
is the cooking and eating room for the company, the other
being the bedroom occupied by Mrs. North and her husband.
The other two partners working with North occupy for
sleeping a tent erected alongside of this hut. Mrs. North
performs all the cooking necessary for the whole company;
and in consideration of this the articles of partnership
under which the men work, provide that two-tilths ot the
gold won shall belong to North and his wife, and that Dyke
and Woods, the other partners, shall equally divide the
balance.
Breakfast is now being partaken of in the hut, and while
being discussed, opportunity might be made to have a glance
at the two partners referred to; but, first, the breakfast
itself, which, on this occasion, consists of fried chops and
“ dough boys,” the latter being simply flour mixed to a paste
with water, and fried in the same pan and dripping which
cooked the chops. Along with this are copious draughts of
strong black tea, served in large pannikins. The quantity of
tea consumed on the diggings is quite phenomenal —it
appears at every meal, and half a gallon is no unusual share
for the ordinary miner to consume; while what is left is
allowed to cool, and generally finds its way after the warmer


article as soon as the consumers return from their day’s toil.
But we are forgetting our purpose —to take a peep at the
two partners enjoying this breakfast with Mr. and Mrs.
North. First, then, we find that they are men of very
dissimilar age and appearance : the elder (William Woods)
has a thick-set, but not over-strongly built, frame; of about
medium height, straight, dark hair, a short, full beard of
the same color and characteristic; shaggy, over-hanging
eyebrows and small, half-closed eyes, overhung with long
black eyelashes. His hands are large, thick, and broad, with
broad flat finger nails, which generally carry a goodly
portion of the parent dust firmly embedded. His head,
erected on a thick, short neck, and slightly cast forward on
his chest, gives him at times a somewhat dogged—even
cur-like —expression, while the • absence of any smile or
softness of movement from his thin lips and firm set mouth
results in a type of face not generally described as inviting.
He is, however, a man of considerable mining experience,
and on that account well able to conduct and control pros-
pecting ventures or gold-digging pursuits generally. For
this reason North and Dyke Consider themselves fortunate
in having such a partner.
Ashton Dyke is almost the antithesis of Woods.
Inclined to be tall, with a large, well-shaped head, sur-
mounted by abundant fair curled hair, light-brown eyebrows,
and moustache, and large brown eyes; his lips, thick, but
well-formed, carry a slight smile around his mouth, which
gives to his face a very prepossessing aspect. A young man
of not much beyond 20 years, he can lay claim to little
mining exp'erience; and, in fact, his bringing up has been
the opposite of what generally produces a good digger.
He, however, is a strong, healthy, vigorous youth, and takes
to the hard work and rough life of the goldfields as if to
the manner born. Being always of a cheerful temperament.


he enlivens the dull monotony of their life very considerably.
His being an especial favorite with Mrs. North has made
him the subject of some jealous and ill-natured remark on
the part of Woods, and this tends to produce no little
straining between the two partners. Woods, however, is
careful to avoid any direct statement on the subject, so that
no absolute rupture has ever been occasioned.
Breakfast over, the diggers have shouldered their picks
and shovels and are just leaving the hut, when Alice says,
addressing Woods, who is nearest her, “Oh, Bill, I wish
you’d go down to the store for some things for me.”
“ Oh, bother it!” (Another time he would have used a
much stronger expression; but the influence of Alice has
not been altogether lost on him.) “ Can’t ye manage with-
out ? I was very anxious to get started early this mornin’.”
“Well, never mind,” returns Alice, with some degree of
disappointment in her tone.
“ Can I do that for you, Mrs. North ?” and Dyke, handing
his tools to North, turns back as he speaks, gets the order,
and starts off immediately for the store.
Alice is left alone with her duties, and sets about them
without delay.
North and Woods start at once for the claim. They are
well away from the hut before either speaks; then the silence
is broken by Woods. “It strikes me, mate North, that
ye’re lettin’ that young Dyke chap have too much o’ yer
wife’s company! ”
This is not a remark calculated to be received by any
husband with too much equanimity, and North rather
sharply replies —
“ And it strikes me, mate Woods, that you’d better mind
what your ill-natured dislike of that young fellow leads you
to say. Abuse him as much as you like, he can defend
himself, and is a better man than you are ; but, if you think


to abuse my wife to spite him, you are mistaken ; and I
warn you, once for all, not to try it.”
Woods, seeing that he has been rather precipitate in his
manner of putting what he wished to say, strives at once to
mollify his partner, but at the same time, if possible, to give
the wound an extra probe.
“ Well, mate, there’s no need to be so quickish about it;
I meant no offence. Dyke is a good-lookin , kind-heaited
feller, an’ his attentions to any woman in this out-o’-the-
way place are likely to turn her head without her knowin
it. Women are queerish critturs, an’ must have company.
Yer wife is left alone all day, an’ has nothin’ better than
your company o’ nights, so Dyke’s attentions don t come
unwelcome like.”
“ Look here, Bill Woods, you don’t like Dyke, and this
is a mean trick to put me against him. I don’t believe
there is anything underhanclor sneaking about him.”
“ I didn’t say he was a did I ? ”
“ No, but you insinuate as much, and you’re very careful
not to do anything of the sort before his face.
“ Ye don’t want me to fall out wi’ my partner, do ye ? ”
“ Well, you will do so if you slander him to me, for I won’t
stand it, I can tell you; so, if you want a change of partners,
why, take your share now, and Dyke and I will work the
claim together, unless he prefers you for a mate to me.”
By this time they have reached the claim, and as his
partner speaks Whods has doffed his coat, and stands, pick
in hand, ready for work.
He replies —“ No, that I’ll warrant he don’t. I’ve no
wife to get his attention; but don’t blame me, mate North,
if things do go wrong; I’ve told ye what I think, an’ put
ye on yer guard; an’ if ye will be blind, why, then I can t
help ye, that’s a 11.”.,
“ Yes, and what’s more, you’ve got such a currish spirit;


you can’t help yourself, so I take no notice of your ill-
natured words.”
These words are delivered with such a pitch of firmness,
that Woods sees at once his partner is more than
usually determined there shall he no more said on the
subject. He sees, too, that he has not exactly made the
impression he intended ; and, like a skilful general, resolves
that the attack shall be suspended until a more fitting
opportunity presents itself.
“ Come now, mate,” says he, assuming the utmost suavity
of manner he can command, “ we won’t say any more about
it; you’re gettin’ warm, an’ I don’t want to quarrel wi’ ye.
Let’s go to work, only Dyke ought to be here wi’ his coat
off, that's all.”
Having delivered himself in this way, with the air of a
man who says something that is absolutely conclusive, he
strikes his pick into the ground with great force, and
follows up the first others not much less
emphatic, clearly showing a desire to be rid of the subject
for the present, and at the same time to work off some of
his superfluous ill-nature and chagrin at the way in which
his charges have been met.
North, no less glad to break the groove into which their
conversation might lead, also sets to work with honest will,
and it is not long until considerable change has been made
in the feature of the ground he is working.
For a time, no sound but the sharp thud of the men’s
picks disturbs the silence which follows; and, as they
are some distance apart engaged in reducing different pieces
of the face, no immediate prospect offers for a renewal of
the lately-closed conversation. Presently, North shifts his
ground somewhat to enable him to clear the roots of a tree
which overhangs part of his working. *On striking his pick
into Hie ground it comes upon some hard substance which


he takes to be a stone. Loosening the earth around it,
he attempts to prize it up with his pick. This proves a
more difficult task than he imagined; but, after another
effort, one end of the mass is unearthed. Nearer observa-
tion discloses to his eyes a yellow colour which he has
learned to recognise, and, stooping down, he clears the earth
away sufficiently to ascertain that his find is of no small
value. He calls his partner.
“ I say, mate, come here; I’ve struck something precious
heavy. Come and see if this isn’t gold ? ”
Woods needs no second summons. He quickly inspects
the discovery, and as quickly delivers judgment.
“ A nugget, by thunder, an’ a big ’un too ! ”
It is immediately brought into the full blaze of daylight.
Woods loses no time in ridding the nugget of any still
adhering earth. With nervous excitement he turns it
over and over, examining every side, corner, or blister about
it.
“ I say, mate, our fortune’s made; this nugget’s worth
thousands! Come, what are ye moonin’ there, for ?
Ye look as if ye were sorry we’d found it.” This last
remark is occasioned by Woods looking up and seeing his
partner standing with his face reverently turned upward,
with head uncovered, and gazing absently into the distance.
Woods’ words quickly bring his attention earthwards.
“ Sorry ! why, man, I’m too glad for words. To think
that now the moment has arrived for which I have toiled
and slaved all these years, that no longer my poor wife will
have to bear ' VT \th privation and solitude, but that we can
now seek a home in more civilized scenes, and have all the
comforts money can bring Sorry ! You cannot realise
what it is to have seen better days, and been dragged down
to beggary and want, through the ill-doing of others. Oh,
God! I thank Thee that Thou hast heard my constam


prayers, and at last given me the wherewithal to raise again
my loved and trusted wife.”
Such a feeling as is displayed in these words of his
partner, William Woods does not understand. No thought
of reverence or thankfulness ever enters his mind. Nothing
higher than luck can ever claim any gratitude from him.
Chance has led them to this nugget. Luck has been their
loadstone. No thought of what it might do for others ever
found a resting place in this rough miner’s breast. Selfish-
ness ! only selfishness impels him now.
“ Say, mate, this is a haul an’ no mistake ! Why, it s a
reg’lar pile.”
“ Yes, truly,” replies North, still with a lingering feeling
of the gratitude he has just expressed, “ this is enough to
satisfy us for many a day. What will it weigh ? ”
“ Weigh! ” and Woods lifts it with an effort. ”By
thunder ! it’s good enough for seven or eight thousand sovs.
Anyhow we must be careful to keep this quiet.” These
last words have a deeper meaning than they convey to his
partner, who replies curiously —
“ Why, what do you fear ? ”
Woods sees that there must be no beating about the
bush, he must come to the point at once; besides, he fears
that Dyke may come up at any moment.
“ Look here, mate, this find is ours ! ”
“ Why, what do you mean ? ”
“ Mean ! that we divide this whack. Dyke did nothin’ to
find it, an’ ye won’t be fool enough to share it wi’him surely.’
“You scoundrel! is he not your partner; has he not borne
with us the brunt of all our toil ? Has he not suffered like
privations with us ? No ! he shall have his full share; this
gold is yours and mine to be divided according to our agree-
ment —two-fifths to my wife and myself, and three-fifths
equally between Dyke and you. On these terms we ve


always worked, and on these terms will this nugget be
divided.”
This is a strong rebuff to Woods —he never con-
ceives for a moment that any objection can be raised to
his proposal; but he is not to be thwarted without another
attempt, so he returns somewhat sullenly —
“What! so my half is to be the half o’ three-fifths, is
it ? Not if I know it. We found this gold, an’ if we caA>
agree to divide it equal, then I must be reckoned wn,L
that’s all; an’ I won’t stand any nonsense, either.”
“ Easy, mate Woods, easy; if there is any prior elai— ..
this nugget, it’s mine, who first discovered it; and I mean
to see fair play. No partner shall ever say that Harry
North dealt dishonorably by him. On that ground I stand,
and cast defiance in the face of the scoundrel who would
seek to rob his mate and North, placing his foot firmly
on the nugget, faces his partner with a calm expression of
fixed resolve, which indicates that his mind is made up
irrevocably.
Woods must needs try another direction.
“ Come, mate, don’t be so fast. Ye’re only hurtin’ yerself
an’ wife in not agreein’ wi’ me. Ye can take a clear half
o’ this find, an’ nobody be any the wiser. If ye’re afraid
o’ yer wife, don’t tell her anythin’ about it, don’t give her
a chance o’ turnin’ on ye for Dyke’s share; she’d be only
too quick to do that. Come, is it a bargain ?
And Woods approaches North, evidently decided in his
own mind that there can be no two courses now, but he is
wrong in this also : his partner’s resolve is not to be shaken.
“ No, I’ve told you I won’t agree to anything but a fair
division with Dyke, and I won’t.”
“ Don’t be a fool. Look here, I’ll let ye have the biggest
share, for yer wife’s sake, so that we divide it. Why should
we throw away a good thing to that young cur, Dyke?


He’s younger an’ stronger, an’ won’t feel the want o’ it,
and we will. It’s our property, fair and square ; ” and, he
adds in a tone which betokens a rising of his worst
nature, “ Darn me if I’ll give it up to him —no, not for all
the partners in the world.”
Dut North’s calmness does not even now forsake him;
he quietly, but firmly, responds —
“ Easy again, mate Woods —easy again ; you’re going
to do the right thing this time, even against your will; and
no partner shall ever say you thought of doing otherwise.’
“ No, I’m blowed if I give up my share ; do as ye like
wi’ yours; but half o’ this gold is mine, an’ half o’ it
I’ll have. Come now, we’ll cut it in two wi’ this” —lifting
the nearest pick, and evidently forgetting in his excitement
the difficulty he would find in dividing the gold with such
an instrument. “ You shall have first pick o the pieces ;
nothin’s fairer than that.”
“ No —I say No !” and North advances towards the lump,
bent on preventing any such sacrilegious proceeding.
“ An’, by Heaven, I say Yes ! Stand aside, an’ I’ll
divide it fair.”
With these words, Woods raises the pick. North, deter-
mined to stop any attempt to cut the gold, advances quickly,
as if to snatch it away. Woods yells out, “Keep off, ye
infernal fool, or I’ll brain ye!” while his eyes flash forth
sure evidence of his intention to carry out this guilty pur-
pose.
Regardless, however, of the personal danger, with thoughts
only of doing what is right, North still attempts to move
the gold, and Woods’ pick falls with great force, penetrating
his skull. The unfortunate man sinks upon the ground,
with no sound but a dull, low groan.
“Ye infernal fool! this is what comes o’ yer interferin’.
Ye won’t get the better o’ that for some time.” Then,


suddenly realising what he has done, Woods stoops down,
takes his partner’s hand, which lies motionless in his own,
turns his face round, and the full truth dawns on him.
“By God ! I’ve killed him !”
He pauses to review his position ; hut this is not a time
for inaction. The gold for which he has placed this guilt
upon his soul meets his gaze. The whole current of his
thought is turned. Something must be done with it—and
at once.
“ Now,” he thinks, “ there is no one to dispute my right
to all the gold.” No one to prevent his taking the nugget.
His mind is quickly made up. With a nervous, guilty
glance at the body of his victim, he mutters firmly, “ Yes,
by God, I’ll do it!” then hurriedly, but with great effort,
lifts the gold ; and, staggering past the upturned face, and
still glaring eyes of the corpse, he rushes away —away, as
he fondly hopes, from his crime—away with the wages of
his sin—away with nobody to dispute his right—away with
the fatal nugget —now his, in spite of all the world, away to
bear the burden of his crime upon his head; to have for
his constant companion the cruel, cutting, agonizing
remorse of a murderer’s conscience ; to dwell day by day
with the memory of his act; to dream night by. night of
his deed and its consequences; to see in daylight results of
the murder and robbery, in darkness the face and spirit of
his victim ; to live thereafter in daily dread of meeting
some one of the living victims of his crime, in nightly
encounter with the shades and shadows of his blood-stained
imagination.


CHAPTER 11.
“ For murder, though it hath no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ.”
— Hamlet.
Alice, left alone at the hut, makes all haste to get evi-
dences of the just-finished breakfast cleared away, and
busies herself with preparations for the mid-day meal.
She is still engaged with this when Ashton Dyke returns
from the store with the necessaries required by her for
household purposes.
As Dyke is leaving the hut, he turns back to her and
says, “ Why is it, Mrs. North, you have never come over in
your spare moments during the day to see us working at
the claim ? ”
Alice has never thought of it. There is no other reason:
she can only reply so.
“ Then come over the first chance you get; it’s not far.”
“ Oh,” she replies, “ I know the claim well enough ; I’ve
been there often with Harry on Sundays.”
“ Well, I’ve to go to the blacksmith’s for some picks, or
I’d ask you to come with me now,” and Dyke, bidding Mrs.
North “ Good-bye,” leaves the hut, and disappears in the
direction of the smithy.
Left alone with her work, Alice soon decides that she
will lose no time in acting on Dyke’s suggestion. She will
give her husband and Woods a surprise by appearing at
the claim that morning. If she makes haste she can
still get there before Dyke reaches the gully. Having once


made up her mind to go, she bends all her energies towards
the accomplishment of her object, and is shortly on the
road to the working. Nothing attracts her attention
until, as she is nearing the claim, she beholds a small
crowd of diggers at the door of a tent larger than the
others in the neighbourhood. As she has passed frequently
in front of this tent, she knows that it is that occupied
by Mr. Heelfield, the watchmaker. Over the door, in large
square letters, is his name with an intimation of his trade,
that gold is bought there and “ horse shoes made.” This
latter intimation refers to the fact that Mr. Heelfield had
once made a complete set of golden horse shoes for a lucky
digger who had found more gold than he had discretion to
use properly. This man had actually wasted a large por-
tion of his find in shoeing his horse with solid gold, and
riding the animal in mad career about the diggings.
The immediate cause of the stir now seen by Alice
is that a party of miners working in the vicinity have
discovered a rich pocket, and one of them has just brought
to Mr. Heelfield a large pannikin full of good-sized nuggets.
Alice does not stop on account of the crowd, but presses
forward, bent on reaching the claim, if possible, before
Dyke.
On nearing the rising ground overlooking the gully in
which her husband and Woods work, she wonders
whether Harry will be glad to see her coming. He surely
cannot be annoyed, seeing that her life at the hut is so
dull and lonely.
She is surprised on reaching the spot to find no one
working in the claim. Can they have gone to break fresh
ground ? Surely not. She must have heard something of
it, if that were so. With an instinctive dread that every-
thing is not right, she quickly descends the rocky bank
above the claim and looks about her.


Oh ! horror ! what is this ? A man’s body ! Harry, her
husband, lying there!
“Oh, my God! what has happened?” and Alice rushes
towards the figure. “Harry! Harry!” She stoops and
raises his head. “ Oh, Heavens, what is this ? ” There
is blood upon her hand. “ Oh, God ! Harry ! Harry !
He is dead ! ”
No one near to hear her cry! No one to help her!
What can she do ? She places her face close over his.
“No!he is not dead !he breathes ! ” What can she do ?
Will water revive him? Something must be done.
“ Water ! water ! ” and she gently lays his head again
upon the turf, and rushes off in the direction of the creek.
“Ah ! who is this ?”
She starts and trembles ; a man is almost meeting her.
In a moment she recognises Ashton Dyke. Thank God, he
has come !
“ Oh, Ashton, Harry's killed ! dying! Run for some
water —quick, quick,” and she turns again, raises the head
of her husband to her knee, brushes back the blood-clotted
hair from his temples, presses her hand upon his feverish
brow, and in an agony of suspense awaits the return of Dyke.
He is here, with water in the crown of his hat. To-
gether they moisten the lips of the dying man.
“My God, Mrs. North, what is this ? Is he dead ?”
“ Oh, no ; don’t say that! Surely not! It cannot be
that I will never speak to him agqin. Oh, Ashton, what
can we do ?”
They bathe his temples and brow with the water.
“ See !he breathes! Oh, thank God, he is not dead !
Speak to him, Ashton ?”
Dyke, kneeling beside the prostrate body of his partner,
grasps his feeble hand, and in a voice choking with emotion,
mutters the question, “ Partner, who has done this ?”


Stooping over his face with one hand gently placed upon
his breast, Ashton Dyke, straining every faculty in the ex-
citement of the moment, catches the words, feebly uttered,
“ Bill Woods.”
Dyke and Alice start, and look at each other with strain-
ing horror.
“A murder ! ”
Dyke, overcoming his excitement, turns his attention to
the dying man : he must learn more.
“ Woods ! and he has fled ! Why is this ? Had you a
quarrel ? For what did he strike you ? ”
Dyke pauses again and places some water to North’s
lips, then listens for his mate’s reply.
“A nugget, mate ! We found a big nugget! ”
The effort is too much for North. He is anxious to say
something else, and struggles to articulate. After an effort
he continues —
“ Don’t tell Alice of this ”
To hear her name is too much for Alice. She has borne
up bravely hitherto, because otherwise she could not do
her husband any good ; but now that she hears her name
from those dear dying lips she cannot restrain herself, and
a sob escapes her. It is audible to North.
“ Oh, God, my poor wife ! ”
His eyes wander slowly as if seeking her face. She
understands the motion, and stoops over him. As their
eyes meet all her pent-up feelings give way, but she must
needs hide her grief from her husband. She turns her
gaze away. Dyke sees there is no hope of recovery for his
partner. Oan he learn more of the cause of his death ?
“ Come, partner, tell me all. Speak, slowly. Here,
take some more water,” and he again places it to the
feverish lips. “ There, you feel better now. Tell me what
occurred.”


North is apparently sinking fast, but he will try to speak
again. Slowly and feebly the words are uttered.
“ I found a big nugget there ’’—indicating by a
slight movement of one hand a tree under the shadow of
which he is lying. “He wanted keep it from you
I refused he went break it in two 1 interfered
-he struck me down . Oh, Alice ! lam dying
—my poor wife !’ ’
She has again bent over him. The dying man still
thinks of her.
“ Be a friend to her Dyke . Promise me ”
The effort has overcome him : he sinks back in Dyke’s arms.
Dyke whispers his promise, which seems to relieve the
expiring mind, as North, for some moments —moments of
anxious watching for the wife and partner —seems to have
fallen into a quiet sleep.
Presently he starts. His feeble frame only has been at
rest; his mind has been more than usually active. Scenes
of the immediate past have been fleeting before him. His
latest hopes and aspirations are recalled. He starts up,
almost rising in his excitement.
“We are to be rich my Alice and I . This
nugget will make us happy . We shall go
home again and have the best of everything .
No ! ” —and his voice trembles with suppressed passion—
“you shall not have more than your share .
He is not too familiar with my wife . No Dyke
is a gentleman . I can trust my wife and
him too . But I say you must divide with him
You must 1 say . Stand back, Bill Woods .
We’ll carry the gold to the hut .”
The words come feebler and with greater effort now.
“ The gold is mine . I found it first . I won’t
rob my partner . No, never never never .”
s


The excitement which has sustained him so far, subsides;
he falls back, but Dyke is watching, and supports him.
Alice realises that she is speaking to him for the last time.
His dying words are precious ; she must hear more.
“ Harry ! Harry ! speak to me ; ’tis your wife calls.”
A smile passes over the face she loves ; again the lips
move.
“Wife! Alice!”
Dyke feels a tremor in the muscles of the form he holds;
Alice sees the eyes fade : they both know the end has come.
Her name the last words from his now silent lips, the
holy name of wife the last conscious effort of the dear dead
clay !
For some time neither speaks. Solemn silence only is
befitting the first moments after the departed spirit has
left its earthly tenement. The first pangs of grief are
softened to Alice by the reflection that she might have
come too late to hear the dying words of her husband.
Dyke would not profane the early feelings of her bereave-
ment by obtruding his sympathy upon her. In silence,
therefore, they both gaze upon the changing features of
the dead. In silent sympathy neither glances towards the
other for some minutes. Then Alice turns her face towards
Dyke ; she appears unable to speak. He knows, now,
that he must be the first to break the silence which
threatens to become oppressive.
“Heis at rest, poor Harry! murdered rather than do
me a wrong.”
At the word “ murdered ” he sees a relaxing expression
cross her face ; it turns her thoughts away from her grief.
Taking her hand, he continues —
“ Mrs. North, sister, this foul offence gives you a double
claim on my care. Doubt not that I’ll keep my promise
to your murdered husband.”


Again the same word “ murdered.” Alice gazes as if
for the last time at the face she had loved so well.
“ Oh, Harry ! gone from me for ever ! ”
Then she seems to realise that something more than
grief is required for her —that she must not give way to
tears. She turns to Dyke.
“And the murderer, is he to go free ? ”
The question is asked with such firmness of purpose that
Dyke sees he must make answer.
He declares emphatically, “No ! By Heaven, he shall be
hunted down ! He surely cannot escape ? ”
The doubt implied in these last words is seen by Alice,
who returns quickly,
“ No, he shall not.”
Then, as if to prevent any wavering, she addresses him
firmly —
“ Ashton Dyke, will you help me?” There is no doubting
her meaning.
“Yes, even to my life’s blood.”
Alice has now resolved; she will act, and at once. To
Dyke she continues —
“You heard Harry’s words. The scoundrel’s latest act
was slandering you and me to my husband. Poor dead
Harry ! You were too good, too true to believe him. Oh,
that the murderer were before me now ! Witness just
Heaven! that I give up all feelings of grief and
bereavement only to harbor promptings to justice and
revenge. Meaner thoughts must make way for the all-
devouring • thirst for vengeance. Perish remorse and my
woman’s heart, and let me like an avenging angel nurse no
other feeling but revenge, and dedicate my life to hunting
down this cowardly murderer ! ” Turning to Dyke, she
continues, without hesitation —“ Will you help me in all ?”
“ Yes, I swear it.” His answer is prompt and decisive.


“Aye, swear it. Listen to me, Ashton Dyke, Think
me not strange that in this moment when I should be bowed
down with grief and humility, I am thirsting for the
blood of my wronger. lam a wife, and my whole being
was bound up in the life of my dead husband. His
thoughts and sympathies were my thoughts and sympa-
thies. We knew no existence apart; and now that one
part of me is destroyed, and his spirit still hovering around
us in the first moments of its eternal flight, shall the other
give way to lamentation and permit the destroyer to go
unpunished ? You heard that one of the dying agonies of
your poor dead partner was resistance to a doubt thrust
before him by the fiend who wrought his death, as to my
fidelity and your honor. Does not that, too, call aloud to
you for vengeance, or does it close your ears when my voice
cries for aid ? ”
“ No, judge me not so poorly. lam yours in this affair,
body and soul.”
“ Then swear to me that you shall know no rest while
the murderer of my husband goes unpunished ? ”
“ I do. If punishment come slowly this hand shall give
you vengeance.”
“Nay, listen to me. Standing beside the dead body of
your murdered partner, in the presence of his spirit, wait-
ing to hear the oath before it takes its way to the eternal
judgment-seat, you swear that, come what may, in the
face of every difficulty, you will devote all your energies • to
finding his murderer, and wherever found, in whatever
position, and at whatever sacrifice, drag him to justice and
to vengeance? Ashton Dyke, mark the words, and swear?”
“ I do, at whatever sacrifice.”
“ Then, so help me Heaven, this murder shall be avenged!”
And Alice falls on her knees beside the body of her
murdered husband.


CHAPTER 111.
“ Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow,
Thou shalt not escape calumny.”
— Hamlet.
The chief centre of gossip at the Bendigo is the “ Golden
Dragon.” Here it is that, nightly v crowds of diggers
assemble after their day’s toil, and play cards and drink
grog far on towards the dawning of another day. The
accommodation at this establishment is, of course, of the
most meagre description. It purports to be little more
than a drinking shop, and certainly can claim no higher
character.
Scenes of drunkenness and besottedness are almost of
nightly occurrence. Whenever any party comes upon a
more than usually good find, it is, in the majority of cases,
discussed at the Golden Dragon, or some other drinking
resort.
Diggers who have borne privations and misery in their
search for gold, on the first change of luck forget all about
them here, and drown alike their past miseries and present
good fortune in the wretched stuff sold to them under the
name of drink. The enormous profits made by the pro-
prietors of these drinking resorts are something startling.
After keeping a drinking saloon for a year or so, many
men retire upon a moderate fortune, to grace Melbourne
“ society ” and “ keep up style ” there.


The ordinary digger is improvident to the worst degree,
and many, into whose hands large quantities of gold come,
soon run through all their earnings, and end their days in
delirium tremens, or “ delicious tremblings, ’ as the digger s
name is for this fell destroyer.
The vast sums obtained by the Government for drink
duties and licensing fees afford ample proof of the great
extent to which drinking is carried on.
The chief rivals of the Golden Dragon and such-like
places are the numerous “ sly-grog shanties ” that exist;
hut it is in the licensed houses that the miners congregate
to play cards and drink.
On the evening of the day on which North was murdered
a number of diggers are assembled in the bar-room of the
Golden Dragon; and Patrick O’Brien, a genial, good-
natured son of the Emerald Isle, has just been treating the
company to one of his usual songs, and earned a hearty
and unstinted round of applause for his performance. The
applause has not ended when the door opens, and the well-
known figure of Moses Marks, the postmaster, enters.
Addressing the company in general, as is his wont, he
enquires if “ any big nuggets have been found that day,
for besides acting as postmaster, Marks is an extensive
gold buyer, and makes it a practice to have his evening
dinner at the Golden Dragon, so that he will be on the spot
when news come to the surface of any rich discoveries.
He is always on the look-out, too, to ingratiate himself
with new-comers, hence his further question
“ Any new chums arrived? ”
Pat, being in a humor for chaff, and having no great
love for Marks, at once sw r aggers up to him in that peculiar
way only practised by Irishmen, and replies to the last
question —
“Yes, sur, I’m here.”


“ Oh ! you’re there, are you ? ” and Marks exhibits no
little displeasure in his voice. “A new chum, eh ? and up
to any larks, I suppose ? ”
“Oh, yes,” replies Pat, in the same bantering tone,
“ I’m yer Moses for fun.”
It is now Pat’s turn to ask questions, so he continues
addressing Marks direct.
“ Tell us now, Moses dear, what’s the latest swindle on
hand. How’s business at all, at all?”
“ Business ! ” Marks is anxious to avoid more than the
last question. “ Mighty poor business I can do at the
Post Office. The Government are as shabby as can be
now-a-days. Starvation wages, and no more is what they
allow me.”
“ Railly, now ; thin why don’t ye risign intoirely. Tell
us now, Moses avick, if the Government stopped yer wages
altogither, how much is it ye’d give thim to be allowed to
carry on the Post Office ? ”
This is too direct a question, and Marks turns away,
pretending to be occupied with other matters; but Pat is
not to be thrown aside. He goes on —
“ Come now, Moses dear, tell us the price o’ letters just
now. Have ye any fat ones for me ? or are they all stew-
in’ over yer own foire ? Shure, ye kape the letters as will
as the Post Office, don’t ye now, Moses dear ? ”
Pat is getting altogether too enquiring, and stumbling
on too many sore places, so Marks must stop him. Fortu-
nately he knows the way. He quickly interrupts—
“ Come, boys, have a liquor at my expense. Eh, Pat,
will you wet your whistle ? ” and, whispering a few words
to the barman, he leaves the room hurriedly.
As soon as Marks is beyond earshot the barman ad-
dresses O’Brien —
“ I say, Pat, you surely struck a soft place to make


Moses Marks shut you up with liquor. He’s only ordered
one bottle though, so don’t be in too great a hurry to finish
it. You won’t touch him on the raw every night.”
“ Faith, no, ye’re roight there. But wid one bottle
from Moses we are in great luck. Shure, I wish me pipes
wouldn’t choke ag’in till we got him to stand another
‘ blow me skull off.’ ”
This expression of Pat’s is the popular name by which
some of the most common decoctions sold at the diggings
are known —a name, too, which is well deserved.
While serving the drink, the barman enquires of Pat as
to his luck at the diggings.
“ Begorra ! ” —and Pat becomes somewhat sentimental
—“ the best o’ it’s moighty poor intoirely. I’ve not struck
on a good claim at all, at all, an’ have to be continted
wid tucker. An’ now me new chum partner’s goin’ to
lave me to work it mesilf, bad scran to him.”
“ Well, Pat, you know you must look out for another
partner at once, for with you, if you have a “mate,” you can
always get “ tucker,” at which feeble joke of the barman’s
there is a general laugh amongst the surrounding com-
pany. Pat does not take it kindly, and fires up with —
“ Shure, now, an’ what do ye mane ? Is it insultin’ me
ye are ? Be the powers! whin Patrick O’Brien can’t get
both mate an’ drink it’s toime for the diggin’s to shut up
intoirely,” at which a re-echoing of the laugh greets him.
This time, however, he does not notice it, but continues
the reference to his ill-luck. “ Och ! ” he declares, “ but
it’s mesilf as would loike to have the claim that North an’
thim two other chaps have near the head o’ the gully.
That’s the bit o’ soil I’d like to try my fortune in.”
The barman gives a knowing wink to the other diggers,
and informs Pat that if North and the other chaps are
doing well they manage to keep it pretty quiet.


Pat, however, is equal to the occasion.
“ Bad scran to ye ! Isn’t that the best proof that they’ve
got a good thing on ? ”
“Well, perhaps so; but why don’t you offer to join
them ? ”
“ Faith ! an’ I would that same, moighty quick, if it
war’nt for that sneakin’ varmint Woods. If he’d dare out
an’ give me a chance, I’d not be long before I wint whacks
wid North an’ Young Dyke, if my consint would do it. If
they’d only hould their tongues an’ ax me, I’d jine thim
to-morrow, that I would.”
Further inquiries on this head are cut short, Pat’s
attention being diverted by the entrance of a servant,
bearing on a tray the dinner served for Marks. He gazes
at it in astonishment, and enquires—
“ Well, now, who is this feast purvided fur ? Is this the
sacrifice that hathenish ould Israelite is goin’ to offer to
the God who regulates his appetoite. An’ what’s thim
grane things ? ”
As the servant places the tray upon the table, Pat
reaches over and helps himself from a dish. His enjoy-
ment is, however, only shortlived. He has put something
into his mouth which is a stranger to his palate.
“ Och, murther ! what a bastely plum ! —Ugh !” and he
quickly relieves himself of the presence of the offending
article.
“These are not plums; these are olives, specially brought
from Melbourne for Moses Marks.”
“ Och ! thin, I wish him joy wid thim. Shure! I’m
not accustomed to ate thim things until they’re ripe.”
“ They’re too expensive for the likes of you, Pat.
They’re'a particular luxury of Marks’ own ordering.”
“ Och an’ the good things o’ this loife are bein’
wasted on the loikes o’ him. The desarvin’ in this world


seldom git their desarts. Desarts! is it ? Faith! they
don’t often git their dinner at all, lit alone desart. I’ll
wager now that ould varmint has got hundreds av ounces
o’ gold in his swag, an’ only paid honestly for half o’ thim, .
an' for the matter o’ that, paid for that same out o’ some-
body else’s money.”
“ Och! an’ is that yerself, Mr. Target; an’ how’s yer
bull’s eye ?”
This is Pat’s way of greeting a new-comer in the person
of Ned Target, who can best be described as a kind of
agent, open for all sorts of odd commissions. He is more
regularly employed by Marks than any other person in the
neighbourhood.
Target has something to relate, and says so. The
diggers crowd around him. He then tells them of the
murder of North, and of the disappearance ol Woods.
“An’ Dyke an’ Mrs. North, where are they ?” asks Pat.
Target tells him that they are now on their way to in-
form the Commissioner.
“Be the powers ! this is a sarious piece o’ business.
Murthered wid a pick, did ye say ? The dirty spalpeen,
whoever did it, to go an’ dishonor the digger s best weapon
wid sich murtherin’ work.”
“What’s that you say about murdering work?” in-
quires Marks, who returns to the room and overhears Pat s
words.
“ Shure ! an’ there’s been a murther done roight amongst
us!”
“ What! who ?”
“ North and Woods. Ax Target there ; he’s just brought
us the news.”
Marks, thus having his attention directed to Target,
greets him cordially, and taking him aside from the crowd,
engages him in talk for a time.


This action is not lost on Pat. He has always had an
idea that a community of interest exists between these two
men. He thinks that now there is something going on
between them that won’t bear the light of day, and resolves
to keep a watch on them. Presently Marks and Target take
their seats at the table on which the former’s dinner has been
served. With such confirmatory evidence Pat determines
to be on the alert, and if possible learn something of what
passes between them. He is, however, the subject of
suspicion and narrow watching on the part of Maiks, and
fails to overhear their conversation. Had he done so, he
would have found that Marks ascertained from Target that
North had been killed with Dyke’s pick ; that Marks had
disclosed to Target the fact that recent midnight excursions
with his candle to North’s claim had led to the discovery that
their working was a very rich one, and a confession of a
consequent strong desire to possess it on the part of the Jew.
Target’s assistance is then invoked towards the gratification
of this desire, and the formation of a plot by which Dyke
is to be accused of the murder, and a way so opened to the
accomplishment of this. Marks reasons with Target thus,
knowing at the same time that no reasoning is necessary—
“ Dyke and Mrs. North are all that are left of the com-
pany now. Dyke’s a very presentable sort of chap, and
if we can only get the diggers to think there s something
that shouldn’t be between him and Mrs. North, we’ll soon
get him scragged for this murder. What s more likely
than that Dyke has murdered both men and put Woods out
of sight, to make believe that he had killed his mate and
bolted ?”
The matter has to be put concisely, for O’Brien makes
every excuse to approach the table where they sit, in his
endeavor to overhear what is passing. With a final in-
junction to Target to be circumspect, and not forget to act


as if convinced that Dyke did the murder, Marks sees that
their conversation must cease. He rises and addresses
O’Brien carelessly —
“Well, Pat, this is a sad business for us, this murder ?”
“ Shure, an’ it’s a sadder one for somebody else, Moses,
me boy.”
“And who’s that?”
“ The poor widow, God bless her. She’s been an orna-
ment an’ a deloight to the diggin’s since she came here, an’
to think she’s been widowed amongst us, an’ hasn’t a friend
to turn to. Och ! but she shouldn’t have left the ould
country when she emigrated at all, at all.”
“ Not a friend to turn to, did you say ? Why ! what
are you thinking about, Pat ? She’s not lost her best
friend ?”
“ What is it ye mane ?”
“ There’s Mr. Dyke ; isn’t he with her now ? Isn’t he a
good consoler ?”
There is no mistaking the postmaster’s meaning.
“Ye dirty blackguard! do ye mane to insinuate that
there’s anythin’ betwixt the two?”
“ Why, Pat, where are your eyes ? You don’t mean to
say that you’ve seen nothing?”
“ Seen nothin’ ! Be the powers ! I’ve seen all there was
to see, an’ that’s nothin’. Now, what’s yer doirty game?
What are ye drivin’ at, at all, at all?”
But Pat is not to receive any further satisfaction, for at
this moment the door opens, and Mrs. North and Dyke
enter the room.
Nervously, but feelingly, O’Brien approaches Mrs. North.
At her entry he has at once removed his hat, and stands
turning it in his hands, shifting it first to one hand, then
to-the other, looking alternately up and down.
“ Mrs. North, ma’am.” He hesitates a moment, then


proceeds abruptly, “ I’ve just heard av yer great trouble,
an’ if ye’ll belaive me, I feel for ye more than I can tell
ye.”
He feels that the right thing to do is to offer her his
hand, but diffidence restrains him. How can a great hulking
fellow like he convey sympathy to a gentle woman such as
Mrs. North.
She sees and understands his hesitation. Her feelings
are too deep for words, but she grasps the half-proffered
hand. There is then no further need of words ; a bond of
sympathetic feeling is formed, and each understands the
other.
Dyke meanwhile has enquired for the Commissioner,
and the barman, at his request,' has gone to see if he is in
the house.
O’Brien is anxious to warn Dyke of his suspicions as to
Marks and Target. He tells him of the “ confab ” between
the Jew and his “ maid o’ all work, ’ but that “ he couldn t
hear anythin’ but soilence an’ whispers.” Dyke is not
disposed to be suspicious; he assures Pat there is no fear.
Pat is not satisfied, but does the best he can by proffering
help, if necessary.
Dyke thanks him, and addressing the whole company,
relates the story of the murder; of Mrs. North s appear-
ance at the claim, and finding the body of her husband ;
of North’s dying words of accusation against Woods, and
the reason given for the deed.
But he is not to have the ear of the company unmolested.
Marks has been watching his opportunity. He decides
that now is the time to throw doubt on Dyke s recital. He
must, however, do so carefully.
“ North was killed with a pick ?” he says, facing Dyke.
Whose pick?”
“ The pick happened to be mine—the one which I used


at the claim. That which was handiest he took for his
bloody work,”
“A very likely story! ”
“ What is that yon say ?”
“A very likely story!”
“ You doubt it then ?”
“ Yes, I do. Can’t you tell a better ?”
“ What do you mean ? Oh ! would to God that I could !
Would it were all false as it is every word true! Now,
mates, do you believe me, and will you help us to track
the murderer?” and Dyke, as he speaks, turns, addressing
the assembled diggers.
The response is almost universal. All declare they will
help. Alice, who has been tortured with doubt and appre-
hension, murmurs thanks to Heaven.
“ Not so fast, men,” breaks in Marks, appealing to the
crowd ; “ don’t be so easily convinced that the murderer is
far to seek.”
“ What do you mean ?” almost thunders Dyke, forget-
ting himself.
Marks keeps cool, however, and so possesses the tem-
porary advantage.
“ Mean !” he re-echoes, “ that there are some things in
this story you must explain. Your pick it was that killed
North; his wife had never visited the claim while he was
at work before; you were away from the gully, and came
there just as she did, you say. Where were you ?”
Dyke can scarcely suppress his rage at the suggestion
implied in these words, but he contrives to answer calmly,
giving the fact of his message to the store.
“ Yes,verylikely,”rejoinsMarks,sneeringly; “andyousay
Woods has killed his mate and decamped with a big nugget?”
Pat has been a most unwilling witness of this scene. He
can restrain himself no longer.


“ Yes, ye dirty dunderhead, isn’t it as plain as the nose
on yer face, an’ as ugly too, for the matter o’ that.”
Marks ignores him altogether ; he must follow up the
advantage he has gained.
“ Now, boys,” and by a glance around he patronisingly
embraces the interested diggers, “ look here, does that
woman” (pointing direct at Mrs. North), “ look like a wife
whose husband has been murdered ? Does she show any
sign of grief ?”
Alice, finding herself made thus directly the point of
appeal, can only think, “ Oh, God ! what can I do ?”
Dyke’s strongest sympathies are now enlisted on her be-
half; his thoughts are turned aside from himself; to
Marks he hisses through his firm set teeth —
You heartless villain !”
“ Not so fast, young man; your interest in the widow
has yet to be cleared up.” Marks feels that he is gaining
ground by thus torturing his victim.
“ You slandering viper !”
Dyke’s passion is almost overcoming him.
Marks now again addresses the miners.
“ Boys, this is the true state of affairs: North is found
murdered, and Woods missing. This man Dyke had an
interest in his death” (Marks winks knowingly in the
direction of Mrs. North), “ and so had she. Woods, too, is
put out of the way, and a story trumped up about a nugget
and all that sort of thing, in the hope that they will be
allowed to quietly keep the claim, and nobody call their
actions in question. Now, Ashton Dyke,” and Marks turns
confronting him, “ what do you say to that ?”
“ That you are a dastardly scoundrel. You have
slandered and tortured by your vile language and viler
manner a pure and suffering woman; that but for her
presence I would make your sneaking hide experience the


only feeling your wretched being is capable of, and thrash
you where you stand. For some damnable game of your
own you have determined to divert the search for the
murderer of this poor woman’s husband, and direct sus-
picion upon herself and the only friend she has.”
Being so engrossed with the scene immediately around
them, no one is aware of the entrance of two policemen,
who pause on the threshold, witnesses of the proceedings.
Dyke continues, appealing to the miners nearest him,
“ Surely, mates, you are not so callous as to allow this
wretch to paralyse the arms of justice by his abominable
slanders.”
But Target does his work well for Marks. Led by him,
the crowd turn away, disregarding Dyke’s effort.
“ What! ye blunderin’ cowards ! are ye goin’ to be hood-
winked by that ruffianly hathen. For shame on ye, to be
made tools av in this way ! Never fear, Mr. Dyke, the tide
may seem agin ye now, but there’s no fear ye’ll weather
the storm in the end ; an’ whatever happens, I’m wid ye.”
“ Thank you, Pat, thank you; but this shameless
slanderer must be punished.”
Marks happening to turn his head at this moment, ob-
serves the presence of the police. This fact emboldens
him ; he can now safely add further insults.
“ You talk of punishment, forsooth ! You, who are even
now fleeing from justice.”
Dyke cannot realise the enormity of Marks’ villainy.
Surely he is not dead to all sense of shame. He faces him
more calmly than before.
“ Fleeing from justice ! you miscreant! I wonder with
such black thoughts in your mind and villainous lies on
your lips you can defame the holy name of justice by so
much as a word. It’s not too late to atone for the slanders
you have uttered, to make amends for the calumnies you


have heaped on a defenceless and unfortunate woman.
Be a man, and join in hunting down the murderer. Make
the only recompense you can for slandering the living by
pointing out the destroyer of the dead.”
“ Yes, that I will.”
“Ah ! you ivill find and denounce the murderer of Harry
North ?”
A ray of hope animates Dyke, but only for a moment;
it is dispelled by the Jew’s quick retort —
“ I do. ’Twas you, Ashton Dyke.”
Marks knows that he has taken a bold step in this direct
accusation, but with the police present he has the courages
of the cur. He expected the advance Dyke makes to fell
him, and retreats towards the officers of ihe law.
Dyke’s arrest follows, as a matter of course ; but as he
is being led away O’Brien indicates plainly to Marks that
this triumph will be short-lived, and that he will have suffi-
cient to do in future to protect himself without accusing
others.


CHAPTER IV.
“ The labour we delight in physics pain.”
— Macbeth.
No time is lost in bringing Ashton Dyke before the proper
authorities on the charge preferred against him by Marks.
Brought face to face with the necessity for adducing proof,
Marks utterly fails. Either from cowardice, or ignorance
of what is expected of him, Target does not swear up to
the mark, and Dyke’s accuser has to admit that there is
not a shadow of evidence to brand him with suspicion of
the crime, while there is manifest proof that Woods is the
guilty party. Dyke is therefore released immediately, and
thus has the melancholy satisfaction of assisting at the last
sad offices to his dead partner.
Marks, with mingled feelings of disappointment and
rage, betakes himself to his duties at the Post Office, and
is in anything but an angelic mood when numerous callers
keep him from brooding over his failure.
It is in the same temper that shortly afterwards a digger
named Tom Grey finds him, on calling for the purpose of
offering some gold for sale.
It is no ordinary circumstance that can make the Jew
forget his usual careful and characteristic way of going
about the purchase of gold, and Tom Grey is not a little
surprised at the evident desire of Marks to have the bar-
gain concluded. When asked if he has weighed the gold


he cannot resist the temptation to “ have a fling ” at his
questioner.
“Of course he has,” he declares. “ I keeps a bran’ new
pair o’ scales on purpose to weigh my gold. Everybody
has ’em at the diggin’s.”
And when Marks tells him that he is in a hurry, he
must needs advise him to “ wait till the hurry is over.”
“ More hurry, less speed,” was what his mother had
taught him, and that lesson he must repeat to the
impatient gold buyer.
It is in vain that Marks displays ill-nature, and asks,
“Am I to buy your gold, or am I not ?”
It only produces the reply, “ In course ye are ; ye don’t
think I’m a goin’ to give it to ye, do yer now ?”
“ Look alive then, let me weigh it,” and Marks sets
about “ preparing ” his scales for the operation. He is not
a little taken aback at the warning from Grey—
“ Now, then, no larks, ye know; fair homey, my covie ;
no bilkin’, ye know ?”
But the gold is handed over, and to keep his customer
from seeing too much, he is asked to take a drink, Marks
observing, “ It will do you no harm,” at the same time
with the mental reservation, “ until you drink it.”
The operation of gold-weighing as practised by Marks
is a very puzzling transaction to a large majority of his
customers, and accompanied, as in the present instance,
with the blinding influence of a drink of his poisonous
decoction specially made for such occasions, is quite un-
intelligible. He purposely uses a large number of different
weights, so as to confuse anyone who would follow the
process, and what little discernment the drink leaves
unclouded, is generally insufficient to see through the
weighing or have the nerve to acknowledge the fact. The
desired effect is therefore almost invariably produced, and


advantage taken of the unfortunate digger to the extent of
any odd pennyweights, if not an ounce or so.
“ There’s just 144 ounces,” declares Marks.
“ Only 14 !” returns Grey. “ I could have sworn there
was 20.”
“Well, weigh it yourself. See, here’s 4 and 4’s 8, and
4’s 11, and B’s 14, and half an ounce ; isn’t that right ?”
and he rattles over this erroneous addition so quickly that
the poor digger cannot detect the error, and acknowledges
confusedly —
“ Oh, yes, that’ll do ; hand over the greed.”
But Marks is not yet done with him. He has still other
profits to make out of the transaction.
“ Well, that comes to £5l, and one off for a lucky
penny.”
Then the money is counted out and paid over.
“ Now, my friend,” continues Marks, somewhat coax-
ingly, and with no sign of haste, “wouldn’t you he better to
leave the most of that in my care until you need it, eh ?”
“ Not if I know it, old Dishclouts. I can take care of
myself, I can ; I generally manages to crack a tidy crust.”
“ Well, see that you look after your gold when you get
any more,” is Marks’ parting advice as Grey goes towards
the door, on which the digger turns, and without any show
of reverence calls out —
“ Cheese yer clappers, old boy ; I can look after the
canaries.” At this he disappears at once through the
door, and Marks is once more left alone to chew the cud of
his disappointment over Dyke’s speedy release, but now
with the softening influence of a good business transaction
just completed.
He is not to be left long undisturbed. No sooner has
Grey gone out than Target slinks in, as if conscious of
some serious dereliction of duty —comes, in fact, like the


cur to be whipped, knowing his doom, but wanting courage
to avoid it. The Jew does not keep him in suspense.
“ You blundering idiot! how dare you show your face
here after what you’ve done ?”
“ Why ! what have I done ?” asks Target, meekly. His
question is merely a quibble; he knows well that it is
what he has not done that is bringing this avalanche of
reproach upon him, but any defence is better than plead-
ing guilty.
“ What have you done ?” echoes Marks. “ Haven’t you
let that young cub, Ashton Dyke, go scot free ; haven’t you
made an eternal enemy of him and that blustering Irish-
man as well, by a clumsy failure to get Dyke scragged ?”
“ Well, what could I do more ? I couldn’t prove that
he did it when I knew he hadn’t.”
“ How do you know that?”
“ Well, doesn’t everybody believe that Woods killed
North and decamped with the gold?”
“ Everybody believes ! You stupid fool! isn t that all
the more reason for thinking you and I are right in saying
that Dyke did it ?”
“ Well, what would you have me say ?”
“Anything ! everything ! even that you saw him do it;
that wouldn’t have been too much. You can’t tell a lie, of
course!” sneers the Jew in his rage.
“ I can, and have told lies for you by the score; but it’s
a different matter to swear away the life of an innocent
man.”
“ Innocent devil! No man is innocent that can be
proved guilty when the chance occurs and it suits our pur-
pose. See what a chance we had and lost through your
infernal chicken-heartedness. I’d almost got them to
believe that Dyke and nobody else could have done it. All
that was wanted was a word from you that you had seen


North and Dyke together ; that yon had seen Dyke run-
ning away from the claim without his hat; or that you
had heard him quarrelling with North, and threatening to
do for him. Oh ! anything you liked to say, you fool!
There were hundreds of ways to prove it without saying it,
and you wouldn’t. Oh ! what a chicken you are, a regular
pigeon-livered idiot; why couldn’t you have said some-
thing, and help me to secure the claim ?”
“ I’m really sorry, Mr. Marks
“ Sorry, Mr. Marks !” returns the postmaster, in atone
of withering contempt. “ You thundering idiot! do I pay
you for being sorry, or for doing what you are told ?”
To what extent this scene between the two men might
have reached is difficult to say, had it not now been inter-
rupted by a gentle knock at the outer door.
“ Come in !” yells Marks, illnaturedly.
There is no response. He repeats the invitation more
emphatically than before. Again he is unanswered. Both
men look surprised, Target, however, with an inward feel-
ing of relief at the interruption.
Marks says sharply, “ See who’s there;” and Target,
peering through the window, informs him that Mrs. North
is at the door.
This is most unpleasant news to Marks.
“ Tell her I’m out —anything, but don’t let her in. I
don’t want to see her.”
Target proceeds towards the door as if to obey, but as he
approaches it swings slowly open, and Mrs. North enters.
Target is anxious to get away unobserved, but Marks’
voice calls him back. He has need of him yet, probably
immediately. Turning to Mrs. North, Marks bows and
says —
“ Madam, you honor me by this visit. What can I do
for you ?”


Alice asks quietly and nervously, “ Have you any letters
for me, Mr. Marks, or” —and she hesitates before finishing
—“ addressed to my husband ?”
“ No, I have none,” replies Marks, without hesitation.
“ Will you oblige me by looking again ?”
“ Certainly, to oblige a lady, of course I’ll look again;
but I’m sure there’s none for you.”
As Marks sets about the appearance of looking, he won-
ders what has sent her on this errand. Can she suspect
that he has received a letter for them which has never
reached them ? Has O’Brien been at mischief here
already ? Can he have put suspicion in her head ? and
Marks concludes that “ this cursed Paddy knows too much
by half.”
Alice, now having time to collect her thoughts, begins to
fear she has ventured beyond her depth in thus bearding
the lion in his den. She almost wishes she had not come.
Is it safe to speak to, and perhaps quarrel with, this man
here ? Her heart beats high, and a feeling of nervousness
and cowardice comes over her. Then she thinks of her
dead husband, and her courage returns. With any coward
fears she will never be able to avenge his death. She will,
she must speak.
At that moment Marks returns to her. He cannot find
any letters, he says, and asks if there is anything else he
can do for her ?
This is her opening, and she embraces it.
“ Yes, you can, Moses Marks. You can explain to me
the reason of your slanderous accusations against Ashton
Dyke and myself. If you are a man, or have any manly
instincts in your breast, you will retract what you have
said. If not, I demand to know your reason for the
charges you have made.”
“ There is no need for that, madam. It has been proved


that I was wrong, and Mr. Dyke is free. Is not that
enough ?”
“No, it is not. Your villainy has delayed the chase
after the murderer of my husband, has been the means of
his escaping; but beyond that, your slanders have left a
stain. Although I cannot go out and aid in the search for
the murderer, I can do more than pray for the success of
these devoted men who are now engaged in it. Your black
heart has sought to fasten a calumny on me, to which,
were I tamely to submit, I would fail in my duty to my
husband’s memory and myself. Therefore, I am here to
demand an explanation of your vile words : to say to you
that although you may now be able to avoid the punish-
ment justly due to you, a day of reckoning will come, and
when it does, Moses Marks, nothing shall save you from
the vengeance of an unfortunate widow.”
“ My good woman, you are altogether wrong in what
you say. What I have done was as your friend. Now, do
not interrupt me,” he cries, seeing his visitor about to
speak. “ I saw the man whom circumstances pointed out
as the murderer of your husband, playing, what appeared
to me, to be a deep game of villainy and hypocrisy. On
the impulse of the moment, with a strong desire to be your
champion, I denounced him, and brought out all the facts
as they occurred to me against him. That I was wrong is
evident now, but that I had any desire to injure you I
deny, and can assure you I did what seemed best in your
interest.”
“And you expect me to believe that ?”
“ On my honor, it is the solemn truth.”
“ You hypocrite ! then why did you slander me ?”
“ I assure you, nothing was further from my thoughts.”
“ Man, it is useless to protest further. You only add
another lie to your already over-burdened soul. Seek not


to mask your villainy under the cloak of friendship. I
know enough.”
“No, no, madam. Listen !”
But Alice is determined she will not listen to more of his
hypocrisy, and stops him firmly —
“ Not another word. You only add to your iniquities by
every breath. Listen to me, Moses Marks, and she faces
him proudly, “ if there is justice on earth, you and I shall
meet again ; then beware of my vengeance !”
Alice has never entered the room far past the doorway;
she now turns quickly and quits the building.
Marks is too far overcome to speak for some moments.
He has never been treated in this way before ; never been
so humiliated in his life, and by a woman, too.
“ Oh! my God, what a Tartar !” he shortly after finds
breath to hiss. “A regular she-devil! a scold of the first
water !”
Then his eye catches Target, and he has something to
wreak his vengeance on.
“ What are you skulking there for, you cowardly imbe-
cile ? Come out of that and get me something to drink,
or I shall choke.”
Target has been hiding in the shadow of the counter.
He now comes forward, and is about to give Marks a drink
from the decanter out of which Grey has been served.
“Not that poison ! Get me some from the proper
place.”
Target makes haste to obey.
“Oh ! what a vampire I’ve escaped ! Meet again ! will
we ? By Heavens ! if we do, I hope your claws will be
clipped first.”
Target now returns with another decanter, and Marks
indulges in a good honest drink, smacking his lips there-
after with a smile of thorough satisfaction.


Another knock at the door, this time a loud one, dis-
turbs him.
“ Jehovah ! is that woman coming back ?”
He turns to Target.
“ Look here, if you let that tigress in again I’ll have you
flayed alive.”
Target is not so anxious to keep out visitors. He goes
towards the door, but it is kicked open, and gives entrance
to a man attired in moleskin trousers and blue shirt. A
red scarf is tied around his waist, and a crop of red hair is
surmounted by a cabbage tree hat which has evidently
seen better days. This man has clearly been on a recent
visit to the Golden Dragon or other similar place. His
walk is unsteady, and there is a peculiar unrest about his
arms, which speaks eloquently as to his state of mind.
Immediately he is well in the room, and has steadied him-
self after the effort of crossing the doorway, he begins —
“ Is Mr, Marks at home at all, at all ?”
“ Yes, I’m Mr. Marks. What can Ido for you ?”
“Oh! you’re Mr. Marks, are ye? Mr. Moses Marks,
Esquire, thunderin’ thief an’ awful liar ! Well, I’m glad
to make yer acquaintance, that I am,” and the new-comer
extends a big red homey hand across the counter in the
direction of Marks. But that gentleman is not given to
such familiarities, and pretends not to see it. He merely
replies—
“ Well, what can I do for you ?”
“ Are ye the man what kapes the Post Office ?’
“ I am ; and what may your name be ?”
“ Bismarck.”
“ What do you mean ?”
“ My name may be Bismarck, an’ yours is Marks, don’t
ye see ?”
“ Oh, yes, I see ; and what is your name ?”


“ I’m Michael Shine, Esquire, from Donegal, now of no
place at all, at all. Have ye any letters for me, Mr. Post
Office ?”
“ No, I haven’t. Where do ye expect one from ?”
“ Shure, if I knew, do ye think I’d tell ye. Say, Mr. Post
Office, don’t ye think ye could get me a letter if I ordered
it a week beforehand loike ?”
“ I tell you there is no letter for you.”
“Oh! ye do, do ye? That manes I’d better go, get,
absquatulate. Say, Mr. Post Office, do ye buy gold here,
at all ?”
“ I do.”
“An’ ye give the tip-top price for it ?”
“ I do —the highest price on the diggings.”
At the prospect of buying more gold, Marks’ manner
undergoes a softening influence. He is now all interest
in what the digger has to say.
“An’ what may the hoighest price be, at all, at all ?”
“ Depends on the quality of the gold. What kind of
gold ?”
“ Shure, I mane the purest gold. Big nuggety gold.”
“ I’ll give you £8 16s. an ounce for it,” replies Marks,
eagerly.
“Ye will, will ye ? Tip us yer flipper, ould buck ; I’m
yer Moses intoirely.”
But still Marks does not go so far as to shake hands
with his questioner, although the temptation now is over-
whelmingly strong. He informs him, however, that he
can have £3 16s. for every ounce of gold he brings.
Mike now approaches as near the ear of Marks as the
obstruction of the counter will admit, and whispers confi-
dentially—
“ Say, Mr. Post Office, can ye tell me the vally o’ a lump
o’ gold the soize o’ my two fists?”


“What! that size ?” asks Marks, placing his two hands
together, and holding them up.
This appears to amuse Mike.
“ No,” he laughs roughly, striking down the small bony
hands of the Jew and showing his own in their place;
“ that soize.”
The contrast is certainly great, and almost brings a
smile to Mark’s face. He restrains himself, however, and
replies shortly,
“ Well, I don’t know ; about
“ ! Tare an’ ages ! me fortune’s made ! JO2OOO,
did ye say ? Are ye quite sure ? Would ye give that
for it ?”
“ Yes, I would.”
“Ye would ; and where’d ye get the money ?”
“Oh ! I’d find the money. Show me the gold and I’ll
soon show you the money.”
“ Show ye the gold!” and the digger laughs rudely.
“ Show me the money, an’ I’ll soon show ye the gold,”
“ Come, my friend, you don’t expect to receive the
money before the gold is weighed and inspected, do you
now ?”
Marks, as he says this, leans partially over the counter
and stares closely into the face of the Irishman, who is
nowhat abashed by the proceeding, but meets the stare
half-way, and replies—
“An’ ye don’t expect to get the gold before the money’s
put down an’ counted, do ye now ?”
“ But, my dear friend, show me your gold ?”
“My gold ! Shure ! I didn’t say anythin’ about my
gold, did I ?”
“ Then, whose gold is it ?”
“ Nobody’s gold, at all, at all, ye ould Shylock.”
“ Then what the devil brought you here ?”


“No divil brought me here, but I found the divil when
I came here.”
“ What do you mean ?”
“ Shure, now I’m goin’ to a claim up Peg Leg Gully,
an’ I thought I’d just loike to know the vally o’ a biggish
nugget before I went, ye know. See how handy it would be
when we found one, do ye see ?”
“And this is all you’ve been wasting my valuable time
for ?”
“ Valuable toime, is it ? Shure, I’ll give ye as much toime
as ye can lay yer doirty hands on.”
“ If you don’t clear out mighty quick, I'll lay dirty hands
on you, and feet too.” The postmaster is getting angry
again.
“Will ye now ? Be the powers ! if ye give me any o’
yer doirty jaw I’ll knock yer uncivilised premises into the
middle o’ next week.”
“ Come, clear out!” demands Marks, imperatively.
“ Come and clear out, is it?” Now, how the divil can I
come an’ clear out at the same toime ? It’s go an’ dare
out, ye mane. Faith ! now, if ye give me another shake
o’ yer doirty mug it’s dare ye out intoirely, I will.”
“ Come now, out you go, or I'll send for the police !”
The mention of police is like throwing gunpowder
upon a fire to extinguish the flames.
“ Police, is it ? Police!” Mike yells, dancing about in
front of the counter. “ Send for them at once,” he con-
tinues, knocking over some packages on the top. “ Send
for them for that,” as he throws the scales out of the open
window. “ Send for them for this,” and he seizes the decanter
and is about to repeat the operation with that when he sees
it is not empty. “ No, be the powers ! I’ll not waste good
liquor,” and placing the decanter to his lips the Irishman
drains it to the bottom before Marks can get round the


counter to prevent him. The emptied vessel is then sent
after the scales, and Marks, in attempting to prevent any
further destruction, is made to measure his length upon
the floor, a similar catastrophe to Target being only
avoided by the discretion with which he keeps out of arms
length. Then Mike, with a dance of triumph, bangs the
door open, and leaves the discomfited warrior Marks to pick
himself together as best he can.


CHAPTER Y.
“And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan’s stithy.”
— Hamlet.
The assistance given by the police in the attempt to follow
and capture Woods is of the most half-hearted description.
They are, or pretend to be, too busy with more congenial
and less dangerous work in the shape of hunting miners
who may be working without a license. So far has this
“ sport ” developed, that “ man-hunting ” has become a
recognised pastime of the gentlemen in blue, and all sorts
of expedients are resorted to by the diggers to avoid the
eyes of the police.
The licensing system has become a terrible infliction on
the miners, and is conducted by the authorities with such
absence of discretion that a revolt has more than once
occurred, and in the main the wishes of the diggers eventu-
ally become respected.
About the time of the murder of North, the miners, Tom
Grey and Mike Shine, whose acquaintance the reader has
already made, resolve to prospect a certain likely spot on
the diggings, and with that object have brought their
puddling tub, cradle, and mining tools upon the ground,
and prepare to try it.
“Anyhow,” remarks Grey, “it’s near water;” an ex-
pression which draws forth the characteristic reply from
Mike —


“ ghnre, I’d much rather it was near whisky, that I
would.”
The men then light their pipes and sit down, one on the
edge of the tub, the other in a similar way occupying the
cradle.
“ It isn’t a good spot to work without a loicense,” remarks
Mike.
“Damn the licenses !” says Grey forcibly. “I thought
I was cornin’ to a land o’ liberty, an’, be me soul! when I
gets here it’s nothin’ but license: license to keep a store,
license to sell sheep, license to dig a hole ; license, license
at every bloomin’ step.”
“ Begorra, I don’t think they’ll let us sleep without a
loicense soon !”
“ Right ye are, mate. I’d kick agin it at every step if I
were you. Refuse to pay for any more licenses, an’ I’ll
support ye, that I will! They’ll get no more license money
out o’ me if I know it.”
“ Thim infernal police are gettin’ too mighty smart alto-
gether, so they are and Mike gives vent to his feelings by
a long draw at his pipe.
“ There’s not a single Johnny Darbie but thinks himself
a bloomin’ full-blown Commissioner. We’re in a land o’
tyranny, and must strike for liberty, continues Grey.
“ Strike it is, me hearty. Strike it is, an’ I’ll back ye
up. Look here, we’ll cheek up an’ defy the first bobby
that comes along, an’ show thim we have roights as well
as thim.”
“ Right ye are, mate ; I’m not a-goin’ to stand any more
bullyin’.”
“ Come along, let’s try a tub-ful o’ stuff, anyhow.”
They throw some dirt into the puddling tub, and are
about to perform the operation of “trying a prospect,” when
Mike suddenly breaks in—


“Be the powers ! mate, there’s a bobby. You slide an’
I’ll trick him.”
Grey requires no second warning. He is off like a shot,
disappearing in a wonderful fashion amongst the different
inequalities of the ground.
Mike, appearing altogether unconscious of the approach-
ing policeman, rams both arms up to the elbows into the
mud in his puddling tub, rubs a goodly quantity on his
pockets, and busies himself apparently with the contents
of the tub. He gives no sign of his knowledge of the
policeman’s presence until that august functionary ad-
dresses him thus—
“ Hi, there, digger, have you a license?
Mike turns, and looks up.
“Av coorse I have.”
“ Well, produce it at once.”
“At once, is it ? Shure, ye’re in a moighty hurry.”
“ Come, now, no lip, but show me your license at once.
Where is it ?”
“Oh ! don’t get scotty; it’s in me pocket all roight.
Here, me hands ain’t the thing to get it, at all, at all.
Put yer hand in there an’ ye’ll foind it fur yersilf,” at the
same time directing the policeman’s attention to the drip-
ping pocket.
“ Ugh ! you dirty devil, are you sure it’s there now ?”
“ Sartin ; put in yer hand an’ ye’ll foind it fur yersilf.”
“ That’ll do now. See you have it handier next time I
call for it. Hadn’t you a mate here just now ?”
“No, sur; it was only a visitor from up the gully.”
“All right.”
With a grin of satisfaction, and the air of a powerful
autocrat, the policeman stalks away.
No sooner has he departed than Grey rejoins Mike, and
the cry of “ Joe, Joe,” resounds along the gully, as a
warning to the other diggers that the police are coming.
D


“ Now, Mike, we must get a trial o’ this ground before
that bloomin’ bobby comes back. We done him for once,
anyhow.”
“ We did that, an’ his moightyship didn’t loike it at all,
at all.”
“ We can fake away, now there’s no down.”
“ Faith ! I’m not so sure o’ that. We must be on the
warey for his cornin’ back. What do ye say to a nip,
Tom ?”
“A nip, Mike ! Have ye any bunker ?”
“ Troth ! I have that. Here’s a beautiful consoler in-
toirely.”
Mike draws a well-filled flask from his pocket, and their
desire to try the ground gives way to a stronger desire to
try something more congenial.
“ This is the stuff to keep the funk out o’ ye,” remarks
Grey, smacking his lips. “ But take care ye don’t get
huffy ; we may have our friend the peeler here again, an’
have to block his hat for him next time. I’d like to spoil
his feathers if he gives us any more blow.”
“ Begorra ! so would I, that same.”
“ I say, mate, where did ye get this twist ? It’s rare
stuff. It’s booze worth guzzlin’, I can tell ye.”
“ Faith ! I got it at a shebeen not far away —a place
the peelers would like to smell, I’ll warrant ye. Be the
powers I like to encourage it as a protest agin this
loicensin’ racket.”
“Well, it’s stunnin’ stingo, an’ no mistake. I wish ye
had a gallon or two o’ it,” and Grey looks the desire he
expresses.
“ Be jabers ! yer roight there, ould buck.”
“ Look out, Pat, here comes the crusher back again,”
exclaims Grey, suddenly, his attention being directed to
the approach of two policemen returning towards where


they sit, having in custody three diggers whom they have
arrested, and are marching off to be lined by the Commis-
sioner. The police are followed and jeered at by a num-
ber of miners, and as they near Mike and Grey, the latter,
grown bold under the influence of the drink he has taken,
becomes somewhat impudent, and is threatened with being
marched off too if he interferes.
“ What’s that ye say ?” he demands; “ ye’ll put me in the
logs too ? There’s not a crusher on the diggin's as can do it;
not a single M.P. amongst the whole crowd as dare try it.”
The immediate result is that he is speedily handcuffed,
and finds himself shortly afterwards under the infliction of
a £5 fine for contempt of the law, or, more properly,
“ obstruction of the police in the execution of their duty,”
Such scenes as these are more in the way of the uni-
formed gentry than the pursuit of dangerous law-breakers
like the murderer Woods, or endeavours to cope with the
blood-thirsty bushrangers who infest the Black Forest and
other well-known haunts of these pests of the digging days.
Thus it is that instead of all the energies of the police
being devoted to the search for the murderer when it
might prove effective, a mere show only is made, and the
real work of the chase left to Dyke and O’Brien, who have
to suffer the delay occasioned by the villainous accusations
made by Marks.
*•*•*■*■****■*■
When Woods left the claim immediately following the
crime, he made all haste to get well into cover of the
bush, intending to reach Melbourne as soon as possible.
The following day, encumbered by the weight of the
nugget, and oppressed with thoughts of the burden he has
imposed upon his soul by the deed he had committed,
he trudges along, hoping to cover ere nightfall a large por-


tion of his dreadful, toilsome journey ; afraid to keep on
the highway, yet apprehensive that if he loses sight of it
he will become a hopeless wanderer in the bush. Towards
evening he meditates on the chances of his escape and his
folly in not putting the body of North out of sight. He
wonders if the body has yet been discovered. Had he
hidden it, he thinks, he might have had no necessity to
avoid observation so entirely. The others would then
conclude that both he and North had disappeared; but as
it is, when they find North’s body and the pick, they will
know he committed the murder, and he after him.
Stopping in his walk, he seats himself on a stump, but
starts up immediately in the fear that he is being dogged.
He is so tired and weary that his nervous system is quite
unstrung. Presently he recovers himself, and reflects what
a fool he is to be afraid ; they won’t know he has the gold ;
and if he once gets to Melbourne he can defy them all.
How he wishes he could get rid of it now : its weight is
too much for him to carry in this way.
He takes the swag, in which he has strapped the gold, off
his shoulder, and places it on the ground beside him. As
he lays it down he starts again, grasps the staff he has
carried, and, peering into the bush, mutters
“By God, there is somethin’ or somebody movin’ there,
but I’ll make a strong fight for it. If anybody’s after me,
I won’t give up this pile for nothin’!”
Then he curses his fear ; there is nothing there, he con-
cludes. How he wishes he had his revolver with him on
this tramp. What a fool North was, he reflects, to drive
him to do it. Why couldn’t he divide fair ? If his partner
had only done that, he could soon have got all the gold
when deposited in the hut, and laid the blame on Dyke for
stealing it.
But now he’s got it as it is, and must make the best of it.


“ North is made quiet enough, curse him ! but I can’t
get the sight o’ him lyin’ there out o’ my head. Why
didn’t I bury him out o" sight ? Why didn t I Oh ! will
I never get rid o’ this fear ?
Is he always to be tormented with visions of his victim ?
“Why can’t I ——”
Then he starts and almost yells at the objects his
imagination conjures up.
All this time he is quite unconscious that he is being
watched —that he is the object of much concern to two men
who have been gradually and quietly drawing nearer and
nearer to him. He is altogether unaware of their presence
until he hears the command —
“ Put up yer hands there ! Put up-yer hands !”
Turning quickly, he sees a revolver pointed at his head
by a dark, villainous-looking character, who strides towards
him repeating the command to “ bail up. His first impulse
is to turn and run into the hush ] then, lecollectmg his
treasure, he rushes towards that, and meets another
revolver on the other side in the hands of a man who
stands presenting the weapon, but does not speak.
The bushrangers see that he has no firearms, and so are
without fear. He raises his stick, but is at once confionted
by a revolver.
“ Now, mate, stand still, or I’ll bore yer ears mighty
quick. Here, Jim, tie his hands while I keep an eye on
him.”
But Woods will not submit quietly to an operation
which means so much to him. He has aheady paid dearly
for the gold, and will not tamely allow it to go beyond his
reach in this way.
“ Now, mates, I’m only a poor swagger,” he says, ad-
dressing both men. “ What are ye alter ? Ive nothin
but these.”


They shake their heads incredulously at the sight of an
old watch and two small nuggets which he draws from his
pockets. Yorky Bill, the leader, takes possession of them.
“ Very well, hand them over. Now, what have ye got
in yer swag?”
A kick from the bushranger’s boot meets with firm
resistance. There is something precious heavy in it.
Woods must make another effort, even against such
odds. Making a rush for the swag, he strikes out violently
with his cudgel; but he is speedily overcome by the two
bushrangers, and made fast to the nearest tree. As they
proceed to open the swag, Woods makes a final appeal.
The nugget is laid bare, and Yorky Bill addresses his
partner—
“ Thunder an’ turtles ! here’s luck, an’ who’d a thought
it from that miserable cove ? Thought he'd somethin’
worth fightin’ for when he started to bluster. Say, mate,
this is a swag worth pilin’, ain’t it? With this we can
give up business an’ start somethin’ less risky. Ye won’t
be sorry ye had to join me now, mate ? Ye’d have dug a
long time without strikin’ a bit o' luck like this, I reckon.”
“ Look here, mates,” calls out Woods from the tree to
which he is tied, “ I’ll give ye a full half o’ the gold an’
not say a word about it if ye let me go.”
“Will ye, now? That is kind, seein’ as we’ve got the
whole lot already. It’s an easy matter to prevent ye say-
in’ anythin’ about it, so don’t open yer mouth too much,
or we might make another openin’ in yer carcase ye
couldn’t shut so easy.”
Meanwhile the other bushranger has overhauled the
swag. There is nothing of value except the nugget. This
he considers a sufficient prize, and suggests to Bill to give
Woods back his watch and the other nuggets.
Bill objects emphatically, and replies —


“ Hold on, Jim, don’t ye come the too mighty liberal
racket yet. We ll make a bloomin’ mistake to leave this
cove here, able to put the bobbies on our track when he
gets off. Don’t ye think we’d better make short work o’
him, an’ stash his jaw for good?”
“ No, no, mate, we haven’t murdered anybody yet, and
I’m not the one to begin in cold blood. Let’s get off with
the gold at once, or we’ll have somebody dropping on us
we’ll have to reckon with first. ‘ Safe find, safe bind,’ say
I, so let us get our swag planted.”
The tone of proprietary interest with which his partner
refers to “ our swag ” grates on the ears of Bill. It is only
a week or two since he bailed up James North, who was
then on his way to the Bendigo, and taking a sudden liking
to him as a “plucky young chap for a new chum,” had
given him the alternative of joining him on the road or
being left tied to a tree. North having made choice of the
latter evil, Bill, not to be baulked, declared he must “either
become his pal or take a bullet through his skull.” Thus
being left without any choice, James North had consented
to join Yorky Bill, while fully determined to embrace the
first opportunity that offered of severing the connection
without dishonor.
This was their first “ case ” together, and Bill did not
relish the idea of dividing so rich a prize at the outset of
their partnership. How he was to avoid this was a
troublesome matter. To give time to conceive some plan,
he pretends to see a number of mounted police, and sends
Jim to reconnoitre. His mind is quickly made up. He will
get Jim to shoot Woods. With such a crime on his head his
mate will be more easily dealt with. Yes, he must force Jim
to do some “ dirty work.”
“ No, Bill,” says Jim, returning, “ I don’t see anything.
’Taint likely we’ll find the troopers anywhere about here.
Come, let us get away with the gold.”


“An’ leave this cove here to blow on us ?”
“ What harm can he do, especially as we’ll have to clear
right away and break up the gold without delay.”
“ Look here, Jim, we divides this lot fair. You’re the
junior partner, ye know, an’ mustn’t expect to get so much
as me.”
“ What’s that ?”
“You’re junior partner, an’ mustn’t expect to get as
much as me.”
“ By Heavens ! if you mean to come the double on me
you are mistaken. We’re mates, fair and square. And
mind you, I didn’t want to be, but we divide equally all we
take. If you mean to be up to any other tricks, I’m not
on, and not to be trifled with either.”
“ Then shoot that chap, an’ leave us without a witness
agin us.”
“ No, Bill, no ; I’m not going to stain my soul with
blood.”
“ Stain, be damned ! Ye’d rather get the trapps on
yer track through yer soft liver. Stash his jaw at once.”
But James North is no coward. Where the life of a fellow-
being is at stake, he has no selfish thoughts of his own
safety. Drawing his revolver, he declares emphatically
that he will not take the life of any man in cold blood,
and, moreover, that he is determined to prevent Bill from
doing so either.
The other sees his determination is well grounded, but
does not give way.
“ There now, Jim, don’t play the infernal fool. If we
leave this cove’s mouth open, we may as well give our-
selves up at once. If ye won’t close him up, stand aside
an’ let me have a pot at him.”
“ No, I swear you shall not take his life while mine
lasts;” and as he speaks North advances towards Woods,


shielding him from Bill’s view. “ Besides, you fool,” he
continues, “if we fired a shot now we might have some-
body on our tracks at once. We’re not far enough from
the township for that,”
“ Then knife him !” roars Bill, drawing his bowie, and
rushing forward ; hut the other is too quick for him, for,
with a sudden adroit movement he severs the line that
bound Woods, and calls him to assist.
Meeting Bill’s rush, his partner grasps his wrist, and
before he recovers from the surprise, has him completely
overcome. Then with the assistance of Woods, Yorky Bill
is securely tied to the tree from which his intended victim
has been so cleverly released.
“ Now, then !” exclaims James North, addressing Bill,
after the struggle, “ what about shooting the cove who can
split on us, eh ?”
“ Damnation ! I’ll have quits with ye for this yet. Let
me go at once, or look out for yer own skins.”
“ Yes, mate, we can do that. Here,” and as he speaks,
James North draws his partner’s revolver from his belt,
sticks his bowie knife into the ground a few feet in advance
of him, and continues —“ when you can reach that knife
you’ll be free. Next time you compel anybody to join you
on the road, be more careful how you try to force him to
commit a murder. This chap and I will divide the gold
which you have lost through your infernal greed. We
w r on’t do the cowardly thing you’d have done, and shoot
you where you stand, and while you can't defend yourself,
but will leave you to the mercy of the first digger that
comes along, and if he’s one that knows ‘ Yorky Bill,’
why, darn me if he’s worth his salt if he leaves your skin
fit for anything better than the top of a longtom.”
Turning to Woods, who has already replaced the nugget
in the swag, he declares that they must get away from


there and settle their plans for disposal of the gold,
upon which both men, without more than a look at the
struggling and blaspheming bushranger, leave him to his
chances of release.
Yorky Bill’s thoughts are anything but enviable after
the departure of his late partner and Woods. He curses his
ill-luck in having had anything to do with such a “sneakin’
toff” as the man who has just treated him thus. His
rage at the idea of being “ done by a new chum sneak ” is
beyond description, and the reflection that these men will
get quickly away with all this gold is maddening. He
cannot bear the thought that they will be able to laugh at
him ; but with no small degree of pride he mutters —
“ By Heavens ! if they do, they’ll be the first that passed
through the hands o Yorky Bill an came out laughin .
How long, he wonders, is he likely to be left there. Ah!
is not that a cooee ? He listens. Yes, it is repeated, and
there is another answering it. He cooees in reply, and is
answered first by one and then the other. Surely he is
safe of release now. Yes, here is somebody, and Patrick
O’Brien, following up the direction of the cooee, emerges
from the bush some distance to the right of where Bill is
tied. Dyke and O’Brien have been on the track of Woods.
They have traced him thus far, and but for their failure to
find a crossing to an adjoining creek, would have been now
far in advance of him.
They had separated to seek the crossing, and O’Brien
understands the cooee which has brought him hither is
the signal that Dyke has been successful.
“ Hi, mate, give us a hand here,” calls out Bill.
O’Brien turns.
“Be the powers ! what’s this ? Faix ! an what are ye
doin’ there, at all, at all ? Is it houldin’ up the tree ye
are ; or are ye practisin’ for a moile-post ? Begorra! ye


look for all the world like a demented scarecrow. Have
ye passed the noight in that perpendicular position o’
recumbency, or are ye there o’ yer own free will an’ choice
to qualify yersilf for a noight or two in the Black Forest ?”
“ Man, can’t ye stash yer jaw an’ let me out o’ this ?”
“ Well, now, ye wouldn’t want me to let any man out o’
a fix afore he axed me ; an’ be me sowl I I’d think the man
who didn’t loike bein’ toied there would ax civilly to be
untoied.”
A repetition of Dyke’s cooee claims Pat’s attention, and
he answers lustily until he sees Dyke approaching —
“Shure, sur, here’s somethin’ for ye to decoide. A doirty
spalpeen wants to get out o’ a fix, an’ is too proud to ax!”
“ Why, Pat, what on earth’s keeping you here ?”
“ Faith! I’ve found a queer berry growin’ on a gum
tree, ripe for pluckin’, but too sassy to be worth much.
Shall I pot it, sur?” presenting the revolver as he speaks.
“ Steady, Pat, steady, it might go off.”
“Go off, is it ? Shure, sur, if it could, it would have
gone off long ago.”
Approaching the bushranger, and having his attention
diverted by the knife sticking in the ground, he exclaims —
“Be the powers! ye’ve got yer knoife here, but
wdiere’s yer fork an’ spoon ? Och! be me sowl! here’s a
pretty fix for a man to be in—toied fast to a tree wid nothin’
to feast his eyes on but a doirty blade that moight free him
at any moment, but seems sharp enough to cut short any
advances in that diriction. Och ! it’s the way o’ the world
—our best frinds are always near enough to pity us, but
never in a position to help us in the toime o’ need, always
willin’, but somethin’ wantin’, an’ so we don’t get help
when it would sarve best. Isn’t that it, sur ?”
“ True enough, Pat, but while you’re moralising, this
poor devil is not benefitting, so cut him adrift at once.”


“ That I will, sur, wid more power than pleasure, I can
tell ye. Bad cess to ye for a poor finger post. Who are
ye, at all, at all ?” says Pat, approaching to release the
man.
“ What the devil’s that to you ?” replies Bill, gruffly.
“ Come, my friend, it’s more profitable for you to be
civil under present circumstances,” remarks Dyke.
“ Civil! Mighty damned civil ye’d be if ye’d been in my
place, 1 can tell ye.”
“ How came you to be tied there ?”
“ The meanest damned trick I ever saw in my life. Two
blasted mates turned on me when we’d got a good pile o’
gold, an’ after I’d prevented the one robbin’ the other o’ his
share, they strings me up here an’ hooks it with the whole
damned lot. Curse them lor a pair o’ mean-livered
skunks.”
“ Why, mate, that’s pretty nearly what happened to me.
We’re now after a digger who has stolen a large nugget,
and murdered his mate, because he wouldn t agree to
deprive me of my share.”
“ What’s that ? Stole a nugget! a big nugget ?”
“ Yes, so I believe. I never saw it.”
“An’ the digger, what’s he like?”
Dyke gives a short description of Woods.
“ Thunder an’ damnation !”
“ What’s the matter ?”
“ Why! that’s the blasted hound as helped to bind me
to that tree!”
“ What! Woods here ? When ?”
“Not half an hour ago.”
“ Which way did he take ?”
“ How in thunder can I tell ? But there’s only one way
to cross this creek, an’ that sneak Jim’s sure to have*made
off that way.”


“ By Heavens ! Pat, we’re on their track now with a
strong scent. Will you help us ?” and he turns to Yorky
Bill.
“ Won’t I ? ‘ Let each man skin his own skunk,’ say I,
an’ as I have to get even with that skunk Jim, blow me if I
don’t help ye to run them down, if it costs me my neck.”
“ Lead on, then, and we’ll follow,” cries Dyke, excitedly.
“Now to redeem my oath.”


CHAPTER VI.
“ The heaviness of guilt within my bosom
Takes off my manhood.”
— Cymbeline.
With the accession of a partner who perforce must have
his share of the nugget respected, the fortunes of William
Woods undergo a very agreeable change.
In the discussion as to what is best to be done with the
golden lump, Woods insists and James North eventually
agrees that it shall be broken up and disposed of piecemeal.
This is done without difficulty, the sale of the gold being,
for obvious reasons, left principally to North.
The amount realised is quite a fortune to the two men,
and during the process of selling the gold, many different
schemes are discussed for the investment of the money.
Woods evinces great anxiety to take up a sheep run, and
join the ranks of the Australian aristocracy by becoming a
squatter. He eventually prevails on North to join him,
and they are not long in finding a suitable piece of country.
The former owner of the land they desire has made his
fortune out of the run, and is anxious to settle in Mel-
bourne.
Being in a part of the country almost inaccessible at the
time of its first selection, the rental paid to the Government
is very small, and when the golden tide began to flow in the
vicinity, the proprietor was able to dispose of his products
in a greatly extended market, and at marvellously in-


creased prices. Indeed, when negotiating the sale, he
boasts that he has for the last three or four years received
from the Government for the grazing right of one paddock
more than ten times the amount he pays in rent for the
whole country, and that off the freehold he has acquired as
his “ pre-emptive right,” he sold to the Government officials
in one season hay to the value of five times the amount he
paid for the land.
These statements stimulate James North to complete the
purchase, and he and Woods are very shortly in possession
of “ Hurley Station,” and engaged in pastoral pursuits of
a highly remunerative kind.
Woods now feels himself tolerably secure from the out-
ward consequences of his crime, and after a time begins to
deport himself with a moderate degree of cheerfulness. In
reply to his partner’s questions on the subject of the gold,
he has forged a very plausible tale, and completely satisfies
him in every respect, so that no suspicion ever crosses the
mind of James North as to the past life of his co-proprietor.
Going about his station duties with unfailing promptitude
and punctuality, never showing any desire to go beyond
the boundaries of their own land except for the purposes of
the station management, the taciturn and somewhat
morose manner Woods occasionally displays is never noticed,
or if it be, it is accounted for by some such explanation as
early disappointment in love affairs.
As he shows no inclination to talk of himself or his
family, Woods is never questioned on the subject, nor does
he ever enquire into such matters relating to his partner,
so that for years they live together on the same station,
come and go, discuss with each other the management of
their concerns, and after all never become more intimate
than on the day of the “ sticking up.”
Neither ever suspects the other of anything but the most


unimpeachable rectitude towards him in their partnership
relations, and as the tide of prosperity on which they
embarked together had not turned, there is no room for
aught but the utmost satisfaction.
After six years of squatting life have passed, six busy
years of seclusion from the outside world, for neither man
appears to have any relatives in the colony, nor takes any
interest in the progress of events outside of those with
which he is intimately acquainted, James North bethinks
himself that he has amassed sufficient money for the
modest wants of a bachelor, and determines to return to
the home of his kindred in the old country. Letters to or
from home during his station life have been almost un-
known, but he has lately received one of such import as to
turn the current of his thoughts homewards, and it is not
long before he proposes to his partner a sale of his interest
in their property. Woods is not at all disinclined for this,
so a bargain is struck without delay. Within a month
afterwards James North sails from the shores of Australia
in the full belief that he is looking for the last time upon
that country.
He little dreams then of the stirring scenes still to be
enacted in that fair land in which he is to play no unim-
portant part, but fortunately it is not given to mankind to
forecast the future.
The horizon of human happiness is not clouded by a
knowledge of events to come.
Although Woods had never made much of a companion of
his partner, the solitude which follows on North’s departure
becomes painfully oppressive, and not being a man given
to any mental recreation, he has to suffer the “ slings and
arrows ”of an over-burdened conscience. Nothing in his
daily life tends to abate the feelings of remorse he suffers.
Nothing, now that he has the knowledge of his solitude,


can resist the unconscious efforts of memory which con-
tinually carry him back to the days he would fain blot
from his history. Born and educated in a community
which looks upon taking the life of a fellow-creature with
just abhorrence, Woods has within him the “ still small
voice ” which tells him daily and nightly of his crime.
No effort of imagination can dismiss from his memory
this bloody act.
Reason as he will, that it had been forced upon him,
that circumstances had driven him to the deed, he cannot
avoid the awful punishment of his own consciousness.
He tells himself repeatedly that he had not any criminal
intention, that when he took up the pick with the mad
object of attempting to divide the nugget, he had no idea
of injuring his partner. He had certainly threatened to
brain him if he interfered, but that was only a stupid
exaggerated threat which he had never intended to carry
out. North brought the blow on himself by his coming
between him and the gold.
Despite every effort of this kind, despite all the casuistry
of which he is master, there arise the terrible visions of
his act and its victims, ten times more terrible as years roll
by. Nightfall, with all its ghastly apparitions, now has
for him terrors it were difficult to depict. The slightest
sound in the solitude of his hut causes him to start and
tremble, so that he has been compelled for some time past
to keep a light burning by his bedside at night.
He will start from his sleep and see in the form of his
clothes hanging on the wall the avenging figure of his
partner’s widow approaching to denounce him. The shadow
of a chair becomes a policeman crouching near his bed
ready to spring up and arrest him ; while if he has placed
a log on end by the fire-place his guilty imagination will
convert it into a gaoler in whose custody he is now,
awaiting the last fell penalty of his crime.


Conscience, that wonderful implanting of a higher
power, has completely enthralled this man, has made him
endure an existence the most wretched conceivable. With
nothing to counteract the effects of a conscience at war
with a companionless and lonely soul, he has to undergo
the full extent of its terrible buffeting. Hope, the only
antidote which mankind can turn to in such cases, refuses
to spread her bright wings and carry him beyond the awful
realities of his position. No promise of future rest smiles
upon him, but only the dark outlook of continual despair,
and a life of black remorse.
What wonder, then, that he desires to get rid of the
associations which give him so much of misery ? What
wonder, that with such a past to look back upon, fraught
with memories that he cannot control, he prepares for a
plunge into the vast futurity in different surroundings ?
Powerless though he is to stem the tide of his imagination
which threatens to engulf him, he can at least turn his
back upon the shore he at present frequents, and amidst
other scenes and with new interests, try, if not to forget, at
least to recall less often the period of his life he desires to
bury.
Thus it happens that within a year of the departure of
James North from Australia, William Woods has disposed
of his station property and sought in the stir and bustle of
Melbourne life the only possible forgetting he can ever
hope for on this side of eternity.
With all these years passed over his head, he is surely
not liable to any molestation from the friends of his
victim.
********* *


The pursuit for the murderer which has been prosecuted
with such vigor by Dyke and O’Brien has never again been
so near a consummation as on the occasion of their release
of Yorky Bill, the bushranger, and after some months of
unwearied application to the task, it has to be abandoned,
owing to Dyke having received letters from Home which
require his immediate attendance there.
Alice North has never given up hope of being able to
avenge her husband’s death. Despite so many years of
failure, she still clings tenaciously to her purpose, but
deprived of the active aid she at first enjoyed, she can now
only watch and wait, never losing sight of her hope.


CHAPTER VII.
“ And he that stands upon a slippery place
Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up.”
—King John.
The suburb of St. Kilda has become one of the favorite
positions for the residences of Melbourne merchants.
Amongst the first out-of-town localities to enjoy the
advantages of a railway, it speedily becomes in demand,
and to possess a villa in St. Kilda is the ambition of many
a prosperous city man.
Situated in one of the principal streets, overlooking the
broad expanse of water lying in the bay between St. Kilda
and Melbourne, stands a square, substantially-built house,
with a broad verandah sloping towards the lawns in front
and on each side.
Sheltered among the trees now growing luxuriously in
the well-kept garden, the house looks towards the
metropolis as if, while rejoicing to be away from the din of
the city, it is anxious not to lose sight of the powerful and
wealthy parent from which its surroundings may be said
to have sprung.
In a comfortable and well-lighted drawing room, fur-
nished with considerable taste, and displaying a richness
of belongings which indicates that the inmates of the
house have no very deep concern as to the cost of the
different articles, sit two ladies, a mother and daughter.
They have just come from the dining room, and are
sipping their after-dinner tea.


The elder lady is a woman who has advanced in years
somewhat beyond the period when she desires to deny her
age, or show anxiety that her daughter should be mistaken
for her younger sister. Of goodly presence, she nevertheless
bears evidences that her early life has not been passed
among scenes and surroundings now made familiar to her.
Mrs. Stevens came to Australia with her husband in the
early days of the goldfields, and amassed a fortune in one
of the most popular goldfield public houses.
She is a woman of great industry and business sagacity,
and had not been long in the business when she saw that
to ensure success she would have to take not only the
management of the hotel, but in addition, the contiol of
her husband, as, unfortunately, he had given way to a
taste for some of the vile mixtures it was his business to
dispense.
With the increase of his business this drinking propensity
grew upon him. After a time his wife s duties became too
onerous for her to pay much attention to him, and he
ended his craving and his life by a drinking bout, which
brought on an attack of apoplexy, to which he speedily
succumbed.
Following on her husband’s death, Mrs. Stevens had
come to the conclusion that she had made enough money,
and being actuated by a very laudable desire to educate
her daughter for a higher position in society than she her-
self could ever hope to occupy, she determined to move to
Melbourne, and, as she expressed it, “ set up house ” there.
Her mind made up, there was no delay in carrying out
her purpose, and Mrs. Stevens shortly afterwards became
known in the city as a wealthy widow with an only daughter,
both of whom might he considered desirable conquests for
colonists in search of wives.
A few years after taking up her residence in Melbourne,


Mrs. Stevens had the misfortune to be the victim of a boat
accident on the Yarra River, and would assuredly have been
drowned hut for the timely aid rendered by a passer-by,
who plunged into the water and brought her safely to shore.
From this meeting an intimacy sprang up between the
rescuer and rescued, which speedily ripened into something
stronger than friendship.
No small help was given to the successful issue of the
courtship of the fortunate rescuer by the fact that his
name was discovered to be also Stevens, and the ardor
with which he pressed his suit was soon rewarded by his
being accepted by the widow, and shortly afterwards
married to her.
Nora, the daughter, was at this time absent from home
finishing her education, and when she returned did not
add to her mother’s satisfaction by the manner in which
she accepted the presence of her stepfather. She did not
disguise her displeasure, with the result that the feelings
engendered between her and Mr. Stevens were not of the
most enviable kind.
On the present occasion the mother and daughter are
alone in the drawing room, having left Mr. Stevens to
enjoy his post-prandial pipe in solitude.
“ Nora, love,” begins Mrs. Stevens, sipping her tea,
“ have ye practised that new piece Mr. Eounderback gave
ye yesterday ?”
“ Eunderbach, ma, dear. Why will you persist in that
horrid mistake ?”
“ Well, my love, it’s the man’s mistake, not mine, if he
will have such a jaw-cracker of a name. I never can see
the sense of them double-barrelled applications.”
“Appellations, ma, dear.”
“Isn’t that what I said? W ell, how are ye gettin’ on with
him ? Do ye think ye will ever be a brilliant executor ?


“ I’m doing my best, and I don’t think he is displeased
with the progress I make.”
“ Displeased ! I should think he wouldn’t. Doesn’t he
get 21 solid shillin’s for every lesson he gives ye, and the
longer he keeps it up the better for him. I often think ye
would have done better to have gone to the Ladies’
Cemetery in town. You’d get better torturin’ there than
from private professerers like Mr. Eounderback, or what-
ever ye call him.”
“ Yes, ma, but then I’d have to be away all day, and
you’d be left quite alone,” and Nora’s manner clearly
indicates that her concern for her mother is not assumed.
“ Well, is it much better now ? One hour ye’re grindin’
and strum-strummin’ on the pianer, then it’s a dose of
German, after that comes French and drawrin’. Pretty
pictur’s ye’re makin’, too. I don’t believe ye’re drawrin’
master knows B from a bull’s fut. I’d not give him the
job to paint the chimney pot. Now, if I had my own way,
I’d take ye home to learn off some of the old masters.”
“ Why, ma, dear, the old masters are painters who lived
many years ago.”
“Of course, I know that. Ye don’t think they’d be old
masters if they were only born yesterday, do ye?”
“ Yes, but I mean they died years ago.”
“ Well, I suppose it’s the dye as makes their pictur’s so
run after.”
“No, no,” said Nora, for the first time during the
conversation exhibiting any degree of impatience; “ they
are dead and buried, and because they can’t paint any
more pictures, those they did are valuable.”
But the mother does not notice her daughter’s manner.
She continues —
“ Well, I suppose there’s somebody now-a-days as copies
their pictur’s, and can teach other folks to do them ; that’s
what I’d like you to do.”


“Never mind, ma, I’m getting on famously with my
drawing lessons here. Why, I’m going to begin painting
from nature!”
“ Paintin’ from natur’! what’s that ?”
“ Why ! working from the original object.”
“ Yes, but what’s the original object ? Yer father some-
times calls me an original object; I hope ye ain’t copyin’
from me ?”
“ No, no, ma, dear, I take- something—a tree, a hill, or
anything —and reproduce it on the canvas.”
“Oh, yes! I see,” but it is clear from her manner that
her vision is anything but perfect. “ Then ye’ll be quite a
painter soon—quite a ‘lady of color’?” she observes some-
what pompously.
“ Oh ! no, mamma, a ‘ lady of color’ is a black woman.'
« Well, now, I thought a ‘ lady of color ’ would be one
what paints, as a ‘ lady of tone ’ is one what plays. ’
Nora must do something to change the subject, so she
asks her mother if she intends going to town to-morrow,
and receives the answer —
“ Yes, my dear, if the weather allows it, but not unless
the rain debates a good bit.”
“ Couldn’t you take a ’bus ?” asks Nora, absently.
“ Well, the ’bus might take me, but I’m not agoin’ out
to get draggled. Why! there’s yer father come home
trenched to-night and lay down on the sofa in his wet
things, and was sound asleep when he was wanted for
dinner. I’m certain sure he’s snortin’ there agin now.”
“ Snoring, you mean, ma.”
“ Well, it’s all the same, isn’t it?”
“ No, not exactly, and neither term is very elegant.
“ Well, I never. Ye don’t expect me to be very elegant,
I’m sure. I’m good enough for yer pa, and that ought to
be good enough for you.”


“ I didn’t complain, ma, dear. I’m sure you’re just the
best-hearted mother that ever lived, and I'm very fond of you.
You’re too good for pa, and not likely to be improved by
him. I never can see why you married him at all; you
certainly wouldn’t if I had been at home to prevent it.”
“ Well, never mind, my love. It’s no use castin up
that agin me now. You never had a man save yei life
at the risk of his own, and then fall in love with ye at
first sight.”
“ With your money, I think, mamma.”
“ Well, I don’t. I don’t believe he knowed I had any
money then ; and, besides, he is very devoted and detentive
to me.”
“ He may be kind enough, but I don’t think he is all a
husband should be; and, then, look at his most intimate
companions. There’s that Jew money-lender, Marks ; now,
is he a man to be courted and feted ?
“No, I can’t abear him; but then he don’t interfere
with us, and only comes here on business.
“ It’s my opinion their business is not of the most
reputable kind.”
“Don’t say that, my love; don’t demean yer own
father.”
“ Stepfather, ma, dear !”
“Well, stepfather. And I’m sure Mr. Marks is a very
despectable Jew, indeed. He’s a very clever man, and is
not one of them low fellows who’s always droppin’ his h’s
and speakin’ through his nose, and generally behavin’
hisself in a very uncorreck and disputable way.
“ He’s not the sort of man I’d like to have any friendship
with, anyway.” , . , .
i 6 my dear, if ye were married, and lum a irienci o.
yer husband’s, you’d not be the one to treat him with
dispect; besides, my love, if yer pa is rough, and sulky,


and all that sort of thing, ye should remember that he
once saved yer mother’s life, and so prevented yer bein’ a’
infant.”
“An orphan, ma, dear. Yes, I know all about that;
but he’s had his reward. Your money saved his credit,
and that’s all he married you for.”
“ Don’t say that, Nora; I don’t believe it. I’m sure
he’s fond of me, and would do all he could to make me
happy.”
“And you are happy, ma, dear;” and Nora, as she
addresses her mother, places her arms lovingly about her
neck and kisses her cheeks.
Their embraces are cut short by the appearance of the
subject of their late conversation, who looks very sleepy
and out of sorts. As he enters the room he addresses his
wife —
“My dear, what are ye doin’ ?” then seeing the tea
things—“ Haven’t ye finished yer tea yet ?”
“ No, dear,” replies Mrs. Stevens. “ Will ye have a
cup ?”
With a very expressive shrug of his shoulders, and a
decidedly wry face, comes the reply—
“ Ugh ! no.”
This is not a very polite way of declining, and Nora
notices it.
She says quietly, almost involuntarily, to herself, “ Well,
I think you might say, £ No, thank you.’ ”
She is overheard.
“ You think, do ye ? Well, ye ain’t allowed to think.
There’s no thanks to you or anybody else, I reckon.”
“ Come, Stevens,” says his wife, seeking to mollify him,
“ don’t be so touchy with Nora ; she didn’t mean to offend
ye, I’m sure. Did ye, my love ?” Then, addressing her
husband, she pointedly continues —“ Don’t ye think ye’d


better go and put on some dry things ? ye’re wet through.”
“Am I? Well, I won’t take hurt, anyway. Besides,
I’m afeerd I’ll have to go to town to-night.”
“ Why ? what for ? Ye’re out nearly every night.”
“And can’t I go if I need to? If I have business to
attend to, it must be done.”
“ Business, indeed ! Ye’re very likely goin’ out to see
yer dear friend Marks : a very pretty man for a bosom
compamer.
“An’ what have ye to say agin Marks ?”
“ I don’t like him.”
“ Why ?”
“ ’Cause I don’t; isn’t that enough ? Isn’t he a reg’lar
swindlin’ money-lender ? Isn’t he a reg’lar Shylot, as
Shakespeare writes about in the ‘Moor of Venice?’ Does
he treat me with proper respect and condemnation ? Does
he, now ?”
“ Well, ye wouldn’t have him always bowin’ an’ smirkin’
to ye, would ye ?”
“ No, but he might treat me as a lady ought to be, and
show some reference to them as is his betters.
“ Oh ! ye don’t like him, an’ he can’t do anythin’ to
please ye.”
“ It’s my opinion he’s got ye under his thumb.”
At this her husband turns upon her savagely, and
demands what she means.
“ Well, ye’ve got to give in to him in everythin’, and
can’t do the smallest thing without askin’ his advice. Ye
couldn’t even buy the furnitur for this here room until he
said ‘ Yes,’ and now it’s here I wonder he hasn’t been to
expect it long ago.”
As she speaks, a servant enters and announces that Mr.
Marks is now in the hall, wishing to see Mr. Stevens. On
the servant’s disappearance Mrs. Stevens breaks out


“There, what did I tell ye? He’s come to pry and
enterseer ; I knew he would. Yer soul s not yer own,
Stevens, when Marks is bye. Why don't ye give him the
cold shoulder, and get rid of him ?”
“ Shut up, or he’ll hear ye.”
The warning is not a moment too soon. If Marks did
not hear anything, they had in some degree to thank the
rain, which at that moment descended upon the roof in a
perfect deluge.
Marks enters, and greets each in turn effusively. He is
in no way abashed at the presence of the ladies, and
endeavours to make himself agreeable to them.
Presently Stevens can get an opportunity to speak to
him in an undertone, and asks what has brought him out
on such a night.
In the same fear of being overheard, Marks says, ‘ Get
rid of the women I want to speak with you. Then
turning to Mrs. Stevens, to avoid the effect of any asides,
he remarks —
“ You have a charming room here; quite the thing, I’m
sure, Mrs. Stevens. Not many like this in Melbourne.
Now, I’ll warrant the fixing of this is Miss Stevens’ taste.
Am I not right, eh ?” as he bows most profoundly to Nora,
who has taken some work and seated herself on the sofa
at a distance from the others.
She replies unconcernedly, without appearing to notice
Marks’ elaborate bow, or taking her eyes from her work—
“ No, indeed, it is all mamma’s taste.”
“ It does you credit, Mrs. Stevens ; its quite unique .”
The sound of this word conveys some dreadful meaning
to Mrs. Stevens’ ears. She must resent such a remark, but
the enormity of the insult seems to render her speechless.
Nora quickly sees how matters stand, and rising hastily,
replies—


“ I’m so glad yon think so, Mr. Marks, because mamma
was very anxious to have something uncommon.”
“ Yes, we didn’t want to be the same as all our neigh-
bours, who think they’re grand folks ’cause they’ve got a
little money. We wanted to be comfortable and homely
like when we was expensive, and not too much of the
multum-in-parvenu style about it.”
Stevens now addresses his wife. He must hasten their
departure, and says simply —
“ My dear, Mr. Marks wants to see me on some business.
Don’t ye think ye could leave us be for a little while ?”
“ Oh! certainly, certainly, if yer business isn’t honest
enough for a wife’s ears to listen to, I’m not the one to
want to hear it. I’m not the sort of 'wife to ferret into a
husband’s business.”
Marks thinks he can compliment her on this, and ven-
tures to say —
“ I’m sure you’re not, madam.”
He has, however, trodden on dangerous ground, and
may congratulate himself on getting off with nothing more
severe than the retort —
“And who axed yer opinion, I’d like to know? The
imperence of some people is prodigalous !”
Nora sees it is time for interference. Putting her arm
around her mother’s waist, she says to her —
“ Come, ma, dear ; we’ll leave pa and Mr. Marks to them-
selves. It’s not dignified to dispute the matter with them.”
“No, my love; I’ll conserve my dignity and depress my
jubilation of temper,” and Mrs. Stevens majestically sweeps
from the room, casting a disdainful look at Marks.
Nora follows her, and the two men are left alone.
“ By Jove, Stevens, I’m afraid I’ve offended your wife.”
“ Yes, an’ ye’d better look out for squalls when the old
woman gets her back up, I can tell ye.”


Marks then makes a hurried survey of the room, com-
menting meanwhile —
“ I say, my boy, you’ve got a snug little dove’s nest
here. Capital idea taking the widow’s name and pro-
posing to her after you had saved her life. She couldn’t
well refuse you, and being rich, it ioas a haul! Eather
different from the days we first met on the Bendigo
diggings, eh ?”
“ Why the devil do ye want to say anythin’ about that
cursed time ?”
“ Because that cursed time, as you call it, was what put
us both on our feet. Where would you have been if you
hadn’t made a rise there ? Where would you have ever
got the makings of such a place as this without the big
haul made there?”
“ Damnation ! Can’t ye speak without referrin’ to that?
Can’t ye let sleepin’ dogs lie ?’
“ No, I can’t; for it’s about the sleeping dog that I’ve
come to speak.”
“ What! —what do ye mean ?”
“Are we quite safe here ? No fear of being heard ?”
“ No, none.”
“ Well, look here,” and Marks hands Stevens a copy of
the Argus, pointing as he does so to an advertisement
around which he has drawn a black border.
The other reads it slowly, then turns to his companion
dubiously—
“ What’s that to do wi’ us ?”
Marks takes the paper and reads slowly and emphatically
the following advertisement: —
“Any person knowing the whereabouts of William
Henry North or his wife, who both came to the
Australian goldfields about October 1854, are re-
quested to communicate with the undersigned, who
will handsomely acknowledge any information.
“ P. W. Wigg, Solicitor,
“ Collins Street, Melbourne.”


“Now this refers to your late partner at the Bendigo.”
“ How do ye know ?”
“ I’ve learned all about it from one of Wiggs’ clerks,
who happens to be in my books, and has to do me a service
when I need it. There’s a big pile of money left to be
divided between this man and his brother James North,
who has also been in Australia and back to the old country
since that. Something like i>30,000, I believe. Now I’m
not the man to forget anything likely to prove of value,
and I remember once on the diggings getting a handker-
chief that came from your claim, and had the name
*W. H. North ' marked on it; so there’s no doubt as to
who your mate was.”
The mention by the Jew of James North’s name in this
relation gave the other a feeling of startled uneasiness. He
contrives, however, to overcome this, and asks somewhat
carelessly —
“ Well, an’ what’s all this to do wi’ me ?”
“Have you any writing of the defunct North?”
“ No ; how the devil should I ?”
“Well, I didn’t keep the post office for nothing, and
luckily managed to hunt up a letter of his from which a
good deal of his family history can be learned, and better
than all, his signature can be copied.”
“ What the devil are ye drivin’ at ?”
“ Why, you fool, we must try and pocket this money.
“How?”
“ By means of North’s will.”
“ What will ?”
“Oh ! you thick-headed idiot! have Ito depend on you
for assistance ? Don’t you see we can easily concoct a will
by North leaving his property to you as his partner, and
when we finger the money, divide it, and nobody will be any
the wiser.”


“By God! Marks, ye’re a wonder ; but how do ye
expect to carry this out?”
“ Where’s the difficulty? Wasn’t I postmaster at the time?
Who’s more likely to be asked to draw up and witness a
will ? Look here; I’ve got everything ready,” and Marks
produces a paper from his pocket. “ This is the ‘ will of
William Henry North, usually called Harry North,’ leaving
one-half of his property to his wife, and one-half to you,
‘ pig dear friend and partner, William Woods Stevens.’ I
couldn’t give it all to you, you know; it wouldn’t look
well,” and he looks knowingly at his companion; “ but
you are appointed sole executor, and can manage the rest.”
“Ye are a clever dog, an’ no mistake. Who else could
have thought o’ such a sharp trick ?”
“ I’m glad you admire it; but it all depends on you to
carry out. You must make your claim for the money; I’ll
be at hand to prove the will is valid if necessary.”
Marks is here driving a double purpose. If he can get
this man to make a distinct and formal admission that he
was a partner of North at the time of his death, he will
have so entangled himself as to render him a pliant tool in
the hands of so skilful a manipulator as the Jew. It will
then only be a question of time when he can levy blackmail
with crushing weight.
To Stevens’ next question as to how the death of North
is to be accounted for, he replies “ that he has already
thought of that. It must be proved that he was killed by
an accident in his claim.”
Then it is that it might be seen these men are playing
at cross purposes. Stevens reflects a moment that if he
can once get Marks to swear to the death of North as
accidental, he will then be less likely to accuse himself of
perjury by denouncing the murder. He must, however,
approach the subject cautiously.


“ But it won’t do for me to be the witness o’ his death ?”
“ True ; but if necessary I can swear I saw him die after
the accident. That’s the only way we can get over the
difficulty.”
Things are going well for Stevens, so he only enquires
what is next to be done.
Marks replies —“ To-morrow I’ll call and see Wigg, and
tell him only what is necessary to pave the way for your
appearance later. Do you know him at all ?”
“ Never saw the man in my life that I knows on; but
what if some o’ the other folks turns up after this
advertisement ?”
“ Who’s to turn up ?”
“ What about the widow an’ Dyke ?”
“ They’re safe out of the country long ago, you may
depend. Twelve years is a long time, and if they’d been
in Australia I’d have been sure to hear of them. Take my
tip for it, they’re man and wife long ago, and safe beyond
the way of doing us any harm.”
“ Well, I’m not so sure o’ that. I feel a bit skeerish
about them ; an’ besides, there are others who may turn
up with a different story ”
“ There’s no danger of that. North was not known by
any other name but Harry, and then only to a very few
at the diggings. Come, man, you mustn’t get soft-hearted.
‘ Faint heart ne’er won fair lady,’ you know, and we’ve
got a fairish piece to try for here ; worth a lot of pluck, I
can tell you.”
“ Wouldn’t it be better for me to go to the lawyer first,
an’ then get you to prove the will, an’ all that ?”
“ No, I don’t think so. I’ll go with some information,
and recollect only part of the story, about the man’s death,
and so forth, and so ascertain how matters stand, and if
there’s any trace of the widow. If she turns up at first,


we’ll have a difficult game to play, so we mustn’t spring
our mine too early.”
“By thunder ye’re right. What a head ye’ve got! Ye
ought to have been a lawyer yerself.”
“ Thank you, that’s no compliment. I’d like to have
something more respectable than that as a profession when
I need another.”
“ Talkin’ of lawyers, wouldn’t it be better for us to get
Grip to act for me over this will business?”
“ No, certainly not. This is a piece of business that
needs to be gone carefully about, and we’ll have to play
our cards so well that it would be worse than dangerous to
show our hand to anybody.
<< Well, have yer own way. Give me the will.”
“ Time enough for that when it is needed.”
“ Oh! then I’m not to be trusted, but only to obey
instructions?”
“ We are partners, hut the will’s a trump we mustn’t
risk any danger of a revoke with, so it’ll remain in my
custody until wanted.”
Stevens’ first impulse is to further resent this; he over-
comes the feeling, however, and remarks quietly—
“An’ ye’re goin’ to start to-morrow ?”
“Yes.”
But Marks’ quick ear has caught the sound of an
approaching footstep. He warns his companion, and con-
tinues so as to be overheard by the newcomer, who proves
to he Mrs. Stevens—
“ And you’ll meet me in town to-morrow to settle the terms
of the purchase ?”
“ Stevens,” says his wife, “ are ye tryin’ to catch yer
death, sittin’ in them wet clothes ? Ye’ll get a fit o’ frenzy
if ye don’t take care.”
“ No fear, my love ; but we are just movin .”


“An’ Mr. Marks is goin’ ?”
“ Yes, ma’am, I must hurry back to town.”
“ Ye’ll excuse me bein’ so anxious about Stevens’ health.
He needs a wife to look after him in his reclinin’ years.”
“ You are quite right, madam. The care you bestow
upon him almost makes me become a Benedict. Good
evening;” and Marks as he speaks leaves the room without
delay. His mission being accomplished, there is no need
for further parley.
Mrs. Stevens turns fiercely to her husband —
“ What does he mean by becomin’ a Benedick ?”
“ I don’t know, unless it's somethin’ to do wi’ house-
keepin’.”
“ Look here, Stevens, if that precious friend o’ yours is
insultin’ me on the sly, ye'd better tell him if he comes
here agin I’ll teach him to hide his demolished head in the
presence of a lady. Come an’ change yer clothes.”
This admonition is so palpably imperative that Stevens
submits -sheepishly to be led off by his better-half, and is
shortly listening to a curtain lecture which would not have
disgraced the immortal Mrs. Caudle.


CHAPTEK YIIL
“ When shall we three meet again,
In thunder, lightning, or in rain ?”
— Macbeth.
The appearance of Bourke Street, Melbourne, on the
evening of Marks’ visit to St. Kilda is desolate in the
extreme. The rain comes down with a will, and being
accompanied by a cold, beating wind, makes the duties of
pedestrians anything but pleasant. After the hour at
which warehouses and offices are closed, the streets present
a very cheerless aspect, and save for the venturesome
spirits who visit the theatres and other places of amuse-
ment, have been given over to the police, cabmen, newsboys,
and such others as are compelled by their occupations to
face the storm. A wet night in Melbourne in the beginning
of winter, when accompanied, as on the present occasion,
by a shifty and beating wind, is the reverse of agreeable,
and no person who can avoid it will brave the elements.
Taking a glance along Bourke Street, between Elizabeth
and Swanson Streets, on the night in question, the only
occupant of that part who meets our eye is a constable on
his beat. Nearer observation reveals the fact that the
uniform encircles the familiar figure of our old friend
Patrick O’Brien. As he approaches we can realise his
thoughts. He is moving along with measured tread and
slow, characterising the night as a “ soaker, an’ no
mishtake.’’ He is not altogether enamoured of his first wet
night’s outing “ in the foorce,” for he is only a recent recruit.


“ Begorra,” he murmurs, “ I won’t enjoy this kind o’
thing till I’ve made the acquaintance of two or three
binivolent landlords on my bate. Och ! how I envy thim
ould hands who have had toime to make themselves useful
an’ comfortable in the neighbourhood. Well, there's one
thing sartin, the streets are quiet enough to-noight, anyhow;
but I’ll have to kape movin’ to bate the storm.” With
this practical reflection, he passes on up the street, and is
soon lost to sight under the shadow of the different gas-
lights.
As O’Brien passes slowly up one side of the street,
Marks, on his way from St. Kilda, hurries down the other.
He is wrapped in reflection on the subject of his visit to
Stevens, and its results, present and potential. But he
has time to notice the weather, and more than once
mutters a firm curse as the wind gives him an occasional
taste of its quality.
“ Well,” thinks he, “ I have done some good with that
fool Stevens at anyrate. I wonder if he’ll have the pluck
to carry it through. By Heavens ! if I once get him to
prove himself to be the mate of the murdered man, and
handle this money, I’ll not leave him long in the enjoy-
ment of it. I’m not going to run any risk and let him
quietly enjoy the benefit, not by a long way. Now is
there any risk of Dyke or any of them turning up?
Devilish awkward if they did. Marks, my boy, you must
be foxy, and keep your skin out of danger, whatever
happens. I think Stevens, or Woods, or whatever he may
call himself, has taken the bait safely enough to-night.”
Marks is lost in the feeling of satisfaction at the smart
evening’s work he has accomplished, and does not notice
the approach of a newsboy, who importunes him to purchase
a copy of the Herald.
“ 'Erald, sir, ’ Erald ; only a penny, sir. Take one, sir,


to ’elp a poor covie to do some business on a night like
this.”
“ Get out of my way !”
“ Please, sir, I ’aven’t sold only two the ’ole blessed
night. Take one, sir ?”
“ Leave me alone, you young cub,” with which Marks,
by a vigorous push, sends the poor boy sprawling into the
full splashing gutter, and hurries on, regardless alike of
the cruelty of the act or its consequences. Fortunately
the youth is not hurt. He soon shows this by picking
himself up and occupying a seat on the kerbstone.
Speaking to himself, he ejaculates —
“ Plowed if I can stand this ’ere much longer. What’s
the good o’ tryin’ to do the straight thing ’ere. Who’s
there to ’elp a poor covie down on his luck? Nothin’ but
kicks an’ clouts. An’ ’ere comes a peeler ; heTl be at me
next,” and as he catches sight of the returning figure of
O’Brien he buries his face in his hands, crouches low, and
hopes to avoid observation.
The constable’s voice quickly dispels this illusion.
“ Now, thin, wdiat are ye snivillin’ there for, at all, at
all ? Why don’t ye get up an’ clear off home ?”
“ Off ’ome ! I ’aven’t sold more nor two blessed papers
this ’ole bloomin’ night.”
“Well, how many do ye expect to sell ? How much do
ye take on a foine noight ?”
“Always sells two or three dozen, an’ on good nights
sometimes double that. Now, why can’t you peeler coves
get up a murder or suthin’ every night, an’ give us news-
paper men a chance ?”
“ Begorra ! I’m afraid ye’d foind it a trifle monotonous
after a whoile. But tell me, now, what’s up that ye’re so
broken down intoirely ?”
“ A surly old bloke pushed me in the gutter just now.


Look I” and, spinning round on his heels, the boy displays
to O’Brien the full extent of the bespattering he has
received in his fall.
“ Well, that wasn’t a very gintlemanly action anyhow.
Moighty unchristian, intoirely.”
“ ’Twasn’t a Christian as did it, bless ye! Old Mo.
Marks ain’t neither a Christian nor a good Jew, for the
matter o’ that.”
“ What did ye call him ?”
“ Marks, the money-lender. Don’t say ye don’t know
Marks ?”
“ No, I don’t.”
“ Well, then, yer must be a new chum bobby, an’ no
mistake.”
“ Well, ye’re roight there. I’ve only jined the foorce
three weeks ago.”
“ Then ye ought to give me ’alf yer sal. to show ye yer
way.about. Come now, it’s a deal. ’Ave ye a match?”
taking from his pocket a short pipe which has evidently
seen much use, and doubtless been more than once a second-
hand investment before it reached its present owner.
“ Be jabers !” cries Pat, thoroughly surprised, “ ye don’t
mane to say ye smoke ?”
“An’ why not! Ain’t a cove to ’ave any fun ’cause
business is dull on a wet night ?” *
“ Well, me boy, it would be much better if ye would stop
smokin’ till ye’ve done growin’, at anyrate.”
The poor boy plainly indicates that his heart has been
touched.
“ Look ’ere, bobby, ye’re the first man in uniform as ’as
ever said a kind word to me, an’, blow me tight, if ye
speak to me like that I’ll stash smokin’ to please ye —
there,” and, suiting the action to the word, he throws his
pipe as far away from him as he can, a proceeding which


is not lost on his companion, and raises the youth many
degrees in his estimation.
O’Brien, determined to show his appreciation of the
sacrifice, says kindly —
“ That’s roight, me boy ; you always be as willin’ to do
the roight thing an’ ye’ll find more frinds among the
gintlemen in blue than ye think of. What’s yer name at
all ?”
“ Ned Woods.”
“An' where do ye live ? Are yer parents here ?”
“ Mother is, but she’s in the Yarrabend. I’ve got no
father, leastways, none that I knows on. He run away
an’ left mother when I was a kid, an’ ’as never been ’eard
of since. After that mother went mad wi’ worry an’
starvin’, an’ they put ’er in the ’sylum. I don’t know
what became o’ me, but I do know as a kind woman —a
nurse in there, took me in ’and some years ago an’ ’ad me
looked after till I was able to do suthin’ for meself,aan’
now I’m tryin’ to ’elp mother an’ ’er by sellin’ papers an’
sich-like, an’ to do the straight thing always ; but it’s ’ard
work, sir—it’s ’ard work, seem’ all as I see aroun’ me.”
“Poor little divil!” sympathetically returns O’Brien;
then he enquires of Ned, “ An’ is yer mother still in the
institootion ?”
“ Yes, but she’s got better now, an’ is made a kind o’
nurse, an’ ’er an’ Mrs. North is chummy an’ friendly like.”
“ Mrs. North, did ye say ? Who is she ?”
“ She’s a nurse in the ’sylum.”
“ Been there long ?”
“ Yes, years. She’s the woman as took care o’ me when
I come there a little kid.”
“ What is she loike ?”
Ned replies by a short description of Mrs. North, from
which O’Brien easily recognises the widow of the victim of
the Bendigo murder.


“ Be the powers !” he exclaims, “ it’s the same ; an’ to
think she has been out o’ soight all these years !”
“An’ do ye know ’er then ?”
“ Share, I think so. Look here, me hoy, when can ye
take me to her ?”
“ Look ’ere, bobby,” and Ned gazes doubtfully but
determinedly at O'Brien, “ do ye mean any ’arm to ’er?
’Cause if ye do, why ! stash me wig ! if ye'll get near ’er if
I can ’elp it.”
“No fear, me bould boy; I’m a frind to her, an’ am
lookin’ for her wid good news, I hope. That is if the
advertisement I’ve seen consarns her. Would ye loike to
do her a good turn ?”
“Aye, that I would.”
“ Then meet me at the post office at 11 o’clock to-morrow
an’ take me to Mrs. North, an’ if she’s not glad to see me
I’ll go bail wid ye to the extint o’ a week’s pay.”
“All right, my covie, I’ll be on the job;” and Ned, with
more show of life than he has hitherto exhibited, is about
to skip away, when O’Brien calls him back.
“ Here, me boy, here’s a ‘ Colonial Kobert ’ for ye to make
up for bad business to-noight, an’ if ye behave yersilf, as ye
ought to do, ye’ll have a frind in Constable O’Brien. Now
don’t forget 11 to-morrow,” upon which Ned is out of sight
and running down the street before O’Brien has time to
pull down the overcoat which impedes the way to his
pockets.
“ Begorra !” reflects the constable, as he walks hurriedly
along in the direction Marks and Ned have both gone, “ is
it not in luck lam intoirely. The first month o’ my jinin’
the foorce I am to get some clue to the long lost murderer
on the diggin’s. Faith now, I’d give all me chances o’
promotion to be able to hunt down an’ lay hands on that
murderin' varmint Woods. Woods! Be the powers!


didn’t that boy call himself Woods. Now, who the divil
can he be, thin ? Shure, I hope he’ll kape his toime wid
me to-morrow ; or if not, it’s no great matter, for I can
easily find me way to the institootion an’ get wind o’ Mrs.
North. Och ! Patrick, be aisy, an’ ye’re on the way to
promotion at once. Share, I almost see the stripes roisin’
on me sleeve already.”
O’Brien has not proceeded far before he is again joined
by Ned, who comes rushing back in breathless haste to
inform him that Marks is being dogged in the direction of
his office by a villainous-looking man who is evidently up
to no good. They both hurry after them, and are just in
time to see Marks enter his office closely followed by a
man who, entering through the door, secretes himself
inside.
“ See there,” whispers Ned, “ I told ye ’e was doggin’
’im, an’ up to some lark. Lie close, an’ don’t let ’im see
or ’ear ye, an’ ye can nab ’im when ’e comes out.”
“Be me sowl! ye’re roight. This is to be a noight o’
adventure, an’ no mishtake. Stand close, me hoy, an’
lend a hand if necessary. Hish! there’s somebody
movin’!”
“ It’s Marks cornin’ out.”
After a few minutes Marks reappears through the open
door, which he pulls shut behind him, leaving his follower
inside. As Marks reaches the street, O’Brien steps forward
and accosts him—
“ Mr. Marks, hush ! Be me sowl! it’s Marks o’ Ben-
digo !”
“ What the devil’s up now ? Who are you ?’’
“ Faith ! an’ ye’ll foind that out soon enough ; but I’ve
business on hand jist now. Do ye know there’s a thafe in
yer office ?”
“ Good God, no ! are you sure ?”


“ Share, is it ? Faith ! I saw him goin’ in. Now, be
quiet. Is there any other way he can get out ? Any back
doors or windows at all ?”
“ No, none ; he must get out to this street.”
“ Then it is an aisy matter to pin him. See ! he’s got a
loight inside. What can he lay his hands on ?”
“ Heavens ! he’ll get at my cash box,” says Marks.
“ Fortunately there’s not much in it,” he reflects.
“ Stand quiet now,” whispers O’Brien ; “ he’ll be cornin’
out in a jiffy. Still an’ aisy, or he’ll slip us now. Lucky
for you this young chap saw him followin’ ye, an’ told me,
or ye’d have a short reckonin’ in the mornin’, sure
enough.”
“ Let’s open the door and catch him inside.”
“Aisy, now, aisy. Share, if ye open the door he must
hear ye, an’ thin it’s not much yer loife’s worth anyhow.
This is the place to collar him, just as he comes into the
different loights, an’ thinks he’s gettin’ safe away. Aisy,
now, aisy ; he’s movin’ to the door. Now, thin, you take
that soide an’ I’ll look after this. ”
O’Brien places Marks and Ned on one side of the door
and he himself takes the other. After waiting a few
minutes in silence, their patience is rewarded by the
appearance of their man. As he slips out and is shutting
the door, O’Brien lays hands on his shoulder ; but he is
evidently a man accustomed to this proceeding, and knows
exactly how to act under such circumstances.
With a quick downward movement he shakes himself
free from O’Brien’s grasp, and before that officer can pre-
vent him, is starting off, and his escape seems inevitable ;
but Ned Woods casts himself at his feet, grasps his legs
firmly, and so throws him. Before he can recover himself,
the burglar is secured by Marks and O’Brien. The latter
turns his lamp upon his face, and recognises the visage of
Yorky Bill.


CHAPTER IX.
“ It hath the primal eldest curse upon’t—
A brother’s murder,”
— Hamlet.
The River Yarra, in its different windings above the city of
Melbourne, forms many most picturesque spots. That
portion of its surroundings which has been set apart as a
site for botanical gardens, contains many delightful picnic
grounds, and the citizens of the metropolis have not been
slow to take advantage of its beauties.
Not long after the appearance of the advertisement for
information as to William Henry North, which occasioned
such perturbation in the lives of the Jew money-lender
and the Bendigo murderer, a boat, containing two ladies
and two gentlemen, is pulled slowly up the river, and
approaches the bank above the site of Government House.
The occupants of the boat are Mrs. Stevens and Nora,
James North, and Ashton Dyke. As they near the bank,
Dyke consults the elder lady as to whether she thinks this
is a suitable place to land. She answers in the affirmative,
and continues —
“ I’m not quite at home on the water ; I always did
prefer ‘ terra cotta.’ ”
Dyke proffers her his assistance to step ashore, and is
rewarded by a most gracious smile.
“ You’re really very polite, Mr. Dyke.”
As she is about to step over the side of the boat, it gives


a sudden lurch, and, grasping Dyke’s outstretched hand,
she cries—
“ Oh ! take care ; ye’ll make me lose my equiliberal.”
Mrs. Stevens being safely brought to land, Dyke turns
his attention towards Nora, and in handing her out, inter-
cepts North, who, having shipped the oars and straightened
up the contents of the boat, hastens to assist and take
possession of the younger lady. Being, however, antici-
pated by Dyke, he must necessarily content himself in the
best grace possible with the companionship of the mother.
Dyke and Nora stroll up the gardens.
“ This is really a delightful spot to land, is it not?” he
asks, by way of opening the conversation.
“Yes, indeed, it is very picturesque,” replies Nora.
Dyke continues —
“ These gardens provide some wonderful picnic spots.
It is made so different from what I remember it in the
early digging days.”
Nora is surprised. She thought that Dyke had only
recently arrived in the Colony.
“Were you ever at the diggings here then?” she
enquires.
“ Oh ! yes ; ’twas there I made the money which enabled
me to take up the property I did, and which, fortunately,
has risen so enormously in value.”
“ Pa was at the diggings too ; but he can’t bear to be
reminded of that. He was terribly put out the other night
because we persuaded him to go to see a piece at the
theatre which had a scene introducing the murder of a
digger.”
“ Unfortunately such scenes were too common at one
time.”
“ Then you must have seen some wonderfully exciting
times at the diggings?”


“ Oh! no, not particularly,” returns Dyke, shortly.
Nora pursues the subject further.
“ Never saw any bushrangers ?”
“ I’ve seen them, but never had much of an adventure
with any of them.”
“ I thought every digger had either seen a murder or
been stuck up by bushrangers. That’s what they call it —
‘ sticking up,’ isn’t it ?”
“ Yes, that’s right. ‘ Stick up ’ and ‘ bail up ’ are the
terms used.”
“ What does ‘ bail up ’ mean ?”
“ The process of ‘ bailing up ’ consisted generally in
tying up the victim to a tree, robbing him of all his
valuables, and leaving him to take his chance of being
rescued.”
“ Did you ever find and rescue anybody that had been
bailed up?” and Nora looks at him enquiringly, as if
hoping that she might discover him to be the hero of some
stirring and brave adventure. He meets her gaze, and
determines to tell her more.
“ Yes, once. Come, we’ll stroll up the river a bit, and
I’ll tell you of that experience;” and Nora and Dyke
continuing their walk, are soon out of sight of their com-
panions.
James North has been busy fastening the boat to a tree
overhanging the water, and has also arranged everything
left in it, so that nothing very attractive lies open to the
gaze of passers by.
Mrs. Stevens has been watching the process. As he
finishes, she addresses him —
“ That seems all snug now, Mr. North. Ye’re right to
be a careful man.”
“ Yes, Mrs. Stevens,” says North, still casting a look
over the boat to see that everything is in order; then


turning to her he proceeds—“ I’ve known what it is to lose
by carelessness, and would not like that you should have
to walk back to town for the sake of a little trouble.”
Mrs. Stevens has been looking around to ascertain
where Dyke and Nora have gone. Not discovering them,
she exclaims —
“ I declare, them young folks is gone away an’ left us.
That’s not very polite, is it ?”
“No, indeed, but perhaps excusable.”
North suddenly perceives that he is not complimenting his
companion in what he says.
“ I don't mean that exactly,” he explains, “ but then Miss
Stevens is such charming company, I don’t wonder Mr.
Dyke takes possession of her.”
He cannot help admitting to himself that the explanation
does not improve matters, but it is best to leave it, and he is
silent for a moment until Mrs. Stevens suggests that they
must follow the others, and asks if there is no fear of any-
thing being stolen from the boat.
He does not think so, and replies—
“ Melbourne is more civilized than it was in the height
of the gold fever.”
“ Why ! were you here then, Mr. North ?”
“Yes, for several years; but I’ve been home and back
again since that.”
“ Then, ye’ve been a digger ?”
James North recalls his experiences of gold acquirement.
He does not think it likely, however, that her husband will
have told her of their first meeting, so he replies shortly—
“ Yes.”
In her next question Mrs. Stevens stumbles on the sub-
ject he would choose to avoid.
“ An’ I suppose ye saw bushrangin’ an’ riotin’ an’ all
that sort of thing ?”
“ Well, some. But that sort of thing had almost died
out when I was on the diggings.”


He devoutly wishes that something would occur to either
close or change the current of her enquiries ; but she still
goes on —
“ Hid ye ever see any of the fights that the Scotch an’
Irish had on the digging, Mr. North ?”
“ No, I never saw any such fights. The accounts we
read of them must have been greatly exaggerated, I think,
—mere sensations for newspaper readers, I fancy.”
He makes this feeble effort to divert her questions, and
hears the next with infinite satisfaction.
“ Why ! ye don’t think that newspaper men would write
anythin’ that wasn’t true ?”
“ Oh, yes, often.”
“ How wicked! That’s worse than tellin’ a lie to one
person only.”
“ It certainly is ; but I’m afraid society thinks it clever.
Number of victims tends to justify crime, I suppose,”
“ How shockin’ ! but we’re not so bad as that now, are
we ?”
“ I’m afraid modern progress is not in the direction of
any improvement in that respect.”
“ Don’t ye think we’d better be after the others, Mr.
North ? It’s not proper, is it, for them to be wanderin’ off
alone like this ? It might prejudge my daughter’s repara-
tion, ye know.”
“If you will excuse me, Mrs. Stevens, I’d like to
embrace this opportunity to speak to you on a very serious
matter —a matter which to me might change all the future
course of my life.”
“ Good gracious ! Mr. North, ye startle me. How can I
infect yer futurity ?”
“You must have noticed that during my brief acquaint-
ance with your daughter I have exhibited considerable
partiality for her company.”


“ Partially! Why, I’ve seen ye altogether in her com-
pany oftentimes.”
“ Then may I hope that my attentions to her have not
been disagreeable in your eyes ?”
“ Bless ye ! no ! I’ve never seen anythin’ disagreeable
about ye.”
“ And I have your consent to paying my addresses to her?”
“ Payin’ for dresses for her ! No, indeed ; we can afford
to give our daughter clothes.”
“ You misunderstand me, Mrs. Stevens ; I mean that
Miss Stevens is the lady I should desire to make my wife,
and that I wish to have your consent to asking her.”
“ Ye mean that ye’d like to marry my daughter ?” she
asks, abruptly.
“ Precisely, Mrs. Stevens. Have I your permission to
ask her ?”
“ Well, I don’t know of any objection much to ye. Ye’ve
always been very gentlemanly an’ attentive to me, an’ I
like ye well enough for a son-in-law. Ye’ve got plenty of
property, haven’t ye?”
“ Well, yes, I’m tolerably well off.”
“ An’ there’s nothin’ agin yer character as I knows on —
is there now, Mr. North?”
Thus appealed to, he replies smiling—
“ No, I don’t think you’ll find any serious discrepancy in
that respect.”
He thinks of the bushranging episodes, but consoles
himself with the reflection that they were harmless, though
profitable.
Mrs. Stevens is very practical in her reply. She
declares—
“ Then, I think ye may say it’s a barg’in.”
“ Thank you, Mrs. Stevens, thank you a thousand times.
You’ve made me the happiest man in Melbourne.”


“Bless ye, man ! don’t be in sich a hurry. Don’t count
yer chickens afore they’re hatched. Ye shouldn’t go into
rhapsodias until ye’ve got Nora’s consent. Come, let’s
follow them.”
She quite takes the command of her future son-in-law,
and he, recognising that there is nothing for him but tame
submission, meekly accompanies her in the task of follow-
ing up the others.
Meanwhile Dyke and Nora have continued their walk
around the adjoining shrubbery, and immediately the
others have left the landing place, stroll down again near
to the same spot.
Nora is asking Dyke as they return if no trace of the
murderer had ever been found.
“ None whatever,” he replies, “ beyond the time that I
speak of, when we released the bushranger from the tree
almost immediately on being left there by his mate and
Woods, no trace of the murderer was ever found. He
disappeared as completely as if the earth had received him
like his victim, or his identity had been entirely changed.
For nearly six months I did nothing else but try to discover
him, and was assisted most of the time by a worthy Irish-
man named O’Brien. Then I received a letter which
necessitated my return to England, and from that day to
this, although I have been back in the Colony some time,
I’ve never seen or heard of Woods, O’Brien, or Mrs. North;
but I have a strong conviction that some day I shall stand
face to face with the murderer, and that the oath I made
the widow over the dead body of her husband will be
redeemed.”
“ Poor woman ! how I feel for her. You never heard of
her after you left Australia?”
“ Not a sign.”
“Was she young ?”


“ Yes, and a thorough lady —a woman in a thousand, in
fact. She and her husband had seen better days, and had
braved the rough life of the Australian diggings to try and
rebuild a shattered fortune.”
“ How sad ! and he was struck down when this was
within his reach! What a load of sin his murderer has to
answer for! What a conscience to torment him day by
day!”
“ Yes, truly, but ‘ Foul deeds will rise, though all the
earth o'erwhelm them to men’s eyes and lam convinced
that though these long years may delay, they will but
intensify the retribution yet to come.”
Dyke exhibits in his manner how deeply this tragedy
has affected him.
After some moments of silence, Nora asks—
“And this robbery injured you too? You would have
shared the stolen nugget ?”
“ Yes, but my loss is small compared to the wrong
done to others. The loss was never felt, its extent not
being known ; nor need I regret it, seeing that good fortune
has attended me in other ways.”
Nora has been deeply impressed by Dyke’s recital. She
is anxious to do something to show her sympathy with him
in this, to help him if she can.
“ Mr. Dyke, I should like you to promise me that if you
ever find the widow, you will allow me to be a friend to
her if possible. I assure you I feel for her acutely,”
“ And your sympathy does you credit, Miss Stevens. If
I can ever gratify your wish, I shall do so, you may
depend.”
“ What a strange coincidence!” exclaims Nora, sud-
denly ; “we are speaking of Mrs. North, and it never
occurred to either of us that we are now here with a Mr.
North. Can he be a relative ?”


“ ’Tis strange ! I never heard North or his wife speak
of any relations ; but now that it is mentioned, I can
recall a fancied resemblance between the men. I wonder
if it is only fancy ?”
“Oris it the hand of fate at work ? Oh ! Mr. Dyke, I
cannot tell you how you have impressed me with this
strange, cruel story, or how I wish I could help you to
render justice a service. Tell me if I can ?”
Dyke gazes intently on the face of his companion, and
asks her earnestly— s
“ If you could strengthen my hands, would you do so ?”
There is a wealth of meaning in his words. She does
not appear to gather their full portent, or if she does, very
skilfully disguises the fact. She replies, simply—
“ Gladly, willingly.”
. “ Then,” said Dyke —and this time there can be no
doubt of his meaning; he grasps her hands before speaking
—“ if I were to ask you to share my fate in all things to
come, what answer would you give? Miss Stevens ! Nora!
Tell me, is their room in your heart for me ? Speak, and
bid me hope !”
Her answer, made blushingly, is no more than a whisper.
It is not indistinct to him, however, and what it is may be
gathered from the fact that she is immediately enfolded in
his arms.
A silence more eloquent than words, more joyful to
these two hearts than any delight of conversation, follows
for some minutes ; then Dyke says —
“And may I speak to your parents at once ? May I —”
“ Yes, Mr. Dyke, whenever you wish.”
“ Let us now be Ashton and Nora to each other. Ah !
here come your mother and Mr. North, and the first
moments of their new-lound bliss are broken in upon by
the voice of Mrs. Stevens, as she calls to them —


“ Where on earth have you two been ? We’ve been
huntin’ for ye all over the place.”
“ Not all over the place, mamma, for we’ve been here
all the time, and were just on the point of coming to look
for you.”
Then, seeing that some further explanation of their
absence is looked for, she continues—
“ Mr. Dyke has been telling me of his digging experiences
of years ago. One of his partners murdered another, ran
away with a large nugget, and has never been heard of
from that day to this, although they were once on his
track, and might have caught him but for the delay in
rescuing a bushranger who had been tied to a tree.”
James North, of course, hears every word that Nora
utters. These words, so earnest, yet simple to the others,
have for him a terrible meaning. They disclose to him
that the man whose life he saved from Yorky Bill is a
murderer; that the partner with whom he lived so long on
their station is stained with the blood of a fellow-being;
that the husband and stepfather of the ladies whose guest
he now is, is a robber and assassin.
What can he do ? He is powerless to keep from them a
knowledge of this fact. Dyke has not yet met Mr.
Stevens, but must do so ere long. This awful knowledge
North must carry in his breast and act a part. He is
oblivious to what immediately follows.
Mrs. Stevens at once appears interested in what Nora
has said, and declares that Dyke must tell her the story.
Nora continues —
“ Yes, mamma, and the poor man who was killed left a
wife who had gone with him to the diggings. It’s a sad,
sad story, and shows what people had to go through here
in the early days.”
“ The murderer was never found ?”


“ No, mamma; but Mr. Dyke feels convinced that he
will one day meet and deliver him up to justice. I’ve
promised to help him.”
North overhears this ; it adds fuel to the flame which
consumes him. He is now all attention to what is passing.
“ You, Nora!” exclaims Mrs. Stevens ; “ whatever can
you do ?”
“ I hope to find the widow and help her.”
North resolves to know the worst, and, if possible, get
Dyke to discontinue the relation of further facts. He
approaches him and asks, appalled at his own utterance —
“ This murder you speak of, where was it ? ’
“At the Bendigo, twelve years ago.”
“And the bailed-up bushranger, did you know his
name ?”
“ He was known as ‘ Yorky Bill.’ ”
The worst is now known ; her husband is the murderer.
Dyke’s interest in North’s questions leads him to en-
quire —
“ Why do you ask these questions ? Ah, stay ! the
murdered man’s name was North. Had you a brother
there ?”
“ Yes, a married brother, Harry. This is an old like-
ness,” and as North speaks, he exhibits to Dyke a locket
attached to his watch-chain.
“ Great heavens 3 ’twas he !”
“ Oh ! my God ! my brother the victim !”
Dyke is about to speak, but North stops him.
“ Hush ! not a word, and least of all to her.”
Dyke obeys him, and a silence falls on all as they
prepare for the homeward journey.
This, then, is the result of James North’s search for his
brother. He is found, but to be lost for ever!


CHAPTER X.
“ Like one,
Who having, unto truth, by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory,
To credit his own lie.”
—The Tempest,
Moses Marks, or —as he had determined upon settling in
Melbourne to be known —“ Morris Marks,” proprietor of
the “ Golden Fleece Loan and Discount Bank,” loses no
time in calling on the solicitor whose signature appears to
the advertisement in the Argus. He finds Mr. Wigg busy
writing, but on informing him that he has called on the
subject of the enquiries as to North, that gentleman
receives him graciously, and motions him to a seat.
Marks then enters into a somewhat reserved account of
his knowledge of North and his history, his object being to
get as much information as possible, and give no more
satisfaction to the enquiries of the solicitor than he cannot
avoid. Mr. Wigg is not a man to be drawn out in the
manner desired by Marks. He is quite a match for the
wily money-lender, and generally gets the better of him
without appearing to do so, and obtains the distinct ad-
vantage of knowing that Marks possesses considerably
more information than he is divulging. During the inter-
view the solicitor has carefully written down the state-
ments made by Marks, and when the latter has apparently
told all he intends to disclose, puts the question to him,
writing meanwhile, and speaking with evident carelessness,
so that the question appears less pointed —


“And this is all you know, Mr. Marks—all you know ?”
Mr. Wigg has the habit of repeating the last few words
of his concluding sentences, a habit which in many cases
gives him the advantage in lengthened discussions, although
it does not add to the elegance of his manner. He is not
a young man, and speaks very quietly and deliberately,
but at the same time not slowly.
Marks does not lose sight of the meaning of Wigg’s
question, and replies —
“All I remember, Mr. Wigg,” but without emphasising
and so drawing attention to the distinction he implies
between knowledge and remembrance.
Wigg now for the first time expresses an opinion.
“ There seems ample indication of North’s death —of
North’s death, Mr. Marks?”
“No doubt of it at all. You don’t doubt my word ?”
“Oh ! dear, no, Mr. Marks ; don’t imagine such a thing.
We must proceed with caution, you know —with caution.
And you say you think you can find a man who was once
a partner of North’s —once a partner, Mr. Marks ?”
“ Yes, I feel sure of it.”
“ Glad of it, Mr. Marks —glad of it. Will he be able to
speak of North’s death —of his death, eh ?”
“ Yes, I think so ; in fact, I’m sure of it.”
“ Glad of it; makes a change. And you can’t say any-
thing of the widow —of the widow, Mr. Marks ?”
“ No, nothing definite ; but I understand she left the
diggings with a young man who had been a partner of
her husband’s. She is probably dead, or in some other
country.”
Marks’ manner is not such as to carry conviction to any
but the most superficial observer that he is speaking from
any knowledge now, so Wigg asks quietly —
“ What makes you think so ?”


He does not look up from his writing, and Marks, after
hesitating and wondering how to take the question,
returns —
“ Oh ! I have no further reason than that she has not
been heard of since.”
“ You mean you have not heard of her since—heard of
her since, Mr. Marks ?”
“ Well, that is all I can say.”
“ Glad of it, Mr. Marks —glad of it. And when may I
expect your friend here?”
“ My friend, Mr. Wigg?”
“ I mean the ex-partner —the ex-partner, Mr. Marks.”
“ Oh ! I’ll make a point of seeing him at once, if I can.
He should see you within a week or so.”
“ Glad of it; makes a change.”
This characteristic expression of the lawyer’s means
nothing. It is simply a phrase of the same description as
“ you know,” “ that’s so,” and other similar unconsidered
trilies of conversation, used without thought and with no
desire for meaning. Sometimes, as in the present instance,
there is a tinge of ludicrous propriety about the words, but
the speaker is unconscious of and does not intend it.
The habit has, however, obtained for Wigg amongst a
circle of his most intimate friends the sobriquet of “ Old
glad of it.”
With Marks the phrase passes unnoticed. He feels that
this interview has drawn to a close, hut there is one
important point on which he desires information. He
rises, and facing the lawyer, says —
“And the question of reward for information —in what
position will I stand with regard to that ?”
“Oh ! ah ! yes. We’ll leave that an open question at
present, you know —an open question, Mr. Marks,”
“ Then you will let me know if I am required again ?”


“ Certainly, Mr. Marks —certainly. Good day.”
Marks lets himself out by the office door and disappears.
Wigg finishes the writing he is engaged in without looking
up. He has heard the door close, and Marks’ disappearing
footsteps : that is enough. Then he rises with an air of
doubt, thrusts his hands deep into his pockets, and moves
slowly up and down the room.
“ So,” he says, reflectively, “ there’s a beginning of the
clue; not a very encouraging one though. Dead, is he !
I must keep this from his brother for a while —from his
brother for a while. And so old Marks knew him on the
diggings, did he, and saw him after being killed by an
accident! Well, many accidents happened at the diggings,
and life wasn’t a very sacred thing there.”
The train of his murmured cogitations is disturbed by a
knock.
“ Come in,” he calls, looking expectantly towards the
door as James North enters.
“Ah ! North, is that you ?”
“ Yes, Mr. Wigg,” replies the new-comer in a tone indi-
cating that he has something particular to relate, and then
plunges at once into his subject. “ I have some startling
news to tell you. My brother is dead—was killed years
ago at the Bendigo.”
“ The Bendigo, was it ?” remarks the lawyer, quietly.
“ Yes, I have discovered a partner of his who can tell
you all.”
“ Yes; then why didn’t you bring him here, Mr. North
—bring him here ?”
“ Shall I do so now ?”
“ Yes, if you can —if you can. No time like the present,
you know —no time like the present.”
“ But there is no trace of the widow ; she has never been
heard of since the failure to find the murderer.”


“ The murderer ! What murderer ?” asks Wigg, ex-
hibiting a surprise of which, from his previous manner, he
would not be thought capable.
“ The murderer of my brother !” and James North ex-
plains the circumstances of the nugget and the murder.
Wigg begins to see daylight.
“And you’ve found the murderer, you say ? Glad of it;
makes a change.”
“No ! no ! the partner I have found is not the one who
did the murder.”
“ But he knows who did it, eh —he knows who did it ?
“Yes, but he never could be traced.”
“ Glad of it —glad of it; makes a change.”
“ I have an appointment with Mr. Dyke in ten minutes
from now,” says North, looking at his watch. ‘ Can I
bring him here at once ?”
“ The sooner the better —the sooner the better.
Wigg appears engrossed with his own thoughts : he
answers his client’s questions absently. North enquires if
Wigg will wait in for him, and being answered in the
affirmative, at once leaves the office.
The lawyer resumes his walk up and down the floor, and
continues the conversation he has been holding with him-
self.
“ This is getting interesting. I wonder if I am to see
both partners, and decide who is the murderer ? Yes, I
am. The story diverges. Somebody is interested in telling
a lie. Who is it, I wonder —who is it ? Marks, without a
doubt. I wonder what his little game is ? Well, I’ve only
to lie quiet and learn all —quiet and learn all.
Again a knock at his door attracts him. His invitation
to enter is followed by the appearance of the man whose
discovery has been the chief object of more than one of
those with whose history we are now concerned.


“Are you Mr. Wigg?” enquires the visitor.
“ I am ; and you ?”
“My name is Stevens; I’ve called to see ye about some
business connected wi’ a Mr. North.”
“ Pray be seated. A Mr. North, did you say —Mr.
North ?” and Wigg simulates perplexity in order to the
more easily draw out the full purpose of his visitor’s
call. He has so far studied human nature that he knows
when he wants to get at the object of a certain class of
men the last thing to do is to appear interested in it.
Stevens begins at once.
“ Ye’ve been advertisin’ for information as to the where-
aways o’ Harry North. Now, me an’ him was mates on
the diggin’s, an’ as ye’re not likely to find anybody else as
knew him then, I thought as I’d come an’ tell ye that he
was killed on the Bendigo nigh on twelve or fourteen year
ago.”
“ Killed ! Mr. Stevens. Killed by whom ?”
The assumption by Wigg that North had met his death
at the hands of somebody startles his listener. Wigg,
having fired the random shot purposely, watches its effect.
After a moment’s surprise and silence Stevens answers his
question—
“He was killed by a fall in his claim. Did ye want ta
prove his death for anythin’ ? Was he heir to any property
or anythin’ like that ?”
“ I am advertising for him at the request of a relative—
of a relative, Mr. Stevens.”
“ The widow, may be ?”
“ No ; but you said you were his partner at the time of
his death? You could prove all the particulars of his
decease and identity —of his decease and identity, Mr.
Stevens ?”
“ Well, yes, may be I could if it was worth while.”


The solicitor sees the character he has to deal with. He
deems it best to strike a direct return blow, so replies-
“ If we made it worth your while, you mean, eh ?”
“ Well, yes, may be I do.”
“ Glad of it, Mr. Stevens —glad of it; makes a change.”
“An’ the money that’s left him, what’s to be done wi’
that ?”
Stevens sees at once he has made a false step ; the other
observes it too, and adds to his discomfiture by the
remark —
“ I’ve said nothing of any money left him, Mr. Stevens
—any money left him.”
“ But ye’ve advertised it,” and Stevens tries by another
blunder to remedy the effect of the first.'
Wigg has a copy of the advertisement handy. He turns
it up quietly, and remarks —
“ No, I don’t think so—l don’t think so, Mr. Stevens.”
Stevens cannot improve matters, so he continues —
“ Well, I certainly thought as there was money left him,
an’ I’d be sorry if there warn’t, as he made a will leavin’
somethin’ to me when we was mates together.”
“ Made a will, did you say —a will, eh ?” says Wigg,
with genuine surprise. He has been on the wrong track
hitherto as to this man’s motive. There is a deeper purpose
in view than the lawyer supposed.
“ Yes, an’ a real good will, leavin’ everythin’ to me an’
his wife.”
“And you’ve brought this will with you, Mr. Stevens —
will with you, eh ?”
“ No, I haven’t, ’cause I never thought it was no good;
but I can get it if need be.”
“Certainly you’ll need it if you make any claim under it.”
“ Well, that all depends if there’s anythin’ to claim on.
Ye haven’t found the widow yet, have ye ?”


The lawyer is not there to answer questions. He avoids
this one, and asks —
“ When will you let me see the will, Mr. Stevens —let
me see the will ?”
“Ye haven’t told me if there’s any property yet; there’s
nobody can demand to see the will until there s property
in sight.”
“ True, and nobody not interested in the will can demand
to know if there is any property. So we’re on level ground
yet—level ground yet, Mr. Stevens,” returns Wigg, playing
with his visitor good-naturedly.
“ Then,” says Stevens, rising, “ I’ll bring the will to-
morrow and demand my rights, do ye hear ? demand my
rights.”
“ At what hour, Mr. Stevens —at what hour ?”
“ You can fix the hour,” is the surly reply.
“Glad of it; makes a change. Say 12 o’clock. It’s a
good hour for hot work —for hot work, Mr. Stevens.”
“ So then ye can expect to hear from me agin, an’ I
won’t come alone either,” and in this mood the lawyer’s
visitor quits the room.
As he departs, Wigg calls after him as if addressing the
doorway more than Stevens
“ No, don’t! Bring your whole family with you, Mr.
Stevens— bring your whole family with you.”
“ Now,” he thinks, “ I begin to see daylight. There’s a
deep game brewing here —a deep game brewing, and Marks
is in the swim. Well, I must lead them on.
“ Come in,” he calls, in reply to another knock at the
door.
A head and shoulders are thrust through the doorway,
and the big, manly voice of Patrick O’Brien asks—
“ Are ye in, Mr. Wigg ?”
“ Yes ; what is it ?”


“ Shure ! I’ve got a lady here wants to see ye particularly
if ye’re in.”
“ Glad of it; makes a change. Bring her in.”
“ Come along, Mrs. North, come along,” and O’Brien
turns and beckons to that lady to follow him.
“ Mrs. North ! the widow ! by all that’s wonderful,” ex-
claims Wigg, and immediately she and O’Brien make their
way into the lawyer’s room. Wigg motions the lady to a
seat. O’Brien is the first to speak.
“ Shure, sir,” he says, as he sees Wigg pointing to a
second chair, “ I’ll lave ye alone together, and she’ll tell ye
her own story intoirely. She won’t want me at all, at all.
I’ll wait within cooee if wanted.”
“ Here ! you can wait in this room, if you don’t mind—
if you don’t mind.”
“ Mind, is it ? Shure ! haven’t I waited for years to do
this lady a sarvice, an’ now I’d forfeit all hopes o’ promo-
tion to sarve her intoirely, that I would,” saying which
O’Brien enters the room in question, and the door is closed
upon him.
As Wigg turns towards his visitor she rises. He inter-
rupts her.
“Be seated, madam, be seated. You have seen my
advertisement then?” he asks.
“ Yes, thanks to my good friend O’Brien.”
“And you are the ” Wigg hesitates, somewhat in
doubt as to the best way to express himself.
Alice renders further questioning unnecessary by reply-
ing—
“ I am the widow of William Henry North, for whom
you advertise.”
“And how do you propose to establish your identity and
that of your late husband as the persons we are advertising
for —we are advertising for, Mrs. North?”


“ Constable O’Brien knew me years ago on the Bendigo
goldfields.”
“And your husband as William Henry North?”
“ That I can’t say. He was always called Harry only.”
“ Had you any brothers-in-law —any brothers-in-law,
Mrs. North ?”
“ Yes, one,” replies Alice ; “ younger than Harry,” she
adds.
“And his name ?”
“ James.”
“ Would he know you, do you think ?”
“ I think so.”
“And you him ?”
“ I feel certain I should.”
“ Glad of it,” mechanically repeats her questioner, at
the same time opening a drawer and taking from it three
pictures, which he examines, and then hands her one.
“ Is that James North ?”
“No.”
“ That ?” showing her a second, and watching her closely.
“ Oh ! Mr. Wigg,” breaks in Alice, on seeing it, “ where
did you get this ?”
She takes the picture from his hand and kisses it
affectionately.
“Oh ! Harry, I can never forget your dear face,” she
murmurs, speaking to the unconscious picture.
After gazing at it for some moments, during which the
lawyer has watched her narrowly, she turns to him —
“ Oh ! give me this, Mr. Wigg, give me ,” but she is
overcome; tears come thick and fast; the likeness is one
of her husband taken in the year of their marriage—one
she would prize beyond all others.
“ Bless her soft heart,” says the lawyer to himself;
“ there is no falsehood here at anyrate.”


After a pause, during which she has recovered her com-
posure, and is again gazing at the picture, he addresses
her kindly—
“ I regret the picture is not mine, Mrs. North, but I
think I will manage to get it for you —to get it for you.”
“Oh ! do, Mr. Wigg, do. You cannot think how I would
prize your kindness if you do.”
He extends his hand as a request for the picture.
Reluctantly she delivers it back, indicating by her action
her desire for one more look at the face she had loved so
truly.
“ Mrs. North,” and the voice of the lawyer exhibits more
feeling that his nearest friends would have thought possible
with him, “ if you promise to return that to -me when I ask
it, I’ll take upon myself to let you keep it now —keep it
now, Mrs. North ?”
“ You will. Oh ! how good you are. Believe me, you
can trust me.”
“ I do,” and as he gives her the picture, she grasps his
hand with mute but fervent gratitude.
“ Do you know this ?” he asks, handing her the third
picture.
She looks at it doubtfully.
“ No,” and she turns to Wigg. He is silent, and she
looks again.
“ Surely it is not James North ?” she says, reflectively.
“ Yes, it is. Oh! how like Harry he must have grown.
Poor Harry! Will I never avenge your death!” She
again showers her kisses upon the picture Wigg has given
her, and tears again fill her eyes.
“ Come, Mrs. North,” says the lawyer, kindly, “ you
must not give way like that. You have now friends around
to help you —to help you, Mrs. North ?”
“To bring me face to face with Harry’s murderer ? Oh !


do not promise me that! Do not torture me with hope after
all these years of failure 1”
“ Nay! calm yourself, Mrs. North; there are better
things than revenge —something more worth living for ”
She interrupts him.
“Tome ? Never ! You do not know the cruel, dastardly
depth of the crime that has gone unpunished, or you would
not speak to me of anything but revenge.”
“ ’Twas not revenge brought you here —brought you
here, Mrs. North ?”
“It was nothing else. I saw in the advertisement a
possible aid to revenge. Have I not during these long
years nursed a lot of nothing but gloom, in the hope of
some chance leading me to the murderer ? For years I
have lived as a nurse in the lunatic asylum, and seen every
man that entered its walls, hoping that a murderer’s con-
science would drive the villain mad and place him within
my reach there. So far my task has been in vain, but Ido
not despair. If you cannot give me help in this, then bid
me go, and seek me not again with any other promise than
that of revenge.”
“ Stay ! Mrs. North, stay ! If you will be guided by me
I will do something to gratify your wish. lam convinced
that you can help me to unmask a piece of the deepest
villainy now being attempted, as I can assist you to avenge
one of the blackest and most cruel of murders. Will you
submit to my advice —to my advice, Mrs. North ?”
“On that condition, yes. Command me in what you will.”
“ Glad of it, glad of it! And your friend the constable,
can we trust him ?”
“Yes, implicitly.”
“ Then his promotion will be rapid, or he is a fool and I
an idiot —and I an idiot, Mrs. North ?”
“ Constable O’Brien is no fool, Mr. Wigg.”


“ Glad of it; makes a change ”
As he speaks, a knock is heard at the door. A clerk
enters the room, hands a slip of paper to his employer, and
awaits his command.
“Ah ! most opportune.” He turns to the clerk —“ Tell
him I will see them in a moment, Mrs. North,” he con-
tinues, addressing her as the clerk goes out, “may I ask
you to pardon me for a few minutes, and instead ol going
away, join our friend, Constable O’Brien in this room.”
As he speaks, Wigg rises, opens the door of the room
occupied by O’Brien ; and Alice, obeying his request, enters
at once.
After he closes the door, the lawyer pauses a minute to
discuss with himself the position of matters. He remarks
aloud —
“ Things become quite dramatic here. Am Ito be the
medium of bringing together a set ol chaiacteis who have
been separated for years —separated for years in spite of
all efforts to find each other? Now if I only had the talent
to bring this on the stage, I’d make a fortune—l’d make a
fortune. How little the world is after all, when an
advertisement does all this re-uniting. I’m the focus for
all this —I’m the focus for all this. Shall I tell North all ?
Ah ! that depends on events—that depends on events.”
He then goes to the door leading to his outer office,'and
calls in James North.
“ I’ve brought Mr. Dyke, of whom I spoke to you, Mr.
Wigg,” says that gentleman entering, followed by Dyke.
Wigg motions each to a chair.
North continues —
“ Mr. Dyke can give you what information is required as
to my brother’s death.’
“ Glad of it, glad of it; makes a change. Were you a
witness of the murder —of the murder, Mr. Dyke ?”


“ No,” returns Dyke ; “but I was present when Harry
North died from the effects of the blow dealt him by
Woods.”
“ How do you know it was Woods —do you know it was
Woods ?”
“ Only from what North himself said before he died.”
“ Then there is no direct proof of the murder —of the
murder, Mr. Dyke ?”
• “ None beyond that.”
James North is not anxious to continue the topic of the
murder. He would prefer to lead the conversation into
other channels, and remarks —
“After this lapse of time there is not much chance of
the murderer being discovered.”
His speech has the opposite effect to that which he
desired. Dyke declares emphatically—
“ I am not without hope, aye, even to conviction, that I
will some day see him.”
“ Would you know him if you did —if you did, Mr.
Dyke ?” asks Wigg.
“ Most assuredly.”
“ Glad of it; makes a change. And you lost sight alto-
gether of the widow —of the widow, Mr. Dyke ?”
“Most completely.”
“Would you recognise her now, do you think ?”
“ Yes, I think so.”
“ Is there anyone else that can help to prove the murder?
We might advertise for any other witness —any other
witness, you know ?”
“ There is none other —but, stay, a digger named
O’Brien; he knew Woods, and was with me in the early
part of the search.”
“ Michael O’Brien ?” asks Wigg, carelessly, appearing to
be engrossed with his writing, as he puts this question to
test Dyke’s memory or knowledge.”


“ No, Patrick,” returns Dyke, promptly.
“ Glad of it; makes a change,” and Wigg admits to him-
self that everything fits in well; that truth is now coming to
the surface. Addressing Dyke, he continues —“Is there any
other incident you would think worthy of mention in con-
nection with this murder —worthy of mention, Mr. Dyke ?”
“Not that I remember.”
Dyke is silent for a moment, and then says —
“ Yes, there was one. Marks, the postmaster, accused
me of the crime, and so delayed the chase after Woods.”
“ Marks ! Ah ! there’s something here. Marks was the
name of the postmaster, eh ? Is he likely to be found —
to be found, think you ?”
“ I couldn’t say.”
“ Marks, postmaster at Bendigo ? We can find particu-
lars of him from the Government records, Mr. Dyke, Can
you fix the date of the murder ?”
“ Not from memory, but from papers I have in my
possession.”
“ Then you must do that. Now, gentlemen,” continues
the lawyer, “ I have a little surprise for you. I want to
introduce you to a lady, if you will permit me ?”
“ When ? Where ?” enquires North, who has been silent
since his unfortunate remark on the subject of the murder.
“ Here, now,” replies Wigg, going towards the door of
the room in which Alice North and O’Brien are waiting.
As Alice enters, Dyke recognises her.
“ Mrs. North ! Alice !” he exclaims, rushing forward and
grasping her hand.
For a moment they gaze into each other’s faces, then
Dyke turns and indicates to her the presence of her
brother-in-law.
“Here,” he says, “is your husband's brother, James
North.”


“Yes, Alice, found after all these years,” cries North,
warmly embracing her.
“What good fortune is this,” she asks; “so many
friends found together ? Are my prayers to be answered
at last ?”
“Yes, Mrs. North ; all in good time —all in good time,
replies "Wigg.
“ But,” says Alice, “ we are forgetting our good friend
O’Brien. To him we owe this meeting.”
“O’Brien!” exclaims Dyke,turning to the lawyer, “have
you discovered him, too, Mr. Migg ?
« Yes, he is here with me,” replies Alice.
Wigg has opened the door and called in O’Brien.
“ Shure, am I not in the way at all, at all. An’ is it
yersilf, Mr. Dyke ? Be the powers ! I’m glad to get a
hould o’ yer hand agin.” .
Dyke is not less delighted. He warmly shakes the Irish-
man’s hand as he says so, then turning to Wigg, he continues:
“ Why, Mr. Wigg, you have succeeded in this beyond
your expectations. Can you not now assist to unearth the
lost murderer ?”
“Yes, you must direct the renewed search,’ presses.
Alice; and turning to Dyke—“ I can still claim your help ;
you will help me again ?”
O’Brien answers for him —
“Aye, that he will—more power to him.”
Wigg takes the opportunity to whisper to O’Brien that
if he will return after the others have gone, he will discuss
with him the question of the murderer, and perhaps supply
a strong clue as to his whereabouts.
Shortly afterwards they all leave the office. More infor-
mation is to be collected before any decisive step is taken.
Dyke, too, is anxious to keep his promise to Nora by intro-
ducing Alice to her without delay.


CHAPTER XI.
“ Friendship is constant in all other things,
Some in the office and affairs of love.”
—Much Ado About Nothing.
“ An oath, an oath, I have an oath in Heaven.”
—Merchant of Venice.
On the evening of the day on which Dyke and Alice met at
the solicitor’s office, Nora is alone in the drawing room of
her home, playing over some music and trying some songs
she has recently purchased. Turning over her favourite
opera, “ II Trovatore,” she comes upon the song, “ Deserto
sulla terra ” (Now on the earth so lonely). The words
recall to her the story Dyke had told her of the murder of
North, and of his widow engaged in the search for the
murderer. Then her thoughts run on the day and what it
has brought to her. “ What a happy day it should have
been to me,’ - she reflects, “ and yet how my happiness
seems clouded by the sad story he told me. It seems to
overshadow the bliss Ashton’s love should bring me, to
co-mingle with the joy with which my cup of life should at
this moment be filled. I cannot dismiss the thought of
her from my mind ; it seems almost to have become a
necessary part of my daily life. Poor woman ! I never till
now could thoroughly realise the feelings of such as she.
If she truly and devotedly loved her husband,—as Ido
Ashton —what a blank in her life his death must have
caused, and how all her true womanly instincts must have
hungered for fevenge! Oh ! how I wish I could do some-


thing for her. I’ll speak to Ashton when he comes to-night,
and help him to arrange some plan of search for her. Ido
hope he’ll come soon.” She then resumes playing, and is
absorbed in it when a servant enters and addresses her—
“ A letter for you, miss.”
“ For me? Thank you.” She takes the letter irom tne
servant, who leaves the room immediately.
Nora looks at the letter. “Ashton’s writing,” she says,
and hastens to break the seal, but hesitates. Perhaps it is
to tell her he cannot come to-night. “Oh ! how I hope it
is not.” She repeats unconsciously aloud—“ To-night he
was to speak to mamma and papa. Oh ! shame on him if he
is afraid to speak to them.” She opens the letter and reads—
When I gave you my promise that if I found Mrs. North I
should allow you to be'a friend to her, I little thought that I would so
soon be able to redeem the pledge. I have discovered her, and, at my
urgent request, she is coming with me to see you. We will be at
St. Kilda shortly after you have seen this.
Your devoted lover,
Ashton Dyke.
“ Mrs. North found ! and by Ashton ! I am so glad.
Now I’ll be able to help them; but am I glad? Will
Ashton be as devoted to me as he should be, now that he
has this search to engross his attention ? But I mustn’t
be selfish, and expect to monopolise all his time. No ! I’ll
be true to my promise, and not show any jealous feeling.”
She is interrupted by the entrance of her mother.
“ Nora, my love, what are ye doin’ ? At the pianer, my
dear ?”
“ Yes, mamma.”
“ What letter’s that ?” asks Mrs. Stevens, seeing Dyke’s
letter in her daughter’s hand.
“ From Mr. Dyke, mamma. You remember the poor
woman he told us about whose husband was murdered on
the diggings some years ago ? He has found her, and is
bringing her here to-night.”


“ To-night, Nora! What for ?”
“ I made him promise if he found her to let me help her
if possible, and he is bringing her here to-night.”
“Don’t ye think that’s a great liberty on so short
acquaintances ?”
“ But, ma, you forget that I asked him ?”
“Asked him here to-night ?”
“ No, to let me help Mrs. North.”
“Well I declare ! I won’t see her.
“ Why not ?” asks Nora, with some surprise.
“ How do we know she is a proper kind of woman to
receive here ?”
“ Oh! mamma, how can you be so uncharitable ?
Probably she is poor ; but she is an unfortunate woman,
and as such deserves our sympathy. If she were not,
I’m sure Mr. Dyke wouldn’t bring her.”
“At anyrate, my dear, it is most unconvenient. Yer
papa has just had notice that a disputation is to wait on
him with a testimonial askin’ him to come out for mayor.
Fancy that! Yer pa mayor ! How would Ido lor a lady
mayor, my dear ?” and Mrs. Stevens struts about majesti-
cally in front of her daughter.
Nora laughs.
“ Well, mamma, I think I should prefer you as you are.
“ What nonsense! my love. Why shouldn’t yer pa be
mavor ? An’ if he can be mayor, I m sure I m good
enough for lady mayor.”
“ Certainly you are, mamma. But I don’t think papa
will consent. I hope he will have more sense.’
“ You are a very provoking girl, an’ have no sense of
what is due to yer father’s persition. Why he might be
mayor when some Royalty came here, an be made a
Knight for his royal principles, an’ as a renumeration of
his magnanimous entertainments. I must go an’ get the


dinin’ room ready to receive the disputation,” and with the
air of a woman already in possession of all the honors a
grateful city can confer upon her, Mrs. Stevens sweeps out
of the room.
Nora does not know whether to be amused or annoyed.
After a moment’s thought, she says —“ Poor mamma, she
has unbounded ambition, and the best heart in the world.
I do hope she will not persuade her husband to make her
and himself ridiculous by acceding to this request. Oh !
it’s too absurd ! I must go and try to reason with mamma.”
As she is about to leave the room, the servant maid
again enters, and announces that Mr. Dyke and a lady
have called to see her.
“ Show them here at once,” says Nora.
The maid goes to obey her, and as Nora glances at her
reflection in the mirrored overmantel, she thinks how glad
she is that Ashton has come. She will get him to speak
to her mamma and papa that night. With their heads so
full of this mayoral business, there is no doubt of their
consent to her engagement with Dyke.
These thoughts are cut short by the entrance of Dyke
and Alice.
Dyke greets Nora as befits young people in their
position, and then introduces his companion. Nora grasps
Mrs. North’s hand, and endeavors to make her feel at
once she has found a friend. She says —
“ Mr. Dyke has told me your story, Mrs. North. Believe
me, I feel for you heartily, and desire to serve you if I can.”
“ Thank you, Miss Stevens ; I’m sure you do. There is
a current of sympathy in your firm hand and sweet smile
that bids me hope, and assures me of lasting friendship.
Mr, Dyke has been the best of friends to me, and your
desire to befriend me is a bright spot in my lonely life.”
“ Not lonely in future, Mrs. North. You can at least


count on sympathy and assistance from Mr. Dyke and
myself,” says Nora, cheerfully, as her eyes gaze into those
of Alice.
“ Yes,” returns Alice; “ but why should my troubles
come to you ? Why should Mr. Dyke and you waste your
thoughts and energies with what concerns me alone ?”
“ Don’t say that, Mrs. North. That you are a wronged
and unfortunate sister is enough for me, and should be for
all right-minded women.”
“ But when only one thought animates me —when only
one desire makes me cling to life ”
Nora interrupts her, saying—
“ That thought is a wifely one, and, believe me, I can
sympathise with you. Mr. Dyke has given me that feeling
which makes a realisation of your position possible to me,
and I should be wanting in my best instincts were I not
anxious to assist you. And Ashton, too, is devoted to your
cause.”
Nora turns appealingly to Dyke; he gives his assent
without speaking.
“ But,” continues Alice, “ should you he expected to
trouble about that after all this lapse of years ? Should
you not rather blame me for harboring thoughts of bring-
ing the murderer to justice after all these years of failure?”
“ Do not for a moment think so, dear Mrs. North,” Nora
replies, firmly, and assures her that her firm adherence to
her resolve will some day be rewarded.
The entrance of the maid-servant interrupts them. Mrs.
Stevens has sent desiring her daughter’s presence in the
dining room for a moment. Nora says she will come
immediately, and dismisses the servant. Then she turns
to Alice, making her excuses, asks Dyke to show his com-
panion the pictures in an album lying on the table, and
leaves the drawing room, promising to return as soon as
possible.


When they are alone, Alice addresses Dyke —
“ I thank yon now for bringing me here, and most
heartily congratulate you on your choice of a wife. In
truth, I wish you every happiness. Were it not better that
you and she should allow me to go about my self-imposed
mission alone ; that you should not have the dawn of your
love overcast by any cloud from my misfortune ?”
“No! Alice, no!” replies Dyke, firmly; “let me still
aid you, and with redoubled efforts worthy of the help
Nora will give us.”
“ Her proffered friendship is to me a new sunrise—a
clearing away of many mists of doubt and despair.”
Dyke, impressed with the earnestness of her manner,
exclaims fervently—
“ I pray then that the light may be shed into the dark
past, so long obscured, and that we may shortly bring the
wrong-doer into the full blaze of day.”
“ God helping me!” cries Alice, in a determined tone,
“I am more and more determined to live with that object
only.”
While speaking, she has been carelessly turning over the
pages of the album. Suddenly her attention becomes
rivetted upon something in the book. Uttering a wild
scream, she calls to Dyke—
“ Ashton ! Ashton ! look here, *tis he !”
“ What ! who ?”
“ See!” and she points wildly at the object which has
occasioned this outburst. “ There ! Woods, the murderer !
Oh, God ! I thank you for a clue at last!” and she reverently
clasps her hands with great excitement.
Dyke has looked at the picture. “ ’Tis he, sure enough,”
he cries ; “ how can he be connected with this family ?”
Another look at the fatal page discloses to him the fact
that the picture is side by side with one of Mrs. Stevens.


What awful suggestion does this fact convey ? Can he be
a brother or a relative ? Dyke gives way to this terrible
train of thought, and is lost in silence. Alice asks him —
“Mr. Dyke! Ashton! what are you thinking? What
can this mean ? Who is he ?”
“ I cannot tell.”
“ Whom do you think ?”
As she speaks, their ears are assailed by the sound of
cheers in the dining room. After looking at each other
inquiringly and with astonishment for some moments.
Dyke replies —
“ Oh ! I am tortured with fears and doubts.”
“Ashton! we must leave this house at once,” and as she
utters these words, Alice excitedly removes the picture from
the album.
Seeing this, Dyke asks —“Ah ! what would you do ?”
“ With this I can discover who and where he is. Come!”
and she moves towards the door.
Nora re-enters at the same moment.
“ Miss Stevens, whose picture is that ?” demands Alice.
“ Papa’s,” answers Nora, simply. “ Where did you get
it ?” and, smiling, she takes up the album.
Dyke is thunderstruck. “ Great God !” he murmurs,
“ what blow is this ?”
“Why!” exclaims Nora, in a tone of puzzled amaze-
ment, “you’ve torn that from the album;” then looking
up, she sees from the expression on the faces of her com-
panions that something is amiss. “What is this? what
is the matter ?” she asks, turning first to one and then the
other.
Again the cheers from the dining room distract their
attention. Dyke is glad of the interruption. When these
subside, he addresses Nora with an effort —
“ Miss Stevens! Nora! Mrs. North is not well; let me
take her away.”


“ Nay! if she be ill, she is better here. What is the
matter ? Tell me. Speak, Ashton ; what has happened ?”
“ You must not know,” replies Dyke in a choking voice.
“ Must not know ! Am I then so poor a creature you
even cannot trust me? Speak, Ashton, Mrs. North; tell
me what is this ?”
Thus appealed to, Alice turns to Dyke —
“ She is a brave girl, Ashton. End this doubt. Speak
to her; I cannot.”
Again, as if in mockery of their feelings, the cheers
resound from the dining room. A comedy and tragedy
are being enacted under the same roof. Thus it is always,
pain and pleasure, tears and laughter, intermingling in
this world’s affairs : a funeral procession passing along
while wedding bells are ringing; but so the joy bells
that proclaim the advent of a new year are but the funeral
knell of the old.
Dyke approaches Nora, and asks kindly —
“ Is that man your father ?”
“ No, my stepfather.”
“ Thank God for that.”
“ Why ! What! Oh ! what is this ?”
“ His name is not yours, then ? Do you know his
name ?”
“Yes, it is the same as mine—Stevens; but he is
mamma’s second husband.”
“ Did you ever hear that he went by any other name ?”
“ None but William Stevens. Oh ! tell me quickly—tell
me what is wrong ? What do you suspect ? Who is he ?”
“ The murderer of North !” replies Dyke, shortly and
sadly.
“Oh ! no, not that —not that; it must be some mistake.
Poor mamma ! poor mamma !”
Nora’s first thoughts are for others.


“ This must be kept from her, Nora. Can you command
yourself sufficiently to avoid showing that there is any
trouble ?”
“Oh ! is there no mistake ? Are you quite sure ?”
“ There is no mistake. Would to God there were.”
Again these cheers from the adjoining room. They
have now become distracting. Dyke asks Nora what is the
cause. She replies—
“A deputation now with papa asking him to become
mayor. Oh ! poor mamma, poor mamma, is this the end
of your ambition ? Oh ! can nothing be done to save her
from this disgrace ? Oh! Ashton! Mrs. North! can
nothing be done ? Ashton! do not spurn, but help me.
Save mamma, say he is not the man.”
“ Nora, darling,” and Dyke affectionately requests her
to go to her own room for a time, as he wishes to speak
with Mrs. North.
Nora suffers herself to be led out by Dyke. As he
returns, Alice confronts him firmly—
“What would you do ? You would not shield him now?”
“ Shield him ! No !”
“ But you would keep the disgrace from them —from her.
Ashton Dyke, will you assist a murderer to escape ?”
“Alice, listen to me,” says Dyke, quietly. “Years ago
this man, blinded by a greed for gold, and in a fit of
passion, struck down his partner. He was then an outcast
and alone. From that day to this he has so far observed
the laws of his country and acted the part of a good citizen
that no one ever suspected his identity with that of a
criminal. To-day we find him the loved husband and
honored head of this household. Shall a passionate crime
of the past outweigh all these years of repentance and
atonement, and bring desolation to an innocent hearth ?
Is vengeance more powerful than the godly attribute of


mercy? Is not forgetfulness the truest vengeance —for-
giveness the most noble revenge ?”
“Ashton Dyke ! is this your sworn constancy of years
ago ? So long as it did not affect yourself you were eager
enough in the search; but now that we have discovered
the murderer, and his punishment comes near to those in
whom you have an interest, you cry for mercy. Did this
miscreant think of others when he struck the blow ? Did
he consider what desolation he was dealing the friends of
his victim ? No! And yet you counsel me to mercy —
plead for forgiveness. What right had this man to link
his name with innocent people, to knowingly drag into
degradation those whose honor he should guard ? Is that
the part of a repentant man—the action of atonement for
wrong done ?”
“Alice, you do me an injustice. I am as eager as you
to bring a wrong-doer to justice, but this fact has opened
my eyes, the position to which this man has attained, the
honors which you have heard even now sought to be placed
upon him, show that this position has not been gained
without merit and deserving. This fact proves that he has
led a life of rectitude and uprightness in the sight of God
and man. Will, therefore, one fatal, impulsive, passionate
act of years ago debar him from mercy and from hope ?”
Alice is not moved.
“ Is it not written,” she asks, “ ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s
blood, by man shall his blood be shed?’ ”
Dyke meets her with her own weapons.
“ But is it not also written, ‘ Judge not that ye be not
judged,’ and that ‘ Mercy is above this temporal sway, an
attribute to God himself and earthly power shall then
show likest God’s, when mercy seasons justice ?’ ”
“ No, ’tis useless ; you cannot turn me from my purpose,
but I can at least seek out my vengeance alone. I need
not look for further aid from you.”


Dyke still pleads with her. Without any tone other
than kindness in his voice, he says—
“ By the memory of our former friendship, and of every
act of kindness I can lay claim to, I adjure you to do
nothing in this matter rashly. Consider first how you are
to prove any assertions you may make. If this man even
denies that he is Woods, what is there to prove it beyond a
strong resemblance ? It may after all be a case of mistaken
identity.”
“ Have you any doubt on the matter ?” asks Alice, with
bitterness, her eyes flashing some degree of scorn.
Dyke does not let her manner affect him, but replies
quietly —
“ I cannot say that I am perfectly assured that this is
the murderer.”
“ Then, as we know that he is in this house, why not see
him face to face ? If we fail to recognise him, is it not
possible that he may recognise us, and so set at rest any
doubt.”
“ No, not yet; not to-night.”
“Ah ! you would give him time to escape.”
“ No ! on my honor.”
“ You will not warn, nor have him put on his guard.?”
“ No, trust me, I will not.”
“ But you will not proceed further of your own free will
to hand him over to justice ?”
“ Not if you will not force me to do it.”
“ I force you to do it! How am Ito do that ? Ah !
the oath !” and her tone assumes some elements of com-
mand. “ Yet you remind me,” she continues, facing him
firmly, “ that without you I cannot prove him to be the
murderer —that he may deny his identity ? No ! Ashton
Dyke, you must not suffer justice to be thwarted.
Eemember you have sworn to aid me ”


“ But not to injure others,” replies Dyke, promptly.
Alice has still a strong claim on Dyke. Has he not
sworn to help her in all ? Must she then remind him of
his oath ? Without him she knows she is powerless, and
nothing must stand between her and her vengeance.
“Ah!” she cries, excitedly, “remember your oath!”
With much force she repeats the words in which he had
promised to aid her —“ ‘ Come what may, in the face of
every difficulty, you will devote all your energies to finding
his murderer ; and wherever found, in ivhatever position,
and at whatever sacrifice, drag him to justice and to
vengeance.’ Now, Ashton Dyke,” she almost screams,
“ do you refuse to deliver him to justice ?”
Nora has been a witness of this last tragic proceeding.
She has come quietly to the door of the room, and stood
there trembling and transfixed with terror. She hears the
oath recalled to Dyke; she sees the inflexible manner of
the woman she has wished to befriend ; she hears Dyke’s
reply—
“ God help me ! I am powerless to avert this blow!”
A wild scream breaks upon their ears. Nora has fainted
in her excitement.
Turning at the sound, Dyke rushes towards Nora, and
takes her in his arms. Alice, doubting that he has yet
determined to assist her, confronts him with the picture of
the murderer, and motioning towards Heaven, reminds
him of the oath he has taken.


CHAPTER XII.
“ Thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy.”
—Troilus and Cressida.
Enquiries made by Wigg soon satisfy that astute gentle-
man of the law that he is beyond doubt in a position
to bring to the bar of justice the man who murdered
Harry North.
He, however, resolves to bring this about in his own
way, and with that object in view has arranged a meeting
of those most intimately concerned in frustrating the plot
in which Marks and the murderer are engaged.
He has skilfully led on these conspirators until they
think the realisation of their wishes nearly accomplished,
managed so well that there is as yet no appearance of
chafing at the “ law’s delays,” although on more than one
occasion one of them has exhibited a little impatience.
He has made an appointment with these men to be at
his office on a certain evening at 8 o’clock, and intimated
to Dyke and North that he wishes them to call round
shortly after that hour.
James North has not been seen by anybody since the
day of the picnic up the Yarra. He was completely
overcome by the knowledge that the husband of the woman
whose daughter he has chosen for his wife, is the murderer
of his brother. The position in which he is thus placed


makes him desire if possible to shield the criminal, hut
in what way to effect this he is unable to decide.
On receiving a note from Wigg to be at his office, as
already indicated, he at once concludes that it has some
reference to the murder, and wonders how he can act so
as to avoid the disgrace of this terrible crime falling on
Nora and her mother. What can he do to hide matters, or
perhaps throw Wigg and Dyke off the search, for he is
convinced that Dyke will prosecute it vigorously. That he
has not had courage to see Nora since that dreadful day
gives him great concern. He debates with himself long
and seriously whether or not to obey Wigg’s summons, and,
after reflecting that he may perhaps effect some good, he
decides to go. He may be able to do something, and will
at least learn what is being done by the others.
He once saved Woods’ life under less likely circumstances.
From his own experience of the murderer he knows that
Woods is not altogether bad. When he himself was stuck
up and compelled to join Yorky Bill on the road, he
ran great risk of being contaminated for all time ; but this
man, and the nugget he had stained his soul to possess,
were the means of his own escape from that life. To Woods,
therefore, he owes some service. Circumstances, he reflects,
may blacken a man ; but when that man is able to rise
superior to his surroundings, there is in him some excuse
for his being helped. Prompted, therefore, by these con-
siderations, and his desire to save Nora and her mother,
he will go to Wigg’s office and await events.
Marks and his partner arrive at the solicitor’s office
some minutes before the hour appointed. They find that
Wigg has not yet arrived, so they are shown into his
private room to await his coming. After they have waited
some time they begin to feel no little impatience, and
Marks expresses himself thus —


“ I don’t like this being kept waiting by that man Wigg.
He’s got everything out of us we know, we’ve put him in
possession of all our documents, and now he brings us
here to get matters “ put in train,” as he calls it. I’m not
sure that he doesn’t think we are to be played with because
we haven’t a lawyer acting for us ?”
“ Well, we haven’t waited long yet; an’ besides, it’s not
after his time, ye know.”
“ But I’m getting anxious about the affair. He’s got the
will from you, and my affidavit of North’s death, and as to
your identity, and seeing the will signed, and all that sort
of thing. I don’t feel quite safe about the matter, and
must say I never felt more anxious in my life to have any
piece of business carried through. I don’t "know how you
feel.”
“ I just feel as if I had my hands on that that’s
all. I don’t see anythin’ to be skeered about, an’ I’m not
goin’ to stand any darned humbug from that lawyer man
Wigg over the matter either. If he’s not prepared to set
things right an’ ante up soon, I’ll know the reason why,
that’s all.”
“ My dear fellow, you are altogether on the wrong track
if you talk of forcing. This is a more ticklish business
than you seem to imagine. No sensible man would think
of driving a screw-nail with a sledge hammer, so you had
better moderate your tone of mind before our friend Wigg
comes on the scene. Flattery and insinuation will drive a
lawyer where bluster is of no account.”
“ Which means, I suppose, you have to manage this
affair,” returns Stevens, sulkily.
“ No, there is no need for that. You can do your part,
but remember that my interest in the matter is that
merely of the person who prepared the will and establishes
its validity.”


“An’ shares the plunder without any risk, eh ?”
“ Well, naturally you must expect your partner to get
a fair division, surely,” returns the Jew in a meaning tone.
“ What the devil do ye mean ? If ye go on scratchin’
that old sore, me an’ you’ll fall out mighty quick.”
“ My dear friend, falling out would be more serious to
you at present, I imagine.”
“ Would it ? Ye forget that the forged papers are your
work.”
“And the murder of North, whose work was that ?
“ What proof is there that he was murdered ? Haven’t
ye sworn that he was killed by an accident ?” and Stevens
laughs triumphantly.
Marks feels the effect of this bravado. He sees the
dilemma he is in. He did not credit his companion with so
much astuteness.
He attempts to turn off the force of this retort, and
remarks quietly —
« Come, my friend, we do wrong to recriminate and
quarrel with each other. If we are to carry this business
through, we must stand by each other, and not try to cut
one another s’ throats.”
“ Cut one another’s throats ! Who began that kind o
talk, I’d like to know ?”
“Well, well, we’ll say no more about it. We are here
to assist one another, and as we are in the water, we must
either help each other to swim across, or go to the bottom
together.”
Marks emphatically makes up his mind that if there is
any sinking to be done, he won’t suffer in that way.
“Very well, my friend; but just take my straight tip
for it, if ye try to drown me, ye’ve to come under wi’ me,
that’s all.”
“ Come, no more talk of going under. We’re in the


swim, and must go through with it at all costs. There’s
that James North ; he ”
Whatever Marks may have intended to say on the sub-
ject of James North must remain for ever a secret. The
entrance of Wigg at that moment cut short his remark.
“Ah ! gentlemen,” says the lawyer, as he hurries in,
“ you are here before me, are you —here before me ?”
“Yes, Mr. Wigg; for my part I always try to be punc-
tual, and I’ve been here some time waiting,” replies Marks.
“ Glad of it; makes a change.”
The solicitor knows that this is a falsehood to begin with.
He has enquired before entering, and learned that his
visitors came together.
“ Well, have ye made any progress wi’ ohr little affair” —
begins Stevens ; “is things all right yet ?”
“ Things are going on well. I’ve laid the position of
your claim before the parties interested —before the parties
interested.”
“An’ the will is admitted ?” continues Stevens.
“ The will, on the face of it, seems to be all right and
regular, a compliment to your ability in preparing it, Mr.
Marks —your ability in preparing it.”
“ Thank you; I acknowledge the compliment,” replies
Marks.
“ Glad of it —glad of it. Your name as postmaster on the
goldfields was Moses Marks. You now call yourself Morris
Marks ; that is a discrepancy —a discrepancy, Mr. Marks ?”
“ My name is Moses Morris Marks, but of late years I’ve
dropped the Moses.”
“Ah! glad of it; makes a change. The other witness
to the will, who is he ?”
“A man named Target, a sort of agent at the diggings.
But he’s dead some years ago.”
“ Where did he die —did he die, Mr. Marks ?”


“ Did he die ? Certainly. I know he is dead years ago.”
“We’ll want some proof of his decease.”
“Will that be necessary?” returns Marks, somewhat
taken aback.
“ I’m afraid so. Can you not make a declaration on the
subject—on the subject, Mr. Marks ?”
“ Well, I can state that I know he is dead, but I don’t
know the exact date.”
“Oh ! never mind that. I’ll get my clerk to run off a
declaration for you to make at once —to make at once,
Mr. Marks.
Wigg goes to the outer office with the notes he has
taken. Immediately he is outside the room, Stevens
remarks to his companion—
“Everythin’ seems right now, eh ?”
“ Old Wigg seems satisfied; but how many more
affidavits am I to sign before I’m done ?”
“ That’s nothin’, so long as we collar the money. Look
here, don’t ye think we should offer old Wigg a good big
commission on the amount to get matters fixed up soon ?
“ Not a bad idea. You suggest it to him, and see how
he takes it. If we can only get him to agree to that we
would be safer, anyhow.”
“ We’ll try it. What should we offer him ?”
“ Oh ! say 20 per cent. Make it worth while if you do
it at all.”
“ Damnation ! that’s far too much.”
“ Well, please yourself,” returns Marks, and adds con-
temptuously, “ what’s the use of offering a fleabite ?
“ That won’t be long in preparing,” says Wigg, re-enter-
ing, “ and we can easily get a justice to declare before to
declare before.”
“An’ what do ye want me to do now?” asks Stevens of
the lawyer.


“ There’s nothing more you can do at present. You’ve
made your claim, declared yourself to be William Woods,
formerly partner ”
This blunder is made purposely. Wigg is feeling his
way ; the other is on the alert.
“ Stevens, sir, Stevens,” he thunders.
“ Oh ! yes, William Woods Stevens, formerly partner of
the deceased on the Bendigo diggings. You’ve produced
the will, attested by Mr. Marks here and the man Target,
which seems in order. Mr. Marks swears he prepared the
will at North’s request, saw him sign it, and that North
was killed in his claim. Everything seems to be in order —
seems to be in order, Mr. Stevens. It only remains for
those who are affected by your claim to investigate matters,
and admit or dispute your right—admit or dispute your
right ” —with some emphasis on the latter alternative.
“An’ how long is it to be afore we can reckon on the
money bein’ paid ?” asks the impatient Stevens.
“ Oh ! the money will be forthcoming as soon as matters
are settled —as soon as matters are settled, Mr. Woods.”
“ Stevens ! Stevens ! Damnation ! can’t ye remember
my name ?”
Wigg takes strong delight in torturing his victim. This
time he thinks it judicious to apologise for the apparent slip.
As he does so, his clerk enters with the document he has
prepared for Marks’ signature. The clerk whispers a few
words to his employer, receives a whispered reply, and retires.
“ This is the declaration as to the death of Target, Mr.
Marks. Just read it over and sign it, will you sign it,
will you ?”
Stevens now engages the attention of the lawyer, and
addresses him confidentially—
“ Look here, Mr. Wigg, ye’re havin’ a lot o’ trouble over
this business, an’ it’s but right ye should have some pay


for it. I’ve been thinkin’ that if ye hurry up things a bit,
an’ let us handle the money soon, ye could take a rattlin’
good commission out o’ it.”
Wigg is not surprised; he expected something of the
kind before this, and is prepared to assent.
“ You’re very kind,” he replies. “ There is doubtless a
lot of extra trouble entailed over this affair, and I won’t
object to a small extra recompense, Mr. Stevens. Let me
see — we ’d better put that in black and white. What shall
we say ?”
“ Say 20 per cent., eh, Stevens ?” interrupts Marks.
The other assents reluctantly, and with a strong scowl
at his partner.
“ Glad of it; makes a change,” echoes the lawyer.
Marks has read over the declaration prepared for his
signature. He tells Wigg it is all correct, and at the
lawyer’s request signs it. Wigg is writing, and presently
reads aloud the paper he has prepared, as follows :
‘“I authorise and direct you to deduct and retain from
any moneys coming to me under the will of the late
William Henry North a payment of 20 per cent, of the
amount.’ There, that will do,” and he hands the docu-
ment to Stevens, who signs it without any remark.
“Now,” continues Wigg, handing the paper and pen to
Marks, will you kindly write * Witnessed and consented to,’
and sign your name ?”
Marks takes the paper and does as requested.
“ Now, that seems all right —that seems all right,”
repeats Wigg.
“ Then you won’t require anything further from us, will
you?” enquires the Jew.
“ No, I think not, Mr. Marks—l think not,”
“ Then, Stevens, we can leave Mr. Wigg; he has other
clients waiting for him. Good night, Mr. Wigg.”


“ Good night, Mr. Marks; good night, Mr. Stevens.”
The lawyer is playing with his victims. He has no
intention of allowing them to leave the office yet, but he
does not wish to appear as if keeping them. They have
just reached the door, and are about to open it, when he
calls after them —
“ Oh ! by the way, wait a minute, gentlemen ; we are
forgetting this declaration —this declaration, Mr. Marks.”
Both men return at once, Marks observing —
“Ah ! yes, you said you could get a justice handy.”
“ Yes,” replies Wigg, as he opens the door to the outer
office, and disappears from view.
“All right, my friend. We’ve baited the old fox, eh?’
cries Marks, in a tone of congratulation, grasping and
shaking his friend’s hand.
“ Yes, he took it like a lamb.”
Any further gratifying remarks are cut short by the
reappearance of the old fox referred to.
“ The justice will be here directly,” he observes, going
to his seat, and motioning the others to chairs ; “ but
while you wait I’d like to mention some information I have
obtained in the course of verifying the different statements.”
Marks and his companion start uneasily at these words,
but recover themselves immediately. The lawyer has ob-
served their action, but does not betray the knowledge.
Without hesitation he continues —
“ The records of the death of North point to the fact
that he was murdered in his claim, and that a partner of
his decamped with some gold. Is that true, Mr. Stevens?
“We had a partner named Dyke, a worthless young
cub, who was never seen after the accident, an’ some
suspicion fell on him as havin’ been the death o North.
“Ah ! yes, that may explain it —may explain it. Then,”
turning to the other victim with a playful smile of mock


seriousness, “ there appears as if you must have had some
difficulty in getting this will signed —in getting this will
signed, Mr. Marks ?”
“ Why! how ? in what way ?”
“You, of course, are confident you saw it signed on this
date —14th October, 1856 ?”
“ Yes, quite certain. There can be no doubt of that.”
Quietly and slowly, watching the effect of each word, the
lawyer continues —
“ Well, the difficulty is, that it has been ascertained that
North was dead and buried nearly twelve months at that
date —at that date, Mr. Marks ?”
“ Damnation ! what do ye mean cries Stevens,
“ That while your dead friend Target might witness a
will executed in another world, I don’t see how you could
—how you could, Mr. Marks.”
“ There is some mistake, Mr. Wigg. You have been
misinformed.”
“ Evidently.”
Marks assures him he can easily set this right, “ and,”
he continues, “ you’ll get your share of the money right
enough.”
“ Glad of it; makes a change.”
Words of more meaning would have irritated the Jew
less ; but he contrives to suppress his feelings and remark —
“ You will find everything work out all right. Let me
have the will until things are settled, Mr. Wigg ?”
“ No ; that remains in my custody.”
Marks sees that the lawyer is not to be persuaded. This
is no time for trifling. Whispering to his companion that
they must get the will even if it has to be taken forcibly,
he turns to Wigg and declares —
“ I must have that will.”
“ You shall not.”


“ Then we must take it.”
Marks and his companion advance threateningly upon
the lawyer, confident that with such odds in their favor,
there is no chance for him. They have miscalculated
their position, however. Quickly touching the hand bell
on his table, a signal to the outside is given, at the
same moment Wigg pulls a revolver from his drawer and
stands confronting them.
“ Stand back ; the first that moves a step is prepared
for a funeral —for a funeral, Mr. Marks.”
The signal has brought assistance. The door opens, and
Ashton Dyke enters. Stevens is the first to see him.
“ Thunder an’ damnation !” he screams, “ ’tis Ashton
Dyke.” In a moment, however, he recovers himself, and
recollects the part he should play. “ This is the partner
o’ North’s,” he exclaims —“ the partner who robbed an’
killed him.” -v
“ Liar and coward!” and Dyke advances towards his
accuser; “so you are discovered at last, William Woods.
You have formed the noose for your own neck.”
“ Trapped ! by God !”
“Yes, William Woods, by God,” repeats Dyke, “for the
hand of Providence is in this. An hour ago I should have
welcomed the chance of your escape, because I believed you
to be a reformed and repentant man; instead of that, you
are now engaged in a diabolical scheme to defraud the
relatives of your victim of their inheritance; but your
co-conspirator, Marks, has overreached himself and you.”
“ You lie, Ashton Dyke, you lie !” cries Marks ; “ this
bluster is well-timed, but ineffective. You think to cover
the stains of your own guilt by blackening your partner.”
Dyke turns to Marks.
“ Your turn will come too, Moses Marks. The devil
first destroyed, his arch-fiend will soon follow.”


“ You’re right there, Mr. Dyke. Marks must be made
to see that he cannot attempt to lick the fryingpan without
risk of smudging his face—smudging his face, Mr. Marks.”
“ Ye’re playin’ a desperate game,” cries the murderer
at bay, making a last show of fight, “ but we ain’t euchred
yet. Yer neck shall stretch for this or I’m very far
mistaken. It’s two to one yet, an Marks here can swear
to yer threatenin’ to do for North.”
“ Yes, that I can, and hearing you quarrel on the day of
the murder. You’ve run your neck into the rope, I’ll swear.”
“ Yes,” exclaims Wigg, holding up the documents Marks
has signed, “we know what you can swear on occasion,
but it won’t help you; we’ve still other cards to play.”
“ Then trump ! an’ be damned to ye ! I defy ye all,”
yells Stevens.
“ Glad of it; makes a change,” remarks Wigg, opening
the door and admitting Constable O’Brien.
“ It’s no use, Woods,” says Dyke, as O’Brien enters;
“ your game is up. Your villainy cannot help you now.
You have too long been able to escape the penalty of your
crime to perpetrate other wrongs. You have not only
stained your soul with murder, the most dastardly, but
you have degraded innocent women by bigamy.
“ It’s false.”
“ No, ’tis true,” replies Wigg, quickly; “ your wife,
Kate Woods, is here to prove it, and all your cruelties to
her and her son —to her and her son.’
The murderer, thus completely driven to earth, realises
the impossibility of escape. Visions of the gallows float
before his eyes. With a yell of defiance, he cries—
“ Foiled on every side. Damnation, I’ll escape them
yet!” and drawing from his pocket a small bottle, he
swallows the contents before the others are aware of his
intention.


“Ah! what have you done?” cries Dyke, seeing his
action.
O’Brien has also seen what occurred. He replies to
Dyke’s question —
“ Be the powers ! he’s swallowed somethin’ !”
“ Now, bloodhounds! I’m beyond yer power!” and the
desperate man rushes across the room and falls into a
chair.
Marks takes advantage of the confusion to try and get
from the room unobserved. Before he can reach the door
it is opened, and James North and Alice entering, intercept
him.
Alice recognises him at once, and exclaims —
“Ah! Moses Marks, I told you we should meet again ;
now the balance has recoiled in my favor.”
“Ah ! what would you do ?” he asks.
“ Leave him to me, Mrs. North ; I have enough for him
to answer already —forgery and conspiracy, Mr. Marks —
forgery and conspiracy.”
“ You’ve no proof !”
“Aye ! the proof is here,” and Wigg points to the docu-
ments on his table. “ Look to Woods,” he cries; seeing
that the murderer and suicide has fallen from his chair to
the floor.
“ He has deprived the law of its just victim, Mrs. North.
A suicide’s grave is a fit ending for a murderer’s life—for a
murderer’s life.”
“Ah! ’tis better so,” observes James North, in a tone of
thankfulness ; “his family then is saved the disgrace.”
Dyke and North raise the dying man from the floor.
They cannot aid him now; the drug has done its work.
Hiding the light from his eyes and burying his face, he
cries—
“Oh ! the pain ! —this pain is awful! Ugh !he is


there !” and he starts forward. “ They are after me—see !
see ! Oh! the pain ! the pain !” and he falls back into the
arms of Dyke. A stiffening of the limbs, a contraction of
the lips, a fading of the eyes, and they know that the
earthly struggles of this guilty soul are ended.
Dyke is the first to speak.
“He is beyond all earthly vengeance now. May God
forgive him!”
Marks now feels that he has to be dealt with; but
there is no warrant for his arrest, otherwise O’Brien would
do more than shepherd him.
That worthy has never wasted any love upon the Jew.
He remarks to him —
“ Shure, now, I’ll wager ye haven’t the courage to follow
yer chum there, an’ save yer friends all bother. Begorra!
the only koind action he ever did in his loife was makin his
two wives widows at once.”
Dyke turns, and grasping Alice by the hand, says
“ Thus ends your weary task. Let me help you to a
brighter, fairer future, and link your life with Nora’s in
deep and lasting friendship. From the lesson this dark
tale should teach us, may we reap a rich harvest of virtue
and humility.”
“ Yes, Ashton ; but henceforth our lives lie far apart —
you to the dawning of your love, I to the quiet content-
ment of a life devoted to the afflicted s care. And through
the current of our lives may we remember that our
destinies are built upon the foundation our acts provide.


CHAPTER XIII.
“ There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”
— Hamlet.
There remains little else to tell.
The suicide of Stevens, otherwise Woods, was the
removal of a great difficulty from the way'of Dyke in his
relations with Nora.
While acting as one of the chief elements in the accusa-
tion against her stepfather, it was impossible for him to
continue the trusted intimacy he desired at her mother’s
house.
He hurried from Wigg’s office to St. Kilda, and saw
Nora alone.
To her he confided the story of what had occurred in the
lawyer’s office. Seated in the drawing room, these young
hearts renewed their plighted troth. As they spoke, the
beams of the waning moon shone clear and cool through
the half-lifted window blind, and the soft stillness of the
night seemed to them an omen of peace for their future
love.
Together they broke the dreadful tidings to Mrs. Stevens,
softening the blow by the disclosure that the husband she
has lost had never been lawfully hers.
She concluded that the discovery of his first wife was the
cause of her husband’s death, and Dyke and Nora merci-
fully left her nursing this error. Dyke determined to keep


from her, if possible, the secret of her husband’s worst
crime. With this object in view he hastened back to town
and saw Wigg before a warrant had been obtained for the
Jew’s arrest, that being the only channel through which
the truth could leak out.
To O’Brien the disappointment of not being the instru-
ment in bringing Marks to trial for his misdeeds was a
serious matter, but after explanations from Dyke and Wigg
he determined to bear it bravely. A subsequent visit to
the Jew convinced that estimable gentleman that so long
as he kept the facts of Woods’ history in his own breast,
he had a chance of escaping arrest for his contribution to
those dismal pages.
The united efforts of Dyke and Nora were insufficient to
shake Alice North’s firm-rooted resolve to continue her
life at the asylum. Despite repeated persuasions, she
continued her ministrations to the unfortunate mortals
placed there, and up to the present day is a tender and
loving, and loved and trusted nurse amongst those she has
learned to understand in the many-sided phases of their
affliction.
The money she became entitled to enabled her to edu-
cate Ned Woods and give him a good start in life. When
Ned reached man’s estate and became a prosperous colonist,
he never dreamed that the life of the kind lady who had
been his friend from boyhood was saddened and embittered
by the act of any relative of his. The sins of the father
were not visited upon the child. The victim of the father’s
crime was the means of raising the son to a position of
honor and worth. The seeds planted by the father in
degradation and misery were nurtured by the friend in love
and kindness, ripened in the sunshine of a good woman’s
helping hand, and gathered by the son as a rich harvest of
self-reliance and esteem.


Time's softening hand stole slowly over the lives of the
mourners. Dyke was eloquent in his appeals to Nora to
make his days of waiting brief, and after no unreasonable
time she consented to fix the date of his joy.
Quietly, as was becoming, the knot was tied in the
presence of two or three firm friends. James North was a
witness to this consummation of their happiness; and
excepting* the mother of the bride, no one knew or suspected
that he carried a heavy heart.
The happy pair began their honeymoon.
Two days later James North was borne from the shores of
Australia. As he sat on deck looking back towards the
receding land, a great bitterness came upon his soul.
Love was slain within him, and hope seemed dead.
The setting sun added a gloom to his feelings. Was
there any sunrise in the future for a desolate heart ?
The big steamer shot forth into the sea. Behind was
the sunset of peace and joy to the friends he had left;
before him the dark ocean of futurity.
With a heavy load upon his breast and a choking
sensation at his throat he left the deck, and sought in a
mingling with his fellow passengers to stem the dull
current of his thoughts.
THE END.


JAfp
bit uo




d. WILKIE & CO.
LITHOGRAPHERS,
lANUFACTURING & GENERAL STATIONERS,
PRINCES STREET, DUNEDIN.
