

COLONEL LIGHT,
The Founder of Adelaide.
UNVEILING OF MEMORIAL, 1906,
AND OF STATUE, 1906.
Re-printed from The Register and The Observer.
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfeli. Street.
PRICE, SIXPENCE






PHOTOGRAPH OF OILPAINTING OF COL. LIGHT, BY HIMSELF, PRESENTED
TO THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR FOR THE ART GALLERY BY
MR. G. G. MAYO, ON JUNE 21, 1905.
Photo, by Ernest Gall.


COLONEL LIGHT,
The Founder of Adelaide.
UNVEILING OF MEMORIAL, 1905.
Re-printed from The Register and The Observer.
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.




60L0NEL LIGHT’S MONUMENT.
[From The Register, Wednesday, June 21, 1905.]
The ceremony of unveiling the
granite monolith which will henceforth
mark the resting place of the great
surveyor who selected and laid out the
site for “the Queen City of the South”
is an event of national interest. The
statue of Col. Light which will soon
adorn one of the principal thorough-
fares of the metropolis, may appro-
priately be regarded as the citizens’
tribute to the “Father of Adelaide:”
but all patriotic South Australians
should feel that they have a proprie-
tary interest in the monumental
column which now towers above
the tomb of the heroic British sol-
dier whose name is indissolubly link-
ed with the early history of the State
he helped to establish. It would be
difficult to overestimate the value of
the work Col. Light performed during
his brief official career in South Aus-
tralia. The circumstances in which the
colonization of the province was begun
made the choice of a site for the future
capital a matter of the utmost import-
ance to every one connected with the
enterprise. In most new countries no-
madic stockbreeders or adventurous
goldseekers are the forerunners of agri-
cultural or urban settlement, and
towns spring up almost spontaneously
in the localities best adapted to meet
the requirements of particular districts.
In South Australia the conditions were
entirely different. The country, with
the exception of a few comparatively
limited areas along the coast, was an
unexplored wilderness; the quality of
the soil had never been tested; and it
was not known where permanent sup-
plies of fresh water could be obtained.
When Col. Light arrived there was a
considerable number of immigrants
waiting to secure the land, and he
knew that additional shiploads were on
the way. The isolation of the proposed
settlement, and the difficulty of obtain-
ing supplies from other parts of Aus-
tralia, made it necessary that the
people should be provided with good
grazing and agricultural land at the
earliest possible date; but it was
equally essential that the embryo city
should be situated in a locality which
would afford ample scope for future
expansion. An error of judgment with
respect to either of those qualities
would not only have meant ruin to
many settlers who were about to invest
all the money they possessed in land,
but the success of the colonization
scheme would also have been imperil-
led by an initial failure. Col. Light was
a man of exceptional ability, and his
military training and experience were
valuable adjuncts to profesional know-
ledge in his new sphere. “The reasons
that led me to fix Adelaide where it
is,” he wrote shortly before his death,
“I do not expect to be calmly judged
at present. ... I leave it to poste-
rity to, decide whether I am entitled to
praise or blame.” The tribunal to
which he appealed with so much con-
fidence has long since vindicated his
judgment, and the beautiful twin
towered and twin spired city four
square, with its encircling parks and
magnificent amphitheatre of fertile
hills, constitutes a monument to his ge-
nius more imposing than the massive
shrines which commemorate the van-
ished glory of ancient monarchs. “Si-
monumentum requiris, circumspice.”
He was not spared to witness the reali-
zation of his prophetic vision of a har-
bour at Port Adelaide filled with ships
from all parts of the world, but even
in the darkest hours of his life he
never had the slightest doubt regard-
ing the wisdom of the momentous
choice he had made in opposition to the
opinions of the Governor and many of


the most influential immigrants. “I
have been accustomed to make leeway
all my life,” he wrote with pathetic
resignation, in reply to a suggestion
that he might make money out of his
property at Thebarton. “Such a thing
as rounding the cape of good fortune
never enters my head. Of one thing,
however, I am certain—that is the situ-
ation of Adelaide.”
If 001. Light had not done anything
else to merit fame his splendid work
in South Australia would have ensur-
ed for him the gratitude and admira-
tion of the people in this State; but so
far from the selection of the site on
which Adelaide now stands being his
sole notable achievement, it was really
only an episode in an exceptionally
eventful career. It has been said that
the story of his early years reads like
a romance from the “Arabian Nights,”
and it would be difficult to name any
other man connected with the coloniza-
tion of Australia whose life was so full
of thrilling experiences, or who experi-
enced so many vicissitudes of fortune.
Col. Light was only 53 years of age
when he died, but for three decades
before he received the appointment
w'hich brought him to these shores he
had been engaged in hazardous enter-
prises in Portugal, Spain, Turkey, and
Egypt, and the record of his adventures
was a remarkable one even for a sol-
dier in those turbulent times. He serv-
ed with distinction as an officer of
Wellington’s army during the Peninsu-
lar campaign, and to some extent his
success as a member of the “Iron
Duke’s” staff was attributable to the
fact that he had sufficient foreign
blood in his veins to enable him to
pass for a native of the country in
which the last great struggle with
Napoleon was waged. His dark com-
plexion and the fluency with which he
spoke the Spanish language, coupled
with reckless courage, made him in-
valuable as an intelligence officer; and
he frequently obtained information of
vital importance to his commander by
means which would probably have pro-
ed fatal to any other member of the
staff. The peculiar features of his birth,
ancestry, and early training also ex-
plain to some extent the hypersensitive-
ness which caused him so much suffer-
ing in later fears His father, Oapt.
Light, was a British naval officer, who,
while cruising among the East Indian
Isles, became enamoured of the beau-
tiful daughter of King Quedah, the
sovereign of Malacca. The King per-
mitted the Princess to marry her sail-
or lover, and gave her as a dowry the
island of Penang, which -was subse-
quently named Prince of Wales’s Is-
land. It is an interesting fact that to
the end of his life 001. Light was in re-
ceipt of a small revenue from the terri-
tory of which his mother had been
Princess. Capt. Light gave his son a
liberal education, and in his youth he
became a frequent visitor at Carlton
House, with the resultthat he was well
known in tiie most exclusive circles of
the British aristocracy. He began his
military career in Spain as a lieuten-
ant, but so conspicuous was his brav-
ery, and so great were the services he
rendered in obtaining information re-
garding the movements of the enemy,
that he was promoted toi the rank of
Brigade-Major on his removal to the
field of operations before Waterloo,
and subsequentlyrojse to the position of
colonel. On one occasion, while he was
still a lieutenant, he rode to within 100
yards of a detachment of the French
Army in order to ascertain its strength,
and afterwards galloped along the
whole length of the enemy’s lines, pre-
tending to be mortally wounded, with
the result that the astonished French-
men allowed him to escape before they
realized that they had been deceived
by a daring ruse. The tidings he carried
to headquarters on that occasion were
of the utmost value ta the British at a
critical stage in the conflict.
Col. Light took part in more than 40
engagements against the French, in-
cluding some of the most sanguinary
battles on the Peninsula; and on more
than one occasion his exploits were fa-
vour, jly commented upon by the Duke
of Wellington. When he returned to
London after the war was over he occu-
pied an exceptionally favoured position
4


in society, and shortly afterwards
married a daugnterof the Duke of Rich-
mond. The union eventually ended in
a separation. In the meantime he had
embarked upon that “wandering life
which precluded all advantages;” and
he never again resided in England for
more than brief intervals between one
adventure and another. He accepted a
commission in the Spanish Army dur-
ing the Carlist agitation, and fought as
a colonel under Sir Robert Wilton.
Next we find him at Alexandria in the
service of the Pasha of Egypt, where
he made the acquaintance of ('apt.
Hmdmarsh, the first Governor of South
Australia. After Sir Charles Napier had
refused to accept that position, he sug-
gested that Col. Light should be chosen
for the office on the ground that “his
great accomplishments, and his char-
acter being so generally known, not
only for his distinguished services in
the Peninsula under the Duke of Well-
ington. but also in Spain at the time
Sir Robert Wilton was there, would
give an eclat to the appointment which
might be useful to the colony, and at
the same time secure an able man for
the work.” This advice coiuM not be
followed, because the post had already
been offered to Capt. Hindmarsh. Col.
Light Avas nominated for the position
of Surveyor-General, however, and the
Colonization Commissioners invested
him with absolute authority to “deter-
mine which of the several sites shall
be selected as that of the first town.”
The story of the four remaining years
of his life and the tragic ending of his
brilliant career while his mental facul-
ties were still at their zenith, need not
be recapitulated, as the facts are well
known to all students of early South
Australian history. On Wednesday the
citizens of Adelaide paid a worthy if
somewhat belated tribute to the mem-
ory of the heroic man who sacrificed
the goodwill of his friends and risked
his professional! reputation in the dis-
charge of a duty which he “never ex-
pected the present generation to ap-
prove;” and whose last days on earth
Were embittered by the acrimonious
hostility of prejudiced traducers. Apart
from his splendid service to South Aus-
tralia Col. Light Avas a man whom any
city in the world might be proud to
honour. No braA T er soldier ever wore a
British officer’s uniform, and with the
most undaunted courage he united high
ideals of honour. His life, Avhich at first
seemed so full of promise was darken-
ed by domestic estrangement, and end-
ed in tragedy; but the Avork he accom-
plished in the face of almost insuper-
able difficulties will be remembered so
long as the City of Adelaide shall ex-
ist. His dying AA r ish that he might be
regarded as the “founder of Adelaide”
has been abundantly fulfilled, and no
monument in the State should be pre-
served by future generations with
greater solicitude than the austere but
substantial column that has been un-
veiled over his graA r e,
5


THE FOUNOER ©F ADELAIDE.
[From The Register, June 21, 1905.]
UNVEILING THE NEW MEMORIAL,
History of the Movement. "
Colonel Light’s Life and Work,
The good work that Col. Light did in the
early history of South Australia is now uni-
versally acknowledged, and the judgment of
posterity, on which he relied, has been en-
tirely favourable to him. In his resolute ad-
herence to the choice of Adelaide as the capi-
tal, and his rejection of Port Lincoln and
Encounter Bay in the face of the
most powerful official opposition, he
is now justified by all. His almost
insurmountable difficulties—the hardships, the
incompetency of some of his subordinates,
and the want of transport—are now, through
the vista of time, seen and recognised. Of
his private character there has always been
only one estimate, and that one full of praise.
Col. Light played a very great,
though a silent, part in the foundation of a
new and a great country. His career was
adventurous, and his life brave; and, notwith-
standing all his difficulties and the tremen-
dous opposition he encountered, his part in
the foundation of the capital of South Aus-
tralia was the chief glory of the life of one
whose accomplishments and attainments re-
ceive so great a commendation from Sir
William Napier, and who, in every deed in his
life, was actuated by the highest and least
self-seeking motive. ... Be was one of
the many builders of Greater Britain.
This eulogy is at once a pertinent ex-
planation and a splendid defence of the
work of Col. Light, the founder of Ade-
laide—artist, musician, mechanist, seaman,
and soldier. Mr. A. Francis Steuart has
written ip his historically valuable little
book, “The Founders of Penang and Ade-
laide,” what thousands of grateful South
Australians would write to-day. It is not
necessary to recapitulate the story of the
first Surveyor-General’s magnificent enter-
prise; how, notwithstanding the persis-
tent buffeting of influential opposition and
discouraging difficulties, he chose the pre-
sent charming site of the infant metropolis;
how, regardless of a delicate physique, he
stuck tenaciously to a task which demand-
ed a giant’s strength; and how, in a long
light against the influence of viceregal
authority, his matchless genius triumphed
and gave to the central State one of the
best-arranged capitals in the world, a
moddl of convenience, order, and beauty.
‘‘Col. Light,” says one writer, “was just
that combination of the artist and the
utilitarian who comes once every fev> cen-
turies. Adelaide had the luck to get him.”
—The Gallant Soldier.—
Just now, when the attention of the citi-
zens is turned to the little plot of time-
honoured turf in Light square, it may be
interesting to give a biographical snapshot
of the man who made Adelaide a miniature
Paris. The year of Col. Light’s birth has
for many years been uncertain. It has
been variously stated as 1785 and 1788, and
the tablet on the old monument gives his
age as 51 years. The point, however, seems
now to have been definitely settled beyond
further question. A few months ago Mr.
A. Francis Steuart, of Edinburgh, who is
a great-grandnephew of Col. Light, wrote
to Mr. Robert Kyffin Thomas, a member of
the Col. Light Committee, as follows: —“Col.
- Light’s age is given on the proposed inscrip-
tion as 51. Now, 001. Light was older than
this at the time of his death. I have be-
fore me a letter from his father, Capt.
Francis Light, to his old school friend,
George Doughty, of Leiston, in Suffolk,
dated Penang, August 23, 1792, in
which he says, T shall send with Wall my
eldest son, William, to your friendly care;’
and in his next letter, of September 11,
he says, ‘He is now six years of age.’ He
was therefore born in 1786, and, dying in
1839, must have been 53, not 51.” This let-
ter was handed to the commit-
tee, who promptly had the correct
age placed upon the new memorial, and
the letter will wisely be preserved as ex-
plaining the reason for the difference be-
tween the two inscriptions. In his man-
hood young Light was described as being of
medium height, sallow complexioned, alert,
and handsome, with a clean-shaven face,
except for closely cut side whiskers, black
curly hair, brown eyes, straight nose, small
mouth, and shapely chin. He was a clever
6


THE MONUMENT ERECTED BY THE PIONEERS.
Lent by the Editor of the Public Service Review.




linguist, an artist of rare skill, and an ac-
complished musician and mechanist. After
having given a splendid account of him-
self in the navy, he began his gallant mili-
tary career as a lieutenant in the 4th Light
Dragoons, and was present at 43 engage-
ments in the Peninsula wars. Sir William
Napier has graphically described one of
his courageous performances.
-—Eds Heroism. —
During a crisis in the famous campaign
Lord Wellington desired to ascertain the
character and strength of a French rear-
guard, but all the exploring attempts were
checked by the enemy’s fire. Capt. Light
then made the trial. He rode forward as
if he would force his way through .the op-
posing skirmishers, but in the wood drop-
ped his reins and leaned back as if badly
wounded; his horse appeared to canter
wildly along the front of the enemy’s light
troops, and they, thinking him mortally
hurt, ceased their fire, and took no further
notice. He thus passed unobserved through
the wood to the other side of the hill,
where there were no skirmishers, and,
ascending to the open summit above, put
spurs to his horse, galloped along the
French main line, and counted their regi-
ments as he passed. His sudden appear-
ance, his blue undress, his daring confi-
dence, and his speed made the French
doubt if he was an enemy, and a few shots
only were discharged while he,,|dashing down,
the opposite declivity, broke from the rear
through the very skirmishers whose fire he
had at first essayed in front, and reaching
the spot where Wellington stood told him
that there were but five battalions on the
hill!
—More Adventures and Travels.—
With the restoration of peace, so the his-
torian tells us. Light returned to England,
and a few years later retired from the
army. Sir George Napier regarded this
“as a great pity, as he had highly dis-
cellent gentleman.” Still an in-
valid, he returned once more to Eng-
land. There he fell in love with and, after
a passionate courtship which he compared
to that of Lucinda and Cordenio, married
a noted beauty “and considerable heiress”
in the person of Miss Bennet. Delightful
indeed is the sentiment which pervades the
lines Col. Light addressed to his bride:—
You say you want not Fortune’s toys.
My angel Mary, nor do I.
Content with love, and you, our joys
Shall smoothly glide, nor hear one sigh.
With thee, dear girl, my lot’s complete;
I’m favoured yet in Fate’s despite.
Thus bless’d, each changing season meet
With grateful smiles of soft delight.
Yes, my sweet life, in some wild place
A cot we’ll find; the shady grove
Shall gently waver on with grace
In tasteful harmony of love.
And Mary then shall deck my bower
With roses fresh and heartsease sweet;
Nor lowering tempest nor the falling shower
Can e’er make dull our dear retreat.
—A Bit of History.—
001. Light with his charming wife spent
many luxurious years travelling in Turkey,
Egypt, and the Mediterranean, and in 1836,
negotiations having been completed “for
the foundation of the new colony of South
Australia,” he was chosen as Surveyor-
General. Sir Charles Napier, who had
been offered and had declined the post of
Governor of the new province, in a letter to
Mr. Robert Gouger, the first Colonial Sec-
retary, advised him “to try and get Col.
Light. Whether he would accept it or not I
cannot say; but his great accomplishments
and his character being so generally known,
not only for his distinguished services in
the Peninsula under the Duke of Welling-
ton, but also in Spain at the time Sir
Robert Wilson was there, would give an
eclat to the appointment which might be
useful to the colony, and at the same time
secure an able man for the work,” Capt.
Hindmarsh had in the meantime been
selected, and Cok Light was therefore
tinguished himself, and was a great favour- made Surveyor-General at the small salary
iLe with Lord Wellington, who had pro- * Q f £4OO, but the amount was subse-
moted him for his conduct.” Now at
leisure, .the ultimate founder of Adelaide'
was for the first time able to engage in!
expensive travel, and in his favourite artis-l
tic pursuits. He toured aesthetic. Conti-
nental centres, but, fired by a love for]
military adventure, he subsequently em-
barked as a colonel in the Spanish Consti-
tutional forces, under Gen. Sir Robert Wil-
son. Light was seriously wounded in the!
“sentimental and quixotic” campaign, but
his leader stamped him as “a
most distinguished officer and ex-
quently increased by £IOO. An
[ experienced seaman and navigator,
[he sailed the brig Rapid him-
self, and reached Kangaroo Island on Au-
gust 19, 1836. The preliminary explora-
Itory work and the “battle of the sites” are
Ewell known, and it is only ne-
[Scessary to say here that in December
[fche nrescaent Colonel made his final de-
Itermination. And how magnificent it was!
jThe illustrious founder of our queenly city,
[after a season of bitterness and deep-seated
enmity, declared with a suggestion of faith
1


in his own judgment that he left it to
posterity to decide whether he was entitled
to praise or blame. Posterity has decided.
The united voice of successive generations
has gone out to his revered memory in a
paean of praise!
—Beginning the Survey.—
The survey of the site was begun on
January 11, 1837, and owing to the arrival
of settlers the work was pushed forward
with a haste consistent with the difficulties
which ever and anon presented themselves.
Most of the journeys had to be performed
on foot, and there was a deplorable insuffi-
ciency of transport wagons. Add to this
the fact that frequent strikes occurred
among the labourers in consequence of the
“constant taunts and jeers of the new-
comers, who would not work,” and some
idea is conveyed of the misfortunes which
daily befel Col. Light. But even then the
picture of our imagination is not wholly
illustrative, for all this time he was harass-
ed by viceregal interference and tormented
by physical suffering. He confesses to “a
very evident change” in his health, which,
“with anxieties of mind,” wore him down
to such an extent that he was obliged to
neglect his duties for many days. There is a
tone of pathetic pessimism about the letter
which Col. Light wrote a year or so later
to the late Mr. William Jacob, who died at
Moorooroo only a few years ago: —“1 was
never sanguine on any point but one, and
that was the eligibility of the site for Ade-
laide. In that ! was always confident, but
in my own affairs never. I have been so
long accustomed to making leeway that
rounding any Gape of Good Fortune never
enters my head. My only wish is to die
easy and have something for the support of
those who have exerted themselves a little
towards my comfort.”
—Resignation and Illness. —
Eventually, on July 2, 1838, “harassed
and worried,” and seriously indisposed, Col.
Light tendered his resignation. “One may
know what it cost him to do so,” writes
Mr. Steuart in his book, “as he had com-
plete knowledge that he had, in spite of
vexatious interference and incalculable
difficulties from the inefficiency of some of
his underlings, done all be could in his
office, and had, moreover, supreme faith
in the future of the new colony which he
had helped to found. The unexpected
action of the Commissioners, which limit-
ed him to a certain distasteful method of
surveying”—(and which he refused to carry
out) —“left him, he thought, no honourable
alternative.” Freed from the restraint of
public business. Col. Light on July 3, 1838,
entered into partnership with Mr. Boyle
Travers Finniss, formerly assistant sur-
veyor, and subsequently Colonial Secretary
and first Premier of South Australia; Mr.
Henry Nixon and Mr. William Jacob, both
late assistant surveyors; arid Mr. Robert
G. Thomas, as the draftsman of the sur-
vey, under the style of “Light, Finniss, and
Company,” surveyors and land agents. The
firm undertook “to negotiate all business
connected with the selection of agency and
land iri the colony/’ and opened an office
in a wooden building in Stephens place.
Col. Light’s interest in the business extend-
ed only to September 1, 1839, when the
partnership was dissolved.
—The Closing Years. —
The original Surveyor-General was now a
great invalid. “Exposure to wet and cold,
hardship, arid fatigue during his duties
wore him out. The wounds received in
Spain continued with few intervals to
give him trouble, injustice from unrequited
labour preyed upon his mind, and his
malady developed into consumption. His
garden must have beeri a great solace to
him during his illness, since he was in 1838
The most successful gardener,’ mixing the
natural soil with the river mud, in the full
belief that the country was as fertile as any
part of Spain or Italy, and causing
his friends envy by producing Tar
better vegetables than any other Austra-
lian.’ His friends were many, and his com-
panionship was much sought after, for 'his
gentlemanly deportment and nobility of
character,’ and he was greatly 'respected
also on account of his widespread learning,
fascinating manners, and the memory of his
former adventurous career.’ Kindliness of
disposition was one of Col. Light’s most
promiment characteristics. An incident
commendably illustrative of this is report-
ed. When at Rapid Bay the exploring
party first came in contact with the Aus-
tralian aborigines, and the Surveyor-Gene-
ral, at once, “by his peculiar conciliatory
manner and mild treatment” managed to
attach closely to himself the tribe that in-
habited the spot. “We saw them there
carrying for him wood,” so the story runs,
“reeds for thatching, and otherwise render-
ing such assistance as they could, and we
saw them sleeping around his hut at night,
each party, white and black, having mutual
and deserved confidence.” At the begin-
ning of 1839, while Col. Light was prepar-
ing his journal for publication, he was al-
most heartbroken by the intimation of the
destruction by fire of the memorial of his
§


COLONEL LIGHT’S HOUSE AT THEE ALTON,
Now occupied by Mr. N. J. Hone.




life, which had been stored in the Survey
Office. The documents embraced a period
of 30 years, and dealt with his remarkable
experiences in Turkey, Egypt, and the
Mediterranean, and on Spanish battle-
ships. He deeply felt the loss of the histo-
ric papers, and his illness was greatly ac-
celerated by the personal distress it caused.
Col. Light lingered until October 5, 1839,
when, “in the presence of his good friend
Mr. B. T. Finniss and his wife,” he passed
away at Thebarton House, the residence
which he had built on his own allotment,
section No. 1, and which he had named af-
ter his early Suffolk home. “His dying
wish, and one much dwelt on in his last
illness, was that he should be regarded as
the founder of Adelaide, and he directed a
plate of engraved copper, indicating this
to be placed in his coffin.”
—A Worthy Tribute.—
A splendid tribute to the professional
skill and zeal of the late Surveyor-General
was embraced in a leading article in the
four-columned black-bordered issue of The
South Australian Register, October 12,
1839. “We should ill-discharge our duty,”
it says in a fine eulogy, “if we hesitated
to repeat here our humble testimony to his
high professional ability or to his worth
as a man. . . . Even in the hottest
times of political dissension our esteem for
the amiable character of Col. Light and
our respect for his great and varied talents
were not exceeded by those entertained by
his warmest admiiers. It is thus that we
can conscientiously join our fellow-colonists
in paying a tribute of respect to the
memory of the gallant officer, and assist
by every means in our power to perpetuate
his memory.”
—The Funeral.—
The same copy of the historic newspaper
contains an account of Col. Light’s fune-
ral, and since circumstances invest the par-
ticulars with pathetic interest they are
given in extensor —“When the melan-
choly fact that the colonel was no more
became known dt was determined that all
public honours which it was in the power
of the colonists to give should be bestowed
on his memory. His Excellency the Go-
vernor readily entered into these views,
and a special meeting of the Legislative
Council was held on Monday to take into
consideration how the Government would
best bear testimony of their respect for one
who had so ardently and energetically
exerted himself to promote the welfare of
the colony. The result of their delibera-
tions was the issuing of notices requesting
that the different shops should be closed
during the funeral procession and cere-
mony, and that all the Government officers
should attend the funeral. It was also
resolved that the Government should de-
vote a certain sum from the public funds
towards defraying the cost of a manument
to be erected over his grave. On Thurs-
day, the day appointed for the
funeral, a little before 12
o’clock, the hearse containing the
body, accompanied by the friends of the
deceased, proceeded from Thebarton to-
wards Adelaide. From the time the pro-
cession left Thebarton till its arrival at Tri-
nity Church minute guns were fired bv a
party stationed at Hindmarsh, and the co-
lours at Government House were hoisted
half-mast. At the old native location the
funeral was joined by His Excellency the
Governor and all the Government officers,
and by the largest body of colonists ever
congregated within this province. Four
hundred and twenty-three gentlemen, all in
deep mourning, formed the procession, and
proceeded in the following order:—
The undertaker.
The Colonial Chaplain and other clergymen.
Mr. Nicholson. . Lieut. Mundy.
Capt. Lichfield, Mr. McPherson.
Capt. O’Halloran. O Capt. Berkeley.
Capt. Field W Dr. Woodforde.
Mr. W. Jacob. Mr. B. T. Finniss.
H. Nixon. J. H. Fisher.
E. Stephens. j. Brown.
D. McLaren. J. Morphett.
T. Gilbert. _ 0. Mann.
Dr. Wright. S. Stephens.
Mr. G. O. Ormsby. Capt. Duff.
TL G. Thomas. Capt. Walker.
The servants of the Colonel’s household.
The different Government departments.
Government Architect. Colonial Surgeon.
Colonial Storekeeper. Protector of Aborigines.
Emigration Agent. Inspector of Hospitals.
Superintendent of Police Postmaster-General.
Collector of Customs. Colonial Treasurer.
Bench of Magistrates.
Sheriff.
Assistant Commissioner. Advocate-General.
The Judge.
The Governor. The private secretary.
The colonists two and two.
—An Impressive Service. —
“In this order they proceeded to the
church, and the body was placed on
a raised platform, the “Dead March”
in “Saul” being played by Mr.
Platts (the organist) during these
arrangements. Part of the funeral service
was then read by the Rev. C. B. Howard,
after which the procession reformed and
proceeded slowly towards the grave in the
centre of the square which bears the name
of the deceased, and in which spot it was
his particular desire to be interred. When
the body arrived at the grave the appro-
9


priate service was read over it by Mr.
Howard, and the remains of the gallant
colonel were then consigned to the earth in
the presence of the largest assemblage of
persons ever seen in Adelaide, all of whom
seemed anxious to show the respect they
entertained for the memory of one whom
they had so sincerely respected and ad-
mired. In compliance with the wishes of
the Government no business was transact-
ed during the day at any of the Govern-
ment offices nor at the banks. The shops
were all closed during the ceremony, and
most of them continued shut during the
day.”
—The First Monument.—
On the same day that the report of the
death and funeral appeared The South
Australian Register printed this advertise-
ment:—“Monument to the memory of the
late Col. Light.—A meeting of the friends
of the late Col. Light will be held at
Messrs. Flaxman & Rowland’s. Rundle
street, on Monday evening next, at 5
o’clock precisely, for the purpose of talcing
into consideration the best means to be
adopted towards erecting a lasting monu-
ment to the worth and services of that
great and distinguished man, and a full
meeting of those friendly to this object is
requested. Adelaide, October 11. 1839.”
The meeting was duly held, with Mr. John
Morphett in the chair. According to a
report in The South Australian Register
of October 19 it was unanimously resolved:
—“1. That a monument worthy the emi-
nent character and services of the late Col.
Light be erected over his remains in Light
square. 2. That for the purpose of carry-
ing out the last resolution a committee be
forthwith appointed to receive the sub-
scriptions of the colonists towards defray-
ing the necessary expenses and generally
to undertake the prosecution of the work.
3. That the committee do consist of the
following gentlemen, with power to add to
their number, and to form a sub
and district committee;—Mr. John Allan,
Mr. John Brown, Capt.. Berkeley, Mr. W.
R. Cooke, Capt. Duff, Mr. J. H. Fisher,
Mr. James Fisher, Mr. W. Ferguson,
jun., Capt. Field, Capt. Fell, Mr. B.
T. Finniss, Mr. Thomas , Gilbert, ■ Mr.
Robert Gouger, Mr. George Hall, Mr
John Hill, Mr. J. B. Hack, the Rev.
C. B. Howard, Mr. William Jacob, Mr.
John Morphett, Mr. David • McLaren,
Mr. Henry Mildred, Mr. Charles Mann,
Mr. Archibald Maddougall, Mr. , Henry
Nixon, Mr. John Newman. Mr. George
Ormsby. Mr. T. S. O’Halloran, Mr. W. J.
Pullen, Mr. Edward Rowlands, Capt. Sturt,
Mr. Edward Stephens, Mr. Samuel Smart,
Woodforde;, Dr. Edward Wright, Capt.
Walker, and Mr. Henry Watts. 4. That
subscription lists be left at the banks and
newspaper offices, and that a deputation
from the committee be requested to wait
upon His Excellency the Governor. 3.
That Mr. Edward Stephens be requested to
act as treasurer to the committee. 6.
That Mr. Henry Nixon be requested to
act as secretary.”
—List of Subscribers.—
The following advertisement is reprinted
from The (South Australian Register of De-
cember 7, 1839:
MONUMENT TO THE MEMORY OP THE LATE
COLONEL LIGHT.
Adelaide, December 6. 1839.
rPIHK Treasurer has the pleasure to announce the
1 following subscriptions:—
£ s. d.
John Morphett 21 0 0
Thomas Gilbert .. .. 10 10 0
David McLaren 10 10 0
Edward Rowlands 10 10 0
Charles Flaxman 10 10 0
Capt. Alfred Fell 550
Capt. Berkeley ............ 550
John Allan g g o
W. R. Cooke 5 g p
Capt. Walker 10 10 0
G. O. Ormsby .. .... ...... 5 5 0
R. Ferguson g g p
H. Mildred .... .... 5 5 0
Edward Stephens .. .. 15 15 p
John Newman .. .. .. .. 5 5 p
Henry Watts .............. 220
A. Macdougall .. .. .... 5 5 p
John Brown 10 10 0
Rev. C. B. Howard 1 p p
Henry Nixon .. .. .. .. 10 10 0
G. F. Angas, London 10 10 0
William Jacob 10 10 0
John Jacob 5 5 p
Capt. J. F. Duff 10 10 0
Thomas Freeman .... .. ~ .. .. 5 g p
E. O. Gwynne 5 50
G. G. Crouch .. .. .. .. ...... 1 \ p
Robert Thomas & Co. .. . 5 5 p
Robert George Thomas 5 5 p
Wm. Kyffln Thomas 2 2 0
B. T. Finniss 10 10 0
J. H. Gleeson 5 5 p
E. B. Gleeson g g p
H. Willoughby 220
R. F. Newland .. .. 1 x 0
N. Hailes' .'. ...... .. .. .. .. 2 2 0.
S. Goldsack 3 3 0
C. S. Benny .... -.. .... ...... 2 2 0
H. W. Rollason .. 22 0
C. W. Stuart 5 5 0
John Stuckey 5 g p
H. M. BoSwarva lip
W. H. Gray .......... ...... g g o'
H. Johnson .. .. .. .. ;. .. g 5 p
Capt; O’Halloran .. .. .... .. .. 55 p
J., Bailey, Colonial Botanist ...... 1 p p
J., Bailey, Colonial Botanist ...... 1 p p
G. S. Kingston .. . o 9 n
O. b. Kingston ..... .. 2 2 0
Wm. G. Field 10 p o
Wm. G. Field 10 p n
W. H. Neale " 5 5 0
Samuel Smart 3 0 0
10


THE OLD MONUMENT ERECTED ON THE SPOT WHERE COLONEL
LIGHT WAS BURIED IN LIGHT SQUARE, PHOTOGRAPHED
IMMEDIATELY BEFORE ITS DEMOLITION,
Photo by W. S. Smith.




tV. J. Pullen
R. Bristow ..
W. Tully .. .
E. Burgess ..
G. A. Hall .
J. M. Skipper
J. B. Shepherd'uon ..
Hack, Watson, & Go.
W. Pearce
.T. T. Seown
C. Calton
J. Lonsdale
S. Oobbin ~
John Reid (Para)
Joseph Bell ~ ..
Dr. Woodforde
W. C. Cox ..
Alfred Hardy ..
J. & S. Bennett
Charles Flaxman, jun.
John Edwards .. ..
Charles Platts
Bentham & Nonmus
F. H. Buralem, Survey Office
William Smillie
Malcolm & McDonald
John Chapman
George Griffin
T. M. Hastings, Survey Office
Rev. T. Q. Stow
Thomas Welbourn ..
Wainwright & Bock
Joseph Lazarus .. ..
Thomas Fawcett
James Chittleborough
J. Bichman. solicitor
C. B. Rodwell ..
Thomas Taylor, solicitor
Hon. Robert Gouger ..
Oapt. Lipson, R.N.
John Wheland ..
Charles Elphinstone
W. Williams, Victoria Hotel
Edwatrd Catchlove & Sons ..
Samuel Payne
C. Dinham
Dr. Nash .
John Barclay
Henry A. O’Hea
James Weston ..
John Richardson
J. Chuck
James Osborn
V. & E. Solomon
Peter Cook .. ..
John Oannan. Survey Department
Ralph Drummond
Thomas Maslin ..
George Hance ..
Frederick Horswill
Jeseph Keanes ..
Charles Hopkins
Dr. Wright .. .
William Phillips
Thomas Hornsby
William J. Forrester
East & Breese
James Goodear
Joshua Fisher
Charles Mann .
J. Ellis .. ..
Lieut. Frome. R.E.
5 0 0 Subscriptions will be received by the Treasurer,
110 at the Banking Offices, at the Newspaper Offices,
1 1 0 and by the Members of the Committee. As it
10 0 is highly desirable that operations should be
2 2 0 commenced as early as possible, those friends of
110 the late Colonel Light who are friendly to the
110 objects contemplated, will oblige the Committee
5 5 0 by coming forward with their assistance as early
110 as possible.
110 —The Memorial Erected. —
2 2 0 Although the foundation stone was laid
0 10 6 on February 18, 1843, the erection of the
55 0 monument which has now been replaced by
;j o 0 a more imposing memorial, was delayed
5 5 0 owing to insufficiency of funds. Tbe work
2 2 0 was discontinued and was not resumed until
5 5 0 1844. The cost is given in the old news-
papers as £460. The memorial took the
010 6 shape of a pentagonal Gothic cross, and
0 10 6 was executed to the design of Sir George
110 Kingston. Mr. Francis! Dutton, in his Ins*
110 toric book, described the structure as “ele-
-110 gant and elaborate;” and, while the plans
j 1 Q of the designer were not strictly adhered
1 i 0 to, the general principle was observed. The
X i o cross originally was 45 ft. high and was
110 divided into three compartments. The
110 lower one comprised five tablets, several
-* 2 0 0 f which were reserved for the inscription
010 c and arms of the deceased; and the second
oxo e compartment consisted of five deep tre-
-010 6 foiled headed niches, surmounted by
2 2 0 crocheted gables, and, like the first, was
1 1 0 supported and further ornamented by but-
tresses, with their appropriate pinnacles
220 a,| d finials. The third compartment was
110 pierced on each face with open trefoiled
5 5 0 arches, ornamented with tracery. The
5 5 0 spire rose from alight open battlement, and
110 was ornamented with crockets. The top
0 10 0 terminated with a cross, and the scheme
010 6 was such that the pentagonal figure was
110 preserved throughout. In 1876 the City
110 Corporation had the following inscription
3 3 0 placed on the momnument: —
0 l° 6 Erected by
H The Pioneers of South Australia
j x 0 In memory of
5 5 0 COLONEL WILLIAM LIGHT,
110 First (Surveyor-General,
lid and by whom
110 The site of Adelaide Was fixed on the
* * 29th of December, 1836.
o io e Died sth of October. 1839,
5 5 0 aged 51 years.
2 2 0 Buried under this monument lOtli October,
110 1839.
100 The structure, notwithstanding frequent
0 10 9 repairs, crumbled into ruins, after having
y stood in Light square for so many
010 6 years as a silent symbol of
5 5 0 a people’s loving gratitude and admiration.
5 5 0 Owing to the historic personal atmosphere
5 5 0 with which the memorial was surrounded—


and the most magnificent modern memorial
can never create that —and for its wealth
of meaning to later generations, it was
felt that no effort should he spared which
would ensure appreciable preservation. AH
kinds of restorative schemes were carried
out, but to no substantial purpose. Dirti-
ness and increasing disfigurement robbed
the monument of any pretension to fitting
dignity, and in its chaotic crumbling condi-
tion it became a prominent eyesore. Public
opinion—that characteristically slow, uncer-
tain, spasmodic element of public life —was
aroused to the necessity for some nobler
recognition of 001. Light’s memory, and the
monolith which will be unveiled to-day is
the long-postponed but gratifying culmina-
tion. The original marble tablet, however,
has been renovated and mounted in accord-
ance with the resolution of the present Col.
Light Memorial Committee. It was re-
cently offered to and accepted by the Pub-
lic Library Board. The tablet will be ex-
hibited in the vestibule of the building, and
historic associations will always cluster
around it. The letters have been gilded,
and the marble cleansed and fixed to a
large piece of slate, the inscription makes
an attractive memento.
—Picturesque Civic Ceremony.—
It is interesting to note here that the
revered memory of Adelaide illustrious
founder is honoured at the first meeting
of the Adelaide City Council in the new
municipal year-—a solemn, picturesque little
cereuuony to which ex-City Fathers are
always invited. The “Memory of Col.
Light” is pledged in colonial wine drawn
from a massive silver bowl, the gift of “his
friend and admirer,” Lieut.-Col. George
Palmer, of Nazing Park, one of the colo-
nization commissioners, with the concur-
rence. so Mr. Steuart says in his book—-
of Messrs. Jacob Montefiore, Raikes, Cur-
rie, M.P., and Alexander Laing Elder. The
same friend also presented the Adelaide
Corporation, through Sir Samuel Daven-
port, with a portarait of Col. Light in uni-
form, copied in 1876 from a full-length pic-
ture in the possession of his grand-
nephew, the Rev. William Lewis Mason,
British Chaplain at Compiegne, and this
still hangs in the Adelaide Council Cham-
ber.
■ —The New Monument. —
However dissimilar in object the majori-
ty of public movements are alike in at least
one respect. They are characterized by sea-
sons of impetuous activity and idle indif-
ference. Renewed interest alternates with
unsympathetic lassitude. And so it has
been with the project for the second Col.
Light memorial! The monument which
has now been erected represents, with the
statue which it is proposed to place in
King William street, the result of the ef-
forts of successive committees for over 13
years. The preliminary meeting to consi-
der the desirability of erecting a suitable
monument in memory of Col. Light was
held in the reception room of the Adelaide
Town Hall on January 15, 1892, and the
Mayor (Mr. F. W. Bullock) presided over
a representative gathering. The Chair-
man explained that the City Council had
already voted £SOO towards the object, and
the Hon. Sir Henry Ayers had donated
£SO. The following motion was carried at
the instance of Sir Henry Ayers
and Cr. Robertson: “This meet-
ing considers it desirable to
perpetuate the memory of the late Col.
Light by the erection of some substantial
monument in the city for that purpose.”
The meeting thereupon resolved itself in-
to a committee. The Mayor abd Sir
Henry Ayers were appointed joint trea-
surers of the fund, and the Town Clerk
secretary. It was decided to make an ap-
peal to the public for funds, and Sir John
Bray, who had at that time been appointed
Agent-General, consented to obtain sub-
scriptions in London. On the motion of
Aid. Hagedoib, seconded by Mr. Joseph
Fisher, it was resolved to erect the memo-
rial over the grave in Light square. Early
in the history of the proposal the value of
preserving the old monument was recog-
nised, for Mr. R. Jagoe, through Mr.
Fisher. suggested that any new structure
should embrace the old one, and he
submitted a sketch with that principle as
the basis. The machinery of the move-
mebt was thus set in motion, and the pro-
ject was launched with considerable promise.
Ambitious artists promptly forwarded
schemes, prominent citizens—among them
Mr. J. H. Angas-, 50 guineas; the directors
of the South Australian Company, a simi-
lar amount; Mr, W. H. Gray, £3O; and His
Excellency the Governor (Earl of Kintoro),
£25 —sent donations, and the committee
began to make enquiries in the other colo-
nies and in Europe concerning the cost of
statues. After the lapse of a few months
sculptors in Europe and Italy and Mel-
bourne and Sydney offered to chisel
marble representations of the de-
ceased colonel at figures extending
from hundreds ,to several thousands.
The idea was taken up with great
vigour, and it had the impetus of an en-
12


thusiasm which seemed to spell immediate
success. But ——!
—Active Work.—
The committee met periodically, trans-
acted formal business, and reported com-
mendable progress. The members began
to take into consideration trie character of
the memorial, and various schemes were
urged, including one for an expenditure of
about £2,000 on a statue at least eight feet
high. It was then ascertained that the
height of the existing structure was 43 ft.
from the ground to the apex, and the
feeling was general that the new monu-
ment should be one of imposing propor-
tions. In March Dr. Mayo intimated to the
committee that conditionally on the Go-
vernment contributing £l,OOO to the move-
ment, he would present to the National Gal-
lery an historic picture of Col. Light, and
that offer seemed to have Indirectly pro-
moted the first of a long series of finan-
cial interviews with various Cabinets. At
the end of April the subscriptions to the
fund, including the promised vote of the
Corporation bad amounted to £BOO. As
the outcome of correspondence the Chief
Secretary (Sir John Downer) advised
that a subsidy of pound for
pound would be recommended to
Parliament. The line, however, was
subsequently eliminated from the financial
proposals. A deputation therefore waited
on Sir John Downer subsequently, and
urged the Government to place £l,OOO on
the Estimates, promising that the money
would not be asked for, at all events for
12 mouths. The Mayor pointed out that
the committee collected £B5O, and as it
was expected that the memorial
would require an expenditure of £2,000
the assurance of the required
contribution from the Government purse
would enable them to commence work al-
most immediately. Mr. William Jacob, who
was a fellow-passenger in the Rapid,
and was engaged with him in surveys,
made a characteristic speech. He said,
considering the benefits which were accru-
ing to the colony from Col. Light’s la-
bours, £l,OOO was a small sum. “Does the
Chief Secretary know the salary Col. Light
leceived?” enquired the speaker. “I can-
not say I do,” answered Sir John. “Only
£500,” retorted Mr. Jacobs, “and he had
the misfortune to have his documents and
almost everything else valuable destroyed
by fire.” In explanation. Sir John Downer
remarked that the item recommending the
subsidy of £l,OOO was omitted from the Es-
timates for the reason that as the money
was not immediately required it was not
desire to overload them. In August of
the following year the line was restored.
—Concerning Designs and a Subsidy.—
It is instructive at this stage to recapitu-
late the conditions upon which the origi-
nal designs were invited. The site of the
monument was definitely fixed in Light
square, and it was resolved to have a
bronze statue of the Surveyor-General on
a 20-ft. pedestal, showing him in the uni-
form of the Royal Engineers, and to make
that the distinct feature. The cost was
not to exceed £2,000. The committee re-
ceived 23 designs and three models, and
they were referred to Mr. E. J. Woods the
architect, and the Director of the School of
Design, Mr. H. P. Gill. They reported that
the best design was one sent in by Mr.
Percival Ball, but it was not for competi-
tion. Two others were good, but it was
considered doubtful if the work these em-
braced could be carried out for the stipu-
lated amount. The committee met again
on July 20, 1897, when it was an-
nounced by the treasurers that £4OO
had been collected, irrespective of the
£5OO voted by the Adelaide Corporation.
With a resolution asking the City Fathers
to make their promise good, the members
went into recess until June of
1900. Mr. A. W. Ware, C.M.G,, had in
the interim stepped into the Mayoral chair,
and consequently became Chairman. Two
months later the Chief Secretary, then the
Hon. J. G. Jenkins, was again approached
concerning the Government subsidy, and
the overtures were renewed some weeks
later. The chief spokesmen on this occa-
sion were the members of the Adelaide
City Council, and Mr. Jenkins agreed, like
his predecessors, to give the long-pro-
mised subsidy. There was a lull again in the
movement until the end of February last
year, when the Government reiterated its
intention to fulfil its time-worn obligation.
With the recuscitation of the project, how-
ever, there came a change in policy on the
part of the committee.
—Funds Transferred.—
At the meeting of subscribers on Feb-
ruary 25 the following motion was moved
by Mr. F. W. Bullock, and was seconded
by Mr. Joseph Fisher, joint treasurers:—
“That the funds in the hands of the hono-
rary treasurers of the uol. Light Monu-
ment Fund be handed over to the Corpora-
tion on the understanding that the fund
be kept separate and distinct for carrying
out the work the subscribers have in
view.” On the suggestion of Mr. R. Kyfiin
Thomas the following addition was made
to the motion, and in the amended form
13




it was carried unanimously:—“And that
two nominees from the subscribers and
two from the Government shall be selected
to co-operate with the committee.” Even-
tually the committee was constituted as
follows; —The Mayor (Mr Cohen, M.P.,
Chairman), Aid. Downs, Johnson, and
Wells, Crs. Baker, Bonython, Myers, Ful-
fill Sellar, M.P., and Hines (Adelaide City
Council); Sir Edwin Smitfi and Mr. R.
K. Thomas (nominated by the sub-
scribers) ; and Messrs. C. E. Owen Smyth,
1.5.0., and L. H. Shell, 1.f5.0. (nominated
by the Government); with Mr. H. P. Gill,
A.R.C.A. At a later meeting the Mayor,
Aid. Yardon and Wells, Sir Edwin Smith,
Messrs. Thomas, Smyth, and Shell, were
appointed as a subcommittee to examine
the original designs which had been sent in
and to determine the question of the site
and report. These gentlemen began their
work with businesslike vigour, and little
time was lost in galvanizing a disappoint-
ingly slow movement. The Government
and the Corporation were promptly request-
ed to hand over their respective contribu-
tions of £I,OOO and £SOO, and an effort
was made to substantially increase the ag-
gregate of the fund. The subcommittee
busied themselves with the selection of the
site, and it having been decided to pur-
chase both a statue and memorial in April,
they made the following recommendations;
—“That the site for a statue to Col. Light
be at the northern end of Victoria square,
in the centre of the roadway of King Wil-
liam street, and that the City Council be
asked for the necessary permission; that a
monument be erected to mark the resting
place of Col. Light in Light square.” The
Corporation agreed to the first proposal
“provided the statue is of bronze, if of
marble the statue to be placed in the
nerth-eastern corner of the north-western
section of the sauare.”
—Completing the Movement. —
The draft conditions drawn up provided
that the bronze statue should represent
Col. Light in his uniform, and that it
should be 9 ft. high, with the pedestal in
proportion, the estimated cost not to exceed
£1,500. The memorial for erection over the
grave w'as to be designed with a view to
commemorating the first Surveyor-Gene-
ral’s work, and the maximum expendi-
ture was fixed at £5OO. As the subcom-
mittee had recommended that none of the
original designs should be accepted in con-
nection with the later proposals, new
sketches were invited. The competition
attracted 22 artists —13 for the statue and
9 for the memorial —and the drawings
were referred to Messrs. Thomas, Smyth,
and Gill, and Cr. Bonython. At the in-
stance of the selection committee, it was
decided to cable to Mr. Birnie Rhind, of
Edinburgh, requesting him to forward a
model of his design for the statue, and
Mr. H. L. Jackman’s design for the monu-
ment was accepted. In December Mr.
Rhind’s sketch was accepted, Mr. Gill re-
marking “that every possible opportunity
had been given to Australian artists in the
matter, but they had not risen to the
occasion. Consequently the committee had
had to look elsewhere; and the work sub-
mitted by Mr. Rhind was the most suita-
ble and satisfactory, abd one which would
do honour to the man whose memory it
was intended to perpetuate.” The formal
consent of the Corporation to the removal
of the old memorial was obtained, and to-
day’s ceremony represents the successful
completion of the first and the most his-
torically important stage of the work.
The members of the committee have ap-
plied themselves assiduously to their du-
ties, and they have earned the gratitude
of their fellow-citizens for having been ac-
tively instrumental in securing a noble me-
morial to the genius of South Australia’s
first Surveyor-General.
-—An Imposing Memorial.—
The new monument is an imposing one,
and will make a conspicuous adornment to
Light square. Its features are appropriate-
ly commemorative of the professional
capacity of Col. Light, and the design is a
testimony to the excellent judgment of the
artist and the judicious selection of the
committee. The structure is 35 ft. high,
and the workmanship throughout is most
thorough. The architect was Mr. H. L.
Jackman; contractor, Mr. J, J. Leahy; and
the subcontractors, Messrs. A. W. Dobbie
and Co., who did the casting for the
bronze work; Mr. F. Burmeister, the engrav-
ing; while to Mr. F. H. Herring was en-
trusted the important task of polishing the
monolith. The memorial is constructed of
South Australian granite. The pedestal
is of Monarto grey granite, and from the
base of the column to the top, of Murray
Bridge red granite. The shaft, which is
beautifully polished, is crowned by a bur-
nished capstan-shaped block, and upon it
rests the bronze tripod and the theodolite,
which is suspended in a horizontal position.
The instrument stands about 6 ft. high,
and makes a prominent symbol of
survey science. The huge monolith weigh-
ed six tons in its quarried state, and when
hoisted after the polishing process it turn-
ed the scales at nearly four tons. The
14


THE NEW MOUNMENT ERECTED TO THE MEMORY OF COLONEL LIGHT
IN THE PLAGE OF THE OLD ONE.
Photo by W. S. Smith.


capping stone of the base underneath the
shaft, however, was even heavier. On
the front and back of the pedestal on rais
ed panels are the two bronze plates. One
bears the inscription;—
IN MEMORY
OF
COLONEL WILLIAM LIGHT,
FIRST SURVEYOR-GENERAL,
BY WHOM
THE SITE OF ADELAIDE WAS FIXED
ON DECEMBER 29, 1836.
DIED OCTOBER 5, 1839.
AGED 53 YEARS.
BURIED HERE OCTOBER 10. 1839.
The second inscription is as follows:
ERECTED BY THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH AUS-
TRALIA, ASSISTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OP
THE STATE AND THE CORPORATION OP THE
CITY OP ADELAIDE, IN PLACE OF THE MONU-
MENT RAISED BY THE PIONEERS IN 1844
UNVEILED BY THE MAYOR OF ADELAIDE
(■THEODORE BRUCE), 21st JUNE, 1905.
It is proposed to put a kerbing around
the monument and to plant a ribbon of
grass up to the level.
—An Interesting Letter.—
The Town Clerk (Mr. T. G. Ellery)
has received the following letter:—
197 Pirie street, Adelaide, Jure 14, 1905.
T. G. Ellery, Esq., Secretary Col. Light Monu-
ment Committee.
Sir—l beg to state I was in the State in 1845. I
arrived with my parents and brothers in the good
ship Asia, on July 16, 1839, at Holdfast Bay. I
am now in my seventy-first year, and was nearing
five years old at the time of Col. Light’s funeral.
We were living in a one-roomed hut, rental 10j
per week, only a short distance from the square;
and, like hoys, even at that age, must of necessity
poke our noses into anything being done in the
open, especially a grave being dug in the town—
as Adelaide was then called. Col. Light died on
Saturday, October 5, 1839, and was buried on the
following Thursday, October 10. It was the first
funeral I had witnessed. It was the first public
funeral in the colony, and a half-holiday was pro-
claimed, and, as was said at the time, people came
from the hush —our rising suburbs of nowadays
were then designated “in the hush” —so that a fair
little crowd eventually had gathered around the
grave to witness the funeral of the good man,
in rank to our then Governor, Capt. John H' .
marsh. My father got within a dozen yards from
the grave, and held me up in his arms for a while
to have a fair view. The long dark coffin—the first
I had seen—placed alongside the open, deep grave.
The minister in his white surplice—Mr. Howard, of
Trinity Church—reading the solemn burial service
at the head of the grave, the lowering of the
coffin into the grave, the scarlet uniforms of the
firing party from the 99th Regiment—one com-
pany of which from the 99th Regiment, then quar-
tered at Hobart, were our first soldiers here —and
the last farewell three volleys fired over the grave
completed the ceremony. All the events of that
day, though I was young at the time, connected
with the great funeral—as it was called—are
indelibly engraved in my memory. For some time
the grave was enclosed with only four panels—post
arid rail. Then after that the green iron railing
with the little monument, after then the larger
one of recent years. —Yours faithfully, J. N. Perry.
P.S.—I have written these few lines from my jour-
nal rather in a hurry.
—Old Colonists Invited.—
A feature of this morning'-s ceremony
will be the presence of over 100 old colo-
nists, who will attend at the invitation of
the committee. The privilege has been
limited to those who were in the State in
or prior to 1845, and the following personal
applications have been made;—
Mrs. E. Norman, sen.—Arrived 1837 in
Navarino.
P. T. Love—Arrived 1840.
Mrs. Holloway—Arrived 1840.
Thomas Neill—Arrived 1839.
Mrs. T. Neill —Arrived 1240.
Arthur Hardy—Arrived February 12,
1839.
Mrs. E. Watts —Arrived 1840 in Bright-
man.
B. H. S. Brown—Arrived 1841
James Bofe —Arrived 1840.
J. Drayton—Arrived 1840.
A. M. Wooldridge—Born South Austra-
lia 1841.
Thos. Cragen—Born South Australia
1839.
John Battersby—Arrived 1838 in Prince
George.
James Beames —Arrived 1840 in Fair-
lie.
Mrs. M. A. Turner —Arrived 1837 in
John Fenwick.
George Smith —Arrived 1836 in Buffalo.
John Breaker —Arrived 1836 in Buffalo.
H. H. Breaker—Arrived 1836 in Buffalo.
D. Breaker —Arrived 1836 in Buffalo.
W, Barnes —Arrived 1845 in Templer.
B. Chaston —Arrived 1838.
Mrs. Fanny E. Abbott —Arrived 1840
in Bayaliston.
Miss M. A. Lockyer—Arrived 1840 in
Bayaliston.
Mary Provis—Born South Australia 1844.
J. B. Cocking—Arrived 1840 in Java.
William Edwards, sen.—Arrived 1840 in
Java.
D, Pedler —Attended Col. Light’s funeral,
1830.
Mrs. W. Carman —Arrived 1839.
W. Turner —Arrived 1842 in Cadet An-
Bohert Tomkins—Arrived 1838 in Eden.
Mrs. B. Tidemaun —Arrived 1839 in Por-
ter.
M
ter.
Mr. P. Clement—Arrived 1839 in Porter.
M. Cain—Arrived 1839 in Porter.
Thomas Day—Arrived 1840.
B. Townsend, sen. —Arrived 1839.
15


P. Francis—Arrived 1840 in Java.
Mrs. James Massey—Arrived 1840 in
H. Lush.—Arrived 1840 in Berman.
Brightman.
Michael McTnerney—Arrived 1840 in Ber-
Mrs. Josiah Edwards—Born South Aus-
man.
tralia 1842.
John Jacob—Arrived 1838. ,
Mrs, Mary Darroch—In South Australia
William Lata —Arrived 1839 in John.
1844.
Amelia Latta —Arrived 1839 in Platenia.
William H. Holmes —Arrived 1839.
Mrs. D. D. Webb—Arrived 1839.
W. Shuttleworth—Arrived 1840.
W. L. Beare —Arrived 1836.
Mrs. George Cooper—Bom South Austra-
H. E. Morris —Arrived 1843 in Canton.
lia 1842.
Hurtle Fisher —Arrived 1843 in Canton.
R. Forrester —Arrived 1840 in Dauntless,
C. B. Fisher—Arrived 1843 in Canton.
William Caust —Arrived 1840.
Ann Close—Arrived 1843 in Canton.
R. Parkin —Arrived 1839.
W. H. Edwards —Arrived 1843.
Mrs. H. Fry—Arrived 1845,
D. Pratt —Arrived 1839. t
Mrs. O. Smith —Arrived 1845,
William Whitmore —Arrived 1839.
John Stephen—Arrived 1343 in Francis
G. Holden —Arrived 1838.
Spaight.
S. T. Holden —Arrived 1838.
Stephen Bastian —Arrived 1840 in Java.
Fanny Hupfeld—Arrived 1840 in John.
Clement Pratt — Arrived 1839 in
Thomas O’Sullivan —Arrived 1840 in
D'Au verne.
Mary Dugdale.
George Perry—Arrived 1839 in Asia.
Mass E. Hancock —Arrived 1840 in the
J. N. Perry—Arrived 1839 in Asia.
Lysander.
Mrs. Emma Brown —Arrived 1837.
Mrs. J- Hill —Arrived 1840 in the Lysan-
G. W. Hill—Arrived 1839.
der.
J. Jeffries —Arrived 1840.
Robert Cobbledick —In South Australia
Matthew Linn —Arrived 1839 in Asia.
1845.
J. T. Ford —Arrived 1839 in Asia.
Mrs. Edith Chaplin—In South Australia
Peter Williams —Arrived 1840 in Jane.
1841.
Mrs. Bust; —Arrived 1838 in Trust.
Mrs. G. Mugg—Born South Australia
Mrs. Margaret Aughey—Arrived 1838 in
1838.
Trust.
J. S. H. Yeates —Arrived 1839.
J. J. Drydan—Born S.A. 1841.
William D. Bottomley—In South Austra-
Mrs. Elliott—Arrived 1839 in Bucking-
lia dn 1840.
hamshire.
Alice Bottomley—In South Australia
John Dibell—Arrived 1841.
1843.
Mrs. O. Baffin—Arrived 1839 in Sir
Charles Penfold —Arrived 1840 iv. -Tohn.
Charles Forbes.
Mrs. Maria Hall—Arrived 183tJ In Prince
A. S. Neill—Arrived 1839.
Regent.
Mr. and Mrs. J. Fox Mellor —Born S.A.
P. F. Laffer —Arrived 1840 in Morley.
1841.
Mrs. P. F. Laffer —In South Australia
Miss Donaldson—Born S.A. 1841.
1845.
Henry Shearing—Arrived 1839 in Buck-
I). H. H. Wear —Arrived 1839 in Prince
inghamshire.
Regent.
Watts Newland —Arrived 1839.
George Smith—Arrived 1845.
Mr. and Mrs. G. Penley—Arrived 1838
Mrs. Sarah E. Green—Arrived 1845.
and 1839.
Mrs. Caroline Stace —Arrived 1845.
John Chillilehorough—Arrived 1836.
Mrs. H. Mantegani—Arrived 1836 in Af-
Richard Perry—Arrived 1842.
ricaine.
Mrs. Martha Kingsley—Arrived 1839.,
William Edwards, jun.—Arrived 1840 in
J. S. Anthony, born S.A., 1841.
Java,
Mrs, G. N. Birks—Born 1845.




I
1
#
jr
THE
Photo by W. S. Smith.
CEREMONY :
THE LIEUTENANT - GOVERNOR, SIR
?. j,
WAY, BART..
, SPEAKING.


PROCEEDINGS HT THE UNVEILING.
A Successful Ceremony.
[From The Register, June 22, 1905 ]
PROGRAMME OF PROCEEDINGS.
The Police Band (by permission of the Commis-
sioner of Police) played selections from 10.30 till
11 a.m.
The Hon, the Premier, members of the Ministry,
the Right Worshipful the Mayor, and members of
the City Council and the 001. light Committee
arrived at 10.50.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor arrived
at 11 a.m'., and was met. by the Hon. the Premier
and the Right Worshipful the Mayor.
The Band played the national anthem.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor spoke,
and asked the Right Worshipful the Mayor to
unveil the memorial and accept it on behalf of
the citizens of Adelaide.
The Right Worshipful the Mayor replied, and
performed the ceremony of unveiling.
“Song of Australia,” Police Band.
The Hon. the Premier, on behalf of the citi-
zens, thanked His Excellency the Lieutenant-
Governor for attending and the Mayor for per-
forming the ceremony, and thanked the com-
mittee for carrying out the work entrusted to
them.
“The national anthem.”
All roads led to Light square in the west
end of the city on Wednesday morning,
when the interesting ceremony of unveil-
ing the memorial to Col. Light was per-
formed. The weather was cold but sunny,
and one who 66 years before had attended
the burial of the great surveyor in the
same square said it was; just such a day
as that which was experienced on that
mournful occasion. Admirable arrange-
ments had been made for the ac-
commodation of those best entitled
to witness the proceedings. Pioneers
whose records began before 1845 were
provided with a special platform, which
was crowded with aged but hale men
and women whose names appeared in The
Register of Wednesday, together with a
full description of the memorial and
a history of the movement. Sub-
scribers and public men were pro-
vided with seats inside the harriers
which kept the general public within bounds,
and the result was that everybody had a
comfortable and convenient place. The offi-
cial entrance to the square was by Mor-
phett street, and from here to the monu-
ment a squad of 300 school children in
neat uniforms and armed with light car-
bines, formed a guard of honour. The whole
were in charge of Mjr. A. H. Neale, and
the schools represented were: —Norwood,
50, Messrs. A. Williams and B. J. Gates;
North Adelaide, 48, Capt. J. Donnell;
Hindmarsh, 27, Capt. J. Harry; Currie
Street, 28, Mr. B. L. Harfield; Parkside,
30, Mr. S. G. Sullivan; Unley, 40, Mr.
O. Charlton; Marryaiville, 32, Capt. F. F.
Whole ban; Grote Street, 45, Mjr. Neale;
Flinders Street, 20, Mr. R. T. Bernard.
In addition the Sturt Street and Goodwood
drum and fife bands, under Messrs. W. J,
Adey and C. Bronner respectively, made
their presence agreeable by playing lively
airs. Many of the people took their places
lonp; before the opening time, and listened,
with pleasure to the Police Band. The
members of the Ministxy and the munici-
pal party arrived at 10.50, and took their
places on a platform at the foot of the
monument. Those who were accorded this
privilege were:—The Mayor (Mr. T.
Bruce), the Premier (Hon. R. Butler), the
Chief Secretary (Hon. J. Warden), the
Attorney-General (Hon. J. R. Anderson),
Aid. Downs, Johnson, and Wells, Crs.
Baker. Bonython, Myers, Hines, Pullin,
and Sellar, Sir Edwin Smith, and Mr. R.
Kyllin Thomas (representing the subscri-
bers to the fund), Messrs. C. E. Owen
Smyth, 1.5.0. and L. H. Shell, 1.5.0. (re-
presenting the Government- on the com-
mittee), Mr. H. P. Gill (Director of the
School of Design), the Chief Staff Officer
(Lieut .-001. Reade), Mr. Joseph Fisher
(one of the original treasurers of the fund).
Air. G. G. Mayo, the Commissioner of
Police (Col. Madley). the Town Clerk (Mr.
T. G. Ellery), and Mr. H. L. Jackman
(architect of the monument).
Among many politicians present were
the Speaker of the House of Representa-
tives (Sir Frederick Holder), the President
of the Legislative Council (Sir Lancelot
Stirling), and Sir John Downer, M.L.C.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor,
17


who was accompanied by Lady Way, Miss
Blue, Miss Goyder, and Dr. Richards,
arrived at 11 o’clock, by which
time there was an immense assem-
blage in Light square. Throughout the
proceedings the people preserved perfect
order. The gusty wind proved exceedingly
troublesome to speakers with notes, but
the whole ceremony passed off with great
success. The climax was reached when the
covering fell away from the handsome 35-ft.
high monument so truly erected by the
contractor (Mr. J. J. Leahy). The Police
Band at this moment played the “Song of
Australia,” and hearty cheering followed.
—Lieutenant-Governor’s Address.—
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
said: —We are all grateful for the rain
during the past month, and I am sure we
are equally grateful for the sunshine this
morning. We are met to pay an instalment
of a debt which the citizens of Adelaide
and the people of South Australia general-
ly, owe to the memory of Col. Light, the
founder of the capital. We are continuing
this morning a tribute paid to him 60 years
ago, when all that was mortal of him was
laid in this square bearing, his name in the
grave under the monument presently to be
unveiled. Even then he was re-
cognised by the colonists as a great
public benefactor, and they had come
under the spell of his personal charm. So
his body was followed to the grave by a
procession of 461 gentlemen, and it was
laid in its final resting place with the tears
of the greatest assemblage which up till
that time had ever gathered in this State,
then less than three years old. Immediate-
ly after the funeral arrangements were
made for the erection of a monument. The
population of the whole colony at that time
was less than 10,000, and yet within one
short week nearly £250 was subscribed for
that purpose, and the amount was raised
to £641 in the course of a few months.
—The Old Monument.—
The foundation stone of the monument
was laid on February 18, 1843, by Sir James
Hurtle Fisher, who had been Resident
Commissioner of Grown Lands, and was af-
terwards the honoured first President of
the geislative Council. Mr. (afterwards Sir)
George Strickland Kingston designed and
superintended the erection of the monu-
ment as a labour of love for his old friend.
It was a Gothic cross, 45 ft. high, and in
my judgment it was Sir George’s architec-
tural masterpiece. When I came to the
colony early in 1853 the monument stood
there in a perfect state of preservation. If
I had had my will that monument would
have been reproduced line by line and
stone by stone. (Hear, hear.) It was a
memento of the friendship of the three
men—Col. Light, Sir James Fisher, and
Sir G. S. Kingston—-and it would have been
an ornament to any city in the world. But,
alas! sandstone even from South Austra-
lian quarries crumbles away, and so we
are not to have a replica of Sir G. S.
Kingston’s masterpiece, but a granite co-
lumn, standing four square to all the
winds that blow, which we hope will last
for centuries and millenniums to come.
(Applause.)
—Sixty-six Years Ago.—
A few persons are now present of the
ever-lessening number who attended Col.
Light’s funeral on October 10, 1839. We
are here to-day to recall memories of those
sturdy pioneers, than whom no nobler band
ever left the mother country to plant the
national flag, the free (institutions, and
British characteristics in distant lands. We
have present to-day Mr. Hudson Beare, a
son of the first assistant manager of the
South Australian Company. There is Mr.
H. T. Morris, so much respected by pas-
toralists and the whole community, who
was then a, handsome young man, and a
nephew of the first Governor of South
Australia. I am disappointed not to see
present Charles and Hurtle Fisher, who
would have been here had it been prac-
ticable. Mr. Charles Flisher marched by
his father’s side in that funeral procession,
and there is no man on this continent
who has done so much for the welfare and
progress of the pastoral interests as Mr,
Charles Fisher has done. It is a disap-
pointment to me also not to see Mrs, Mar-
ryat, the daughter of the first Colonial
Chaplain, who conducted the funeral cere-
mony. Fie was a man of piety and zeal,
and he has left to the clergy of all de-
nominations in this State an example of a
catholic spirit and of toleration for those
who differed from his views. I don’t think
my friend Mr. Joseph Fisher followed in
the procession. (Mr. Fisher—“l saw it.”)
If we have only a few of those sturdy pio-
neers present, at all events we have their
sons and daughters and grandchildren, who
are filling honourable positions, and are as
great a credit to the State as their fore-
fathers were in their time. (Applause.)
—Historic Figures.—
May I say one word or two about the
man himself? To my mind Col. Light was
the most picturesque and fascinating figure
among the early settlers. I don’t forget
18


*5gT *
- •;■
THE CEREMONY: THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR READING
DR. MAYO’S LETTER.
THE STAND ON THE RIGHT IS OCCUPIED BY
PIONEERS.
Photo by W. S. Smith.




Sir John Hindmarsh, whose record for bra-
very has not been surpassed in the glorious
history of the British Navy. (Hear,
hear.) 1 don’4 forget Sir James Fisher,
with his white hair and his red cheeks,
with his blue coat and gilt buttons and
his buff waistcoat, with his graciousness of
manner and kindliness of disposition, char-
acteristics that made 4he band strike up
when he entered any assemblage, “A fine old
English gentleman, all of the olden time.”
(Hear, hear.) Nor do I forget Sir John
Morphett, even in his old age well dressed,
an upright figure with all .the alertness of
youth. He was a 4 the head of everything
in those old days. His was the first name
at the head of the subscription list, and it
stood for .the sum of 20 guineas. (Ap-
plause.) To my mind he was a typical
English country gentleman. I am sure
that every one felt a few weeks ago when
Lady Morphett passed away that one of
the strongest links with the old times in
South Australia was finally severed.
—A Biographical Snapshot.—
But now let me turn to Col. Light. Every
schoolboy in that guard of honour which
has come here to our great pleasure on
this occasion knows something of Col.
Light’s adventurous career. They know
he had royal Malay blood in his veins. His
father was Capt. Francis Light, who was
one of those adventurous seagoing English-
men who have done so much for the ex-
pansion of the Empire in all parts of the
world. He was founder—and first Go-
vernor was the title
given to him—of the colony of Pe-
nang. He married a daughter of
the native Sultan or Rajah, and
she was the mother of Col. Light. Col,
Light was brought up as a young gentle-
man of fortune. First he was midship-
man, and served several years in the navy.
Then he entered the British Army, and
served all through the Peninsular war with
so much courage and distinction as to win
rapid promotion and the admiration and
friendship of the Duke of Wellington.
Next he drew his sword on the side of the
constitutional party in the war in Spain.
Although he had passed through 43 en-
gagements without a scratch, he received a
severe wound whilst he was fighting in
Spain. When peace came he mar-
ried, and travelled with his wife
in his yacht in the basin of the
Mediterranean, and finally he took service
under Mehemet, the belligerent Pasha of
Egypt, by whom he was dispatched to
England to procure officers for his navy
from boatswain to admiral. The portrait of
Col. Light is embedded permanently in
English history in that great mili-
tary classic Napier’s “Peninsular War.”
Gen. Napier says“ Ca pt. Light distin-
guished himself by the variety of his at-
tainments —artist, musician, mechanist, sea-
man, and soldier.” In a word, we may say
now, he was the Admirable Crichton of the
first quarter of the nineteenth century. You
may see what he was as an artist
in three watercolours in the Na-
tional Gallery, which we owe to
the munificence—as in so l many other
things—and to the generosity of Sir Edwin
Smith. (Hear, hear.) You may see some-
thing of the quality of the artist in the
book which I hold in my hand. I refer
to his Sicilian Scenery engraved by the
first artists of the day. lam sorry to say
there is no copy of this book in South
Australia. I have borrowed the copy I
hold in my hand from the Public Library of
Victoria.
—The Topographical Instinct.—
In 1836 came the great opportunity of
Col. Light’s life. He told his old friend
William Jacob, on his death bed, that/ he
always had an ambition to be like his
father, one of the builders of the Empire.
Sir George Napier, when he declined the
Governorship of South Australia, suggested
the appointment of Col. Light, believing
that his long experience in the Iberian
Peninsula, Italy, and other parts of the
Mediterranean had qualified him for ser-
vice in laying the foundations of a prospe-
rous community in the sunny south. The
appointment, however, was filled, and Col.
Light accepted the position of Surveyor-
General in the new settlement. Like other
great travellers and explorers, such as
John McDouall Stuart and Charles Sturt,
Light possessed what I may call the
topographical instinct. The exercise of that
instinct had saved a division of the British
Army from capture or annihilation in
Spain, and the exercise of that instinct
preserved the infant community of South
Australia from being strangled almost at
its birth.
—Selecting the Site.—
I shall not delay to tell the story of the
selection of the site of Adelaide. There
were the Governor (Capt. Hindmarsh) and
the Resident Commissioner (Mr. Fisher),
but the responsibility of fixing the site
rested entirely with Col. Light. When his
choice was announced you all know what
wrangling, discussion, and ill-feeling hap-
pened. Governor Hindmarsh had steered
H.M.S. Buffalo to Port Lincoln, and he
19


would not have been the seaman he was
if he had not admired that haven, in which
could rest all the navies of the world.
Some of the colonists wished the capital to
be fixed at Encounter Bay, and my first
predecessor. Sir John Jeffcott, the Judge,
was drowned in endeavouring to show that
the passage into the Murray was navigable.
And, although the land order holders and
everybody else were clamouring for land
grants, there was a strong party that
urged for further delay, so that
Col. Light might travel up and
down the coast to see if he could
find a better site for the capital. The
majority of the colonists thought, however,
and we know that Col. light was right
in the decision he came to. (.Cheers.) The
choice he made secured the welfare of the
settlement. South Australia was settled
on the Wakefield system, and was to be
a self-supporting colony. It was the first
scientific attempt that was made to settle
people on the land in a distant dependency.
To the success of that enterprise fertile
land and plenty of it was an indispensable
condition, but if Port Lincoln or Encounter
Bay bed been chosen as the capital there
would have been no South Australia in the
year of grace 1905. The early settlers
would have drifted away to Melbourne,
Sydney, or Hobart Town, or back to Eng-
land in disgust, and the site of this great
city and its suburbs would to-day in all
probability be only an outlying pastoral
district of Victoria or Hew South Wales.
—A Charming Situation.—
How, as to tiie site. After 70 years no bet-
ter site can be found. (Hear, hear.) A
mile or two either way would have spoilt
the whole thing. It is situated on one of
the finest plains in the world, under the
shelter of the beautiful hills which have
moderated the climate. They have secured
us from drought, and have furnished us
with a beautiful water supply and a glo-
rious picture. Hour by hour and day by
day throughout the year the hills make a
beautiful landscape that eludes the skill of
the best possible landscape painter. Eight
miles from the city there is the Port. Those
of you who have read Col. Light’s journal
will remember how he looked at those two
old ships—the Rapid, a brig of 164 tons,
and the Tam o’ Shanter, a barque or ship
of 360 tons—as being the first prows that
ploughed the water between the mangroves,
and which he hoped would be the channel
of the commerce of a great commercial
community. If he could look at Port Ade-
laide to-day what would his feelings be?
He would see week after week ships of
7,000 and 8,000 tons burden coming safely
into the refuge of that harbour trading re-
gularly with us throughout the year. If
he could rise from that grave he
would be more astonished even than
we should be to-day upon look-
ing at this fair city, with its Govern-
ment and legislative halls, with its muni-
cipal institutions, with its cathedrals and
churches, and its universities and School
of Mines, and secondary and public
schools, with its warehouses and manufac-
tories and shops and happy homes.
(Applause.) He would be delight-
ed to see more than entered into
his imagination. Where in the wide world
will you find a city better plan-
ned than Adelaide? (Applause.) Adelaide
with its broad streets and with its
quincunx of squares and its park
lands 2,300 acres in extent —(Hear,
hear)—a grand inheritance of the
citizens for all time. The choice and
laying out of the site of the City of Ade-
laide was an effort of genius. Col. Light
knew right well the value of his great
achievements. As he lay on his dying bed
he asked that "The founder of the City
of Adelaide” should be engraved on a
sheet of copper and placed in his coffin
with him, and you all remember the noble
passage embraced in the preface of his
diary, which ought to be inscribed on the
statue to be erected. (Applause)
—The Verdict of Posterity.—
These are the words, and I reiterate that
they ought to be inscribed on the statue
which the committee propose to erect in
King William street close to Victoria
square:—"The reasons that led me to fix
Adelaide where it is I do not expect to be
generally understood or calmly judged at
present. My enemies, however, by disput-
ing their validity in every particular have
done me the good service of fixing the
whole of the responsibility upon me. lam
perfectly willing to bear it; and I leave it
to posterity, and not to them, to decide
whether I am entitled to praise or blame.”
(Applause.) The verdict of posterity has
been given. Not only we who are fortu-
nate enough to live in or around the City
of Adelaide, not only those who will suc-
ceed to our places when we are gone, but
generations to come, when our poor names
are forgotten, will bear in remembrance
the honoured name of Col. Light, the foun-
der of the City of Adelaide—-(applause)—
the preserver, nay it is not too strong a
word to use, the saviour of the State of
South Australia. (Applause.)
20




I
THE MAYOR OF ADELAIDE (MR. THEODORE BRUOE) UNVEILING THE
MONUMENT,
Photo by W. S. Smith,


—The Duty of the Citizens. —
This city and this State are Col. Light’s
best and most glorious monument. It is
due to ourselves that the place Avhere lies
his honoured dust should be preserved
from desecration, and should be
marked out as a sacred spot to
the citizens of Adelaide for all
time. Mr. Mayor, it is your privilege
that this monument is completed during
your tenure of office, and you have had the
privilege of having your name inscribed
upon this granite column. They have Lord
Mayors in Melbourne and Sydney, but no-
thing can take away from Adelaide the
honour of being the first city in Australia
to have municipal institutions. Sir James
Fisher was the first Mayor of Adelaide.
He beat Sir Edwin Smith’s and Mr.
Cohen’s records, for he held that office
five times. He laid the first stone of the
first monument to Col. Light, and it is
fitting that his successor should unveil the
second. Mr. Mayor, on behalf of the Go-
vernment of South Australia and on be-
half of the subscribers I ask you to-day
to do us the honour of unveiling this monu-
ment, and to accept it as a sacred trust to
preserve the memory of Col. Light. (Loud
aipplause.)
—The Mayor’s Speech,—
The Mayor said it afforded him much
pleasure to be in the position of Mayor of
Adelaide Avhen such an important epoch
took place as the unveiling in the city of
a mmorial to the late Col. Light. His Ex-
cellency had delivered an oration which
ought to go down to all time for its splen-
did historical value, (Applause.) It Avas
an oration such as the citizens of Adelaide
had seldom listened to by any one whom
they honoured and respected as they did
the Lieutenant-Governor. He did not think
it was necessary for him to add anything
connected with the rise of the City of
Adelaide, nor was it necessary for him to
say anything in regard 4o the virtue and ca-
pacity of the man whom they were honour-
ing that day. He thought that the noble
band of pioneers who had followed the fu-
neral bier of the late Col. Light from Trinity
Church, on North terrace, to the hallowed
ground on Avhich they were standing must
from their heavenly home be looking down
with eyes of admiration upon that all too
tardy recognition of the great man whom
they had learnt to honour and respect even
in those early days. (Hear, hear.) They
had Avith them that day men who had as-
sisted to build the Empire. Some people
might ask how it was that South Australia
had made such progress, and they might
wonder at the class of men they had in
4he State. The answer to those questions
was represented in the pioneers on his left
—worthy scions of noble houses. They were
men who had come to the State in the
days gone by, and he questioned much if
since the period when the May Flower sail-
ed from old England with the Pilgrim
Fathers a belter 1 class of emigrants had de-
parted from the land of their birth than
those who left for South Australia in 1836
and for some years afterwards. (Applause.)
It was to those gallant men that the State
owed its reputation, and it was to those
pioneers that they orved the government
and the honour and pleasure of having men
like Sir Samuel Way, the late Judges
Boothby and Cooper, and others, wdro had
graced the judicial benches, and honestly
and faithfully upheld the traditions of the
profession they had so much adorned.
He would now perform the unveiling cere-
mony, which he did Avith all honour and
rermrence, trusting that the Almighty in
His mercy might alloAV the monument to
stand in everlasting memory of the noble
man who hallowed the ground there while
peacefully sleeping beneath ic. (Cheers.)
—Monument Unveiled. —
The Mayor then removed the coverings
from the monolith, and the people stood
with uncovered beads, while the Police
Band played “The Song of Australia.”
Three resounding cheers having been given,
the Mayor sincerely thanked those pre-
sent, on behalf of the citizens, for having
assisted at the ceremony. They had among
them tAvo of the originators of the move-
ment which had culminated in the erec-
tion of the magnificent monument just un-
A-eiled. He referred to Mr. Joseph Fisher
and Mr. F. W. Bullock, whom he was
pleased to see in the best of health and
spirits. (Cheers.)
\ Picture of Col. Light by Himself. —
His Excellency said that an appropriate
ceremony Avould uoav be performed. It was
a source of regret that South Australia
possessed no Avorthy portrait of Col. Light.
There was one in the City Council chamber
painted, he should think, by an Oriental ar-
tist, and was probably more of a caricature
than a portrait. Lady Way Avas wearing a
miniature of Col. Light and his Avife, Avhich.
by and-by would find a place in the Public
Library. (Hear, hear.) But early in the
movement for the erection of this monu-
ment—it had spread over 15 years—a let-
ter was addressed to the committee by a
colonist who was very dear to the hearts
21


of all who knew him. He meant the late
Dr. Mayo. (Applause.) The letter was as
follows: —“Gentlemen —I propose to pre-
sent the picture or portrait of Col. Light
to the National Gallery upon the condition
that the Government give £I,OOO to the
work you have in hand—namely, that of
erecting a suitable monument as a memo-
rial of a man so distinguished as a soldier,
so capable as an engineer and artist, and
occupying as he did so unique a position as
the first Surveyor-General of so important
a portion of Her Majesty’s dominions as
is the Province of South Australia. Geo.
Mayo.” Dr. Mayo had crystallized into
those few lines all that had been said at
much greater length that morning. He
was glad to inform the people that Dr.
Mayo’s son was present that morning, and
with the hearty acquiescence of Dr. Mayo’s
daughters, Mr. G. G. Mayo would hand
to him the portrait of Col. Light, executed
by the colonel himself, to be placed in the
National Gallery on North terrace as a per-
petual memorial of Dr. Mayo’s generosity,
and of the memory of his friend Col. Light.
(Cheers.)
Mr. G. G. Mayo then handed the paint-
ing to His Excellency, who thanked him
for having so generously carried out his
father’s wishes. Those competent to speak
say that it is a splendid portrait of the
great surveyor.
—Votes of Thanks. —
The Premier moved a vote of thanks to
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
and the members of the committee who
had worked so arduously in the direction
of erecting the noble monument to South
Australia’s most distinguished public ser-
vant. They had listened to the oration by
Sir Samuel Way setting out the work and
character of Col. Light, and they could' en-
dorse every word he had said. He did not
think anybody in the early days of the
State had rendered such splendid services
as Col. Light, who had given to South Aus-
tralia the most charming capital in the
Commonwealth. As head of the Go-
vernment he was gratified at
the completion of the work. The
Government subsidy of £l,OOO had been
promised in 1892. (Mr. Fisher —“Ami we
could never get it.”) The movement had
lapsed for several years; but in 1903 the
Hon. J. G. Jenkins, then Premier of the
State, had carried out the obligation of
previous Governments by making the long-
promised donation. The sum of £5OO had
been contributed by the City Corporation,
and a similar amount had been obtained
by private subscriptions, which brought the
aggregate up to £2,000. They had now a
monument which would do credit to South
Australia, and would represent the affec-
tionate remembrance of grateful citizens for
generations to come. (Applause.)
Sir Samuel Way, in acknowledging the
compliment paid to him, said he looked
forward to the day when they should not
only have a monument to the memory of
McDouall Stuart and Col. Light,but also one
to Capt. Flinders, the great navigator who
had discovered the coast of South Austra-
lia, and Capt. Sturt, the great explorer,
who had revealed the country’s resources.
He would also like to see fitting memorials
to perpetuate the memory of George Fife
Angas. the founder of South Australia,
his illustrious son, John Howard
Angas, John Pidley, the man who had
invented the reaping machine and given
it to the world. (Mr. Fisher—“ And Col.
Torrens.”) Yes, as Mr. Fisher had inter-
jected, a monument to Col. Torrens, and to
his son. Sir Bichard Torrens. (An Old
Colonist—“ And to Eyre, the explorer.”)
Yes; he hoped some day to see a monu-
ment erected to the memory of that great
man. The little plan he bad formulated,
however, would require some time to com-
plete. He desired to thank the guard of
honour which had come there that day to
receive him. They centred their hopes for
the future of South Australia in the young
boys, and he was ouite sure that they
would not be disappointed.
The Mayor, on behalf of the City Cor-
poration and the executive committee of
the Col. Light monument, thanked the
Premier for his kind words. He wished
to intimate that the Minister of Education
bad promised that it would not be neces-
sary for the members of the guard of hon-
our to return to school that day, and that
they could enjoy the pleasure of a half-
holiday.
—Col. Light’s Flagstaff.—
A little while ago it was stated that a
flagstaff erected by Col. Light, which was
originally a spar of the brig Bapid, the
vessel that brought the renowned surveyor
to the new province, was still in existence.
Small pieces of this historic relic survive,
but the main portion seems to have passed
away. Mr. N. J. Hone, who for the past
25 years has occupied the former residence
of Col. Light, at Southwark, remembers it
perfectly. It stood in the grounds until
about 15 years ago, when a strong gale
brought it level with the earth. The lower
portion of the pole was about 8 in. in dia-
meter, and tapered towards the top. The
base upon which it was erected, apparently
22


of Australian wood, is still to be seen. Mr.
Hone intended .to keep the pole as a me-
mento, but unfortunately it disappeared
without his knowledge. Before that pieces
of it were turned into articles which will
be cherished by their fortunate possessors.
One of these was a “Chairman’s gavel,”
which was presented to Lady Holder by
the W.C.T.U. Another piece is preserved
in the museum of the South. Australian
Chamber of Manufactures.
—Gol. Light in Sicily.—
By the courtesy of His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor we have been able to
inspect the volume of Gol. Light’s sketches
to which he referred in his speech. The
title page has the inscription:—“‘Sicilian
scenery, from drawings by P. He Want,
Lie original sketches by Major Light.” It
was published by Rodwell & Miartin,
Hew Bond street, London, in 1823. There
are over 60 sketches etched on si eel, by
a number of different engravers. The
work is throughout of the most delicate
character, testifying to the ariistic ability
of Col. Light, and also of the artist and
engravers who prepared his sketches for
publication. The views include numerous
representations of the scenery of Sicily, of
the towns and buildings of the period, and
also of the ruins of the ancient temples
and other famous buildings for which the
island is noted. The very interesting des-
criptive matter is printed in both English
and French. The volume is the property
of the Public Library in Melbourne. It is
unfortunate that there is not a copy in the
South Australian Library.
—An Interesting Relic. —
Mr. A. C. Thomas has shown us a small
compass, remarkably well preserved and in
good order, which was used by Gol. Light
in the surveying of Adelaide. It was given
by the founder of the city to the late Mr.
R. G. Thomas, who came out in the Cygnet
and joined Col. Light’s staff in Adelaide.
The valuable relic is now in the possession
of Mrs. R. G. Thomas, of Mary street,
Unley.
THE OLD MEMORIAL : WHEN WAS IT ERECTED 1
[From The Register, June 28, 1905.]
In his speech at the unveiling of the
Light Memorial on June 21 His Excellency
the Lieutenant-Governor mentioned that
the foundation stone of’ the Pioneers'
Monument was laid on February 18, 1843.
One of the inscriptions of the new struc-
ture records the fact that it has been
erected “in place of the monument raised
by the pioneers in 1844.” Several enquiries
have been made by readers of the reports
in The Register for an explanation as to
an apparent discrepancy in these dates.
It appears that the funds raised were
not sufficient to carry out the work, and
that operations had in consequence to be
suspended. The South Australian Register
of September 27, 1843, and numerous other
issues of the same paper in the early part
of 1844, contained the following advertise-
ment: —
MONUMENT TO COL. LIGHT.
The committee appointed to carry out the in-
tention of the subscribers to Col. Light’s Monu-
ment regret that they have to appeal to their
brother-colonists for further funds to enable them
to complete their wishes.
When the subscriptions were first collected the
amount paid was not sufficient, in the opinion
of the committee, to justify them in adopting
any design that was suggested, the high prices
both of labour and materials rendering the execu-
tion of any suitable work out of the question.
The subscriptions were accordingly left in the
Bank of South Australia at interest.
The great reduction in the prices of all labour
and the increased facilities for procuring suitable
materials for the work induced the committee
about nine months ago to reconsider the subject,
and, alter much deliberation, they approved of a
design of G. S. Kingston, Esq., and accepted the
offer of his gratuitous services in preparing the
necessary drawings and superintending the build-
ing.
After public advertisement for tenders for the
work according to Mr. Kingston’s design the
committee accepted that of Mr. Lewis, which was
for a sum very slightly exceeding the limit of the
funds which they calculated they had at their
disposal.
The design and hire work as far as it is ex-
ecuted t(ha committee believe have given general
satisfaction. But the committee have to state
that in estimating their resources they included
£lOO voted by the Colonial, Council in 1838. Hav-
ing communicated with His Excellency the Gover-
nor on the subject before they ventured to accept
the tender, the committee did not fee] themselves
justified in applying for the payment of this Sura
until it was actually required, nor can they urge
it on the Colonial Government under the present
23


financial position of tlhe colony beyond a simple
statement of the facts. This they made to His
Excellency the Governor, and, in reply, they are
now informed that their application is referred
to the Colonial Office.
The committee have consequently been com-
pelled to suspend the work, but they confidently
rely upon the respect their brother-colonists feel
for Col. Light’s memory to enable them to com-
plete the building without waiting for the reply,
which under all the circumstances may be safely
anticipated.
The amount required will not exceed £lOO, and
of this sum they are happy to state part is
already promised.
Subscriptions will be received by E. Stephens,
Esq., treasurer,. at the Bank of South Australia.
This appeal seems to have been at any
rate partially successful, tor in The Ade-
laide Observer of May 4, 1844, we find the
following paragraph:—
Now that the contractor for Col. Light’s Monu-
ment is again at his post it is to be hoped that
this well-earned tribute of respect to departed
worth and eminence will not be Suffered to re-
main in its present unfinished and discreditable
state. We are not advocates for expensive monu-
mental erections anywhere, more especially in a
state of society like this, where money doeg not
require much artificial spreading; but the pro-
jected monument was so long in abeyance alto-
gether that it seems pitiful to let the structure
remain as it is without a final effort for its
completion.
A little over a month later —on June 12,
1844—The Register reprinted the following
paragraph from Tlie Southern Austra-
lian:—
Colonel Light’s Monument.—The public of Ade-
laide have at last become alive to the disgrace of
allowing the above monument to remain in its
present unfinished state. Arrangements are in
progress for having a grand concert in aid of the
fund, and every one who knows of it has agreed
heartily to eo-operate in so desirable a measure.
That part of the old theatre which is now oc-
cupied as the Resident Magistrate’s Court, with
its dress boxes and appurtenances, has freen
kindly lent for the occasion. Many gentlemen of
first-rate musical talent, both as vocal and in-
strumental performers, have promptly offered
their services, and it is proposed to have a fine
organ on the occasion. Altogether this pro-
mises to be as grand a festival as has been in
Adelaide for many a day, and we have no doubt
the pleasure of the concert will be heightened
to many by the consideration that, they are at
the samle time contributing to do honour to a
gallant, good, and honourable man, who served
his country in many a well-fought field, and who
spent his last years in the service of the colonists
as the able pioneer to their adopted land.
In The Adelaide Observer, July 13, 1844,
appears the following:—
We have great pleasure in being able to ahnourtce
that the committee have made such arrangements
with Mr. Lewis, the statuary, as will facilitate
the completion of Colonel Light’s monument in
about three months. It is to be hoped that the
public will not permit the committee to remain
exclusively liable for the considerable sum yet
required to finish this deserved tribute to the
much-lamented first Surveyor-General of this colony,
a tribute, too, which will become a lasting
architectural embellishment to the metropolis.
It will readily occur to all who* have considered
the matter that, in order to the protection of
the monument, it should be surrounded by, a
dwarf wall, or a substantial as well as ornamental
fence; and if this were made to enclose a space
reasonably ample flowering and ornamental
shrubs might be added with pleasing effect.
After its completion the monument seems
to have been left in an unprotected condi-
tion, as is shown by the following para-
graph from The Adelaide Observer of May
10, 1845:
A correspondent who addresses us on the subject
of the exposed condition of Col. Light’s monu-
ment, and who generously notifies a collection in
aid made by him, to the extent of £lO, will be
gratified to know that there is every probability
of the early completion of the desired enclo-
sure, of which an improved design has been fur-
nished. It is said that through His Excellency
the Governor the contribution of £lOO, promised
by Governor Gawler, has been sanctioned by the
Home Government, and that the work so long
delayed and so often interrupted, will at length
be finished in a manner worthy of those with
whom originated the design thus to perpetuate
the memory of a gallant and distinguished officer
now no more, and to whom the colony confessedly
owes so much.
This paragraph was fallowed on June 14,
1845, by a letter in the same paper signed
“An Old Colonist.”
Upon walking over the square a few days since
I was much struck with the very great natural
facilities afforded for the formation of a verv
delightful promenade, one that would be avail-
able to the citizens immediately upon the clear-
ing up of the most tempestuous weather. The
site itself, which abounds in available material,
would provide not only for good dry walks, but,
if desired, a considerable portion of the wall of
enclosure, which might be coped with better stone
from the Government quarry. The removal of
the surface stone from the site would prepare
the subsoil for the reception of trees and shrubs,
and assist in (if I may say so) the moral eleva-
tion of one of the most elevated, well adapted,
and prominent pleasurable reserves of our rising
metropolis. This is a season when the arborist
and florist must be specially provident of their
time, and so ought our fellow-citizens now to
bestir themselves to rescue this salubrious spot
with its costly anl revered memento, from further
neglect, or the possibility of desecration.
24


ADDENDUM.
The following is a copy of a letter
written by Col- Light to the Colonial Com-
missioners for South Australia upon his
arrival at Kangaroo Island. After the
lapse of nearly 70 years it will be found to
be interesting reading:—
"Dated Rapid, brig, in Nepean Bay, Kan-
garoo Island, August 23rd, 1836.
"To the Colonial Commissioners for South
Australia.
"Gentlemen—l have the pleasure to re-
port the safe arrival of this vessel on the
19th instant, after a passage of 104 days
from the Lizard to her anchoring in the
bay called Antechamber Bay by Captain
Flinders. On the following day we an-
chored at the south-east end of Nepean
Bay, and, having the wind from the N.W.
against us, had to beat up, and passed along
the shore to the southward and eastward
of Cape Jervis. I can hardly express the
delight I felt at the beautiful appearance
of the mainland. With good glasses at
the distance we were off (about three miles)
it looked more like land already in posses-
sion of persons of property than that left
to the course of Nature alone. On the
21st at daylight we weighed and turned up
to that point of the bay which had been
selected by the manager of the South Aus-
tralian Company for landing their stores,
and at 2.30 p.m. came to anchor about two
miles from the point. In this bay there is
excellent anchorage in 3,4, and 5 fathoms
water, safe in every wind. I feel con-
vinced that labour and a little resolution
will do much here; and that even in this
place a good settlement may be found, and
this is one of the worst in the island. There
are several Knglish sailors who have run
from ships and settled in the island. Some
of these worthies paid us a visit last night,
who state that at their dwellings they are
never in want- They have plenty of corn,
good gardens, water, and all they require
in the wild life they have by choice em-
braced. If, therefore, these men, without
agricultural implements and without the
least knowledge of farming, can produce
wheat, melons, cabbages, turnips, fine po-
tatoes, rear pigs and poultry, what may
not be done by an emigration of men pro-
fessedly adapted? The whole face of the
island appears, sofar as we can see, to be
covered thickly with gumtrees and shrubs,
and the soil I saw was very moist, with
trunks of trees in every direction; but
nothing can be easier than clearing the
whole surface. Yet this is not (to- appear-
ance at least) to be compared with Cape
Jervis.
"29th.—Visited the northern sides of the
bay. I was delighted to find it exceed my
expectations. I see nothing to prevent a
settlement being formed here, even if no
ether can be found. A well about six feet
deep has been dug in the sand about eighty
yards from the sea, and good fresh water
is procured. If such water is procured so
near the sea, why may it not in any part?
Ships of considerable burthen may anchor
close to the company’s point in a very
safe harbour, and barges could transport
from them to the town. Vessels of 200
tons may anchor very near the shore.
“Should the Cygnet arrive during my ab-
sence on the mainland I shall leave direc-
tions for Mr- Gilbert to take possession of
the ground near the river for landing his
stores.
"I am. Gentlemen, &c..
"WILLIAM LIGHT.”
W.K.THOMAS & CS. PRINTERS. ADELAIDE.
25


HOISTING THE MAIN COLUMN INTO POSITION,
Photo by W. S. Smith.


THE) MONOLITH IN POSITION.
Photo by W. S. Smith.




UNVEILING THE STATUE.
COLONEL LIGHT: HIS EARLY LIFE
(By A. Francis Steuart, author of “ The Founders of Penang and Adelaide,” and great-grandnephew
of Col. Light.)
[From The Register, November 27, 1906.]
Now that a fit monument has been
erected in Adelaide to its founder, 001.
William Light, it may not be amiss to
narrate, shortly, the story of his early
life. Born in 1786 in the principality
of Keddah, on the west coast of the
Malay Peninsula, he was the eldest son
of Capt. Francis Light, an Englishman,
who, after serving in the British Navy,
had gone to the East; and, backed by
the sympathy of Warren Hastings, had
succeeded in founding on August 11,
1786, the British settlement of Penang,
or Prince of Wales Island, becoming
its first Superintendent, or Governor.
Young Light’s mother is a more sha-
dowy personality than his father.
There is no doubt whatever that she
bore the Portuguese name of Martina
Rozells; that she and Capt. Light had
in all five children; that, as his relict,
he left her much property in Penang
by his will; and that she continued to
reside at Penang until her death in
1822. Beyond this, however, nothing
of her history is known, except that
there is a contemporary tradition that
she was somehow a Princess of the
blood of the family of the Rajah of
Keddah, and that she was married to
her English helpmeet by Malayan rites,
even though she and her son figure as
Roman Catholics in the first list of
Christians in Penang.
—A Touching Letter. —
Capt. Francis Light had been born
at Uallingho, in Suffolk, in 1740, and
was himself educated at Woodbridge
Grammar School with the sons of
neighbouring Suffolk squires; and it
was to one tried friend of his early
life (George Doughty, olf Leiston, and
his wife —“Sweet Ann and Honest
George,” as he styles them) that he at
once thought of entrusting his son for
his education, first promising to them
a letter on the subject “as long as a
Methodist’s sermon or Sheridan’s
speech!” He writes*, however, from
Prince of Wales Island, September 11,
1792; —“Dear George—Trusting to the
sincerity of our long friendship and
your genuine goodness, of heart, with-
out waiting for permission:, I have con-
signed one of my children to your care
and authority. Send him to school,
and let him have the best education
that money can procure. He is now
six years of age. His disposition is
mild and easily persuaded. He has
that species of obstinacy which does
not easily bond to harsh control. . . .
I send him on board with our friend
Wall. 1 shall take care to send you
supplies of cash, as well for the boy’s
maintenance as the purchase of Gols-
berry Farm. Wall says It lies so con-
tiguous to your palace that I have a
longing desire to become the owner of
it; so make sure olf it. I shall then
think of returning in good earnest. My
best love to your wife and children.”
Next year he found that he would
never carry out his intention of re-
turning to England, and he writes: —
“My Dear Friend —The letter I wrote
by Capt. Wall was short and incohe-
rent, partaking of the state of mind.
At that time I was ill, and have been
very ill, but am now pretty well re-
covered; yet I have an inward sensa-
tion that, though I may linger a year
or two, I conjecture I shall not have
ye happiness to see you. As we cannot
command our time in this world, the
only thing to be done is to submit
with patience. I have consigned my
27


son William to your care. In doing
this I have not exceeded the bounds of
friendship. Let him have a good edu-
cation, and he will provide for himself.
I have remitted £1,200 to the house of
Ferguson & Scott & Co., London. This
money I have directed to be paid to
you. Capt. Wall will have between
£4 and 500, which he will likewise pay
to you. With this and what else may
come you will be able to give Wil-
liam an education and send him back
to India, where he must push his for-
tune by his industry, for it is probable
by the time he is of age (say 17) to
be sent out I shall be forgot. But a
lad of good principles, education, and
industry will never be long at a loss
for friends in this country.”
—lnteresting Further Comments. —-
He explains further that he has never
been able to send the money to- “make
a small purchase of land fora retreat
when the vessel is no longer able to
endure the buffeting of wind and wea-
ther;” but adds that “this office of
superintending or governing of this
famous island is not a profitable one,
my expenses exceeding salary just as
2to 1.” He is consoled by thinking
that “history shows no examples of
the first adventurers making fortunes;
it is sufficient that hereafter they are
spoke of;” and he tells his friend that
he has appointed him his executor.
The end of this letter shows his affec-
tion for the Avhole Doughty family:—
“You tell me nothing of your sisters,
especially Abigail, my favourite. I
wish you would send me her picture,
that 1 might have the pleasure of pay-
ing my morning addresses to a fair
lady. Dear George, give ten thousand
wishes to your wife, daughters, and
sisters, and tell them I am never so
happy than when I am thinking of
them. Adieu, my dear friend; con-
tinue to plough ye fields: it is a thou-
sand times preferable to governing.
Remember me to Lynn and old Ran-
dall!”
—V Closing and an Opening Career. —
Capt. Light’s forebodings were cor-
rect, as he died, to the great grief of
the little colony of Penang, on October
21, 1794, of fever. His friend, Mr.
Doughty, continued to protect his son
until his own death in 3798, and Wil-
liam Light spent his young life with
him therefore at Theberton Hall (he
called an estate in South Australia —
now spelled Thebarton—after it) or at
Mrs. Doughty’s estate at Martlesham
Hall, near to Saxmundham, in Suffolk.
Mrs. Doughty had been Anne Goodwin,
the heiress of Martlesham, and was a
most amiable lady. She after her hus-
band’s death adopted William Light
also, and watched over his career like
a mother. She writes In 1799: —“Wil-
liam Light is with me, and is as good
a child as can be. His mind is set
upon going to sea, and I had some
thoughts of putting him to a naval
academy some time this summer. He
is turned of 18, and I am informed he
must be there three years. . . . He is
so good, I should be unhappy not to do
everything I can to serve him.” Her
son also acted with her as his guar-
dian, and in 1800 was able to write
that his ward’s heart’s desire had been
granted, and that “Master Light” had
“joined the Clyde frigate,” the muster
book of which has his name, with
Suffolk as his place of origin, in that
year.
—Vicissitudes.—
After this Light’s wanderings were
varied. He sailed to the Eastern Seas,
and spent a short time in prison in
France as one of Napoleon’s captives.
Then, tiring of the navy, he, by Lord
Wellington’s influence, entered the
army in 1808, and fought all through
the Peninsular war in the 4th Dra-
goons and on the staff as an aide-de-
camp to the future Duke of Welling-
ton. On his return to England, war-
stained, and a hero feted by the Prince
Regent, the home of the Doughtys be-
came his home once more; but only
for a brief space, as his restless spirit
made him set off immediately on his
travels, first to Sicily, and then, in
1823, he returned to Spain to aid the
constitutional movement. As he was
wounded and stranded without money
at Corunna kind Mrs. Doughty by her
28




ARRIVAL OF HIS PIXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR. THE GUARD
OF HONOUR.
Photo. W. S. Smith.


aid again allowed him to return to
England in 1823; and this was fortu-
nate, as he went abroad in a few'
months almost for good, and she died
in 1529. She never knew, therefore,
of the last venture of 1 her ward in
South Australia, which was to bear so
much fruit, as he dl d not become
Surveyor-General of the new province
until 1836; and we may be the more
glad of this perhaps when we reflect
that even he himself did not know of
his own great success in that capacity.
He died on October 5, 1839, and it was
left to posterity to give, posthumously,
real recognition to his work, and to
applaud his correct judgment and re-
solution, and they have now done this
strikingly and effectively by the erec-
tion of a noble statue of himself in
the town he founded amid so mud!
opposition from his contemporaries.
THE FOUNDER OF ADELAIDE.
[From The Register, November 28, 1906.
Lord Mahon in his history relates
that on the night before the battle of
the Plains of Abraham, General Wolfe
w r as descending the St Lawrence with
part of his troops. Not a word Avas
spoken; not a sound was heard save
the rippling of the stream. Then Wolfe
alone repeated in a loav tone to the
other officers in ids boat those beauti-
ful stanzas with Avhich a country
churchyard inspired the muse of Gray.
One noble line—“ The paths of glory
lead but to the grave.”—must have
seemed at such a moment fraught Avith
mournful meaning. At the close of the
recitation Wolfe added:—“Now, gentle-
men, I would rather be the author of
that poem than take Quebec.” He took
Quebec the next day, and fell in the
hour of A’ictory. Col. Light had a bril-
liant career; and as a soldier he had
Avon renown under the Iron Duke. For-
tune and fame and fashion had been
lavish in bestowing their favours upon
him; but one thing more he desired. He
told his old friend, William Jacob, on
his deathbed that he had always
cherished an ambition to be, like lbs
father, one of the builders of the Em-
pire. Col. Light appeared to posses a
charmed life on the battlefield. Unlike
Wolfe, he was to realize his great
wish. His noblest achievement was To
be a victory, not of conquest but of
colonization; but, like Wolfe, he waa
to fall in the hour of victory. Although,
Light had passed through 43 engage-
ments without a scar, he received a
Avouud in “a sentimental and quixotic
campaign” which was destined to con-
tribute to his death in connection Avi'll
the subsequent work Avhich his genius
and. chequered experiences Avere edu-
cating him to undertake, and it Avas in
a sense fitting that the public honoured
a man whose career was spent in
storm and stress should have
been preceded by extraordinarily tem-
pestuous weather. On Tuesday the Go-
vernor unveiled with appropriate cere-
monial a monument erected in the
main thoroughfare of the city which
Col. Light founded 70 years ago; ana
the realized ambition of the man thus
marked out for distinction —that he
might be one of the “builders of the
Empire”—will be indissolubly associat-
ed with the history of the Common-
wealth. Adelaide, indeed, is Col.
Light’s permanent monument; but now
that it has been decided to remove
from the Queen City the reproach of
being almost barren of street statuary,
this latest addition to “civic furnish*
ings,” wdiich should have been the
pioneer of its kind, is both appropriate
and welcome.
Men of action are among the most
suitable subjects of public statuary be-
cause impressive personality appeals to
the deepest instincts, stirs the dormant
imagination, and releases the dynamic
poAver of the multitude. This is parti-
cularly true in a new centre of culture
29


where, as in the case of Light, the per-
sonality—in addition to claims of pa-
triotic interest and gratitude—comes,
by contrast to its surroundings, with
romantic charm of a historical and pic-
turesque nature. Light’s appearance in
South Australia might be well termed
providential. It was the culminating
point of a life of great promise which
seemed likely to end in comparative
failure; and yet the appointment of
Surveyor-General at a salary of £4OO
per annum in an unexplored and unset-
tled colony formed on “sentimental and
quixotic” lines apparently much re-
sembled the repetition of tbie campaign
in which he received his only wound
in conflict, that prophetic intimation
of his fate. But the extraordinary
equipment of Light, and the experience
he had bought by many vicissitudes
and hardships and disappointments,
proved of the greatest value to- South
Australia, because it fitted him to per-
form a unique service—one upon which
the whole destiny of the new State
turned. “My enemies,” said Light, re-
ferring to his selection of the site for
the first town in the new settlement,
“by disputing the validity of my rea-
sons in every particular, have done me
the good service of fixing the whole
of the responsibility upon me.” They
proved that only Light was capable of
the choice. Governor Hindmarsh, with
his naval instinct, would have prefer-
red Port Lincoln, with its magnificent
harbour; and Sir John Jeffcott, the
Judge, would have gone to Encounter
Bay in order to secure the advantage
of the River Murray; but Col. Light,
with a practical sense of immediate re-
quirements, insisted on settling the
people upon fertile land where their
labour could at once be made profit-
able.
Seventy years have passed, and the
posterity to which Light appealed has
confirmed the soundness of his judg-
ment. As the Lieutenant-Governor
has pointed out, had either the naval
or the legal logic prevailed, the coloni-
sation of South Australia would assur-
edly have been a failure; and instead
of being a prosperous State, this migm,
now be simply an outlying sheep walk
belonging to other States. All the
prowess which Light had developed
was required to maintain his selection
of a site, and to persevere with his
plan. Less than his prestige, acumen,
charm, patience, and persistence would
not have succeeded in averting the
ruin to the province which, he clearly
perceived, would attend his defeat..
Not only was he an immiraoie
Crichton—as Sir Samuel Way has ob-
served-versatile and accomplished to
an extraordinary degree; but he had the
genius which is equally marked in its
capacity for suffering pain and for con-
quering difficulties. The opposition
which he encountered affected him
acutely and shortened his life. Still,
amid all drawbacks, he surveyed the
future city, which he had located not
only with a utilitarian sense, but with
artistic feeling; and he supplied it with
broad streets, and spacious squares,
and gave to it geometrical form and a
boundary of park lands. The glory of
Light was not merely in the wisdom
of his choice of a site for Adelaide,
but in the prescience with which he
designed a city which has already be-
come, by reason of its natural advan-
tages and arrangement, one of the
most beautiful capitals in the wide
world. Surely there is a curious ap-
propriateness in the facts that the me-
tropolis of South Australia, the only
State in the Commonwealth to be inde-
pendently established by the enterprise
of free colonists, should have been
founded by a man of action, the son
of an Empire builder, and a gallant
sailor and daring soldier: that the first
town of South Australia, which
originated with idealists, should be laid
out by an idealist, an accomplished
and travelled gentleman, who was
poet, musician, and artist; and that the
Queen City of the South should be de-
signed by a descendant of a Queen. If
it be true that “all may do what has
by man been done,” the statue of Light
in the beautiful city which he originat-
ed will be a monument of both grati-
tude and inspiration—a memorial of
personality which is the most marvel-
lous and moving thing in the universe.
30


THE STATUE OF COLONEL LIGHT.
VICTORIA SQUARE.
Unveiled, November 27, 1906.




COLONEL LIGHT STATUE
On Tuesday, November 27, in the presence
of a large and representative attendance of
pioneers and influential citizens and hun-
dreds of the general public the mag-
nificent statue by Bimie Rhind of Col.
Light, recently placed in position on
the granite pedestal In Victoria square,
was unveiled by His Excellency the Gover-
nor (Sir George Le Hunte). The area sur-
rounding the monument was railed in, and
seats in raised tiers on the east and west
sides were provided for the pioneers who
arrived or were born in South Australia
previous to 1845. The names of the pio-
neers who were invited were published in
The Register on Tuesday. A string of bunt-
ing was hung across the square, and between
half-past 10 and midday horse, vehicular,
and tram traffic was suspended in King
William street between Waymouth street
and the Queen’s Statue and along
Flinders and Franklin streets be-
tween the eastern and western align-
ments of Victoria square. A dais for
prominent guests was erected immediately
in front of the statue. A guard of ho-
nour was provided by the 10th A.1.R.,
under Capt. C. Medlyn. The bearer of the
colours was Lieut. J. J. Hughes, and the
staff officer for infantry (Lieut. Cass) was
also on parade. Another guard of honour
was supplied by cadets from the State
schools under Mjr. Neale. The
Military Band played selections
between 10.30 and 11 a.m., when His
Excellency the Governor arrived. Among
those on the dais were His Honor the
Chief Justice, the Premier (Hon. T. Price),
the Chief Secretary (Hon. A. A. Kirkpat-
rick), the Treasurer (Hon. A. H. Peake I,
the Commissioner of Crown Lands
(Hon. Laurence O’Loughlin), the
following members of the Colonel Light
Monument Committee: —The Mayor of
Adelaide (ex officio Chairman), Aid.
Downs, Johnson, and Wells, Crs. Baker,
Bonython, Myers, and Pullin (representing
the Adelaide City Council), Sir Edwin
Smith and Mr. R. Kyffin Thomas (nomi-
nated by the subscribers), and Messrs. C.
E. Owen Smyth, 1.5.0. (nominated by tne
Government), with Mr. H. P. Gill,
A.R.C.A., the Hon. J. Lewis, M.L.C., Capt.
the Hon. R. D. Ryder, A.D.C., Col. Mad-
ley. Dr. Richards, the Town Clerk (Mr T.
G. Ellery), Col. Rowell, C. 8., Lieut.-
Col. Reade, C. 8., (chief staff offi-
UNVEILING CEREMONY.
cer), Messrs. F. W. Bullcck and
0. Willoox (ex-Mayors), J. Fisher,
William Finniss (son of the late Hon. B.
T. Finbiss), J. C. Morphett (son of the
late Sir John Morphett), and J. P. Stow.
There was a large gathering of pioneers,
prominent among whom were Messrs. H.
T. Mbrris and W. L. Be are, who came out
in 1836.
- —The Mayor’s Address.—
The Mayor said; —I regret extremely that
we are not to-day to have the benefit of
an oration from Ilis Honor the Chief Jus-
tice. Those of us w r ho were present at the
unveiling of the Col. Light monument on
June 21 last year have, I am sure, interest-
ing and delightful recollections of the elo-
quent tribute that was paid to Col. Light
by His Honor on that occasion, and the
committee were desirous that he should to-
day place us under another debt of grati-
tude to him. Unfortunately, His Honor’s
time is so much taken up with his judicial
duties that he found it impossible to accede
to the washes of the committee.
-- History of the Movement.—
1 think on on occasion of this kind it is
only fitting that I should give a resume
of the work done by the Corporation of
Adelaide and the various committees ap-
pointed to arrange for the successful car-
rying out of the work. (Hear, hear.) Dur-
ing the year 1891 the fact was brought very
forcibly before the public of Adelaide that
the old monument erected in Light square
was showing signs of decay, and many were
the suggestions as to how Col. Light’s me-
mory should be perpetuated in something
more substantial and enduring than sand-
stone. The first meeting was held in the
Town Hall, Adelaide, on Friday, January
15, 1892, and was presided over by Mr. F.
W. Bullock, who was appointed Chairman
of the committee, the late Sir Henry Ayers,
G.0.M.G., being appointed Hon. Treasu-
urer, and the Town Clerk of Adelaide (the
late Mr. Worsnop) Hon, Secretary. I am
pleased to note that we have in the City
Council at the present time Messrs. Aider-
men Johnson and Wells and Councillor
Sellar, who were members of the first com-
mittee. (Hear, hear.) At that meeting a
resoultion was carried — What the meeting
considers it is desirable to perpetuate the
memory of the late Col. Light, Founder of
31


the City of Adelaide, by the erection of
some substantial monument in the city for
that purpose.” During the ensuing 12 months
12 meetings were held, and the question
was brought before the City Council, and
a request made that they should contribute
to the fund, and they at once promised to
donate £SOO. The citizens responded to
the extent of £368, and a deputation was
arranged to wait on the then Chief
Secretary (Sir John Downer) on November
7, 1892, who generously promised that the
(Government would subscribe to the extent
of £I,OOO. During this year the commit-
tee received various designs for the statue,
and at the last meeting, held on November
25, 1892, passed a resolution as follows: —
“That the committee are not satisfied with
any of the designs sent in, and that new
designs be invited.” During the -ear 1893
eight meetings were held, with Mr. C.
Willcox (the Mayor) as Chairman; and on
April 7 23 new designs and 3 models were
received, and at a meeting held on April
14 Mr. E. J. Woods (architect) and Air.
H. P. Gill (Director of the School of Arts)
were appointed judges of the designs and
models sent in. On April 20 the judges re-
ported they were of opinion that none of
the designs could be executed for the
amount stipulated by the committee; also,
that the best idea was sent in by Mr.
Percival Ball, and they expressed regret
that this gentleman’s work was entered
“not for competition.” The Government
at this time seems to have regretted the
promise they made to place the sum of
£I,OOO on the Estimates for that year, as
they informed the Chairman they could not
hand it over. The interest seems then to
have languished, as during 1894 onlv one
meeting was held, and no further meetings
of the committee were held until July 20,
1897, when the appointment of Messrs.
E. W. Bullock and J. Fisher as joint trea-
surers was made in place of the late Sir
Henry Ayers, and the meeting resolved
that the Mayor be requested to bring un-
der the iiotice of the City Council the de-
sirableness of renewing the promise of a £SOO
donation, and in the event of the council
agreeing to the proposition active steps be
at once taken by the committee in order
to carry out the original design; and it
was also decided that the Government
should be urged to add pound for pound to
the subscriptions raised. No further meet-
ings were recorded from 1897 until June 8,
1906, when Mr. Bullock (the joint treasurer)
asked that he might be relieved of his du-
ties, but the committee prevailed upon him
to remain in office. On July 30, 1901, the
committee decided to wait as a deputation
on the Premier and request the Govern-
ment to place an amount on the Estimates
for the purpose of erecting a suitable monu-
ment to Col. Light. The deputation wait-
ed on the Government on August 9, when
the Premier promised to place the matter
before his colleagues. Nothing further was
done in the movement until September 18,
1903, when a deputation, consisting of the
members of the Adelaide City Council, wait-
ed on the Chief Secretary, with a request
that the Government would renew the
promise made by a previous Ministry to
contribute £I,OOO towards the fund. This
the Government subsequently promised to
do, and the contribution was paid into the
fund in January, 1905, and at the same
time the City Council paid in their contri-
bution of £SOO. At a meeting of the com-
mittee held on February 24, 1904, the funds
in the hands of the treasurers were handed
over to the corporation on the under-
standing that they should be earmarked for
the purpose of the erection of a monument
to Col. Light, and that two nominees from
the subscribers and two from the Govern-
ment should be selected to co-operate with
the committee appointed by the council.
At a meeting of the subscribers, held on
March 9, 1904, Sir E. T. Smith and Mr. K.
K. Thomas were appointed to represent
the subscribers, and the Government ap-
pointed Messrs. L. H. Shell and C. E. Owen
Smyth, while the City Council appointed
the Right Worshipful the Mayor, Aid.
Yardon and Wells, and Crs. Baker, Bony-
thon, Cox, Myers, Ponder, and Pullin. On
April 12, 1904, this committee appoint-
ed a subcommittee, consisting of
the Right Worshipful the Mayor, Aid. Var-
don and Wells, Sir E. T. Smith, Messrs,
R. K. Thomas, C. E. Owen Smyth, and
L. H. Shell, and the Town Clerk (Mr. El-
lery). to take the whole matter into consi-
deration and arrange for calling the de-
signs, &c. At the meeting of the subcom-
mittee on April 26, 1904, the site was fixed
for the statue of Col. Light in King William
street, at its present position, and also
directed that a monument be erected to
mark the resting place of Col. Light in
Light square. The City Council agreed to
this on May 9, 1904, and designs for the
monument were examined by the commit-
tee, and that submitted by Mr. Jackman was
selected. This monument was erected in
Light square, and unveiled on June 21,
1905. At a meeting of the general commit-
tee on December 23, 1904, Mr. Birnie
Rhind’s model was selected for the statue,
and Messrs. Garlick, Sibley, & Wool-
32


dridge were commissioned to prepare the
pedestal for the same. The subcommit-
tee which had previously carried out
the arrangements for the memorial in
Light square were reappointed to arrange
details in connection with the erection of
the statue, the cost of which was £I,OOO,
and the pedestal £5lO. In February last
an appeal was made by myself as Chairman
of the committee for additional subscrip-
tions to the fu'nd, with the result that
£258 13/ was received by the committee.
That generous citizen, having already given
liberally, had promised by letter to make up
the required amount if it were not forthcom-
ing in the ordinary way. (Cheers.)
—The Founder of Adelaide. —
I should be wanting in my duty on a day
such as this were I not to do more than
make a passing allusion to the life and cha-
racter of the great man whose monument
your Excellency will have the distinguish-
ed honour of unveiling. It is fitting, sir,
that this statue should be unveiled by one
who holds the highest position in our State
as representative of His Gracious Majesty
Kiug Edward VII. (Cheers.) During the
reign of the late revered Queen the British
Empire materially spread itself, for at her
accession to the crown in 1837, or one
year after the founding of this State, the
area in square miles under rule amounted
to 8.329,000. while to-day it amounts to
nearly 12,000,000 square miles; and, while
the population jn 1837 was 160,000,000, His
Gracious Majesty King Edward VII. now
rules over a population of 400,000,000, occu-
pying and owning nearly one-quarter of the
land area of the world. (Cheers.) Dur-
ing the nineteenth century there were
many prominent names connected with Em-
pire building in the British nation in all
parts of the world—as Clive Hastings, Sir
John McDonald', Cecil Rhodes, and others.
Few names stand higher, at any rate in the
State i% which we live, than the revered
and respected name of Col. Light.
(Cheers.) It would have been strange in-
deed had not Col. Light had the knowledge
and perspicuity which characterized him
so strongly, as with his parentage he was
almost bound to display attributes of
sagacity, pluck, energy, and dogged-
ness. It has been my pleasure to read a
small book published by Mr. A. F. Steuart,
of Edinburgh, to whom I may say the citi-
zens of Adelaide are indebted for helping to
supervise the work, which I believe has
been so ably carried out by Mr. Birnie
Rhind, the modeller of this statue; and to
Mr. Steuart we are indebted for what we
know of Col. Light’s early history.
—Col. Light’s Parents. —
His father, Capt. Light, was born in the
early part of the eighteenth century, and
had a distinguished career as an officer in
His Majesty’s Navy. He found the limits
of naval life too circumscribed for a man
of his intrepid nature, and in 1765 we find
him on his way to the East on an East
Indian trader, and in 1781 he was in close
communication with Warren Hastings with
a proposal to establish a Bri-
tish settlement in the neighbour-
hood of the Malay Peninsula. Recognis-
ing that it would be a great advantage to
the British Empire to extend its sway
in the East, and recognising also that the
island of Penang in the Eastern Archipe-
lago wais admirably adapted from a strate-
gical point of view, he decided, with the
consent of the British Government, to hoist
the flag and declare the island a British
dependency. In 1782 he married Martina
Rezelles, the daughter of the King of
Quedah, the outcome of which union
•'among other children) was William Light,
the founder of this city, who was born in
the year 1785.
—Reminiscences of Col. Light.—
At an early age his father, owing to the
unhealthiness of the climate, sent William
home to Mr. George Doughty, of Theberton
Hall, Suffolk, and it would appear as if
Col. Light fully appreciated the kindness
and attention shown him by that gentle-
man, as he named his residence in South
Australia, situated on suburban section No.
1, Thebarton, which name has been handed
down through the christening of that town,
which is now built on the old section first
occupied by Col. Light. He seems to have
been from his earliest manhood a gentle-
man of great culture and mental attain-
ments. His ability as a linguist was fully
recognised during the time he occupied a
commission in His Majesty’s service dur-
ing the Peninsular war, as it is said he
spoke French and Spanish with like faci-
liay to English. Though for some time he
occupied a position and served with great
distinction in the navy, it is as a military
officer he made his first mark in life. _ In
1808 at the desire of the Duke of Welling-
ton, he obtained a commission in the
Fourth Light Dragoons, and served with
his regiment all through the Peninsular
war, being in no less than 43 actions, out
of which he was fortunate enough
to come without a wound. He


also acted as confidential aide-de-
camp to the Duke of Wellington,
and the historian says of him, “He was a
man of extraordinary accomplishments, sol-
dier. seaman, musician, artist, and good in
all.” He was a gentleman of most self-
sacrificing disposition, and a story is told
of him that when nearly starving himself,
and having heard that George and William
Napier, two fellow-officers, were wounded,
he stifled his own craving, and at the end
of a long march risked his life by riding
some 20 miles in order to leave with them
the only loaf of bread which could be
secured for his own sustenance. Sir George
Napier adds to this story, “that it was a
kindness never to be forgotten.” An in-
teresting anecdote is told of him as to the
way in which' he found out the strength of
the French at a battle which was
fought about this time. The Duke
of Wellington desired to know what force
the enemy were in, but all his attempts
were stopped by the enemy’s fire, until
Col. Light rode forward and, dropping hi*
reins, leaned back as if badly wouhded, al-
lowing his horse to canter wildly along the
front of the troops. Thinking him severe-
ly wounded they ceased their fire, and he
thus passed unobserved or unnoticed along
their front, and was able to take back to
Wellington the interesting news of the
strength of the enemy, and the engagement
eventuated in a pronounced victory for the
British forces. After leaving the army he
seems next to have travelled for some time
in Italy, in the Riviera, about the same
time that Byron and Shelley were there;
but he soon got into active life again, and
in 1823, returning to Spain, embarked as
a colonel in the Spanish forces, under the
leadership of Gen. Sir Robert Wilson. In
1824 he married a daughter of the third
Duke of Richmond, and for some years
seems to have spent a wandering life up
and down the Mediterranean in his own
yacht, and in 1830 we find Light and has
wife travelling all through Egypt and
studying the ancient law of that country.
Eventually receiving an offer from the
Pasha, Mahomet Ali, as a recruiting offi-
cer, he sailed for England in 1831 fn his
own vessel to secure, if possible, about 70
British officers, among whom, strange to
say, was Capt. John Hindmarsh. with
whom Light became intimately connected
in South Australia. It may not be gene-
rally known, but the position of first Go-
vernor of South Australia was offered to
Sir Charles J. Napier, who, while declin-
ing it, wrote to Robert Gouger, the first
Colonial Secretary, to try and secure the
appointment of Col. Light; but fortunately
for us the appointment had already been
conferred upon Capt. Hindmarsh. In the
interests of South Australia and this City of
Adelaide in particular the far more impor-
tant position was allotted to Light, that
of Surveyor-General, and he sailed for
South Australia in the Rapid, a brig of 162
tons, his staff consisting (among others)
of gentlemen whose names are well known
in South Australian history, and whose
descendants we are pleased to know we
have living with us at the present time.
—Familiar Names. —
May I be permitted to mention such fami-
liar names as Sir G. S. Kingston, J. C.
Morphett, Boyle Travers Finniss, W.
Jacobs, Alfred Hardy, and Dr. Woodforde?
Part of his staff preceded him in the Cyg-
net, which sailed on March 24. 1836. He,
lin the Rapid, left on May 1, 1836, and
arrived at Antechamber Bay on August 20
of the same year.
—Choosing the Capital.-
Col. Light soon found that Kangaroo Island
was not suited for a capital or for a sea-
port, as the harbour wais inferior and the
land of comparatively poor quality. After
a thorough examination he left with his
staff for Rapid Bay, and seems to have
spent some time in sailing up and down the
©astern coast of St. Vincent’s Gulf before
he was able to decide where he should land
his party. After haying come to anchor
Port Lincoln, with a view of discovering
what sort of country surrounded that har-
bour; but, considering it unsatisfactory, he
returned with all haste, and his mind fullv
made up as to where the first settlement
should be laid out, and on arrival
of Hi® Fvcellencv Capt, Hindmarsh on
Dece'mher 28, 1836, he pointed out the spot
on which Adelaide now stands.
—“I Leave it to Posterity.”
in Holdfast Bay and examining the land,
he writes:—“l cannot express my delight
at seeing no bounds to a flat of fine coun-
try, with abundance of fresh water lagoons,
which, if dry in summer, convinced me that
we need not dig a deep well to gain a suffi-
cient supply.” He then divided his party
into two, and. leaving Mr. Kingston in
charge of. the larger one. he journeyed to
His Excellency, while expressing his sense
of the beauty of the place, thought it was
too far from the harbour, and threw a
great many obstacles in the gallant
Colonel’s way, all of which we are glad
now to know, after 70 years’ experience.
34


Sill
SPECTATORS AT THE CEREMONY.
Photo. W. S. Smith.




Col. Light had the strength of mind to
put on one side. One of your predeces-
sors, your Honor, the first Judge of the
Supreme Court (Judge Jeffcott) in South
a deal of trouble and spending a deal of
money to prove himself an ass, and in de-
fence of his choice of the site of the future
City of Adelaide he stated in historic
words, “1 am perfectly willing to bear it
and leave it to posterity, and not to them,
to decide whether I am entitled to praise
or blame.” (Cheers.) We thus see how
particularly thankful the present residents
of South Australia ought to be for the
determined action that was taken by Coi.
Light, who successfully laid the founda-
tions of our fair city—laid out, I believe I
may say, better than any city in Austra-
lasia, or probably in the world, situated
on gently rising ground, with magnificent
Australia, was very desirous that the capi-
tal of South Australia should be at En-
counter Bay, and in trying to prove the
safety of the harbour of his choice he was
drowned. One gentleman who was very much
perturbed in bis mind through the capi-
tal being fixed where it is to-day stated
that he would publish the proceedings in
all the newspapers in England. To this
001. Light replied that he would be taking
views of the splendid amphitheatre of hills
within easy access, safe and reliable har-
bours and watering places on the coast,
magnificently wide streets, noble in their
design, and laid out at right angles to one
another so as to be easily located —a large
area of internal squares, with divisional
parks between north and south, the whole
being fringed with something like 2,300
acres of park lands, a rich inheritance for
-countless unborn thousands to enjoy.
(Cheers.)
—Reference to the Pioneers. —
This work so admirably begun has, we are
glad to know, been worthily carried on
through the efforts and perseverance oi
those noble pioneers who to-day we are
pleased to welcome at this ceremony.
(Cheers.)
—Municipal History.—
It may not be generally known, but it is
nevertheless a fact, that Adelaide was the
first city in Australasia to have a corpora-
tion. On October 31, in 1840, the first
election for the first City Council of Ade-
laide took place. Its first Mayor was the
late Sir James Hurtle Fisher, whose sons
may he worthily looked upon as pioneer
pastoralists, not only in this State, but in
northern Queensland. Sir J. H. Fisher had
with him as Aldermen, Mr. A. H. Davis,
Mr. Matthew Smillie, and Mr. George Ste-
phenson. Those were the days of small
things, and the salaries paid were not such
as I think would find acceptance with the
official staff of the City Council at the pre-
sent day. The first City Treasurer was the
late respected Sir John Morphett, for
many years the President of the Legis-
lative Council. It is rather amusing
to notice from the historian of that
time that Sir John deposited as secu-
rity for the due fulfilment of his duties
grants of town acres Nos. 630, 660, and
663, which to-day have an approximate
value of £5,000 —not bad security, we
should imagine, for a gentleman
who was receiving the munificent
salary of £52 10/ per annum.
(Laughter.) The late Sir George
Strickland Kingston, many years Speaker
of the House of Assembly, was ap-
pointed surveyor and collector. Hav-
ing secured an Englishman as trea-
surer and an Irishman as surveyor,
T suppose the council thought it would be
a wise thing to introduce among its officers
one possessing a little of that caution
which we are told is a strong characteristic
of the Scot. (Laughter.) Therefore they
elected to the position of Town Clerk the
late Mr. David Spence, to whom we are
indebted not only for the careful manner
in which he watched over the interests of
this young municipality, but from the fact
that he left behind him, in the person of
Miss Catherine Spence, a lady who for
many years has worked in the interests of
common humanity, and given an immense
amount of time to unravel social problems
for the benefit and uplifting of the poorer
section of the community. (Cheers.)
—The Request.—
And now, sir, on behalf of the citizens ot
Adelaide and the public of South Australia,
may I be permitted to ask your Excellency
to unveil the statue of him who, under the
aegis of the Southern Cross, founded a city
in which we, as loyal subjects of His
Gracious Majesty King Edward the Seventh
and members of the great British Empire,
have found happy, contented, and peaceful
homes? (Loud cheers.)
—The Governor's Speech.—
His Excellency the Governor said: —On
the last occasion that I was asked to per-
form the ceremony of unveiling a statue it
was in memory of those who had carried
the honour of Australia and laid down their
lives in a foreign home in defence of the
35


Empire. On the present occasion we are
met to perpetuate the memory of a man
Avho brought honour to South Australia,
and found his last home among her people.
The speech of the Mayor and the beauti-
fully written articles in the newspapers
have left me very little to say about Col.
Light’s life. It has struck me that he
embodied in a most remarkable way the
grandest combination that England can
produce—a sailor, a soldier, and a civil ser-
\ T ant. He was a man of courage and of
knowledge to the smallest detail in his
profession, and Avhen he kneAV he was in
the right nothing would induce him to
waver. It was due to Col. Light’s great
firmness of principle that aa e are gathered
on this spot to-day, and not someAvhere else
less suitable as a city site. (Hear, hear.)
He Avas knoAvn to waver only once, and
that was Avhen great pressure Avas brought
upon him by those highest in authority,
who questioned his judgment in the selec-
tion of the site for Adelaide. It was said
that the locality was too far from the sea,
and Col. Light Avent doAvn with the Gover-
nor to inspect a site nearer to
the coast; but his unerring judg-
ment and engineering knowledge con-
vinced him that the Torrens in flood times
would overflow and menace the site that
other people had chosen ror the capital. So
Col. Light returned, and Avithout hesita-
tion firmly announced his adherence to
his original selection. (Cheers.) It Avas
an unfortunate thing that he was not left
to carry out his scheme in its entirety, un-
hampered by interference on the part of
others and of the home authorities.
Again here Avas an example of a lesson
that England has never learnt, and I don t
know that she ever will learn it, al-
though I hope Australia will —that to in-
terfere with the man on the spot is a most
fatal blunder. (Cheers.) What we have
lost of the Empire and what we have
spent in recovering and holding it have al-
ways been due, as the reading of history
proves, to failure to trust the man on the
spot. (Hear, hear.) Col. light, above
all, was a man to be trusted, and lie
should never have been interfered Avith. It
was an unfortunate moment Avhen it vA/as
decided to send Air. Kingston to England
about the surA'eys. He came back with
instructions that the surveys Avere to be
done in a particular way, and that if Light
did not approve of it Mr, Kingston was
to supersede him. It killed Col. Light.
(A Pioneer —“Yes; it killed him.”) But
Ave won’t think of the unhappy part of his
career, although I could not refrain from
quoting this very sad lesson, to
be learnt from interfering with the
man on the spot, who ought to
be trusted (Hear, hear.) If Col.
light were here now—and who knows but
what he can see and hear what is go-
ing on to-day—he would be able to con-
trast Adelaide as he first kbew it with
the handsome capital of to-day, with its
natural beauties enhanced % the splendid
efforts of successive corporations. The civic
authorities have carried out Col. Tight’s
best wishes in a way, I am sure, of which
he would have approved. (Cheers.) Seventy
years ago there were 50 houses, 100 huts,
and 2,500 people in Adelaide. To-day its
population without the suburbs is 40,000,
and the assessed value of the city without
the suburbs is close cn half a million.
The Treasurer is present to-day with an
overflowing Treasury. Let him carry bis
mind back to the day whe'n the first Trea-
surer (Mr. Osmond Gilles) had to lend a
private safe to keep the funds of the pro-
vince in in a canvas tent watched over by
a drunken marine. But it was not of much
consequence, because there Avas only 1/6 in
the safe. (Laughter.) It Avas due to Col.
Light’s great foresight that we have the
beautiful squares and park lairds as play-
grounds for the young and drillgrounds for
the cadets, who are the coming soldiers.
Those charming reserves make for health
and Avealth. If the founder of Adelaide
could see to Avhat the city has grown he
would pronounce it good—the city he plant-
ed, the branches of which have spread out,
and the people, like fowls of the air, are
resting under them. I am pleased to sec
so many of the old pioneers present. Many
of them are contemporaries of Col. Light,
although most of them were very young-
in his day. (A Pioneer —“I have seen him,
sir.”) Well, we all envy you, sir. I know
that the hearts of the pioneers are sorry
that the late Dean Marryat Avas not spared
to be with us to-day. (Hear, hear.) No-
thing would have gladdened him more than
to have Avitnessed this ceremony. I feel
honoured at having been asked to unveil
this statue, and doubly honoured ivhen I
remember that but for the appointment
having been previously given to Cant.
Hindmarsh, Col. Light Avould have been
the first Governor of South Australia. As
the founder of Adelaide, however, his name
will lire from generation to generation, and
neAmr be forgotten. (Cheers.)
His Excellency, amid loud cheering, then
unveiled the statue, remarking, “In the
name of the King, and on behalf of the citi-
zens of South Australia, I unveil this


statue to the founder of Adelaide/'
Cheers followed for the King, Col. Light.
.Adelaide, and the Governor.
His Excellency, addressing the Mayor,
said:—l now ask you to accept this statue
and keep it in the safe care of the Corpora-
tion of the City of Adelaide for ever.
(Cheers.)
The Mayor said —On behalf of the citizens
of Adelaide and the people of South Aus-
tralia I accept this masterpiece, and feel
sure that they will reverence it as a monu-
ment to the life of the man who founded the
city in which they ai’e pleased to dwell.
(Cheers.)
—Speech by the Premier. —
The Premier said; —I rise to move a vote
of thanks to the Col. Light Memorial Com-
mittee for carrying out the work entrust-
ed to them. The executive committee is
as follows: —The Mayor of Adelaide, Cr.
Bonython, the Superintendent of Public
Buildings, and Messrs. R. K. Thomas and
TL P. Gill, and the other members of the
committee are Aid. Downs, Johnson, and
Wells, Crs. Baker, Myers, Pullin, and Sel-
lar, the Under Secretary, Sir E. T. Smith,
and the Hon. John Lewis, the Town Clerk
being secretary to the committee. Our
warmest thanks are due to the committee
for the admirable manner in which they
have carried out their onerous duties. They
have certainly done splendidly with
the money at their disposal—an amount of
about £2,000 —half of which was a subsidy
from the Government, £5OO from the City
Corporation, and the balance from private
subscriptions. With this the committee
first erected a monument in Light square,
and with the balance of the money have
erected this noble statue in the centre of
the city. (Hear, hear.) We have pleasure
in expressing to the committee our tho-
rough appreciation of their labours and
out entire satisfaction with their work.
—All Honour to Col. Light.—
We are here to-day to declare without a
single dissenting voice all honour »to Col.
Light. (Cheers.) That he deserves all the
honour we can give him is clearly manifest
from the history of the city. The letter of
instructions from the Commissioners, dated
March 9, 1836, shows how completely the
responsibility of selecting the site for the
city was left on Col. Light's shoulders.
Paragraph 15 reads;—“Although the Com-
missioners leave the decision of this im-
portant question entirely in your hands, it
is their desire that, should His Excellency
the Governor arrive sufficiently early
in the colony, you will confer with
him o*n the subject, and pay due regard
to his opinion and suggestions, without,
however, yielding to any influence which
would have the effect of divesting you in
any way of the whole responsibility of the
decision. The Commissioners think they
may also assist you by stating the grounds
on which they conceive your decision ought
to rest. The Commissioners are of opinion
that the best site for the first town
will be that which combines in the high-
est degree the following advantages:—l. A
commodious harbour, safe and accessible at
all seasons of the year. 2. A considerable
tract of fertile land immediately adjoining.
3. An abundant supply of fresh water. 4.
Facilities for internal communication. 5.
Facilities for communication with other
ports. 6. Distance from the limits of the
colony, as a means of avoiding interference
from without in the principle of coloniza-
tion. 7. The 'neighbourhood of extensive
sheepwalks. (The above are of primary
importance, the following of secondary
value). 8. A supply of building materials,
as timber, stone, or brick, earth and lime.
9. Facilities for drainage. 10. Coal." How
fully and completely the City of Adelaide
combines all these advantages, except the
last, every one of us here is
prepared to testify. (Hear, hear.)
To use Col. Light’s own words:—“The geo-
graphical position of the present site cannot
be disputed, except by those who are de-
termined to find fault and raise clamour
from motives too contemptible to think of.
The greater quantity of good land, good
sheepwalks, good fresh water, a good har-
bour, best line of communication with the
Murray, and the frequent showers we saw
on the Mount Lofty Range, even in the
months of November and December, gave
me certain proof that here we stood in no
fear of those droughts so much complained
of in New Holland. These were my rea-
sons for selecting this spot as the best that
could be found. This will, I am sure, be
one of the finest plains in the world."
(Hear, hear.) Col. Light goes on to say:
“Deeply feeling the importance of the trust
imposed upon me by the Commissioners
when they confided solely to me the task
of selecting a site for the capital of this
province, and feeling yet more the fact
that the wellbeing of thousands is now con-
nected with, and may in a great measure
depend upon, the correctness of the deci-
sion I then made, I am anxious if possible
to convince the Commissioners and the
public that I endeavoured scrupulously to
do my duty, and that my exertions have
37


been conscientiously directed to the good
of the colony.”
—A Victory of Peace.—
Col. Light was a brave soldier, who won
distinction under Wellington. You will, 1
am sure, agree with me that “peace hath
her victories, no less renowned than war,”
and that his selection of a site of the Ckf
cf Adelaide was a brilliant victory of
genius, its development into beautiful Ade-
laide a victory of peace, which conferred as
much—if not more —honour than his distin-
guished military services on the Peninsula.
The correspondence of the time was gene-
rally very adverse to Col. Light’s selection
of the site for Adelaide. The distance
from the sea was urged as a fatal objec-
tion. The cry was raised, Bring the
ship to our doors.” One letter emanating
from high quarters said, “Adelaide may be
chosen, we may erect houses, and com-
mence canals to connect it with the sea,
and some fine morning may bring us the
news that at Encounter Bay, or Boston
Bay, or at Point Drummond. or in
Spencer’s Gulf, a splendid harbour, with
abundance of fine land has been discover-
ed. What then becomes of Adelaide?”
Col. Light’s reply was, “In my opinion nei-
ther the fineness of the morning nor such
a discovery would affect the increase and
prosperity of the present site.” And in
reply to the further question, “Will it, be-
ing the the seat of government, save it?”
The gallant colonel’s answer was, “Most
certainly, with the advantages it possesses,
and provided the government is good.” If
Col. Light could arise from his grave he
would say that Adelaide is now certainly
the success he foresaw, as every aspira-
tion of his —even that referring to the Go-
vernment, and that goes without sayingi—■
(laughter)—is abundantly satisfied. There
could be no more fitting day for the un-
veiling of this statue than November 27,
for it is exactly 70 years ago that
Col. Light practically decided, notwith-
standing all opposition—to adopt the pre-
sent site for the City of Adelaide. On
November 24, 1836, Col. Light went from
the Port River to Holdfast Bay, a*nd there
received the most favourable report from
Mr. Kingston on the country on the Ade-
laide plains, and having already from his
own personal examination almost made up
his mind to fix the site where it is now
he came to the definite conclusion on No-
vember 25—70 years ago —that this should
be the capital town of South Ai str lia. It is
only right that we should remember that
he received yeoman service from Mr. King-
ston, Assistant Surveyor-General—after-
wards Sir George Kingston—(A Pioneer—
“No, no; he killed him.”) —the father of
the Right Hon. C. C. Kingston; and from
Mr. B. T. Finniss, who was assistant sur-
veyor, and whose son I am pleased to see
here with us to-day. Col. Light also men-
tions the name of Mr. Neale as also assist-
ing in the city survey, and there were two
other assistant surveyors—Messrs. Hardy
and Cannan. November should ever be re-
membered as a red letter month in the his-
tory of South Australia. It was almost
precisely such a November as we have had
this year when Col. Light by a stroke of
genius pitched upon absolutely the best
spot in South Australia for its capital. Sin-
gularly enough he was somewhat guided in
his selection by the fact that from Novem-
ber 11 to November 20 there was a succes-
sion of gales and thunderstorms,
and he records in his diary
his surprise and delight at
finding such wintry weather at this time
of the year. The actual pegging out of the
streets and allotments was commenced on
January 11 and completed on March 10,
and on March 23, 1837, the purchasers took
possession of the blocks. There are no
doubt here with us to-day many old
colonists and their sons and daugh-
ters who can readily feel the grea-
test pride and satisfaction at this
recognition, tardy though it has been,
of Col. light and Ms splendid ser-
vice to South Australia, in the honour of
which, in a secondary degree perhaps, so
many of them deserve to share. We may
have different political opinions, but we are
all united in one thing—the greatness of
our people and the mightiness of the Em-
pire to which we belong. (Cheers.) I
see before me in the near future, when
this square will be to the Australian youth
of South Australia what Westminster Ab-
bev is to the Britisher at home; when the
father will take his son by the hand, lead
him round the square, and show him the
noble men of his country, and say to him —
“Go on, do well, and you also will some
day have a reward in that the good work
men do lives after them.” If the statue
were swept away the City of Adelaide
Avould be a monument to Col. Light which
could never be wiped out. (Loud cheers.)
• —A Veteran Colonist’s Eulogy.—
Mr. Joseph Fisher seconded the vote of
thanks. It was appropriate that he should
take part in the proceedings, because he
was one of the few old colonists now
38










living who actually saw the fune-
ral of the late Col. Light in the
square which bore his name. (Hear,
hear.) Of course, he was then only a small
boy, and did not remember more than the
bare fact. He was present, too, at the lay-
ing of the foundation stone and the opening
of the old monument. Another reason
was that he was an active member of the
old committee, formed some 15 years since,
under the presidency of the late Sir Henry
Ayers, to further the erection of the pre-
sent memorials to the late surveyor who
selected and laid out the site of the present
City of Adelaide. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Bul-
lock and he acted as joint treasurers to the
fund, after the lamented death of Sir Henry
Ayers. They tided in vain for years to
get the Government and the corporation
to hand over the funds respectively pro-
mised by them, and after many years they
threw up their trust in disgust, and handed
over the affair to the present committee,
who were to be congratulated upon their
success, and it was to their efforts that
they owed the successful completion of the
desired work. The committee had been
more fortunate than they had been. Pro-
bably that was due to tire strong stand
taken by Mr. Bullock and himself, or the
altered circumstances —more likely the lat-
ter reason. The first paragraph in The
Register that day so fully expressed his
views and put the position so excellently
that few words were left for him to say
regarding the beauties of the capital.
—lf Col. light Were Here!—
It would be generally admitted that the
site selected by Col. Light was a wonderful
instance of foresight, almost amounting to
inspiration. (Cheers.) It was selected
under great difficulties, for the plains of
Adelaide were then covered by large gum-
trees, stringybark, wattles, anl beautiful
flowering shrubs. Yet who would say that
after 70 years’ experience the site could be
altered with advantage a single yard—
north, south, east, or west? (Cheers.) If
the deceased Colonel could only be with
them that day to see the beautiful City of
Adelaide which had been erected on the
magnificent site selected by him he was
sure he would be lost in admiration.
(Cheers.) He would wish for no greater
treat than to accompany him, say, along
North terrace, from the railway station to
the Hackney road, where he would see such
a concentration of useful public buildings,
such as the University, the Art Gallery, the
School of Mines, and so on, as he would
scarcely find equalled in the world.
(Cheers.) If time permitted that occasion
would find ample scope for many interest-
ing reminiscences and contrasts between
the Adelaide of 1839 and 1906, but it would
take too long to do anything like justice to
the subject. Now that they had success-
fully completed their well-deserved monu-
ments to their former surveyor there were
other deserving colonists whose eminent
services to the State deserved permanent
recognition. (Cheers.) In the forefront of
those he would suggest the names of Sir
Hubert Richard Torrens and! Mr. John Rid-
ley, who, by their exertions as author of
the Real Property Act and the inventor of
the reaping machine respectively, had done
so much to help forward the present pros-
perous condition of the State. (Cheers.)
—A Lifelike Presentment.—
The Chief Justice, in putting the vote of
thanks, said in consequence of the zeal
and judgment of the committee Adelaide
now possessed a statue of its founder
which those present who had seen Rim in
the flesh had declared to be a lifelike pre-
sentment of the man. (Cheers.) It was
successful, too, as a work of art. (Hear,
hear.) They should give the committee an
enthusiastic vote of thanks for the - len-
did work tihev had done for the nv.
(Cheers.) | J i
The motion was carried with cheers.
—Remembering Others
Mr. R. Kyffin Thomas, in behalf of the
executive committee, sincerely acknowledg-
ed the vote of thanks. He could assure
the large audience that they felt amply re-
warded for their labours, which had been
continuous, and sometimes arduous, and
which had been the means of enabling the
citizens to become the possessors of such)
a noble monument as had been unveil-
ed that day. (Cheers.) They felt
further rewarded by the consideration
that had been shown to them, and the
acknowledgment that had been made.
They could not as a committee take the
whole of the praise in connection with the
erection of the statue. They felt that
thanks were due to those, too, who had
worked for many years with the same ob-
ject. (Hear, heard Those gentlemen de-
served a large share of the credit, for they
bore the burden of the pioneer efforts,
and collected a large amount of the
money necessary for the erection of the
two memorials, the movement associated
with which had now been brought to such
a happy and fitting issue. (Cheers.) Their
thanks were due to the Mayor and the Cor-
39


poration of Adelaide for giving them that
prominent site for the statue of Adelaide’s
founder. (Hear, hear.) They had grave
doubts whether the City Council would
have allowed King William street to be in-
terfered with in that in aimer, but the
members had thoughtfully recognised with
the committee that such a memorial as His
Excellency had just unveiled demanded the
best position that could be given it.
(Cheers.) Mr. Fisher had struck
an important note in suggesting
that many statues had yet to be erected
to commemorate the lives and labours of
the early pioneers of the State. (Cheers.)
He thought immediate attention should be
directed to a memorial to the great ex-
plorer Sturt, who visited parts of Austra-
lia before South Australia was founded. In
a sense he was one of the founders, because
on his reports the founders of the State
acted. Capt. Sturt was afterwards a citi-
zen of South Australia and a member of the
South Australian Civil Service and Govern-
ment. The committee appreciated the vote
of thanks, which he acknowledged with
sincerity. (Cheers.)
—“What About a Half Holiday?”—
Towards the close of the ceremony, when
the chances of a respite from school duties
seemed to be fleeting, a questioning boyish
voice rang out —“What about a half-holi-
day?” His Excellency smiled at the abrupt
and pertinent enquiry, and, calling Mjr.
Neale, who represented the Education De-
partment, remarked—“ Some of the boys
are reminding me of something which I
never try to forget in South Australia—a
holiday. (Cheers.) Will you please see,
Mjr. Neale, that a half-holiday is grant-
ed them to day?” (Cheers.) Mjr. Neale
acquiesced, and the boys applauded vocife-
rously. If for Nothing else it was due to
them for the courage they displayed in
standing to attention under a severely hot
sun throughout a ceremony, which extend-
ed for an hour and a quarter.
—Cheers for the Sculptor.—
At the call of His Excellency cheers of
admiration for the work of the sculptor
(Mr. Birnie Rhind, E.A.) closed the his-
toric proceedings.
—A Descendant of Light.—
We have received the following letter
from Mr. Robert J.Hogg:—lo7 Elgin street,
Carlton, Victoria:—“l regret that owing to
shortness of time to make business arrange-
ments I will be unable to be present at the
ceremony of unveiling the statue of Col.
Light. I tender my humble appreciation as
a descendant of the one whose memory you
so practically revere, and trust that the
function will be an eminent success.”
AN ASSEMBLY
The following, who arrived in South Aus-
tralia, or were born in the State prior to
1845, signified their intention of being pre-
sent at the unveiling of the statue: —
Mrs. Susan Andrews, Norwood, ship Canton,
1815; Mr. J. Austin, Sturt street, ship Bucking-
hamshire. 1839; Mr. J. Shep. Anthony, Malvern,
born in State. 1841; Mrs. Margaret Aughey, Hutt
street, ship Navarino, 1837; Mr. W. H. Ayliffe,
Brighton, born in State, 1844; Mr. J. B. Adam-
son, Unley, ship Recovery, 1839; Mrs. P. E. Ab-
bott, Kensington, ship Rajahstan, 1840.
Mrs. Emma Brown, Hindmarsh, arrived 1837;
Mr. James Beames, ship Pairlie, 1840; Mr. R. H.
11. Brown, Kent Town, arrived 1841; Mr. and
Mrs. William Burfcrd. bom in State; Mr. William
Biggs, Bowden, ship Resource, 1839: Mrs. J. V.
Backhouse. Fitzroy, ship Fairfield, 1840: Mr. H.
Burford. Yacka, bom in State. 1843; Mrs. E. Bar-
low. Parkside, ship Eliza. 1840; Mr. John Bur-
gess, Magill, ship Fairlie, 1840; Mr. J. Battersby,
West Hindmarsh, ship Prince George, 1838; Mr.
William D. Bottomley, Croydon; Mrs. Alice Bot-
tomley, Croydon; Mr. W. L. Beare, Glenelg, ship
OF PIONEERS.
Duke of York, 1836; Mr. Jabez Burford, Yacki,
ship Lady Emma, 1836; Mr. G. G. Breaker, Unley,
shin Buffalo. 1836.
Mrs. Lydia Cross, Parkside South, ship Royal
Admiral. 1838; Mr. J. Chitleborcugh, Hindmarsh,
arrived 1836; Mr. J. R. Chapman, sen.. Pros-
pect, ship Pharsee, 1838; Mrs. George Cooper.
Plympton, bo:n in State, 1842; Mr. B. Chasten,
Southwark, ship Eden, 1838; Mr. H. Crabb. North
Adelaide, ship Java, 1840; Mr. Thomas Cragen,
Grange; Mrs. M. A. Childs, Parkside, ship Fair-
lie, 1840; Mr. T. Cornish. St. Peters, ship Bright-
man. 1840; Mr. W. G. C. Cole, Grange, ship Ly-
Sander. 1839; Mr. W. S. C. Collins, Maylands,
arrived 1837.
Mr. W. Douglas, Salisbury, ship Pestonjee Bo-
rnanjee, 1838; Mr. Thomas Day, Keswick, arrived
1840; Mr. W. A. Dußieu, Semiphore, ship Planter,
1839; Mr. Charles Drummond, Kent Town,, ship
Sir Charles Forbes. 1839.
Mr. Henry Edwards, Unley road, ship Delhi,
1839; Mr. William Edge, Norwood, ship Duchess
ox Northumberland, 1839; Mr. J. E. Earle. Payne-
ham. born in State; Mrs. G. T. Eardley, Hind-
40


marsh, ship Moffat, 1839; Mrs. E. M. Edwards,
Wayville. born in State, 1842; Mr. J. J. Earle,
Lockleys. ship D’Auvergne, 1840.
Mr. Robert Forrester. Adelaide, ship Dauntless,
1840; Mr. C. F. Folland, sen., Enfield; Mr.
George Fishlock. Oakbank, ship Hoogly, 1839;
Mrs. George Foreman, Southwark, arrived 1839;
Mr. F Frost, Adelaide, ship Asia, 1839.
Mrs. Grant. North Adelaide, ship Pestonjee Bo-
manjee, 1838; Mrs. Greer, Hurtle square, born in
State; Mr. George Goldsack, Hutt street, arrived
ISI4J Mrs. George Goldsack. Hutt street, born in
State, 1841; Mrs. Phoebe Greig, Crystal Brook,
born in State. 1841; Mrs. S. E. Graham, North
Adelaide; Mrs. E. S. Green, North Adelaide, ar-
rived 1845; Mrs. Griffiths, Adelaide, arrived 1839;
Mrs. Margaret Paterson Graham, Strathalbyn, ship
Dauntless. 1840.
Mr. George R. Hughes, North Unley, arrived
1340; Mr. Henry Harrrp, Semaphore, ship Duke
of Roxburgh. 1838; Mr. T. G. Haddriek, Glenelg,
shjp Resource, 1839; Mrs. Hyde, Port Adelaide,
in State in 1840; Mr. Arthur Hardy, Glenelg, ar-
rived 1839; Mrs. John Hill, Prospect, ship Ly-
sander, 1840; Miss Hancock, Prospect,
ship Lysander, 1840; Mrs. Hosken, Cla-
rence Park, ship Buffalo, 1836; Mr. G.
W. Hill, Salisbury, arrived 1839; Mrs.
IV. Huish, Field street, born in State in 1845;
Mr, IV. H. Holmes, Henley Beach, arrived 1839;
Mr. William Hay. North Adelaide, arrived 1838;
Mr. Robert Hall, Adelaide, born 1842; Mr. Ed-
ward Hall, Adelaide, ship Baboo, 1810.
Mr. J. Jeffries, Salisbury, arrived 1840.
Mrs. Martha Kingsley, Nailsworth. ship Buck-
inghamshire, 1839; Mrs. Johann Kerndt, Coroman-
del Valley, ship Siam, 1841; Mrs. D. Kekwick,
sen., North Adelaide, ship Cygnet, 1841.
Mr. and Mrs. William Latta, sen., Norwood, ar-
rived 1830 and 1840 respectively; Mrs. E. Lazar,
Wright street, ship Buckinghamshire, 1839; Mr.
P. P. Laffer. Blackwood, ship Morley. 1840.
Mrs. Helen Mantegani, North Adelaide, ship
Africaine, 1836; Mr. Richard Martin, Payneham,
ship Lysander, 1840; Mr. Hugh McOallum Ful-
larton, born in State, 1841; Mr. H. T. Morris,
Kapunda, ship Buffalo, 1836; Mr. Edward Mack-
lip, Darlington, ship Lysander, 1840; Mr. and
Mrs. J. Fox Mellor, Fulham, born in State 1841;
Mr. Henry Malpas, Willunga, ship Lvsander, 1840;
Mrs. G. Mugg, Goodwood, ship John Renwick,
1837; Mrs. McLachlan, Port Adelaide, arrived
1842; Mr. John Minchin, Eastwood, born in 1840;
Mrs. McNicol, sen., Salisbury, ship Pestonjee Bo-
maniee, 1838.
Mr. Thomas Neill, Fitzroy. ship Recovery, 1839;
Mrs. Thomas Neill, Fitzroy, ship Charles Kerr,
1840; Mr. David Nock, Glenelg, arrived 1844; Mrs.
R. Norman. New Thebarton, ship Navarino, 1837;
Mrs. Mary Nimnio. Carrington street, born .in
State; Mr. W. Newland, Woodville, ship Sir
Charles Forbes. 1849.
Mr. T. J. S. O’Halloran, North Adelaide, ship
Rajahstan. 1838; Mr. John Ottaway, sen., Birken-
head, arrived 1838; Mrs. O. Opie, Little Adelaide,
ship Surge, 1839.
Mr. Richard Parkyn, Wright Street, ship Cleve-
land 1839 ; Mr. Thomas Peirce, Blackburn street,
ship Singapore, 1839; Mr. W. Pedler, Salisbury,
ship Royal Admiral, 1838; Misses Mary and Eliza-
beth Peirce. Elgin, ship Singapore, 1839; Mr.
J. N. Perry, Pirie street, ship Asia, 1839; Mr.
Richard Perry. St. Peters, born in State, 1842 ;
Mr. Clement Pratt, Flinders street, ship D’Au-
vergne, 1838 ; Mrs. E. Putland, Norwood, ship
Eliza, 1840: Mrs. S. L. Phillips, North Adelaide,
ship Singapore, 1839; Mr. 0. B. Powell, Coro-
mandel Valley, born in State, 1840.
Mrs. Millioant Rone, Payneham, ship Canton,
1844; Mr. George E. Roberts, Grote street, born
in Adelaide, 1843; Mrs. George E. Roberts, bom
at Enfield, 1842; Mrs. G. Ragless, sen., Edwarda-
town, ship Joseph Albino, 1844; Miss Rogers, Ma-
gill, ship Platina, 1839.
Mr. Jonu Shepherd, Goodwood, ship Francis
Speight, 1848; Mr. J. P. Swann, Salisbury; Mr.
George Edward Swann, Angaston; Mr. S. J. Swann,
Salisbury, ship Joseph Albino, 1844; Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Smith, Stockport, ships Singapore and
Duchess of Northumberland, 1839; Mr. J. B. Sto-
dart. New Parkside, ship Palmyra, 1839: Mr.
Charles Smith. Oakbank, ship The Mariner, 1843;
Mr. George Scrymgour, Adelaide, ship Ganges,
1838 ; Mr. P. Stow, Prospect, ship Haitley,
1837; Mr. H. Shearing, Marion, ship Buckingham-
shire, 1839; Mrs. Smith, Adelaide, arrived 1839;
Mr. and Mrs. B. Sanders, Mount Barker, arrived
1844 and 1845 respectively ; Mrs. M. A. Strat-
ton. North Unley. arrived 1839 ; Mr. G. F. Spar-
shott, Wellington square, born in State, 1840;
Mrs. G. H. Stephens, Norwood, ship Java, 1840;
Mr. and Mrs. George Smith, North-East Road ;
Mrs. C. Stace, North Adelaide ; Mrs. J. Smith,
Fulham, arrived 1840; Mr. W. J. S. Stacy, Mount
Lofty, ship Anna Robinson, 1839; Mrs. W. J. S.
Stacy, arrived 1840.
Mr. Robert Tomkins, Bowden, ship Eden, 1838.
Mrs. G. Vincent, Norwood, ship Royal Admi-
ral, 1840.
Mr. John Witherick, Waymouth street, in State
Prior to 1845; Mr. A. M. Wooldridge, Hyde Park,
born in State prior to 1845 ; Mr. Thomas Wig-
gins, Salisbury, arrived 1837 ; Mrs. E. Winzer,
Norwood, ship Royal Admiral, 1840 ; Mrs. Eliza
Williams, Enfield, born in State 1840 ; Mr. H.
P. Wickham, Woodville, arrived 1840 : Mr. Peter
Whitington, Hyde Park ; Mrs. J. W. Wilder,
Franklin street, ship Ganges, 1839 ; Mrs. S. A.
Willoughby. Churchill street, born in State, 1836;
Mr. Daniel Whickham, Parkside, ship Africaine.
1836; airs. S. J. Walton, Walkervil'ie, ship Hen-
ry Porcher, 1838; Mr. H. Wilkins, Parkside, born
in State, 1837; Mr. D. H. H. Weir, Adelaide,
ship Prince Regent, 1839; Mrs. Eliza Waldmore,
Maaryatville, ship Fairfield. 1840.
W.K.THOMAS &. C 2. PRINTERS. ADELAIDE.
41






•
'
*
A
