

Colonial Representation
london.
OUR SELF GOVERNING COLONIES.
HOW THEIR
INTERESTS ARE PROMOTED
IN THE
UNITED KINGDOM.
Illustrated with
PORTRAITS OF COLONIAL REPRESENTATIVES.
From Sell's “ Dictionary of the World's Press," 1900.




COLONIAL REPRESENTATION IN LONDON.
OUR SELF-GOVERNING COLONIES.
How their Interests are Promoted in the United Kingdom.
ILLUSTRATED WITH PORTRAITS OF COLONIAL REPRESENTATIVES.
I I 'THE Empire’s self-governing Colonies are represented here by a High Com-
\\ I missioner in the case of Canada and by Agents-General in the case of the Cape
of Good Hope, Natal, New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland,
Western Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. The Canadian Provinces of
British Columbia, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia, have also Agents-General;
their status is interesting in view of Australian; Federation, and may be gathered from
the perusal of Mr. Duff-Miller’s commission appointing him Agent-General for New
Brunswick. It runs as follows :
Seal \
province I “ VICTORIA, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great
. y Britain and Ireland, QUEEN, Defender of the Faith, &c., &c., &c.
{Signed) To our Trusty and Well-beloved Charles Alexander Duff Miller,
Jno. Jas. Fraser." of London, S.E., England, Gentleman.
REPOSING especial trust and confidence in your experience,
loyalty, skill and integrity, WE have nominated, constituted
and appointed, and by these PRESENTS do nominate, constitute
and appoint You the said Charles Alexander Duff Miller, to be
during our pleasure, Agent-General of our said Province of New
Brunswick, in Great Britain and Ireland, hereby giving and
granting unto You full power and authority to do perform and
execute all and singular such acts, powers, duties and things as
pertain to the office Agent of this Province, in Great Britain,
and as may be imposed upon and required of You, under our
instructions, from time to time, lawfully to do, perform and
execute. To Have, Hold, Exercise and Enjoy the said office,
but so as not to interfere with ‘the rights, dignitaries, privileges
and duties of the High Commissioner for the Dominion of Canada,
in the United Kingdom.
* The signatories to this commission, Jno. Jas. Fraser and James Mitchell, are respectively the
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province and the Provincial Secretary.


‘‘Given under the Great Seal of our Province of New Brunswick;
Witness Our trusty and well-beloved The Honorable John James
Fraser, Lieutenant Governor of our said Province, at Fredericton,
the Eighteenth day of February, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Eight Hundred and Ninety Six and in the Fifty Ninth
year of our Reign.
“ BY COMMAND OF THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR.
{Signed) “ JAMES MITCHELL.”*
The superior title given to Canada’s representative is due to the fact that Canada
is a federation of colonies ; therefore, the official head in the United Kingdom has wider
interests to promote than has the Agent-General of a single Colony. When the
Australian Colonies have been federated, there will probably be a High Commissioner
for Australasia ; and when our African possessions have undergone similar development
there will probably be a High Commissioner for British Africa. Meanwhile the office
of the High Commissioner and the offices of the Agents-General, allowance being made
for differences in the magnitude of the countries they severally represent, are run on
much the same lines and have each the same aim—the development of the resources
and trade of that part of the empire each is connected with. These offices consequently
provide pretty much the same facilities; they are even for the most part in the same
locality, Victoria Street, Westminster.
As to the facilities, a member of the Press, or the law, or a man of business, or
indeed any one, wishing to have any point cleared up regarding Canada, say, would
go to the High Commissioner’s Office, where unless he could be answered over
the counter, so to speak, he would have the privilege of consulting the excellent
reference library kept in the office. Then when colonists come here on a visit,
they usually make for the office of their own colony. There they see their leading
newspapers which are kept on file and have their letters received and forwarded to them
wherever they may be. If a Colonist wishes to go to the House of Commons or to see
a procession or anything requiring a pass, he goes to his Agent-General and gets what
he wants through him.
These are rather of the nature of incidental duties—the main duty of an Agent-
General being to act for the different Government departments of his own Colony. He
is, therefore, called Agent -General —Agent to Government departments generally.
Whatever any Government department wants done, he will do—buy or sell or give
away, engage a policeman, or a schoolmaster, or a railway booking clerk or general-
manager, or a commanding officer for Colonial forces, borrow money, pay pensions,
and so forth.
As to the work of his office, the High Commissioner says : —“ Apart from the heavy
correspondence with the departments in Ottawa and those in London, and on emigration
and other matters, the actual number of letters received relating to trade and commerce
numbered last year, 1,231. Several letters have frequently to be written about one
inquiry, and personal investigation is also frequently necessary. Besides the corre-
spondence, the number of callers during the 3 ear numbered 12,578. Of these 1,680
were Canadians who registered; and the balance, deducting a proportion for duplicate
calls on the part of Canadian visitors, represent inquiries for information on emigration,
on trade and commerce, and on general matters, and it is safe to say that at least one
half the number related to questions of trade. Our inquiries have not only come from
* The signatories to this commission, Jno. Jas. Fraser ani James Mitchell, are respectively the
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province and the Provincial Secretary.


the United Kingdom and from Canada, but there is a growing correspondence with
continental countries, which are also becoming interested in the development of
Canadian commerce.” From what the High Commissioner says of his office, a general
idea of what goes on in the other Colonial Offices in London may be gathered.
As to the Colonies being represented in the Home Parliament by their Agents-
General—a point once mooted in connection with Imperial Federation—the compiler
of this article has gathered in the course of the numerous interviews he has had at
the different Agencies that it is regarded as a scheme not likely to be ever realised, and
moreover as one fraught with inconvenience. “ For instance,” and though these are
not the exact words used in any one case, they represent the prevailing opinion,
“ suppose the Agent-General had some important business he wished to get through
with, say, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, and suppose a Government proposal
were before the House of Commons that he disapproved of, if he voted according to his
convictions he would offend the man he was next morning going to call on and whose
good graces he might be desirous of cultivating ; and if he voted against his con-
victions, well—but you can finish the argument yourself! ”
We proceed to give a few details of each, interspersed with biographical notes
and the portraits of the chiefs—the order observed being according to the year the
several colonies received Eesponsible Government, viz.: after Canada, which was
formed into a Dominion in 1867, New Zealand (1852), Victoria (1854), New South
Wales (1855), South Australia (1856), Tasmania (1856), Queensland (1859), West
Australia (1890), Cape of Good Hope (1892), and Natal (1893).


CANADA.
In a description of the representation of Canada in the home
country, written for the Canadian Magazine by Mr.
J. G. Colmer, C.M.G., Secretary of the Canadian
Government’s Office in London, that gentleman says
“the High Commissioner for Canada is recognised as
the doyen of the Colonial representatives in the United


Kingdom.” We, therefore, commence with the present
holder of that office, Lord Strathcona and Mount
Royal, G.C.M.G., who, born in Morayshire, N. 8., in
1820, achieved distinction as plain Donald Alexander
Smith. He began life in the service of the Hudson
Bay Company, spending thirteen years on the Labrador
Coast. He was thereafter stationed in the North-West
Territories, and attained the position of Resident
Governor and Chief Commissioner of the Company in
Canada. For his work as Special Commissioner to the
Canadian Government in 1869 in settling differences
in the Red River Settlement he received the thanks
of the Governor-General in Council, and in 1870 began
his Parliamentary career, sitting in the Dominion
Parliament at Ottawa and in the North-West Territorial
Council. In 1896, the year in which he became High
Commissioner, he represented Canada on the Pacific
Cable Conference held in London, and in 1897 he was
raised to the Peerage. What Lord Strathcona has been
to Canada, and therefore to the Empire, we cannot
convey here, but some conception of the great force he
has exercised may be gathered from a few remarks by
his predecessor in the office of High Commissioner,
Sir Charles Tupper, viz., “The Canadian Pacific Rail-
way would have no existence to-day, notwithstanding
all that the Government did to support that undertaking,
had it not been for the indomitable pluck and energy
and determination, both financially and in every other
respect, of Sir Donald Smith.” Lord Strathcona’s
close connection with the commercial development of
Canada is well known, and may to a certain extent be


gathered from the positions he occupies in addition
to those mentioned. He is, to name only a few of these
positions, President of the Bank of Montreal, Governor
of .the Hudson Bay Company, Director of the
Canadian Pacific Railway Company, and Director of the
Commercial Cable Company.
As to the office of High Commissioner, that was created in 1880 by an Act of the
Dominion Parliament, which lays down that “the High Commissioner (shall act as
representative and resident agent of Canada in the United Kingdom, and in that
capacity execute such powers and perform such duties as are, from time to time, con-
ferred upon and assigned to him by the Governor-in-Council; take the charge,
supervision, and control of the immigration offices and agencies in the United
Kingdom, under the Minister of Agriculture ; carry out such instructions as he, from
time to time, receives from the Governor-in-Council respecting the commercial,
financial, and general interests of Canada in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.”
Previous to this the Dominion was represented by a number of emigration agents
appointed and stationed in different centres in the United Kingdom, the chief agent
(Mr. Dixon) residing in London. “These agents”—we cannot do better than use
Mr. Colmer’s own words—“ were more or less independent of each other, and usually
reported directly to the Department of Agriculture (Canadian) to which they were
attached. In 1874, however, on the decease of the London agent, it was decided to
appoint an Agent-General for Canada. Mr. Edward Jenkins, who acquired fame as
the author of ‘ Ginx’s Baby,’ was selected for the position, and the other agencies
were placed under his supervision. The promotion of emigration still continued to
be the leading feature of the duties of the Canadian representative, the aid of the late
Sir John Rose, who came to be regarded as a sort of confidential agent of the
Dominion Government, being invoked in connection with any matters of special
importance.” This state of affairs ended with the creation of the High Commissioner’s
office in 1880, as already noted.
The duties of the High Commissioner are very comprehensive,” availing our-
selves of Mr. Colmer’s concise phraseology, “ and include the supervision of the
interests of Canada in the United Kingdom and, incidentally, also on the continent.
His first duty on arrival is to report himself to the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
to whom he is accredited, and by whom he is subsequently presented to Her Majesty
the Queen, as the representative of the Dominion of Canada. He is not only the
representative of Canada and of the Canadian Government collectively, but acts as the
commercial agent of the various departments of which the Government is composed.
He is the intermediary in connection with the many subjects that are continually under
discussion between Her Majesty’s Governments in Canada and in the United Kingdom.’’
He sometimes negotiates loans, is the Trustee for the Sinking Funds of the various
guaranteed loans, arranges the preparation and forwarding of all coinage, and in his
name and the name of the manager of the Bank of Montreal are placed the deposits
in London of the insurance companies doing business in Canada. Through the High
Commissioner’s office “ the stores required by the Militia Department and the North-
West Mounted Police from the War Office are arranged. The same remark applies
to the shipment Of all rails that may be purchased, and to the purchase and shipment
of supplies for other Departments; and the accounts for all these and other services
have to be paid and statements and vouchers rendered to the Departments concerned.”


Apart from mere business the High Commissioner for Canada has social functions
to perform, attends Congresses and conferences—indeed, he has acquired such a status
that “in connection with the negotiations with Spain, and the Treaty with France,
relating to Canadian trade, he was associated as a Joint Plenipotentiary with Her
Majesty’s Ambassadors at Paris and Madrid.”
The Canadian Provinces of British Columbia, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia,
besides being represented generally with the rest of Canada by the High Commissioner,
have each its own Agent-General to promote their special requirements. The
position of these Provincial Agents-General affords an illustration of what the position
of the Agents-General for the Australian Colonies is likely to be on the completion
of federation—Federated Australia represented by a High Commissioner to deal with
and act for the Federal Government, the Agents-General dealing with and acting for
the local or provincial Governments. This fact, already noted, is deemed of sufficient
importance to warrant its repetition.


BRITISH COLUMBIA.
The Agent-General for this Province, Mr. William
Walter, 15, Serjeants’ Inn, Temple, E.C., was
appointed in 1898, being selected by reason of his
knowledge of the country, and interest in it. The
offices of his predecessor, Mr. Forbes George Vernon,
were at Westminster, amongst the other Agents-
General ; but the development of the mines and other
resources of British Columbia coming to depend more


upon the investment of capital than upon anything
else, it was deemed advisable to have the offices in the
City and the duties of the Agent-General specially
devoted to influencing capital towards British Columbian
investments.
British Columbia being the most westerly province of Canada, is thus far removed
from the seat of the Central Government, and is separated from the rest of Canada by
the Rocky Mountains. Its importance to the Dominion is exceedingly great, for its
coast-line is Canada’s only outlet to the Pacific. Its mild climate is in striking
contrast to the severity manifested in more easterly provinces, and is one of the many
other differences justifying special representation here. Its peculiar needs, for
instance, could not be adequately advertised by a general representative for Canada,
which is for the most part an agricultural country, whereas British Columbia is
mainly a mining country. It thus appeals to quite a different class of men, both in
the way of labour and capital.


NEW BRUNSWICK.
Photo by Elliott & Fry
Baker Street.
Born at Kingston, Ontario, Charles A. Duff-Miller, the
Agent-General for New Brunswick since 1896, was
educated at Montreal, and in England and Switzerland.
His father, John Miller, was the inventor and founder of
the tanning extract process, and thereby became an ini-
. portant factor in the development of New Brunswick, with
its extensive forests of hemlock bark. Mr. Duff-Miller has


always taken an active interest in the affairs of his native
Province and in the affairs of the Dominion. Through
his letters to the Times and other organs of the Press
in this country, he was the means of acquiring sub-
stantial support for what was then called the “ National
Policy ” —a policy forced on Canada through the refusal
of the United States to renew the Reciprocity Treaty,
and whose aim was the protection of Canada’s infant
industries against the lustier growths of the States.
This policy was mainly identified with the name of Sir
John A. Macdonald, who marked in a special manner his
sense of Mr. Duff-Miller’s services. For several years
Mr. Miller was in the London Scottish Regiment,
subsequently joining the Princess Louise’s Hussars Bth
N.B. Cavalry. His predecessor, the first Agent-General,
was the late Hon. James I. Fellows.
Reference is made above to Mr. Duff-Miller’s father’s invention of tanning extract—
an invention that has had a considerable effect upon the development of New Brunswick.
It has even determined the location of the London agency, viz., in Leather Market,
Bermondsey. By it the fibrous and woody matters are eliminated from the woods and
barks used in the manufacture of leather, and the remaining tanning properties so
concentrated that one ton of extract takes the place of seven tons of the original tan bark.
This effects a great economy in carriage, and the enormous extension that has gradually
taken place in the importation of tanning exti’act into England has enabled us to retain
our great leather tanning industry in spite of our diminished supply of oak bark.
The following further particulars regarding New Brunswick and her industries
and Provincial Agents-General are of interest as coming direct from the pen of Mr.
Duff-Miller himself:—
“New Brunswick was the province to take the first decisive step which led
in 1867 to the Federation that now forms the Canadian Dominion. Of its population
of about 330,000, only one per cent, is of non-British origin. Its area is two-thirds
the size of England. Chief industries—farming, fishing, the manufacturing of
timber, wood-pulp for paper-making, tanning extracts, cotton goods, leather boots
and shoes, furniture, &c. Large and promising deposits of petroleum have lately
been found to exist in the Province.
“New Brunswick derives its name from the reigning House of England.
Formerly part of Nova Scotia, it was formed into a separate province in 1783, when
it received a large addition of population from the refugee Loyalists from the
neighbouring English Colonies, which then became the United States of America.
“ New Brunswick is not the only province of the Dominion having an Agent-
Oeneral in London, the others being Nova Scotia and British Columbia, Although


the whole of Canada is represented by a High Commissioner, the Provinces named
consider it desirable to have their special and exclusively provincial interests looked
after by an Agent-General. Each o ithe Provinces of the Dominion is a complete
State in itself under the British flag, and its powers and privileges and rights are so to
speak delegated or lent to the Dominion ; so each has a perfect right to appoint its own
representative, in addition to the Dominion Representative, and I believe this arrange-
ment gives the utmost satisfaction to the people and Governments of the Provinces in
question.
“ The Agents-General are all gentlemen who have a thorough and personal
knowledge of the particular province they represent, and who can therefore readily
communicate this knowledge to others, the duties of each being to give information
in regard to the varied resources of his province, to forward its special and more
individual or provincial interests; to advise and assist members of the Government
and other gentlemen when they visit the Metropolis of the Empire, and to help
forward the objects of their visit; and in every legitimate way to make known and
advance the country they represent.
“ There is little doubt that the different Colonies of Australia when they federate
will still retain their Agents-General in London, although they, too, as a Common-
wealth or Federated Dominion, will be represented also by a High Commissioner.”


NOVA SCOTIA.
Photo by London Stereoscopic Company,
Cheapside
Mr. John Howard became Agent-General in 1892. He is
a Nova Scotian, having been born there in 1856. He
was educated in England, F ranee, and Germany, and
on returning to his native Province, embarked upon
a commercial career. Before his appointment to his
present position he was in the High Commissioner’s
office for Canada. His predecessor, the late Hon.
William Annand, at one time Premier, was Nova
Scotia’s first Agent-General.


The chief duties of the Agent-General consist in promoting the individual interests
of Nova Scotia, as circumstances may require, by making more generally known the
capabilities and resources of the Province, and the many opportunities that occur
for the profitable employment of capital in their development or in other directions,
and by bringing forward the advantages it offers as a field for immigration to the
better class of settlers ; as well as by acting for the Government in commercial and
financial matters. In respect of the latter it is satisfactory to know that Nova Scotia's
credit stands high, as was evidenced by the fact that her last loan placed on the London
market last August was subscribed for more than twice over despite the unfavourable
state of the money market prevailing at the time. The wealth of Nova Scotia lies
principally in her fisheries, minerals, lumber and agricultural products, fruit and dairy-
ing. The fisheries are perhaps best known by their variety and inexhaustible supply.
The value of the fish taken annually is nearly £2,000,000, of which about £1,000,000
represents those exported. The chief minerals are coal, gold, iron (found in close
proximity) gypsum, antimony, barytes, manganese, copper, and lead. The total coal
area is 4,000 square miles, with an available working of forty billion tons, but the
present output is only about 3,000,000 tons. Gold, hitherto not systematically worked,
has in twenty-six years yielded £2,750,000. Millions of feet of lumber are shipped to
different parts of the world. The Nova Scotian apple trade is an increasing and im-
portant one. About 500,000 barrels are now grown annually, a large portion of which
is exported to Great Britain, and command the highest prices owing to their fine
flavour and keeping qualities. The building of wooden ships was at one time a very
prosperous industry, and Nova Scotia owned more shipping in proportion to population
than any other country. With the introduction of iron ships, however, the industry
has fallen into decay, but the attention of capitalists having been attracted by the
advantages of the coal being found contiguous to iron and limestone for iron ship
building, it is reported that the industry is likely to be revived. Nova Scotia, which
claims the distinction of being Britain’s oldest colony, having been discoveredby Cabot
in 1497, contains 20,000 square miles and has a population of about 500,000 inhabi-
tants, who are known as “ Blue Noses,” a term which originated with Loyalists who
left the revolting Colonies in 1776, being called “True Blues,” but changed by the
rebels into “ Blue Noses ” as a term of contempt. The designation is, however,
accepted by every Nova Scotian as a most flattering one. Since Confederation, Nova
Scotia sends 20 members to the Federal Parliament and has 10 Members in the Senate.
The local Parliament consists of 38 Members and there are 21 Members in the
Legislative Council. In addition to these representatives there is a perfect system of
municipal government in operation in the 18 Counties. The capital of the Province
and seat of the local Government is Halifax with a population of about 50,000. It is
the Headquarters of the Navy and Army in British North America. Besides the
regular forces quartered there the city has two Volunteer Infantry Battalions and two
Artillery Corps. Its magnificent harbour is commanded by the Citadel, and numerous
forts and batteries protect the entrances. The people on the seaboard are mostly
engaged in fishing and are a fine hardy race, making ideal material for the formation
of a reserve which could be drafted into the Naval service, should occasion require.
The men engaged in the fishing industry alone number about 20,000, who in the
winter months when they cannot follow their calling, might be trained so as to be
efficient should they be called upon to act in support of the Empire.
In the event of war the strategical position of Nova Scotia becomes at once apparent
as a base of operations in the North Atlantic for defending the great Canadian food
route to the United Kingdom, and none the less important would be the coal measures,
for they are practically the only source of supply across the Atlantic accessible to
British ships of war. In Cape Breton some of the mines are on the coast and extend
both inland and seawards, making it possible for a ship to receive direct from the pit’s
mouth the coal taken from below where she is moored.


NEW ZEALAND.
Photo by Bussell <t~ Sons,
Baker street, W.
The
Hon. William Pember Reeves was appointed Agent-
General for New Zealand in 1896. The son of the Hon.
William Reeves, of Christchurch, New Zealand, he was
born in 1857. He is a J.P. for New Zealand, and has
occupied the positions of Minister of Education and of
Labour and Justice in the Colony.


This Colony’s London office was established in 1871; previous to that a member of
a mercantile firm in London had acted for the Government. At first the Agent-General’s
duties consisted principally in selecting and sending out emigrants and in making the
resources and possibilities of New Zealand known. This latter duty still devolves on
him, and while free or assisted Government emigration has been discontinued he now
has the selecting for reduced rates of passage of people desirous of going to that distant
Colony to settle. The extension of public works, such as railways, telegraph lines,
gives much work for the Agent-General’s Department, contracts for the supply of
materials for these works, and arrangements for their delivery and shipment being
made by that office on behalf of all the Government Departments in the Colony.
Copies of all the leading books published in this country are obtained and sent to the
New Zealand Parliamentary Library. The Agent-General acts in this country for the
Public Trustee of New Zealand, and for the Government Insurance Department,
receiving the premiums of policy holders resident here, and paying the liabilities con-
nected therewith when they become due. In the matter of the Colony’s defence he
deals with the War Office and sends out the requisite military stores. He has also
the sending out of officers, commissioned and non-commissioned, for the militia and
volunteers, and assists local bodies in the Colony requiring competent officers for any
position. He receives his instructions direct from the Prime Minister, except in
matters of finance, regarding which he corresponds direct with the Colonial Treasurer.
The Permanent Secretary has a staff under him of ten clerks and messengers.
Attached to the Agent-General’s Department are Consulting Engineers, both railway
and telegraph, also an Inspector of Produce, whose duties are to examine cargoes as
they arrive from New Zealand and to report upon their condition, pointing out defects
in packing, when they occur, as shown after a long voyage; thus enabling the con-
signors to guard against them and improve their methods ol presenting their produce
to the home market.
It is remarked above that the Agent-General, amongst his other duties, acts in
this country for the Public Trustee of New Zealand. As this is an official much
desired by many here, we add a few words as to his uses. The Public Trust Office was
constituted by “ The Public Trust Office Act, 1872,” and its powers enlarged by “ The
Public Trust Office Consolidation Act, 1894.” The office is designed mainly to afford,
at low rates of commission, a secure and convenient recourse in every case where a
person residing either in New Zealand or abroad, and desiring to form a trust or
appoint an agent or attorney in the Colony, may be in doubt or difficulty as to the
choice of a trustee, executor, agent, or attorney. The office is also designed to relieve
those who may be appointed trustees of property in the Colony, or who, after having
accepted the trusts of such property, may, for various reasons, be unwilling or unable
to undertake or continue the administration. The good faith of the Public Trust
Office is guaranteed by the Government, the Colony itself being pledged to maintain
the integrity of all capital funds entrusted to it.
The Agent-General also acts, as mentioned, for the New Zealand Government
Life Insurance Department, as to which we quote this interesting paragraph from the
“ New Zealand Year Book.” “It has frequently been stated that the people of New
Zealand carry more insurance on their lives than the people of any other country in
the world, and it must gratify all admirers of thrift to know that such is the fact.
The other life offices in New Zealand combined have a slightly larger amount of
insurance on their books than the Government Department alone, and it is estimated
that on the average every male adult carries life insurance to the extent of somewhat
oyer £75. In addition to this, an average of between £6 and ‘£7 is assured on the
lives of females over fifteen years of age.”


VICTORIA.
Photo hy Elliott <& Fry ,
Baker Street, W.
The Agent-General for Victoria, Lieut.-General Sir Andrew
Clarke, R.E., G.C.M.G., C. 8., C.1.E., son of Colonel
Andrew Clarke, of Co. Donegal, was born in 1824.


He entered the Royal Engineers at the age of twenty,
and saw active service in the New Zealand Campaign
of 1847-8, and was Secretary to the Governor and
Member of the Legislative Council of Van Dieman’s
Land. In 1853 he became Surveyor-General and
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands for Victoria, with
a seat in the Legislative Council, and on responsible
Government being granted the Colony in 1854, he was
included in the first Ministry, having been returned
Member of the Assembly for the City of Melbourne.
In 1863 he resumed a military career, being engaged in
the operations against the Ashantis on the Gold Coast;
Director of Works of the Navy 1864-73. During the
years 1873-5 he was Governor of the Straits Settle-
ments, when he brought the Malay States of the
Peninsula under the protection of Great Britain, at the
termination of his tenure of office being sent on
a special mission to Siam. After serving as
Director of Public Works in India, with a seat in the
Viceroy’s Council, he became in 1881 Commandant of
the School of Military Engineering at Chatham, and
in 1882 Inspector-General of Fortifications. He has
already represented Victoria in this country as Agent-
General three times, his present or fourth filling of the
office dating from January, 1897.
On being asked to describe the nature of the work of the office of Agent-General
for Victoria, which office, by the way, was established in 1869, Sir Andrew replied
that the subjects he has to deal with are too varied and numerous to be explained
succinctly. However, he would indicate some of them generally, and leave those that
heard or read to fill in what details their knowledge of the Colony and of a Government
office might help their fancy to suggest.
“ For instance,” he said, “ and speaking generally, and maybe loosely, in addition
to the negotiations with the Imperial offices on subjects which affect the Colony
individually or the Empire generally, such as the Pacific Cable, Mail Subsidies, New


Hebrides, negotiations regarding federation, distribution of funds to him in this country
of intestate estates, &c., &c., the duties of an Agent-General comprise the buying of
stores for the naval and military forces, and material for the State railways. He also
receives indents for other Government stores in connection with the Post Office, light-
houses, &c. One of the chief duties of an Agent-General is to disseminate information
about the Colony, and advise intending emigrants. Then there is attached to this office a
mining expert, specially sent over by the Victorian Government for the purpose of
furnishing information relating to the mineral resources of the Colony. In this way
all the Government reports and plans can be consulted by intending investors. The
officer supplies information, but is prohibited from giving advice. Agriculture being a
most important industry of the Colony, and large and increasing consignments being
sent every week to this country, the Melbourne authorities have thought it advisable
to have a branch office of the Agent-General’s Department in the City, the duties of
the officer-in-charge being solely that of looking after the agricultural interests of the
Colony.”
As to the New Hebrides, which Sir Andrew specifies as a question of Imperial
import, a word or two of explanation may not be superfluous. The proximity of the
New Hebrides to our Australian Colonies makes the future of that territory a serious
question. Our colonists trade with the natives there under strict conditions, which
forbid any dealings in arms, ammunition, and spirits—articles which the natives often
ardently want. French traders, on the other hand, labour under no such restrictions ;
they have thus a great advantage over us—an advantage that will ultimately give them
the ascendency, and may result in their interests becoming so paramount as to lead
them to contemplate annexation. But a great power like France next door, our
colonists regard as a menace to Australasian peace—if not indeed to Australasian
security, and they wish the Imperial Government to step in and do something-
sole protection for choice. That is the New Hebrides question.
Another question, regarding which negotiations are now being conducted between
the Imperial Government and the Agent-General for Victoria, is as to the coinage of
silver. Victoria is allowed to coin gold, an operation on which there is a loss, and she
naturally thinks that if she is fit to be trusted with the minting of gold—the greater—she
is fit to be trusted with the minting of silver —the less. Moreover, there is a good deal of
profit accruing from the minting of silver, and naturally she would like some of that
profit. The Imperial Treasury hesitates conceding this request, however, and perhaps
not altogether unreasonably—at any rate, until there be found some proper regulations
defining the extent to which Victoria may turn out silver coins. Silver is a raw product
in Victoria and comes here to be made into coin, in which shape it is sent back again.
A useless expenditure, say the Victorians. Quite true ; but if Victoria be allowed a free
hand in coining silver, what is to prevent her flooding the Empire with half-crowns and
shillings, and -so getting an enhanced price for her silver ? However, this coinage
matter is considered by the authorities not insoluble—in fact, it is nearing a
settlement.
At the Agent-General’s office for Victoria there are all the facilities for visitors and
callers provided at the other London Colonial offices—a library and officials to consult
both by visitors here from the Colony and by those intending to go from here to the
Colony and, indeed, by anyone with an object in view. Hundreds of visitors come
here yearly from Victoria alone —the chief months for arrivals of those on pleasure
being March, April, and May. People on business are arriving all the year round.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Hon. Sir Julian Emanuel Salomons, Q.C., took up
his appointment as Agent-General in March, 1899. He
was born in 1834, in Birmingham, where his father was
a merchant. In 1861 he was called to the Bar (Gray’s
Inn), and practised in New South Wales, and on appeal
before the Privy Council. He was appointed to the


New South Wales Legislative Council in 1870, with a
seat in the Cabinet, and held the office of Solicitor-
General. In 1886 he became Chief-Justice, and during
the periods 1887-9 an d 1891-3 he was Vice-President of
the Executive Council and representative of the Govern-
ment in the Legislative Council.
The duties of the Agent-General for New South Wales are practically the same as
the duties of other Agents-General. Although no Government-assisted passages are
now granted, the office is always ready and willing to answer inquiries from intending
emigrants. Of course, the Agency is there for commercial people as well, to utilise
as a means of obtaining needed information ; and it is, accordingly, like the other
Agencies, the recipient of thousands of letters per annum on all subjects. Like the
other Agencies, too, it does the financial work here for its Government, negotiating
loans and paying off liabilities ; and it purchases stores for its Government Depart-
ments—railway and telegraphic materials, arms and ammunition for defence, &c., &c.
There is no regular Inspector of Colonial Produce attached to the Department, but
the Agent-General is frequently called upon by the New South Wales Government
to obtain reports upon the condition of cargoes of fruit, meat, &c„ as they arrive from
the Colony.
Files of the Government Gazette and the leading Sydney newspapers are kept,
also complete sets of Parliamentary papers, Statutes, Departmental reports, and so
forth, and these facilities are largely availed of by business people desirous of obtain-
ing information as to company legislation, land and mining laws and regulations, as
well as the various commercial, mineral, and agricultural statistics. Much useful and
valuable work is done at the Agency, towards lessening the general deficiency of know-
ledge of the progress and prospects of the Colony, by the extensive distribution of hand-
books and other literature dealing with New South Wales. Copies of the under-
mentioned publications (official) are generally available on application, viz.; Coghlan’s
exhaustive “ Wealth and Progress of New South Wales,” “ Statistical Register of New
South Wales,” “ New South Wales : the Mother Colony of the Australias,” “ The
Seven Colonies of Australasia,” by T. A. Coghlan, Annual Reports re Mines, Railways,
Public Works, Factories, Education, &c., &c. Railway and other maps are also
obtainable.
Visitors from the Colony, many of whom are business men, are afforded various
conveniences, such as the receipt and forwarding of letters, registration of addresses,
reference to newspaper files, and the varied official and other information available at
the Agency.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Photo by Elliott <£• Fry,
Baker Street , IV.
The Agent-General, The Hon. John A. Cockburn, M.D.,
was born in Berwickshire in 1850, and was educated
at Cholmeley School, Highgate. He studied
Medicine at King’s College, London, and graduated


M.D.,Lond. (gold medal) in 1874. He emigrated to
South Australia in 1875. In 1884 Dr. Cockburn was
elected a Member of the House of Assembly, and was
Minister of Education from June, 1885, to June, 1887.
In June, 1889, he formed a Ministry, and held office till
August, 1890, as Premier and Chief Secretary. His
administration was characterised by the introduction
of Bills providing for Progressive Succession Duties,
and a Progressive Tax on Unimproved Land Values
and other advanced Liberal measures. In 1892 Dr.
Cockburn was again Chief Secretary, and in 1893 he
became Minister of Education and Agriculture in
Mr. Kingston’s Administration, and held these
offices up to 1898, when he was appointed to his
present position. Dr. Cockburn has attended as one
of the Representatives of South Australia all the recent
Conventions which have been held on the subject of
Federation, viz., in Melbourne in 1890, in Sydney in
1891, in Adelaide and Sydney in 1897, and in Mel-
bourne in 1898; he has also frequently represented
South Australia at other inter-Colonial Conferences.
He was the Minister in charge of the measure in the
House of Assembly which in 1894 conferred upon
women the rights of Parliamentary Franchise, and as
Minister of Agriculture organized the Produce Export
Department. In Dr. Cockburn the Colony has a repre-
sentative of marked courtesy and activity.
The province of South Australia was founded in 1836. We give in Ur. Oockburn’s
own words the following account of the origin and work of his office. During the
earlier years of the existence of the Colony the management of public affairs was largely
vested in the hands of Commissioners residing in London. In 1841 the powers of the
Commissioners were transferred to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, and South
Australia became virtually a Crown Colony. In 1856 a constitution conferring the rights


of self-government was conceded, and this was followed by the appointment in 1858 of
Mr. G. S. Walters as Agent-General in England. Consequent upon the death of Mr.
Walters, Mr. F. S. Dutton was appointed in 1866, aod held the office until his death
in 1877. To him succeeded Sir Arthur Blyth, K.C.M.G., C. 8., who also died in
harness in 1891. Sir John Bray, K.C.M.G., followed, but resigned his position on
account of ill health in 1894 ; shortly afterwards he died on the return voyage to
Adelaide. The Hon. Thomas Playford was appointed in 1894, and filled the office
with distinction for four years. During Mr, Piayford’s tenure of office the Agency was
removed from Victoria Street, Westminster, to 1, Crosby Square, in the City. This
step was rendered imperative in consequence of the Government of South Australia
undertaking the inscription of its stock. From every point of view convenience has
resulted from the change. The headquarters of finance, shipping, and business
generally are situated in the City, and experience has shown that proximity to these
greatly facilitates negotiations. The Secretary to the Agency is Mr. T. Fred Wicksteed,
who is also Registrar under the Consolidated Stock Act. In connection with the office
there is also an engineering staff under Mr. Strickland. South Australia has played
an important part in the steps which have recently been taken towards the consumma-
tion of Australasian Federation. Its Premier, the Right Hon. C. C. Kingston, Q.C.,
was President of the Conventions which were held in 1897 and 1898. South Australia
was the first colony in which the referendum to the electors for assent to the proposed
Constitution was this year taken, and the addresses from the Legislature to the Queen
praying for the enabling Imperial Act were the first to reach the hands of Mr.
Chamberlain.


TASMANIA.
Fhe Hon. Sir Philip Oakley Fysh was appointed Agent-
General early in 1899. The son of John Fysh, King’s
Lynn, Norfolk, he was born in 1835, and has twice
attained the position of Premier in Tasmania—in 1877
and in 1887. He also took office as Colonial Treasurer
in 1873, and again in 1893. In 1876 and m 1878 he


joined the Ministries of the day without office, and
during the years 1880-4 he was Major-Commanding
Tasmanian Volunteer Rifle Regiment.
The Tasmanian Agency was established in 1886, the Crown Agents for the
Colonies being previous to that the only representation Tasmania enjoyed here.
Besides shipping stores for the various public departments in the Colony, and affording
information on all matters connected with Tasmania, the Agency pays special heed
to trade openings for Tasmanian produce—especially fruit. When the Tasmanian
apples arrive in spring, each shipment is inspected, and a report furnished to the
Government on its condition, and on the prices realised at auction. Efforts are also
made to push the hard-wood timbers of the Colony in the English markets. These
commercEl duties are carried out by Mr. Herbert W. Ely, the Chief Clerk, whose
connection with the Agency goes back to within two years of its incipiency. As from
the other offices of Agents-General, so from this, literature is widely distributed amongst
libraries arid other institutions, and lantern slides to illustrate lectures freely lent,
especially to managers of Evening Continuation Schools in country districts.


Fhe Hon. James R. Dickson, C.M.G., Premier for Queens-
- land, is a Devonshire man, with a Scottish education
and business training in Scottish banks. He went to
Australia in 1854 —five years previous to the establish-
ment of responsible government —entered Parliament
in 1873, became Secretary for Public Works and Mines
in 1876, then Colonial Treasurer till 1879, and again


from 1883 till 1887, acting- as Premier during Sir S. W.
Griffith’s absence in the Old Country in 1887. After
travels in Europe for over two years, he again entered
Queensland Parliament in 1892, in 1897 became
Secretary for Railways and Postmaster-General, and
in 1898 Premier.
Photo by Russell <£• Sons, Baker Street , H
The Agent-General, The Hon. Sir Horace Tozer,
K.C.M.G., was appointed in April, 1898. He was born
in New South Wales in 1844, and educated in Sydney,


taking to the legal profession. He was first elected
to the Legislative Assembly in 1872, and again in 1888,
1893, and 1896, accepting office as Colonial Secretary
(now Home Secretary) in 1892. Twice he came over to
England as a lawyer to conduct mining cases before
the Privy Council, and has greatly aided in the develop-
ment of Queensland goldfields, in which he has large
owning interests.
The Queensland Agency seems to be more actively engaged than any of the
others in stimulating emigration. This is done under “ The Immigration Act of
1882’' (Colonial) and amending Acts of 1884, 1886, and 1887, which impose upon
the Agent-General the negotiation of the best arrangements for the transport of
emigrants, the selection of free emigrants, the measuring of the pecuniary assistance
to be given to individual farmers in aid of their passage, the systematic distribution
of information as to the Colony’s resources and prospects, the organisation of
emigration agencies, and suitable advertising to attract emigrants of the right kind.
It is of interest to note the methods of advertising pursued by the Agency.
Stalls for the display of Queensland produce are taken at shows and exhibitions;
books, circulars, and leaflets are distributed by the hundred thousand ; so are maps
of the Colony to public libraries, institutions, and schools ; short, pithy articles are
sent out for insertion in the newspapers; lantern slides are supplied to clergymen,
schoolmasters and others, to illustrate lectures on the Colony with; and the Agent-
General himself is always pleased, when his duties permit, to give special addresses.
The other duties of his office are thus summed up by Sir Horace Tozer: to
represent the Colony in its transactions with the Colonial office; to attend to its
financial arrangements with the Bank of England and local bankers, and see that all
liabilities of the Colony are promptly met; to represent Queensland at conferences
and other consultative gatherings —either in the United Kingdom or on the Con-
tinent—in which the political, material, or social interests of the Colony are involved ;
to assist producers and their commercial agents to obtain the highest price for all
imports from the Colony; to arrange the best system for the purchase of materials
and stores by competitive tender ; for proper inspection and for forwarding at the
most reasonable rates, and for the adjustment of all disputes which may arise in
connection with such purchases, and to represent the various departments oi the
Executive Government of the Colony in all matters specially referred by them to
him —such matters as were recently the subjecfs of the Postal Conference, Pacific
Cable Conference, Coinage of Silver Conference, and Sugar Bounties Conference.
Reporting to his Government, Sir Horace Tozer compares the work ol his office
with the work of the other Agents-General in these terms : “ Each of the Colonies is
transacting the same kind of work, and I have not been able to discover that the
number of people, the wealth of any particular colony, or even the quantity of
material purchased for railway construction, are a basis for the quantity of work done
by the several Agents-General in the metropolis. I rather am inclined to judge that
Queensland, whose system involves the purchase and inspection of all its material and
stores by its own officers and not by commission (as is the case with some other
Colonies), and whose policy is to actively attract emigrants and capital, and which
alone employs lecturers in this kingdom, and exhibits at all shows, especially
agricultural, has at present the lion’s share of the work.”


WEST AUSTRALIA.
Photo by Henry Vander Weyde ,
Regent Street , W.
The Hon. Edward Horne Wittenoom was appointed
Agent-General for West Australia in 1898. He had
previously served his Colony as a Member of the
Legislative Council, to which he was elected in 1883,


1884, and 1894. From 1894 to 1898 he occupied a seat
in the Ministry as Minister for Mines and Education,
and held the position as Acting Premier during Sir J.
Forrest’s absence at the Queen’s Jubilee.
The varied nature of the work of an Agent-General’s office is well illustrated
by a few remarks made by Mr. R. C. Hare, Secretary to the West Australian Agency.
“ We have hundreds of letters a day sometimes,” he said, “ from all sorts of people —
engineers, barristers, builders, cabdrivers—all wanting to know something which no
one can tell off hand. It has, accordingly, in each case often to be hunted up, and
may even involve correspondence. We are always pleased to give information
respecting the Colony—indeed, it is our duty to do so.” In his last report Mr.
Wittenoom says :—“ I have spent money liberally in endeavouring to make the
Colony well and favourably known,” and his statement of accounts shows that
payments to the extent of over £9OO were made in the year “ for newspaper notices,
lectures, lantern slides, &c.” Attached to the Agency, too, is a Travelling Repre-
sentative, Mr. E. T. Scammell, who places himself at the disposal of Chambers of
Commerce, and indeed of anybody with sufficient influence to get up a meeting for
him to lecture to —this he does at the Agency’s charges. The Agent-General himself
is always willing, when his engagements permit, to address gatherings deemed
important enough to awaken special interest in regarding West Australia and her
prospects. To the same end books, pamphlets, official reports and returns, news-
papers, maps, plans, &c., received from the various departments in the Colony are
distributed amongst public libraries and institutions, as well as to persons applying
for information. On its more purely business side the Agency during the year made
two applications for loans, sold and redeemed Treasury Bills (Colonial), received
eighty indents relating to railway stores, stationery, Coolgardie water-works, &c.,
sent out emigrants, paid pensions and annuities, and appointed officials for various
posts in the Colony. Now and then something out of the way, so to speak, falls to
the Agency to perform; for instance, if the Colony wants pictures for an art museum,
it purchases them ; a couple of years ago West Australia had an observatory erected,
the Agent-General had to get the plant; and, last year, when Her Majesty made a
gift of four red deer to the Perth Zoological Society, the Agent-General had to ship
them and see that they were sent off all right.


CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
Photo by Elliott d: Fry ,
Baker Street , W,
The Hon. Sir David Tennant, K.C.M.G., was appointed
Agent-General in 1896. The son of Hercules Tennant,
at one time Civil Commissioner and Resident Magistrate
in Cape Town, he was born in 1829. In 1866 he was
elected a Member of the House of Assembly, becoming
Speaker in 1874 —a position he held till 1896. No other


man has held the Speakership of any Legislative
Assembly for so long a period as Sir David.
The nature of some of the details entering into the work of an Agent-General’s
office is exemplified by a letter from Sir David Tennant to the Commissioner of Public
Works, Cape Town. In it occurs the statement that among those selected by the
Agency and sent to the Cape during the year were 31 traffic clerks and 202 trained
employes of various classes for the service of the Railway Department, 16 veterinary
surgeons for the Colonial Veterinary Department, an architectural draughtsman for
the Public Works Department, two assistant engineers and a pile driver for the Port
Elizabeth Harbour Board, four bricklayers for the Table Bay Harbour Board, a secre-
tary for the Meteorological Commission, a charge nurse and a head laundress for the
Valkenburg Asylum, and a gardener for the Botanic Gardens, King William’s Town. To
select suitable candidates for such varied positions as these must involve very careful
judgment, especially in view of the fact that they are intended for a distant country
where the conditions of life and service are quite different from the conditions under
which they have been brought up and trained.


NATAL.
Photo by Russell (6 Sons,
Baber Street, W.
Sir
Walter Peace, K.C.M.G., Agent-General for Natal,was
appointed in 1893 —the year in which the office was created
and the year in which responsible government was granted
to the Colony. Sir Walter, like Sir John Robinson, the
first Premier, is a Yorkshireman, and went out to Natal


in 1863 with a friend named North. The two worked
together at farming, and then went into business as
North, Peace, and Co., merchants and millers, Durban.
Sir Walter’s first official position was as Belgian Consul
in Natal. Thereafter, having acquired an intimate know-
ledge of the requirements of the Colony, he returned in
1879 to England, and became Acting Emigration Officer
for Natal in 1880, also Agent for the Natal Harbour
Board, with an office in Finsbury Circus, London. He
is the author of the work, ■“ Our Colony of Natal,” and
took an active part in acquiring reduced cable rates to
the Colony and its inclusion within the Imperial Penny
Postage scheme. He was a Commissioner for Natal at
the Colonial and Indian Exhibition in 1886, and is one
of the Royal Commissioners for the Paris Exhibition in
1900. Natal was for a long time a province of the Cape,
but has been a distinct and independent Colony since
1856. The office over which Sir Walter Peace presides
is maintained by an annual grant out of the Colony’s
treasury of over his salary being ,£1,500 a year,
and the Secretary’s —Mr. R. Russell, who was born in
Natal, educated at Oxford, and called to the Bar at the
Temple—£4so.
The Agent-General has a well-equipped suite of offices at 20, Victoria Street, S.W.,
where visitors from the Colony are encouraged to call, and where they may have letters
sent them. As at the offices of the other Colonial Governments, a visitors’ book is kept
for Colonists to record their London addresses in, so that communications and enquiries
for them may be readily forwarded. A library containing the Parliamentary Reports,
Statutes, Government publications, and other books relating to the Colony is at their
disposal, and the disposal of an\one seeking information as to Natal.
As in many other of our Colonies, so in this—the Government owns and controls
the railways. It stands in the same position to the harbours; then it performs
functions of the kind we are more familiar with seeing Government undertake, such as
postal and telegraph business. The Government is constantly needing supplies of
material for the railways and harbours and other public works, and these supplies
her Home Secretary (otherwise called Colonial Secretary) orders through her Agent-


General. It is the purchasing and shipment of these supplies, from pins and pen
points to railway carriages and steam engines, &c,, that makes the chief business in the
Agent-General’s office. As to the Natal Police, that is a Government force recruited
in the colony, and comprises 600 whites and 800 blacks. There is also local police
under the different boroughs and districts. The newspapers of Natal are the Natal
Mercury (owned by Sir John Eobinson) and the Natal Advertiser, both published in
Durban, and in Pietermaritzburg, the capital, the Natal Witness and the Times of Natal.
The order in which the London Agencies of the Colonies
have been treated in the foregoing paper has been, as already
indicated, determined by the date of the grant of self-
government, and is in no way affected by the importance of
the Agency or of the Colony. Similarly the space alloted to
each is unconnected with any formed idea of merit or of
magnitude. The information has been supplied by the
Agencies themselves in interviews and in writing, and the
measure of information here given is according to the
measure of informatio n obtained.


3 1508 01697988 7


THE TRADE of the WORLD REVIEWED for the BENEFIT of BRITISH TRADERS.
EVERY THURSDAY. ONE PENNY.
SELL’S
Commercial gnfelltcjence
FOR THE MANUFACTURER AND THE MERCHANT,
THE HOME TRADER AND THE EXPORTER
Commercial Intelligence is a remarkable enterprise. It is generally
recognised that foreign competition abroad and at home is ever growing more
keen, that our industrial rivals are straining every nerve to supplant British
goods in foreign markets and to flood our home markets with their pro-
ductions. Last year the United States for the first time took the lead in export
trade, exporting £250,985,000 against our £233,390,792, and of the £250,985,000
the enormous amount of £112,214,373 represents the exports to Great Britain,
largely consisting of goods now competing with British productions on our
own soil. It helps one little, however, to be directed to such figures. If
foreign competition is to be met it is necessary to be informed of its methods,
not after a market is lost but when it is threatened and on the first signs of
its appearance. That brings us to the mission of Commercial Intelligence.
We do not bore our readers with an endless array of statistics, showing
in appalling columns that we are by so many millions better or worse than
in the “ corresponding month of the preceding year.” That sort of thing is
interesting, no doubt, but it does not help a merchant or manufacturer to find
a new market for his goods. What Commercial Intelligence aims at
and accomplishes, by the publication of timely intelligence and useful information,
is to help the British trader to swell the trade statistics published by others.
To this end we survey the world’s markets, new and old, at home and abroad,
with a single eye to the defence and practical development of British commercial
interests. By careful scrutiny of the official reports of our own, and of foreign
consuls and diplomatic agents ; by a study of references to trade developments in
the Colonial and foreign Press; by the careful watching of our special corre-
spondents for signs of inroads on markets where we grow too confident of
supremacy, and for new opportunities of development which our competitors have
been quicker to realise, we aim to render useful service alike to the individual
interests of British merchants and manufacturers, and to the total volume of
our national prosperity.
For Great Britain, 6s. 6d. per annum)
Subscription ■ _ __ . 0 „, Post free.
(For the Colonies, Bs. Bd. „ „ j
King, Sell, & Railton, Ltd., Printers, 151, Fleet Street, E.C
