









COLONY OF FIJI
CONTENTS
SUBJECT MATTER OF CHAPTERS
Page
POSITION AND DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLANDS ... 3
HISTORY 11
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS 15
GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL CONSTITUTION ... 17
JUDICIAL 21
CURRENCY AND BANKING 26
MISCELLANEOUS (Including Lands)... ... ... ... 27
AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE 37
INSECT PESTS 49
MINOR PRODUCTS 52
LABOUR. AND IMMIGRATION 57
MEANS OF COMMUNICATION 63
EDUCATION 67
MUNICIPALITIES 69
GENERAL 71
SPORT 77
FAUNA 79
FLORA 84




APPENDICES.
1. CHARTER OF THE COLONY OF FIJI AND LETTERS
PATENT.
2. SISAL HEMP AND OTHER FIBRES IN FIJI
3. NOTES ON THE LAU ISLANDS.
4. JUSTICES OF THE PEACE.
5. LIST OF SPECIMENS OF FIJIAN TIMBER.
6. MISCELLANEOUS STATISTICS.
7. TARIFF OF CUSTOMS DUES.


Printed by
Fiji Times, Limited.
SUVA - FIJI.




FIJIAN MAN SHOWING STYLE OF HAIR.


POSITION AND DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLANDS.
The islands of the Colony comprise all the islands, rocks,
and reefs lying between latitude 15 and 22 S. and between
longitude 177 W and 175 E. They number between 200
and 250, some eighty of which are inhabited. The total
area of the colony including Rotumah (14 square miles) is
7,435 square miles, or a little larger than Wales, and is
greater than that of the whole of the British West Indies.
The principal islands are as follows: —Viti Levu (or Great
Fiji) in the Western portion of the group, which measures
about 96 miles from East to West, and about 63 miles from
North to South. It contains the provinces of Rewa, Taile-
vu, Naitasiri, Colo East, Colo North, Colo West, Ba, Ra, Na-
droga, Namosi, and Serua, and the area of the island is esti-
mated as being approximately 4,112 square miles, or about
the same size as Jamaica.
The town of Suva, the Capital of the Colony, is situated
in the South East of the island, in the Province of Rewa.
The European population of Suva, according to the census
of 2nd April, 1911,. is 1376, and there are considerable
numbers of Indians, Fijians and Polynesians in the town it-
self and on its outskirts. The total population of the town
is approximately 5000. There is also a considerable floating
population consisting principally of Fijians and Indians.
The entrance to Suva harbour is through an opening in
the barrier reef, which forms a natural breakwater. The
harbour is land-locked on three sides and has a sufficient
depth of water to afford anchorage to vessels of the largest
3


tonnage. Inshore the water is shallow, but wharfage ac-
commodation is provided to enable vessels to berth for load-
ing and discharging cargo. The town itself is built on the
Eastern side of the harbour, and the business portion of
the town occupies the low lying area near the sea. The
gradually rising land to the back and sides of the busi-
ness portion forms the residential area. The land on the
opposite side of the harbour rises rapidly from' the sea
and forms a succession of mountain ranges clearly visible
from the town.
'About twelve miles from Suva by road suitable for
wheeled traffic, and a longer distance by water, up the
Rewa River, lies Nausori, the centre of the sugar industry
in the district, where there is a Mill, the property of the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited. On the banks
of and in the proximity of the Rewa river, large areas of
land are under cultivation both in sugarcane and bananas.
Many Europeans, Indians, and Fijians are engaged in these
two industries, with the result that this district is, compar-
atively speaking, closely settled. Proceeding inland up the
Rewa River the country is unsettled, except by Fijians and
a few scattered Indians. In appearance it is wild and moun-
tainous but there is a large area of good cultivable land not
yef cleared or occupied. About 1.10 miles from Suva and 30
miles from Ba by road, on the opposite side of the island,
is the Government hill-station of Nadarivatu, where there
is a small Sanatorium and rest house which is available for
the use of the public, and which provides limited accommo-
dation for travellers through the inland district of Colo North.
Nadarivatu is the headquarters of the chief executive officer
for the province. On the Ba river at Rarawai, which can
be reached by coasting steamer from Suva, is another mill
owned by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, Ltd., and the
centre of the sugar industry in the Northern portion of the
Ba province. Ba is connected by tramlines (the property of
the Company referred to), with Tavua on the North East
and Lautoka to the South West. The latter settlement is
one of the three ports of entry in the Colony and is one
of the most important centres of the sugar industry.
The sugar mill at Lautoka is the largest in the Colony. From
4


VIEW ABOVE DURULOLO, REWA RIVER




Lautoka the Company’s tramline passes on to the South East
through the province of Ba and the sugar district of Nadi
to the province of Nadroga to which place the cultivation
of sugar is being extended. All sugar produced in this
province and the adjoining province of Colo West to which
the tramlines will eventually run, will, it is expected, be
transported by rail to the mill at Lautoka, some 60 miles
distant. This mill is capable of producing 100 tons of dried
sugar per diem. In these two provinces of Nadroga and
Colo West there is a considerable area of land devoted to
the cultivation of bananas, and vessels visiting the Colony
make Momi —in the former province—the port of shipment
for this produce. There are large areas of land in this
district suitable for the cultivation of cane, bananas, sisal
hemp, maize, and other products. On the other side of Ra-
rawai on the Ba river, and on the Northern side of the is-
land is the settlement of Penang in the province of Ra,
where there is a sugar mill owned by the Penang Sugar
Company of Melbourne. The province of Ra is but sparsely
settled though there is much land of good quality available
for settlement.
Nearer Suva and on the South side of the island is the
settlement of Navua, on the river of that name, in the
province of Serua. On this river is situated the mill of the
Vancouver-Fiji Sugar Company. It is within easy reach of
Suva, and is visited daily by the launches of the Fiji Ship-
ping Company, which take from 2J to 3 hours to cover the
distance. The journey is an interesting on!e, following a
course within the reef, in smooth water. At Navua there
is a considerable area under cultivation in sugar and ba-
nanas, and the planting of rubber has in recent years been
undertaken in the district. At Navua the land is cultivated
to a considerable extent by time-expired Indian immi-
grants, who, having completed their indentures, have re-
mained in the Colony and settled on the land in preference
to returning to their native land.
The island of Vanua Levu (or Great Land) is the next
largest island after Viti Levu and lies North East of it.
The island is 114 miles in length and averages in breadth
7


26 miles. It contains an area of approximately 2,439 square
miles. It is deeply indented on its Eastern side by Natewa
Bay, while on the South is the magnificent harbour of Sa-
vusavu, one of the finest in the Pacific. The island is di-
vided into the provinces of Macuata, Cakaudrove, and Bua.
At Labasa, in the Macuata province, on the Labasa and
Qawa rivers, in the North East of the Island, is a sugar
mill owned by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company Ltd.
in the centre of an important cane growing district. There
are at Labasa, as in Ba, many independent sugarcane growers
who produce cane and dispose of it to the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company, who provide the necessary tramlines
for its transport. Labasa is in communication with Suva by
wireless telegraphy, the apparatus for which has recently
been installed by Messrs Marconi and Company Limited, on
behalf of the Fiji Government. In the vicinity of Savusavu
Bay and at Bua there are a number of Europeans engaged
principally in the cultivation of coconuts, tea, bananas,
cocoa, &c. There are a few Europeans in other parts of
the island, but except at Labasa there can be said to be
no close settlement/ although land in the vicinity of Buca
Bay, on the South East coast is being rapidly settled. At
Tuba, on the Dreketi river—a watercourse which is navh
igable for a distance of approximately twenty miles from
the coast, there is a saw-mill of the Pacific Lumber Com-
pany of Canada which is engaged in cutting, dressing and
exporting the timbers of the island which are of good qua-
lity and of considerable beauty and value.
Taviuni is on the Eastern side of Vanua Levu from
which it is separated by the Somosomo Straits. It is about
25 miles long and has an average breadth of nine miles.
The estimated area is 217 square miles. Its
soil is exceedingly fertile and in consequence,
the island has been named the “Garden of Fiji.”
In proportion to its area, Taviuni has more European
settlers than any other part of Fiji. The chief occupation
of these settlers is the chitivajtibllL of and thb.
raising of cattle. Taviuni, also, has been_ provided with
wireless telegraphy, and the apparatus is installed at the
Government station at Waiyevo. On the Southern side of
8


this island there is land, approximately 8000 acres in extent,
of exceptionally good quality which has been acquired by the
Government for the Purpose of leasing it to settlers. Ta-
viuni is well watered by numerous streams which have
their sources in the ridge of hilhs which form the centre
of the island ; these ridges being heavily wooded, provide
an efficient catchment area.
Kadavu, an island estimated to contain about' 124
square miles, lies almost directly South of Suva. It is
mountainous and is the first island of the group to be
sighted by steamers nroceeding to Suva from the Austra-
lian States and New Zealand. There is but little land cul-
tivated by Euroneans on Kadavu, although the quality of
the soil is good, and suitable for cultivation of coconuts
or bananas. In the early da vs of settlement of the colony
a harbour on the South side of this island was used as
a port of call by trading steamers, and whalers in the Paci-
fic were wont to make Kadavu their headquarters. The is-
land is distant some 60 miles from Suva.
Ovalau. off the East coast of Viti Levu is centrally
situated. Its chief town is Levuka, a port of entry, and
formerly the canital of the Colony. Levuka has consider-
able Euronean nonulation and carries on an extensive trade
with the islands in the Eastern portionof the group for
which it is the local market for copra and other produce.
The Yasawa islands lie to the West and North of Viti
Levu, and the Lau group, widely scattered, lie to the East
of the two islands. These two groups produce consider*-
able quantities of copra. The native inhabitants, more
especially of the Lau group, are comparatively well off.
There are many European planters in the Lau group en-
gaged in the cultivation of cocoanuts.
The more important islands of Fiji are mountainous
and volcanic, rising more or or less abruptly from the
shore to a height of about 4,000 to 4,500 feet. The hills
are bold and picturesoue, for the most part composed of
old lavas. Upon the South Eastern, or windward sides,
the islands are covered with dense forests of tropical vege-
tation. The soil is generally deep and rich and the country
9


is well watered. The leeward sides of the larger islands
consist of grassy hills and plains dotted with casuarina
(nokonoko), screw-pines, and reeds or wild cane.
Fiji is rich in harbours and roadsteads as well as
rivers.
Rotuma, a dependency of Fiji, situated in 12 30’ S.
Latitude, and 177 10’ East Longitude, has a total popula-
tion of 2,293 of which Rotuman natives number 2,167.
The principal island is 7 miles long by 3 miles broad.
There are nine small islands scattered round the main is-
land, and of these only one, namely Uea, is uninhabited.
The islands of Rotuma are particularly well adapted
for coconut cultivation, and the natives derive a
able income from the sale of copra to European and other
merchants who have stores on the island. The export of
this product amounts approximately to about 1,350 tons a
year. This means a production of over 100 tons per
month which indicates that the people are comparatively
speaking more industrious than other native races in Fiji.
The price paid by merchants to natives has fluctuated from
Is. for 211bs. to Is. for 71bs. or £lO 3s. 7d. per ton. The
local value of copra exported from Rotuma in 1910 wais
£17,245.
The houses occupied by the natives are built gener-
ally of mortar atnd' stone, the lime for the mortar being
obtained by burning coral procured from the reefs sur-
rounding the islands. In this particular the natives of Ro-
tuma may be said to be considerably in advance of those
of other groups of islands in the South seas.
The education of the natives of Rotuma is conducted
with considerable success by the Wesleyan and Marist Mis-
sions, the former body having 600 children on their rolls
and the latter 150.
CLIMATE AND METEOROLOGY.
The climate of the Fiji Islands, considering their pro-
ximity to the Equator, is remarkably healthy. Fever, in
8


POST OFFICE, SUVA.




its several forms, is scarcely known, while malarial fever,
the great scourge of many tropical countries, is remarkable
by its entire absence. The country is remarkably free
from zymotic and endemic diseases. Dysentry and a mild
form of Dengue fever are the only diseases to which Euro-
peans are particularly liable. The heat of the tropical sun
is for the greater part of the year tempered by the cool
trade winds which blow from the South East. The maximum
temperature recorded at Suva in 1910 was 96 degr. F. on
the 6th February, and the minimum 61 degr. F. on the
7th July of that year. The highest temperatures are ex-
perienced between the months of December and March,
and the lowest between the months of July and September.
Speaking generally the months of December—March are
hot, steamy, and trying, more especially so when the wind
is from the North, while the atmosphere in the cooler
months is pleasant and clear. The hot months are usually
the wettest, although the rainfall in certain of the districts
is fairly distributed. In Suva the rainfall averages 107
inches per annum. From June to October the average rain-
fall during the past twenty-five years was 6.2 inches per
mensem.
.
The climate and rainfall vary in different parts of
the islands. On Viti Levu there are distinct belts of wet
an( i dry areas: that on the South East of the Island is wet
and humid, while that on the North and West is compara-
tively dry. The same remarks may be applied to the other
large islands of the Colony. This may become apparent
to the traveller who, as he emerges from the heavily
wooded land of the wet zone, finds himself suddenly on the
reed covered land of the drv.
......
Fiji is within the zone of hurricanes in the Southern
Pacific and has on occasion been visited by gales of
somewhat severe force. Some of these hurricanes have
caused serious damage to crops, especially to bananas.
Appended hereto is a return of cyclones and storms which
have visited the group.
These records have in the past been kept by various
persons throughout the Colony, and it is not possible to
9


MONTHLY MEANS,
YEARS 1884-
-1910.
Month
Barometer
reduced to 32de
F. and Mean
Sea-level.
Suva—9 a.m.
g. Shade Temperature.
Max. Min.
Rainfall
Humidity,
per cent,
(saturation
equals 100 0/0).
Inches.
F.
F.
Inches.
January
29.860
85.8
73.9
10.572
74.0
February
29.863
86.7
74.5
10.036
76.0
March
29.879
86.2
74.1
14.224
76,8
April
29.936
84.5
73.1
11.381
76.6
May
30.022
82.1
71.2
9.330
77.3
June
30.045
80.5
69.4
5.572
77.5
July
30.053
79.6
68.1
4.010
76.7
August
30.047
79.6
68.3
7.426
76.3
September
30.054
80.5
68.9
6.568
74.0
October
30.026
81.7
70.6
7.918
73.3
November
29.954
83.0
71.7
9.440
72.8
December
29.885
84.8
73.1
11.335
73.5
Means
29.969
82.9
71.4
—
75.4
Total
...
107.812
. . .
vouch for the accuracy of the details noted on the return.
Arrangements have recently been made for authentic re-
cords, to be taken in the future of atmospheric disturb-
ances. Meteorological stations are established at Suva, Lev-
uka, Taviuni, Labasa (Vanua Levu|) and Lautoka (Viti Levuj)
All stations are in telegraphic or telephonic communication
with Suva.
Public notification of approaching storms is given by
a code of signals displayed at the various centres or by
public warning by some other method.
10


VIEW AT BAU.




HISTORY.
Fiji is unfortunately exceedingly poor in history. Fi-
jian history as by\ Fijifan native traditions may
be said to have begun with the advent of the white race.
The absence of a written language prior to the establish-
ment of the missions, and the lack of traditional history
add greatly to the difficulties of research into the origin
of the Fijian race.
There is much diversity of opinion as to the origin of
the Fijian. It has been said that he hails from New Guinea
and that the Papuan stock is found paramount in him
with a tincture of the Malay element becoming perceptible
in the eastward portion of the group. It seems however
to be mere conjecture on the part of those eminent wri-
ters who havje essayed to describe the origin of the rade.
Nothing has been found in tradition or in historical record
to render the task more easy, nor does the Fijian convey
through the medium of his songs any light as to an early
immigration. It may be inferred however that if these is-
lands were originally the habitat of people who had mi-
grated from other (and distant lands, immigrjation mujsti
have taken place at a very early date. Some similarity has
been found to exist in the language of the people to that
of the Polynesians lying eastward of them, but there is no
trace to be found of a Polynesian occupation of Fiji.
The Fiji islands were discovered by Tasman, the Dutch
navigator, in 1643 ; he however did not land, but merely]
sailed through the group naming it “Prins Wilhelm’s Ey-
landen.” From that date until the visit of Captain Cook
11


who lay-to off an island in the Lau group in 1769 which he
named “Turtle Island,” the group seems to have remained
unvisited. In 1789 Captain Bligh on a launch of the ship
“Bounty” sighted a portion of the group. It is recounted
that after the mutiny of his sailors on the “Bounty,” he on
passing through the Yasawa group was espied and pursued
by natives in a canoe from the island of Waya, where the
natives were always on the outlook for derelict vessels.
He again passed through other parts of the group in 1792
when in command of the “Providence.” In 1794, the Duff,
commanded by Captain Wilson, appears to have followed
the same course as Tasman and was nearly wrecked,
touching the reef off Taviuni.
It is unfortunate that there was no intercourse with
the natives, so that no early impressions of them are on record
except such as Captain Cook gathered at the Friendly Islands
where he heard that the people were clever at building
canoes and planting, and were given to fighting and can-
nibalism.
It has been stated that early in the 19th century a
number of convicts escaped from New South Wales and
settled among tjhe islands, but the statement probably is
without foundation.
About the year 1802 a vessel was wrecked on the Ar-
go reef and a number of Europeans were rescued from it
by the natives of Oneata, one of the group lying to the East-
ward of Viti Levu.
Between 1803 and 1808 the first of the sandalwood
traders touched at the island of Koro. In 1808 the Ameri-
can brig “Eliza” with 40,000-dollars from the river Plate
was wrecked on the reef near Nairai. The greater part of
the crew escaped in the ship’s boats, but two of the crew
took passage in native canoes that happened to be there
at the time, one landing at Bau and the other at Verata.
the former was a Swede named Charles Savage who at-
tained considerable influence with the natives. He was ev-
entually killed and his body eaten by the natives_ as Wa-
ilea in 1813. About the same time that Savage arrived in
the Group there came also an Irishman named Connor who
12


SERUA TOWN.




attained a somewhat similar position with the natives of Re-
wa as Savage did with those at Ban. From this time onward
European sailors continued to pour into the islands for after
the exhaustion of the sandal wood forests, South Sea whal-
ers made a practice of frequenting the group, and other
vessels did a trade in “sea-slugs” (holothuria
edulisl).
On the Bth October, 1835, the Reverend William Cross
and the Reverend David Cargill, Methodist Missionaries,
who were then labouring in the Friendly Islands, sailed from
Vavau (Tonga) and landed at Lakeba, in the Lau Group,on
the 12th of the same month. These were the first mission-
aries to land in Fiji.
On the 10th September, 1858, Mr. W. F. Pritchard who
had been appointed British Consul in the group, arrived
at Levuka and assumed the duties of his office.
In 1858, the United States corvette “Vandalia,” Captain
Sinclair, arrived at Levuka and preferred claims against Ca-
kobau, as King of Fiji, amounting to forty-five thousand
dollars. Cakobau induced Captain Sinclair to allow him
twelve months in which to meet the demand. As a result
of interviews between Cakobau and the British Consul,
the cession of the islands was offered to Great Britain on
condition that the American claim was paid by the British
Government, for which payment a's a direct equivalent, cer-
tain land “if required” was to be granted in fee simple,
besides the general sovereignty of the whole group. Sub-
sequently, on the 14th December, 1859, the Chiefs of Fiji,
“acknowledged, ratified, and renewed the cession of Fiji,
to Great Britain, made on the 12th of October, 1858, by Ca-
kobau.” The offer was declined by Her Brittanic Majes-
ty’s Government in 1862.
About this time the demand for cotton, owing to the
American Civil War, led to an influx of Europeans into Fiji
for the purpose of cotton cultivation. In June, 1871, cer-
tain European settlers set up a Fijian Government with the
principal chief Cakobau, as King. A constitution was ag-
reed upon and a Parliament elected. The Parliament and
the Government before long drifted into mutual hostility
13


and the Ministry latterly governed without the aid of Par-
liament.
The question of annexing Fiji had been agitated both
in Australia and England since 1869, on many grounds, and
in August, 1873, the Earl of Kimberly commissioned Com-
modore Goodenough, commanding the squadron on the
Australian Station, and Mr. E. L. Layard, then Her Majes-
ty’s Consul in Fiji, to investigate and report on the mat-
ter. The Commissioners, on the 21st March, 1874, reported on
the offer of the sovereignty of the islands from the Chiefs
with the assent of the Europeans, but on certain terms
which were not acceptable, and Sir Hercules Robinson
then Governor of New South Wales, was despatched to
Fiji in September, 1874, to negotiate.
This mission was completely successful, and the sov-
ereignty of the islands was ceded to Her Majesty by Cako-
bau, the Chief of Bau, Maafu, who was the Chief of the so-
called Lau Confederacy which included not only the Lau is-
lands but Taviuni and the greater part of Vanua Levu,
and the other principal chiefs in a (deed of cession dated the
tenth day of October, 1874, A charter was shortly after-
wards issued by Her Majesty creating the islands a separate
Colony and providing for the Government.
A copy of the charter of the Colony is appended.
Rotuma, a dependency of Fiji, was discovered by H.M.S.
Pandora in 1793, when searching for the mutineers of
the “Bounty.” In 1879 the three principal chiefs offered the
islands to Great Britain and they were annexed on the 13th
May, 1881.
14


Total.
Males.
Females.
Europeans and
other whites 3,707
2,403
1,304
Half-Castes
2,401
1,217
1,184
Indians
A 0,2486
26,073
14,213
Polynesians ..
2,758
2,429
329
Fijians
87,096
46,110
40,986
Chinese
305
276
29
Rotumans
2,176
1,043
1,133
Others
812
457
355
Totals 139,541
80,008
59,533
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
A census of the Colony taken on the 2nd April, 1911,
showed the population of the Colony to be 139,541, made
up as follows: —
As compared with the census of 1901 the figures show
an increase of 19,417 in the total population, and it is note-
worthy that this is the first census taken in the last four
decades that shows an increase. Census returns in 1881
showed the population to he 127,486, in 1891 121,180, in 1901
120,124, and in 1911, as shown above, 139,541. The large de-
crease of the native race during the earlier intercensal pe-
riods has caused the census return to show a decrease of
the total population in respect of those years notwithstand-
ing actual increases in other races of the community. Dur-
ing the last decade the native population has decreased 7.7
per cent, while Europeans have increased 50.8 per cent.
15


half-castes 58.3 per cent., Indians 135.5 per cent, and Po-
lynesians 41.4 per cent. The native population while in re-
cent years showing an actual increase in their numbers,
decreased in the year 1903 by 2481 owing to an epidemic
of measles which was attended by considerable mortality.
Of the total population of the islands Fijians number 62.04
per cent.; Indians, 28.80 per cent.; Europeans, 2.70 per cent
Polynesians, 2.00 per cent.; Half-castes, 1.70 per cent.;Ro-
tumans, 1.60 per cent.; Chinese, .20 per cent.; Others, .60
per cent. While the increase in the Indian population is due
principally to immigration, there has been a natural in-
crease in that race.
The increase in the European population is principally
due to the extension of sugar cultivation; but general im-
provement in the commercial prosperity of the Colony has
brought a certain influx of population into Suva, and to
other commercial centres.
16


NATIVE CONSTABULARY




GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL CONSTITUTION.
The political constitution of Fiji is that of a Crown Colony
and its constitution is provided for by Letters Patent.
The Governor is appointed by the Sovereign and holds office
during His Majesty’s pleasure. He is assisted by an Ex-
ecutive and Legislative Council. The Executive Council con-
sists of the Governor as President, the Chief Justice, the
Attorney-General, the Honourable William Sutherland (Na-
tive Commissioner), the Honourable Mr. A. R. Coates
(Agent-General of Immigration), and the Honourable Mr. R.
S. D. Rankine (Receiver-General.) The Legislative Council
consists of the Governor as President, ten official members
nominated by the Governor, two native members nominated
by the “Bose vaka Turaga” (Council of Chiefs) and select-
ed by the Governor and six elected members.
The qualification of an elected member, as required by
the Letters Patent of the 31st October, 1910, are as fol-
lows :
“No person shall be capable of being elected a representative of
Suva or of Levuka in the Council, or, having been so elected, shall
sit or vote in the Council, unless he—
(1) Is qualified to be registered as an elector; and
(2) Has been continuously resident for two years in the Co-
lony; and either
(3) (a) Possesses and has possessed for at least twelve months
next before the election, in his own right or in right of
17


his wife, freehold property in the Colony of the clear
value of five hundred pounds, or of the annual value of
fifty pounds over and above all charges and incumbrances
affecting the same; or
(b) Has been in occupation for at least twelve months next
before the election, in his own right or in right of his
wife, of freehold or leasehold property in the Colony of
the extent of five hundred acres; or
(c) Eents and has rented for at least twelve months next
before the election freehold or leasehold property in the
Colony of the yearly value of one hundred pounds; or
(d) Is possessed of a {net annual income from all sources of
not less than two hundred pounds.
No Member shall be capable of being elected a representative
of the Eastern, Northern, or Southern Electoral Divisions, as pro-
vided in Article 14, or having been so elected shall sit or vote in
the Council unless he—
(1) Is qualified to be registered as an elector; and
(2) Has been continuously resident for two years in the Co-
lony ; and either
(3) (a) Has resided in the electoral Division for which he is
a candidate for twelve months immediately preceding the
day of election; or
(b) Possesses a bet annual income of one hundred and fifty
pounds arising from lands in that Division belonging to
him in his own right or in right of his wife.”
The Colony is divided into five electoral divisions and
representation on the Legislative Council is provided for as
follows: —
(1) Three Members by persons duly qualified as electors as
herein-before provided, who are resident in the towns of
Suva or Levuka. Two of such Members shall be elected as
representatives of Suva, and one shall be elected to re-
present Levuka.
(2) One Member by persons duly qualified as alectors as
herein-before provided, who are resident in the Eastern
Electoral Division comprising the Provinces of Lomaiviti
(exclusive of the town of Levuka), Macuata, Bua, Cakau-
drove, and Lau.
18


(3) One Member by persons duly qualified as electors as
herein-before provided, who are resident in the Northern
Electoral Division comprising the Provinces of Pa, Colo
North, Colo West, Ba, and Nadroga.
(4) One Member by persons duly qualified as electors here-
in-before provided, who are resident in the Southern Elec-
toral Division comprising the Privinces of Rewa (exclu-
sive of the town of Suva), Namosi, Serua, Naitasiri, Colo
East, Tailevu, and Kadavu.
Under the provisions of the Letters Patent, dated 21st
March, 1904, it is directed that there shall be at least one
Session of the Council in every year, and that there shall
not be an interval of twelve months between the last sitting
of one Session and the first sitting of the following Session.
It is the practice to hold at' least three Sessions in each
year, in the months of April and September and December
respectively. The Sessions are held in Suva.
The Governor is empowered to prorogue or dissolve the
Legislative Council at any time but unless it is sooner pro-
rogued or dissolved, the Governor must dissolve the Coun-
cil at the expiration of three years from the date of the re-
turn of the first writs at the last preceding general elec-
tion.
By-elections are held whenever necessary owing to the
resignation or death of an Elected Member.
Laws.
The laws of the Colony, known as Ordinances, are
made by the Governor in Legislative Council and are subject
to disallowance by His Majesty the King.
By sections 24-26 of Ordinance No. VII of 1875 “The
Supreme Court Ordinance, 1875” certain Imperial Laws are
made applicable to the Colony. These sections read as
follows: —
24. The Common Law the Rules of Equity and the Statutes of
general application which were in force in England at the date
when the Colony obtained a Local Legislative that is to say on
the second day of January, 1875, shall be in force within the
19


Colony subject to the provisions of section twenty-six of this Or-
dinance.
25. Such portions of the practice of the English Courts as ex-
isted on the said second day of January, 1875, shall be in force
in the Colony subject to the provisions of section twenty-six of
this Ordinance and except so far as such practice may be incon-
sistent with any general rules of the Supreme Court relating to
practice and procedure.
26. All Imperial Laws extended to the Colony by this or any
future Ordinance shall be in force therein so far only as the cir-
cumstances of the Colonial jurisdiction permit and subject to any
existing or future Ordinances of the Colonial Legislature and for
the purpose of facilitating the application of the said laws it
shall be lawful for the Court to construe the same with such verbal
alteration not the substance as may be necessary to render
the same applicable to the matter before the Court and every
Judge or officer of the Supreme Court having or exercising func-
tions of the like kind or analogous to the functions of any Judge
or officer referred to in any such law shall be deemed to be within
the meaning of the enactments thereof relating to the last-men-
tioned Judge or officer and whenever the Great Seal or any other
seal is mentioned in any such Statute it shall be read as if the
Seal of the Supreme Court were substituted therefor and in mat-
ters of practice all documents may be written on ordinary paper
notwithstanding any direction as to printing or engrossing on
vellum parchment or otherwise.”
It will be seen therefore that in the absence of any
local enactment any legal dispute will be settled in accord-
ance with the Common Law, the rules of equity or the sta-
tutes of general application which were in force in England
on the second day of January 1875.
20


JUDICIAL.
The Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court of the Colony was constituted by
Ordinance No. VII of 1875 “The Supreme Court Ordin-
ance 1875” and is presided over by a single judge, called
the Chief Justice.
The jurisdiction of the Court is conferred by sections 21
23 of the Ordinance, which are as follows: —
21. The Supreme Court shall within the Colony have the same
jurisdiction as Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench Common
Pleas and Exchequer lawfully have in England and shall be a Court
of Oyer and Terminer and Gaol Delivery Assize and Nisi Prius
with like powers and jurisdiction as such Courts have in Eng-
land.
22. The Supreme Court shall be a Court of Equity, and have
within the Colony the same jurisdiction as Her Majesty’s Court of
Equity in England and all and singular the powers and authori-
ties of the Lord High Chancellor of England with full liberty to
appoint and control guardians of infants and their estates and
estates of idiots, lunatics and such as being of unsound mind
are unable to govern themselves and their estates.
23. The Supreme Court shall be a Court of Probate and a
Court for divorce and matrimonial causes and shall have wfthin
the Colony the same jurisdiction as Her Majesty’s Court of Pro-
bate and Court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes in England.
The sessions of the Supreme Court are held in Suva
21


but. provision exists for the holding of Circuit Courts a,t
Lautoka.
The Chief Justice has power to admit and enrol to prac-
tice as barristers and solicitors in the Colony such persons
as shall have been admitted barristers or advocates in Great
Britain or Ireland and as shall have been admitted as soli-
citors or writers in one of the Courts at Westminster, Dub-
lin or Edinburgh and also any person admitted to practice
as barristers or solicitors in any of His Majesty’s Crown Co-
lonies, or in Australia, New Zealand, or Canada.
The Chief Justice has also power to appoint persons
to be Commissioners of the Supreme Court to administer
oaths jand take solemn declarations and affirmations and
to make such interlocutory orders and issue such process
and exercise such powers in relation to the administration
of justice as shall from time to time be prescribed by any
Ordinance or rules for the time being in force for regulating
the procedure of the Supreme Cou rjt.
The ordinary sessions for the despatch of criminal busi-
ness of the Supreme Court commence on the twenty-first
day of April, the twenty-first day of July, the twenty-first
day of September and the first of December but if any such
day is a dies non then they commence on the lawful day
next following.
The Chief Justice may however adjourn any such
Sessions and may hold at any time a Special Session in ad-
dition to the ordinary Sessions whenever it may be expedi-
ent or necessary so to do.
Criminal trials before the Supreme Court must be either
by J ur y composed of seven or by the Chief Justice sitting,
with assessors.
Whenever a criminal case is brought under the cogni-
zance of the Supreme Court under the “Criminal Procedure
Ordinance 1875,” in which the accused or one of them or the
person against whom the crime or offence shall have been
committed is a native or Polynesian Immigrant or a native of
India or China or any Pacific Island the trial must take
place before the Chief Justice with the aid of assessors in
22


lieu of a jury unless the Chief Justice for special reason
think fit otherwise to order.
Stipendiary Magistrates Court.
In addition to the Supreme Court, there are inferior
Courts in the various districts of the Colony, known in Suva
as the Chief Police Magistrate’s Court, and in the Provin-
ces as Stipendiary Magistrate’s Courts, Provincial and Dis-
trict Courts.
The Chief Police Magistrate’s Court, and the Stipendi-
ary Magistrate’s Courts are presided over by European Ma-
gistrates, the Provincial Courts are presided over by Eu-
ropean and native magistrates sitting together and district
Courts by Native (Fijian) Magistrates.
The jurisdiction of Stipendiary Magistrates is conferred
by section 6 of Ordinance No. 1 of 1876 “The Stipendiary
Magistrates Ordinance.’’ The section reads as follows:
“Every Stipendiary Magistrate may hear and determine all
charges which by law now in force or hereafter to be in force
may be heard and determined before one or more justices of the
peace or by any Court of Petty Sessions.”
It is lawful for the Governor to assign to each Stipen-
diary Magistrate a district, but each Stipendiary Magistrate
has jurisdiction throughout the Colony.
European Stipendiary Magistrates, as Commissioners of
the Supreme Court, have jurisdiction in civil suits in which
the sum involved is less than £5O. In cases in which an in-
dictable offence has been committed, European Stipendiary
Magistrates have power to hold preliminary enquiry and to
commit the accused for trial before the Supreme Court.
Native Stipendiary Magistrates are not invested with
power to investigate informations which disclose an indict-
able offence but they may issue warrants for the appre-
hension of the accused or other preliminary process but the
duty of investigation by enquiry lies with the European Sti-
pendiary Magistrate. They are invested with certain limited
jurisdiction in cases of offences under the native regula-
tions, i.e., in purely native cases. The more serious of the
23


offences under native regulations are dealt with by the
Provincial Courts.
Justices of the Peace.
The Governor may appoint any number of persons be-
ing resident within any town or district to be justices of
the I eace for the towns or districts in which they reside.
No charge or complaint may be heard and determined by
any justice of the Peace not being a Stipendiary Magistrate
but any affidavit may be sworn or any information taken
and any summons or warrant or other preliminary process
may be issued by a Justice of the Peace.
Taxes.
The Colony derives the greater portion of its revenue
from duties on imported 1 goods. In 1911 the revenue for
the year wais; £240,394 14s. 9d., of which £146,628 6s. 3d.
was received from import duties. The present Customs Ta-
riff is printed in the appendices.
Persons engaged in trade and in certain professions,
must be licensed for which a fee is payable.
Dues are levied on vessels for the upkeep of harbours
and lights. Wharfage is exacted jfrom Vessels and on cargoes
for upkeep of wharves.
The Building Tax Ordinance 1911 imposes an annual tax
on all buildings (including machinery) rated on the annual
value, up to a maximum of 2s. in the £. Houses or huts of
an annual value not exceeding £lO pay at a fixed rate of
10s. per annum.
Native Fijians pay a special tax at the rate of 10s. to
£1 per male adfilt according to Districts, which produces
about £16,000 per annum.
The above are practically the only direct taxes, the ba-
lance of the revenue being obtained from fees and fines of
Court, fees for registration in connection with land trans-
actions, stamp duties, postage stamps, etc.
24


There are no land taxes, road taxes or income tax;
and, except in the towns of Suva and Levuka, no munici-
pal rates. The Building Tax Ordinance referred to above
does not apply to any native house or hut which forms
part of a Fijian village, nor to any hut or building within
the boundaries of a town constituted under the Municipal
Institutions Ordinance 1909.
25


CURRENCY AND BANKING.
British gold and silver coinage is the medium of circu-
lation. Other money is rarely seen. Government, banking,
and other accounts are invariably kept in pounds, shillings
and pence.
The Bank of New Zealand and the Bank of New South
Wales each have branches in the towns of Suva and Le-
vuka, and the latter institution has also a branch at Lau-
toka.
A Government Savings Bank was established in 1908,
with its head office in Suva. A branch has been opened at
Levuka, and arrangements will be made in due course for
further extension of its business to other parts of the Col-
ony.
26


MISCELLANEOUS.
Lands and Land Tenure.
Prior to the British occupation of Fiji, European sett-
lers in the group had acquired in more or less irregular
fashion, large areas of land from the native chiefs, and one
of the first tasks before the Government was to enquire
into those land claims and to issue Crown Grants for those
which were substantiated before the Lands Commission.
In this manner 412,112 acres of land were alienated.
In 1875 further sales of native land were prohibited by
Ordinance, and the only tenure granted was leasehold for
periods not exceeding 21 years.
Leases however, which had been obtained in good faith
prior to the British occupation, were acknowledged even
if the term exceeded 21 years. This short term of leasehold
did not conduce to lands being taken up by fresh settlers
especially for such products as coconuts, which only at-
tain their fullest maturity when the short lease would ex-
pire. Consequently between 1876 and 1896 only about 13,000
acres in 100 leaseholds were issued.
Of this area 7000 acres were taken up for sugar chiefly
by the various sugar companies and 4200 acres for timber,
so that only about 1780 acres were taken up in 20 years
for products other than timber and sugar.
27


In order that long tenure might be granted, the Go-
vernment in 1896 acquired land on 99 years leases and is-
sued sub-leases to settlers for terms of from 22 to 99 years
and this tended to stimulate the demand for land consid-
erably.
By Ordinance No. IV of 1905 settlers were enabled to
acquire these long term leases direct from the natives, the
agreement to lease being subject to the approval of the Go-
vernor in Council.
The same Ordinance even permitted the sales of native
lands, and between 1905 and 1909, 39,476 acres were so pur-
chased thus bringing the total area of land held by settlers
on freehold title up to 451,588 acres.
Many of these native grants were for properties al-
ready the subject of short leases near expiry but much of
the larea was ;for fresh country.
Since 1909 the operation of the clauses in the Ordin-
ance permitting sales of native land has been practically
suspended and leasehold up to 99 years, with re-assessment
in the 33rd and 66 f th years, is again the usual tenure :
in fad the sale of native land’s is now tioit pfermitted
at all except to the Government.
The method of obtaining native leaseholds now is for
the settler to select the block he desires and lodge an ap-
plication for it with the Native Commissioner stating the
name o f the land, its locality, estimated area and the rent
offered and giving a description of the boundaries.
This is sent to the native owners and if accepted by
them the agreement is subject to the approval of the Go-
vernor in Executive Council.
If approved the applicant can forthwith occupy the
land but must make prompt arrangements for its survey
by a licensed surveyor whose plans are examined by the
Crown Surveyor before the lease is executed.
Realising the difficulty, especially for intending sett-
lers not resident in Fiji, of obtaining land in the manner
above outlined, the Government holds “open to settlement”
28


some 130,000 acres of land in different parts of the Colony,
which have been surveyed and classified, and they can be
further divided into lots to suit settlers if done without pre-
judice to the original block.
A list of these blocks is subjoined and further parti-
culars regarding them can be obtained on application to the
Commissioner of Lands.
In to these blocks the natives have handed over
to the Government to deal with on their behalf, blocks of
surplus lands in various parts o f the Colony. The most im-
portant of the lands under this category is situated in the
Province of Tailevu in the island of Viti Levu and it cov-
ers some 20,000 acres. A preliminary survey of this has
been effected, separating the hill land from the flat and it
is now offereid) oh long lease. In the case of leases for 99
years provision is made for re-assessment of rent in the
33rd 1 and OGth years, usually to a maximum of 5 per cent,
on the unimproved value of the land.
Some 6000 acres of this land was leased in 1910, but
many suitable blocks with easy access to the coast or to na-
vigable streams remain unallotted. The flats are well adapted
for bananas and the hills for cattle or dairy farms. The
produce can be exported to Levuka distant 22 miles or to
Suva 48 miles, in punts towed by motor launches, the whole
passage being in reef-sheltered waters.
Beyond the areas to which reference has been made
above, the natives have recently, at a meeting of a Council
of their Chiefs, decided to hand over to Government for
settlement the whole of the lands which are at present un-
used, and they have resolved to place the disposal of all
lands including those at present under lease in the hands
of the Government. As a result of this resolution it is an-
ticipated that the selection of lands by intending settlers
and the leasing thereof will be greatly facilitated. Steps
are about to be taken to give legislative authority to the
wishes of the native owners. A list of the lands will be
available in due course for inspection in the office of the
Commissioner of Lands who will be able to inform app-
29


licants of the exact description of any block required, pro-
bable terms for rental, etc.
The ruling rentals on land in Fiji vary widely accord-
ing to the quality of the soil and its situation with regard
to the coast or navigable rivers.
Pastoral lands can be leased from 3d. to about 2s. per
acre. Land suitable for rubber and coconut plantations
for 6d. per acre< for the fVrst 10 ye ads, rising gradually,
thereafter to about 6s. per acre. Land suitable for
banana plantations may be rented at rates varying)
between 3s. and 6s. per acre, while land suited
for sugar-cane, if in the vicinity of any of the cane mills or their
tramlines, command's rentals of about 10s. per acre, if classed
as first class cane land. Small blocks of 5 to,
10 acres leased by East Indians and used also by
them for residential purposes are leased at rates
up to; £1 per acre, if the blocks are adjacent to sugar mills.
The above information will serve to indicate that there
is no lack of land available for settlement by any who de-
sire to embark in any of the various forms of tropical agri-
culture in Fiji.
Description of the Open Reed Lands of Fiji.
The following description of the reed lands of Fiji is
extracted from a report by Mr. P. P. Wright, an experienced
pastoralist, on a 40,000 acres block of reed country in the
Province of Nadroga, but it applies to not less than 100,000
acres of similar country in different parts of Fiji.
This land is generally less than 1000 feet above sea level
and consists of hill and dale covered with reeds and grass
with patches of bracken. It forms the prevailing type of
country in the provinces of Nadroga, Colo West, Ba, Ra
and North Tailevu in Viti Levu and in Bua North and Ma-
cuata in Vanua Levu and the annual rainfall is from 60in.
30


to 80in. It is well watered as a rule and in every 1000
acres there is some perennial water.
While the growth of reeds is strong the soil is a rich
brown with a stiff sub-soil overlaying rocks of volcanic or-
igin—commonly basaltic.
In portions varying from 10 to 50 per cent, of the
whole the soil is an inferior red gritty clay with an excess
of iron, and in the worst only bracken grows upon it.
Grasses.
In parts the reeds give place to Fijian grasses the
chief one being “co cagi cagi” (tho thangi thang!) an an-
dropogon related to those so much valued in New South
Wales as grass for wool growing.
Among these at certain seasons there is a growth of
small milk thistle and of the plant known as “Cobblers
pegs,” both much relished by horses, cattle and sheep
while the native grass called “co vatu’’ (tho vatu) is fre-
quently noticed. It is much liked by stock, and it is a
strong growing grass.
Weeds.
Three plants which are not eaten by stock and yet
which are often noticed in this type of country are “drala”
“usi” and “co veiveiwai.” The first has neither seed nor
burr but cumbers the ground in places and having only
one root and no runners it should easily be eradicated.
The second is a low shrub, also without seed or burr
or running root and its eradication should present no dif-
ficulty.
The third is better known as lemon grass and it grows
in tufts or stools at wide intervals. It would require to be
hoed out for though it is not common it might spread when
other vegetation is eaten down.
Noxious Weeds.
In addition to those three there are two plants which
are actively noxious—Guava and the “Nadi Burr’’ ; The first
31


because it will spread if not attended to, and the second
because of the burr which would attach itself to the wool
of sheep.
The Guava is only seen yet in limited areas chiefly in
the vicinity of towns and along native paths but it is a
noxious weed which the pastoralist should check before it
goes far. It has been found that if cut low sheep if heavily
stocked on the land will eat the young leaves as they
sprout. The Nadi burr is inclined to take full possession of
the land if neglected, but it is only noticed yet in settled
districts and in the vicinity of paths used by stock and
sheep. If cut down and burned before stock is placed on the
land it should cause no trouble to pastoralists.
To break in land of this type for pastoral purposes roads
20 feet wide are cleaned of reeds along lines to be fenced.
The reeds within this are then burned off in the dry
season and immediately thereafter the seeds of the sensi-
tive plant (mimosa pudica) and of paspalum or other gras-
ses are sown in the ashes.
It has been found that six to eight weeks after the Are
an average of one sheep per acre or its equivalent in
cattle is required to keep down the growth of the young
reeds. The latter however do not long survive continual gra-
zing and within two years all trace of reeds disappear if
the land has been fully stocked and the sensitive plant and
paspalum and native grasses only remain.
It is estimated that this type \pt country will carry from
one to three sheep per acre. An expensive item to be fa-
ced by the pastoralist in this country,is *the cost Of fencing,
for as a general rule these lands are far removed from fo-
rest country and the transport of hardwood posts will be
costly. This difficulty has been met by settlers using hard-
wood only as straining; posts and using “live posts” of
vau, wiri wiri or mulomulo.
The following is a statement of land alienations which
shows approximately the position in regard to land, as it
stood on the 31st December, 1910, viz:—
32


Crown Grants.
Acres.
Area held by Crown on Crown Grant... 9,865
Area held by settlers on Crown Grant... 418,118
Total area held on Crown Grant... 427,983
Native Grants.
Area held by Crown on Native Grant... 48,831
Area held by settlers on Native Grant... 37,570
Total area held on Native Grant... 86,401
Native Leaseholds.
Area held by Indians on native lease... 19,420
Area held by Europeans on native lease... 102,390
Total area of native leaseholds held
by settlers 121,810
Crown Leaseholds.
Area held by Indians on Crown lease... 3,411
Area held by Europeans on Crown lease 20,045
Total area of Crown leaseholds held
by settlers 23,456
It will be seen that the alienated lands of the Colony
are as follows: —
Crown Grants 427,983
Native Grants 86,401
Total freehold area ... 514,384
Add Native leasehold area 121,810
Add Crown leasehold area 23,456
Total alienated area... 659,650 acres.
33


Block
No.
Class.
Name.
Area.
Situation.
Province.
Island.
Tenure.
I.
b
Bua
4,600
On Bua Rvr.
Bua ...
Vanua Levu
2.
b
Tiliva
8,060
On Bua Rvr.
yy * • •
yy
3-
b
Koroinasolo
2,180
Rukuruku Bay ...
• ••
yy
a
4-
b
Nasau
3,280
Rukuruku Bay ...
1 yy
yy
«|
5.
b
Nakavakea
3,950
North-west coast
\
yy • • •
yy
a s
6.
b
Burenitu ...
13,140
North-west coast
yy
yy
§•§•2
7 •
b
Nabalavu
3.100
North-west coast
yy • • •
yy
1 §1
8.
a & b
Raviravi...
1.200
East of Dreketi R.
Macuata
yy
<u G
c n . (D
9-
a & b
Dreketi ...
50.000
N’rth of Dreketi R.
1 yy
yy
Pj JH
10.
a
Wainunu
20,000
Wainunu
Bua
yy
ii.
a & b
Varanisisi
61
Macuata coast ...
Macuata
yy
■S
12.
b
Nadroga ...
44,574
Nadroga
Nadroga
Viti Levu
13-
a & b
Qeledradra
506
South-west coast j
yy
yy
to 2 >
14.
a
Navadugu
55
South-west coast I
yy
yy
£ (11
IS-
a
Taqa
38
South-west coast ;
yy
yy
. >
16.
a & b
Bainivore
32
South-west coast
yy • • *
yy
0 - 2
17-
a & b
Nalovo ...
70
South-west coast
yy • • *
yy
18.
a & b
Nacobi ...
1,066
Nadi south ...
Ba ...
yy
u $ c
£
19.
a & b
Sarava ...
300
Ba River
yy • • •
yy
20.
a & b
Namau ...
9,000
Upper Ba Rvr
yy
yy
73 5 <U
21.
b
Koro No. I
8,410
Tavua district ...[
Colo North
yy
22.
b
Koro No. 2
1,247
Tavua district ...
yy
yy
0) 73
23-
b
Nubuiluva
3,4io
Nadar i vatu
yy
yy
<u
24.
b
Nadala ...
15,446
Nadarivatu
yy
yy
T T3
25-
a & b
Tailevu ...
20,000
Tailevu
Tailevu
yy
26.
a
Wainikaroko
162
South coast
Serua
yy
3 3
2 7.
b
Islands in Man-
Nadi dist. mouth
OJ £
grove ...
125
of Sabeto Rvr
Ba ...
yy
H
28.
a & b
Yanuyanugatu Is.
Yasawa
Yasawa
29.
a
Taviuni ...
8,000
Taviuni east
1
Cakaudrove.,.j
Taviuni
LANDS OPEN FOR SETTLEMENT ON LEASE.
A ” signifies agricultural land. “ B,” pastoral land.
34


Blocks 1 to 7 are of similar character, open liilly
country covered with reeds, fern and patches of timber,
and though classed “b” (pastoral land) and well suited
for (stock, they contain patches of fine land suited for
coconuts, fibre or cotton. All have frontages to the sea
coast or navigable rivers. Land well watered. Rainfall, 80
inches. Monthly steamer service. There are sheep and
cattle in this district already.
Block 9.—Good flat and hilly country. (9300 ac. flat)
mostly timbered. Access to coast or Dreketi river would
have to be made by road. Suitable for coconuts on flats
and sisal and stock on hills.
Block 10.—Hilly, but not very steep country covered
with forest and is situated in the wet zone (150 inches).
Well adapted for cocoa, Para rubber, etc. Access provided
to sea or navigable river.
Block 12 is entirely reed and fern country, with no tim-
ber at all on it. It has rather restricted outlets but it would
cut up into four good pastoral blocks, each having outlets
to the sea or to a navigable river. There are sheep and
cattle in this district already. Parts well adapted for sisal.
Blocks 13 to 17.—Small blocks on or near Nadroga
coast. Suitable lands for fibres, cotton, pineapples, but
not for coconuts.
Block 18. —Open country, reeds and fern. 200 acres to
300 acres flat cane land and balance suitable for sisal or
stock.
Block 19—Partly good sugarcane land and partly hill
land.
Block 20. —Open country on upper waters of Ba river.
Reeds, grass and fern. Suitable for grazing.
Block 21 and 22. —Open land on the slopes below Na-
darivatu, covered with reeds, grass and fern. Hills rising
from 600 to 2800 feet above sea level. Both good pastoral
blocks. Sheep and cattle are in this district already.
Blocks 23 and 24. —Mountainous country 2000 feet to
4000 feet above sea level. Mostly forest country. Some good
timber.
35


Block 25. —The flats on coast and rivers as well as
some of the low hills are excellent for bananas. The rest
of the land is low hilly country covered with light forest
interspersed with reed patches and is suitable for rubber,
sisal and stock.
Block 26. —Adjoins Tarawa Rubber Estate. Suitable
for rubber, cocoa, bananas, etc., Coast frontage.
Block 29.h-Excellent land for coconuts, etc., but in-
accessible owing to sea cliffs and no anchorage. Access
would have to be made by road from south west coast.
36


AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE.
The principal crops grown in Fiji are sugar cane, co-
conuts and bananas.
Sugar.
A species of true sugar cane, called “Dovu” by the
Fijians, is probably indigenous to Fiji, and a wild cahp
of another species, known to the natives as “Vico,” is
found plentifully throughout the group. “Dovu” is grown
and used by the Fijians for chewing and for sweetening
their dishes, but “Vico” contains too little sugar to be at-
tractive for such purposes.
The best sugar lands are the alluvial flats on the
banks of the large rivers, although soils of fair quality
but of a more clayey and often peaty nature exist in the
lower reaches of the rivers and along the coasts. The
ocean foreshores and the river deltas are for the greater
part deeply fringed with mangrove or “tiri” scrub, which
generally covers the ground between high and low water
marks, while most of the land immediately above tidal
influence bears evidence of having formerly been covered
with “tiri.” Some considerable areas of mangrove swamps
have been reclaimed by means of dykes and flood gates,
and it is hoped tijiat this heavily salined soil will in afew
years be sweetened sufficiently to enable it to produce
g3od crops of sugar cane. In the meantime the scheme
37


District.
Island.
Area (acresl.
Rewa
Viti Levu
10,000
Ba
yy
14,000
Lautoka
yy
15,000
Navua
yy
6,000
Raki Raki
yy
1,200
Labasa
Vanua Levu
10,500
has resulted in improved drainage of much of the low
lying cultivable land immediately behind the “tiri” proper.
There are six distinct cane growing districts, each
with its own raw sugar factory. The total area of land
under cane cultivation is here given, approximately, for
the separate districts.
The yearly rainfall varies considerably for the differ-
ent districts, ranging from about 120 inches per annum
at Rewa and Navua to little more than half that quan-
tity for the four other districts. As a rule, the wet season
sets in about the middle of December and continues to
the end of Marcjh or the middle of April. As in other im-
portant sugar producing countries, the varieties of cane
planted are numerous. The majority of these, however, are
propagated to only a limited extent, the main crop com-
prising not more than about half a dozen kinds which
have proved the most profitable. The leading varieties at
present are Badila, Malabar, Rose Bamboo and Striped
Singapore, yielding on the average about 20 tons per acre,
occasional plant crops giving as much as 60 tons per
acre.
The earliest record of the production of granulated
sugar in Fiji dates back to 1872, when Mr. Lester Smith —
formerly a West Indian planter —was credited with the
distinction of having initiated the industry for which he
was subsequently awarded a bonus by the Legislative
Council for his enterprise. Since then, the production of
sugar has increased until now it easily holds first place
in the statistical lists of exports from the Colony.
The pioneer mill of Fiji was erected in Suva by Messrs.
38


REWA RIVER AND CANE FIELDS.




Brewster and Joske in 1873, but owing to lack of experi-
ence in the business the venture was financially unsuc-
cessful, and the mill was closed after a short career. Then
in 1880 the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, of Sydney,
interested itself in Fiji, and decided to erect at Nausori,
on the Rewa River, its first factory, with an annual capa-
city of 10,000 tons of sugar. This mill commenced opera-
tions in 1882.
The Rewa, being on the windward side of the island,
was at that time considered the most suitable district,
on account of its higher rainfall and the richness of the
alluvial soil on the banks of the river.
Gradually, however, it was found that the leeward
side of the island produced sweeter cane, its more clearly
defined contrast between the wet and dry seasons of the
year being more conducive to proper ripening of the cane;
besides being less favourable to the growth of weeds.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company now has, in ad-
dition to Nausori, three other mills, viz:—Rarawai on the
Ba River, opened in 1886, capacity 20,000 tons sugar per
annum; Labasa, opened in 1894, capacity 15,000 tons; and
Lautoka, opened in 1903, capacity 25,000 tons. To the last
named factory is to be conveyed the cane from the Siga-
toka district, now being opened up.
The two remaining districts of Navua and Raki Raki
are served respectively by the Vancouver-Fiji Sugar Com-
pany’s Tamanua mill, producing some 7,000 tons sugar,
and the Melbourne Trust Company’s Penang mill, capa-
city 2,000 tons per annum. The only other mills erected,
being of small power, were compelled to cease operations
when the price of sugar fell in 1884, and it became evi-
dent that in order to attain success manufacturing of sugar
must be conducted on a large scale.
Most of the existing mills were started and carried
on for some time as self-contained sugar estates, but the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company is gradually leasing
out its plantations, principally to ex-employees who
39


have gained their planting experience in the Com-
pany’s service in Fiji. There are also a large
number of independent planners who in common with
the tenants, enter into contracts to grow cane for the
mills. The Contract is usually for a term ojf five years,
planter to cut the cane and load it into punts or upon
trucks supplied by the millers, who then undertake the
transport to the mill. Payment is usually on a sliding scale,
according to the sugar yielding quality of the cane, as de-
termined at the mill by analytical chemists.
In recent years the supplies of cane for the mills
have been considerably augmented by the advent of the
Indian coolies as cane growers. On the expiry of their
terms of indenture as plantation labourers, many of these
people now settle down on small blocks, leased to them
by European and Fijian owners for cane planting. In this
way numerous small areas on the outskirts of the larger
plantations are being brought under cane, and the coolie
cane grower is annually becoming a more important element
in the Community.
The native Fijian does not make a reliable plantation
labourer, his natural temperament rendering him quite un-
fitted for the monotonous duties incidental to cane culti-
vation, but the Indian coolies have proved themselves emi-
nently suitable for the work, and are employed by the
planters generally. The coolie immigrants are recruited
annually in the Madras Presidency on behalf of the Govern-
ment of Fiji under strict regulations prescribed by the
Government of India. They are brought to Fiji between
the months of February and June, their employers being
responsible for the cost of their passages and other ex-
penses of introduction. The term of the agreement is for
five years, and the wages paid are fixed by Government
regulations. The practice of allotting a daily task to each
labourer is largely followed, a woman’s task being three
fourths of a man’s. Many elect to increase their earnings
by taking up more than one task per day or by working
in the factories where higher wages are paid. The labourers
40


SHEEP AND COCOANUT PLANTATION.




feed themselves, ibut are housed by their employers, and
when sick, are treated in the plantation hospitals, which
are under the supervision of the Government Medical
Officer. After the expiry of their indentures some of the
coolies re-engage for a further period, but most of them
settle on the land and grow rice, bananas or sugar cane.
After ten years, continuous residence in the Colony they
are entitled to free return passages to India, but of this
privilege only a small proportion avail themselves, the ma-
jority preferring to remain in the Colony, which offers
advantages so much superior to those of their own coun-
try. !
For the heavy plantation work implements drawn by
horses and mules are largely used. Except for a limited
number bred locally, the mules are imported by the ship-
load from America. The crushing season usually commences
soon after the Ist of June, and closes before the end of
the year, when the wet season sets in. With the exception
of the produce off the Yancouver-Fiji Sugar Company’s Ta-
manua mill —which is exported to Canada —practically the
whole of the raw sugar is shipped to the C.S.R. Co.’s re-
fineries in New Zealand and Australia.
It will help to give an idea of the magnitude of the
sugar industry, to state that in connection with the four
Colonial Sugar Company’s mills alone there are employed,
in round figures, about 7,500 coolie labourers, 2,000 horses
and mules, 200 miles of permanent and 70 miles of port-
able tramway, 3,500 cane trucks of about 2\ tons capacity
each, 27 locomotives, 10 tugs and launches, and 80 lighters
and punts.
i
COCONUTS.
The copra industry is confined to the islands of Tavi-
uni and Rotumah and to the small islands to the East form-
ing the Lau Group, and to certain parts of Vanua Levu
and Ovalau, and also in the Yasawa Group, and other smalll
islands, where the cultivation of coconuts is almost en-
41


tirely carried on by native Fijians. It is carried on both
by Europeans and by natives who have always planted
coconuts around their villages.
Many of the European plantations have been estab-
lished 25-30 years and planting has steadily progressed,
so that some otf the areas of coconuts are of considerable
size. Upon many of these plantations cattle are run among
the palm's : a£ there is a ready market to the local butchers,
these practically pav for the production of copra. When such
procedure can be followed copra producing is a very lu-
crative industry. The price of copra, which has risen dur-
ing the last few years appears to be keeping up and the
general prospects of this industry are excellent.
It is necessary to bear in mind that with coconuts
as with all permanent cultivations, the effects of a hurri-
cane are severe. The trees may be so stripped]
of leaves and 1 of the nut-bearing branchlets as to
prevent the production of a crop for two or more
years, or with a more moderate gale the crop for one year
may be lost. ,Bu,t the occurrence of severe storms is rare,
and old plantations show no evidence of wholesale destruc-
tion of trees.
With such a paying industry which has been well es-
tablished for many years, it is easily understood that land
suitable for the cultivation of coconuts has been in conf
siderable demand but there are still considerable arleas of such
land available for settlement in Fiji.
The expenses in connection with the establishment of
a plantation would be the lease or purchase of land if the
latter be alienated land, erection of house, store rooms,
labour lines, sheds and trays for drying the copra. Labour
has then to be obtained, and nuts for planting.
The cost of clearing the land varies from £1 to £4 an
acre, according to the growth upon it. The cost of planting
is only a few shillings per acre.
A ismall crop may be obtained in five or six years which
42


COCOANUT TREES AND CATTLE. TAVIUNI.




will increase up to the 12th year when the palms should
he in full bearing. The cost of bringing an acre into good
bearing is about £lO to £l2.
During the first five years or so, no income is derived
from the palms and the cattle cannot be run among the
trees until they are about three years old and the leaves
are sufficiently high to escape damage by the cattle. The
capital must therefore include provision for these first
years.
BANANAS.
The banana grows exceedingly well in Fiji. The natives
recognising: this, and the high value of the fruit as folod,
have cultivated the plant extensively. Among the native
food plants, Horne, a botanist, who visited the group in
1878, places the banana third in order of merit, yam and
dalo being considered more important. Many different kinds
of bananas and plantains were found in cultivation when
Europeans first settled in the group. The name “banana”
is generally used in connection with those kinds of which
the fruit (may be eaten raw; “plantains” refer to those
whose fruit needs some cooking process before being
eaten.
The taller varieties suffer rather severely during hurri-
canes which periodically visit the group ; and therefore the
Chinese banana introduced in 1848 from Samoa was a
valuable aJddiltiom to the native food plants, since its dwarf
habit enables it to stand against winds that would break
down the taller kinds.
When regular steamer connections had been estab-
lished with Australia, planters soon recognised the value
of the banana as aP article of export ; aPd f in Australia
and New Zealand Fiji bananas have earned a high repu-
tation.
The following table shows the export in bananas and'
43


Year.
Bunches of
Cases of
Year.
Bunches of
Cases of
bananas.
fruit.
bananas.
fruit.
187(5
—
2,032
pines
1892
788,100
5,558
1877
3,100
3,183
pines
1893
348,599
17,241
425
other fruit
1894
390,746
33,014
1878
21,316
800
pines
1895
207,352
34,934
1,746
other fruit
1897
209,722
31,309
1879
43,069
1,986
1898
364,486
40,730
1880
79,409
2,419
1899
463,985
47,226
1881
73,583
3,700
1900
396,242
46,224
1882
124,242
5,668
1901
271,436
57,526
1883
171,237
5,760
1902
291,816
66,598
1881
229,734
4,279
. - . ■
1903
329,013
96,827
188.')
277,973
5,095
1904
165,506
66,766
1886
261,741
4,507
1905
147,007
83,413
1887
359,294
6,070
1906
604,617
191,640
1888
517,666
4,567
1907
462,139
192,591
1889
531,008
4,499
1908
356,180
145,110
1890
720,788
5,777
1909
585,713
188,577
1891
784,675
4,118
1910
271,024
81,225
other fruit, taken from Blue Books, since 1877 —the earliest
record since the group became a Crown Colony.
This table is interesting as showing the rapid growth
of the industry in the earlier years and it may be remarked
that at the present time the demand exceeds the supply.
When all the markets within reach are tapped the de-
mand will increase very largely.
The two columns show the number of bunches of ban-
anas and the number of cases of fruit. In the earlier
years, pines and citrus fruit accounted for most of the
latter, now however the cases of fruit represent bananas
chiefly.
In the Colonies and especially in New Zealand there is a
demand for bananas removed singly from the bunches and
packed in cases; advantage is taken of this to utilise
small bunches which it would not pay to ship as bunches.
(A bunch is made of several clusters of bananas, the
clusters are spoken of as “hands,” while the single fruit
forming the clusters are referred to as “fingers”). The
44


LOADING BANANAS. SUVA HARBOUR.




To Australia.
To New
Zealand.
Month.
Bunches.
Gases.
Bunches
. Cases.
January
27,609
1,356
6,278
10,239
February
42,131
2,008
4,534
8,123
March
72,748
2,396
9,110
12,540
April
54,905
4,109
5,555
9,803
May
46,345
2,504
11,661
7,651
June
41,447
1,767
2,410
7,971
July
40,674
2,320
1,732
6,654
August
42,720
2,919
1,532
7,786
September
39,802
4,802
1,230
7,592
October
38,130
6,778
1,324
7,595
November
43,782
6,024
2,509
9,284
December
49,226
4,189
8,880
22,241
Total
... 509,519
41,172
56,755
117,479
“fingers” of several small bunches or from bunches which
have been partially damaged are removed from the stalk
and .placed in cases without packing material, until the
case is so full as to prevent the contents shaking about
a lid is nailed on. All bunches of less than eight
hands are treated in this way.
Bananas may be planted during any month of the year,
and fruit is obtained all the year round. Most fruit how-
ever is obtained during the months October to March.
The following table, showing the average number of
bunches and cases exported to New Zealand and New South
Wales for three years, 1909, 1910, and 1911 gives indicai
tions of the variation of the produce during the months
of the year.
AVERAGE MONTHLY EXPORT OF BANANAS FOR THE
YEARS 1909, 1910, 1911.
Referring again to the table of exports of bananas it
will be seen that the number of bunches exported increased
rapidly from 3,100 in 1877 to over million in 1892 whereas
the number of cases remained about the same, being chiefly
45


pineapples and citrus fruits. A gale occurred in December
of this year and it may explain the large decrease in the
number of bunches exported the following year. Prob-
ably many of the bunches would only be partially dam-
aged and could be utilised as case fruit and this may ex-
plain the large increase in the number of cases exported
in 1893.
Since that year the number of bunches has not reached
the high figure of 1892 but the number of cases has steadily
increased.
A disease in bananas which appeared in the group
about this time has had considerable effect in limiting
the size of the bunches and therefore on the number of
bunches exported as such.
Gales or hurricanes, affecting banana cultivation oc-
curred in January, 1895, January, 1900, January, 1904, Janu-
ary, 1905, and March, 1908, and the effects of these are
seen in the diminished export of those years, but it will
be noticed that the effect is only for one season.
Land for cultivation of bananas is situated along the
creeks or rivers near Suva or other ports of shipment,
which are referred to later on.
The land need not be stumped; after clearing, the
banana plants can be set out among the stumps which after
a year or so are much more easily extracted. The land must
be kept clean by hoeing.
Land within easy reach of some port of shipment has
been in considerable demand and naturally that nearest to
such shipping places has been taken up, but areas are
still to be had where bananas could be conveniently grown.
In Fiji two kinds are cultivated for export, Gros
Michel or Jamaica banana and the Chinese or dwarf banana.
The former may be expected to give bunches about 18
months and the latter 12 months after planting, and from
good land the yield in bunches should be about two-thirds
of the .number of roots planted.
It is generally reckoned that one labourer to six acres
is sufficient for clearing, planting, weeding and harvesting.
46


50 acres of land say
10s. per acre rent ...
£25
0
0
9 men for 15 months-
-£26 per annum
292
10
0
Plants, say
...
40
0
0
Allowance for tools,
labour house, punts
and sundries
100
0
0
Total...
£457
10
0
A rough estimate of the cost of opening and bringing
into bearing 50 acres of bananas is as follows: —
The first crop should give 200 bunches per acre, or
10,000 bunches at say Is. 6d. £750 Os. Od.
This is a very low estimate and it is safe to say that
in many instances considerably greater profits are made.
In the case of good land, cleaned, ploughed and kept in
first class condition the cost of upkeep can be reduced and
the output increased.
The cultivation of bananas is one that may be carried
on in conjunction with permanent crops, such as cacao,
rubber, citrus fruits, etc., which can be planted in the same
lines alternatively with bananas. In a few years when the
banana crop is exhausted the land will be occupied with a
permanent crop the cost of establishing which will be trifling
owing to profit on the bananas. The banana plants cause
no injury to the permanent crop, and are of assistance by
affording the young plants shade and keeping the soil in
good condition.
Bananas grown continuously *on the same land
exhaust the soil of certain elements to such an extent that
paying crops cease to be obtained. It will then be neces-
sary to throw* o{u ; t the cultivation, and give the land f a rest
A proper system of manuring is likely to lessen this ten-
dency of the land to exhaustion, but it is not likely to entirely
prevettit it. While the land is out of use, it must be re-
membered that it may become a nursery for the distribution
of weeds. In order to prevent this undesirable condition
of affaiiris, the land will need some attention, and it is sug-
gested that a system of rotation offers the most economical
method of working the estate.
47


The simplest and possibly the best crop that can be
used in some form of green manure, such as Mauritius beans
or cowpeas. ;No immediate profit is to be made out of
such crops, but the advantages to be gained by their use
are sufficiently well known. Old banana land may also
be laid dowin uinder grass and used for cattle-grazing, while
in districts wfhere Vane may be disposed of to a mill, the cul-
tivation of sugar-cane may be carried on alternately with
bananas.
Fruit is cut when full but quite green. Bunches of eight
hands and over are ready for transport to the steamer; the
smaller bunches are taken to sheds where the fruit is re-
moved from the stalk, sorted, and carefully packed into
standard sized cases.
All the transport from the plantation is by water, large
punts being used ■where the steamer can be reached inside
the reef, cutters where there is open water to be
negotiated. Care is taken by use of tarpaulins, etc., to keep
fruit dry after cutting and until it is loaded on the steamer.
The importance of exporting only good fruit has been
recognised by the Government by the appointment of an
Inspector with power under regulations to inspect fruit
during loading of steamers and reject any inferior or dam-
aged fruit. In this way the quality of the exports have
been {the quantity exported may be slightly
reduced by the rejections of inferior fruit.
Ports of call for loading fruit are Suva, where fruit is
taken in from Rewa River, Tamavua river, the Suva dis-
trict and the smaller creeks opening into Suva harbour;
Levuka; Rovadrau for bananas around the Navua river,
and Momi or Cuvu for bananas from the Sigatoka and Nadi
districts. The present steamers /run twice a month to Sydney
and once a month to New Zealand.
In addition, there is a fortnightly service to Melbourne
for conveying bananas in cool storage to that port. This ser-
vice is only at present in its infancy, but it has proved to
be of great benefit to the industry both by relieving the
already established markets and by opening up other mark-
ets in Victoria, Tasmania, and in Western Australia.
48


INSECT PESTS.
In dealing with the agricultural possibilities of Fiji, re-
ference must be made to the insect pests of certain crops.
In the first place it should be understood that few of
the injurious insects are indigenous to the Colony, but have
gained admittance from time to time in importations of fruit
and plants, and this applies more especially to recent years,
owing to the increased facilities for travel and of transport.
Until recently, vegetable matter has been allowed to
enter Fiji without being subjected to any form of inspec-
tion, but now a thorough system of plant inspection is
carried out at the three ports of entry in the Colony—
namely, Suva, Levuka and Lautoka. In the same way, at
each of these ports, all seeds and vegetable matter arriving
by post, have to undergo examination by the Inspectors.
It is hoped that, by means of a rigid form of inspection,
the importation of various insects, which, if introduced,
would be extremely detrimental to the cultivation of cer-
tain crops, may be, in some measure, prevented.
As examples of these possible importations might be
mentioned the following: —The Queensland fruit-fly (Dacus
tyroni, Froggatt) which would probably destroy the banana
industry of Fiji, several enemies of sugar cane, of which
the following are the most important;—A moth borer (Dia-
trea striatalis), a bad pest of sugar cane in Java, and more
injurious than the notorious cane borer (Sphen/ophorus
49


obscurus); several insects from Papua, for instance a small
leaf hopper (Perkinsiella vastatrix): some bud-moths, and
a beetle borer; a moth borer and several beetle grubs from
Queensland—notably the “cane grub” (Lepidiota Albohirta().
Of cocoanut pests the most dreaded importation is the Rhi-
nocerous beetie (Oryctes rhinoceros, L, Tagalog, Uang),
which is at present so serious a pest in Samoa. It is a
noteworthy fact that this pest does not exist in Fiji.
Having taken steps to prevent the introduction of addi-
tional insect pests it now remains to combat those already
in the Colony.
While the coconut palm ha?s numerous insect and
other enemies, the only ore that calls for serious considera-
tion at j*resen;t is. (the coconut leaf moth (Levuana iri#
descens). This insect is peculiar to Fiji and the area of its
attack appears to be limited to Viti Levu, and one or two
adjacent islands. The extensive ravages of this moth pre-
vent the palms from producing nuts. The habits of this
insect (are being studied at present with a view of dis-
covering a remedy.
The chief insect attacking banana crops is the so-
called “banana borer” (Sphenophorus sordidus), which it
is believed was introduced into Fiji about nine years ago,
and before there was any system of plant inspection. This
insect is a serious pest.
It is believed at present that the only method of suc-
cessful control, will be by the agency of* natural enemies,
which will have( toi be soughit for in certain islands in
Oceana, where there is reason to believe an efficient para-
site exists.
A fungoid disease of bananas locally known as “strang-
les”—causes considerable loss to planters in some dis-
tricts. This disease has never been investigated, but appears
to closely resemble the so-called “Fiji disease” of sugar
cane.
The chief pests of sugar cane, in addition to the fungus
causing the Fiji disease just referred to, are the sugar
cane borer, (Sphenophorus obscurus), and a leaf hopper
(Perkinsiella vitiensis).
50


The former is very destructive in certain districts and
especially to the softer varieties of sugar cane, hut an
efficient parasite has been recently introduced into Fiji from
British New Guinea by Mr. F. Muir of the Hawaiian Sugar
Planters’ Association, and it is anticipated that there will be
a noticeable reduction in the numbers of this injurious
borer in the near future.
The leaf hopper (Perkinsiella vitiensis) does not do a
great deal of damage, as it is kept in check by numerous
parasites, notably Ootentrastichus, Anagrus and a Stylopid
(Ellenchus tenuicoruis).
Most of the other cultivated crops in Fiji seem remark-
ably free from the attacks of injurious insects.
An agromyzid parasite fly has recently been success-
fully introduced with the object of controlling Lantana,
which is a bad weed in this Colony.
51


MINOR PRODUCTS.
Many plants grow so well and give such excellent
crops, beyond the three chief crops and those the cultiva-
tion of which on a large scale is gradually being taken up,
that it is desirable that they be given further and more ex-
tended trial both for the local market and for export.
Cotton.
Fiji is admirably adapted to the production of cotton,
and at one time it was the chief export of the group.
When prices fell in Europe after the American Civil War,
the cultivation of cotton was gradually replaced by that
of coconuts and sugar cane. Dr. Seeman reported most
favourably on Fiji as a cotton-producing country. All the
drier parts of the group are excellent areas for the growth
of the higher classes of Sea Island cotton, in which areas
the rainfall averages from 50 to 70 inches per annum, with
well-marked wetalnd dry seasons.
The following notes show the cost of cultivation and
the results of a,n area of eight acres of Sea Islapd cotton at
the Government Experimental Station, at Lautoka.
The cotton wa? planted at different times between the
end of November and the middle of March, the best time
to plant appearing to be from the middle of December to
the middle of January, the actual time depending on the
rains. j
52


INTERIOR OF NATIVE HOUSE.




The cost of cultivation, including clearing of land, cart-
ing away stones, making drains, ploughing, harrowing, lin-
ing, planting and supplying, thinning out and weeding,
scarifying, spraying, and other methods of dealing with
pests, and picking for 7.96 acres with labour at 2s. a day,
amounted to £9O 17s. lOd.
Of the above operations the clearing, draining, and cart-
ing are permanent improvements and should not be wholly
charged against this year’s cultivation, and, omitting these,
the actual cost of the one year’s cultivation comes to
£6O 13. lid., or at the rate of £7 12s. 6d. per acre.
The total yield of ginned cotton was 2146.751 b., or 2701 b.
per acre. The highest yield was 479.81 b. from a measured
acre on black well-drained soil, and the lowest was 141.51 b.
on poor red soil. On a fair average soil and with good culti-
vation the average yield of ginned cotton should be over
3001 b. per acre.
Limes and Limejuice.
The plant flourishes with little or no cultivation and
thrives on distinctly second class soil. Under cultivation
the crops should be very good. Fruit may be exported as
fresh fruit or the juice may be expressed and bottled.
In a small trial shipment sent to Canada, as fresh
fruit, 67| dozen sold at 5 cents, per dozen.
Coffee.
The different varieties of coffee grow well in many
parts of the group. It is possible that the spread of coffee
cultivation might result in the spread of the “coffee leaf
disease” which appeared in the group and ruined what was
about 28 years ago, a most promising industry. The small
areas of coffee plants here and there seem to be healthy,
however, and the cultivation would appear to be worth
consideration if only fo** loeal use and together with some
other product.
53


Cacao.
This crop is found satisfactory and quite successful in
the warm moist valleys of the wetter districts.
The oldest plantations are now beginning to yield ap-
preciable crops and appear to give satisfactory returns.
Cocoa grown on the Wainunu river, Vanua Levu, by Captain
D. Robbie was reported on by the Imperial Institute and
was acknowledged to be as fine a quality as the best Trini-
dad cocoa. Taken in conjunction with the cultivation of
bananas, its sale will pay for the cultivation of both
crops. This is particularly recommended for suitable land,
as the cultivation can be established at a minimum cost.
It is noteworthy that this crop is entirely free at present*
from insect and fungoid pests.
Yaqona.
The dried root of piper methysticum which is used in
making the native drink yaqona is a crop that gives ex-
cellent returns for small areas. The crop can be cut at any
age, but, for drying, three-year old roots are about the
youngest that should be dug.
The roots increase rapidly if not dug and the value
increases in proportion. The average time is three or four
years for digging. An average yield would be about 9 or
lOlbs. of green root giving about 31bs. of dried root from
a three year old plant. This would be worth at least Is.
a lb. and there would be a quantity of rootlets which have
a value. The plants can be set out at about 1000 per acre—
so that it will be seen that considerable returns are to be
obtained. The demand is however limited.
Maize.
This crop does well in the drier parts of the group.
Two and sometimes more crops can be got in the course
of the year with green manurial crops in between. Good
land is required for this crop and drained swamps and
land subject to periodic flooding are specially recommended.
There is a local demand for maize to a limited quantity
54


for feeding horses and mules. Maize is not used as a staple
article of food by the native races in Fiji nor by the East
Indians. Until these people can be taught to eat corti dour
or “mealies” there will be no opening for an extensive
cultivation of maize. Fiji can never hope to compete in
foreign markets with Queensland and the United States
of America in this product.
Rice.
The cultivation of this crop is entirely in the hands
of the free Indians, who cultivate it chiefly for their own
food supply. There is plenty of swampy land suited to the
cultivation of “swamp rice” and of drier land on which
“upland” varieties can be grown. With the large and in-
creasing Indian population in the group, it would appear
that there is an opening for scientific methods and modern
machinery being applied to the cultivation and prepa-
tion of this crop for local use. The quantity imported dur-
ing 1910 was 1626 tons.
Tobacco.
Tobacco appears to grow well in almost any part of
the group. The drier parts specially are recommended. This
crop is one of the standard native products. Selected seed
in the first place, up-to-date cultivation, and proper fer-
mentation and curing produced excellent cigar tobacco some
years ago, and there is no reason why the industry should
not be resuscitated.
Oil Seeds.
Peanuts, and castor oil grow well, the former doing
best in the drier parts of the group. The castor oil plant
grows in a semi-wild condition in many districts. Samples
of these seeds have been reported on at the Imperial In-
stitute as good average samples.
Starches.
Cassava (Manihot sps.) arrowroot (Maranta arundina-
cea[) and Fiji arrowroot (Tacca Pinnatifida) grow very well
55


in Fiji and the starches from these plants examined at
the Imperial Institute have been reported upon as of good
quality.
Spices.
Ginger, pepper, nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon, vanilla, pi-
mento, etc., have been given good crops on an experi-
mental scale and would be worth attention and further trial
in suitable situations.
Sisal Hemp
There are considerable areas of land in the group spe-
cially suitable for the cultivation of sisal hemp. In the
drier districts the cultivation of this product is likely
to prove most satisfactory to settlers. The cultivation of
sisal hemp is not necessarily more successful on poor or in-
different soils, but there is much land available of an in-
ferior quality, and land unsuited for other cultivation will
produce sisal hemp. The plant recommended for use in
Fiji is that of the green variety (agave rigida variety sis-
alana) which is cultivated extensively in Florida and in
the Bahamas (West Indies).
A report by the Superintendent of Agriculture on sisal
hemp in Fiji is included in the appendices (vide page Hi).
56


LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION.
The labour employed or to be obtained in Fiji con-
sists almost exclusively of the following classes, viz:—
(1) Indian coolies recruited in India and introduced
into Fiji under indenture.
(2) Indian coolies whose periods of indenture have
expired (and who have obtained certificates of industrial
residence.
(3) Indian coolies, whose periods of indenture and
industrial residence have expired and who have settled in
the ,Colony.
(4) Native Fijians.
(5) Polynesians (so-called) introduced from the neigh-
bouring Pacific Islands, principally the Solomon Islands
and the New Hebrides, whose indentures have expired and
who have settled in the Colony. The introduction of Poly-
nesian labour under indenture is now prohibited.
The chief supply of labour is obtained from India. All
work in connection with the recruiting of the labourers,
their (transport to Fiji and their reception in the Colony
is performed by agents or officers of the Colonial Govern-
ment
The system may be described briefly as follows:
At Calcutta and Madras the Government have Emigra-
57


tion Agents, who employ recruiters to obtain the labour-
ers .required for plantation work in Fiji. When recruited
the labourers are sent to depots established at Calcutta
and /Madras and are there subjected to medical examina-
tion. If engaged, they are sent to Fiji by vessels employed
for (the purpose by Government, under contract. Upon
arrival in Fiji the labourers are landed at the Quarantine
Depot, where they undergo further medical examination.
Allotment to the various employers then takes place and
the labourers are handed over to their employers.
All expenses in connection with the recruiting, deten-
tion in India awaiting shipment, transport, detention in
Fiji, etc., etc., are in the first place paid by the Govern-
ment, which obtains repayment in the manner hereinafter
described.
Employers of labour, who desire to obtain Indian la-
bourers under indenture must apply to the Agent-General
of Immigration on or before the Ist of October in the
year preceding that in which the labourers are required.
Before doing so, employers must pay to the Receiver-
General of the Colony a fee, called the “application fee,”
the amount of which is fixed annually by the Governor-
in-Council, usually at £6 per caput.
Sums received pn account of application fees are, to
a (great extent, not required to meet disbursements for
some subsequently. They are therefore placed on
fixed deposit with the local banks, any interest earned
being credited to the persons on whose behalf the fees
are deposited.
The Emigration Agents are informed of the number
of immigrants required. Recruiting is then commenced and
the immigrants (despatched to Fiji, where they usually
land between the months of February and June. After arrival
the immigrants are allotted to employers, who must, when
notice of allotment appears in the official Gazette, pay to
the Receiver-General a fee known as the “allotment
fee” also fixed by the Governor at an amount which as
nearly as possible represents the difference be-
58


NATIVE HOUSE AND CANOE.




tween the application fee and the actual cost of introduc-
tion. Accounts are balanced yearly. If the fees paid do
not cover cost of introduction, the balance is paid to Go-
vernment by employers. If the fees exceed cost of intro-
duction the balance is refunded to employers.
The average cost of introduction for some years past
has been £l6 per caput. As the application fee is usually
£6 the allotment fee may said to be £lO.
Employers who obtain thirty or less immigrants in
any one year, may arrange with the Government for pay-
ment ; cf the application and allotment fees under a de-
ferred payment system, which provides for payment spread
over four years. One-fifth of the fees in these cases is pay-
able on allotment, and one-fifth at the expiration of each
of the next four years together with 5 per cent, interest
on the sum unpaid.
Employers pf Indian labourers must provide at their
own expense, suitable dwellings for immigrants. The style
and dimensions of these buildings are fixed by regulations.
Fuel ,and water, where these are not obtainable within
a certain distance of these dwellings, must be supplied
gratis by the employer. Implements for work must be sup-
plied and maintained at the expense of the employer. Em-
ployers must supply rations to immigrants during the first
six months of their indentures, for which they are allowed
to 4d. per diem from each immigrant. A certain
proportion iof women and children is invariably received
with the male labourers and accompany them to the es-
tates.. Women and children above a certain age are inden-
tured ;for employment. Children of immigrants must be
rationed by employers for twelve months from the date of
the parent’s indenture. They must be similarly rationed
while in hospital. A ration scale in all cases is laid down.
Immigrants may be employed either at task work or
time work. In the latter case the hours of work are nine
hours of each day from Monday to Friday inclusive and
five hours on Saturdays, exclusive of hours for meals.
59


Wages are payable on Saturdays. For males above the
age of 15 the rate is Is. per diem, for females above the
age of 15, 9d. per diem, and in other cases in proportion
to the amount of work done. Any ordinary task is reck-
oned as being equal to a day’s work.
On plantations to which more than five immigrants are
indentured, plantation hospitals, approved by the Agent-
General ,of Immigration, must be erected and maintained
at the expense of the employer, unless other arrangements
are Approved by the Agent-General.
Except in a few isolated cases, the medical care of
immigrants is provided for by Government, who maintain
Government Medical Officers for the purpose. These offi-
cers visit the plantation hospitals and the immigrants, anjd
give direction for their care. Employers in “Medical dis-
tricts,’’ i.e., in districts in which there are Government
medical .officers, contribute what is known as a “capita-
tion rate’’ a yearly rate per caput of immigrants employed
The rate is fixed by Legislative Council, generally at 2s.
per caput per annum.
The period of indenture is five years in all cases. At
the expiration of that period and provided no extension
order has been granted against the immigrant for an off-
ence at law, he is “free,’’ except that he is not entitled
to ja return passage to India until the expiration of a
period of five years from the date of the completion of his
indentures.
An immigrant who has completed his term of inden-
ture and period of industrial residence is entitled, within
a specified time, to a free return passage to India, the cost
of which is borne by general revenue.
Up to the end of 1910 a system of immigration in res-
pect of natives of the Solomon Islands or Polynesia was
maintained. Emigration from the New Hebrides and Solo-
mon Ishlands has now been prohibited and Polynesians are
not available as a source for the introduction of indentured
labour.
60


FIJIAN GIRL.




FIJIAN LABOUR.
Contracts for labour with Fijians for any period ex-
ceeding one month must be made subject to the provisions
of “The Fijian Labour Ordinance, 1895.”
A Fijian wishing to engage for periods exceeding one
month must notify his wish to the “Turaga-ni-koro” (chief
of the village), subject to whose assent and to the assent
of ;the Bull (chief) of his district he is free to enter into
a contract, subject to the following provisos, viz:—
(1) If the native is a married man he shall not
enter into a contract for a period exceeding
three months except under conditions hereinafter
stated.
(2) That his absence is not inconsistent with engage-
ments into which he has previously entered or
with obligations imposed by law.
(3) That his presence is not required by the Dis-
trict Council in cases of actual necessity.
Women and children under the age of 14, may not en-
gage for service but may accompany their husbands or
fathers in cases mentioned below.
A married man may be engaged on a plantation for
a period exceeding three months if accompanied by his
wife and family (if any) and if his employer provides for
the use and occupation of such family, suitable house
accommodation and planting land.
Permits to recruit native labourers are issued by the
Native Commissioner.
Contracts entered into by Fijian labourers must be
ratified before a Stipendiary Magistrate.
Fijian labourers may be employed for service by time-
work or task-work at the option of the employer. Where
Fijian labourers and Indian labourers are employed by
task on the same work, the task should be similar in each
case. When employed on time work his daily wages shall
not [be less than he would be entitled to receive for a
61


task finder his contract. The rate of payment for a task
shall not be less than Bd.
The hours of labour at time work are nine hours on
Mondays to Fridays inclusive and five hours on Saturdays,
exclusive of meal hours.
Employers must provide free passages for labourers
from their homes to the plantations to which they may
have engaged and, within fourteen days of the completion
of 'these contracts, free return passages. Employers must
also pay the labourers “native-tax” amounting to about
£1 per caput per annum. Implements for work, suitable
dwellings and rations must be supplied at the expense of
the (employer.
A certain (small) amount of clothing and bedding must
be supplied free of cost to labourers.
One-fourth of the amount of wages earned by a labour-
er must be paid to him weekly and the balance at the
expiration of his contract, in the presence of a Stipendiary
Magistrate.
When the number of labourers on any plantation ex-
ceeds ififty a plantation hospital must be maintained at
the expense of the employer.
Job contracts may be entered into with Fijians on spe-
cial conditions laid down by law.
The land in Fiji belongs to the natives. Large areas are
leased, and the area is increasing steadily. The amount of
rent collected by the Government on behalf of the natives
and distributed among the owners of land in 1911 was little
short of £25,000. The ordinary Fijian finds no difficulty in
procuring the necessaries of life. Some will work for short
intervals during the year at 2s. a day with liberal food
rations added, and when they have collected a few pounds
their desire usually is to return for a time to their native
towns or districts. The difficulty of all employers is to
obtain a continuous supply of native labourers throughout
the year.
62


MEANS OF COMMUNICATION.
The Fiji islands lie north of New Zealand and East of
Australia. They are distant about 1200 miles from Auckland
and about 1800 miles from Sydney.
There is direct monthly communication between Auck-
land and Suva by a vessel owned by the Steam-
ship Company of New Zealand, Limited. This steamer leaves
Auckland generally on a Wednesday and arrives at Suva on
or about the following Sunday, the passage occupying about
four days. After ‘discharging her cargo and visiting other
ports in the Colony, this vessel returns to Auckland leav-
ing Suva about five days after her arrival. The outward
cargo consists of fruit, principally bananas.
The Union Company also maintains communication be-
tween Auckland, Tonga, Samoa and Fiji, and vice versa.
Vessels leave Auckland and Sydney respectively on the
same day, the first vessel proceeding from Auckland to
ports in Tonga, Samba and Fiji, and direct from Suva, in
the last mentioned group, to Sydney; and the second vessel
proceeding from Sydney to Suva and thence to Levuka, Samoa,
Tonga .and Auckland. The service is a four-weekly one
in ,each direction.
The Australasian United Steam Navigation Company
maintains (a four-weekly service between Melbourne, Syd-
ney and Fiji. The vessel employed in the service proceeds
from ,Sydney direct to Suva, occupying about six days on
63


the journey. She remains in the group for a few days dis-
charging and loading cargo, and returns direct to Sydney,
proceeding thence to Melbourne with fruit in cold storage
from Fiji.
A subsidised four-weekly service is maintained between
Melbourne and Fiji. The vessel employed in the service
proceeds from Melbourne to Fiji, via Sydney, remains in
the group for a few days, and returns direct to Melbourne
with fruit in cold storage.
The Canadlan-Australian Royal Mail Company maintains
regular communication between Sydney, Auckland, Suva,
Honolulu and Vancouver. The vessels of this line call at
Suva once in every four weeks both on the inward and
outward voyages.
All the vessels above referred to carry passengers
and mails in addition to cargo.
In addition to this regular Communication, a vessel
maintains a six-weekly service between Sydney, Fiji, Rotu-
mah and Wallis Island.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company maintains a
vessel which trades between Australia and Fiji, proceeding
occasionally to New Zealand. Many other trading vessels
call at ports in the group while, in the sugar season, other
vessels are engaged in carrying sugar from the Colony to
Australia and New Zealand.
Communication within the group is maintained by
steamers, teteam launches and a large number of small
sailing craft. The Government pays a substantial subsidy
to ,a vessel belonging to the Australasian United Steam
Navigation Company, which runs according to a time-table
approved by the Government. This steamer runs frequently
from Suva to Levuka, Taviuni and Labasa and once a month
to the Lau islands.
A small steamer runs weekly from Suva to Levuka,
Ba and Lautoka and back to Suva, calling at ports in
Viti Levu between these places, both on the outward and
inward journeys.
64


RAFTS AT SUVA




There is communication by steam launch twice daily,
morning and afternoon, between Suva and Nausori, on the
Eewa river and between Nausori and Suva. A steam launch
leaves Suva for Navua every morning, except Sundays,
and returns to Suva the same day.
Owing to the absence in most places of metalled roads
and of bridges over the creeks and rivers, which are found
in igreat numbers in Fiji, communication is maintained
almost entirely by water.
Mails from and to England are received and despatched
once in every four weeks via Vancouver; they are also re-
ceived in the same period via Australia; and they
are despatched once in four weeks both via Auckland and
via Sydney. Mails are received from and despatched to New
Zealand three or four times a month and more frequently
in the case of Australia. Parcels post is maintained with
England via New Zealand and Australia but not via Van-
couver.
The Colony is in touch by cable with the outside world,
the cable of the Pacific Cable Board passing through Suva,
where a station is maintained. There is telegraphic communi-
cation between Suva and Levuka, and telephonic communica-
tion between Suva, Nausori, Nadarivatu, Ba and Lautoka. A
telephone system is established in Suva, and a system for
Levuka is shortly to be erected. Wireless telegraph sta-
tions have been installed at Suva, Taviuni and Labasa
(Vanua Levuj) and Savu Savu is shortly to be connected
with the Labasa Station by a daily overland service. Tele-
graphic comhiuhlcatiion is thus established between the
most important of the islands of the Colony.
The journey from England to Fiji via Vancouver occu-
pies about thirty days; via Sydney or Auckland about
six weeks.
There are no railways in Fiji at present other than
the private lines of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company.
The question of the construction of the first Government
Railway is at present under consideration. Arrange-
ments have been made with the Colonial Sugar Re-
fining Company whereby their line from Ba to Lautoka
65


and Nadi is made available for public use on certain days
of the week. v
Except in the municipal areas of Suva and Levuka
and in the case of certain native tracks maintained by the
natives, the whole cost of forming and maintaining roads
in the Colony is borne by general revenue.
There are Road Boards in each province under whose
supervision the funds voted by Legislative Council for
road construction and maintenance are disbursed. The mem-
bers of the Board comprise official and unofficial members
appointed by the Governor.
Except in Suva and Levuka, and in the neighbourhood of
Suva and in the sugar centres, practically no metalled roads
exist at present. Bridle tracks exist everywhere but the
lack of bridges render these useless for wheel traffic in
most cases.
66


EDUCATION.
The Public Education Ordinance of 1890 constituted the
towns of Suva and Levuka educational districts within the
meaning of that Ordinance, anjd gave power to the Governor
to constitute other educational districts. Up to the present,
no other districts have been declared.
In Suva and Levuka there are Public Schools under
the management of School Boards, partly elected by the
ratepayers (and partly nominated by the Governor" The
funds at the disposal of these School Boards are derived
from a capitation grant from general revenue and from
rates on property in the municipal areas.
In the two Public Schools named above education 'of
children between the ages of six and fourteen years is at
present free. Children over the age of fourteen are char-
ged a small fee.
In connection with the Levuka Public School, there
is a boarding establishment maintained by the Board. The
charge |for board and residence is very reasonable. Simi-
lar accommodation is about to be provided in Suva, where
facilities for advanced primary education will shortly be
provided.
At some of the sugar centres private schools have been
established. At Nausori, Rewa, the school receives assist-
ance from general revenue. Assistance is also afforded by
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company.
67


At Nasinu, a few miles from Suva, the Government
maintains a school for the education of native youths. The
medium of instruction in this school is English. The educa-
tion of the natives in the provinces is at present almost en-
tirely in the hands of the Methodist and Roman Catholic
missionaries. The Methodist Mission maintain a technical
college at Davuilevu, and the Catholic Mission have a simi-
lar institution at Cawaici, in Ovalau. for the education of
Fijians.
There is a Convent School and a Brothers’ School
in Suva maintained by the Catholic Mission for the educa-
tion of Europeans and others.
A Provincial School has been established at Lakeba,
in the ( Lau {province, under the charge of a European imaster.
The school is maintained by the natives off the province
assisted by a grant from general revenue.
The Government has under consideration the question
of the establishment of central schools for natives in vari-
ous portions of the Colony. It is proposed that special
attention should be given to agricultural and technical edu-
cation in these schools.
❖
*
♦
❖
♦
♦
♦
*
♦
❖
❖
❖
*
$
❖
68


VICTORIA PARADE, SUVA




Suva Municipality.
Levuka Municipality.
Year.
Revenue.
Expenditure.
Revenue.
Expenditure.
1906
2,727
3,031
1,263
1,374
1907
2,812
2,857
1,135
1,129
1908
3,147
3,091
1,102
1,554
1909
3,215
3,575
1,555
1,433
1910
5,609
4,933
2,382
1,875
MUNICIPALITIES.
Provision is made by law for the constitution of towns
and v the incorporation of Councils which govern those towns.
There are at present constituted under the Ordinance the
Municipalities pf Suva and Levuka. The Municipal Coun-
cils are financed and derive their revenues from rates le-
vied; from rents and profits from property vested in the
Councils; (from certain penalties and forfeitures recovered
under the provisions of the Municipal law and of by-laws
made by the Councils ; from assistance granted by Go-
vernment in the form of moneys derived from licenses, and
from certain other Government grants. The following table
shows the revenue (and expenditure of the Municipalities
of Suva and Levuka for the last five years: —
From time to time certain loans have been made to
the Respective Councils by Government. The debt of the
Suva Municipality consists of a debenture loan of £2OOO,
bearing' interest at 5 per cent, and repayable at the rate of'
£lOO per annum. -On the 31st December, 1910, the amount
69


of .the debt was £1,400. A loan of £5OO, bearing interest
at 5 per cent, is repayable at the rate of £5O per annum bydbe
Levuka Municipality. This debt on the 31st December,
1910, stood at £2OO.
The revenue of the Municipalities is expended princi-
pally on the construction and maintenance of roads and
on sanitary work.
Members of the Councils are elected by the ratepayers
of the Municipalities. The composition of a Municipal Coun-
cil is provided for as follows, viz:—Six members, where
the dumber of ratepayers is under 600; eight members,
where the ratepayers number more than 600 and less than
2000. Where the ratepayers exceed a number of 2000,
the Council may consist of ten members.
70


LEVUKA.




GENERAL.
Fiji as a whole affords considerable opportunity to
people who seek to invest capital in agricultural ventures.
Its to the Commonwealth of Australia and the
Dominion of New Zealand, and the geographical position of
the (islands combine to make Fiji a place which should
continue to grow in importance. The trade returns of the
Colony, the increased shipping, and the development of the
export /trade in local produce are sufficient indication of
the increasing prosperity of the Colony.
Endeavour is being made to facilitate the acquisition
of land by means of a more efficient mode of registration
of (native lands. It is proposed that the control of large
areas (should be vested in the Government, whose power
to ideal with those lands on behalf of the native owners
will provide an easy means of satisfying the needs of
settlers who apply for land for planting and' grazing purposes.
As /regards the latter the Colony offers good openings
to (the practical grazier. Cattle, horses and sheep thrive
well throughout the Colony, and, stock, as a whole, are
not subject to diseases to be met with in other countries.
Grazing in Fiji is not affected by drought or flood, and the
richness of the soil and pasture provides an exceptionally
high carrying capacity on improved lands.
71


Water Supplies.
Suva and Levuka have water supplies excellent both
in quantity and quality. Water is brought to the sjowns
from the reservoirs which are served by natural streams.
In some of the country districts pipe supplies have been
established, but in the majority of cases country residents
are supplied by tanks, the galvanised iron roofs of houses
forming the catchment areas. Small streams of excellent
drinking iwater are plentiful throughout the group and.
as already stated, serious droughts are unknown.
Religion.
The Church of England, the Presbyterian Church, the
Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic Missions an)d the Seventh Day
Adventists are represented in the Colony.
The headquarters ol the Bishop of Polynesia are at
Suva. /There are Anglican churches at Suva and Levuka.,
The Bishop of Abydos (in partibus) resides in Suva,
and has charge of the Roman Catholic Mission. There is a
Roman Catholic Cathedral at Suva, and the Mission has
stations in many parts of the Colony.
The Chairman of the Methodist Mission is stationed
in Suva, where there is a Methodist Church for natives.
At Levuka there is a Methodist Church for Europeans,
and there are native churches and centres of the Mission
throughout the Colony.
There is also a Presbyterian Church for Europeans in
Suva.
Hospitals.
There is a large hospital in Suva maintained by Go-
vernment. This is the principal medical institution in the
Colony and is under the charge of two Resident Medical
Officers, assisted by a European matron, and nursing staff.
Another Government hospital has been erected at Levuka,
and is under the charge of a Government Medical Officer.
Both of these hospitals provide for the treatment of Euro-
peans and natives. Eight provincial hospitals for the treat-
ment of natives are distributed throughout the group. These
are supervised by Government medical officers who have as
72


PART OF SUVA SHOWING HARBOUR.




their assistants native medical practitioners, trained at the
Colonial Hospital in Suva. Plantation hospitals are main-
tained on the various estates for the treatment of labourers.
Indians are treated at the Colonial Hospital and as out-
patients at provincial hospitals. A ward for Indian pa-
tients will shortly be erected at the Labasa provincial hos-
pital.
Segregation of lepers is provided for by law, and an
asylum (for their treatment is maintained by Government
on the island of Makogai. The asylum on this island is
a new one fully equipped by Government for that purpose.
Accommodation for Travellers.
There are hotels and boarding establishments in Suva,
Levuka, (Rewa, Ba, Navua, and Lautoka, where travellers
may obtain accommodation. In Suva the Union Steam Ship
Company are erecting a first-class hotel which when com-
pleted will provide completely for tourists accommodation.
It is anticipated that this establishment will be opened in
1913. At other places one must rely on natives
and settlers for hospitality, except at the Hill Station, Na-
darivatu, Colo North, where a small Government rest house
has (been established. The daily charge for lodging and
attendance exclusive of food at this Best House is 2s. 6d.
The rest-house stands at an elevation of 2750 feet above
sea level. The average mean temperature for the last
three years is 66degc A path on the station ends at an
elevation of 3700 feet, while walks and rides at elevations
of from 200C9 tb 3000 feet and upwards can be had for dis-
tances up to 18 miles in various directions. Mount Vic-
toria (4600) can be climbed after a seven miles walk or
ride. Fires are a necessity during many months of the
year.
The overland tourist, or the traveller by road from one
centre to another, must in the majority of cases, how-
ever, {depend on the natives for his food and lodging.
Unless a tourist takes his own provisions and a servant
or Spook, his diet will consist of fish, prawns, yam, taro,
73


and bananas, for which the natives will require to be paid
about 2s. per diem. Carriers are always obtainable at native
villages, and the custom is, in regard to porterage, for
luggage to be carried by villages, i.e., natives from one vil-
lage will carry to the next, where it is by custom usually
necessary to arrange for a fresh lot of carriers. The wage
to each carrier is as a rule 2s. Probably the better arrange-
ment is to engage a guide and the necessary porters before
leaving Suva. The roads on which the inland traveller
has to pass are sufficiently good in most cases for horses,
but not for vehicular traffic. Horses can be hired in some
districts only. The roads are really bridle tracks and na-
tive paths. Rivers and streams in the inland country are
for the most part unbridged, but there is generally no
danger in crossing them. Certain mountain streams however
may <at times owing to freshets present an obstacle to
one’s journey, more particularly in the rainy season. These
freshets are at times of sufficient force to render some streams
dangerous to ford. These conditions are however not
of frequent occurrence, and one may place oneself with
safety in the guidance of native guides. Apart from the
lack of domestic comforts which the inland traveller must
face, travelling in the interior of the larger of the islands
is pleasant and interesting. To lovers of tropical scenery
almost every part of Fiji must afford great attraction and
iS weL worth visiting. During the months of May to Oc-
tober, the climate is cool, and walking and riding are pleas-
ant. The tourist may make a visit to almost every one of
the more important islands by interinsular steam vessels.
The largest and best fitted of these vessels, subsidised by
Government, is the Australasian United Steam Navigation
Company’s Steamship Amra. By this steamer which leaves
Suva about once a fortnight, one may visit Levuka, the
old capital of Fiji and seat of the Cakobau Government, on
the (island of Ovalau. Here a pleasant day may be spent
in visiting Lovoni Valley, an attractive picnic ground; or
in *an instructive visit to the Mission training station at
Cawaci. From Levuka the Amra proceeds to Lau, Taviuni,
and Jjabasa, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s sugar
centre, <pn the island of Vanua Levu. At each of these
74


SUVA HARBOUR.




places the tourist may find much that is of interest. From
Labasa the return trip to Suva is made by way of Buca
Bay, Taviuni and Levuka. Other interinsular steamers ply
periodically .between Suva, the island of Vanua Levu, and
the Lau Archipelago; and sailing cutters ply regularly be-
tween all the inhabited islands of the Colony. Much tra-
velling throughout the group is necessarily done by small
sailing craft. These are owned in some instances by tra-
ders and by the merchant community, a far greater number
however are native-owned. This class of vessel is manned
almost entirely by native or half-caste masters and crews
who are excellent seamen. Tourists are warned against
taking ;a passage in a cutter carrying copra, unless they
are happily immune from seasickness. The odour arising from
this cargo is apt to defeat even a hardy sailor. In cutter
travelling it is generally of advantage to provide one’s own
food (unless prepared to put up with native fare, which,
though wholesome, is better enjoyed by those who have
already acquired a taste for it. Numerous opportunities
are open to those who are inclined to employ this method
of seeing the islands and the people of Fiji in their native
towns.
From Suva, an enjoyable day may be spent by a visit
to any of the near-lying plantations or to the experi-
mental station at Nasinu about six miles from Suva, where
the propogation of economic plants is undertaken by the
Department of Agriculture. There are motor launches and
vehicles always available for hire. The Tamavua River
which empties into Suva harbour forms an attraction of
which many people avail themselves. On the banks of
the istream, one may see both cultivated lands, and lands
covered with rich tropical vegetation. On one of the tribu-
taries of this river is situated the intake of the water sup-
ply which feeds the reservoirs of Suva; near to this spot
there is a small waterfall. The spot is a pleasant one for
picnics on a fine day. A part of a day on the shore reef of
the harbour offers many attractions to tourists interested
in marine fauna. At low water the coral is in many places
uncovered, and many varieties of fish may be observed.
There is communication by steam launch twice daily
75


between Suva and Nausori, the headquarters of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company on the Rewa River. The flat lands
surrounding the sugar centre at Nausori are almost en-
tirely under cane cultivation. From Nausori one may return
to Suva either by river or by road. Vehicles may be hired
at Nausori or Suva for the overland journey which covers
about 13 miles over a fairly good road.
To Navua, the Vancouver-Fiji Sugar Company’s centre,
a launch runs daily from Suva according to tides. To those
who have the time to spare, or who desire to see the in-
land country and native life, a very interesting trip may
be made through most picturesque scenery from Suva to
Namosi, near the head of the Navua River, returning by
the Waidina and Rewa rivers to Suva.
There are numerous drives round Suva which are of
interest to visitors.
76


FIJIAN MEKE (DANCE).




SPORT.
There is very little shooting to be obtained in the
Colony. Duck, pigeon, and plover are to be found, but only
extending from Ist September to 31st March. Good fly-fishing
may be had in certain of the rivers. The most common
fish resembles a species of bass, known to the ' natives
as “ika droka,” and affords good sport. This fish is
plentiful in the upper reaches of the Wainimala and Wai-
nibuka rivers, tributaries to the Rewa river, and also on
the (upper reaches of the Navua, Ba and Sigatoka rivers
in Viti Levu.
The Government has lately introduced some specimens
of the Australian perch, and has established them in some of
the main rivers of the Colony.
Splendid sea fishing is to be had throughout the group,
both deep sea fishing, and trolling in the harbours and at
the mouths of rivers. Fish up to IGOlbs. in weight may be
caught on the rod 1 . Some of the fish are extremely game
and with light tackle will tax the skill of the most experi-
enced fishermen.
Cricket, tennis, and golf are played practically through-
out she year. The ground of the Suva Cricket Club at
Albert Park, Suva, is an excellent one. There are also good
cricket grounds at Levuka, Navua, Lautoka, Ba, and Rewa.
The Bau team of,natives have their ground at Wainibokasi,
and form a good combination. The grass courts of the
Suva Lawn Tennis Club are at Albert Park, where annual
77


tournaments ;are held. There are many private courts in
Suva, <and throughout the Colony. Golf is played in Suva,
on the Fiji Golf Club Links at Muanikau near Suva point.
There is a fairly large membership roll, and the course is
open v to visitors on the usual conditions. The course at
present is limited to nine holes, and, although somewhat
rough at present, provides a good game.
Football is played during the cooler months but the
climate is not suited for regular play throughout the
year.
Race meetings are held at Suva, and occasionally at
Ba. Fields, however, are not large and the meetings are
confined to three or four occasions during the year.
Rifle shooting under the auspices of the Fiji Rifle
Association is encouraged by Government, and there are
affiliated clubs at each of the centres. A regular meeting
of the Association takes place once a year in Suva.
Clothing.
Tourists if visiting Fiji between the months of Decem-
ber to May, are recommended to provide themselves with
the lightest tropical clothing.
In the cooler months from May to November light
tweeds and flannels may be substituted for the ordinary
white duck or drill clothing.
“Topes” or helmets are recommended for the hot sea-
son, although sun-strokes are practically unknown and hel-
mets are not always used by the permanently settled
European community.
78


FAUNA.
Although the fauna of Fiji cannot be described as ex-
tensive, it is at the same time none the less interesting and
varied. There are many creatures which were introduced
many years ago and now occur in a wild state in the forest.
The chief of these are pigs which were probably introduced
from Tonga, where some were left by Captain Cook. Cattle,
imported during more recent times, run wild in the bush
in some parts. The former are hunted by the natives with
dogs and spears, while the latter afford good shooting in
certain localities.
In many districts the domestic fowl has taken to the
bush, and is now r referred to as “wild-fowl.”
Among recent introductions are the Indian Mongoose
(“Herpestes mungo”), and the Indian (“Sturnidae”),
both imported for the benefit of the sugar the
former )to keep jin check the swarms of rats, also introduced,
and the latter to prey upon the numerous insect enemies
to which the sugarcane is liable. The mongoose is
responsible for the disappearance of most of the indige-
nous birds of Fiji, especially the ground-nesting varieties.
Bird life is still plentiful in those districts to which the
mongoose has not yet penetrated.
The chief indigenous animals are the following:—
Mammals.
The indigenous mammals are poorly represented. At
certain seasons porpoises abound in the seas within the
79


group, and whales may be seen occasionally although not
as frequently as formerly. Black fish are plentiful at cer-
tain times of the year.
The bats are represented by three species of the fru-
givorous variety, the so-called “flying-fox,” and one small
insectivorous cave bat.
A rat, very dark in colour, and having an almost round
head is native to Fiji, but of recent years has become
very scarce owing to the mongoose and it is possible that
it is now extinct or nearly so.
Birds.
These were both numerous and varied until the advent
of the mongoose. Even at the present time one meets
with birds of great beauty in the forest, but it is to be
feared that these are becoming less year by year.
The golden or orange dove is a very beautiful bird, but
is rarely met with now. Pigeons, of two species are
plentiful, and afford excellent eating. A bronze coloured
ground pigeon is also remarkable for its beauty.
Of the larger birds three varieties i)f hawks and a
large crane are known. Wild ducks and water hens are
common in parts, as are also sandpipers, and cuit-
lews. Parrots, parroquets of many species, king-fishers
and owls are met with in the bush, while small fly-catch-
ers and honey-suckers are common even in private gardens.
The smaller indigenous birds have gradually retreated
before the advance of the rapidly increasing mynah, owing
to the pugnacious and aggressive habits of this latter
bird.
Reptiles.
Ten different kinds of snakes are recorded from these
islands, although this number is probably less at the pres-
ent time owing to the mongoose. The snakes are harmless
and are much relished by the natives as food. None of
the larger snakes exceed ten feet in length.
Lizzards and geckos are common. The surrounding
waters harbour turtles in great numbers, both the “taku”
80


or hawksbill and the “vonu” or green turtle. The former
is the species which yields the tortoiseshell of commerce,
while the latter is much prized on account of its edible
properties.
Amphibia.
The only representatives of this group of animals
are a large frog, which it appears is peculiar to Taveuni,
an island situated in the north-east part of the group, and
a small yellow tree frog.
Fishes.
These seas abound with innumerable kinds of fishes,
many of them are remarkable for their beautiful colouring.
Fresh water fish are also very plentiful. Some varieties
are edible only during certain months of the year, but the
majority afford excellent eating at all seasons.
Sharks of several species are extremely common in
these waters, and in many cases venture for considerable
distances up the larger rivers.
Mollusca.
This group jof invertebrates is represented by several
snails, slugs, and a few of the rarer land shells. (Helici-
nidae). Many very beautiful and rare sea shells of every
conceivable shape are to be found on the shore. The or-
ange cowry (“Cypraeidae”) is a remarkably pretty shell
and is peculiar to certain parts of the group. Other cow-
ries are common.
Oysters occur in some localities and pearl shells are
not infrequently met with, some of the pearls of which
realise large prices. The trochus shell, locally known as
“sici,” is abundant in the neighbourhood of reefs, and was
exported in 1911 to the value of £14,000.
Orustacea.
Lobsters, crabs, crayfish* and prawns, are plentiful. The
latter are found in most fresh water streams and are al-
ways in demand on account of their virtue as an ingre-
dient of curries. On the island of Vatulele are to be found,
in salt water pools, a species of red prawn, known by the
81


natives as “ura-damu,” and concerning which they have a
superstition to the effect that anyone who removes them
from their habitat will meet with shipwreck upon his
next voyage. Their belief in this superstition has been con-
firmed during recent years by such a disaster actually
overtaking certain European visitors to the island, who
defying the superstition, removed several of the prawns.
A large land crab (“Birgo latro”) locally known as the
“uqavule,” occurs on a few isolated islands, where it is
reported to climb the coconut trees and remove the nuts.
It is said that the flesh of this creature is very palatable.
Myriopoda.
Centipedes and millipedes are common and often attain
a length of eight inches. The former are capable of in-
flicting a severe bite which in some cases gives rise to
slight constitutional disturbances. The natives regard the
latter with a certain amount of awe, on account of their
supposed power of ejecting an acrid fluid, which is said
to cause blindness if it strikes the eyfe.
Arachnoidea.
Spiders, as varied as they are beautiful abound, as do
also scorpions of the smaller varieties. It is probable that
the two species of ticks in Fiji, have both been introduced.
Insects.
The insect fauna of Fiji is extensive but on the whole
lacks the brilliant hues one associates with insects in most
tropical countries, the majority being of somewhat sombre
colours. Contrary to one’s expectations, the insect fauna
of Fiji in no particular resembles that of the adjacent Aus-
tralian continent.
The lepidopterous insects present a greater variety
of colours than other orders, and of these the moths are
both more numerous and more highly coloured than the
butterflies. The order of beetles is poorly represented, but
one species (“Macrotoma heros”), measuring several in-
ches in length, is one of the largest in the world. Some
of the so-called “fire-flies” (“Lampyrides”) are plentiful
upon calm warm nights.
82


The true flies are represented by nine different species
of mosquitoes, sandflies, gadflies and the commoner forms
of blood-sucking diptera, as well as the übiquitous house
flies, which in some sugar districts almost amount to a
plague.
No species of Anopheles occur and consequently malaria
is not endemic.
Although the species of mosquito responsible for the
transmission of yellow fever in other countries, abounds ir
Fiji, yellow fever is unknown here.
White ants (“Termitidae”) are common and cause con-
siderable damage to timber in many places. Two native
woods, known as “vesi” (“Afzelia bijuga”) and ‘bua bua”
(“Guettarda speciosa”) are however resistant to their at-
tacks. Some pretty dragon-flies are occasionally seen.
The so-called “stick-insects” (“Phasmidae”) which some-
times attain a length of ten inches, are commonly met with
and their resemblance to pieces of stick or bamboo is very
striking. A leaf insect (“Phyllium scythe”), on account of
its remarkable resemblance to the leaf of the guava, upon
which it generally feeds, is rarely detected. Crickets and
grasshoppers are numerous in parts, where they cause a
certain amount of damage to cultivated crops.
Worms.
An interesting representative of this group of animals
is the marine annelid locally known as the “balolo,” a spe-
cies allied to “Lysidice ninetta,” the annual appearance
of which, upon a stated day, the natives predict by study-
ing the phases of the moon.
Of the lower marine animals, the Echinodermata are
represented by starfish of several species and varied colours
and beche-de-mer or Trepang. Four or five species of the
latter are supposed to occur on these shores, some of the
rarer varieties obtaining high prices. In 1911 this article
of commerce was exported to the value of £460.
83


FLORA.
The flora of Fiji is essentially tropical, though a few
forms belonging to a temperate one are to be met with in
the mountain tops.
The chief botanical investigations have been made by
the United States Exploring Expedition, Milne, Hervey,
Seeman and Horne and the flora of Fiji is probably better
known in most groups in this part of the Pacific. The
stock of new plants awaiting discovery is far from being
exhausted and of recent years many additions to the list of
plants known have been made by botanists and collectors.
As explained in the chapter referring to the climatic
conditions, the group can roughly be divided into “wet” and
“dry” zones. The vegetation of these zones, as may be ex-
pected, varies considerably. That of the wet zone may be
described as heavy forest chiefly while the dry zone pos-
sess large areas of open grassy country.
Around the whole sea coast is a belt of mangrove,
which forms an excellent natural wind-break for cultiva-
tion on the river and sea flats.
The forest of the wet zone is a dense growth of large
trees, giant creepers, ferns, palms and epiphytical growths
frequently so thick that passage through the forest is a
matter of some difficulty.
The forests extend from the coast up to the top of the
hills and breaks in them are generally artificial, though
84


WAIN UN U RIVER.




small ones may be caused by falling trees, blown down by
hurricanes.
Such breaks as well as abandoned clearings very quick-
ly become overgrown by shrubs, small trees, creepers, etc.,
of the forest and also by weeds of comparatively recent
introduction.
In places the forest trees grow to large size and many
of them afford valuable timber. At the present time this
industry, appears, to be receiving more attention but
there seems to be room for much increase. A list is given
below of the native timbers with notes on the character of
the wood and the uses to which it may be put.
Ferns are very common everywhere —in the forests and
in the open grassy country, in rich land and in poor, around
the sea coast and on the tops of the highest mountains.
Palms flourish among the flats and on the sides of moun-
tains when sheltered from the prevailing winds. Bamboos
are common.
The branches t of trees, stems of palms, etc., are often
covered with orchids, bycopods, ferns and lovanths.
Along the banks of creeks are to be found a great
variety of trees. On the higher land the Casuarinas are to
be met with. Bamboos occur here and there but are not so
common as in the wet zone. Patches of forest occur through-
out the dry zone, bu;t as a rule such patches are small in
extent. Fires are not uncommon in the dry zone and their
occurrences may help to explain the comparatively small
area of forest. Many of the plants occurring in Fiji are
common in Australia. Many of these now considered Fijian
will probably be found to have a wide distribution over
the Polynesian Islands. Some plants occurring in Fiji are
indigenous plants of economic importance. These include some
of American origin, and others are Malayan. Many of the
plants are valuable for essential oils, fixed oils, rubber, resin,
tanning materials, dyes, starches, timber, fibre, drugs,
spices, fruit, etc. Moreover many of the indige-
nous plants are closely allied to cultivated plants,
although their produce is not at present of any
85


commercial value. The following may be men-
tioned : Species of Saccharum (sugar cane), Piper
(pepper).,, Boehemeria (ramie), Cinnamonum (cinnamon), My-
ristica (nutmeg). Their presence indicates that the useful
species should thrive and they would perhaps be of use
for cross fertilisation purposes, or for budding, grafting,
etc., in connection with the propagation of the valuable
species.
86


APPENDICES.
CHARTER OF THE COLONY OF FIJI.
CHARTER passed under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom
for erecting the Fiji Islands into a separate Colony, to be
called the Colony of Fiji, and for providing for the Government
thereof:
VICTORIA, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the
Faith, to all to whom these presents shall come, Greet-
ing:
WHEREAS the Chiefs and people of certain islands in the South
Pacific Ocean commonly known as the Fiji Islands, and hereinafter
more particularly described, have ceded to Us the said Islands,
and the Sovereignty thereof, which We have been graciously
pleased to accept: And whereas it is expedient to make provision
for the better government of the said Islands: Now know ye that
We, of Our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
have thought fit to erect and do hereby erect, the said Fiji Islands,
under which designation are included all islands, rocks, reefs,
foreshores, and waters lying between the fifteenth and twenty-
second degrees o>f south latitude, and between the one hundred and
seventy-seventh degree of west longitude and the one hundred and
87


seventy-fifth degree of east longitude from the meridian ef Greem
wich, into a separate Colony, and the said Islands are hereby er-
ected into a separate Colony accordingly, to be known and desig-
nated as the Colony of Fiji.
11. And We declare and appoint that the Government of
Our said Colony shall be administered by a Governor duly som-
missioned by Us in that behalf.
m. And We do hereby further declare and appoint that there
shall be, within Our said Colony, a Legislative Council, which
shall consist of the said Governor for the time being, and of such
other Public Officers and persons within the same not being less
than two in number, as shall be named or designated for that
purpose by Us, by any Instruction or Instructions, or Warrant or
Warrants, to be by Us for that purpose issued under Our Sign
Manual and Signet, and with the advice of Our Privy Council; all
of which persons or officers shall hold their places in the said
Council during Our pleasure.
IV. And We do further declare and appoint that the Governor
for the time being of the said Colony, shall have full power and
authority to make and enact all such Laws and Ordinances as may
from time to time be required for the peace, order, and good go-
vernment of Our said Colony; and that in the making of all such
Laws and Ordinances the said Governor shall exercise all such
powers and authorities, and that the said Legislative Council shall
conform to and observe all such rules and regulations as shall be
given and prescribed in and by such Instructions as We, with the
advice of Our Privy Council, shall from time to time make for his
and their guidance therein: Provided nevertheless, and We do here-
by reserve to Ourselves, Our Heirs and Successors, Our and their
right and authority to disallow any such Ordinances in the whole
or in part, and to make and establish from time to time, with the
advice and consent of Parliament, or with the advice of Our or
their Privy Council all such Laws as may to Us or them appear
necessary for the peace, order, and good government of Our said
Colony, as fully as if these presents had not been made.
V. And We do further declare Our pleasure to be that, for
the purpose of advising Our said Governor, there shall be for Our
said Colony an Executive Council, which shall be composed of such
persons and constituted in such manner as may be directed by
88


any Instructions which may from time to time be addressed to Our
said Governor by Us under Our Sign Manual and Signet, and all
such persons shall hold their places in the said Council at Our
pleasure.
VI. And We do authorise and empower Our said Governor
to keep and use the Public Seal of Our said Colony for the seal-
ing of all things whatsoever that shall pass the said Seal. And
We do direct that, unti x a Public Seal shall be provided for Our
said Colony the Seal of Our said Governor shall be used as the
Public Seal of Our said Colony for sealing all things that shall
pass the said Seal.
VII. And We do furtho|r authorise and empower Our said Go-
vernor to make and execute in Our name and on Our behalf,
under the said Public Seal, grants and dispositions of land which
may be lawfully granted or disposed of by Us within Our said Co-
lony, either in conformity with instructions under Our Sign Manual
and Signet, or in conformity with such regulations as may be made
by Our said Governor in that behalf and duly published in Our
said Colony.
VIII. And We do further authorise and empower Our said Go-
vernor to constitute and appoint all such Judges, Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of the Peace, and other necessary
Officers and Ministers as may lawfully be appointed by Us, all of
whom shall hold their offices during Our pleasure.
IX. And We do further authorise and empower Our said Go-
vernor, as he shall see occasion, in Our name and on Our behalf,
where any crime has been committed within Our said Colony, or
for which the offender may be tried therein, to grant a pardon
to any accomplice not being the actual perpetrator of such crime,
who shall give such information as shall lead to the apprehension
and conviction of the principal offender; and, further, to grant to
any offender convicted of any crime in any Court, or before any
Judge, Justices, or Magistrate, within Our said Colony, a pardon
either free or subject to lawful conditions, or any respite of the
execution of the sentence of any such offender for such period
as to such Governor may seem fit; and to remit any fines, penal-
ties, or forfeitures which may accrue or become payable to Us.
X. And We do further authorise and empower Our said Go-
vernor, upon sufficient cause to him appearing, to suspend from the
89


exercise of his office within Our said Colony, any person exercising
the same or under by virtue of any commission or warrant granted
or to be granted by Us, in Our name, or under Our authority,
which suspension shall continue and have effect only until Our
pleasure therein shall be made known and signified to him. And
We do hereby strictly require and enjoin him, in proceeding to any
such suspension, to observe the directions in that behalf given to
him by any instructions under Our Sign Manual and Signet as may
be hereafter addressed to Our said Governor for the time being.
XI. And whereas it is necessary that provision be made for
the execution of this Our Charter in the event of the death or
incapacity of Our said Governor, or of his removal from his
command, or of his absence from the limits of his said Gov-
ernment: Now therefore, We do further declare Our pleasure to be
that, in any such event as aforesaid, all and every the powers and
authorities hereby vested in him, shall be and the same are hereby
vested in such person as may be appointed by us under Our Sign
Manual and Signet to be the Lieutenant-Governor of Our said Co-
lony; or, if there shall be no such Lieutenant-Governor, then in
such person or persons as may be appointed by Us, under Our
Sign Manual and Signet, to administer the Government of Our said
Colony; and in case there shall be no person or persons within Our
said Colony so appointed by Us, then in the Senior Member of the
Executive Council of Our said Colony for the time being; and such
Lieutenant-Governor, Administrator, or Senior Member of the Ex-
ecutive Council, as the case may be, shall execute all and every
the powers and authorities herein granted until Our further plea-
sure shall be signified therein: Provided always, and We do fur-
ther declare Our pleasure to be, that Our Governor for the time
being, during the period of his passage by sea from one of Our
said Islands to another, or while visiting or residing at any place
within any of Our said Islands, shall not, for any of the purposes
aforesaid, be considered as being absent from the limits of his
said Government.
XII. And We do further declare and direct that, during his
absence from any one of Our said Islands, but while he is within
the limits of his said Government as aforesaid, Our said Governor
may if he think fit, appoint some person to act as his Deputy in
administering the Government of Our said Islands upon such terms
and conditions and for such time as he may think fit; and all
90


or such of the powers and authorities aforesaid as Our said Go-
vernor in his discretion shall from time to time think it necessary
or expedient to assign to such Deputy, shall be vested in such De-
puty.
XIII. And W r e do further direct and enjoin that this Our Char-
ier shall be read and proclaimed at such place or places as Our
said Governor shall think fit within the said Colony.
XIV. And We do hereby require and command all officers,
civil and military, and all other the inhabitants of Our said Co-
lony, to be obedient, aiding and assisting unto Our said Governor
for the time being, and to the Officer appointed to administer the
Government of Our said Colony, in the execution of this Our Com-
mission and of the powers and authorities herein contained.
XV. And we do hereby reserve to Us, Our Heirs and Succes-
sors, full power and authority from time to time to revoke, alter,
or amend these Our Letters Patent as to Us or them shall seem
meet.
In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent. Witness Ourself, at Westminster, the second day
of January, in the Thirty-eighth year of Our Reign.
By Warrant under the Queen’s Sign Manual.
C. ROMILLY.
FIJI.
LETTERS PATENT providing for the Administration of the Govern-
ment of the Colony of Fiji.
Edward the Seventh, by the Grace of God of the United
Kingdom of-Great Britain and Ireland and of the Bri-
tish Dominions beyond the Seas King, Defender of
the Faith, Emperor of India: To all to whom these
presents shall come, Greeting.
WHEREAS by certain charters and Letters Patent of Her late
Majesty Queen Victoria, bearing date respectively the second day
of January 1875, the First day of October 1880, and the Seven-
91


teenth day of December, 1880, provision was made for the admin-
istration of the Government of Our Colony of Fiji, and for the an-
nexation thereto of Rotumah Island as in the said Charters and
Letters Patent is described and set forth:
And whereas We are minded to make further provision for
the administration of the Government of the Colony and it is ex-
pedient that the aforesaid Charters and Letters Patent should be
revoked:
Now know ye that We have thought fit to revoke and deter-
mine and by these Presents do revoke and determine but without
prejudice to anything lawfully done thereunder the said recited
Letters Patent, and every clause, article, and thing therein con-
tained, and further know ye, that We have thought fit to con-
stitute, order, and declare, and do by these Presents constitute,
order, and declare as follows: —
1. There shall be a Governor and a Commander-in-Chief (here-
inafter called “The Governor”) in and over the Colony of Fiji,
and the person who shall fill the said Office of Governor shall be
from time to time appointed by Commission under Our Sign Manual
and Signet. And we do hereby authorise and command Our said
Governor to do and execute, in due manner, all things that shall
belong to his said office, according to the several powers and au-
thorities granted or appointed him by virtue of these present
Letters Patent and of such Commission as may be issued to him
under Our Sign Manual and Signet, and to such other powers and
authorities, being still in force, as may have been heretofore given
to any of his predecessors in his said office, and according to such
Instructions as may from time to time be given to him, under
Our Sign Manual and Signet, or by Our Order in Our Privy Council,
or by Us through a Secretary of State, and according to such
Laws as are or shall hereafter be in force in the Colony.
2. The Governor shall keep and use the Public Seal of the
Colony for sealing all things whatsoever that shall pass the said
Public Seal, and until We shall otherwise direct the Public Seal
hitherto used for the Colony shall be used as the Public Seal.
3. The Governor may, in Our name and on Our behalf, make
and execute under the said Seal grants and dispositions of any
lands or other immovable property which may be lawfully granted
and disposed of by Us within the Colony, provided that every such
92


grant or disposition be made in conformity with some law in force
in the Colony, or with some Instructions addressed to the Governor
under Our Sign Manual and Signet, or through a Secretary of
State, or in conformity with such Regulations as are now in force
or may be made by the Governor in that behalf and duly pub-
lished in the Colony.
4. The Governor may constitute and appoint all such Judges,
Commissioners, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers as may
lawfully be appointed by Us, all of whom, unless otherwise pro-
vided by law, shall hold their offices during Our pleasure.
5. The Governor may, upon sufficient cause to him appearing,
suspend from the exercise of his office within the Colony, any
person holding any office within the Colony, whether appointed
by any Commission or Warrant from Us or in Our name, or by
any other mode of appointment. Provided that in the case of any
such officer whose emoluments exceed £lOO a year such suspension
shall continue and have effect only until Our pleasure therein
shall be signified to the Governor. The Governor shall in proceed-
ing to any such suspension observe the directions in that behalf
given to him by any Instructions under Our Sign Manual and
Signet, addressed to the Governor for the time being.
6. The Governor may, as he shall see occasion, in Our name
and on Our behalf, when any crime or offence has been committed
within the Colony, or for which the offender may be tried therein,
grant a pardon t o any accomplice in such crime or offence, who
shall give such information as shall lead to the conviction of the
principal offender or of any one of such offenders if more than
one; anld further, may grant to any offender convicted of any
crime in any Court, or before any Judge, Justice, or Magistrate,
within the Colony, a pardon, either free or subject to lawful
conditions, or any remission of the sentence passed on any such
offender, or any respite of the execution of such sentence, for
such period as to him may seem fit, and may remit any fines,
penalties, or forfeitures which may become due and payable to Us.
7. For the purpose of advising the Governor, there shall be
for the Colony an Executive Council, which shall be composed
of such persons and constituted in such manner as may 'be di-
rected by any Instructions which may from time to time be ad-
dressed to the Governor by Us under Our Sign Manual and Signet,
93


or through a Secretary of State, and all such persons shall hold
their places in the said Council at Our pleasure.
8. From and after the coming into operation of these Our
Letters Patent the present Legislative Council in the Colony shall
cease to exist, and there shall be in and for the Colony a Legis-
lative Council constituted as hereinafter mentioned.
9. The Legislative Council shall consist of the Governor as
President, ten Official Members, six Elected Members, and two
Native Members.
10 The Official Members of the Legislative Council shall be
the persons for the time being holding such public offices in the
Colony as We may from time to time designate by any Instruc-
tions under Our Sign Manual and Signet or through a Secretary
of State or as the Governor may from time to time by instrument
under the Public Seal of the Colony appoint, subject to Our dis-
allowance or confirmation through a Secretary of State. The Offi-
cial Members of the Council shall hold their places therein during
Our pleasure.
11. The Governor may by an instrument under the Public
Seal of the Colony suspend any Official Member of the Legislative
Council from the exercise of his functions as a Member of the
Council. Every such suspension shall be forthwith reported by
the Governor to a Secretary of State, and shall remain 'in force
unless and until it shall be either removed by the Governor by
an instrument under the said Seal, or disallowed by Us through
a Secretary of State.
12. Whenever any Official Member of the Legislative Council
shall die, or shall, with the permission of the Governor, by writing
under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign his seat in the
Council, or shall be suspended, or shall be declared by the Governor
by an instrument under the said Seal to be incapable of exercising
his functions as such Member, or shall be temporarily absent from
the Colony, the Governor may by an instrument under the said
Seal appoint some other person holding a public office in the Colony
to be provisionally an Official Member of the Legislative Council
in the place of the Member so dying, resigning, or being suspended
or declared incapable or absent.
Every such provisional appointment may be disallowed by Us
94


through a Secretary of State, or may be revoked by the Governor
by any such instrument as aforesaid.
Every person so provisionally appointed shall be to all intents
and purposes an Official Member of the Council until his appoint-
ment shall be disallowed, or revoked, or superseded by the perman-
ent appointment in his place of an Official Member of the Legisla-
tive Council, or until the person in whose place he has been
appointed shall be relieved from suspension, or declared by the
Governor by any instrument under the Public Seal to be capable
of exercising the functions of a Member of the Legislative Council
or shall have returned to the Colony.
18. Every male person shall be entitled to be registered as an
elector, and, when registered, to vote at the election of Elected
Members of the Council who —
(1) Is the son of parents of European descent;
(2) Is a British subject by birth or naturalisation having ef-
fect in the Colony.
(3) Is of the age of 21 years or upwards;
(4) Has been continuously resident in the Colony for 12 months
and
(5) Is possessed—
(a) Either of freehold or leasehold property, or both, within
the Colony, of the total yearly value of twenty pounds
over and above all charges and incumbrances affecting
the same; or
(b) Of a net annual income, from all sources, of not less
than one hundred and twenty pounds.
14. The Elected Members of the Council shall be elected as
follows:
(1) Three Members by persons duly qualified as electors as
herein-before provided, who are resident in the towns of
Suva or Levuka. Two of such Members shall be elected
as representatives of Suva, and one shall be elected to re-
present Levuka.
(2) Three Members by persons duly qualified as electors as
herein-before provided, who are engaged, either on their
own behalf or in the employ of other persons in the culti-
vation of land or the management of farms within the Co-
95


lony of not less than 100 acres in extent, or in the pro-
duction and manufacture of sugar, provided that the annual
salary or wages derived from such employment be not less
than £l2O.
15. The Governor of the Colony shall, as soon as possible after
the promulgation of these Letters Patent, establish by proclamation
such regulations, not inconsistent with these Letters Patent, as he
may think necessary for regulating the registration of electors,
and generally in regard to the election of Members of the Legis-
lative Council, and such regulations shall take effect and have
the force of law in the Colony immediately on the proclamation
thereof; and the provisions of any Letters Patent, Orders in Coun-
cil, or Ordinances repugnant to the provisions of any such regula-
tions shall be read subject to those regulations, and shall to the
extent of such repugnancy be void and inoperative; but any regu-
lations so made may be repealed or altered by any Ordinance
or Ordinances hereafter to be enacted by the Governor, with the
advice and consent of the Legislative Council, or by any Letters
Patent, or Orders in Council which may hereafter be issued or
passed.
16. No person who is in receipt of salary payable out of the
public revenue of the Colony shall be capable of being an elector
or of being elected a Member of the Legislative Council or having
being elected shall sit or vote in the said Council. If any elected
Member of the Legislative Council shall, after his election, become
subject to the disqualification aforesaid, his seat in the said Coun-
cil shall thereupon become vacant.
17. No person shall be capable of being elected a Member of
the Council, or having been elected shall sit or vote in the Coun-
cil, who—
(1) Has been sentenced by any competent British Court, whe-
ther of the Colony or not, for any crime punishable by
death, hard labour for any period, or imprisonment for a
period exceeding one year, and has not received a free
pardon from Us for the crime for which he has been so
sentenced; or
(2) Is an undischarged bankrupt, whether he has been de-
clared a bankrupt by a Court in the Colony or by any
other British Court; or
96


(3) Has within five years before the election received charit-
able relief in the Colony from any public source; or
(4) Is of unsound mind.
18. No person shall be capable of being elected a Member of
the Council as provided in Article 14, or, having been so elected,
shall sit or vote in the Council, unless he—
(1) Is qualified to be registered as an elector; and
(2) Has been continuously resident for two years in the Co-
lony; and either
(3) (a) Possesses and has possessed for at least twelve months
next before the election, in his own right or in right of
his wife, freehold property in the Colony of the clear
value of five hundred pounds, or of the annual value of
fifty pounds over and above all charges and incumbran-
ces affecting ,the same; or
(b) Has been in occupation for at least twelve months next
before the election, in his own right or in right of his
wife, of freehold or leasehold property in the Colony of
the extent of five hundred acres; or
(c) Rents and has rented for at least twelve months next
before the election freehold or leasehold property in the
Colony of the yearly value of one hundred pounds, or,
(d) Is possessed of a fnet annual income from all sources of
not less than £2OO.
19. Every person who, having been returned as a Member of
the Council, but not having been at the time of his election
qualified to be elected, shall sit or vote in the Council, shall for
every day on which he shall sit or vote in the Council, and every
person who shall sit or vote in the Council after his seat shall have
become vacant shall for every day on which he shall sit or vote
after his seat shall have become vacant, be liable to a penalty
not exceeding Fifty Pounds, to be recovered by action in the Su-
preme Court of the Colony by any person who shall sue for the
same.
20. All questions which may arise as to the right of any
person to be or remain an elected Member of the Council shall
be referred to and decided by the Supreme Court of the Colony.
21. If any Elected Member of the Council shall, by writing
under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign his seat in the
97


Council, or shall be absent, except on the ground of illness, from
the sittings of the Council for a period of two calendar months
during the session of the Council without the leave of the Gov-
ernor, or shall become subject to any of the disqualifications spe-
cified j/n Article 17 of these Letters Patent, or shall take any oath
or make any declaration of allegiance to any Foreign State or
Power, his seat in the Council shall thereupon become vacant.
Whenever the seat of an Elected Member has become vacant
the Governor shall, as soon as possible, issue a writ for the elec-
tion of a new Member in the place of the Member whose seat has
become vacant.
22. No Member of the Council shall sit or vote therein until
he shall have taken 'a)nd subscribed the following oath before the
Governor, or some person authorised by the Governor to admin-
siter such oath:—
“I, A. 8., do sincerely promise and swear that I will be faithful
and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Edward, His heirs
and successors, according to law.
“So help me God.’’
Provided that every person authorised by law to make an affirm-
ation instead or taking an oath may make such affirmation
instead of taking the said oath.
23. The Native members shall be appointed as follows: —
(1) The Great Council of native Chiefs in the Colony shall
submit to the Governor the names of not more than six
persons, being aboriginal natives of the Colony, who are
able to speak and understand the English language, and
from the persons so submitted the Governor shall select
two persons who shall upon such selection be and become
members of the Legislative Council.
(2) The provisions of Article 21 of these Letters Patent with
regard to the resignation of and vacation of seats by elected
members shall apply to Native Members, and if the Legisla-
tive Council be dissolved, or if a Native Member resign his
seat or his seat become vacant, the Governor shall, from
the names already submitted, select another person to till
the vacant seat, and the person so selected shall be to all
intents and purposes a Native Member of the said Council,
but only until the next meeting of the Great Council of
98


Chiefs which shall submit to the Governor not less than
three nor more than six other persons qualified as afore-
said and the Governor shall select one or two of such per-
sons (as the case may be) to be a Member or Members of
the Legislative Council.
Provided that the Governor whenever the appointment of a
Native Member is necessary, may, without assigning any reason,
require the Great Council of Chiefs to submit the names of other
persons qualified as aforesaid in addition to the persons first sub-
mitted.
24. The Members ot the Legislative Council shall take pre-
cedence as follows:
(1) First the Official Members according to their Seniority
at the date of the coming into operation of these Our
Letters Patent, and in the case of Members hereafter ap-
pointed, according to their Seniority in the Executive Coun-
cil, or, if they are not Members thereof, according to the
priority of their respective appointments; provided that if
the Chief Justice, or the person lawfully discharging the du-
ties of Chief Justice, is an Official Member of the Legis-
lative Council he shall take precedence therein next after
the Governor.
(2) Secondly, the Elected and Native Members in such order as
the Governor may from time to time, with Our approval,
prescribe.
25, It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council, to make laws for the peace,
order, and good government of the Colony. Such laws shall be
styled “Ordinances enacted by the Governor of Fiji, with the
advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof.” But We
hereby reserve to Ourselves, Our heirs and successors, power to
disallow any such Ordinance, either in whole or in part, such
disallowance to be signified to the Governor through a Secretary
of State.
2G. The Legislative Council may require the aid of any Judge
of the Colony in the discussion of any law.
27. No Ordinance enacted by the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council shall take effect until either
the Governor shall have assented thereto in Our name and on Our
99


behalf, and shall have signed the same in token of such assent,
or until We shall have given Our assent thereto by Our Order in
Our Privy Council or through a Secretary of State.
28. After any Ordinance shall be finally passed by the Gov-
ernor, with the advice of the Legislative Council, the same shall be
presented to the Governor for his assent on Our behalf, and the
Governor shall declare according to his discretion, but subject
nevertheless to the provisions contained in these Our Letters Pa-
tent, and to such Instructions as may from time to time be given
in that behalf by Us, Our heirs and successors, that he assents
to such Ordinance, or that he reserves such Ordinance for the
signification of Our pleasure thereupon.
29. When the Governor assents to an Ordinance he shall, by
the first convenient opportunity, transmit to a Secretary of State
a transcript of the Ordinance authenticated under the Public Seal
of the Colony and by his own signature. If at any time from the
date of the Governor’s assent to any Ordinance We shall notify
to the Governor, through a Secretary of State, Our disallowance
of such Ordinance, or any part thereof, the Ordinance, or the
part thereof so disallowed, shall become null and void from atnd
after the day on which the Governor shall signify such disallow-
ance by proclamation.
30. All Ordinances passed by the Governor, with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council, shall take effect, and come
into operation as law, from and after the date at which it shall be
assented to by the Governor on Our behalf, or at which it shall be
enacted by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the said
Council, that such Ordinances are to take effect and come into
pleasure thereon, any Ordinance passed by the Legislative Council
operation as law.
31. The Governor shall reserve for the signification of Our
pleasure thereon any Ordinance passed by the Legislative Council
by which any provision of these Letters Patent is repealed, altered,
or amended, or which is in any way repugnant to or inconsistent
with any of the provisions of these Our Letters Patent. An Or-
dinance so reserved shall take effect so soon as We shall have
given Our assent thereto, either by Our Order in Our Privy Coun-
cil, or through a Secretary of State.
32. The Governor shall transmit to the Chief Justice of the
Colony, to be enrolled in the Supreme Court, a transcript, duly
100


authenticated in the manner before mentioned, of every Ordinance
passed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Legis-
lative Council, and the Governor shall also from time to time
trans(mit to the Chief Justice, to be enrolled in the said Court, a
certificate under his hand and seal, of the effect of every Order
which he may have received from Us for confirming or disallowing
in the whole or in part, or for amending the provisions of any such
Ordinance, which certificate shall in like manner be enrolled in the
said Court, and there remain on record to the extent that the
Judges of the said Court may without further or other proof take
cognisance of all Ordinances to be made and promulgated for the
peace, order, and good government of the said Colony: Provided
always, and We do hereby declare, that the Judges of the said
Court have not, and shall not have, any right or authority to pre-
vent or delay the enrolment of any such Ordinances, and that the
validity thereof doth not, and shall not, depend upon such enrol-
ment.
33. The Governor, if present, or, in the absence of the Gover-
nor, such Member of the Legislative Council as the Governor shall
from time to time appoint, or in default of such appointment the
Member present who stands first in order of precedence, shall pre-
side at the meetings of the Council. The Governor, or any Member
for the time being presiding at a meeting of the Council, shall have
a casting vote, but not an original vote.
34. All questions arising at meetings of the Legislative Council
shall be determined by a majority of the votes of all the Members
present, except the Governor or other presiding Member, and in
case of an equality of votes the question shall be determined by
the casting vote of the Governor or other presiding Member. Pro-
vided that the Governor may disallow any vote or resolution of the
Council, and any vote or resolution so disallowed shall have no
force or effect.
35. Every Member of the Legislative Countil may, upon due no-
tice being given, propose any Ordinance or resolution which does
not impose any tax or dispose of or charge any part of the public
revenue.
36. No Member of the Legislative Council may propose any Or-
dinance, vote or resolution, the object or effect of which is to im-
pose any tax or to dispose of or charge any part of the public re-
101


•venue, unless such Ordinance, vote, or resolution shall have been
proposed by the direction or with the express sanction of the Go-
vernor.
37. The Legislative Council shall not be disqualified for the
transaction of business by reason of any vacancy or vacancies
among the Members, but no business except that of adjournment
shall be transacted unless there shall be present at least six Mem-
bers besides the Governor or other presiding Member.
38. Subject to the provisions of these Letters Patent the Go
vernor and the Legislative Council shall, in the transaction of the
business of the Council, and the passing of, assenting to, and en-
rolment of Ordinances, conform as nearly as may be to the direc-
tions as to the transaction of the business of, and the passing of,
assenting to, and enrolment of laws enacted by the Legislative
Council, contained in any Instructions under Our Sign Manual and
Signet as may herewith or hereafter be addressed to the Governor
in that behalf, but no Ordinance enacted by the Governor, with the
advice and consent of the Legislative Council, shall be invalid by
reason that in the enactment thereof any such instructions were
not duly observed.
39. Subject to the provisions of these Letters Patent and such
Instructions as aforesaid, the Legislative Council may make Stand- __
ing Pules and Orders for the regulation of its own proceedings, and
until any such Pules and Orders shall be made, and subject to
any Pules and Orders to be so made, the Standing Pules and Or-
ders of the Legislative Council now in force shall remain in force
and apply, so far as the same are applicable thereto, to the Coun-
cil established by these Letters Patent.
40. The Sessions of the Legislative Council shall be held at
such times and places as the Governor shall from time to time
by proclamation appoint. There shall be at least one Session of
the Council in every year, and there shall not be an interval of
twelve months between the last sitting of one Session and the first
sitting of the next following Session. The first Session shall be
held within six months from the promulgation of these Letters
Patent.
41. The Governor may at any time, by proclamation, prorogue
or dissolve the Legislative Council.
102


42, The Governor shall dissolve the Legislative Council at the
expiration of three years from the date of the return of the first
writs at the last preceding general election, if it shall not have
been sooner dissolved.
48. A general election shall be held at such time within three
months after every dissolution of the Legislative Council, as the
Governor shall by proclamation appoint.
44. In the event o f the death or incapacity of the Governor,
or of his removal from his office, or of his absence from the limits
of his Government, all and every the powers and authorities hereby
vested in him, shall be, and the same are hereby vested in such
person as may be appointed by Us, under Our Sign Manual and
Signet, to be the Lieutenant-Governor of the Colony; or if there
shall be no such Lieutenant-Governor, then in such person or per-
sons as may be appointed by Us under Our Sign Manual and
Signet to administer the Government of the Colony; and, in case
there should be 'no person or persons within the Colony so appointed
by Us, then in the Senior Member of the Executive Council of the
Colony for the time being, and such Lieutenant-Governor, Admin-
istrator, or Senior Member of the Executive Council as the case
may be, shall execute all and every the powers and authorities
herein granted until Our future pleasure shall be signified therein.
Provided always, and We do further declare Our pleasure to be,
that Our Governor for the time being, during the period of his
passage by sea frohi one island of the Colony to another, or while
visiting or residing at any place within any such island, or du-
ring his absence from the Colony in the execution of any commis-
sion or other authority under the Pacific Order in Council 1893, or
any similar Order, shall not for any of the purposes aforesaid, be
considered as being absent from the limits of his said Government.
45. During his absence from any Island of the Colony, but
while he is within the limits of his said Government as aforesaid,
or during his absence from the Colony in the execution of any
Commission or other authority under the Pacific ‘Order in Council
1893, or any similar Order, the 'Governor may, by an instrument
under the Public Seal of the Colony, appoint some person to act
as his Deputy in the Colony, and in that capacity to exer-
cise, perform and execute, during his pleasure, all the powers ves-
ted in him as Governor, or such of them as shall in and by such
103


instrument be specified and limited. Provided, nevertheless, that
by the appointment of a Deputy as aforesaid his power and au-
thority as Governor of the Colony shall not be abridged, altered,
or in any other -way affected, otherwise than We may at any time
hereafter think proper to direct.
46. We do hereby require and command all officers, civil and
military, and all other the inhabitants of the Colony, to be obedi-
ent, aiding, and assisting unto the Governor.
47. We hereby reserve to Ourselves, Our heirs and successors,
Our undoubted right, power, and authority to make by and with
the advice of Our Privy Council, all such laws for the peace, order,
and good government of the Colony as to Us, our heirs and .suc-
cessors, may seem necessary, and all such laws shall be of the
same force and effect in the Colony as if these Letters Patent had
not been made.
48. We do further direct and enjoin that these Our Letters Pa-
tent shall be read and proclaimed at such place or places as the
Governor shall think fit within the Colony, and shall come into
operation on a r date to be fixed by such proclamation.
49. In these Letters Patent “the Colony” means the Colony of
Fiji comprising all islands, rocks, reefs, foreshores, and waters ly-
ing between the fifteenth and twenty-second. degrees of south lati-
tude, and between the one hundred and seventy-seventh degree of
west longitude and the one hundred and seventy-fifth degree of
east longitude from the meridian of Greenwich, and the Island of
Eotumah, and its Dependencies, that is to say, all islands, rocks,
reefs, and fisheries lying between the twelfth degree and the fif-
teenth degree of south latitude and between the one hundred and
seventy-fifth degree and the one hundred and eightieth degree of
east longitude from the meridian of Greenwich.
“Governor” includes the officer for the time being administering
the Government of the Colony.
“Secretary of State” means one of Our Principal Secretaries of
State.
50. And we do hereby reserve to Us, Our heirs and succes-
sors, full power and authority, from time to time, to revoke, alter,
or amend these Our Letters Patent as to Us or them shall seem
meet.
104


In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent. Witness Ourself at Westminster, the Twenty-first
day of March in the Fourth year of Our Reign.
By W arrant under the King’s Sign Manual.
MUIR MACKENZIE.
FIJI.
LETTERS PATENT passed under the Great Seal of the United
Kingdom, amending Letters Patent of 21st March, 1904, pro-
viding for the Administration of tne Government of the Colony
of Fiji.
George the Fifth, by the Grace of God of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British
Dominions beyond the Seas King, Defender of the Faith,
Emperor of India: To all to whom these presents shall
come, Greeting.
WHEREAS by certain Letters Patent, passed under the Great Seal
of the United Kingdom, bearing date at Westminster the Twenty-
first day of March, 1904, provision was made for the Administra-
tion of the Government of Our Colony of Fiji.
And whereas by the aforesaid Letters Patent certain provi-
sion was made in regard to the Elected Members of the Legisla-
tive Council of Our said Colony.
And whereas by further Letters Patent bearing date the Twen-
ty-fifth day of July, 1907, Clause Fourteen of the aforesaid Letters
Patent was amended:
And whereas We are minded to further amend the aforesaid
Letters Patent of the Twenty-first day of March, 1904:
Now know ye that We do hereby declare Our will and pleasure
and direct and ordain as follows:
Clauses 13, 18, and 21 of the aforesaid Letters Patent of the
Twenty-first day of March, 1904, together with Clause 14 thereof
as amended by the Letters Patent of the Twenty-fifth day of July,
1907, ,are hereby repealed and revoked, but without prejudice to
anything lawfully done thereunder, and the aforesaid Letters Pa-
tent of the Twenty-first day of March, 1904, shall henceforth ‘be
105


construed and take effect as if instead of Clauses 13, 14, 18, and
21, the following clauses had been inserted therein:—
“13. Every male person shall be entitled to be registered as
an elector, and when registered to vote at the election of Elected
Members of the Council who —
(1) Is the son of parents of European descent* or, being the
son or lineal descendant of a European father, can read,
write, and speak the English language;
(2) Is a British subject by birth or naturalisation having effect
in the Colony;
(3 Is the age of twenty-one years or upwards;
(4) Has been continuously resident in the Colony for twelve
months; and
(5) Is possessed either—
(a) Of freehold or leasehold property, or both, within the
Colony, of the total yearly value of twenty pounds over
and above all charges and incumbrances affecting the
,-saine; or
(b) Of a net annual income, from all sources, of not less
than one hundred and twenty pounds.”
“14. The Elected Members of the Council shall be elected as
follows: —
(1) Three Members by persons duly qualified as electors as
hereinbefore provided, who are resident in the towns of
Suva or Levuka. Two of such Members shall be elected as
representatives of Suva, and one shall be elected to rep-
resent Levuka.
(2) One Member by persons duly qualified as electors as here-
in-before provided, who are resident in the Eastern Elec-
toral Division comprising the Provinces of Lomaiviti ex-
clusive of the town of Levuka), Macuata, Bua, Cakaudrove,
and Lau.
(3) Ono Member by persons duly qualified as electors as herein-
before provided, who are resident in the Northern Electoral
Division comprising the Provinces of Ra, Colo North, Colo
West, Ba, and Nadroga.
(4) One Member by persons duly qualified as electors as herein-
before provided, who are resident in the Southern Electoral
106


Division comprising the Provinces of Rewa (exclusive of the
town of Suva), Namosi, Serua, Naitasiri, Colo East, Tailevu,
and Kadavu.”
"18. No person shall be capable of being elected a representa-
tive of Suva or of Levuka in the Council, as provided in Article
14, or, having been so elected, shall sit or vote in the Council,
unless he —
(1) Is" qualified to be registered as an elector; and
(2) Has been continuously resident for two years in the Co-
lony; and either
(3) (a) Possesses and has possessed for at least twelve months
next before ‘the election, in his own right or in right
of his wife, freehold property in the Colony of the clear
value of five hundred pounds, or the annual value of
fifty pounds over and above all charges and incumbrances
affecting the same; or
(b) Has been in occupation for at least twelve months next
before the election, in his own right or in right of his
wife, of freehold or leasehold property in the Colony of
the extent of five hundred acres; or
(c) Rents and has rented for at least twelve months next
before the election freehold or leasehold property in
the Colony of the yearly value of one hundred pounds;
or
(d) Is possessed of a net annual income from all sources of
not less than two hundred pounds.
No Member shall be capable of being elected a representative
of the Eastern, Northern, or Southern Electoral Divisions, as pro-
vided in Article 14, or having been so elected shall sit or vote
in the Council unless he—
(1) Is qualified to be registered as an elector; and
(2) Has been continuously resident for two years in the Co-
lony; and either
(3) (a) Has resided in the Electoral Division for which he is
a candidate for twelve months immediately preceding the
day of election; or
(b) Possesses a -net annual income of one hundred and fifty
pounds arising from lands in that Division belonging to
him in his own right or in right of his wife.”
107


“21. If any Elected Member of the Council shall, by writing
under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign his seat in the
Council, or shall become subject to any of the disqualifications spe-
cified in Article 17 of these Letters Patent, or shall take any oath
or make any declaration of allegiance to any Foreign State or
Power, his seat in the Council shall thereupon become vacant.
An Elected Member of the Council may, with the permission
of the Governor, absent from the sittings of the Council or
from the Colony for a period or periods not exceeding twelve cal-
endar months at any one time; but if any Elected Member shall
for any reason be so absent 'for more than twelve consecutive
calendar months, or shall be absent except on the ground of illness,
from the sittings of the Council for a period of two- calendar months
during the session of the Council, without the leave of the Go-
vernor, his seat in the Council shall thereupon become vacant.
Whenever the seat of an Elected Member has become vacant,
the Governor shall, as soon as possible, issue a writ for the election
of a new Member in the place of the Member whose seat has be-
come vacant.”
11. And We do hereby reserve to Ourselves, Our heirs and succes-
sors full power and authority from time to time to revoke, alter,
and amend these Our Letters Patent as to Us or them shall seem
meet.
111. And We do further direct and enjoin that these Our Let-
ters Patent shall be proclaimed at such place or places within Our
said Colony, as Our Governor shall think fit, and shall come into
operation on a date to be fixed by such proclamation.
In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent. Witness Ourself at Westminster the thirty-first day
of October in the First year of Our Reign.
By Warrant under the King’s Sign Manual.
MUIR MACKENZIE.
108


FIJI.
LETTERS PATENT passed under the Great Seal of the United
Kingdom concerning the appointment of Official Members of
the Legislative Council of the Colony of Fiji.
George the Fifth, by the Grace of God of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British
Dominions beyond the Seas King, Defender of the
Faith, Emperor of India: To all to whom these presents
shall come, Greeting.
WHEREAS by certain Letters Patent passed under the Great Seal
of the United Kingdom, bearing date at Westminster the Twenty-
first day of March, 1904, provision was made for the administration
of the Government of Our Colony of Fiji:
And whereas by Clause 10 of the aforesaid Letters Patent cer-
tain provision was made in regard to the Official Members of the
Legislative Council of our said Colony:
And whereas it is desirable more clearly to define the mode
of appointment of such Official Members:
Now know ye that We do hereby declare Our Will and Plea-
sure, and direct and ordain as follows:
Clause 10 of the aforesaid Letters Patent of the Twenty-first,
day of March, 1904, is hereby repealed and revoked without pre-
judice to anything done thereunder, and the aforesaid Letters Pa-
tent shall henceforth be read and construed as if instead of the
said Clause 10 the following clause had been inserted therein:—
“10. The Official Members of the Legislative Council shall
fae such persons holding public offices in the Colony as the
Governor may from time to time by instrument under the
Public -Seal of the Colony appoint, subject to Our disallowance
or confirmation through a Secretary of State. The Official
Members of the Council shall hold their places therein during
Our pleasure, and shall in any case vacate their seats at the
next dissolution of the Council after their appointment.”
11. And We do hereby reserve to Ourselves, Our heirs and suc-
cessors, full power and authority from time to time to revoke,
alter, or amend these Our Letters Patent as to Us or Them shall
seem meet.
109


111. And We do further direct and enjoin that these Our Let-
ters Patent shall be proclaimed at such place or places within the
Colony as the Governor shall think fit.
In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent. Witness Ourself at Westminster the twenty-fifth day
of August 1911, in the Second Year of Our Reign.
By Warrant under the King’s Sign Manual.
MUIR MACKENZIE.
110


APPENDIX 2.
SISAL HEMP IN FIJI.
Introduction.
The cultivation of sisal hemp is now being taken up in the
Colony, and this pamphlet is published in response to numerous re-
quests for information which have been received in regard to this
crop.
Many publications have been issued and articles have appeared
in the various agricultural journals relating to the cultivation of
sisal hemp in the countries where the industry is well established,
and much general information has necessarily been obtained from
these sources.
Sisal hemp has been cultivated at the Experiment Stations of
this Department since their establishment in 1907, and the results
which have been obtained from the first cutting are given.
Since the industry is a new one in Fiji, the remarks given
are intended rather as a general indication of the methods which
may be used at first and from which operations more exactly
suited to local needs may gradually be evolved with the devel-
opment of the industry.
Land in Fiji.
There is much land in the group which from its hilly nature
and the poorness of the soil or for other reasons, is quite unfitted
for one of the three chief industries —sugar-cane, copra or bananas,
or for other crops requiring good soil. It is upon these lands, pro-
111


vided they comply with the conditions referred to under the head-
ing of “Soil and Climate,” and especially within the “dry zone,”
that sisal hemp is likely to prove most satisfactory.
There seems to be an impression that sisal hemp requires poor
land. The ability of the plant to thrive on poor soil in dry cli-
mates does not necessarily mean that it gives the best returns
in such places, but rather that the crop should be looked upon
as one that may be utilised for land which is too poor to give
payable returns with other crops.
Soil and Climate.
It has been mentioned that the plant does not need a rich
soil. In its original home the kind of soil on which the plant
flourishes is a broken, stoney one lying upon soft limestone. The
climate there is in general dry and arid, and the plant is spe-
cially provided by nature to withstand these conditions.
F. E. Center, in “The cultivation of Sisal in Hawaii,” 1906
(a bulletin of the Hawaii Agricultural Experiment Station), states
that the plant will grow in any soil at any elevation in tropical
and sub-tropical countries provided there is sufficient drainage,
and that the best yields are obtained on porous limestone or coral
soils in a warm, moist climate subject to only moderate changes.
In places where the rainfall is considerable or the soil of
better quality, the plant grows more luxuriantly but the fibre is
not so good. There is also more watery matter in the leaves, and
the cost of extracting the fibre is greater. Upon such soils weeds
would be more troublesome than on poor soil and, as weeds must
not be allowed to over-top the plants, especially when young, the
cost of cultivation is greater.
Dryness of the soil is a very important point in sisal-hemp
growing, for the plant will not thrive where its roots come in con-
tact with standing water, or where water, if not actually remain-
ing in the soil, takes a long time to run off.
There is a great variety of soils in Fiji, and where there is
any choice in the matter, places where the soil most nearly re-
sembles that found best in other countries should be chosen.
The Plant.
There are several plants, natives of Central America and
chiefly Mexico, yielding what is known on the market as sisal
112


hemp, so called from the port of Sisal from which it was first
shipped.
In Yuibaltan the plant is called “Henequen,” and there are two
principal varieties —the “white,” the botanical name of which is
“Agave rigida variety elongata,” and is the plant chiefly cultivated
for fibre in Yucatan (Mexico), and the “green,” “Agave rigida va-
riety sisalana,” the plant cultivated extensively in Florida and
the Bahamas. It is the latter which is recommended for use in
Fiji.
The variety “elongata” has teeth along the edges of the leaves,
which possess a whitish bloom, while the variety “sisalana” has
bright green leaves each provided with a purple terminal spine.
The latter variety is said to give the best agave fibre.
The fibre, which is white, strong and flexible, is contained in
the leaves, which vary in length up to about 5 feet and in breadth
up to about 5 inches. They are borne on a short thick stem,
and a (succession of leaves is given off from the heart of the plant.
During the growth of the plant suckers spring up around its base,
and these may be removed when large enough and used for plant-
mg purposes.
On reaching maturity a flower stalk or “pole” grows up from
the centre of the plant, to a height of about 20 feet. Flowers
are borne on branches growing out at right angles to the pole
from its upper part.
After the flowers have fallen it is found that numerous bulbils
develop at the ends of the branches. These bulbils or “pole-plants”
may be used for propagation purposes.
The “poling” of a sisal-hemp plant marks the last stage of
its life history and it then dies.
Propagation.
It has been mentioned that either “pole-plants” or suckers may
be used for propagation purposes.
In Fiji a few old plants existed in the Botanic Gardens and
here and there on certain estates. Both suckers and pole-plant*
have been obtained from these, and the plots at the Experiment
Stations have been planted from them. In addition a small number
of pole-plants was obtained from Honolulu.
The two plants appear to be identical.
113


For other cultivations, plants have been obtained from Queens-
land.
The supply of young plants in Fiji is very limited and there
is little choice as to which kind to use. It is likely therefore
that results will improve when an opportunity is offered for care-
fully selecting the most suitable young plants for setting out.
Still it may be as well to give some information in regard to tite
relative merits of suckers and pole-plants for this purpose.
A full account is given of information collected in regard to
the length of life of the plants, and of the bearing upon this of
the kind of young plants used, by Sir (then Dr) Daniel Morris
KXJ-M.G. (Colonial Reports, Miscellaneous No. 5, 1896).
Pole-plants the only ones used in many instances, and
Sir D. Morris says:—"They were small in size and conveyed in
large quantities in the holds of schooners, where they got over-
heated and weakened. Such plants were necessarily predisposed
to early maturity. I am also of opinion that pole-plants, produced
as an expiring effort of the parent plant, are not always calcu-
lated to produce such robust plants as suckers; at least they are
not likely to be so when derived from plants whose leaves are
periodically reduced when cut for fibre purposes.”
Suckers therefore seem to be more desirable as young plants
and should be taken, when there is any choice, from the most
vigorous plants. They will be found to spring up in twelvemonths
or so after planting, and when large enough may be removed.
Mr. A. J. Boyd, in "Sisal Fibre Industry in Queensland,” 1906,
remarks that "when a mature plant, surrounded by suckers, sends
up a pole the older suckers at once suit and send up
slender poles, which will produce a small number of and
bulbils.”
From this it will be seen that suckers should not be taken
for planting purposes from a plant that has poled.
At the Experiment Station the young plants used were about
12 inches long, having been placed in nursery-beds until they
attained this length. It is recommended that this plan be fol-
lowed, the nursery-beds being filled with suckers removed from
the cultivations. A supply of young plants is then ready at any
114


time for filling vacancies, for replanting, or for extending the cul-
tivation, or for sale.
With the commencement of planting, where the supply of
plants is limited, a plentiful supply of suckers springing up
anounfcl the existing plants may perhaps be looked upon as a de-
sirable condition. It must be remembered however that when the
sisal-hemp plants are grown Tor fibre purposes the presence of
suckers around the plants, for reasons to be given later, should
be discouraged as much as possible. With all precautions that
may be taken, the plants will give sufficient suckers to allow
vacancies to be filled and gradually to allow of the replanting
of exhausted areas.
The young plants, when about to be set out in the fields,
should have all the lower leaves and the roots trimmed off with
a knife. This allows the plant to take root more quickly and is
said to lessen the number of suckers produced.
Laying out of Plantation and Planting.
One of the most important points in regard to the cultivation
of sisal hemp is the arrangement for transport of the leaves to
the mill.
For the purpose of arriving at an estimate of the amount of
raw' material in the shape of leaves to be transported, let us take
the moderate yield of half a ton of fibre per acre with a per-
centage of two-and-a-half of fibre; we have then nearly eighteen
tons to carry from each acre.
When a plantation covers hilly land, it is presumed that the
factory will be located on the lower level and advantage may then
be taken of the natural fall to transport the leaves by means of
wire-ropes. Roads however will be necessary along which carts may
be taken or trucks run upon suitable rails.
These roads must, to a certain extent, follow the contour of
the hills, and from them side roads may be necessary to reach
all parts of the cultivation.
The plants are set out in rows at a uniform distance apart
and will be too close to allow carts to get into the actual cultiva-
tions. Some carrying by hand will therefore be necessary, but it
should be made as short as possible. Side roads may either cut
115


across the rows or be made by leaving wider spaces between cer-
tain rows at intervals. In the former method, if the side roads are
10 chains apart, it will be seen that the cutters have not more
than 5 chains to walk to reach a road. This is practically a sys-
tem detailed in Mr, Boyd’s pamphlet already referred ‘to and sug-
gested by Mr. D. J, Stoddart, a Jamaica planter. Crossing the
rows 'of plants to reach 1 a road, as would be necessary in the second
system mentioned above, is more inconvenient than going along a
row; and if the roads are placed nearer together more planting
space is of course taken up by them.
The actual distances apart of the rows of plants and of the
plants themselves in the rows, will depend entirely upon the soil—
the poorer the soil the nearer together the plants may be placed.
Distances recommended by various authorities will be found to
vary from 10 feet by 10 feet to 6 feet by 6 feet or even nearer.
At the Experiment Stations the distances used are 8 feet by 8
feet and the plants in one row come opposite to the gaps in the
adjacent ones. This gives 681 plants to the acre. There is diffi-
culty 'in getting into the cultivations only when the time is ap-
proaching for the first cutting. Of course care is always neces-
sary in going among sisal-hemp plants on account of the strong
and sharp terminal spine.
Planting should take place during the wetter months (Novem-
ber-March), but showery weather at any time of the year may be
taken advantage of. The plants are very hardy and are specially
adapted by nature to withstand dry weather.
At the places where the young plants are to be placed, the
soil should be loosened and the plant planted, taking care that
it i s upright, that it is not set too deep, and that no soil falls into
the crevices between the leaves.
Ploughing the land previous to planting is not necessary, but
all weeds should be cut down as the plants require as much sun
and air as possible.
Cultivation.
The sisal-hemp plant requires little attention when it has been
planted out, and the cultivation is confined to preventing weeds
from shading the plants, and removing suckers.
116


It naturally follows that cultivation will be cheapest where the
growth of weeds is least, hence the drier parts of the group will
probably give best results.
As the plants will not thrive in areas where the soil remains
wet, it may be necessary here and there to make drains to assist
the natural drainage. These must be kept in proper working or-
der by clearing out when necessary-
Sisal hemp is usually recommended for places where the soil
is too poor to allow other crops to pay, and the use of catch crops
between the rows of sisal-hemp is therefore out of the question. If
the land is good enough, however, there is no objection to the
use of one when the sisal-hemp plants are young, provided the
latter are not liable to be shaded by the catch crop.
With the growth of the industry there will be much demand
for suckers for planting purposes, and, as they are removed, they
may be placed in nursery-beds until required.
It is important that they are removed from the parent plant
however, for while they remain attached to it they absorb some
of its strength and probably induce early poling, They may be
separated from the parent plant with a knife or sharp spade.
Plants growing on rich land seem to produce more suckers,
and they must be inspected and suckers removed more frequently
than on poor soil. If not required for planting or sale the suckers
must be thrown away.
Harvesting the Leaves.
The fibre is an essential element in the structure of the leaf
and is oT course present in leaves at all ages. There is however
a definite time when the fibre is at its best and the leaves should
then be cut. As the leaves mature and gradually become unable
to carry out their proper functions young ones are being put out
to replace them. It would appear then that we should be able to
remove the older ones without any serious injury to the plant, and
in practice this is found to be the case.
The fibre, too, is at its best in the mature leaves, when the
plant can, as it were, best spare them.
Care must be taken that immature leaves are not cut, a point
that will be referred to again.
117


The leaves start out in a vertical position in the centre of the
plant and, with the development of younger ones, they gradually in-
cline until they become horizontal. If still left on the plant they
die, and may be found on an old uncut plant lying on the ground
in the Jform of a fibrous mass attached to the stem.
It is generally understood that leaves are mature when they
have reached an angle of 45 degrees to the vertical.
It will be noticed in plants that have not been cut that the
lower leaves are quite short and the upper ones longer and longer
up to the central ones, which may be( 4 and r a half or 5 feet long.
The leaves do most of their growing in the young state and
in the centre of the plant; when they are mature they do not
lengthen. Fibre for rope-making should be at least 3 feet long,
and the plants are ready for cutting when mature leaves of this
length are to be obtained. The first cutting will include all the
small leaves, which will be useless for fibre purposes, but should
be cut off to enable the rest to be removed the more easily.
The exact age for cutting will depend on the rate of growth.
At the Experiment Stations the first cutting was made in from
three to three and a half years after planting, which is likely to
be an average time.
There appears to be no harm in leaving the leaves on the
plant for some months after they are ready to cut, and the cut-
ting may therefore either be arranged so as to remove a few
leaves several times or more leaves fewer times a year as found
most convenient. There is no particular season for cutting leaves,
they are maturing at all times during the year and may be cut
during any month.
The milling of the leaves will, it is presumed, be carried out
during the dry months, April-October, and the cutting will be ar-
ranged to extend over this period so as to keep the mill regularly
supplied. All the leaves that mature during the year should be
milled, and if itihirty leaves are matured per plant per annum,
it is recommended that two cuttings of fifteen leaves each or
three of ten leaves be made rather than one of thirty.
The leaf is removed by, a clean cut as close to the stem as pos-
sible, for the butt end has most fibre, and if part of the leaf is
left on the stem there is some considerable loss. A hooked knife
is piost convenient and it should be sharp.
118


The leaves are now ready to be carried to the carts or trucks
either loose or in bundles as may be found convenient.
Poling.
It has been remarked that sisal-hemp plants (like all agaves)
end their lives by “poling.”
The “crop period” of a plant will be from the first production
of leaves fit to mill (3 feet long) up to the time of “poling.” The
question as to how long this crop period will be is of great im-
portance to the sisal-hemp industry.
If left to themselves and no leaves were cut from the plants
they would in the course of some years, send up poles, and the
average time may be looked upon as the natural period of the
plant’s existence. With the regular cutting of mature leaves how-
ever it is understood that the time of poling may be delayed for
some years.
The question of early poling of sisal hemp was gone into
very thoroughly in connection with the industry in the Bahamas in
1893, and a full account is given in the paper already referred to
(Colonial Reports, Miscellaneous series, No. 5, 1896) by Sir Daniel
Morris. Whether neglecting to cut the mature leaves induces
early poling or not, it is clear that cutting immature leaves cer-
tainly does so. The plant is weakened by this process, the leaves
subsequently borne are smaller and fewer and its life is ended
sooner; another point mentioned in this account is that when root-
suckers are allowed to remain attached to the parent plant, it is
believed that they exhaust the parent plant and accelerate the
period of poling.
The nature of the plants used for planting has some effect
on the time of poling, as has already been mentioned, and it may
perhaps be repeated that using pole-plants taken from old plants
cut for fibre production may give rise to early poling, and further
that the use of suckers from plants that have poled may give
rise to the same result.
To summarise briefly, it seems that early poling, a very unde-
sirable feature in plants used for the production of sisal hemp, may
be induced by—
1. Cutting immature leaves.
119


2. Allowing root-suckers to remain attached to the parent
plant.
3. Propagating by means of “pole-plants” from old plants
that have been regularly cut.
4. Propagating by means of suckers from plants which
have poled.
In this industry, as in all other agricultural undertakings, a
great improvement can be brought about by careful selection of
the plants for propagating purposes. The matter of early poling
is one that should be borne in mind by all aisali-hemp planters.
It will certainly happen that some plants will pole before others,
and if any are observed to pole phenomenally early, it would be
as well to disregard them as a source of young plants, otherwise
a strain of early-poling plants may be established.
In an article on “The Principal Commercial Plant Fibres, *
which appeared in the Year-book of the United States Department
of Agriculture, 1903, the average length of the cutting period in
Yucatan is said to be twelve to twenty years, ten to fifteen years
in Cuba, jand six to twelve years in the Bahamas.
On the appearance of the pole it may be cut off, or bent over,
which will enable leaves to be obtained for a further period of
about a year.
We have no data to go on in regard to the length of time of
this crop period in Piji, and it is a matter which will be carefully
watched, and especially in regard to the differences that may be
shown by plants grown in the wet and dry zones respectively.
It is unlikely that all the plants in a cultivation will pole
simultaneously, and even when poles do appear there is still
another year of cropping. The cutting of leaves on a plantation
can be made almost continuous by planting suckers in the spaces
between the plants when poles commence to appear, and by the
time all the old plants have poled and are removed the ground
will be occupied by the new plants nearly ready for cutting.
The details of this replanting will possibly be best worked out
for each individual case when the time arrives.
Extracting the Fibre.
In connection with each plantation of sufficient area, a mill will
be required, equipped with suitable machinery for cleaning the fibre
120


and for baling it after it is dried. Wires will be required on
which the freshly-prepared fibre may be hung out to dry and
bleach. A good supply of clean water is necessary for washing
the fibre during the process of milling.
There are many machines on the market for extracting the
fibre, varying in size from “Raspadors,” the small primitive ma-
chines used mostly in Yucatan, up to the large automatic ones,
the daily output of which may be calculated by the ton.
The way in which machines clean the fibre is more or less
the same in all makes. The leaves are fed against a drum pro-
vided with smooth beaters and revolving at a good speed. The
beaters strike the leaves and beat out all the pulpy matter and
remove the outer skin, leaving the fibre behind in straight lengths.
Jets of water are usually arranged so as to play upon the leaves
during this process, materially helping to cle,an the fibre.
The fibre exists in the leaf in separate straight threads parallel
to one another, and it is necessary to keep it in that form when
cleaned. The leaf is therefore cleaned in two halves, one half
being held while the other is being machined. In small machines
this holding is done either by a clip or by rollers, the latter having
the additional advantage of first crushing the leaf. After the first
half is cleaned, the leaf is withdrawn and held by the clean fibre
while the second portion is treated. In automatic machines two
drums are commonly used, one to clean either end, and the leaves
are presented to first one and then the other, being carried on and
held firmly by a* system of endless belts or moving tables. In
such machines leaves are fed in at one side and clean fibre is de-
livered at the other.
The prices of machines range from about £3O to £l,OOO. It
would be impossible in this pamphlet to describe the various ma-
chines on the market. The following points should be taken into
consideration in selecting a machine of suitable size:—
1. The average area to be cut each year.
2. The average yield.
3. The average number of days during which milling can
take place.
The first point requires no further comment. In re-
gard to the yield it is the quantity of leaves that must be con-
sidered and not the fibre itself. Makers frequently refer to the
121


capacity of their machines as of so many pounds weight of dry
fibre a day. This may be misleading unless at the same time the
percentage of fibre is known. It will be seen that there is the
same amount of cleaning to be done for a fixed weight of leaves,
whatever the percentage of fibre. An increase from two and a half
to three per cent, of fibre means an increase of one-fifth of the
output at the lower figure.
In regard to the third point it must be remembered that the
milling of leaves cannot conveniently take place during wet wea-
ther on account of the difficulty of drying the fibre. The ma-
chinery should therefore be capable of cleaning the year’s crop
well within what is generally spoken of as the dry season, allowing
for wet weather during this dry season. In places where the dry
season is shorter, the capacity of the mill should be greater in
proportion to the area to be cut than for drier places.
A machine of large capacity may be more economical while
working than a one, but, when the crop is finished and the
machine standing idle, it represents more capital out of use.
In connection with the actual milling, it must be remembered
that the leaves should be cleaned as soon as possible after being
cut. They are adapted by nature to prevent an undue loss of
moisture during dry weather. After they are severed from the
plant, leaves do not readily wilt, they remain apparently fresh even
for days. It is, however, very harmful to the fibre to allow cut
leaves to remain more than a few hours, for fermentation sets in
and the fibre becomes weakened and spotted. It is recommended
that leaves be milled the same day they are cut, or if cut in the
afternoon they should be treated the first thing next day.
As the fibre comes from the machines saturated with water it
needs a thorough drying. Sometimes it will be seen to have a
greenish tinge, which however will disappear by prolonging the
drying. Drying is accomplished by hanging out and exposing the
fibre to the sun and air. It should not be exposed to rain or
heavy dews or the colour and lustre are impaired. Stained fibre
should be sorted out and not mixed with clean white, first-quality
fibre. When dry the fibre is ready for baling. It should be kept as
straight as possible and may be tied into conveniently-sized heads.
A powerful press is required as the fibre should be tightly pressed,
and then it is secured with four or five bands.
122


Waste.
The waste matter from the cleaning process should consist of
the skins of the leaves and the watery pulp. There is, however, an
amount of fibre beaten out of the leaves by all machines. This
may be either short lengths of fibre which do not come within the
part of the leaf held on the two occasions »that it is gripped du-
ring the cleaning process, or pieces of fibre broken off or beaten
out of the long strands. This fibre may be recovered as “tow”
by shaking out the cellular matter. It has a value and may be
used for making the bands for the bales.
The pulpy matter is unsuitable for immediate use as a manure
but may be so used after being well rotted or burned.
Yield.
In Yucatan the usual return is said to be about 1200 lbs. per
acre of 650 plants. It must be remembered that in that country
most of the fibre is obtained by the use of primitive and rather
wasteful machines. (From the West Indian Bulletin; Vol. V.
No. 2, 1904). This may be taken as an average yield over large
areas and may certainly be used as a basis for calculations.
The actual returns in Fiji from the small areas at the Ex-
periment Stations are given later on.
Value.
There have been great fluctuations in the price of fair quality
sisal hemp in the English markets, the highest value being £5O
per ton in 1889 and the lowest £l3 in 1895. In the case of a
product subject to such fluctuations it is naturally difficult to sug-
gest a Iprice as likely to be a fair average one; the present price
seems to be from £2O to £24 per ton. It is likely that martlets
for the disposal of the Fiji product, more easily reached than Euro-
pean ones, should be sought. There are large demands for binder-
twine and general cordage in Australasia and in Canada, and it
is to these countries that Fiji hemp should be sent at first.
Effects of a Hurricane.
In March, 1910, a hurricane visited the group and the Nasinu
Experiment Station suffered severely.
The sisal-hemp plants were inspected on the morning after
the hurricane, and it was reported that they appeared to have
suffered little injury, beyond a few of the leaves having been
123


split, and some of the plants leaning over. Within four days,
however, the surface of the upper parts of many of the leaves,
facing the direction from which the wind had come, commenced
to turn brown and finally became black, and the affected parts
became dry and shrivelled.
In all cases the affected area included the tips of the leaves,
and sometimes additional patches were to be seen lower down.
A few of the plants were blown out of the perpendicular. No
leaves had at the time been removed, so some support may have
been afforded by the lower ones.
A rough estimate gave 40 to 45 per cent, of the large leaves
then on the plant as the amount of the damage, and such leaves
were useless for fibre production.
It will be noticed that there will be some considerable time be-
tween the visit of the hurricane and the appearance of the dam-
age. It is quite possible that had the leaves been worked up
before the brown colour developed, the fibre obtained would have
shown little evidence of the damage. The injury is thought to
have been caused by the leaves beating upon one another, the
brown places being practically large bruises.
In a large cultivation it would probably be found impossible,
after such a visitation, to make a cutting of entire fields in a
few days in the hope of saving bruised leaves, but at any rate
some considerable portion may perhaps be dealt with and the
fibre saved.
The plants were about 5 feet high to the tip of the centre
leaves and bearing a full crop, and would therefore be offering
a maximum surface to the action of the wind. After a cutting
has taken place there would be less area exposed to the wind,
but on the other hand it would be all at the top of the plant and
there would be no lower leaves to act as props to the stem. The
plants which lean over on this block do not seem to be any the
worse. The leaves have curved so as to be more or less upright
in the centre of the plant.
The damage done by the wind affected the crop for that par-
ticular year only, so far as can be seen, and amounted to 40 to
45 per cent, of the leaves on the plant at the time. It is there-
fore not thought that t he effects of hurricanes are likely to be any
very serious menace to the industry.
124


General view at Lautoka Station. Plants about 1½ year old.
Plants 3 years 7 months old—Lautoka Station. From the right hand side, the rows are numbers
4, 5 and 6, referred to on pages 13 and 14. Rows 4 and 5 show the appearance after the first cutting.




Leaves.
Fibre.
Number.
Weight.
Weight.
Ibs,
lbs.
Sound ( a )
8,488
14,263
376
Damaged ( b )
4,586
7,060
178
Results at the Experiment Stations.
Nasinu Station is situated about 8 and three-quarter miles from
Suva, on the road bo Nausori, the site of a sugar-mill on the
Rewa River. The general country around the station is hilly. The
land was covered with forest when selected. The particular
block upon which the sisal hemp has been planted is part of a
low hill, one side sloping gently and the other rather steeply.
The soil is red and may be described as a heavy loam about one
foot deep. The subsoil contains more clay and is about 10 feet
deep before the rock (a volcanic mud locally known as “soapstone”)!
is reached.
The soil is very well drained naturally. The plants were set
out in rows 8 feet apart and 8 feet being allowed between the
plants in the rows. The plants in one row are placed opposite
the gaps in the adjacent rows. The land had not been stumped
previous to planting, and here and there the presence of stumps
interferes with the regularity of the rows.
The young plants, suckers about 12 to 15 inches long, were
planted in April, 1907, Cultivation has consisted of removing suck-
ers and weeding when necessary. Mile-a-minute vine (Mikania
scandens) has proved very troublesome, and it is very important
that it is not allowed to get a hold among the sisal hemp, since
it could entangle the young plants so quickly.
The first cutting took place in October, 1910, when 321 plants
were dealt with. The task for cutting was 1000 leaves, but this
should be considerably increased on the second cutting*, as there
are no leaves on or near the ground to interfere with the work.
The leaves under 3 feet long were discarded, and those given
below are all of this length or over. Damaged leaves refers to
those injured by the hurricane. They were treated in the machine,
but the fibre is stained and of little value.
The results are as follow:—
125


Number of leaves
per plant.
Average weight
of leaf.
Percentage of
fibre.
Weight of fibre,
per 1,000 leaves.
Yield of fibre
per acre of 681
plants.
lbs.
lbs.
lbs.
a ...
) (
17
2-6
44'3
798
407
b ...
J I
i-5
2-5
...
i
From these figures we get by simple calculation the follow-
ing:—
Had no leaves been damaged by the hurricane and the leaves
(b) given fibre at the same rate as (a) we should have obtained
the following figures:—
No. of leaves per plant 40.7
Average weight per leaf... ... ... 1.7 lbs.
Percentage of fibre 2.6
Weight of fibre per 1000 leaves... ... 44.3 lbs.
Yield per acre (681 plants) ... ... 1,228.0 lbs.
The rainfall has averaged 132.68 inches per annum for the
years 1907 to 1910.
i
Lautoka Station.
This station is within the “dry zone” and near the port of
Lautoka on the north-west coast of Vitilevu.
Three blocks are planted up with sisal hemp as follows:
A. On the slopes of a low hill, dark chocolate soil 8 to 10
inches deep and lying on a partly disintegrated sandstone. It was
ploughed previous to planting the sisal hemp, not in connection
with this crop, however, but it happened to be part of a plot on
which cotton was to be planted. This soil is very well drained
naturally.
B. Flat land, with red soil 10 to 12 inches deep on a clay
subsoil. It is well drained. It was ploughed before the suckers
were planted.
C. Land similar to B, but on a slight slope. The plot was
covered with short grass and low bush and no clearing was done,
the plants being set out among the grass.
126


Row No. 5 on right hand side, row No. 6 in centre. The latter shows the appearance
after the severe cutting refferred to on page 14
Row No. 6 in centre, looking in the opposite direction to print shown above.
Two year old plants on the right hand side.




Row.
Leaves.
■
Date of
Weight of
Weight of
cutting.
fibre.
Tow.
No.
No. of Plants.
Number.
Weight.
1910.
lbs.
lbs.
lbs.
I
32
April 23 ...
1,432
1,984
46
15
2
31
May 2 ...
1,403
1,864
49
16
3
31
Oct. 20 ...
Not counted
2,367
66
18
4
31
Nov. 4 ...
1911.
,,
3,180
75
...
5
6 a
32
32
Jan. 18 ...
„ 24 ...
1,926
2,607
3,289
69*5
8 7
19
32
„ 24...
443
961
27
...
No attention is paid to this block C beyond removing suckers
which are needed for supplies, and it therefore represents a culti-
vation under very unfavourable conditions except in regard to
drainage.
It was unfortunate however that the suckers used on block C
were very much smaller than those on A and B, and the differ-
ences in the development of the plants on B and C must be
partly due to this circumstance.
Cultivation on blocks A and B has consisted of removing
suckers and weeding twice a year. The rainfall for the years 1907
to 1910 averaged 69.42 inches per annum.
The blocks B and C are not yet fit to cut. The figures given
below refer to portions of block A, planted in June, 1907.
The distances and method of planting were the same as at
the Nasinu Station.
In April, 1910, six rows of hemp plants were thought to be
fit to cut, the plants then being two years and ten months old.
It was decided to cut one row at a time, allowing intervals be-
tweent he treatment of the different rows to determine the im-
provement with age.
The following table shows the figures actually obtained: —
127


Row.
No. of leaves
per plant.
Average
weight of
leaf.
Percentage
of fibre.
Weight of
fibre, 1,000 i
leaves.
Yield of fibre per
acre.
Percentage
of tow to
fibre.
lbs-
lbs.
lbs.
1
44*4
i*4
2*3
32*3
9/8
32*6
2
45*3
1*3
2*6
34*3
1,0/6
32*7
3 |
2-8
...
1,450
27-3
4
...
...
2*4
1,648
5 j
...
27
: ...
i,479
27*3
6 a
6o
17
27
45*2
1,851*5 ?
2,426*1
6b
13*8
2*2
2-8
6ro
574*6$
1 (total)
In the first cutting all the leaves were removed up to an
angle of 45 deg. and all those under 3 feet long were discarded.
The hurricane in March was not severely felt in the Lautoka dis-
trict, and the sisal-hemp plants suffered no injury.
In row 6 the line of figures marked (a) refers to the leaves
cut up to an angle of 45 deg., but it is desired to test the effect
of systematic severe cutting, and further leaves were removed, leav-
ing only eight on each plant besides the central spike. The extra
leaves so removed are referred to in line marked (b).
The severe cutting will be used for this row upon each occa-
sion.
From these figures given above we may obtain by calculation
those shown below:—
It will be seen that with the increasing age before cutting
there has been an increasing yield of fibre, as is natural with
the extra number of leaves that have reached maturity (to be
seen in the second column). The leaves for rows 3, 4 and 5 were
not counted, but from 44.4 in April, 1910, the number of mature
leaves has increased by January, 1911, to 60 per plant.
It is possible that this latter number removed in one cutting
(and in addition it must be remembered that all the short leaves
were also removed) may be too severe on the plant, and it is
not recommended that plants be left so long, but that they be cut
when thirty leaves per plant at least 3 feet long have reached
maturity.
128


No. of leaves.
Weight, lbs.
Fibres, lbs.
Tow, lbs.
10 Plants
3U
552
17.5
5.5
A second cutting to angle of 45 deg. of the plants in row 1
was made on January 23rd, and the following results were ob-
tained from ten plants.
This gives:—
31.4 leaves per plant ... Yield per acre, 1,191.8 lbs.
1.8 average weight of leaf ... Percentage of tow to fibre
31.5
3.2 per cent, of fibre ... Weight of fibre per 1000
leaves, 55.7 lbs.
(Leaves, 4 feet to 4.6 feet long).
So that it will be seen the two cuttings of row (1) have given
considerably better results than the single cutting of row 6 in
the same way (to angle of 45 deg.) in the same time (these figures
are given in row 6a).
The machines used at the stations are made by Death and
Ellwood, of Leicester, England. That such machines clean the fibne
very well will be seen from the report upon the fibre prepared
in Suva by one of them. They are said by the makers to turn
out 6-10 cwt. of fibre in, a day, requiring 3-4 h.p.
They are provided with rollers which grip the leaves and
crush them before they come under the action of the beater-
knives. The direction of motion of these rollers may be reversed
by pressing a conveniently-placed foot-lever. To clean leaves,
this lever is pressed and two leaves are fed in, butt ends first.
When half-cleaned they are withdrawn and the point ends are
then presented to the rollers, the fibre of the cleaned half being
held by the operator.
In common with all hand-fed machines much, in the way of
output, depends upon the operator. With these machines an in*
crease in the speed does not mean an increase in the output in
exact proportion because the time taken to reverse the leaves
and to feed in fresh ones remains the same whatever the speed.
It is important that the butt ends are cleaned first, for some
129


of the fibre does not reach to the tip of the Deaf, and it would
be drawn through during the second part of the cleaning if the
point ends werh treated first. For the same reason, care should
be taken that not more than one-half of the leaf is cleaned during
the first part of the process. A careless operator in this respect
can cause the loss of much fibre.
Machines are usually adjustable for different fibres, and should
be set so as to clean the fibre perfectly but without damaging it.
Of course with less perfect cleaning, the apparent yield of fibre
will be greater, but the value will be considerably reduced.
Report on Fiji Fibre.
The following report was made by the Director of the Im-
perial Institute, London, upon a sample of sisal-hemp fibre pre-
pared by a Death and Ellwood machine from leaves of plants
grown in the grounds of Government House, Suva. The soil is
good, but it is not very deep and lies upon “soapstone.” The lo-
cality cannot be regarded as a favourable place for the best growth
of the plant. The rainfall in Suva has averaged 107 inches for
the last twenty-six years.
“Report on Fiji Sisal Hemp.
“Specimen of perfectly cleaned and nearly white fibre of very
good lustre and even diameter.
“Commercial valuation £34 to £35 per ton with Mexican sisal at
£25 to£27 per ton. Strength very good. The fibre is of excel-
lent quality, being superior in composition to many samples of
nsal previously examined. It is very strong and of good length
(4 to 5 feet) and would be very valuable for rope-making.”
It is clear that excellent fibre can be obtained from sisal-
hemp plants in Fiji, even in the wetter districts, though it is in
the dry zone that the cultivation is specially recommended.
130


OTHER FIBRES.
Other fibre plants exist in Fiji of which the most important
is Mauritius hemp (Furcraea gigantea). Fibres of rope-making,
possessing the necessary length and strength, are all valuable,
and all plants yielding such fibres are worthy of cultivation.
Information on the comparative values of cultivations of sisal
and Mauritius hemps can only be obtained by actual trial.
A sample of Mauritius hemp from plants grown in the pro-
vince of Bua on the island of Vanualevu, prepared by the Death
and Ellwood fibre machine already referred to, was sent for exam-
ination to the Imperial Institute, London, and the following report
was obtained; —
“A soft fibre, beautifully prepared, perfectly white in parts,
ind of good lustre. Strength good, length 4 to 5 feet. Commercial
ralue about £31 per ton with good average Mauritius hemp a
£22 10s. per ton.”
It will be seen that Fiji is capable of producing a superioi
quality of this fibre, and it is recommended that trial plots be
established for comparison with sisal upon hemp plantations.
The recommendations in regard to the planting and cultivation
of sisal hemp given in this pamphlet may be used in connection
with Mauritius hemp.
131


APPENDIX 3.
NOTES ON THE LAE ISLANDS.
THE LAU ISLANDS.
This group of islands, to which there is a service of three
slearners a month —extends from the 17th to the 21st parallel*
of latitude, and from 170 deg. West Longitude to 179 deg. 40
min. Easit, and covers an ocean area of some 30,000 square
miles. It forms one of the provinces of Fiji. Thirty-three}
o(f the islands are inhabited, with populations ranging from about
30 pp to 1200 persons, and the province is one of the few
where the natives flourish and increase.
HISTORICAL.
The Tongan Element.
Situated as it is, half way between Tonga and Fiji, and
oolonised in early times from Tonga, partly by the chance of.
storm-driven canoes and partly by actual conquest, it is not
that the people are more Tongan than Fijian in
features and characteristics. There are still actual colonies
of Tongans living there, while among the true Lauans the Tongan
tongue is a second language, understood and spoken by all from
childhood upwards.
The story of how the too-powerful chief Maafu was sent
put from Tonga to seek fresh fields for conquest in the Lau
islands is well known, and is within historical times. He was
eventually, in 1848, appointed by the King of Tonga as Lieu-
tenant-Governor of Lau. Here he reigned until 1874, when, at
the cession of Fiji to Great Britain, he exchanged his title for
that of first Roko of Lau, dying seven years later, in 1881.
132


TYPICAL FIJIAN GIRL.






TYPICAL FIJIAN MAN.


The prevailing trade winds had for generations
before Maafuis time driven over canoes from Tonga, frail vessels
too ; and the shipwrecked Tongans, being better fighters, had
held their own with the Fijians, and eventually fraternising with
them, had been in the habjit of taking back to Tonga the
far .stronger “vesi” canoes of the Fijians from Kabara and other
timber-producing islands of the Lau group.
Earliest €hristians in Fiji.
Thus a regular intercourse between Tonga and Lau sprang
up, and when Tonga became Christianised, it was to Lau (Ono
Island) that the first native Christian teacher came, to be fol-
a few years later, in 1837, by the first white missionaries,
Cross and Cargill, who settled on Lakeba island. From the Lau
Group Christianity then spread to the rest of Fiji.
First Europeans in Fiji.
The first known Europeans to come in contact with Fiji
were the members of Tasman’s voyage of discovery, and there
is little doubt that the portion of Fiji that he sighted in 1613
was Vanua Balavu Island in the Lau Group. Captain Cook also
came to Vatoa (which he called Turtle Island), during his voy-
ages. In 1791 Captain Bligh, of the Bounty, sailed through the
Lau Group in his open boat on his way to Timor; and later in
Ijhe same year Captain Hewett touched at Lakeba in his search
for Bligh; while in that year also Mr. Oliver, Gunner
in .command of a schooner built of native timbers and manned
by the crew of the wrecked warship Pandora, came to Matuku
Island and stayed there six weeks.
In 1797 the mission ship Duff en route from Tonga to China
sailed through the Lau Group, and this occasion was momentous
as the first chart of the islands was then made by her master,
Captain Wilson.
In 1802 a large vessel was wrecked on the Bukatatanoa (Argo)
reef, arid, some of the crew were taken to Oneata Island, and
thence, as curiosities, to the sovereign island of La-
first of the white men’s sicknesses, the “Lila,” said to be
Responsible for the commencement of the decrease of the Fijian
race. Since that time vessels innumerable have been wrecked
133


in ithe Lau islands, including a second large ship on the Argo
reef in 1835; and many of these wrecks are within memory of
living persons. One of the most interesting individuals still liv-
ing (in the Lau islands is Captain Cocks, late Government
b(our-master, who was shipwrecked on Vatoa, the most easterly*
of the group, as far back as 1850, in the ship Emtna Sharrot,i
from The natives of tliat island had luckily been
'Christianised Tor some years by the Tongan teacher who came
to Ono, and treated the crew kindly, but their captain was ad-
vised not to make for Moala Island, another of the Lau Group,
which was marked in a rough chart he had, by the expressive
dhmb show of a native pretending to gnaw at his own arm and
shaking his head at the word Moala.
Cotton Planting.
At the time of the American Civil War cotton rose to high
prices, and with the consequent rush, of cotton planters to Fiji
the real history of the Lau Group begins. These islands be-
came renowned for their cotton, as the soil and atmosphere,
seemed especially to it, and some of the finest cotton in
#he world was produced here; and could still be produced should
sie prices ever walrrant it, as they may some day do when
Ahnerica finds it can only supply its own increasing population.
LOMA LOMA.
Loma Loma, the chief town of Vanua Balavu Island, and
the Government headquarters of the Lau Group, was one of the
first places to which the white settlers of Fiji came. Owing to
its magnificent 'natural harbour, nine miles across, it was also
a favojurite pott of the whaling ships, when whaling was an im-
portant industry of the South Pacific. At the height of the
cotton boofii Loma Loma was a rival of Levuka; and long before
Fiji was ceded to Great Britain there were over a hundred whites
living there. Large stores, public buildings, a school, and three
hotels were not considered too much for their requirements; and
it was of course a port of entry, and a. line of big ships'
traded directly between Loma Loma and Europe. It remained a
port of entry until Suva was made the capital in 1882, and with
the fall of the cotton industry the staff was much reduced. But
fortunately for the progress of the Group, those of the cotton
134


planters who still put their faith in the young Colony turned their
attention to cocoanut planting, and the consequence is that the
Lau islands have become one of the most important copra*
producing centres of the country; and their yearly export amounts
to nearly £70,000. Most of this is sold to Levuka and is counted
with the product of that port, though a great deal is shipped straight
through to Australia. Loma Loma is to-day a flourishing little
settlement of white, red-roofed houses along the front road facing
the bay; and consists of private houses, storete, churches, hospi-
tal, and Government buildings. Lying at the back are the two
-native towns -of Sawana and Loma Loma, adjoining each other.
The first of these is entirely inhabited by Tongans, but natural-
ised as Fijians.
Botanical Gardens.
About half a mile inland are situated the Botanical Gar-
fijens, started by a town committee in 1869. A number of rare
iknported trees are to be found there, and there are avenues
of the finest 40-year old New Hebrides crotons to be seen in
Fiji.
At the northern end of the town is the Government station,
Consisting of the Magistrate’s house, the Court house, Constabu-
lary barracks, gaol, etc. In front of the station at the foot of
the flagstaff are to be seen a group of cannon, one at least being
off (historical interest, as one of the only two guns ever lost
by British troops in the South Seas—in the action at Tonga when
the landing iparty sent ashore by H.M.S. Favourite in 1840 was
repulsed. For years they stood in front of the King’s Palace
at Tonga, till through the patriotism of Mr. William Hennings, an
important personality in the early political history of Fiji, they
were brought back to British territory in Lau.
There is a good driving road for 15 miles along the coast,
and it is one of the sights of the island to see a race between
the natives o'p. their sturdy little Tongan ponies, bare backed,
and with a. slingle bit of rope twisted round the horse’s nose
as a bridle
Hof Springs.
Two miles from Loma Loma, at the southern end of the is-
land, are the hot springs. There is one small spring near the
beach, the surrounding “soap stone,’’ hollowed out to make a
135


bath; with two coooanut trees, one on each side of it, planted
40 years ago ,-amd still flourishing, but dwarfs of 3ft. high. In-
land, througlT a cleft in the cliffs, and approached by a sharp
Ascent of some 60 feet, with a similar descent inside, one comes
to another hot spring, a pool in a dark cave much feared by the
natives, who declare it to be haunted. Here the water is about
five feet deep and extends about 14 feet back into the cliff. The
average temperature is about 170 deg. Fahrenheit, but at times
is /much hotter, and the water is rich in sulphur and chlorides
of sodium and magnesium.
Loma Loma Harbour.
As the steamer approaches the island at the north end it
winds its way through a narrow passage of deep water under
the overhanging of Qila Qila, where flocks of frigate birds,
called by the natives “the old women of Qila Qila,’’ make their
hfome. The water is a deep blue-green colour here, quite clear
and still, and reflects the overhanging trees and cliffs, and this
place is justly said to be one of the most beautiful spots in
Fiji. Just across the narrow neck of land lies the “Bay of
Islands,” where clusters of picturesque little verdure-clad islets*
with an occasional solitary palm tree on them, rise sheer out
of the water
Proceeding dotvn towards Loma Loma one can usually dis-
cern a turtle in the water, which dives down head-foremost
in a most human fashion on the approach of a boat. A large
portion of the real “tortoiseshell” of Fiji from' the “taku” or
shell turtle—comes from the Lau islands. The Loma Loma har-
bour is in reality an immense basin, the rim being formed at
one side bv Vanua Balavu Island, and the remaining portion
by the outer reef, with the islands of Cikobia, Munia, Susui, and
Na Malata situated at intervals upon it. At Susui island there
is ,a small inner lagoon, where two kinds of delicately flavoured
oysters are found; the one being a large variety with a beau-
tiful irridescent shell, and the other a smaller sort, which liter-
ally “grows upon trees,” as it hangs on to the branches anc|
roots of mangrove trees which are awash at high tide.
LAKEBA ISLAND.
This fertile island is the headquarters of the natives of
the group, and the Roko lives there. It is centrally situated
136


in the group, but unfortunately has only a narrow and difficult
entrance to the harbour. There is a fair sized settlement of
whites here, a Government hospital, and the Government aided-
school, a large institution which, though only four years old, is
Mready having* a good effect on the rising generation.
There are some wonderful stalactite caves here, extending
far into the hill, and when lit up by torches they make a most
ibnpressive sight. A good driving road, about 13 miles long;
encircles the island.
MANGO, KANACEA, AND NAT TAB A ISLANDS.
These three privately owned islands produce a very large
amount of copra annually, and there are also big cattle-rearingj
stations on them. This seems to be an ideal combination, the
running of cattle beneath the cocoanut trees, whereby the trees
are kept weeded from too much grass, and all the available land
is brought into use. There are still large fortunes to be made
in Lau this way. The cocoanut crops are easily the best in Fiji;
the emajflness of the islands allowing all the trees to be within
reasonable distance of the sea atmosphere, which seems so es-
sential to the cocoanut tree.
CICIA ISLAND.
Portions of this island are under lease to the company own-
ing {Mango {lsland; while another estate is under lease to the
executors of one of the early settlers, and here sheep are also
run on part of the cocoanut lands, and do well there. The hill-
sides of all the Lau islands would make excellent pasture land
for igheep.
KABABA AND NAMUKA ISLANDS.
These islands are noted for the excellent hard woods grown
there, “Vesi” and “Boca” chiefly. From these are made most
off the Lau canoes, still an important item in Lau to the fisher-
men, despite the increase of European-made boats. Here also
are made carved yaqona bowls, head-rests, and oil receptacles
fashioned in the shape of a turtle. At Namuka is a large cave,
filled with ice-cold water which has an underground outlet to
the sea. The natives some years ago released a turtle with a
long rope tied to it, and so discovered the exit to the passage.
137


VULAGA AND OGEA ISLANDS.
These islands, farther South, are famous for their lagoons,
tihe former especially, with its hundreds of “mushroom shaped
islets covered with fan palms, is a sight never to be forgotten.
From these palms often hang long strings of bats— “flying foxes”-
iwfhich flutter shrieking away when a boat comes too near them.
Ogea has large deposits of rich phosphates, and will one
day be a source of wealth to the Colony. On this island grows
the “kaukauloa” wood, a splendid black ebony, said to be found
only on this one island in Fiji. And here too is to be seen
one of the only remaining large double war canoes of Fiji, with
a house built io n the platform between the two hulls.
ONO ISLAND.
At the extreme South of the group, 200 miles from Loma
Loma, lies Ono island, where there is a large pearling lagoon,
from which many extremely valuable pearls have at times being
taken, but which has never been systematically fished by Euro-
peans.
This island was the scene of the first advent of Christianity
to Fiji. The people are healthy, and prosperous!, and live quite
out of the world, being but seldom visited by ships. The finely
wioven mats of Ono are much sought after through the rest of
Fiji, and the people also make a good quality of tappa. Breadj-
fruit and orange trees flourish profusely here.
THE MOALA GROUP.
This is a sub-group of the Lau islands, and consists of Mo-
ala, Matuku, and Totoya. They lie about half way between Lau
proper and Fiji; and their people form a connecting link be-
tween the semi-Tongans of Lau and the actual Fijians of Fiji.
Here also are seen for the first time after leaving Lau round-
ended houses of Lau, the latter copied from the Tongan shape.
GENERAL NOTES.
The climate of Lau is exceptionally good. Steady trade winds
Blow for nine months in the year, keeping the atmosphere cool,
while the annual rainfall keeps about the satisfactory average
of 60 inches. There are no mynahs here, so that small bird
life is much more plentiful than in the rest of Fiji, and there
are no mongooses.
138


AGRICULTURE.
Copra is of course the staple industry, and about two-thirds
olf it is grown by the natives and sold to the stores, either in
Lau or at Levuka. The freight away from Lau is heavy, and the
establishment of a central oil mill in the group, with a cattle-
cake plant as a side industry, would probably be a paying enter-
prise; especially if also the outer husk of the cocoanut —now 1
thrown away—could be made use of by fibre-making machines as
is done in Ceylon.
Cocoa, bananas, and oranges, limes, and lemons grow well
here, but at present there is no outlet for the fruit, as there
are no direct vessels from Lau to Australia.
Cattle do exceptionally well in Lau, and there is a good
market for them at the chief centres in Fiji.
The total tonnage o f vessels entering Loma Loma from other
parts of Fiji in 1911 was 14,000 tons, consisting of 46 steamers
and 160 sailing vessels.
The revenue of the Lau Group for 1911 was nearly £3OOO,
consisting of taxes, licenses, Court fees, etc.
139


APPENDIX 4.
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE.
The Honourable Eyre Hutson, C.M.G., Colonial Secretary;
the Honourable Alttelrt Ehrhardt, K.C., Attorney-General; the
Honourable William Sutherland, Native Commissioner; the Hon-
ourable Arthur Robert Coates, Agent-General of Immigration; and
the Honourable Richard Sims Donkin Rankine, Receiver-General;
Members of the Executive Council.
The Honourable William Augustus Lynch, Chief Medical Offi-
cer, the Honourable Islay McOwan, Inspector General of Con-
stabulary; the Honourable William Akerman Miller, Commissioner
of Works; the Honourable Dyson Blair, Commissioner of Lands;
the Honourable Adam Adair Coubrougk, the Honourable James*
Burton Turner, the Honourable John Maynard Hedstrom, the
Honourable Henry Milne Scott, K.C. ; the Honourable
Henry Marks, the Honourable Charles Wimbledon Thomas, the
Honourable Ratu Joni Madraiwiwi, and the Honourable Ratu Ka-
davu Levu, Members of the Legislative Council.
Robert Malcolm Booth, Georgius Wright, Frank Spence, and
Hugh Macdiofnald, Governor’s Commissioners, Esquires.
Mark Thomas Dods, Registrar of the Supreme Court; William
Last Russell, Stipendiary Magistrate; John Vaughan Thompson,
Government Schoolmaster; John William Philpott, Inspector of
Produce; and Cyril Gerard Brooke Francis, Inspector of Con-
stabulary; Henry Noble Holton Joynt, Gilbert Emerson Arnold*
Thomas Reginald St. Johnston, Roul Ferdinand de Boissiere, Basil
Mayor Wilson, Government Medical Officers; James Dickson Dixon,
140


Government Storekeeper; and Arthur Maurice Hocart, Headmaster,
Lau School, Esquires.
David Birell Millar, David Robbie, David Jaffa Solomon, Harry
Granville Nicholas Carr, William Charles Fisher, Herbert Henry
Steinmetz, Edward Duncan, Charles Ormond Eyre, George Free-
man Martin, Thomas Coster, Edgar William Fenner, Henry Thomas
Waring, Milton Craig, James Valentine Tarte, Gabriel Jacob
Marks, Frederick C. Clapcott, Arthur Hebden Ogilvie, George
Whalley, James Young Wood, John Pruce Berry, Leslie Edward
Brown, and Daniel Calder, Esquires.
141


APPENDIX 5.
LIST OF SPECIMENS OF FIJIAN TIMBER.
Yaro or Tavulavu Premna Taitensis Hard durable wood
Ceona ' Very durable wood
Caukuro or Velou Casuarina nodiflora Very handsome wood; to
5 feet in diameter.
Qumu Acacia Richii Good for furniture
Cavuna Tabua Podocarpus cupressina
Vocea Hard, good for piles
in salt water
Bua Loa Euphorbiaceae Hard, heavy wood
Yasi Yasi Eugenia speciosa Good sound durable wood
Ho saw a Very tough sound wood
used for oars
Dabi Carapa moluccensis Handsome wood for furni-
ture
Dawa Pometia pinnata Good furniture wood
Vesivesi Pongamia glabra Good for general carpen-
tering
Yaduvu Olacinea speciosa „ „ „
Vaivai Serianthes Vitiensis An Acacia, the best wood
in Fiji for boat planks
Bau Vudi Euphorbeaceae Somewhat resembles Aus-
tralian cedar
Koka damu Bischoffia javanica Hard, dark red wood
Tadiri Pittosporum Richii Good for general carpen-
P. Pickeringii tei ing
Tavola Terminalia Catappa Very durable wood
142


Vau clamudamu Hibiscus tiliaceus Generally used for boat
var-purpurescens timbers, knees, etc.
Vuna Not more than 9 inches
in diameter, good for
turning
Tabukoka Bischofiia speciosa
Calavia Hard, close grained wood
yellow
Galali Hard tough wood
Mcliwai Citrus sp.
Makita Parinarium laurinium Hard durable wood
Bua Fagrea Berteriana A soft description of tim-
ber No. 1.
Olo Couthovia corynocarpa Hard good wood
Yasiva
Mena
Raulu Pellionia elatostemoides
Dag a
Doi Alphitonia excelsa Good for general carpen-
tery
Dogo Rhizophora mucronata Grows in mangrove swamp
hard and close grained
Cara Hard tough wood
Malawaci Trophis anthropopha-
gorum
Cibicibi Pterocarpus Indicus Hard useful wood
Dedara Good furniture wood
Sea Eugenia jambosa Hard wood
Maku Trichospermum Richii Soft wood
Vulavula Soft, not very durable
Losi Ficus speciosa Tough good wood
Baluwai
Macou Cinnamonum pedatiner-
vum Soft wood
Rourou Hard wood
Mali Myristica gran difolia
Maw am aw
Vola Plerandra Pickeringii Good for furniture
Tarawau Ki Coqe Dracontomelon sylv-
estre
143


Savairabunidamu Good for boat timbers and
other uses where
toughness is desirable
Uru
Waciwaci Soft wood
Kura Morinda citrifolia Yellow, good for furniture
Drega quruquru Alstonia Vitiensis
Vodea
Nawanawa Cordia subcordata Hard and tough, crooked
parts used for boat
knees, fairly light
Yasi Eugenia effusa
Vutukaloa Barringtonia sp.
Yasi vYasi Eugenia sp.
Mavota
Sarosaro
Bau Sapendus Vitiensis
Buabua Guettarda speciosa Hard, close grained, heavy
wood, light coloured,
very durable and
can be used for
the same purposes
as lignum vitae.
Vesi Afzelia bijuga Hard, close grained, heavy
wood, dark colour,
good for bridge
work, as piles,
stringers, etc., also
foundation blocks,
plates, and joists
in house building.
Sacau Hard, close grained, heavy
wood, dark colour,
good for all bridge
work, not readily
attacked by “Toredo
Navalis,” good for
house scantlings.
Yasi Loaloa Hard, close grained, heavy
dark coloured wood
144


good for bridge
work, and house
scantlings.
Damanu Calophyllum Burmarmi Hard, close grained, heavy
wood, of a dark
wavy red, good for
house scantlings,
boarding and floor-
ing, also cabinet
work, takes a good
polish.
Dakua Dammara Vitiensis Is a kauri, close grained,
light coloured wood,
good for house
scantlings, walling,
and flooring and
cabinet work.
Yaka Dacrydium datum Hard, close grained wood
very finely grained
and coloured, fine
cabinet wood.
Dilo Calophyllum Inophyllum Hard, close grained wood,
dark red colour,
handsome cabinet
wood, also used
extensively for
frames and knees
of vessels and punts.
The oil from the
seed is used as an
embrocation for
rheumatism.
Mulomulo Thespesia populnea Good timber for frames
and knees of ves-
sels and puntsstands
well in salt water.
Hard and heavy.
Sagali Lumnitzera Coocinea Good timber for frames
and knees of vessels
and punts.
145


Rasawa Very tough timber, dark
spotted colour, very
good for planking
of boats and ves-
sels, requires no
steaming in boat
building work.
Dubi Good wood for boat knees
and small cabinet
work.
Tawula Soft grained wood, of a
yellowish while col-
our, extensively
used for making
banana and fruit
cases for export.
146


Year.
Imports.
Exports
(the Produce of the
£
Colony).
£
1877
132,855
114,222
1878
136,607
146,845
1879
142,212
132,513
1880
185,740
177,912
1881
276,039
130,533
1882
303,329
163,435
1883
450,594
320,183
1884
444,219
335,646
1885
301,030
320,304
1886
230,628
261,882
1887
188,071
270,611
1888
183,221
368,912
1889
189,393
363,227
1890
206,757
353,756
1891
253,048
457,814
1892
253,586
434,470
1893
276,398
354,317
APPENDIX 6.
MISCELLANEOUS STATISTICS.
FOREIGN TRADE.
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS OF THE COLONY.
147


Year.
Imports.
Exports
(the Produce of the
£
Colony).
£
1894
285,890
570,868
1895
241,759
317,850
1896
242,492
430,130
1897
248,748
427,623
1898
234,849
528,917
1899
263,043
477,945
1900
349,890
613,808
1901
351,182
541,258
1902
526,846
521,298
1903
489,095
541,704
1904
439,995
586,237
1905
442,852
702,362
1906
609,495
598,357
1907
643,007
881,364
1908
662,654
878,393
1909
636,250
947,136
1910
870,120
1,005,818
1911
957,079
1,276,207
Year.
Revenue.
Expenditure.
Public
W
orks.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1901
113,883
7
11
104,973
6
3
27,443
11
7
1902
132,512
14
4
113,341
7
10
23,965
17
9
1903
138,166
16
11
124,948
0
7
23,635
0
0
1904
139,404
16
0
168,645
3
4
20,295
3
3
1905
136,620
16
0
132,043
2
6
28,794
18
9
1906
185,423
19
9
149,373
14
10
32,402
9
5
1907
179,801
18
6
156,811
8
0
30,256
3
8
1908
178,015
5
8
197,798
16
1
53,878
16
10
1909
177,909
13
5
187,684
13
0
51,489
8
3
1910
211,952
5
2
236,661
0
3
67,786
13
8
A1911
240,815
8
5
263,825
6
11
82,119
12
0
B1912
268,200
0
0
272,645
15
11
71,863
12
0
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.
A Revised Estimate
B Estimate
148


£
£
£
Nature of Import.
1909.
1910
1911.
Bacon and hams
2,704
2,932
3,312
Bags and sugar-mats
... 20,059
19,498
25,968
Beer
5,278
5,351
6,219
Boots and shoes
7,457
8,229
9,844
Breadstuffs and biscuits...
... 56,713
57,638
60,443
Bran and pollard
4,257
4,652
6,985
Butter and ghee
... 12,142
17,693
17,631
Cement
2,727
4,293
7,678
Coal
... 23,762
27,822
28,684
Cordage
3,864
4,048
4,210
Cutlery
3,431
4,934
5,750
Drapery
... 114,178
141,818
146,125
LAND.
Total area ... ... ... 4,953,920 acres.
Area of land granted... ... 514,384 „
Native lands under lease ... 121,810 „
Crown leases ... ... ... 23,456 „
Estimated to be under cultivation
by Europeans and Indians 98,060 „
STOCK, 1911.
Horses and mules ... ... 6,228
Horned cattle ... ... ... 45,000
Sheep ... ... ... ... 4,561
'Goats 13,865
TRADE, AGRICULTURE, AND INDUSTRIES.
The following statement shows the total imports during the
years 1909, 1910, and 1911;
149


£
£
£
Nature of import.
1909.
1910.
1911.
Drugs
...
5,782
5,253
6,610
Fish
...
12,043
11,332
12,214
Furniture
...
4,319
5,652
6,567
Galvanised iron and goods
16,848
29,342
22,237
Glassware and crockery ...
...
3,441
4,093
4,864
Hardware
41,042
45,145
56,601
Iron-bar, rod, sheet, rails, and pipes
11,909
11,543
23,502
Jewellery
...
3,969
4,345
4,479
Leatherware
5,813
8,834
7,670
Live stock
12,215
64,773
14,681
Machinery
22,077
45,336
38,728
Machinery (agricultural)...
5,115
8,868
10,595
Manure
...
6,924
6,600
7,221
Meats
18,371
25,228
22,489
Oils
21,436
21,680
20,470
Paints
...
3,910
4,282
6,508
Rice
12,102
15,099
16,945
Soap
1,431
1,685
1,811
Stationery
...
6,477
6,360
7,459
Spirits
8,070
10,987
11,866
Sugar
...
4,723
5,831
5,015
Timber
32,164
42,881
47,535
Tobacco
...
8,407
9,976
13,569
Vegetables and green fruit
...
7,032
8,398
8,706
Wines
2,269
3,119
2,871
Year. Entered. Cleared. Total.
19 06 213,065 205,025 418,090
190 7 228,121 227,108 455,229
19 08 244,173 234,860 474,033
190 9 272,552 274,140 546,692
1910 ... 262,273 253,299 515,572
1911 295,477 289,458 594,935
The following statement shows the total shipping entered and
cleared during the past six years:—
150


0
O
Entered.
Cleared.
National-
ity.
I
|
0)
1909.
1910.
1911.
1909.
1910.
1911.
Q
No.
Tone.
No.
Tons.
No.
Tons.
No.
Tons.
No.
Tons.
No. |
Tons.
British ...
St’m
126
264,919
113
256,011
140
290,167
122
268,255
109
246,382
i
134
285,031
»>
Sail.
9
4,813
3
2,217
3
1,345
6
2,660
6
1,953
2
1,185
Germ’n...
St’m
i
458
I
458
...
...
American
Sail.
3
1,548
4
2,020
*6
2,942
3
2,053
5
2,939
4
2,211
Norweg’n
St’m
i
714
1
714
...
>»
Sail.
...
...
1
1,023
...
...
I
1,023
French ...
Sail.
I
2,025
1
2,025
.
i
Particulars regarding the number, nationality, and tonnages of vessels entered and cleared at the ports
of the Colony during 1909, 1910 and 1911 are given in the following table :
151


Description
No.
Tons.
European owned vessels
... 116
2,511
Native owned vessels
140
919
Chinese „ „ ...
10
145
Half-oaste „ „
18
212
Indians „ „ ...
3
10
Polynesians ...
1
3
278,
3,800
Year.
No.
Tons.
1906
148
213,065
1907
151
228,121
1908
134
224,173
1909
• • •
140
272,552
191C
. . .
124
262,273
1911
. . .
. ..
150
295,477
Imports. Exports.
Year. £ £
1906 ... ... ... ... 609,496 603,410
1907 ... ... ... ... 643,007 881,364
1908 ... ... ... ... 662,654 878,393
1909 ... ... ... ... 636,250 947,136
1910 ... ... ... ... 828,029 1,005,818
1911 ... ... ... ... 957,079 1,276,207
Customs Duties Levied.
Year. £
1906 ... ... ... ... ... 99,594
1907 ... ... ... ... ... 107,078
1908 ... ... ... ... ... 106,595
1909 ... ... ... ... ••• 106,357
1910 131,691
1911 ... ... ... ... ... 150,165
The number and tonnage of local vessels holding coastal
licenses during 1911 were:—
The following figures show the number and tonnage of vessels
visiting the Colony during the last six years:—
The following table shows the value of the total imports and
exports for the past six years:—
The amount of Customs duties levied on imports during each
of the past six yea-rs were as follows: —
152


The following figures are appended as
in trade during the last few years:—
showing the increase
Total Trade.
Year.
£
1907
... 1,524,371
1908
... 1,541,047
1909
... 1,583,386
1910
... 1,833,847
1911
... 2,233,286
Country.
United Kingdom ...
Percentage of
Total Trade.
Per cent.
7.41
British Possessions:—
New South Wales...
42.89
New Zealand
33.75
.Victoria ...
1.52
South Australia ...
.04
Western Australia
. . .
—
Queensland
.08
Tasmania
.02
India
2.08
Canada ...
4.99
Hong Kong
.'22
Other British Colonies
.14
Foreign countries:—
United States of America...
4.71
Japan
-46
France ...
.05
China
.19
Germany
1.30
Norway ...
.02
Sweden ...
.01
Belgium ...
.06
Portugal
.01
Other foreign countries ...
.05
The ratio of trade with the respective countries to the total
trade of the Colony is shown in the following table: —
153


Summarised, the totals are as follow: —
United Kingdom ... ... ... ... 7.41
British Possessions ... ... ... 85.73
Foreign countries... ... ... ... 6.86
'100.000
Year.
Sugar.
Copra.
Green fruit.
Quantity.
Value.
Quantity.
Value
Value.
Tons.
£
Tons.
£
£
1906
38,523
347,198
9,772
143.683
97,678
1907
66,597
602,820
12,290
182,788
79,891
1908
66,149
647,306
12,931
154,488
62,217
1909
60,825
607,969
15,880
226,599
98,491
1910
61,761
669,432
13,078
258,841
47,302
1911
72,834
797,274
16,337
294,245
151,668
PRINCIPAL EXPORTS.
154


£
s.
d.
Aerated and mineral waters, quarts, per dozen
...
0
1
6
Aerated and mineral waters, pints per dozen
Aerated and mineral waters, half-pints or smaller
quan-
0
0
9
titles, per dozen
Ale, beer, porter, cider, perry, hop, ginger or other
beers,
0
0
6
quarts, per dozen
Ale, beer, porter, cider, perry, hop, ginger or other
beers,
0
3
0
pints, per dozen
Ale, beer, porter, cider, perry, hop, ginger or other
beers,
0
1
G
half-pints or smaller quantities, per dozen
Ale, beer, porter, cider, perry, hop, ginger or other
beers,
0
0
9
in wood or Jar, per gallon
...
0
1
6
Anchors, black or galvanised, per lb.
Arrowroot, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Asbestos and asbestos manufactures, 12| per cent, ad va-
lorem
Bacon, hams, and cured pork, per cent, ad valorem
Bags and sacks, over 2 bushels, not otherwise enumer-
ated, including those which are second-hand or
0
0
0%
which have been used, per dozen...
Bags and sacks, not otherwise enumerated, including
which are second-hand or which have been
12| per cent, ad valorem
those
used,
0
1
0
Bags, paper, per cwt....
Baking powder, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Barley, 12% per cent, ad valorem
0
3
0
APPENDIX 7.
TARIFF OF CUSTOMS DUES.
155


£
s.
d.
Bath-bricks, 12£ per cent, ad * alorem
Beans, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Beeswax, per lb.
0
0
2
Benzine, benzoline, gasoline, naphtha, optimol, and other
similar oils, per gallon ...
0
0
2
Bicycles, tricycles, and s imilar vehicles, not otherwise enu-
merated, per cent, ad valorem
Biscuits, sweetened or fancy, per lb. ...
0
0
1
Biscuits, other, including dog biscuits, per lb. ...
0
0
Of
Blacking, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Blue, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Boats, launches, and yachts, imported in any vessel, or
which have been put out of any vessel off the
coast of Fiji and are subsequently brought into
Fiji, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Boilers, steam, and component parts thereof, and boiler
plates, per (cent, ad valorem
Bolts and nuts, not otherwise enumerated, 12| per cent.
ad valorem
Bottled fruits, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Boots, shoes, slippers and goloshes, 12£ per cent, ad va-
lorem
Boxes and trunks, not otherwise enumerated, per cent.
ad valorem
Bran, per 1001b.
0
0
10
Bricks, 12| pier cent, ad valorem
Butter and Ghee, per lb.
0
0
1
Calcium Carbide, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Cameras; magic or optical lanterns ; including slides
and all accessories, t per cent, ad valorem
Candles, per lb.
0
0
1
Canvas, sail, 12\ per cent, ad valorem
Caps, percussion, per 100
0
0
1
Cards, playing, per pack of 61 cards or under ...
0
0
6
Carts and carriages, not otherwise enumerated, per
cent, ad valorem
Cartridges and cartridge cases, 12f per cent, ad valorem
Cement, per cwt.
0
0
8
Cheese, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
156


£
s.
d.
Cigarettes, including wrappers, per lb....
0
5
0
Cigars, including wrappers, per lb....
0
6
0
Coffee, chicory, cocoa, and chocolates, per lb.
0
0
3
Coin, not otherwise enumerated,, 12| per cent, ad va-
lorem
Confectionery, including cakes, plum-puddings, comfits,
liquorice, liquorice-paste, lozenges of all kinds ex-
cept medicated, sugar-candy, succades, icing sugar.
sweetmeats, mincemeats, candied and crystallised
fruits and peels, per lb. or pint...
0
0
3
Cordials and syrup, not medicinal, per gallon ...
0
2
0
Crockery, earthenware, chinaware, glass, and glassware.
not otherwise enumerated, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Dholl and gram (whole or split) of all kinds, per ton ...
3
0
0
Doors, sashes, and Venetian blinds, per cent.
ad valorem
Drapery, including cottons of all kinds, undershirts, other
shirts, blankets, rugs and shawls, apparel and slops.
and all materials composed wholly or in part of cotton,
linen, silk, wool, jute, ramie or other textile fabric
mot otherwise enumerated, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Drugs and medicinal substances, including patent and pro-
prietary medicines, unless prohibited by order of
the Governor, containing not more than 8.7625 per
cent, of proof spirit; chemicals and drysalteries
(except those otherwise enumerated) ; and tinc-
tures of the British Pharmacopoeia, except those
containing opium, per cent, ad valorem
Dynamite, lithofracteur, blasting-powder and similar ex-
plosives, including ingredients for making such
goods, per lb.
0
0
6
Enamelled ware and hollowware, per cent, ad va-
lorem
Fancy goods arid toys, not otherwise enumerated, 12| per
cent, ad valorem
Firearms, 12| per cent. ,ad valorem
Fireworks, 12£ per (cent, ad valorem
Fish, dried, salt, preserved, or chilled, 12£ per cent, ad
valorem
157


£
s.
d.
Floor and oil cloth and linoleum, carpets and matting,
12j per cent, ad valorem
Flour, including seconds, thirds, and fourths, sharps, and
pollard, per ton of 2,000 lb.
1
0
0
Fruits and vegetables, dried or preserved, not otherwise
specified, per cent, ad valorem
Furniture, not otherwise enumerated, 12£ per cent, ad va-
lorem
Fuse, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Galvansied manufactures, not otherwise enumerated,
per cent, ad valorem
Gas, in iron cylinders, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Gelatine, per lb.
0
0
2
Ginger, per lb.
0
0
1
Ginger wine, containing not more than 5 per cent, of
proof spirit, per gallon ...
0
2
0
Glue, per lb. ...
0
0
1
Golden Syrup, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Grain and pulse, not otherwise enumerated, per bushel
0
0
6
Grease, including dripping, fat, lard, and tallow, 12| per
cent, ad valorem
Grindstones, including emery wheels, per inch diameter...
0
0
1
Hardware, including all metals and manufactures of metals
in whole or in part, and ironmongery, not other-
wise enumerated, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Hats and caps, not otherwise enumerated, 12£ per cent.
ad valorem
Hay and chaff, per cent, ad valorem
Honey, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Hops, per lb....
0
0
3
Indiarubber and guttapercha manufactures, not other-
(wise, enumerated, 12f per cent, ad valorem
Ink, per cent, ad valorem
Iron, black, in bar, hoop, rod, sheet, or plate, per ton...
1
10
0
Iron, galvanised, in bar, hoop, rod, sheet, or corrugated,
per ton
3
0
0
Iron, pig and scrap, per ton...
1
0
0
Iron tanks, black or galvanised, each ...
0 10
0
Isinglass, per lb.
0
0
2
158


£
s.
d.
Jams and jellies, including calf’s-foot jelly, and marma-
lade 12| per cent, ad valorem
Jewellery, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Kapoc and fibre, 12f per cent, ad valorem
Kava, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Kerosene, of 100 degrees or over, closed-flash test, per
gallon ...
0
0
6
Kerosene, under 100 degrees, closed-flash test, per gallon
0
0
8
Kinematographs, kinetoscopes, bioscopes, and all acces-
sories, not otherwise enumerated, 12% per cent, ad
valorem
Lamps and lampware, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Lead, including shot and bullets, not otherwise enumer-
ated, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Leather and leatherware, except as otherwise specified,
12% per cent, ad valorem
Lines, clothes, fishing, lead, -log, sash, and plough, 12%
per cent, ad valorem
Lime, fire-clay, plaster of Paris, whiting, and chalk, per
cwt.
0
0
8
Locomotives and component parts thereof, 7% per cent.
ad valorem
Macaroni, per cent, ad valorem
Machinery and component parts thereof, which the Go-
vernor in Council may from time to time specify,
including agricultural, electrical, mining, paper-mak-
ing, sawing, sugar-making, steam engines, oil en-
gines, gas engines, hot-air engines, sugar-mill fix-
tures, including bolts and nuts imported with and
belonging to the same, 7% per pent, ad valorem
Machines and implements, agricultural, and component
parts thereof, which the Governor in Council may
from time to time specify, including ploughs (ex-
cluding trace or so-called plough chains), cultiva-
tors, Demerara shares, Demerara shovels, digging
forks, draining tools, scarifiers, scufflers, harrows,
hoes, and rakes, earth scoops, grain sowers, stump
extractors, harvesting machines, scythes, bottom-
ing tools, sickles, spades, tractors used for tilling
159


the soil, thrashing machines, and hillers, handles
for the a hove implements and machines made of wood
and not fitted to the implements or machines, 5
per cent, ad valorem
Machines and implements, agricultural, and component
parts thereof, which the Governor in Council may
from time to time specify, including corncrackers,
Icoffee pulpers, rice hullers and polishers, fibre
cleaning, ginning, spinning, and weaving machines,
winnowing machines, scutchers, shelters, presses
for baling produce, evaporating machines for fruit,
tea, a,nd like products, and oil presses, handles for
the above implements and machines made of wood
and not fitted to* the implements or machines,
per cent, ad valorem
Maize, not otherwise enumerated, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Malt, 12% per cent ad vloream.
Matchesr—
£
s.
d.
Wooden, in boxes, per gross boxes
Wax or other kinds, in boxes containing under 100
0
1
0
matches, per gross boxes ...
For each additional 100 or part thereof, por gross
0
1
0
boxes
Meats, including game, dried, preserved, salt, or chilled,
0
1
0
not otherwise enumerated, per lb.
0
0
1
Methylated spirit, per gallon ...
Milk, condensed, and cream, 12% per cent, ad valorem
0
2
0
Millstones, per inch diameter...
Molasses and treacle, per cent, ad valorem
Mootr cars, motor cycles, motor tricycles, and similar ve-
hicles, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Mouldings and architraves, and laths, 12% per cent, ad
valorem
Morphia, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Musical instruments, not otherwise enumerated, 12£ per
cent, ad valorem
Mustard and mustard seed, 12% per cent, ad valorem
Nails and tacks, copper and muntz metal, 12% per cent,
ad valorem
0
0
1
160


£
s.
d.
Nails and tacks, not otherwise enumerated, per cwt....
0
3
0
Nuts, metal, not otherwise enumerated, 12£ per cent.
, ad
valorem »
Nuts of all kinds, not otherwise enumerated, per lb
0
0
1
Oakum, per cwt.
...
0
4
0
Oars, and sculls for boats, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Oatmeal, including rolled or! crushed, oats and groats,
12| per cent, ad valorem
Oats, per bushel
...
0
0
6
Oil, residual, or brick, declared by the importer to be
im-
ported solely for use {in brick-making, 12£
per
cent, ad valorem
Oils, of all kinds, not otherwise enumerated, except
for
medicinal use, in bulk, per gallon
0
0
9
Oils, in bottle 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Oilman’s stores, including flavouring and culinary essen-
ces, not otherwise specified, 12| per cent, ad
va-
lorem
Opium, medical, and other preparations containing or
de-
rived from opium, unless dutiable at a higher rate
of duty under the head of drugs or spirits,
per
lb. of opium contained ...
...
1
0
0
Opium, tincture of opium, and laudanum, per lb.
...
1
0
0
Paints, in oil or dry colours, including dryers, per i
cwt.
0
4
0
Paints, mixed, ready for use, per cwt. ...
...
0
7
0
Paints, artists’, per cent, ad valorem
Palings, split, not otherwise enumerated, per 100
0
2
0
Paper, brown, and wrapping, including old newspapers
for use as wrapping-paper, per cwt.
...
0
3
0
Pease, split or dried, peasemeal, pea flour, lentils,
and
dried peasoup, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Pepper, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Perfumery, not being perfumed spirits, or otherwise <
enu-
merated, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Pickles and sauces, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Picture-frames, and mouldings for same, 12£ per cent, ad
valorem
Pipes, earthenware, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Pipes, tobacco, including cigar and cigarette holders
and
161


mouth pieces, and cases for same, 12£ per cent,
ad valorem
Platedware (E.P.), not otherwise enumerated, 12± per
cent ad valorem
Plate powder, 12f per cent, ad valorem
£
s.
d.
Posts and rails, split, not otherwise enumerated, per 100
Potted meats, land soups, per cent, lad valorem
0
2
0
Powder, sporting, per lb.
Printing materials (type and paper) 12£ per cent, ad
valorem
Punts and lighters of steel or iron and rolled or curved
plates or sheets for building the same, 7| per cent,
ad valorem
0
0
6
Putty, per cwt.
Rails, fish-plates, switches, crossings, turn-tables, railway
sleepers, of iron or steel, 7± per cent, ad valorem
0
3
0
Resin, per cwt.
0
2
0
Rice, per ton...
Rice, ground or) flaked, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Rope, cordage, marline, and spunyarn, 12£ per cent, ad
valorem
Sago, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Sails, tents, and tarpaulins, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Salt, in bottle or jaij, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Salt, in bulk, including rock salt, not otherwise enu-
2
0
0
merated, per cwt.
Sewing-machines, 12| per cent, ad valorem
0
2
0
Shingles, per 1000
0
2
0
Snuff, per lb.
Soap, /plain, (hard or (soft (including “Sunlight” ( and “Moon-
0
3
0
beam” brands), per lb. ...
Soap, toilet, fancy, medicated, scented, and soap ex-
tracts, including “Lifebuoy” soap, 12| per cent, ad
valorem
0
0
1
Soda, crystals, per ton
Spices of all kinds, including aniseed, carraway seed,
celery seed, cardamom seeds, capsicums, cayenne,
cassia, cinnamon, cummin seed, coriander, cloves,
curry powder, fenugreek, mace, myroBafans, "pyi-
1
0
0
162


memo, turmeric, vamlia, ana similar articles, per
£
s.
d.
lb. or pint.
Spirits, of all kinds imported into the Colony, the
strength of which can be ascertained by Sikes’ hy-
0
0
2
drometer, and is over proof, per proof gallon ...
Spirits, of all kinds imported into the Colony, the
strength of which can be ascertained by Sikes’ hy-
0
15
0
drometer, and is under proof, per liquid gallon ...
Spirits, and spirituous compounds, not otherwise enu-
taierated, and scented waters imported into the
Colony, the strength of which cannot be ascer-
0
15
0
tained by Sikes’ hydrometer, per liquid gallon...
Case Spirits.—Reputed contents of two, three, four
or more gallons shall be charged—
Two gallons and under, as two gallons; over
two gallons and not exceeding three gal-
lons, as three gallons; over three gallons
and not exceeding four gallons, as four
gallons, and so on for any greater quantity
contained in any case.
Sponges, not otherwise enumerated, 12| per cent, ad
valorem
0
15
0
Starch, per lb.
Stationery, including the following, unless otherwise enu-
merated : —Albums ; account-books ; advertising mat-
ter ; almanacs ; atlases; birthday books ; charts
and maps ; cigarette paper ; circulars ; copy books;
diaries ; drawing books ; manuscript books ; hand-
bills ; billhead, invoice, and statement forms ; prin-
ted or ruled paper ; counter books ; cheque and
draft forms ; tags ; labels ; blotting-pads ; sketch-
books ; copying letter-books ; manifold writers ;
maps ; plain or faint-lined ruled books ; paper,
writing, fancy, and other; envelopes ; printed
forms ; posters ; plans ; programmes ; postcards ;
printed window tickets ; printed, lithographed, or
embossed stationery ; Christmas, New Year, birth-
day, and Easter cards ; cards ; stereotypes ; prin-
0
0
2
163


£
s.
d.
ters’ blocks ; and bank notes, unsigned, per
cent, ad valorem
Steel, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Sugar, per lb....
0
0
oi
Sulphur, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Tapioca, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Tea, per lb. ...
0
0
4
Tiles and slates, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Timber, cut for cases, iiot exceeding 3 feet in length,
12| per cent, ad valorem
Timber, dressed or surfaced, over 2 inches wide,not other-
wise enumerated, per 100 feet superficial
0
2
0
Timber, undressed, to ver 2 inches wide, not otherwise enu
fmerated, per 100 feet superficial
0
1
6
The duty on timber to be computed on a thickness
of 1 inch, and to be in proportion for any
greater thickness. Any thickness under 1 inch
to be reckoned as 1 inch.
Timber, dressed or undressed, pot over 2 inches wide,
not otherwise enumerated, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Tin and tinware, 12| per cent, ad valorem
Tobacco, manufactured, per lb.
0
5
0
Tobacco, unmanufactured, per lb.
0
1
6
Turpentine, per gallon
0
I
0
Twine, per lb.
0
0
2
Umbrellas, parasols, and sunshades, 12£ per cent, ad va-
lorem
Varnish, lacquer, Japan, furniture, and other liquid
polishes, per gallon
0
2
0
Vaseline, or soft paraffin, per lb.
0
0
2
Vermicelli, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
Vinegar, per gallon ...
0
0
6
Wines—
Bordeaux (claret), hock, Australian, New Zealand,
or South African, in bulk per gallon
0
2
0
Bordeaux (claret), hock, Australian, New Zealand,
or South African, in bottle, for six reputed
quarts or twelve reputed pints or twenty-
four reputed half-pints or smaller quantities
0
2
0
164


£
s.
d.
Other kinds, in bulk, per gallon...
Other kinds, including Vermouth, for six reputed
quarts or twelve reputed pints or twenty-
0
4
0
four reputed half-pints or smaller quantities
Sparkling, for six reputed quarts or twelve reputed
pints or twenty-four reputed half-pints or
0
4
0
Wire,
smaller quantities...
fencing, 12£ per cent, ad valorem
0
9
0
Wire rope, per ton
Woodenware, not otherwise enumerated, 12| per cent, ad
valorem
3
0
0
GENERAL DUTY.
On all articles not specified or not included in the free list an
ad valorem duty df 12| per cent.
V * i
LIST OF ARTICLES EXEMPT FROM DUTY.
Animals
Ballast, ship’s—stone or sand
Books and periodicals, printed
Cards and calendars, greeting, arriving by post, and not im-
ported lor sale
Coal
Coats of arms, flags, and other objects sent by their respective
Governments for official use by Consuls
Coin of the Realm
Coconuts
Coke
Copra
Curiosities, South Sea Island
Cylinders, iron or steel, in which gas or ammonia are ordinarily
contained
Films for kinematographs, kinestoscopes, and bioscopes
Garden seeds
Government medals and decorations to be worn by persons resident
in Fiji.
Guano •
Living oysters
165


Luggage, personal, tas may be from time to time permitted by
the Governor tti Council by any reguTation macle *sy him
and (published in the Gazette
Manures
Music, printed, and pianola music
Notes, bank, signed
Organs and harmoniums, church, and furniture, church, bona fide
imported for church or religious purposes
Packages, inside and outside, of wood, tin, glass, paper, or other
material, in which goods are ordinarily and actually con-
tained
Packages, empty, used and returned, not otherwise enumerated
Pictures and photographs, not otherwise enumerated, unframed
Plants
Prizes, engraved, for the Fiji Rifle Association, imported for com-
petition
Pyre thrum rcseum
Rifles, and component parts thereof, imported by and for the use
of the Fiji Rifle Association
Salt for manure
Seeds for propagation or cultivation, including maize, beans, rice,
or other grain, for planting purposes, subject to a de-
claration by the importer to the Customs authorities that the
seeds are imported for propagation or cultivation.
Show-cards, patterns, and cut samples, and advertising matter, of
no commercial value
Stamps, postage, used and unused
Uniforms by| a jpublic servant for his own use
Vaccine lymph and other antitoxins
Vegetables and green fruit, not otherwise enumerated
Articles imported as the property of, and for the use of the
Pacific Cable Board on allowance by the Governor in Council
Articles imported by the Western Pacific High Commission for
official use
166


List of Recorded Storms in Fiji-
Date.
Description. |j
Sources of
nformation.*
Part of Group Affected.
Lowest Readings of
Barometers.f
Year.
Month.
1848
Jan.
Hurricane
T.
1856
March
Gr’t. Cyclone
H.
1866
March
Gr’t. Cyclone
H.
1871
March
Violent
Hurricane
H., T.
Whole group affected. Centre said
to pass over Western portion of
group.
1873
Dec,
Hurricane
H.
Taviuni and Eastern side of group.
1875
Jan.
Hurricane
H., T., W.
Northern portion of Viti Levu and
centre of group. Levuka suffered
severely.
29.40 Makogai.
1879
Dec.
Hurricane
H., T., W.
N.W. and W. of Viti Levu.
1881
March
Str’g.Cyclone
W.
W. of Viti Levu.
1882
Jan.
Str’g.Cyclone
W.
S.E. portion of Viti Levu.
1883
Jan.
Hurricane
H.
E. side of group. Taviuni suffered
severely.
1883
Feb.
Str’g.Cyclone
H., W.
Centre of group and Levuka. (H.)
E. of E. coast of Vanua Levu.
1886
Jan.
Str’g.Cyclone
W.
W. coast of Viti Levu.
1886
March
Very severe
Hurricane
H.,T.,W.,G.
E. part of group. Taviuni and Lau.
(W).
29.000 Suva. (G).
27.57 Buca Bay
28.87 Bua (H).
28.76 Levuka (W.)
1888
Feb.
Hurricane
W.
E. portion of group.
28.53.
YS89
Jan.
Hurricane
T., W., S.
E. portion of group. Severe in Ta-
viuni.
29.51 Matuku (S)
29.41 Levuka (W).
1B9T"
Jan.
Severe
Hurricane
T.,W.,S.,G.
E. coast of Vanua Levu, Ovalau,
Suva, Rewa.
28.80 Vanuabalavu (S).
28.19 Levuka (W).
28.248 Suva (G).
1899-00
Dec. 31
Jan. I
Hurricane
T., S.
Recorded from Lau only.
29.24 Munia (S).
1901
March
Hurricane
T.,W.,G.
N.E. of Viti Levu, Ovalau.
29.600 Suva (G).
28.40 Levuka (W).
1903
April
Cyclone
W.
Lomaiviti.
29.36 Levuka
1904
Jan.
Hurricane
T., W., H.,
S., G.
Lomaiviti and Bua (W).
29.068 Suva (G).
29.23 Munia (S),
28.27 Levuka (W).
29.056 Bua (H).
1905
Jan. 6
Cyclone
w, s.
E. of group, Taviuni and Lau.
29.21 Munia (S)
29.64 Levuka (W).
1905
Jan. 20
Cyclone
W., T.
Lau to Nadi.
29.40 Levuka (W).
1908
Jan.
Hurricane
W., S.
Taviuni and Lau.
29.08 Munia (S).
29.36 Levuka (W.)
1908
March
Hurricane
G.
W. and S. of Viti Levu.
29.316 Suva (G).
1910
March
Hurricane
W., S., G.
Lau, Ovalau, Viti Levu
28.80 Suva (G).
28.28 Levuka (W).
29.28 Munia (S
1912
Jan.
Hurricane
Weather
Stations
Vanua Levu, Taviuni and N. parts
of Lau.
> 29.10 Suva
28.84 Levuka
28.28 Labasa
28.13 Taviuni
* REFERENCES. The letters in column 3 and in parentheses in 4 and 5 refer to the authorities as follow :
T—Almanac published by the “ Fiji Times” newspaper, and giving the dates of storms.
H Papers by Mr. R. L. Holmes, taken from the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society; Vol. xiii, No. 61, January 1887, and Vol. xxvi, No. 135, Jan. 1905.
W. —Captain W. Wilson, Harbour Master, Levuka.
S.— Mr. H. H. Steinmetz, Munia, Lau. 4t .
G Government Meteorological Observer (the Government Storekeeper up to end of 1905, the Supt.
of Agriculture subsequently). , x . _ , , - c T T . •
t The pressures given in this column for Suva, Bua and Levuka are reduced to 32 F. and M.S.L. It is not
known whether the other figures are readings or corresponding reduced pressures.
The terms used in column 2 maybe arranged in order according to extent and severity as follows:
cyclone, strong cyclone, great cyclone, hurricane, severe hurricane, and very violent or very severe
hurricane.














