

ujs of the Victorian Branch of the Royal








THE COLUMBUS JUBILEE,
Wednesday, 12th * October, 1892.
On the 12th of October, four hundred years ago, there burst upon
the view of an intrepid Genoese navigator the first glimpse of the
islands of that western world beyond the Azores, the existence
of which he had laboured for years to convince European savants,
and for the discovery of which his perilous voyage had been
undertaken.
In memory of that historic event and in honour of the brave
voyagers and their inspired commander, Christopher Columbus, the
city of his birth, Genoa, has kept fete, while in America the Chicago
Exhibition—the greatest exposition of industrial progress the
world has yet seen —has been dedicated to the same resplendent name
by the President of the United States. To the Victorian Branch
of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia has fallen the
privilege of paying, what may to some extent be considered as
homage offered on behalf of Australasia, to the memory of the
illustrious geographer and navigator.
On the conclusion of the Society’s Third Triennial Business-
Meeting, a Columbus-Jubilee, under the distinguished patronage of
His Excellency the Governor, the Earl of Hopetoun, was held in
the Town-Hall, Melbourne, at which nearly 1500 persons were
present, including the Consul-General for the United States, the
Vice-Consul for Spain, the Consulate-Secretary for Italy, the
Consul for Sweden and Norway, Representatives of the University
and many leading citizens. The Hon. W. Shiels, M.L.A., Premier
of the colony, the Hon. Sir Graham Berry, K.C.M.G., and the
Hon. Duncan Gillies, M.L.A., intimated their regret at not being
able to take part in the proceedings, in consequence of the urgency
of parliamentary business.
The back of the platform was draped with the Stars and Stripes
of the United States, supported on the right by the flag of Spain,
and on the left by the flag of Italy, the whole being surmounted by
the British and English-Australian flags, while grouped about the
*The Council deemed it preferable, to adhere to the historic date rather
than to the strictly chronologic of the Gregorian calender.


the presidental chair were some fine specimens, showing the character
of the West-Indian flora, ethnology and urnithology, kindly con-
tributed by Messrs Law and Somner, R. Kershaw A. Thie,
and C. French. Also the following unique portraits of
Columbus :—(1) Christopher Columbus, after a woodcut from the
picture of Paulus Jovinus. (2) De Bry’s reproduction of
Columbus’s portrait, a large bronze plaque, nearly life-size,
surrounded by two mermaids. [lt is stated that the original
of this picture was painted by order of King Ferdinand ; subse-
quently it was abstracted from the Indian archives in Spain, and
found its way to the Netherlands, where it was copied and engraved
by De Bry, in 1593. This is considered the oldest poitrait extant.]
(3) Full sized portrait of Columbus, enlarged from the Capriolo
woodcut, (4) Miniature-portrait of Columbus, # engraved by Tomard,
*ln the letter forwarding this picture to the President of the
the Society, Mr. John J. Shillingla l •' shows, how it came into the possession
of his family, and supplies a transi lion of an interesting memoir on this
portrait. The author was a disl nguished member of the Geographical
Society of France, named Tomard, and a very old friend of Mi.
Shillinglaw’s father, who was at that time (1847) the librarian of the Royal
Geographical Society of London. “ I recall it quite distinctly,” he says,
“ when the portrait and memoir came over from Paris and the interest it
awakened among the circle of my father’s friends. The picture, I send
herewith, is the one then received. We brought it out to the colony (in a
few days it will be 40 years ago,) and it has ever since been in my mother’s
drawing room. This memoir formed one of the bulletins, published by the
Geographical Society of Paris about the year 1847, the following extract
from which pertains to the portrait now referred to : —“ I now arrive at a
portrait, which I place last, because I take it to be the most ancient and
authentic. This portrait is either the work of Titian, or it is from his school of
painting. This is the opinion of the best connoisseurs. I saw it by chance.
D ntil lately it has been in the gallery at Yincences unknown. I was attracted
by the beauty of the painting and by the oldness of the picture. The
noble character of the features struck me : the nose aquiline, the forehead
large and high, and the eyes clear, although a little bronzed by time. The
oval of the face is long, the look firm and mild. The expression is full of
candour, the chin is bearded, and ends in a point like in the portraits of
Ferdinand le Catholique and like all those of Phillip the Ist and Charles
sth’s reign. Calmness and nobleness is painted in every feature as in ail
superior men. On approaching the picture, what was my surprise to behold,
written in old fashioned gold letters to the right of the picture, these two
words, “ Christoforus Columbus.” This was a subject of congratulation.
I received every assistance from Count Orti Manara, Podestate of Yerona,
and we now know, how this treasure was acquired. The family, to whom it
belonged, kept it with the greatest care until the last heir died, when it
was bequeathed to the gallery of pictures of this city. The Admiral has
the head bare, and has the right hand upon the breast. He wears a gold
chain and the Spanish ruff, which we see in other portraits of this time.
Without doubt neither Titian or his pupils could have painted him, while
living, as they could not go into Spain until after his death. But why
could not one of them find at Madrid or Seville or elsewhere from 1580 to
1540 a portrait made “ad vivum,” which they could have copied after-


lent by Mr. John J. Slhllinglaw, F.R.G.S. A large map, on
which we retraced the successive tracks of Columbus, was also-shown.
Punctually at 8 o’clock, the President of the Society took the
chair, and the Melbourne Amateur-Orchestral Society, under the
leadership of Mr. Julius Herz, opened the proceedings by performing
Reissiger’s overture Die Felsenmiihle, followed by two delightful
Hungarian dances by Brahms.
Baron Sir Ferdinand Von Mueller, who wore the insignia of the
Commander-Order of Isabella of Spain, and on rising to deliver the
Oration was received with hearty cheers, then said :
Ladies and Gentlemen, —
We are assembled this evening, to celebrate as quadri-cen-
tennial an event, which in its own bearing and sequences stands
unique in the whole range of history, and which in its con-
ception and scope has no anologon ! It was in the early morn of
the 12th Oct., 1492, according to the Julian calender, that the
first glimpse of the western world was obtained by Christopher
Columbus. What-had occupied the thoughts of philosophers since
the dawn of knowledge, what had engaged calculations of cosmo-
graphers in all ages, what had been forshadowed without known
chartography by Scandinavians from Iceland, Greenland and
further west, and thence as far down as their “ land of the grape-
vine,” f and what indeed had dimly been indicated as discoverable
by ondrifts at the Azores—-all this had in its brilliancy been attained
on that memorable day ! What mortal can enter into the almost
superhuman feeling of the geographic Hero, when thus a new world
lay before him, and this too in tropic garb—lands of marvellous
exuberance and enchanting novelties. Amidst the triumphant
exultations of the moment he bent in pious humility his knees, and
consecrated the first new island to the name of our Redeemer, “ San
Salvador.”
wards with the talent which characterises the school of Titian. It seems
to me, to be one of the style of Dominico .Campagnola. I shall publish this
portrait soon from a design, which I owe to the kindness of the learned
Count Orti Manara. What is more natural than that the picture should
have been brought into the Venetian states ? ”
fVitis Labrusco extending so far north.


Who can estimate the proud delight of the sole originator of this
ever memorable enterprise, when he reflected on the future grand
destinies of what might be the forebodement of a new continent, and
calculated the prospects of its coming relations to the vast eastern
world ! The real extent of these incomparable discoveries could not
have been comprehended by the first beholders, and thus Columbus
saw in the earliest dazzling displays only the commencement of the
“ thousands of islands ” stretching far into the western hemisphere,
about which his countryman, Marco Polo, had heard on reaching
the shores of China two hundred years before.
While paying our homage this festive day, we with the whole
civilized world can not only recognise the full importance of what
arose at once and followed subsequently for the benefit of mankind
from Columbus’s deeds, but furthermore we can share in conceding
a national recognition, because almost all the West-Indian possess-
ions of the British Crown were discovered by Columbus in his four
successive voyages. Thus the Bahamas, most of the Windward
Islands, Jamaica, Trinidad and British Honduras, even the very
island, on which Columbus first set foot, and where he offered as a
greeting his prayers, are under the sway of our own gracious Sovereign;
while Spain owes a permanent debt of gratitude to its first western
Emissary for the acquisition of Cuba, the greatest of the Antillan
islands, (qual in territorial extent to Ireland. Add to this
the facts, that through Columbus’s voyages the Spanish language
became that of very extensive countries in both North and South-
America, and that millions of the offspring of the Iberian peninsula
found new homes and ampler scope for their energy and industry
across the Atlantic. The rivalry of seafaring nations was quickly
called forth by a desire to participate in territorial acquisitions and
transoceanic commerce. If a shorter naval route to India could not
be found, at all events a new and perhaps ampler India would be
brought within easy reach, and the increasingly pressing demands in
the home-countries for additional resources be early satisfied.
The 400th anniversary of Columbus’s sailing from the last islands
on the eastern side of the Atlantic Ocean has already been celebrated
with commensurable solemnity and splendor under the direct
auspices of His Majesty the King of Italy in Genoa, that city


being the birthplace of the great navigator. The United States, by
illuminating their principal city for days and by dedicating to the
discoverer now the greatest industrial fair ever held, share in
these rejoicings.* So it is becoming also of us, in geographic union,
to offer our modest tribute, though it be from antipodal distance.
Among the great historic events, which have exercised a vast
influence on the world since the spread of our sacred faith, Colum-
bus’s discovery of America stands in its own bearing quite incompar-
able. In its grand significance it ranges before such events as the
re-establishment of the Roman Empire under Charles Magne
through his colossal individuality of power, or such as the grant of the
Magna Charta on the demand of the English Barons and its
beneficent reaction on the liberties of all nations, or such as the united
simultaneous effect of the change in warfare by the adoption of
firearms and the invention of printing by moveable types. What
Columbus did far surpassed the successes achieved by Diaz and
subsequently completed, but not eclipsed, by Grama, in opening the
sea way to India round Africa.
Of world-affecting achievements, subsequent to that of the Col-
umbus discoveries, but few can bear even some comparison to his, thus
the circumnavigation of the globe by Maghellan, with its concomi-
tant exploratory results through what has ever since been called the
Pacific Ocean ; or the exploits of Sir Francis Drake, who as the
second in those early days completed the circuit of our planet,
and who carried the British Flag to the shores of North-Western
America, whereby he already brought himself in contact with the
western part of the great Canadian Dominion, to which Her Majesty’s
sceptre extends.
Columbus’s deeds mark an epoch of its own, like in widely different
directions the grand researches for a new astronomic system, con-
ducted by his contemporanean Copernicus and continued by Galileo,
Kepler and Newton, or the establishment of the antiphlogistic
theory for basing thereon modern chemistry with its endless applica-
tions, augumented by the utilization of steam, gas and electricity
*A new-built Santa Maria received a naval greeting of many nations
at Palos, and will figure as the most prominent object at the Chicago-ex-
hibition.


for daily purposes, this only largely developed during the last few
decades. Furthermore, what gave such startling significance to the
discoveries of Columbus was their absolute isolation at a vast
distance from the then known world. In the eastern hemisphere
all territorial exploits by the Caucasian race since the beg.nning
of science were linked together in an almost uninterrupted
chronologic and geographic continuity. Consequently, Columbus
appeared on the horizon of worldy progress like some brilliant meteor,
arising to pass away alas ! almost assuddenly, but leaving h>ng guiding
luminosity on his course. That the bold western dash of Colum-
bus was inspired by some predictions of the physician and astron-
omer Toscanelli and the teachings of Cardinal D’Ailly, or that he
had been musing - over charts and documents of his father-in-law
at Madeira, does not diminish the greatness of his achievements.
Undoubtedly and perhaps purposely he had paid a visit, in
1477, to Iceland, where local Sagas of intercourse with country-
men settled beyond Greenland until only 130 years before, would
still be freshly current.*
But there is a wide difference between suggestive calculations
and accomplished facts, between limited oral tales and promulgated
scientific data, between vague topographic indications and world-
wide recognisable geographic discoveries.
Nevertheless, let due honor be rendered to the Norse for push-
ing forward with an intrepidity quite their own at the time, under
such great disadvantages. The brave Scandinavians however
probably only established fishing and hunting stations, and must,
notwithstanding their armour and iron weapons, ultimately have
succumbed to the overwhelming multitude of ferocious Algonkin-
warriors.t
The claims o*' Amerigo Vespucci to stand sole sponsor at the
geographic baptism of what proved to be a western world, albeit
his share in some of the earliest discoveries, must ever be regard-
ed as quite secondary to those of Christopher Columbus. All
*The whole of the northern shores of Greenland are not even known at
the present day, notwithstanding Peary’s recent courageous explorations.
-(•Professor Horsford 3 years ago discovered at Chaleur-Pay the ruins of
Norbego, the port of “ Vin-Land,”


subsequent generations could but have wished, that the name of
our hero had been more extensively impressed on the maps of the
double continent, if indeed it could not be chosen for the whole of
what poetically might be termed the great ‘‘ Occidentia.” A lead-
ing French geographer of our day even contends, that the name
America did not originate with Vespucci, but arose from the
aboriginal term of a small tract of country in Central America,
just as the appellation, given by the Phoenicians, with some allus-
ion to the south-west wind, ultimately became extended to the
whole continent of Africa. But whether the resemblance of the
two names was merely incidental or not, the word America, brief
and euphonious as it is, was not at first used as an equivalent to
the names of the other three divisions of the globe. On the con"
trary, that name was restricted to what of the continent had been
seen by Vespucci.
Asia and Europe derived their designation from some par-
ticular allusion to the rising and the sotting sun, to use still the
words of the Ancients. Australia, in recognitioivof its isolated
greatness, lost its early western name of New Holland, and in
making this change geographers followed trains of ideas similar
to those of great antiquity. However, in using the term America
for the fourth division of the globe, we have long since in our
thoughts disconnected from it the name of any particular distin-
guished traveller. America signifies to us symbolically a stupen-
dous grandeur of connected territories, the wealth of a whole
hemisphere, the splendour of intellectual prowess and the hopes
of still far greater destinies !
Such was the impetus, given by these peerless exploits, that
simultaneous with Columbus’s third voyage his compatriots, the
Cabots, sailed in search of a western passage, reacaed Canada,
and seem to have proceeded as far down as what subsequently be-
came known as Carolina. These courageous navigators under-
took the voyage on behalf of Henry VII, under whose standard,
but for some slight delay in communicating, the discovery of
America would have been effected.
Only one year afterwards, Hogeda and Vespucci discovered
Guiana. In the year following, one of the Pinzons—prominent


companions of Columbus on his first voyage —sailed as far as the
Brazilian coast, independent of the Portuguese Cabral, while
Coelho and Vespucci at the time of Columbus’s last voyage map-
ped nearly the whole of the Brazilian shore-line.
Furthermore, our hero’s voyages were instrumental to the
finding not only of the longest of all rivers on our planet, but
also of the mightiest, unless it he the Congo, and this almost
immediately after the cessation of his own active exploratory work.
Imagine the proud gratification, which it must have been to
Columbus, to become aware of the vastness of the discoveries,
emanating from what he so largely or entirely initiated himself,
the seashore lines thus geographically disclosed being almost equiv-
alent to that of the whole outer coasts of the European Continent,
exclusive of the Mediterranean and Arctic lines.
All this marvellous and fascinating work was accomplished
almost within one single decade—a feat without parallel in the
whole history of the human race !
While meditating cn the transcendental grandeur of America,
the remarkable fact presses anew on our attention, that the intra-
tropical regions of Africa, though mostly so much nearer, remained
almost or entirely closed to the genius and power of Europe till our
own epoch. In judging condingly his merits, be it remembered
it was Columbus, who first ventured out on an independent course
straight away from land far through oceanic waters, no opposite
coast being known nearer than 4000 miles even at the calculations
of that time, the distance to China being then underrated by more
than half! For although Numismatists in our day have proved,
that the Azores were visited by the Carthagians, yet that group
of islands had been re-discovered only about 159 years before Col-
umbus set out on his first voyage, and no one had ever dared to
pass beyond them.
There is at Nurenberg yet a globe, constructed by Behaim in the
very year of Columbus’s departure, which work of art Baron Nor-
+ Even our own coast seems to be identified with early Portuguese
or Spanish enterprises, and thus perhaps one of the first ships for India
might, disabled, have been cast on our own shores not far from Warrna mbool,
where as emphasised by Mr. A. C. Macdonald, a tradition seems to have been
perpetuated of such an extraordinary incident among aboriginal tribes nomad-
ising on coast-*localities, to which Tasman did not penetrate.


denskiold considers the most important geographic exponent since
Ptolemams’s Atlas. Behaim had been staying at Lisbon, and
appears to have been the only supporter there of Columbus’s scheme
unless it was the king himself. It is here of interest to remark,
that Norkenskiold also brought to light a Cracow-map of 1512 by
Stobnicza (issued a year before the Isthmus of Panama was crossed,
as quoted by Winsor) in which extraordinary accurate production
an outline is given of the east-coast of both Americas down to
Argentina, and showing also with approximate exactitude much of
the west-expansion of South-America right to the Pacific Ocean.
Adversely the Hauslab-and Schoener-globes, constructed about
1515, still show Japan only 300 or 400 miles distant from Central
America, instead of 7000. So much for some of the geographic
notions at that time, lower California, although so much nearer,
being only discovered 20 years later. But had it not been for the
powerful high-minded Queen Isabella, the discovery of America
would perhaps not have taken place until another century, with
what results on the world’s fate it is impossible to say. As a
Queen she knew, how to watch politically the glory of her realm,
as a Sovereign the lustre of her reign, even her private jewels being
at the disposal other country. Well might we wish, that history
could say as much for other rulers of that period. Had she lived
long enough, we may be sure, the last years of Columbus would
not have been of such inexpressible sadness.
As if by special ruling of a resentful Nemesis some of the
principal early oppressors and detractors of Columbus found a
watery grave. Thus of twenty-one vessels, which were caught in a
tornado during an intended home-voyage from the West-Indies,
only few reached again the harbours of starting, while the par-
ticular ship, conveying Columbus’s own share of the acquired
treasures, was the only one that returned to Spain. Over and over
again it was asserted by his adversaries, that all he did could have
readily been accomplished by others, an assertion which was met in
mirth by the incident of the proverbial “ Columbus-egg.”
It is not my intention, to follow in thought Columbus through all
events of his memorable life. Moreover the plans, incidents and
achievements of his expeditions are of such universal historic and


even encyclopedic record, that they need not be dwelt on here, nor
could justice be done to them during the hour allotted to this dis-
course. Episodes in his life have been dramatized by writers of
more than one nationality. Of pictures of him several exist, but,
strange to relate, not one as a life-portraiture.*
The English language provides full information concerning the
history of Columbus for reference, more particularly the volumes of
Washington Irving, based on original documentary researches and
written in a most elegant style ; Prescott’s meritorious works on
Ferdinand and Isabella elucidates collaterally much in relation to
their protege, Justin Winsor wrote with particular critical acumen
and impartiality. Nor should here be passed, as highly important in
newer literature, the French work of Count Le Lorgues, who viewed
Columbus more particularly from a standpoint of fervent religiosity.
All these authors rely more or less on original publications, from
the time of Martyr de Anghierra down to that of Navarrete and
Humboldt. Thus we obtain a clear insight also in regard to sub-
jects, which contemporaneous passions or hostile interests or
erronious notions might have caused to be misunderstood. In
Columbus’s days the transit-period had commenced from mediae-
val to recent history : it was a turning time, when for valour and
enterprise there were extraordinary opportunities. Then, like-
wise, the inventive genius of newer art broke wider forth. That
century indeed was more a transition from one age to another in
great worldly aspects than any other from epoch to epoch.
The early success of the spirited Columbus and his sturdy
companions had the effect of providing an outlet for the bravery and
skill of that turbulent time, particularly set free for new
action in Spain after the last struggle with the Moors, therefore
tho belligerous tendencies of the moment were prevented from di
version to warfare in adjoining countries. Furthermore, the
superiority of European arms over native weapons rendered the
conquest in the New World by some few hundred Spanish warriors
*A contributor to the bulletin of the Geographic Society of Paris in
1847, Monsieur Tomard, claims to have discovered in the gallery of Vincence
a portrait of Columbus, either by Titian or by one of his pupils, which he
says agrees best with the lineaments, ascribed to the visage of the great
discoverer. From that bulletin Mr. J, J. Shillinglaw furnished the portrait,
presented during this festival.


over hundreds of thousands of the aboriginal populations less
sanguinary, than it might have been in other ages. If later his-
tory could only contemplate with deep sadness many of the
occurrences during the early European footing in America, it
even the sublime teaching of religion was lost sight of in fanati-
cism, if in avaricious roving for worldly gain concomitant severe
oppression fell on the primeval children of the soil—then some
allowance must be made, because views and aspirations of men
at that time of violent restlessness cannot be measured by the
standard of thought or laws, more particularly of the present age.
Nevertheless in the occasional darkness, which overclouded those
days, stands one of Columbus’s companions, Bishop Las Casas,
shining forth in far more than the ordinary philanthropy of a
divine. He was an incessant champion of the poor oppressed
natives, going to and fro from the West-Indies to Spain, advoca-
ting the rights of humanity during well nigh 50 years! Some
tew of the decendants of the original Caribs will still represent
their once dominant tribes at the Columbian Exhibition, though
they have almost shared the face of the “ Last of the Mohicans.
Above all, as incalculable in value from the very commencement,
were the researches of many of the early bearers of the gospel,
who brought their learning to bear for the benefit of most branches
of applied science with immediate and practical results. Col-
umbus’s appearance separates the real history of America from
the obscure records of Pre-Columbian time. Perhaps it is not
too much to assert, that no other mortal ever experienced start-
ling changes and vicissitudes from the deepest depression, when
seeking hospitality at the convent of Rabida* with his young son
on their start for France, to his elevation for commanding what
reallv was a small Escadre, with a simultaneous prospect of be-
coming an Admiral, a hereditary Viceroy and the recipient of
palatinal riches, sharing in new revenues to the full extent of
even the church, and what outglories all this—rising to become
one of the greatest of celebrities in historic records. A giddy
height, dangerous as it must have been especially to one, who was
not a native of the country of bestowal. If the reproach of in-
* The enlightened Prior exercised there and then a vast influence on
Columbus’s favorable fate,


gratitude fell on the generation of Columbus’s time, be it in jus-
tice remembered, that subsequently a West-Indian island with
adequate privileges and endowments came into his possession
and a ducal Coronet ot Spain into his arms, which is still worn
by a direct decendant, whom at a very venerable age homage
from the United States designated, to open preliminarily by an
electric message the great Exhibition of industrial feats, mainly
instituted in commemorative honor of his illustrious ancestor.
His son Diego became Nephew-in-law to the Sovereign of Spain,
and had granted to him by Charles Y, the grandson of Queen
Isabella, an annual pension of £25,000, a sum representing then
four times larger monetary value than now. May it not fairly
be asked, what would have been the deterring effect on transatlan-
tic exploration in the 15th century had Columbus’s first Expedi-
tion perished, or had it sailed under a leader of less naval expert-
ness or of less tactful firmness or of less d aring courage ? It is
marvellous to contemplate, how he accomplished one of his
voyages from Gomera across to the West-Indies in five weeks.
As a discoverer he reached, what geographically may be regarded
the key to the double Continent. In the eastern hemisphere
nearly ail on the paths of knowledge was gradual and repetitious
of resemblances ; in the western half of the world all was sudden,
with no real forecast, as any anticipations could be imaginative
only.
Among what America gave as additional to the food-supply of
the world may be named : —the ordinary sweet Potato, Maize,
Cacao, Tapioca, true Aru-root, Ananas, Tomatoes, Guavas,
French Bean and the Gourds. The Cocos-palm had long before
found its way across to the eastern hemisphere through the
Pacific Ocean from island to island on its own accord, while all
others of the hundreds of American palms remained isolated from
those of the eastern half ofour globe. America gave us besides, lead-
ingly as luxuries or for medicinal use the Tobacco and Peru-bark.
With all this we in Australia must be the more deeply im-
pressed, because our great southern land, although of vast pro-
ductiveness, gave from its primeval resources hardly anything
additional to universal sustenance. But the colossal rural wealtq


of Europe and Asia, far outweighing as it did that obtainable
from America, became through Columbus’s exploratory visits ac-
cessible to the newly discovered side of the globe. Imagine what
is implied, when we say, that the American Continent speedily
acquired our Cereals and Kitchen-Vegetables, not to speak of
spices, sugar-cane, sugar-beet, orchard trees, bananas, fodder-
millet, carob-bean, and a host of other plants, together with un-
surpassable herds, flocks and poultry. America, yet be it not for-
gotten, making us some return gifts, for instance, as animal food,
the domestic turkey. Our races of farm-animals, all new to the
western hemisphere, were early imported into America, although
it had its own splendid game, including the untameable Bison-
Buffalo. Columbus took horses across the Atlantic Ocean in his
second voyage, and they stood him to good service in encounters
with savage tribes, to whose horror the rider and horse must
have appeared like what in our ancient fables was the Centaur.
The three kinds of horses of the endemic American Fauna be-
longed as peculiar species to an extinct creation of a geologic
epoch anterior to that of man.
But what may have been the outburst of delight, when the
great naval pioneer and his companions saw at once the multitude
of humming birds, some of no greater size than any remarkably
large insects, when they beheld other splendid members of the
feathered tribes and whatever else of animals presented itself, all
new to their astonished view, all heralding the wisdom of the
Divine Creator! These must been moments of rapture, of
which every thinking being in the world could bat envy them.
Llamas, Alpacas, so also the most gigantic of existing vultures
and ophidians, as well as many other prominent zoologic types,
cither utilitarian or destructive—did not come under the view of the
very earliest of explorers in America, while more striking still
another race of human beings of somewhat advanced civilisation
came under the gaze of the amazed beholders. Now-a-days we
little think, that these explorers were also the first Europeans to get
a sight of plants of so grand an aspect as the Agaves, Yuccas,
Fourcrojas, Cacteae in their multifarious oddness, the Calceolarias
ip their manifold loveliness, the Fuchsias and spotted Caladiums ip


their singular gayness, the Bromeliaceae with a handsome sturdiness
of their own, not to mention the, Tropaeolums and many other
frequent and long known inmates of our gardens. But this to a
small extent may show, what the discovery of America has done also
for horticulture everywhere. Up to the present, American homes
have been founded for 75 millions of people of direct descent,
originally European. Yet this represents only one-third or one-
fourth in the proportion of area to population—compared to that of
the eastern hemisphere. What an, immense scope thus yet for the
spread of prosperous settlements I
The annual exports of America, chiefly from sources European in
their origin, can already be counted by hundreds of millions sterling,
irrespective of the still more huge supply consumed locally.
At the next Columbus’ Jubilee, who can say, what will be the
varied productiveness of these great western lands, or what place
these wide regions will hold in the display of mental loftiness !
Columbus was imbued with deep religious feelings, with an
enthusiastic conception for deeds of greatness, and with an un-
bounded self-reliance, supported by extensive nautical learning, such
as was very rare among his contemporaries. It was he, who led
three great maritime nations early into the paths of western dis-
coveries ; it was he, who initiated colonization in the modern sense,
as distinguished from mere mercantile stations ; it was he who
contributed permanently to science not only by extensive mapping,
but who first also brought under notice some facts in connection
with variation of the magnetic needle ; it was he who originated
the interchange of the leading utilitarian products between the
eastern and western world. What all could have wished for
Columbus, to complete his geographic triumphs, was that he him-
self should have cast the first glance from the isthmus of Panama
on the oceanic expanse beyond. But that fell early to the share of
Balboa; so Columbus was left even at the end of his days in un-
certainty, as to whether he had discovered merely another Archi-
pelagos or a new Continent, although he must have anticipated
enormous extensions of firm land in the western hemisphere,
especially after having encountered himself the tremendous currents
of the Orinoco. Even ordinary thinkers, would be over-


come by a persuasion, that great territories must exist on the
western side of the world, the eastern at that time having been
crossed at least in one line to the oceanic confines of China, so that
the expansion of land over one fourth of the space in the eastern
half of our planet had already been demonstrated, the exact
extent not even now being definable. This anticipation of very
ample western proportions of land to water was early verified so
far, as to its being shown, that the space of the two western contin-
ents could not be of less than half that of the three eastern taken
together—Australia then not coming yet under consideration,
whatever even in our own time or afterwards Arctic and Antarctic
efforts may yet reveal, —the south-polar blank being twice as large
as our Australian Continent, the northern half as large as Europe,
though the central portion of either region may remain for ever
untraversable. Who would not wish that the Oolumbus-Jubilee
of our time could have been celebrated with the crowning triumph,
of ships of all nations passing through the American Isthmus, as
the precursors of a vastly changed and facilitated shipping com-
merce affecting the greater portion of the globe. This has been the
dream of four centuries ; it remains the greatest of all measures, to
be carried out yet for maritime traffic. Doubtless long before
another centennary rejoicing, such as of this day, the Panama-
Canal will have become a reality—such is the magnitude of interests
involved in the accomplishment ! What was sunk and lost in any-
one of the greater wars, would long ago have brought these glorious
gains about, breaking the narrow barrier between the two great oceans
for nearer international communication and therewith for closer
bonds in the brother-hood of man !
“Four discovery-voyages and four burials” says one of Columbus’
biographers; but the final rest of his earthly remains is in Spanish
soil, close to spots of scenes memorial to his earliest triumphs.
Mental agony at the close of his life he bore with fortitude and
dignity. He will be remembered by posterity always as one of the
most radiant of luminaries on the horizon of worldly progress.—
Memories, such as we celebrate this day, have a special significance,
too often lost sight of. They arouse us from the many trivialities
of our surroundings, and awaken us from the lethargies of common
life, into which we are so apt to lapse, and lead us to higher con-


templations as regards duties of man to man, of nations to nations
—whether individually or collectively allotted to our worldly career.
This we in Australasia must all have forcibly felt by the recent
appearance among us of the finder of Livingstone, —Stanley—a
sovereign in his own realm of knowledge—the explorer, who gave
the grand final strokes to the geography of Africa, —the first
traverser of its vastest River-system,—the penetrator of the most
unbroken of equatorial forests, and let us add the solid founder
there of new industrial dominions, —the enthusiastic expounder of
their latent resources, —the harbinger of peace and progress. The
echo of his eloquent and almost prophetic words will not likely ever
vanish from the minds of his hearers anywhere, just as the still
grander deeds of Columbus will through ail ages tell tacitly their
own tale, —one impressive, elevating, electrifying ! Let us then
neither in our own time spare thoughts and means for cosmopolitan
considerations.
While offering the palm of admiration for the past, may it be
perceived also still further with quick mental grasp, that Science is
the best forerunner of commerce and industries. The world can
afford to let research unfettered be in advance of utilisation. In
this respect Australia has its own mission to fulfil. The blank in
the Antarctic chart is twice as large as the space of our whole
island continent, though the commentator of Ptolemseus’ charts,
the most illustrious of living arctic physicists, the first and only one
to perform the eastern passage, might indeed already have been on
a south-polar errand from our shores.
One of the highest mountain-systems in tropical latitudes, that
of the great Papuan island, so near to our own northern territories,
remains largely untouched by special scientific elucidations, or even
absolutely unseen ! The vacant white on our own geographic map
is still as expanded as the united extent of some European King-
doms, and therefore resources beyond imagination continue here
even primarily concealed. The fate of a wanderer in our desert,
lost since well nigh half a century, remains still unascertained, a
fate of romantic sadness. Whatever has been accomplished geo-
graphically, the newer inhabitants here or elsewhere are apt to think
lightly of, while to present conveniences aajd benefits former dis-


Am
Centuries pass, and new ones are proceeding—
Glory in each and fame ;
But yet in their unaltered flow of speeding
Lost is no lustrous name !
For, never in oblivion can be sinking,
Who noble were and brave—
And ages after ages will be thinking
Of Great beyond their grave.
So also wreaths we round an urn are turning
On this one festive day,
When for Columbus also we are mourning,
Though vivid yet his sway,
But joyous too we here must be regarding
Unfading his renown,
While to that Hero’s memory awarding
Also our Laurel-Crown,
While these pages were passing throng], the press we received
American Journals recording that at the Columbus festival in New
or k on the 20th October, aprocessiou of twenty thousand schoolboys
including descendants of the original inhabitants and of negroes,
passed thiough the streets; and similar demonstrations took place
m other cities of the Union. A statue of Columbus was presented
to the municipality of New York by Italian citizens. At the
Chicago procession governors of many states and other representa-
tives were present, and forty-one aboriginal tribes were represented
by three hundred and twenty youths.
In London Mr. Clement Markham, irrespective of bis splendid
discourse at the Royal Geographical Society, enriched the literature
conceming the discovery of America by a special and highly
meritorious volume—“ Life of Christopher Columbus,” 1892. ' '
well, to express sentiments of grateful recognition, profound sym-
pathy and emulative exultation as a tribute due to the discoverer
of America by the whole civilized world, mingled with hopeful
feelings that the visions, foreshadowed to him already as to a still
infinitely brighter future of great Occidentia, will have become
more and more gloriously realized !


unfettered he in advance of utilisation. In
this respect Australia has its own mission to fulfil. The blank in
the Antarctic chart is twice as large as the space of our whole
island continent, though the commentator of Ptolemseus’ charts,
the most illustrious of living arctic physicists, the first and only one
to perform the eastern passage, might indeed already have been on
south-polar errand from our shores.
One of the highest mountain-systems in tropical latitudes, that
of the great Papuan island, so near to our own northern territories,
remains largely untouched by special scientific elucidations, or even
absolutely unseen ! The vacant white on our own geographic map
is still as expanded as the united extent of some European King-
doms, and therefore resources beyond imagination continue here
even primarily concealed. The fate of a wanderer in our desert,
lost since well nigh half a century, remains still unascertained, a
fate of romantic sadness. Whatever has been accomplished geo-
graphically, the newer inhabitants here or elsewhere are apt to think
lightly of, while to present conveniences aajd benefits former dis-


tances, as, calculated by time and mode of travelling, are almost
swept away with the former toils and dangers, now totally dis-
regarded in forgetfulness by the multitudes. Where is the grati-
tude f Where even the universal gratitude to Columbus ? Yet the
enlightened of our age see in Columbus the originator of vast
worldly advancement, conceived with sterling genius, the incompar-
able conqueror in the fields of geography, the founder of new
empires, the sufferer resigned with touching piety to his undeserved
humiliating fate. For many of the immeasurable sorrows, arising
at his time and subsequently along with uncountable advantages in
the destinies of the new world, Columbus himself cannot be held
responsible ; in reality his career was too short to guide the new
order of powerful events even through their earliest phase.
A day like the present cannot be celebrated again generally by the next
two generations. Yet perhaps descendants of those, now assembled
to do homage, will at the semi-millennial verge of time through a
renewed and still far ampler jubilee then tender the reverence of
their period, and perhaps bear in some remembrance also, how with
solemnity it was endeavoured, and here on behalf of Australians as
well, to express sentiments of grateful recognition, profound sym-
pathy and emulative exultation as a tribute due to the discoverer
of America by the whole civilized world, mingled with hopeful
feelings that the visions, foreshadowed to him already as to a still
infinitely brighter future of great Occidentia, will have become
more and more gloriously realized !
Centuries pass, and new ones are proceeding—
Glory in each and fame ;
But yet in their unaltered flow of speeding
Lost is no lustrous name !
For, never in oblivion can be sinking,
Who noble were and brave—
And ages after ages will be thinking
Of Great beyond their grave.
So also wreaths we round an urn are turning
On this one festive day,
When for Columbus also we are mourning,
Though vivid yet his sway,
But joyous too we here must be regarding
Unfading his renown,
While to that Hero’s memory awarding
Also our Laurel-Crown.


The Consul-General for the United States of America,
COL. G. H. WALLACE, said—
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
As there are but five minutes for an American to tell the story
of Columbus, I have come to the conclusion to begin near the end,
and after the address of our learned president, who is such an
accurate, enthusiastic geographical scholar, there seems but little
for me to add.
Who among us can accurately describe the difficulties Columbus
met and overcame. Wisdom and ignorance, superstition and
prejudice were allied with wealth and power in opposition, and if
we would tell the results which have followed his triumph as a
natural sequence we must repeat the history of four centuries. His
achievement meant the emancipation of the whole race of man and
there have been no backward steps, the march of civilization has
since been ever onward.
There have been four centuries of discovery, of struggle, of
achievement, and this year 1892 witnesses more happy homes, more
well fed, more well clothed, well housed and well educated men and
women, more good government, higher general education, and
more and wider spread human happiness all the world over than any
year has seen Unce the world began.
Columbus ! What other name on the scroll of time is known
and honoured by so many of the human race ? Wherever the
creations of the printing press—that triumph of the genius of man
] iaV e found their way, wherever there is a school or a scholar is
taught, where there are people who read or people to listen, the
story of Columbus is known, and in this quadro-centennial of his
achievement it is being rehearsed, and all do him honor, not for his
conquests, but for his work of peace. It affords the Americans,
who are in the midst of the peoples of this the youngest of the new
worlds, a pleasure and a happiness to unite with them in honoring
his memory and commemorating his grand achievement, and
especially as we are thus permitted to be first in the world in
recognition of the day.


W hile we sit here, a Spanish caravel of eighty tons, a long,
narrow, single-decked, vessel, with a beak at the prow and a high
poop surmounted with a castle, with three masts of nearly equal
size and lateen sails, manned by sailors clothed in the fashion of
four centuries ago, will enter New York harbour. She has been
built in Spain, of Spanish mahogany, from the drawings made by
the great Columbus himself, which have been preserved in the
Columbian library at Seville. She will be escorted to her anchorage
by the “ White ” beet, under the flag of the United States, and by
representative vessels from the navies of Spain, Italy, France,
Germany, England, Brazil and the Argentine. As her anchor is
cast they will salute her with a salvo of artillery, which will differ as
greatly from the gun fired by Martin Alonzo Pinzon 400 years ago,
announcing the discovery of land, as the little caravel differs from
the ocean palaces of 10,000 and 12,000 tons which now link the
eastern and western continents. With one glance of the eye we may
see the progress made by civilization in four centuries, illustrative
of the mighty advancing strides made by man in his every capacity;
a demonstration that he has been subduing the world and harnessing
the elements to do his will. It is only by such object lessons that
we may gain some conception of what Columbus’s deed did for man.
On the 21st October, under the present Gregorian calendar, the
sun will be at that point in the heavens whence it looked down upon
Columbus as, disembarking, he knelt upon the land, raised his eyes
heavenward, and with uplifted arms joined with his followers in a Te
Deum, recognising and giving thanks to the Power which had
guided and guarded him to the full fruition of his hopes.
On that day, in response to the proclamation of the President,
the people of the United States will assemble in their churches and
unite in repeating that Te Deum ; and thirteen millions of school
chi Idren will assemble in the schoolhouses in acknowledgement of
their indebtedness to the great discoverer for their educational
advantages ; while at Chicago, in a building covering 40 acres and
capable of seating 800,000 people, the President of the United
States, with the executive, judicial and legislative officers of the
national and state governments, and representatives from nearly


every government on the earth, will unite in dedicating the buildings
of the World’s Columbian Exposition.
In 1893 the peoples of the whole world will there display
evidences of their present industrial and intellectual development, a
grand and magnificent object lesson, and a loyal tribute to the
genius of Columbus. All honor to the man, and may his example
be ever before us, an incentive to effort, and may we go on in the
pathway he opened before us, and hasten the day when there shall
be no east, no west, no north, no south, no native, no foreign, but
one grand universal brotherhood of man. (Prolonged applause.)
The Vice-Consul of Spain,
Mr. WILLIAM STKACHAN, said
Me. Pebsihent and Membees of the Royal Geogeai’hical
Society.
I thank you for the graceful compliment which you have paid
to the ancient kingdom of Spain by inviting its representative here
to assist in this most interesting celebration. It will always be the
glory of Spain that by the wise foresight and enlightened liberality
of the illustrious monarchs, Ferdinand and Isabella, the great
discoverer, Christopher Columbus, was enabled to equip the little
fleet which, under his command, sailed from the coast of Spain four
hundred years ago to cast anchor by the shores of a new world. I
think it peculiarly appropriate and gracious that here, in this distant
province of the Great British Empire, whose fleets and merchantmen
are on every sea, in a gathering held to commemorate the greatest
naval achievement which history records, a kindly thought has been
given to the old land of Spain, whose daring sons led the way in the
exploration of unknown seas and in the conquest and colonization
of hitherto unknown lands. The adventurous spirit which
distinguished the Spanish nation in past centuries has, in recent
years, revived. The centre of this new activity is Barcelona, the
city where, four centuries ago, a royal reception was accorded to
Columbus on his return from his successful voyage of discovery, and
to-day, from that busy and bustling port, large ocean steamers
carry on a great and growing trade with the Spanish-speaking
millions of the New World whose discovery we commemorate.


To the British nation Spain has always been an object of
intense interest, whether as friend or foe, whether, as of old, fiercely
contending for the sovereignity of the seas, or in our own century
fighting side by side for the liberation of the Peninsula —and in our
day, I am confident that the subjects of Her Gracious Majesty,
Queen Victoria, entertain a warm and generous sympathy towards
the widowed Queen of Spain and her little son, His Catholic
Majesty Alfonso XIII., King of Spain.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on the success of this
important celebration. (Applause.)
The Hon. ROBERT REID, M.L.C., was the next speaker. He
said that it might be fairly claimed for the British Empire that it had
followed the glorious example set by Columbus more than any other
nation. The spirit of daring and love of adventure flowed in
British blood, and early led our forefathers to send out their ships
for the exploration of unknown seas, and to found colonies in every
habitable part of the globe. British navigators and explorers had
nobly distinguished themselves at sea and on land, and had opened
up the way for the marvellous expansion of the British nation. We
were now solving the greatest problem that any nation on earth had
been called upon to face, namely, how to weld together peoples of
far distant countries, possessing every kind of climate, so that they
may permanently become one grand homogeneous empire.
One factor in the solution was to be found in those marvels of
the present day—the great steamships which traverse the wide
ocean with as great safety and security as people travelled on land,
thus conveying the productions of our wide fields and rolling downs
with more ease and less expense than other nations could, although
they may be self-contained, having a far more expansive territory
concentrated in one part of the globe.
We in Australia should glory in our heritage, and by again
carrying the flag of exploration into Antarctic regions maintain the
honour of the race for exploration. Nor should we ever forget that
distinction and greatness as a people could only be achieved by
drawing closer our connection with the British Empire. It was a


presage of good to Australia to know that everything was being
done by the Imperial Government to convince the outlying colonies
that the unhappy mistakes of the past, which resulted in the loss
of those colonies that now constitute the grand nation of the
great American Republic, whose representative we have listened to
with so much pleasure to-night, were not likely to be repeated.
Our immortal bard (Lord Tennyson), who left us but a few weeks
ago, had rightly said:— •
“ Britain fought her sons of yore ;
Britain failed, and never more,
Careless of our growing kin,
Shall we sin our fathers’ sin.
Men who in a narrower day—
Unprophetic rulers they—
Drove from out the mother’s nest
That young Eagle of the West
To forage for herself alone.
Britons, hold your own !
Sharers of a glorious past,
Brothers, must we part at last ?
Shall we not, through good and ill,
Cleave to one another still,
One with Britons, heart and soul,
One life, one fleet, one flag, one throne !
Britons, hold your own,
And God guard all.”
Prolonged Applause.


The members of the Melbourne Leidertafel (who generously
volunteered their services), under the baton of their conductor, Mr.
Henry John King, now rendered the following dramatic poem (a
gift from J. M. Bruce, Esq., J.P., President of the Melbourne
Liedertafel), Mr. Henry Stockwell taking the principal solo parts:—
COLUMBUS.
A Dramatic Poem.
ARGUMENT.
THE scene of this dramatic poem lies wholly on board the “ Santa Maria”
the admiral’s ship of the little fleet which opened the way to the New
World. The story deals with the concluding episodes of Columbus’s eventful
voyage ; and the central idea of the writer is to bring into relief the deeply
seated and intense religious enthusiasm, as well as the strong practicalness
which characterised Culumbus. An instrumental introduction leads to Scene
1., in which Columbus congratulates his crew on their hitherto prosperous
voyage, and on the near approach of the successful termination of their task.
A prayer to the Virgin succeeds, and is followed by a festive chorus, sung
by the crew before retiring to rest. A watch is set; and Columbus, left on
deck, gives ecstatic expression to his feelings of delight at the coming realisa-
tion of his life’s dream, at the prospect of the rich treasures which await his
enterprise, and, what is still more dear to him, at the opportunity .afforded
him for being the pioneer of civilization and Christianity in a new world.
Scene 111. discloses the first symptoms of discontent amongst the crew,
aroused by the fact of the wind having, from the outset of the voyage, blown
constantly from the east, their fears being excited as to whether this may
not always be the case in these regions, thereby preventing their ever return-
ing home. Columbus, in a cheering solo, allays their doubts ; and they
resume worx to the strains of a jovial chorus. Scene IV. opens with a short
description of daybreak, followed by a calm, which holds the vessels motion-
less. Discontent again arises, and soon becomes fury. Columbus attempts to
quell the mutiny, but at first in vain. His crew threaten him with death ;
he defies their rage, and invokes the aid of Heaven. His men rush on him
to hurl him into the sea, when suddenly he points them to the signs of a
not far-distant land, in the green branches and hand-fashioned staff floating
hard by, and in the plumage and song of unknown birds seen flying through
the air The wind rises ; the vessel moves towards the goal, and the crew
own their master’s skill, and again obey his behests. Scene V. brings the
little drama to a conclusion ; the light on shore is seen at early morn ; the
“ Pinta’s ” signal-gun is heard ; cries of “ Land ” arise from the masthead ;
and amid the triumphant song of praise to Heaven from Columbus, and the
mutual exhortations of the crew to “ row strongly to the new-world shore,”
the curtain falls.
W. GRIST.
Scene.—The “ Santa Maria ” on the Atlantic. Time 1492.
No. I.—INTRODUCTION AND SOLO
COLUMBUS—
Swift in our wake the orient gale
Ardently presses to woo the sail;
Coyly the white wings fly the embrace,
Fly, yet repel not the amorous chase.


COLUMBUS AND CREW—
Star of the sea, whose love and power
Extend alike o’er land and wave,
No. 3.—CHORUS.
CREW—
No. 4—CHORUS.
GREW-
Ere the sun with visage red
Sinks into his watery bed,
Fill a bowl with Spanish wine,
Mirth and song and dance entwine ;
Drive away the parting sorrow,
Joy to day, and care to-morrow ;
Let the merry goblet clink,
To our happy voyage, drink.
Fill again the gladdening measure,
Comrades, drain the ruddy pleasure ;
Let the brimming flagon pass,
Farewell claims a cheering glass,
Proudly ahead are our wave-steeds prancing,
Tossinj the main as we onward roll ;
Gaiiy the ripples of ocean are glancing,
Joyed to revisit the western goal.
Near is the yearned-for day !
Praise to the favouring Power
That bids us dare the unknown way,
And fills with growing hope each new-born hour,
The sun descends once more to greet the main,
The shadows lengthen on the burnished plain,
The calm of evening fills the balmy air,
And ocean solitude invites to prayer.
Bow, comrades, at our Holy Mother’s shrine
And aid your mortal strength by help divine.
No 2.—CHORUS AND PRAYER.
Be with us in the threatening hour
When billows rise and tempests rave.
Shed o’er our darkened path thy beam,
Before whose light the storm-fiends quail;
Inspire our hearts with hope’s bright gleam,
Hail, Virgo, Stella Maris, hail.
Star of the sea, thy holy calm
Breathe o’er the homes by sorrow torn ;
Pour on their grief thy healing balm,
And bid them wait the joy of morn.
Rest, Holy Mother, at our side,
Nor foes of earth nor hell prevail;
Our peaceful voyage homeward guide ;
Hail, Virgo, Stella Maris, hail.
Heard is the prayer : opposing waves are still.
The friendly winds our snowy canvas fill :
Our keels upon the ocean proudly ride,
Cleaving a rapid path with facile glide ;
The red sun couches in the glowing west;
We follow, radiant orb, thy signal blest
And chase thee to thy mystic land of rest.


No. S.—SC ENA.
COLUMBUS-
CREW—
COLUMBUS -
Yearning thoughts of home we banish
Nameless dread and peril vanish ;
Clink the merry goblet, clink,
Drink to unknown fortune, drink.
Alone upon the main 1—
The fair Canaries, old-world sentinels,
lhat guard the verge of broad Atlantic plain,
Are melted from my view—now gladly swells
My heart, and leaps with pride elate.
To grasp the promise of my glorious fate.
I gaze upon the sea--tis night ;
Silent is all, save moonlit waves that gleam
With thousand beauties ever new and bright,
Cheering the omen of my blissful dream.
Ye radiant beams that gild the trackless way
Are evanescent emblems of the store
That paves the golden land of far Cathay,
t And bids the rover to the welcoming shore.
Ye sparkling ripples, mirrored in the glass
Of placid ocean, brightly though ye shine,
Faint is your lustre, few your myriad mass,
Besides the gems that teem in western mine.
But gold and gems to m > are dross,
Mine is a vision grander far ;
For me the triumph of the Cross,
The smile of Heaven my guiding star.
Withdraw not, favouring breeze, thy gale,
Nor sigh from orient Ind to roam ;
Still follow on my flying sail,
To find in western Ind thy home.
For me a deed in sacred lays
Of holy writ foretold of yore;
The heavenly banner I’ll upraise,
All earth shall wonder and adore.
No. 6.—SOLO AND CHORUS.
Still in our wake the east wind is blowing,
Driving us hourly from country afar ;
Faint is our hope and fainter is growing,
Dying our faith in Columbus’ star.
Day upon day our spirit is crushing,
Vainly our glances homeward yearn ;
Onward to chaos and mystery rushing,
Never shall west wind speed our return.
Check, oh, my friends, your heaviness growing.
Let not despair your energy mar ;
Joy in the gale from the eastward is blowing ;
Hold to your faith in your leader’s star.
Even the face of the morn is blushing,
Reddened with shame that ye timidly yearn ;
Not to perdition and death are ye rushing,
’Tis to wealth and a happy return.
[ A WATCH
IS SET,


No. 7.— CHORUS.
CREW—
Cheer’d by thy word and a smiling sky,
Gladly again to our task we hie ;
Still in our rearward, east wind, blow ;
Again we toil with a loud “ Jo-ho.”
Up the mast ! the horizon scan ;
Stand to the windlass I the tiller, man ;
Swiftly again o’er the wave we go,
Setting all sail with a loud “ Jo-ho I”
No. B.—SOLO AND CHORUS.
COLUMBUS—
Dawn on the ocean breaks —another dawn ;
The eastern sky is ruddy with the glow ;
Behold as from a flaming quiver drawn,
And sped through air as from a giant bow,
Updarts to middle heaven an arrow bright :
The fire-streaked rays their glorious fan unfold :
Now rushes from its bed the orb of light,
And turns the silv’ry plain to molton gold.
CREW-
Sail at thy beck no more unfurl we—
Vengeance alone is now our cry ;
Into thy watery realm we hurl thee,
Die ! author of our ruin, die !
Back in your midst your threats I hurl ye ;
Cease, cowards, your insensate cry ;
My green-cross banner I unfurl thee ;
For neaven and king I death defy.
CREW-
COLUMBUS-
Lo ! Heaven itself rebukes your craven fear,
And sends a message your weak hearts to cheer.
See the green foliage floating by our bark,
Welcome as olive borne by dove to ark ;
That staff behold, fashioned by human hand,
A herald’s wand that beckons us to land ;
[THEY RESUME THEIR TASKS.
[THE SUN HAS RISEN : A CALM COMMENCES,
The wind is stilled ! arrested is our motion,
The dropping sail flaps idly on the mast;
We lie becalmed upon the glassy ocean,
In freedom’s mighty empire prisoned UMBUS
This is thy deed, Columbus, ’tis thy fantasy
Hither has brought us to an unknown sea,
Far from our Spanish home and all we love,
A waste around, the burning sun above.
Never again to see the land we cherish.
Victims to thee and thy mad lust for fame,
Our vessel doomed a rotten log to perish,
Ourselves to starve, and leave no trace—: Q °[FUßlbuSl Y
Tyrant, no more our fury brave ;
Go 1 lead our way to ocean grave.
[THEY RUSH UPON COLUMBUS,
Back ! recreants, back ! and bow to Power divine ,
Fall on your knees, adore the blessed sign ;
[POINTING TO THE SIGNS OF LAND,


Hark to the merry birds whose timeful song
Is harbinger of new world promised long ;
Now the wind rises ; friends lament no more,
Back to your toil, and steer for western shore.
■CREW—
Great leader, we adore the blessed sign,
And joyful hail the messenger divine.
With shame we cast away our craven fear,
And bless the omens of our heaven near.
Welcome green branchlets floating to our bark,
Welcome as olive-branch to Nob’s ark ;
Pardon, Columbus, pardon we demand ;
Lead us, our captain, to the promised land ;
Sing, merry birds, your tuneful lay prolong,
Herald our coming with your festive song.
The wind is rising, we despair no more,
Up, seamen, up and steer for western shore.
No. 9.—INTERMEZZO.
No. 10.—FINALE, RECITATIVE.
COLUMBUS—
The morn again is grey ;
Oh, light! that I beheld in darkness gleam,
Wert thou a heaven-sent beacon ray,
Or wert thou but my fancy’s air-drawn dream ?
[A GUN IS HEARD.
Hark ! hark ! the “ Pinta’s ” signal gun !
Land ! land ! the cry ; the goal is won,
Haste, comrades, haste, to gain the strand,
Crowd on all canvas for the land.
As crystal pure the lucid air,
Sparkling the wave as diamond rare ;
See green woods opening to our view,
Rich flowers and fruits of every hue.
Ambrosial odours fill the gale,
Balmy as from Arabian vale ;
Lo ! pouring from their forest home,
Seaward the wandering natives roam.
Quick from the bows the anchor cast,
The iron grips its earth-love fast ;
The pinnance launch and man the oar,
Row strongly for the new-world shore.
Hail, glorious land of promise, hail!
Lam Deo. let the cry prevail :
To Him all praise and might belong,
To Him alone exalt your song.
CREW—
Row, comrades, for the new-world shore,
The National Anthem was then sung, and the largest and most
successful meeting ever held by the society terminated.




1
\
i


