



n
®s
P
§ss
HK
i m£mm
»>'sb^ v • jk \\ i i fS **~
XU — i__t'
: vv i
kl\'1K j3
i /% m w
HWlW
wa#'
•-S W7 1 HKM
r \ / s ■ ■* ii «w> : rrv >Ah«x» • m - , . tl
/Xfa v// a/ i.JV. . U'y^i^^nTrx
V vmJpi vW
\ \ v v r/ 1 f&e’Tf/ L ' - i v' ><--3* ■Ti
Ionium Hif ' mM/ . b Ji P* .
IS
1
-
/*<
ft
o
P
L^S
|||S
ii
ill
w
f
)|jg||
fggb
IC
fe
£


Come to the Fair
■m
<a storu| bi|
MURIEL OlYOlfT
decorations buj
WALTER CUNNINQHAM
AN ALPHA PRODUCTION
r
PUBLISHED BY THE COMMONWEALTH TRADES ALPHABET
142 PHILLIP STREET, SYDNEY
COPYRIGHT


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
TOO-WIT, TOO-WHU! Do I know you?” called "The Wise
Old Owl who lived in an Oak,” to a little girl as she walked
along the road, looking up into the trees.
He had watched her stop at each large tree and blinked his eyes
when she stood looking intently into the bright green foliage of the
oak tree where he was perched, trying to see who had asked this
question of her.
Spying the Wise Old Owl she smiled in answer to his wink
and said, "I am Little Betty Blue, the 'little girl who had a little curl
right in the middle of her forehead,’ but I have walked miles and miles
in the wind so I suppose my hair is all untidy and that must be why
you do not know me. I am so glad to see you, Wise Old Owl, I am
sure you can help me.”
"Where are you going to my pretty maid?” the Wise Old
Owl asked.
"Well, you see, it’s a long story. If you can spare the time I will
tell you all about it,” said Betty.
"Go ahead, my dear, I have all the afternoon to spare,” replied
the Wise Old Owl,
★ ★ ★
The Wise Old Owl flew to a lower branch and sat wide-eyed
ready to listen to Little Betty Blue, who had made herself comfortable
on the grassy bank, covered with pretty blue flowers high above the
white shining road that went up and over the hill.
"Early this morning,” said Betty, "the King’s messenger brought


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
me an invitation from the King and Queen of Hearts to be a week-
end guest at the Palace, and to attend a great fair to be held in the
grounds. We were excited and thrilled. Mother, so proud that her
only daughter had been honoured by the Royal Family, told me to
me to
wear my best holiday clothes.
"I started to get ready in good time to catch the coach which
left at half-past-two, but when I looked for my shoes I could only
find one; then, on looking around again, I saw to my horror the
puppy dog had it and was chewing the strap off.
"Rushing to my friend down the street, I cried, 'Cobbler, Cobbler,
mend my shoe, get it done by half-past-two,’ please, and I will
call for it.
"On the way home I called to see my special girl friend 'Polly
Flinders.’ When I arrived I found her in tears and saw her pretty
new frock was all soiled. I asked her what had happened, and tried
to brush the dust and ashes from her frills.
"Polly told me she was sitting in front of the fire warming her
toes and did not realise the floor was dusty, then her mother came
and caught her and whipped her little daughter for spoiling her nice
new clothes.”
"I should think she would,” remarked the Wise Old Owl. "You
girls are too careless,” he added with a knowing wink at Betty Blue.
Betty smiled and continued her story.
"Mrs. Flinders came in with a dish of warm water and carefully
cleaned Polly’s pretty frock.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"I asked her to please let Polly come to the Fair, and she smiled
and said Polly would be there before me if I did not hurry home and
finish dressing.
"When I was dressed in my very best clothes, I put the invitation
in a nev/ hand-bag with a packet of lunch my mother had prepared
for me to eat in the coach, then, wearing slippers and carefully carrying
the one best shoe, I started off to the Cobbler’s shop.
"On arriving, I found my shoe was not quite ready. The Cobbler
had a special job that morning. He explained that 'Dr. Foster went to
Glo’ster’ and needed his shoes in a hurry. Knowing doctors are busy
men, with important work to do, I could only shake my head and say,
'Oh, that’s all right.’
'The Cobbler’s son, who was working on my shoe, looked at me
and said I looked different all dressed up in such fine clothes, and
wished he were coming to the Fair with me.
"Then his father called, 'Now then! "Jack be nimble, Jack be
quick’’ or Miss Betty will miss the coach.’
"Hearing a rumble out in the street, we all looked out the
window and saw the coach go by, crowded with laughing happy people
on their way to the Fair.
"The coach had gone without me. At first I was very upset and
started to cry, using my very best handkerchief. T will never get to
the Fair now,’ I cried. The kind Cobbler told me to dry my tears, that
he would think of something. And in the meantime he put beautiful
brilliant buckles on my shoes and said I would have the prettiest feet
at the Fair.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"Jack was sorry I had missed the coach and said he had an idea
to help me. 'I have a little pony, I call him Dapple Gray. I will let
you ride him to the Fair,’ said Jack.
"Thanking my kind friends, I scarred on my journey. All went
well for a mile or two, then it started to rain. I was annoyed as my
pretty new frock was getting spotted with rain drops.
" 'Oh, Rain, Rain, go away!’ 1 cried, and in a few minutes a
beautiful rainbow was in the sky and the sun was shining.
"I felt so happy I sang this little song as I rode along,
Lovely rainbow hung so high,
Right across the distant sky.
Please touch the ground close to my side
And o'er the bridge Vll pony ride .’ ”
Betty Blue sang with a sweet clear voice, and the Wise Old Owl
cried, "Bravo! Bravo!” Betty gave him a graceful bow and continued
her story.
"Along the road I could see an old lady coming towards me.
As she approached I saw it was 'Old Mother Hubbard.’
"I called, 'Good afternoon’ to her, and she told me some sad
news about her poor old dog. He had nothing to eat as her cupboard
was bare, and she was off to the baker’s to buy him some bread, but
was afraid it would be too late as she was old and could not hurry.
"I was sorry for poor old Mother Hubbard and told bet to take
the pony and ride him to the baker’s, then leave him with the Cobbler’s
son Jack.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"She thanked me and said it would save a lot of time, so I helped
her up on to Dapple Gray’s back and, as she turned the pony and
started back to town, she was mumbling to herself, 'Poor old boy, he
is so hungry. I hope he won’t die.’
"I went on my way walking smartly along. I passed fields of
green corn and saw many cows and sheep feeding in the meadows.
Suddenly I heard clear high notes coming from behind the tall hedge.
Finding a hole I crawled through and saw 'Little Boy Blue’ blowing
his horn.
" 'ls anything wrong/ I asked.
" 'Not with me, this time,’ he answered. 'I am often in trouble,
but "Little 80-Peep” has lost her sheep to-day. I am helping her find
them.’ And he asked if I would help, too.
"I replied I would like to go with him but was on my way to
the Palace.
" 'Leave them alone and they’ll come home and bring their tails
behind them,’ I called back, as I wriggled through the gap in the hedge.
"Walking along the road I started to count to pass the time away.
‘One, two, buckle my shoe,
Three, four, shut the door.
Five, six, pick up sticks.
Seven, eight, lay them straight.
Nine, ten, a good fat hen.
and when I got to 'nineteen, twenty, my platter’s empty,’ I realised I
was hungry, and decided to stop at the next mile post and eat my
sandwiches and cake.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"Approaching the mile post, I saw a fine white cat sitting on the
top, purring in a strong deep voice. I called to her, 'Pussy-Cat,’ but
she did not hear me, so I repeated, 'Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat, where have
you been?’
"I was very surprised when she looked at me and said in words
just as boys and girls use, 'l’ve been to London to see the Queen, and
a very proud cat am I,’ she purred louder than ever.
"Thinking I would like to continue this quaint conversation, I
said, 'Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat, what did you there?’ ”
The Wise Old Owl, who was blinking his eyes in amazement,
said, "Please go on, Betty, tell me why should a cat go to London to
see the Queen.”
" 'lt’s like this,’ Pussy-Cat continued.” said Betty. " 'Our dear
Queen is very happy and comfortable in her London Palace, but there
was one little thing that annoyed and even frightened her at times —
a little brown mouse!
" 'Now this was a shrewd mouse, none of the Royal cats could
catch him. The Queen ordered the Town Cryer to go to the
and call for volunteers to rid the Palace of this pest.’ 'Although I say
it myself,’ continued Pussy-Cat, T am rather smart, so I thought I
would offer my services to Her Majesty, the Queen.
" 'When I arrived at the Palace everyone was very kind, and took
me at once to the Queen’s Chair, which was the favourite hiding place
of this naughty mouse.
" T peeped under one corner of the heavy material that hung


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
around the Royal Chair, and there I saw the mouse sitting up cleaning
his whiskers with his paw.’ 'I am sure he had never seen a white cat
before,’ said Pussy-Cat smiling, 'because he gave one look at me and
rushed to the wall.
" 'Now that I had been able to frighten the mouse from under
the chair half my job was done. I raced him to his hole in the corner
and put out one of my white paws and, smack! —I had him.
" 'The Queen was delighted and said I would be rewarded on
the day of the Fair,’ said Pussy-Cat, when she had finished her story.
"I was very surprised to hear she was going to the Fair,” said
Betty, looking up to see if the Wise Old Owl was still listening.
"Too-Wit, Too-Whu!” he exclaimed, very much awake, "I think
she is a very clever cat and should be rewarded, but go on, my dear,
what did you do then?”
"I asked her if she would show me the way to the Fair,” said Betty.
"But Pussy-Cat was on her way home to her children. It seems
the 'Three little kittens had lost their mittens’ and mother Pussy was
out looking for them.
"Pussy-Cat then jumped down and asked, 'How many miles to
Barley Bridge?’
" 'Three-score and ten,’ I said, reading the sign post.
" 'Can I get there by candlelight?’ she asked.
" 'Yes, if your legs be long,’ I replied.
" 'Oh, my legs are long enough, just watch me go down the road,’
Pussy, and off she went home to her family.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"Pussy-Cat was soon out of sight; looking up to the right I saw
a tiny shelter formed by rocks and surrounded by pretty wild flowers
and dainty waving grasses. Climbing up I found a nice flat stone for a
stool and another that would make a fine table, and soon I had them
arranged in the shelter. I sat down and opened my lunch parcel.
"I had just finished the first sandwich when a large black crow
flew down and stood on the grass in front of me. I threw him some
pieces of bread and sat wondering if he knew the way to the Palace.
I think he overheard me talking to myself.
"When he had finished his bread, he cried, ’Caw-Caw,’ which I
suppose was 'Thank you,’ and flew away.
"I watched him out of sight and then walked to the tree where I
last saw him, and that, Wise Old Owl, is the end of my adventures
so far,” said Betty Blue^
"Too-wit, Too-Whu, I can help you!” the Wise Old Owl said.
"Caw-Caw-Crow came here and told me of your plight. Now I must
find a home for you to rest this weary night.”
He seemed to be talking to himself and wondering what to do.
Then he continued, "I have a friend over the hill, who will put you
up for the night. He is known as the 'Crooked Little Man,’ and,
although crooked by name, is not crooked by nature. You will find
him very kind. ”
The Wise Old Owl twisted his head in a queer way and gave
three loud hoots, then called, "Come here, Caw-Caw-Crow and take
this young lady up to the crooked little house to Mr. Jiggy-Jag.”


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
Caw-Caw-Crow was on a higher branch fast asleep, and almost lost
his balance when he heard the owl hoot.
After thanking the Wise Old Owl, Betty followed Caw-Caw-Crow
till they came to a crooked little style, and just beyond she saw a
crooked little house. It was a funny little place, long and narrow, and
it certainly had a bend; there were two rooms downstairs and two
rooms upstairs, each had a nice window, but they were all put in
crookedly. The front verandah had curly posts with curly rungs in
between.
The chimney pot was made of zig-zag pipes and looked some-
thing like a big letter Z on the top of the house.
Betty and Caw-Caw-Crow walked along a crooked, crazy path and
saw an old man, so old he was all bent up and really did look crooked
all over.
He was sitting on a little stool that had curly bent legs, and, as
the door behind him was open at the bottom and closed at the top,
Betty thought it must be crooked, too.
On his knees he had an old black cat that was curled up asleep.
As he patted it, he said, in a croaky old voice,
“/ love little pussy her coat is so warm,
And if I don’t hurt her she’ll do me no harm.”
Caw-Caw-Crow beckoned Betty with his wing to come and meet
Mr. Jiggy-Jag. She said, "How do you do,” and, as he did not seem
to hear, added, "I hope I am not disturbing you, Mr. Jiggy-Jag.”
The little man’s neck was bent low, so he looked at Caw-Caw-


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
Crow, who was standing on the path in front of Betty. Then he raised
his head and said, "The Wise Old Owl has sent you, and I see Caw-
Caw-Crow has taken quite a fancy to you. I am glad to meet any
friend of theirs.”
He listened while Betty explained her predicament, and nodded
his head up and down as he stroked the old cat.
"I have a little guest room here, and can make you comfortable
for the night,” said Mr. Jiggy-Jag.
Betty thanked him and said "Good-Bye” to Caw-Caw-Crow.
The Crooked Little Man took Betty to the door, and, as he
opened it, told her he had purposely made it crooked so that his cat
could go in and out at any time.
Inside all was neat and clean, but everything had a bend or twist.
The table and chairs had curly legs like the stool outside. The wood-
work round the fireplace was the same and even the mats and rugs
were of plaited materials sewn together crookedly.
Mr. Jiggy-Jag took Betty to a little bedroom and told her to
make herself at home.
It was a sweet little room. All the furniture was blue; the tiny
blue bed had a crazy-patch-work quilt in every colour and pattern.
The curtains at the windows were made the same way, in dozens of
queerly-shaped pieces of pretty materials sewn together. It looked
very bright and gay, and the little chair under the window had a tiny
patch-work cushion, too.
Later Mr. Jiggy-Jag knocked at the door and said, "There, my


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
dear, 'A glass of milk and a slice of bread and then good night, we
go to bed!’ ”
must
Betty was very tired, and the little bed looked very inviting, so
she said "Good-night,” and thanked the crooked little man.
One thing Betty remembered about that bedroom in the crooked
little house was a pretty motto hanging on the wall,
“Quiet is the night, soft is the breeze,
Dim is the light of the far-away moon.
Sleep, children, sleep: be not alarmed
Angels on guard, shall keep you unharmed ,”
★ ★ ★
"Cock-a-doodle-doo” was the first sound Betty heard next morn-
ing. It was very early; the sunlight was peeping over the window sill,
and as she lay in bed Betty watched it creep into the room, over the
window sill, over the chair, on to the floor, then on and on until it
reached the end of the little blue bed.
Betty saw many little birds fluttering about on the apple tree
outside, and she sang this little song,
“Once I saw a little bird
Come hop, hop, hop.
So I cried, Little bird,
Will you stop, stop stop?
1 was going to the window
To say, ‘How do you do?’
But he shook his little tail,
And away he flew.”


I I w III j j % -»
Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
The next sound came from inside the house. Mr. Jiggy-Jag was
knocking on the door. When Betty called, "Come in,” he opened the
door, and in scampered Pussy, followed by Mr. Jiggy-Jag with a nice
glass of orange juice and thin wholemeal bread and butter.
"I know it’s early, my dear,” he said, "but my mother taught me
a little rule that I have followed all my life.”
“Early to bed, early to rise.
Makes a man health*■ wealthy and wise.”
"Do you think that is true?” Betty asked.
"Well, you can judge for yourself after I tell you about my
life,” he said, sitting on the chair by the window.
While Betty drank her orange juice and ate the lovely bread and
butter, the crooked little man said, "Although I am old and bent, I
have lived a long, long time and am still very active for my age, so I
consider I am healthy.
"Now, about wealthy, there are so many ways of judging if a
man is wealthy. I have my own home; it’s a little bit queer, I admit,
but just how I like it. I grow all my vegetables and fruit, have
chickens and ducks and old Daisy the cow. I have pussy to keep me
company, so in all I think I am wealthy.
"About wise—well, it’s hard for me to say. Next time you see
our friend the Wise Old Owl just ask him.”
Mr. Jiggy-Jag walked to the door and chuckled, "Just you think
it over, my dear, and come down to breakfast in half an hour.”
Feeling very fresh and happy after her good night’s rest, Betty
went down the crooked little stairs to the kitchen.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
The
the fire.
crooked little man was stirring something in a large pot on
"Porridge for breakfast,” he said. "Do you like,
‘Peas porridge hot, peas porridge cold,
Peas porridge in the pot nine days old?
Some like it hot, some like it cold,
Some like it in the pot nine days old.' ”
"I like mine hot, thank you,” Betty replied, and passed the bowls.
After breakfast she said, "I would like to 'Wash the dishes, Wipe
the dishes,’ and then go out to see the garden.”
Mr. Jiggy-Jag and Betty wandered about looking at the trees and
flowers, while the old black cat played with a little pet mouse.
As they rested a while on the seat under the apple tree,
“Little Robin Red Breast sat up in a tree,
Up went Pussy-cat and down went he,
Down came Pussy-cat and away Robin ran.
Said Little Robin Red Breast, ‘Catch me if you can.’”
Later they went to the back garden, where Mr, Jiggy-Jag said
Betty would see his "pride and joy.”
Opening a crooked little gate, they went into a chicken run and
the crooked little man said,
“ Higglety, Pigglety, my black hen,
She lays eggs for gentlemen.
JSometimes nine and sometimes ten,
Higglety, Pigglety, my black hen
is the best hen in this country,”


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
She certainly did look a fine bird.
Returning to the house up the crooked little path, they heard a
loud noise in the apple tree. Caw-Caw-Crow had come to tell Betty
it was time to continue her journey, and kindly offered to be her guide.
Betty thanked Mr. Jiggy-Jag for his hospitality, and said she
hoped to see him again. They all walked as far as the gate to say
"Good-bye.” As Mr. Jiggy-Jag opened the gate Betty saw a pin on
the ground. Of course it was a crooked little pin, so she decided to
keep it in remembrance of her kind friend, the crooked little man.
"That’s right, my dear.” 'See a pin and pick it up, and all the
day you’ll have good luck,’ he called after Betty as she waved her
hand, saying "Good-bye” to the crooked little man, his pussy and
the mouse.
* * *
Caw-Caw-Crow tried to amuse Betty as she walked along the
road. He would fly ahead, then return to point with his wing to
place of interest as they passed.
"This is the house that Jack built” Betty read on a notice. She
saw a farmer sowing his corn and a cow with a crumpled horn, also
a dog and a cat, but passed in a hurry because she saw in the distance
the Palace on a hill, and in the village at the foot of the hill many
people, so Betty knew that she was nearing the end of her journey.
And Caw-Caw-Crow, who was anxious to get back to his favourite
tree, said "Good-bye” to Betty Blue and away he flew.


fv3A|TO*
||
rL^
zm&f
WWrcM
"-am.
H9
|Mn
MrL
p|| YiP
ip
%-
-
H
n
B
J
m^A /
•\c
jj\ fjj
j
\/hj
a n
■#\
Vf J
ht
pfcf
f. §MmSi
S|
v —
>%>
M
a
j
1 ' ii
PP
9^
fe|
y0
V
r f kr/im&SS
jfvy
j
Sot " Pi f
/II
\
US*
t
viaJd
I^Jm/
fcpS
m
■F7i«fcMUV>fT
*|i|^T
2
W A
r v
"AWS
“ 1
> ‘ M /;
,
yjfl' *4
)\
F/ / MJ
J
*>A
L
BW»
■T _ :
f y
•/
$k
// 0
¥/i
f * *il
wL J
y
Ik .
&f.
a
■J
V/a
k
M
P
py
ll
U ;;•*/
\)i /
.*.« ;;^w
;;;, . ,
■XII* /
1
v
V
A,
Jjvj \
/I
pUU^J
l^i
rd
ft
(1
)
\ t/r
\\
n 1
\ \
g
/
/ &■
®[
\jp^^'
M *
XaW^:
vfi
jJ
l/
1
t \\
A
M
i
g5k
w\ mt
M
Bi
y
\1
Bi^
f® <s
pr
4i
V:
6U
W[ %n
lA^T^
pi
§ ®
*jr|
li
BBs
11
1?
j
w
M
a4M
S& xprx
c.
1
_ji
||Bjg5?Sf
Vtfffi \bJJ&
!w - Vj
M
B
A
51
m
P~7T
hi
WM
WnWztM
sT^
T


■ ‘***\ y \
-' N *
m'-M
uli
[ /
Ifil/mj
lyjf wy S j
/> 'lr -
SV?
v/V I
* > *
E&gy®
i!it
WAm
» J *
* y h
*
* */r
i. 4f*
»? y
i<s3Li.
>li v 1
& f
rA • /
<• •*
• •
Ct


'' 1: '
Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
ahead Betty could see "Little Miss Muffet” on her way to
She was in a great hurry, so Betty ran to catch up with her.
had a sad story to tell, it seems
Just
Fair.
“Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet.
Eating her curds and whey,
There came a big spider and sat down beside her
And frightened Miss Muffet away.”
Further down the road they saw another little girl dressed in
fine clothes, but she was having trouble tripping over her long
Miss Muffet and Betty stopped to wait for her, then Betty said,
very
skirt
“Little Miss Lily, you're dreadfully silly,
To wear such a very long skirt.
If you take my advice
You will hold it up nice
And not let it trail in the dirt.”
The three little girls walked along together talking about the
Fair. When they came to the village they could see people rushing
about and hear them shouting. Something was causing great
excitement.
Later they met "Jack Sprat" with his wheelbarrow, rushing along
the street. Betty stopped him and asked where he was going, and
what was wrong in the village.
"I am the only one the Queen can trust now. 'Tom, Tom the
Piper’s son stole a pig and away he run.’ It was to be cooked for the
feast at the’Fair,” he replied.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"There is great trouble up at the Palace, everything
wrong, or is late.
gone
‘The Queen of Hearts
She made some tarts.
All on a summer’s day.
The Knave of Hearts
He stole the tarts
And took them clean away.’
"I think you should go to the Palace and help the Queen,” said
Jack Sprat, as he went on his way to market.
Approaching the Palace the three little girls saw many people in
the grounds; some were arranging tables, others decorating the trees
and shrubs by hanging fancy lanterns and gaily-coloured streamers in
every possible place.
Workmen were building stalls and platforms, and everywhere was
the noise of happy busy people.
The three little girls were greeted by a maid-in-waiting, who
found them timidly standing in the high doorway of the Palace, looking
with admiring eyes at the tall handsome sentries in their bright new
uniforms.
Rosabelle, the maid-in-waiting, told them "the Queen was in the
parlour eating bread and honey,” because the whole routine of the
staff was in disorder.
Opening the parlour door, Rosabelle announced the three little
girls to the Queen and, as they gave their very best, well practised


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
curtsey, the Queen said in a lovely clear voice, "I am so pleased to
see you, my dears. You must help me to get things ready for the Fair.
''Everything has gone wrong. 'lf all the world were apple pie’
worries would be over.”
They had a hurried lunch together, then asked the Queen what
they could do to help.
. "Litde Miss Lily,” said the Queen, "You go to 'Little Tommy
Tittlemouse’ and tell him to catch 'Little fishes in the brook,’ then
take them to Polly in the kitchen as quickly as possible.
"Then we will need a few ducks. 'There was a litde man and
he had a little gun,’ living down near the brook. Ask him to shoot
some fine birds for the Fair and take them home to be roasted by his
old wife Joan, who is a very fine cook I hear.
"Miss Muffet, you go to the baker’s and say,
‘ Pat-a-cake , Pat-a-cake baker's man,
Bake me a cake as fast as you can.'
Also ask for 'Hot Cross Buns, apple pies, plum cake and sugar
candy.’ ”
The Queen turned to Betty and said, "Betty Blue, I will leave
the tea to you.
‘Jack and Jill went up the hill
To fetch a pail of water.
Jack fell down and broke his crown
And Jill came tumbling after.'
Now we have to fetch more water to make tea, orange and lemon
drinks.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"Tell Simple Simon to bring his mother’s pail and help you,
continued the Queen.
Betty called for Simple Simon, and he told her he "met a pie-
man going to the Fair,” so that was good news.
Betty and Simon soon had all the water needed for drinks, and
Simon took a few buckets to the kitchen and "Polly put the kettle on.”
This job done, Betty went to the Queen to tell her all was well
in the kitchen.
The Queen still looked very worried and said, "If only Bobby
were here. He is bringing things for the Fair, but 'Bobby Shaftoe’s
gone to sea.’ ”
"Never mind,” said Betty, "he may be back in time.”
The Queen walked to the window and stood looking out to sea.
Suddenly she turned and clapped her hands with joy, saying, "It’s
Bobby Shaftoe coming home.
‘J s ate a ship a-sailing, a-sailing on the sea,
And, oh! it was all laden with pretty things for me.
There were raisins in the cabin, and almonds in the hold,
The sails were all of satin and the masts were made of gold'
"Now all will be well, we can have the Fair. Tell everyone to
dress and come when they hear the bells,” said the Queen.
The Town Cryer left at once to tell everyone in the village the
good news.
★ ★ ★
When Miss Muffet, Miss Lily and Betty Blue finished their
they rested, then made themselves tidy; as they were ready early
jobs
they


Wk / -■" wBlnr j- 4 • I y>_ •
Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
went to the Palace gates to watch the people as they came along the
road from the village.
“Hark, Hark, the dogs do bark.
The beggars have come to town.
Some in rags, and some in tags,
And some in velvet gowns,”
said Miss Lily.
"I hear 'the bells of St. Clement’s,’ ” said Miss Muffet. "Every -
will be here soon.”
The first to arrive was an old, old lady. "How can such an old
lady get here so quickly?” whispered Miss Lily.
"Look!” Behind her is a gander. It must be 'Old Mother
Goose,’ ” said Betty,
Old King Cole arrived in a golden coach drawn by beautiful
white horses. His three fiddlers were mounted on frisky black mares
that pranced and danced along the road as if they knew this was the
great day of the Fair,
Next came "The Old Woman who lived in a Shoe,” with all her
children running and shouting with joy. This was indeed a great treat
for them.
Then "The Brave Old Duke of York” came with "Old Farmer
Giles” and the "Man from St. Ives.”
Mary was there and, of course, her little lamb, "Curly-locks”
came running in chased by "Georgie Porgie.”
"Marjorie Daw” and Jack came with "Wee-Willie-Winkie,” fol-
lowed by many other well-known people in Nursery Rhyme Land.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
Among the last to arrive were "Little 80-Peep and "Little Boy
Blue,” with "Baby Bunting” looking very smart in a new rabbit
skin coat.
When everyone had arrived they all sat at tables on the lawn
in the shade of the fine old trees, and had a really wonderful feast.
"Tommy Tucker” sang a song, and Old King Cole’s Fiddlers
played merry music.
“Tom, he was a piper's son,
He learned to play when he was young,
But the only tune that he could play ,
Was ‘Over the Hills and far away
Old King Cole made a speech and said he was happy
many happy people, and hoped they would enjoy themselves
as he meant to.
to see so
as much
He made everyone laugh when he said he was glad no one had
thought to bake a pie of "four-and-twenty blackbirds.”
The King and Queen of Hearts looked very happy and graciously
nodded and smiled to all their guests.
The Knave of Hearts was very quiet; he still felt a little sore
after his spanking.
When the feast was over the King told everyone to go and
wander round the grounds and have a good time, but not to forget
the Prize Giving, to be held at four o’clock in the Royal Courtyard.
Betty and her friends went arm-in-arm to see some of the shows.


/ IT \Ja \ 1 (jQk
■M* »* ( \ V- ''JtiSv MK
/ / % — _ |H
Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"There was an old woman toss’d up in a basket, ninety times as
high as the moon.”
She took a broom with her, and, of course, the little girls knew
it was the magic broom used to sweep the cobwebs off the sky. They
got so tired waiting for her to come down again, that they turned to
a man on a platform, who shouted,.
“Wasn’t it funny? Hear ye all, people.
Little Tom Thumb has swallowed a steeple.
How did he do it ?
Til tell you, my son.
’Twas made of white sugar
And easily done.”
Miss Muffet saw a Punch and Judy show in the distance under
the tree. "Oh, I love Punch and Judy shows!” she said, and, joining
hands, they ran over just in time to see it start.
Everyone laughed and laughed at the quaint little figures jigging
about. The gentlemen laughed with deep "Ho, Ho, Ho’s,” and the
ladies in polite little "Ha, Ha, Ha’s,” but the boys and girls just
shouted with laughter as they clapped their hands.
All went well until,
“Punch and Judy fought for a pie,
Punch gave Judy a knock in the eye.
Said Punch to Judy, 'Will you have any moreT
Said Judy to Punch, 'My eyes are too sore .’ ”
Leaving the Punch and Judy show they saw the dearest little cart
tiny shaggy pony. The cart was made in the shape of a little


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
house, and was decorated with gay paper ribbons. A lady sitting in
the doorway called to people as they passed,
“Smiling girls, rosy boys,
Come and buy my little toys.
Monkeys made of gingerbread,
And sugar houses painted red.”
Miss Lily and Betty chose gingerbread men, and Miss Muffet
bought a sugar house. They nibbled these dainties as they wandered
about enjoying every minute of their visit to the Fair.
Seeing a crowd near the gates, the three little girls went to see
who was arriving so late, and there
“Little Johnny Morgan,
Gentleman of Wales,
Came riding on a nanny-goat
Selling of pig tails.”
He caused great amusement waving his hat to everyone as he
jogged along, followed by small boys, who asked for a ride on the
goat’s back.
Not far away a jovial old man was exciting much interest by
asking his litde audience riddles, and giving away plum pies for the
first correct answer. He called out in a loud merry voice,
“Riddle-me-riddle-me-riddle-me-ree,
Perhaps you can tell what this riddle may be.
As deep as a house, as round as a cup,
And all the King's horses can't draw it up.”
"Little Jack Horner” put up his hand first and said, in a mild


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
well.” So he got a plum pie and went off in a corner
voice, "A
to eat it
next one the old man called out was this,
“ Purple , yellow, red and green.
The
The King cannot reach it, nor the Queen;
ISor can old Noll whose power's so great.
Tell me this riddle while I count eight.”
Something about this riddle reminded Betty of the early part of
her journey to the Fair. She thought and thought, then remembered
her little song. And as the merry old man counted "six, seven, ”
up shot her hand and she answered, "A rainbow,”
The plum pie was very nice, and Betty decided they would wait
for one more riddle.
"Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho!” said the merry riddle man. "This is a
good one.
‘/4s I was going o'er London Bridge
I met a cartful of fingers and Thumbs.' ”
Miss Lily guessed that one. "Gloves,” she said, and collected her
plum pie.
"Shall we go to the stage and see what is going on?” said Miss
Muffet.
There they saw a comedy,
“Heigh, diddle, diddle.
The cat and the fiddle,
The cow jumped over the moon.
The little dog laughed to see such sport,
And the dish ran away with the spoon."


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
It really was funny to watch and everyone laughed and laughed.
It was a real comedy.
"Ding, Dong, Ding, Dong,” the sound of a bell came nearer.
The Town Cryer called, "Hear ye! Hear ye! Hear ye! Assemble in
the Royal Courtyard for the Prize Giving.”
There was a great rush to get good seats, as this was something
everyone wanted to see.
The King and Queen sat on their Royal dais, and with them the
"Three Wise Men of Gotham” who were to act as judges.
"Most Excellent Majesties and Wise Men,” the Town Cryer said,
"The first on the list is the case of Tommy Stout.”
"Continue,” said the King.
"Ding, dong, bell, Pussy in the well,” said the Cryer.
"Who put her in?” asked the first Wise Man.
"Little Tommy Thin,” answered the Cryer.
"Who pulled her out?” asked the second Wise Man.
"Little Tommy Stout,” answered the Cryer.
The crowd shouted and clapped till the King raised
hand
for silence.
“What a naughty boy was that.
To try and drown poor Pussy-Cat,
Who never did him any harm,
But killed the mice in his father's barn,”
said the Third Wise Man.
"Come forward, Tommy Stout!” called the Cryer.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
The King pinned a bright new medal with flowing ribbons on the
lapel of his jacket.
“Now, Tommy Thin,” the Wise Man said,
“Shall have nothing for tea but old dry bread;
No jam or honey till the moon is new,
And cross his heart no harm to do.”
★ ★ ★
"Ding, Dong, Ding, Dong,” rang the Cryer’s bell for the second
"Captain Poopleton,” called the Cryer, and one of the King’s
came forward in full dress uniform.
case.
men
“Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,” said the Cryer,
“Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
All the King's horses and all the King's men
Could not put Humpty Dumpty together again.”
"Captain Poopleton acted very promptly in bringing his men and
horses to the aid of this unfortunate Humpty Dumpty,” said the first
Wise Man.
The King pinned a noble medal on the Captain’s scarlet tunic.
The crowd clapped and stamped their feet as the brave Captain
returned to his men.
★ ★ ★
"Ding, Dong, Ding, Dong,” rang the bell for the third time.
"Kitty Fisher,” called the Cryer, and a nice little girl left her
and walked over to stand shyly before the Royal dais.


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
“Lucy Locket lost her pocket.
Kitty Fisher found it,”
said die Cryer, smiling over his scroll at little Kitty Fisher.
"This litde girl acted honestly when, finding the pocket or purse
of another little girl, she returned it in good order and condition," said
the second Wise Man.
The King pinned a silver medal tied with blue ribbon on Kitty
Fisher’s frock.
"Ding, Dong, Ding, Dong," rang the bell for the fourth time.
"Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat,” called the Cryer, and out came Pussy
with her three little kittens in their mittens.
"This beautiful white pussy-cat frightened a most annoying
mouse from under the Queen’s chair and killed it with her own paw,"
said the Cryer in a husky voice.
"This case has been specially recommended by Her Majesty, The
Queen of Hearts,” said the third Wise Man. "Her Royal Highness
will make the presentation."
The Queen stepped down from the dais and patted Pussy and
each of her kittens. Then handed Pussy-Cat a beautiful silver cup
inscribed, "To the best Mouse Catcher in my Kingdom." Everyone
there clapped, and many of Pussy’s friends gathered round to con-
con-
gratulate her.
"Ding, Dong, Ding, Dong," rang the bell for the last time. The
sun was setting, the Fair was over, everyone was very happy and stood
to attention as the Cryer shouted in his loudest voice,


Come to the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
"Hear ye, Hear ye, Hear ye,
“F for fig, I for ink, and IV for nice new hones;
“I for Isaac the waterman, and S for sack of stones
"FINIS”
This
and
meant
the end of the Fair in Nursery Rhyme Land
The King and Queen stood on the dais and waved to their people.
Every voice at the Fair joined in three cheers of, "Hip! Hip! Hooray!”
As the last "Hooray!” echoed through the trees, the King raised his
hand and said,
“And now, goodnight, our play is done.
Farewell to each and everyone
THE END


Titles of Nursery Rhymes used in Story
"COME TO THE FAIR IN NURSERY RHYME LAND"
"The Wise Old Owl”
"Little Betty Blue”
"The Little Girl that had a Little Curl”
"Pat-a-cake”
"Hot Cross Buns”
"Jack and Jill”
"Simple Simon”
"Polly put the Kettle on”
"Bobby Shaftoes gone to sea”
"I saw a ship a-sailing”
"Hark, Hark, the dogs do bark”
"The Bells of St. Clements”
"Where are you going to my Pretty Maid?”
"Cobbler, Cobbler”
"Polly Flinders”
"Dr. Foster went to Glo’ster”
"Jack be nimble”
"I have a little pony I call him Dapple Gray’
"Oh, Rain, Rain, go away”
"Old Mother Goose”
"Old King Cole”
"The Old Woman who lived in a Shoe”
"The Brave Old Duke of York”
"Lovely Rainbow”
"Old Mother Hubbard”
"Little Boy Blue”
"Little 80-Peep”
"One, Two, buckle my shoe”
"Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat, where have you been?”
"Three little Kittens”
"Old Farmer Giles”
"The Man from St. Ives”
"Mary had a little lamb”
"Curly-Locks”
"How many miles to Barley Bridge”
"The Crooked Little Man”
"Georgie Porgie”
"Marjorie Daw”
"Wee Willie Winkie”
"Baby Bunting”
"I love Little Pussy”
"There, my dear, a glass of milk”
"Quiet in the Night”
"Cock-a-doodle-do”
"Tommy Tucker”
"Tom, he was a Piper’s Son”
"Sing a Song of Sixpence”
"There was an old woman toss’d up in
"Wasn’t it Funny?”
"Once I saw a little bird”
"Early to bed”
basket”
"Peas Porridge Hot”
"Wash the Dishes”
"Punch and Judy”
"Smiling Girls and Rosy Boys”
"Little Johnny Morgan”
"Riddle-me-ree”
"Little Robin Red Breast”
"Higgety, Pigglety”
"See a pin and pick it up”
"This is the House that Jack Built”
"Little Miss Muffet”
"Little Jack Horner”
"Purple, Yellow, Red, and Green”
"As I was going o’er London Bridge”
"Heigh, Diddle, Diddle”
"Three Wise Men of Gotham”
"Little Miss Lily”
"Jack Sprat”
"Tom, Tom, the Piper’s Son”
"The Queen of Hearts”
"If all the World were Apple Pie”
"Little Tommy Tiddlemouse”
"Little Fishes in the Brook”
"Ding, Dong, Bell”
"Humpty Dumpty”
"Kitty Fisher”
"F for Fig”
"And now, Good-Night”
"There was a Little Man”


Come to the Fair
■m TurfAeAy
LITHOGRAPHED IN AUSTRALIA BY
WILLIAM BROOKS & CO, LIMITED
199 ELIZABETH STREET, WATERLOO
FOR THE PUBLISHERS
THE
COMMONWEALTH TRADES ALPHABET
142 PHILLIP STREET, SYDNEY


\*<f*J(r \ v V3I \ v * W*1 * 1
< f <*• # . Vgfffllrv\j* uiiMiHF -Oi ■* i — ■ - —"V - A, \ \ F
iL/ * * pjj i Ct \ ]
< I WI V v_' i ..- w « M a ’. '.I 1 i\ f LA /■ M ~j( t^MHb '*' -• — _ ; V -—— j "* f\
' • jr *-T j f vi y \ v Vi- f / / f \ « i .1 v v * i ->■ » v ' ■ v ‘fr
1 -/il // \ 1 /V . / a ArAi i \ o \ i\ 'V ' '-i y I / . * J ; /y V'. *v —>
•U JyJjJhmfflj // W If' j\ o V» ; . rv'
t itm /f 'A
H* p 1a y/U <C Iw^^M-
y A j" ’ / Y I / O \§ * *X|rY« 'Tf <■'», i y I \ LWCL / j r <5
f r & 1 • * 1. s . 1
j j ,i £) \ *\ -iyi4H j) .«• #) I - Mv. & & -V “? 5P)^
I V 1 ■ » y aI m 1 jHVy- jV73 il.
11 Aax Tl. ii w \\
J/jv\ \*v-If y [I 4 ' \ - */
fLA f } // t T5 a >/ - y \ \ \ J *^d
- « f v . i Jpy / Jr / \ / 1 <A v' A/‘ '*■ • 1«<« 1 jFth * L», . j ■v-" £$5411 A . [7 ' y-- —'
Mm. Al| AjF/' <
'•* jj»®“ vii' 1 | 1 I j y ■*'• r £ ■* s ■'.- -% _ . ,4~y ■ - n -i - * A ’ AT" ' w \ , *%. < -71
M. > *• -
if. ' ▼ \/f J[
III l\ » “CA y V //TMi AV A, yA I v I ~i» £• a { N * Tviy i ! | J /] jfKi, y\r j 4 JVj
I'jfffS i ii \ J /»’ jyV ' ' . ’’ r i a


