

CLAIMS OF THE HEATHEN
UPON THE
STUDENTS AND PASTORS OF
THE REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
HEY. JOHN G. PATON,
MISSIONARY FROM TANKA, NEW HEBRIDES, SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.
Published by Authority of the Foreign Mission Committee of the
Reformed Presbyterian Church.
URGING THE




“COME OYEE AND HELP US-.’’
AN ADDRESS
UHGING THE
CLAIMS OP THE HEATHEN
UPON THE
STUDENTS AND PASTORS OF
THE REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF SCOTLAND
REY. JOHN G. RATON,
MISSIONARY FROM TANNA, NEW HEBRIDES, SOUTH SEA INLANDS.
Published by Authority of the Foreign Mission Committee of th«
Reformed Presbyterian Church.
PAISLEY: i. & E. PARLANEs
1863.


The first part of this Address was delivered to the Students at the close of
the Divinity Hall in Edinburgh, and the whole is published by request of
the Committee, in the hope that it may deepen the missionary spirit in the
Church, and induce some of those to whom the appeal is presented to be-
come Missionaries.
Any number of copies of this Address may be had from J. & E. Parlane-
Publishers,. Paisley, free by post at 4d. each.


ADDRESS.
TO THE STUDENTS OE THE REPORTED
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
Gentlemen,
I never expected to enjoy the pleasure of meeting
again with the Professors and Students assembled
at the Reformed Presbyterian Divinity Hall in
Scotland. Eor when sent forth as a missionary to
the heathen and once engaged in the work, its
character and claims appear in such a light that one
is forced to the conclusion that while spared he will
never leave it. But man, in his ignorance of the
future, purposes much that God disposes of in a very
different manner from what he had intended. When
He marks out our path of duty, and by leading events
in his providence says distinctly to us, “this is the way:
walk ye in it;” then it is ours unhesitatingly to follow
wheresoever he leads. Thus when I had designed
to be busy with mission work on the South Sea
Islands, an unexpected train of events has so altered
my arrangements that I am led to appear before you
on behalf of our mission. In doing so, I am not
expected to tell you what has been done in our work
on the new Hebrides; for with the past history of our
mission I presume you are all familiar, and the late
visit of Hr. Inglis, one of its honoured fathers, must
have brought it all so fully and freshly before your


minds, that little can be left for me to relate; and in
Williamu yon have seen a living proof, though by no
means the best jproof, of the fruits the gospel, from
Aneiteum.
Having been driven from Tanna by heathen violence,
we went to Aneiteum, where at a meeting, my
brethren in the mission deputed me to plead its cause
in the Sabbath Schools and Churches of Australia,
Tasmania, and New Zealand, for the purpose of
awakening an interest in our Mission, and to solicit
aid in raising the funds required for purchasing a new
mission Ship for our New Hebrides Mission; because
for the proper oncarrying and extension of our work,
the urgent need for such a vessel had become apparent
to us all. By the brethren I was induced, nay, I may
say almost compelled to undertake this mission to the
colonies, for I deemed myself the least qualified among
them for such work. Besides I saw that I was sent at
a time, the most unfavourable for succeeding; for a
course of unprecedented trials and reverses in our mis-
sion had disheartened our friends, and led our enemies to
speak, of us as religious madmen for risking our lives in
persevering in the attempt to christianize such degraded
savages. But the result in this as in many other in-
stances, proves that man’s extremity is God’s oppor-
tunity. Had our mission not been broken up at Tanna,
Australia had not been visited by us, and we would
not have had the new ship and the many good friends
our mission now possesses in the colonies. Having
undertaken this work, in humble dependence on divine
aid I resolved to do my utmost to carry it out. But
on landing in Sydney, without a friend, a stranger in
a strange land, the character and responsibility of the
undertaking, with the fearful consequences of not
succeeding, made me again shrink from it, and wish
I had been on the islands, and that such a work had


been entrusted to abler bands. Gladly would I
have returned to the islands without setting foot on
shore. But I was committed—the work must be
done. For me there was no alternative. I called on
private Christians and Ministers who became interested,
and thus God opened up my way, gave me access to
his people, and influenced their hearts, drawing forth
their sympathy and liberality, so that they con-
tributed the £3OOO which we asked for the Ship, and
now it is in the Treasurer’s hands to pay for her, and
send her to her work without delay. My first letter
received in Australia urged me to try and raise as much
money as possible in the colonies for the Ship; for
both our mission committee and the committee in
No via Scotia were agreed as to our need of the vessel,
but they were equally alarmed at the large sum of
£3OOO being required for her purchase, “surely far
less will do.” I prosecuted the work, earnestly im-
ploring God to open up my way and give success, and
he has used my humble instrumentality among the
Sabbath Schools and Churches to gain the desired end.
Thus the committee have the large sum asked for put
into their hands, and are freed from all anxiety, except
in expending it—a pleasant duty.
The Colonial Presbyterian Ministers as a whole,
and many of the Independent, Episcopalian and
other ministers entered cordially into our schemes,
gave me ready access to their schools and congre-
gations, and at my request formed themselves into
local and central committees to advise with me and to
receive and take care of the money raised. The
Superintendents and Teachers of Sabbath Schools
were also most cordial, and by collecting cards the
Sabbath School children cheerfully raised the greater
part of this large sum of money. To all these friends
I feel truly grateful, and to them our church and


mission are deeply indebted. May the Lord bless
and reward them.
I had been urging the committee to send out more
missionaries, but letter after letter came informing me
that none had been got. At last I received one
saying, “no missionaries have yet been got, or are likely
to be got for some time for our mission. The late
reverses seem to have frightened the sons and
daughters of our church for the present, and I do not
know how far your accounts of your trials in your
letters to the church are to for producing this
effect.” Though this letter was not from a member of
the committee, yet being from a member of the mission,
on receiving it I was truly grieved, laid it before God;
and large as the sum was, required for the Ship, I
vowed that if He would prosper my work, so as to
make me successful in raising £6OO or £IOOO more,
with it, I would go home and try to bring out
additional missionaries, or at least disabuse the minds
of the young people of our church of any bad im-
pressions caused by my letters. And as for my
trials they were severe indeed, but sent by God who
cannot err. Had I to rewrite these letters not one
fact would be withheld, and many more might be
added. How can the church pray for her missionaries
unless she knows how they are situated in their workr
And better far that young missionaries should know
well by such letters what the work is before they
come to it, than that they should come out to our
islands and then be disappointed. Being thus led to
form the resolution to try and raise with
which to come home and if possible get more mission-
aries, I was able to arrange for two meetings
almost daily, and the interest and liberality of those
addressed so increased, that I was soon forced to the
conclusion, that being in the way of duty the Lord


was leading me so as to gain the end in view. On
closing the schemes in Australia, it was found that
for the new Ship, for additional Missionaries, and for
Native Teachers, I had in my various Treasurers’
hands, £5083 Os. Bjd., viz: £321 for Native Teachers,
£3OOO for the New Ship, and the remainder to get
more Missionaries. This whole sum, less expenses,
I advised to he sent home at once, so that the Ship
might be paid for and sent to her work without delay.
If this scheme is only judiciously managed and the
work properly followed up, the income for Teachers
will be given annually by the Christian friends, who
have subscribed £5 each for the support of a Teacher;
and thus I expect a permanent income for the support
of these most valuable assistants in opening up new
Islands.
Mr. Inglis being present at the last meetings of my
Mission Ship Committees in Melbourne and in Sydney,
both committees influenced by my report, and by his
advice, urged me at once to return home to Scotland,
and, if possible, to bring out additional Missionaries
with all the money over what was needed for the
Ship. As all the leading Presbyterian Ministers,
and some of the Congregational Ministers were
members of these committees, I agreed, made the
necessary preparations, and in a few days after, sailed
for London in the “ Kosciusko.” The day before
sailing I received a letter advising me not to come
home, as my visit, in the present position of the
Church and so soon after Mr. Inglis had left, was not
likely to secure the desired end. But my arrange-
ments being made, I thought the interest created
throughout the colonies in our Mission, and the
urgent necessity for more missionaries would satisfy
the Church and justify me in carrying out my
purpose, and now having by God’s blessing enjoyed


a favourable voyage, I am here to set before you the
claims of our mission, that thereby I may know if
God will grant our desires in this also, by providing the
required missionaries. Would that this important and
responsible duty had been intrusted to abler hands.
I will however try to state what is wanted, and may
God move your minds and hearts to pity the poor
heathen. May He set the path of duly before you,
teach you what you ought to do, and give you decision
to act accordingly; and provide whom He will for
His own work among those dark places of the earth,
where so many are perishing in heathenism.
I am sent to seek missionaries for the Hew Hebrides
Islands, and in order that your minds may be influenced
anew, by the condition of their inhabitants, permit me
to state a few leading facts regarding them.
You are aware that in the Hew Hebrides group
alone we have above 30 islands, with a population of
at least 150,000, all living in heathen darkness, bowing
down in worship to stocks and stones. These islanders
have sunk to the lowest position that it seems possible
for man to reach. They are all naked, painted savages,
constantly killing, feasting on, and oppressing each
other. Might is right, and the strong oppress the
weak. Cannibal-feasting is of almost daily occurrence.
Infanticide is universally practised, and it is generally
the mother or father that takes the infant’s life.
Widows are strangled; the sick and the aged are often
destroyed; even a wife, a mother, if sick, is driven
from her house by her husband, and forced to sleep in
the bush till she dies or recovers, as the case may be.
In a word, all the crimes mentioned by the Apostle
in the first of the Homans, and many other crimes of a
most shocking and debasing character, that I cannot
here mention, are practised daily on our islands —I may
say, on every one of the thirty of our group, except on


peaceful Aneiteum. But on Aneiteum, by the blessing
of God on the labours of the Eev. John Geddie and
the Bey. John Inglis, and their worthy Partners, and
their Native Teachers, the powerful influences of Christ-
ianity have swept away all these revolting practices,
and now—peace, safety, happiness, and prosperity are
enjoyed through the gospel. The universal Headship
of Christ over Church and State is acknowledged. The
Bible is their only law book, and as a people, they are
rapidly improving and rising in the scale of civiliza-
tion. The Bible alone will improve them; for I hold
that alt“experience has proved that the Bible is the
only real civilizer and elevator of fallen man. Think
of this wonderful change, and remember that fifteen
years ago the Anieteumese practised all the crimes 1
have referred to as now existing on the other islands, and
two years ago the whole population, then amounting to
4,500* were professing Christians. Now they are all
clothed, and with the word of God daily in their hands,
sitting meekly at the feet of His servants the mission-
aries, learning of them what Jesus would have them to
do. What other means could have produced this blessed
change? Certainly what the gospel has done on
Aneiteum, we may legitimately infer it can and will
do for all the other islands of our group. Can God
design us to draw any other inference? Let us then
diligently use His instrumentality, and earnestly look
up for His blessing to make it effectual. Mission-
aries must be sent to the islands, to live among the
natives, to learn their languages and reduce them to
written forms, to translate the scriptures, and to teach
them to read and understand them; for only by such
means can they be evangelized, civilized, elevated, and
saved. Give them the Gospel and they will soon enjoy
all the blessed fruits that follow in its train.
Gentlemen, To obtain these missionaries I am come


among you. Nothing else could have induced me to
leave the work and return home at this time. But if
I succeed in getting six or seven missionaries to accom-
pany me to the work, surely the time will not be lost,
and the increased influence thus brought to bear on the
work may he expected to produce the happiest results.
But do I hear some one saying, six or seven
new missionaries! "What presumption! "Where will
you employ them all? And how would you support
them? I answer, if we had twenty, or even fifty
missionaries at present to go to our islands, they would
find an abundance of work on our 30 islands with their
150,000 perishing heathen. Certainly the more men,
the more hope of safety to life and property, and the
more hope of success in the mission work; and as to
their support, our respective churches in Scotland and
Nova Scotia will surely do what they can; and besides,
I confidently hope that the Presbyterian churches in
the colonies of Australia will assist in supplying all the
means needed for the extension of our mission. Nay
more, their flourishing and powerful Union Church in
Victoria,' in her late General Assembly, and their
highest church courts in New South Wales, and in
New Zealand, have all passed resolutions to cast in
their lot with us, and in future to assist in supporting
and extending our New Hebrides Presbyterian Mission.
Though not united, the other branches of the Presby-
terian Church in South Australia, Tasmania, and
Queen’ scHand, in Victoria, and in New South Wales,
have been equally zealous in assisting to get the ship
and the additional missionaries; and from the character,
cordiality, and promises of their leading men, I have
no doubt whatever that they will he equally zealous in
assisting in their permanent support. Therefore I
have no fear of the Committee falling into a state of
bankruptcy, or even of pecuniary difficulty; for the


earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof—the
silver and the gold are His—the hearts of men are
His—and He can make them bring to His treasury all
that is required for the oncarrying of His own work.
But should difficulties be felt in supporting them, we
have now made the acquaintance of many of God’s
people in the Colonies, who are indeed among the
excellent ones of the earth, and both able and willing
to assist in such work—we| will’ appeal for help to
them, and also to our deeply interested and never-
failing friends the teachers and children of the Sabbath
schools, and I believe they will raise whatever money
is required for the support of our mission on the Hew
Hebrides. Let us do our duty by sending out mission-
aries as they are needed, and let us trust to God for
the future: surely our bread shall be given us and our
water shall be sure. Did not Jesus preface the apos-
tolic commission by the gracious words, “All power is
given unto me in heaven and on earth?” And what
is the conjoined promise? “Lo, lam with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.” I say, if accom-
panied by Him who sways the sceptre of the universe,
we go to His work in obedience to His command, what
have we to fear? Oh for stronger faith, and a clearer
sense of duty to be possessed by the church, and by her
ministers qualified for mission work! And oh, for the
Holy Spirit to quicken and impel to duty both at home
and abroad, then would we see efforts put forth pro-
portioned to the magnitude of the work with which
Jesus has intrusted them!
Gentlemen, let me now put the solemn, searching,
and trying question—Will any of you students be-
come missionaries, and come with me to assist in this
most noble and self-denying work of saving the perish-
ing heathen? Who is on the Lord’s side and ready for
this department of His service? Will any of you?


No, I will alter the question and ask, How many of
you will go as missionaries and seek the salvation of
these degraded savages? How many of you will come
and help us to evangelize these perishing thousands of
our fellow men? Who will come to the help of the
Lord against these mighty powers of sin and Satan in
these dark remote regions of the earth, where the
prince of this world holds all but universal sway?
Certainly if the deplorable condition of the heathen
ever moved men —Christian men and Christian women
—to compassionate them and haste to their rescue,
never was there a more affecting scene presented to the
human mind. Never did man appear in a more help-
less and heart-rending condition. Never since the great
commission was given, was a more urgent claim pre-
sented to the church and to the preachers of the blessed
gospel. Never did Satan more effectually debase man
and drag him down under every vice that his fiendish
ingenuity could invent, than he has done on our islands,
where by the thousand he sweeps them to perdition.
Oh friends! Does such a sight not move your hearts
and souls to haste to their rescue?
But again, look at these poor heathen, enchained the
slaves of Satan, and being dragged generation after gen-
eration down to the place of woe. Look at them, as
parents and children, all meet and writhe in agony
in the burning lake from which there is no returning.
Oh, hear their wailing cries as they are driven to join
yon dark mass of untold millions in the place of tor-
ment; and oh, see Satan triumphing over his prey!
Look at the foul fiend as he glories in tormenting them,
while hell echoes with their shrieks and groans.
Then, oh turn your eyes and look at the broad way
filled with millions more of poor heathen; yes, alas,
and of our own countrymen there are many also, all
rushing madly on to this awful doom. Oh students


and Christians in Scotland, look at this appalling yet
truthful picture! And can you remain at ease where
you are? Dare you stand still? No, friends! Let
us haste to stop this fearful tide of lost and perishing
sinners rolling on in the same channel, and all plung-
ing into one common misery in the yawning gulf of
woe. Oh, stand not at a distance looking on in pity, but
let us haste to snatch the few that yet remain, as
brands from the burning. Certainly this is a work for
the noblest of minds to undertake. It requires true
Christian heroism to attack the roaring lion in his own
strongholds, and pluck the prey from his devouring
jaws.
And are there not such young men among you?
Young men who have dedicated themselves unreserv-
edly to the service of God, and who are willing to go
wherever He directs—men in whose breasts such noble
spirits are already working, and urging them forward
to the contest. Students, do you not thirst to enter
the work, that you may build on no other man’s
foundation, but that you may buckle on the whole
armour of God, haste to the forefront of the battle,
and with the sword of the Spirit assist to take those
strongholds of Satan, to unfurl the banner of Christ’s
love where it has been unknown, till it waves in holy
triumph over every heathen tribe, and sets the prisoners
free throughout the length and breadth of Heathendom.
Are there not many students, ay, and young ministers
too, in our church, who feel that they have a longing
for the work—an inward call from the Spirit thus
pressing them to engage in it? And have they not
many of the necessary qualifications? Yet Satan
throws difficulties in their way, and suggests to their
minds, doubts and dangers, and the claims of others at
home, so as to keep them back from this work in
which God evidently urges them to engage. Thus


they are like Saul when sought for by Samuel and the
people, though knowing that he was called of God to
rule over Israel, yet he was hid. Notwithstanding the
call given in the convictions of conscience, yet their
own humility, or mistaken views of their qualifications
for the work, or its apparent difficulties and dangers,
lead them to shrink back, like Saul hiding from known
duty, so that they must be sought out and urged to it
by others. Oh that I knew where such men are hid-
ing! Surely we would seek them out, and though
they might say, “ "What am I, and what is my father’s
house in Israel, that I should lead the way and occupy
the foreground in such a work?” we would answer
their objections and help them over their difficulties—
“ Who made the mouth of man? ” Who qualifies him
for this work, and who assists him in it? God’s grace
is all-sufficient, and His strength is perfected in our
weakness.
Oh friends! Students, if you are inclined to become
missionaries, come forward at once, and make your
desires known to the Committee, so that you may have
the prayers and assistance of the church in helping
you speedily to make all necessary preparations for the
work. If my trials or letters have disheartened any of
you from becoming missionaries, let me inform you that
notwithstanding of these trials, I am ready and eager
to return to the work, either alone, or with any of you
who may accompany me; and if I had a thousand
persons to dispose of, whereas I have only one, I would
say to them all, be missionaries: for it is the most
urgent and important work on earth . Come to the
heathen and let us tell them of Jesus and of His sal-
vation. Oh! come to this Christ-like work. Let us
teach them by day and by night; and let us move heaven
and earth for assistance, till the gospel is preached in
all its freeness and fulness in every heathen land.


Through the kind friends in Australia I am provided
with money to purchase your outfit and pay your
passage out to the islands. But alas! if I return alone
what will the world think of us? What will the
churches think of us ? What will Jesus think of us ?
What shall I say to the friends in Australia ? Or how
will we appear among the many warm hearted friends
of Christian missions ?
Home mission work must be attended to, and I re-
joice exceedingly to see that you are now taking such
a deep interest in it. The missionary spirit seems,
indeed, now to he awakened among you, and I am
delighted to see it, and hope it will soon impel
every one of you actively to engage in the work.
But let not your zeal for the work at home make
you neglect the superior claims of the heathen
abroad. I say superior claims; for those at home
have access to the means of grace: they know
their duty, and it is their own fault if they perish.
The heathen abroad are perishing for lack of know-
ledge. They have never heard of Jesus. There is no
man so caring for their souls, as to go and lead them
to Christ for salvation. God granted me as great
pleasure and success in home mission work as falls to
the lot of most men, and in the foreign field, few
whose lives have been spared have experienced
greater losses, troubles, and trials. Yet to my
mind the foreign field has by far the higher claims.
The salvation of a soul is of the same value, and is
accomplished by the same means, at home and abroad;
but the home field is crowded with ministers, while the
foreign field has few missionaries, and in many places—
none. Five hundred and fifty millions of our fellow
men are yet perishing in heathen darkness, without any
man to care for their souls, or to shew them the way
of life; while all the ministers and missionaries of the


present day are labouring among little more than two
hundred and fifty millions of professing Christians. I
say, can the claims of two hundred and fifty millions of
professing Christians, possessing so many able and
devoted ministers, bear a just comparison with the claims
of about five hundred and fifty millions of perishing
heathen ? Can the claims of the church in Scotland,
and in Great Britain, where she enjoys a host of min-
isters, cause you all to settle down at home, where,
from the labourers already in the 6 eld, you have so
small a sphere of usefulness —while the poor heathen
cry in vain for help, and so far as your personal efforts
go, they are all left to perish ? Oh! that you had more of
the spirit of Him who left His Father’s house, to seek
and to save the lost, then surely the claims and attrac-
tions of sweet home would lose so much of their fascin-
ating power over your minds, that for the short time
you have to labour here (surely the longest life is short
compared with the Christian’s rest in our Father’s
home), you would be ready to go wherever the claims
of the perishing are most urgent, and wherever you
would be likely to do most good during the few days
of your earthly sojourn. May Jesus point out your
sphere of labour, impel you to it, and greatly bliss and
prosper you in it, so that you may have many souls for
your hire.
Students of the Reformed Presbyterian Church of
Scotland—Oh let it be seen that it is not ouly in
name that you have been taught to contend for
Christ’s crown and covenant. If you are true sons of
that branch of the Church, show that you are worthy
of those principles which have been bequeathed to you,
baptized in the blood of such a noble train of
martyred ancestors. And how can you do this more
effectually than by appearing in the van of those
Christian warriors who occupy the outposts of the great


army now employed for the extension of Messiah’s King-
dom? Surely you have a right to he first and foremost
in the ranks of the faithful who jeopard their lives in the
high places of the field, preaching the gospel to dispel
heathen darkness. Have you not a right to lead the
way in such a warfare? Or can it he possible that
your fathers, mothers, and sisters cheerfully gave up
all for Christ, and shed their blood on the moors and
mountains of their native land while contending for
His supreme Headship over Church and State, that they
might preserve for Scotland her Covenanted Eeform-
ation, while you dare not risk the dangers to he met
in spreading that same gospel-light among the heathen?
Has the blood of our noble ancestors become so cold in
you that you have lost their spirit? Has it so degen-
erated that dangers at a [distance scare you? Dare
you not face them in our mission field? Gentlemen,
can it he possible that you possess so little of the noble
spirit that inspired Cameron, Cargill, and Eenwick to
preach the gospel faithfully, though thereby they
jeoparded their lives, which they at last willingly laid
down for its sake, sealing their testimony with their
blood; that you cannot give up the comforts and advan-
tages of home, and meet the few dangers to be over-
come in seeking to save thousands of perishing heathen?
lam told that, “at present, there is not much of the
missionary spirit, and far less of the martyr spirit in
our church, especially among the young ministers.”
What! Has it passed over to Hovia Scotia? Let the
example of the brave Gordons urge you to the work.
The one and his wife fall martyrs on Erromanga, but
his younger brother, like Eenwick, at Cargill’s
martyrdom, catches the spirit of the departed martyr,
and influenced by love to God and the cause, prepares
for the work, offers himself as a missionary and is
accepted. And see him now about to sail in our new


mission ship for blood-stained Erromanga, that be may
unfurl the banner of Christ’s love on his brother’s
grave, and begin at the spot where he fell, to preach
the gospel for the salvation of his benighted murderers.
Oh that his desires may be fully gratified, and the
rich fruits of the gospel soon seen waving in triumph
over Erromanga. To this end let him have a special
interest in your prayers.
The devoted and pious Mathiesons, the youthful
Johnston, ay, and another, too, “a dearer one still, and
a nearer one yet than all others,” have all passed
from my side in the work on Tanna to the mansions
of eternal glory. But have these deaths damped the
zeal of the Nova Scotians? No; others have come
forward to occupy their places. Three of their
missionaries have fallen in the work, but other three
devoted and accomplished young ministers and their
wives have come forward to fill their places; and
should they also fall, others will grasp the standard,
maintain the warfare, and pass on the glad news of
salvation till the gospel of Jesus rules in triumph over
every land. But oh that the Gordons may have been
like Renwick in Scotland, the last of the martyrs that
will fall on our islands before they are all under the
influence and saving power of the gospeh
Students, is it possible that the spirit that can
brave every danger to proclaim the gospel in the dark
places of the earth, has passed from among the young
men of our church? No, my dear friends, certainly
not! It cannot be! “lam persuaded better things
of you, and things that become the gospel” of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Surely this urgent
call from the Heathen will not be heard in vain.
Surely some of the sons and daughters of our church
are ready and eager to come forward saying, “here am
I, send me.” I would like also to have one or two


missionaries from some of the other branches of the
Presbyterian Church in Scotland to assist in our
mission: say, from the Free Church, the U.P. Church,
or the Original Secession; for ours is, and has always
been, a catholic-spirited mission. Ministers of these
churches are as able to preach the gospel, and have
been as successful in preaching it among the heathen
as we have been. And is it not becoming that the
sons and daughters of those churches, which are all the
younger sisters of our church, should be invited to
join us and assist in our mission? Let us have some
missionaries from among them, and I can conceive of
nothing that would tend so much to lessen our differ-
ences and draw us nearer to that desired union which
gives strength, and which our blessed Lord enjoins on
all his children. In spite of home training and feel-
ings, peculiarities and prejudices, in the mission field
all party differences are suppressed : in the practical
oncarrying of our work they are futile and unknown.
The Bible and the preaching of the pure gospel are our
common bonds of union, and we only know each other
as missionaries doing what we can individually and
unitedly to convert the perishing Heathen. We all
acknowledge Jesus Christ as the Supreme Sovereign of
Church and and the Scriptures are set forth as
His Word, by which all laws and conduct among men
should be framed. Thus party differences are lost sight
of, and I think very properly. Indeed we find time for
nothing else but our one grand and all absorbing work
of bringing the heathen under the power and influence
of the gospel. And, God forbid, that any bane of
schism should ever come to divert the missionary’s
mind, from this, his great work to which all he does
tends, and in which all he does concentrates.
Students, let me ask you, is this not a work in which
the greatest minds will find ample scope for all their


powers? Is it not a field in which the most accom-
plished scholars will find ample exercise for all their
attainments? The inhabitants of almost every island
speak a different language. The language of every
island must be learned by the missionary as he hears it
spoken by the lips of the untaught savage, and then he
must reduce it to a written form for the first time. In
such a field as this will all your literary accomplish-
ments not find ample exercise and scope in writing these
languages, in translating the Bible and giving it to the
natives in their own tongue, in preparing other books
for them, in teaching them, and in preaching the
gospel to these perishing multitudes of poor heathen.
Ah friends! there is no work, nor sphere in this world,
in which the greatest talents, the most accomplished
minds, and the most profound scholars could more
honourably and profitably be employed for God.
There is no field in which their labours could be expected
to produce greater or more lasting results —results that
eternity alone will unfold. What earthly honour is
like that of translating the Word of God into a new
language ? Give me this and the blessed results that
are designed to follow, and I seek no other honour,
you need no other. Eemember that Jesus has prom-
ised his supporting grace and rich reward to all who
so live and labour.
It is not a field in which you can expect to rise to
earthly wealth and fame. Gentlemen, if such be the
ambition of any of you, keep far away from our
mission work, for you have neither part nor lot in it.
Such desires found no place in the breast of Jesus the
Great Missionary; nor do they find a place in the heart
of any true missionary of the present day. Having
drank deeply of the spirit of his great Master, like
Paul, for Him he lives, for Him he labours, and to Him
he looks for his rich reward while he preaches the


gospel to the poor perishing heathen. He may live
unknown to the world, and be lightly esteemed even
by some of the few who do know him; but this gives
him no concern. He knows how Jesus was treated,
and feels that it is enough if the servant be as his
master. His lonely home, his plain garb, and his
humble fare are better far than Christ’s were, when,
despised and rejected of men, He had not where to lay
his head. The true missionary does not look at the
honours and comforts of home, and fret over his own
supposed hardships. Ho! no! His heart is in his
Master’s work. As it lies before him in its awful
nature and consequences, in the magnitude of its
length and breadth, he weeps over the perishing
heathen around him, he does all he can to enlighten
them, and wishes every day of his life were a year,
so that he might spend it all in the soul-inspiring
heaven like work of teaching them the evil of sin, and
the knowledge of salvation through Jesus. His eye
constantly rests on Jesus the great model Missionary,
whom he tries to follow in the prosecution of his work.
Faithfully he tries to perform every duty, and is not only
contented in his work, but joy and gratitude fill his
heart at being permitted so to labour for him to whom
he owes his all. Many trials and tears he may have
peculiar to his lot, but he bears them all in silent
resignation, rejoicing to spend and be spent for the
blessed Jesus. Every evidence of an enquiring or
penitent heathen that comes before him fills his
heart with gratitude and praise. Yes, he has many
sources of real joy that the world knows not of, and
that even home pastors seldom taste. If his heart is
really in his Master’s work, of all men he is the most
happy; but if not, of all men he is most miserable.
Therefore, only those who have counted the cost and
feel that their hearts are in the work, should become
missionaries.


Students, 0 that I could take you to these islands and
let you see the real condition of the heathen as I have
seen them! lam sure your love for Jesus Christ, and
your desire to save souls, would lead you to compass-
ionate them, so that you would haste to enlighten and
save them, and find ample joy in spending and being
spent in such blessed work. If you have only the
true missionary spirit, I assure you, that notwith-
standing the trials and dangers of the work, in it you
will have daily and increasing sources of comfort and
joy. Excluded from home with many of its comforts,
and its associations, and its dear Christian society, you
would have the inward pleasure of doing your utmost
to carry out Christ’s great commission to “disciple all
nations;” and you would experience the fulfilment of
the conjoined promise, “Lo, I am with you alway;”
thus you would have the joy of being co-workers
with Jesus in bringing in the fruits of his great
scheme and work of Redemption. His presence would
increase your joys, and soften and sweeten all your
trials in the work. And if any fruit resulted from
your labours, you would have the pleasure of seeing its
immediate effects on your people; you would have the
unspeakable joy of being instrumental in freeing them
from eternal misery, and bringing them to enjoy the
blessings of the redeemed. At death you would have
the joy of seeing them in heaven. Think of the
eternal joy that you would thus bring them to possess.
Think of the good that they may be instrumental in
doing for the cause; for if you convert one soul you
set the machinery a-going, that by God’s blessing may
convert thousands. Everjr jiew convert becomes a
fellow-labourer, a most zealous, devoted, and success-
ful missionary, being able to meet and deal with the
prejudices, superstitions, and objections of his coun-
trymen, far more effectually than any foreign mission-


ary ever can; and then, as this is not our rest, think
of the present and future joy of your eternal reward.
Oh students! I entreat you to weigh well before
God these momentous questions; make them the
subject of careful thought and prayer, as the salvation
of many thousands may depend on your decision, and
if they do not induce you to become missionaries, I
know not what will. My constant desire and prayer
are, that God may shew each of you the path of duty
which He has assigned you; that He may bless you
all, and lead you all in the way that He would
have you to go: so that whether your lot is cast at
home or in the foreign field, you may live for his
glory; and being able and successful preachers of
the gospel, may you bring forth much fruit in leading
many, many sinners to have peace with God, through
faith in Jesus Christ. May you all be able and
honoured workmen in the Lord’s vineyard, burning
and shining lights in the church below, that you may
meet with joy in the church above, where Jesus will
be all and in all, and His praise the eternal theme and
joy of the redeemed.


TO THE PASTORS OF THE REFORMED
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
Fathers and Brethren,
Think it not presumption if I make my appeal to
you also, on behalf of our poor heathen, for we would
desire exceedingly to see some of you become mission-
aries, and assist us in our work among them. All are
agreed that Students and Preachers may be chosen for
missionary work, and with great propriety sent to the
foreign mission field, and from them nearly all our
missionaries are got. But unfortunately for us at pre-
sent, our church has few preachers, and can give us
no missionaries from this source; and as what has
been said to the Students applies equally to them, we
set the claims of the heathen before them, leaving the
decision with God and their own consciences, and press
on to the more difficult part of our work.
Now, permit me to state, that I see no proper
reason why missionary work should be entrusted to
young men alone. I never could understand how it is
that missionaries are only selected from among the
students and probationers. Is the nature of the work
such that it may be left to the young and inexper-
ienced men, while the ministers of age, influence, and
experience are all kept at home for the more important
and weighty duties of the church? Surely for all
other great undertakings in both church and state,
men of matured wisdom, of age and experience, are
found to be most useful. Consequently men possessing


such qualifications are chosen to occupy the most
important posts, and to manage such undertakings,
because experience has proved that they succeed best
in such hands. Hence we find such men occupying
the highest places and wielding the greatest influence
in directing both ecclesiastical and secular affairs.
Why has the venerable Palmerston stood so long at
the head of the British government? How was Sir
Colin Campbell chosen to subdue the late Indian
Mutiny? What gave Dr. Chalmers that power
that he so ably used in maturing his plans for
church extension, and for church freedom, until he
was no longer able to tolerate the Erastian yoke?
The state having assumed the crown-rights of Jesus
Christ in dictating to His church, like a second John
Knox he rose among his coadjutors, sounded the
note of jubilee, and lit up a flame in that vast
assembly of Scottish divines, which has acted like a
Third Reformation in Scotland, purifying and arousing
the churches at home, and sending its light and
blessings throughout Christendom, and far hence to
many heathen lands. Oh that they had only come
one step nearer to Second Reformation principles, then
we had been united! But may we not even now hope
for, and do all we can to bring about this much longed
for consummation? What gave the late professors of
our church the influence that they possessed and
exercised, not only in our church, but far beyond its
pale? What gave Paul the aged such a hold upon
the affections of the whole church, and such influence
over all her members? Humanly speaking in all
these instances and in thousands of others which
might be adduced, was it not the matured wisdom of
age and experience that gave this acknowledged
power and influence over the minds of others? Well


then, if one or two ministers of age, influence, and
wisdom, matured by experience, were to give up their
churches and come out to our islands as missionaries,
might not their assistance he of great advantage to us
in our work, and might not their doing so give a new
impetus to the church’s zeal in prosecuting her
missions both at home and abroad? And might it not
provoke many of the younger ministers to follow their
example? Ah! surely there is something out of the
common order of affairs needed to excite our church’s
flagging zeal in the Lord’s work!
But if we cannot get ministers of age and experience
to become missionaries, we have many young ministers
who have lately become pastors; and what prevents
some of them from becoming missionaries? What
prevents the church from separating some of them from
their congregations, and setting them apart for this
urgent work among the heathen? The experience
that they have had of the duties of a home-pastor’s
life will qualify them all the better for going abroad
as missionaries. For though the work differs in its
form, in its spirit it is the same, and what gives
success in the one department, will also give success in
the other. Their having been pastors, if they have
been faithful and acceptable in performing the varied
duties of their exalted office, will have gained them a
circle of warmly attached friends, and a congregation
deeply interested in their future movements, who
would follow them with their prayers and assistance
in their work. Such experience and assistance would
be a blessing both to themselves and to the mission.
But now a host of objections meet me from every
quarter, showing that I have struck a chord involving
many tender interests, and intimating that I must
walk cautiously through this all but forbidden ground.


Setting aside many of the objections which appear
unimportant, I am forced to answer a few of those
which appear to have some weight, so as if possible to
induce some of the pastors of our church to become
missionaries.
Many say “It is wrong to divide the pastoral tie, to
take a minister away from his flock, even to become
a missionary.”
I answer, right or wrong, I need not wait here to
discuss its validity, since this sacred tie is often broken
in all branches of the Presbyterian Church in our land
—our own not excepted. Why then bring this objec-
tion against pastors becoming missionaries, when an
urgent call like the present comes from heathen lands,
seeing that in the actual practice of the church, the
pastoral tie is often broken, when, I hesitate not to
say, inferior motives often prompt to the change; at
least it is seldom that so powerful motives can be shewn
as are urged in the present case. Certainly if a pastor
can be translated from one congregation of the church
to another, when it is supposed there are proper reasons
for the change; surely more satisfactory reasons, or
more weighty reasons could not be urged to lead to
such a change, than those we have presented on behalf
of our poor islanders. That a pastor who is labouring
amongst a flock of fifty, or it may be a few hundred
members, should be freed from that charge, that he
may go and preach the gospel in a field where at pre-
sent there are only four men labouring among 150,000
perishing heathen. Nay, I might say three of them
are on Aneiteum, now a Christian island, and beyond
it there may be more than 150,000 heathen; there
cannot be less, according to all calculations, even on
our one group, for which I plead. Would it be wrong
to free a pastor from his charge, where he spends his


time and talents amongst a flock where he will not
have above one hundred, or it may he two hundred
persons on Sabbath at church, and all these well versed
in the word of God, and in the leading doctrines of
our common Christianity? Would it be wrong to
free him from this narrow sphere, that he may go
where there are thirty beautiful islands, with their
150,000 heathen now without a single missionary, or
one to bring them to Jesus for salvation—all waiting
for the law of God, but none to give it: that he may
go where these perishing thousands of Ethiopians might
be led by him to stretch out their hands to God, but
now they are perishing because there is no man to care
for their souls. Hell is enlarged to receive them, as
generation after generation they sink helplessly and
irrecoverably into its burning lake. 0 look at them
as they writhe in agony, hear their wailing cry as it
constantly increases, and let me ask, Could stronger
reasons be given for any pastor being separated from
his flock here, that at once he may go as a missionary
and give them the means of grace, without which they
cannot be saved? To my mind the numbers and the
claims of any home congregation upon their pastor are
light indeed, when compared to the claims of those
thousands, ay millions, of heathen, which are now
from every benighted land crying to Britain for
missionaries. If such a pastor could only bring one
heathen soul to Jesus, then that one would try to bring
others, and so the gospel light would spread to many:
for as in the first ages of the church, so on our islands
even now, the moment any person is led to embrace
Jesus Christ by faith for salvation, that instant he be-
comes amissionary, and his whole heart and soul longs
to bring others to Him, that they also may participate
in his new joy; consequently every convert becomes a


most efficient and successful missionary. Thus through
one pastor going among them, the gospel light might
be given to thousands, and indeed it often is. The
Rev. John Geddie was a pastor before he went to
Aneiteum. He was separated from his flock in Nova
Scotia that he might go to the heathen, when no
licentiate of the church could be got to undertake the
work. In his case the pastoral tie was broken that he
might become a missionary. Look now at the blessed
results. Had he not left his flock in Nova Scotia, pro-
bably Aneiteum would yet have been in heathen dark-
ness. But now, through the blessing of God on his
exertions, and those of his fellow labourers, in less than
fifteen years above 5000 of the most degraded savage
cannibals have been led to embrace Christianity, and
to practice its requirements. Here certainly we have
clear proof that the gospel has lost none of its original
power and influence over the human mind: it is still
mighty as ever for accomplishing its own peculiar work.
But it must be sent to the heathen; this is our duty,
and the issues rest with God: yet as instruments we
participate in the unspeakable pleasure of seeing the
blessed results. To me then, it seems wrong to keep
so many able and devoted young pastors at home, where
many of them have, alas! but little evidence that
they are doing good; indeed, except in keeping their
flocks together, and in supplying their Sabbath wants,
they have little scope for the exercise of their minis-
terial gifts—every corner of the field at home being
so well occupied by evangelical ministers of other
denominations. The wants and building up of the
church at home must be attended to, and the smallest
flocks in it must be faithfully cared for. The apostles
were to begin at Jerusalem, and afterwards, when
engaged in their great work, they took particular care


of the interests of the churches (probably small
churches) which met in certain houses, and yet they
went on with their great work of trying to “Go into all
the world and preach the gospel to every creature.”
We, in following their example, are not to despise the
day of small things, yet we are bound to labour where
we are likely to do the greatest amount of good, where
we are likely to produce the most fruit to the glory of
God. Then is it not heartless, and almost like losing
precious time to have some pastors labouring at home
where they have little encouragement, except in seeing
an individual now and again join the membership of
the congregation under their care, it may be because
their sphere is too limited, or because the field is not
suited to their peculiar talents and qualifications—
while an urgent call from the heathen is lying so long
before the church, and no one to accept of it. Were
two or three of such pastors separated from their
charges by the church, and sent to the heathen as
missionaries, they might bring so many thousands into
the church. 0 that such objectors would but more
carefully consider the condition and claims of the
heathen, who have never heard of the blessed name of
Jesus. 0 pastors of the church, pardon me when I
entreat you carefully, at the throne of grace and in the
light of eternity, to consider the claims of the thou-
sands, yes millions, of poor perishing heathen, who
have no man to lead them to Jesus or to care for
their souls. Consider what claims they have upon
you, and determine whether you are labouring where
you ought to be, where you are likely to do the most
good, and where you are likely to produce the most
fruit for the glory of God in the extension of Christ’s
kingdom among men. Is there really not one of you
that will become a missionary and go to the heathen?


But another common objection is, Why take away
men who are settled in churches, useful among their
people, and acknowledged of God in doing good?
To this I answer, Surely their having been settled
as pastors, till they have proved that they are useful
among their people, acceptable as ministers, and
•acknowledged of God in doing good, appears to me the
strongest reason possible why they, in preference to
others, should be selected for missionaries. Their
pastoral connection has given them experience, and
their qualifications and talents having been thus exer-
cised till they have done good, they are proved men;
consequently men in whom the church will have the
utmost confidence, as being qualified for the work; so
she will be ready to do all she can to assist them in all
their future movements in the work; certainly then
such men should be preferred as missionaries. The
influence they have acquired in the church, by the
good they have done as pastors, will give their word
the more influence in the church at home on behalf of
the mission. Their doing good as ministers, shews
that they are able to do good as missionaries; and their
acknowledged position in the church will give their
opinions as missionaries the more influence with their
brethren at home, who were associated with them as
pastors. A few such men becoming missionaries,
might prove a blessing to the church at home, as well
as to the heathen abroad. Active, useful men at home
are the men most likely to prove good missionaries;
indeed, we want such men only to join us in our
mission. I confess that if we could get a sufficient
number of well qualified, devoted young men, who
have at an early age given themselves to Christ and
His work among the heathen, and who have diligently
prosecuted their studies with the intention of becoming
missionaries, we would prefer them to all others, as


they are most likely for many reasons to prove the
best missionaries. But failing to obtain such men, we
would desire to have some of our devoted young
pastors: for we would prefer young men to men more
advanced in life for our mission, except it were that one
man was needed with peculiar qualifications for some
particular department of the work; then let the man
who appears to be best qualified for that work be
chosen and sent to it, seeing it will be likely to succeed
best in such hands.
Bid not the Holy Ghost require Paul and Barnabas
to be separated from the church at Antioch for mission
work among the heathen ? Were they not useful men in
that church, and acknowledged of God in doing good?
Had they not diligently, with much hard working,
during many severe trials, gathered that church from
among the heathen as their own spiritual children?
How trying then to leave it! They were the very
men above all others who were likely to be useful in
that church; the men that the church would have
supposed she could not want—her spiritual fathers,
without whom she could not succeed. Tet these are
the men that by divine authority she must separate
from herself, dedicate to the work, and send far thence
among the Gentiles. Oh friends! could we have a
higher example, one more to the point, one better
calculated to justify the course of procedure for which
I am pleading, or one which shews more clearly
that God raises up and qualifies the men needed
for such work. Judicious caution ought to be
exercised by committees in selecting and sending out
missionaries to the heathen. All men are not
qualified for becoming missionaries on our islands.
We want pious, well qualified, active, energetic,
cheerful, happy, persevering men, and, if possible,
proved men. Many men are useful as pastors at home


who would not succeed so well as missionaries, and
vice versa; but, as a general rule, men who succeed in
the one department, are most likely to succeed in the
other. Men who are not succeeding well at home,
and therefore feel discontented, should seldom be
selected as missionaries: for if they cannot manage
a Christian congregation, they are less likely to succeed
in instructing rude savages, and in bringing them into
the unity and harmony of a Christian church. Though
such men generally find something or somebody to
blame for all their grievances, either real or supposed,
yet veiy often those difficulties and causes of offence
are owing to their own temperament and peculiarities,
which make them ready to find fault with, and be-
come offended with every one, before they look within
for the real cause, and there try to remedy the evil.
Such men are unfit for being missionaries, for unless
they succeed and see immediate fruits resulting from
their labours, they will take a dark view of things, be-
come disheartened, easily excited and overcome with
difficulties, fret in the work, and give everything the
colouring of their own minds, and so they will be less
useful and less happy in the mission field than they
were at home. If they cannot manage a home congre-
gation, how can they be expected to manage a lawless
mass of degraded savages ? Yet I believe some men do
not get well on at home because their sphere of labour
is not adapted to their peculiar talents and turn of
mind, which would make them able and useful mission-
aries. But for our mission we must have cheerful
active men, whose hearts are in the work; men who
can look on both the dark and bright side of the field,
but whose active happy turn of mind leads them
rather to dwell on the bright side. Men of such
energy and perseverance of mind and body, that they
are able to nerve themselves for difficulties and trials,


and always ready to turn everything, whether pros-
perous or adverse, to the best account for the advance-
ment of their great work among the heathen. We
want useful men who have counted the cost by
looking at the work in every aspect, and who will go
to it prepared, for the sake of the work, to endure any
hardship or trial that may come; for having given
their hearts to it and to God in it, they must be
prepared to exercise much of the charity that thinketh
no evil, quietly to submit to the trials that God is
pleased to send them, and to labour on in their lonely
and oftimes heartless work, with the eye of faith
directed to Jesus, persevering in season and out of
season, till the heathen around them are brought to
rejoice in Christ; —if they faint not they shall reap the
harvest with joy. Oh, my friends, give us such men
for the work: men who have tasted that God is
gracious, who know the value of their own souls,
who live near to Jesus, and who weep over sinners,
working and praying for their salvation; and though
for a time they sow in tears, yet they will seek and
wait for the divine blessing, till both you and they
will be led to rejoice by the rich harvest of sheaves
that you have been instrumental in bringing into the
church of God. "What has been the result of the work
on Aneiteum ?
Another common objection is,—pastors are settled
in life, are generally married, and have families, which
circumstances disqualify them for becoming mission-
aries. Let me ask, are there not some pastors in our
church, who, when they were students, and even after
being licensed to preach the gospel, had a strong in-
ward conviction that they should become missionaries?
that there was more need for their services abroad
than at home; that the claims of the heathen are very
great, and that they should therefore become mission-


aries ? But as no opening in the mission field present-
ed special claims for them, and as no personal call was
pressed upon them, though general calls were again
and again made of a most urgent character, yet they
halted between two opinions, still thinking that they
should become missionaries; but meantime keeping
the thought in their own breasts, and continuing to do
all the duties of a probationer in the church till a call
came to them from some congregation. When it was
presented, for a time they hesitated, as conscience
urged the claims of the heathen, giving them a secret
conviction that they should become missionaries. At
last one after another got over the difficulty by accept-
ing the call for the present, as that seems to he their
path of duty, but still the claims of the heathen are so
great and so urgent in their estimation, that in a short
time they will devote themselves to the foreign mission
field. But now they very properly got interested in
their pastoral duties, and in the business of the church.
They married, and became the heads of families, and
the conviction that they ought to have become mission-
aries has all along been pressing itself upon their
minds. But now they quiet conscience by saying, “I
am settled in life, and as I cannot take my wife and
family to the heathen, I must now dismiss the idea of
being a missionary myself; but, if spared, I will make
one of my sons a missionary, and I will do all I can
to foster a missionary spirit among my people, and
thus I may do as much good to the missionary cause
as if I had been a missionary myself.” Thus the
heathen are left to perish till their son becomes a
missionary, which, alas! very seldom takes place.
Tew pastors in our church have sons in the ministry,
and there is not one who has a son a missionary. Ah,
friends ! you know that though such resolutions may
be, and generally are, conscientiously made, yet they


may be frustrated by a thousand contingencies over
which you have no control, and so the heathen are left
to perish. I know there are pastors in our church
who have tried to satisfy their minds in this way.
And I admit that, by this mode of reasoning, such men
often come to the right conclusion, for missionaries
must have decision of character. When God says, this
is the way, walk ye in it, they must feel it to be their
duty implicitly to obey. Procrastination is dangerous.
Conscience may be stifled and silenced; and habit may
lead us to fall into and feel contented in doing what
is very different from what God once pressed as the
clear path of duty. But should this fall into the hands
of any such pastors, ah ! I entreat them to reconsider
the whole question, and see if it is not possible, ay,
and practicable, for them to accept this urgent call and
now to become missionaries. While there are thous-
ands, yes, and millions of heathen perishing without
any missionary to lead them to Jesus, surely it is not
too late. Let us haste while our day lasts; so far as
our personal efforts are concerned or available for the
work, our opportunities will soon be past, our accounts
rendered, and the work entrusted to others. How
shall we meet these poor heathen at the bar of God ?
Oh, brethren, let these solemn considerations prompt
us to do all we can to save the heathen! Are we doing
what we ought to do for them ?
But he is married, and is it right to take a lady
to such a field among such naked, painted savages
and cannibals ? At one time such an objection was
defended by the home propagators of Christian missions,
but the experience of all missions, and especially of our
South Sea missions, has proved that married mission-
aries are most efficient and successful. If the mission-
ary’s wife is a woman of the right stamp, if she has a
true missionary spirit, for many years at the commence-


ment of almost every mission, she really does as much,
if not more of the work than her husband. It matters
not how able and devoted he is, this will be the case.
And what she does, if an active, judicious, pious
woman, opens up the way for his doing much to
advance the interests of the work, that without her, it
would scarcely be possible for him to do. Her presence
and assistance in the work protect him from much pre-
judice, annoyance, and grief, to which without her he
would be constantly exposed ; not to speak of how
she increases his personal and domestic comforts, cheer-
ing him by her company, and assisting him by her
prayers and advice. All are aware that it is not the
missionary, but the missionary’s wife that first reaches,
teaches, and influences the children and the females at
the opening of all new mission stations. And all are
also aware of the powerful influence that the children
and the ladies exert over home society from its lowest
to its highest grades. And though the females and
the children occupy a much lower position in the scale
of society on our islands ; indeed, though they occupy
a very subordinate position, yet they exercise a con-
siderable influence over their haughty savage lords.
My life has more than once been saved by the pleadings
and cries of dear little heathen children to whom I had
shown kindness ; and frequently have I been saved by
the influence of females, either because they had become
interested in Christianity, or because they felt that I
had tried to lessen their oppression. They have even
thrown themselves between me and the savage, and on
their naked bodies received the blows of his club
intended for me. Yes, they have considerable influence,
and if the missionary’s wife is a right minded woman,
influenced by the missionary spirit, and properly
interested in her work, she increases that influence


almost daily, for she is watched and imitated hy the
females and the children in all her actions and move-
ments, so that to a large extent she forms their
character as she does that of her own children. Indeed,
her assistance and presence have been found so necessary
that every society engaged in the South Sea Missions
has unanimously recommended that if possible no
unmarried man he sent out as a missionary. The
value and work of such female missionaries will he
more apparent to you if you think of the work of the
able and devoted Judsons. Or look at what has been
done on Aneiteum by the worthy wives of our honoured
missionaries. I believe they have done as much as
their husbands have done to elevate and Christianize
that island. And they have only done what all mis-
sionaries’ wives who are fit for the work have done,
and must do, in opening up any new mission field in
the South Seas. Look at the devoted Mrs. Johnston,
though her husband fell in the work long ago, yet she
continues teaching the females of Aneiteum to love
Jesus, and now she takes charge of the Orphan Institu-
tion on that island. And think of the other devoted
and accomplished female missionaries who have suffered
and died in the work, and who we hope are now in
glory. They were equally instrumental in doing good
so long as they were spared, but their work is finished,
and now they enjoy the rest which awaits the people
of God. Without speaking disparagingly, compared
with those, what are home pastor’s wives doing to save
souls ? What fruits are they producing to the glory
of God for the extension of Christ’s kingdom ? What
opportunities have they of doing good, compared with
those female missionaries ? Oh mothers and daughters
of our church! what has Christianity done for you ?
What claims have the heathen upon you ? and what


responsibility has Jesus laid you under to do all you
can to extend the glad news of salvation to your poor,
dark, benighted sisters, that they also may be elevated
and made happy as you are in highly favoured
Christian Britain. Surely, then, a minister’s being
married gives him a most important and necessary
qualification for his being successful in mission work.
And a few years’ experience in home work to his wife
will have qualified her all the better for the more
arduous duties of the foreign field. Thus two points
in the objection are strong arguments in favour of my
appeal.
But their children. They could not take them to
the heathen, and their parental feelings would not let
them leave them at home ; certainly then it is un-
reasonable to think of takings such men to the mission
field. Let me ask, have missionaries no children, and
have they not as much affection for their children as
home ministers have ? Yet they have all to send their
children home to be educated among their friends.
Have missionaries no parental' feelings to be lacerated
when they are forced to send their children home for
their education ? Have they no parental love prompt-
ing them to long for the society and training of the
dear lambs that God has given them ? Or, does their
work so blunt their feelings as to make them stoical in
its prosecution ? No, friends! No! Their work is
not of such a character, but though they are possessed
of, and pressed to their work by, the finest feelings
that can move the human breast, yet their pity for
perishing souls, and their desire to save them, and a
clear sense of duty prompt them to sacrifice all feelings
to duty in this as in every thing else, that they may
serve Jesus among the heathen, for they firmly believe
that Jesus has said, “ Whosoever loveth son or
daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.”


But, if having children is a reason why home pastors
should not go to the foreign mission work, surely it is
as good a reason for missionaries who have children in
the field leaving their work and coming home to
educate and look after their children. Now, what
real friend of missions would be prepared to justify
such a course of procedure? Yet it is just what this
objection would lead to. Pastors in leaving home for
the foreign mission field are required to do nothing
with their children, but what every missionary of
necessity must do when in the field —here then they
may be considered as being equal. Nay, to me it is
evident that the advantages are on the home pastor's
side. He being at home has present knowledge of
those friends best qualified to take the guardianship of
his children, and to perform their duty faithfully in
training them up in the fear of Grod. Consequently
he can judge for himself and select those guardians
best qualified and most likely to manage his children
judiciously. He can with his own hands place his
children under their care, and give all needed directions
regarding them and their education, so that he may
leave them with a contented mind, compared with the
missionary who in a foreign land has concluded that
duty compels him to send them home for their educa-
tion. Then with an anxious mind he makes all the
preparation he can for their departure, and must place
them on board a vessel, to go a voyage of about 16,000
miles, and often among strangers who may feel very
little interest in them while at sea; and when they
land they may find that the friends expected to receive
them are dead since they sailed, or they may not make
them very welcome, and attend to them as their parents
had desired. Looking at all these considerations,
certainly the advantages are on the home pastor's side.


But to either the trial is severe indeed; yet duty to
our Lord Jesus Christ and the heathen leads to it, and
his grace supports under it, therefore here let us leave
this most tender subject, presuming that we have
shown the objection to be entirely in favour of pastors
becoming missionaries.
But another objection which finds many supporters
is, —pastors are now, from the altered state of society,
led to adopt a mode of living which soon unfits them
for going abroad as missionaries, and really our
church at present has so much need of such men as are
asked for, that she cannot spare any of them.
What does the first part of this objection amount to,
but simply, that pastors are led to adopt home comforts
and luxuries which seem to become so necessary to
their existence and usefulness that they cannot give
them up and submit to the hardships and drudgery of
a missionary’s every-day life. But may we not ask, —
do missionaries not give up or rather leave these com-
forts that they may go to the heathen, and have they
not an equal right to them with pastors who remain at
home ? While boys, werepthey not educated in the
same schools, enjoying the same advantages and equal
privileges ? When students, did they not study in the
same classes and universities, and generally enjoy the
same comforts ? When licensed to preach the gospel,
did they not enter the holy office of the ministry by
the very same course of study and examination ? At
their ordination, did they not come under the same
solemn vows to the church and to God, and are they
not laid under the same weighty and solemn obliga-
tions to their great Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
to seek by every means in their power the advancement
of his glory in the salvation of sinners, in the extension
of his church, and in every other way peculiar to their


exalted and most responsible office ? So far, then, they
stand on an equal footing. But because some of them
become pastors at home, and are led, and able to
conform to the customs of society, as it is said, in
maintaining a rank corresponding to their position
in life, is this a reason why they should not be ready
and willing to renounce all and go to the heathen when
duty calls ? I confess that it is easier for a young man
who has not adopted such a mode of living to go to
the heathen, than it is for a pastor to give it up and
go, but both are bound to sacrifice comforts and
pleasures when these stand in the way of duty. And
by the working of reason and conscience, God will
convince every man what is or ought to be his path of
duty, and if this seems to lie in the direction of going
to the heathen, why not at once comply? Does their
now altered position, in the slightest alter their vows to
the church, their obligations to God, or their duty to
the perishing heathen? Certainly not. Is their altered
position, so far as their domestic comforts and their
modes of living are concerned, not of their own making,
and because they cannot take these with them, or enjoy
them to the same extent among the heathen, are they
therefore freed from all obligations to go abroad as
missionaries ? Will such reasons justify when the
heathen and they meet face to face at the bar of God's
justice ? No. I feel certain that no such excuses will
be pled then. Oh, brethren, let our responsibility and
the claims of the perishing heathen be carefully and
prayerfully considered in this light, and surely we will
act differently towards them. Then indeed would
both the Pastors and the Churches bestir themselves
and put forth efforts in proportion to the importance
and vast magnitude of the work which Jesus has
entrusted to them. To them Christ gave the great


work of evangelising the world by the preaching of
“the gospel to every creature.” And praised be God
it has accomplished great things for us, and it has
spread its saving light into many lands. And surely
“ the Lord has done great things for us ” as a church,
and by us among the heathen in bringing them to
rejoice in Jesus “ whence joy to us is brought.” Our
church has done as much, I believe more, in propor-
tion to her membership than any other branch of the
Presbyterian Church in Scotland. At her last meeting
of Synod she had 4729 members, and till lately she
had four missionaries, which was more than a mis-
sionary to every ten of her ministers, including both
pastors and preachers. This is good if the Mosaic law
is to be our rule for supporting religion and mission-
aries, but when we look at the masses of heathen that
are perishing, and at God’s goodness to us, have we
done what we should have done to save them, have
we done what we could have done as a church to send
the gospel to them ? Alas ! how much remains yet
to be done before they have all even heard of salvation
through the blessed Jesus. Oh let every minister and
member of the church rise to the help of the Lord, and
do all they can individually and collectively to seek
and save the perishing heathen.
But, again, because another part of these ministers
become missionaries and go abroad, are they an inferior
class of men who could not succeed at home, and who
must therefore bear with hardships, trials, and poverty
that those who become home pastors could not endure,
or what lays them under such obligations ? No,
friends ! I know that you are too generous and noble
minded to admit of such a conclusion as this! I feel
assured that you will claim for missionaries at least an
equal right to all the comforts and advantages of home


pastors, and that they should be placed in a position
at least to be able to secure the minimum of such
advantages. If their love for Jesus and for perishing
souls is such that it forces them to leave home and
friends and comforts, that they may go and preach the
gospel among the dark places of the earth in foreign
lands, it seems hard indeed if they are not to be looked
upon and spoken of as having at least an equal right
to all the comforts enjoyed by those who remain at
home. And it seems as hard to exclude those ministers
who become pastors at home, from the privilege and
honour of going abroad as missionaries, if they feel so
inclined, simply because they have been led so far to
conform to the habits of the society in which for a
time their lot has been cast.
But you say the church has so few of such pastors
as are wanted, she cannot at present spare any of them
to go as missionaries. How will you prove that the
church is justified in keeping so many of the Lord's
servants to herself at home, in the face of such an urgent
call as this from the heathen—when she has so many
able and devoted young pastors at present, and so
few missionaries among the heathen abroad ? The
heathen have from age to age and from year to year
been increasing their continued cry, “Come over and
help us,” which cry, alas, has only been heard and
answered by a very few. The cry is now becoming
louder and louder every year, as from the shores of
India, Africa, China, Madagascar, our South Sea
Islands, and a thousand other dark spots on our earth,
it comes with every wave that strikes our British
shores, and is echoed through the churches by every
breeze that blows on our Christian land. To Britain
now as to Jerusalem of old, the eyes of all nations seem
to turn for gospel light and Christian help. Oh, that


as a nation and as churches, God’s people in Great
Britain, may improve their privileges, be faithful to
their trust, and let their gospel light radiate to the
very ends of the earth. Then God our own God shall
bless us, and our nation shall flourish and prosper
through the preaching of the gospel. At present, alas!
the cry for help is only heard, so as to be answered by
a very few in the churches. Is this carrying out our
Lord’s great commission, —“ Go ye, therefore, and
disciple all nations ?” Are we doing to them, as we
would be done by, were we in their position ? Oh,
that the church’s compassion for them would prompt
her to send the ablest and best of her Students,
Preachers, and Pastors to the rescue, for while her
time and opportunities are passing they are perishing
—perishing for ever!
I feel assured in my own mind that if any of you
pastors were now coming forward, and expressing your
willingness to become missionaries and go to the
heathen on the New Hebrides Islands, and were the
claims of those heathen laid properly before your
flocks certainly they would agree to the change. I
have formed a wrong estimate of the membership of our
church, if there is a single congregation in her com-
munion so very selfish that they would not cheerfully
give up their minister to become a missionary—ay,
surely they would do it though it would cost them
much pain and many tears, and they would follow him
with their best wishes, their prayers, and their pecuinary
assistance to his new work among the perishing hea-
then. Let the trial be made. Let the church
separate two or three pastors from their charges (if
such can be got willing to undertake the work) and
set them apart as missionaries, and I have no fear that
the result will be injurious to their flocks. Certainly


the congregations so deprived of their pastors would
have the present sympathy and assistance of the re-
maining ministers of the church, and would they not
have the fulfilment of our Lord’s precious promise to
those who are led to give up houses, lands, or friends
for his sake and for the sake of his kingdom? Let the
church feel certain that she is doing her duty and then
she can look up for the Divine blessing, and expect it
both upon herself and upon her mission. Send the
men that are now needed for the mission, and surely
God will provide for the wants of the church at home.
Is not the preparation of the heart in man from the
Lord ? Therefore he can soon influence and train up
any number of men that he sees to be needed for the
ministry in the church, but if looking at her present
wants and requirements at home, causes her to keep
all her able young pastors here, when she has so many
at present, and when she has such an urgent call for
help from the heathen pressed upon her, can she as
earnestly seek or expect the required increase of such
labourers. ? If such pastors were going out as mis-
sionaries it might produce the happiest effects in the
church, by causing her flagging zeal to burst forth
into a purer and holier flame of love to Jesus Christ,
purifying herself, and conferring her rich gospel
blessings upon others. It might induce many of her
pious and talented young men now turning their
attention to business, to give their hearts to God in
the ministry, and at once to enter upon the required
course of preparation for being able to preach the
gospel for the salvation of fallen man. It might lead
many pious parents to see the work in a new light,
and thus cause them to dedicate the best of their sons
to the work and to train them up, and educate them,
for the holy office of the ministry j and thus it might


lead to a greater host of ministers and missionaries
than the church has ever yet possessed. Alas I that
worldly, calculating, cold-hearted Christian parents
give so few of their sons to be preachers of the
gospel. And, alas ! that business, worldly business is
become the all absorbing question of the day, and
swallows up so many of the best and ablest of the sons
of the church. Undoubtedly we are to be “ not sloth-
ful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord.”
All praise to business when kept in its own place, it
is the backbone and life of prosperity, if the motive
power be good—but too many only aim at buying,
selling, and making worldly gain for themselves, while
the great object of life is disregarded. This being so
manifest, alas! alas! that so many pious parents in
the church who are in such worldly circumstances that
they could easily have educated their sons for the
ministry, dedicate and educate them all, or nearly all, to
the business of this world. Christian parents could
you dedicate your sons to a nobler work than that of
preaching the gospel ? Could you expend the means
that God has given you in educating them for a better
cause ? Could you train them for a better master, for
one to whom you are more indebted, or for one that
will give you and them a richer reward ? Remember,
nearly all they gain by business perishes in time, but
their being lent to the Lord so long as they live, in the
work of the ministry, may, and if they are faithful,
will produce much fruit for eternity in the salvation of
many souls. Oh fathers and mothers in the church, I
entreat you to meditate upon these things, these
solemn and awfully important questions involving the
best interests of so many, and may God guide you and
help you to do your duty faithfully to the world, to
your children, to the church, and to the cause of Him
to whom you owe so much.


Let me entreat such objectors and the church to
remember that the Eev. John Geddie, of Aneiteum,
was a married man, settled in life, with a family, the
pastor of a congregation, acknowledged of God in doing
good among his people, and eminently useful and
successful in stirring up the mission spirit in the
church, and yet he was separated from his flock, and
left home, and comforts, and friends, and gave up all,
that with his able and devoted wife he might go as a
missionary to the heathen. Now, see how God has
blessed their efforts, and crowned their labours with
success, in bringing thousands of heathen on Aneiteum
to seek and serve our Lord Jesus Christ. Did the loss
of this able and devoted man cause his congregation to
suffer ? No ! but by enjoying the promised blessing
it has prospered ever since, and continues to take the
deepest interest in our mission to this day. If a
higher example is asked for let us take one from
Scripture. Were not Paul and Barnabas separated
from the church for mission work among the heathen ?
And at a time when the church at Antioch might have
said we have so few of such men we cannot want any
of them, but especially these two who are the great
men of our church. But if we must part with some
of our ministers for such work, send Lucius and Menaen,
who are younger men, that we could more easily spare
at present; for the church will suffer great loss if we
give up these men who are our ablest spiritual teachers.
But no! In obedience to the Divine command, they
are at once separated from the church, and dedicated
to the mission work assigned to them, by laying on of
the hands and by prayer and fasting, and what were
the blessed results ? But you say they had the direct
command of God in this case. So has our church.
Hear the words as they fall from the lips of Jesus as


fresh and powerful to us now as when they were first
heard by the twelve Apostles :—“ Go ye therefore and
teach all nations.” You admit that we are bound to
the utmost of our power to carry out the spirit and
work of this commission. Well, then, if the church at
present acknowledges this to be a call from the heathen
for more missionaries, and if all that are required
cannot be got among the students and preachers, let
her give a call to such of her young pastors as in every
sense seem best qualified and adapted for missionary
work, that they may go as missionaries to the heathen.
Of course all would prefer them to come forward and
of their own voluntary choice to offer themselves as
missionaries for the foreign field. But failing this, if
such a call were given, I hope there are few, if any,
pastors in our church who would reject it. Indeed, I
hope there are none who, after careful consideration,
would be found to say, “ The field is too narrow ; in
my present charge I have greater opportunities of
doing good ; the call is not unanimous, nor signed and
supported by a sufficient number of the members and
adherents of the mission to induce my acceptance; and
the salary offered is too small, it would not afford me
my present comforts and luxuries; and besides, there
may be difficulty in raising it if the number of mission-
aries is so increased, —for such reasons I am necessitated
to refuse the call.” Now just think of Paul and
Barnabas having given such reasons for refusing to
leave the church at Antioch, and therefore declining
the call they had received. To them it was enough
to know God’s will through the church in such a
matter, to undertake any duty or work set before them
in the cause of Jesus Christ. And such a call if given
in the present case might be as much in accordance
with the mind and purpose of God as was the call of
the Apostles.


Students, preachers, and pastors of our church, do
the mind and hand of God not appear in the present
call? Strangers in Australia, Tasmania, and New
Zealand who were appealed to for help, could not at
present give us men, because they require double their
present number of active faithful ministers to open up
and fully occupy their new and extensive colonies.
But manifesting their sympathy with us, and their
deep interest in our mission, they wished us God’s
blessing, and cheerfully and liberally gave us above
five thousand pounds to assist with the Lord’s work on
our islands. Ministers and people, high and low, from
the Sabbath school children to the excellent governors
of their colonies, cordially united, and more especially
among the Presbyterians and Independents, and
placed this princely sum in our hands, with £3OOO
of it to pay for our new mission ship, the “Australasian
Day Spring,” and with £3OO of it to be paid yearly in
£5 subscriptions, to support native teachers, and with
the remainder I am sent home to try and bring out
more missionaries. The Lord has thus raised up many
new and influential friends for our mission, and greatly
increased our means for its extension. All this encour-
agement surely indicates that the hand of God is in it,
and that he is urging us to send additional labourers
to the rescue of our poor heathen. And now, if we
can send out a sufficient number of efficient mission-
aries to the work on our islands, the interest and
sympathy of our Australian friends will be deepened
and increased, and God will continue the liberality
with which they have responded to our first direct call
for help to enable us to carry on and extend our mis-
sion.
Does it not look as if this were the beginning of a
great work by the Presbyterian Churches in the


Colonies, for the speedy evangelization of our South
Sea Islands which are yet in heathen darkness ? The
Colonial Churches cannot for many years give us men,
but they have shown us their readiness to give us
money to obtain and support men, if they can be got
from home. Is it not then of the utmost importance
to get these powerful churches at present interested in
our South Sea mission? The Congregational Churches
have for many years been deeply interested in the
groups of islands under the care of the London Mis-
sionary Society, and the Wesleyans are as deeply
interested in their mission on the Fijees, and the
Episcopalians in their Polynesian Mission. The
Presbyterian Church has been last in entering this
vast field of mission work, but I hope she will not be
the least zealous and successful in doing what yet
remains to be done to Christianize our poor perishing
islanders.
Australia is naturally, physically, and morally a
great country, and only in extent of territory are.
Tasmania and New Zealand inferior. The inhabitants
of these coknies are a great and noble people, and
their ministers who are appreciated are men of learning
and talent. They are first class men, and from the
character of its church-going people only first class
ministers will be appreciated and succeed there. Others
need not go, but what a field it is for such men!
Collected in these colonies, especially in Victoria, are
thousands of the most talented and best educated men
and women that ever left the British shores, and they
have gathered around them many of the ablest young
people of different countries. True, collected there
also, are thousands of a very different class. But
through, above, and beyond the heterogeneous mass
eagerly engaged in the scramble for gold, the scrutin-


ising eye can see the leaven everywhere at work,
organising and elevating the whole. There you can
see the elements of a great people, a mighty nation
yet to cover the vast continent of Australia. At
present their wealth and power is very great, but what
will it be when the whole country is inhabited and
cultivated, then its power for good or for evil will be
immense. Let us hope that the good will so pre-
dominate as to influence and subdue the whole, so
that Australia may in every sense flourish and be
blessed through the preaching of the gospel. Even
now set before the inhabitants of these colonies any
laudable object requiring their pecuniary aid, and it
will not be withheld. Do they hear of distress in
Lancashire? Thousands are sent to relieve the
sufferers. Do they hear of the same distress in
Lanarkshire? Again they send cheerfully of their
means to aid the sufferers. Do they hear of destitu-
tion in Ireland ? Again their liberality flows to support
the destitute. Does the cry for help come from our
South Sea Islanders ? Again to assist in seeking the
conversion of the heathen, thousands are cheerfully
given. Indeed, they seem never to weary in giving
according to their ability, for every good object that is
brought before them. How important is it, then, to
get their Presbyterian Churches now deeply interested
in our South Sea mission, especially as the larger
missionary societies are now directing their attention
to the more extensive fields of India, Africa, and China.
Certainly the churches in Australia ought to bring
their influence to bear on the conversion of our South
Sea Islanders whose claims are very great, and who
are their nearest neighbours. And I believe that if
the claims of our poor heathen can only be set clearly
before this great and rising people who compose their


churches, they are able to give, and I trust they
will give, money to any amount needed for its support.
Yes, I hope a great work has been begun in the
churches in our Australian colonies for extending the
gospel from island to island over our South Seas, till
having reached India and China, these vast empires
with their teeming millions of perishing heathen will
form the centre and field of their missionary operations.
Let the ministers and churches in Australia fairly take
up the work, and with God’s blessing their zeal and
power brought to bear on our mission work will
produce the most wonderful results. They now appeal
to us to send the needed men, and if we do so and keep
up that interest, great indeed may be the blessed
results, not only to the heathen on our islands but to
millions far beyond them, but if we forbear—as sad
may be the consequences.
Oh, friends, fear not the loss of a few able men to
our church at present. Let the church show her
gratitude for the blessings enjoyed, by doing all she
can to extend these blessings to others who have them
not. Look to the past! Has God not blessed our
church since she entered upon her mission to the
heathen ? Has she not prospered since she entered on
her mission to the perishing heathen ? Has not God
evidently favoured her from the time that she began
to work for the conversion of the South Sea Islanders ?
From that time he has strengthened her stakes and
lengthened her cords increasing her in all directions.
He has freed her from a load of debt, congregational
debt, under which she could scarcely move, so that
casting her bread upon the waters she has had the
promise fulfilled, and that not many days hence, but
as it were while she is yet engaged in the very act.
Now will she stop short in her work among the heathen?


Surely not. But to the full extent of her power, as
God has blessed her and prospered her, I hope she will
do all she can to extend the blessings of salvation to
those benighted Ethiopians now so urgently craving
her help. As God has blessed her, so in return he
urges their claims upon her, and oh may he give her
grace to act wisely and faithfully with this question on
which the eternal happiness of so many thousands
seems to depend.
Students, Ministers, Members, and Adherents of the
Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland, you are
equally responsible for the manner in which this appeal
is disposed of, and the consequences that may follow,
and therefore, you ought to be equally interested in it.
Permit me then to ask, —Is the love of Jesus Christ
so cold among the qualified for missionary work in our
church, that they cannot leave home, sweet home with
its comforts, to serve him in a foreign land ? Has our
church now so little compassion for the heathen that
when she has no preachers to send to them, she cannot
send some of her pastors ? Oh ! is it possible that the
honoured sons and daughters of our church can all sit
still, or continue doing the work and enjoying the
comforts of home, while so many thousands are perishing
for want of the knowledge of that salvation which
they have and could so easily communicate to them ?
Oh friends! I cannot think that you can see them
stretching out their hands for help, and crying to you
for that help, and yet that you can all remain at such
a distance, and see them sinking into misery which
places them far beyond your reach and beyond the
reach of mercy.
Surely the missionary spirit cannot have become so
very low in our church, the covenanted Church of
Scotland. Surely the love of Jesus Christ that


prompts and fosters that spirit cannot be so cold in
our church that she cannot now produce four or six
missionaries for our islands. Is God opening up the
field among the heathen for our church, and will her
sons and daughters not enter and occupy in the name
of the Lord ? Does he say again and again, “ Whom
shall I send, and who will go for usand is there
none of them who will voluntarily and cheerfully come
forward saying, “ Here am I, send me.” Did Jesus
come from heaven to save us, and to enrich us with so
many spiritual blessings ? Did he shed his blood for
us, and does he now in glory plead our cause, and
confer on us all the mercies we enjoy ? And does he
say to us, “All power is given to me in heaven and in
earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations.” And
can we* dare we forbear to obey His parting command ?
Can we, dare we (being laid under such obligations by
the work and love of Jesus Christ) remain at ease in
our comfortable homes, spending what God has given
us on ourselves and our families, while so many millions
of our fellow-men are perishing in heathen darkness ?
Surely if Jesus did and does so much for us, if his love
rests in our breasts, if we know the value of our own
souls, then we will compassionate the perishing heathen
and haste to save them from fearful misery by bringing
them to Jesus for salvation. Oh my friends and
brethren, what are our puny efforts at most for the
conversion of the heathen, compared with what they
ought to be, or compared with what Jesus has done
for us, and with what we individually are bound to do
for Him while spared here ? What obligations has he
laid us under to extend, nay, to carry the gospel to the
heathen, and in doing so what hardships and trials
have we to endure compared with what Jesus endured
for us when he laid down his life for our salvation ?


But for Jesus where would we have been? What
would we have been ? Surely we owe all to Him for
time and for eternity. Oh let us then keep our eye
fixed on Him as the Great Missionary, and in obedience
to His parting command, let us follow His example in
preaching the gospel to the poor and perishing for
their salvation. Let us so far as able “Go into all the
world and preach the gospel to every creature.” Let
us tell them what great things the Lord has done for
us, and that he is able to do the same for them ; and
as we go we will enjoy the fulfilment of the blessed
promise, “ Lo I am with you alw'ay, even unto the end
of the world.” If we go from proper motives in
obedience to Him, and desiring to live and labour for
Him alone, then whether we see the fruits of our labours
or not, assuredly we will enjoy the promised reward.
If we forbear God will raise up deliverance for them
from some other quarter, so that His name may become
great among the Gentiles in every land, and the whole
earth be filled with his glory and become vocal with
his praise.
But as there are yet five hundred and fifty millions
of our fellow- men in heathen darkness, and only about
two hundred and fifty millions of professing Christians
in our world, what a harvest remains for the church to
reap ! What a work remains for her to do before “the
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our Lord and of his Christ!” Oh Ministers, are you
doing what you can to save those perishing millions
of heathen ? Oh Students, are you doing what you
can to save them ? Sabbath Scholars and Sabbath
School Teachers, are you doing what yon can to save
them ? Members of the church, are you doing what
you can to save them ? Wealthy Christians, are you
doing what you can to save them ? Parents, are you


doing what you can to save them ? Children, are you
doing what you can to save them ? Young Men and
Young Women, are you doing what you can to save
them ? Are we individually and collectively doing
what we can to save them ? Oh, friends I How will
we meet them before God, when we are individually
called to give an account of our stewardship! Let us
pray over these solemn questions till we feel our hearts
beating with real love for the perishing heathen, and
with compassion for them, prompting us to go forth to
their rescue, being resolved to do all we can, and to
move heaven and earth for assistance, till they are all
brought to rejoice in Jesus Christ our Saviour.


