

In
iilmtmriam
1866-1916
“The memory of the just is blessed.”
- Prov. X, 7




Commemorating
The Fiftieth Anniversary of the passing to his Rest of
A Good Man—and a worthy Australian colonist
of British type.
' ’HE article by the Right Reverend the Bishop of Bendigo
(Victoria) is followed by others extracted from a booklet
(printed years ago for private circulation) embodying the
“Diary of E. C. Close” —a record of personal experiences in
the Peninsular War together with various publications bearing
on the life and death of the subject, and the veneration
entertained for his name and memory, throughout the length
and breadth of a countryside.
“ Q”
EMPIRE DAY,
24th MAY, 1916


Born at
Bangamati,
Bengal,
Died at
Morpeth
N. S. Wales,
7th May, 1866.
12th March, IV9O.
THE LATE
EDWARD CHARLES CLOSE, SEN R , ESQUIRE
Who served in the Peninsular War under the
(afterwards) Duke of Wellington.
He was a member of the first Legislative Council of New
South Wales, Warden of the Maitland District, and first
President of the Maitland Hospital.
He gave the ground and the building of the original
Church of England at Morpeth (portion of which, owing to
fire, has been rebuilt). A handsome Memorial Window
erected to his memory shortly after his decease remains in
excellent condition.


7 'HIS article, written by the ‘Right Reverend the Rishop of Rendigo
(Victoria), appeared in the “Sydney Morning Hercdd” under date
6th May, 1916. (j 4 few minor details have been added by permission).
A HUNTER RIVER PIONEER
(By the Bishop of Bendigo, Rt. Rev. J. D. Langley, D.D.)
Among the splendid men by whom the foundations of our
Commonwealth were laid, the late Edward Charles Close, of
Morpeth, holds a prominent place. I had the pleasure and
privilege of forming his acquaintance in the year 1859, and I
remember well the high position of esteem and confidence in
which he was held throughout the Hunter River district.
The following interesting information regarding his early
history has been supplied to me. He was born on the 12th
March, 1790, at Rangamati, in Bengal, where his father, Mr.
Edward Close, held the position of an agent for the East India
Company. His grandfather, John Close, had been associated
with commercial circles in London, and was a resident in the
parish of Allhallows Barking, London. He was (about 1768-70)
church-warden of the which, I understand, lays claim \ ,
to being the oldest church in London. The Close family is
stated to have been formerly settled in Yorkshire. Through his
mother (nee Marianne Collinson) Mr. Edward Charles Close was
descended from the Collinson family, being the great-grandson of
Peter Collinson, F.R.S. (born 1693-4), a noted botanist of his day,
and one of the earliest members of the Antiquarian Society.
Mr. Close’s father having died in India prior to his son’s birth,
the widow returned to England in 1798, with her child, and took
up her residence at “The Chantry,” Ipswich, in Suffolk, the home
of her brother Charles Streynsham Collinson (sometime High
Sheriff of that county). Her son was educated for the ministry
of the Church of England, but he preferred to enter the army,
and on February 8, 1808, he was gazetted ensign in the famous
48th Regiment of Foot. He soon became a lieutenant, and later
on adjutant, serving with his regiment in the Peninsula war,
and was present at the battles of Talavera, Albuera, Busaco, Vit-
toria, Niville, Orthes, and Toulouse.
In the “Despatches of the Duke of Wellington” the follow-
ing occurs under the “Memorandum upon the battle of Talavera”


“the advance of the Guards to the extent to which it was
carried was nearly fatal to us, and the baffle was certainly saved
by the advance, position, and steady conduct of the 4?3th Regi-
ment, upon which General Sherbrooke’s division formed again.”
Mr. Close arrived in Sydney with his regiment, or a detach-
ment of it, in 1817, and a little later sold out his commission
and settled at Morpeth on the Hunter River. On September 27,
1821, he married Sophia Susannah, only daughter of John Palmer,
Esq., R.N. (then Deputy Commissary-General of New South
Wales). I am informed that nine children were born to them,
of whom only four survived childhood —Edward Charles, Robert
Campbell, George Thomas Palmer, and Marianne Collinson. The
latter married George Campbell, Esq., of Duntroon, Queanbeyan
(now the Royal Australian Military College). They have all passed
away years ago.
At the present day the family is represented by five of Mr.
Close’s grandsons, two of whom hold commissions in the Aus-
tralian forces now fighting at the front, whilst a third served
in the Matabeleland and Boer campaigns, and was a member of
the Mawson Antarctic Expedition. There also survive several
grand-daughters and a great-grandson, Thomas Close Smith,
married to the Hon. Mary Grenville Morgan-Grenville, only
daughter of Baroness Kinloss, and grand-daughter of the third
and last Duke of Buckingham—having issue.
In “The Life of Bishop Tyrrell,” by the late Canon Boodle,
there is the following interesting paragraph referring to Mr.
Close ;
Edward Charles Close was a man whom the Bishop and the Church
could ill have spared—a kindly, conscientious, high-principled Christian
gentleman, ever forward in good and useful works. In early life he
had served under the Duke of W ellington in the Peninsula, and in one
of the seven engagements named on the seven clasps of his medal he
had vowed, while lying down with his regiment under heavy fire,
himself untouched among his dead or wounded comrades, that, if by
God s mercy his life was spared, he would build a church as soon as
his means should enable him to do so. In the year 1817 Mr. Close
arrived With his regiment, the 48th, in New South Wales, and in 1821
received a grant of land, which he had selected, on and around the
present site of Morpeth. He had not forgotten his vow. For a while
church-building was impossible. He had settled in the unreclaimed
bush. There was not then a single clergyman on the Hunter River.
. . . . but Mr. Close did all he could. Just and kind to his convict
servants, which was far more than could be said of many of the
masters of those evil days, be held himself responsible for their good.


and he assembled them for prayer on the Lord’s Day. He opened a
Sunday school for the. children of those around him, and with the
members of his family taught in it; and when any were sick or dying
he was found at their bedside, giving and administering remedies,
because there was no doctor, and reading to and praying with them.
The late E. G. Close, at the age of 9,
with his Mother and Uncle, the
late Charles Streynsham Collinson, Esq.
of ’* The Chantry,” near Ipswich, Suffolk, England
(From an oil painting executed about the year 1199).
when there was no clergyman. In those days the Government not only
gave a site for a church when required, but also a grant for the erec-
tion of the building. But when the time came that Mr. Close was able


to perform the vow made in his time of danger, he gave wholly what
he had promised—the church and the site also. For the parsonage a
money grant was given, and though others had failed to contribute
their proportion, Mr. Close did the part which fell to him.
At the time of his death, which occurred on May 7, 1866, the
following- paragraph appeared in the “Maitland Mercury”:—
It is with deep regret that we have to chronicle the unexpected
death of one of the oldest colonists, and perhaps the most respected
resident of the district —Edward Charles Close, Esq., of Morpeth. In
the year 1817 Mr. Close arrived in this colony with the 48th Regiment
of Foot, in which he held a lieutenant's commission. Four years after-
wards he received a grant of land, as was usual in those days, arid
he chose the site of the present town of Morpeth and the land adjoin-
ing it for his settlement. He settled at Morpeth in the year 1821, arid
resided there from that time, a period of 45 years. He was the first
police magistrate of this district, and that office he held for a number
of years. He was eight or nine years a member of the first Legislative
Council of these colonies, and now, like so many of his contemporaries,
he has peacefully passed aWay. Until a very late period he was
warden of the Maitland district, and in that capacity, as in all others,
he fulfilled his duties with honour to himseif and benefit to his adopted
country. To his credit it can also be said that he filled all these
offices without emolument —hs never received a shilling from the revenue
of the colony. Through life Mr. Close maintained the character of a
sincere Christian. His Christianity was no mere outward show of sanc-
tity, He was always a liberal contributor to his own Church and to
the Churches of other denominations. He presented valuable sites for
the erection of places of worship. The poor and afflicted would ever
find a helping hand extended with the kind words of comfort he would
utter. As a landlord he was indulgent in the extreme, especially in
seasons of distress. His sympathetic heart was ever ready to respond
to the appeal of the distressed. His tenants will gratefully venerate
his memory so long as they retain possession of memories of their own.
The name of Close is inseparably connected with the town of
Morpeth. Originally the town site formed a part of the grant, and
the natural advantages of its position marking its importance, the
town was laid out, and the “Green Hills'* of the Hunter gradually rose
to its present status —returning a member to the Parliament of the
colony. Mr. Edward Charles Close, jun., the eldest son of the lamented
subject of our notice, was twice elected to represent the electorate.
It is but rarely that the whole district is found uniting in deep and
sincere regret for a gentleman, one of whose prominent characteristics
was a very modest estimate of his own ability and influence. Mr. Close
never was a fluent or ready speaker at public meetings, and he used
always laughingly to remark that he never was a speaker, nor would
he, when appealed to, ever attempt even to repeat the expressions he
had used, so strong was this conviction with him. Yet we have re-


peatedly seen Mr. Close turn the current of feeling at a meeting
where people had got warm and angry. He was a man of singularly
genial and cordial manner, equally pleasant in demeanour to the rich
and poor, the influential and retiring, and never arousing any angry
feeling by his words or acts, and being a man of strong common-
sense and clearness of thought, his hesitating short speech would be
listened to with the deepest respect, and would often still the clamour
and anger that more ready speakers had tried in vain to allay. But
though not a public speaker, Mr. Close was eminent for conversational
power, and charmed the most intelligent men by his quiet humour
and genial enjoyment of the passing joke. These qualities, united with
his readiness to take part in nearly all public movements, made Mr,
Close, in the days of his strength, the favourite chairman of this part
of the Hunter. If Mr. Close Were present at a meeting he was in-
variably moved into the chair—nor do we recollect an instance of a
counter-motion. We have had among us, and we happily, can still
number among our leading residents, some true specimens of the “fine
old English gentleman” ; but we have never known anyone who was a
finer or truer example than Mr. Close.
Some months after Mr. Close’s death the inhabitants of the
Hunter River district erected a tine window to his memory in
the church at Morpeth.
I have very pleasant memories of the Close family. My first
acquaintance with them was in the year 1359, soon after my
arrival in the Maitland district. Mr. E., C. Close, sen., was a
charming man, genial, hospitable, universally respected and re-
vered, a thorough English gentleman of the old school. His sons
were worthy sons of a worthy father. The eldest, Mr. E. C.
Close, junior, took an active part in the political and social
affairs of the country. He was an enthusiastic commanding
officer of the Maitland Volunteer Rifle Company, of which I was
for years a member, and he was greatly and universally re-
spected. With Mr. Robert Close I had only a passing
acquaintance. He was associated with the firm of Camp-
bell and Co. (of Campbell’s Wharf, Sydney), and was a
universal favourite. George Close and I were- for many
years on intimate terms. He was a genial companion and an
honorable man. In his later years he took an active interest
in the affairs of the church in the parish in which he resided,
and was ever ready to give financial support and personal help
when needed. It is to men like the Close family that we are
largely indebted for the splendid position of our Commonwealth
to-day, for its mental, spiritual, and material development and
growth.


' ! 'HE following extracts are made from an article which appeared
* in the “Church Chronicle” of 21st Mai), 1866, written by the then
Bishop of Newcastle, entitled
DEMISE OF E. C. CLOSE, SENIOR, ESQ.
The hand of death has taken away one, who, for many years,
moved among us as a personification of kindly manliness; one
who, with singular abnegation of'self, consulted at all times the
well-being of those about him, the advancement of the country in
ST. JAMES’ CHURCH, MORPETH.
Built by the late £. C. Close.
which his lot was cast; one who leaves behind him in the hearts
of all who had the pleasure of his acquaintance, a feeling of
pained regret that his face will not meet them again,
that his genial presence has gone, and his generous
heart beats no longer in response to the plea of the suffer-
ing or the poor; one who for nearly fifty years had dwelt in
the colony sans peur et sans reproche; a good father, a good
man, a Christian, a patriot, and a gentleman. He had, during
his long life, met with several accidents, which would have
been fatal to a constitution less robust; they gradually reduced his
strength, and a paralytic affliction had latterly rendered any


lengthened exertion impossible, and all exercise fatiguing. But
to the last his gentle spirit was master of his mind, and ruled
his conduct and his life for the benefit of others.
The deceased was a native of Rangamatti, in India, where
he was born in 1790. He was early removed to England, where,
with the intention of fitting him for the Church, he was educated
under the eye of his uncle, Charles Streyncham* Collinson, High
Sheriff of the County of Suffolk. The military enthusiasm of
the day, and the excitement of the wars in which Britain was then
engaged, were, however, too much for the young man, who fol-
lowed the call of duty in a more material warfare than that
upon which he was preparing to enter. He accordingly joined
the army, under the veteran soldier of India, the Marquis of
Wellesley, afterwards Duke of Wellington, whom he followed in
the Peninsula War, during which he was present in seven of
those engagements which reflect honor on every member of the
little band of warriors who first withstood and then drove
headlong the choicest soldiers of the Empire (of France). The
memento of his career as a soldier was preserved by him, and
occasionally worn —a medal with seven clasps bearing the names
of Toulouse, Orthes, Nivelle, Vittoria, Albuera, Busaco, Talavera,
names which will never be forgotten while Britain is remem-
bered as a friend of the suffering, the foe to despotism.
Mr. Close arrived in the colony in 1817, and four years after-
wards, at the time of his marriage, he received a grant of land,
which he selected on the bank of the Hunter, on or about the
site of the present town of Morpeth. Those who know the place
only as it is have little idea of the labor involved in bringing a
piece of forest land into cultivation, and fitting it for the purpose
of trade. Mr. Close found the country a dense bush, covered
with scrub and ancient trees, whose arched branches almost con-
cealed the river, and whose leafy bows were so impervious to
light that to walk beneath them, even in broad daylight, w r as like
walking in the dimness of twilight. Th>s dense forest and bush
land Mr. Close set to work to clear, with all the obstacles and
impediments incident to the then lawless condition of an ignorant
and criminal population ; and the result of his labors now is
before us in fertile meads and peaceful habitations.
For forty-five years he labored unwearied, working with
his own hand where more than mere manual labor was re-
Also spelt Streynsham.


quisite, and frequently sharing in the mechanical toil which was
necessary for the furtherance of his operations. For many years
he acted as a magistrate for the district, and for part of the time,
before the stipendiary magistrates were appointed, the whole of
the duties of a police magistrate devolved upon him, though he
held no appointment and received no emolument as such, at a
time when it was dangerous to oppose ruffianism, and scarcely
safe for anyone with a pretence to honesty or gentlemanly con-
dition to move without weapons or far from succour. During the
whole of this time, though laboriously occupied for the benefit of
Cameron Studio]
[W. Maitland
THE MAITLAND HOSPITAL.
Of which Mr. Close was the first president
the district, and having no coadjutor nearer than Giendon, he
persevered in reclaiming his forest property, and made no enemy.
When the colony was placed under a responsible govern-
ment, Mr. Close formed one of the first Legislative Council, a
position which he held for about nine years. He was also for
many years warden of the district, and in that post his whole
course of conduct was marked by impartiality so strict, attention
to duty so unwearied, and perseverance so determined, that when
he retired the whole district regretted his resignation, and contri-
buted to mark their sense of the integrity and zeal with which
he had studied the interest of the country, by presenting him with


a testimonial of esteem in the form of a piece of plate—with a
eulogistic inscription—of the value of about
The Maitland Hospital, of which Mr. Close was the president,
is greatly indebted to him for the liberal support he always
afforded it, not only by the contributions of his own purse, but
by the advocacy of one who never pleaded warmly for anything
which was not calculated to be a benefit to his fellow-men. The
committee-room is adorned with a good portrait of Mr. Close,
in oils, taken at the expense of some friends of the institution,
and presented by them in token of their admiration of his char-
acter, and in recognition of his exertions on behalf of the hospital.
It would be impossible to enumerate all the generous acts of a
life spent in ungrudging liberality. Mr. Close’s praises ring
more clearly in the hearts of those whom he has befriended and
assisted, and with a truer tone than can be uttered by words;
but for the sake of those who have neither known nor understood
him, we may say that in every phase of his life he shone as a
beneficent and self-sacrificing model, whom we should do well
to imitate.
As a man, kind, gentle, generous, forgiving, yet unflinching
in the performance of duty ; as a landlord, liberal and unselfish ;
as a friend, trusty and true, not sparing reproof, but administer-
ing it with gentle firmness ; in private life beyond reproach ; in
public unassuming and bashful, yet weighty perforce of his
known human worth; genial and cordial at all times, harsh
never, his few words were always listened to with respect and
deference, and whether at his own table, in conversation, at a
public meeting or on the Bench, he entered freely and fully into
the spirit of the current business, and showed by the sparkling
wit of his replies, the pertinence of his remarks, the pointedness
of his decisions, that though a man of few words, he was one
of clear perception and sound judgment. He was one of the old
school, reared in the midst of dangers and difficulties for the
benefit of after ages ; and his loss must be severely felt, though
softened by the gradual manner in which it has fallen upon us.
He married September 27, 1821, at Parramatta, Sophia,
daughter of John Palmer, Esq., first Commissary-General of this
oolony, by whom he had nine children, of whom four survive, viz.,
Edward Charles, Robert Campbell, George Thomas Palmer, and
one daughter, Marianne Collinson, married to George Campbell,
Esq., of Duntroon, Queanbeyan.


'J 'HE following account of a Dinner given to Mr .Close,on the occasion
of his resignation of the Wardenship of the Maitland district, appeared
in the columns of the “Maitland Mercury ’’ on the Bth of May, 1852 :
Mr, E. D. Day said he had been honoured by being selected to read
the address to Mr. Close, one of the most gratifying duties he had
ever performed. The whole proceedings connected with this testimonial
to Mr. Close had proved how universal was the feeling of esteem, of
respect, of gratitude felt towards that gentleman. To the address were
appended no less than 660 signatures, and numbers of others would
have been added but that so many of their neighbours and fellow-
citizens were away at the goldfields. The address was as follows:
“TO E. C. CLOSE, ESQ.
"Dear Sir,—We, the undersigned inhabitants of Maitland and the
adjoining localities, having oeen informed of your resignation of the
Wardenship of the Maitland District, beg leave to assure you that we
sincerely regret your retirement from a station, the important duties of
which you have long so worthily and efficiently discharged. We could
not, indeed, allow this event to pass over without placing upon record
the general estimation in which your public and private character is
held'; for while strict impartiality, untiring industry, and courteous
manner invariably marked yOur public career, the breath’ of envy, nor
the tongue of slander, have never even assailed the purity of your
private life.
“Your liberality in relieving the distressed, and your willingness to
alleviate the sorrows of the afflicted, have earned for you (a rich, a
consoling reward) the blessings and affections of the poor.
“But, although we deeply regret our loss, we cannot fail to derive
some satisfaction from the remembrance that your departure from
office will be the means of enabling you more fully to enjoy, in the
evening of a useful and honoured life, the pleasing consciousness of
having faithfully performed the responsible duties of your state.
“Arrangements have been made for procuring from London a testi-
monial, which we trust you will kindly accept, and bear into your
domestic circle, as a convincing and enduring proof of our regard, and
which we respectfully and cordially present.
“And, in conclusion, we fervently hope that the Almighty Disposer
of the lives of mpn may grant you many years to witness, and to
participate in, the proope'ity of this community, every class of which
will ever cherish your memory and revere your virtues.”


The testimonial referred to in above address was a presentation
of plate, consisting of a large salver, together with a tea and
coffee service—in solid silver.
The salver, illustrated below, bore the following inscription :
“This salver (with a full tea and coffee service) was pre-
sented by the inhab’tants of Maitland and the adjoining localities
to Edward Charles Close, Esq., on his resignation of the War-
denship of the Maitland District, as a tribute of gratitude justly
due ,to his zealous and efficient discharge of the duties of his
office, and as a testimonial of the esteem deservedly entertained
for his consistent and practical benevolence, and the unsullied
purity of his private life. Maitland, 1852.’’
SALVER
Presented by residents of Maitland District
(1852)


MARCHANT & CO. LTD., Printers
Kent Street, Sydney


, J-Nterisxinq.- Incident.—A correspon-
*“** ! rom Morpeth, writes:-
r loipeth Churca was destroyed by fire some time ago, and
by wardens to pull down the walls
(which had been left standing), as they were very shaky,
and might prove dangerous ultimately. Oh last Wedaes-
cay evening, Mr Hunt, the architect, attempted to find the
foundation stone and was successful. The words ‘E.C, C.
January, 1837,’ were distinctly seen oa the stone, and
yesterday, as we were looking at it, Mr. Close said ho had
iaid the stone himsek when a boy, and thought ha put
a ensiling ana. a sixpence in a hole it. it somewhere.
Accordingly we searched and found the hole and dug out
“ e ,°™ coins. As was generally remarked, it Is not often
that the person who lays a foundation stone of a public
building ever sees the very same stone again; and Mr.
Close himself said that very few present abtto ceremony
were alive now.”A" iI n« tU *
