

The Methodist Missionary Society
of Australasia.
Commission re . .
Native Church
Information collected for the
consideration of the
Commission.
Melbourne:
Spectator Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd.
270 Post Office Place,
1923.




Making Christianity Indigenous.
In the apostolic days when churches were
being founded among the communities in Asia
Minor and Southern Europe, the apostles did not
shrink from placing much responsibility on
those who were newly converted, in spite of their
gross irregularities and serious blunders. They
put their confidence in them, and relied upon the
guidance of the Holy Spirit by unceasingly pray-
ing for them. In those days the churches became
almost from the beginning active Missionary
Centres, carrying their message of salvation and
good news far and wide. Paul was particularly
noted for his policy of throwing the churches he
had newly founded upon their own resources.
Through visits and letters he deepened their spiri-
tual life, but we never find him settling down in
one place and making himself the controlling
figure in any particular church. The policy he
adopted ensures indigenous growth. To be
thrown upon one’s own resources is the most
effective means of self-development.
Chengting T. Wang, M.A.


Constitution of the Commission.
The annual meeting of the Board of Missions held in
Sydney in February, 1922, passed the following resolution:—
That the following be appointed a Commission to enquire
into the question of self-government and self-sup-
port in the native church in Fiji and elsewhere, viz.,
the members of the Mission Board resident in Vic-
toria, together with the General Secretary, the Gene-
ral Treasurers, Rev. IT. H. Nolan and Rev. W. E.
Bennett, M.A., B.D. The members resident in Victoria
to be the Executive; Rev. J. W. Burton, M.A., to be
convener.
Minutes of Meeting of Executive.
A meeting of the Executive met in the Conference Com-
mittee Room, Lonsdale-strcet, on Tuesday, 25th July, 1922.
There were present Rev. Dr. Morley (in the chair), Rev.
J. T. Field, Mr. F. J. Cato, Dr. E. L. Gault and the Convener
(Rev. J. W. Burton).
The Convener read the resolution of the Annual Meeting
of the Board constituting the Commission,
He laid the Memorandum which he had prepared on the
table.
Correspondence was read from the General Secretary, Rev.
J. G. Wheen, on behalf of the Sydney members of the Com-
mission, and from the Rev. A. J. Small, chairman of the Fiji
District.
A long discussion took place over the whole question,
and a number of points was carefully considered.
It was resolved—
That the action of the Convener in drawing up the memo-
randum he approved; that a copy of the Memorandum
be sent to every missionary on the field in order to
provide a basis for the discussion of the question of
an indigenous native church ; that each missionary
be earnestly requested to forward to the Convener
as early as possible suggestions, and particularly con-
structive criticism; that the Commission assures the


brethren on the mission field that there is not the
slightest desire on the part of the home church to
force any cut and dried scheme upon them, but feels,
with them, the grave importance of wise and careful
steps towards the creation of a truly native church;
that it believes that the men in actual contact with
the problems of the field can, out of their experience,
supply information from which may be formulated a
definite policy that may serve as an objective for
many years to come.
That the Convener be requested to obtain official infor-
mation from other societies in Australia as to their
polity, and also to correspond with the secretaries of
the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, the
Methodist Episcopal Board, and the Secretary of the
South African Conference.
The following covering letter was forwarded, with a copy
of the Memorandum, to each missionary of our Methodist
Church in Australasia: —
METHODIST MISSIONARY SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
148 Lonsdale Street,
Melbourne.
26th July, 1922.
My dear Brother, —
You will know that the last Annual Meeting of the
Board of Missions appointed a Commission to investigate
and to recommend to the Board re the native church.
I am sending you herewith a Memorandum which
attempts to set out the position, and it is submitted to
you merely as a basis for discussion.
The Commission wishes it to be very clearly under-
stood that there is no desire on the part of the Home
Church to urge upon the brethren on the field any cut and
dried scheme or any particular set of ideas; the sole aim
is to seek the fullest information, to elicit the freest possi-
ble expression of opinion, and to draw up broad outlines
of policy only after the most careful consideration of all
evidence.
The Commission asks you, therefore, to be good
enough to read carefully the accompanying Memorandum,
discuss it where practicable with your brethren, and to
let the Convener have, as early as possible, any sugges-
tions and constructive criticisms.


There is none of us who docs not feel the importance
of the subject, and we are all one in realising the need
of carefully thinking through this great and complex
problem. Thus we trust to reach conclusions which will
form themselves into a more or less elastic policy—a
policy that will have as its ultimate end the establisliing
of a self-supporting, self-governing and self-propagating
native church.
I am,
With fraternal regards,
JOHN W. BURTON
(Convener).
To Mission Secretaries and Administrators of other Socie-
ties the following communication was sent:
Dear
I am enclosing a copy of a Memorandum dealing with
our Native Church. We are most anxious to obtain the
fullest advice and the results of the experience of others
regarding this matter.
I should be greatly obliged if you would be good enough
to let me have any information in your possession regard-
ing the polities that you have adopted in various parts of
your field—particularly amongst undeveloped peoples.
With kindest regards,
Yours sincerely,
JOHN W. BURTON.


(For Private Circulation Only.)
(COPY OF MEMORANDUM.)
Commission re Native Church.
Memorandum by the Convener.
In the year 1822—just one hundred years ago—the Rev.
Walter Lawry commenced our Mission in Tonga. He went
as a minister of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, and had the
honour of being the first Methodist preacher to proclaim the
good tidings in the islands of the South Seas. His stay, how-
ever, was brief, and the real history of our Mission commences
with the arrival of the Revs. John Thomas and John Hutchin-
son in 1826. In a few years there followed a most wonderful
success, and within a generation Tonga was nominally
Christian.
Quite early in the history of the Mission the missionaries
impressed upon their converts the privilege and duty of con-
tributing towards the expenses of the Mission, and evoked a
remarkable response. In those days there was no recognised
currency, and hence the native Christians contributed in kind.
This was mainly coconut oil. In order that this commodity
might be converted into cash, it was sent to Sydney or else-
where, and the money received on this account was credited to
the Wesleyan Missionary Society.
Tims the “pooling system” of native contributions arose
quite accidentally, and it has been retained, in the main, until
this present. This policy, it will be readily seen, was not
designed, but was the outcome of the temporary necessities
of that time.
Even when metallic currency became common the system
was perpetuated, and was left as a legacy to our Australasian
church when she took over the care of the South Sea Missions
in 1855. Practically all the costs of the Mission were borne
by the Missionary Society, and all the native moneys were
remitted to them. To a large extent this was a matter of
book-keeping, but it was recognised as an established method.
How long this system might have been continued none


may say, but in 1880 “the Tongan trouble” arose. This pool-
ing system, whereby moneys collected in Tonga were disbursed
in Sydney, was cited as one of the chief grounds of complaint.
The following General Conference, in order to save as much
as possible from the wreck, made Tonga a self-supporting and
self-dependent district attached to the New South Wales Con-
ference. This was done, not as a matter of considered policy
for the whole mission field, but merely as an attempt to meet
an immediate contingency. It will be noted that this formed
a distinct departure from the Methodist polity in making a
District, and not a circuit, the financial unit.
Samoa, some years later, followed the example of Tonga
in self-government and self-support, and made the District
the financial unit, i.e., “Missionary” moneys were pooled and
distributed by district authority.
This system means that in addition to the supporting of
all their own native workers and providing for the erection
and upkeep of buildings, etc., the members of the native
church are also responsible for all the salaries, houses and
allowances of the white missionaries.
It is obvious that there are many disadvantages in such
a system, some of which it were unwise to emphasise.
It may be stated, however, that in the first place such an
unit is too large for a native fully to comprehend, and the
inevitable result is that the control of moneys and of agents
falls into the hands of the white missionaries. Natives have
little actual responsibility, and their opportunities of education
in church government, therefore, are restricted.
Farther, it may he shown that such a system, while reliev-
ing the home church from the support of its white ministers,
prevents, the native church from making such large,contri-
butions as it might to the evangelisation of others. This is a
serious defect, and only little, thus far, has been done to mend
it.
Much might be said about the position of the European
missionary receiving his support from native peoples, and the
consequent unrest which every now and then appears at the
disparity in salary between the brown and white man.
Some years ago there was serious unrest in Fiji. It was
of healthy sort, but it had its dangers. Dr. Geo. Brawn, with
a true .missionary instinct, was aware of this, and sought to
introduce such a change in policy as would meet the new con-
ditions. Many of us fully recognised the admirable quality
of the motive that inspired the late doctor, but we were obliged
to join issue with the methods adopted. However, “the lay


representative trouble” is now a thing of the past, and we
may well forget any friction which was caused at that time.
One part of the scheme suggested by Dr. Brown was
adopted, viz , that the “Missionary” moneys should be divided,
half to go to Sydney towards the support of white missionaries,
and half to be retained in Fiji and administered by a com-
mittee of the district in the payment of native ministers, etc.
This method is still in operation.
Again, the district is the unit, and has proved itself much
too large for the capacity of the native people. Moreover,
there are ever rumblings of criticism concerning the half that
is sent to Sydney. “Why,” asks the native, “should half
the money be spent on the few white missionaries, and only
half be devoted to the support of the native missionaries and
other expenses of the district ? Here is a danger point.
In 1917 the General Conference passed the following
resolution:—
“(1) That in order to secure fuller self-dependence on the
part of our native Christians, further efforts be made
to induce our mission circuits, or sections of such cir-
cuits, to undertake the direct support of the native
ministers, catechists, teachers and other native workers,
as well as to provide for district expenses other than
those connected with the white missionaries.
(2) That in cases where the circuit, or section of such cir-
cuit, is not able to assume full financial responsibility
for its native work, suitable grants in aid be given from
the general funds of the Society.
f 3) That Foreign Mission meetings be held annually in each
circuit, and that the funds so collected be remitted to
the general funds of the Society, to be used in the
evangelisation of non-Christian people.
(4) That the salaries and allowances of the white mis-
sionaries shall in all cases be a charge upon the general
funds of the Society.
(5) That the Board confer with each District Synod, and
formulate proposals, to be submitted to the New South
Wales Conference, which shall have power to create such
special legislation as shall meet the circumstances of
the several districts.”
But apparently little came of it, for the 1920 General
Conference minutes have the following resolution:—
‘ ‘ That the Mission Board be requested to ascertain what
has been done in the Mission Districts under the reso


lutions of the last General Conference re sub-circuits
in Mission Districts (see Minutes 1917, pp. 60-61), and
to take any further step to more fully give effect to
the same.”
In 1919, however, an attempt was made in the Lau Cir-
cuit, Fiji, to make the circuit, under the charge of the European
missionary, a self-supporting unit. The circuit was to provide
for the salary and allowances of the white missionaries sta-
tioned within its bounds, and meet all other expenses of the
circuit. Serious financial difficulties arose, and at the last
.Annual Circuit Meeting the Synod was requested to discon-
tinue the scheme.
At the last annual meeting of the Board the subject was
again brought forward, and the following minute appears:—
‘‘Native Church—
Resolved:
That the following be appointed a Commission to enquire
into the question of self-government and self-support
in the native church in Fiji and elsewhere, viz., the
members of the Mission Board resident in Victoria,
together with the General Secretary, the General
Treasurers, Rev. 11. 11. Nolan and Rev. W. E. Bennett,
M.A., B.D. The members resident in Victoria to be
the Executive; Rev. J. AV. Burton, M.A., to be con-
vener.
That the following motion, tabled by the Rev. J. W. Bur-
ton, M.A., be referred to the Commission for consideration
and report;—
That this Board desires to express to the Fiji Synod its
appreciation of its attempts in connection with the
Lau Circuit experiment to find a basis for self-govern-
ment and self-support, and especially commends the
efforts of the Rev. A. W. Amos, who initiated the
experiment. It offers its sincere sympathy to the
Rev. N. R. Greenwood in his present difficulties in
the circuit, and assures him of the Board’s confidence
and prayerful support.
The Board, however, is convinced that the ultimate solu-
tion of the problem of a self-governing and self-
supporting church is not to be found in this direc-
tion, and requests the Fiji Synod to give special con-
sideration to the whole question with a view to formu-
lating a general policy to be submitted to the next
annual meeting and to the subsequent General Con-
ference.


The Board suggests that in such a policy the basic prin-
ciple be observed that the support of all the white
missionaries be a direct charge on the home church,
so that each missionary may be regarded by the native
church as a gift from their brethren across the seas,
that to encourage the progress of the church towards
self-support and self-government it should be the
policy of the district to carve out of the larger mis-
sion circuits —which are really extensive districts —
groups of churches to form a true circuit, to which a
native minister is appointed superintendent. A
minister so appointed to hold his own Quarterly Meet-
ing, and to look not to the missionary, but to his own
stewards, for Ids stipend. Such a circuit, to begin
with, to be classed as an aided circuit, and to receive
a grant from the H.M. and C. Fund, this grant
diminishing according to scale until the circuit
becomes self-supporting, and is classed as such; that
as at present the Missionary collections be divided
in some equitable way, and that the moneys remitted
from the native church to the Board be applied to
the work in the newer fields where the population is
not yet nominally Christian.
The Board believes that such a policy will (a) provide
complete and desirable independence for the mission-
ary; (b) will produce a fuller sense of responsibility
on the part of the native church for its own work;
and (c) will further allow of a definite appeal being
made to the native churches for unselfish,, giving for
missionary work in other lands.”
At the International Missionary Council, held at Lake
Mohonk last year, this subject of an indigenous Christian
church was the most prominent one, and evoked the gravest
consideration. The writer was privileged to be present, and
while he tried to keep his mind upon the wider aspect of the
discussion, inevitably he was led to compare the problems of
other countries with those of our own church in the South
Seas. He was forced to a realisation that similar troubles
to those experienced in other fields (especially in Africa) were
likely to arise in our native churches in the Pacific.
It should be pointed out that the policy outlined in the
motion submitted to the Board, and referred to the Commis-
sion, is in line with that adopted by our Wesleyan Methodist
Missionary Society in England. (See extract following.)
Some of the advantages of such a policy may be enume-
rated briefly:—


1. A start can be made in any part of a district, or even
of a circuit, without committing the whole, e.g., in New Britain
and Papua, where much of the land is still largely “heathen,”
there are parts where a policy of this kind might be initiated
and a small circuit formed, with a native minister, or even a
catechist, as the head.
2. It will keep the native minister in closer touch with his
people; he will not feel that he is the agent of a society, but
rather the servant (minister) of his own people.
3. It will make provision for the development of the native
Christian (both ministers and laymen) in the management of
their own church. Personality cannot grow in the shade of
others, and while there will surely be risks, there will no less
surely be developed men of force and character.
4. The people themselves will feel their responsibility, and
as they are able to bear the financial burden, it will be trans-
ferred to their shoulders.
5. In more advanced places, where the money subscribed
at present is more than the total cost of the native work (e.g.,
Tonga, Samoa and Fiji), the opportunity could be taken to
lead native Christians to contribute to the Society’s funds
for the prosecution of the work among the unevangelised
areas.
6. The white missionary would not be looked upon as a
permanent and integral part of the church life. He would
be considered in the light of a love-gift from brethren over
the seas —a gift that can be withdrawn when it is no longer
necessary.
7. It would provide a definite objective to which all mis-
sionary work could be made to tend. At present we have no
formulated policy, and we lose in directness and in definiteness
because of this lack.
8. Most important of all, it would probably give fuller
opportunity to the native church to develop along the lines of
its own peculiar genius, for it may be presumed that it is no
part of our task to seek to acclimatise Methodism, as such,
amongst a people so far apart in thought and development
from the races of Europe and America. At present our native
church has little that is distinctive in character, and is merely
a somewhat distorted reflection of the church at home. There
are, perhaps, many things that such an indigenous and self-
developing church might teach us, and prove that we, without
them, cannot be made perfect.
JOHN W. BURTON.
Melbourne, 7th July, 1922.


Extracts from the Hisitory of the Westeyan
Methodist Missionary Society.
by
G. G. Finlay, D.D.,
and
W. W. Holdsworth, M.A., B.D.
Yol. 1., Page 176 and ff.
A Statement of Policy,
Adopted Unanimously by the General Committee,
April 29, 1914.
It is the policy of the Society to select and send out men
whose gifts and training give assurance of their fitness for
the work to be done. The work calls for men of culture and
strong character, of wide outlook, and having withal a high,,
sense of vocation. This is true of Africa and the West Indies,
no less than of the Eastern fields.
The Society wall continue to submit all its missionaries to
a period of missionary probation on the field. It is undesirable
in all interests to retain on the field those who after patient
and sympathetic trial do not appear to be well fitted for the
work to which they are sent.
The Place of the Missionary on the Field.
The chief duties of the foreign missionary on the field
will be: —
(1) The general oversight of the native church, the
understanding being always that the oversight in detail should
be transferred as rapidly as safety allows to indigenous minis-
try and to duly constituted local courts. . . .
The Church on the Field.
Recognising that it is not entrusted to us or to any other
foreign society to complete the evangelisation of the lands in
which we are labouring, but rather to raise up a Christian
church able and willing to assist until it succeeds us in that
work, it is the primary aim of the Society to lead men and
women into personal fellowship with Jesus Christ; to unite
those who have become disciples into churches; and to edify
the church until it becomes an efficient and faithful witness of
Jesus Christ.


It is not the desire of the Society to impose on the infant
churches of the mission field every detail of form and consti-
tution found useful in the Methodism of this land. It is rather
its aim to embody in the offices and constitution of those
churches forms that are indigenous and familiar in the lands
where the work is growing. . . .
It is the policy of the Society from the first to set before
infant churches on the mission field the duty.of contributing
to the support of their own ministry, and of erecting their own
cl mrch buildings, and early to encourage them to take part in
the direction of their own affairs.
It is further the policy of the Society to seek without
ceasing to lay upon the church the duty of self-support and
self-government, and no church will be considered as fulfilling
its calling that is not taking an active part in the evangelising
of the people in its area. Merely to pay for its own ministry
and to maintain its own property is not to fulfil all the func-
tions of a Church of Jesus Christ.
The privilege of self-control must depend on three con-
ditions
(1) The presence of an efficient ministry.
(2) Material ability to support the ministry.
(3) The presence of laymen in the church able to fill
the various offices, and to manage the church’s finances.
To encourage the progress of a church towards self-sup-
port and self-government, it is the policy of thp Society from
time to time to carve out of the larger mission circuits—which
arc really extensive districts—groups of churches to form a
true circuit, to which a native minister is appointed superin-
tendent. A minister so appointed holds his own Quarterly
Meeting, and looks, not to the missionary, but to his own
stewards, for his stipend. Such a circuit, to begin with, is
classed as an aided circuit, and receives a grant from the local
committee, representing the general committee. This grant
diminishes according to scale until the circuit becomes self-
supporting, and is classed as such.
The District Synod will for the present fix the minimum
stipend to be paid to a native minister in each circuit, and will
satisfy itself year by year that the amount fixed has been
paid in full.
It will be expected of the native church that it will zealous-
ly follow up the missionaries’ efforts by supplementing their
evangelistic work, and by taking over as early as possible the
care of infant churches which are the fruits of their joint
labours.
It is the policy of the Society to make a frequent and
careful survey of its whole field with a view to stimulating a


larger measure of self-support among the native churches, and
in order to ascertain what items of expenditure, especially in
the provision and, maintenance of property, should be con-
sidered the sole or chief responsibility of that church.
Replies.
A—FROM OUR OWN FIELDS .
From the Rev. A. J. Small, Chairman Fiji District.
Suva,
15th June, 1922.
Dear Bro. Burton, —
This will be only a brief reply to your letter of the 4th
May, which I found awaiting me on my return from three
weeks’ cruise in the Lau Circuit, when I had the joy of minis-
tering to our people at Lomaloma, Mualevu, Matuku, Totoya,
Moala and Lakeba.
The Lau Annual Circuit Meeting, at which I was present
officially, after long discussion, passed a resolution asking
Synod for permission to discontinue the scheme inaugurated
four years ago creating the circuit a financially independent
one. The present liabilities are heavy, and with the low price
of copra ruling, there is little prospect of the debt being
cleared off for some time to come. Still, the people are facing
the situation bravely, and I have no doubt will continue to do
so. I read to the members of the meeting the substance of
your motion as moved at the last Annual Meeting of the Board,
and there were many expressions of admiring gratitude that
our elders are thinking in that direction. Personally, I am
enthusiastically in favour of the basic principle laid down in
that proposed new constitution, and sincerely hope that our
church will adopt it. I favour also the institution in Fiji of
an annual missionary collection to be taken up, after proper
preparation, in all our churches on a given Sunday on the
clear understanding that the whole of it is to be devoted to
the support of Missions in connection with our church in
places more or less benighted. I am inclined to think that
such a collection would be a popular one, and this departure
should be made to apply alike to the Fijians and Indians.
As Convener of that Commission appointed by the Board,
I hope you will hurry up with your recommendations. Let
me know quickly what your ideas are, and how you will meet
objections, some of which are obvious.
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) ARTHUR J. SMALL.


From the Rev. A. J. Small, Chairman, Fiji District.
Suva,
3rd November, 1922.
Dear Bro. Burton,
The sessions of Synod closed only last night at nine
o’clock, and as the boat for Sydney is leaving to-day, I have
very little time for all the correspondence which I must get
through.
You will be glad to learn that the Synod approved most
heartily of your “basic principle,” and all the native members
went home in good heart. They at once agreed, as I said all
along they would, to provide residences for their missionaries
and be responsible for their up-keep. They also agreed that
if all the missionary collections remain in Fiji that all district
expenses other than the salaries and allowances of missionaries
and their travelling expenses to and from Australia be charge-
able to the Fijian Church. “Missionaries” mean all European
agents.
Of course, the scheme, even if agreed to by the General
Conference, cannot come into force until the circuit annual
meetings have had an opportunity of sending up their recom-
mendations on it to the Synod. However, the General Con-
ference can give, if it so desires, permissive legislation, which
will meet the case.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) ARTHUR J. SMALL.
| The Fiji Synod prepared a new constitution for the dis-
trict, to be submitted to the Board. This constitution makes
provision for the basic principle” of the independence of
the white missionary, but does not outline any scheme for
creating small circuits with native government and responsi-
bility.]
From the Rev. W. J. Chambers, Chairman New Britain Dis-
trict.
Rabaul,
19th December, 1922.
Dear Mr. Burton,
We gave this Memorandum of yours our best thought.
There was not one of us who was not in complete agreement
with the policy enunciated in your document. It appealed to
ns all as a correct indication of the way we should travel.
We cannot hide the fact, however, that it is very difficult
for us to bring such a scheme into operation just yet to any


great extent in this district, as our native helpers are at the
beginning of things in the matter of finance. At the same
time, we know very well that to apply a policy such as you
have indicated wherever there is even a remote hope of ulti-
mate success is perhaps the only way to bring them up in
ability to manage it. We are not without the courage to ven-
ture, not without the belief that it will be operating before
many years.
We shall look into the ways and means during the year,
and we trust that in some places these small circuits under
the care of native ministers or catechists may be brought into
being soon after our next Synod.
Enclosed you will find the Resolutions of Synod dealing
with the matter.
With very kind regards,
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) W. J. CHAMBERS.
Resolution of New Britain District Synod—
MEMORANDUM RE NATIVE CHURCH.
This Synod, having given careful consideration to the
Memorandum on the Native Church prepared by the Rev. J.
W. Burton, M.A., is of opinion:—
1. That to aim at the progress of the Native Church,
towards self-support and self-government is an ideal
which we should have before us in all our missionary
work.
2. That the proposal to establish small Circuits or Home
Mission Stations within Mission Circuits, with a
native minister or catechist.as superintendent, is one
that may be calculated to serve this end.
3. That it may be possible to put this system into opera-
tion in some of the older circuits in this district in
the near future.
Resolved —
1. That a,s the Synod is not yet prepared with a scheme,
a Committee be appointed to consider the whole ques-
tion during the year with a view to a plan being
formulated for consideration at,the next Synod.
2. That the following shall be the Committee: —Revs.
W. J. Chambers (Chairman of the District), H. R.
Rycroft, J. IT. Margetts and W. H. Cox.
(Signed) W. J. CHAMBERS.
Chairman.


From the Rev. W. E, Eromilow, D.D., Chairman Papua Dis-
trict.
Dobu,
7th November, 1922.
Dear Brother Burton.—
Native Church. — l enclose the resolution of our Synod
thereupon. The people of this circuit give at the missionary
meetings more than is needed for the support of their village
pastors, but not enough to meet other expenses apart from
our salaries. There is at present no direct giving* to the sup-
port of their pastors, and some of the brethren say that the
contributions would most likely drop at first if an attempt
were made to get them to give directly. The Papuan has to
be educated in self-reliance and leadership. We are only now
preparing to appoint some of them to be teachers and then
catechists, and so on to the native ministry. Our church
stewards are infants in money matters. I have instituted men’s
meetings at which all community concerns are discussed. I
have to take the chair so far, and I have not yet succeeded in
securing a secretary. They are beginning to speak freely. All
men who care to come are admitted, bad or good. lam hoping
that out of these gatherings councils will be formed—to be
run by themselves. The pleasing feature to me in these meet-
ings is the leading part taken by a number of my old school-
boys.
Kindest regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) W.M. E. BROMILOW.
Resolution of Papua Synod, 1922.
MEMORANDUM RE NATIVE CHURCH.
That this Synod is in genera] sympathy with the sugges-
tions contained in the Memorandum, but would point out that
at present all native ministers and catechists in this district
are from the South Seas. AVe consider the time is by no means
near when natives in the Papua District will be able to con-
duct quarterly meetings and administer finance. At the same
time we think some of the suggestions may be applied in a
modified form in the near future. AVe may, for example, be
able to induce our people in certain circuits or sections to
assume financial responsibility for their Papuan teachers.
(Signed) WM. E. BROMILOW,
Chairman of the District.


From the Rev. P. M. Waterhouse, Rotuma.
Noatau Rotuma,
14th September, 1922.
Deai- Mr. Burton, —
In the first place I will say that from my knowledge of
the people here they would Avelcome some form of independence
in the matter of church finance. I arrived here in May, 1918,
and at the annual meeting a fortnight later was asked if there
could not be some form of independence, as at Lau. I said I
did not know enough about things to do anything then. Next
jyear, owing to no shipping, I could not get to Synod. In
1920 Mataiasi Vave, the native minister from Davuilevu, was
here for some time, and was very enthusiastic about the Lau
Circuit, and explained fully to the native ministers and chiefs
what was done and bow the money was divided; and there
was a strong desire to follow. I felt that there was too much
involved in that the white missionaries’ salary and allowances
would be dependent on the natives, also the scale of division
was not suited to Rotuma.
As far as Rotuma is concerned, I think that the general
idea of the circular could easily be put in force, that is—
(1) The white missionary’s salary and allowances and that
of all white workers be paid from the home funds. It is not
fair that these should be dependent on the fluctuating income
derived from the natives. The white workers have enough
worry without any trouble over salary. I think this was the
weakness of the Lau scheme.
(2) All of what is now known as “The Native Moiety,”
native ministers’ salaries, education, circuit travelling and all
payment of native agents, be handled by the circuit quarterly
meeting. It might be well at first for Synod to state the
amount of these so as to prevent too lavish an expenditure on
the part of the natives. As they gained experience more,free-
dom could be granted. The question of raising the money
would have to be considered. Should the usual annual giving
be held and a portion retained for the circuit, or should the
whole go to the general funds and the circuit find the money
in another way ? Here, if it were, put properly to the chiefs
and people, I think the money could be raised quarterly either
by one collection or by monthly or weekly collections. The
annual missionary meeting collection would then go entirely
to the genera] funds. I am of the opinion that taking this
year’s collection as a basis there would not be a very great
reduction in the amount sent up.


I think, to begin with, only what pertains to the native
side of the work should be handled by the quarterly meeting,
but that possibly later on the upkeep of the mission houses
might be taken as well.
Rotuma happens to be a small, compact and wealthy cir-
cuit. The minister is in touch with everyone, and can reach
everyone easily. The people are generous, and have an idea
of their own importance. Their idea of thankfulness is invari-
ably expressed in giving. Were I staying I would be quite
willing to try the experiment. As it is, I believe that when my
successor has been here a year, and has a knowledge of things,
he would have no difficulty in carrying on a scheme such as
this. I have before said that the people were anxious to try
the Lau scheme, and from little things that have been said,
and what has been wanted to be done, I am sure they would be
glad to try this. It would be necessary to provide that in
case of a shortage a subsidy could be granted to make up
deficiencies, but I doubt if it would be wanted.
The matter wants to be discussed with the chiefs and
native ministers; they might favour a division of the annual
giving rather than a quarterly effort. It is only here that I
see any real difficulty, but I think as long as it is clearly put
there would be no trouble. With the native ministers at
present here there would be little trouble. There seems to be
nothing else that needs be said. It remains to try the scheme,
and I think Rotuma would be a very fit place to do so, but
as I am leaving it is not easy to urge it.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) P. M. WATERHOUSE.
From the Rev. R. C. Nicholson, late of the Solomon Islands.
Scottsdale, Tas.,
10th August, 1922.
Dear Mr. Burton, —
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your circular and
Memorandum re the Native Church. Gladly I respond to your
request for constx-uctive criticism on this great question.
First of all I find myself in complete agreement with the
motion submitted by yourself at the last Annual Meeting of
the Board of Missions. I may say, en passant, that I have been
a student of this problem of an indigenous church for a con-
siderable time. I have always held the view that the support
of white missionaries should be undertaken by the home
church. The value of this to the missionary on the field cannot


tie over-estimated. Its reflex action on the church at home is
also an important matter.
But I must say no more in agreement of what has heen
set forth already. Our aim is, as you say, the establishment
of a self-supporting, self-governing and self-propagating
native church. I have to admit that I have studied this
problem principally in its relationship to our newer mission
districts in the Pacific, and therefore what I have to say has
special significance for New Britain and Papua.
It seems to me that as the potential wealth of our native
peoples in these two districts is so great there will be no diffi-
culty regarding the support of the native church, and that the
solution of the whole problem lies in the creation of thoroughly
efficient native leaders, both lay and clerical.
[Then follows a very valuable contribution regarding the
methods to be adopted to obtain a supply of thoroughly effi-
cient native leaders.]
You will notice that I have not attempted to deal with the
question of a general policy. I have left this alone because it
has already been so satisfactorily handled by yourself. To my
mind your motion meets the situation exactly, and I have no
doubt that it will be adopted in due time as the policy of our
Missionary Society. My purpose in writing has been to make
a few suggestions on the practical problem of how to set about
the task of creating native leaders who shall in turn build up
a Native Church that shall be truly part of the life of the
people and capable of natural development.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) R. C. NICHOLSON.
B—FROM ADMINISTRATORS OF OTHER SOCIETIES.
From the Rev. C. W. Andrews, 8.A., 8.D., One of the General
Secretaries of the W.M.M.S., London.
London,
24th November, 1922.
Dear Mr. Burton, —
I ought to have acknowledged before this the Memoran-
dum that you were good enough to send me on August 29th,
dealing with the Native Church. As far as I can see, you are
following our own practice on the field in regard to self-sup-
port and the best way to attain it. We are doing the very
thing that you propose, that is, carving out of a district a group


of churches which becomes a circuit, which is in the first
instance aided, but subsequently becomes self-supporting.
I do not know that we have any advice to offer other than
what is contained in our declaration of policy appended to
your statement. Our procedure is just what you propose. If
you will consider our statement of policy and, if you think it
right, try to work to that, you will be doing what we have
been doing for some years past, and I think I may say that
we have found it quite successful.
I was very glad to hear from you, and I should like to
take the opportunity of wishing you all possible success in
the work of your Society.
With kindest regards,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) C. W. ANDREWS.
Prom the Rev. C. H. Patton, M.A., D.D., One of the Secretaries
of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions
(Congregational), Boston.
Boston,
7th November, 1922
Dear Mr. Burton, —
I received your circular entitled “Commission re the
Native Church,” and read it with very great interest. It
happened to come at a time when I was thinking about the
problem of transferring responsibility to the native church. I
was surprised indeed to learn of the pooling system which
you have followed for so many years. The wonder, to my
mind, is that it ever worked at all. Having in mind the fields
of my own Board, I can hardly conceive of any of our native
leaders being content to have their contributions sent to the
home base and pooled with the appropriations of the support-
ing Board. The fact that you have gotten along with so little
friction all these years under such a system would appear to
■convey a great compliment to your missionaries, who must
have been men of rare tactfulness, commanding the respect
und the affection of the native converts. Having gotten your-
selves into such a fix, it would appear that you are working
your way out with a good deal of wisdom.


Of course this matter of self-support is a part of the larger
problem of self-realisation and of the naturalisation of Chris-
tianity among the island population. I note you say: “At
present our native church has little that is distinctive m
character, and is merely a somewhat distorted reflection of the
church at home.” I wonder if that is not the case with most
of the Pacific Island native churches. If we could make
inquiry as to our church in the Carolines or in the Gilbert
Islands (the one recently transferred to the Japanese Kumiai
Church, and the other of the L.M.S.) I am thinking we would,
discover pretty much the same situation. It may be that a
strong native consciousness and insistence upon freedom
of development along indigenous lines goes for the most part
with the sense and fact of nationality. I know more about
the native churches of Africa, and my observations there led
me to think that in a primitive, childlike population a some-
what slavish imitation of the missionary and his ways is inevit-
able, and possibly desirable as the first stage of progress. When
we deal with a country like Japan we, of course, are in quite
a different world.
It all goes to show that each Board will have to Avork out
this complex problem according to the circumstances in each
field.
When Robert E. Speer returned from his world trip a few
months ago he was talking to some of us about the rising tide
of nationality and the insistent demands of native Christian
leaders for a large transference of authority from the mission
to the church. lie said something like this: “This problem ; s
everywhere, and belongs not to one field, but to all fields. It
is impossible of solution. The Secretary or the missionary
does not exist who has Avisdom enough to fathom this matter
for the whole world. That is, it is impossible through any
formula or man-made plan looking to transference of authority
from the mission to the church. It is essentially a personal
problem, and must depend upon spiritual and social qualities,
Avorked out Avith great patience in adaptation to the circum-
stances of each field. ’ ’
Thanking you for remembering me Avith this circular and
its interesting information,
I remain,
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) CORNELIUS H. PATTON


From the Rev. Prank Mason North, M.A., D.D. LL.D., Senior
Corresponding Secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions,
Methodist Episcopal Church, New York.
New York City,
17th October, 1922.
My dear Sir and Brother, —
It was indeed a pleasure to have a note from you. My
memory went promptly back to the experiences of last Octo-
ber in the hills, and I found myself recalling with pleasure our
fellowship at -that time.
I wish that I might help you on the matter of which you
write. The organisation of our work is such that I am not
sure that we can find anything that exactly parallels the con-
ditions which you describe. The principles, however, are the
same, and it is a satisfaction to say that the policy announced
by the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, and endorsed
by you, expresses our own conviction with reference to the
development of the church on the field. It is my own thought
in the matter that there must he a middle ground between the
extreme of an exclusive national or native organisation, which
has destroyed all its normal relationships with the promoting
missionary organisation, and a dictatorial, or even directing
attitude on the part of that organisation which represses all
native initiative and diminishes to the lowest degree self-
control. If both groups can be free from a too obvious conscious-
ness of its distinction from the other, and a fellowship ser-
vice on the basis of the common life and purpose which comes
to believers who are citizens of a heavenly commonwealth can
be developed, the strength of both can be increased in the
one service. This, of course, is an ideal, but lam confident
that it is a better ideal than that which elevates as a com-
pelling obligation the transfer to the native church of respon-
sibilities which can only be borne in a fellowship with the more
experienced Christian group, and which ought to come, not
by a mechanical transfer, but by the development of a power
which makes success possible.
You will see that I am not attempting to discuss in detail
the positions taken in your favour, and this because conditions
in most of our fields differ so definitely from those which you
describe; but I may say that I consider your judgment in the
matter is sound, and that your procedure is in harmony with
our own general administrative purpose.
Thanking you for writing me, I am.
Yours cordially,
(Signed) FRANK MASON NORTH.


From the Rev. A. J. Brown, D.D., Senior Secretary of the
Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the
U.S.A.
New York,
9th October, 1922.
My dear Mr. Burton, —■
I hasten to reply to your letter of August 29th, in which
you ask for an expression of my views regarding the Native
Church. Perhaps I had best answer your question by referring
you to chapter 15 of my book, “The Foreign Missionary, ’'
published by Fleming H. Revell Company, New York, a copy
of which I think is in either your library or that of the Presby-
terian Society. It discusses the subject more fully than it
would be practicable for me to do in a letter. The latest
important contribution to the subject is the action of the
International Missionary Council at its meeting at Mohonk
Lake, New York, in 1921. The enclosed copy of my letter to
all our Presbyterian Missions will explain some of the details
that will probably interest you. I assume that the printed
minutes of that meeting are already in your possession.
Cordially yours,
(Signed) ARTHUR J. BROWN.
Extracts from Dr. Brown’s Letter to Missionaries—
The following extracts from Dr. Brown’s letter to the
missionaries are of interest:—
“The International Missionary Council did not originate
or precipitate the discussion. It has simply given expression
to a sentiment that has been developing through a considerable
period of time until it has gathered such force and become so
acute as to call for a definite action. We have long said that
one of the axioms of missionary policy is the purpose to estab-
lish the church and commit to it all practicable responsibility.
Have we been too slow in putting our policy into effect ? The
Japanese churches have taken matters in their own hands.
Are we in the other fields holding power too long ? Have we
been building up missions of foreigners rather than churches
of native Christians ? Our brethren in the churches in the
mission field in various lands make no secret of their belief
that we have. I found unmistakable evidences of their pro-
test in both of my visits to Asia. Dr. Speers’ recent letters


from India show that the problem is now acute in that country,
and we know from our correspondence that India is not alone
in this respect. President Wilson’s famous phrase—“the self-
determination of peoples”—has stirred native churches as
well as nations, and an acute situation has developed that we
must squarely face. The proposal to vest power in the Pres-
bytery rather than the Mission is not new. Secretary John C.
Lowrie made it long ago. The presbyteries were not ready for
it then. Probably some are not now. But others are ready.
Some others, about whose readiness there may be misgivings,
regard themselves as ready, and not a few of both classes are
increasingly restive under present conditions.
“Before taking final action, however, the Board felt that
it ought to have the considered judgment of the missions and
the churches concerned, inasmuch as the proposals of the
council affect them as well as the policy and methods of the
Board. The Board therefore directed that the actions of the
International Missionary Council and the Foreign Missions
Conference of North America be transmitted to the missions,
and through them to the churches with which they co-operats,
for such action and advice as they may deem expedient.”
“Difficult as the problem is, the very fact that it has
arisen is of itself gratifying evidence of the success of your
work. As I stated in my paper at Lake Mohonk, ‘since the
aim of Foreign Missions is the Church, absence of the problem
would mean the absence of the Church, which in turn would
mean the failure of the missionary enterprise.’ We may well
be thankful that the people to whose evangelisation you have
consecrated your lives are coming to the point where they
can more fully share with you in the conduct of the work.”
From the Rev. Seafield Deuchar, 8.A., General Secretary
Victorian Branch Church Missionary Society—
Melbourne,
30th August, 1922.
Dear Mr. Burton, —
In, reply to your letter of yesterday’s date, I must first
thank you for the Memorandum which I have read this morn-
ing. I find that our problem is the same problem as yours, but
with some difference. For instance, most of our mission work
in Africa, China and India is amongst poor people, and they
contribute very little towards the work. Where the contri-
bution of the Native Church is large enough to be taken into
account it has been used either for the development of the


church t h rough native agencies or for the spread of the
G ospel in some other part.
In our mass movement work the church is dependent for
its support almost entirely upon funds from the home society,
and most of the native catechists, teachers, Bible women and
evangelists are supported by friends through funds, which we
call “Trust Funds.’’ We are more and more realising that
in this the Native Church must take control in larger areas,
and that we must be prepared to let this Native Church
administer our funds and trust them to do so without any
interference from the European missionary.
A delegation from our headquarters in Loudon, which
visited India and Ceylon recently, has just returned, and it
gives me pleasure to send herewith their report on this matter.
The report will speak at greater length and more clearly
than I can, if you have time to read it.
I am,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) SEAFIELD DEUCHAR.
From the Rev. G. J. Williams, Australasian Secretary London
Missionary Society.
Melbourne.
30th August, 1922.
Dear Mr. Burton, —
I am sorry to have delayed answering your letter con-
cerning self-support. Yours of the 28th inst. now reminds me
of my omission.
As a matter of fact there is not much to tell you, We
can scarcely be said to have any “methods’’ with regard to
self-supporting native churches. Our one policy is to encourage
them as much as possible to achieve self-support. Our work
in Samoa is the only extensive example of the realisation of
our ideal. There the churches have reached a total of contri-
butions to the society that exceeds the cost of the mission.
Theoretically the Samoan Mission is now able to maintain itself
without the assistance of the society, but it is not yet fully
acting upon the corollary of self-support, namely, self-govern-
ment. For all practical purposes the Samoan Mission is still
related to the Society in the old way. In India and China we
have here and there self-supporting churches, and in these
cases they have accepted the responsibility of self-government.
In a word, our general principle is to encourage self-govern


ment wherever self-support has been achieved, and I think
that answers your question as well as any other information
which we have would be likely to do.
With kindest regards,
I am,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) GEORGE J. WILLIAMS.
From the Rev. P. H. L. Paton, M.A., 8.D., Senior Secretary
Presbyterian Foreign Missions, Victoria.
Melbourne,
31st August, 1922.
Dear Mr. Burton, —
Many thanks for your letter of the 29th inst., enclosing
Memorandum dealing with Native Church.
Our polity in all our fields is to pay all white missionaries’
salaries and expenses ourselves, and to lay upon the Native
Church the full responsibilities for the building of churches
and schools, and, as soon as they are financially able, the full
support of all native agents. No pastor is settled except on
entire native support.
In the New Hebrides the natives handle their own monies
in connection with the local missionaries, and he opens a trust
account —our object is to make each station entirely self-sup-
porting except for the salaries of our white missionaries and
the cost of building and maintaining their homes. We also
make ourselves responsible for motor launches where the
station is not able to provide one themselves.
In Korea we make ourselves responsible for certain educa-
tional and medical work in addition to salaries of white
workers, but here also we are working towards an entirely
self-supporting and self-governing church. The missionary
becomes the junior colleague, a purely friendly counsellor of
the native pastor once he is appointed. The Korean Church,
through its Presbytery, is autonomous. On the Presbytery of
the Korean Church our missionaries Pave a seat and a vote,
blit merely because the Korean Church wishes it so, as we gave
up the right ourselves.
We have no contributions coming into our funds from
native sources except a very rare donation now and again.
With kind regards,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) FRANK H. L. PATON.


From the Right Reverend the Bishop of New Guinea, Samarai,
Samarai,
Dear Mr. Burton, —
3rd October, 1922.
Thank you for your letter and the Memorandum enclosed.
We are just trying to arrange a scheme somewhat on the lines
suggested in the Memorandum. Hitherto we have not been
able to do much in the way of getting support for the mission
from the people, though they do a good deal in church
building, etc.
I have suggested a contribution of 2/-per bead tier annum
from all confirmed Christians, but we have not yet decided
whether to make the individual the unit or the community.
I mean each smaller community of Christians in one village.
Personally I favour this latter, but I am open to conviction.
I think a fixed amount is better than putting individual against
individual or community against community. Such tends to
self-glorification, and kills out the spiritual effect of almsgiving,
which is one of the aims to he kept in view.
I do not think it wise to use the money contributed by
native Christians to support white workers. Bather the prin-
ciple should be: White Christians support white missionaries,
and native Christians support native missionaries. There is
also the important question of missionary work in other lands
to be kept in mind. For that I would devote offerings on
certain days, such as dedication festival of the church and Good
Friday, especially the latter, and try and get the people to
make a special effort for that; and I should allow the Christians
at each place to decide to what country it should go.
I do not think here at least we could leave disbursement
of native Christian contributions to local people. Native clergy
and teachers must be sure of their stipends, and so the mission
must pay regularly. But people could be told so much was
given to the mission to repay it for disbursement to teachers.
Here we have the difficulty that people do not have much
current cash.
It is an important matter, and closely affects spiritual
growth if handled wisely.
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) HENRY, BISHOP OF NEW GUINEA.
