





COMMENDATIONS.
(3i I- tT 2-




09 /T
COMMENDATIONS.
IvEV. A. 0. GEtKIE,
Dear Brother,—
Having learnt that you are contemplating an early
removal to Britain, with no immediate prospect of returning to
this country, we cannot allow you to depart without expressing
our fraternal regard; and also, our recognition of the Christian
liberality and courtesy by which you have been characterised
during your residence in this city.
We earnestly pray the Great Head of the Church to direct
your way and make it prosperous wherever you may resume
your Evangelical labours, and that in these times of un-
settled opinions, and probably of approaching trials, both you
and we may be found faithful. We trust through the mercy of
our Redeemer, that if not permitted to meet again on earth, we
may be re-united in a more blissful region, after the toils and
wanderings of this life are past.
We remain, dear Brother,
With Christian affection and esteem,
Yours in the Gospel,
CHARLES DE WOLEE, A.M.,
Minister of the Wesleyans.
JOHN COOK, D.D.,
Minister of the Church of Scotland.
DAVID MARSH,
Minister of the Baptist Church.
Quebec, Lower Canada,
April 27, 1852,


THE LATE EEV. ADAM LILLIE, D.D.,
Professor of Theology to the Congregational Churches op Canada,
Toronto, Upper Canada,
15th June, 1852.
Dear Brethren,--
Allow me to introduce to your acquaintance, tlie Dev.
A. C. Geikie, late of Quebec. Regretting deeply the loss of Mr.
Geekie’s valuable service to this new country, my prayer is that
God may guide him to some desirable sphere of labour in which
He may make him eminently useful and happy. Mr. Geekie
carries with him the confidence and esteem of his brethren, with
the recognition, on their part, of very superior adaptations for
his work, in which I have known him while resident in this part
of the province, endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.
Any kindness shewn Mr. Geekie will be deemed a personal
favour by
Dear brethren,
Yours very sincerely,
ADAM LILLIE.
To the Reverend
Thomas Binney, London,
J. Kennedy, Stepney, and others.
THE LATE REY. WILLIAM SWAN.
Edinburgh, 31st May, 1855.
Rev. A. 0. Geikie.
My Dear Sir, —
You have intimated a wish that I should
furnish you with a certificate of your having at my request per-
formed an acceptable and important service in going to St.
Petersburg and ministering there in the British and American
Chapel to the Congregation of the Revd. Mr. Ellerby, during


his visit to England in the summer of 1853. I have the plea-
sure of complying with this request, testifying that you per-
formed the duties assigned you so as to secure the thankful
acknowledgements of the Christian friends in the capital of
Russia, to whom you were a temporary pastor during the
absence of their Minister.
I remain, my dear Sir,
Very truly yours,
W. SWAN,
Secretary of the Congregational Union of Scotland
EEY. EOBEET UEE, D. D., GODEEICH, CANADA.
I have much pleasure in testifying to the piety, talents,
and pulpit gifts of the Eev. A. Constable Geikie, who has for
some years been a Minister of the Presbyterian Church of
Canada, and who is now, as I regret to learn, proposing to leave
Canada with the view of devoting himself to some other sphere
of labour. I regret that he has come to this decision, as it will
deprive our Church of one who is well fitted to advance its
interests. By those who know him he is much esteemed for his
literary attainments and gentlemanly deportment, and above all,
for his unostentatious piety. His pulpit gifts, of which I have
had little opportunity of judging, have been highly valued by
the foremost men of our Church.
Mr. Geikie was an intimate friend, and acted for some time
as Assistant, of the late lamented Dr. Bayne, of Galt, a gentleman
who may with propriety be termed, the father and founder of
our Church; and lam warranted by the best of reasons in
saying that in the esteem and affection of that gentleman Mr.
Geikie occupied a distinguished place,—as compared with his
ministerial brethren, perhaps the highest place,
I shall only add that Mr. Geikie has my warmest wishes for
his success in any field of labour to which he may be called.
EOBEET UEE,
Convenor of the Union Committee of the Presbyterian Church
of Canada.


REV. JOHN TAYLOR, M.D., D.D., Edin.
Toronto, Canada West,
27th November, 1860.
I have had the pleasure of knowing the Rev. Arehd.
Constable Geelde, a Minister of the Presbyterian Church of
Canada, for some years, and have great confidence in bearing
testimony to the excellence of his character. I have also had an
opportunity of hearing him preach, and had much reason to be
delighted with his discourse. I know that he is esteemed
among his Brethren as an able and efficient minister.
JOHN TAYLOR, D.D., Edin.
Professor of Divinity to the United
Presbyterian Church in Canada.
THE REV. GEORGE SMELLIE.
Fergus, Canada West,
28th November, 1860.
I have much pleasure in certifying that, having en-
joyed ministerial intercourse with the Rev. Archibald Constable
Geikie of the Presbyterian Church of Canada for several years,
I regard him as an agreeable, improving, and faithful friend—
an able and devoted Minister of the Gospel —and possessed of
pulpit gifts of a superior order. He is sound and evangelical in
his doctrine, I feel assured that his attainments, both in theology
and general literature, far surpass the generality of ministers,
and his mode of communicating his ideas has a point, freshness,
and academical air not often to be met with.
I may add that, with consent of the congregation of Knox’s
Church, Mr, Geikie was selected as his assistant by the late Dr.
Bayne, who was by far the ablest, and, I believe, the most un-
selfish minister who ever adorned our Canadian Church, and this
says much for Mr. Geikie.
GEORGE SMELLIE,
Minister of Melville Church,
Fergus, Canada West,


EEYD. E. F. BITENS, D.D.,
Author of the Life of the Late Bevu. Robert Burns, D. D,
St. Catherine’s, Canada West,
28th November. 1860.
I have known the Eev. A. 0. G-eekie for several
years, and have had reason to form a very favourable opinion
of his personal character and professional qualifications. He
has a highly cultivated and well balanced mind, a refined
taste and a genial disposition. He is possessed of a large
measure of shrewdness, common sense, and capacity for
business. His stores of general information are extensive,
and his powers of communication are very considerable. He
has been employed in different departments of service
which have put these qualities to the test. His contribu-
tions to various literary journals have been highly creditable.
I have never heard Mr. Greek!e preach, but the facts of his hav-
ing filled several important posts throughout the Province, and
latterly been chosen as Assistant to the lamented Dr. Bayne in
the oversight of one of our largest congregations, as well as his
having enjoyed the confidence of that eminent servant of God
(whose pathway to the tomb he did much to smooth), supply
evidence sufficient on this head.
I regret that Mr. Geekie should think of leaving the Pro-
vince, but earnestly trust that, wherever he may go, his gifts
and graces will soon find an appropriate field for their exercise.
EOBEET F. BIJENS,
Moderate! of Presbytery of Hamilton,
Presbyterian Church of Canada.
EEY. PEOPESSOE YOUNG, M.A. Edin.,
Now Professor of Moral Philosophy, University College, Toronto.
Knox’s College, Toronto, C. W.,
26th November, 1860,
My Dear Sib, —
Having been intimately acquainted with you for a
considerable number of years, and highly esteeming you as a
brother Minister in the Presbyterian Church of Canada, I gladly
bear testimony to your Christian character and qualifications for
the work of the Ministry. You are possessed of excellent


natural abilities, and tliese have been cultivated with more than
ordinary success. Your sermons (of which I can speak from
personal knowledge, having frequently heard you preach) are of
a decidedly superior order. No more significant testimony,
whether to your private worth, or to your gifts for the public
work of the Ministry, could be given, than is furnished by the
fact that that eminent servant of God, the late Dr. John Bayne,
was anxious to obtain you as his assistant in 'Galt, and did, in
fact, induce you to leave the charge which you held in Berlin,
Canada West, for the purpose of transferring your labours to
Galt. I may add that you are well known as a successful culti-
vator of general literature, of which you have given proof by
your contributions to the Canadian Journal, and to other periodi-
cals. I sincerely wish you all success, and remain,
My dear Sir,
Yours truly,
GEOEGE PAXTON YOUNG, M.A., Edin.,
Professor of Theology.
Eev. A. Constable Geekie.
REY. ROBERT IRYINE, D.D.
My Dear Brother Geikie, —
I am sorry to learn from yours of yesterday, that you
seriously contemplate leaving this Province, not only on account
of the personal intimacy that has existed between us for years
past, but on account of the loss which our Church will sustain in
your removal from Canada, should our King and Head point
your way to a sphere of labour beyond our bounds.
Still, as a matter of justice, I feel it due to you to say that,
having known you personally and intimately, as a missionary
within the bounds of the Presbytery of Hamilton, as a settled
pastor at Berlin, Canada West, and latterly, as assistant of our
revered friend and father, the late Dr. Bayne, I can certify to
your high accomplishments as a scholar, your very superior
gifts as an orthodox and evangelical preacher, your eminent


piety and wisdom, your estimable social habits, as also to your
fidelity as a devoted and working pastor.
I may add in this connexion, from personal knowledge,
that Dr. Bayne felt and believed as I do on all the points I have
thus alluded to; and moreover, that, in the most explicit terms,
he assured me, at the time of your negotiations with the Galt
congregation, that it was his wish that you should not only be
his assistant, but his successor.
I am, yours very fraternally,
E. IRVINE.
Manse of Knox’s Church,
Hamilton, 27th November, 1860,
DANIEL WILSON, ESQ., L.L.D., &c., &0.,
Author or “Prehistoric Man,” and Professor of English History, XJnniversitv
College, Toronto.
University College, Toronto,
November 27th, 1860.
To the Rev. A. 0. Geikie.
My Dear Sir, —
The opportunities I have enjoyed of private inter-
course with you, as well as what I have witnessed of your public
labours, alike as a member of the Canadian Institute, and in the
more important position of a Christian Minister, have led me to
form a high opinion of your abilities ; and have caused me fre-
quent regret that one in so many respects fitted to adorn the
Christian Ministry, should be placed in circumstances which
have rendered the genial manners and well cultivated mind of
so little avail. Your liberal tastes and the ability with which
you use your pen, when added to the higher graces most indis-
pensable for the sacred functions which devolve on you, are
calculated, I feel assured, to render you a valuable acquisition
in a far more important sphere than any you have yet occupied ;
and it will greatly gratify me to learn of your advancement to
some congenial and fitting post of duty.
Believe me, my dear Sir,
Very faithfully yours,
DAN. WILSON,
Professor of History, &c.
University College, Toronto.


BEY. PEINCIPAL WILLIS, D.D., L.L.D.
Toronto, 27th November, 1860.
The Eev. A. C. Geikie having applied to me for an ex-
pression of my opinion on his qualification for a ministerial
charge, I feel it but Justice to him to say that I think well of his
talents, and have confidence in his principles and the purity of
his motives.
Mr, Geekie has the advantage of some experience, and, I
believe, has commended himself to the hearts as well as con-
sciences of his hearers, among whom he has manifested those
amiable, and courteous, and obliging dispositions, which, in a
pastor, are so much prized, and anywhere tend to conciliate
attention to the message which he bears.
I have frankly said to my friend, that, with gifts which
place him far above the average of preachers, I think he has
scarcely done himself Justice, in respect of some means of
enlarging his usefulness, which are quite in his power; and he
has only, I believe, to combine with the good taste, and powers
of writing and composing which he is known to possess, a more
plentiful infusion into his discourses—not of the polemical—but
of the good, strong doctrinal theology, to which, it may be, his
attention was not turned so much in early life, as to other studies,
—to be, with God’s blessing, a most acceptable and efficient, as
he is already, in many respects, an accomplished Minister of the
Gospel of Christ.
MIOHL. WILLIS, D.D., Glasgow,
Principal and Professor of Divinity,
Knox’s College, Toronto.
MINUTE OF THE COLONIAL COMMITTEE, FREE CHURCH OP
SCOTLAND, 22nd JANUARY, 1861.
The Convenor reported that the sub-committee for obtain-
ing additional Minutes, had examined the Testimonials in favour
of the Bevd. Archibald Constable Geikie, Canada West, and had,
according to the power given them by the Committee, accepted
the services of Mr. Geikie for Australia. *' * *
Extracted from the Eecords of the Colonial Committee by
PETEE HOPE, B.D. Edin,
9th August, 1871.


Galt, Canada West,
March 21, 1861.
To the Revd. A. C. Geikie
Reverend and Dear Brother—
We, the undersigned, having learned with sorrow
that you are about to leave Galt, cannot allow you to depart,
without thus expressing, not only our sympathy, but also our
high appreciation of your character, both in public and private,
as a man and a Christian Minister since you came amongst us.
Your well stored and matured mind, both as a Scholar and
a Theologian, cannot fail to gain for you the esteem and respect
of the Christian Community, wherever God in His Providence
may cast your lot, as well as an extensive field of labour in that
section of the Church to which you belong. Our earnest prayer
is, that you may be guided by Him whose name is Counsellor,
and that the Great Head of the Church may make you successful
as a Minister of the Gospel of reconciliation.
Yours in the bonds of the Gospel,
HAMILTON GIBSON,
Minister of St. Andrew’s, Galt, in connection with
the Church of Scotland.
JOHN JAMES,
Minister of the United Presbyterian Church, Galt,
ROBERT ACHESON,
Minister of the United Presbyterian Church of North America,
(Cameronian.)
FROM THE TORONTO GLOBE, AUGUST 3rd, 1869.
“Hanover College, State of Indiana, held its fortieth com-
mencement on the 24th July, and conferred the degree of D. D.
upon the Rev. Archibald Constable Geikie, Bathurst, New South
Wales, the second time he has received this degree during the
last month. This College, founded some forty years ago, is the


Presbyterian College of the State of Indiana, and has trained
several thousand young men, four or five hundred of whom have
entered the Ministry. It has a magnificent building on the
banks of the Ohio, midway between Cincinnati and Louisville,
and an able Faculty consisting of six Professors, the Eev. Dr.
Archibald being President. Dr. Geikie’s earnest efforts in
favour of the Union of the different Presbyterian bodies in Aus-
tralia, as well as his literary attainments, have doubtless
secured for him this recognition on the part of another Branch
of the great Presbyterian Family.”
Hanover College, Indiana,
June 25, 1869.
To the Eev. William Gregg, M.A., Edin.,
Professor of Theology,
Knox’s College, Toronto,
My Dear Sir—
An application from yourself and others to the
Faculty of Hanover College, requesting that the Honorary de-
gree of Doctor of Divinity should be conferred on the Eev.
Archibald C. Geikie, of Australia, and supported by proper
reasons, was received by me some months ago ; and I had plea-
sure in submitting it to the Faculty at a recent meeting held for
the purpose of considering such applications. I am happy to
say that the Faculty, in view of the recommendations and state-
ments given by yourself and other gentlemen connected with the
Canada Presbyterian Church, resolved to nominate Mr. Geikie
to the Board of Trustees of the College, for the proposed hon-
our ; and also, that their nomination was sustained by the vote
of the Board. Dr. Geikie’s earnest efforts in favour of the
Union of all true Presbyterians of every name, and his leader-
ship in a movement of this character, have interested us in him,
no less than his high literary talents and attainments.
I am, dear Sir,
Most repeetfiilly yours,
EDWAED J. HAMILTON,
Prof. Logic and Philosophy, Hanover College.


Royal Institution, Edinburgh,
December Bth, 1873.
Sir, —
We have the the honour to inform you that at a
General Meeting of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, held
here this day, you were elected a Corresponding Member of the
Society.
We have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient humble servants,
ARTHUE MITCHELL, Y. P.
T. B. JOHNSTON, Y. P.
JOHN STUAET, Secretary.
Eev. A. C. Geekie, D. D.
THE EEY. DE. VAUGHAN,
Master op the Temple, Lon.’
The Temple, E. C.,
February, 12, 1875.
My Dear Sir—
I heartily thank you for your Book (On Missions), 1
cannot tell you how much I admire it. Such originality, such
force, such rush and go, is most refreshing. I hope to study it
more and get it into me. Meanwhile I must thank you. Oh
how just are its criticisms, how bold its avowals, how unanswer-
able its arguments.
These few lines are all I have time for just now, and they
come late.
Yours very gratefully,
C. J. VAUGHAN.
To the
Eev. A. C. Geckie, D. D.,
Bathurst,


REV. W. LINDSAY ALEXANDER, D.D.,
St, Andrews, &c,, &c.
Edinburgh,
15th February, 1876.
I hereby certify that I have known the Rev.
Archibald C. Geikie, D.D., now of Bathurst, New South Wales,
since he was 14 years of age. His late much-respected father
was an office-bearer iu my church up to the time of his leaving
Edinburgh. Of that church Dr. Geilde became a member when
about 15 years of age, and during the seven years following he
continued in fellowship with us, esteemed by all who knew him,
as a consistent follower of the Lord Jesus Christ. At that time
he was engaged in the prosecution of study, and when, in his
22nd year, he emigrated with his father to Canada, he soon
after entered the Ministry there. After labouring for some
years in Canada, he returned for a season to this country, when
I had the pleasure of renewing my personal intercourse with
him, and when he was cordially welcomed by those who had
known him in earlier years. At that time he repeatedly
preached in my church. Since he removed to Australia, I have
had little intercourse with him directly; but I have watched
with interest his course, and have rejoiced to see him iu
positions where his talents and devotedness have enabled him to
serve in no mean degree the cause of our Lord and Saviour. All
along, from boyhood to maturity, up to the present time, he has
been the same true-hearted, sincere, upright, and devoted
Christian, against whom no man has ever had occasion to utter
a reproach. His reputation has been without blemish from the
first until now.
W. LINDSAY ALEXANDER, D.D.,
Minister of St. Augustine Church, Edinburgh, and
Professor of Theology to the Congregational
Churches of Scotland*
■->#><§.3*6-




tiatfjurst;
DOWSE & MacDOUGAL, MACHINE PRINTERS, WILLIAM-STREET, BATHURST.
“Bathukst Times” Office.
1 87 6.




