

Z *s»«
, N <i /v
COMMUNICATIONS
y 1 Cs*'. St-J .
WITH </ '
y 3
INDIA, CHINA, &c. via EGYPT
THE POLITICAL POSITION
OF THEIR
TRANSIT THROUGH EGYPT
CONSIDERED, WITH A VIEW TO SHOW THE NECESSITY FOR ITS
BEING PLACED ON A BASIS OF GREATER
PERMANENCY & SECURITY.
ARTHUR ANDERSON,
(NOT PRINTED FOR SALE.)


LONDON;
J. UNWIN, PRINTER, 31, BUCKLERSBURY.


COMMUNICATIONS WITH INDIA
Within these few years a new route has been opened, and
a new mode of conveyance provided, for the communications
between Great Britain and her vast oriental dependencies,
or, to speak more comprehensively as well as correctly,
between the eastern and western hemispheres.
Steam navigation has been availed of to accelerate these
communications. The Red Sea has been found to be the
best, if not the only practicable, route for shortening the
distance between Europe and the East: and Egypt, under the
auspices of an enlightened ruler, bids fair once more to
become (and to an infinitely greater extent) that which she
was under the sway of the Ptolemies, the high road of
communication and the entrepot of commerce between
Europe and Asia.
Although the advantages of this new route and means of
conveyance must be sufficiently obvious to those who may
have bestowed any tolerable degree of attention on the sub-
ject, it may be well, in order to show more clearly their great
national importance, to make a brief comparison between the
present and the former mode and means of communication,
by sailing vessels navigating round the Cape of Good
Hope.
A letter sent to India by the former means of transmission


could not reach any of the presidencies on an average in
less than four to five months, and the answer to it required
about the same time to reach England, making an interval
of from eight to ten months before an interchange of com-
munication could be effected between the two countries.
By the new route and the steam conveyance the time
required for this interchange of communication is reduced
to about as many weeks. Bombay has been brought within
thirty, and Calcutta within forty, days post of London.
In short, the eastern and western worlds have been virtually
approximated to one fourth of the distance which formerly
separated them.
The present arrangements for effecting this new com-
munication, commonly called the “Overland Route,” are as
follow ;
Two large steam vessels, the “ Oriental” and “ Great
Liverpool,” belonging to the Peninsular and Oriental
Steam Navigation Company ply between England and
Alexandria, once a month, under Contract with Her Ma-
jesty’s Government for the conveyance of the India, &c.
mails.
These vessels depart from Southampton on the Ist of every
month, and from Falmouth, where they call to take onboard
the mails, on the 2nd of every month, touching at Gibraltar,
and Malta, and receiving at the latter place that part of the
mails usually despatched from London on the 4th of every
month, through France, to Marseilles, and thence by a
government steamer to Malta. They arrive at Alexandria
generally on the 17th of every month; here the mails, pas-
sengers, and goods, in transit for India, &c., are landed, and
conveyed by the canal of Alexandria, the Nile, and across the
desert of Suez, to the Red Sea at Suez, where steam packets
of the East India Company, despatched from Bombay on the
Ist of every month, with the mails for Europe, are in waiting
to receive the mails for all India, and the passengers destined


for Bombay. Steamers of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Company, and of the Hon. East India Company,
have also now begun to ply occasionally between Suez,
Aden, Ceylon, Madras, and Calcutta; and by the Oriental
Company’s steamers, packages, as well as passengers, are
received and forwarded to or from England and Ceylon,
Madras and Calcutta.
The mails from India for Europe are despatched by steam
vessels of the East India Company, from Bombay on the Ist
of every month, except the months of June, July, and
August, when they are despatched about eight days earlier to
allow for the greater length of the passage to Suez, oc-
casioned by the south west monsoon. These steamers
usually arrive at Suez from the 19th to the 22nd of every
month ; and the mails and passengers being conveyed across
Egypt to Alexandria, are there embarked in the Oriental
Company’s vessels before mentioned. These depart from
Alexandria for England about the 22nd, to the 26th of every
month, varying according to the time of arrival of the East
India Company’s steamer at Suez. Touching at Malta,
where that portion of the correspondence, directed “ via
France,” is landed, and despatched to Marseilles by a British
government steamer, and usually arrives in London about
three or four days in advance of the heavier and larger portion
of the mails brought by the Oriental Company’s steamers to
Falmouth —these steamers, after landing that part of the
mails at Falmouth, proceed to the Motherbank quarantine
station; and thence, after a detention of a day or two,
to Southampton, where the passengers are disembarked, the
cargo landed, and the vessels prepared to start again for
Alexandria on the Ist of the following month.
Such is a brief outline of the present state and arrange-
ments of what is called the " Overland Route to India,”
which can only as yet be considered in its infancy. Mea-
sures are in active progress for rendering the communi-


cations by this route more comprehensive, as well as more
frequent; and when the vastness of the field which presents
itself to this enterprize is contemplated, it seems alike
presumptuous either to attempt to predict the precise rate
of its progress, or to prescribe limits to its future develop-
ment.
The communications by this route have, however, already
become of sufficient magnitude and national importance to
render any measure, calculated to ensure their permanency
and security, deserving of the serious attention of the
Government, and of the active solicitude of the public, both
of this country and of India.
The number of covers despatched from and received at
the Bombay post-office, to and from Europe, via Egypt,
during the year 1842, was upwards of one million. The
correspondence by this route has quadrupled in less than
five years, and still continues rapidly on the increase.
Who that has observed the eager anxiety with which the
monthly arrival of the overland mail is looked for by so
large a portion of the public, can doubt for a moment the
great public importance which attaches to its regular and
safe transmission. And who can doubt that great disap-
pointment and inconvenience would ensue in the event of
any accident causing the loss or interruption of a single mail.
Such being the case, let us consider the nature of the
tenure on which the security and continuance of these im-
portant communications—the most important of any beyond
seas which we possess—depend.
A very little consideration places before us a fact, to
which it would be folly to shut our eyes. The facility, the
security, and consequently the peaceable continuance of the
overland communications with India, depend upon the favor
and probably on the life of Mehemet Ali, Pacha of Egypt,
now in the 74th or 75th year of his age.
To his enlightened mind and vigorous government we are


indebted for that protection and facility in their transit
through Egypt, but for which these communications could
neither have been established, nor have been hitherto main-
tained. He has, with a magnanimity and liberality, of which
few parallels can be found in the history of potentates and
governments making higher pretensions to civilization, pro-
tected our communications when we were actually making
war upon him, and has up to this time afforded to us that
protection gratuitously.
But although Mehemet Ali has hitherto rendered to us
this important service without any compensation, is it
reasonable that we should expect him always to continue to
do so? Or, supposing we were to trust to such an un-
reasonable expectation, who can ensure the Pacha’s life for
a year or even a day ? And who can tell how the transit
through Egypt of these communications may be treated by
his successors ?
To every one acquainted with Egypt it is well known that
the Pacha could at any time cause the interruption or entire
loss of our Indian communications by this route, in such a
manner as to leave us no tangible ground for reclamation. A
secret intimation to one or two sheiks of the Bedouins
would be quite sufficient. And what could the British
government, with justice, say or do in the case of such an
event? Could they make a formal reclamation for indem-
nification ?
The present, or any future Pacha of Egypt, might reply
to such reclamation as follows—“ lam sorry for what has
happened, and I will endeavour to find out and punish the
offenders. But possibly they may be beyond my reach. In
Syria, for instance, where I have no jurisdiction. And,
after all, as you have made no arrangement with me for
guaranteeing the safety of your communications, you have
no more right to hold me responsible for their safety, or to
make any reclamation on me for their loss, than I would


have to call upon you to indemnify me for the loss of a
letter which might be robbed from a mail coach in any part
of your country.” But, it has been observed to the writer,
and by high authority, when using a similar argument to the
foregoing—“ Should such an event occur, we shall soon find
a means of redress.” No doubt we have the power. We
could occupy Egypt in a month. But where is the ne-
cessity for the government of this country placing itself in
the possible predicament, of either quietly suffering the in-
terruption of a communication so important to the interests
of tbe public, or of being led into the commission of an act
which might involve the nation in an expensive general war
—if it can be shown that the whole object required—the per-
manent security of these communications through Egypt—
may be obtained by an amicable arrangement with the present
Pacha, which would be binding on him and his successors ?
and by which we should obtain such a guarantee as would
either permanently secure these communications, or give us
a right of interposition in case of failure on the part of the
present or any future Pacha of Egypt, to afford the necessary
protection and facility to them.
The transit of these communications through
Egypt cannot now be suffered to be stopped or
INTERRUPTED. THEIR CONTINUANCE HAS BECOME AN OB-
JECT OF PUBLIC NECESSITY, AND MUST BE MAINTAINED
AT ALL COSTS AND HAZARDS. THIS MAY BE PEACEABLY
SECURED BY AN AMICABLE AND EQUITABLE ARRANGEMENT
with Mehemet Ali. Circumstances, moreover, render
the present time peculiarly auspicious for effecting such
an arrangement; and the object, therefore, of these obser-
vations is to press on the attention of that portion of the
public who have an interest in the permanent maintenance
of the “overland” communications with India, &c.; the
necessity for their adopting prompt and energetic measures


to induce the government not to neglect so favourable an
opportunity for effecting so very important a public object.
The Pacha of Egypt has had various testimonials pre-
sented to him from this country, expressive of public
gratitude for the liberal protection afforded by him to our
communications with India, &c. And it is only a few days
since the prime minister of England took an opportunity
of declaring, in his place in parliament, the high sense which
he entertained of the Pacha’s conduct.
In replying to some observations of Dr. Bowring, relative
to the establishment of a more frequent communication with
India, Sir Robert Peel expresses himself thus:—" I rose,
however, principally to bear a public testimony to the
liberality with which the Pasha of Egypt has permitted the
transit of intelligence through his territories—(Hear, hear,
hear). Whatever complaints may have existed as to his
conduct, he, at least, may naturally have felt the proceedings
of this country towards himself as apparently harsh and
provoking; but, with truly generous and enlightened feeling,
he never allowed this to induce him to throw the slightest
obstruction in the way of our communication with India—
(Hear, hear). There may be Governments more enlightened
and intelligent than his, but it is hardly possible there could
have been manifested greater liberality—(Hear, hear). I
believe his conduct as much marked by wisdom—(hear),
and just as calculated to promote his advantage as to re-
dound to his credit—(hear); but it is not every Government
which takes so enlightened and liberal a course under such
circumstances as those in which he was involved.”—(Hear,
hear.)
Sir C. Napier also said, he certainly concurred in the feel-
ing expressed by the right lion, baronet. At the time when
the British forces were intercepting the Pasha’s correspon-
dence, he was generously admitting the uninterrupted trans-
mission of ours —(hear). Conduct like this was worthy of


civilised states, and showed that the Pasha’s policy was not
that of a barbarian, at least—(Hear).
Now all this is very complimentary, very proper, and
nothing more than just. But will these effusions enable the
Pasha to pay the soldiers which he maintains to protect our
communications and travellers through “his territories?”
Or have we any precedents to show him, from the con-
duct of the “ more enlightened” Governments of Europe,
of our communications being either protected or facilitated
through their territories—for nothing?
I apprehend not. Let us take our neighbours the French,
for instance, who insist on being considered the most
enlightened nation on the face of the earth. Does their
government permit us to send our correspondence through
France for nothing? No. For that portion of our Indian
correspondence which is sent through France, we have had
to pay to the French government the enormous tax of four
francs the ounce weight. And it was only the other day
that the agents or couriers of some English newspapers were
seized for presuming to pass through the French territories
with private despatches on their persons, and were sued in
the French courts for an alledged fraud on their post-office
revenue.
Two wrongs, however, do not make a right, and although
the conduct of other governments, making high pretensions
to enlightenment, will not bear a contrast with that of the
Pacha of Egypt; the question, after all, is not so much
what France or other countries do, as what it is just and
expedient for us to do, in order to secure the permanency of
our communications with India, &c., through Egypt.
In considering this point, it will be necessary to take a
brief view of the former and present political position of
Mehemet Ali.
Previous to the settlement of the Turco-Egyptian question
in 1841, the Pacha, although exercising all the powers of a


sovereign, both in Egypt and Syria, had no properly defined
or recognized political character, and this circumstance
presented, no doubt, much difficulty in making any permanent
arrangement with him, in regard to the transit through
Egypt.
Since the settlement, however, of that question, he has
acquired a distinctly recognized political character. The
government of Egypt, under certain conditions, has been
vested in him, and his family, in hereditary succession, under
the guarantee of the allied powers, who interposed in his
quarrel with the Porte. He is, therefore, hereditary Pacha
or Vice Roy of Egypt; exercising all the functions of
sovereignty in that country, subject to the payment of a
certain annual sum to the Porte, as tribute ; being bound also
to observe certain fundamental laws of the Ottoman Empire
in his administration of the government of Egypt; as well as
not to commit any infraction of the commercial or other
treaties of the Porte with other countries, to the injury of
the people of those countries.
It appears, therefore, that Mehemet Ali is now in a position
to enter into and guarantee the fulfilment, both by him-
self and his successors, of any arrangement which may be
proposed to him, and which he may be disposed to accept,
for ensuring the permanency of the transit through Egypt, of
our communications with the East.
That such an arrangement has become highly expedient,
1 think will be readily admitted. It can, of course, only be
rendered secure by our giving the quid pro quo. A gratuitous
concession is no treaty, and may be withdrawn at the plea-
sure of the conceder ; an annual sum must be paid to the
Pacha, in consideration of his protecting and facilitating
the transit of our communications through his territory.
A few words will, I think, suffice to show the justice, as
well as the expediency of such an arrangement.
The route of the Indian Mails and passengers, for a


distance of eighty-four miles, in passing across Egypt, lies
through the desert of Suez. On the skirts of this desert,
numerous and powerful tribes of the Bedouin Arabs used to
hover. The predatory and ferocious disposition of these
tribes is well known. Until the po-wer and vigilance of
Mehemet All’s government was put in force to overawe and
keep them in check, no European traveller durst venture
to cross the desert, nor indeed to travel at all in Egypt,
except under the paid-for protection of some powerful
Bedouin sheik, (chief of a tribe.)
Mehemet Ali has put a stop to this, and has rendered the
route through the desert as safe as any public road in
England. But he has only been able to do this by main-
taining a considerable cavalry force to scour the neighbour-
hood of the desert when necessary, and to exhibit his power
to those predatory tribes. And since the withdrawal of
Syria from his jurisdiction, not only has an increase to this
force, but the establishment also of numerous military posts
in the neighbourhood of the route, become necessary.
The fiercest of the Bedouin tribes chiefly come from
Syria. The borders of that province are no great distance
from the desert route of the Indian mails, &c. Hence these
tribes could make serious incursions, and commit extensive
depredations, in the line of our communication with India,
and quickly retire into Syria, where Mehemet Ali has not
now the pow 7 er to follow them, This renders military posts
and a considerable force in the neighbourhood of the Syrian
borders indispensable for ensuring the security of the route
through the desert. And is it reasonable that we, who are
reaping by far the greatest benefit of this protection, should
contribute nothing towards the expense of it ?
Let the reader of these remarks imagine himself for a few
moments in the desert of Egypt, beholding two trains of
dromedaries, laden with numerous boxes, &c. These con-
tain the Indian mails. The one train is passing towards


Europe, the other towards Asia. Let him now contemplate
the political, commercial, and social importance of the
safety of these packages. They contain nearly a hundred
thousand letters; some probably conveying intelligence of
political events, or of the state of political negociations, of
the utmost national consequence. Some conveying infor-
mation to the merchant, without which commercial opera-
tions of great magnitude might be thrown into confusion,
and involve him in serious loss. But others, and by far the
largest proportion, are fraught with an immense amount of
social happiness to thousands in both hemispheres. A vast
interchange of communication —between husband and wife,
parent and child, brothers, sisters, friends, in short between
all the various relations of social life, is. dependent on the
safety of the two caravans now passing through that solitary
desert. And this intercourse iis effected in one fourth of the
time which it formerly occupied, in consequence of this route
being open to it.
When the reader contemplates this picture, and recog-
nizes in it, as he must do, not one of imagination, but of
actual and indisputable fact, can he hesitate for a moment
in acknowledging the expediency of endeavouring to secure
the permanency of these communications at a comparatively
trifling cost; or will he not rather be disposed to say of this
object, as a late enlightened Governor-General of India,
Lord William Bentinck, said of the then contemplated
steam communication, that “it would be cheaply purchased
at any price.”
The question is simply this. A fair and liberal
proposal to the Pacha of Egypt, if promptly made, would
very probably induce him to enter into an arrangement for
permanently securing the transit through Egypt of our
communications with India, China, &c.
Is it wise to neglect this opportunity ? To trust to chance
for the continuance of these important communications—to


be content to let them remain on the somewhat beggarly
footing of the Pacha’s gratuitous protection, repaying him
only by a few empty compliments, until, perhaps, we are
awakened by some untoward contingency, to the disad-
vantages of our position, and under circumstances which
may probably render it both difficult, hazardous, and expen-
sive to set ourselves right? This would certainly not be
political wisdom, yet without a manifestation of the opinion
of those interested in the subject, addressed to the proper
quarter, there is reason to apprehend that the question may
be left where it is.
In recommending that memorials on this subject should
be addressed to the proper quarter, there is some little diffi-
culty in pointing out precisely any particular department of
the Goverment to which, more than another, the effecting
of the object in view belongs.
It has been hitherto rather too much the practice to con-
sider all matters, connected with the improvement of our
Indian communications, to be the exclusive concern of the
East India Company, and to endeavour to throw the ex-
pences thereof, as much as possible, on the people of India.
This is obviously not altogether fair. The improvement of
that communication is as much the concern of the parent
country as of India. It is indeed more so—as much more
so as the benefits drawn by this country from India are
greater than any which the people of India have as yet
gained by their connection with us.
This is a point, however, which it is immaterial, as far as
regards the more immediate object of these remarks, to discuss.
Parties who may wish to present memorials in favor of it,
cannot, it is considered, do wrong in signing them in dupli-
cate. One to be addressed to the Prime Minister—the
other to the Chairman, Deputy Chairman, and Directors of
the Honorable East India Company.


It may, and probably will, be asked by many into whose
hands these remarks may fall—who is the writer; and what
may be his motive for coming forward in this matter ? This
shall be answered frankly. The writer, as a director and a
proprietor of an enterprize—the Peninsular and Oriental
Steam Navigation Company —which has already effected
much in improving the communications with India, and to
whose lot their further improvement and extension appears
to have fallen—has, with his co-proprietors, a deep interest
in the permanent maintenance of the transit through Egypt.
The interest of the establishment, with which he has the
honor to be connected, is, however, completely identified
with the public and national in terests in this question, and he
therefore feels satisfied that the facts and arguments which
he has adduced in his attempt to call attention to its im-
portance, will lose none of their force in the mind of the
reader, from the candid avowal that his humble advocacy of
it does not proceed exclusively from public motives.
The writer has, besides, had some personal experience of
the readiness with which the Pacha of Egypt entertains pro-
posals for promoting the general interest of commerce and
civilization, and for drawing more closely his relations with
the commercial interests of Europe, and particularly with
this country. For an instance of which he begs to refer to
the statements and documents in the Appendix.
The arrangement to which they refer, although effected
through private agency, of a preliminary character, and
relating only to the transit of goods and passengers, has, it
is submitted, furnished a basis and paved the way for a con-
vention of a more public, permanent, and general nature,
such as is herein recommended to the attention of the public
and government of this country.


APPENDIX.
Particulars of a Negotiation and Arrangement
effected by the Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Company, with His Highness the
Pacha of Egypt, relative to the transit of goods
and passengers to and from India, tyc.
In the formation of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Company, the opening of a transit through
Egypt for goods of the finer description as well as its im-
provement for passengers, was viewed as an object of much
importance to the success of the undertaking.
Towards the close of the year 1840, the Company being
then only in the course of formation, Mr. Arthur Anderson,
one of the managing Directors, addressed a letter to Lord
Palmerston, then Secretary of State for foreign affairs,
pressing upon his lordship’s attention the importance of se-
curing, in the course of the negociations for the settlement
of the Turco-Egyptian question, a right of transit through
Egypt, and of opening a transit for goods as well as for mails
and passengers.
To this communication Mr. Anderson received a short
reply, referring him to the Convention of Commerce with
the Porte, dated 16th August, 1838, which had already fixed
the transit duties through the Ottoman dominions.
On referring to this convention, it was found that the
lowest rate of transit-duty stipulated for was three per cent.


ad valorem. A rate which would have amounted to an entire
prohibition of goods of high value, the only description
likely to be sent through the new route, being transmitted
by it.
The modification of this duty, and the opening of a transit
through Egypt, was therefore included among the objects to
which Mr. Anderson was instructed to direct his particular
attention, in a mission which he was soon afterwards re-
quested to undertake to the Peninsula, Egypt, &c. And
for this purpose he was provided with a letter of credentials
from the Company to the Pacha.
Mr. Anderson arrived in Egypt in January, 1841, and
found the Pacha’s political affairs in a very unsettled state,
so much so that any attempt to negociate with him on the
transit question would have been both ill-timed and unlikely
to attain to any practical result. Having, therefore, con-
cluded the other objects of his mission to Egypt, he pro-
ceeded to Constantinople, with the view of watching the
progress of political events in the settlement of the Eastern
question, and of seeking the advice of the British Ambas-
sador in a matter which, although pursuing it with a view
to the interest of the enterprize which he represented,
Mr. Anderson considered to be one of some public impor-
tance.
Lord Ponsonby evinced much interest in the question
expressed a pretty confident opinion of being able to
settle it on the basis which Mr. Anderson proposed, by
means of a supplementary convention with the Porte; and
with this view wrote to his government for the necessary
instructions to enable him to negociate, but which instruc-
tions it is believed he never received.
After a detention of some months at Constantinople, during
which Mr. Anderson’s experience of the proceedings of the
Ottoman goverment officials there in some other subjects of
negociation in which he was concerned, gave him but little


hopes of success in any matter depending on their interven-
tion, an envoy from the Pacha arrived at Constantinople,
and arranged the remaining points of difference between him
and the Porte, among which was the commutation of the
whole of the duties and taxes of Egypt, for a fixed annual
sum to be paid to the Porte by the Pacha. Finding, there-
fore, that the Pacha was in a position to deal with the duties
in Egypt, as regarded their reduction or modification, in
such manner as he might deem expedient, Mr. Anderson
determined immediately to return to Egypt, and negociate
with the Pacha direct, on the transit question.
On arrival at Alexandria, Mr. Anderson transmitted to
the Pacha, through his chief minister, Boghos Bey, the fol-
lowing Memorial, which he had prepared during his passage.
(Translation from the original in French.)
To HIS HIGHNESS MEHEMET ALI,
Hereditary Pasha of Egypt.
Highness,
In virtue of the commission with which
I am charged by the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navi-
gation Company, I have the honor, respectfully, to submit to
your Highness, proposals to serve as the basis of an arrange-
ment, on terms mutually advantageous to your Highness
and the Company, for opening and establishing a transit
through Egypt, for Merchandize passing to and from India,
and other places in the east.
In submitting these proposals I consider it my duty to
declare that I am not invested with any political character
whatever; but present myself to your Highness purely and


simply as a commercial man, charged with the interests of
a great commercial enterprise.
Your Highness is aware that the whole of the merchan-
dize passing between India and Europe is now transported
in sailing vessels proceeding round the Cape of Good Hope,
and that the ordinary time occupied in a voyage, by that
route, is about four months.
By means of the enterprise which I have the honor to
represent a much more accelerated communication for
passengers, mails, and merchandize, is about to be established
between Europe and the East, via the Mediterranean, Egypt,
and the Red Sea.
If the cost of transport by this new route, as compared
with that by the ordinary one, be rendered so moderate as
to present to merchants an advantage in availing themselves
of it, there can be no doubt that a large proportion of
Oriental traffic will be drawn into it. If, on the contrary,
the cost of the new conveyance be so great as to counter-
balance the advantages of its celerity and certainty, the
traffic will be continued to be carried on as at present, and
the portion of it which will find its way into the new route
will be very inconsiderable.
It is therefore obvious that the only means of drawing
this important traffic into the contemplated route by Egypt
and the Mediterranean, and thereby to benefit all interests,
among which that of your Highness is not the least consi-
derable, is to keep the cost of transit within such limits, and
render the means of transport so secure and certain as will
induce merchants to prefer the new route to the ordinary
one by the Cape of Good Hope.
Without entering into detail, which would occupy too much
of your Highness’ time, I shall content myself with stating
that I am prepared to produce authentic statistical data,
tending to show that, provided the cost of transit shall
not exceed the requisite limits, merchandize amounting in


value to ten millions of pounds Sterling (two millions of
purses) will probably find its way annually into tlie new
channel of conveyance, when it shall have attained a full
development, and adequate means shall have been provided
for its transport.
With these observations, I have the honor to propose,
that your Highness will be pleased to enter into an arrange-
ment for the transit of merchandize through Egypt; to give
to the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company,
who are about to embark in this great undertaking, the
necessary protection and facilities, and to permit a tariff of
transit duties to be formed, by competent persons, appointed
by your Highness and the Company respectively; such
tariff to have for its basis that the duties shall not exceed
one-half per cent, upon the average value of the goods.
I can prove to your Highness that any higher rate of duty
than half per cent, would so enhance the cost of transit as
neither to afford to merchants an inducement to prefer the
new route to the ordinary one, nor to leave to the Peninsular
and Oriental Steam Navigation Company adequate remune-
ration for undertaking the business, and that in such case
the traffic would be so limited as not to be worth conside-
ration.
The pecuniary advantages which must infallibly result from
this establishment, so soon as it shall have acquired a due
degree of development, will be very considerable.
It is well known to the world that your Highness seeks to
diffuse throughout your interesting country civilized ideas
and fixed habits; and what can contribute more to this de-
sirable object than the enterprise which I have the honor to
represent? The transport of merchandize, passengers, &c.
through Egypt will afford employment and subsistence to many
thousands of persons; of these a considerable proportion
will be Bedouins, with their camels and other beasts of
burthen.


The following of this occupation, together with their
being brought into continual contact with Europeans, can-
not but produce the best effects on the character and habits
of these people. They will be taught, by their interests, the
advantages of peaceable occupation, profitable without risk;
and thus corrected without coercion, reclaimed from their
savage and nomade life, the wanderers of the desert will
become submissive and industrious subjects, contributing to
the power and prosperity of the country.
But besides the considerations which I have just ventured
to point out, there are others of still greater importance,
which will not have escaped your Highnesses profound
penetration. Any commercial enterprize connected with the
British possessions, and which has for its basis to economize
and facilitate communication, is sure to engage the attention
of the Government, which considers itself in fact a party
interested, and consequently encourages and protects it.
This being true in ordinary cases, how much more force
must it have when the question is a vital one to the vast
dependencies of Great Britain in India. How much will
not the British government be disposed to risk. How
much indeed will it not be compelled, by the force of public
opinion, to undertake, in order to secure to itself a speedier
channel of communication, and to open to commerce a
shorter and more expeditious route. The enterprize which
the company is about to establish will diminish by more
than one-half the distance between Calcutta and England;
but whether it shall be advantageous or not, depends upon
the restrictions or facilities which your Highness may impose
on or afford to the transit of merchandize through Egypt.
This, therefore, becomes a question of the last importance,
not only to the company and the British government, but
to the general interests of commerce throughout all Europe;
for the commerce with India is not restricted to the English
only, but extends to all countries.


Hence, that which thwarts the interests of Britain, thwarts
the interests of all, and all will have a direct motive for
endeavouring to remove obstructions which, while they do
good to none, are productive of much general evil. The
protection and facilities already afforded by your Highness
to the correspondence, and travellers passing through Egypt,
between England and the Indies during the late political
difficulties, have been cordially appreciated and thankfully
acknowledged by the whole of the British commercial in-
terest, and the approbation and support of a class so
powerful, and which exercises of right so direct and positive
an influence in the government of the country, will be to
your Highness a guarantee of the alliance of Great Britain
of the most efficacious and permanent nature.
PROTECTION, &c.
In order to establish the communication upon a secure
basis, it will be necessary that your Highness, in considera-
tion of the transit duty, should afford your special protection
to the transit in such manner, that it may not be subject to
the least impediment or embarrassment. It will also be
requisite—
Ist. That the route across the desert, between Cairo and
Suez, should be thoroughly amended, and in particular, that
it should be cleared of loose stones, which now render car-
riage travelling on it difficult and disagreeable.
2nd. That the route between Cosseir and Ghenneh
should also be made available for carriage travelling, by the
removal of some rocks which form an obstruction at a cer-
tain part of it.
The cost of these improvements would not exceed a few
hundred dollars.
As the opening or examination of the packages in transit


would be a fatal objection to the undertaking, inasmuch as
it would occasion great loss of time, deterioration of the
value of the goods, and heavy quarantine expenses on their
arrival in Europe, I am prepared to submit a plan which
will obviate the necessity of any examination of the goods,
and, at the same time, guarantee to your Highness’s Trea-
sury the amount of transit-duty which may be justly due
to it.
I pray Your Highness to take these proposals and sugges-
tions into your consideration, and to honor me with a reply
at the earliest convenient time, in order that I may transmit
it to my constituents.
I have the honor to be,
with the highest consideration.
Your Highnesses
most humble servant.
(Signed) ARTHUR ANDERSON,
A Managing Director of the Peninsular and Oriental
Steam Navigation Company.
Alexandria, 10th September, 1841.
In consequence of a conversation which Mr. Anderson,
had with Boghos Bey, the following note was appended to
his Memorial:—
TRANSLATION.
{No. 2.) Explanatory Note of the following passage in Mr.
Anderson’s Memoir to his Highness the Vice Roy of Egypt.
“In order to establish the communication upon a secure
basis, it will be necessary that your Highness, in considera-
tion of the transit duty, should afford your special protection
to the transit, in such manner that it may not be subject to
the least impediment or embarrassment,”


That is to say—-That the Company, or its employes, shall
be permitted to run on the routes between Suez and Cairo,
and between Cossier and Ghenneh, vehicles of any descrip-
tion, which they may find most convenient.
That the Company shall be permitted to navigate the
Nile, with such steam or other description of vessels as may
be found necessary for the transit of mails, passengers, and
merchandize; and that it may also have on the canal of
Alexandria the necessary number of track boats. That it
may hire depots or magazines for the transit, or build them
at its own cost, in case suitable places cannot be had on
hire.
That all beasts of burthen, carriages, vessels, or other
things, as well as people of the country, belonging to or
employed by the Company, shall be so far considered under
the special protection of his Highness, that no local autho-
rity shall be able to seize or withdraw them at any time
from the service of the Company, and generally that every
reasonable protection and facility may be given to render
the transit secure and easy.
Of course his Highness will adopt such measures as he
may consider expedient to prevent goods in transit from
being introduced into the country for consumption.
(Signed) ARTHUR ANDERSON.
These documents having been translated into Turkish and
placed in the hands of the Pacha, Mr. Anderson had in the
course of a day or two afterwards an intimation from his
Highness that he would give him an audience at his Town
Palace in Alexandria at a certain fixed hour, in order to
confer on the subject of the memorial. The Pacha accord-
ingly came into town from a country house where he was
then residing, and received Mr. Anderson (who presented
his credentials from the Company) in the same manner as the
etiquette of the Pacha’s court prescribes for the reception of


Consuls Genera] of the European powers. After the usual
compliments, the Pacha at once entered upon the business
in hand. He said that he had attentively considered the
paper which Mr. Anderson had caused to be presented to
him, and concurred in the reasoning contained in it. That
he was desirous to promote, as far as was in his power, the
interests of commerce and the communications with India,
and would cause the arrangements proposed in the memorial
to be carried into effect. On Mr. Anderson requesting that
his Highness would be pleased to direct that he might be
furnished with a document to that effect to carry home to
his constituents; the Pacha replied in the affirmative, and
the next day Mr, Anderson received the following despatch
from Boghos Bey:—
(Translated from the French.)
To Mr. ARTHUR ANDERSON,
A Managing Director of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Compang,
Alexandria, 15 th September, 1841.
The house of Briggs & Co. having transmitted to
me, on the 10th inst., your memoir to his Highness the
Vice Roy bearing the same date, together with a translation
of the commission of which you are the bearer, on behalf
of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Com-
pany, I have made it my duty to submit the same to his
Highness.
On the part of the Vice Roy, I have the honor to inform
you that his intentions are to favour, for the general interests
of commerce, the transit of merchandize to and from the
Indies by the Mediterranean.
The memoir above mentioned, and to which you have


subsequently added an explanatory note, may be divided into
two distinct heads :
1. The transit duty in favour of Egypt.
2. The means of transport, depots, and the requisite
security.
On the first head, his Highness declares that he does not
desire to make it a question of money; that the Peninsular
and Oriental Company, honoured as it is by the Royal
Charter of her Britannic Majesty, has so much of his con-
fidence, that it shall be authorized to carry on the transit
(operer le transit) for one year complete from the Ist Jan-
uary to the 31st December, 1842, * taking note of the values;
and that on the expiration of that term the company, through
the means of agents here, may make payment to the treasury
of such sum as it (the company) may consider to be due,
which sum shall, nevertheless, be susceptible of modifications
for succeeding years, in such manner as the nature of cir-
cumstances may point out.
With regard to the second head, it is his Highness’s in-
tention that the charges of transport shall be rendered as
light as possible; that—necessary precautions being taken to
prevent merchandize declared in transit for Europe from
being opened and sold in this country or in Turkey—the hire
of camels shall be fixed, and that of vessels of the country
shall be regulated according to the present rates of freight
on the Nile; and desiring to render at his own cost the
routes between Suez and Cairo, and between Cosseir and
Kenneh more practicable. His Highness will attend to such
• The experimental period thus granted has, by a subsequent arrange-
ment, been agreed to commence from the date of arrival at Suez of the
company’s first vessel stationed in the Indian Seas, and accordingly com-
menced on the arrival of the “ Hindostan” at Suez on the 10th February,
1843.
In the mean time, one or two cargoes of Indigo and other Indian produce
have been brought by sailing vessels to Suez, passed through Egypt at the
half per cent, transit duty established under Mr. Anderson’s arrangement,
and shipped from Alexandria to Europe, chiefly to Trieste,


indications as he may receive to that effect. His Highness
will also furnish such military posts and escorts as may be
necessary to afford perfect security to the transit. But the
arrangements connected with these objects being susceptible
of considerable detail, the Company’s agents may be in-
structed as to the carrying of them out, together with such
as may be pointed out by the Vice-Roy.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
BOGHOS YOUSSOUFF.
Thus was an arrangement of no mean importance to
the interests of commerce settled, through the clear-sighted-
ness and prompt decision of Mehemet Ali, in a few days,
which probably might, and would have occupied years of
regular diplomatic intervention with the Porte. It is here
cited with a view to show that a fair and liberal proposal for
the far more important object of permanently securing the
transit of the mail communications through Egypt would
now, in every probability, meet with an equally prompt and
favourable reception.
Mehemet Ali has faithfully and liberally fulfilled the pro-
mises given in the preceding document. He has maintained
in perfect security the transit through the desert. He has
granted permission to the Peninsular and Oriental Company
and others to navigate, not only the Nile, but even the Great
Canal of Alexandria, a work executed at his own expence,
with steam vessels under the British flag, in order to facili-
tate the transit of passengers, &c. to and from India. He
has granted to the Company buildings for coal, and transit
depots at the various points of the route through Egypt
where they have been required. He is now erecting a line
of telegraphs through the desert between Cairo and Suez,
by means of which, and those already established between
Cairo and Alexandria, the arrivals and sailings of vessels or


other intelligence will be communicated from the Red Sea
to the Mediterranean, and vice versa, almost instantaneously.
He has also in the course of erection, and in advanced pro-
gress, a hotel and transit depot at Suez, on an extensive
scale, for the accommodation of travellers, and to facilitate
the transit of merchandize.
