

di o
ns'
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
COMMISSION passed under the Royal Sign Manual
and Signet, appointing The Right Honourable
Lord Denman, P.C., K.C.V.0., to be Governor-
General and Commander -in - Chief of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
Dated 22nd March 1911.
Appointment of the Right Hon.
Lord Denman, P.C., K.G.Y.0.,
as Governor-General.
His duties and powers.
Commission appointing
GEORGE R.I.
George the Fifth, by the Grace •of God of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Dominions beyond the
Seas King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor
of India: To Our Right Trusty and Well-
beloved Counsellor, Thomas, Baron Denman,
Knight Commander of Our Royal Victorian
Order, Greeting.
WE do by this Our Commission under Our
Sign Manual and Signet appoint you, the said
Thomas, Baron Denman, to be, during Our
pleasure, Our Governor-General and Commander-
in-Chief in and over Our Commonwealth of
Australia, with all the powers, rights, privileges,
and advantages to the said Office belonging or
appertaining.
11. And We do hereby authorize, empower, and
command you. to exercise and perform all and
singular the powers and directions contained in
certain Letters Patent under the Great Seal of
Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
bearing date at Westminster the Twenty-ninth
day of October 1900, constituting the said Office
The Right Honourable Lord Denman, P.G., K.C.V.0.,
to be Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
u (33)7838. Pk. 5. 30. 3/11. E. kS.


of Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief, or
in any other Letters Patent, adding to, amending,
or substituted for the same, according to such
Orders and Instructions as the Governor-General
and Cornmander-in-Chief for the time being hath
already received, or as you may hereafter receive
from Us.
111. And further, We do hereby appoint that,
so soon as you shall have taken the prescribed
Oaths and have entered upon the duties of your
office, this Our present Commission shall supersede
the Commission under the Sign Manual and Signet
of his late Majesty King Edward the Seventh,
bearing date the Eighteenth day of April 1908,
appointing Our Right Trusty and Right Well-
beloved Cousin and Counsellor, William Humble,
Earl of Dudley, Knight Grand Cross of Our Royal
Victorian Order (now 7 " also Knight Grand Cross of
Our Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George) to be Governor-General and
Commander-in-Chief of Our Commonwealth of
Australia.
Commission of 18 th
superseded
IV. And We do hereby command all and
singular Our Officers, Ministers, and loving sub-
jects in Our said Commonwealth, and all others
whom it may concern, to take due notice hereof,
and to give their ready obedience accordingly.
Officers, &c, to obey the
General.
Given at Our Court at Saint James’s this
Twenty-second day of March 1911, in the First
year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty’s Command,
L. HARCOURT,
