

dlmnpiiatke Jmprtomp 4
*
and jJoliij.
AN ADDRESS,
DELIVERED IN
BRISBANE.STREET CHAPEL, HOBART, ON WEDNESDAY,
20th DECEMBER, 1854,
BY THE
REV. G. GEAR KE.
Published at the request of the Van Diemen's Land Congregational Union.
PUBLISHED BY J. WALCIT AND SONS.
Launceston— A, Duthie, Brisbane-street,
1 855.




dompuitiiT Jinprlancc of
4Mi am! JJolitg.
AN ADDRESS,
CEtIVEBEB 1»
BRISBANE-STREET CHAPEL, HOBART, ON WEDNESDAY,
20th DECEMBER, 1854,
bt xns
EE V. G. CLARKE.
Published at the request of the Van Diemen’s Land Congregational Union.
Sobn;
PUBLISHED BY J. WALCH AND SONS.
Launceston—A. Ddtiue, Brlshane-street.
1855.




VV\ 5 2 -C O 9 f
A D D R E S S,
“We should earnestly contend for the Truth, but we sh 'uld first ha
certain that it is Truth, or else we fight against God, who is the God
of Truth, and do the work of the Devil, who is the father and propaga-
tor of lies ; and our own zeal, though never so warm, will not excuse
us ; for this is plainly—prejudice.”— Locke.
“ The Reformation of the religion. [Faith] of Christendom was
brought about by going back to the doctrinal standard contained in
the revelation of Jesus Christ; and it is vain to expect the advent of
those countless blessings which the restored Church of Christianity
will bring in her train, save by a loyal surrender of our intellect and
heart to the canon of ecclesiastical order laid down in the same inspired
record.” — English Review.
“ITT CHRISTIAN BRETHREN,—The subject I have
jLVX been desired to bring under your consideration this
evening, is —The comparative Importance of Faith and
Polity. By Faith, we here mean a man’s religious views,
or what he believes in relation to God and salvation ; by
Polity, the principles of Church-government with which he
identifies himself. We are to compare these two things,
and try to assign to each its proper value and place in
relation to the other.
There is probably more reason to apprehend mischief in
Christian Churches from a prevailing spirit of apathy and
indifference in regard to these subjects, than from sincere
erroneous conclusions, and I shall therefore attempt, not so
much to show what religious views I think a Christian man
should hold, or what principles of Polity he should support,
as to urge our obligation to make conscience of both, —to
a 2


indicate the danger of treating either in a temper of uncon-
cern, —or of practically regarding one to the exclusion of the
other.
I.—l begin, then, with the importance of J Faith, or the
measure of practical interest with which a man’s convictions
about God and salvation ought to be regarded. Let us
just glance at the nature of the subjects which these embrace.
Expressed very generally, our religious beliefs may be said
to include what we think of God, —His character, will, pro-
vidence, and government ; our convictions about the duty,
propriety, and advantage of prayer ; our views of human
responsibility, the requirements of the Divine law, and our
actual relation to them ; they embrace, also, our conclusions
regarding Holy Scripture, the provision of mercy in the
Gospel, the process of redemption and recovery ; what we
may take as the constituted means of grace, and communion
with the Supreme, acceptable worship, and so forth. With-
out presuming to state what I think our ideas ought to be in
regard to any, or all, of these matters, it will not be denied
that they are intrinsically grave, solemn, and of the highest
purport. Yet there is diversity, to the extent of contradic-
tion and radical opposition in men’s views respecting them.
It were something worse than puerile to maintain that they
are all equally true or false, harmless or hurtful ; and the
question we have to consider is,—how far may such diversity
be material ? Why is it of practical importance that we
should believe one thing on such subjects and not the other ?
Now, looking upon man merely as an intellectual and sen-
tient being, taking him to be a rational creature, and, as such,
alive to the instinct of self-love and self-preservation, let
us distinctly set before us the question,—what is the one
consideration upon which the worth of his religious beliefs
is suspended ? What is that one point on which our accep-
tance or rejection of a given doctrine should turn ? What
is that indispensable quality which it is our wisdom, right,
and duty to demand, without which any conclusions on these
matters are utterly valueless, but with which they are
beyond all price ? What, but this, —that the thing a man
believes, or wishes me to believe, shall be TRUE ? This


is the touchstone for all religious creeds. No pretensions,
whatever their character, can make error binding upon my
understanding and conscience. Let articles of faith be des-
titute of truth, it matters not what else may be urged on
their behalf, they are to a being endowed with reason, and
a regard to his own welfare, to speak of nothing more,
utterly worthless. They not only have no claim upon his
sympathies, but they demand absolute rejection. Let me
repeat it, for it is vital, the key to the importance of any
faith is simply its accordance with the claims of Divine
Truth. These admit of no rival, and may be sacrificed to
no inferior consideration. Truth is the master of man’s
soul, and not his slave. We are at her bidding, she never
at ours. In the exercise of our private judgment we have
no rights of choice, pleasure, or prescription over her ; she
has boundless rights over us. Weighed as against her
claims, all else that may bo adduced in favour of a creed is
but as the dust in the balance, and altogether lighter than
vanity. You may plead antiquity, inheritance, convenience,
fashion, worldly interest, or church prescription ; all of
these are of no avail, if that for which you plead them be
only untrue. Now, there is often a strong temptation, as
we all know, to give these minor considerations the first
place, and the truth the last, in our esteem. They are fre-
quently urged with a zeal that seems blind to the ultimate
standard of valuation. Let the usage of antiquity, the voice
of tradition, the promptings of convenience, the meshes of
vested interests, and the clamour of predilection and pre-
scription, go for what they are worth —we cannot assume that
any or all of them are necessarily synonymous with the
truth ; they are not convertible terms ; you cannot put one
for the other, as you may an algebraic symbol for a given
number ; they have each in turn been often arrayed against
her. If a doctrine be true, to what purpose is it to plead
any of these as objections in the bar of submission ? Who
would admit them for a moment in natural science ? and
have we not in religion precedents enough of the danger of
such a course ? When the Saviour came “to bear witness
to the truth,” were the claims he brought forward subverted


by such cavils as “ Lave any of the rulers believed on him ?”
or “ who gave thee this authority ?” or “ can any good thing
come out of Nazareth ?” The truth being proffered, was it
not irrelevant to urge in excuse for rejecting it transgression
against “ the tradition of the elders,” or even to plead that
“as for this sect we know that it is everywhere spoken
against ?” And are objections precisely the same in princi-
ple one whit more conclusive now ? No ! Take these
things for what they are worth, but let them not be pitted
against the homage that truth demands. Let us remember
that they may all be thrown into the opposing scale, though
reason and conscience alike protest against the act. Is a
given belief true or false ? —that is the great question for
intelligent and responsible beings—the one which it is at
our peril to subordinate to any other, and to answer which
is absolutely decisive. The high court of truth is supreme
for all rational beings, her adjudication is final, from it there
is neither exemption nor appeal.
Simple, however, as all this may appear, and readily perhaps
as it would be acknowledged, when once plainly stated, it is
by no means universally acted upon. In a great variety of
ways the true is sacrificed to what is current, convenient, or
prescribed, and the importance of having a faith in harmony
with fact is forgotten. The fear has been expressed that
there are not wanting peculiar symptoms of debility in the
moral tone of modeni society. It is not the cry of one, but
of every section in Christendom, If we could read rightly,
might they not be traced in part to a hidden and almost
unsuspected doubt, or, at least, forgetfulness, in regard to
the exclusiveness of Divine Truth ? The best of men, and
the least disposed to take a sombre view of the religious
condition of society, are sensible that there is something
wrong somewhere. There are those of undoubted and earnest
piety, who more than half suspect that an insidious disease
is preying upon the vitals of the Church itself, though they
may think themselves unable to describe it, or to assign to
it its precise cause. She is, they say, plainly out of health.
The occasional flush upon her cheek looks somewhat hectic,
Spasmodic and nervous activity subsides into a languor and


listlessness that steal over the whole frame. There are those
who think that her outward activities, to some extent, like
the fitful energies of consumption, are not inconsistent with
the presence of secret disease, nay, may even partially be
caused by it. Her hands soon hang down, her knees
tremble, and her constitution seems altogether less hardy
than it was. It was not always thus. True, the Church
has often suffered, and that grievously, but not precisely in
this Avay —not as by a wasting sickness. Now, if there be
room to suspect even a tithe of this, surely it is of some con-
sequence that wo try to ascertain its cause. The truth
I take to be partly this—the importance of having a true
faith is decried. There has, of late years, got to be a mass
of loose floating scepticism in society, and which has even
affected the Church, about the imperative claims of Truth.
It is not the less real because many whom it has touched
seem the least conscious of its presence. There is need
to awaken men’s attention to the first elements of responsi-
bility. A spirit of indifferentism is abroad, most ominous
in its character, often manifest in conduct, sometimes even
avowed in words. It affects a charity elastic enough to
embrace with equal nonchalance the most contradictory
beliefs on the most solemn subjects. It appears to me one
of the saddest features of our times. I think that if men in
general, and the Christian Church in particular, attached
anything like due importance to a man’s objective faith,
that if they appreciated the practical influence of every man’s
religious views upon his character and destiny,—or in other
words the practical effects “of the ideas which his mind
receives, and his sympathies cling to, about the Supreme,
His nature, works, and will,” —we should not be called upon
to witness, for instance, the confusion, helplessness, and
inconsistency that have woven ecclesiastical relations in these
Colonies into a mass of entanglement that seems well nigh
inextricable.
That is but a spurious charity which would make of
no account what a man believes so long as he believes it
with all his heart. Were it genuine, it would justify every
form of superstition to which man has ever surrendered him-
self. Many, doubtless, arc beguiled by-the air of liberality


which the sentiment breathes, and do not see that it is quite
incompatible with reverence for the claims of Divine Truth,
Perhaps it is at this moment the most popular and prevailing
sentiment in regard to religious beliefs. It is the maxing
embodied in the famous couplet of Pope—
“ For modes of faith, let graceless zealots fight.
His can’t be wrong whose life is in the right.”
In other words, it is but bigotry to contend for objective
Truth, or, in plain prose, what a man believes is of minor
consequence, the strength of his belief is of chief importance
to him. The objective is nothing, the subjective is every-?
thing. A man may give his assent to any propositions he
pleases, so long as he be sincere about it, “-Now I hesitate
not,” says an author who has written well and wisely on
this subject, “ I hesitate not to admit that, like a clump of
violets under cover of the foxglove, a wholesome truth
underlies this mischievous and absurd doctrine—namely,
that right thinking divorced from right feeling in religious
matters is little worth, But accept the maxim in its ful,l
breadth, and what does it mean ? What, but this ?—that
creed is nothing, sincerity in receiving it, and conscientious
conformity of life to it, are everything.” In short, the
maxim taken fully is a hardy denial of the importance of
Faith.
I have not made the assertion unadvisedly that there is
reason to apprehend danger from the popularity and preva-
lence of this most absurd and mischievous doctrine. The
sentiment leaks out in our ordinary intercourse and conver-
sation, It is by no means uncommon to hear it plainly
enunciated. It may easily be illustrated by the working qf
facts which no one can deny. We need not travel far for
evidence of its hold on the popular mind, but may find
it in abundance at our own doors. I fear that our statesmen
and religious bodies have absorbed more of the spirit of this
theory than they themselves imagine. In these Colonies,
there has been the introduction un the one hand, and the
acceptance on the other, of the principle of endowing the
most adverse and contradictory creeds. With one hand the


State is paying labourers to erect an edifice of faith, and
with the other, another set of labourers to pull it down.
There have not been wanting indications of a desire to ex-
tend this principle of State endowment to every phase of
religious opinion that may be professed in the community.
“ In shaping that part of their policy which touches man in
his spiritual capacities, they seem to look with comparative
indifference at its probable effect upon men’s views of God
and Clu-istianity. This marvellous Catholicity in regard to
opinion and faith, however, is displayed only in reference to
spiritual things. What a man may think of God, and of His
moral government, has, in their view, so little practical bearing
upon his own character and destiny, that they are willing to
provide out of public resources for the teaching of any and
every doctrine ; but what a man may think and believe
touching this earth, that sun, or those stars, is by no means
an unimportant matter in their estimation. The rude
peasanf is pitied for the deplorable ignorance that allows him
to suppose that the moon is a green cheese, that the sun is
a ball of fire, that China is in Africa, and that the green
rings which he sees in the meadows are caused by the
midnight dance of fairies. These childish and erroneous
beliefs are justly referred to as dwarfing his stature, and
seriously impeding his moral development. It would be
curious to look into the face of that man who might be bold
enough to propose that the public be rated to provide the
teaching in some schools of such trash as this, whilst in
others a different and much higher kind of instruction might
be given. Why, this is the very thing of which the advo-
cates of National Education complain. What then ? Is
error so serious in relation to the ordinary ivorks of God,
and so innocuous in relation to Himself and the principles
pf His administration ? Why not pay indifferently the
scientific professor and the ignorant dame for teaching what
they believe ? Why interpose by law to encourage the one,
and, if possible, put down the other ? Is it not because you
are convinced that correct views do something to mould the
piao, to widen his sphere of usefulness, to open up to him
fuller sources of enjoyment ? When chemistry, geography,


mechanics, or astronomy, arc in question, does any one in
his senses say, “ Never mind what a man is taught, so long
as he believes it with all his heart ?” No, no ! This
absurdity is never found except in association with the
spiritual world ; and I greatly suspect that it is chiefly
because the claims of Divine Truth are underrated, and its
practical influence upon men is supposed to be imaginary,
that any can be met with who profess themselves willing to
support, by a public provision, every kind of religious
teaching —good, bad, indifferent, and contradictory !” Such
is the undeniable result that has been brought about in these
Colonies, involving, both in the provision and the acceptance
of it, a principle which, I confess, shocks my reason as
much as my moral judgment, and which the most expansive
charity can never reconcile with that reverence which is duo
to Divine Truth. It is one thing to endow a single creed,
taken to be the expression of the Truth, and though we
should not think it right, it is at least compatible with an
abstract reverence for the Truth in those who sincerely hold
it, —but it is another to give a legislative sanction to mu-
tually subversive and contradictory beliefs about God and
everlasting salvation. To reconcile this with a sense of the
importance of faith is a task beyond my power. I would ear-
nestly submit to you that in simple reverence for the claims of
Truth as such, it behoves us all respectfully, but firmly, to
discountenance a principle and practice, only consis-
tent with the position of the old heathen philosophers and
statesmen, that there is no such thing as Truth to be ascer-
tained about God, and that all creeds arc equally false, and
for certain purposes, equally useful. Surely, in regard to
this matter, the cry of alarm is not uncalled for amongst us.
In speaking of man’s faith or creed I have had in view his
own personal belief, rather than any of those authoritative
standards of doctrine professed by the special denomination
to which he may belong. I wish we could speak of them,
of a man’s formal and of his real creed, as identical ; but we
gain nothing by shutting our eyes to the fact that in a mul-
titude of cases they are palpably not the same. I think it
would not be difficult to show that sectarian standards of


Faitli have exercised an influence upon mens’ sentiments in
regard to the claims of Truth, which was never contem-
plated by their framers, and the effect of which has, indeed,
been precisely opposite to what they intended. No doubt,
the very compilation of a systematic creed shows, that in the
eyes, at least, of its authors, it was of supreme importance
that a man’s faith respecting God and personal salvation
should be in harmony with the Truth. In their zeal, how-
ever, to guard, against all possible error, these good men
were not content with a simple enunciation of the great
verities to which Christian faith refers, but these have been
interwoven with explanations of a speculative and metaphy-
sical character, suggested and elaborated by the philosophy
of their times. Some of these are exploded, and it is not
too much to say that others baffle the comprehension of men
of ordinary culture. Still, however, they are retained as
part and parcel of a creed, to which, in its integrity,
submission is enjoined. In some cases, I believe, they have
been so framed that logical self-consistency has been sacri-
ficed to politic comprehension. To the great number of
propositions that they comprise, the subscriber professes his
belief without exception or limitation. They may be more
or less incomprehensible, doubtful, or self-contradictory, yet
the same assent is required to all. Now, is it a violation of
charity to say, that in a vast multitude of cases such assent
is very carelessly given, and that there is an utter absence
of anything like a hearty admission of their truth ? No !
The elasticity of formal articles of faith has passed into a
proverb. They arc often subscribed without thought or ex-
amination, A solemn assent is given to them when many of
their propositions are not understood, —when they are
doubted, —when they baffle every effort at mutual reconcilia-
tion. Hence the practice of mental reservation, and the
imposition of a non-natural signification in the place of a
“ plain grammatical sense.” Now, we might argue before-
hand that the tendency of all this must be really subversive
of proper reverence for the Truth. What is prescribed over-
rides what is true, or it is recklessly assumed that they must
be one and the same question, and that to answer one is to


answer the other. Hence the discrepancy between a man's
personal convictions and his professed creed is either inge-
niously explained away, or admitted as a thing of very slight
import. I confess, I cannot escape the conviction that this
has done very much in society, to instil a spirit of indiffer-
ence to the quality of a man’s beliefs about salvation ; the
tendency of it appears to me to be, at least, favorable to the
notion that what a man really holds is nothing, but how ho
holds it is everything. lamat a loss for any expedient to
reconcile a careless subscription to a formal standard of belief,
with anything like an appreciation of the claims of Truth, or
a conviction of the importance of the condition, that a man’s
faith should be in harmony with them.
These remarks may, I hope, suffice on the first part of
our subject. I fear we are not without occasion for urging,
in opposition to this tendency of our times, the impor-
tance of the religious views men may hold about God and
the soul’s salvation. I have endeavoured to fix attention
mainly upon one point, which I regard as the key to the
whole matter, namely, that the question of true or false is
supreme over every other consideration. Our temptations
are great, and it behoves us, as earnest men, to watch, lest
we bend our creed to our convenience. We are too prone
to let circumstances predetermine what our opinions shall
be, and, then, casting about for reasoning to support us in
our forgone conclusions, to make them the synonym of
Truth. By such a process no man need despair of ultimately
persuading himself into any absurdity he may wish to be-
lieve. There is no doubt that the exercise of the private
judgment may be abused. It is so when a man’s faith is the
result of choice and convenience rather than of conviction, —
when he conceives of himself as having prescriptive rights
of acceptance or rejection over the Truth. The exercise of
the right of private judgment, is nothing more than liberty
to search for the truth and to obey it ; and I know of no more
unwarrantable exercise of private judgment, than that per-
version of its true function, which starts with the presump-
tion that a given set of propositions must be true, and then
denounces the temerity of all, who, with more conscience and


reverence for Divine Truth, weigh evidence before they come
to a conclusion.
11. Let us now proceed to the second part of our subject,
namely, the importance of Polity. Here the question we
have to solve is, —how far may it be considered of practical
moment that we should personally adhere to some principles
of Church constitution, and not to others ? Is the private
Christian justified in passing over this matter as of compa-
rative indifference, or should we not make conscience of our
corporate relations, as we acknowledge we ought to do in
the doctrines we hold concerning personal salvation ?
In endeavouring to answer this question, I hope to bo
able to show wherein the Church polity we may adopt, is of
material consequence ; and, in doing so, to suggest its
value as compared with that of Faith. Here again, my ob-
ject is not so much to advocate those principles which, to my
own mind, seem accordant with Scripture and the genius of
Christianity, as to urge the obligation to make conscience of
our Polity. I wish to make it clear, that, as we are lacking
in reverence to the truth when we deem our faith something
that we are at liberty to choose, as taste, convenience, or
vested interests may suggest, so in the matter of Church
organization, we are shut up to the simple acceptance of the
principles laid down by inspiration. We must keep to the
polity, as well as to the faith, of the New Testament, if we
would fulfil the requirements of Christianity. Loyalty to
Christ demands a hearty surrender to all, that, directly, or
through the Apostles, he has enjoined upon his disciples.
Let i t be observed, that our enquiry now is quite distinct
on the one hand, from faith or the essentials of salvation, and
on the other, from ritual or modes of Divine worship. With
the latter especially, Polity is sometimes confounded. It
has no necesssary connection with any set of doctrines, or
any forms of devotion. The use of a liturgy, chaunting, in-
toning, wearing robes, read or spoken prayers and sermons,
are not essential characteristics of Polity. This has to do
simply with constitutional principles of government. Any
of these things are compatible with any system of Church
organization. The question before us is one of social rela-


tions, —relations of members to one another, and to the
world at large.
It will hardly be denied that there is occasion for direct-
ing attention to this subject. For the disposition is common
even among good men, who are ever ready to acknowledge
that in our faith we are bondsmen to the Truth, to regard
Church-polity as a consideration so subordinate as hardly to
deserve serious, anxious, conscientious investigation. We
are quite ready to admit that correct views and practice
upon this subject are not essential to personal salvation, yet
still it may be shown to be of incalculable importance in
other respects. I fear its importance is greatly underrated.
It seems to be forgotten that we do not exhaust our respon-
sibility when we are aiming to make our own “ calling
and election sure.” As Christians, we have relative duties
to perform as well as personal interests to secure. We
sustain relations to our fellow-christians, to the world, and
to the extension of the Saviour’s kingdom. Granted, for
the sake of argument, that the principles of polity that we
support may not seriously affect the ultimate salvation of
our own souls, is that the only consideration to awaken our
anxiety, and absorb our attention ? Is Christianity to be
resolved into such a refined selfishness as deems that only
important which may make or mar my own spiritual
fortunes ? and, if I may bear myself harmless through
unsound principles of Church government, may they not
sei’iously affect the usefulness, freedom, and comfort of
others ? May they not do much to obstruct the pi-ogress
and efficacy of the Gospel ? If the glory of God, and the
good of our fellow-men, be an object that we really have at
heart, and if at the same time an unscriptural polity may
result in hindrances to both, sui’cly we cannot feel ourselves
justified in waiving the matter as unworthy our anxious
consideration ! Still, as I have said, the subject is too com-
monly waived, and even good men often tacitly consent to
rule it out of sight. I think your own experience and
observation will bear me out in this assertion. What, for
instance, is moi'e common than to hear such language as
this, —“ If lam right in my creed, what does it matter


■whether I prefer to join this or that Church ? The same
saving truths of the Gospel may he preached by Episcopa-
lian, Presbyterian, Methodist, or Independent, and there are
devout Christian men in all these bodies. Why should I
trouble myself about their different principles of Church
order and discipline, and not consult my convenience in
joining which I choose ?” Why not ? Simply for this
reason, —that, if there be principles of polity laid down in
the New Testament, you have no right to choose, but are
bound to submit. Intentionally, you may only be listening
to a preached Gospel; inadvertently, you may be helping to
support a machinery of gross unchristian character. Mark
the frequency and earnestness with which the Apostle main-
tains the liberties of Christians. You have no right to lend
your sanction to an organization that systematically infringes
them. A faulty adjustment of Church relations may
seriously impede the aggressive power of the Church ; you
have no right, by your union with it, to foster and per-
petuate hindrances to the spread of the Gospel. “It is truly
painful to mark the easy way in which Christians will pass
over from one ecclesiastical system to another, it may bo
precisely its opposite, without thought, of mere caprice, for
the sake of company or out of partiality to a particular
minister.” So it ought not to be, and would not be, if the
subject of Polity were not too often systematically neglected.
I know that the difficulties of coming to a conclusion on a
matter so controverted, ai’e often pleaded in excuse for di-
vesting ourselves of the trouble and responsibility of inves-
tigation. But are they at all greater than those attending
an enquiry about matters of faith ? I believe they are not.
Wo are prone to set down to our understanding, difficulties
that, in truth, belong not to the department of the intellect
at all. We bring them to the subject of investigation, and
then persuade ourselves that we find them in it. It may be
we stand committed to certain interests and relations, and
these are the prolific source of our casuistry, prejudice, con-
fusion, and blindness. It, indeed, requires a more quickened
conscience and a heartier loyalty than is often supposed, to
get an uhwarped vision of the truth, but having these moral


requisites, the great Scriptural principles of Polity are very
plain to those who enquire for them. Depend upon it, that
a host of difficulties which we are apt to set down to the in-
tellect, or to the want of explicitness in the record, are
really moral in their character and source.
To return, however, to the importance of these principles,
how may it be illustrated ? Chiefly, I think, by their in-
fluence upon the social relations of the Church. False prin-
ciples of Ecclesiastical constitution may, indeed, react upon
and corrupt, even Christian doctrines of Faith, but more es-
pecially do they injure the purity, and mutilate the liberties
of the Church, —aye, and of the world. Indeed, I will
venture to assert, that the mass of what is called Church his-
tory testifies that they have done more, perhaps, than any
other cause that can be named, to destroy not only religious,
but even civil, liberty. Some principles of polity are dan-
gerous to both. Whence the persecution, tyranny, and op-
pression that, from age to age, have desolated Christendom
in the name of the meek and merciful Saviour ? Is there
not too much truth in the charge of the sceptical historian,
that the bloodiest wars of Europe have been waged on be-
half of religion, at the instigation and with the smile of the
Church ? Now, all this would have been impossible, if the
principle of employing the secular arm for the promotion of
truth had not been recognised as an essential element of
Ecclesiastical polity,—if it had been remembered that the
only legitimate weapons of aggression for the Church were
“ not carnal but spiritual.”
The importance of Church polity may, perhaps, become
more obvious to us, if we take up, in detail, the questions
with which it is concerned, and bring them to the test of re-
corded observation and actual experience.
I.—The first is,— Of whom should a Church he composed 1 ?
We reply, it should be a brotherhood of “ Saints”—a society
from which impurity should be as much as possible excluded.
Repentance towards God, faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and loyal submission to His will —this is the indispensable
qualification for membership. The condition is mainly one
of character . A life plainly incompatible with personal


regeneration, and renewal by the Holy Spirit, in short, the
absence of piety is a sufficient disqualification. If moral
impurity be subsequently detected in the Church, they are
“to put away that wicked person from among them.”
Here, I take it, is a great scriptural principle of Polity. But
suppose all this to be practically disregarded and set aside;
substitute other and less stringent terms of communion ; let
the Church no longer bear an exclusively spiritual character;
enlarge its pale so that there shall be room within it for
every grade of character, from the believer to the infidel,
from the saint to the sinner who has not even a rag of decent
wordly reputation to cover him. Suppose all this, what can
we expect as its inevitable results ? Is it not a misnomer
to call an organization so constituted, a Christian Church ?
Has such a conglomerate the right to assume the name of
“ God’s building”—His “ temple,” His “ Church,” —aye,
and even to arrogate an exclusive claim to it ? Can the
most clastic charity call such a promiscuous aggregation, a
community of saints ? Is it a corporate exhibition of the
spirit of Christ, a reflection of His likeness and will upon
the world ? .No !-—assuredly whatever men may choose to
entitle it, it is not that, but a misrepresentation of Him,
His Gospel, and His people,—it is not an embodiment of
Christianity. We must leave it to the consciences of Chris-
tian men, who know this right well, to reconcile the sanc-
tion they give to such principles of Church communion and
discipline, with zeal for the honor of their Master and the
spiritual good of their fellow-men.
I must take the liberty of noticing, while we arc on this
point, a misapprehension that seems to bo afloat regarding
our own procedure as a denomination. A good deal of
argument lias been expended on the question, “ ought a con-
gregation to elect its own minister ?”—lt has been very
justly observed that a “ congregation” is a promiscuous ga-
thering of persons of every shade of character, and, there-
fore, it were unreasonable to expect that confidence may be.
placed in their judgment of ministerial qualification. Now,
let me say that so far as we are concerned, this question is
altogether irrelevant. We do not maintain that a “ congrc-


gallon,” but that a “ Church” has a right to choose its pastor.
And when we speak of a “ Church” we mean a formal asso-
ciation of pious Christian men, and not the general assembly
of worshippers, which Ave designate a “ congregation.” Our
opponents may refuse to alhuv us the designation, we can-
not help that. Only let the fact be remembered, —let it be
pre-supposed that by a Church we mean a band of “ saints,”
Avho, with all their imperfections, may be regarded, as in the
main, loyal subjects of Christ’s kingdom, and the Avholo
argument, so far as Ave have to do with it, falls to the
ground. Then the character of the Church, being in sym-
pathy with the Gospel, constitutes a guarantee, so far as it
goes, for their judgment of pastoral qualification.
2. A second matter with Avhich Polity is concerned, is the
relation betAveen the official and the 'private members of a
Church, or as it is sometimes expressed, the respective
rights and duties of clergy and laity. Many grave practical
questions are involved in this branch of the subject. There
is, for instance, the question of appointment and pastoral in-
stitution, the tenure of office, the nature and extent of autho-
rity on the one hand, and of proper submission on the other ;
the claims to exclusive discharge of certain duties and per-
formance of certain rites, the settlement of questions of dis-
cipline, trial, excommunication, and so forth. Have minis-
ters the right to assume to themselves alone the enforcement
and execution of the laws, given by Christ for the govern-
ment of his people ? Are they at liberty to say that they
alone have this right to administer the tAvo great Christian
ordinances ? that God has appointed them only as his com-
missioned agents to distribute the symbols of His presence,
and that for others to do it were profanity and sacrilege ?
Does the New Testament authorise this assumption ?or is
such language an arrogant usurpation on the part of the
Christian preacher ? In claiming a Divine right of monopoly
in certain things, is he trenching on the liberties and duties
of the body of the Church, or Avill the Bible bear him out ?
These are, indeed, no mere abstractions, and their impor-
tance may be at once seen from the fact that by far the ma-
jority of the secessions and divisions of these days have had


their rise, not in mattters of Faith, or essential Christian
doctrine, but in differences of judgment and sentiment on
the relative rights of ministers and people.*
3. A third question of Polity is the relation of Churches
to one another. I need hardly say, that I use the word
Churches here in its scriptural signification, for local associa-
tions of believers. Has each Church the right to manage
its own affairs, without dictation or interference from other
quarters ? Or does this claim rest upon an unscriptural
principle of Polity ? Should churches be associated toge-
ther by any other tie than common sympathy with Christ,
and love to His cause ? Should their mutual influence be
other than persuasive ? Must we bow to the decrees of
Synods and Hierarchies, and be moulded and shackled by
regulations imposed upon us by external authorities ? Or is
it presumption for a Church to say, we acknowledge no laws
in our government but those of Christ, and claim freedom to
interpret and obey them, and to promote His cause according
to the best of our conscientious judgment ? That this, too,
is a matter of gravest importance to Christian liberties, I
need not stay to illustrate.
4. The last great branch of Polity to which I would refer
is, the relation of Churches to secular •power . This, of
course, involves the whole controversy of the connection of
Church and State, the employment of force to sustain Church
machinery, and the general right of persecution on behalf of
the Gospel. Here, too, I need not stop for illustration. If
it be right to employ compulsion for the conservative or ag-
gressive operations of the Church of Christ, to wield in
effect the sword of the magistrate on behalf of religion, and
to give him by virtue of his civil office, authority and con-
trol in spiritual things, then, of course, we may not cavil at
God’s arrangement. But if, on the other hand, this be a
principle of Polity which finds no sanction in the New Tes-
tament, or which is repudiated there, and if, in actual opera-
tion, it has been fraught with perils to man’s religious and
* For instance nearly all the secessions that have taken place among
our Wesleyan brethren have been on questions of Polity, and not of
Faith.


civil liberties, and is the parent of incalculable cruelty, op-
pression, and injury, it behoves us to oppose it with all the
energy we can command. Let the subject, at least, be fairly
investigated, and not dismissed in a flippant and careless
spirit, as though, because it is a question of Polity affecting
mainly the general interests of Christ’s kingdom rather than
our own salvation, we might safely let it alone or even lend
our sanction to what we believe unchristian in principle. Let
us not deal with the subject as though convenience, choice,
and interest have here the right of directing our conduct,
but let the voice of conscience be as imperative in our Polity
as in our Faith,
The form in which the subject has been presented may
appear somewhat abstract, though it could hardly be avoided.
It may, however, be well to indicate that it may be looked
at in closer association with conceivable life and experience.
I can do little more than suggest how this may bo done, and
you can easily fill up the outline for yourselves. Let us
imagine a case which might easily exist, and test the dif-
ferent principles of Polity that may be brought to bear upon
it. Most of you are probably familiar with the story of the
mutineers of the “ Bounty,” and their settlement on Pitcairn’s
Island. For many years they were unheard of, and when at
length, their retreat was discovered, Adams only of the ori-
ginal crew remained alive, but their descendants had grown
into a considerable community. I only wish you to prolong
indefinitely the time of their re-discovery, and then imagine
some such history of the Islanders as this. Among the va-
rious articles rescued from the vessel before she was destroyed,
were a few books including the Bible. So long as Adam’s
companions were alive no use was made of it ; but when he
found himself alone, the circumstances in which he was
placed, and a feeble sense of responsibility for the rising
community around him, directed his attention to religion, and
so to the study of the Bible. By degrees the light streamed
into his mind, and the simple perusal of the book became
the instrument of conversion to his soul. No one, I suppose,
will deny that the word of God may issue in such a result
without the intervention of Human agency. The truth, now


so precious to him, he is naturally impelled to impart fo
others, and his simple preaching is, by the blessing of God,
attended with similar results. The believers are drawn
together and form a society quite distinct from that of the
general community. Adams, we will suppose, has never
even been baptised, but they read that the rite is enjoined,
and perform it for one another. As naturally do they ap-
point one of their number to preside over the affairs of the
little band, and take a lead in the ministry of the word. They
may, and probably would, choose him for their first teacher,
but they are not under an obligation to do so. lie cannot
claim the office by any Divine right. Turning to the New
Testament, they found the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper
enjoined upon his disciples, and they, therefore, observed it at
stated times as a social meal. If their chosen pastor were
present, they would naturally expect him to preside,—if not
they found nothing to prevent their observing it by them-
selves,* —and so in other matters, —deeming themselves com-
petent to exercise all the functions of a Christian Church,
they carried into practice what the New Testament en-
joined. Now, supposing all this to have been matter of
fact and history, what shall we say of it ? Did they in
the New Testament import of the term constitute a
* The historic growth of the meaning and mode of observing the
ordinance of the Lord’s Supper affords one of the most striking illus-
trations of the reaction of Polity on Faith. In nothing, perhaps, has
there been such unwarrantable assumption, or so wide a departure
from the authority of Scripture. The following note occurs in a recent
publication “The Voluntary Principle Exposed,” by the Rev. T. C.
Ewing;—“ Indeed, so profane are Christian men becoming under ‘ this
system’ that it has ‘ been discussed, and approved of, in the Committee
of the Colonial Missionary Society, that a lay preacher without ordina-
tion might administer the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper! !”
“Search the Scriptures,” we may reply; where is there a shadow of
support for the notion that the presence of an “ ordained minister”
is necessary to the due celebration of this solemn rite? What is there
to forbid Christian “ lay” brethren from observing it, if they deem
proper, in the absence ol a clergyman? We fearlessly challenge proof
from those records of inspiration which are the only standard of
authority that we can" acknowledge. Unquestionably, it is both natural
and seeml}' that the presiding officer of a Church should conduct this
service, but he must leave the Bible if he would claim it, as by Divine
right, his monopoly, and denounce as profane its observance in his
absence. By the Book we stand or fall.


Church ? Was it duty or was it arrogant assumption on
the part of their teacher to preach the Gospel ? Did he
incur guilt by doing it, or would he have been guilty if he
had not done it ? Having themselves accepted the Gospel,
and finding that certain ordinances were enjoined upon
believers, were they bound to observe them, or were their
ministrations invalid ? Either it was their duty, or they
were guilty of sacrilege and profanity. If these things are
by Divine right a monopoly of the priesthood, if their
efficacy depend upon their being administered by consecrated
hands, if an “ Apostolic succession” of ordination can alone
authorise the fulfilment of the commands of Christ, then
they ought to have remained without them until, perhaps,
some century after, they should be discovered and visited by
a duly authorized Minister. Would any Minister have a
right to go to such a society and say, “ All that you and
your fathers have done is wrong : you have not entered the
Church of Christ by the door, but climbed up some other
way ; you have been guilty, like Uzzah, of laying unholy
hands upon the ark of the Lord ; your rites are invalid, and
your performance of them a thing to be repented of; the
work must all be done over again by a rightly constituted
authority,” and all that. Now I mean to say that the
theory of Church Polity advocated by some would compel
us to use such language ; and, if we justify it, mark the
conclusions upon which it will land us. Then these poor
people might have passed away, generation after generation,
and though the Word of Life was in their hands and in
their hearts, they could have neither part nor lot in the
Christian Church until they might, perchance, be rediscov-
ered. Then they are handed over to the uncovcnanted
mercies of God. Then they are both enjoined and forbidden
to do the same things. Then the Gospel is not applicable
to men in all circumstances, but its benefits are tied to an
unbroken line of genealogical succession. How, on the
other hand, if the commands of Christ, and the Apostolic
injunctions, are to go for anything —how could they be
absolved from their performance ? They are imperative,
and, being imperative, they could only follow some such


course. If this be true, then many of the claims put forth
by some principles of Polity —especially in regard to the
relation of clergy and laity—are utterly baseless of scriptu-
ral authority, and rest upon mere usurpation of the liberties
of Christians. If the principles of Polity embodied in the
supposed case are to be condemned by the exclusive preten-
sions of ecclesiastical caste, then we must accept conclusions
which, I am sure, no reader of the New Testament will find
easy to reconcile with the genius of the Gospel.
Looking back, then, upon the whole subject which has
occupied our attention, I trust we shall find no ditficulty in
coming to a conclusion on the comparative importance of
Faith and Polity. If it be a matter of unspeakable concern
to myself that my faith should be based on the Truth, if it
involve my own everlasting destinies, and if these may be
secured, though I may actually be sanctioning a Polity of
grossly unchristian character, this docs not exhaust my re-
sponsibility. The Gospel of Christ is not to be resolved into
this quintessence of selfishness. lam not to be so wrapt up
in the interests of my own soul as to be indifferent to the
spiritual interests of others. I have duties to Christ, duties
in relation to his people, to the world, to the conservation
and extension of the Truth. An unscriptural Polity defrauds
the Church of its rights, taints its purity, encumbers its
action upon the world, and puts a drag on the triumphal
chariot of the Gospel. It has trampled upon men’s civil, as
well as their religious freedom. We have no right, there-
fore, to go on in a spirit of easy indifference to this matter,
because, forsooth, we can get to heaven ourselves though we
have been helping to oppress our brethren. Let us hope
that a better day will soon dawn upon the Church, and that
Christians everywhere will make conscience of their Polity,
though they may differ in their ultimate conclusions. “ The
reformation of the faith of Christendom was brought about
by going back to the doctrinal standard contained in the
revelation of Jesus Christ; and it is vain to expect the
advent of those countless blessings which the restored
Church of Christianity will bring in her train, save by a


loyal surrender of our intellect and heart to the canon of
ecclesiastical order laid down in the same inspired record.”
In conclusion, while we take care not to underrate the
importance of either Creed or Polity, let us not forget that
both may bo unexceptionable, without our being truly
Christians. Wo must have subjective, as well as an objec-
tive faith. We must not divorce right feeling and right
living from right thinking. It is not enough to know the
Truth, and in theory to hold it, we must, also, be in sympa-
thy with, and obedience to it. Nothing short of our personal
and actual experience that “ the Gospel is the power cf
God unto salvation” will avail us when we come to stand at
the great tribunal, which shall fix, without appeal or limit,
the final destinies of every soul.
FINIS.
Printed at the Colonial Times Office, Coll ins-,street, Hobart Town.




