

COMPETITION V. PATRONAGE.
[Extracts from a Lecture with the above title, given at the Emerald Hill
Mechanics' Institute, on 10 th April, 1877, by Mr. E. E. Morris, M.A.,
Head Master of the Church of England Grammar School .]
“DETUR DIGNISSIMO.”
The question was a political, though not a party question. It
was a policy which did not divide parties in the State, and which
either party in the State could accept. It was, however, a purely
political question, and if adopted ought to have for its effect the
making of politics purer and better. He advised the entire
abolition of patronage in admission to the public service, and that
for the future appointments should be given to the fittest, not to
the first cousin of wife, or the son of a constituent
who had been a consistent supporter of a Minister, or a voter on
the Ministerial side. It was quite certain, however, that some
pressure from the constituencies would be required before the
system would be it was that Ministers would gain,
but they could not be expected to see at once that immediate loss
of patronage would be ultimate gain of power. Their faith would
be cold, as it was at first in England. It would be for the electors
to warm it.
The change would improve education. “There is hardly any
other mode in which the State can do so much to raise the quality
of educational institutions.” So said Mr. Mill, and he said it
with proofs before him that the improvement had already taken
place in English schools, consequent upon the throwing open of
the Indian appointments. Surely it stood to reason that a new
and powerful stimulus would improve the work of schools ; and
self-interest is a powerful stimulus. They knew how hard boys
would work for a prize. Here were valuable prizes which the
State had to offer at no expense, but only gain to herself. The
competition would induce the keenest rivalry between schools,
and improvements in one would be adopted in another. The
feeling of the schoolmasters here was in favour of the principle.
But it was urged—Would not competitive examinations produce
cram? Cram was the worst enemy of modern education. He
had lifted up his voice against it wherever opportunity allowed.


But there was a science of examining, and examiners who have
had experience would tell them that cram can be detected and
defeated. From those who offer themselves it must be possible
to select the ablest men. “Judicious regulations, sagacious
examiners”—these are the remedies he should prescribe. Ap-
pointments in the Indian civil service, in the Indian engineering
department, in the higher branches of the army, in the English
civil service—except in one or two special offices, such as the
Foreign Office —were no longer given by patronage, but by open
competition. In England, everything, or almost everything, had
been thrown open, and yet the millennium had not arrived. And
so it was all the world over —if they expected too much they
would be disappointed. And on the broad shoulders of the
competitive system men laid their disappointed hopes. But he
believed even the disappointment was not widely felt, and there
was not a politician living—he would not say a statesman —who,
if he came into office, would dare lay hands on the system, or
return to the method which they practised in Victoria, and which
had corrupted official life in the United States, and helped to drive
men of culture out of politics.
Important as would be the effect on education, the effect on
politics would be greater. If this system were adopted it
would give better Ministers, less hampered and with more
time. If the loaves and fishes of office were kept down,
they would have better and purer politicians. In England before
patronage was abolished—he did not like to say in Victoria now,
because it would seem to be personal, and that he wished to
avoid—Ministers had been known to give places—he hardly liked
to say it, the charge was so serious—places of emolument and
profit to their supporters and their supporters’ cousins. It would
strengthen the hands of a Minister if he could say to the crowd of
importunate cormorants that flock round him: —“I cannot give
you place or office, for the simple reason that I cannot give it to
any one, not even to my own son. It is not mine to give. It
will be given to the worthiest. To yours, as to the rest of the
world, the course lies open. None can bar it.” A man who could
say that upon his canvass would stand on a higher pedestal
altogether. It had also been said—he was not in a position to
prove or disprove the statement about Victoria—that the system
of appointment by patronage was expensive to the State, because
Ministers who had the power of appointment, but all their posts
filled, would create new and unneeded posts for the hungry, and
fill them. One could not help feeling that this temptation must
be very strong, either in this form or in that of keeping up offices
after the necessity for them had passed. Sinecure offices were
distinctly immoral, as the direct encouragement of idleness by the
State. See also how constituents would gain. They would save
their self-respect. They would never have to go cap-in-hand to
ask a favour. The right to compete would be theirs, and they
should not wish for more. And he contended that this freedom
was especially right in a democratic country. Democrats jeered


at old countries—(was the jeer unknown amongst ourselves ?) —
where there were class distinctions and privileged classes. It had
been the work of democrats, of liberals, to fight that these dis-
tinctions should be abolished. It was surely worse to create new
privileges than to maintain those which had been sanctioned by
time. It was bad that the administration of Government should
be lodged in inefficient hands because they were the hands of the
son of a lord, but was it better if the inefficient hands were those
of the relative of a Minister, or of some powerful constituent who
had votes in his pocket ? All democrats, as well as all who wish
for efficient administration, should ask for freedom in this matter,
and to break down the barriers of favouritism. Jobbery was a
charge often brought against democracy. Would it always be?
Subordinate office should not depend on party at all. In popular
Governments there needs must be parties, and indeed the
machinery of party Governments, whose members stand or fall
together, had many advantages. But for the public good the
change should be reduced to the smallest dimensions. It would
be a fortunate day when Victoria and the other colonies could use
the words of an English statesman—“We have withdrawn
patronage from the dominion of party, and given it to the people.”
These were the words of a statesman who won his spurs in
Australia, Mr. Robert Lowe. They had indeed not far to seek
for an instance of a country, in many respects not unlike their
own, in which all officials change with a new Administration, in
which office was used for party purposes—the United States.
Appointment by competition, with certainty of tenure during good
behaviour, would free American politics from much unnecessary
labour, and would help to entice those men of worth and culture,
who now shrink from the inevitable and seething mass of jobbery
now existing. The medicine recommended for Victoria was
absolutely needed for the United States. Great success had
attended the introduction of the competitive examination system
in the Indian civil service. Mr. Grant Duff says that the com-
petitive system gives a far higher average of men for the civil
service than in the old days. The system which lie recommended
was the selection of civil servants by competition only for the
original appointment. Let other methods be adopted when once
they were appointed—promotion by seniority, or selection of the
fittest. No one proposed to appoint higher officials by examina-
tion : no one proposed to examine our mandarins. Examination
was right for boys, as a test of their school work at the time when
they were leaving school and going into life. It was not a suitable
test for men. Their work was of a different nature, and it was
quite right that higher posts should be given in such manner that
their life work might be tested. The zealous officer should be
promoted —he of “ the Government stroke ” left in the cold.
The first objection was that a Clive and Wellington would
under this system be excluded. Perhaps. But not for certain.
The talents which they showed later in life would have been
disciplined and brought to bear earlier. But even suppose they


were—was it a final argument, fatal to the system ? Were race-
horses the best to put between the shafts? Clive had a civil ap-
pointment in India, but it was a fortunate change for him which
emancipated him from office. Put this argument to themselves
those who were wise fathers. If with prophetic eye they saw that
their young hopeful would turn out a Clive, would they put him
in a bank or in an office ? Nay, rather they should send him up
the country to be a pioneer of cultivation, and all that follows in
its train.
“ School work is no test of life work,” it was again said.
Granted. But what was ? How can they tell the unknown but
by the known, the future except by the past? Consider the
patronage of some of our bishops in England. They were of
irreproachable character. Yet when it was their duty to appoint
faithful men to livings in their gift, how often had they felt that
they were more certain of faithfulness in their daughters’ husbands
than in the curates who had toiled and moiled in the parish. It
was expecting almost superhuman virtue to ask that men with
posts to give at will should look first beyond their households and
their friends. If they could not hope it from bishops, was it
unkind or cynical to doubt politicians ?
“We don’t want book learning; we want common sense.” The
opposition between book learning and common sense was, to his
mind, more apparent than real. His experience might be unusual,
but he had not known many book worms. Very seldom was it
found the case that intelligence applied to school work was absent
in other matter. But on the contrary, the presence of intelligence
in book learning was a presumption of common sense, though not
a certain guide to it. Moreover, book learning was allied to the
future work of the civil servant. Civil servants were not officers
of irregular cavalry.
“We don’t want clever fellows, for we are only appointing
clerks.” Now; he did not agree with those who depreciated the
work of the civil service; and he believed that the present system
of appointment, with what was called “ the Government stroke ”
that followed, was responsible for the depreciation. Of course
the work was humble at the commencement. But intelligence
was much needed in higher positions of the Government service.
The routine of that service without intelligence was what men
called “red-tape”—an article with which, however useful in its
way, real intelligence would promptly to a great degree dispense.
It was, of course, of the highest importance that regular machinery
should be established. There was in England a Civil Service
Commission, in whose hands all the examinations were. It would
surely be possible here so to remodel the existing examinations
which were held by the Melbourne University as to make them
competitive.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
