

I
SYDNEY: ;
W. E. PIDDINGTON.
LONDON:
J. EIDGWAY, PICCADILLY.
COMPARISON
BETWEEN THE
ORATORY OR THE HOUSE OR COMMONS
THIRTY YEARS AGO
THE PRESENT TIME.
A LECTURE
Jtlikwfc at tljt Ptdjanks? Stljool |,ds,
i )
SYDNEY,
ON TUESDAY, 22nd JULY,
ME. JUSTICE THEEKY.
PRINTED AT THE EMPIRE GENERAL STEAM PRINTING OFFICE, 173, GEORGE STREET,
SYDNEY.




Sydney Mechanics? School of Arts.
July, 1856.
Mr. Justice Therry delivered the following Lecture, at this
Institution, last evening. The Lecture was listened to through-
out with marked attention, and amidst frequent interruptions of
applause?by an auditory consisting of from 400 to 500 persons
?principally members of the Mechanics? School of Arts.
Ladies and Gentlemen?
I have undertaken the office of this evening?s lecture in accordance
with the principle that I deem it the duty of every person to contribute
his mite, whether bodily or intellectual, to the service of the commu-
nity of which he is a member. It occurred, then, to me, that a
discourse, on the subject I have chosen, may not be unacceptable
at an institute to which, I am informed, there is attached a debating
class, for the cultivation of eloquence ; ?and it may, moreover, not be
inappropriate at a time when new institutions are forming around us,
in which the art of oratory must be studied by all who are ambitious of
distinction and success. I have ventured upon the task, because I
have moved in other scenes, and amongst other men whom the majo-
rity of those who now hear me, had not an opportunity of knowing,?
and because, perhaps, I may be able to give some information or
entertainment respecting those scenes and persons which that oppor-
tunity afforded me.
In comparing the eloquence of the House of Commons thirty years
ago, with that of the present period, it is right I should state that my
knowledge of the men of the former is much greater than those of a later
period. As to the eminent men of former time, ?if I may so designate
them, ?I heard them all frequently. I knew some of them personally
?and more than one intimately;?whereas, my knowledge of the


eminent men of the present time is derived from such occasional
visits as I had an opportunity of making to the Houses of Par-
liament during my late sojourn in England, together with the
opportunity I had of knowing, from competent judges, the estimation in
which they were held. The two great men in the House of Commons,
shortly previous to my leaving England in 1829, were Canning and
Brougham ?the two men who seemed to occupy a similar prominent
position on my return home were Disraeli and Gladstone.?As orators,
they were incomparably the foremost men of their respective times ;
hut the present time favours now ?more than it did formerly?
the strong common-sense-spoken speeches of intelligent educated men,
who do not aspire to the exercise of oratory in its highest departments.
A short time before I was of an age to observe and appreciate
public men, some eminent orators had passed away from the sphere
their talents had long adorned. Amongst them were the highly-gifted
Sheridan, and Curran, the most intrepid and eloquent of advocates.
Of Curran, Lord Byron says, ? Such imagination there was never
anything like it that I ever heard of! I have heard him speak more
poetry than I have ever seen written?though I saw him but seldom,
and but occasionally, I saw him presented to Madame de Stael, at
Macintosh?s. It was the confluence between the Rhone and Soane,
and they were both so d d ugly that I could not help wondering how
the best intellects of France and Ireland could have taken up respec-
tively such residences.? Sheridan enjoyed great repute in his time.
? The orator, dramatist, minstrel, who ran
Thro? each mode of the Lyre, and was master of all.?
But his published speeches give you no idea of the man ?none at all?
yet he spoke the best speech of his time on the Begum charge during
the trial of Warren Hastings, when Burke and the first men of England
competed for the palm of eloquence ; ?and it must have been so, if his
speech merited the great compliment paid to it by Pitt, who besought
an adjournment, as ? they could not, at the moment, pronounce an
impartial judgment, whilst under the magical influence of the enchanter?s
wand.?


Before I had left Ireland, however, I had seen the most gifted of
Ireland?s orators ?the most genuine of her patriots?the ever-glorious
Grattan. I saw him at a public meeting, and well remember how the
whole assembly rose and gazed upon him with admiration and reve-
rence as he stood up, and at a very advanced age, in a few short and
graceful sentences moved a resolution. He had many excellences,
but he had especially one excellence, as stated by Lord Brougham, of
the highest order, in which he may be truly said to have left all the
orators of modern times behind. The severe abstinence which rests
satisfied with striking the blow. To give a sample of this peculiarity,
it may be said that Dante himself never conjured up a striking
pathetic and appropriate passage in fewer words than Grattan
employed to describe his relation towards Irish independence, when
alluding to its rise in 1732, and its fall twenty years later ; ?He said,
?I sat by its cradle, I followed its hearse.? He died as he had lived,
in the service of his country. His tranquil death is described by
Charles Butler in his reminiscences.
Mr. Butler writes thus: ?
At the end of May, 1830, Mr. Grattan came, for the last time, to London.
On the first day of the following June the writer of these pages called upon
him, and being informed that he was extremely ill, was retiring without
having seen him ; but Mr. Grattan having heard that he was in the house
sent for him. It was evident that he touched the moment of his dissolution;
hut the ethereal vigour of his mind was unsubdued, and his zeal for the
Catholic cause unabated. He pressed the writer by the hand ;?? It is,? he
said, ? all over! yes, all over, but I will die in the cause?l mean to he carried
to the House of Commons to-morrow to beg leave of the Speaker to take the
oaths sitting, and then to move two resolutions.? These he mentioned to the
writer, but spoke so indistinctly that the writer could only perceive generally
that they were substantially the same as the clauses which he had prefixed to
the bill which, in 1812, he brought into Parliament for the relief of the Eoman
Catholics. He again pressed the writer by the hand, repeated the intention
of being carried to the House, and desired the writer to attend him to it.
But he died the ensuing night.
The first time I visited the House of Commons was early in the
session of 1822. The House was full. Mr. Hobhouse, now Lord
Broughton, had just risen pursuant to notice on a motion for Parlia-


mentary Reform. He was then a young man, had just entered
Parliament as member for Westminster, and with the 'prestige of being
the friend of Lord Byron?the author of some admirable notes to his
cantos of Cliilde Harold, ?and also the author of travels in Abyssinia ?
and of the hundred days in Paris subsequent to the abdication of
Napoleon. He had, moreover, the reputation of being a ripe scholar.
His speech both as to promise and performance was an able one ?and
if he had perseverance commensurate to his abilities he would have
risen to a high Parliamentary position. The subject was a popular one,
and he poured forth a cataract of words in a tone of vehement decla-
mation, uttered with a good voice and manner, and in other respects
he exhibited many Parliamentary aptitudes. Lord Castlereagh (after-
wards Lord Londonderry) replied to him in a short pertinent speech
mainly urging the unsuitablenesss of the time for entertaining the
motion. It was the only time I ever saw the celebrated Lord Castle-
reagh?in a few months afterwards his life was closed by a disastrous
act of suicide. Though I heard him with feelings very far from a
predilection in his favour ?from my knowledge of his career as Secre-
tary for Ireland ?and though it was manifest he had never studied
oratory as a liberal art, yet there was something very prepossessing in
his appearance and address. He looked every inch a nobleman?
nothing could be more urbane than his address, and, notwithstanding he
had no imagination, no energy of thought or language, yet he was
heard with much apparent respect. This partly arose from his re-
markably conciliatory tone of address, and from an apparent frankness
of language and manner that disarmed suspicion of his sincerity. In
other respects he was neither fluent nor agreeable, and his language
was meagre and common-place, and frequently so confused as to be
scarcely intelligible. It has often been to me and others a matter of
surprise, that such a man should be for so long a period the leader of
the House of Commons of England. It is difficult to account for it,
unless the problem be solved by attributing it to the accidental circum-
stance of his high aristocratic connections, ?to the moral quality of
great decision of character which he unquestionably had, and?to
that indescribable quality termed tact, which he possessed in an eminent


degree. It may be said of him he was barely equal to his office,
and had no quality or accomplishment beyond it ? par negoiiis, neque
supra.?
On the occasion to which I advert, his reply to Mr. Hobhouse
closed the debate. The truth is, the ? times were out of joint? for the
discussion. The country had only recovered from the disastrous dis-
turbances and distressing seasons of ?2O and ?2l, and the House had
no relish for the debate, A few years afterwards, Hobhouse spoke
again on the same subject, and those who will refer to the debates of
1826 will find there pronounced by him perhaps the ablest speech
ever uttered in favour of Parliamentary Reform. He unwisely marked
out Canning for an object of his hostility, hut found himself unequal to
the contest ?lmpar congressus Achillei ?and it is alleged that it was to
him Canning alluded when he said, ? I like to see demagogues enter
this House. I never knew of one who did so, that did not, within six
weeks after his entering it, shrink to his natural dimensions.? And, on
another occasion, he slightingly designated him and Burdett, as ? the
honorable baronet and his man.? The latter, it is known, owed his
seat for Westminister in a great degree to Burdett s influence.
Hobhouse retaliated, and gave a sketch of Mr. Canning in a style of
masterly invective ?showing, what I always thought of him, that it
required only perseverance and earnest application on his part, to
take a foremost rank amongst the orators of England.
In the subsequent years quickly following on the death of Lord
Castlereagh, there were three eminent ministers of the Crown?not
only eminent indeed in their own generation, but who have left the
impress of their character and talents on the present as well as on future
generations. These men were, ?first, Mr. Canning, who filled the im-
portant department of our foreign administration?a statesman who
burst assunder the bonds that in the time of his predecessor had chained
England to the despots of the Continent, and made that great country,
as it were, partaker in the conspiracy against the liberties of mankind.
?Secondly, Mr. Peel, a statesman by whom our jury system and our
criminal code was revised, and who, in latter times, rose to greater


eminence by still more important public service. And, thirdly, Mr.
Huskisson, by whom the wretched fabric of commercial prejudice
and antiquated policy was overthrown.
I propose to speak of these three eminent men separately and
successively?and first, of Mr, Peel.
The great merit of Mr. Peel?s speeches consisted in their admira-
ble logical arrangement, the clearness of their statements, and the
comprehensiveness of their details. Tis true, they furnished no rivalry
to the splendid outbursts of Burke, Sheridan, and Canning, but as
speeches adapted to the object at which he aimed, ?practical, useful, and
directed without diversion to any other purpose than that of promoting
the business in hand, ?the speeches of Sir R. Peel were second to none.
During the whole of his Parliamentary career, there is not a
single instance of his speaking for mere speaking sake, nor is there to
be found one speech from him, however fragmentary the report, that
does not contain some valuable ingredient in the shape of information,
illustration, or advice. In figurative language he seldom indulged, but
in illustration he was sometimes very felicitous, as for instance in
dwelling upon the insanity of the idea of the re-enactment of penal
laws on account of religious notions, and upon the consequent
impossibility of long retaining the remains that were left. Mr. Peel
said (the passage is noticed in Mr. Doubleday?s late work) ?? We can-
not replace the Roman Catholics in the position in which we found them
when the system of relaxation and indulgence began. We have given
them the opportunities of acquiring education, wealth, and power. We
have removed with our hands the seal from the vessel in which a
mighty spirit was enclosed, but it will not, like the genius in the fable,
return within its narrow confines to gratify our curiosity, and to enable
us to cast it back into the obscurity .from which we have evoked it.?
This is an illustration original in its conception, and appropriate, and
even beautiful in its application.
It was the good or ill fortune, ?as it may be deemed by persons of
discrepant opinions,?that in respect of all the great and principal
measures of his life, Peel had to occupy an apologetic position. It took


many years of his life before, in him, the young Octavius of proscrip-
tion was ripened into the Maecenas of maturer years, and a more liberal
policy. For twenty years he was foremost in front of the battle, long
waged by the High Tory party in England, against the claims of the
Roman Catholics. Yet, his best speech was made, and all the arts of
successful advocacy were thrown into the vindication of that measure
which, during the period of an ordinary political life, he had opposed.
This speech I heard, and can bear personal testimony to its high ora-
torical desert. In like manner?with respect to the Corn Laws ?
he had advocated from his entrance into Parliament in 1809 to
1846 a protective policy. Nay, a few years before he had mounted
into power by a rigid maintenance of these laws, which he was the first
to infringe, and the relaxation of which he espoused and advocated
with all the new-born zeal of a convert. Thus, on two great and mo-
mentous occasions he abandoned his party avowedly. He and his
immediate friends vindicated tins course, on the ground that Ms talents
belonged not to a party but to the country, and that it should not be
said of Mm as was not inaptly said of one of the great statesmen of
England, ?He gave up to party what was meant for manMnd.? An
ordinary or second-rate person would have sunk under such manifest
inconsistencies, especially in a country like England, where the system
of moving and acting in concert with a party is generally established,
and where, he who has once chosen his side, feels that it would be a pain-
ful, and fears it would be a discreditable slip, to recall an avowed prin-
ciple or an adopted preference. This conventional barrier was never more
completely broken down and disregarded than by Sir Robert Peel on the
Catholic and Corn questions. Whatever may have been his diminished
claims to respect and admiration as a foreseeing statesman, on the
score of his frequent change of opinion,?and though his conduct
gave an offence that never was quite forgiven by the partisans whom
he led and abandoned, ?yet the majority of the nation believed that
on both occasions he acted from a high sense of duty, and from
conscientious convictions. By Ms conduct on each occasion, he did
not gam, but surrendered power and lost office. This was an
unmistakable indication of sincerity. He had thereby proved that


he had real sympathies with the masses of the people. Previous
to his death, and even after his fall from power, this feeling
grew daily stronger and stronger, ?and he died amid the general
regret of the nation which had recognised in him the great
commoner of England. As a specimen of his best style of speaking,
perhaps a more favourable instance cannot be furnished than on the
occasion that may be termed his farewell speech to the party of Pro-
tectionists, of which he had long been the leader. It is straightfor-
ward, ?and is spoken in language that comes more glowing from the
heart ?than usually distinguished his speeches.
In relinquishing power, I shall leave a name, severely censured I fear by
many, who on public grounds deeply regret the severance of party ties?not
from interest or personal motives, but from the firm conviction that fidelity
to party engagements, the existence and maintenance of a great party, consti-
tutes a powerful instrument of Government. I shall surrender power, cen-
sured by others who from no interested motives, adhere to the principle of
protection, considering the maintenance of it to be essential to the welfare
and interest of the country. I shall leave a name execrated by every mono-
polist, who, from less honourable motives, clamours for protection because it
conduces to his own individual benefit; but it may be that I shaH leave a
name sometimes remembered with expressions of good will in the abodes of
those whose lot it is to labour, and to earn their daily bread by the sweat of
their brow, ?when they shall recruit their exausted strength with abundant and
untaxed food, the sweeter because it is no longer leavened with the sense of
injustice.
The next of these eminent men whom I propose to introduce
to your notice is Mr. Huskisson. In the House of Commons Mr.
Huskisson always commanded respect, because his speeches always
conveyed information, and he seldom uttered what was not worthy of
attention. On questions connected with the Com Laws, with finance,
with commerce, with foreign and colonial policy, which were the ques-
tions to which he principally confined himself, no member of the House
perhaps possessed equal weight. On these subjects?there was a truly
admirable order and perspicuity in his statements and his reasonings.
The pleasure which his speeches gave was not of that description which
eloquence, in the ordinary acceptation of the term, is usually supposed


to convey. His style of speaking was rather easy fluent and conver-
sational than studied and impressive; though it was free from careless-
ness, yet it wanted grace and dignity. Occasionally, however, he rose
into a bold and masculine strain of thought and of expression, His
speeches in recommending to the House of Commons a pension
to the family of Mr. Canning;?on the silk trade in 1826; ?
and on his resignation of office in 1828, were felicitous speci-
mens of manly eloquence and finely sustained declamation,
which perhaps no member of the present House of Commons
could equal?which none certainly could surpass. But it was not
often that Mr. Huskisson attempted an impressive and impassioned
style of oratory ; ?and it was discreet in him not to attempt it frequently;
for, though not deficient in language, and for the most part chaste and
classical in the selection of it, yet I have sometimes noticed a hesitation
in his utterance ?a ripple in the flow of his elocution ?which would
materially detract from the effect that an ornate and impressive speaker
usually aims to produce. The pleasure, which the speeches of Mr.
Huskisson generally gave, was of a different description ; ?it was the
sort of satisfaction which is felt at seeing a knot cleverly untied?a
puzzling theory perfectly developed. The character of his eloquence
has been thus aptly illustrated by an eminent critic (I think
Barnes) : ?? Those who can relish a neatly demonstrated problem of
Newton, or a well-argued page of Hobbes, would also feel much
delight at hearing the narratives and arguments of Mr. Huskisson.?
He was a speaker of first-rate distinction and acquirements : ?but the
expression must be understood with reference to his audience and his
subject. In an assembly either of merchants or of philosophers?men of
business or of enlightenment ?it may be questionable whether in
extent of knowledge, in a clear perception and mastery of his subject,
and in the power of making his auditors equally masters of it with him-
self, he would not bear the palm away from any speaker of his time.
It is no disparagement, however, to other great statesmen of that
period, or of any other statesman now. living or dead, to say of him what
was attested of him in his lifetime, affirmed by the universal voice
of his country at his death, ?and which the success of his commercial


policy has since confirmed?that he was the greatest commercial states-
man England ever produced.
It is now scarcely thirty years ago since Mr. Huskisson introduced
a hill for connecting the cities of Liverpool and Manchester by
a Railway line. I recollect well the apprehensions and difficulties
surrounding the passing of that measure. It was introduced amongst
the loudly-expressed fears of the timid?the doubts of good and
sensible persons?and it was brought in and passed amidst even the
faint cheers of the few stout-hearted men who had an unyielding con-
fidence in the great ability and sound judgment of their great leader
who projected and vouched for the success of the design. It is a
melancholy event, and a sad dispensation of Providence, into which
it behoves us not to inquire, but humbly to submit to it, that on the
opening of that railway, this great man was crushed to death by the
train passing over him, and that the day of the great triumph of his
principles was the day of his death ?a death too of torture not ex-
ceeded by
? The lifted axe or agonising wheel,
Luke?s iron hed, or Damien?s crown of steel.?
That great and good man, ?for in private, he was as amiable and vir-
tuous as he was useful and eminent in public, life ?it may not be
presumptuous to suppose?has now entered into that existence in which
the great men of all ages are, as it were, associated in a world of their
own, and from that superior sphere shed their eternal influence for the
control and the consolation of mankind. And if it be so, ?with what
gratification and pride must he not now gaze upon that England he loved
and served so well?intersected with a thousand railway-lines?spread
like a net-work over the whole face of the land?accelerating com-
munication?shortening distances ?augmenting means of social enjoy-
ment and commercial enterprise, and by multitudinous contrivances of
intercourse raising up the whole country to a degree of prosperity
unparalleled in the history of thg nations of the world. If he were still
further to fix his view on the present House of Commons ?the theatre
of his former triumphs?instead of four or five committees indolently


transacting the whole business of the nation, ?independently of nume-
rous committees on other branches of the national commerce and in-
dustry?he would behold eight or ten railway committees sitting at
one time?the committee rooms crowded with eager spectators and
speculators gazing on the walls covered and lined with various inter-
sections of the railway lines, on which has been appropriately be-
stowed the epithet of the Railway Cartoons, and which I can confidently
assure you, from personal observation and comparison, have each one
hundred attentive visitors for one that looks upon the cartoons of
Raphael quietly adorning the silent halls in the picture galleries of
Hampton Court.
Though to the wild schemes of reform propounded by Hunt and
Cobhett he was opposed, yet of gradual and temperate reform Mr.
Hnskisson was an earnest advocate. Indeed, his fall from office,
which, to use the language of Burke, ? like death, canonizes a
great man,? was occasioned by his voting that the right of election
from East Retford ?then convicted of corruption?should be trans-
ferred to Manchester ; and he also divided against Mr. Peel for giving
members to Birmingham. It was from the refusal by Parliament of
such just and temperate measures of reform (after the corruptions of
Penryn and East Retford had been permitted to pass unpunished) that it
was deemed idle to expect any real relief, and this public impression
caused the tide of democracy to swell and set in with an irresistible
force that overcame all opposition, until it peacefully ebbed and calmed
in the salutary measure of a peaceful reform. His free trade policy
is as simple of elucidation, as it is sound in principle. It may be
thus shortly explained. The cheapening and increasing the supply of
sugar, at once the first necessity and greatest luxury of domestic life,
illustrates by the simple process, that by reducing the duties, the price
fell, and the consumption increased so rapidly that the revenue on the
low duties soon became as considerable as under the higher duties.
It is to me a matter of melancholy interest that the last letter Mr.
Huskisson ever wrote was addressed to myself, and it is somewhat singu-
lar that much of it was taken up with the affairs of Australia, of whose
future advancement he was the sanguine and true prophet. The letter


concludes with a remarkable passage, illustrative of the solemn assu-
rance given to us ? that in the midst of life we are in death,? for on
the very day after he had penned this passage he had ceased to live.
? From increasing years,? the letter concludes, ? and a state of
health more liable to derangement than when you left England, I shall
probably take a less arduous part in public matters, although, from the
deep interest which I feel in rational freedom and temperate improve-
ment, my mind will continue fully alive to everything that is calculated
to promote these objects in our own as well as in other countries.?
Within a few hours after thus expressing this continued interest in
measures dear to his mind, and meditating measures of future improve-
ment, the career of this great man was closed in the calamitous death
to which I have adverted.* (Sensation.)
Though last in point of order, yet first in point of fame of these
three great statesmen is Mr. Canning. Perhaps I cannot better
acquit myself of the part that devolves upon me of speaking of this great
orator than as I have already spoken, when the impression made upon
my mind was fresh and strong immediately after his removal hence,
and after I had been in the habit of many years listening to his match-
less eloquence with an admiration and delight, unsurpassed by any
similar sentiment with which the great orators, whom from time to time
I had heard, had inspired me. [Mr. T. here read the following cha-
racter of Canning from his own biography of that statesman.]
* There is a striking passage in this letter touching the tendencies of
Military Governors in colonies ?and it is the more remarkable, as what Mr.
Huskisson here predicates of the disposition of military men was strictly and
literally verified in the assumption for a time of all the offices of state by the
Duke of Wellington, on his becoming Prime Minister, a few years afterwards.
This letter was written in 1828 during the Duke?s first administration. ? I can
easily understand that military authorities think themselves fully competent to
the efficient management of all civil concerns, and that they are quite ready to
carry on all the affairs of a colony without the aid or interference of those to
whom, from habits or acquirements they ought to resort for counsel and co-
operation. Neither is it to be expected that the example of Government at home,
will lead such men to feel less confidence in their own ability to superintend
and direct the whole administration, judicial, civil, and financial of the colony.?


Mr. Canning was the most eonsumate orator of his country and age. He
had cultivated eloquence as a liberal art?with the zeal of a student?and
became one of its classic masters. Some may have exceeded him in particular
qualities or powers, but he possessed an assemblage of endowments and
acquirements which left all rivalry at a distance. He combined the free
movement, spirit, and reality of British Parliamentary debate, with the elabo-
rate perfection of the forum and the agora, and the accessory accomplishments
and graces of ancient and modern literature. Chatham can be estimated only
by tradition and'his effects ?in the absence of all genuine remains. He must
have possessed fervour, fancy, a superior reason and great popular effect, but
he exercised an art which he had himself created ?and in which he had no
rival of the first rank. His theatrical delivery, and the mimic lightnings of
his eye, astonished and frightened country gentlemen and noble lords, to
whom eloquence was a novelty and talent alarming. His dramatic appeal to
the ? frowning ancestor ? on the tapestry, and his pantomimic exhibition of
his crutch would fall powerless, or worse, on a modern opposition. Fox,
with the impetuous ardour of liberty, humanity, and his temperament?with
the muscular vigour of his dialects?simple and unadorned ?would be the
first orator in the assembly of a free people. Pitt, with his high sounding
amplifications, lofty sarcasms, and imposing manner, was supreme in dictating
to a drilled majority or subservient council?and in imposing his authority
upon the common order of minds. Burke has bequeathed the eloquence of
his meditations and the oracles of his philosophy, to sages and to posterity.
But, give Canning ? audience meet??the select representatives of a civilized
free people?men capable of feeling deliberative eloquence as a cultivated
liberal art?and he brought into the field an assemblage of qualities beyond
all single rivalry. Fire and imagination like Chatham, with a severe judg-
ment and less artificial delivery?vigorous dialects, like Fox, with more of wit
and fancy?dignity of manner and measured declamation like Pitt, with a
livelier and lighter tone of pleasantry and sarcasm?much of the philosophy
of Burke, with less prolixity, and a more scrupulous taste?these are among
the qualities which determine Mr. Canning?s place in the first order of
orators.
He had studied with a quick and congenial feeling those severe and
external models?the remains of ancient eloquence. His elegance of expres-
sion was fastidious without weakening its force; his wit was net elaborately,
concentratedly brilliant as Sheridan?s, but it was more prompt, redundant, and
disposable?and if it may be so said more logical, whilst his ridicule, inimi-
tably poignant was ever governed by high breeding and his good taste. Mr.
Canning?s reading was extensive and various, and his fancy flitted over
history, fiction, and external nature with quickness and felicity, for illustra-
tion, citation, or metaphor. Mr. Canning not only meditated his speeches,


but compared carefully (whether on paper or in his memory matters not) the
passages of effect. His exquisite sense of the elegance of style, of the pre-
cise value of words, and of oratorical collocation and cadence, will be felt and
admired in the speeches revised by him, and discerned in those that remain
in a state less perfect. His printed speeches present the orator with more
interest and fidelity than any other published speeches excepting Burke?s,
who wrote his for the press. ? Canning?s Speeches, vol. i. p. 174.
Fortunately for his own fame, ?Mr. Canning carefully revised his
own speeches, and they, Who have omitted to do so, have failed to leave
a record to which posterity may refer as a memorial of their renown.
Of the many hundred soul-thrilling appeals of O?Connell in Parliament, ?
and still more out of it, ?no adequate or worthy record remains. They
have passed away and perished like the brilliant outbursts of genius in
the theatre of a Kean or a Kemble, and were lost and extinguished in
the tempest of applause which at the time they elicited. In truth, I
believe O?Connell was never known to have prepared a speech before,
or to correct one after, he had delivered it. In this respect his highly-
gifted associate, Mr. Sheil was more chary of his fame, and some of the
beautiful and rhetorical orations of him, ?whom Roebuck designates as
? the most brilliant rhetorician of the age,??are not only remembered,
but to this day may be read as specimens of high-wrought anti-
thetic eloquence and models of classic elegance.f Mr. Macaulay, too,
f Sheil avowedly prepared his speeches. He acted?and owned it?on the
principle that as other eminent performers such as Kean and Macready produced
effects by studied acting and graceful delivery?the same qualities, adapted to
such a theatre as the British Senate, might in like manner, be telling and
effective. Of this?his wonted habit?a remarkable instance occurred on the
occasion of his selecting me as the friend to accompany him to the celebrated
meeting at Penenden Heath in 1826. We left London late in the afternoon,
in a post-chaise, and did not reach Rochester until about one on the morning
of the day on which the meeting was held. As soon as it became dark, we
slung from the roof of the chaise a small lamp, by the light of which Sheil read
and committed to memory,?and then recited passages from the manuscript of
his speech. Occasionally when he came to a brilliant passage he would pause
and exclaim to me ? What do you think of this ? 1 And then with his fine


has not been unmindful of the duty he owed to his own talents, and
of the claim they imposed upon him, of transmitting a faithful record
bright eye flashing and fixed on the lamp,?which he addressed as if the 40,000
men of Kent whom we met the next day at Penenden Heath were before him, ??
he spoke in a tone of vehement and beautiful declamation some well-wrought
passages with which he expected on the morrow to electrify the electors of
?unconquered Kent.? ?At breakfast next morning, an event occurred
sufficiently curious to be worthy of notice. It was a kind of Table d'Hote
repast, where about 40 or 50 persons ?mostly Kentish freeholders?sat down.
One able-bodied Kentishman, not knowing that Sheil was present, ventured
an opinion. He said ? that if the price of hops or the duty on corn were the
question, he could well understand why there should be a meeting, but he did
not see any occasion for a meeting in Kent about this Catholic business.? He
added, ?I?d soon settle it ?? ?How,? responded Sheil, ?By hanging up,? quoth
the Kentishman, ? O?Connell and Sheil on the bough of the first tree I met.?
?What!? said Sheil, ?would younot give them the benefit of atrial?? ?Ohno,?
said he, ? a trial is of no use to such fellows as these, hang them up at once, and
then there is an end of the Catholic question.? As the man of Kent was . a
brawney person who could have crumpled up Sheil like a sheet of paper, the
discussion was not prolonged. Afterwards, however, when we met on Penenden
Heath, and the avowed inflictor of severe and summary justice discovered that
Sheil was the person whom he had addressed in the morning, with the frankness
and good humour worthy of the John Bull character, he apologized to Sheil,
assured him he did not know whom he had addressed in the morning, and that
what he had said was not in earnest, but in joke. The matter ended by both
parties (to borrow a phrase from the barbaric code of duellists) shaking hands
on the ground.
As to the speech of Sheil, Jeremy Bentham pronounced this opinion
upon it: ?So masterly an union of logic and rhetoric as Mr. Sheil?s speech
scarcely have I ever beheld.???Tis true that its effectiveness was marred by
the lateness of the hour at which he spoke,?and by the noise proceeding from
Hunt?s and Cobbett?s followers, who happened to be near him. Much, how-
ever, ?but certainly not all of the speech,?as it was printed in the Sun, evening
newspaper, was spoken. Sheil was unfairly dealt with by the Press in the
matter.?As we drove up to Penenden Heath, a Reporter from the Sun met us,
and on the assurance that the manuscript, which he requested Sheil to give up,
should not be forwarded to London until after he had spoken, Sheil handed
it to him. The tmth is, the speech as written was passing through the
Press in London whilst Sheil was speaking it. It is, however, whether as


of them to future times. Neither Macaulay,;}; nor O?Connell, nor Shell
(the two latter I knew intimately, and each might form the subject of
a separate lecture) were in Parliament before I left England, and, there-
fore, a sketch of them does not form the legitimate theme of this
evening?s lecture ?hut on the point I have just touched, ?the importance
of studious preparation and diligent revision,?l may remark, ?the
careful assiduity with which Mr. Canning prepared and revised his
speeches previous and after their delivery could not be surpassed. The
last important speech he made was on the threatened invasion of
Portugal by France. The liberal policy it breathed, ?the decision which
marked it, ?and the lofty tone of eloquence that pervaded every part of
it, was the great achievement of his political life, and the crowning act
spoken or written, one of the most brilliant specimens of high rhetorical talent
that can be met with anywhere, and fully deserves the high euloginm pronounced
upon it by Jeremy Bentham.
+ An occurrence took place on the first occasion of Mr. Macaulay?s speak-
ing in London, which quite satisfied me he was one of those who laboured hard
before he spoke in public?At the Annual Anti-Slavery Meeting (I think of
1820) Mr. Macaulay, whose fame as a brilliant speaker at ? The Union
Society ? at Cambridge, and a Society of the same name in London,
had proceeded him, delivered the first of those brilliant orations with
which the country has been since delighted. At its close, I told Mr.
Macaulay that, from his rapid mode of speaking, and from so much of the
merit of the speech being dependant on the accurate collocation of the words
in which his many metaphors and figures were expressed, it would be only an
act of justice to himself to furnish a report of the speech. At first he hesitated,
and expressed some doubt whether he could furnish sufficiently ample notes
for the purpose;?but said ?he would think of it.? On my telling him if he
thought proper to do so, I should pay due attention to the notes, provided he
forwarded them to the Morning Chronicle Office by eight o?clock that evening.
On coming to the office of the Morning Chronicle, at that hour, I found a large
packet containing a verbatim report of the speech as spoken?the brilliant
passages marked in pencil and the whole manuscript well thumbed over, fur-
nishing manifest denotement, that no speech in Enfield?s Speaker was more
laboriously and faithfully committed to a school boy?s memory, than was his
first essay in public eloquence committed to memory by the great historian of
the age.


of his oratorical renown. In preparing that speech for the Press, which
he confided to me, he certainly imposed no light labour, as may
he seen by the passages from the first proof of his corrections
for the Press, which, as a literary curiosity, I have preserved,
and this evening brought with me. [Mr Therry here exhibited
the first proof corrected by Mr. Canning, which is a very curious
specimen of the anxious care he bestowed on composition.] From it
(said he in continuation) all may learn who engage in the arduous
pursuit of rhetorical renown ?that success in that?as in every other
object of human ambition, ?can only be won and accomplished by
human toil. Not only did he require three or four revises of this
speech to satisfy his highly cultivated taste for composition?and
perhaps it may be said sometimes too fastidious taste ?but an incident
occurred at an early hour on the morning of publication to show that
he carried his anxiety and sensitiveness to quite a wonderful and
scarcely excusable excess. [Mr. T. here related a curious anecdote
of his being awoke at two o?clock one morning by a King?s messenger
from Downing Street ?the sole object of the visit being a request from
Mr. Canning that the words ? Spain with the Indies,? which occur in his
celebrated speech on the affairs of Portugal should be printed ? within
inverted commas and in italics.? Mr. T. had, however, anticipated his
wish upon the point.] Let it not be supposed, however, that Mr. Canning
could not acquit himself in a mamier worthy of his fame without pre-
paration. His ready and pleasant wit was thus happily displayed at
the close of a day?s contest for Liverpool in 1818. The leading topic
of his vivacious address being caught from a passing event in the
morning?s proceedings.
At the close of the fourth day?s poll, it having been found that the freemen
could not he polled with rapidity, a bar for a nominal candidate was opened,
and Arthur Heywood, Esq., stood on behalf of Lord Sefton. Mr, Canning
met this, by opening a bar, in the name of Bolton, for his party. Immedi-
ately after the nomination of Mr. Bolton, Colonel Williams appeared for Lord
Sefton ; and nine bars were opened, and subsequently twenty-one. These
extraordinary circumstances are referred to, and commented on, in a vein of
classic pleasantry, in Mr. Canning?s speech on the fourth day of the election.
? Gentlemen, you have all read, no doubt, the letters of Lord Chesterfield.


It is upon the authority of that polite writer, I think, that it has been laid
down as a maxim, that, for the perfect enjoyment of social comfort, a company
ought not to he less numerous than the. Graces, nor more numerous than the
Muses. Gentlemen, your candidates, when we set out, were equal in number
to the Graces only; and, so long as that analogy was preserved, we went on
most courteously together. On Saturday that analogy was abandoned by the
addition of two candidates. Disorder immediately ensued; but we had no
sooner reached the hustings this morning, than an attempt was made to
repair it, hy raising our number to nine. Bars were actually opened for
candidates equal in number to the Muses; but not, that I could see, with any
increase of harmony from that association.
? Gentlemen, having tried that mystical number for one round (just time
enough to induce Lord Sefton?s friends to inscribe * Harmony and Sefton ? on
their flag,) it was found, that the Muses were anything but a security for
harmony. The harmony which followed the adoption of their number was,
indeed, of that species for which certain concerts (called, I know not how
justly, after our neighbours the Dutch) are celebrated, where every man is
said to play his own tune upon his own instrument
?Unluckily, the effort to escape from this confusion was not so well
considered as it was, no doubt, well intended. By adding to the number nine
nine more, and three more to that, till, by regular progression, we rose to the
number that I have stated, twenty-one?l cannot help thinking, that we
rather augmented than diminished the complication of our affairs.
? Thq list, however, of twenty-one, which I hold in my hand, but which
the excessive state of pressure in which I see you, prevents me from reading
to you, contains many names of individuals which you would hear with kind-
ness and respect. (Cries of ?Bead, read !?) But then, gentlemen, there are
others of a different description. (Cries of ?Bead, readl?l No, gentlemen.
The concert which I have described is, happily terminated; and, as many of
the performers were advertised without their own consent, and were never
persuaded to take a vocal part in it, I should do unfairly in bringing their
names before you for criticism and comparison.?
One passage more I will venture to read, as it gives an idea
of his more serious and elaborate displays of eloquence. It is on the
influence of the Press.
Mr. T. read this passage, from vol. 6, p. 404, of Canning?s
speeches.
? What should we think of that philosopher who in writing at the present
day a treatise upon naval architecture and the theory of navigation should
omit wholly from his calculation that new and mighty power?new, at least,


in the application of its might?which walks the waters like a giant rejoicing
in his course; ?stemming alike the tempest and the tide; ?accelerating inter-
course, shortening distances; creating, as it were, unexpected neighbourhood,
and new combinations of social and commercial relation ; ?and giving to the
fickleness of winds and faithlessness of waves the certainty and steadiness of
a highway upon the land ? Such a writer though he might describe a ship
correctly, though he might show from what quarter the wind of heaven blew,
would surely be an incurious spectator of the progress of nautical science who
did not see in the power of Steam a corrector of all former calculations. So
in political science, he, who speculating on the British Constitution, should
content himself with marking the distribution of acknowledged technical
powers between the House of Lords, the House of Commons, and the Crown,
and assign to each their separate provinces?to the Lords their Legislative
authority?to the Crown its veto ?(how often used ?) to the House of
Commons its power of stopping supplies (how often in fact necessary to be
resorted to?) ?and should think he had then described the British Constitu-
tion as it acts and as it is influenced in its action ; hut should omit from its
enumeration the mighty power of public opinion embodied in a free Press,
which pervades and checks and, perhaps, in the last resort nearly governs
the whole ; ?such a man would surely give but an imperfect idea of the
Government of England, as it is now modified, and would greatly underrate
the counteracting influences against which that of the Excutive power has to
contend.?
This beautiful passage, recognising the power and influence of the
Press, invites a passing notice of its rise and progress. Formerly
reports of proceedings in Parliament were positively forbidden, and it
was deemed a breach of privilege to report them. But it was soon
ascertained that the prohibition was idle and impracticable. Who
could prevent a member in the House from reporting to a friend out of
it next day what occurred the evening before ? Some members who
were anxious that their constituencies should know the part they took,
published their own speeches, and thus the practice grew until
reporting became a recognized and established system. Indeed, it
could not well be otherwise. Dr. Johnson first undertook the office of
reporting the debates in the Gentleman's Magazine, about 1740; but it
has been truly remarked that in these reports, he gave his readers more
of his own style and eloquence than of what had been actually uttered in
Parliament. It was in vain the House passed a resolution that ? who-


ever should presume to give an account of the debates or other
proceedings in Parliament, or any committee thereof, as well during
the recess as the sitting of Parliament, the House would proceed
with the utmost severity against such offender.? In 1771, however,
the debates began to be given day by day as they occurred, and the
attempt gave rise to a contest between the House and newspapers
which occupied the House to the exclusion of other business for three
whole weeks of the session,?when a committee of the House
reported it might be expedient to order the offending parties to be" taken
into custody of the Sergeant-at-arms. Mr. Burke aptly compared the
recommendation to the decision of the assembly of mice who came to a
resolution that the cat, to prevent her doing any more mischief, should
be tied up, but forgot to say how the operation was to be managed.
In truth, the House were as powerless to prevent the publication of the
reports as the assembly of mice to tie up the cat, and so established or
recognised a part of the business of Parliament has the Press since
become, that in the construction of the new Houses of Parliament
provision has been made, that those who attend on its behalf should
hear the debates with every advantage. Another obstacle thrown in
the way of the Press was an illiberal and unmeaning attempt made by
that cabinet of old curiosities in those days, the Benchers of Lincoln?s
Inn, who passed a by-law to exclude from the bar those who had been
engaged upon the Press. To his great honour the attempt was nobly
resisted by Mr. Stephen, then a member of the House, and a Master
in Chancery, who had formerly been a reporter, and subsequently
editor of the Morning Chronicle. In the debate on which this narrow
and exclusive doctrine was broached, he said : ?? I will put a case, I
will suppose a young man of education and talent, contending with
pecuniary difficulties?difficulties not proceeding from vice, but from
family misfortunes. I will suppose him honestly meeting his obstruc-
tion with honourable industry, and excercising his talents by reporting
the debates of this House in order to obtain a profession. Where I
ask is the degradation of such an employment ? Who could be so
meanly cruel as to deprive him of it ? The case, Sir, which I have
now supposed was, thirty years ago, my own ? This appeal spoke so


home to the heads and hearts of an assembly of English gentlemen. Sir
John Anstruther, a Bencher of Lincoln?s Inn, supported Mr. Stephen?s
view, reprobated the by-law, and the Benchers, overwhelmed by the
indignation their regulation had excited, expunged it from the books.
Mr. Stephen was in other respects a remarkable and very able man.
He had declined a puisne judgeship and higher appointments, adhering
to his Mastership in Chancery, in order, it was supposed, that he might
the more freely render his assistance to his friend and relative Mr.
Wilberforce, in extirpating slavery, of which, next to that eminent man,
he was the most strenuous, useful, and persevering advocate.
After this spirited reply, the question was not again mooted, and
the injustice of the exclusion thus attempted will be easily admitted,
both to the country and to the individuals who might be affected by it,
when it is borne in mind the by-law would have excluded from the pro-
fession such men as Lord Campbell, the present very learned Chief
Justice of the Queen?s Bench, formerly dramatic critic and reporter of
the Morning Chronicle. It is stated of this very able lawyer, who, skilled
in all branches of his profession, is eminently so in the dry department
of special pleading, that Mr. Perry allotted to him the ? Poet?s Comer,?
to pour forth the inspirations of his youthful muse. It would also
have excluded Sir John Stuart, Vice Chancellor of England ?the
late Mr. Justice Talfourd?Charles Dickens, the delight and ornament
of the literature of his age?Edwin Chadwick, whose reports on the
Poor Laws is a wonderful monument of human industry and ability?
John Coulson, one of the first conveyancers in England, and draftsman
of bills for both Houses of Parliament ?John Payne Collier, who has
given to the world the best edition of Shakespeare?James Bacon, the
eminent chancery barrister ?the late Sir J. Dowling, Chief Justice of
this colony, and many others, who like myself, had not only to eat but to
earn their way to the Bar, and ?to whom the Press afforded serviceable
facilities and means, and to whom the res angusta domi might have
otherwise furnished an insurmountable obstacle to the attainment of a
position in the profession. This notice of the Press may be pardoned
to one who has long been engaged in the vocation, who gratefully
acknowledges the assistance it afforded him when in early life he
required it, and who now rejoices at seeing that other and younger


men in these colonies find that here, as in England, it gives them a
helping hand to the attainment of the laudable objects of their legiti-
mate and honourable ambition.
Besides these three eminent men]! there were other members of
the House, at the time to which I allude, as orators, not inferior to
them. Next to them, and in some respects equal to the best of them,
and in others even above them, ?ranks Lord Plunket. By Brougham,
Macintosh, Wilberforce, and all the great authorities of his time, he is
placed amongst the foremost orators of the day. Their estimate of
him is quite as high as that entertained of him by the late Lord Dudley
and Ward himself a man of high oratorical repute, and, perhaps,
 Lord Dudley and Ward was, no doubt, a man of great accomplishments in
private and public life. But his appearances in Parliament were ? few and far
between.? He was no debater, ?his merit lay in bringing the resources of
great classical acquirements, and a highly endowed mind to occasional displays
of fine declamation, committed to memory with the most elaborate accuracy
and precision. In Lord Brougham?s Oratorical Sketches, I confess, I was
greatly surprised to find that Lord Brougham had exhibited a portrait of him to
future times, in which this nobleman is depicted as an Orator of equal, if not
higher endowments than Canning. Lord Brougham refers to the period when
Lord Dudley was Foreign Secretary, and speaks of ? the masterly performance
of his official duties, which marked his short administration of the Foreign
Department in 1827.?
I hardly think Lord Dudley?s contemporaries will confirm this tribute to
Lord Dudley?s assiduous discharge of his duties. Indeed, it was a topic of
general complaint at the time, that he seldom appeared at his office in
Downing-street, and the business of the office was often in inconvenient arrears.
Lord Dudley, long previous to the disastrous eclipse of his reason, during the
latter years of his life, was one of the most absent and forgetful men in England,
of which I recollect one striking instance. He was charged with a message to
Mr. Huskisson from the Duke of Wellington, in June, 1828, to the effect ? that
unless he (Huskisson) set himself right with the Duke by half-past two
o?clock that day, he could allow no further time,? intimating that if he did not
receive an answer by that time, he would appoint a successor to the seals of the
Colonial Office. Lord Dudley never delivered that message, and at three o? clock,
the inexorable Duke wrote a letter to Sir George Murray and appointed him
Secretary for the Colonies. If the Duke of Wellington had received that answer
(I Peel, Huskisson, and Canning.


the most accomplished classical scholar in Parliament, who, in a letter
to the Bishop of Llandaff in 1824, thus speaks of one of Plunket?s
brilliant orations in 1821:?? The anti-Catholics have but one great
advocate, Peel, and he is so completely over-matched by his chief
opponent, Plunket, that hardly the appearance of a struggle is main-
tained. I wish you had heard Plunket. He had made great speeches
before ; but in this he far surpassed them all. I have not for many
years heard such an astonishing display of talent. If he had been
bred in Parliament, he would have been the greatest speaker that ever
appeared in it.?
it would, probably, have healed the breach between these eminent statesmen,
and prevented, at least at that time , the disruption of the Tory party which then
took place, and which has not since been, and probably never will be re-united.
Lord Palmerston, Lord Dudley, Lord Glenelg (then Mr. Grant), and other
leading men retired from office with Mr Huskisson.
As to Lord D?s. speeches at that period, I should not venture to detract
from the weight due to Lord Brougham?s high authority on this or any other
question, but that it happened to me to have had this advantage over Lord
Brougham ?I heard all Dudley?s speeches during that period; and I believe
Lord Brougham was not present at the delivery of even one of them. And I
unhesitatingly declare that Lord Dudley did not, on one occasion, during that
short administration, rise even to the level of mediocrity. A reference to
Hansard will be found to support this statement. His position there did not
admit of his well-known habit of elaborate preparation, but tested his ability as
a debater by the suddenness and sharpness of the attacks made by Mr.
Canning?s assailants, especially by Lords Grey and Londonderry, and the
experiment was quite a failure. So much so indeed, that it was with difficulty
Mr. Canning, finding himself in a defenceless position in the House of Lords,
from Lord Grey?s somewhat ungenerous and caustic criticisms upon his public
conduct, was prevented by Mr, Huskisson and some ofhis other more judicious
friends from getting himself made a Peer, in order thathe might take his own part
in person. In a moment of irritation under the influence of these attacks he
exclaimed, ?-I?ll go to the King, get His Majesty to make me a Peer, and will
reply to Lord Grey in person, in the House of Lords to-morrow evening.?
Fortunately for his fame, he did not take a step which, from the high position
he then occupied in the estimation of the country and the world, would have
been for him, rather a descent than an elevation.


If ever there were ? thoughts that breathe, and words that burn,?
they are to be found in some of Plunket?s speeches in opposition to the
union with Ireland, and will render his name immortal, not merely
for the genius, but for the indignant and inflexible integrity, which
they exhibit: ?
Sir, I, in the most express terms, deny the competency of Parliament
to do this act. I warn you, do not dare to lay your hand on the
constitution. I tell you, that if, circumstanced as you are, you pass this
Act, it will be a nullity, and that no man in Ireland will be bound to obey it.
I make the assertion deliberately?l repeat it, and I call on any man who
hears me, to take down my words ; you have not been elected for this
purpose ?you are appointed to make laws and not legislatures?you are
appointed to act under the constitution, not to alter it?you are appointed to
exercise the functions of legislators, and not to transfer them?and if you do
so, your act is a dissolution of the Government?you resolve society into its
original elements, and no man in the land is hound to obey you. Sir, I state
doctrines which are not merely founded in the immutable laws of justice and
of truth?l state not merely the opinions of the ablest men who have written
on the science of government, but I state the practice of our constitution
as settled at the era of the revolution, and I state the doctrine under which
the House of Hanover derives its title to the throne. Has the king a right
to transfer his crown ? Is he competent to annex it to the crown of Spain
or any other country? No, but he may abdicate it; and every man who
knows the constitution knows the consequence, the right reverts to the next
in succession?if they all abdicate, it reverts to the people. The man who
questions this doctrine, in the same breath must arraign the sovereign on the
throne as an usurper. Are you competent to transfer your legislative rights
to the French Council of Five Hundred ? Are you competent to transfer
them to the British Parliament ? I answer no. When you transfer you
abdicate, and the great original trust results to the people from whom it
issued. Yourselves you may extinguish, but Parliament you cannot extin-
guish?it is enthroned in the hearts of the people?it is enshrined in the
sanctuary of the constitution?it is immortal as the island which it protects?
as well might the frantic suicide hope that the act which destroys his miserable
body should extinguish his eternal soul. Again, I therefore warn you, do not
dare to lay your hands on the constittuion ;it is above your power, * * *
Sir, I thank the administration for this measure. They are, without
intending it, putting an end to our dissensions?through this black cloud
which they have collected over us I see the light breaking in upon this unfor-
tunate country. They have composed our dissensions?not by fomenting the
embers of a lingering and subdued rebellion?not by hallooing the Protestant


against the Catholic, and the Catholic against the Protestant?not by com-
mitting the north against the south, not by inconsistent appeals to local or to
party prejudices?no; but by the avowal of this atrocious conspiracy against
the liberties of Ireland they have subdued every petty and subordinate
distinction. They have united every rank and description of men by the
pressure of this grand and momentuous subject, and I tell them that they
will see every honest and independent man in Ireland rally round her con-
stitution and merge every other consideration in his opposition to this unge-
nerous and odious measure. For my own part, I will resist to the last gasp
of my existence and with the last drop of my blood, and when I feel the hour
of my dissolution approaching, I will, like the father of Hannibal, take my
children to the altar and swear them to eternal hostility against the invaders
of their country?s freedom. Sir ?I shall not detain you by pursuing this
question through the topics which it so abundantly offers. I should be proud
to think my name might be handed down to posterity in the same roll with
these disinterested patriots who have successfully resisted the enemies of
their country ?successfully I trust it will be?in all events I have my
? exceedingly great reward??l shall bear in my heart the consciousness of
having done my duty, and in the hour of death I shall not be haunted by the
reflection of having basely sold or meanly abandoned the liberties of my
native land. Can every man who gives his vote on the other side this night
lay his hand upon his heart and make the same declaration ? I hope so. It
will be well for his own peace ?the indignation and abhorrence of his coun-
trymen will not accompany him through life, and the curses of his children
will not follow him to his grave.
Macintosh, too, was a man that took a lead in the debates of that
period. Though often very eloquent, his speeches partook more of the
character of philosophical reflections than of oratorical exhibitions.
They are dissertations bequeathed to the meditation of posterity, and,
like many of Burke?s, were more effective with those who read than
with those who heard them. The late Lord Denman, also, was a
speaker of some mark in the House at this period. He had a deep
sonorous voice for declamation, a fine person, a noble bearing, and
all the outward accomplishments of an orator were happily united in
him. His well known Mgh-minded integrity served also to win and
secure him respect and attention. On the Queen's trial, however, he
did not rise to the height of his argument, and the concluding sentence
of his peroration, by which he implored the House of Lords to tell Her


Majesty to ?go and sin no more,? was certainly as awkward an
expression from one who was bound to vindicate her entire and perfect
innocence as could have possibly escaped the lips of the most unprac-
tised and unsophisticated advocate. In plain truth and terms, it was
an acknowledgement of her guilt, and a solicitation of pardon for her
sin. His friend, Lord Brougham, has written an apologetic dissertation
upon this remarkable peroration, but use what circumlocution we may,
it is impossible to tell a lady or a gentleman ?to sin no more? without
conveying, by irresistahle implication, the imputation that the party so
addressed had at least sinned once. In mentioning the eminent men of
this period, the venerated name of Wilberforce should not be omitted.
His speeches were always listened to with delight. His diction was
elegant, classic, and spirited, and his tones as soft, melodious, and
silvery as those in which Milton makes Belial speak ; and, moreover,
his address was the most winning imaginable. His son, the Bishop of
Oxford, possesses much of his eloquence, hut does not inherit his insinu-
ating, simple and fascinating address. But the renown of Wilberforce
does not rest alone, or mainly, on his eloquence. His distinguishing
merit is, that by his successful labours he abolished the slave trade,
and thereby achieved one of the greenest laurels that ever brightened
in the wreath of fame? a laurel brighter than that of the warrior, as
it is not stained with blood, or the widow?s and orphan?s tears.
There were other men of merited note too in those days, Copley
(now Lord Lyndhurst) still lingering in Parliament, ?and still sustaining
his great repute, though not in the House where he won his early
fame.
? There he poured upon the Nation?s ear
Strains such as Athens once was wont to hear.?
Charles Grant was too indolent to achieve greatness. He often spoke
with fervid eloquence and always with classic taste. Burdett,
when in his early and mid career, he spoke in the tone and
spirit of a true-hearted Englishman, was a very captivating speaker.
There was also the clever and sarcastic Tierney,?and others worthy of
a separate portraiture, to disclose whose merits would far exceed the
limits of one evening?s discourse.


Again, there were members of the House, who may be said to
form a connecting link between the House of Commons thirty years
ago, and the present time. In the van shines the illustrious name of
Henry Brougham, the worthy rival of Canning, in those days, as he is
in these of the ablest members of the House, to which his great talents
have raised him. His mind is quite an encyclopaedia. He appears to
have left no art or science unstudied ; as an orator, powerful, varied,
vehement, sarcastic, to an extent of the most galling bitterness. As a
debater, prompt, and ingenious, with knowledge equally extensive,
accurate, and readily disposable?the great and useful ally of those
eminent and useful statesmen who abolished the slave trade and
slavery?the promoter of popular education, and, ?were every other
distinguishing feature of his glorious career blotted out and forgotten,?
on this spot?in this Mechanics? Institute ?it should be home in mind
that he was the indefatigable friend and advocate of Mechanics?
Institutes?in his lectures at which will be found specimens of
eloquence, perhaps surpassing any to be met with either in his brilliant
advocacies at the bar, or his most elaborate lucubrations in the senate.
Dr. Birkbeck and he were the co-founders of Mechanics? Institutes,
which have now spread their humanising and useful influence throughout
England and the empire. Brougham still lives, and, notwithstanding
some pardonable eccentricities and imperfections in his career as a
consistent politician, (and without imperfections he would not be human)
he still flourishes as a great pillar of the State, deservedly admitted
and recognised to be the foremost man of all his time. Another
eminent man, belonging, alike, to the past period, of which I spoke
and to the present time, is Lord Palmerston. He is now closely
verging on the fiftieth year of his Parliamentary life. In the course of
that eventful period, he has served in almost every ministry, which has
no doubt laid him open to the charge of playing different parts, as the
Whigs or Tories were lords of the ascendant. On this account he
has been compared to Proteus, assuming many shapes, yet, like
Proteus may it be said of him, that he is in every shape the God. He has
many excellences, but it often struck me that the great cause and
secret of his success lies in his being a thorough English gentleman,


which is an epitome of all that is honourable, straightforward, amiable,
and conciliatory in the human character. As an orator, he is fluent,
off-hand, apparently unstudied, always in good humour, and remarkably
fond of a good joke, which he never fails to introduce with a telling
effect. Besides being what I cannot more appropriately designate
than a dashing debater, he can, when in the mood, and the occasion
suits, rise to a very high tone of classic eloquence, and there is one
characteristic in his speaking in which he excels, and which English-
men above all things like ?a downright straightforwardness and firm-
ness of decision. He does not, after balancing both sides of a question,
leave his hearers at a loss on which side his opinion lies ; but, with an
unmistakeable clearness, pronounces his fixed opinion, by which he is
prepared to stand or fall. His voice is not for war to-day, and for peace
the next, whilst the battle is raging ; ?but, having once entered into the
quarrel, he does not submit to get out of it; aye, and he did not submit
to get out of it, until he made such an impression, as to make them who
provoked it, quail and tremble to enter into a quarrel with England
again.*
* I happened to he present on an occasion that impressed me with the
highest sentiments of Lord Palmerston?s manliness ?his cordial sympathies?and
fidelity to friendship. On an evening, (the proceedings of which were never
reported by the Press), on the discussion of Mr. Canning?s character and policy,
Mr. G. M. Dawson (Peel?s brother-in-law) attacked Canning?s policy, with a
vehemence amounting to virulence. Lord Palmerston, foremost amongst the
faithful to his chief, concluded a sharp and telling invective against the petty
annoyances of such speeches as Mr. Dawson?s, and concluded by assuring ?the
member that the vexatious opposition thus raised, and the men who raised it,
would be alike forgotten, whilst the name and policy of Mr. Canning would
shine forth with imperishable lustre to future times.? Lord Palmerston was the
staunchest Canningite in the House. By pursuing the policy he then adopted
and admired ?Lord Palmerston now finds himself?the first man in the
country. And, I venture to suggest that in the acts of patronage which from his
high position he has been enabled to perform, there has been none more gratifying
to his own feelings than the advancement of the son of his old political guide
and friend to the Governor Generalship of India, ?the highest post in our
colonial dependencies ?and one the present Lord Canning is in every respect
competent to fill.


On my late visit to England, in 1848 and 1849,1 naturally paid an
early visit to the House of Commons. As I entered the House I
found the indefatigable Joseph Hume on his legs, the same in manner?
standing on the same spot ?and in tone and gesture quite unaltered.
He seemed as if he were only concluding a speech I heard him begin
upwards of twenty years before; and he was in the act of
repeating what I heard him at least one hundred times proclaiming
and urging?the alliance between England and France ?his oft-
repeated admonition to the House??As long as France and England
are united, we may defy any nation, or any combination of force that
the world can bring into the field against us.? War was not then
dreamt of ?and if the good old patriot?s life had been spared,?he
would have rejoiced in the verification of the prediction which the
result of the late war has fulfilled. This staunch and worthy senator
was at all times a great favourite of the country ?old favourite indeed
he deservedly was, ?for no man ever gave, for forty years and upwards,
m ore persevering, useful, patriotic, and disinterested service to his
country than the venerable and honest Joseph Hume. For the
whole of that period, he was a constant attendant upon the House?the
first in, and the last out, of the House every night,?detecting every
abuse, ?and sparing neither friend nor foe in denouncing it. He
shunned every favour alike from the Minister and the People?intent
solely on the upright and and conscientious discharge of his duty in the
House, which admitted and admired the Fabricius-like integrity of
his career.
Let it not he supposed that such a man ?though he sat nearly
during the whole of his long Parliamentary life on the opposition
benches, and never was in office?was without influence. He had
deservedly great weight. The Minister feared him. I once over-
heard a conversation between Mr. Morris, the late High Bailiff of
Westminister, and the present Lord Eipon?then Mr. Kobinson, Chan-
celler of the Exchequer. Mr. Morris was urging the Chancellor to
increase his salary?to which Mr. Eobinson replied ?I would he de-
lighted to serve you ; ?but what will Hume say to it?? Thus, in his


long period of good and faithful public service, Hume not only cor-
rected many errors and abuses, but, bis ever-watchful eye detected,
and restrained others.
In surveying the benches as I entered the House almost all the
distinguished men of my earlier time?Canning, Huskisson, Plunket,
Brougham, Copley, Burdett, and Macintosh?were missing. I only
observed Sir Robert Peel, the honest old patriot Joseph Hume, Sir
John Hobhouse, Lord Palmerston, and Lord John Russell, and of these,
only the two latter now remain to decorate the scene. Their places
had been supplied by younger, but, it struck me, not superior men. In
one respect, however, the superiority of the present House was very
decisive. Eloquence is now more equally distributed, and is an art
more generally cultivated than formerly. The occasions that call for
the exercise of the art in its higher branch are rare, but instead of
eloquence being confined to a few, it is now shared and practised by
many. Formerly, the whole speaking duties of the House seemed to
be restricted to from twelve to twenty eminent members, hut now there
are few members who cannot creditably acquit themselves in expounding
or discussing any measure before the House. To the measure of
Reform no doubt this great improvement is mainly attributable. No
longer now, can a noble lord return, as Mr. Coke, of Norfolk, once
threatened to do, his coachman to the House of Commons, All the
lazy drones, who sat for years in silence as mere nominees of the
peerage, are driven from the hive ?and although property still exercises
a great and legitimate influence, no peer now can return a member to
Parliament who from talent or some intellectual qualification does not
possess a large share of the confidence of the constituency he represents.
No longer now, as formerly, when Sir F. Burdett offered to prove at
the bar of the House that ? seats in Parliament were sold as regularly
and as openly as stalls in Smithfield market,? can it be said that
the Lower House consists of appointees of the Upper, but the House
presents a full fair average of the representation of the whole people.
The strong common sense of Mr. Cobden, ?the vigorous dialectics of Mr.
Bright?who equals Cobden in plain straightforward speaking,?sur-
passes him in wit and eloquence,?and is manifestly a man of higher
educational attainments, as well as superior in natural genius?supply


the place of the more ornate and ambitious speakers of former times. The
point, however, in which the greatest improvement is noticeable, is in
conducting the business of the House,?its daily and nightly meetings
giving much more ample time for discussion. But more important
still, for one committee that sat formerly, ten continually sit now. The
attendance of members is more constant and assiduous, and it may be
truly said ?that every member takes a part in the real business of the
country. During many years I attended Parliament formerly,?the
whole business of Ireland appeared to be conducted by the Secretary
of Ireland, assisted by Sir J. Newport, Sir H. Parnell, and Mr. Spring
Bice (now Lord Monteagle).f This state of things is quite altered,
and every member is both able and willing to take his part in the busi-
ness of legislation, which is more practically and effectually conducted
in committees out of the House, than in discussions within its walls-
Then I noticed that the public eye is far more attentively fixed on the
proceedings of Parliament than formerly, which greatly serves to
quicken the attention and constancy of members to the discharge of
their duties. The railway trains, by the increased facilities of inter-
course, bring a vast multitude of visitors to London, and business and
other stirring matters attract a large concourse of persons nightly to
the gallery and avenues to the House about the time of the
meeting of the House. In bygone days, you only met a few
loiterers in the lobby, who appeared to take little or no interest
in what was passing in Parliament. Now, you might see quite a
regiment of persons drawn up on each side of the long corridors that
lead to the House, leaving a passage for the members to pass to and
fro, and on every countenance you see intense eagerness, curiosity, and
interest depicted. This, I confess, struck me as one of the most
f I perform a pleasing duty in recording of this nobleman, ?with whose
friendship I have been honoured from my boyhood,?that I never knew a more
true-hearted -Irishman. In his long active and distinguished public life, he has
rendered real service to the country of his birth, by the many useful measures
which he promoted; ?and, to my knowledge, many an Australian emigrant
gratefully acknowledges that Lord Monteagle gave him a helping hand on
leaving his native land.


remarkable changes between the proceedings in and about Parliament
thirty years ago and the present time'?the large share of interest which
the people out of doors take in what is passing within. It was when
I was forming one of this regimental line drawn up along the corridors
that I first saw Lord George Bentinck, ?the golden dawning of whose
excellence the House so much admired, ?then rising rapidly into public
favour. As he passed along, I was struck with his fine, manly, aristo-
cratic bearing; and he shared more of the monstrari digito ?the being
pointed at as a popular man?than any other member, with the exception
of Sir Robert Peel, whom I saw then, too, for the first time since my
return to England. With his person time had dealt somewhat severely.
His once florid, handsome countenance had become very care-worn, and
all the lineaments of robust and manly vigour, which had once made him
the very impersonation of a very contented, happy, and prosperous
gentleman, had in a great degree disappeared. He had, to use a well
understood, familiar term ?aged very much ; but still he was a fine
looking person. This was shortly after his fall from office on his
repealing the corn-laws. He was ?at the time I saw him?in sad dis-
favour with the party he had so long led, but in the zenith of his
popularity with the country, which he continued to enjoy for the short
time that intervened until the close of his life by the fatal and disas-
trous accident of a fall from his horse. After this little review (if I
may so term it), of the members passing to and fro under the salute of
the assembled crowd, ?as I entered the House one evening, I heard one
of the eminent men of the time, Mr. Disraeli, to great advantage. The
occasion was one on which Lord George Bentinck reprehended with great
severity the conduct of Earl Grey in reading certain passages from a
despatch of the merchants of Jamaica, whereas the whole despatch bore
quite a different meaning from that for the purpose of which his Lord-
ship quoted it.J Lord George Bentinck, who was a fearless out
X The party of which Mr. Peel was the recognized leader in 1827, were much
annoyed by an expression of Lord George Bentinck in the debates connected
with the repeal of the Com Laws in 1846, that ? they had hounded to death his
illustrious relative Canning.? The expression was, no doubt, a strong one, but
the following extract from a letter which I have seen from Lady Canning


spoken Englishman, hinted at the falsification of the document by using
it for a purpose for which it was not designed ; and I think the word
? forgery ? escaped his lips. Lord J. Russell, in vindicating his noble
friend, lost his temper, and said ? such language was unworthy of one
moving in Lord G. Bentinck?s sphere of life, and he must attribute it to
his well-known early association with persons of inferior tastes and
habits.? This was an allusion to Lord G. having been for some years
devoted to the turf, Mr. Disraeli, in commenting on this passage, with
admirable railery said, that Lord John Russell?s indignation ought
appropriately and consistently to be directed to his brother the Duke of
Bedford, whose horse had won some racing stakes the day before at
shortly after Mr. Canning?s death, indicates that Lord George was a pretty
faithful interpreter of the feelings of the nearest and dearest surviving friends of
Mr. Canning, The letter is dated April, 1829, and addressed to Mr. Stapleton,
Mr. Canning?s Private Secretary, and attached friend: ? You know my determi-
nation taken at the formation of the present Government, never to apply for or
receive from it any favour, either for myself or others. You know likewise the
feelings which prompted this resolution, and recent events have not tended to
mitigate these feelings, as they have proved to all the world the truth of what
all along I have been convinced of, that the members of the present Govern-
ment who seceded in 1827, ?and who afterwards directed such a factious and
unrelenting persecution against the head of that Government, were not
actuated by strong religious or political principles, but by bitter personal
animosity and envy. The consequences, which resulted from the fatigues of
mind and body occasioned by their conduct, have been too fatal to my
happiness, and are of a nature which barely admit of the exercise towards
them of that Christian virtue ?the forgiveness of injuries.? It certainly
was a novel and not a very consistent or edifying sight to behold the
men who but a short time before had withdrawn from Mr. Canning?s adminis-
tration, on account of his fidelity to the Roman Catholic cause, become
the champions of that cause immediately after the removal hence of the
man who lived its apostle, and died its martyr. Impartial history will
hereafter probably decide that a measure which Mr. Peel and his friends deemed
so very right in 1828, could not surely be so very wrong in 1827 as to justify
or excuse their withdrawal from the service of the country, because the head of
the Government was the leading advocate and devoted friend of Catholic
Emancipation.


Doncaster. He told Lord John when next he met his brother he should
address him, ? Brother, avaunt!?you have been seen at Doncaster, and
your horse has won, you have been associated with persons of inferior
tastes.?
The three members of Parliament who chiefly attracted my attention,
and would, I think, that of most visitors to the debates, were, Lord
Derby in the Upper House, and Mr. Gladstone and Disraeli in the
Lower. As a debater in the possession of an unbounded dominion
over language, in promptitude and ingenuity, Lord Derby cannot be
exceeded. I had heard his first speech about twenty-five years
and it was manifest from the commencement of his career, he was
marked out as a man for future eminence. The occasion on which I
last heard him in England was in opposing the repeal of the Navigation
Laws. He rose at two o?clock in the morning, and spoke until the sun
dawned at five; and though the House was crowded, and it was the
third night of the debate, ?I am sure there was not one present who
would not with pleasure have heard him for an hour longer. He spoke,
too, on the unpopular side of the question, but he poured forth such a
torrent of eloquence?of biting sarcasm, relieved with powerful decla-
mation?leaving no arguments on the opposite side, if not unrefuted at
least not unnoticed, and exhibiting such an accurate memory of all
that was said in the debate, as well indeed as of all that had been said
or written on the subject, that it was impossible for the hearer not be
impressed that he was in the presence of a very first-rate and superior
man. It has been the accident of Lord Derby?s public life to have been
but a short period a leading minister of the country. This is mainly
attributable to the tide of a free-trade commercial policy setting in
upon his political position, with a force too overwhelming to
be withstood. But whether in or out of office, though his high
aristocratic deportment and lofty bearing may prevent him from
being a very popular man in the ordinary sense of the term, yet his
country must be proud of him as a greatly-gifted man, and regret that
talents so undoubted and eminent are not now actively enlisted in some
prominent position in the service of the empire.
I have already stated that Disraeli and Mr Gladstone appeared to


me the leading men of the present time. Already an evening?s lecture
has been devoted to the delineation of Disraeli, and I therefore propose
to speak briefly of him. His first appearances in Parliament were
unsuccessful, but he soon displayed talents for debate of the highest
order, and overcame what is with some a fatal error, that of changing
sides too peremptorily, without sufficient cause or excuse. His great
qualifications, however, soon raised him to the highest eminence in such
a popular assembly as the House of Commons. He had, too, to over-
come some prejudice as the author of popular novels, ?which were a
combination of politics and romance, ?as the world is jealous of award-
ing to a man of genius a capacity for the serious business of fife. His
great speech, however, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, dissipated this
error. In that and other speeches, he displayed the most disposable
and useful talents for public business? the utmost shrewdness and
discernment?apparently powerful and most intelligible logic, lively wit,
the most penetrating sarcasm, and the most invulnerable self-possession.
The caustic ridicule with which he assailed Sir Robert was quite
unequalled in its withering sarcasm, when in brilliant periods he
proclaimed the once powerful premier, Sir Robert Peel, to the British
public as ? a very pompous, common-place, and treacherous personage,
at the head of an organized hypocrisy ?a great middleman, who
bamboozled one party and plundered the other,? It was when Sir
Robert Peel avowed his conversion to Free Trade, then forming a
party under the leadership of his patrician coadjutor and friend Lord
George Bentiuck, that these volleys of sarcasm were nightly
discharged by this clever novelist-orator, which startled the House
from its propriety ; ?for never, since the days of Cicero were more
bitter personal philippics dealt out against a public man with more
merciless severity and withering effect. Apart from the merits of that
conversion, to which Peel?s memory now owes its main renown, ?the
eloquence of Disraeli?for it is with that I have to deal ?was of the
loftiest flight, and so prompt, varied, and masterly, that no man was
more feared by his foes or applauded by his friends. I regret I did
not hear this distinguished orator more frequently, but the few


occasions on which I did hear him impressed me with the conviction
that he well deserved the high reputation he enjoyed. In speaking of the
great merit of Mr. Disraeli?s speech on the budget, I speak of it only
as a display of oratorical ability. As a financial measure it received,
as well as his other speeches on commerce and finance, considerable
damage from the commentaries of Mr. Gladstone, who is well informed,
and brings a ready and disposable knowledge to the discussion of these
subjects. On questions of commerce and finance Mr. Disraeli is
manifestly not familiar and at home. To use a plain-spoken and well-
understood phrase he crams for the occasion,?and I venture to suggest
there are few subjects on which he would less wish his Parliamentary
talents and aptitudes to be tested and judged of, than by the display of
his borrowed acquirements in statistical discussions and details ? got up
for the debate,? which he is occasionally called upon to exhibit. This
is no discredit to him, ?his taste and information do not lie in that
direction, ?but independently of these topics, to use the language of
Burke, he has a ? salient spring of merit within himself ? which must
secure him a high position among the eminent men of Parliament of
his time. Throughout the debates on the sugar duty questions and the
repeal of the navigation laws in 1848-9?the task of frequent and
responsible speaking on these uncongenial topics was too prominently
cast upon him. I repeat my regret that I seldom heard him on sub-
jects more suitable to the bent of his genius. I speak of him therefore
chiefly from trustworthy information, and from easily accessible sources
of ordinary and general intelligence.
I had the good fortune, however, to hear Mr. Gladstone frequently,
and on some important occasions. His style of oratory was different
from that of any speaker I had before heard, or indeed read of. The
great merit of it is, that there is no art in it. It is impossible to hear
him, without being impressed that the sentiments he expresses and the
arguments he advances are the emanation of an upright and strictly
conscientious mind. He never stoops to the artifices of debate ; his
candour is not limited to the expression of his own views, but extends
to an equally candid and fair dealing with the views of those opposed


to him. Next to this characteristic of his speaking which struck me,
was his perfect self-possession and the unimpassioned tone with which
periods, expressed in beautiful and often exciting language, flow from
him with the utmost ease and grace. Sometimes he assumes the spirit
and language of the loftiest declamation, ?hut even in his declamation
there is no vehemence, which the word declamation usually conveys.?
All is calm, ?the tone of voice throughout, soft, silvery, and most insin-
uating, manifestly indicating that his various powers and accomplish-
ments are under the strict discipline of a well regulated reasoning
mind. His personal character as one of the most amiable men in
England, ?no doubt ?adds great weight to a reputation, which each
year developes itself with renewed and augmented claims to the respect
and admiration of the country. Great as was his success as Chancellor
of the Exchequer, yet I do not think he has as yet arrived at the
eminence for which his great talents have destined him. With all my
admiration of this distinguished person there is too frequently a want
of decision, arising, some may think, from timidity, hut to a closer ob-
server, arising from an over-conscientiousness and strict anxiety to pursue
the path of truth and of duty. Often he supports a position in a high
strain of eloquence, to which the House is but little accustomed, and
ends in persuading almost every mind but his own. Sometimes, how-
ever, he breaks the chain of his scruples, as in his masterly ex-
posure of the iniquities of the Government of Naples, with a warmth of
eloquence quite irresistible. On such occasions he shines forth with
masterly success and effect. It is quite refreshing to hear him on
such occasions?when in a righteous cause ?his mind is quite made
up ?his diction is so elegant, rich, and spirited?his tone so distinct
and melodious that the most hostile ear must listen with delight.
Such a man, speaking as he does with the glowing language of the
heart, must command great influence in a popular assembly;?and he
has only to acquire a share of that tone of decision and out-spoken
firmness which eminently distinguish Lord Palmerston, to render Mr.
Gladstone the first man in weight and influence, as he is, in my judg-
ment, decidedly in point of character and talent ?the first man in
the House of Commons. If Mr. Gladstone had been called to


the bar, I greatly fear he would have found the unscrupulous defence
of his client?s interests in a wrong cause too difficult a task for his
frank and ingenuous nature to overcome. He could scarcely prevent
the weak side and defenceless points, stated in his brief, from peeping
out somewhat too prominently. But, in a righteous cause, from his
nature and talents he would have been irresistible with a court or
jury. His position in society, however, has happily raised him above
the requirements of a profession;?nor is it to be regretted,?for the
character of the man and of his mind is essentially that of a statesman.
In conclusion ?I may remark of almost all the eminent orators
whom I have presented before you in quick review, that they were
men of humble origin, and may be truly regarded as the architects of
their own fame and fortune. Curran was the son of a peasant, whose
talents raised him to the table of his prince ; ?Grattan, of a Dublin
citizen, of moderate position;?Huskisson, of a country surgeon;? Peel,
of a Manchester manufacturer; ?Plunket, the son of a Presbyterian
clergyman in the North of Ireland ; ?and even Canning, though of
gentle blood by his paternal side, in early youth lost his father, who
had been disinherited for marrying a dowerless beauty. The lady, after
her husband?s death, was curtailed of the small allowance made by his
father, ?and became an actress of but moderate attainments for the dra-
matic art. Among the letters that fell in my way?when preparing Mr.
C.?s biography, was one from his mother to a friend, soliciting him to
come to her benefit, and use his interest for it, saying ? if you or my
riends will not do so, how can I support this fat chubbed boy of mine.
Soon after it is true the rich relations of his father took him by the
hand and educated him, but he had in early youth to feel ?the hard
hand of an oppressive fortune.? That fat chubbed boy, however, rose
to be a great man ?became to be the guiding spirit of his age ?to be
the Prime Minister of England?and what, perhaps he was himself
even prouder of, returned at the head of the poll for the second city in
England (Liverpool), in opposition to the great man of the age, Henry
Brougham. When taunted with his early humble origin, and with
being an adventurer, on the hustings at Liverpool, in a spirit of noble


exultation he exclaimed : ?If to depend directly upon the people as
their representatives in Parliament ?if, as a servant of the Crown, to
lean on no other support than that of public confidence ?if that be to be
an adventurer, I plead guilty to the charge, and I would not exchange
that station, to whatever taunts it might expose me, for all the advan-
tages which may be derived from an ancestry of a hundred generations.?
Thus, to each and all in this great and free country, the paths
of glory are open,?the ranks of loftiest distinction may be won by
honourable toil, from the highest to the humblest ranks of sub-
ordination. So has it been in England, ?so may it be in Australia
and from the educational institutions which the patriotism of this land
is now rearing around us, may we hope that at no distant date some
future Huskissons, Peels, and Cannings may arise to delight us with
their talents, ?to enlighten us by their wisdom, ?to win for themselves
admiration and renown, ?and to confer lasting blessings on their country.
Though I have not exhausted the subject, I fear I have exhausted
you ?and in bidding you farewell shall only say that I am greatly re-
warded if, by any remarks of mine to-night, I have at all contributed
to your information or entertainment.
A vote of thanks having been awarded to his Honor by ac-
clamation, the meeting separated.
Printed at the Empire General Steam Printing Office, 173, George Street, Sydney.


-
i
