





13 if




61 o
au u
Complimentary Dinner
The Honourable
W. A. HOLMAN, M.L.A.,
TO CELEBRATE THE COMPLETION
OF HIS FIFTH YEAR AS PREMIER
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Given at Parliament House, on the Evening
of Friday, 29th June, 1918




T oasts.
HIS MAJESTY THE KING.
The Hon. W. A. HOLMAN.
Proposed by
The Hon. G. W. FULLER, M.L.A. (Colonial Secretary).


KEY NOTES.
“The thing that will stand to the Premier’s eternal credit,
both as a Labour and a National Premier, is his work in
connection with the war,”
Hon. G. W. FULLER, M.L.A.,
Colonial Secretary.
“ A more real or truer friend no man ever had. I have
seen him in tight places where the proof of friendship has
been put to the severest test, and he has always survived the
test.”
Hon. J. GARLAND, K.C., M.L.C.,
Solicitor-General and Minister of Justice.
“ The Premier’s personal charm and his great, broad
mind, are largely responsible for his well-deserved success in
life.”
Hon. J. S. T. McGOWEN, M.L.C.
“ I feel sure that he will guide the destinies of the
National Party in a manner that will be in the best
interests of the community as a whole.”
Hon. Wm. BROOKS, M.L.C.
“He is a warm-hearted friend—kind, chivalrous and
generous in the highest degree.”
Hon. D. R. HALL, M.L.A.,
Attorney-General.
“All must feel that the right man is guiding the destinies of
the State at a time when loyal service and careful administration
are vital to the existence of every part of the Empire.”
Hon. P. T. TAYLOR, M.L.C.


SPEECHES.
Mr. FULLER, in proposing the health of the Premier,
said that years ago many of those present were unable
to see eye to eye with him. But time and circum-
stance had brought great changes. From the very
outset of war Mr. Holman had struck the right note
and inspired public confidence in the highest degree.
(Applause.)
“We are perfectly satisfied,” added the Colonial
Secretary, “ that we have in Mr. Holman, as Leader
of the National Party to-day, a man who is determined
as far as possible to advance the welfare of our own
people, and to help the Empire in this grave crisis
through which we are passing. (Cheers.) An English-
man born, Mr. Holman started life in a humble way,
but soon displayed those intellectual qualities and grit
which have since carried him forward on the wave
of a successful career. Ever since the war started he
has been animated by a whole-hearted desire to pre-
serve those democratic ideals he has so strenuously
advocated in the past, and to help maintain the liberty
and civilisation which the world has won during the
long centuries that are past. (Applause.) I regard
Mr. Holman as the most broad-minded and national


statesman in the whole of Australia to-day. For many
years he had a hard and difficult path to travel. He
did heroic work towards bettering the condition of the
working man at a time when he sorely needed better
conditions. Many of the roads he now travels in a
motor as Head of the State in the early days he plodded
along on a pack-horse or bicycle in the interests of the
trades unionists. And lots of the advantages which
the workers enjoy to-day they owe to the pluck and
honest-set purpose of the Premier.” (Applause.)
Mr. Fuller went on to say that one of Mr. Holman’s
outstanding qualities was his immense capacity foi
constructive thought and his mastery of detail. Mr.
Holman was to-day one of the notable men of our time.
Few political careers were so full of interest. So great
was the wealth of material that it was only possible
to refer to a few brief incidents in his eventful life.
From the time of his first political defeat in the fight
for Leichhardt during 1894, Mr. Holman had courage-
ously plodded along determined to win distinction.
And he had succeeded. (Applause.) He suffered defeat
at Grenfell in 1895. Undismayed, he then forsook
political aspirations for three years, and took to journal-
ism. He edited, with conspicuous success, the Grenfell
Verdette, and became known as a clear-thinking writer,
as well as an eloquent speaker. He stood for Grenfell
again in 1898 and won. Ever since he had been the
prominent man in politics we knew him to be to-day.
And last Sunday he completed his fifth year as Premier
of New South Wales. (Applause.)


Mr. Holman’s maiden speech in Parliament, as
member for Grenfell, compelled the attention of the
big intellects of the day. It was delivered in opposition
to the rigidity of some of the provisions of the Federal
Constitution Bill. His layman’s grasp of constitutional
law was the outstanding feature of this maiden effort,
showing that he was a master of detail as well as a
constructive thinker. Mr. Holman next turned his
attention to the study of law. Despite many difficulties,
he won through, and was called to the Bar in 1901.
He was elected for Cootamundra in 1904, and had held
the seat ever since, in spite of many powerful attempts
to dislodge him. (Cheers.)
“ The Premier’s guiding hand,” said Mr. Fuller,
“ can be recognised in many of the excellent State
services which we have to-day. He has been closely asso-
ciated with successive Education Ministers in creating
the privileges which the boys and girls of rich and poor
alike enjoy in New South Wales to-day. (Applause.)
He was largely responsible for the establishment of
the Chair of Economics at the Sydney University.
At the very outset of war Mr. Holman tackled skilfully
the economic problems which arose. Provision was
made against unemployment. A Moratorium Act was
passed, and profiteering was definitely checked by the
creation of the Necessary Commodities Control Com-
mission. Foreseeing a huge wastage of men during
the war, Mr. Holman himself, in co-operation with
Mr. Flowers, researched into the question of saving
infant life as an offset. A scheme which could be


adapted to local conditions was discovered, and the
result is the present excellent system of State Baby
Clinics. (Cheers.)
“ The thing that will stand to the Premier’s eternal
credit, both as a Labour and National Premier, is his
work in connection with the war. At the very com-
mencement of hostilities Mr. Holman struck a thrilling
note of patriotism throughout Australia. He did
yeoman service in the interests of recruiting and
established a net-work of agencies to secure reinforce-
ments which added thousands of men to the colours.
Mr. Holman’s scheme was remarkable for its com-
pleteness of detail. Within a few days committees
were at work in ah the large centres, and every railway
station, public office, and shop window throughout the
State displayed the State Government’s recruiting
posters. Mr. Holman was himself Chairman of the
Central Recruiting Committee, and personally planned
the whole work of the campaign, giving directions as
to publicity, platform speaking, and administration.
The Public Services of the whole State were exploited
by the Premier to assist the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. (Applause.)
“ Mr. Holman’s war activities were not confined to
organising a recruiting campaign. By a survey of the
Government’s resources he found many other ways in
which to assist the Commonwealth. He established
the Flying School at Richmond. This has trained and
turned out fifty-three efficient aviators, fifty-one of


whom are now flying at the Front. (Great applause.)
Apart from these things, the Premier established an
Intelligence Branch, within his Department, to watch
events abroad and keep the Government in touch with
questions vitally associated with the war. This he
conceived to be a duty imposed by the Paris resolutions,
which made a wide call to the Empire to get ready for
post-war conditions. As a result the Government has
at its immediate disposal a record of the way in which
post-war problems are being tackled by the belligerent
nations and is using the material to advantage.
(Applause.)
“ With Mr. Holman as our Leader in Cabinet we feel
that we have a master mind amongst us. So far as the
administration of our Departments is concerned, when
difficulties arise, all we have to do is to appeal to the
Premier and they are immediately solved. We
recognise, as Nationalists, that we have a man at the
head of the Government who is guiding and controlling
us aright in the best interests of the country. I feel
that our Chief is entitled to, and one day will receive,
one of the highest honours His Majesty the King can
confer. (Applause.). His great talents and unfailing
courtesy are the admiration of all those who come in
contact with him. I can pay our Premier no greater
compliment than to say that he is one of those rare
men who are in the highest sense nature’s gentlemen.”
(Great applause.)


The Minister for Justice (Mr. GARLAND) said that
in the past he had known the Premier as a formidable
and generous opponent. In opposition to the Premier
one never knew what was in store for the opponent
round the corner. (Laughter.) The Premier had the
characteristic British quality of never knowing when he
was beaten. And the fact remained that since he had
got the reins of office in his hands he never had been
beaten (Applause.)
“ I unblushingly confess,/’ said Mr. Garland, “ that I
infinitely prefer being his colleague to his opponent.
(Laughter.) And a better colleague no man could
have. He combines two rare gifts :an infinite capacity
for detail, and a great political imagination. We are
proud to be associated with him. (Applause.) There
is no man I have ever met who has described his high
intellectual gifts. Our Premier is ever ready to listen
to argument. If he is convinced he is wrong he is
man enough to change his opinion and adopt another
one. A more real or truer friend no man could ever
have. I have seen him in tight places where the proof
of friendship has been put to the severest test. And he
has always survived the test. (Applause.) The fact
that he has been able to change his views and adopt
others dictated by circumstances, patriotism, and
common sense shows that he is a statesman. (Applause.)
During recent events it required the mind of a statesman
to acknowledge that circumstances had arisen which
proved that certain views previously held were wrong.
The Premier has always set up for himself high ideals


in life to guide him. And when he saw that these
ideals were endangered by the world war he swept
every obstacle aside and made sacrifices for the pre-
servation of those ideals.” (Applause.)
Mr. McGOWEN, M.L.C., said that Mr. Holman had
always been a tower of strength to his party. That
was why he was Head of the State to-day. Ihe
Premier’s personal charm and his great, broad mind
were largely responsible for his well-deserved success
in life. There were times when the Premier’s eloquence
almost took one’s breath away and made the blood
tingle in one’s veins. The Premier had done well, and
was doing well, and if he continued to give his best to
the British Empire, the best would come back to him.
(Applause.)
Mr. WILLIAM BROOKS, M.L.C., said that the one
paramount duty of the people in the State and the
Commonwealth to-day was to support at all costs the
National Governments. If the public continued to
support the Premier as Head of the National Govern-
ment in this State, he felt sure that he would guide
the destinies of the party in a manner that would be
in the best interests of the community as a whole.
(Applause.)
Mr. P. T. TAYLOR, M.L.C., said that it was a
pleasure to be associated with a gentleman of Mr.
Holman’s brilliant attainments and patriotic resolve.


As Mr. Fuller had said, the Premier had struck the
right note in the crisis through which we were passing.
He had worked hard in the interest of the Allied cause,
and had rendered services which were certainly impor-
tant. As Head of the National Government he had
inspired public confidence, and all must feel that the
right man was guiding the destinies of the State at a
time when loyal service and careful administration
were vital to the existence of everv part of the Empire.
(Applause.)
The Attorney-General (Mr. D. R. HALL) spoke of
the Premier’s early life and related some humourous
incidents. The Premier had always had a tremendous
capacity for work, was an omniverous reader, had an
extraordinary power of analysis, and had always
manifested great courage in meeting his difficulties.
He had never known Mr. Holman choose for himself
the easy path. When the organised secularists of
Sydney opened the Lyceum Hall with a great flourish
of trumpets ovei 25 years ago, a youth offered to
come along and deliver to them a series of lectuies to
show them the error of their ways. The offei was
accepted and young W. A, Holman appeared to expose
the fallacies of the agnostic propoganda. This he did
with as much eclat as on the occasion when twenty
years later he visited the Banker’s Institute to tell the
financial magnates all about the merits ot socialism.
(Laughter). He had always been the complete master
of his own mind, and he had never known a man with
such power of concentration, skill, and determination


to succeed no matter what the difficulties. He was
a warm-hearted friend, kind, chivalrous, and generous
in the highest degree. (Applause.)
The PREMIER responding said that he felt very
much in the position that was promised to the hero in
the Mikado —on the occasion of his own funeral—to be
the central figure in the celebrations. “ For once in
my life,” he added, “ I am the central figure in the
celebration, and while the natural optimism of the
politician has caused me to look forward to such an
occasion, 1 find it more embarrassing than I anticipated.
However, I have possibly been saved from this
embarrassment in its entirety by the kindness of Mr,
Fuller in including my wife in the congratulations for
myself. In addition to presenting my thanks for the
kindly references to myself in the giving of the toast
I deeply appreciate the references to Mrs. Holman.
(Cheers.) For many years she has taken a keen
interest in politics; has been one of the natural leaders
of the women in her State, and has always given me
the full support which her great talents enable her to
give. (Applause.)
“ I should like to tell you a little story I heard in
Victoria —where ah kinds of stories are told which would
not be tolerated in New South Wales. (Laughter.)
The story runs that a man, speaking to a clergyman,
said : ‘ Well, you know, parson, I am a bit of a rough
diamond, and 1 realise it. But there is one thing 1


will say for myself. I never could bear to see a woman
chopping wood. That gets me right down. Whenever
my old woman starts on the wood pile I always pull
down the blind.’ (Laughter.) Please remember this is
a strictly Victorian story. (Laughter.) In the past
there have been occasions when I have seen my wife
chopping wood politically. And I have pulled down
the blinds. (Laughter.) But I deeply appreciate the
reference 3 to her work which she has done in the cause
of charity and other good things since I have been in
office. (Applause.)
“ The speeches we have heard to-night have ranged
over twenty years. If I were to attempt to cover the
same ground, with the greater knowledge of detail about
myself at my disposal, it would take you a couple of
hours to hear my reply. You, doubtless, all remember
the story of Voltaire. He was told that something
scandalous about himself about to be published could
be suppressed for the ridiculously small sum of 100
crowns. Voltaire replied to the person making the offer
that he could supply him with much better authen-
ticated and more scandalous anecdotes for 50 crowns.
(Laughter.) I feel rather like him to-night. I could
tell you some- things about myself which would put
those my colleagues have told you right in the shade.
I do not propose to enter into any such enterprise. I
would beg you to realise that I stand to-night in a strange
position amongst the politicians of Australia. Looking
at the faces of my colleagues at the recent Premiers’
Conference I was unable to recognise a single man who


was in office when the war broke out. I believe lam
the only Minister in office in Australia who has had
uninterrupted service throughout the war. Standing
as I do in that unique position, and having been com-
pelled to listen to the kind and flattering observations
upon it of those who have proposed the toast, 1 can
now only attribute it to the profound, philosophic, and
patriotic calm which characterises New South Wales
politics. (Laughter and applause.) In the other States
of Australia they are perpetually engaged in turmoil
and in disputes which turn upon personal ambition
In New South Wales we are always prepared to pull
together for the common good. And clearly when they
know they have got a good Premier they have sense
enough to hang on to him. (Laughter and applause.)
“ I deeply appreciate the kindly remarks of Mr. Fuller
and Mr. Hall. And I appreciate more than anything
to-night the references to myself which have fallen
from the lips of my former sagacious chief, Mr.
McGowen. (Applause.) I dare not enter upon the world
of reminiscence which these speeches have excited. I
have been a Deputy Leader, and I have worked as
Leader of a Party with Mr. Fuller and Mr. Cann as my
Deputy Leaders. I can only say that I cannot believe
Mr. McGowen ever got the support and loyalty from me
which I have received from Mr. Fuller and Mr. Cann.
I endeavoured to help and support my old Chief at all
times with any faculties I had. You have heard the
all too generous terms in which Mr. McGowen described
my services to him. Whatever he said about me,


however undeservedly, I should like to say of Mr. Cann
and of Mr. Fuller, whom I have been proud to be
associated with as a colleague. Mr. Fuller is one of the
gentlemen of our Parliament whose magnanimity and
personal delicacy of feeling have always made him a
power and ornament to any party with whom he has
been associated. (Applause.)
“ I wish to say one word about myself. To be five
years Premier, and four years of those five Premier
while the war has been raging, and while the whole affairs
of the State have been practically thrown into chaos by
the war, believe me, is not to play a child’s part in the
politics of Australia. It can only be done at the expense
of considerable wear and tear. We have heard what
has befallen Mr. Watt. He has been reduced to illness
by the stress of work. Much of the criticism which
was directed against Mr. Hughes was caused by the
excessive labours which he had to perform as Prime
Minister. And the fact that Mr. Andrew Fisher did not
succumb is only due to the fact that he is an ideal type
of a highly-unimaginative race, who hardly realised
before he left for Europe that they had begun a war at all.
(Laughter.) Ido not say it disparagingly. Ido not
believe it caused him, or causes him, any anxiety.
(Laughter.) lam not built that way. During the
last year I have felt a certain slackening of effort
and failure of grasp, in respect of which I can only
say to my generous colleagues in the Party, if it
can be cured it shall be. And, of course, if it cannot be,
other arrangements will have to be made for carrying


on the Government. The Government cannot be carried
on by a sick man. lam not sick to-day, but I have
been. I hope, and I feel that my colleagues join me
in the hope, that there will be no need for anything of
the kind but I am fully aware of the partial and
unsatisfactory nature of the aid I have been able to give
my colleagues and Party during the last four months.
“ I beg the generous indulgence of gentlemen present
who are in the other Party, while I say something
about the National Party. Personally I regard it
as a very great gain to the State. I think it
saved this country from a very deplorable alternative.
(Applause.) The formation of that Party would have
been absolutely impossible but for the generous self-
abnegation of Mr. Wade, whose determination at
that moment to put the claims of the country before
everything else made a National Government possible.
(Applause.) Some of the speakers have said to-night,
and, I believe, correctly, that the formation of the
National Government in New South Wales led to good
results all over the Commonwealth. I believe that the
Commonwealth, as a whole —it is a point of some doubt —-
has benefited. If it be so then the general benefit, as
well as to New South Wales, is due to the patriotic
determination of Mr. Wade at the right moment to
throw all other considerations aside. (Applause.)
“We have formed this National Party for what
it is worth. We are carrying on the Government as
best we can. We have introduced certain legislation,


and carried out certain things which, I feel, and I am
sure my colleagues feel, were done with no consideration
of mere party profit or party advantage. I have
taken certain steps not merely because I think they will
help the National Party, but because I believe the
National Party will forward the cause of our country and
the Allies in the great struggle in which we are plunged
to-day. If it can be shown that the existence of the
National Party or Government might be a hindrance
in the furthering of our country’s cause, I would gladly
agree to the abolition of both to-morrow. If it can be
shown that the re-casting of Australia and the formation
of a single central government are necessary to secure
a concentration of national vigour to help win the war —
the one task which lies before the democratic world
to-day —although 1 am a National politician and believe
the National Party is a good party, fraught with great
benefit for the whole of Australia, I say let State
individuality be abolished a hundred times if it is
necessary to help preserve humanity and win this
great struggle. (Applause.) It is because I believe that
the National Party combines the best sentiments of
our various political elements that I am leading it
to-day.
“ I am working shoulder to shoulder with men I
frankly admit I disagree with on many minor points
of policy and administration. But the whole right to
determine our policy and administration will be de-
feated if we are defeated in this war. If we
lose this war the whole power disappears. And to


struggle to-day about minor details, while the enemy
is at our gates, and the peril is over our heads, would
be a profound misunderstanding of the situation and the
principles which should guide us in the unprecedented
crisis of to-day. For that reason lam in the National
movement to-day, and joined with Sir Charles Wade
in forming it. I have applied my industry and my
devotion to try and carry into full material effect the
principles which Mr. Wade outlined before he left the
country. We formed the National Government. It
is now in its second year, and has advanced, on the
whole, I believe, in the confidence and support of the
people of New South Wales. We did these things,
solely because we believed we saw the over-riding
necessity of loyalty to the common cause for which
democracy is fighting to-day, (Applause.) I recognise
to-night the crowning compliment which has been paid
to me, and no language of mine can possibly express
the appreciation of it which I feel." (Great applause.)
ill


Congratulations.
Cables of congratulation were read from
Mr. Taft and Mr. Roosevelt, ex-Presidents of
the United States. Cordial telegrams came
from all over Australia, including messages from
the Acting Prime Minister (Hon. W. H. Watt,
M.H.R.), the State Premiers, the Mayors of
Municipalities, and the Presidents of Shire
Councils, and other public bodies.


GUESTS.
The Hon. G. W Fuller, M.L.A..
The Hon. D. R. Hall, M.L.A.
The Hon. John Garland, K.C., M.L.C
The Hon. J. D. Fitzgerald, M.L.C.
The Hon. W. G. Ashford, MX. A.
The Hon. R. T. Ball, MX.A,
The Hon. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick, MX.A,
The Hon. W. C. Grahame, MX.A.
The Hon. G. S. Beeby, MX,A.
The Hon. A. G. F. James, MX.A.
The Hon. David Storey, MX.A.
The Hon. G. Black, M.L.C.
The Hon. W. Brooks, M.L.C.
The Hon. J. H. Cann.
The Hon. J. S. T. McGowen, M.L.C.
The Hon. R. D. Meagher, M.L.C.
The Hon. A. W. Meeks, M.L.C.
The Hon. J. Joynton Smith, M.L.C.
(Lord Mayor of Sydney).
The Hon. P. T. Taylor, M.L.C.
The Hon. F. E. Wall, M.D., MX.C.
The Hon. W.‘ Bennett, MX.A.
The Hon. J. J. Cohen, MX.A. (Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly).
The Hon. C. A. Lee, MX.A.
The Hon. C. W. Oakes, MX. A.
Mr. W. R. C. Bagnall, MX.A.
Mr. T. R. Bavin, MX. A.
Mr. G. S. Briner, MX. A.
Mr. A. Bruntnell, MX.A.
Mr. E. A. Buttenshaw, MX.A.
Mr. W. Cameron. MX. A.
Mr. A. A. C. Cocks, MX.A.
Mr. P. B. Colouhoun, M.L.A.
Mr. J. T. Crane, M.L.A.
Mr. B. J. Doe, M.L.A,
Mr. S. Hickey, M.L.A.
Mr. T. J. Hoskins, M.L.A.
Mr. J. C. Hunt, M.L.A.
Mr. T. Keegan, M.L.A.
Mr. W. F. Latimer, M.L.A.
Mr. T. J. Ley, M.L.A.
Mr. A. G. Manning, M.L.A.
Mr. G. W. R. McDonald, M.L.A.
Mr. P. McGarry, M.L.A.
Mr. H. D. Morton, M.L.A.
Lieut.-Colonel Nicholson, M.L.A.
Mr. F. J. Thomas, M.L.A.
Mr. W. Thompson, M.L.A.
Mr. R. B. Walker, M.L.A.
Mr. R. W. D. Weaver, M.L.A.
Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Armstrong.
Mr. A. Bakewell.
Mr. Walter Bentley.
Mr. H. S. C. Budge.
Mr. R. Clark.
Mr. F. H. Cooke.
Mr. T. B. Cooper.
Mr. E. Covell.
Capt. B. Gumming.
Mr. W. H. Forrest.
Mr. Russell French.
Mr. J. Garlick.
Mr. R. Greig.
Mr. A. Griffith.
Mr. E. B. Harkness.
Mr. E. F. H. Harpur.
Mr. C. H. Hay.
Mr. G. A. Heath.
Mr. A. H. Hemsley.
Mr. J. W. Holliman.
Mr. Wm. Holman, Senr.
Mr. J. B. Holme.
Mr. H. C. Hoyle.
Mr. F. W. Hughes.
Mr. Percy Hunter.
Mr. D. R. Jamieson.
Mr. F. W, J ones.
Mr. A. S. J ones.
Mr. W. Keep.
Mr. W. J. Kessell.
Mr. Kelso King.
Mr, F. Langdon.
Mr. W. G. Layton.
Mr. Chas. McDonald.
Mr. McKenzie.
Mr. McPherson.
Mr. H. H. Massie.
Mr. Neville Mayman.
Mr. H. F. Morris.
Mr. R. R. Moss.
Mr. Newman.
Mr. Archdale Parkhill
Mr. A. P. Pearson.
Mi. E. S. Phippard.
Mr. A. Rickard.
Mr. T. Routley.
Mr. D. G. Stead.
Mr. A. P. Stewart.
Mr. E. H. Stoney.
Mr. C. M. Terry.
Mr. F. C. G. Tremlett.
Mr. Wm. Vicars.
Mr. F. Walsh.
Mr. Hugh Ward,
Mr. C. E. Waters.
Mr. R. A. Warden.
Mr. J. L. Watkins.
Mr. C. A. White.
Mr. V. W. Williams.
Professor Wood.


