

COMPETENCE IN A COLONY
CONTRASTED WITH
POVERTY AT HOME:
OR
RELIEF TO LANDLORDS AND LABOURERS,
HELD OUT BY
AUSTRALIAN
Colouration and emigration.
A MEMORIAL
ADDRESSED TO THE
EIGHT HONOURABLE LORD JOHN RUSSELL,
ETC, ETC.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY RICHARDS, 100, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.
1848.


COLONIZATION AND EMIGRATION.
A MEETING, held in London in December last, on the subject of Colonization,
formed a Committee, comprising among others the following gentlemen :
The Lord Farnham ; the Lord Crofton; Lord John Chichester, M.P.; Hon. Capt. Maxwell, M.P; Hon.
John James Hewitt; Hon. Francis Scott, M.P.; Sir Robert A. Ferguson, Bart., M.P.; Sir William
Yerner, Bart., M.P.; Sir Edmund C. W. Macnaghten, Bart., M.P.; Sir A. B. Brooke, Bart., M.P.;
A. Shafto Adair, Esq., M.P.; Captain Bateson, M.P.; Col. Matheson, M.P.; Richard S. Bourke, Esq.,
M.P.; John Boyd, Esq., M.P.; George Duncan, Esq., M.P.; A. E. Lockhart, Esq., M.P.; John Young,
Esq.,M.P.; William Lockhart, Esq., M.P.; Benjamin Bond Cabbell, Esq., M.P.; William Forties, Esq.,
M.P.; J. W. Sutherland, Esq.; Mark Boyd, Esq.; Hananel De Castro, Esq.; Archibald Boyd, Esq.;
Captain Hamilton, R.N.; Jacob Montefiore, Esq.; Captain Trevelyan; D. Q. Henriques, Esq.;
E. Lennox Boyd, Esq.; Samuel Browning, Esq.; R. Montgomery Martin, Esq.
The Committee to be permanent, and with power to add to their number.
The following Resolutions were adopted :
I.—That this Meeting will do its utmost to urge on Her Majesty’s Government the propriety of giving
pecuniary assistance in aid of an Emigration to the Colonies upon a large scale, being deeply im-
pressed with the conviction, that the relief that would thus be afforded to the distress in Ireland and
Scotland, while it would secure a comfortable provision for the Emigrants themselves, could not fail
to lay the foundation of wealth and prosperity in an important part of Her Majesty’s dominions, the
benefit of which the Mother Country would ultimately reap.
3.—That Australia, from the salubrity of its climate, the demand for labour that now exists, and is likely to
increase, the abundance of food for the support of the labourer, and its other advantages, both social
and physical, offers, in the opinion of this Meeting, an admirable outlet for Emigration.
3.—'That the Meeting feel confident that the Colonies themselves will liberally contribute to any measure
of pecuniary aid which the Government of this country may sanction.
It was determined that a Deputation should wait upon Earl Grey; and that the accom-
panying Memorial should be laid before Lord John Russell.
HENRY WHITE, Secretary,
4, New Bank Buildings, London.
The vast amount of pauperism existing in this empire, and the
inadequacy of property or charity to arrest its yearly increase, are
circumstances so alarming, as to induce us to approach and lay
before your Lordship the following facts, in the hope that a Avell-
considered and comprehensive system of Colonization may speedily
be devised, more able to meet the appalling difficulties which sur-
round us, than any of the plans of Emigration hitherto adopted. In
submitting these facts, we believe that, by abstaining to put forward
any particular scheme as absolutely the best, we act in a manner at
the same time most respectful to your Lordship, and also best cal-
culated to effect the only object which we have in view, viz., the
prosperity and advancement of this country, and its dependencies.
In England, a million and a-half, or nearly one-tenth of the
population, receive parochial relief. In Ireland, nearly three mil-
lions, or more than one-third of the inhabitants, subsisted last sum-
mer on charity, by gratuitous relief, or by forced and profitless em-
ployment. In Scotland, pauperism is rapidly on the increase, and
the burden of maintaining the poor is augmenting in a still more
rapid proportion.


During the last ten years, the sums levied for the relief of the
poor in England and Wales, have amounted to no less than
66,000,000/, being an average of nearly (and last year amounting
altogether to) the yearly sum of 7,000,000/; and by the 9th and
10th Viet., cap. 101, the State advanced for the employment of
the labouring classes in England and Scotland, 2,000,000/. The
deficiency in a single crop, of a single description, in one year, in
Ireland and Scotland, has added to the burden in expenditure
for relief and improvement (Commons’ Paper, No. 13, 1847),
10,342,500/., and private subscriptions (including 200,000/. sub-
scribed on two occasions) are reckoned at 1,000,000/. The amount
levied for poor’s rates in Ireland (Commons’ paper, No. 144, sth
March 1847), 298,000/.; the poor rates in Scotland, 295,000/.; giv-
ing a total charge for the relief of the poor, in little more than one
year, of 20,935,500/.
Hence the public burdens are increased, property is encumbered,
and charity exhausted, in an endless and hopeless endeavour to
overtake pauperism, which increases in a still faster ratio. The
deteriorating effect which this state of habitual dependence upon
alms must have upon the moral character of so large a proportion
of the labouring classes, both in destroying the feeling of self-
reliance and in multiplying crime, is too obvious to require further
notice on our part.
The British population increases at the rate of nearly a thousand
souls a-day, or, assuming the pauperism at the rate afforded by
public returns, 180 paupers are added daily, making an increase
of 65,000 yearly to the mass of destitution in the United Kingdom.
During the fifteen months that the Relief Board was in operation,
12,900,000 qrs. of grain and flour were imported from abroad into
this country, of which 4,900,000 qrs. were consumed in Ireland,
principally for the maintenance of the destitute population. Nor
is the fact irrelevant to the question under consideration, that these
importations cost, in the short space of fifteen months, 33,500,000/.
If productive industry give a value to man’s labour, the profitable
employment of these masses, now subsisting on charity, or unre-
munerative works, ought to engage the most anxious attention of
all statesmen, and since many think it hopeless to restore the
balance between labour and employment at home, those employ-
ments elsewhere which are most reproductive are most to be
desired. On this view, our Colonies demand attention equally as
an outlet for surplus population, and as a vent for our manufactures.
Of our total exports, about one-third is taken by our own colo-
nies, and the remaining two-thirds are taken by the rest of the
world. Thus the world takes only double the amount taken by our
u 2


FOREIGN
STATES.
£ S.
d.
Prussia .
. 0
0
6 per head.
Russia .
. 0
0
8 —
France .
. 0
1
6 —
U. States
. 0
o
8 —
COLONIES.
£ S.
d.
Canada. . 1 15
0 per head.
W. Indies . 2 17
6 —
Cape G. H. 3 2
0 —
Australia . - f “7 + "
ein
own dependencies, and of this amount one-half are either goods
wholly unmanufactured, or merely re-exported, or such as go to
be used in foreign manufactures ; whereas the commerce to the
colonies is chiefly of manufactures completed, as is shown by the
declared value of the respective exports to our own colonies and
foreign countries. The population of the world (estimated at 860
millions) consumes yearly Is. 2 d. per head of British exports. The
proportionate consumption by foreign countries and British colo-
nies is estimated as follows, viz.:—
Estimating the relative values of colonial commerce to this coun-
try, Mr. Elliot (late Chief Commissioner for Emigration, and now
Under Secretary at the Colonial Office) stated, that “ with a popu-
lation of less than an eighth of the older North American popula-
tion, the Australian Colonies have a trade with this country which
exceeds the former value of the other by more than a million
sterling.” Australia consumes most largely of our produce, and
supplies, in return, the largest amount of raw material used in
our principal and oldest manufacture; it is now retarded in its
beneficial career, only by the want of that of which we have a
ruinous abundance, viz., labour. The import of Australian wool
has, in a few years, increased from a single bale of 250 lbs. to
the present supply of 21,000,000 lbs., and if labour be adequately
supplied, will attain in ten years hence 100,000,000 lbs.; the present
amount is one-third of the whole wools imported, and affords em-
ployment to far more than one-third of the operatives engaged in
the manufacture of imported wools; since the Australian wool being
of a quality different from the British, encourages rather than ex-
cludes the use of the latter, inasmuch as the British wool could
not be used so extensively were it not for its admixture with the
fine Australian. If therefore Australian wools deteriorate in
quality, or diminish in quantity, from the scarcity of labour, British
woollen manufactures must relatively decline, to the loss alike of
the grower and the artificer. But wool, though at nresent the
principal staple of those colonies, is not the only commodity which
we require, and which they can supply. There is an increasing
want of cotton, and growing fears of a precarious supply. We
abandoned our cotton fields in the East—the cotton fields in the
West are ours no longer, and may fail us in our need. Boundless
tracts in Australia arc adapted for the easy and rapid growth of


this necessary article, whilst the value of the ores, great already,
is speedily increasing, from the discovery of new mines, which
require only additional labour to bring them into active operation.
To commerce, therefore, this question is of much importance.
But our more immediate concern is with pressing hunger and
destitution; we refer to the condition of the poor. If they are
starving for want of food here, is there no British soil more blessed
with plenty? If the land, rent free, will not support the popula-
tion (and famished families and rentless ruined landlords prove its
truth in various parts of Scotland and Ireland), is every place in
the empire so overstocked? If remunerative employment cannot
be found for unskilled labour here, is it as unproductive in other
parts of the British dominions?
Ireland has 300 persons, England 260, to each
Australia has 12 square miles to each individual. Australia has
nearly the area of Europe, with the population of Wiltshire or
Northumberland. In this country the people press on the sources
of subsistence, in Australia the food presses upon the people. Ire-
land has 3,000,000 dependent on charity for subsistence; New
South Wales has subsistence for 3,000,000, with only 180,000
persons to consume it. There they are languishing to obtain that
which we are anxious to get rid of. Each groans under the burden,
while disputing the right to bear it; each prefers suffering from
the disease, to paying the fee for the cure. Here there are districts
where the land, rent free, would not afford a pound of meat a-week
to each starving inhabitant.
In the legislative assembly of New South Wales, in the month
of June last, it was stated, that this year, “ no less than 64,000,000
lbs. of meat would be wasted, sufficient to feed 1,100,000 of those
poor people who were starving in England and Ireland,” In New
South Wales the people are 180,000, the cattle 2,000,000, the
sheep 8,000,000, being about 13 head of oxen and 50 sheep for
each person. The superabundance of food is wasted for want of
mouths; the corn is shed for lack of reapers; the wool is injured
for want of shearers ; and consequently, all descriptions of produce
either perish, or are greatly depreciated both in quality and value.
Herds of cattle and flocks of sheep are “ boiled down” for tallow,
there, while thousands are famishing for want of food here, —there
the meat is wasted, —here men are wasting. Human skeletons
pine here for what fattened dogs reject there. The balance between
food and population is unequal at home, it is as unequal in New
South Wales, —but it is the other way. In like manner the scales
of labour and employment are uneven here; they are as uneven at
the antipodes, but in the opposite • direction: here labour is too


plentiful, there it is as much too scarce. We have tried and failed
to bring the food to the starving man, —therefore convey the starv-
ing man to his food, the labourer to his hire, and you may restore
the lost balance.
In Ireland, a scanty meal at 2 d. or 2 \d, per day, was doled out
to sustain life. In New South Wales, the unskilled labourer, full
fed with ample rations, supplied with a dwelling and garden, found
in tea, sugar, milk, and tobacco, disdains to work under 2 s. Qd. a
day besides. If destitution cause crime here, —affluence leads to
the same result there. Want here and abundance there; scarcity
and superfluity of labour—opposite extremes—end alike in vice,
indolence, insubordination, and social disorder. The common wages
at present given in that country are as follows:—Sheep-shearers,
Qd. per day; reapers, 10s.; whilst shepherds and ordinary la-
bourers receive from 25/. to 30/. per annum in money payments,
in addition to which they are housed, and receive the following
rations weekly, which in England would be worth as follows:
10 lbs. meat ... at sd. per lb. . . 4s. 2d.
10 lbs. flour . . . 2d.
lb. sugar . . . 4 d.
3 oz. tea .... 4 d.
Tobacco Is. o d.
Bs. A.d. per week.
or the annual value of nearly 22/.
Where there is a wife and family, they are provided for with
equal abundance, and in consequence of the low price of provisions,
the amount of wages of unskilled labour, and the additional emolu-
ments, command to a man and small family as large a quantity of
the necessaries of life in New South Wales, as could be got for 80/.
or nearly 100/. a-year in this country.
If the local advantages offered to emigrants to New South Wales
are so great, it is natural to suppose that, unless great and insur-
mountable difficulties are interposed, the largest stream of emi-
gration would be directed thither; but on the contrary, not five in
a thousand of those who emigrate, go to New South Wales. What
then is the cause of such an extraordinary fact?
First there is the physical difficulty arising from the length of
voyage—next there is the artificial difficulty of obtaining land
when the voyage is ended. The high price of land, and the vex-
atious regulations attending its sale, deter the emigrant who has
capital, enterprise, and forethought, from venturing to New South
Wales; the accounts of their friends who have returned, or the
letters from those who struggle on, alike warn him from encounter-
ing in Australia the insuperable barrier which Government has


placed in his way. The low fixed price of land in North America,
and the cheering accounts received from relations who have acquired
comfort or independence there, alike induce the emigrant to follow
them with his capital and industry. Where land is dear, settlers
and capital are repelled—where it is cheap they are attracted.
No committee of the legislature of New r South Wales has ever
touched on the price of land without complaining of the extrava-
gant amount exacted by Government, and petitions to Parliament
from every quarter of the Colony have repeatedly urged its reduction.
In America and Australia the demand for labour is great: in one
the land bears its natural, in the other an unnatural price; British
emigration is redundant to the one, is deficient to the other. The
wages of labour are highest in Australia; the possession of capital
is most attractive in America. So just is the remark of Mr. Arthur
Young, “ Give a man the secure possession of a bleak rock, and he
will turn it into a garden; give him a nine years’ lease of a garden,
and he will convert it into a desert.” The amount of land sales in
the United States during ten years has averaged more than one
million and a half sterling annually, whilst the raising the price of
land in Australia contrary to the expressed opinion of all the
governors and the colonies of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, from s s. to 1/. per acre, has almost annihilated the fund
derived from the sale of land.
Hence the United States, —our rivals in the arts of peace, as they
may become our enemies in time of war-—have for twenty years
absorbed in foreign soil that emigration and capital which would
have been, as will be shewn, thirty-fold as reproductive had it gone
to our own possessions. And some idea of the amount of capital
abstracted and amassed may be formed from the fact that between
the Ist January 1846, and the Ist January 1847, the sums remitted
to residents in Ireland, from friends emigrated to the United
States, amounted to 160,000/.
The Colonization Circular informs us that in twenty-two years
626,628 persons have gone to British North America, of whom more
than half who land in New Brunswick, and many think the same
proportion from Canada, or on the lowest calculation twenty-five
per cent.; i. e. 156,657 cross the frontier, and are to be added to
710,410, who have gone direct to the United States. Thus we are
to take the number who have gone to the States at 867,000, as
against 460,000, or, more properly, a million, as against 336,000
who remain in Canada; of 1,500,000 who in twenty-two years have
emigrated, 800,000 have settled in the United States, more than
fifty per cent, on the whole period; and of late years sixty-five per
cent, of our whole emigration, with a vast amount of British capital,


have settled in foreign North America. At present the regulations
of the United States place a limit on the emigrants thither, and
Canada, hitherto regarded as the only outlet for our population, is
already over-stocked, and indignant at the multitudes landed in
disease and destitution; while Australia is as clamorous for them.
That during ten years, eight committees of the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales have successively urged the necessity of in-
creased immigration. In nine months of the year 1847, 240,000
souls, —an amount equal to the entire population of the continent
of New Holland—have landed on the other side of the Atlantic;
while not 800 have gone to New South Wales.
If the 800,000 who in twenty-two years have gone to the
United States had settled in Australia, they would have consumed
(at 71. 10s. per head) of British produce 6,000,000/. They have
consumed on the average of the States 200,000/. The difference,
therefore, caused by those persons who have emigrated to foreign
powers, instead of colonizing British settlements, has been a loss to
British manufacturers of 5,800,000/.
In the United States, distant three thousand miles, the richest
and most productive land can immediately be bought at the fixed
price of a dollar per acre. In our own colonies, 16,000 miles
hence, the lowest price at which Government will put up to auction
the worst land is about five times that amount. We have chosen to
make land dear where land is plentiful, and money cheap where money
is scarce. This cause mainly reduced the fund from which emigra-
tion to Australia was to be paid, from 300,000/. in 1840 to a few
hundreds in 1844; and it will ever deter agricultural capitalists from
emigrating. The leases of grazing lands now granted in the colony
have repaired to some extent the deficiency of the land sales, by
supplying a fund from which the emigration of labourers may be
resuscitated to a very limited extent. Hence the first step to be
adopted for obtaining a sufficient fund for carrying out, in con-
junction with private or parochial subscriptions, a comprehensive
and effective system of colonization, appears to be the reduction
of the present high and prohibitory price of waste land to a price
which the capitalist can pay, and in sections of a less number of
acres than now sold. Foreign states induce British emigrants and
capital to locate abroad, while they cannot take root in our own
plantations; and the British settler, unable to settle advantageously
in British settlements, seeks in a foreign land those advantages, and
confers those benefits, which are virtually refused him in his own.
Hitherto the means available for emigration being derived solely
from colonial funds, have been so small, and so uncertain, that,
whether well or ill applied, they have been exhausted before num»






bers sufficient to afford any sensible relief have been removed, and
the usual objection raised against colonization as a means of relief,
is its inadequacy to relieve: emigration is also carried on by fits
and starts, alike regardless in point of time, and unequal in amount
to the wants of the colonies, or the necessities of the mother country.
The immediate payment of scarcely more than two years’ main-
tenance of the pauper, would defray his passage to a land where
he would permanently benefit, instead of burdening, those he leaves
behind. Still, with strange inconsistency, we continue to tax our-
selves in England, and more heavily in Ireland, to foster an increas-
ing pauperism.
If colonization be admitted as either a primary or auxiliary
mode of relief, the question is, whither the labourer can be sent.
To this the simple reply is, where he is most wanted, and where
the sending him will be most profitable to all parties:—to himself;
to the land he leaves; and the land he goes to. The distant voyage
is more expensive in the first instance; and therefore the lower
price may induce proprietors, seeking merely the clearance of their
estates, to select the shortest passage as the cheapest. But govern-
ment should have higher objects in view, and should encourage
that colonization which is most beneficial at all times to all parties;
and ultimately the most economical. The original colonies of
England (now a mighty empire) were social, were economical,
were religious communities. The present expatriation from Eng-
land is the reverse of all these:—it is dissocial, uneconomical, irre-
ligious, and only to be amended by a radical change. The accounts
which have lately been received from North America, from the
governor of Canada, and various other authorities, show, that the
emigration thither has been what is justly termed a “shovelling
out” of the poor, and a transfer of misery from one side of the
Atlantic to the other. How could it be otherwise, when 79,000,
within six weeks in last spring, or 13,100 a-week, 5,000 in one
half-week, or 3,000 in one day, sailed from one port under the
inspection of one agent? No wonder that Canada was flooded;
that typhus fever, dysentery, and death, accompanied this mis-
guided torrent; and that all the warnings and prophecies were
sadly verified by the fearful realities which ensued!
_ There is this practical distinction between emigration and colo-
nization:—Emigration is but a small portion of colonization ; the
former is shifting the scene of distress, the latter is the exchange
of misery for comfort. The former is the consequence of sending
labour where it is not required; the latter is attained by sending
it where it is most wanted. The numbers who have arrived in
Canada have been as greatly too many, as those in New South


Wales have been too few, for the requirements of the colony; and
hence those may be in error who have thought that distance ex-
cluded the Australian colonies from being a field for the relief of
British labourers who cannot find employment at home.
Various conflicting statements are put forth respecting the
relative expense of the voyage to Canada and to New South Wales;
and the subject is too important to be dismissed hastily. The
voyage across the Atlantic may be made for 5/. or 61.: but the
expense has not ended on the emigrant’s reaching the shore; so
that 8/. is the very lowest calculation, and 10/. nearer the actual
cost, of an emigrant to Canada before he obtains employment. The
government contract-price of passage to South Australia last year
was 12/. 7s. 7igd., to New South Wales 12/. 10s f ; and, although
it was recently stated at the Colonial Office that this was owing to
accidental circumstances, and was not likely to occur again, yet, at
this present moment, ships are chartered by the Emigration Com-
missioners to convey emigrants to Sydney and Port Phillip at a
price considerably lower, viz., 11/. 9s. 3d. and 10/. 10s. per head.
The outfit has been stated as a large addition to the passage-money;
but this latter expense is in almost all cases borne either by the
emigrant or the parish. Therefore the expense of sending colonists
to Australia, where they get immediate employment, is little more
than the cost attending their settlement in British North America.
If reproduction be any criterion of the value of industry, it is
the best economy to send the emigrant to New South Wales; inas-
much as he repays his passage-money more quickly, whether we
estimate his value in reproductive labour, in contribution to the
colonial revenue, or in the consumption of British manufactures.
If it be permitted to calculate the repayment in the consumption
of British goods; The colonist of New South Wales takes 11. 145. 3d.
per head of British exports, and fwice that amount is 15/. Bs. 6d.
The emigrant to New South Wales, therefore, takes an amount
more than equivalent to his passage money within two years. The
Canadian is calculated to take 11. 15s. per annum: this multiplied
by five amounts to SI. 15s. The Canadian therefore takes goods
equivalent to his passage in five years. The North American of
the United States takes but ss. per annum; and if the passage
money to New York be 5/., he cannot repay his passage under
twenty years. The United States emigrant therefore requires ten
times, and the Canadian nearly three times as long as the Australian,
to return in value of British goods the cost of transit. Moreover,
as a supporter of British industry, each settler in New South
Wales at 11. 145., contributes as much as four or five Canadians
(at 1/. 155.) or thirty North Americans at 55.; nor ought we to


forget that 25 per cent., or in some instances above 50 per cent,
of those who land in Canada pass to the United States.
One main object to be attained by colonization is an outlet for a
surplus population; another, is a vent for commerce; a third, and
not unimportant object, is the support of the colonial revenue.
In England the pauper is a burden averaging for each adult per
annum 5/.—ln New South Wales the same individual pays the
state in local taxes, per annum, 2/ Bs., making an annual difference
on this view alone, of per head 11. B s. Taking the population at
180,000, and the average annual revenue for five years at 436,000/.,
a loan for emigration, secured on the colonial land revenue of
New South Wales, and guaranteed by the imperial government, by
which alone it could be effected, would be repaid by the amount
of taxation of those emigrants themselves in nine or ten years.
The taxes paid by 100 emigrants, at 2/. 85. each, would be 240/.,
and in ten years would be 2400/. An advance for 100 emigrants
to New South Wales, even at 16/. per head, would require 1600/.,
which with ten years’ interest at 4 per cent., amounts to 2240/.:
thus they more than repay their passage in ten years by 160/.:
and if we take the price at which Government are now contracting
to send emigrants to Sydney, viz.—ll/. 9s. gnd 10/. 10s. per head,
the taxes would repay the fare in less than six years.
The importance of each individual in the value of the capital
he creates is not less remarkable; at home the average annual
burden of each adult pauper is 5/. The annual cost by which the
value may be estimated of each Australian shepherd, is at least 55/.:
thus each Australian labourer increases the reproductive capital
of the community, by 60/. per anpum, in comparison with his
former condition. Hence the speedy return of the outlay in every
profitable and practicable manner, overcomes the obstacle of dis-
tance ; and were the other existing obstacles removed, Australia,,
with its numerous resources in pastoral, agricultural, and mineral
wealth, would present the fairest field ever opened for colonization.
Canada has already received yearly as many as she could absorb*
and this year has been more than glutted: if Government attempted
to settle emigrants in Canada, it could not be done for less than
60/. for each family, or 17/. 6s. for each adult, according to the
estimate of Mr. Elliot, or according to the statement of the Emi-
gration Agent-general in Canada, Mr. Buchanan, to Lord Elgin.
And not under 24/. a piece in New Brunswick, according to the
evidence of Mr. Moxon, the deputy governor of the Land Com-
pany in that province, since they “ must be supported for a period
of from twelve to fifteen months after arrival.’’ In Australia the
emigrant would not be chargeable the day after he landed; and if


these authorities are admitted to be correct, it follows that the
expense of sending emigrants to Australia, is even less than to
North America.
It is not intended to propose any specific measure as the only
remedy for a great and increasing evil; we are contented with
offering weighty suggestions, which may indeed be opposed by
theoretical objections, but which severally possess practical advan-
tages calculated to overcome the theories advanced against them,
and any one of which would effect relief to a greater amount than
the plans now in operation.
It is not desired that the government should engage in specula-
tions, or embark in commercial enterprises ; but if the first duty
of the state be to take care of its own people, to provide for its own
safety, and to secure its own possessions,—the subject of coloniza-
tion must ere long be undertaken by the state as a question of
urgent political necessity, and contributions by parliament wfill
recommend themselves, not more on the grounds of public expe-
diency than financial economy.
The proposal that a grant of public money should be voted for
the purposes of colonization, is not an essential part of the pro-
position, but it is, nevertheless, one founded on justice, as well as
economy and sound policy. If the benefit be mutual, the burden
should be shared alike by the colony and mother country, and the
payment for an advantage should be proportioned to the relative
amount of the gain. The economy will appear from the two-fold
stimulus afforded to British commerce by exchanging the manu-
factured article for the raw staple thereof; the policy, from the
attachment of those subjects who are grateful for effectual aid
afforded in a period of distress.
Where funds arising from any of the colonies are applied by
her Majesty’s government in promoting the emigration of the
labouring classes, such sums should be increased by an amount,
raised in this country, equal, or bearing a certain proportion, to
the sums derived from colonial contributions.
If, however, the objections to such a course of proceeding be
deemed insuperable, it is then submitted, that her Majesty’s minis-
ters should bring forward a measure which would render a smaller
amount of colonial funds effectual for a larger amount of emigration,
and adopt a system which would at once encourage the co operation
of private efforts, and reinforce the means available from other
sources. Sums raised by parishes, by unions, by public or private
bodies, should be assisted according to the liberality of the sums
first raised. We are aware of the sum remitted from New South
Wales available for emigration, and that the recommendations


which have been issued from the Colonial Office may give a tem-
porary impulse to emigration; but we fear that the effect is only
momentary, and will increase rather than diminish the difficulties
hereafter.
In the Colonization Circular, the 10th article, relating to the
Disposal of Lands in the Australian Colonies, entitles the purchaser
at 11. per acre and upwards, within six months after payment, to
claim a free passage for a proportionate number of emigrants.
Each emigrant, under certain restrictions, is rated to the depositor
at the cost of 20/.; but as Government can contract for the passage
at 10/. 10s., the charge of nearly twice that sum to the depositor
can hardly be considered as a great encouragement to the increase
of the Emigration Fund, or to private enterprise.
Under the provisions of the Poor Law Amendment Act, during
eleven years ending January 1846, 11,235 persons have been aided
in emigration, at a total cost of 75,700/., averaging 1Q22 persons
and 6,880/. per annum, each individual costing the parish 6/. 14s. sd.
If a more economical and comprehensive system had been adopted,
which, instead of exporting the labourer to a foreign country where
he was not wanted, had sent Jiim to a colony where his services
would have been valuable, and had divided the expense, the cost
would have been smaller, and the advantage greater to all parties.
Under the proposed system, arrangements could be made with
poor families and great landed proprietors, whereby large numbers
of the able-bodied poor of both sexes might, at a moderate expense
to themselves, exchange a life worse than useless, for a scene of
active industry, profitable alike to themselves, to the country they
left, and to that of their adoption. Further encouragement might
be given by affording corresponding advantages and facilities to the
labouring emigrant who shall defray a portion of his own passage-
money.
Although generally the description of emigrants should be re-
stricted to that class which is most required by the colony, still
when the expense is divided, it is only fair that the contributors in
this country should have a voice in the selection ; and proper
restrictions and a careful supervision on the part of the govern-
ment, would insure a comprehensive and well-conducted system of
colonization, and without this it is to be feared that the necessities
of some of the colonies will induce them to follow the example
in some instances adopted, and introduce, in lieu of our own suf-
fering fellow-countrymen, savages and barbarians, to enjoy those
advantages in our colonies which are the natural birthright of
British subjects.
The objection that the effect of Government aiding private Emi


gration would be not to stimulate but discourage private enterprise,
is entitled to the less weight, since no project similar to that now
suggested has been undertaken or even attempted by Government;
and if the inaction of the Government tends to destitution and
disease at home, or the dispersion abroad, into foreign countries,
of British subjects, there is imposed an immediate obligation to
prevent these disasters either by the separate action of the Govern-
ment, or by acting in concert with, and in aid of other parties.
There is the duty to propose and provide for, and not merely to
dispose of and disperse the suffering masses. Other suggestions
might be offered, such as having an agent in every parish, instead
of the sixty or seventy agents, who are little known beyond the
towns in which they live, and often not even there. Every magis-
trate, every clergyman, every relieving officer, might be induced
to co-operate, if any practical system were shown whereby their
exertions would relieve the pauperism they observe daily increasing
around them.
The 555 Savings’ Banks might also be led to assist in this phil-
anthropic object; but there is no intention here of doing more than
drawing the attention of her Majesty’s Government to the subject,
with the view of showing that other systems might be devised
more equitable and more beneficial to all parties concerned, thov
the almost useless and hopeless practice at present followed.
The warmest acknowledgments are due to the Emigration Com-
missioners for their exertions and attention to emigrants; and while
we regret that a system of Colonization has not been adopted, or
that the stream of emigration has been diverted from a fertilizing
to an unprofitable channel, we cannot attach blame to those who
had no power to control.
The principle of Colonization is perfectly recognized.
The practice of Emigration is imperfectly applied.
It is not desired that your Lordship should consider this only
as a Colonial question. Your attention is called to it as one of
great importance to the whole empire. It is believed that the
present plan of maintaining the poor here in idleness, or conduct-
ing Emigration, can neither afford appreciable relief, nor insure
social order at home, or in the Colonies. An efficient system of
Colonization would augment the comfort of the people,—would
secure the tranquillity of the State,—would greatly add to com-
mercial prosperity,—would relieve manufacturing distress, —would
assist the Agricultural and Shipping interest, —would diminish the
Public Burdens and increase the Revenue, would cement the
affections of Colonists, and consolidate the distant portions of our
vast empire.


LETTERS FROM EMIGRANTS.
The following appeared in the Torquay Directory of the 16th February,
1848.
To the Editor of the Torquay Directory.
Sir, — At a time when our mechanics and labourers cannot find employ-
ment in their own country, when every newspaper informs them that they
are greatly wanted in Australia, and when placards, on every wall, announce
the willingness of government to give them a free passage thither, I have
thought the following letter, received on Friday last, from a native of Tor-
quay, who, about nine years since, went a free emigrant to Australia, may
be acceptable to many of your readers.
I am, Sir, your’s, &o. W. Pengelly.
“ Noariungua, near Adelaide , South Australia , July 18, 1847.
“ My dear Brother, —I have no doubt you have long been expecting
a letter from me, but you must excuse my neglect in mot writing before.
I am happy to tell you that myself and family are quite well, and in a fair
way of getting through life; thanks be to the Almighty who enabled me to
come to such a land of promise as* this, —a land capable of producing most
abundant crops of almost everything that has been tried in its soil, and
beneath its soil it abounds with minerals of almost every kind.
“ The change that has taken place in the colony, since my arrival, really
seems like a miracle; that year there were only four acres of wheat grown,
and now there is more than that quantity for every individual here, and all
this change in eight years. The emigrants that arrive now have something
different to look at to what they had then , instead of giving two shillings
for a two pound loaf, they get it now for threepence , and everything else
in proportion. I have made application for a section of 80 acres, which I
hope to get at the next land sale, which will take place in September.
Lands are all sold by auction now, the usual price being £l per acre, as
before ; this regulation has been made about three years (since the dis-
covery of minerals), it gives different parties an opportunity of getting it,
and it sometimes fetches a deal more than the pound per acre, when there
is a deal of competition for it. The section I have applied for is quite
adjacent to that on which I am now living, and if I am fortunate enough
to get it without competition, I shall have it for £*Bo Is. I have been
struggling, in an upright honest way, until I have a good stock to stock a
section with sheep, cattle, and farm utensils; and now I hope it will please
God that I shall have the land of my own to cultivate with my family,
which is getting very useful to me.
“ I grew from two to three hundred bushels of wheat last year, and
have the same land cropped this year; I sold my wheat for 4s. 6d. per
bushel, all except what I kept for my own consumption ; the labour was
done by myself and family, all except thrashing, which I had done by a
machine, at £l per 100 bushels, which is by far the cheapest plan, as I
have no barn to thrash it in.


“ Cattle-keeping is very little expense here; we have had a very good
lambing this season ; my flock amounts to nearly 500, which, if wool fetches
a good price this year, will bring me a good return.
“ I consider myself a deal better off than I should have been had I stop-
ped in England, and any steady, industrious man will find the same in this
colony, if he will emigrate; there is plenty of labour for every one, and at
every calling, if he likes to do it. We have ships arriving almost every
week; and the emigrants, mostly, get employed before they leave the ship.
Mechanics are getting from 6s. to Bs. per day, according to their calling;
and labourers are getting 4s. per day; farm labourers get from 12s. to 15s.
per week, with meat, drink, and lodgings, according to their abilities; and
everything is much cheaper here than in England,
“As the country gets cultivated we have a great deal more rain fall, and
it seems to get cooler every year; the rain does not fall nearly so heavily
in England, as in this country, in the rainy season, —the wettest months in
the year are July and August. We have a great many good and substantial
buildings erected in the colony, as fine as any standing in Torquay when I
left. I must now conclude my long letter to you, as I have filled my paper.
So no more at present from your affectionate brother, *
The following appeared in the Morning Chronicle of the 15th February,
1848 :
Canada and Australia.— “ We scarcely remember to have met with a
more striking contrast between the salubrity of Australia and the ungenial
character of Canada, than is exhibited in a letter recently received from
a Canadian emigrant, who left the island of Mull, about eighteen months
since, for the latter colony, in company with sixty other persons, only sixteen
of whom have survived the first Canadian winter, — the severity of the
climate, and their great privations, having proved fatal even to these hardy
Highlanders. The very opposite of all this is experienced in Australia,
There, sickness and disease are scarcely known, and food is actually wasted
from want of mouths to consume it. In fact, the labouring classes in that
healthful colony have never known want, in the European sense of the
term, —for not only food, but the means of procuring clothing, may be
obtained in abundance; and, from the delightful character of the climate,
a little shelter, and only slight clothing, are all that is required, —a great
inducement to those who are inclined to emigrate from their native country
in search of employment, which, in that colony, is superabundant.”
feICHARDS, PRI&THR, 100, ST. MARt'IS’S LANE.


