

The International Knowledge and Life Course
LESSON EIGHT
COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS
AND PHILOSOPHIES




COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS
AND PHILOSOPHIES


In the same Series:
THE SEARCH FOR HAPPINESS
EDUCATION AND MIND AND MEMORY TRAINING.
PSYCHOLOGY
THE BODY AND ITS CARE
SEX, MARRIAGE AND EUGENICS
OUR ANCESTRY
HISTORY
THE GREAT DESIGN
CITIZENSHIP
SALESMANSHIP AND SERVICE
SUCCESS


Internationa! Knowledge and Life Course
COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS
AND PHILOSOPHIES
PUBLISHED; SYDNEY


Set up, printed and hound
in Australia op
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-J9 Nickson Street, Sydney
19SS
Registered at the General
Post Office, Sydney, for
transmission through the
post as a hook
COPYIIOHT


INTRODUCTION TO RELIGION
Since we are students, let us frankly approach this
section upon the religions with genuine sincerity.
Let us read, study, and digest with open, analytical
minds —above all, with minds free from prejudice.
For prejudice is the hallmark of ignorance. The
history of human progress is the history of the life-
work of its great men. The search for truths makes
a study of their work essential.
Carlyle states: “Some speculators have a short
way of accounting for the Pagan religion: mere
quackery, priest-craft, and dupery, say they; no
sane man ever did believe it—merely contrived to
persuade other men, not worthy of the name of
sane, to believe it! It will be often our duty to
protest against this sort of hypothesis about men’s
doings and history; and I here, on the very thres-
hold, protest against it in reference to Paganism,
and all other ‘isms’ by which man has ever for a
length of time striven to walk in this world. They
have all had a truth in them, or men would not have
“Most of our so-called reasoning consists in finding argu-
ments for going on believing as we already do.”
J. H. ROBINSON.
5


taken them up. Quackery and dupery do abound;
in religions, above all in the more advanced decay-
ing stages of religions, they have fearfully abounded:
but quackery was never the originating influence in
such things; it was not the health and life of such
things, but their disease, the sure precursor of their
being about to die! Let us never forget this.”
You have already learned the danger of preju-
dices, that they act as mental blinkers, preventing
the entrance into your consciousness of the rich and
varied world of thought which surrounds you.
As you study the various religions, you will re-
cognize that prejudice was the greatest enemy of all
historical spiritual reforms, a senseless sabotage of
human progress.
Read without prejudice and bring the highest
moral and spiritual self-qualities to your study.
“Give” as well as “receive.” The connecting link
between your mind and the author’s or teacher’s
mind is the first principle of all study.
Anatole France, the great thinker, philosopher
and author, expressed this principle in the following
words: “A beautiful verse is like a violin bow drawn
across the resonant fibres of our soul. It is not his
own thoughts, but ours, that the poet sets singing
within us. It is only themselves they have put into
their verses—and it is only ourselves we find there.”
Before commencing your study of the religions,
frankly admit the existence of knowledge, philoso-
phies, high emotions and conceptions of which you
6


may be in total ignorance. Then say to yourself:
“Since I recognize and admit my ignorance of
supreme values, it follows that I am alive to my
desire for them.”
Your reasoning will then be perfectly logical.
You come alive only by your awareness of your
deficiencies, followed by a second awareness—that
of mind hunger. Decide to feed and nourish your
deepest and real self.
CRITICISM
Approach your studies with reasonable humility.
A little knowledge is a dangerous thing. Too many
people possess “scraps” of information culled from
unqualified accidental sources, and, being able to
talk and quote from memory, imagine that they are
authorities upon a wide range of subjects—a range
so wide, indeed, as to be utterly beyond the average
capacity.
Your right to criticize is determined by your pos-
session of a knowledge as profound and intricate
as the authors’. Therefore, do not look for faults,
but for thought values, filling up the gaps in your
own knowledge rather in a spirit of acceptance than
of critical opposition. The carping critic never
learns, for he resists the friendly offerings of all
other minds.
“The manner in which one single ray of light, one single
precious hint, will clarify and energize the whole mental
life of him who receives it, is among the most wonderful
and heavenly of intellectual phenomena.”
ARNOLD BENNETT.
7


The Indian philosopher, Harindranath Chalto-
padayah, has a beautifully and powerfully expressed
critical estimate of the carping critics:
A thread of Rhythm runs through man
And blossoms and brute, and the body of God,
But the critic, who oft is a lumpless clod,
Still comes with his little envious span,
A hollow phrase and a measuring rod.
If your studies are approached in a spirit of
broadminded eagerness to seek the truth, then you
will find bold truths hiding timidly in the most un-
expected places.
A profound philosopher once studied a number of
religions in turn, became a convert to each and
finally decided that all were in essence the same, a
means to a higher enlightenment.
This is not in any sense an adverse criticism of
religion, nor is it intended to deprive any one of
faith. The reverse is the case.
Many honest thinking people believe that religion
is merely a superstition which has brought much
misery to the world. They tell of the bitter wars
which have been waged in the name of the Cross
and the Crescent, the Inquisition, the return thrust
of the hunted when they in their turn became the
hunters, the persecution of reformers and scienti-
fic thinkers and the shameful exploitation of the
people.
This is not the work of religion but of some
hierarchy using religion as a cloak for lust of
8


power. Man has always and will always have with-
in him a religious impulse as ai part of his very
being. Most of the uplifting of mankind has been
inspired by that impulse, often even by dogmatic
religion. Education would have been impossible
without it and it has given countless millions of
people a happy contentment in life.
THE BASIS OF FAITH
The main basis of religious faith is intuition. Re-
ligious intuition is the “feeling” of the existence of
conditions or things for which there is no earthly
parallel, and which are consequently neither physic-
ally provable or unprovable.
This “feeling” or “extra-sense,” when allied to a
powerful “wish,” becomes greatly vivified, and gives
reality to the unreal. Intuition may yet become
scientifically accepted as the highest of mental attri-
butes. Science may be forced to ally its deductive
methods of research with the inductive intuitional
processes.
But whether consciousness is limited to actual
environment, or is possessed of a power capable of
piercing the physical veil, it is sufficiently evident
that religious intuition cannot be successfully denied
by a mere shrug.
It is an experience of even the most rabid free-
thinker or atheist that nothing material, even when
“Religion is the effective desire to keep in right relations
with the power manifesting itself in the Universe.”
WARDE FOWLER.
9


transmuted or translated into terms of love or art,
satisfies the mind. There remains the inescapable
cry of the spirit—a longing, a thirst and hunger
which, though unreasonable enough in the light of
pure logic, yet makes itself heard and felt beyond
denial. It is good, in the formative process of estab-
lishing your freely acting mentality, that you
should say: “I am a free-thinker,” for the very
word implies your freedom from piled-up tradition,
your willingness to use your brain. But it is well
to remember that your brain, however magnificently
developed and used, remains but the instrument of
your experience-senses.
Neither religion nor philosophy is a gloomy sub-
ject of study. Most great teachers and philosophers
are joyous men, and those of the past, too, allied a
strong earthly happiness to their serious-mindedness.
Truly great teachers are well-balanced, with
a strong sense of proportion. They are normally
happy, serene and contented because of their inner
knowledge. The vivid power of their faith enables
them to overcome all temptations to sadness, melan-
choly and despair. Creative genius possesses a
veritable torch of inextinguishable joy which sus-
tains itself and influences humanity. Every great
teacher has a faith in something greater than him-
self. This faith lies in the soul of every one who
looks for it.
There are many expressions of the religious im-
pulse in the world to-day. Each plays its part in
10


building a universal code of ethical conduct, based
on the establishment of the Kingdom of God on
earth. This implies the reign of goodness attained
by the eradication of those evils which obstruct
humanity in its forward spiritual climb.
Space will not permit more than a brief con-
sideration of the lessons drawn from the lives and
teachings of the four greatest religious teachers—•
Jesus, Buddha, Confucius, and Mohammed.
Whether you are a follower of one of these
religions, or of the more ancient faith of Jewish
idealism or of Theosophy, Spiritualism, Hinduism,
Bahaism, Unity, Rosicrucianism, or of any other
faith, the goal and ideals are essentially the same.
“The humble, meek, merciful, just, pious and devout souls
are everywhere of one religion; and when death has taken
off the mask they will know one another, though the divers
liveries they wear here make them strangers. They that
have one end, can hardly disagree when they meet.”
WILLIAM PENN.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


JESUS AND HIS TEACHING
There is to-day a widespread revival of interest in
Jesus of Nazareth. Renan says that Jesus “fixed
the starting-point of the future faith of humanity.”
Many are seeking to find the starting-point once
again. Evidence of this quest is supplied by the
number of the “lives” of Jesus that have been
written in recent years. At one time, a “Life of
Jesus” would have been considered the exclusive
right or privilege of the professional theologian,
or a writer whose mind was accommodated happily
within the prevailing orthodoxy. Renan broke from
that tradition, and began a succession that is still in-
creasing.
Jesus is acknowledged by all who have seriously
considered him as an outstanding illustration of
self-consistency. He spoke the truth—and lived it.
Life and mind accorded perfectly. So close was this
alliance that He was able to say, “I am the Truth,”
and the saying raises no resentment in men’s minds.
It is this clarity of character, free from inward con-
tradiction, that has again commanded the attention
of men whose vaunted self-sufficiency has been
12


ruddy shaken as life drives forward in a log, in
which we all move uncertainly.
For an understanding of Jesus we are driven
back to the Gospels. It is worth considering why
the record of this man was ever written at all. The
external circumstances of His life did not encour-
age the venture. He was a working provincial, a
carpenter in a conquered country. His name was
subject to disparaging insinuation; He clashed with
authority and convention and fought a losing battle;
He came in the end to a cross like any common
criminal.
But He left with His friends something that they
believed the world would not willingly let die, and
they set down a selection “of all that Jesus began
both to do and teach.” (Acts i, i.)
The four Gospels of the New Testament—those
of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John —remain our
authority for the life and teaching of Jesus. Their
purpose, however, is not to offer a biography in the
modem sense of the word, but to record an im-
pression, that others might know what manner of
man He was. The Gospels give us a portrait but
not a photograph. And by a similar intention they
do not attempt to present His teaching in any con-
cert of arrangement. They do not endeavour to
present the teaching of Jesus as a philosophy—a
“What a man believes may be ascertained not from his
creed, but from the assumption on wh ; ch he habitually acts.”
BERNARD SHAW.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


system of metaphysics, or a manual of ethics, or a
theory of economics. They give vivid flashlights of
a leader of men. awake, alert, and tingling to the
fingertips, believing that His life would be found
to be the Light of Men. Any understanding of His
teaching must therefore be preceded by some esti-
mate of The Man.
JESUS HIMSELF
The Gospels present the character of Jesus as one
whose spiritual confidence was limitless. He was
found in fashion as a man, but as a man who ktvcw
God, not by hearsay. Living in that intimacy he
attained a moral grandeur that provoked the ex-
clamations; “What manner of man is this?" (Malt,
viii, 27.) "Never man spake like this man!” (John
vii. 46.)
This grandeur is a living unity defying dissection.
Nevertheless some of the features of the character
of Jesus may he described. In The Everlasting
Man , G. K. Chesterton says: “I must try to
imagine what would happen to a man who did really-
read the story of Christ as the story of a man; and
even of a man of whom he had never heard before.''
If we read the story in that spirit and with that out-
look, we gain immediately the impression of a man
of extraordinary attainments. He possessed abun-
dant energy, leisureliness, friendliness, sanity,
humour, indignation, insight, pity, joyousness and
originality. And He rings true in every phase.
14


ENERGY
1. It is the figure of a man ever pressing for-
ward: ‘7 must be about my Father’s business.”
(Luke ii, 49.) “I must preach the Kingdom of God
to other cities also; for therefore am I sent.” (Luke
iv, 43.) He grew weary, but only after long jour-
neys on foot, attended by tremendous labours. He
showed boundless energy in travelling throughout
the country and in doing good deeds. There is
noticeable also the same urgency in His mind, often
volcanic. He thought rapidly and acted instantly.
Yet His energy was not the crashing kind. It was
without contradiction and enjoyed a certain leisure-
liness.
LEISURELINESS
2. He refused to be hurried. “There are twelve
hours in the day.” Purposeful, He had time to spare
—to pluck wild flowers by the way; to watch the
changing light on the hills as evening deepens into
night; to rest or to go fishing with His friends.
FRIENDLINESS
3. And in time His friends became a great multi-
“What we need as we embark on this quest of Christ is to
get a picture of Him clearly in our minds. Not a picture
which is that of the ecclesiastical and conventional stained
glass window. Not a picture thrown on the screen of the
mind by the language of creeds and confession of faith.
Not even the picture painted by the Gospel writers in a
setting 2000 years old. Rather, the glorious figure of the
Gospel picture in a modern setting.”
LESLIE WEATHERHEAD.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


tude. The friendliness of Jesus drew men and
women and little children from all walks of life.
The rich Joseph of Arimathea, Zachaeus the publi-
can, the quiet sisters of Bethany, and many of the
unnamed poor had a place and a home within His
cordial heart and understanding. He took little
children to His arms. He even befriended the
prostitute.
SANITY
4. Yet Jesus was never led astray by unbalanced
sentiment. His understanding of men and things
reflected a sanity of mind that was never thrown
back upon itself shocked and helpless. He knew
life; He knew what was in men. He accepted people
and things as He found them, though always hop-
ing to readjust their sense of values. His sanity
made Him sure in His attitudes.
HUMOUR
5. Besides this genial sanity, He was sustained
by a sense of humour. In recent years there has
appeared a portrait of the Laughing Christ, sug-
gesting that “the Man of sorrows, acquainted with
grief,” had a mind that often found relief in laugh-
ter. It has been said that Marcus Aurelius, “being
an adherent of the Stoic philosophy,” had a face
that never changed under the stress of emotion.
Jesus never adopted this pose of superiority to
human feelings. He saw the humorous side of
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


things, and showed it. Instead of preaching heavily
that ceremony in religion is a small concern and
the spirit is everything, Jesus drew an amusing pic-
ture of a man who is feverishly anxious to make
the outside of his cup bright and clean, but neglects
the inside, and drinks from his cup unwashed and
dirty. He drew a living picture of a Pharisee who
was always careful to strain his drink lest an insect
would choke him, but who could unconsciously swal-
low a camel! (Matt, xxiii, 24.)
The humour of Jesus passed quite easily into play-
ful irony and often to indignation.
INDIGNATION
6. Indignation is anger caused by injustice or a con-
temptuous reaction to what is mean and base. There
were occasions when “He looked in anger.” (Mark
iii, 5.) Cruelty and the cunning that contrives a lie
always brought this fire to His eyes. Inhumanity
and pretence —especially in the name of religion—
He could never tolerate. Young people who
neglected the old folk, excusing themselves by the
payment of tithes, men who made a widow’s life to
wither by their extortion and devouring, never met
“gentle Jesus meek and mild.” “Upon them, the
whole generation of reptiles, fell the terrible wrath
of the Lamb.” (Matt, xxiii.)
“A daw’s not reckoned as a religious bird because it keeps
a-cawing from a steeple.”
THOMAS HOOD.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Jesus’s righteous indignation was shown in the
Temple which had become a source of profit for
the priests by graft. Jesus realized the mockery
of religious worship based on pecuniary gain, and
gave full rein to his emotions. He strode through
the Temple, overturning the tables of the money-
changers, and rebuked them: “My father’s house
shall be called a house of prayer, but you have made
it a den of thieves.”
INSIGHT
7. His insight penetrated the dark corners in the
hearts of men and the intricacies of life’s problems,
and He was often amazed that men were blind to
the signs of the times. While other men argued,
His mind had arrived ; while they were still seek-
ing, He saw. After a few words with a woman at
a wayside well, He knew the manner of her life.
(John iv, 17.) His disciples returned from an enter-
prise and reported success, and Jesus foresaw the
overthrow of evil. (Luke x, 18.) He brushed
past the accidental to deal with the essential. Is
this food clean? God gave it. How many times
must I forgive? Forgiveness is not an act; it is
an attitude; “Have a forgiving heart.” (Matt, xviii,
21.)
PITY
8. His pity was His strength to spare, “a pro-
digality of sympathy.” Jesus never grew away from
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


human need, it was the compelling power of a life
sensitively exposed to the suffering and sadness of
men. The Gospels teem with the records of His
healing. He held himself debtor to all who needed
help. To the appeal of the leper and the blind and
the lame, His characteristic word was, “I will.”
(Matt, viii, 2.)
HIS JOYOUSNESS
9. For Him “life’s morning radiance never left
the hills.” And something akin to that light rested
on the forehead of Jesus Himself. All large natures
feel sorrow and joy profoundly—and while Jesus
was often straitened, His joy was abiding and His
joyousness abundant. His universe was friendly,
and so He took the good of every day, expecting
more to-morrow. (Matt, vi, 31-32.) Yet He accepted
the good things of life as the gifts of God that are
always more than any man can earn. His gladness
was the overflowing gladness of the man who always
has something to praise and someone to thank.
(Mark vi, 44.) There was ever a bright bearing
about the goodness of Jesus, He was radiant and
refreshed people with whom He came in contact.
He spent much time simply seeking to make them
happy, and His own joyousness was the method of
His seeking. He was often found at feasts, and
“Who worships God shall find him. Humble love, and not
proud reason, keeps the door of heaven. Love finds ad-
mission where proud science fails.”
YOUNG.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


attended more than one party given by a publican
(tax farmer). (Mark ii, 15.) He entered into the
spirit of conviviality at a wedding feast in Cana of
Galilee. (John ii, i-io. ) Indeed the miracle recorded
is a parable; Jesus was continually turning the water
into wine, making glad the hearts of men.
ORIGINALITY
10. The character of Jesus is so closely knit and
compact with power that it gives the impression of
amazing originality. Every word and every act,
every judgment and every expectation is full of
light. To ask how Jesus came by His knowledge of
God is like asking how any man comes to a know-
ledge of himself. To these ultimate problems no
explanation has ever been offered. The knowledge
of God was in Jesus an aspect of his own self-
consciousness.
HIS TEACHINGS—GOD
r. The original distinction of Jesus as a teacher is
His conception and communication of God. Jesus
did not argue about God, just as a man does not
argue about the reality of life while living. Jesus
said to know God is life, and He talked about God
quite naturally in the old simple way. He never
attempted to define God, but led men to believe that
they could discover Him at any time and in any
place. No special contrivances were needed to en-
sure contact —-no priests, no temple, nor any ritual
to induce the right logical outlook. God is not the
20


high and inaccessible “Absolute” of philosophy, nor
the distant and receding “First Cause” of science,
nor just the exact “Architect of the Universe.” God
is a spirit, kindly and near, and He may be known.
“The pure in heart see God.” (Matt, v, 8.)
Speak to Him thou, for He hears, and Spirit with Spirit
can meet,
Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and
feet.
MAN
2. Every man has an inheritance—a patrimony;
he is a son; he belongs. Every man has fellows and
a portion with them. They share the same open
house, for God is Father of all. Unless we can think
of God in this way the ethical teaching of Jesus
must remain for us the rule of an impossible life.
It has point and practicability only for men who
recognize each other in the light of a Father’s com-
mon concern. It will be found by experience that
this teaching is something stricter than the sugary
philosophy of a good-natured universe. Facts often
bludgeon us and are brutal, and law is relentless.
But Jesus held that if men will carry forward in
the love of God, by patience, and by honesty of life,
they will grow in confidence and be assured. Man
must take himself in hand. He must cultivate the
gift of self-rule. Socrates taught that the highest
virtue was “Know Thyself.” Jesus went further
“Man is born free and everywhere he is in fetters.”
ROUSSEAU.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


and taught that the end of self-knowledge is to
secure self-control.
Man himself is a world within a world; his self-
consciousness involves conflict—in which instinct,
impulse and thought and will contend for mas-
tery. The unrestrained issue of this lawless welter
is evil. Jesus went straight to the seat of it:
“From within, out of the heart of man, proceed evil
thoughts.” (Mark vii, 20.) From this heart proceed
the pride and all the pettiness of a man whose
cosmos is all ego. From this heart proceed also sen-
sual and sexual excesses. Altogether it is an ugly
brood — “evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, mur-
ders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceits, lasci-
viousness, blasphemy, greed, pride, folly,” but the
way of control is clear.
“My son, give me thine heart,” was the ancient
requirement, and Jesus taught that the disposition
and allegiance of the heart was the bridle rein of
life. Against the immediate gratification of impulse
or desire He appealed to the highest satisfaction of
the reasonable soul at the close of a long probation.
He saw man enslaved to desire, and man’s freedom
in his obedience to the law of his own soul.
A man’s desires make his personality. If his
desires are too numerous to harness and control,
his personality is divided, split into unco-ordinated
fragments. A personality divided against itself, a
plaything alternately of the instincts and the mind, is
a personality devoid of peace. According to Jesus,
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


the true life is attained only in the complete unity
of one’s personality, in the heart and mind filled
with peace.
The temper of the life of Christ is humility—the
characteristic Christian virtue. Humility however is
not self-depreciation; it is the spirit of the man who
has himself well in hand, and who understands his
own nature and place in the universe of God.
This inward peace is threatened by many hostile
powers. These, according to the naive psychological
picture-images of that age, which Jesus accepted,
were evil spirits. They sought a prey and a home
in the heart of man. In the inevitable conflict with
these powers of darkness man may strive and
struggle, waste and burn, but he is not left to wrestle
alone. There is something equally intangible but
supremely powerful—a Holy Spirit—making for
righteousness—and this Spirit is the errorless advo-
cate for man’s soul. So to humility the balanced
heart adds hope.
But while man’s conquest of himself must always
be an individual affair, it is not possible in isolation.
Indeed isolation and introspection may easily bind
on him the very faults he would correct, and breed
within him the distempers that make for bodily dis-
ease and spiritual death. The way of Jesus is strict
but not ascetic. (He came eating and drinking.)
“In a word, neither death, nor exile, nor pain, nor anything
of this kind is the real cause of our doing or not doing any
action, but our inward opinions and principles.”
EPICTETUS.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


There is nothing about Him that commends the
pillar of the stylite, or the cave of the anchorite, or
the cell of the recluse. The soul-free man has com-
munity and is social. His soul is forged and edged
in fellowship, in the market-place, in the arena of
games, in the circle where mind meets mind, and so
is quickened and cleansed. To the injunction “Deny
thyself,” therefore is added “Love one another.” In
this love that Jesus enjoins the sensibilities are
cleansed by service. Jesus insists that this love opens
the true way of life. The world that Jesus knew,
like the world of all of us to-day, counted injustice
and tyranny, class hatred and economic stalemate,
its major problems. By them men are teased and
tortured. The temptation to hit back is tremendous.
“Resist not evil,” says Jesus. “But whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also.” (Matt, v, 39.) There is more here than pas-
sive resistance. There is positive forgiveness. There
is implied the view that the final meaning of life is
to be found in personality, which alone is worthy
to be served. The word personality is derived from
the persona or mask worn by actors in the Greek and
Roman drama. This showed his character or what
he considered it was. On his rotulus or little roll
was inscribed his part in the play—his role. The
ideal personality is therefore one in which both
character and role are in harmony. This is
the only combination which can produce right
conduct and satisfaction in life. Revenge de-
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


predates one’s own personality without really
neutralizing the wrong practice of the other,
and at the same time it widens and aggravates the
breach so that the social bond is completely broken.
Revenge is ultimate suicide. By forgiveness of per-
sonal injury, Jesus said, the man who is wronged
increases his spiritual stature, makes appeal to the
better nature of the wrong-doer by which amend-
ment may come, and keeps open the door of recon-
ciliation. Nor can this forgiving spirit of love —the
spirit of the man who has learned to deny
himself—ever be compatible with the lust for
power from which all tyranny springs. Seek not
status, but service. “Ye know that the princes
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them and
they that are great exercise authority upon them.
But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will
be great among you, let him be your minister; and
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your
servant: even as the son of man came not to be
ministered unto, hut to minister.” (Matt, xx, 25.)
This principle of love is the mainspring of life.
It may declare itself variously, healing the sick,
relieving distress of body, combating ignorance and
error, ranging itself against injustice, protesting
against war, seeking freedom of thought and con-
science for every man.
“Humility and love, whatever obscurities may involve re-
ligious tenets, constitute the essence of true religion. The
humble is formed to adore; the loving to associate with
eternal love.”
JOHANN K. LAVATER.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Most of these wrongs, however, are perpetrated in
the world by men who are fierce with the greed of
material things—“possessions.” Personality demands
property and requires it for life and expression.
Though man cannot live by bread alone, he must have
bread to live—and raiment too —and shelter. But a
sufficiency is sufficient. Beyond the safe margin is a
danger-zone. Possessions may possess the man.
“Life is more than meat, and the body than
raiment.” (Matt, vi, 25.) Jesus never warned
men against poverty, but he often warned men
against wealth. “It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter the Kingdom of God” (Matt, xix, 24) and
“What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul.” (Mark viii, 36.)
Beware of covetousness. The covetous man be-
comes blind, and forgetting God, he forgets hu-
manity.
THE SOCIAL ORDER
It has often been stated as a specific weakness in
Jesus’s plans for mankind that he advocated no
reforms in the social system.
Jesus was not concerned with laws, He dealt in
principles—applicable for all time. Like Confucius
He believed that any social order will be satisfactory
if administered by righteous well-balanced men. But
the best social system can never be just if its human
administrative element is corrupt. “Get your hearts
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


right and your motives clean and the social system
will work out well.”
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
All the teaching of Jesus has coherence, for it is
the multiple issue of one commanding conception
that informed His mind and life—the conception of
the Kingdom of God. “Jesus came preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom of God.” (Mark i, 14.)
The first mission of His disciples was for the same
purpose — “He sent them to preach the Kingdom of
God.” (Luke ix, 2.) He was often found answering
His own question, “Whereunto shall I liken the
Kingdom of Godf” The Kingdom of God is the
rule of God, and the rule of God is love operative.
“T 0 men who live by the rule of the goodwill of
God, the Kingdom has come. It is possible to every
man, and is always at hand.” (Mark i, 15.) This
is in fact true “personality,” the acquiring of an
individual unity with the infinite. It is fulfilled in the
fellowship of mankind; it is born in the under-
standing and the goodwill of men who have found
their kinship in God. Seeing this Kingdom and
serving it is the noblest life possible for any man.
Any alternative leads into “far country.” The end
of the Kingdom no man knows, but the entrance
is ever present, the now which men blindly pass be-
“Men are tattooed with their special beliefs like so many
South Sea Islanders; but a real human heart with divine
love in it beats with the same glow under all the patterns
of all earth’s thousand tribes.”
O. W. HOLMES.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


cause of their ignorance and selfishness. But men
who esteem only the things that are true, beauti-
ful and good, and seek their increase, such men
have accepted the broad valuations of Jesus, and
have already entered their Kingdom of Heaven.
In this humanizing enterprise the virtues of Jesus
—self-control, humility, tenderness of heart, self-
denial, love —spread themselves with positive power.
They are not the negation of life but its fulfilment.
They do not take the colour out of experience; they
enrich it. This true life, of course, makes great
demands. There is agony at the strait gate, and the
narrow way to the Kingdom never runs downhill.
It is clearly no life for the soft and sensuous. It is
possible only to men who will treat themselves as
athletes, who toe the line and travel light. It calls
forth the highest courage and demands the sternest
manhood. It was inevitable that wherever Jesus
went He raised the dust. He did not strive nor
clamour, but His quiet words carried an overturning
power. These words still run through the highways
of men, sounding the call of His Kingdom, renew-
ing from day to day the commandments that can
never be concluded—
“ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart;
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself!’
(Mark xii, 30.)
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


SOME LESSONS FROM THE GOSPELS
The foregoing pages provide a brief yet intimate
presentation of the teaching of Jesus. But for the
student there is a second method of approach, one
which is necessary to a complete grasp and under-
standing of the wide range of such teachings.
This second method demands a strictly analytical
reading of the New Testament. Read slowly, digest-
ing each word, and write in your own words and
style their application to your personal thoughts and
conduct. Think deeply, truthfully, and fearlessly,
and meditate upon the living principles enunciated
by Jesus.
By this means you will become revealed to your
true self. You will attain a new set of living values,
which will provide you with peace and strength
from day to day.
In reading and studying the New Testament you
must remember that literary expression varies
through the ages. By transcribing the sayings of
Jesus into your own phraseology you will succeed in
giving them a new present-day vitality.
Since our modes of expression have changed
during the centuries you may find that a more
modern translation of the Bible, such as that by
Dr James Moffat, is more fitted to your needs. This
“Brothers, love is a great teacher but we must learn how
to acquire it, for it is got with difficulty. We buy it dearly,
slowly, and with much labour. Every one can love
occasionally—even the wicked can do that; but we must
love not for a moment but for ever.”
DOSTOEVSKY.
29


translation has been used in the following pages.
Those who are conversant with the authorized or
revised version of the Bible are advised to read it
in the Text.
The following examples are taken at random.
You will find others perhaps more applicable to
your personal needs.
“Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and
where thieves break through and steal.
“But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven,
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through and steal.
“For where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.” (Matt, vi, 19-21.)
When man refuses to be a victim of material
desires and self-interest, he will possess an im-
perishable joy.
Jesus taught that the highest plane of happiness,
however hidden from the unseeking, is available
to you if you search rightly. He realized that the
supreme joy, the supreme happiness, “the King-
dom of Heaven,’’ comes not from externals and
riches, but from an inner state of service and non-
attachment to material things.
Contentment with simplicity provides time and
opportunity for inner development.
If your treasure is material riches, your heart
(feelings, sympathies, moralities) will be chained to
such things.
30


“The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto treasure
hid in a field; the which when a man hath found,
he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all
that he hath, and buyeth that field.” (Matt, xiii, 44.)
Treasure buried in a field is hard to find. It de-
mands long and courageous search, self-denial,
suffering. The treasure of the mind and spirit
demands the highest qualities for its discovery.
When found, you must repudiate all unessential
material values, and make the treasure your own.
“Judge not, that you may not he judged your-
selves, for as you judge so you will be judged.”
The measure you deal out to others will be dealt
out to yourselves.
“Why do you note the splinter in your brother’s
eye and fail to see the plank in your own eye?”
(Matt, vii, 1-2.)
Man’s thoughts concerning other men should be
constructive and charitable. Before you think of
judging others make sure that your own conduct is
beyond reproach.
“The eye is the lamp of the body,
So if your eye is generous,
The whole of your body will be illumined.
But if your eye is selfish,
The whole of your body will be darkened.”
(Matt, vi, 22-23.)
“To give a man full knowledge of a true morality, I would
send him to no other book than the New Testament.”
J. LOCKE.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Modern psychology acknowledges the above as a
supreme truth. If you will your thought into gener-
ous channels, your eyes will reveal your entire being
as harmonious. If you cloud your eyes with hates
or selfishness, your entire being will be revealed
as discordant. The thoughts behind the eyes, either
illumining or darkening these lamps of the body,
determine your well being or ill being. You can-
not frown, pretending anger, without a momentary
contraction of the blood vessels of the whole sys-
tem. In real anger, the frown or scowl indicates
an actual mental and physical state of destructive
emotion.
“Do not trouble about what you are to eat or
drink in life,
Nor about what you are to put on your body,
Surely life means more than food,
Surely the body means more than clothes.”
(Matt, vi, 31-32.)
By the above Jesus had no intention of preaching
an extreme asceticism. But He did preach against
indulgence of appetites and vanity. He knew that
man’s days were wasted upon false appetites—that
one appetite begets another—that the body requires
the simplest of natural foods, and the simplest of
clothing. He considered hours spent in stuffing the
body with rich viands and drinks and hours spent
before mirrors to be a sheer waste of life, destruc-
tive of the real joys which come through meditation
32


and contemplation, peace of mind, good fellowship,
selected knowledge, a practised virtue, and the spirit
of love.
“So do not he troubled about to-morrow.
To-morrow will take care of itself.
The day’s own trouble is quite enough for to-day.”
(Matt, vi, 34.)
Jesus wisely urges man to value the moment. To
use the moment as if it were eternity. It is the
great wisdom 1 ,
“Ask, and the gift will he yours,
Seek and you will find,
Knock and the door will be open to you,”
(Matt, vii, 7.)
A psychological truth. Until you ask you have
no desire. Unless you ask you cannot claim. Un-
less you seek that which you desire (attract by
thought and action) you will not find. You must
knock loudly and courageously upon the door of
your wants. Almost any objective can be attained
by constant and properly directed efforts.
“Beware of false prophets; they come to you
with the garb of sheep but at heart they are raven-
ing wolves. You will know them by their fruit;
do men gather grapes from thorns or figs from
thistles? No, every good tree hears sound fruit;
“We are ail members one of another.”
ST PAUL.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


every corrupt tree hears rotten fruit. A good tree
cannot bear rotten fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bear sound fruit. Therefore by their fruits you
shall know them. Not every one who saith unto me
‘Lord, Lord ’ shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father
which is in Heaven.” (Matt, vii, 15-21.)
Jesus teaches you to have no illusions about life.
He knew men and their sophistries. He knew liv-
ing service from lip service, conversions born of
fear, and the persuasive smiles and fair words which
often cloak evil intentions. Jesus demanded a real-
istic proof of goodness.
“Then Jesus went into the Temple of God and
drove out all who were buying and selling inside the
Temple; He upset the tables of the money changers
and the stalls of those who sold doves.”
How significant of to-day! It is not difficult to
realize that Christ was rebuking the “money” col-
lectors, not only of business, but of the established
Churches. Money then, as now, was the main ob-
ject of veneration, and Christ the reformer pointed
an accusing finger at all money-grubbers, even
though they were practising their greed in the
holiest of temples.
“We piped to you and you would not dance. We
lamented and you would not beat your breasts!
For John has come neither eating nor drinking,
and men say : ‘He has a devil.’
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


The Son of Man has come eating and drinking,
and men say: ‘Here is a glutton and a drunkard, a
friend of tax gatherers and sinners.’ ”
(Matt, xi, 17-19.)
The purest of motives and actions are often de-
liberately misconstrued by carping critics. Misun-
derstanding is inevitable, no matter what you do.
Since public opinion is based upon ignorance and
petty thinking, you must act according to your
ideals. Public opinion matters little if you are true
to your principles.
“It is not what enters a man’s lips that defiles
him, what defiles a man is what comes out of his
month. For out of the heart come evil designs,
murder, adultery, sexual vice, stealing, false wit-
ness and slander.”
You may eat with unwashed hands, absorbing a
certain amount of earthy dust and grime. But that
does not really defile you. A man may eat with
unwashed hands and yet be pure of heart. But if
from your mouth come obscenities, lies, guile, abuse
and scandal, then you are defiled, because these
evils, and those referred to by Jesus, come from an
evil heart.
“When you give alms, make no flourish of trum-
pets like the hypocrites in the Synagogue and the
“Happy the man who has learned the causes of things, and
has put under his feet all fears, and inexorable fate, and
the noisy strife of the hell of greed.”
FRANCIS BACON.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


streets so as to win applause from men; when you
give alms, do not let your left hand know what
your right hand is doing; keep your alms a secret.”
(Matt, vi, 2.)
Few passages contain more wisdom than the
above. It is an old and very true adage that to give
money is to make an enemy, the reason being that
the borrower, unable to repay, is placed in an in-
vidious position for all time. The wise man binds
the debtor to secrecy, and tells the debtor that he
expects no return except that he pass on the kind-
ness to some other unfortunate person. By this
means the chain of goodwill and good feeling may
be passed on in ever widening circles, and may en-
circle the globe. Jesus does not advocate indiscrim-
inate giving. Give wisely. Money giving is often
destructive of the receiver’s character. It may
weaken his independence. Undermine his self help-
fulness. Good advice, a kind word, a clear vision,
may be needed more than money. If money be
given, add to the gift. Give also the friendly, help-
ful word.
No one should give fanatically. Charity begins
at home. See that your own dependants do not
suffer by your charity. This is a most important
truth, ignorance of which has been responsible for
much misunderstanding. Although Jesus lived a
life almost devoid of every possession, He advocated
material poverty only for His disciples and those
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


who had reached a high degree of spiritual develop-
ment. He did not mean that every one should carry
out these instructions to the letter. His sense of
balance and proportion made Him realize that it
would be impractical for every one to give away
all possessions. This would merely result in chaos
and disorder. He knew that until people were suffi-
ciently developed (educated) to appreciate frugality
and simplicity of material living, it was sheer waste
of time and energy asking them to subscribe to the
principle of comparative poverty in material things.
“Do not look gloomy like the hypocrites, for they
look woebegone to let men see they are fasting
(Matt, vi, 16.)
Jesus possessed a contempt for all self pity or
outward show, and an unbounded admiration for
the strong man’s creed, “I must not wear my heart
upon my sleeve. I will face disaster with a smile.”
“No one can serve two masters; either he will
hate one and love the other, or else he will stand
by one and despise the other.” (Matt, vi, 24.)
To-day we are realizing the psychological truth
of these words. A true moral efficiency can be
achieved in any pursuit only by laying down an
honest goal and wisely subordinating everything
to its achievement. The scattering of nervous
“Souls are made sweet not by taking the acid fluids out,
but by putting something in—a great love, a new spirit,
the Spirit of Christ.”
HENRY DRUMMOND.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


energy along by-paths is wasteful and defeats the
main objective. The ranks of life’s failures are
kept full by neglect of these teachings. Jesus does
not use psychological terms, but he gives us the
perfect motto: “No man can serve two masters.”
“Well then, whatever you would like men to do
to you, do just the same to them.” (Matt, vii, 12.)
Life presents a multitude of problems requiring
various solutions. In mental conflict you may ask:
“What shall I do?” In the above words Jesus gives
an invariable answer applicable to every query. An
answer that unlocks the door to the secrets of toler-
ance, charity, manliness, wisdom, tact and indeed
every virtue. What can you do, how can you act,
under any circumstances other than by this standard
of virtue?
“No one sews a piece of undressed cloth on an
old coat, for the patch breaks away from it, and
the tear is made worse.” (Matt, ix, 16.)
A little meditation will reveal a dozen illustrations
of this truth. If we wish to patch our personalities,
to mend old ways, to form new habits, the renova-
tions must blend with the old formations. We must
study the original fabric and refrain from using in-
discriminately any new unrelated ideas. The old
and new must blend. Haphazard methods are useless.
“And Jesus sat down opposite the treasury and
watched the people putting their money into the
38


treasury. A number of the rich were putting in
large sums, but a poor widow came up and put in
two little coins amounting to a halfpenny. And
He called His disciples and said to them, ‘I tell you
truly, this poor widow has put in more than all who
have put their money into the treasury; for they
have all put in a contribution out of their surplus,
but she has given out of her neediness all she pos-
sessed, her whole living.’” (Mark xii, 41-42.)
It is literally true that a paper boy in tune with his
surroundings may have more influence for good on
humanity than a millionaire out of tune with them.
The very fact that a good life is being lived radiates
a good influence in ever widening circles. No man
should lose heart because of his poverty or obscurity,
since these very qualities may in themselves be for-
mative in their effect.
“Give Caesar what belongs to Caesar,
Give God what belongs to God.”
(Mark xii, 13.)
By this apt answer to His suspicious questioners
Jesus taught that each of us must conform to the
laws of the land as well as render homage to God.
“Is a lamp brought to be placed under a bowl or
a bed?
Is it not to be placed upon the standf
“One Universe made up of all that is ; and one God in it all,
and one principle of Being, and one Law, the Reason,
shared by all thinking creatures, and one Truth.”
MARCUS AURELIUS.
39


Nothing is hidden except to be disclosed,
Nothing concealed except to he revealed.”
(Mark iv, 21.)
It is notorious that many of us will freely discuss
almost every topic with the exception of religion.
Bashfulness, modesty, fear of ridicule, combine to
make us dumb. Religion is life, the energy of life,
the dynamic of life lived joyously and victoriously
by faith in One who is both willing and able to help
us. Paul said what he had proved, “I can overcome
all things through Him who strengtheneth me.”
True religion is so helpful that you should rejoice in
it, and pass it on to your fellows.
You must not misunderstand the meaning of the
word “spiritual” in connexion with the teachings of
Jesus. Every word he uttered had a definitely
practical significance; every word was a challenge to
men to think ami act virtuously, to become spiritually
creative through love, kindness, unselfishness and
inner beauty. He taught that the kingdom of good
is a kingdom of these spiritual virtues, as the king-
dom of evil is of their primitive opposites. The
mission of Jesus was primarily devoted to the
human evolutionary climb from beast to God, and
He preached those principles of virtue without
which human welfare is impossible:
“He who is greatest among you must be like the
youngest,
And he who is chief like a servant.
40


Which is the greatest, guest or servant?
But I am among you as a servant.”
(Luke xxii, 26.)
Or again:
“Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go
with him twain.” (Matt, v, 41.)
Modern investigations have discovered the great
truth that the fundamental element in success is ser-
vice. Give help in every way possible and you will
create goodwill, which in the long run means more
than the immediate reward.
“Do not give dogs what is sacred and do not throw
pearls before swine, in case they trample them under
foot and turn to gore you.” (Matt, vii, 6.)
This broad allegory has a definite meaning. Use
your gifts in personality and materials to the best
advantage; anything less is not merely waste, but
an invitation to your own destruction.
“You will understand the truth and the truth will
set you free.” (Matt, xviii, 41.)
Jesus taught that the truth was the highest ideal to
strive for.
LESSONS IN LIVING
You should read the New Testament in a broad
and balanced manner. Read between the lines and
you will find that the life story of Jesus forms an
“The only reason why professing Christians do not accept
Jesus Christ as Saviour and Guide is that they are afraid
to.”
“DICK” SHEPPARD.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


inspiration for your journey through life, for not
only has He given you His gems of moral teaching,
but in His own life He has shown you how a man
can experience and control temptations. Jesus not
only preached but practised what He preached. In
your own tribulations you cannot be more strongly
encouraged than by remembering the sufferings of
Jesus. He taught that a man can face privations,
the cruel injustices of humanity, betrayal by friends,
lashings, trials and pangs of imprisonment, and a
slow torturing death and yet remain master of self.
Perhaps the greatest trials you will suffer in life will
be caused by disappointments and disillusions. Your
hopes may be blighted, your friends betray you,
your ideals be destroyed; you may be tempted to
believe that nothing is worth while and that it is
foolish to trust, to persevere in goodness and to
retain your ideals.
A brief description of some of Jesus’s problems
will do much to remind you that faith and trust can
be maintained in spite of all opposition and disap-
pointments.
His native town, Nazareth, was the first to turn
against Him. It was this incident which gave rise
to the remark that no prophet is without fame save
in his own country. His brothers deserted him.
They asked Him to depart, they inferred they were
unsafe so long as He remained. They subjected Him
to the hardest of all hurts—ridicule. His trusted
friends doubted Him. The people deserted Him.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Although He had healed the sick, comforted the suf-
fering and shown a thousand kindnesses, they turned
against Him and treated Him as an imposter.
He was forced to leave His native land—while
thus exiled He meditated upon events; upon the
ignorance of men, their narrow outlook, their brutal
instincts and passions, their cunning and greed. He
meditated upon His own recent disturbances of mind.
Within His heart doubts and anger were now mast-
ered. He gazed over the hills towards the Dead Sea
and the Jordan. He knew the beauty of earth, of
life and living, none more acutely nor sensitively.
He had made His decision. He faced His destiny
with equanimity. He had determined to return to
Jerusalem to face the hostile crowds, and to continue
His preaching. His enemies became threatening,
yet in spite of His superb and dauntless courage,
His sincerity and eloquence, the invincibility of His
moral code, the purity of His inspiration, His self-
mastery, His unequalled knowledge of men, His
balance, His unvarying justice, His worldly simplic-
ity and His kindliness, His chosen disciples forsook
Him. The story of the first days leading up to the
trial by Pontius Pilate is a pitiful account of broken
promises. His disciple Judas sold Him for thirty
pieces of silver, Peter denied Him three times in one
evening, and eleven disciples fled at His arrest.
His remarks at this juncture illustrate a sublime
creed in the face of disappointment.
“The conduct of our lives is the only proof of the sincerity
of our hearts.”
GEORGE ELIOT.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


“Am I not to drink the cup which the Father has
handed me.”
In these few words He proved how a man
should accept his fate without doubt or rebellion.
YOUR RELIGION
Every religion tends to become bigoted at the hands
of posterity. Propounded as a morality by the
teacher, the spirit of the message is all too frequently
clouded over by ritualistic formalities and sectarian-
ism. If you endeavour to follow the teachings
of Jesus you will be a good Christian. The accident
of your birth into a Protestant or Roman Catholic
order can in no manner make you better or worse.
The proof of you lies in your inner goodness out-
wardly and practically lived and expressed.
“If those who are bitterly opposed to Christianity will take
the trouble to trace those things in it which arouse their
indignation to their true sources, they will find, I think,
that almost everything which offends them comes from
ecclesiasticism, not from Christianity. Religious societies
must exist, and it is not likely that a class of officials will
ever be found who do not wish to increase their power.
But as soon as we recognize that the history of the great
Church is a monstrous abuse, which has made the word
of God of no effect by its traditions, we shall be more
ready to go back to the fountain-head, and to judge of
modern problems by the broad principles of the New Tes-
tament, in entire detachment from ecclesiastical tradition,
which has completely upset the moral standards of the
Gospels, counting disobedience to the hierarchy a graver
offence than sins against love, truthfulness, humility or
DEAN INGE.
purity.”
44


CONFUCIANISM
It is your good fortune and privilege to be intro-
duced to the wisdom of one of the greatest men of
history. The name of this man is Confucius. He
was born about the year 550 B.C. This proves that
wisdom is by no means a new quality. The clan
name of Confucius was K’ung, and he was known
as K’ung Fu-Tze, meaning “The Philosopher
K-ung.” Confucius is merely the Latinized form
of the name K’ung Fu-Tze.
This wisdom, of which you will enjoy many
examples, earned him the affectionate title, The
Sage of Shantung. Although of noble family, his
father died when Confucius was three, and the
family was left in poverty. The young Confucius
battled manfully with circumstances, making the
best use of his leisure in the cultivation of his gifts
for music and literature. When nineteen he married,
keeping the wolf from the door by accepting such
humble jobs as keeper of stores and superintendent
“The perfect man knows that religions are many but that
Reason is one. The broad-minded see the Truth in different
religions; the narrow-minded see only the differences.”
CONFUCIUS.


of parks and herds. Whatever Confucius did, he
did well.
The advent of Confucius in Chinese history was
very opportune, for it was at the close of the famous
Chow Dynasty, the third which, within historic
time, had ruled the country, lasting from 1122-256
B.C. When Confucius appeared, this dynasty was
disintegrating and the Imperial Throne was fast los-
ing its control over the 15,000,000 who dwelt in
“China Proper.” It must be remembered that
“China Proper” at that time covered an area less
than one-sixth part of the present republic. The
glory of the Chow Dynasty was departing, and the
country was becoming more and more a prey to dis-
order and corruption. There were indeed many in-
stitutions of learning where the ancient histories,
poems, legal codes and books of ceremonies were
studied. Yet the period was one of widespread de-
generacy and ever increasing suffering. The Gov-
ernment was feeble and disorganization was rampant.
Mencius, one of the most distinguished of the fol-
lowers of Confucius, described the period as one in
which “the world had fallen into decay and right
principles had disappeared. Perverse discourses and
oppressive deeds were rife. Ministers murdered
their rulers and sons their fathers. Confucius was
frightened by what he saw and he undertook the
work of reformation.”
He was then twenty years of age. He gathered
around him a group of young men who wished to be
46


instructed in the principles of right conduct and
government. For some years after this the history of
Confucius is uncertain. It would appear that he was
devoting himself to his studies. In 5 T 7 B.C. he
appears again in the State of Lu, where great dis-
order reigned. The Prince of Lu, unahle to restore
quiet, fled to the neighbouring State of Ts’i. Con-
fucius also went there, not to engage in public life
but to continue his studies in private. At this period
he gathered around him most of his disciples, who
followed him as the Christian disciples followed
Jesus 500 years later. He allied himself to no parti-
cular party; he was more concerned in the enuncia-
tion of the basic principles that underlie all
personal and public life.
When he was fifty-two years of age he was
appointed chief magistrate of the city of Chung-too
in the State of Ts’i. It is recorded that during his
period of office a striking reformation took place in
the life of that State. So striking was this reforma-
tion that Confucius was appointed Minister of Crime.
The history of the period, as set forth in the Annals
of Ts’i states that “He transformed the Govern-
ment so that dishonesty, injustice and vulgarity hid
their heads. Loyalty and good faith became the
characteristics of the men, while chastity and obedi-
ence marked the women. He was the idol of the
people, and flew in songs through their mouths.”
“Darkness will cover the earth, until we learn the lesson
of universal brotherhood.”
BENJAMIN FAY MILLS.
47


A disagreement with the ruler of the State of
Ts’i resulted in Confucius leaving the State, when he
began those wanderings that were to continue until
his death in the year 478 B.C.
In his old age Confucius described himself as a
man who in the eager pursuit of knowledge for-
gets his food; who, in the joy of its attainment, for-
gets his sorrows; and who does not perceive that old
age is coming on.
For him age had no terrors, but rather compen-
sations. “At fifteen I had my mind bent on learn-
ing. At thirty I stood firm. At forty I was free
from doubt. At fifty I knew the Decrees of Heaven.
At sixty my <ear was an obedient organ for the recep-
tion of truth. At seventy I could follow what my
heart desired without transgressing what was
right."
Confucius did not set himself to create a religious
system. On the contrary, he endeavoured to pene-
trate to the common basis of all religions. He was
not concerned with the future destiny of man. In-
deed, the prospects of a Hereafter did not enter into
his thinking. Rather was he concerned with the
present state of things, and the adherence to
moral standards in personal and public life.
THE WORD “GENTLEMAN”
You are acquainted with the word gentleman, but
not perhaps with its true meaning. It is a word
which with us has fallen into a certain disrepute,
being nowadays applied to a man conspicuous by his
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


aristocratic dress, air of aloof superiority and
moneyed exclusiveness. This is a very erroneous
conception, because the word “gentleman” is one of
the most beautiful and significant in the language.
The word “gentleman” should be treasured.
Confucius understood its true meaning, and ex-
plained it to his students as follows:
“A gentleman regards what is right; vulgar per-
sons regard what will pay.
“A gentleman in his manners aspires to be free
from excitement and all familiarity.
“A gentleman in his choice of language aims at
freedom from vulgarity and unreasonableness.
“A gentleman may not be without strength and
resoluteness of character. His responsibility in
life is heavy, and his way is long.
“He is responsible to himself for leading a moral
life. Is not that a heavy responsibility?
“He must continue in it till he dies. Is the way
then not long?
“A gentleman must be a man of strict personal
honour. He must be one whom the members of his
family hold up as a good son, and his fellow citizens
hold up as a good citizen.
“A gentleman must be one who makes it a point
to carry out what he says and-persevere in what he
undertakes.
“Good manners and soft words have brought many a difficult
thing to pass.”
SIR J. VANBRUGH.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


“A gentleman must be sympathetic, obliging, and
to the members of his own family affectionate.
“A gentleman will never try to save his life at
the expense of his moral character. What is right
he esteems of the highest importance.
“A gentleman must be ready in the presence of
danger to surrender his life, in the matter of personal
advantage to consider what is the moral right ; he
should be devout in worship and possessed of a true
grief in mourning.”
HOW MANY “GENTLEMEN” DO YOU KNOW?
The West can with advantage accept the ideal of
the Chinese “gentleman.”
THE GOLDEN RULE
Confucius, five centuries before Christ, was the
world’s first teacher of the Golden Rule. A student
once asked him if there were any word which would
serve as a rule of practice for one’s whole life. The
sage replied “Shu.” This Chinese word is the
equivalent of “reciprocity,” plus the suggestion of
“heart-sympathy” inherent in the Chinese term. The
nearest translation of “Shu” is, “What you do not
like, when done to yourself, do not do to others.”
Reciprocity should henceforth have a new mean-
ing for you. Pass on its significance to others.
A PRACTICAL TEACHER
Confucius laid no claim to divine revelation. He
did vaguely intimate that he and every right thinker
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


had a mission from Heaven. He conceived of man’s
nature as from God. In none of his statements is
there any glow of piety, but he insisted always upon
the moral foundation of life. To him the conduct
of the State, as of the individual, must be moral.
Hence his advice to the Ruler of Ts’i:
“Encourage education and good manners and the
people will never fail in respect.
“Encourage the love of justice and the people will
never fail in obedience.
“Encourage good faith and the people will never
fail in honesty.
“Those who have kingdoms should not be con-
cerned that they are poor or have small possessions.
They should be concerned that the people are not
contented and that possessions are not equally
distributed.
“For with equal distribution there will be no
poverty. With mutual goodwill there will be no
want.”
No other teacher has been so daring in the appli-
cation of his teaching to public life. Christianity,
Buddhism and Islam all define the relationship of
the individual to the divine with promises of future
rewards. Confucius on the other hand paid prac-
tically no attention to the future. With splendid
courage he applied his principles to the present indi-
vidual and social life. He was the first to expound
“Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child the same
is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.”
JESUS.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


the idea of the Kingdom of God on earth. He set
down definite rules for the establishment of the
Kingdom of God on earth as the following;
“A bad man is not fit to rule.
“Virtue in the magistrate will secure virtue in the
people.
“Man is greater than any system of thought.
“The State cannot exist without virtue.”
He believed in good example and good appoint-
ments.
“Employ the upright and put aside the crooked,
in this way the crooked can he made upright.”
The key to Confucian wisdom is contained in
the following quotation from the Great Learning :
“The ancients who wished to illustrate the highest
virtue throughout the empire first ordered well their
own states. Wishing to order well their states, they
first regulated their families. Wishing to regulate
their families they first cultivated their own selves.
Wishing to cultivate their own selves, they first
rectified their hearts. Wishing to rectify their
hearts, they first sought to be sincere in their
thoughts. Wishing to be sincere in their thoughts,
they first extended to the utmost their knowledge.
Such extension of knowledge lay in the investigation
of things. Things being investigated, knowledge
became complete. Their knowledge being complete,
their thoughts were sincere. Their thoughts being
sincere, their hearts were then rectified. Their
hearts being rectified, their own selves were culti-
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


vated. Their own selves being cultivated, their
families were regulated. Their families being regu-
lated, their states were rightly governed. Their
states being rightly governed, the whole empire was
made tranquil and happy.”
THE GOOD LIFE
Confucius taught that the only happy life is the good
life. You, as a student-seeker after truth, virtue and
inner peace, know that individuals are changed only
by seeking impartial knowledge. Confucius said,
“It is not easy to find a man who has learned for
three years without coming to be good.” He implied
that no one can attain the good life without study.
Goodness contains too many high and rich qualities
of mind and heart to become the property of the
hysterically and suddenly converted.
The wise Confucius stressed the enormous value
of perseverance, for he and his students had per-
severed, and they knew its high reward.
If you were lucky enough to have the personal
council of a Confucius, you would be told: “If you
are as a marksman who has missed the target, blame
yourself, not your weapon.”
Confucius, pondering upon human values and ever
“Rejoice not overmuch at glad tidings, neither be cast down
by bad —for man knoweth not the future, and what seems to
him misfortune brings discipline and, in the end, happiness.
But what seems good too often brings misery, sorrow and
ruin.”
CONFUCIUS.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


carefully examining and weighing causes and effects,
asks ;
“Is it not just an entire sincerity which marks the
higher man.”
He summarizes the qualities of greatness as
follows:
“The Higher Man has nine things which are sub-
jects with him of thoughtful consideration. In
regard to the use of his eyes he is anxious to see
clearly. ... In regard to his countenance he is
anxious that it should be benign. In regard to his
demeanour he is anxious that it should be respectful.
In regard to his speech he is anxious that it should
be sincere. In regard to his doing of business he is
anxious that he should be reverently careful. In
regard to what he doubts about, he is anxious to
question others. When he is angry he thinks of the
difficulties his anger may involve him. in. When he
sees gain to be got he thinks of righteousness.”
SOUND GOVERNMENT
Much wisdom is shown by the advice on govern-
ment. The following two principles were adopted:
(1) That it was wrong for rulers to learn by
ruling; they should learn before ruling.
(2) That every man should have the opportunity
to rule provided he had been suitably trained
and was of sufficient ability.
To produce these results, the teachings of Con-
fucius were an important part of school education,
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


instilled day by day and memorized. The philosophy
and the attributes of a gentleman thus became a
veritable part of the students’ make-up. When the
education was completed, the student sat for an
examination, the object of which was to reveal not
knowledge, but judgment and character. This con-
ception of education is being revived by modern
educationalists, who are just beginning to appreciate
this truth.
SOCIAL STATUS VALUES
The Chinese ranks of society were based on the love
of scholarship, in contradistinction to our faulty
tendency to regard money as the slide rule of value.
Social values were as follows:
(1) Scholars, teachers, and officials.
(2) Farmers.
(3) Artisans.
(4) And least important, merchants and
soldiers.
The merchants came last in the social scale, be-
cause they were uncreative, mere makers of profit
by another’s labour. Soldiers were set even lower
for they were the outward sign of internal turmoil
and the guardians of plunder.
In the realm of art, and particularly in pottery
and painting, it is doubtful if the productions of this
“Nothing has such power to broaden the mind as the
ability to investigate systematically and truly all that comes
under thy observation in life.”
MARCUS AURELIUS.
55


period have ever been surpassed. The Chinese genius
in art serves as a perpetual inspiration. A thousand
years before the English school of landscape painters
existed, Chinese artists sought and painted the
beauty of nature, creating priceless masterpieces.
Chinese art sprang naturally from the Confucian
religious ideals.
Their religion taught them that the nameless
unity of the universe exists in and about every-
thing, that not a stone is without its universal
significance.
China is for ever indebted to Confucius. The
comparative contentment of her peasantry is pro-
verbial. In spite of droughts, floods and all misfor-
tunes, they remain stoical philosophers, and believers
in the virtue of work. Give them but an acre of soil
and freedom from l political plundering, and they are
content.
The proof lies before your very eyes. Who has
not remarked upon the tireless industry and hus-
bandry of the local Chinese gardener? Stand and
look at him, the wide-hatted toiler, bare legged and
muscular, plying his hoe methodically and without
haste, or jog-trotting down neat rows of vegetables,
watering them by the primitive, yet rain-like effec-
tive double watering-can. Look and admire, and
take a lesson in industry. Simple people, peaceable
people, honest people. They live up to their old
proverb: “All that a man needs in this transitory
life is a hat and a bowl of rice.” (Chinese Proverb.)
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


The patience and perseverance of the Chinese
artisan is astounding. He will, with amazing skill,
carve seven balls one within the other from a solid
block of ivory, and 10, if by chance he detects a flaw,
he cheerfully starts again, ignoring the time and
labour spent on his previous effort. An Englishman
had one of these ivory balls on his office table. He
was asked why he so valued it, and he replied: “To
be a perpetual reminder of the wisdom, the patience,
the artistry, the frugality, and all the other virtues
of the East. Behind them lie Confucius, Lao-tze
and Gautama, who have taught me much and will
teach me more; I would be proud to have been a
Chinaman.”
A UNIVERSAL TEACHER
Confucius had the truthfulness of the truly great,
and when asked, “Is the sun nearer to the earth at
dawn, when it is larger, or at noon, when it is
hotter?” he professed his inability to answer the
question, and thereby earned the derision of the
multitude by his truthful sincerity. Confucius was
a universal teacher, in the sense that he did not con-
fine himself within the limitations of any particular
religious dogma, and that he took a practical interest
in the world at large. He penetrated to the heart
of things, and stressed those great fundamental and
eternal truths upon which all religious systems have
“In His House there is but One Lamp. Along whichsoever
of its Rays we may look, a bright assemblage meets us.”
ZARATHUSTRA.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


been built. As a result, he was free from all extrava-
gances and narrowness. He refused to speculate
upon the nature of spiritual things. To him the
test of any system was its immediate application
to the present condition of the individual and of
society. He was very definite upon the essential of
“goodwill and mutual confidence” among men.
Without these no stability could be ensured. It is
significant that the world to-day is emphasizing this
very fundamental principle which the Chinese sage
pointed out twenty-five centuries ago, in similar
economic and political circumstances.
Confucius did not belong to China alone. He
belonged to the human race.
His influence can be seen not only in the East,
but also in the teachings of the West. The part
played by Confucius in shaping other religions and
philosophies is beyond question. Many of the bright
lights of these systems are without doubt borrowed
from the teachings of the teacher of Shantung. In-
deed it is only now being realized just how far-
reaching was the influence of this Chinese seer.
EAST AND WEST DO MEET
As a student-philosopher, you will extend your
growing wisdom by mistrusting catch cries and
parrot sayings. For example, Kipling’s “East is
East and West is West, and never the twain shall
meet,” is an extremely wrong and dangerous
epigram. East is certainly East, West is certainly
58


West, but meet they certainly do. Meditate upon
this fact and there will come the profound realiza-
tion that the East has a vital something to teach. No
man of whatever colour can afford to be ignorant
of Confucius, whose genius places him on a pinnacle
of majesty seldom surpassed. Notwithstanding
his fame, his followers have recorded that he had
no foregone conclusions, no obstinacy and no selfish-
ness. His objective through life was not fame or
position, but to fit himself for such as might arise.
He was not concerned about being known, he sought
to be worthy to be known.
CONFUCIAN LESSONS AS TAUGHT TO
CHINESE PUPILS
It is both instructive and interesting to read Con-
fucian extracts selected by scholars for the education
of Chinese children. This task was in 1909 entrusted
to Cheng Hsiao-hsii who later became Prime
Minister of Manchuria. This New Handbook of
Confucian Teaching has been translated by R. F.
Johnston, Professor of Chinese in the University of
London. The fourteen selected texts are so brief as
to warrant quotation in full. Allowing for the
impossibility of exactly translating the meaning, you
will find their perusal very stimulating.
I. It is in accordance with the nature of things
that of all beings on earth man is the noblest.
‘‘Be brave and sincere; then follow any path with devotion,
and you will reach God.”
KRISHNA.
59


Man’s nature, the commentator continues, is such
that he is capable of leading the good life. If he
falls into evil ways it is not through any defect in
the nature with which he came into the world; it is
because he has failed to recognize or to exercise the
privileges and potentialities which were his in virtue
of his manhood, and because he has “shih ch ’i pen
hsing” : “lost his own nature.’’
11. When you meet with men of noble character,
try to emulate them; when you meet with inferior
men, look inward and examine yourself.
111. The gentleman is slow of speech, resolute
in action.
The commoner kind of man, says Cheng Hsiao-
hsii, is readier with words than with deeds. The
gentleman, on the other hand, is readier wth deeds
than with words.
IV. Tze-lu said: ‘‘Master, will you tell us what
your ambitions are?” The master replied: “It is my
ambition to give rest and peace to the aged, to be
loyal and faithful to my friends, to give loving care
to the young.”
The good man, observes Cheng Hsiao-hsu, does
not allow his wider interests to absorb his energies
to the neglect of the duties that lie near at hand;
but with utter sincerity and unselfishness and a well-
60


disciplined will, he gives rest and peace to the aged,
loving care to the young, and loyalty and good faith
to those with whom he is brought into daily contact.
He will then have proved his capacity to undertake
the greater tasks that lie beyond. Thus he begins
with self-discipline, he proceeds to the proper dis-
charge of his duties to his family, and he gradually
extends the sphere of his activities to all his relations
with his fellow-men.
V. Uprightness belongs to man by virtue of his
birth; if he loses that, he is in peril.
The lesson may be understood as referring to the
fact that every man is born with the seeds of good-
ness in his being. As Sir James Irvine once said;
“Perhaps the thing most prominent in 'my mind is
this—that my experience has given me still higher
appreciation of the inherent goodness of human
nature.”
VI. In his teaching, the master made four sub-
jects his chief concern — scholarship, right conduct,
loyalty to duty, and sincerity.
The Confucian teaching aimed at a man’s moral
and intellectual development, with emphasis on
the former as the more important of the two.
“The virtue of the heart is its depth, of speech its fidelity,
of government its regulations. The virtue of the servant is
ability, and the virtue of action is its timeliness.
LAO-TZE.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Our English public-school system is understood
to have as its primary aim the formation of
character. The Confucian system of education is
inspired by the same ideal. To quote the words of
Lu Hsiang-shan, “hsiieh che so i wei hsiieh, hsiieh
wei jen erh i” : “the whole aim of education is simply
this —to learn how to be a man.” Intellectual train-
ing was not neglected, but moral discipline was put
first.
A new educational ideal has recently been pro-
pounded. It recommends that “the professor will
no longer merely impart knowledge; he must lead
and inspire his pupils”; and that “character and not
learning, general culture and not specialized know-
ledge, will be demanded.” There is nothing very
novel about this “new educational ideal.” It was a
Chinese ideal more than two thousand years ago.
And was it not a Greek ideal too? The Socrates of
the Memorabilia, in answer to someone who asked
him what should be the principal subject of study,
replied “right conduct.”
VII. The wise are not shaken by doubt, nor the
good by anxiety, nor the stout'-hearted by fear.
This is merely a way of saying that the wise, the
good and the brave are clear-sighted, know what is
expected of them, and do not falter in right action.
He who is always perplexed about how he ought to
act, and worried about whether he has acted wrongly,
will be paralysed by irresolution; and he who is un-
62


able to keep his fears under control cannot be des-
cribed as a man of true courage. But proper train-
ing and self-discipline help one to overcome these
imperfections and disabilities.
VIII. Fan Ch’ih asked a question about the way
in which kindly sympathy manifests itself in action.
The Master said: “In the domestic relationships it
is shown in the maintenance of a balance between
familiarity and reserve; in the management of
affairs, it is shown in courtesy; in general inter-
course with mankind it is shown in loyalty and good
faith. Even when contact is made with uncivilised
peoples, kindly sympathy must not be withheld.”
A distinguished scholar, Alexander Sutherland,
observes that; “The earliest dawn of a sympathy that
should be both warm and wise is undoubtedly to be
traced among the Chinese,” with whom “benevolence
is not to consist in the mere giving of alms, it is to
show itself by a willing sympathy towards all men.
. . . The Chinese vindicated in ages now long past
their claim to be the first of truly benevolent peoples.”
IX. Tsu-Kung asked if the Master could give
him one word to serve as a rule of life. The Master
said: “Would not ‘reciprocity l he such a word? What
you do not wish others to do to you, do not do unto
others.”
“Love thine enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you.”
JESUS.
63


The Chinese word Shu is here translated as
reciprocity, others have called it altruism or charity.
Its resemblance to the words of Jesus, “Do to all
men as you would that they should do to you,’’ is
obvious.
X. The Commander of a mighty army may be
carried off to captimty, but the humblest man of the
people has a will which need never be surrendered.
In this text, which reminds us of a doctrine of
Epictetus, we have another clear and vivid enuncia-
tion of the principle of the essential dignity of
human nature. Rank and power may be lost, and
the body may be deprived of liberty, but the human
spirit cannot —unless it consents to its own undoing
—be overcome. If the will be directed towards the
accumulation of material wealth and honours, the
result may be emptiness, desolation, and moral en-
slavement; but if it be directed towards the riches
that are incorruptible, it will never suffer loss and
will never sacrifice its freedom.
XL The true scholar and the man of true virtue
will never seek to save themselves at the cost of their
moral integrity. In its defence they will be ready to
sacrifice life itself.
This text may perhaps be said to be a Confudan
parallel to the words of Jesus, “Whosoever will save
his life shall lose it and whosoever will lose his life
shall find it,” which, according to A. E. Housman,
'is the most important truth which has ever been
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


uttered, and the greatest discovery ever made in
the moral world.
Character and learning should go hand in hand,
but as we have seen in connexion with the sixth
of our texts, the greater of these is character.
XII. The Gentleman ( Chiin-Tzii ) contemplating
the world, is free front unreasonable likes and dis-
likes. He stands for what is right.
This is a saying which the party-politician—and
not he alone—would do well to bear in mind.
Neither the Chinese nor the people of any other
race are exempt from liability to be swayed by
prejudice and passion, but the dignity and poise and
quiet reasonableness which, till recently at least,
were marked characteristics of the educated classes
in China, were no doubt in large measure due to
their Confucian training.
XIII. If truth has been revealed to you in the
morning, you may die when night comes without re-
pining.
In his comment on this text, Cheng Hsiao-hsii
refers again to the heaven and hell theories of wai
chiao (“foreign religions”) which, he says, are
superstitions that mislead the foolish. Believers in
these wai chiao have hopes and fears of what comes
after death; but the life and conduct of the true
Confucian are not influenced by such hopes and
“Wisdom, in all ages, entering holy souls, makes them
friends of God and prophets.”
MOSES.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


fears. He knows that he must die, and he shares
with the rest of the human race a natural dread of
death; but having been a seeker after truth during
his lifetime he accepts death, when it comes, with
equanimity, knowing not only that it is the common
lot of all but that he has experienced life to the
full, in depth if not in length of years.
XIV. Among the truly educated, there is no dis-
tinction of classes.
As Professor Johnston says: “If Bristol or any
other University is in search of a Chinese motto
expressive of at least one of its educational ideals,
I can suggest none more appropriate than this say-
ing from the Confucian canon —Yu Chiao Wu Lei
—“Among the truly educated, there is no distinction
of classes.”
CONCLUSION
And so you take leave of Confucius. Think of him
not as an ancient but rather as a living friend, wise
and sincere, ever ready with his counsel. As you
stand irresolute, wondering what you should do,
pondering on the aims and ideals of life, it may
be that a brief word of three letters— “Shu” —
will act as a signpost to the way of reality and
happiness. The way is clear. . . . What you do not
zoish others to do to you, do not do unto others.
The lessons of Confucianism are too many to be
briefly summarized. The foregoing should be read
and re-read, until there emerges a strong realization
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


not merely of the personal benefits which follow the
leading of a good life, but also that a clean and
healthy civic life is dependent upon the type of life
lived by even the humblest of its members. Your
influence for good and evil is greater than you have
perhaps realized.
“It behoves us always to bear in mind that while actions
are always to be judged by the immutable standard of right
and wrong, the judgments which we pass upon men must
be qualified by considerations, age, country, station, and
other accidental circumstances; and it will then be found
that he who_ is most charitable in his judgment is generally
the least unjust.”
SOUTHEY.
67


BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS
Buddha means "the wise.” Buddha was born 562
8.C., so that he antedated Jesus by six centuries.
He was the son of Suddhodana, King of Kapilavastu,
a city and country near Nepal, in India. He was
given the name of Prince Siddartha, which means
the “Establisher,” or “He who has accomplished his
purpose.’’ He was sometimes also called Gautama,
his family name. He had a brilliant intellect and
was a fine athlete. At the age of seven he is said
to have known anatomy, geography and mathe-
matics. At fifteen he was made heir-apparent to the
throne. At seventeen he married. His people loved
and admired him for his powers of mind and body,
and his future as a great king seemed assured. But
his father had kept him ignorant of the common
realities of life and had sheltered him from know-
ledge of sorrow and suffering. It was not until he
was twenty-five that he knew the facts of old age,
sickness and death. He meditated upon these things,
and made an extraordinary decision. He forsook
his wife and child, his titles and possessions, and for
five years lived as an orthodox Hindu monk, a
recluse in the forest. He found fault with the ex-
68


isting Hindu religion. He could not accept their
belief that personal sins could be atoned for by
money payments, penance and fasting. By quietly
meditating he at last “came to the perception of the
true condition and wants of mankind.” He became
“enlightened,” “illuminated,” “awakened.” He be-
came a “Buddha.” He became conscious of the true
meaning of life. He realized the great unchanging
law, that the entire universe is bound by cause and
effect. He saw that every action has its exact equal,
counter-balancing, readjusting reaction. Action and
reaction is a natural law. Jesus knew it and taught
it. St Paul knew it and said, “God is not mocked;
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”
This universal law rules all planes of being.
Good is a force. Evil is a force. They are the
opposite forces of creativeness and destruction.
Good and evil represent the opposing poles of
thought and conduct. They do not attract one
another. They repel one another. Good grows upon
good, evil upon evil. Your daily thoughts and ac-
tions are bit by bit creating what you call you. The
“I” is self-governing and self-building. Conscious-
ness is indestructible, but it grows in kind. If dom-
inated by good, it climbs to divinity. If dominated
by evil, it sinks to bestial depths. Man’s evolution
is purely a matter of right living; his devolution a
matter of wrong living.
“The Supernatural miscalled, the Natural in truth, is the
real. To me everything is Supernatural. Without Soul all
is dead.”
RICHARD JEFFERIES.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


You cannot have a good effect from an evil cause.
Every happening is the logical result of some event
(cause) which preceded it. Every thought is the
logical result of some emotion (cause) which pre-
ceded it. Consciousness is indestructible. Person-
ality is indestructible. Buddha taught that the per-
sonality-consciousness moves in a continuous flow
of reincarnations, the beginning of each identical
with the ending of its predecessor. Births and re-
births are repeated until all evil has been eradicated
from the soul. Then, and only then, the soul in its
perfection reaches Buddhahood (becomes enlight-
ened) and so enters “Nirvana.”
BUDDHA’S GOSPEL
This wisdom came to Buddha after deep meditation
and self-discipline. He attracted a number of dis-
ciples, and directed them to preach his new gospel
in different lands. This gospel was based on the
“four noble truths” and the “eight-fold path.”
THE FOUR BUDDHISTIC TRUTHS
1. The truth that sorrow and suffering will exist as
long as the world exists.
2. The truth of the cause of sorrow and suffering—
the clinging to earthly things which pass away.
3. The truth of the deliverance from sorrow and
suffering—the conquest over selfishness and all
evil passions.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


4. The truth of the path leading to the deliverance
from sorrow and suffering, which means the
conduct which all must endeavour to observe if
they hope to attain to the kingdom of Nirvana
This path was termed “the eight-fold path.”
THE EIGHT-FOLD PATH
1. A right belief.
2. High aims.
3. Kind speech.
4. Upright conduct.
5. An honest occupation in life.
6. Perseverance in goodness.
7. Right use of the intellect.
8. Right meditation.
INTERPRETATION OF THE FOUR TRUTHS
Continuous, uninterrupted happiness is impossible.
Through sorrow and suffering the soul gains excel-
lence, knowledge and power to find peace without
worldliness.
Through self-mastery the “I” personality grows
in understanding of values. By personality is under-
stood the entire you —your conception of you your-
self, your aims and your conduct. It is the degree
of harmony of this entirety which will mar or ac-
complish your success and happiness. Undoubtedly
“As some massive rock stands unmoved by the storm-wind,
so the wise unmoved by praise or blame.”
BUDDHA.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


selfishness and evil passions destroy the power of
discerning and judging values.
INTERPRETATION OF THE EIGHT-FOLD
PATH
1. Belief in the value of life as a gift. A gift of
inheritance. A gift of responsibility to the "I”
and to others.
2. High aims imply a balanced appreciation of mor-
ality in all living things. The need to tread the
higher path with courage and sincerity.
3. You know full well how harsh speech destroys
the flavour of life. Destroys it for the speaker
and the receiver. How kind speech is its own
reward.
4. Complete honesty in all relationships, individually
and socially.
5. The happiness that comes from honest work in
producing or creating something. Pride in
creative labour, irrespective of the kind of work.
6. The proper use and practice of the will to good-
ness. Not thinking you’re “good,” but doing
good.
7. Train your brain. Learn to reason, reflect,
meditate, analyse. Cultivate by right reading and
association.
8. Meditate only upon right and moral things and
desires.
In addition to the eight-fold path there are five
precepts which must be rigidly followed by every
good Buddhist. These are :
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


First. Animal life of any sort must not be
destroyed, both for pity’s sake and also that he may
not hinder even the smallest creature in its upward
path of reincarnation, for in every living thing there
is a soul going through its cycle of evolution towards
final perfection.
Second. Must not steal.
Third. Must not commit adultery or any indecent
practice.
Fourth. Must not tell untruths.
Fifth. Must not take intoxicating drink which
so often lures men to evil.
The similarity between these and the Ten Com-
mandments of Moses will be apparent to you. But
there is a most significant difference. The Com-
mandments of Mosaic Law are designed with a per-
sonal God in the background. A mystical Creator
Father-God, omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient.
The Buddhistic commandments have no such back-
ground. Man, perfected and glorified, is the only
God. The unseen spiritual world of many religions
is ignored by Buddhism. The individual soul state
(consciousness) has but one master, the ego “I.”
Infinite time —infinite schooling time for individual
evolution. Buddhism insists that each man and
woman rewards himself or herself, not by faith, not
by money payments to priests, not by privileges,
“Thoughts alone cause the round of a new birth and a new
death; let a man therefore strive to purify his thoughts.
What a man thinks, that he is; this is the only secret.”
THE MAITRÂYANA UPANISHAD (HINDU).


pardons, atonements, indulgences or penances, but
only by a practical earthly living virtue.
The outstanding feature of Buddhism among the
religions of the world is its emphasis on life itself.
Confucius confined his teaching to the present prac-
tical state of the individual and of society. . . .
Jesus Christ emphasized the spiritual basis of life.
Buddha combines both and teaches that destiny is
the result of personal action, the long past and the
longer future being determined entirely by individual
effort. Among all the religions Buddhism chiefly
insists on personal effort in the scheme of things.
BUDDHIST TRAINING
In the training of a Buddhist priest certain very
strict precepts have to be observed in addition to
those already mentioned. These forbid a monk to
eat food at forbidden times, to go to plays or enter-
tainments, to wear ornaments, to sleep on soft beds,
to receive any money. In other words he is taught
to discipline his body and to renounce all material
possessions. He is allowed to possess only eight
articles which are considered necessities: three
robes, a girdle, an alms-bowl, a razor, a needle and
a water strainer.
Buddhism is most wise. It does not “wall up”
its monks and priests. It teaches them the truths of
life, then allows them to return to ordinary citizen-
ship, to teach by example, in country villages, towns,
cities. They show that the good life is not dependent
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


upon environment. It is a within-power, not a
without-power.
THE LOTUS SYMBOL
The Lotus plant and flower is the Buddhistic symbol.
Indigenous to India, it was planted in each country
in which the seed of Buddhism had been sown.
Have you ever seen the Lotus flower? Its natural
soil is slimy, so is primitive man’s. It struggles for
life. It lifts its buds above the stagnant water
reaching towards sunlight. The buds unfold. They
gaze wide-eyed in a miracle of spotless beauty. The
flat leaves rest buoyantly on the water. Only the
roots know the mud and slime. A magnificent sym-
bol. Man’s consciousness, the Lotus flower, lifting
triumphantly, by his own efforts, above the slime of
ignorance and evil.
Keep the image-symbol of the Lotus flower in
your thoughts. Buddha is not idealized or wor-
shipped as a God. But as a perfected, glorified man.
One with the Universal Divinity that is harmony,
in and about and around all things. He is the pure
essence of life.
As with other religions, Buddhism has lost much
of its original simplicity and purity, and in some
areas has developed into various forms of super-
stition. It is highly significant that in India, the
“Young men, life is before you. Two voices are calling
you—one coming out from the swamps of selfishness and
force, where success means death; and the other from the
hilltops of Justice and progress, where even failure brings
glory.”
JOHN P. ALTGELD.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


original homeland of Buddhism, this faith is almost
forgotten. Its defeat lay in its very excellence—the
crystal clarity of its impersonal ethic. Man tends
to lean on a mystic human examplar. Buddha ful-
filled that note for some and in so doing lost them
the only key to true Buddhism which is not in
Buddha, but in his teachings. Christianity by glori-
fying Jesus defeated the colder wisdom of the
Stoics.
Man, unattached to a divine examplar and super-
visor and so unguarded and misguided in the prac-
tice of ideals, is a stupid, contradictory creature.
Perhaps man’s greatest fault, against himself, is his
inordinate love of outward show. He too readily
becomes material-minded, vain, superficial, artificial,
a child at a circus craving amusement, excitement—
craving the applause of the mob that reinforces his
belief in himself and in his place in the clan. Unfor-
tunately though simplicity and the renunciation of
the material and the artificial side of life were
important teachings of Buddha, modern Buddhism,
like modern Christianity, pays great attention to
massive and magnificent temples, majestic altars,
rich priestly vestments and gaudy ceremonials. It
is a debatable question as to whether Buddhism bor-
rowed its doctrine and observance or vice versa.
Some scholars maintain that Christianity borrowed
much of its doctrine and practice from Buddhism.
Whichever be the case the analogies between the two
are striking. The cross, mitre and cope worn by
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Christian priests, the censer suspended from five
chains, benedictions given by extending the right
hand over the heads of the faithful, the rosary,
ecclesiastical celibacy, worship of saints, fasts, pro-
cessions, litanies and holy water —all these are com-
mon to Buddhists and Christians. In addition to
these both observe the institution of nuns, worship
of relics, the baptism of children, masses for the
dead, burning of incense and the ringing of bells
during worship. Their priests alike teach a pur-
gatory from which the soul can be released by their
prayers. Both conduct their services in a dead
language, the Catholic priest in Latin and the
Buddhist priest in Pali. But the great spiritual
truths founded on key words, like the “Shu” of
Confucius have become a meaningless jargon,
“Om” —a matter of mirth to the ribald. But con-
sider their original meaning to the initiate; Om
mani padme hum, were a series of symbols recalling
the whole of the Buddhist tenets.
Delusions assail the soul to defeat it in its ascent
to the realms of pure thought. Desire weakens the
soul in its effort to attain perfection. Unreality
clouds the vision of the soul so that its sight is not
fixed on the infinite. Delusion, Desire, and the
Unreal must be overcome and such is the message
of Buddha to all the world and all ages.
“The Tathagata is the one who causes a way to appear—
a way which has not appeared before. lam only a Way-
shower, and you, as the Wayfarers, must walk in the Way
of your own choosing.”
BUDDHA.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Concentrate on Buddha and all these disappear —
the delusion of that upper world which is OM, and
of the spirits which are called MA; the desires of
this world which are named NI and of the flesh
itself which is PAD. But beyond all these only
constant concentration can rid one of the unrealities
■ —the fear of ghosts which is ME and the fear of
hell which is HUM.
So the rolling syllables om mani padme hum end-
lessly intoned are as full in their way as the Con-
fucian “Shu” —lessons for faith and conduct rather
than a meaningless jumble of reiterated sounds.
Buddhism has been the great educational factor
in Asia. A civilizing force, inspiring Asian art and
literature.
A MESSAGE TO YOU
Student, take from Buddha its splendid simplicities.
Its high belief in self -responsibility. Its kindliness.
Manliness. Evolutionary significance. Its linking
of you with eternity.
And remember the Lotus flower.
APPENDIX
Henry Steele Olcott, the American world authority
on Buddhism, who is himself a Buddhist, wrote and
lectured upon this philosophy-religion in many
countries.
For many years Colonel Olcott fought single-
handed in the cause of Buddhism. He finally suc-
ceeded in reconciling the two main divisions. The
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


northern and southern Churches were linked under
a “Joint platform of fundamental Buddhistic
beliefs.”
As triumphant an achievement, as to bring the
Roman Catholic and the Greek Orthodox Church
into workable agreement.
Some years ago Colonel Olcott stated; “A religion
. . . believed in and followed by probably one quarter
of the world’s population, cannot be regarded with
indifference by any intelligent person. . . . There are
possibly no religious systems existent which offer
more hopefulness to mankind, or which offer more
inducements to the human race to reach a higher
spiritual plane and become more godlike. It teaches
that man in himself possesses extreme potentialities
with regard to the acquisition of wisdom, and that
as a man progresses upwards towards knowledge he
becomes an intellectual master, instead of a slave to
the human weaknesses and passions. Instead of
Buddhism teaching annihilation at death, it really
teaches the absolute opposite —a continuous life. It
teaches that mankind passes from life to life, in a
regular series of progressions, and from birth to
birth the individual gradually increases in wisdom.
If there is a single English word which would
“The man who foolishly does me wrong, I will return to
him the protection of my most ungrudging love; and the
more evil comes from him, the more good shall go from
me.”
BUDDHA.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


describe Buddhism, it is ‘Justice’ —absolute and
unvarying Justice. As a man sows he will reap,
and he consequently works out his own destiny. The
man who in the present either suffers or enjoys, is
the inheritor of his deeds in a previous life.
Buddhism teaches that the individuality does not die,
but that past deeds, words, and thoughts have their
just effect upon the individual with each successive
birth. Consequently there is ever a moral force
behind the individual, which has its due effect in
his subsequent careers, constituting causes which
will have to work themselves out.
“If the non-progressive causes do not so work
themselves out in one birth, they will go on to the
next, for the Buddhistic theory is that in the
existence of a human being the past is accumulated
upon the present and assisting to work out the
future. A Buddhist’s main desire is to see things in
their true light—to attain to wisdom. His aim and
object is to reach the ‘Nirvana,’ which is a state of
exaltation in which the individual has freed himself
from the laws of causation and from the world, its
miseries and its retrograding tendencies. (‘Nirvana’
means ‘the extinction of the lamp’—not annihilation,
but, as insists Dr Annie Besant, the extinction of
each little ‘farthing rushlight’ of personality and
petty self-centredness in the blinding sunshine of
purest wisdom.) The Buddhistic philosophy is
simply one of expansion from the narrow point of
80


individuality to supreme comprehension—a compre-
hension so expanded as to take in all the wisdom
which the greatest of intellects have attained to, and
more. The Buddhist endeavours not to merge him-
self into the oversoul but to enter into ‘Nirvana’ —
the state in which the animal part of man has been
pdaced out of sight, and the spiritual part of man
has attained absolute supremacy. Hindus and
Buddhists alike believe that a man is responsible
for every thought or word, and consequently a man
who holds such views cannot but elevate his moral
nature.
“It is safe to say that any individual who observes
the Buddhist precepts can never be guilty in a
criminal tribunal. With such a faultless moral code,
and with such a distinctly laid down system of
spiritual progressiveness, it is not fair to speak of
Buddhism as a religion of despair. Buddhism is
rather a moral philosophy than a religion. It asks
no man to believe what is unpalatable to his common
sense, or what does not square with his inborn intel-
ligence—there is nothing of superstition or dogma
in it. At present the world is in a time when the
crucibles of science are heated, and when all the
religions of the world are on their trial, and will
be tried on their merits, the golden truth being
separated from the dross of falsehood or super-
stition, and I believe that out of that ordeal
Buddhism will come forth triumphant.”
“Hate not, quarrel not, abuse no one; these are the teach-
ings of Buddhism.”
NEHANYKO.


MOHAMMEDANISM
Another great religion which has much to teach us
is Mohammedanism. You will recollect that Buddha
was born in the year 562 B.C. Almost exactly the
same period after Christ, in the year A.D. 570, an
Arab camel driver named Mahomet or Mahommed,
set out to reform the life of his country. His mes-
sage embraced the whole range of human activities,
from the physical to the moral. To-day not less than
250 millions in the world reverence that Arab as
“The Prophet,” 20 millions of these being in China.
A faith that is held by at least 15 per cent of the
world’s population has a claim to the consideration
of every person interested in the future of
civilization.
Mohammed was fired to undertake his great mis-
sion by the far-flung repercussions of the fall of
Rome, the political futility of Byzantium in the
seventh century, and by the decadence into which
Mecca, his own city in Arabia, had sunk. Around
the Supreme God (Allah) had grown up a degraded
pantheon of lesser gods and goddesses; even the
camel had been deified. For 200 years Arabia had
been in the grip of economic depression, and upon


every hand Mohammed saw stark and grinding
poverty, disillusionment and despair. Arabia was
spectre-haunted by inhuman practices; mothers
killed their infants rather than face the inevitable
hunger, and girl children were sold and even buried
alive. Vice and disease were the evil shadows of
Arabian economic misery.
Mohammed was a man of extraordinary charac-
ter, one of those rare men who see, feel and think
with exceptional power. As Mohammed looked at
Arabia’s wretchedness he was profoundly moved,
and there sprang from his pity a flaming determin-
ation to attempt the re-establishment of a civic and
racial sense among his desert people. At this period
the idea of preaching a new religion never entered
his mind. To himself he was no divinely inspired
nor appointed prophet, but if he thought of himself
at all it was with humility as a server of suffering
humanity. His one motive was to establish a model
moral community, based upon right ideas of God
and man, upon the purified site of a corrupt Mecca.
As with many other human guides and leaders,
Mohammed was dust long before his name had be-
come a religion. Half the world was crying for
guidance, as it is to-day; crying for renewed faith
in the goodness of life. Mohammed saw the need
and heard the cry, and answered with a powerful
“God is with those who persevere,”
THE KORAN.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


moral message. Not until long afterwards was that
message shaped by the desert into a gospel.
Like all world movements, Mohammedanism’s
beginnings were secret and meagre. Mohammed
wisely began by an appeal to his own household.
His wife Khadijah, his adopted son, his cousin Ali
and his uncle Hamzah listened attentively to his
strong moral reasoning, and they also began to rea-
son correctly (morally and clearly). For three years
Mohammed’s teaching was in secret, the number of
those who listened attentively gradually but steadily
increasing. Quite a list of “high caste” students
became interested in the “message” of right feeling,
right thinking, and right conduct expounded by
Mohammed the Sincere, the Wise, the Patient and
Courageous. Not every wealthy aristocrat of Mecca
was selfishly contented; there were some who felt as
Mohammed felt, ashamed of Arabia’s poverty and
immorality and moved towards its uplift.
PERSECUTION
The history of the “Truth Bringers” is one of per-
secution. Change, though it be a change from an
earthly hell to an earthly heaven, is intensely re-
sented, even by those who have most to gain and
least to lose. The more necessary and reasonable
the change, the more violent are the means adopted
to destroy its innovation. For change means a
break in continuity, and is invariably resented even
though it seeks to lift human life to a dignified
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


level. A sick humanity is like a sick man who is
too lazy to take good advice, preferring his habit
of ignorant acceptance of misery. Mohammed the
Truth Bringer fared no better than other humani-
tarians of creative vision and power. The pagans
of Mecca heard of this man who dared denounce
their gods and practices, and they vowed revenge.
But Mohammed and his students (disciples) lived
in the part of Mecca which had always been a
“Sanctuary,” in which even barbarism superstiti-
ously agreed that no blood could be shed. This
difficulty, however, was easily overcome; bigotry
and ignorant hatred are as determined and ingenious
as love. The Meccans decided to starve their vic-
tims to death. The entire clan of Abu Talib, to
which Mohammed belonged, was included in this
death plan. But the intentions of the Meccans were
frustrated. Mohammed was more fortunate than
many other great teachers, nevertheless the death
planned for him was full proof of the common
hatred directed against reform. Jesus was nailed to
a Cross; Socrates the mental giant was publicly con-
demned to death by the vote of the citizens he sought
to enlighten. Every man who creates or fights a
dogma is leader and dictator or victim and sacrifice.
Even Moses taught that the teacher of a new cult
should be stoned to death without hearing. But
“To endure is the first thing a child ought to learn, and
that which he will have most need to know.”
ROUSSEAU.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Mohammed escaped. Quick in defence, he urged
his students to take refuge in Abyssinia.
Here in the Christian city of Aksum they were
well received, and the Emperor refused to extradite
them. From here Mohammed set out for the nor-
thern city of Medina to preach his teachings. This
flight is known as the “Hegira,” and from it all
Moslem chronology is dated.
Mohammed met much opposition in Medina, but
gradually this subsided and his mission was ac-
claimed. Before he died in A.D. 632, Islam had
become thoroughly established and the conquest of
Arabia determined upon. Islam signifies “to deliver
over entirely,” and is used in the sense of entire sub-
mission to Allah or God. In short, it means a con-
version of the whole human family. It is not our
purpose here to trace the successive attempts made
after the death of Mohammed to spread the faith of
Islam throughout the Middle East. In less than a
hundred years it dominated the world from Spain
to Canton. Suffice to mention that to-day it stands
among the three greatest religious creeds of the
world, and is making rapid advance on most fronts.
MOHAMMEDAN TEACHINGS
Our purpose is rather to explain briefly and plainly
the main tenets of this remarkable cult. The
Mohammedan’s belief is simple and sincere. He is
proud of this belief; he is guilty of neither subter-
fuge or evasion. He does not apologise for his
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


thoughts, but openly professes his allegiance to the
one God. “There is no other God but God,” he
renders homage in public as though it were the most
natural thing to do. Three times daily, wherever he
happens to be, he will bow on bended knee and pro-
claim, “There is no God but Allah and Mohammed
is his prophet.”
Islam is the religion of the simple desert soldier.
Allah, his great master, is always right. It is Allah
who has given each a predestined place to occupy in
life. There are no soul twisting doubts, his orders
are definite. A good Mohammedan must obey the
rules of living, accept whatever fate may have in
store for him and await fearlessly the call to
eternity.
The country itself teaches inexorable lessons in
fatalism and submission to reality. The Moham-
medan ideal of God is austere and magnificent, a
reflection or mirage of his brazen skies, his shifting
desert sands and the sweet cool of his oases. There
are no intermediaries, priests or acolytes. The
Mohammedan is a man who is prepared to stand
naked and alone facing a God who will decide his
destiny according to His own wisdom — God knows
best!
Each man is a trusted servant, chosen for a par-
ticular duty. The name of highest honour is
“All service ranks the same with God—
With God, whose puppets, best and worst,
Are we; There is no last nor first.”
BROWNING.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


“Abdullah,” which means Servant (habdi) of
Allah. He neither hopes for any special beneficence,
nor does he tremble at any of his commands. He
obeys without questioning, and faces the future with
the same courage and equanimity as he faces death
—Mekhtub —(it is written!) Only the individual
who is inwardly superior can attain to such a great
ideal. What a lesson to humanity! Little sects,
parishes, the whole human family, with their petty
disputes, are nothing when one can believe in a
God to whose service one is privileged to belong, and
to whom every believer is equal, be he prince or
beggar. Islam makes every one of its followers
proud to be a Mussulman, and able to conduct the
service of praise. The thought that all action is
predestined may seem strange to the Western mind,
but such a thought has its advantages. No man can
do more than his brain, his physique and his en-
vironment allow; and the belief that fate is written
has a psychologically ennobling effect on people of
proud souls, lonely riders in deserts as wide, variable
and treacherous as the sea.
Instead of worrying about life’s insecurities, dis-
aster and death, it is all accepted as being inevitable.
Mekhtub! The man travels straight to his destina-
tion, and often achieves the impossible! Almost
every great man has believed in his destiny. Moham-
med insists that every human being has a destiny.
It is for this reason that every traveller has drawn
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


attention to the innate nobility of the true Moslem.
In discussing this question of destiny with his dis-
ciples, Mohammed said, “There is not one among
you whose sitting-place is not zwritten by God,
whether in the fire or Paradise.”
There is a saying among soldiers that only those
who can obey know how to command. This is true
because commanding and obeying have an identical
basis, both depending on the formation of habits.
The pattern of the soul is dependent upon the con-
stant repetition of pattern activities. (See section
on Psychology.) It is apparent therefore that there
should be a frequent exercise of all habits which
tend to produce perfection. This denotes not weak-
ness, but strength. Military discipline is achieved
by endless routine manoeuvres as every conqueror
has proved. The Mohammedan takes care to have
constant reminders that he is a pupil in the service
of the Great Almighty, that he must keep physically
fit and hardy, that he must learn to endure hardship
and practise thrift, and that he must be charitable.
Islam is wise in not vaguely defining these virtues as
pious hopes, but clearly defining them as a creed.
Every one should profit by this reminder, and revise
his or her conduct lest the benefits of self-discipline
be forgotten.
“Whatsoever be your religion, associate with those who
think otherwise. All have a quarter of the heavens to which
they turn, and wheresoever they turn—there is the face of
Allah.”
MOHAMMED.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


PRACTICAL OBLIGATIONS
Besides teaching self-discipline, the religion of
Islam demands the following obligations:
1. It is necessary for every Mohammedan to
be circumcised, a practice taken over from
the Jews. This initiation into life was in-
tended to act as a secret badge to distinguish
the fellow tribesmen. It is as old as the
Chaldean, and has followed him from
Mesopotamia to the ends of Africa, and the
farthest shores of the Indian and Pacific
Oceans.
2. Fasting is practised rigorously during one
month of the year {Ramadan), at this period
no food, drink or smoking or sexual indul-
gence is permitted during the daylight
hours.
3. A good Mohammedan must save his money
to make a pilgrimage to Mecca and to
Mohammed’s grave at Medina at least once
in a lifetime.
4. All who can afford it are expected to donate
2J- per cent of their income to support of
the poor.
5. Worship, which consists of the repetition of
certain ritual texts is accompanied by bow-
ing of the body.
6. Prohibition of certain meats. Chief of
these is the flesh of the pig, which is as
much an abomination to the Moslem as to
90


the Jew. This has been one of the most
rigid taboos since the days of the Prophet
himself, and indeed since much earlier. It
is possibly based on hygienic observation of
the worm infested livers of the pigs of the
East and their habit of living on offal. To
one who believes as the Semites do that we
are what we eat, the reason for refusal and
abhorrence is obvious.
7. Prohibition of wine. This was relaxed dur-
ing the middle years of Islam, but has again
become severely enforced. Indeed it has
been invested with all the virtues commonly
assigned to morality.
The above rules are in the main agreed upon by
all sections of Mohammedans, for like all other re-
ligious systems it has become split into sects in the
course of its history. These sects are really followers
of different teachers who varied in their interpreta-
tion of the Prophet’s teachings. This is not surpris-
ing since we find Christianity and Buddhism similarly
sectionized. But it is noteworthy, that whereas
Christianity is split into very many sects, as is the
case also with Buddhism, Islam has really only four
divisions. Every orthodox Moslem is a follower of
one or other of these four.
Like all other religions Islam has its “Sacred
“Such as are thy habitual thoughts, such will be the char-
acter of thy mind, for the mind is dyed by the thoughts.”
MARCUS AURELIUS.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Book.” Christianity has its Bible, Buddhism has its
Sutras and Islam has the Koran, which has
always ranked as one of the great books of the
world.
To the devout Mohammedan the Koran is a divine
revelation. Being the communication of the All-wise
to the Prophet, it is an infallible guide to conduct.
It gives the life story of the Prophet in addition to
the history of the world, but does not profess to
have been written by the Prophet himself. Under
divine inspiration he dictated it to others. It is
based on a definite scheme. The Christian Testa-
ment superseded the Hebrew Testament. So in like
manner the Koran superseded the Christian Testa-
ment. This is the accepted view of Islam, they say
it is the last and best, they include with honour
Nagi Isa (The Prophet Jesus). Consequently many
of the characters which appear in the Hebrew and
Christian Testaments appear also in the Koran.
This recognition of the good points in other religions
is a praiseworthy feature, and is in keeping with the
sincerity which Mohammed displayed throughout a
life in which he had to face innumerable hardships
and difficulties.
CHANGES
Islam, like the other religious systems, is shaping
itself according to the needs of the time. As a result
Islam to-day has become a spiritual State with cer-
tain well-defined principles. Its original idea of
spiritual domination of the terrestrial globe sank
92


early into the background. Its greatest triumphs,
even in antiquity and the Middle Ages, were not of
the sword but of the pen and the compass.
Beyond those previously mentioned, modern Islam
imposes few restrictions. No doubt its leaders are
alive to the trend of civilization and are fashioning
their tenets accordingly. Herein they have shown
their wisdom. Aware that Mohammedan countries
could not withstand the pressure of progress in an
age when the relations of people had become so
intimate, these leaders have wisely passed over those
lesser restrictions which were so marked in earlier
times. A striking illustration of this is the manner
in which Islam now offers equality of position to
both men and women, a recognition which would
have called forth the most severe condemnation
from the early followers of the Prophet. This strik-
ing freedom allowed by modern Islam has made it
possible for the most devout of its adherents to
enter into all the activities of modern life without
in any way renouncing their faith or becoming
conscience-stricken.
A WORLD FORCE
It is because of this reformation of Islam that it has
become a force to be reckoned with. Its very free-
dom from prohibitions has given it a new zest and
missionary zeal. At the present time it is making
“He shall not prosper who deviseth lies.”
THE KORAN.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


a rapid advance into the African continent and has
stretched a line of educational institutions right
across that land from the Indian Ocean to the
Atlantic. In India it is increasingly active, but only
as a religious force. In the East Indies it has suc-
ceeded in ousting the native cults, and to-day is the
recognized faith of the great majority of the people
living in those Islands. From the East Indies it has
moved north through Indo-China and stretched its
mosques throughout China. It has even penetrated
Japan. In America and in Europe it reckons among
its converts a considerable number of European
scholars. There is a large mosque for Europeans at
Woking in England.
Its secret is that it has ceased to be national. It is
essentially monotheistic, and is not burdened with
an elaborate system of dogma. It needs no hierarchy
and depends upon no sacramental usages.
It may be that the reformers of Islam have looked
farther ahead than they themselves imagined. It
would almost seem that they had visioned a time
when mankind would outgrow the necessity of
ritualistic aids in their approach to the Divine. Cer-
tainly these reformers have prepared for that time.
Modern Islam insists upon the belief in and
the worship of the Divine Being to whom the
human unites itself by personal piety. As' a
result the creed of Islam is the simplest of any
religion and its commandments the fewest. The
ultimate aim of Islam is a spiritual state.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Undoubtedly the directness of the Mohammedan
appeal owes much to the land of its origin. In the
desert life of the Arab there is grandeur allied to
extreme simplicity. Lawrence, the statesman-student,
in his Seven Pillars of Wisdom, phrases it in
appropriate words:
“This creed of the desert inexpressible in words,
and indeed in thought. It was easily felt as an in-
fluence, and those who went into the desert and
stayed long enough to forget its open spaces and
its emptiness were inevitably thrust upon God as
the only refuge and rhythm of being.”
The desert has shaped a great Gospel.
CONCLUSION
The nature of truth does not change; it is fixed by
the Law of Morality. The efforts of every great
teacher have been made in the interests of humanity,
and although at the time they have been persecuted
and their teachings ridiculed, their names and teach-
ings have survived and flourished.
This fact makes clear the existence of a human
moral law which, despite the opposition of human
“Oh people of the Earth! Make not of the Religion of
God a source of variance amongst you. Verily, it was
revealed for the purpose of unifying the whole world .. .
that all nations should become one in faith and all men as
brothers; that the bonds of affection and unity should be
strengthened; that diversity of religion should cease, and
d’fferences of race be annulled. And so it shall be! These
fruitless strifes, these ruinous wars shall pass away and
the Most Great Peace shall come. Let not a man glory
in this that he loves his country; let him rather glory in
this that he loves his kind.”
BAHA'U'LLAH.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


ignorance and passions, is seen to be gradually find-
ing universal lodgment. Through the centuries may
be traced a quickening intelligence of living values,
and to-day, no less than in the past, are needed both
teachers and sincere disciples. History should not
repeat itself. It need not, if hearts and minds are
open to the great moralities. The teaching of
Mohammed was at first just plain moral values, but
like all great universal messages, it suffered at the
hands of a posterity which preferred mysticism to
reality.
Nevertheless, the Islamic religion is a strong
faith, and its practice is helping millions of the
living as it helped millions of the past.
The Islamic religion is an important rung in the
ladder of human evolution.
CONCLUSION TO RELIGIONS
The words of all these great teachers, if properly
understood and obeyed, regarded as living and endur-
ing, should guide you safely through all the pitfalls
of life and reward you with that serenity which
Seneca described as true joy. Whenever you are
faced with a serious problem or suffer despair,
danger, ingratitude, sickness or slander, remember
these friendly words of encouragement. Practise
the attitude of listening with an inner ear for the
help and guidance of a master wisdom. This is not
a lesson of piety, but rather one of plain common
sense. It applies not merely to the words of Jesus,
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


but also to those of the other great teachers made
familiar by this lesson.
Whilst you, in your life, may acquire much
wisdom through your own experience, it is an
obvious short cut to wisdom to reflect on the experi-
ence of others, the truth of whose words have been
proved through countless generations. Do not be
afraid of quoting Jesus, Confucius, Buddha or
Mohammed or any proved wise men to your
friends. The repetition will be as helpful to your-
self as to them. But speak from personal experi-
ence and do not preach. The thoughts and
words of the wise must help you in your code
and manner of living. This right use of wis-
dom is the supreme test. No one enjoys being
preached at, but all appreciate help. If you have a
secret fount of assistance, it would be churlish to
maintain secrecy. Only by the wide sowing of the
great truths will mankind ever reach his great goal
of peace, harmony, and contentment. That you have
knowledge of these truths entails an obligation—you
must pass them on to your friends. Always remember
however, the noble words of Baha’u’llah: “O chil-
dren of Baha! Have intercourse with all the peoples
of the world, with the disciples of all religions in
the spirit of complete joyfulness. Remind them of
what is good for them all, but beware of making the
word of God the stumbling block of friction or the
‘‘The highest path is pointed out to us by the pure ideal of
those who look up to us, and who, if we tread less highly,
may never look so high again.”
HAWTHORNE.
97


source of mutual hatred. If ye know what the other
does not know, tell him with the tongue of friend-
liness and love. If he accepts it and takes it up
then the aim has been attained. If he rejects it pray
for him and leave him to himself; ye may never
importune him.”
It was Napoleon who used to say, “The only
important rhetorical formula is repetition.” He
knew that by repetition of a truth or of any crystal-
lized idea, one ultimately profoundly influenced that
portion of the subconscious mind from which every-
thing profound and enduring emanates. These are
not “vain repetitions such as the heathens use,” but
crystallized belief in its most compact form, and of
vital personal value. The great mysteries of life
are unlocked with the keys of repetition, meditation
and reflection. They are as necessary to the growth
of happiness and contentment as are the harrow and
fertilizer to a farmer. This is the real meaning of
luck. People may say you are lucky in the possession
of a contented mind, but you, knowing the secret is
that the principles of the masters have been digested
by your mind so thoroughly that they have become a
part of yourself, will acknowledge the source of
your “luck” and inspire others to seek and find.
The attainment of wisdom does not rob you of the
pleasures of life, but on the contrary, you become
a better human in every sense of the word and enjoy
life much more richly. You are wiser because your
vision is extended, and because you are better
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


balanced, better equipped mentally, emotionally and
spiritually.
But almost nothing has been said of the usage of
religious ritual, church attendance, communion,
masses, and public devotion of every description.
For professing members of any creed these are right
and helpful. Their province is, however, that of
your minister, and their diversity renders them out-
side the scope of this lesson. But for the great
legion who do not possess a formal faith, religion
has also a great and friendly meaning, the signifi-
cance of which has been outlined in the foregoing
pages. The degree to which you profit depends
entirely on the time and attention you give to the
truths which have been clearly outlined. Remem-
ber the words of Mazzini, who devoted his life to
the cause of liberty—“l do not know,” he said, “a
single great conquest of the human spirit, a single
important step for the perfecting of human society,
which has not had its roots in strong religious faith.”
If you still lack faith, you may be convinced by
two facts. Firstly the universal desire for a religious
faith, and secondly the extraordinary manner in
which the great teachings throughout the ages in
diverse countries and times have their basis in the
same truths. It would seem as though, however
diverse may be the approach, the same goal is dis-
covered, although its outer form may differ. In all
“Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself.”
JESUS.
99


religions or philosophies this is repeatedly empha-
sized.
Man over and over again reaches the same stage
of knowledge of this truth, crystallizes it and
triumphantly announces it, but ignorance and super-
stition repeatedly submerge in form and ceremony
what insight and inspiration create as simple truths.
We know the history of the brilliant period of
ancient Rome, the great intellectual achievements of
ancient Greece, the Empires of Egypt, the seven
Kingdoms of Mesopotamia, the historical back-
ground of India and China. Back behind them we
see the vaguer outlines of even older Empires and
schools of thought, but through them all there runs
one connecting thread that manifests itself in dozens
of philosophies, dozens of religions, and in the public
works of hundreds of known or forgotten observers
and recorders. In essentials the message is always
the same: “Seek perfection and seek it first in know-
ledge of yourself
“Know thyself.” “Search the heart” is the con-
stant theme. This search is like the search of the
refiner of gold—he seeks the grains of immutable
gold and disregards and rejects the dross. In the
search for self-perfection we ascend the path in good
company. The strongest incentive to self perfection
is perhaps the knowledge that no man lives to him-
self—he is his brother’s keeper whether he will
or no.
Religions should be understood and interpreted
100


as service and brotherhood —an ideal which, though
instinctive and evolutionary, needs constant religious
affirmation by teachers and thinkers to combat the
devolutionary swing of the pendulum. One of the
failures of religions has been their aloofness from
the economics of normal human life. The futility
of preaching and teaching spiritual precepts to
hungry or starving peoples is obvious. But behind
all religions is a spiritual truth —a cardinal truth
which continually asserts and repeats itself as the
fundamental law of human life. This law is Love.
Only in its full acceptance and application may indi-
viduals and nations find happiness, peace and fulfil-
ment.
If all men and women would follow faithfully the
teachings of any one of the great religious teachers,
to quote Beverley Nichols, “they might make, of
desire, a power that would change the world. A
power that would make a garden of the foullest slum,
“Man . . . should strive untiringly to give expression to
the eternal spirit which animates him, by increasing and
enhancing what is positive in himself and transmuting what
is negative into a positive quality. For the rest every path
leads to the goal and every one can attain it, as Sri Krishna
says to Arjuna in the Bhagavad-Gita, ‘no matter how men
approach me, I accept them just as they are, for all paths
on which they wander, are mine.’ And it is so, one single
primordial force flows through the universe, conditioning
and animating every formation, manifesting itself in all of
them; thus, each of them is not only an expression, but a
possible perfect expression of divinity; and perfection is the
goal. Every formation is capable, not in spite of but
because of its peculiarity of realizing divinity; whether it
succeeds depends on the spirit in which it lives.”
KEYSERLING.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


would turn sorry social discord into a perfect har-
mony. A power that would give to gold an unfading
glitter, that would transform a million hatreds and
suspicions into a universal love. A power indeed,
that would turn the world’s bloody wars into a single
shining peace.” This much and no less are the aims
of the 1.K.L., and you as a student are asked to
accept your responsibility as a helper and teacher
toward the goal of the brotherhood of man.
“The Moslem from the Koran hears the truth that he
must learn;
The Hindu in the Vedas sees the Way his feet should
turn;
In Moses and the Prophets the Jew restores his soul;
The Christian in the Gospel finds the Life which is
the Whole
And all may read the self-same speech, no matter
what the scroll.
That God is One; That Men are One; That Faith is
ever the Same;
That Love is still the Nearest Word to Hint the
Nameless Name.
This is the creed of the East and the West when you
plumb to the depths, my son.
For the Word of the Lord is Unity, and the Will of
the Lord shall be done.
Hands are black, white, yellow, or brown, but the
hue of the heart is one.”
HARROLD JOHNSON.
102


PHILOSOPHERS OF THE PAST
Philosophy is by no means a “dry as dust” study.
Why should it be? Philosophy is a most friendly
word, originating in the Greek “Philos,” meaning
loving and “Sophia,” meaning wisdom. How could
a “loving-wisdom” science fail to be vitally interest-
ing and helpful ?
Philosophy is a process of thinking, a systematic
study of truth, a detached penetration of the broad
roads and by-ways of past and present, an examiner
and sifter of principles and values, and a director
of the future. Philosophy is a close reasoner, and
therefore can belong to no creed, caste, party or
institution. It is a “loving-wisdom” lighthouse of
human needs, an eye to the blind or lost and a
monument to safety.
You have already had an interesting introduction,
in other sections, to several of the religious teachers
and philosophers; and now you are to come face to
face with others little less famous and instructive.
From your study of the lives of the philosopher-
teachers you will be able to defend them against the
“Every pound of knowledge requires ten pounds of wisdom.”
PERSIAN PROVERB.
103


common charge, or idea, of being old fossils, who,
having done with vital living, sit in arm-chairs, or
rain-barrels as Diogenes is said to have done, advis-
ing the world how to live. Ridiculous as it is in
view of their extra active lives in practical affairs,
philosophers are often ignorantly classed as mum-
mies. To be a philosopher it is necessary to have
great knowledge and great experience of life and
living. In the words of Stephen Graham Phillips,
American philosopher-author —“ Only those who
have lived know how to live.”
NECESSITY FOR PHILOSOPHY
Before meeting the ancient philosophers it may be
as well to clear up another point. You will meet
quite intelligent people who argue that perfectly well
people need no philosophy. They infer that philo-
sophies are merely sanctuaries for the disappointed
or disillusioned, second-hand suits of clothes from
life’s pawnshop to cover living poverty.
How would you answer such an argument? You
might reply, “Only an idiot is perfectly contented.
The healthiest brain in the healthiest body, and the
two living a chosen natural life, will sooner or later
feel the itch to extend beyond self, to think sym-
pathetically about others, their struggles, their
thoughts and ways and the eternal hunger of the
human mind.” You might add that philosophy not
only sifts the gold from the dross in human values,
but brings values into a working relationship for
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


both individuals and nations, giving preference to
reason over passion and clothing history with sym-
pathetic insight.
PHILOSOPHY IS TIMELESS
Philosophies view the past, present and future as
evolutionary parts of an epic plan. They do not pro-
fess a definite knowledge of the plan, but are content
to believe its nature to be a moral one, reminding
the ages of the virtues upon which evolving civiliza-
tion depends. Thus the philosophers of the past
speak with a conviction vigorously pertinent to to-
day’s problems, and their words of wisdom, often
tinged with subtle and ironic humour, lend valiant
aid to the philosophic thought of our times. You
will discover for yourself the persistency of philo-
sophy’s attitude towards life, in its emphasis of
truth, reason, thoughtfulness, beauty and goodness
as the simple mainsprings of the good life, and in
its unchanging regard of these virtues as the social
foundations in the midst of all economic change.
Virtues remain philosophically uninfluenced by time,
geography, politics, customs or education, undis-
turbed as the sun, moon and stars by the mechanical
changes in human life. Elephants in one age or
country and aeroplanes in another are, as far as
philosophy is concerned, of no greater importance
than changing a pencil for a pen.
“It is not knowledge, but little knowledge, that puffeth up.’ 5
CARLYLE.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Throughout the ages, and beneath industrial and
scientific change, flows a deep stream of emotion, a
stream now fed and clean and peaceful, now starved
and muddy and sullen, or overfed and uncontrolled,
leaping its banks, madly destructive. Philosophers
of four thousand years hence will be watching this
stream, for its behaviour profoundly affects all
human destiny. Out of its beneficent flow arises a
noble crop of human values—art, literature, health,
love, peace and happiness; out of its sullen or
swollen flow comes hate, war, famine, disease and
misery. The teaching of most philosophers is based
upon the necessity for balance between impulse and
action (emotion and behaviour), and since the
emotions remain fundamentally identical through the
ages, the wisdom of a philosopher of two thousand
years ago is as pregnant with significance as though
he lived to-day.
There is a type of so-called philosophy which is
emphatically not the result of “loving-wisdom”
thought, but which, though definitely the result of
“hatred-foolishness,” and therefore anti-human,
nevertheless has a brazen voice and many followers.
You will recognize this pseudo-philosophy by its
spurious teachings of might is right, regardless of
humanitarian justice. Those who preach such
brutality are men of inflamed egotism, victims of
moral gout.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


MEET THE PHILOSOPHERS
The proper use of your imagination is very import-
ant. It enables you to project yourself backwards
or forwards into past or future. It was a common
practice of the. philosophers of old to summon in
imagination all the great spirits of those who had
gone before to meet and converse in that quest for
knowledge to which they had devoted their lives
and talents. Let us suppose that you of this
conscious living now are invited to a friendly meet-
ing of philosophers of the past, who are come to-
gether for your special benefit and pleasure. Appre-
ciating the need for quiet, and being lovers of the
simplicities, they have chosen a mountain ridge for
converse.
The night is clear and the stars brilliant. There
is no moon, but the flames of the huge log fire light
up the near grey trees and give spirit to the scene.
Where will you sit, next to Socrates? You prefer
to sit on a log outside the magic circle; your modesty
does you credit. The philosophers are seated in a
semi-circle, some in shadow and others in fire-light.
There is Aesop, whose fables were collected about
300 B.C. by Phaedrus, a philosopher of Athens, and
were so highly esteemed by Socrates that whilst in
prison he turned them into verse; next to Aesop is
Lao-tze (born 604 8.C.), the old master philosopher
of China, who wrote The Book of the Simple Way.
“Blessedness is not the reward of virtue but virtue itself.”
SPINOZA.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


He valued simplicity, believing that life was harmed
by being made complex; next to Lao-tze sits the
slender Akhnaton, the Egyptian poet and idealistic
King, born in the fourteenth century 8.C., who
esteemed virtue more than love, and who replaced
the worship of many gods with the one God Aton,
and built the beautiful city of Akhetaton to
replace that of Thebes. He was the world’s
first recorded idealist. Socrates (469-399 8.C.),
the greatest of the Greek philosophers, who
taught that “good” meant “intelligent,” and “virtue,”
“wisdom,” is now wandering around the group
looking for somebody to debate with. Plato
(427-347 8.C.), his great disciple, is staring into the
coals. Aristotle (384-322 8.C.) is talking animatedly
with the friendly Epicurean philosophers, Epicurus
(342-270 8.C.) and Lucretius (95-54 8.C.)
who both taught that pleasure was an essential part
of life but that pleasures must be carefully selected.
They exalted the joys of intellect rather than those
of the senses. Seated next to the Epicureans are the
founders of another school of philosophy, the Stoics
—Zeno (336-264 8.C.), Epictetus (A.D. 50-125),
and Marcus Aurelius (A.D. 121-180). They taught
that as life is brief and troubles and sufferings are in-
evitable, they should be disregarded when outside
one’s power of choice and avoided when within it.
All life was to be subdivided between such externals
which were to be met with Stoic indifference and in-
ternals which were to be cultivated to the soul’s ulti-
108


mate perfection. Bending down poking the camp fire
is the stout figure of the Scotsman Hume (1711-76),
who is smiling benevolently towards Francis Bacon
(1561-1626), the English philosopher who raised the
curtain on a new world of modern thought. The
dark man next to Bacon, with hands spread to the
coals, is Spinoza (1632-77), the excommunicated
Jew of Amsterdam, frail and tubercular. The sharp
but noble featured Frenchman, Voltaire (1694-
1778), leans against a tree while Kant (1724-1804),
the German, barely five feet in stature, replies to
him in polished French. There, with the full fire-
light on his studious face, sits Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903), the famous English philosopher of a
generation ago. The man with the pessimistic
expression is the German Schopenhauer who died
in iB6O. He lived as a hermit, and entertained a
rather dismal outlook upon life. Closest to the fire
is another German, the most dynamic of Europe’s
philosophers, Nietzsche (1844-1900), who believed
in a ruling class of supermen.
LISTEN
What a gathering of wisdom! Do not be afraid to
ask each or any of the masters questions that are
perplexing your mind. Mark well their replies, and
you will begin to understand a little about these men
“If a man be endued with a generous mind, that is the best
kind of nobility.”
PLATO.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


who devoted their lives to the search for truth and
wisdom.
You might address yourself to Lao-tze asking;
“Could you offer me some advice that will guide me
through life?”
Lao-tze; “If you do not quarrel, no one on earth
will be able to quarrel with you. Recompense injury
with kindness. To those who are good, lam good,
and to those who are not good, I am also good; thus
(all) get to be good. To those who are sincere I
am also sincere; and thus (all) get to be sincere.
The softest thing in the world dashes against and
overcomes the hardest. There is nothing in the
world softer or weaker than water, and yet for
attacking things that are firm and strong there is
nothing that can take precedence to it.”
(The Simple Way: Lao-tze.)
Turning to Aesop you might ask; “How is it
that such a great master of rhetoric as yourself
should have felt his wisdom best expressed in fables ?
Was it because the parable makes a wider appeal
than the strictly literal approach? Would you tell
me one or two of those that seem sound lessons in
practical wisdom?”
“A dog crossing a bridge over a stream with a
piece of flesh in his mouth, saw his own shadow in
the water, and took it for that of another dog, with
a piece of meat double his own in size. He therefore
let go his uwn, and fiercely attacked the other dog,
to get his larger piece from him. He thus lost both:
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


that which he grasped at in the water, because it was
a shadow; and his own, because the stream swept it
away.
“An astronomer used to go out of a night to
observe the stars. One evening, as he wandered
through the suburbs with his whole attention fixed
on the sky, he fell unawares into a deep well. While
he lamented and bewailed his sores and bruises and
cried loudly for help, a neighbour ran to the well
and, learning what had happened, said, ‘Hark ye,
old fellow, why, in striving to pry into what is in
heaven, do you not manage to see what is on
earth ?’
“Two Game Cocks were fiercely fighting for the
mastery of the farm-yard. One at last put the other
to flight. The vanquished Cock skulked away and
hid himself in a quiet corner. The conqueror flying
up on to a high wall, flapped his wings and crowed
exultingly with all his might. An Eagle sailing
through the air pounced upon him, and carried him
off in his talons. The vanquished Cock immediately
came out of his corner, and ruled henceforth with
undisputed mastery.” ( Aesop’s Fables.)
The dark-eyed Jew, Spinoza, seated by the fire-
side turns his keen gaze on you as in hesitant speech
you say to him; “I understand that Anatole France
paid you a great compliment by saying, ‘lf Napoleon
“Some people seem to be here in the world just on their
guard all the while, always so afraid of doing wrong that
they never do anything really right.”
BROOKS.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


had been as intelligent as Spinoza he would have
lived in a garret and written four books.’ Have you
any advice to offer as a guide to permanent
happiness ?”
Spinoza: “After experience had taught me that
all things which frequently take place in ordinary
life are vain and futile, and when I saw that all the
things I feared, and which feared me, had nothing
good or bad in them save in so far as the mind was
affected by them, I determined at last to inquire
whether there was anything which might be truly
good, and able to communicate its goodness, and by
which the mind might be affected to the exclusion
of all other things. I determined, I say, to inquire
whether I might discover and attain the faculty of
enjoying throughout eternity continual supreme
happiness. I could see the many advantages acquired
from honour and riches, and that I should be
debarred from acquiring these things if I wished
seriously to investigate a new matter . . . but the
more one possesses of either of them, the more the
pleasure is increased, and the more one is in conse-
quence encouraged to increase them; whereas if at
any time our hope is frustrated, there arises in us
the deepest pain. Fame has also this great drawback,
that if we pursue it we must direct our lives in such
a way as to please the fancy of men, avoiding what
they dislike and seeking what pleases them. But the
love towards a thing eternal and infinite alone feeds
the mind with a pleasure secure from all pain. .. .
112


The greatest good is the knowledge of the union
which the mind has with the whole of nature. The
more the mind knows, the better it understands its
forces and the order of nature; the more it under-
stands its forces or strength, the better it will be
able to direct itself and lay down the rules for itself;
and the more it understands the order of nature, the
more easily it will be able to liberate itself from
useless things; this is the whole method.”
(The Improvement of the Intellect: Spinoza.)
Marcus Aurelius, a curiously detached Roman
whose philosophic nature had a hint of cold severity
that permitted prolonged persecution of the early
Christians, overhearing our conversation now inter-
rupts and adds: “There are three things which
belong to a man— body, soul, and mind. Sensation
belongs to the body, impulse to the soul, and reason
to the mind. To have the senses stamped with the
impression of an object is common to brutes and
cattle; to be hurried and convulsed with passion is
the quality of beasts of prey and men of pleasure,
of atheists and traitors, too, and of those who do
not care what they do when no man sees them. Now,
since these qualities are common, let us find out the
mark of a man of probity. His distinction, then,
lies in letting reason guide his practice, in content-
ment with all that is allotted him, keeping pure the
divinity within him, untroubled by a crowd of
“The greatest of human actions are measured by the motives
which inspire them.”
PASTEUR.
113


appearances, preserving it tranquil, and obeying it
as a god. He is all truth in his words and justice
in his actions; and if the whole world should dis-
believe his integrity, dispute his character, and ques-
tion his happiness, he would neither take it ill in the
least, nor turn aside from that path that leads to the
aim of life towards which he must move, pure, calm,
well-prepared, and with perfect resignation in his
fate. {Meditations: Marcus Aurelius.)
“Nevertheless,” you remark, “humanity draws
warmth and comfort from friendly personal relation-
ships. Men can help me and I can help them. There
is a brotherhood between us that has its spiritual
consolations.” Overhearing these words Schopen-
hauer adds with a certain sardonic coldness: “What
one human being can be to another is not a very
great deal; in the end every one stands alone; and
the important thing is, who it is that stands alone.
The happiness which we receive from ourselves is
greater than that which we obtain from our sur-
roundings. The world in which a man lives shapes
itself chiefly by the way in which he looks at it.
Since everything which exists or happens for a
man exists only in his consciousness, and happens
for him alone, the most essential thing for a man
is the constitution of his consciousness. Therefore
it is with great truth that Aristotle says, ‘To he
happy means to be self-sufficient.’
“Men are a thousand times more intent on be-
coming rich than on acquiring culture, though it is
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


quite certain that what a man is contributes more to
his happiness than what he has.’’
(Wisdom of Life: Schopenhauer.)
To this the diminutive Kant adds in his charming
manner; “Morality is not properly the doctrine how
we may make ourselves happy, but how we may
make ourselves worthy of happiness.”
{Practical Reason: Kant.)
Turning next to the pensive Chinese philosopher,
Lao-tze, you ask; “Does not your Chinese philo-
sophy teach that we will not be contentedly happy
until we reduce our wants}”
Lao-tze: “You are going too fast. You see
your egg and expect it to crow. You look at your
bow and expect to have broiled duck before you. I
will say a few words at random, and do you listen
at random. How does the Sage seat himself by the
Sun and Moon and hold the universe in his grasp?
He blends everything into one harmonious whole,
rejecting the confusion of this and that. Rank and
precedence, which the vulgar prise, the Sage stolidly
ignores. The revolutions of years shall pass him
undisturbed, aeons of ages shall leave his soul
unscathed. The universe itself may pass away, but
he will flourish still. How do I know that the love
of life is not after all a snare ? How do I know but
“Properly speaking, everything depends upon a man’s in-
tentions. Where these exist, thoughts will likewise appear;
and as the intentions are, so are the thoughts.”
GOETHE.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


that he who dreads to die is like a little child who
has lost his way and cannot find his home?”
(The Simple Way: Lao-tze.)
There is a general chorus of agreement during
which Epicurus interpolates: ‘‘We must not avoid
pleasures, but we must select them.”
Bacon who has been idly throwing chips into the
fire throws his short cloak over his shoulders and
says; “My praise shall be dedicated to the mind
itself. The mind is the man, and knowledge mind.
A man is but what he knoweth. Are not the
pleasures of the affections greater than the pleasures
of the senses, and are not the pleasures of the intel-
lect greater than the pleasures of the affections ?Is
not that only a true and natural pleasure whereof
there is no satiety ? Is not that knowledge alone that
doth clear the mind of all perturbations? How
many things be there which we imagine are not ?
How many things do we esteem and value more
than they are ? These vain imaginations, these ill-
proportioned estimations, these be the clouds of
error that turn into the storms of perturbations. Is
there then any such happiness as for a man’s mind
to be raised above the confusion of things, where he
may have a respect of the order of nature and the
error of men? Is there but a view only of delight
and not of discovery? Of contentment and not of
benefit? Shall we not discern as well the riches of
nature’s warehouse as the beauty of her shop? Is
truth barren? Shall we not thereby be able to pro-
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


duce worthy effects, and to endow the life of man
with infinite commodities?”
(The Praise of Knowledge [is9 2 ] : Bacon.)
A pause follows these brief words so typical of
the Elizabethan. In the dark heavens outside the
glow of the fire a lone star falls as if to mark the
passage of time. You are the only member of that
illustrious assembly to whom time has significance
and under its spur you hasten to ask Socrates—
“ What do you consider the greatest virtue ?”
Socrates : “Knowledge. Know thyself.”
Addressing Spencer you continue; “You believe
that truth should be sought as the highest ideal?”
Spencer replies in the studied and sententious
exactitude of his time; “Whoever hesitates to
utter that which he thinks the highest truth, lest it
should be too much in advance of the time, may
reassure himself by looking at his acts from an
impersonal point of view. Let him remember that
opinion is the agency through which character adapts
external arrangements to itself, and that his opinion
rightly forms part of this agency—is a unit of force
constituting, with other such units, the general
power which works out social changes ; and he will
perceive that he may properly give utterance to his
innermost conviction; leaving it to produce what
effect it may. It is not for nothing that he has in
“Keep your mind on the great and splendid thing you would
like to do; and you will find yourself unconsciously seizing
upon the opportunities that are required for the fulfilment
of your desire.”
ELBERT HUBBARD.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


him these sympathies with some principles and
repugnance to others. He, with all his capacities,
and aspirations, and beliefs, is not an accident but
a product of the time. While he is a descendant of
the past, he is a parent of the future; and his
thoughts are as children born to him, which he may
not carelessly let die. Like every other man he may
properly consider himself as one of the myriad
agencies through whom works the Unknown Cause;
and when the Unknown Cause produces in him 1 a
certain belief, he is thereby authorized to profess
and act out that belief. Not as adventitious there-
fore will the wise man regard the faith that is in
him. The highest truth he sees he will fearlessly
utter; knowing that, let what may come of it, he is
thus playing his right part in the world—-knowing
that if he can effect the change he aims at —well;
if not —well also; though not so well.”
{First Principles: Spencer.)
“The inquiry of truth,” interjects Bacon with
the famous lift of his quizzical eyebrow, “which is
the love-making or wooing of it; the knowledge of
truth, which is the praise of it, and the belief of
truth, which is the enjoying of it, is the sovereign
good of human natures.”
( Essays: Of Truth: Bacon.)
A general chuckle of approval follows this neat
condensation of the great subject of all men’s
inquiry. “It is true enough,” you answer, “but you
speak from the vantage point of an attained emin-
118


ence. Here am I, no philosopher, but a poor student,
an eager but awkward inquirer. Can you tell me
from your own experience how a philosopher
begins ?”
At this inquiry David Hume jumps to his feet
as if anxious to impress upon me his ideas of philo-
sophy. “I find myself absolutely and necessarily
determined to live, and talk, and act like other people
in the common affairs of life. I dine, I play a game
of backgammon, I converse and am merry with my
friends. When I am tired with amusement and
company, and have indulged in a reverie in my
chamber, or in a solitary walk by a river-side, I feel
my mind all collected within itself, and am naturally
inclined to carry my view into all those subjects,
about which I have met with so many disputes in the
course of my reading and conversation. I cannot
forbear having a curiosity to be acquainted with the
principles of moral good and evil, the nature and
foundation of government, and the cause of those
several passions and inclinations, which actuate and
govern me. lam uneasy to think I approve of one
object, and disapprove of another; call one thing
beautiful, and another deformed; decide concerning
truth and falsehood, reason and folly, without know-
ing upon which principles I proceed,. lam concerned
for the condition of the learned world, which lies
under such a deplorable ignorance in all these par-
“Wisdom does not show itself so much in precept as in
life —in a firmness of mind and a mastery of appetite.”
SENECA.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


ticulars. I feel an ambition arise in me of contri-
buting to the instruction of mankind, and of acquir-
ing a name by my inventions and discoveries. These
sentiments spring up naturally in my present dis-
position ; and should I endeavour to banish them, by
attaching myself to any other business or diversion,
I feel I should be a loser in point of pleasure; and
this is the origin of my philosophy.”
( Treatise: Hume.)
Hearing an impatient grunt from Nietzsche you
say: “Your ideal is rather in strength than in good-
ness, is it not?”
Nietzsche; “What is good? To be brave is good.
What is good? All that increases the feeling of
power, the will to power, power itself, in man. What
is bad? All that comes from weakness.”
There is a momentary silence which you break by
saying somewhat lamely to Aristotle: “What is
your conception of the ideal man?”
Aristotle: “He does not expose himself needlessly
to danger, since there are few things for which he
cares sufficiently. But he is willing, in great crises,
to give even his life—knowing that under certain
conditions it is not worth while to live. He is of a
disposition to do men service, though he is ashamed
to have a service done to him. To confer a kindness
is a mark of superiority; to receive one is a mark
of subordination. He does not take part in public
displays. He is open in his dislikes and preferences;
he talks and acts frankly, because of his contempt
120


for men .and things. . . . He is never fired with
admiration, since there is nothing great in his eyes.
He cannot live in complaisance with others, except
it be a friend; complaisance is the characteristic of
a slave. . . . He never feels malice, and always for-
gets and passes over injuries. . . . He is not fond of
talking. ... It is no concern of his that he should
be praised, or that others should be blamed. He does
not speak evil of others, even of his enemies, unless
it be to themselves. His carriage is sedate, his voice
deep, his speech measured; he is not given to hurry,
for he is concerned about only a few things; he is
not prone to vehemence, for he thinks nothing very
important ... a shrill voice and hasty steps come to
a man through care. He bears the accidents of life
with dignity and grace, making the best of his cir-
cumstances, like a skilful general who marshals his
limited forces with all the strategy of war. . . . He
is his own best friend, and takes delight in privacy
whereas the man of no virtue or ability is his own
worst enemy, and is afraid of solitude.”
( Ethics, iv, 3 : Aristotle.)
“Sir, I thank you,” you answer, “you fill my
vision with a picture of dignity and wisdom. One
wonders whether it is possible to be a philosopher
amidst the rush and bustle of our modern world,
but you, sir,” you continue, turning to Voltaire, “you
“Public opinion does not consist of what people think; it
consists of that part of what people think which they ex-
press. That is what exerts the influence.’’
WILLIAM TEMPLE.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


lived a hectic life and crowded a prodigious amount
of work into your life.”
Voltaire: “ Not to be occupied, and not to exist,
amount to the same thing. All people are good
except those who are idle. One must give one’s
self all the occupation one can to make life support-
able in this world. . . . The further I advance in age,
the more I find work necessary. It becomes in the
long run the greatest of pleasures, and takes the
place of the illusions of life. If you do not want to
commit suicide always have something to do.”
“Your works have been a subject of bitter con-
troversy,” you continue. “Tell me, do you believe in
religion?”
Voltaire: “You yourself say that belief in God
has kept some men from crime; this alone suffices
me. When this belief prevents even ten assassina-
tions, ten calumnies, I hold that all the world should
embrace it. Religion, you say, has produced count-
less misfortunes. Say rather the superstition which
reigns on our unhappy globe. This is the cruellest
enemy of the pure worship due to the Supreme
Being. Let us detest this monster which has always
torn the bosom of its mother; those who combat it
are the benefactors of the human race. It is a ser-
pent which chokes religion in its embrace. We must
crush its head without wounding the mother whom
it devours.” ( Dictionary: Voltaire.)
Raising his right hand Bacon continues the dis-
cussion ; “I had rather believe all the fables in the
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Legend, and the Talmud and the Alcoran, than that
this universal frame is without a mind. A little
philosophy inclineth a man’s mind to atheism-, but
depth in philosophy bringeth men’s minds about to
religion. For while the mind of man looketh upon
second causes scattered, it may sometimes rest in
them and go no further; but when it beholdeth the
chain of them, confederate and linked together, it
must needs fly to Providence and Deity. Religious
indifference is due to a multiplicity of fractions.
The causes of atheism are, divisions in religion, if
they be many; for any one division addeth zeal to
both sides; but many divisions introduce atheism.
. . . And lastly, learned times, especially with peace
and prosperity; for troubles and adversities do more
to bow men’s minds to religion.”
( Essays: Of Atheism: Bacon.)
Plato who has been listening with keen interest
now takes up the theme; “He whose mind is fixed
upon true being has no time to look down upon the
little affairs of men, or to be filled with jealousy and
enmity in the struggle against them. His eye is ever
directed towards fixed and immutable principles,
which he sees neither injuring nor injured by one
another, but all in order moving according to reason.
These he imitates, and to these he would, as far as
he can, conform himself.” ( Republic : Plato.)
“Errors, like straws, upon the surface flow;
He who would search for pearls must dive below.”
DRYDEN.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


As you listen to this age-old principle you realize
suddenly that Plato wrote those words over 2000
years ago and that in Egypt 1200 years earlier they
were commonplace. To the Egyptian Akhnaton now
you say; “Even in your time you believed in one
God— Aton —the one life within and behind the sun.
Would you be so good as to quote from your won-
derful Song to Aton?”
Akhnaton smilingly repeats:
“All cattle rest upon their pasturage,
The trees and the plants flourish,
The birds flutter in their marshes,
Their wings uplifted in adoration to thee.
All the sheep dance upon their feet,
All winged things fly,
They live when thou hast shone upon them.”
This gives the frail Spinoza an opportunity for
an outburst against dogmatism in religion: “You
who assume that you have at last found the best
religion, or rather the best teachers, and fixed your
credulity upon them, how do you know that thev
are the best among those who have taught religions,
or now teach, or shall hereafter teach them? Have
you examined all those religions, ancient and modern,
which are taught here, and in India, and all the
world over? And even supposing that you have duly
examined them, how do you know that you have
chosen the best?” {Epistle: Spinoza.)
“I have often wondered that persons who make
boast of professing the Christian religion—namely,
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


love, joy, peace, temperance, and charity to all men
—should quarrel with such rancorous animosity and
display daily towards one another such bitter hatred,
that this, rather than the virtues which they profess,
is the readiest criterion of their faith.”
(Tractatus Theologico-Politicus: Spinoza.)
Spencer at this stage interposes and says: “Ulti-
mate scientific ideas are all representations of
realities that cannot be comprehended. In all direc-
tions the scientist’s investigations bring him face to
face with an insoluble enigma, and he ever more
clearly perceives it to be an insoluble enigma. He
learns at once the greatness and the littleness of the
human intellect—its power in dealing with all that
comes within the range of experience, its impotence
in dealing with all that transcends experience. He,
more than any other, truly knows that in its ultimate
nature nothing can be known.”
{First Principles: Spencer.)
‘‘Nevertheless, you remark mankind over and over
ploughs the same furrows towards the same harvest.
His instinct towards perfection is right and the sea-
sons successively ripen his thoughts. You for
example, sir,” addressing Plato, “in your civilization,
had ideas that we are only now once more beginning
to appreciate as being inseparable from social prob-
lems of every day. You appear to have had very
advanced social ideals even in your distant times.
“What is not good for the swarm is not good for the bee.”
MARCUS AURELIUS.
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Have you any advice to offer on the question of
education of children?”
Plato: “The elements of instruction should be
presented to the mind in childhood, but not with any
compulsion-, for a freeman should be a freeman too
in the acquisition of knowledge. Knowledge which
is acquired under compulsion has no hold on the
mind. Therefore do not use compulsion, but let
early education be rather a sort of amusement; this
will better enable you to find out the natural bent
of the child.” ( Republic: Plato.)
Bacon, too, is anxious to add his ideas to this
discussion; “Let parents choose betimes the voca-
tions and courses they mean their children should
take, for then they are most flexible. And let them
not too much apply themselves to the disposition of
their children, as thinking they will take best to that
which they have most mind to. It is true that, if
the affections or aptness of the children be extra-
ordinary, then it is good not to cross it; but generally
the precept is good, Optimum lege, suave et facile
illud faciet consuetudo —choose the best; custom will
make it pleasant and easy.”
( Essays: Of Parents and Children: Bacon.)
“How like your problems were to ours to-day,”
you cry, “and how similar your solution. Did you,
like us, have all the problems of inferior types,
crimes and faulty heredity? I seem to remember
that you also advocated the practice of eugenics, did
you not?”
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES


Plato; “The best of either sex should be united
with the best as often as possible, and the inferior
with the inferior; and they are to rear the offspring
of the one sort but not that of the other; for this
is the only way of keeping the flock in prime con-
dition. Our braver and better youth, beside their
other honours and rewards, are to be permitted a
greater variety of mates; for such fathers ought to
have as many sons as possible.”
{Republic: Plato.)
“Did you allow eugenically undesirable persons
to marry?” you continue, and the ancient economist
philosopher promptly replies :
“We granted this permission with strict orders to
the parties to do all in their power to prevent any
embryo from seeing the light ; and if any should
force its way to birth, they must understand that
the offspring of such a union cannot be maintained,
and they must make their arrangements accordingly.”
( Republic: Plato.)
Turning again to Nietzsche you say: “I under-
stand that you have similar views. Can you offer
me any advice with regard to matrimony?”
Nietzsche: “Thou art young, and wishest for child
and marriage. But I ask thee, art thou a man who
dareth to wish for a child? Art thou the victorious
one, the self-subduer, the commander of thy senses,
“The company of just and righteous men is better than
wealth and a rich estate.”
EURIPIDES.
127


the master of thy virtues ?—or in thy wish doth
there speak the animal, or necessity? Or solitude?
Or discord with thyself? I would that thy victory
and freedom were longing for a child. Thou shalt
build living monuments unto thy victory and thy
liberation. Thou shalt build beyond thyself. But
first thou must build thyself square in body and
soul. Thou shalt not only propagate thyself, but
propagate thyself upward! Marriage: thus I call
the will of two to create that one which is more than
they who created it. I call marriage reverence unto
each other as unto those who will such a will.”
{Thus Spake Zarathustra: Nietzsche.)
As his rapidly spoken words cease you feel
impelled to ask ; “Do you then believe that from good
progeny we should endeavour to create a race of
supermen who should be the ruling class?”
Nietzsche takes a turn or two up and down the
firelit path before he answers; “There are some
that preach my doctrine of life but at the same time
are preachers of equality. ... I do not wish to be
confounded with these preachers of equality. For
within me justice saith, ‘Men are not equal.’ We
wish to possess nothing in common. Ye preachers
of equality, the tyrant-insanity of impotence thus
crieth out of yourselves for equality.” He pauses
for a moment and raising his hand like an ancient
prophet suddenly exclaims: “Ye lonely ones of to-
day, ye who stand apart, ye shall one day be a
128


people; from you who have chosen yourselves, a
chosen people shall arise; and from it the superman.”
(Thus Spake Zarathustra: Nietzsche.)
There is a momentary silence as these great
men look back into the distant and varied past.
You break the silence by addressing Plato: “You
also believe that the equality of man is a fallacy,
do you not?”
Plato: “Citizens, you are brothers, yet God has
framed you differently. Some of you have the
power of command; and these he has made of gold,
wherefore they have the greatest honour; others of
silver, to be auxiliaries; others again, who are to be
husbandmen and craftsmen, he has made of brass
and iron; and the species will generally be preserved
in the children. But as you are of the same original
family, a golden parent will sometimes have a silver
son, or a silver parent a golden son. And God pro-
claims . . . that if the son of a golden or a silver
parent has an admixture of brass or iron, then nature
requires a transposition of ranks; and the eye of
the ruler must not be pitiful towards his child be-
cause he has to descend in the scale to become a
husbandman or an artisan, just as there may be
others sprung from the artisan class who are raised
to honour, and become guardians and auxiliaries.
“Wisdom is knowing what to do next; skill is knowing how
to do it; and virtue is doing it.”
JORDAN.
129


For an oracle says that when a man of brass or
iron guards the state, it will be destroyed.”
{Republic: Plato.)
Again there is silence as before the mind’s eye
passes in review the long category of fallen king-
doms, but as precious time is passing you hasten to
address Socrates: “It was surely your teachings
which gave your pupil Plato these ideas. You taught
that a State would degenerate unless it was led by
its wisest men. What were your remarks about the
State being governed by orators?”
Socrates: “They go ringing on in long harangues,
like brazen pots which, when struck, continue to
sound till a hand is put upon them.”
{Protagoras: Socrates.)
Turning then to Spinoza you query; “Although
you agree that governments should be controlled by
our wise men, do you not think that the individual
should be given as much liberty and freedom as
possible?”
Spinoza: “The last end of the State is not to
dominate men, nor to restrain them by fear; rather
it is so to free each man from fear that he may live
and act with full security and without injury to him-
self or his neighbour. The end of the State, I repeat,
is not to make rational beings into brute beasts and
machines. It is to enable their bodies and their
minds to function safely. It is to lead men to live
by, and to exercise, a free reason ; that they may
not waste their strength in hatred, anger and guile,
130


not act unfairly toward one another. Thus the end
of the state is really liberty.”
(A Treatise on Religion and the State: Spinoza.)
“This is a counsel of excellence,” you continue,
“but when will it be possible to grant full liberty
and freedom to the individual without jeopardizing
national safety?”
Plato, as though recognizing his right to reply,
answers with vehemence; “Until philosophers are
kings, or the kings and princes of this world have
the spirit and power of philosophy, and wisdom and
political leadership meet in the same man . . . cities
will never cease from ill, nor the human race.”
( Republic: Plato.)
It is drawing towards the dawn and as one last
query you address Kant who hitherto has been
listening patiently: “Could you, as perhaps the
greatest of modern philosophers, sound a note on
which we might conclude our most interesting talk ?”
Kant: “Two things fill the mind with ever new
and increasing admiration and awe, the oftener and
the more steadily we reflect upon them: The starry
heavens above and the moral law within. I have
not to search for them as though they were veiled in
darkness or were in the transcendent region beyond
my horizon; I see them before me and connect them
directly with the consciousness of my existence. . . .
The former view of a countless multitude of worlds
“Make yourself an honest man, and then you may be sure
that there is one rascal less in the world.”
CARLYLE.
131


annihilates as it were my importance as an animal
creature, which after it has been for a short time
provided with vital power, one knows not how, must
again give back the matter of which it was formed
to the planet it inhabits—a mere speck in the
Universe. The second on the contrary, infinitely
elevates my worth as an intelligence by my per-
sonality, in which the moral law reveals to me ... a
destination not restricted to conditions and limits of
this life, but reaching into the infinite.”
( Ethics: Kant.)
A cock crows, the air stirs with the cold of
the false dawn, the fire has sunk low as you stand
and address them with humility and earnestness:
‘‘Thanks and good night, Illustrious and Honoured
Ones. I shall reflect upon your discourse as a worthy
student and citizen.”
“Give me a good digestion, Lord,
And also, something to digest.
Give me a healthy body, Lord,
And sense to keep it at its best.
Give me a good digestion, Lord,
To keep the good and pure in sight;
That seeing sin, is not appalled,
But finds some way to set it right.
Give me a mind that is not bored.
That does not whimper, whine or sigh,
Don’t let me worry over-much
About that fussy thing called ‘L’
Give me a sense of humour, Lord,
Give me the grace to see a joke;
To get some happiness from life,
And pass it on to other folk.”
PRAYER FOUND IN CHESTER CATHEDRAL.
Halstead Press Pty Limited, 9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
RELIGIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES
