

COMPAC
Souvenir commemorating the opening of
THE COMMONWEALTH CABLE
by H.M. The Queen, Elizabeth ll—December 3,1963


THE OVERSEAS TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (AUSTRALIA)






THE IMPOSSIBLE BECOMES A REALITY
Yesterday it was much less easy, sometimes impossible. Today,
the world no longer imposes any barrier to communications
between distant friends or relatives or business associates. Voices
thousands of miles away have a new clarity that brings them
intimately closer. World calls now become local calls,
world broadcasts take on a new reality, and world news a new
sense of immediacy. For the modern tools of international
commerce—the telephone, the teleprinter, the computor—there
are now more channels of communication, new standards of speed
and accuracy and dependability, new avenues for exploitation.
And all this because of an incredibly thin cable, newly lying in
the uttermost depths of two great oceans, to bring to Australia,
in an instant of time, the voices, the messages, and the images of
people from the other side of the world.


This brochure has been specially
produced by the Overseas
Telecommunications Commission
(Australia) to commemorate the
official opening of the
Commonwealth Pacific Cable
by
Her Majesty The Queen
GREAT BRITAIN
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
NEW ZEALAND




It all began in Queen Victoria’s reign, O with the birth of the submarine telegraph
cable, and it remained that way for 75 years. Then came the dramatic impact
of radio short-wave, high-frequency radio —which could transmit voices and
pictures as well as words with a speed and in a volume beyond the capabilities of
the submarine telegraph cable. From the 1920’s to the 1950’5, radio not only carried
all the world’s conversations and pictures, and the greater part of its messages,
but it also made possible the development of large-volume service facilities such
as international telex. © In its heyday, therefore, radio was paramount, and it
will continue to have wide applications in many parts of the world for a long time
to come. However, when it came to meeting the phenomenal demands it had
helped create, radio began to reveal its vulnerability. For one thing, its capacity
was too limited; for another, it suffered periods of instability. Both defects derived
from natural causes for which there was no absolute technical remedy. © Thus


1 Following the first successful
demonstration in 1837, the
year Queen Victoria came to the
throne, of an electric telegraph
system along the railway
between Euston and Camden
Town in England, telegraph
lines spread rapidly across the
countryside in the wake of the
new railways. By the 1850 s
England and Europe were linked
by submarine telegraph cable,
and in 1866 the first successful
cable had been laid across the
Atlantic. The British telegraph
cable network reached Australia
in 1871, and had encircled the
globe by 1902, with the opening
of the first Pacific Cable. Until
1873, when duplex working was
introduced, submarine cables
could only carry one message at
a time in one direction. The
signals had to be copied and re-
transmitted manually at each
relay station until 1900, after
which incoming messages could
be reproduced on perforated tape
which was then fed into an auto-
matic transmitter for transmis-
sion to the next relay station.
Completely automatic transmis-
sion only commenced in the
19205.
Loaded with submarine telegraph
cable, an old frigate lies alongside the
‘‘Great Eastern” which, in 1866, laid
the first successful trans-Atlantic cable.
(By courtesy of Science Museum.)
2 Short-wave radio owed much
of its spectacular success to
the development of (1) indepen-
dent sideband transmitters for
the simultaneous transmission of
telephone, telegraph and photo-
telegraph traffic (2) time-divi-
sion multiplex equipment enab-
ling many teleprinter services to
be operated on a single radio
transmission (3) equipment to
protect world-range radio circuits
through the use of complex error
detection and correction systems
to ensure extremely accurate re-
ception, even under poor propa-
gation conditions.
Part of the equipment in O.T.C.'s
Paddington terminal for the protection
of radioteleprinter links. Transistor-
ised error-correcting multiplex equip-
ment is seen on the left.
3 Only radio waves with a
frequency below the order of
30 megacycles per second are
reflected back to earth from the
ionosphere. The top diagram
shows the extremely limited
frequency range for all global
radio transmissions. According to
the degree of ultra violet radia-
tion emitted from the sun, so the
electrified layers of the upper
atmosphere or ionosphere reflect
or absorb these radio waves with
correspondingly favourable or
adverse effects. These conditions
vary from day to night and
season to season and, over the
years, follow a generally predic-
table pattern within an eleven
year cycle. The second diagram
shows how short-wave radio
signals are directed around the
world by being “bounced” off the
ionosphere in a series of hops.
It also demonstrates how occa-
sional solar flares or sunspot out-
bursts have a shattering effect on
the ionosphere, thereby disrup-
ting radio communications in
affected areas for periods which
may last from part of an hour
to several days.


4 The three basic elements of
the Commonwealth large-
capacity_ cable systems are:
(i! a lightweight coaxial sub-
marine cable; (ii) submerged
amplifiers to re-cnergise the
signals as they pass through the
coaxial tube of the cable;
{iii) land based terminal equip-
ment designed to merge at the
sending end and sort out at the
receiving end, the millions of
electrical signals representing
speech, writings, images and
music, flowing simultaneously in
both directions through the cable.
(a) Two cutaway views of a submerged
amplifier in its steel housing. The
enlarged picture shows the armour
termination, bulkhead. gland, etc.
(h) Part of the complex of transmission
units at O.T.C.'s Paddington cable
terminal station.


some alternative communications system had to be found, ideally one combining
the dependability of the submarine cable and the diversity of radio. It had long
been the ambition of telecommunications engineers to add amplifiers to submarine
cables to restore signal levels lost by attenuation and to lay these with the cable
on the ocean bed and supply them with power from the cable ends. For by so
doing, a coaxial submarine cable system could be created to carry all forms of
communications with optimum capacity, quality and stability over very long
distances. O After solving the very considerable problems of design, manufacture
and economics, the breakthrough finally came in 1956 with the laying of the first
coaxial submarine cable system across the Atlantic as a joint British, Canadian
and United States venture. With a capacity of 36 two-way voice channels, each
capable of subdivision into a number of telegraph channels, TAT 1, as it was
called, demonstrated the great potential of this new form of telecommunications.


ERRATA
@ (should read)
By December 1961, the first link, CANT AT,
had been opened between Britain and Canada.
By July 1962, Australia and New Zealand were
in communication through the first stage of the
second link, COMPAC, and . . .
By perfecting the two-way submerged amplifier and by creating a new type of
lightweight coaxial submarine cable, British engineers then opened the way for a
vast new concept —a large-capacity global network linking the nations of the
Commonwealth. From that point on, events moved swiftly. © By December 1961,
the first link, CANTAT, had been opened between Britain and Canada. By July
1962, Britain and New Zealand were in communication through the first stage of
the second link, COMPAC, and by December of the same year the second stage to
Fiji had been opened. The laying of the final stages, from Fiji to Hawaii, and
from Hawaii to Canada, was completed on October 10, 1963, and COMPAC was
made ready for service by December 3 of this year. Following close on COMPAC,
the third link, SEACOM, is planned to extend the Commonwealth Cable by 1966
from Australia via New Guinea to the Federation of Malaysia and to Hong Kong.
COMPAC, which represents the first venture of the Overseas Telecommunications


pr Some idea of the work en-
tailed in laying the
COMPAC cable may be gathered
from the distances and depths
involved:
(1) from Sydney to Auckland
1,439 miles, maximum depth
2,800 fathoms;
(2) from Auckland to Suva
1,449 miles, maximum depth
2,500 fathoms;
(3) from Suva to Hawaii 3,510
miles, maximum depth 3.400
fathoms;
(4) from Hawaii to Vancouver
2,936 miles, maximum depth
3,200 fathoms.
The 9,334 mile long COMPAC
cable is linked by a 3,900 mile
microwave radio system across
Canada to the 3,017 mile long
trans-Atlantic cable, CANTAT,
thus making a total distance of
16,251 miles in this new
Commonwealth communications
complex between Australia and
Britain.
(a) In deep waters submerged ampli-
fiers, which weigh half a ton, are
floated down hy parachute to regulate
their descent to that of the lightweight
cable. This scene was taken on board
H.M.T.S. “Monarch.”
(h) H.M.T.S. “Monarch” off Port
Alherni. Plastic balloons mark course
of cable to beach.


£* Members of the Pacific Cable
Management Committee are:
T. A. Housley, C.8.E., General
Manager of the Overseas Tele-
communications Commission
(Convenor and Australian Rep-
resentative ); Col. D. McMillan,
C. 8., 0.8. E., Director, External
Telecommunications Executive,
British Post Office, and H. H.
Eggers, C.M.G., 0.8. E., Manag-
ing Director, Cable and Wireless
Ltd. (joint British Represen-
tative); D. F. Bowie, President
and General Manager, The
Canadian Overseas Telecom-
munication Corporation (Cana-
dian Representative); and G.
Searle, Second Deputy Director-
General, New Zealand Post
(b)
Office (New Zealand Represen-
tative).
Following the initial success of
TAT I and the agreement
between Britain and Canada to
lay a second trans-Atlantic cable,
CANTAT, it was decided at
Commonwealth conferences held
during 1958 at London and
Montreal to establish a round-
the-world network of large-capa-
city multi-purpose cables, with
CANTAT as the first link.
Australia then invited other
interested governments to a con-
aspects, set out the broad design,
construction, ownership and
control arrangements, and their
recommendations were accepted
by the partner governments of
Britain, Canada, Australia and
New Zealand.
(a) T. A. Housley, C.8.E., Convenor
of the Pacific Cable Management
Committee.
(h) The Postmaster-General addressing
delegates at the opening of the 1959
Pacific Cable Conference in O.T.C.
House, Sydney.
ference to consider extending the
cable system into the Southern
Hemisphere. The Governments,
of Britain, Canada and New
Zealand accepted this invitation
and sent delegates to the Pacific
Cable Conference which was
opened by the Prime Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies, on Sep-
tember 28th, 1959. At this
conference the leading admini-
strators and technical experts of
the telecommunications autho-
rities concerned, after studying
the technical and financial


An historic moment . . . The first shore-end k
cable is landed on Sydney's famous Bondi beach B
from C. S. “ Retriever ” on 19th April, 1962 f
Commission (Australia) into cable ownership, is a partnership project between
Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. It has been planned and brought
into being through the co-operative efforts of the telecommunications authorities
of these four Commonwealth countries, under the direction of a management
committee headed by Mr. T. A. Housley, General Manager of O.T.C. © COMPAC is a
multi-purpose communications system with an initial capacity of 80 two-way voice
channels enabling the simultaneous transmission and reception of telephone, telegraph,
phototelegraph, telex, leased teleprinter and audio broadcast services. What else
can COMPAC do? First, it can carry voices, pictures—even music—with a quality
previously unattainable. Second, it can be relied upon for continuous, uninterrupted,
unmutilated service. Third, it has the capacity to meet the mounting demands for
communications over the regions it serves. O It therefore opens up new avenues
for the commercial and technical exploitation of its high-grade services: for example,






by making available for the first time wide-band circuits for the exchange of data-
type communications for computer operation. It will also offer new prospects for
large users of international teleprinter services. It will expand and improve press
and press agency facilities for gathering world news and pictures, and it will
enable both national and commercial stations to broadcast high-fidelity pro-
grammes directly from overseas. For all of us, too, it will provide a new experience,
a new thrill, when we need to speak with someone on the other side of the world.
Eastward from its Vancouver terminal, COMPAQ is linked by a microwave radio
system across Canada to Montreal and on to Grosses Roches on the St. Lawrence
Estuary. Thus the traffic-carrying capacity of COMPAQ is joined through Canada
and the Atlantic cable complex to Britain and Europe, and we now have a
communications system stretching continuously more than half way around the
world. This introduces a new and little realised aspect—the effects on this


I*T COM PAG has initially 80
• two-way voice channels from
which can be derived a consider-
able number of other communica-
tions services, as the diagram
shows. The significance of this
capacity becomes apparent when
contrasted with previous cable
and radio circuits over the same
route: 13 radiotelephone and 28
cable and radio telegraph chan-
nels operating between Australia,
New Zealand, North America,
Britain and Europe.


O The two maps and the dia-
gram illustrate how the Com-
monwealth cable system can be
exploited to take advantage of
the differing time zones around
the world. Maps 1 and 2 show
the situation at 9 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Australian eastern time. The
diagram gives a broad outline of
the overall traffic picture.


communications system of the constantly changing periods of night and day
through which it passes. For while Australia sleeps, Hawaii wakes, Canada
advances towards midday, and Britain nears the end of another working day.
© Fortunately these world time differences can work in the system’s favour, in
that advantage can be taken of this by allocating a larger number of channels
between any two countries during their mutual busy hours and at a time when
the capacity is not required on other sections of the system. For instance,
channels that are used some of the time between, say, New Zealand and Canada,
will be used at other times between Australia and Britain, and so on. Thus channel
capacity which is virtually lying idle in one zone can be used to provide
additional capacity elsewhere as the demand occurs. This will be achieved by high-
grade automatic switching between the various sections of the cable system.
Finally there are the benefits that will come from the Commonwealth Cable’s


compatibility with other communications systems, both radio and cable. © Radio,
for example, will bring to the cable traffic from points the cable does not touch.
The Commonwealth Cable by interconnecting with other cable systems will not
only encourage an inter-flow of traffic, but will also provide, through mutual aid
arrangements, against the provision of any one cable, either Commonwealth or
otherwise, suffering from interruption. Thus the traffic and commercial potentials
of the world’s new coaxial cable systems will be enhanced and safeguarded.
COMPAC has cost nearly £33 H million. It has called for the manufacture of well
over 9,000 miles of coaxial cable and 350 submerged amplifiers designed to
function in great ocean depths under tremendous pressures for at least 20 years
without maintenance or renewal. It has required the construction of terminal
stations and complex electronic equipment. ®lt brought into being two new
cable ships. It has involved many negotiations, including those for landing sites


9 Map showing world coaxial cable systems.


-J Meticulous attention to
JL\I every detail is the key to
the technical perfection on which
the success of the COMPAC
system is based. All raw
materials, all components at
every stage of manufacture, are
exhaustively tested. Valves for
the submerged amplifiers, for
instance, are run for a whole year
before use, and the electrical
components are hand-made by
specialists. All metal surfaces
including connecting wires are
gold-plated to prevent corrosion,
or other defects and each ampli-
fier contains duplicate systems
working in parallel so that if one
half should fail, the other will
(a) Each amplifier unit is assembled
with the utmost care and precision in
an atmosphere of near-surgical clean-
liness.
maintain service with negligible
effect upon the performance of
the system. The rigorous testing
continues during the loading on
board ship of the cable and
amplifiers and throughout the
laying operations. Nothing is left
to chance. Even each cable joint
made on board is X-rayed on the
spot. All this scrupulous care is
taken to ensure that both cable
and amplifiers continue to func-
tion in great ocean depths at tre-
mendous pressures (as much as
4 tons per square inch at 3,500
fathoms) over a long period of
time. The lightweight coaxial
cable developed by British engin-
eers and manufacturers derives
its strength from a central core
of high-tensile steel wires, thin-
ner than a man’s little finger, yet
capable of withstanding a pull
of over 4 tons, and free of any
twisting or kinking tendencies
associated with earlier types of
submarine cable. Around this
central core is the electrical
working part of the cable or “co-
axial tube,” comprising a copper
tube or inner conductor covered
with an extrusion of polythene
insulation and six aluminium
ribbons known as the “return
tapes.” Raw materials for the
cable have been supplied from
(b) O.T.C.’s international telecom-
munications terminal station at Pad-
dington, N.S.W.
within the Commonwealth; poly-
thene and copper tape from Aus-
tralia; polythene, copper and
aluminium from Canada; and
high-tensile wire strands and
steel armour wire from Britain
where both the cable and sub-
merged amplifiers were manufac-
tured. This lightweight coaxial
cable is used without any further
protection than its outer poly-
thene casing in all deep-sea lay-
ing operations, and it is only in
coastal waters that the cable is
armoured with outer wrappings
of tough steel wire. The elec-
trical or transmission losses in a
submarine coaxial, cable over
long distances are so great that
intermediate amplifiers must be
used, to restore the strength of
the signal currents, at regular
intervals of about 26 miles along
the cable. Each of these “booster”
units, or repeaters, is enclosed
in a single water-tight pressure-
resisting steel housing which can
be attached to and laid with the
cable. These submerged ampli-
fiers in their torpedo-like con-
tainers are 10 feet long, 104
inches in diameter, and weigh
half a ton. The valves in the
amplifiers are energised by a
direct current, supplied from the
land terminal stations, which
(c) Crossbar exchange tester in the inter-
national maintenance centre associated
with COMPAC cable in O.T.C.’s Pad-
dington terminal station.
passes along the inner conductor,
through each submerged ampli-
fier in succession, and returns via
the sea. On long trans-oceanic
cables the voltage applied to the
ends of the cable may be in the
vicinity of 6,000 volts. On shore
the cable is continued in a series
of underground ducts to the ter-
minal station. These stations
include equipment to supply
power to the valves of the sub-
merged amplifiers; “pilot” equip-
ment for continuously monitoring
the condition of the cable link
and shore-based installations;
units for fault location; duplica-
tion of all essential equipment
with provision for immediate
changeover in cases of failure;
and the whole complex of trans-
mission units to enable all the
various services to be operated
through the system. One of the
most intricate installations in
this regard is a new International
Telephone Exchange at O.T.C.’s
Paddington Terminal Building.
This exchange—an electronic
wonder in itself— will allow Post
Office operators throughout Aus-
tralia to dial direct onto the cable
and throughout the entire system
to Canada, the Americas, Britain
and Europe. This ingenious
equipment receives dialled code
(d) Intercontinental 5002 crossbar tele-
phone exchange for COMP AC project in
O.T.C.'s Paddington terminal station.
digits from operators both at
home and throughout the world
and transcribes them to the
necessary international and local
telephone codes currently in
operation. Thus, the subscriber’s
call is not only automatically fed
through the cable, but may be
successfully routed through the
complex of internal communica-
tions systems at either end to
connect subscriber to subscriber
across the world. Only one
manual action is involved—a
single dialling by the interna-
tional operator concerned.


and its interconnection with other compatible systems. More than anything else,
COMPAQ has demonstrated what four great Commonwealth countries—Britain,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand can achieve in a true spirit of partnership,
backed by the wealth of skill and experience gained in more than a century of
leadership in cable and radio communications. CANTAT, COMPAQ, SEACOM—
step by step the peoples of Australasia, of America, Britain, Europe and South-
East Asia are being brought closer together than ever before through this great
new concept in global communications.
THE OVERSEAS TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (AUSTRALIA)
Australia’s Overseas Cable and Radio Services


The Overseas Telecommunica-
tions Commission (Australia), or
O.T.C. as it is more generally
known, is the Australian
National Body, constituted in
1946 by Act of Parliament, to
establish, maintain, and develop
all public overseas telecommuni-
cations services by both cable
and radio. In addition, O.T.C.
operates Australia’s coastal radio
service through a chain of radio
stations around the mainland
and in Papua-New Guinea.
O.T.C. is further responsible for
the fulfilment of Australia’s
obligations under the Common-
wealth Telegraphs Agreement
which established a partnership
between the countries of the
Commonwealth in the telecom-
munications services which link
them. This partnership enables
a high degree of co-operation in
the development of the Com-
monwealth telecommunications
system as a whole, within the
broader framework of inter-
national co-operation achieved
through the International
Telecommunication Union, a
specialised agency of the United
Nations. The international cable
and radio services provided by
0. are:
1. Overseas Telephone Service
O.T.C. provides the cable and
radio communications channels
enabling subscribers to the Aus-
tralian Post Office telephone ser-
vice to be connected directly to
telephone subscribers in other
countries overseas. During
1962/63, overseas telephone calls
to and from Australia totalled
864.000 paid minutes.
2. International Telex Service
O.T.C. operates the international
exchange and overseas channels
enabling subscribers to the
internal telex service of the
Australian Post Office to be
directly connected by teleprinter
with telex subscribers in 55 other
countries. During 1962/63 inter-
national telex traffic totalled
820.000 paid minutes.
3. Leased Communications
Channels
O.T.C. leases one-way and two-
way long-distance teleprinter
channels to organisations having
a continuous and considerable
need to maintain contact with
overseas offices. O.T.C. also
leases circuits for phototelegraph
transmission and/or reception,
and for the interception of over-
seas broadcast programmes. Dur-
ing 1962/63, two-way leased tele-
printer services totalled 153,000
hours of operation.
4. International Telegrams
Service
O.T.C. is responsible for the
transmission and reception of all
international telegrams to and
from Australia. During 1962/63
international telegrams amounted
to 80 million words.


5. Phototelegraph Service
At O.T.C.’s phototelegraph ter-
minal in its Melbourne Office,
pictures are transmitted to, and
received from, places all over the
world. The bulk of this traffic
is news pictures, but business
organisations also find this ser-
vice valuable for exchanging
drawings, plans, specifications
and documents, in exact facsimile
form, with overseas offices. Dur-
ing 1962/63 just under 6,000
phototelegrams were sent or
received.
6. Coastal Radio Service
This service provides, as its
principal function, essential
maritime communications hand-
ling distress signals, navigation
warnings, Air-Sea Rescue Ser-
vice and Radio Medical Service
messages, time signals, and naval
traffic as required. It also pro-
vides, by radiotelegraph and
radiotelephone, communications
with ships in transoceanic and
local waters and, by radiotele-
phone, message communication
with small vessels.
Some stations also provide com-
munications facilities for net-
works of mainland and island
outpost stations in remote areas.
During 1962/63 the Coastal
Radio Service transmitted and
received over 17 million words in
telegraph messages, and handled
telephone calls totalling 96,000
paid minutes.


THE OVERSEAS TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (AUSTRALIA)
Chairman A. E. Chadwick, M.S.M.
Vice-Chairman E. w. Easton
Commissioners P. A. Dorrian
G. H. Lush, Q.C.
A. H. Petfield
General Manager t. a. Housley, c.b.e.
Head Office O.T.C. HOUSE, 12 Spring Street,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Telephone 2-0544
Melbourne Office 382-384 Lonsdale Street,
Melbourne, Vic.
Telephone 60-0351
WAITE 8c BULL PTY. LIMITED. SYDNEY


