

ABai
BARTLETT ADAMSON


COMRADES ALL




COMRADES ALL
and other
Poems for the People
Bartlett Adamson
Published by
CURRENT BOOK DISTRIBUTORS
Sydney, March, 1945,


Acknowledgment
Of these verses the following now make their first appearance;
‘ Comrades All,” “One Guardian Truth,” “Capitalism,” “Labor
Renegade,” “Mortgage,” “Not Suspect," “Economic Impulse,”
“Diagnosis" and “Relativity”. The others have appeared vari-
ously in “Bulletin,” “Progress,” “Sydneysider,” “Russia and
Us,” “Workers' Weekly” and “Australian Authors’ Annual,” all
of Sydney; “Current Opinion,” New York; and “International
Literature,” Moscow, in which “This Monster of Fascism” was
printed both in English and in a Russian translation. To the
periodicals concerned I have pleasure in making all due acknow-
ledgment.
—B.A.


INDEX
Comrades All 7
The Red Star 10
Labor Renegade 10
Diagnosis 10
This Monster of Fascism 11
Bomb Happy 12
One Guardian Truth 13
Mortgage 13
The Call of Life 14
The Oath of Eureka 16
Not Suspect 17
Glory 18
Economic Impulse 18
Knight of the Garter 18
Capitalism 19
Big Business 19
For Low-Brows 19
Armageddon 20
Election Night 22
Nemesis 22
Relativity 22
Red October 23




COMRADES ALL
This world will then be human, and our ways of life be grand.
When comrade creed and code and deed shall lead in every land,
When comradeship is measure
Of our work and of our pleasure.
And when success and truthfulness walk freely hand in hand;
When avarice is banished and when brilliance need not brawl;
When peoples of all places.
Of all colours, faiths, and races.
Can live and work together as great-hearted comrades all,
Comrades all!
But, what may be our hope to see mankind as comrades all?
The comrade creed and code and deed are primitive in man,
For men and women, ever since the human tale began,
Have died for one another
As a brother for a brother,
And brotherhood for common good prompts every social plan
At final need few men indeed deny the comrade call:
The strong shall aid the weaker,
And the wise shall guide the seeker,
For human need has long decreed that men be comrades all,
Comrades all!
Yet, what may be our hope to see mankind as comrades all?
Our fighting men and women fare by skyway, land, and sea,
And side by side and day by day face death in some degree;
While black and barefoot bearers
March as equal danger-darers,
And black and white as comrades meet and fight for worlds to be:
When merchant seamen sag on rafts where flying terrors fall,
Or drift with hope at zero,
While some lone and unknown hero
Dives off to save a thirst-mad mate —these people know the call:
Comrades all!
For those who fare or fight together soon grow comrades all.


When men outback ride out to track some traveller astray.
And search through mulga heat and hate unresting night and
When football players, racing
In and out, and ever placing
The team-fame first, their own fame last, from first to last of
play;
When workers of the shops or mines or farms fight, back to wall;
When neighbor stands by neighbor
In the cause of union labor,
In firm defence of union rights—all these obey the call:
Comrades all!
And those who fight for union might are comrades first of all.
The surfers of our beaches who, for hobby, more or less,
Go lunging through the breakers in a cool foolhardiness,
Go strongly plunging under
Toppling walls of death and thunder,
To save a friend, or stranger —they are comrades, as you guess.
When bushfires roar and ravage, and men race to meet the call,
And face, in breathless manners,
Face and fight the mad flame-banners.
To save the homes of strangers, or of friends—these men are all
Comrades, all!
And man will be true human then when men are comrades all
Where Soviet men and women own the products of their hands,
And own machines and finance, own the State, and own the
Where Soviet life embraces
Many colors, faiths, and races.
They work, or fight, as brothers might when comrade-need
demands.
When women of our alleys, owning half a tattered shawl
Through slum-ways of the city
Go to share their rags, and pity,
With someone trapped in worse distress —they, too, have heard
the call:
Comrades all!
And women, then, are women most when comrades, comrades all


When those who manned Eureka met, and their great vow was
made;
When wharfies at the “Dalfram” struck against the murder-
trade;
When grim guerilla forces
Muster jamtin-bomb resources,
And fight an armed invader for a people half-betrayed;
When miners crouch, entombed where rotten timbers creak and
And mates defy the rumble
Of the roof that yet may crumble,
And dig through doom and darkness—they are comrades most
of all,
Comrades all!
For deeds like these are comrade-deeds exalted most of all.
This world will be true human then, our days of life be grand,
When comrade creed and code and deed shall lead in every land;
When men meet one another
As a brother meets a brother;
And when success and truth and trust walk freely hand in hand;
When craftiness has perished and ambition need not brawl;
When peoples of all places,
Of all colors, faiths, and races.
Can live and work together as great-hearted comrades all,
Comrades all!
But, what may be our hope to see men live as comrades all?
With freedom on the march once more a mighty future gleams.
The dawn glows red. The new day may be nearer than it seems.
For comradeship, so common
To the heart of man and woman,
Now colors all the pattern of our thoughts and deeds and
dreams.
And history has labored, and the grain of time is tall.
The hopes that long lay sleeping
Grow ripe-ready for the reaping.
And peoples all the world around are rising to the call:
Comrades all!
Why should not we yet live to see mankind as comrades all!


THE RED STAR.
Steadfast the Red Star shines and gleams and g!
Steadfast above the tides of Nazi night.
Steadfast above the menace and the might
Of war and ruin and cataclysmic throes,
Steadfast above black calumnies of foes,
Steadfast for human freedom, human right.
And every cause for which the workers fight,
And every dream of justice mankind knows.
Steadfast the Red Star shines, not in some chill
And lonely vastitude of space afar.
But as a most beloved and friendly star.
A guiding light that leads man forward still . .
Steadfast the Red Star shines and glows and
In the warm firmament of human dreams.
LABOR RENEGADE.
He claims to be a democrat.
And all of us, his betters,
Arc willing to concede him that—
Except the first five letters.
DIAGNOSIS.
On the land we cannot study.
In the town we cannot train.
For the city stunts the body
As the country starves the brain.


THIS MONSTER OF FASCISM.
Stealthily, from the caverns of the past.
This monster crept, like some incredible ape,
And ignorance, with mind and mouth agape,
Stared at the thing aghast.
Sired when old avarice, in gusty fear,
Mated with treachery for price and price,
Begotten as a deal in merchandise
And spawned in what bleak year.
Pre-dedicated to the god of gold,
Suckled by foster hate on dregs of crime,
On cose of cruelty, malignant slime
From dugs grown lank and cold—
So was this Fascist monster born and bred.
In secret vaults dimlit and dank with tears,
Where moans and screams were music in its ears
And even death lay dead.
This Fascist monster, beckoning for its aid
All those of miser creed and bestial taint,
And those of superstitious unrestraint
Trained to the murder trade.
And those of blood diseased and twisted brain,
Homicide, sadist, flagellators, freaks,
Despots with bloated paunch and sagging cheeks
Mumbling their words insane.
And power-drunk humans of inhuman kind,
Creatures of vulture beak and cavernous maw,
Of strutting pose and posed prognathous jaw
And megalomaniac mind,
And gibbering dwarfs who limp and swill delight
From pogrom-cries and sobbing prison cell,
Who dance and prance to hear their victims yell
For mercy through the night—


Such are the Fascist lackeys. Where they go
Horrors flame out and deeds of vilest price.
Vast agonies and traitorousness and vice,
And war, and war-wide woe,
Such are the Fascist minions, marshalled all
To strangle freedom, progress, reason, hope.
Enslaving life in ever-diminishing scope,
In ever-tightening thrall.
But man was born to freedom. Progress leaps
Vibrant along his blood. Hope knows no death
Reason fights on where even the foulest breath
Of Fascist evil creeps.
And man, indomitable in face of wrong,
Steadfast for liberty, passionate for right,
Rallies in world-wide brotherhood and might
To fight this Fascist throng.
The Fascist monster reels. Its lackeying hosts,
Discipline-drugged, and with up-clutching hands,
Go, whirled upon its tempested commands,
Tangled in frenzied gusts.
Dragged and engulfed in vortices of gloom,
Whirled where the monster goes with lurch and lunge
To roar fn self-annihilating plunge
Over the brink of doom.
BOMB-HAPPY.
The leaning-tower of high finance is leaning more and more,
Its deep foundations jolted by the bomb blasts of the war.
And while it wobbles diwily, in half a mood to flop,
The Money Barons whimper from their windows near the top.


ONE GUARDIAN TRUTH.
(Dedicated in profound admiration to E.L.A.S. patriots of
Greece in their fight to preserve democracy for the Grecian
people.)
Treachery walks the world in strange disguise
And no disguise at all. In every land
Where greed, in desperate gamble, steals command,
Traitors come swaggering forth, and quislings rise
To strangle truth with a noose of lies.
And government gives fraud a friendly hand,
While honesty, that cannot understand,
Secs justice go to gaol—and freedom dies.
In such an age of black night for mankind,
One guardian truth, immutable and just,
Gleams through the storm —one beacon-fact, defined
Clear as a searchlight slanting on a steeple:
A people cannot, must not, dare not, trust
A government that dare not trust the people.
MORTGAGE.
I like no mortgage, not the least,
Nor any plan that breeds it.
A mortgage is a savage beast.
It bites the hand that feeds it.


THE CALL OF LIFE.
I have no faith in gods unseen,
In paradises none may scan.
My faith is firmer, more serene,
My faith is in my fellow-man.
Gods are a failure. From their ports afar
They send their agents, and their sample creeds.
Making this world of ours a vast basaar,
An auction-hall where folly shouts and pleads,
Where faiths are sold, each guaranteed to be
The brand of linen that the nude soul needs,
Where fear may lease the parks of paradise
For such and such a fee,
Or purchase, at a special bargain-price,
Tickets and passports for eternity.
And man, still jostling in that marketplace,
Squanders the hard-earned profits of his mind,
Gambling his golden prayers for plots of space
And palaces with title-deeds unsigned.
Haggling for future love, his eyes agleam
With present hatred for his fellow-kind
When he might, splendid as a light-heart youth.
Bathe in the living stream
Of knowledge welling from the hills of truth.
Free from those remnants of a worA-out dream.
Free from those trammelings of yesterday,
Scorning to mortgage life for hopes afar,
Greeting the morrows as a keen mind may,
And fearing not what jeopardies might mar
The strong glide forward on the rainbow-bright
Crest of the breakers where the big seas are—
The strong glide forward on a thundering surge
Of life in measureless might,
The strong glide forward to that new-won verge
Where life and living mingle and unite.


True to the call of life! There lies the way.
Into the past old superstitions go.
Our deified grotesques have had their day.
Their laws were tyrannous, their trade was woe.
Leave them and all their merchandise of sky
And give our loyalties to truths we know—
To deeds of living worth and social sense
Statured to meet the high
Courage and clean serene irreverence
Of men who dare to live nor fear to die.
Down the dark past old fancies, tottering, go.
Demons and fairies mould our fates no more.
Satans and saints are dead, or nearly so.
Monarchies most divine in years of yore
Wander disconsolate, an outcast clan.
Trailing the tattered pomp that once they wore
Only the gods remain, and even they
Must join the caravan
And journey past the gates of yesterday.
Leaving a liberated world for man.
I have no faith in gods unseen,
In paradises none may scan.
My faith is firmer, more serene,
My faith is in my fellow-man.


THE OATH OF EUREKA.
(Written in July, 1939, when the Mensies Government tried
to introduce a National Register in Australia and when Cham-
berlain was still in power in Britain. W'orkers throughout the
Commonwealth, knowing well that Menzies, like Chamberlain,
aimed primarily at repression of the workers, rightly opposed
the Register. At Port Kembla, where wharf-laborers shortly
before had gone on strike rather than load the “Dalfram” with
scrap-iron for Japan, the workers publicly burned their Register
Cards and took the Oath of Eureka; “We swear by the South-
ern Cross to stand truly with each other and fight to defend our
rights and liberties.” The Register was a fiasco.)
The workers of Kembla, those leaders of men,
Those leaders in deed as in thought,
They challenged the might of the pound and the yen,
And there at the “Dalfram” they fought
The cause of the Chinese distraught.
And still marching onward,
With gase lifted sunward,
The call of Eureka is caught.
Democracy thrills to that message of yore.
The vow of Eureka has echoed once more.
The workers awaken. They rally and rise.
The workers have taken the lead.
With light of Eureka aflame in their eyes.
United in word and in deed,
They fight the conscriptionist creed.
No despot shall darken
Our wide land, for hearken!
These men of the Southern Cross breed.
They raise the bright flag that all true men adore.
They march in the light of Eureka once more.


Eureka the Flag! By that symbol they swear
Unswerving to stand to the fight.
And sworn to the faith of Eureka, they dare
To march in their militant might,
To battle for freedom and right,
To vanquish each traitor.
Each Fascist dictator.
Each monster of death and of night.
The workers now march like those freemen of yore.
They take the firm oath of Eureka once more.
The workers have trampled the counsels of gloom,
Of cowardly leaders that quake.
This register card is a ticket of doom.
Then spurn it and burn it and break
Each move that the tyrannies make.
The workers have risen,
And heedless of prison,
And bidding democracy wake.
They march man to man with those great men of yore.
They swear the great vow of Eureka once more.
NOT SUSPECT.
No taints of aristocracy
Within his veins are sizzling.
Therefore it seems unlikely he
Could ever be a quisling.


GLORY.
He dreamed of glory through his boyhood years
Thousands of lancers in the morning-light
Charging behind him with tumultuous might,
A thundering cataract of cavaliers.
He dreamed of glory: silver swords and spears.
Banners of gold and purple, and the bright
Meadows of waving hats to left and right.
His tall plumes tossing in a gale of cheers.
He dreamed of glory. But he dreams no more.
Glory has made him her ambassador,
And there, erect among the rotten-ripe
Corpses that snuggle in their beds of blood,
He stands unconquerable, knee-deep in mud,
And fumbles for a match to light his pipe.
ECONOMIC IMPULSE.
Freud is a man whose fancies vex.
He places primal stress on sex.
And that is where his theory phuts.
The primal stress must still be guts.
KNIGHT OF THE GARTER.
He said I was not noble born
But there he came a thud.
For I replied, in terms of scorn:
'Tve bowyangs in my blud.”


CAPITALISM,
Like all things else it goes its destined way,
This man-made plan that man has worshipped
A vehicle of progress years ago
It served its purpose, history will say,
And having long outlived its useful day
It takes the track of death. By brinks of woe,
With dim disasters lurking far below.
Downward it clanks and rattles in decay.
Downward it clatters, like a worn-out car,
Downward, more madly still, with leaps and jolts.
With scorching brakes and twisted axle-bar.
Downward, with tyres exploding as it bolts.
Downward, with passengers that scream and squeal.
While dodderers fight to grip the steering-wheel.
BIG BUSINESS.
An orange orchard there you’ll find,
A golden glory in the hills.
I know because I peeped behind
That hoarding advertising pills.
FOR LOW-BROWS.
By mental swank let not yourself be blinded.
You’ll often find the highbrow quite low-minded.


ARMAGEDDON.
(Written in May, 1917, for a Sydney “Bulletin” Competition
in vers-libre, in which it won second place. That was the period
of suspense when there was still grave danger that Kerensky
might drag Russia back from the course she was taking toward
what proved to be “Red October.”)
Striding from star to star
Two gods went splendidly past
Across the river-shallows of the wide-flowing sky,
And, glancing to choose the starry stepping-stones,
They saw the world.
They saw:
The German storm advancing,
Like ponderous periods of jargon
A crash of hieroglyph,
An inky mass,
Over the daintily-painted page of Belgium.
They saw:
France, like a light-foot rhythmic matador.
Leap to the ready, poise alert, and flash
A sword of light that drove the headlong storm
Staggering backward.
They saw;
The Britannic millions, a confused crowd,
Trying to march in a line.
An awkward squad, more or less of heroes,
Eager and disorderly as vers-libre is,
Trying desperately to march in a line.
Trying, and trying, and tardily
Learning the measured might of discipline.
Until their brown battalions thudded by.
Swinging in line.


They saw:
Russia,
A slow voluminous music visible,
Rising and falling, billowing and receding,
Ebbing and flowing, flowing
To what predestined end!
To sink maybe to caverns of woe,
Or swell and thunder
To some clear ocean-tone of exultation
They saw:
These and others, a circle of nations.
Rise and kindle a ring of fire,
A prisoning wall of flame around the roaring
Black mass of storm.
They saw;
A leaden mist of mingled battle-smoke
And praying breath and hate and woe
Creeping over the world and covering it,
And seething, curling into fantastic roots,
Rising in rugged trunks, branching and forming
A forest, a grey moss on a boulder,
A monstrous forest of fog among whose roots
Men lived and wrought and fought and died.
Or crawled with tattered flesh and tattered wits,
And women loved, and wept behind their eyes,
And romping children shouted and ran,
Playing at war.
They saw:
In one keen casual glance,
These trivial incidents of everyday,
This turmoil-tinted boulder in a stream,
This ripple
Of some far cyclone-passion of creation,
And without pause,
Across the river-shallows of the wide-flowing sky
They passed, striding from star to star.


ELECTION NIGHT.
A street. The tinsel of electric-light.
A polling-board aloft. A coterie
Of people swanking on a balcony.
An angry crowd below. Eyes flashing bright.
Great voices roaring to the roof of night.
A gust of missiles. Intermittently
A thistledown of laughter floating free,
And over all the stars in flight on flight.
And jerked and jostled by the surging crowd,
A tattered woman, weary-eyed and bowed
By overwork and overweight of woes.
Mumbles and dreams of brotherhood and love,
While, leaning from the balustrade above,
The country’s portly ruler thumbs his nose.
NEMESIS.
Yes! Many fools make money
According to the rules.
But what is yet more funny,
Money makes many fools.
RELATIVITY.
So long as one least coolie lies
And in an Asian gutter dies.
There cannot be, beneath the sun,
Security for anyone.


RED OCTOBER.
Red October! Red October! When a new dawn woke the world,
When a people rose triumphant with a dawn-red flag unfurled,
When a multitude of heroes, marching forth for peace and food,
Fought for all the world of workers, fought for world-wide
brotherhood.
Red October! Tyrant forces toppling from the brink of night.
Vanquished when those men and women marched as comrades
to the fight.
Marched with mighty-minded Lenin, firm of faith and strong of
will.
Marched with mighty-hearted Stalin, marching, marching for-
ward still.
Red October! Men emerging from ten thousand years of strife,
Forth to wide and human vistas, forth to social ways of life,
Life that gave them pride and purpose, hope renewed and
strong accord,
Nerves of steel and iron courage, strength to fight the Fascist
horde.
Red October! Vast horizons bright with hope for all mankind,
Dawn-light of a new life rising from a dark night left behind.
Dawn-red flags and mankind marching, firm of faith and strong
of will,
Led by mighty-hearted comrades, marching, marching forward
still.


T, V. Bennett S Coy., 241-3 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
