

CONCRETE INDUSTRIES (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED




INTRODUCTION
Shown here in pictures is the story of Concrete
Industries' progress, depicting the phases in which
Concrete Industries, with its subsidiary companies,
are operating in the fields of domestic and civic con-
struction. In the interests of shareholders, staff and
customers Concrete Industries and its subsidiaries
have concentrated on building a solid, progressive
company; eguitable, pleasant and remunerative
employment and products of guality comparable
with the finest concrete manufactures in the world.
Specialised plant for each phase of production,
competent direction, and exacting laboratory tests
at every stage of production have caused this large
and still expanding company to be recognised by
Governments, engineers, architects and home
owners as a company in which absolute trust can be
placed. The results of this constant emphasis on
service and quality will be seen in the pages to
follow.
Of especial interest is the growth of the Company
during the years since its inception. Moneys are put
to work fully, to return steady dividends, and an
ambitious and far-sighted expansion policy ensures
the retention of markets when more competitive
conditions return. The rapid growth of Concrete
Industries (Australia) Limited is an endorsement of
the faith of many people to whom we have been of
service, and it is in appreciation of this faith, and
what we consider justifiable pride, that we present
this pageant in pictures.
AERIAL VIEW OF
VILLAWOOD FACTORY


CEMENT LININGS
PTY. LIMITED.
MONIER PIPE
COMPANY PTY. LIMITED.
MONOCRETE
PTY. LIMITED.
MONIER HOME BUILDERS
PTY. LIMITED.
MONIER TILE
COMPANY PTY. LIMITED.
STANDARD CONCRETE
& CONSTRUCTION
CO. PTY. LIMITED.
MONIER BRICK
COMPANY PTY. LIMITED.
MONIER STEEL
PTY. LIMITED.
CONCRETE INVESTMENTS
PTY. LIMITED.
CONCRETE INDUSTRIES
(AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE:
VILLAWOOD, N.S.W.
BRANCHES:
BRISBANE
MELBOURNE
ADELAIDE
PERTH




MAIN PRIOR TO LINING
Corrosion has reduced original bore of 4" to 1".
MAIN CEMENT-LINED
Section of same main restored by cement
lining process. Life is approximately doubled.
CEMENT LININGS
PTY. LIMITED
Senior member of the Concrete Industries'
subsidiaries is Cement Linings Pty. Limited,
instituted primarily for the restoration of
corroded water mains in situ. Using an
entirely Australian patent, water mains already
laid down for some years can be cleaned and
relined without removal from the ground. This
company has been singularly active in the
restoration of old pipes for almost every major
water authority in the Commonwealth, and
hundreds of thousands of pounds have been
saved by authorities controlling water
reticulation.
The Company's skilled staff, with special equip-
ment, scour the encrustation from the interior of
the iron pipes and line them with dense concrete,
impervious to cracking or corrosion. This
method doubles the effective life of the pipes.
The other major function of the company is the
lining of new mains at the time of installation at a
cost comparable with factory linings. The great
advantage of this process is that new pipes need
be of only that capacity needed for the satisfac-
tory supply of water to the district at the time of
installation. No margin need be allowed for
reduction of water flow in the bore by encrusta-
tion. Water supply authorities naturally have
not been slow to avail themselves of this process.


2,500 MILES OF
PIPES RE-LINED
It is estimated that, in the last 15 years, re-
placement of three million pounds worth
of piping was saved by the process at a
cost of only £750,000.
Listed on map below are some of fhe
major projects—public and private—
undertaken by Cement Linings Pty. Ltd.,
throughout the Commonwealth. These
projects involved over 2,500 miles of
piping.
Factory Lined Speciais
As shown in the above illustration, bends and Junctions are no
obstacle to Cement Linings. Because of the high pressure applied
in the lining process, the concrete adheres firmly to the iron
surface and is quite impervious to flaking. When applied in situ,
pressure forces concrete into the joints, thus a rigid, indestruct-
ible bore of constant diameter is retained throughout the full
length of the pipe, including the joints.
Bathurst City Council.
Nn in Lithgow Municipal Council.
■ ijiWi Goulburn City Council.
Bowral Municipal Council.
Forbes Municipal Council.
Taree Municipal Council.
Penrith Municipal Council.
Molong Municipal Council.
Condobolin Municipal Council.
Coomo Municipal Council.
Kiama Municipal Council.
Department of Public Works.
Hunter District Water Board — Newcastle.
Met. Water, Sewerage and Drainage Board — Sydney.
Grafton and South Grafton Wafer Board.
Department of Interior — Canberra, A.C.T.
Dorrigo Shire Council — Coff's Harbour.
Willimbong Shire Council — Leeton.
Berrigan Shire Council —Toe umwal.
Boree Shire Council —Conow indra.
Wingecarribee Shire Council—Moss Vale,
City of Greater Newcastle — Abattoirs.
Wingham Municipal Council.
Sydney Cricket Ground Trust.
Royal Agricultural Society Show Ground — Sydney.
Erina Shire Council — Wyong.
Katoomba Municipal Council.
Pieton Municipal Council.
Colonial Sugar Refining Company — Broadwater.
Narrandera Municipal Council.
Mudgee Municipal Council.
Vacuum Oil Co. Pty. Ltd.—Sydney and Newcastle.
Kempsey Municipal Council.
Shell Oil Company of New South Wales.
British Australian Lead Manufacturers.
West Maitland • Gas Company.
A9V & Mil Toowoomba.
I| LnllU Brisbane Cify Council.
Ipswich City Council.
Maryborough City Council.
Queensland Meat Export Co. Ltd. —Ross River.
Rockhampton City Council.
Thursday Island Municipal Council.
Townsville City Council.
Vacuum Oil Co. Pty. Ltd. — Brisbane.
Bundaberg.
■
flip Horsham County Council.
Vlui Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Chiltern Shire Council.
Ararat Town Council.
Creswick Shire Council.
Sale Town Council.
Vacuum Oil Co. Pty. Ltd. — Yarraville.
Australian Cement Co. Ltd. — Geelong.
Winchelsea Water Works Trust.
Lome Water Works Trust.
Stawell Water Works Trust.
WnifCT Department of Public Works — Geraldton.
■ ilUifl ■ Golden Horseshoe I New I Ltd. — Kalgoorlie.
Lake View & Star Ltd. — Kalgoorlie.
Bunbury Water Board.
Met. Water Supply, Sewerage and Drainage Dept. — Perth.
Goldfields Water Supply Department — Kalgoorlie.
Si AUSTi Engineering and Water Supply Department.


MONIER PIPE COMPANY PTY. LIMITED
Manufacturers of Reinforced Concrete Pipes for Water,
Sewerage, Drainage and Irrigation, and Contractors for
the supply of pipes to all Government and Municipal
Authorities. We enjoy the confidence of an ever increas-
ing private and industrial clientele, not only in the supply
of pipes but in all manner of precast concrete products
such as Vats, Wine Vats, Water Tanks, Fencing Posts,
Box Culverts, "Hollowbeam" Precast Flooring, Septic
Tanks, Park and Garden eguipment.
Our factories are "strategically" sited:—in New South
Wales at Villawood, which is the head office, Newcastle,
Lismore, Glen Innes, Dubbo, Wagga, Port Kembla; in
Victoria at Albion; in Queensland at Alderley, and in
Western Australia at Perth. This widespread network of
supply centres enables deliveries and servicing to be
made, with a minimum of delay, to any district in any
State.
The ever increasing consciousness of the convenience,
versatility and economy of precast concrete is resulting
in a constantly growing demand for the products of our
company.
Although dogged at times by the shortages of raw mat-
erials and lack of sufficient labour, production has shown
an upward curve over the past years.
Photograph below shows general view of Villawood factory (N.S.W.).


Newcastle N.S.W.
Brisbane Queensland
Port Kembla N.S.W.
Dubbo N.S.W.
branch factories
Wagga N.S.W.
Glen Innes N.S.W.
Perth Western Australia
Lismore N.S.W.
Melbourne Victoria


Hollowbeams.
The exceptional development achieved by the Monier Pipe
Company in the development of concrete, steel-reinforced
Hollowbeams has put a method of construction at the disposal
of contractors that has virtually revolutionised building pro-
cedure. Hollowbeams have exceptional strength and insulating
properties and are made to builders' specification in depths of
4", 5”, 6”, 7" and 8”, of various lengths, to take a loading
of from 20 to 250 lbs. per square foot. The versatility of this
building medium can be readily comprehended from the con-
struction photographs at right.
The beams are made at the MONIER factories. They are
delivered to the job, can be readily manoeuvred into position
and, as soon as they have been laid, form a perfect working
floor for further extension of the building. Beams drop into
position on top of or abutting girders or walls.
The crevices are sealed with mastic material, such as mortar
topping, ready for the overlaying of floor covering. The Hollow-
beam permits the easy laying of electrical and telephone conduit
through the beam cavity itself or in the crevices prior to the
application of the topping. The Hollowbeam, besides its con-
venience of installation, offers two other major advantages in
small and large building construction: firstly, there is an enor-
mous saving in weight over solid concrete flooring: secondly,
concrete mixing and handling machinery is eliminated. This
latter enables building alterations to go on even when tenants
are still in occupancy and, in the erection of new buildings,
leaves additional space for the storage of other building materials
on the ground area. Formwork becomes unnecessary and a
considerable saving in site labour is achieved. A floor can be
laid to an accurately designed strength and provides a complete
working platform as soon as it is placed in position.
Shown on this page are only some of the varied products leaving the company's factory
for satisfaction of civil, industrial and agricultural markets.
Civic Works
To civil authorities, in addition to the large volume of concrete
pipes for all purposes. Monier Pipe Company supplies concrete
seats, concrete drinking fountains, concrete tables and concrete
flagging for municipal parks and play-centres, also box culverts,
gutter bridges, telephone conduits, etc.
Agricultural
Apart from the demand for "Hollowbeams" for industrial
building there is a continual call from industry for wine vats,
storage vats, brine vats and other types of vats, concrete floors,
and a large variety of products for specialised purposes.
Industry
To the man on the land Monier Pipe Company supplies large
quantities of irrigation pipes and specials, well casing, concrete
troughs, concrete tanks, concrete fence posts, concrete sillage
vats, concrete silos, and septic tanks.


Newcastle N.S.W.
Brisbane Queensland
Port Kembla N.S.W.
Dubbo N.S.W.
branch factories
Wagga N.S.W.
Glen Innes N.S.W.
Perth Western Australia
Lismore N.S.W.
Melbourne Victoria
MONOCRETE
PTY. LIMITED
Monocrete Pty. Limited is yet another illustration of what
foresightedness, co-operation and energetic administration
can achieve. Of an entirely Australian origin, Monocrete
provides what is now a well-established building medium
for the building of houses, factories, offices, schools and
hospitals. Wherever structural stability and capacity for
design are of paramount importance, Monocrete has ably
proved itself, and that at a time when housing is the
nation's most pressing need.
Monocrete is designed for the Australian climate; is fireproof and termite-
proof, and many hundreds of homes have been erected from our factories
in Sydney, Canberra and Perth for The Department of Works and Housing,
Canberra; War Service Homes Commission, N.S.W.; Industry, and the
general public. Accepted as a suitable medium of finance by all lending
bodies, Monocrete may be erected in any area.
By reason of its inherent qualities of strength, ease of erection and
insulation, and its precise quality as maintained by laboratory control,
Monocrete was selected for the erection of a meteorological station at
Macquarie Island in the Antarctic.
The demand for this material is heavy and constantly increasing, and
manufacture is constantly expanding to take care of the demand.
Additional services to the home-builder are provided by this Company
in the application of high-quality exterior and interior wall finishes.
TYROLEAN is an attractive fine textured rough-cast applied externally in
a variety of permanent pastel colours.
WALLTEX is a decorative interior finish providing a wide range of light
textured wall treatments —a delight to see.
LuxurioLuxurious
Interior
The charmingly liveable
atmosphere Monocrete
can provide is shown in
this glimpse of the inside
of a Monocrete lounge-
room. The remarkable
insulatory qualities of
Monocrete make homes
warmer in winter and
cooler in summer. Un-
sightly ventilation vents
have been replaced by the
inconspicuous ventilation
rim shown in this picture
at the junction of wall
and ceiling. Walls have
been sprayed directly
with Walltex giving a
modern and indestructible
texture finish.
Scene from Monocrete construction yards showing
vibrators at work in the construction of Monocrete
wall panels.
Monocrete wall sections being cast and cured in the
vast Monocrete construction yards.


MONOCRETE
PTY. LIMITED
Monocrete Pty. Limited is yet another illustration of what
foresightedness, co-operation and energetic administration
can achieve. Of an entirely Australian origin, Monocrete
provides what is now a well-established building medium
for the building of houses, factories, offices, schools and
hospitals. Wherever structural stability and capacity tor
design are of paramount importance, Monocrete has ably
proved itself, and that at a time when housing is the
nation's most pressing need.
Monocrete is designed for the Australian climate; is fireproof and termite-
proof, and many hundreds of homes have been erected from our factories
in Sydney, Canberra and Perth for The Department of Works and Housing,
Canberra: War Service Homes Commission, N.S.W.; Industry, and the
general public. Accepted as a suitable medium of finance by all lending
bodies, Monocrete may be erected in any area.
By reason of its inherent qualities of strength, ease of erection and
insulation, and its precise quality as maintained by laboratory control,
Monocrete was selected for the erection of a meteorological station at
Macquarie Island in the Antarctic.
The demand for this material is heavy and constantly increasing, and
manufacture is constantly expanding to take care of the demand.
Additional services to the home-builder are provided by this Company
in the application of high-quality exterior and interior wall finishes.
TYROLEAN is an attractive fine textured rough-cast applied externally in
a variety of permanent pastel colours,
WALLTEX is a decorative interior finish providing a wide range of light
textured wall treatments —a delight to see.
Luxurious
Interior
The charmingly liveable
atmosphere Monocrete
can provide is shown in
this glimpse of the inside
of a Monocrete lounge-
room. The remarkable
insulatory qualities of
Monocrete make homes
warmer in winter and
cooler in summer. Un-
sightly ventilation vents
have been replaced by the
inconspicuous ventilation
rim shown in this picture
at the junction of wall
and ceiling. Walls have
been sprayed directly
with Walltex giving a
modern and indestructible
texture finish.
Scene from Monocrete construction yards showing
vibrators at work in the construction of Monocrete
wall panels.
Monocrete wall sections being cast and cured in the
vast Monocrete construction yards.


Above: The home of Mr. Mitchell (owner-builder).
Sugar Loaf Crescent, Willoughby, showing the beauty
and versatility of Monocrete.
Below: The Monocrete home of Mr. J. N. Daven-
port at Stuart St., Blakehurst, George's River. Oyster-
pink Tyrolean wall finish with slate-grey MONIER
tiles.
Architect:
Gerard H. B. McDonell, B. Arch. A.R.A.I.A.


MONIER HOME BUILDERS PTY. LIMITED
A younger member in the Concrete Industries group,
Monier Home Builders was established for the express
function of building complete Monocrete homes in
groups. Construction teams were trained within the
organisation and the whole company geared for the
rapid construction of groups of Monocrete homes.
Many schools, also, have been erected under contract
from the Department of Education. Reports from the
Headmasters of newly erected Monocrete schools give
testimony to the excellence of the material for this
purpose. The acoustics are good. Even with the single
partitioning Monocrete 4" wall there is a complete
absence of noise interference from adjoining class-
rooms. It is certain that the suitability of these new
schools will lead to a greater demand by all Educational
Authorities.
The operations of this company represent real progress
in our attempts to provide a complete home building
service.
It is interesting to note that not more than 20% of the
total value of any Monocrete building has to be obtained
outside our organisation.


Foundation beams being positioned on brick foundation.
Monier window unit being guided into position.
Monocrete home with walls complete. Ready for roofing and glaziers.
Monocrete home with MONIER Tile roof, showing the charming
modernity of design and possibilities for large window areas.
A typical two-room school erected in Monocrete for N.S.W.
Education Department at Villawood, N.S.W.
Interior of the same school showing light, airy and
acoustically good design.


Above: Home of Mr. R. W. Gates, Dirook Park Rd., Cronulla.
Architect: W. Hardy-Morphert, A.R.A.I.A., A.S.T.C. (Arch.). Builder: E. S. Baker.
Below: Home of Mr. C. P. Taylor, Owner-Builder, Princes Highway, Sylvania.


MONIER TILE COMPANY PTY. LIMITED
Roofing tiles have been the greatest restrictive
factor in building programmes in the last few
years. With an assured market waiting, pro-
duction commenced in 1947 and attained a high
rate in a short time. By popular demand produc-
tion has been expanded considerably since that
date. The maintenance of a high standard of
quality combined with attractive colours has
overcome the initial conservatism of home
builders, and authorities concerned. We have
our own testing laboratory and at every stage,
from the delivery of the basic materials to the
finished tiles, our testing division makes exact-
ing tests. Strength, absorption, permeability,
texture and colour tests are carried out in the
laboratory to ensure standard and highest
quality.
Working on mass production methods a full
range of attractive, permanent colours is pro-
duced: Yellow, Light Red, Dark Red, Grey,
Green, Muntz, Chocolate, and two-tone Red.
The high quality of MOTHER tiles, coupled with
an ever-growing building programme, assures
continued business for this company.
One of the company's six automatic tile-making machines in
operation. These machines, sited at Villawood and Canberra
factories, have a capacity of 11,000,000 tiles per year.
Photo above shows Villawood extensive tile despatch section.


STANDARD CONCRETE & CONSTRUCTION
CO. PTY. LIMITED
Carrying on the work of Concreters Limited, Standard Concrete
& Construction Co. Pty. Limited construct continuous concrete
piping using the pneumatic core system in various sizes, concrete
culverts, concrete bridges, concrete gutters and concrete combination
footpath-gutter-piping.
The versatility of this method in negotiating irregular terrain has been
readily recognised by civil engineers, and orders for hundreds of
l miles of piping, ranging from 18" to 72" diameter, have been placed
with us by engineers throughout the Commonwealth.
Growing health consciousness, too, has lead to the closing in of
more open drains and channels, calling
i for substantial efforts on the part of this
, Company.
In addition to pneumatic core drain-
age, Standard Concrete & Construc-
. tion Co. Pty. Limited carries out J
\ concrete roadwork, construction
:\ of concrete bridges, cement j
\ penetration of roads, con-
struction of swimming pools N*
and other civil engineering
I'A contracts. ogj
Two 48 pipes at Tallangaţa, Victoria, in the process of
construction


Special section stormwater take-off in Woollahra, N.S.W. Cast on three pneumatic cores,
this pipe is 5' wide by 1' 3" high (internal dimensions) and carries the full weight of
main city traffic.
Below: Two-cell culvert at Wellington, N.S.W., erected flush with road surface and
carrying full weight of street traffic.
Above: Stormwater culvert 4' by 2'
made on two 24" pneumatic cores.
Above: Combination footpath, gutter and cul-
vert at Kuring-gai, N.S.W. This one-piece
construction is made possible by the Pneumatic
Core System.
Above: Outlet end of culvert, 6' x 3' 3", and
24" pipe line at Concord, N.S.W.


MONIER BRICK COMPANY
PTY. LIMITED
Newly established to meet the exceptional and increasing
demand for bricks in homes and industry, Monier Brick
Company Pty. Limited is employing the very latest machinery
with an initial capacity of 12,000,000 standard bricks per year.
Manufactured on a fully automatic machine under a pressure
of 100 tons per brick, with proper curing methods under close
laboratory control, these bricks more than comply with the
exacting demands of the specification for concrete bricks as
laid down by the Australian Standards Association.
The photograph at right shows the type
of brick making machine used in the
manufacture of MONIER BRICKS.


"DUPLEX EMPEROR" BRICKMAKING PRESS.
Output 2,500 bricks per hour.


MONIES STEEL PTY. LIMITED
With the extensive and valuable plant being used by
the subsidiaries of Concrete Industries (Australia)
Limited, it is necessary to have an efficient internal
engineering service to carry out maintenance at the
factory site and to manufacture plant and machinery.
This is the function of Monier Steel Pty. Limited.
Fully equipped and operated by competent
engineers, Monier Steel preserves the interests of
shareholder and customer alike by ensuring that
production in the brother companies does not lag
for want of skilled maintenance. The machines in
subsidiary companies, the concrete mixers, the
trucks, the cranes, the pipe-making machines, the
giant presses are kept under constant surveillance
by Monier Steel's Engineers.
This company thus represents a worthwhile invest-
ment in ensuring maximum and uninterrupted
production.
At right: Monler Steel power-drill in operation at
Villawood, N.S.W.


At left: Welder at Monier
Steel workshop working
on crane of brother sub-
sidiary— Monocrete Pty.
Ltd.
At right: Monier Steel lathe
operator, on 72" lathe, turn-
ing a runner-end cap for
Monier Pipe Company's pipe
division.


CONCRETE INVESTMENTS
PTY. LIMITED
All over Australia are located the factories, depots
and distribution centres of the Concrete Industries'
subsidiaries.
These broad ramifications require expert real estate
knowledge and enterprise. Land must be bought for
the establishment of new depots. Potential markets
for various products must be anticipated and depots
opened in likely areas. These are the functions of
Concrete Investments Pty. Limited. They purchase
the land, erect the buildings and administer prop-
erties when established. Concrete Investments is the
financial member in the real estate section.


CONCRETE INDUSTRIES (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
VILLAWOOD, NEW SOUTH WALES




Printed by Barry Chirlian & Co.,
79 Pitt Street,
Sydney
