

111I 11
«t a\
if . 3
■5 CONDITIONAL ' |
| |
f IMMORTALITY, I
% »
I a
fl AW TAUGHT IN TUB jU
l! : - ' ■- }| •
J|
| |leto Ces lament Scriptures: |
A $
$ I
E BY S
J
|| : LAYMAN. |
'1 ' ||
in ■ _ • .f-;
(■ M ■ On
l ' I
! 11
£ LEE &, ROSS, EXCELSIOR STEAM PRINTING WORKS, %.
| # 231 and 233 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
| J| (near market street), y j




CONDITIONAL
IMMORTALITY,
AS TAUGHT IN THE
Testament Scriptures:
LAYMAN.
LEE & ROSS, EXCELSIOR STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
231 and 233 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
(near market street),




PREFACE
The writer, at one time, indeed for a period of seventy years,
believed, like thousands, nay, millions of his fellow Christians, in
the doctrine of eternal torment, but rejoices now in the brighter,
more consistent, and glorious views of the Divine Being, as a God
“ too wise to err, too good to be unkind ; ” in fact, as the embodi-
ment of love, power, wisdom, justice, and mercy. He believes in
two great classes of human beings, namely, the righteous and the
wicked, both of which are mortal, defiled, and corruptible,
returning to the original element from which man was first
created—dust. The one redeemed, through faith and repentance,
by Jesus Christ—their Redeemer; the other as faithless, unre-
deemed, and impenitent; that both will be raised to life at the
general resurrection of the dead, incorruptible; but the one
undefiled, having been cleansed “ by the washing of regeneration,”
(Titus ii. 5), and immortal; the other, defiled, unregenerate, and
mortal; the one, received into the presence of God, and enjoying
endless bliss; the other, driven from the presence of God’s sacred
Person, and destroyed—but not eternally tormented—in hell fire.
These views he has set forth at large, in the following pages, to
which he invites the candid attention of his fellow men, in the
humble hope it may be the means of removing, as it has clone in
his own case a great stumbling block out of his way when
reflecting upon the character of the Supreme Being, and placing
before him, in all the full blaze and grandeur of his nature, the
omnipotent and benignent Sovereign of the Universe, “ who
causeth His sun to rise and shine upon the evil, as well as upon
the good,” (Matt. v. 45), God blessed for evermore.
In all God’s doctrines and commands,
His councils and designs ;
In every work His hands have framed,
His love supremely shines.
Angels and men the news proclaim,
Through earth and Heaven above ;
The joyful, the transporting news,
That God, the Lord, is love !
*.-s-


■j' ' ■ ,


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY
AS TAUGHT
Jit % |fy«j Stestomqnt Jtafytewa:
LAYMAN.
INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.
The utter inconsistency of eternal punishment, for sinful man,
with the nature of God, as He is revealed in the New Testament,
is so palpable, that it is astonishing how it ever could have been,
adopted as an article of Christian belief. Let any rational human
being ask himself if such a doctrine as that of eternal torment, in
hell fire, can possibly be compatible with the character of the
Supreme Being, if He is—as by the Apostle Paul, and others, He
is represented as being—exceedingly rich in grace, (Eph. ii. 7);
and, in displays of goodness, exceeding abundant, (1 John i. 14) ;
who has given to believers in Christ, all things pertaining to life
and goodness, with exceeding great and precious promises, that
they might be partakers of the Divine nature, (2 Peter i. 3,4) ;
who is a God of tender mercy (Luke i. 7,8), and pitiful (James
v. 11); in whose name and by whose mercies it was Paul sought
to convince men of the way of salvation (Rom. xii. 4); who is the
father of mercies, of tenderness, and God of all grace, or kindness
(2 Cor. i. 3); so that even where sin abounded, this magnificent
property of willingness to save, and pardon, was still more
abundantly displayed (Rom. v. 20); whose forgiveness of trans-
gressions is according to the riches of his grace (Eph. i. 7), and,
that to this benevolent property of the Divine nature, it is, we are
indebted for salvation (Eph. ii. 5); so in ages, then, to come, He
would continue to show the exceeding riches of his kindness
through Jesus Christ (Eph. ii. 7). St. Peter declares Him to be


gracious (1 Pet. ii. 8), and James, that He is very pitiful (James
v. 11) ;of whose mercy the sacred writings are full. Such being
the character of the Supreme Being, eternal punishment in fire, or
everlasting torment, must be diametrically opposed to such a
nature, totally inconsistent with it, and, therefore, impossible.
How, could it be possible with such a benignant being as God is
described to be, in whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning
(James i. 17); being the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever
(John iv. 8), and from whom that holy principle —love—emanates
to all intelligent and accountable beings who possess it (John iv. 7),
and without which, human nature would be a moral desert, without
a flower of love to cheer the heart, or grace the scene ! With such
testimony before the world, so voluminous, so harmonious, and so
consistent, unless the writers whose testimony is given were gross
impostors, or most deluded, ignorant, and superstitious individuals,
the doctrine of eternal torment must fall, and be regarded as an
astounding and unmitigated error, corruption of truth, or slander,
ever perpetrated against the all-merciful and only Sovereign of the
Universe ; and its introduction into the Church, as an insiduous
and successful attempt of the devil, to undermine the character of
God, in connection with the dispensation of his mercy, as displayed
in the mission of his Son Jesus Christ, for the redemption of fallen
man, and his restoration to Divine favour.
Look at the meaning of the term “ grace ” as given, for example,
in Johnson’s Dictionary, as applicable to the passage “ Exceeding
rich in grace,” and we find it primarily means, favour, kindness,
virtue, pardon, mercy, favour conferred.” It might be more
correctly rendered in the sentence quoted, very eminently abound-
ing in kindness, in pardon, in mercy, and in holiness, to those
who sought either kindness, favour, pardon, mercy, or renovation
of nature at the hand of God. How, then, can we possibly
reconcile eternal torment as a punishment, as a possibility with a
God, pre-eminently abounding in kindness, who is love (John iv.
8), whose love surpasses human comprehension (Eph. iii. 19) and
whose peace passes human understanding (Phil. iv. 7) 1 The fact
is that the term grace, and many others, is so constantly used
without reflection, as to its real import, that its generic meaning is
entirely overlooked and lost in some vague idealism, which leaves
the real truth enveloped, as it were, in a dense fog of ignorance.
Such, no doubt, is too much the case with the generality of
readers and students of the Bible, and hence the deplorable
ignorance so generally met with on such an important subject as
eternal punishment, among all ranks of both clergy and laity.


CHAPTER I.
JESUS CHRIST, THE AUTHOR AND ONLY SOURCE OF ETERNAL LIFE,
OR IMMORTALITY, TO ALL BELIEVERS IN HIM, AS THE
REDEEMER OF MEN, PROVED FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT.
Hear the voice of the Son of God and live. John v. 25
He that feedeth on me shall live by me—Christ. John vi. 57
I, Jesus, am the resurrection and the life. _ Jolmxi. 25, 26
He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live ;
and whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die.
How if we be dead with Christ, we believe we shall also live Romans vi. s
with Him.
Being dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through our Lord Romans vi. u.
Jesus Christ. ...
God has appointed “us not unto wrath, but to obtain salvation i Thess. v. D-ii
from death, bv our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that we,
his disciples, should live together with Him.
Salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory ; for if 2 Tim. IL w, 11
we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him.
God sent his only Begotten Son into the world, that we might i Johniv.9
live through Him.
In Him (Jesus Christ) was life, to as many as received Him; to John i. 8, 12
them He gave power (right or privilege) to become the sons of God.
The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the j o hn v. 28
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
He that hearethmy (Jesus Christ) words, and believeth on Him John v. 24
that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into con-
demnation ; but is passed from death unto life.
Again, the hour is coming in the which all that are in their j o hn v. 29
graves shall hear his (Christ’s) voice, and shall come forth they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life.
The only conclusion which can reasonably be arrived at, is, that
if the believer has passed from death unto life, on the conditions
stated, namely, that of faith in Christ, they who do not so
believe, must still be in a state of death, or condemnation to
death, which is confirmed by our Lord’s declaration in the 29th
verse, when He says “ they that have done evil ” shall come forth
to the resurrection of condemnation. Our Lord says, “ye will not John v. 40
come unto me that ye might have life.”


For the bread of God is He who cometh down from heaven and
giveth life unto the world; Jesus saith unto them, “ I am the
bread of life,”
They that receive the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by
one Jesus Christ.
That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.
If, as here stated, God’s favour reigns, or has dominion over
believers unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ, then, those in a state
of sin still remain under the dominion of death, and are still
liable to all its consequences, namely, extinction or annihilation.
For ye were the servants of sin, the end of which is death;
but now being freed from sin, and become servants to God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. For
the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
The payment, or wages due to sin being death, and death as a
sentence having been passed upon all men, eternal life is a free
gift from God, bestowed at the intercession of Jesus Christ, and is
not the result of man’s meritorious actions, since all men have
sinned and come short of God’s requirements, but is the reward
of true repentance and sorrow for sin, and faith in Jesus Christ’s
intercession and obedience even unto death, on man’s behalf, and
God’s promise of pardon und acceptance to all who come to Him
through his Son, Death, therefore, is the lot of all the ungodly
and unbelieving, for sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death,
or extinction.
But if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but
the spirit is life because of righteousness.
When Christ, our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with Him in glory.
He that hath the Son hath life, he that hath not the Son of God
hath not life.
We are in Him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the
true God and eternal life.
Who also shall raise us up by his own power.
The doctrine of conditional immortality is so clearly laid down
in these texts, as to require no extended argument to illustrate it.
“ The wayfaring man, though a fool, cannot err therein.” It is
self-evident, and incontrovertable, as the persistent teaching of the
Apostles, and of their Divine Lord and head, Jesus Christ.


CHAPTER 11.
DEATH, AND NOT IMMORTALITY, THE PORTION OF THE UNGODLY*
WITHOUT IMMORTALITY THERE CAN BY NO POSSIBILITY BE
ETERNAL TORMENT. DEATH THE PORTION OF THE UNGODLY
AND IMPENITENT, THE DOCTRINE OF THE BIBLE.
Sin hath reigned unto death. Rom. v. 21
His servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto Rom. vi. is
death, or of obedience unto righteousness.
For the end of those things (sins) is death. Rom. vi. 21
The wages of sin is death. Rom. vi. 23
The motions of sin did work in our members to bring forth Rom. vii. 5
fruit unto death.
The commandment which was ordained to life I found to be Rom. vii. 10
unto death.
For sin, taking the commandment, deceived me and Rom. vii. 11
slew me.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Rom. viii. 1, 2
For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free
from the law of sin and death.
For to be carnally-minded is death. R° m - viii. e
We (the Apostles) are unto God —to the one (unbelievers) the 2 Cor. ii. ie
savour of death unto death.
He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death. Rev. u. 11
On such the second death hath no power. And who was not Rev, xx, 6,14,1.3
found written in the Book of Life was cast into the lake of fire.
This is the second death.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the Matt. x. 28
soul: but rather fear Him which is able to destroy both body and
soul in hell.
There is one lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy. James iv. 12
But these (the ungodly) as natural brute beasts made to be 2 Peter ii. 12
taken and destroyed, speak evil of things they understand not, and
shall utterly perish in their own corruption.
To whom (those that walk after the flesh) the mists of darkness 2 Peter ii. i?
are reserved for ever.
Broad is the way which leadeth to destruction. Matt. vii. 13
God endureth, with much long-suffering, the vessels of wrath Rom. ix. 22
fitted to destruction.


For many walk, of whom I have told you before, and now tell
you even weeping, the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction. When they shall say peace and safety, then sudden
destruction cometh upon them.
They that are unlearned and unstable wrest as they do the
other Scriptures to their own destruction.
With all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish.
He shall hum up the chaff (wicked) with unquenchable fire.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered ; and men gather and cast into the fire and are burned.
But that which beareth thorns and briars is rejected, and nigh
unto cursing ; whose end is to be burned.
Gather ye together, first the tares (the children of the wicked),
and bind them in bundles to burn them. •
,12 As, therefore, the tares are gathered and burned in thejire, so it
- shall be in the end of the world, and the Son of Man shall send
forth his angels, and they shall cast them into a furnace of fire;
and there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
50 So it shall be in the end of the world; the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from amongst the just, and cast them
into the furnace of fire.
As good fish are gathered into vessels, and the bad cast away.
Such are Jesus Christ’s own words.
In the thirty-one preceding texts, not one word can be construed
as indicating an eternity of suffering, or, of immortality, as being
possessed by the wicked, which would, if inherent in them by
nature, necessarily involve it; yet many of the quotations aie the
words of Him, who is the appointed judge of the quick and the
dead. To do so, the legitimate meaning and intentions of the
writers and speakers must be strongly perverted. The end of the
wicked is spoken of in all the first fourteen quotations, as death ;
and being cast into hell, is, in the thirteenth, declared to be the
second death, and, therefore, the extinction of all vitality. This
punishment is explicitly declared to be that of all whose names
are not found written in the book of life, as may be proved on
reference to the verse immediately following. Now, what is the
meaning of the word death 1 Is it not the extinction of life,
mortality, destruction ? As the first death, which is the lot of all
men born into this world, is literally their extinction from amongst
livino- men, what then must be the result of the second death, but
final'extinction or annihilation, as certainly as chaff and tares are
burnt and consumed when cast into a fire, for the express purpose
of effecting their perfect destruction 1 How can dead mortals
suffer? Do dead bodies feel pain, or their dust retain inherent
animation ? If being cast into the lake of fire causes this second
death, after a resurrection from a first, how can eternal torment
be inflicted or endured? Did any one ever hear of such an


absurdity as a lifeless, inanimate, extinguished thing, suffering
What have we to do with theological meanings, when we have
God’s Word and common sense to guide us, and are assured that
the end of the wicked is destruction! The next seven texts
assure us of this fact. How can a destroyed non-existant thing
suffer!' Let the advocates of eternal suffering, answer
this question if they can. To put such questions as
the foregoing, appears like offering a wanton insult to common
sense, were it not that they are extorted ignorance and bigotry,
twin sisters which usually go together, and are most studiously
nursed and fed by those holding high positions in the Church of
Christ, and who are ready to persecute all who differ from them
in opinion, rather than meet them in the arena of free, honest, and
open discussion. The next' text brought in review says, the
unrighteous perish. Now we find this word means “to die, to be
destroyed, to be lost, and to come to nothing.” Here, again, the
doctrine of the eternal tornrent shines forth in all its glaring
inconsistency and absurdity, since it invests the dead, destroyed,
lost, and come to nothing, with the property of eternal life. All
the numerous quotations examined, though different words are
employed, all mean the same thing, namely, eternal death, extinc-
tion, and annihilation. We have six texts which speak of
the finally impenitent and ungodly as being destroyed, as fitted to
destruction, going to destruction, and destruction coming upon
them, thus adding evidence upon evidence in support of the final
extinction or annihilation of all God’s enemies. Seven texts
declare the instruments or means used to effect this destruction,
namelv, five, in which, and with which, they are to be burnt up,,
consumed, like chaff, and dry tares, cut and gathered into bundles
on purpose “to burn them.” Surely this means annihilation, if
it means anything. The dictionary explains the word burn thus,
“ Burn, v. t. (pret. and pp. burnt, burned,) to consume by fire.”
Tell any clodhopper, however ignorant as to things in general,
that if he cast a bundle of dried tares, or a quantity of chaff, into
a fire that they would not be consumed, and destroyed, and he
would laugh you to scorn for your ignorance and folly. These
words being those selected by the Lord Jesus Christ, there is no
going from them ) they are plain, authoritative and decisive. A
being, to suffer eternally, must be immortal, and man not being
immortal by nature, that property must be the gift of God, which
is bestowed only by Him, on the believers on his Son Jesus
Christ, it follows, as a natural sequence, that none who are not
such, can possess immortality ; therefore the ungodly and
unbelievers cannot suffer eternally. Death, or the penalty of
extinction incurred by Adam, entailed that penalty upon all his
posterity, while life and immortality were brought to light only
by Jesus Christ, and are the undisputed and only right (by


the gift of God) of the followers of his beloved Son Jesus
Christ.
Mortality is natural to all men, being inherited from Adam, by
whom came death, “ for in Adam all die ” (1 Cor. xv. 22).
Immortality was not known till the time of Jesus Christ, as
generally obtainable by man, by whom it was brought to light,
according to God’s “purpose of grace,” made manifest by the
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who abolished death, and
brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel (2 Tim,
i. 9, 10) ; by whom, also, all obtain “the resurrection and life,”
but not all immortality, which is an especial gift of God bestowed
upon the righteous only, Adam and Jesus Christ were the exact
opposites of each other in nature, life, and conduct. Adam was a
son of God by creation, Jesus Christ being “the only begotten
Son of God,” was his son by birth. Adam possessed immortality
prospectively and conditionally, on faith and obedience, and by
unbelief and wilful disobedience, forfeited it, thereby incurring
the penalty of mortality, or death, the grave and corruption, not
only on himself, but upon all his posterity. St. Paul says “by
one man’s (Adam’s) offence death reigned hy one, much more
they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ” (Rom.
v. 17). Jesus Christ, by his righteousness, even to death, procured
immortality for all men, through faith and obedience on their
part, with the power to confer life by their resurrection with
incorruption on all (1 Cor. xv. 42). Immortality has, therefore,
always, from Adam to the present day, been conferred conditionally.
Adam held it conditionally, broke the conditions imposed, and
lost it. Jesus Christ brought it to light, made it visible or
clearly obtainable, through righteousness, and also confers it on
all who are faithful and obedient to the conditions imposed by the
new covenant between God and man. Jesus Christ, St. Paul
says, is the Mediator of the new covenant or testament, that by
means of death for the redemption of transgressions under the
first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance (Heb. ix. 24). He being the Mediator of a
better covenant, established upon better promises than the first,
for if that first had been faultless, then should no place have
been sought for the second (Rom. viii. 6,7). Man never was
immortal, Adam having forfeited that condition, and none
are or can be made so, except the followers of Jesus
Christ. The eternal torment of the wicked is, therefore,
an impossibility, unless God makes them immortal for the
express purpose of its infliction, which would be an act perfectly
antagonistic to his grand and holy nature, as an omnipotent God
of mercy, love, and justice. It is also contrary to the express
declaration of the writers of the New Testament, as proved by the


preceding evidence from that record. Adam was the source of
death, the grave, and corruption, to all his descendants. Jesus
Christ is the resurrection and the life to all, and of immortality to
the righteous. If one, Christ, died for all, then were all “ dead,”
and He died for all, that they which live should not live unto
themselves, but unto Him which died for them and rose again
(2 Cor. v. 14, 15). Adam was by nature corruptible, and saw
corruption. Jesus Christ was by nature incorruptible and did not
see corruption (Acts xiii, 30, 35), “ because it was not possible He
could be holden ” of death (Acts ii. 24), being immortal. God says,
he that overcometh shall inherit all things ; I will be his God, and
he shall be my son; but the fearful and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and sprcerers, and idolators, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone—which is the SECOND DEATH (Rev. xxi. 7,8), or
in other words, final extinction, but not eternal torment
which is not awarded to one in this black catalogue of crime.
The texts which allude to eternal torment all apply, and they are
but two, to an exceptional case, namely, to the Beast and the false
Prophet, the devil and those, if any, who shall worship the Beast
and his image, &c. In this case, where these worshippers are
exclusively spoken of, there is no proof that even the men alluded
to are to be subjected to eternal suffering, although occasioned by
the instrumentality “ of fire and brimstone,” and that they are to
have no rest day or night; it does not, however, say this suffering
is to last forever, but, that the smoke which results from the
ignited materials employed, shall “ ascend up for ever arid ever,"
thus implying their nature as being inextinguishable and eternal,
but, in the case of the devil, it is said “he shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.' As the all wise God has ordained,
in the case of the righteous, different degrees of honour in
heaven, (1 Cor. xv. 41, 42), so there may also be different
degrees of punishment inflicted on the unrighteous. Those,
therefore, who wilfully permit themselves to become the
dupes of the Beast and false Prophet, will be made
to participate in their sufferings, but not eternally ; their punish-
ment being, probably, unexceptionally severe and marked, their
offence must be great in the sight of God. The fire into which the
devil is to be cast must be eternal in its nature and duration, or he
could not, being immortal by nature, be punished eternally. The
smoke, therefore, of such a place, necessarily “ ascends up for ever
and ever.” The punishment is to be carried into execution “in
the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb ”
(Rev. xiv. 10). A circumstance which favours, greatly, the
hypothesis of limited duration, since the sufferings of his enemies
could be a source of anything but pleasure to so merciful and
loving a Being as our blessed Redeemer, and would be calculated
to detract from the pleasure and glory of the abode of the blessed.


The place assigned to the punishment of the wicked, is, in the
Scriptures, termed hell, bottomless pit, lake of fire and brimstone,
lake of fire, and furnace of fire, all of which terms imply a region
or place, surrounded by impassable barriers, of great, but limited
extent, in a constant state of active conflagration, of which ignited
brimstone is a prominent ingredient. From this place there is
no escape. In such a place, an immortal must, of necessity, from
the nature of his constitution being indestructible, exist in a state
of indescribable misery, “ both day and night,” knowing no rest.
On the other hand, a being incorruptible, but defiled and mortal,
from his natural constitution, must perish and be consumed,
sooner or later, although it is impossible to form any opinion
upon which the slightest dependence can be placed, as to the time
requisite to accomplish its destruction. The dead are all to be
raised, though formerly corruptible, incorruptible (1 Cor. xv. 42).
The wicked are, in the Bible, always said to be cast into hell, &c.,
from whence it would appear that the most correct description of
its nature is that of a chasm or pit of vast dimensions; a sub-
terranean volcanic region, from the opening into which smoke is
constantly issuing in great volumes. Man, after his resurrection,
being changed from a corruptible into an incorruptible nature,
could not be destroyed by death, decay, and corruption, as is now
his lot, but by some other means. It appears, therefore, that God
has selected fire ; we may, therefore, rest assured that whatever He
has ordained in this case, as in everything else, is the result of
infinite wisdom, justice, and mercy. In our Lord’s interpretation
of the parable of the wheat and tares, he says “ there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.” This, however, is no proof
whatever of eternal suffering, but of the intensity of the despair
and agony resulting from the full perception of their irretrievable
loss of all things, and perfect hopelessness of their position.
“ Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which,
according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us (Christ’s
followers), again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and unde filed,
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are
kept through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last
time ”(1 Pet. i. 3,4, 5). “ O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God ! How unsearchable his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of
the Lord 1 or, who hath been his councillor 1 or, who hath first
given to Him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again ? For
of Him and to Him are all things, to whom be glory for ever.
Amen.” (Rom. xi. 33-36).
Holy is God in all his works,
And truth is his delight;
But sinners and their wicked ways,
Shall perish from his sight.








