

CONFERENCE OF INS
DEPARTM


To the Honorable John Perry, M.P., Minister of Public Instruction
CONFERENCE OF INSPECTORS, TEACHERS, AND
DEPARTMENTAL OFFICERS.
I have the honor to submit herewith a report of the proceedings of the
meeting of Inspectors, Teachers, and Departmental Officers, held at your invitation
at the New Masonic Hall, Sydney, on Thursday last, 14th instant, for the purpose
of discussing, in a general way, the first published Report of the Educational
Commissioners (Messrs. Knibhs and Turner.)
In addition to the Commissioners themselves, there were present Messrs.
E. Bridges (Acting Under Secretary), J. M'Credie (Acting Chief Inspector), J. D.
Bradley (Acting Deputy Chief Inspector), D. J. Cooper, M.A. (Superintendent of
Technical Education), R. N. Morris, LL.D. (Chief Examiner), all the members of
the Inspectorial Staff with hut one exception, and a great number of Teachers and
Departmental Officers. The body of the large hall, and the gallery, were filled to
overflowing, the seating accommodation being altogether inadequate.
I have the honor to be.
Your obedient servant,
GEORGE NASH,
Secretary to Conference.
19th January, 1904.
+ 34013 A


DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
Conference of Inspectors, Teachers, and Departmental
Officers, held at Sydney on Thursday, 14th January,
1904, for the purpose of discussing in a general way
the first published Report of the Educational Commis-
sioners (Messrs. Knibbs and Turner).
The Honorable J. Perry (Minister of Public Instruction) presided.
There were present Messrs. Knibbs and Turner (Educational Commissioners), F. Bridges (Acting
Under Secretary) ; J. M'Credie (Acting Chief Inspector); J. D. Bradley (Acting Deputy-Chief Inspector),
D. J. Cooper, M.A. (Superintendent of Technical Education) ; R. N. Morris, LL.D. (Chief Examiner) ;
all the members of the Inspectorial Staff with but one exception, and a great number of Teachers and
Departmental Officers.
The Minister of Public Instruction (Mr. Perry), addressing the meeting, said Ladies and
Gentlemen, —I, perhaps, have to apologise to you for breaking into your holidays by calling you here to-day.
I have called you here, not so much in the form of a conference, but to discuss the whole question that is
so ably dealt with by the gentlemen who were sent away to study the question of our educational system
and our schools, and on whose report questions have arisen. As you—most of you—will be returning to
the country, I thought I would take advantage of your presence here and give you an opportunity of
questioning the two Commissioners, who are present here to-day. I have not been able to supply the whole
of you with copies of the Report of the Commissioners, but, thanks to the Press—and I must give thanks
where it is due, as I will have to deal with them a little later on in a different w*ay —but, thanks to the
Press, they have done exactly what I wanted, and that is to draw public attention to the great question of
education. (Applause.) They have put the body of the report and recommendations into your hands, and
I have no doubt most of you—l might safely say all of you—have read what appeared in the papers with a
great deal of interest, and you have evidenced by your presence here your determination to do the best you
can in the interests of the people of this country. (Applause.) I intend—as soon as it is possible to do
so—to see that no school, however small, will be without a copy of the Report. (Applause.) I do not
think that I need to assure you that I desire to give you every opportunity to thoroughly consider this
matter—l and those who have taught me my business —because I look upon it that when I went into the
Education Department I was something like the raw material a pupil-teacher is made out of, and I had to
be instructed, and they have instructed me well. I think I can say that things are a little better now than
when I first took charge of the Department. (Applause.) I want to deal with a few statements that have
been made by the Press, because I want to clear the ground a little, and I hope you will not think that I
want to hold myself up as the “ horrible example ” to-day. I must necessarily take up a little of the time.
I do not wish in any way to cramp you, but I want the people of this State to understand that the
Department having charge of this important subject is not going to starve the children in the way of
education. I want the people to understand that if what is being done here is a little behind that which is
being done in other countries, the Department knows it, and they have taken the very best course possible
to bring about a change. (Applause.) If we had—as we are told by the papers that we claim to have—
the very best system, almost unimprovable, I should not have been guilty of the extravagance, which is one
of the charges against the Government, of sending the Commissioners away to inquire into and write reports
upon a subject we are well awai’e of. Rut we wanted to get their practical experience in order to guide us ;
and I am not going to say here that I, or anybody in my Department, is quite equal in ability to the man
who writes these articles in the newspapers. Immediately on receiving the Report of the Commissioners
they would have changed things the very next day, but I am not going to do anything quite so stupid.
(Applause.) lam going to see what is practicable, and what is practicable I will do. (Applause.) You
will pardon me if I refer to a few matters in connection with the attitude taken up by the Press, and I will
say right away that I do not think the Press altogether meant it when they characterised you in the way
they have done ; but I fancy they are misled by the malignancy they wage against the present Government
and my connection with it ; therefore, you have been attacked, and they have stated more than once that I
have been driven—or the Government have been driven—to do something by the Opposition. I should
like to point out to you that the Opposition was in power a great many years before I was. What did
they do ? If we are so many years behind the times—twenty years, Mr. Knibbs says—and I have only
been


been in office a little over four years—what were the other fellows doing 1 (Applause.) Then they tell us,
with reference to a little thing I did—that is, the expansion of the system by trying to reach the solitary
individual in the bush by subsidising a tutor or a governess—that I was driven to do it by the repeated
resolutions of the Farmers’ Associations ; but I can tell you that I got no resolutions from them until after
the system was in work. Dealing first with a statement made in an article in the Daily Telegraph , that
the verdict of the two Education Commissioners is, in effect, that we are not an educated people, and cannot
hope to be until we have done an immense deal on radically changed lines, it may be claimed that such a
verdict, more or less modified, might be pronounced upon every community, probably without exception.
Education, in an abstract sense, is practically without limit, and, therefore, incapable of the fullest attain-
ment; but among the factors that go towards the making of an educated people the following fairly hold
place :
1. A small percentage of illiterates.
Now, I have had prepared for me a statement of the percentages that other countries have, and I find that
the percentage of scholars to the total population of the United Kingdom is 14 ; Europe (as a whole), 9'5 ;
United States, 13 7; Canada, 12 5: and Australia, 13. That is the percentage of scholars to the total
population of those countries. I call to mind a tale I had told to me about a wealthy American, who, on
visiting England, was very much struck with the beautiful lawns. He asked, “How do you get such
beautiful lawns?” and was told by the gardener, “ Roll your lawns ; keep on rolling them for a thousand
years, and you will have lawns like ours.” So it is with this country ; you do not make scholars in a
country where the whole of the energies of the people are utilised in making the country; you make the
scholars later on. (Applause.) Now, putting that on one side, I hold that the percentage of 13 in Australia,
as compared with 13'7 in the United States and 12 5 in Canada, is a veiy good one. Then I have a
comparison of the percentage of adults that can write. I wanted to get the latest figures from the latest
census returns, but they are not yet prepared. However, I have the latest available figures, and they show
the percentage to total population of adults that can write to be—in the United Kingdom, 94; Europe,
60 ; United States, 83 ; Canada, 90; and Australia, 90 ; so we fairly hold our own with other countries.
Now, taking the census returns at the years 1861, 1871, 1881, 1891, and 1901, the degree of education of
every 10,000 children over 10 and under 15 years, I find was—in 1861, 6,769 children out of every 10,000
who could read and write; in 1871, it was 7,666 ; in 1881, 8,804 ; in 1891, it was 9,705 ; and in 1901,
9,805, with but 65 who could read only, and 130 who were unable to read. Now, I think, at any rate, that
although we must not stay where we are, but keep moving on, we have, with the material we have
had to work upon, done thoroughly well. Other factors that go towards the making of an educated
people are—
2. A preponderance of persons educated beyond the average standard.
3. A successful application of acquired knowledge to the business and other concerns of life.
4. Assimilation of best methods extant in matters of science, mechanics, &c., together with the
possession of a fair amount of inventive capacity.
5. An intelligent realisation of public and social duties.
6. General knowledge and appreciation of the affairs of other countries.
7. Advancement of the community as a whole in its moral and material condition.
Judged by those standards, not only New South Wales, but Australia generally will compare favourably
with the rest of the world, as will be evident upon a little consideration. If, notwithstanding, our system
of State education is in need of alteration for its better and more complete development, that may also be
said of the same systems of other countries, and is the result of the remarkable change that has come over
the world’s estimation of matters educational which has placed them on a higher plane of intimate
connection with the prosperity of a country. It is not very many years ago that I recollect the question
“ Why should the Government educate a man’s child 1" I have heard it said by many people—in fact I
heard a man well up in the Public Service of this country say we were doing too much in the way of
educating the people. I asked him what he would have done if his parents had not seen to his acquiring a
good education ; he would not have been occupying the position which he had attained. (Applause.) But
now, most communities are searching not only for a good, but for the best system, and we are informed of
a “ spirit of unrest that has accompanied the educational renaissance of the past five years,” and that “ the
observer of educational efforts in the other countries is struck by the extent to which public interest is
aroused in the work of the primary schools.” This is so in the largest countries, and even a small State
like the Straits Settlements has recently had its Education Commission. It is admitted that our State
system, supplemented by denominational and private agencies, reaches nearly every child in our immense
and sparsely populated territory, and that the proportion of illiterates among our native-born is as low as
that in any of the most advanced of the old world countries. Although these are important facts that we
may be proud of, we are still told that we have to do an immense deal more and become radically changed
before we can be educated. Now, we all know full well that in the process of evolution, in education as
well as other matters, there is no stage at which we can sit back and say that we have arrived at perfection
and that nothing more remains to be done. No such self-satisfied complacency exists in the Department
over which I preside, and the dispatch of the Education Commissioners, and the work accomplished at the
last Conference of Inspectors, and during recent years, are in themselves sufficient indications that the
Department is fully alive to the necessity for keeping abreast of modern requirements. A perusal of the
valuable report of the Conference of Inspectors and Departmental Officers held in January, 1902, shows
clearly the keenness of perception, the strong grasp of essentials, the accurate and extensive information in
regard to the trend of educational progress in different countries, and the enthusiastic determination “to
march breast forward” on the road “to better things” which infused such vitality into the proceedings of that
Conference. I may say that a number of the recommendations of that Conference have been carried out.
Some have been postponed, but the Department is fully alive to the necessity for them. Now I come to
the report of the Commissioners, and in order to strengthen my hand in anything I wanted to do or say
here, Messrs. Knibbs and Turner are both here to-day. Their report only reached me in December, and
within forty-eight hours of its reaching me it was in the hands of the Press. I have been charged with
suppressing the document which was of so much interest to the people and teachers—with being thoroughly
knocked


knocked all of a heap by the disclosures made ; but I do not think I look like being knocked all of a heap.
(Applause ) To summarise the results achieved, and the reforms inaugurated as the outcome of those
deliberations, it may be said that many of the improvements and developments, steadily, unostentatiously,
and yet effectively carried out, have, in numerous instances, anticipated the recommendations submitted by
Messrs. Knibbs and Turner. Notwithstanding these facts, it is surprising with what reiteration such
truisms as “ The necessity for further educational progress ” are advanced in glowing periods and defended
vehemently from the designedly assumed standpoint that the Department is quite content with what has
already been accomplished, and is the jealous guardian of obsolete and effete methods in all directions—
a stone-walled Lhassa, as it were, in the educational world. To apply the term “ our obsolete system,” as
the Daily Telegraph —possibly for political reasons—does in its articles on the subject, is, undoubtedly, a
libel. Culture, unlike Jonah’s gourd, does not spring up in a day. lam sure that the commmon-sense of
the community will agree with me when I say that with our enormous area of territory, with its large
tracts of rough country, our scattered population, and the means at our disposal, we have accomplished
much, and the Department fully recognises that much more remains to be done. There need be no
apprehension whatever that with experienced and liberal minded men at the head of administrative affairs,
such as we claim to have and must continue to have, desirable developments or needed innovations will be
overlooked if on close investigation they are found to be suited to our requirements. I am not going to
have it charged against us in the future that we have to go back on our tracks again. I will look ahead
and be sure that we are not taking a step in the wrong direction. When we are sure of it you may depend
upon it we will take that step, and lam sure the people of this country—and the children are an important
part of the people of the country—will not begrudge the expense. It must be remembered that our system
aims primarily to impart a sound elementary education to all children, next, to carry as many as possible
into the higher realms of education, and finally, to place scientific and University instruction within the
reach of any scholar—however poor—who displays native talent capable of being benefited thereby. I do
not want to say that the University should be thrown open to everyone simply to enable them to say “ I
am a University man” ; there is too much of that in the Old Country and we do not want to allow the people
to pass into the University free unless the country is to be benefited by their doing so. (Applause.) To
return to my subject, the first of these objects—that is, to impart a sound elementary education to all children—
had its foundation well laid in the “Public Schools Act of 1866 ”; the second and third were rendered
capable of attainment by the Public Instruction Act of 1880, which grafted on to the primary system the
Superior Schools and High Schools, and by the later introduction of technical education as part and parcel
of the State system. I have had placed in my hands, a little time ago, a brief exposition on the objects
which the Act of 1866 was designed to accomplish, written by Mr. W. Wilkins, and while I think every
teacher knows it, I, perhaps, will be pardoned for making extensive quotations from it so that the teachers,
public, and Press may be benefited by it—and I think the latter want a lot of educating. (Applause.)
This was sent out as early as the 27th March, 1867 —I was going to say before Mr. Bridges or myself were
born. However, the names of the gentlemen who compose the first administrative Council have in them-
selves a significant ring : they were Sir Henry Parkes—(Applause)—George Allen, W. M. Arnold, James
Martin, and Professor J. Smith. And I may say in reading this it will prove to us their admirable
foresight, and for that reason—and the reason I said just now, for the benefit of the Press—is my excuse
for taking up your time. This was the circular issued by the Council of Education to teachers :
The Public Schools Act was intended, in the first place, to extend the means of instruction throughout the Colony, so
that by the various agencies which the Council will establish or support, every locality, however remote, and every family,
however humble, may have the ameliorating influences of education brought within their reach. While the Public and
Denominational Schools already existing will provide for the teaching of the great body of the population, the Provisional
Schools will confer the same advantages upon newly settled or thinly inhabited localities; and the half-time schools,
under itinerant teachers, will carry the benefit of instruction into remote and neglected districts which will not be reached
by the more regular agencies.
But, concurrently with this extension of the means of instruction, the Council of Education further contemplates
improvement in its character by its more systematic communication and by its closer adaptation to the special means of the
pupils. Thus, while it is desired that every scholar, on quitting school, should he able to read and comprehend ordinary
English prose, to write in a flowing and legible hand, to be acquainted with the grammatical construction of his mother
tongue, the more useful arithmetical processes, and the physical conformation, natural resources, and industrial products
of the colony, it is further deemed necessary that some instruction should be given upon subjects of a less technical,
though not less important, description. For example, the laws of health in individuals and communities, the principles
which regulate family and social economy, such general notions respecting property, capital, and labour, and their relations
as may be rendered comprehensible to boys at school; and other questions of similar kind which have an important
bearing upon the condition and prosperity of the individual classes, should be included in the programme of a good
elementary school. It is of equal moment that some knowledge of the laws by which the community is governed -should be
widely diffused, in order that none may err through ignorance, but that all may feel equally interested in obeying their
requirements, and in supporting the authorities to whom the duty of enforcing their provisions is entrusted.
Of even greater importance than effective and enlarged instruction is the moral training of the youth of the Colony.
The formation of habits of regularity, cleanliness, and orderly behaviour, the inculcation of regard for the rights of
property (public and private), the growth of a spirit of obedience to the law, and respect for duly constituted authority,
the correct practical appreciation of the value of time as an element of worldly success, the emplanting of a love for patient
and sustained exertion in some industrial pursuit, and the development of character for energy and self-reliance, are all
points of the highest vq,lue both to individual children and to the community at large. Honesty, truthfulness, temperance,
and other virtues may be cultivated by school discipline ; reverence for sacred things may be fostered ; and, without any
violation of the strict neutrality required between conflicting creeds, a religious spirit may be educed by a teacher who
exhibits in the performance of his own duty the promptings of religious influences.
The results of such teaching would speedily become manifest in the character of the individual thus educated.
Along with thoughtful intelligence, and, for their years, a mind well stored with information, they will have received such
a moral and religious training as will prepare them for the easier and more cheerful performance of the duties incumbent
uoon them in their various relations as members of a family, of society, and of a State. The national character
■will thus be elevated and improved, while the comcomitant advance in national prosperity will place New South Wales in
a uosition of honor and respect. Such results the teacher should labour to secure ; they are such as will most certainly
earn for the teaching profession in New South Wales the thanks and confidence of the Legislature and people.
The elevation oi the teaching profession to its proper rank in a civilised community has been regarded by the Council
as one of the most effective means of improving the character of public instruction.
To accomplish the aims shadowed forth in the preceding remarks, teachers are required whose personal attainments
are high, whose moral character is above question, and whose religious principles may be discerned in every act of their
lives. A high authority has pronounced that a teacher requires to know more than he is called upon to teach—(applause) —in
order that he may teach with intelligence and w T ith taste; and this view has led the Council to arrange for the successive
examination of teachers until they have gained a respectable rank in the profession. They must, at the same time, possess
such


such moral qualities as will secure for them the respect of the community in general, and such professional skill as will
place them above depreciatory remark. But, to be fully successful, other qualifications are necessary. The best teacher is
liable to failure unless possessed of a calm temper, courteous manner, and sound judgment. Tact and discretion are not
less necessary than sound principle for the accomplishment of the subjects which he will constantly have in view.
Well, I think that, with some one or two alterations to suit the times, would not be a bad thing to have
tacked on to the back of every certificate issued to each teacher as he is appointed. To speak only of two
matters touched upon in the above, namely, character-building and a noble ideal, to which the Education
Commissioners now rightly attach a high importance, it will be seen that they were recognised to be
essential even thirty-seven years ago; and to assert a failure in these or in other respects after the lapse of
such a period is to pass condemnation on these instructors who have had the practical carrying on of the
work on the lines indicated. I have read the Report of the Education Commissioners, and Ido not think
anything the Commissioners said bears that construction. It is idle to censure the system while professing
to absolve the individual. One might as logically contend that the builder who has not done his work in
accordance with the specification set before him is free from blame for the resultant defects in the building.
Now we come to the question which is, I may say, the whole question for consideration : that is, the pupil-
teachers. I hope lam not wearying you '! (No, No. Applause.) The pupil-teacher system is to be dealt
with, but instances of the inaccuracy or carelessness of newspaper articles will be found in the following
statement: “ That at 14 years the mere child is allowed to pass direct from his class to the teaching ranks
on passing a simple examination in elementary subjects ; that the pupil teacher period lasts for five years ;
and that a start is made to train him to teach after he has actually been for five years teaching.” In the
Metropolitan district, where the bulk of appointments are made, the average age at which a pupil-teacher
receives his first appointment has been over 16 years during the last four years, while last year the
average age was 17 for eighty-one first appointments. In several cases the age at time of first appointment
was 19 years. By the new regulations, no appointment will be made under the age of 16 years. The pupil-
teacher period has hitherto been four years, not five, and in future even this is reduced to three years.
The statement regarding starting to train completely ignores the daily instruction and supervision he
receives from his head master during the years of the pupil-teacher course, the value of which is not to be
destroyed merely by depreciatory statements from critics. Further, in the allusions to this subject, no
notice is taken of the fact that in other places the monitor system prevails—the worst form of pupil-
teacherism—-inasmuch as the monitor remains a pupil, and has naturally no control over the other pupils,
whereas the pupil-teacher has a broad dividing-line drawn between himself and the ranks of the scholars,
and it is very rarely that he gets appointed to the school in which he was formerly a pupil. (Hear, hear.)
If he is not fit to do anything at all in ordinary schools, how much less control will he have as a monitor,
who is still a pupil i Now that the minimum age on first appointment has been raised to 16 years, and the
standard for the competitive entrance examination made much higher, the average age at time of appoint-
ment will not be lower than last year. These candidates for the office of teachers have to pass the literary
portion of their examination before 18. Positions cannot immediately be found for all successful candidates,
and they have to wait their turn for vacancies to arise. A considerable time, therefore, in many instances,
elapses betwen the date of the candidate’s first examination and the date on which he receives his first
appointment. In the interim the candidate is usually pursuing his studies at school under the guiding hand
of the teacher who prepared him for the examination, and is further qualifying himself for his duties.
Then comes the appointment ; and here again the want of full and definite information as to the methods
of procedure adopted by the Department is further evidenced. (Applause.) The pupil-teacher—not the
raw lad of 14, referred to as teaching “Johnny and Tommy the way to do sums”—you know the article I
am referring to, in the Telegraph —is only appointed to schools in charge of fully qualified and experienced
teachers, and his training commences from the very first day of appointment, and not, as alleged, after a
five years’ course. In the official communication addressed to the head master, notifying the youth’s
appointment as pupil-teacher in the school under his charge, the following passages occur, and I think it
would be well to read them to you. You all know it, no doubt, but I will give it, for there are some who do
not know it, and, as I said before, require a lot of enlightenment.
Pupil-teachers’ home studies should be supervised and directed, and their written exercises carefully corrected, so
that the instruction given may be thoroughly grounded. Studious habits should be encouraged, and every assistance
rendered that may tend to develop in the pupil-teachers’ minds a love for learning and a desire to fit themselves for a
thorough performance of their duties.
Their practical training should also receive your careful attention, so that their acquaintance with the most
convenient mode of organising schools, the most efficacious discipline, and the most appropriate and skilful methods may
be gradually extended and improved. Nor should your watchful care for their welfare cease at the school door. Their
manners and habits, their home life, and their morals, so far as these phases of their character can be effected by your
personal influence, demand from you the most anxious solicitude and untiring vigilance. Although much trouble may be
occasioned by the performance of this duty, the benefits accruing to the pupil-teachers themselves, to the schools in which
they are employed, and to the profession generally, will amply repay all the labour expended. It cannot be accepted as a
valid reason for a teacher’s failure to discharge the duty therein indicated that he does not come into contact with the
pupil-teachers when out of school. If he rightly apprehended the obligations of his position, he will perceive that it is
incumbent upon him to seek proper opportunities for obtaining the requisite knowledge on the points mentioned.
It will be your duty to exercise a watchful supervision over your pupil-teachers, to require of them a cheerful
obedience to your directions, a punctual and effective discharge of duty, and a manifestation of a proper interest in the
welfare of the schools. But you should, at the same time, keep in view the fact that, while young and inexperienced, they
should not be required to take any important charge, nor should their mental or bodily powers be unduly taxed by
requiring of them the performance of duties beyond their strength.
(Applause.) It is thus clear that the pupil-teacher is not, as represented, allowed to run amok, as it were,
amongst the “Johnnies and Tommies,” but is carefully trained and helped, as apprentices should be in
all professions—legal, medical, or engineering. In fact :
A man must serve his time to every trade,
Save censure—critics all are ready-made.
The critic’s stock-in-trade, as in Byron’s time, is still “ A mind well trained to find or forge a fault.” A
good deal of forging has been done by the critics of the Education Department. We have faults, and we
acknowledge them, but we do not want to be saddled with more than we have. I find in Mr. Commissioner
Turner’s report it is stated that, under the examination system, public school teachers in England were
often the victims of inspectors’ caprice. If so, then I have to say that the inspectors were badly chosen;
and,


and, if it comes to the knowledge of the Department that we have got capricious inspectors who will
deliberately do a wrong to a teacher through some caprice, I can promise him a very short time in the
Service. (Applause.)
Mr. Turner : That is an extract only !
Mr. Perry : lam thankful for several extracts, and lam going to make use of them. (Laughter.)
But, on this question of substituting inspection for examination, a question that may be fraught with
consequences of much importance, I do not for a moment intend to adopt here an ex cathedra attitude.
Mr. Turner has, however, himself supplied us with reports on the matter of so striking a nature as to be
calculated to give us pause. lam getting advice from the Herald this morning, and I am told I have
stultified myself. You had a conference last year, and I had a deputation from that conference asking me
to substitute inspection for examination ; and I am always only too eager to talk over these matters with
anybody, either inspectors or the general public—University lectuiers not excluded. (Laughter.) I have
had several interesting conversations with the University people, and to our benefit. They brought this
matter under my notice, and urged me to substitute inspection for examination. I had at that time no
conversation with Mr. Maynard, the Under Secretary at the time, but I think Mr. Taylor, Mr. Nelligan,
Mr. Swan, Mrs. De Salis, and Miss Golding—all of whom have a fair amount of common-sense—were
appointed by the body of teachers, and they brought this matter before me, and I pointed out that, while I
did not hold myself up to be an educational expert, I would give consideration to it. I asked if it were
not possible to go from one extreme to the other; if we dispensed with examination we would not know
what results the year’s work really showed. I think that the plan that came into my mind at the time
was a hybrid system of inspection and examination—one year examination and the next year inspection.
These ordinary inspections will comprise the general management of the school and the methods of teaching
—the teacher’s skill, usefulness, character, and local reputation, the public estimation of the school, and the
educational wants of the locality. Thus there will be a respite from individual examination, and the
general aspects of the school will be viewed, but if there be a doubt concerning the standard of the work
done, then there will be recourse to the former method. Now I come to that portion of Mr. Turner’s
report which, I think, fully bears out what I said to that deputation. I have taken out from the report
a copy of the extracts from the General Report by the Board Inspectors for London, 1901, and they say :
Since the substitution of inspection for examination, our annual reports show that we have watched with keen
interest, and no less anxiety, to see the effect of the change on the efficiency of the Board schools.
In 1896 we set forth the possible and desirable benefits likely to accrue therefrom. In 1897 we said that the effects
of concentrating the attention on method had produced, as far as we could judge, good results. In 1899 we gave the first
note of warning that all was not well in the schools. Last year we went a step further, and gave a stronger warning. We
said, in effect, that in some schools not only was the old standard not maintained, but that a palpable decrease in efficiency
was apparent.
Well, I want to pat myself on the back, and I am not likely to have my hair turned grey by the Herald
saying I have stultified myself. The report continues :
We do not withdraw from the position we have taken up. There are some schools made brighter and more efficient
by freer conditions, but the majority suffer. The occasional and partial individual examinations we have been able to
conduct during the year just ended confirms us in this view ; hut we thought it well to select some few typical schools,
and submit some portion of the work of each to a more complete and exhaustive test towards the end of the educational
year. Thirteen departments were selected —eight boys and five girls. Three of the departments are in poor localities, but
we counterbalanced, as we thought, the effect of their selection by including three higher-grade schools, each with the very
highest reputation for efficiency. The part of the work chosen was the arithmetic of the upper standards, viz., standards
for 4,5, 6, and 7. Five exercises were given to each scholar, printed on cards. In awarding marks, 4to each exercise, we
were very careful to assign full value to intelligence as shown in the methods employed. Thus, if the exercise was not
worked accurately, we yet awarded a considerable number of marks, provided the child had shown that he or she knew
how to solve the problem. We further alloted 2 marks for neatness and order. Tims it was possible for each scholar to
earn 22 marks. We examined 1,611 papers in all, with results as follows :—224, about 14 per cent., won from 18 to 22
marks ; call this excellent. 618, about 38 per cent., won from 10 to 17 marks ; very fair to very good. 759, about 48 per
cent., failed to reach 10 marks. The latter statement means that 48 per cent, of the children failed to secure the value of
two exercises out of five, and 2 marks for neatness ; and, under the old system, would have failed.
Now, no doubt to adhere rigidly to inspection, and to allow the teacher to put values on the work of the
children, would be as unwise as holding to examination altogether. (Applause.)
Another fact brought out pretty clearly from this examination is that, whereas under the old system the dull
children received more than their fair share of attention, under the new system they received less.
I think the dull child wants a little more care and attention. (Applause).
There must be something amiss when, in all the departments examined, the number of children who failed to do anything
almost balances the excellent passes—2ll to 224.
We feel that a grievous mistake has been made, and that, while striving to escape from the evils of one system, we
have rushed into evils of another. Under the old system the educational pendulum was swung much too far in the
direction of slavery ; under the new it is swung too far in the direction of license.
I think that is what I told the deputation—that we must be careful we did not go from one extreme to the
other. (Applause.)
We want so much of the former as will make for educational efficiency, and so much of the latter as will secure that
efficiency is achieved in the best possible way. Until some substitute is found, we must adhere to our opinion that
occasionally impartial individual examinations are a necessity. Let us not be misunderstood. Neither as a body, nor as
individuals, have we ever suggested a return to the old system. We have never asked for wholesale individual examination
by inspectors, neither have we objected to inspection per se. What we do say, and wish to emphasise, is that, while
inspection as now understood is admirable so far as it goes, it needs some help if the standard of efficiency is to be
maintained. If the necessary stimulus can be applied in any other way, we will rejoice.
That is what we are endeavouring to do, and I hope we will he able to do. I think the step we
have taken will accomplish that.
Now, in other States and other countries it is just the same. In Victoria they are getting back on
their tracks. I do not mind being a little bit slow off the scratch, so long as I get to the other end first.
Now, passing from that to another subject in connection with the granting of subsidies to remote districts,
and I am very anxious that all the teachers and the inspectors shall take an interest in that question.
Very often, in very remote places, it is not possible for a long time for an inspector to get near, and
therefore we are calling on teachers to see that the State is not “ had,” as it was predicted we would be
“ had ” in that connection—that is, if they will let me know that proper attention is being given by those
subsidised


subsidised tutors and governesses to the children. After all, that is what I want. I want them to devote
the time to instructing those children who otherwise would be without any education whatever. With
reference to the statement that “insurmountable difficulties stood in the way of subsidising private
teachers, a course strongly urged upon the Department by successive annual conferences of the Farmers’
and Settlers’ Association,” it may be remarked that the difficulties have been met; but that only once did tlio
Farmers’ and Settlers’ Association bring the matter under my notice, and that was after the new regulation
was in operation. Another matter is the centralised schools. That is a matter that country teachers
especially will give some attention to. The plan to consolidate small rural schools into a common central
school, and to convey children to and from school by suitable vehicles, was suggested by me some two jears
ago, when the Sydney Press ridiculed the idea. Now, I do not want exactly to compare children with
cream-cans, but I happened to be in my own district, sitting down, one day, and I saw a waggon made
cool and comfortable for the cream-cans, taking them to the central factory. “Now,” I said, “why was
this not thought of before? This is a solution of the whole difficulty.” We have a great number of small
schools staffed with teachers, who are worth more than they get, but who cannot get more because there is
an average in a number of the schools of not more than ten to twenty children. Now, I thought if we
could gather those children together in some central school, you could have a first-class building, a first-class
staff, and first-class competition among the children. Then I looked round for other advantages, thinking
that something would have to be done in that direction, and I wanted to make out a strong case for
myself. I also tried to think of what the objections would be. I thought, among other things, that you
would take your children to the school dry on a wet day ; they would not be compelled to sit with damp
clothes and feet in the school; they would escape the bullying of the bigger boys; the growing girls would
escape any molestation from tramps ; in fact, the children would be taken delivery of and delivered home
again in those bush places without any danger whatever. It would enab'e the children of country residents
to partake of some of the higher educational advantages that at present are concentrated in Sydney and
the large towns of the State. It would help to create a demand for teachers of higher attainments, and
those possessing qualifications to meet both the Departmental and University requirements. It would lead
to a better class of buildings, improve the organisation, brighten the intellects, and stimulate the activity
and discipline of our children. I spoke of that in opening a school somewhere in the metropolis. Some
few months after—and I want to give you this to show that there is nothing new under the sun—l received
a copy of the report of the Educational Department of America, in which it was pointed out that this had
already been done, and the place where this was first done—in the chapter that I had opened in connection
with this matter—was called “Perry.” (Applause) However, we are waiting, and I read with very
great interest Mr. Turner’s paper on that question.
Now I refer to a question, but I do not think there is any need to discuss the matter here. I
mention it just to show how wide the Commission was. One portion of the Report deals with the
question of subsidising educational establishments not controlled by the State, and this has, as it might
have been expected to do, provoked apprehensions lest the principles of the Public Instruction Act would
be interfered with. I will just observe that the inclusion of this subject will show the great latitude
allowed to the Commissioners which gave them power even to suggest matters of policy. They were
not cramped iu any way, and they knew full well when they went away that they were not so
cramped. We may differ from Mr. Knibbs’conclusions on this subject; but because we differ on a few
points, it must not allow us to discount his other excellent recommendations. (Loud applause.) As
administering the Department, I have to deal with the business aspect of affairs, and perhaps I will be
pardoned when I say that from a business standpoint it would not be good business for us to subsidise a
competitor. Nobody in business does. (Laughter.) But it is a good thing to make our own business
(schools) more attractive and better, and, instead of subsidising a competitor, use the money in doing so.
Take this aspect of the case. You go into a district when it is in what we may call the “ Stone age.”
Well, then, you get along to the different ages. You get a little school. Gradually the district grows ;it
is being developed by means of communication, for which my friend, Mr. O’Sullivan, is badly attacked at
times ; there comes a railway to the place ; the place grows, and it progresses through various stages, until
at last it has a superior school. Then at that time the various denominations, or some private individual,
may see that he can collect his particular flock under a separate roof, and, if we subsidise him, you will
enc'ourage him to do it. What would become of our teachers and buildings if you induce other people
to come into competition with our schools? However, that is a matter I think that we may very
easily dismiss. I think this State has settled that question long ago. (Applause.) The Herald , in
a recent foot-note to a correspondent’s letter—l read that letter with a very great deal of interest
—stated that what it urged was that our system should undergo examination in the light of what
other states or nations are doing, and that when improvement is shown to be necessary it should be
introduced, if possible, from within and gradually, so as not to add to the present heavy cost of education,
or to disorganise our system. Well, those words exactly describe my attitude and the attitude of the
departmental officers to this question. Coming from the Herald , it looker! to me as if they had wallowed a
little bit in a sea that they did, not quite understand, and they wanted to get back again. According to
the same paper, we must sit silently down and allow them to say that our Australian youths and girls, men
and women, are a set of uneducated, weak eyed, stupid people, suffering more or less from curvature of the
spine and hollow-chested. Where are their eyes? We can always put up a fair team in the matter of
football, or any other exercise. We can always send men to the Universities, who can always find their
places in the Oxford or Cambridge boats. Now I wanted to say, if there is any way in which we can
improve matters, we are ready to improve them. Although lam not suffering from curvature of the spine,
or things of that sort, still I went to a school, and we had not any backs to our seats, Mr. Knibbs, so
that I do not think it is altogether correct for them to draw their conclusions in that way, and I do
not know whether Mr. Knibbs intended that they should. Only two days before the Iferald laid down
that the attitude—“We do all this already” —should not be adopted; the departmental conscience
was to be awakened ; procrastination from within was to be resisted, and there were to be no more
“old ruts” or “carrying old cargoes of absurdities to the old wharf, futility.” If it were the case that
we are so far behind hand, I might be inclined, for my own part, to suggest that it may have been
attributable to our fiscal policy, which condemns us to be raisers of raw products for other people to
manufacture and resell to us. In fact, if wo are to remain hewers of wood and drawers of water for other
nations, we do not require an education necessary in those countries with a more enlightened fiscal policy.
i


I want all present to approach each subject with an open mind, and let there be nothing personal, that
is, for instance, in dealing with training of teachers and the pupil teacher question—while recollecting
that something better is expected that when we were pupil teachers, or under them, and that you, teachers
of schools, have cast on you the work and responsibility of, as it were, working up the raw material into a
teacher—you must not let the desire to get rid of those duties influence you. On the other hand, the fact
that we have a staff of well-qualified teachers, who have grown up and have done good work in the service
under the pupil teacher system, must not stand in the way of a right decision being arrived at, and an
advance made on more progressive lines. Before concluding I want to correct other statements that have
been made with reference to the Department’s attitude in connection with conferences. I have been told
that at the Conference of Inspectors that I had the pleasure of calling together in 1902, they went there
tongue-tied, that they were really afraid to call their souls their own. Well, Ido not think any teacher
whoever met one of our inspectors has got any idea that they are tongue-tied, and I just want to quote
what I said at the Conference in 1902 on this subject. As a matter of fact, I think if the address I gave
at that Conference had been published in the articles in the papers, at any rate some of the subsequent
articles would not have been written. I said :
And I want it to be distinctly understood that the utmost freedom of speech and freedom of thought should be
exercised in your deliberations. It is only by a direct attitude and a conscientious determination to thresh things out that
any good can be expected from this Conference.
I say that now. Again :
No progress of a permanent character has ever been obtained without intellectual opposition, and this must be the
key-note of the deliberations of this Conference.
Now, I think that, at any rate, will show that as far as that Conference was concerned, they were given an
entirely free hand. I went on further :
I refrain from going any further into its details, for I do not wish any views of mine to influence your conclusions.
That is, in point of fact, the attitude I want to take up with regard to the whole of the subjects submitted to this
Conference.
Now, I know—l am not foolish enough to think anything else—l might have what I consider to be a very
beautiful theory. I may have something that I consider, after considerable study, to be unanswerable ;
but lam not foolish enough to keep that theory to myself. I put it forth in order that it may meet with
fair criticism, because it is only when these things are brought under criticism that you can see either the
weakness or strength of your argument. I never did object to fair criticism, but Ido object to unfair
criticism, and Ido object to this question being made a party one. If ever there was a question in the
world that should be free from party politics, it is the question of education. (Loud applause.) In order
to show you that we were not blind, I want to ram this point well home. I want to make this point clear
to the people of this State—that the Department was fully alive to the necessity of going forward. I
desire, therefore, to make a final quotation from my address already referred to: —■
The welfare of our new nation depends upon the intelligence and capacity of its people, and it is to our Department
that the people in this State look for the cultivation of that intelligence and capacity. They fully expect that for the
money spent on public education in New South Wales the best and. the most practicable methods will be employed, and
that the future of the rising generation shall not be left to anything in the shape of haphazard procedure. Taking our
business-paper in the original order of its drawing up, “the training of teachers” is placed first for our consideration.
The training of teachers is, without doubt, the most important responsibility devolving upon the Department. I realise
that our present system has succeeded in producing many admirable teachers whose work to-day is recognised from one
end of the country to the other. You can only judge a system by the results it produces, and it is not for me to say
whether better results could have been obtained under different conditions. lam keenly alive to the necessity of seizing
every opportunity for improving things. To be content with anything that we do is but the prelude of stagnation, but I
know full well that the leading spirits of the Department are not content, and are as eager a,s anyone to secure the best
results. lam anxious to extend and improve, as far as possible, the conditions of our training colleges, and my intentions
have been strengthened considerably by the knowledge that I am supported by the sympathy of all grades in our service
to-day. Ido not claim to have fully analysed the methods connected with our training colleges, and, therefore, in putting a
few questions in this speech, lam fully prepared for satisfactory assurances on the points that I raise. When I ask,
therefore, “Do our present methods succeed in not only imparting knowledge of the technique of the teaching profession,
but also inspiring our teachers with high aims and a consciousness of the need of something better than we have so far
attained, and a determination to take a share in the attainment of it ?” I am inviting the testimony of the Conference
upon the point. We all learn by experience ; but the man whom we can least permit to gain his experience while working
is the teacher. Dr. Abbott says : “I gained my experience as a teacher at the expense of my pupils for at least two
years. ” No doubt this is true, and doubtless many teachers have taken a much longer time than two years. The training
of teachers is supposed to obviate, as far as possible, this loss to the children ; and we should, therefore, commence early
and continue the period of training for a sufficient time, in order to send our teachers properly equipped to their work.
It is possible that in the near future the people will demand that all primary education shall be under the control of the
State, and that all teachers must pass through the State training colleges, where they will have to satisfy the authorities
that they are not only well equipped as regards attainments, but that they are, in the truest sense, men and women
possessed of both physical and mental strength, with a large stock of common sense, the ability to understand children,
and unmistakable capacity to teach. On the teachers of this country rests the responsibility of fashioning the nation’s
progress, for it goes without saying that upon the education of our children depends the success of the future, and the only
way of improving the education of a country is to improve its teachers. Most of you gentlemen have been teachers from
the initial stage of the profession up to the mastership of large schools ; you should, therefore, have a large knowledge of
what ought to constitute the more important elements that should enter into the training of teachers. lam anxious to
extend and improve, as far as possible, the conditions of our training colleges.
I want to say in conclusion that of course it is quit® natural—l have striven against it as hard as I could—■
to resent unjust criticism, and any criticism that you may have read, or fancied that in any way had been
levelled against the Department, and in a way against the teachers, you want to put it on one side
altogether, and approach this great question of improving our educational methods without any soreness at
all, with a strong desire to make our system —well, Mr. Knibbs has given us very high ideals, and I am
very glad of it—if we are not able to reach them, that is, to jump from the lower rung of the ladder to the
top, we can reach them rung at a time, We must have high ideals, and I hope in the very near future to
carry out all necessary reforms—(How long, Mr. Knibbs '() Four years. (Mr. Knibbs : It cannot be done.l
If Mr. Knibbs can provide me with the coin, I will undertake to do it before. Referring to the article i
this morning’s Herald \quoting from article], which you have all read, you will probably agree with me tho
the recklessness of the terms used is in itself sufficient to show the utter futility and absurdity of expecting
to get credit for any good results from a paper that can see nothing good in the present Government; but
in this matter there is, fortunately, the precedent of former Governments, and of successive educational
34013 B leaders


leaders and teachers : and if the Herald wants me to adopt its advice and seize upon what it calls a
dramatic moment, I must first be convinced that all these have so persistently followed a wrong and
“futile” course that it is requisite now to turn our steps in quite the reverse direction. Ido not think
there is any necessity to turn our steps in the reverse direction. I think, myself, it is an onward movement.
I say here that when Mr. Knibbs told me he would have to condemn some portion of our system, I said,
“Well, Mr. Knibbs, make it as strong as you like; it is only by a strong dose sometimes—if there is any
disease—that you can reach the disease, and you want to make it pretty strong because we have to stir up
the people in the matter.” And my object is to stir them up. I thank the papers very much for what
they have unintentionally done; they have stirred up the people ; and they have made this educational
movement in New South Wales—and I claim to have done some little, at any rate, towards it—a real live
question in this community. Now, Ido not want to take up very much more of your time here to-day. I
want to say this : This is a preliminary conference. I have taken advantage of your presence in the'city,
and I hope I have not shortened your holidays at all ; but I am sure you will ungrudgingly give a day or
two of your time to a big question like this. I am anxiously waiting for the other two sections of the
Report, and I intend then—before make making any drastic change, because these things want a lot of
thinking out, and I do not think Mr. Turner or Mr. Knibbs would thank me if I simply took their Report
as they gave it to me, and wrote a minute on it, “ Let these things be done ” ; I know the gentleman well,
and I think they would be more likely to say to me, “ Now, do not do anything without thoroughly
understanding it, and if there is any point you do not understand call on us, call on your teachers, call on
the inspectors.” Well, I have called on them. You are all here together. I want to say that I will,
before any important step is taken, call a conference together again as soon as it is possible to do so of
educational experts both inside the Department and outside the Department, when the matter will be
thoroughly threshed out. (Cheers.) As I said, I have had four years’ instruction, and Ido not feel
competent to deal with so important a thing in a few days. I acknowledge at once my incompetency in
that regard. Ido not set myself up to be the equal of a newspaper writer who can do it in a few hours—■
I cannot, Mr. Knibbs cannot, but they can. They can criticise, but they have no responsibility. I have.
I have taken up considerably more time than I thought I was going to take. As a matter of fact, it is a
very interesting subject, and I could go on for hours if my throat were all right; but I feel signs of my
throat not being able to survive very much more. I thank you very much for giving up your holiday and
meeting here to-day, in order that matters of considerable importance may be questioned and threshed out.
I thank you very much indeed. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Senior-Inspector Dawson (Sydney) : Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, the statement made
by the Honorable the Minister has, in my opinion, a very good ground for congratulation. We have not
in these thirty years been idle. We have accomplished a great work in this Colony, and we have done it
under able and wise guidance. (Applause.) That minute read by the Minister, dated 1867, is an answer
to a great many criticisms that have been hurled at our system. We have, under this wide guidance, built
up character, trained children to self-activity, and we hope to do it more and more. Reference was made
to a period of educational unrest. I welcome that period of educational unrest. I wish it to continue for
ever. (Cheers.) Educational unrest is educational life; educational stagnation is death. And, therefore,
I speak here—and I may say I try to voice the opinion of my colleagues, the inspectors—and say advisedly
to the Minister, to the public press, to the people of this Colony, that the inspectors of this Department
are fully in accord with the spirit of progress. But like wise men who have a responsibility—the
responsibility of advising the Minister—they are cautious, some of them, perhaps, by nature. (Laughter.)
Therefore, in their attempt at reform, in their advocacy of progress, they have carefully considered the
£s. d. aspect of any of the recommendations. Our Commissioners, able gentlemen, have come back to us—■
I do not mean to say that there are not as able gentlemen in this room—(Applause)—our Commissioners
have come back with a very fine report, highly idealistic in many ways; but I have heard it said that they
made a great mistake when they did not bring with them two or three of the Vanderbilts and Mr. Carnegie.
(Applause.) With regard to this meeting, the inspectors are of the same opinion as the Minister. With
a large promiscuous gathering such as this, and no detailed procedure laid down, no question can be
thoroughly debated here on this occasion. That, I understand, will be done by-and-by, perhaps at Easter—.
the sooner the better—but at present I do not think in this large assembly a great many, a high percentage,
could say that they have honestly read the Report from cover to cover, and not only read it but digested
it. Some things are not easily digested. (Laughter and applause.) Well, then, turning back to the
period of educational unrest. It is everywhere. We have known of it for many years. It has spread
through all the countries of Europe, and at last it has become aflame here in our State. That is a great
step. Well, as teachers and inspectors—l prefer to be called a teacher any day—we are the butt of the
critics everywhere, not in this Colony alone, but the teachers everywhere are the butts of the critics, to
carp at, to sneer at, to flout. That is our experience. Ido not object to criticism; but the grave question
that will have to be met will be this : Are we not saddling the teachers with too much of the work of
education 1 What is to be done in the homes 1 (Applause.) What have parents to do now 1 (Applause.)
What, I ask, is the vast body of clergymen occupied with 1 What are they to do 1 Have they to stand
by while the teacher sweats developing the moral capacities of the children 1 Now, ladies and gentlemen,
the inspectors have been criticised too. I wish to say this advisedly : Some of the criticism is decidedly
unfair. But, mind you, we are accustomed to criticism, and we have developed rather thick hides.
(Laughter.) I wish to point out to you that the craze for reform amongst inspectors is not a new thing.
I have been a reformer for many years ; others of my colleagues and associates have had .those ideas (so
beautifully put by the Commissioners) in their minds, and have had some of them discussed and put in
operation. With regard to the freedom of teachers, what teacher in this room can stand up and say that
I ever suppressed his individuality ? Not one. I have always gone on this principle : That the teacher
must have full charge of his school. I wish to point out to you that at our Conference in 1902, many of
those points which the Commissioners have reported upon were discussed by us, always, mind you, with
the idea of a great responsibility. The £ s. d. part of the operation was constantly in our minds, and,
therefore, we made no rash or violent recommendations. We advised many things, many improvements ;
some of them have been delayed because the Minister was not prepared to go on till he had the Report of
the Commissioners, thereby showing true caution, because we must advance step by step. A little here
and a little there. We will have reform, I hope, but not revolution. (Applause.) “ Raw haste is half-sister


to delay.” That is a well known adage, especially in educational matters. The slightest move of the
Minister’s pen, and think of the number of children who are affected by that move. Therefore, we must
have caution. Therefore, here and now we cannot debate and settle these great questions. A word as to the
pupil-teacher system, so severely criticised. When the proper Conference comes, that matterwill be thoroughly
threshed out, and we shall not forget that in those countries where the pupil-teacher system does not exist, it
is still there in a surreptitious form. It is a great question. They cannot solve it in England. They cannot
solve it in America. How can we solve it here ? We have to compromise. There is no system except at
enormous expense—we want Mr. O’Sullivan at the head of affairs—that will provide fully trained teachers
for every school in this great Colony. Think of the rural schools. I am sorry to say that in the Report the
rural school receives little attention. As to inspection and examination, a little has been said about that.
At the Conference two years ago, many of the inspectors, just as the teachers, wished to have reform, but
we wanted to be cautious. I do not suppose there is a lady or gentleman teacher present who objects to
examination altogether, because there must be some test of work, and examination conducted in a fair way
is a very good test. What has been done in Victoria 1 Mr. Tate, the Director of Education there, has
had a meeting of his teachers and inspectors, and he says : “ Those who would abolish examinations
altogether were extremists it was not safe to follow.” Now, there is a matter to make us pause a little,
and think deeply before we make a great plunge. But lam here to assure you, ladies and gentlemen, that
under our good General, the Under Secretary (Loud applause), we inspectors will have in the year to come,
and in all future years, the fullest opportunity to allow our teachers the bent of their individuality, so that
in their turn they will develop their pupils’ individuality. That is a great reform ; but, mind you, not
without some kind of provision that examinations will be enforced wherever it is found necessary. And to
that provision, Ido not think any fair-mined teacher can object. Now, ladies and gentlemen, I have
spoken more than I intended to speak. My chief object in standing here is to point out that the inspectors,
with no detailed procedure, could not—just as you teachers may find to be the case—debate and decide
here and now these great questions. And I wish to assure the press and the public that the inspectors are
fully in accord —not now, but for many years past —aa to the desirability of advance. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Swann (Superior Public School, Parramatta North) : As the Vice-President and senior officer of
the Teachers’ Association, and, therefore, in some measure the representative of the teachers, it devolves on
me to say a few words. First of all, I would like to say the teachers have very many political faiths, but
no matter what their political faith may be, I can honestly say, from my acquaintance with them, that we
all respect Mr. Perry and honor him as Minister. (Applause.) He is the right man in the right place,
and, for my part, I should be very glad to see his party kept in. (Applause.) Now I think Mr. Perry
may be very well satisfied with the response to the advertisement and circular which he caused to be sent
out. It is not forty-eight hours since I saw a number of those present climbing up the steeps of Leura and
Katoomba, and many of us gave up the tail-end of our holidays in order to be present to-day. But, as
Mr. Dawson has well said, we are not prepared now to discuss the various questions in the Report. It is
something like fifteen or sixteen days ago since I received my copy of the Report. Well, I may have read
a great deal of it, but I have not digested it yet, and Ido not think many teachers have either. I think it
would be a very good thing if this Conference could be adjourned until Easter, so that we might come
together and have a business-paper before us, and be able to deal with the matter in a systematic manner.
I do not know that I should touch upon anything else, but there is one thing that has been very much on
my mind since Mr. Perry read that circular issued in Mr. Wilkins’ time. I kept a copy of that circular.
I was not in the Service at the time, but I think I have been responsible as much as anybody else
for showing that circular about. But lam sorry to say that that does not quite represent the state
of affairs in Mr. Wilkins’ time. Now, I do not want to say anything nasty, but when I entered the
Service in 1876 I received a copy of that circular, and I also received another circular saying that,
notwithstanding the attention they desired us to devote to methods, our practical scale of promotion
would depend on the results that were obtained. It seems to me far too much has been made of the £. s. d.
question. I ask Mr. Perry, I ask all of you, if you can remember when Parliament starved the Education
Vote ? They always seemed to me to be too ready to vote the funds for this service ; and if Germany, and
France, and Italy were kept miserably poor by their immense military establishments, which drain the
life blood from the people—if they can .spend a certain amount on education, I think wealthy Australia
ought to be able to spend an equal amount. Without making it a formal motion, I would like to assure
Mr. Perry that we would like to have the Conference postponed until Easter. We would be very glad if
you would give us something definite to debate. (Applause.)
Mr. Perry : I studiously avoided having any cut and dried procedure to-day. I wanted you to
come here in order to express your opinions. I have already told you that I intend to have a Conference
as early as possible, and so important do I consider this subject that if it is necessary to extend our Easter
holidays longer than usual, I will extend those holidays, in order that I will have as big a gathering as
possible to discuss this question. (Applause.) Mr. Knibbs suggests that an opportunity should be given
to the teachers in the country districts to come here ; I will take good care that they do. If it were merely
a question of dealing with education here, and the big centres, which approximate to the conditions of
Switzerland as a whole, there would be very little difficulty about it, but it is in order that we may have
the experience of the rural teachers that I want the Conference to be pretty wide. And at that Conference
lam sure we will have a programme which will satisfy the most hungry man on educational matters. In
sending a copy of the Report to each school, and to each Mechanics’ Institute, I want you to very carefully
study its contents, and to come here prepared with suggestions, so that nobody will be taken as it were
unawares. You want to be here ready with suggestions, and you may depend upon it that the Department
will fairly consider the suggestions, no matter where they come from. I hope you will study that Report,
and be able to give me all the advice it is possible for you to give, in order that I may be able to hand
down to my successor good, safe lines to run upon. It is my sincere hope that at that Conference we will
be able to evolve a system which will place us —will I say it—in the front of nations. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Swann : I think Mr. Perry has given us all we wanted in that respect, so I thank you,
Mr. Perry.
Dr. Morris : Is it probable that the Commissioners’ Report will be in your hands before Easter ?
Mr.


Mr. Perry : I have been pressing on our friend, Mr. Knibbs, the advisability of letting us have
that some time during the month of March. Whether he will be able to do it or not, of course he cannot
make a promise. Ido not believe in a man making a promise unless he is sure he can fulfil it. But I have
impressed the Commissioners with the necessity of letting us have the Report as early as possible.
Mr. Kibble says they are going to give their whole time to the matter from this out.
Mr. Inspector McKenzie (Blackheath) said : I understand that any one of us may ask the
Commissioners for information—of course, in a fair spirit. One thing has struck me forcibly in the few
hours that I have had to glance over the Report. We find that our Commissioners have travelled over
great centres of population; we find a great deal about schools in London, in Paris, and in Berlin. We
find that they have travelled through a great many old populous countries, where the conditions are, as we
all know, very different from the conditions in New South Wales. I know it particularly well from having
travelled over the western inspectorate for four years, and from now having a mountain district to travel
over which is, so to speak, “ all legs and arms.” I know perfectly well what this State is, and how very
different it is from those old countries that I have spoken of. For instance, Belgium has a population of
550 to the square mile, England 540, Switzerland over 200, France nearly 200, and Germany nearly 300.
Here, in New South Wales, even taking in the big centres of population, the average population to the
square mile is a little over 4—something between 4 and 5. Well, now, to show what an Inspector of
schools has to meet with in travelling over this district, I might mention that about last week, within
four days, I travelled over, in the course of my duties—although the schools were in recess—3oo miles of
country, partly by rail, partly by coach, partly on horseback, and the rest of it I had to perform on foot,
because the country I had to travel over was so difficult that I did not dare to ride a horse across the paths.
Now, I would ask the Commissioners in what part of the world they have met with schools such as I have,
as a consequence of that journey, recommended the establishment of—that is, a small half-time school 1 I
have recommended that that class of school be established in the outlying places to provide education for
twelve, possibly, later on, for thirteen or fourteen, children. Now, the great majority of the schools in this
State are these small country schools—that is, half-time schools, provisional schools, and small public
schools. I would like to ask the Commissioners if they have made inquiries as to what would benefit our
small country schools—if they have made inquiries in any part of the world as to the condition of the small
rural schools 1
Mr. Commissioner Knibbs said : Mr. Perry, Mr. Bridges, ladies and gentlemen, I think, in the
question asked, a matter has been raised which is of undoubted importance ; and seeing that my colleague
has had direct experience of the country schools cf this State, it is not likely that the Commissioners went
round simply to find out what was the character of the schools in the great centres of civilisation. It is
obvious, in a moment, that the educational limitations of a sparsely-populated country are very great
indeed. And I would like to say here, if I have not made it very clear in the Report, that I think
the Department of Public Instruction has accomplished a tremendous work in spreading the degree of
education it has so widely over the territory. When one finds the fraction which represents the area
divided by the number of the population for country districts, it is astonishing that we have done what we
have; and I think we owe, as a State, a tremendous obligation to the energy of the Department of Public
Instruction, and to the officers and teachers connected with it, for their work. I wish to say that, because
it has been represented to me that I appear to have failed to recognise the exact nature of the departmental
activity—-that is, by those who have only scanned the Report. I may say that we have not overlooked the
fact that a different type of schools is necessary in a sparsely-populated territory, and we did see some
schools of that kind. Mr. Perry has said, and another gentleman has quoted statistics to show, that the
country school is an element of great importance. But one has to remember that the whole population is
practically aggregated about the metropolis—a circumstance which is, I think, detrimental to the interests
of the country. Judged from that point of view, we have to go ahead; and the Commissioners, in judging
of the whole circumstances, made a comparison of city schools with city schools and of country schools with
country schools. I think that answers the question.
Cries of “No, no ! ”
Mr. Knibbs : The country schools in Switzerland and Germany are undoubtedly better schools than
they are in the territory of New South Wales, and my colleague paid attention to that matter in America.
We had to divide our work, in order to deal with the large area that had to be covered. The buildings
themselves, in places of corresponding density of population, are better in Europe than they are in New
South Wales.
Mr. Commissioner Turner said : Mr. Perry, Mr. Bridges, fellow-teachers, ladies and gentlemen.
The Commissioners had instructions on their leaving the State to give a joint report on educational matters
that they thought would be of interest to the people of this country. It was found impracticable on our
return to write a joint report. I will hold myself responsible for every word I have written. Before I
address myself to Mr. McKenzie’s question, I would like to point out that in the chapters I have put before
you, I have tried to show where a practical benefit may be had, and I have tried to make my recommenda-
tions practical all through. I will take you to the question of Kindergarten, and I say we have as good a
Kindergarten in New South Wales as there is in any part of the world ; but we have not enough of it.
We have it only in one or two schools. I have recommended that it be extended. Is that practical 1 I
think so.
Cries of “ Question ! ”
Mr. Turner : I have already said that I want to say a few words before dealing with Mr. McKenzie’s
question. I think that cautiousness of the Scotchman is developed in the Australian a bit. Take the
question of the lower part of our schools. I have recommended that manual training be introduced there
so as to link on the Kindergarten with the development in our Superior Schools. Well, that is practical
enough, I believe. I was sent away to see if our system could be improved. I did not go away to flatter
it, and I did not come back to condemn it. I can see where our Public Schools might branch off in other
directions to the benefit of our boys and girls. I think I have had as much experience as other men, and
T say we have been going along in one direction too much. We have no idea outside of working for
University and Public Service Examinations. Let us get on to the agricultural and industrial grooves.
Let us have more science in our schools. It is now taught in many places ; but let us have our laboratories,
and let them be provided by the State. If we are going to educate our children we must expend money


on it like other people do. Take Chicago, for instance : the Vanderbilts and the big moneyed men do not
maintain the common schools there, or in other parts of America. The bone and sinew of the country do
it. And they pay their Superintendent £2,000 a year, and their head-masters of schools with'l2 classes,
averaging, probably, an attendance of over 400, £7OO a year, and their first assistants can rise to £4BO a
year. The people of the Chicago district support the schools. I would add to our school course agricultural
and industrial science, and would have more art taught in our Superior Schools. I took that view of
public instruction and the needs of this country, and kept it in my mind during my visits, and I did not
see where we can always follow in many respects those great countries that have been so long settled in
their ideas. I think, as a community, we are second to America. If we had had two years to do the work
in, the value of our report would have been enhanced. I did not actually see those rural schools in
America, but I did the next best thing. I saw the Chief Inspector of Schools of Toronto, and his
inspectors, and Dr. Chippendale, of Chicago. I have placed the views of these gentlemen in Chapter 58.
Mr. McKenzie’s question is how would we improve the condition of the schools in those places where there
is an attendance of thirteen or fourteen. If there are sufficient schools together, I would say a central
school system, such as I have described in that chapter would be the best. In that report of the Conference
I do not see a w’ord from Mr. McKenzie as to what he can suggest.
Cries of “No ! no ! no ! He is not a Commissioner.”
Mr. Turner : Ido not think they can improve upon it in America. The only improvement that I
can see would be for the Government to build better schools, and send the best young men we can get to
take charge of them ; —if possible, to get them trained, all the better. But if trained men are to be sent
to these schools, they must be well paid. With regard to the question of subsidising other schools, I am
firmly of opinion that the State should have full power to educate its own children. We have 80 per cent,
of the population, and I think the State should have complete control of primary instruction. I saw
nothing in this regard better than you have done. Except where it is impossible, let us have a centralised
system.
Mr. Inspector W. S. Reay (Taree) : I would like to ask the Commissioners if we are to understand
from the answer given by Mr. Turner to Mr. McKenzie’s question if the strictures which have been passed
upon the schools of the State apply then to the city schools and not to the great bulk of the schools of the
Sfate in the country 1
Mr. Turner : In answer to Mr. Reay, I may say I have never made any strictures on our education
system. My whole ideas of what I consider an improvement are embodied in the general criticisms that I
have given in Chapter 56, and there I have said :
At the outset, it may be said that our Primary Schools and our Primary Elementary System will take a worthy
position when placed side by side with the schoo's and systems of other countries ; and our head teachers, mistresses, and
assistant teachers, are as intelligent and earnest as will be found elsewhere. There are, however, some defects in our
system, chiefly in the upper primary schools, or, as they are called, Superior Schools. In the matter of managing schools,
of imparting knowledge, and disciplining of classes, the teachers of New South Wales are quite as efficient as those of
other countries ; but, as a class, they lack the thorough training given in the normal schools of France, Switzerland, and
Germany, and fall short of the higher ideals of teaching common in those countries. The Commissioners think that, with
an improved training system, which should be introduced without delay, and the substitution of inspection for examination,
which will allow Inspectors opportunities for suggesting good teaching methods, the educational status generally of New
South Wales teachers will be raised considerably.
The success of our schools hinges upon the training of the teachers. They lack the thorough
training necessary. I, therefore, say that I think an improvement should be made in our training system.
I conscientiously affirm that. I believe our teachers have as good diplomas, as good methods of teaching,
and are as good discipliniarians as elsewhere, but I believe that, in the matter of training in psychology,
the length of time they have been soaking in those subjects is to the advantage of the teachers on the
Continent.
Mr. Knibbs : I might say that I endorse the expressions read to you by my colleague. I find that
in the last quotation lam in perfect agreement with him. lam certain that every teacher ought to know
the real truth about the relative character of the schools in other countries and in their own. There is no
policy so terrible as that which induces one to shut his eyes to the real state of the facts; and one of your
Inspectors—Mr. Board—has written an extremely able report, which, through the courtesy of the Minister,
I had an opportunity to read. Mr. Board will bear me out when 1 say that it is simply astonishing that
the countries of Europe and America are ready to build the palaces which they call schools. These is no
doubt whatever that the best of our schools are in no way comparable to the school buildings of Switzerland,
or the recent school buildings of Germany, or those of Norway and Sweden.
Members : What about England 1
Mr. Knibbs : On the whole, 1 do not think there is a great gap between England and ourselves.
There are some better buildings in England. In solving the great problem of providing educational
requirements for the sparse population of the territory of this State, there has not been that spirit that
there is in Europe—that money spent on education is well spent. And that factor must be taken into
account when one is judging the whole question. But it must not lead us to affirm that we are in a position
comparable to that of Europe. If we had the fortunes of the Vanderbilts, the Minister could not in four
years get anywhere near the state of education of Europe, because it cannot be done by money alone. I
felt, in travelling through Europe and seeing the advantages of education there, very sorry that I did not
get my education in one of those places—not as a matter of nationality. My colleague has given a
description of the French system. You will see that you would be by the same effort and the same
intelligence farther ahead and better able to discharge those duties which are so near your heart. It is not
the practice of the cultured man to refuse to acknowledge his limitations, and, I think, when we were more
immature we were more ready to resent any questioning of our qualifications to do anything. I think it
is a mark of high culture when we humbly doubt our powers, and when we are ready to learn from others
who are even without the same national instincts. Education is one of those things in which there is no
such thing as nationality. The spirit that breathes in every man is the same, and education is the thing
that moulds it. Variations in education modify the human spirit, and what we are hoping is that we will
he sufficiently broad-minded to face the real truth, and make an attempt to bring our standard of education,
not only in regard to its personnel, but in regard to its equipment, equal in its chief centres to what it is
in other parts of the world. There is no other practical way of doing it than by getting it into the ganglion
of


of the whole educational nervous system. The centres are the places where we train our men. I would
ask the Inspector to whom I have referred, to say if he was not astonished at the splendid school buildings
in the great centres of Europe. I think it is one of those things that you have to see to believe; and Ido
not overstate the case when I say that the schools of Europe are educational palaces. There is no modern
school in Europe the hygienic and general conditions of which are not practically perfect. Can anyone say
that of ourselves ? It is a matter in which one need not blame the Department. It is owing to the whole
state of things in the State, and the absence of that public opinion which would give to the administration
of the Education Department all the money they require. I want you to clearly recollect that when I say
anything that really appears to be a stricture on the system, that does not touch its personnel. Another
thing about the schools of Europe is that they are all equipped for realistically teaching science. Now,
are our schools 1
Members : No!
Mr. Knibbs : All primary schools recently built in Germany, except the country schools, are well
equipped for teaching science. In France, in certain normal schools, every teacher, in his manual training,
makes a chest which is fitted up for chemical and physical apparatus. It is made in some cases by the
students, and in others purchased. The teacher uses it for scientific demonstrations, and undoubtedly it
would be a great improvement to have such a degree of education during their period of training as would
enable them to make use of such material. Except through their private study, will anyone say our
teachers are so qualified at the present time. We are not so much concerned with their achievements under
private study, as with the use of the opportunity we have put at their disposal. I look at ithe question
from the point of view that we have absolutely no interest in defending the present system as against an
ideal one, because all ideal systems are for ever incomparably in advance of realising ones; and when one
sketches it, as the Commissioners tried to do in the Report, it to a certain extent is realised. In many
countries their aim was to create what is necessary for stimulating the teaching profession toward that end
which we should move to. In saying this, we do not for a moment suppose that the country teachers and
inspectors of the Department who studied the matter seriously have not had these matters in their minds.
That would be ridiculous. But what one does say is that in travelling round the world, and seeing the
ideal realised to some extent in their concrete form, one has testimony that the ideals have brought forth
iruit, and there is no doubt whatever that on the whole the education of the people of Europe is better
than ours, notwithstanding the statistics quoted by Mr. Perry. There is no doubt that if you got the
public as well educated on the whole in regard to this question as the public of Europe is, you would have
a force behind you, and a readiness on their part to supply you with the means that you have not got
to-day. Another point that I would like to make is this : I speak quite candidly when I say that the
teaching profession, as a profession, has not that respect which everyone hoping for the best possible education
in this State desires to see it have. It is not altogether a question of emolument, although I, for one, wish
to see teachers far better paid than they are at the present time ; and I believe that one great result of
good training for teachers is that it will accentuate the fact that you are professional men and professional
women carrying out the highest duties that can fall to any man or woman. The teacher gets us in the
most plastic period of our existence. There are two great influences that mould the character of the human
being—the home influence and the school influence—and when we can get the public to realise that the
function of the teacher is of the same order as that of any noble-minded clergyman, and when we get them
to realise also that the teachers are prepared by a proper method of professional training, then we shall
enhance the respect in which the teaching profession is held, and make it possible for able men and women
to decline to take other positions, and to remain in the teaching profession. It is no secret that many men
are tempted to leave the profession because of what might be called its social status. (Cries of “No.”) It
is so when one looks beneath the surface. The public, as a whole, regard the rate of emolument as gauging
the calibre of your work. Ido not take that view ; and I know there are many men who do not regard
that question, provided they can carry out the work that is dear to them. And no teacher is worth
anything who does not work from his heart. It is a life of self-sacrifice and of great devotion ; and I hope
the day is not distant when the public will fully enter into the idea that public money is well spent on
education, and will enable the Minister to carry forward any public educational movement. That is the
spirit we want, not the carping at defects of the past or shortcomings which are due to the difficulty the
Department had before it. We want to go ahead, and have the public purse at our disposal. I want to
take exception to any suggestion that we should regard too strongly the matter of economy. Suppose the
truth is as bad as the more radical Commissioner believes. lam afraid lam regarded as the more radical
Commissioner. People have told me that I have attacked the Department. Ido not see it in that light.
Suppose the case is as urged, what ought we to do 1 Ought we not to make it clear to the public that the
public degree of support cannot possibly enable the Department to realise what is realised in other countries.
We have really to educate our public to feel that they cannot do too much for the Education Department,
and that they cannot maintain too sympathetic an attitude towards its Minister, its Under-Secretary, its
inspectors, and its teachers.
Mr. Inspector Grieve (Sydney) : I will read an extract from a Special Report on Educational
Subjects, by Mr. E. M. Field, one of His Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools, and conclude by asking a question.
It is dated 1901. It is an extract with regard to the Provincial Schools of Prussia, in which the interests
of 5,236,826 children are involved. He say 3 :
The school-rooms are ceiled to the wallplate, often low roofed, and extremely deficient in ventilation. They are
well warmed. Desks are usually eight or nine deep ; if the rooms are oblong desks are usually arranged in one block
across it, so that the teacher has his raised platform at one end, with the children of all ages in an individual group before
him. The bareness of the plastered walls is only relieved by two or three pictures, nearly all of a past or the present
Emperor, of Luther, or the Diet of Worms.
The maps, which are kept folded, are few, usually very good in execution, but not always in serviceable condition.
The illustrative apparatus is usually miserably scanty.
Cloak-rooms are found, but hooks for hats and coats are provided in the school-room itself. The play-grounds and
office arrangements are certainly most indifferent.
The writer adds that this does not apply to Berlin, which has an organisation of its own. I would ask if
x'nis state of things is a fair description of things as they exist in Germany, or are we misled 1
Mr. Knibbs : Mr. Field is one of the most progressive of educationists, and his ideal is a high one.
That extract refers only to the lowest type of old country places, where they have one school for all classes.
That


That throws us off the real issue, as you will see at once. The real issue is that if you take in the great
Prussian cities, and compare our schools with theirs, our schools do not compare favourably. I have
travelled over this State. If you ask Mr. Field to report on our country schools, his report will be couched
in very much the same terms as you have in that document. The same is true of France. The point is
that right throughout Europe, in towns much smaller than Sydney, they have far better schools than we
have. If you want to compare them, compare our country schools with those mentioned in the Report.
Inspector Grieve : Are those schools mentioned here not schools that deal with 5,000,000 of
children ?
Mr. Knibbs : Yes ; but the population of Germany is very large. You have to remember that in
Prussia there is obligatory education. (Voices : “So there is here.”) And you have to remember that the
population is centralised about the great capitals, and that the villages are sometimes extremely small, and
that applies to very small villages.
Mr. F. Bridges (Acting Under Secretary) : I do not intend to make a speech, but to make a state-
ment with regard to the very important question of training teachers, that has occupied a large part of the
Report, and of what has been said to-day. The Department of Public Instruction has been treated very
badly. We have not neglected the training of teachers. Thirteen years ago we drew up a scheme of a
Training College, containing chemical and physical laboratories, and all the equipment necessary for a first-
class college. I went to Melbourne to make the necessary inquiries. The scheme was approved by the
Minister, but the Public Works Committee squelched it in one act. Two or three attempts have been
made to put money on the Estimates, but the financial condition of the State has not led to the proposal
being favourably entertained. If we have not a proper Training College the Department is not to blame.
When we cannot get what we want, we do the best we can. It seems to be ignored by the Commissioners,
and by the Members of Parliament, that we have done the best we can, and that we are prepared to do more
when we can get the funds.
Mr. Inspector McKenzie : There is a point on which I would like to obtain some information. We
are given to understand very clearly in the Commissioners’ Report that the pupil-teachers as a rule are
appointed at 14 years of age ; and very many other things we are given to understand with regard to these
pupil-teachers—that they are mere children, in fact, with only sufficient education to enable them to scrape
through the examination requisite for their appointment. Now, I would like to ask if any steps have been
taken to ascertain the average age of our pupil teachers for, say, some years past, or for the past year, at
the time of their appointment ?
Members : Mr. Perry gave that this morning.
Inspector McKenzie : I would like to ask if any steps have been taken to ascertain if pupil-teachers
are such bad disciplinarians as they are said to be, and if they have got no instruction in methods of
teaching, &c., until they go into the Training College. I would like to ask Mr. Turner about the disciplinary
power of the pupil-teacher.
Members : It was dealt with this morning.
Mr. Senior Inspector Lobban : After the very excellent introduction to the question by our Minister,
and the very clear and lucid way in which he has stated the facts, I think we can go forth with a knowledge
of what we have to do. We have here Mr. Turner and Mr. Knibbs; and I think it is not competent for
us to discuss the matter further until we have considered it more fully. I therefore beg to move :— ■
That this Conference be now adjourned indefinitely, until called upon by the Minister.
The teachers, inspectors, and Commissioners have spoken, and I beg to move that we now adjourn
indefinitely, and await the call of the Minister to a further conference.
Mr. J. J. Callaghan (Superior Public School, Hamilton) : It appears to me that what has been
said this morning is not without its value ; and there are a few things that might be said this afternoon.
If Mr. Lobban would alter his motion to meeting this afternoon
Members : No.
Mr. Callaghan : But there are persons here who would like to give the impressions that are in
their minds as to the salient features of the report, and which appear to be of some interest. I would be
very glad if the matter was held over until this afternoon. It is hardly fair to adjourn now, after the
Minister inviting you to attend.
Mr. Perry : To save time, it will be as well to take an expression of opinion from the members of
the Conference as to the advisability of adjourning indefinitely or until the afternoon. I will take the
opinion of those present.
Dr. Morris : I think, Mr. Perry, your wish would have a very great effect on the action of the
speakers.
Mr. Perry : I will take my own view, and get an expression of opinion.
Mr. Perry took a vote, which affirmed that Mr. Lobban’s motion should be withdrawn.
Mr. Perry : We will meet again this afternoon at 2 o’clock.
On resuming at 2 p.m., —
Mr. Bridges : In consequence of a Cabinet meeting occupying the Minister, it is unlikely that he
will be here before 3 o’clock, and he has asked me to take the chair in his absence. (Applause.) I would
ask those who speak this afternoon not to be too lengthy; ten or fifteen minutes should be the maximum
time occupied by each speaker. No doubt a good many would like to speak, and those who do speak should
have consideration for those to follow. I would ask, however strongly you feel on the subject, that you
express yourselves courteously, and in a calm and dignified manner. We should hear, not one, but both
sides of the question, and that can only be done by patient and courteous discussion. I would ask that
anyone who rises to speak would give his name in, as the reporters do not know all of you. In fact, there
are many here whose faces I cannot recognise in this dim light. It would, therefore, be a convenience if
you will send your names along.
Mr. Wiley (Superior Public School, Newtown) : Might I suggest that in view of the rain we might
delay for a quarter of an hour. I think the rain will have prevented a good many being here up to time.
Mr. Bridges: But teachers are proverbially punctual. (Laughter.)
Mr.


Mr. Inspector P. Board (Albury) : Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen : I had scarcely thought of
addressing you—let alone at any length—until some remarks had been made by Mr. Knibbs on the Report
that I wrote after my return from Europe a couple of months ago. I intended to forbear speaking, partly
because I had written that Report, and because I thought I had said in that Report in what directions
certain reforms in our educational system might very well be made ; and, since the Minister has been good
enough to make that Report publicly accessible, I think it is scarcely necessary for me to say more. But
with regard to the point to which Mr. Knibbs refers, and about which he asked me to say something—the
character of the school buildings throughout Europe and Great Britain—l may state that I think the best
of the school buildings in the larger cities of Switzerland, Germany, and France are better than our school
buildings; but, at the same time, it has already been remarked that we must not judge of the operations of
any system anywhere by its best specimens. (Applause.) When one comes to look at many of the school
buildings that are to be found in—at any rate —the towns I have visited, Frankfort, Heidelberg, Edinburgh,
Glasgow and London, we find in these cities very many buildings that are decidedly not in accordance
with what we understand to be the best. I was in one school in Paris that was of a decidedly inferior
type with regard to the building itself, but the furniture in it was of a better class than the building. I
mention that to show how difficult it is to arrive at any generalisations with regard to any such questions
as these, and I think it a pity that we should have to indulge in any such generalisations, for they appear
to me to be altogether outside the question. (Applause.) It is not a question with us as to whether
buildings in Edinburgh, Berlin, or Paris are better than some here ; the question is what is the best type
adapted to Australian conditions in all its varieties —and how can we best secure the type of buildings we
require in view of the limited financial support we have granted to us by our legislative body. As far as
the modern type of building, I think what the Commissioners have told us is deserving of every consideration.
(Hear, hear.) Ido not know that for my own part 1 should follow implicitly everything they have said,
even in representing the finest type of building. Take one instance, where the Commissioners supply us
with some details as to the best methods of lighting. I found some schools in the large towns in Great
Britain where they were disregarded
Mr. Knibbs : Recent ones ?
Mr. Board : Yes; recent ones—and, I might mention, one or two of them in Edinburgh. Further,
we have had considerable experience in this country with regard to building ; we have found, for instance,
that it is not advisable to make windows face to the north-east as recommended by the Commissioners.
On that point they will allow me to differ from their views. And now I wish to leave that as an entirely
subordinate aspect of the Commissioners’ report (Hear, hear), and one that I really think is scarcely worth
an hour’s consideration by a meeting which has only limited time at its disposal such as this. I wish to
discuss the Report of the Commissioners in as dispassionate a way as possible. But, before I go on to
express general agreement with the reforms that are proposed by the Commissioners, I wish to make one
or two remarks on the other side. I think it is to be somewhat regretted that the Commissioners have
made rather extreme statements with regard to the existing condition of things. (Hear, hear.) Now,
their motive for that I believe to have been a good one. They have acted on the Minister’s suggestion
that they should speak out strongly, and their object in doing so has doubtless been to raise public interest
•in the need for further financial support to the State education of this country. (Applause.) Now, that
motive is an excellent one, and if anything done at this meeting can contribute to that end it will not have
been held in vain. But, with all that in view, we have to remember that any reformer must base his
proposals for reform on the good that is already to be found in the institution which he wishes to reform.
(Hear, hear.) And I think that the Commissioners probably thought more highly of the existing condition
of things than they have been able to represent in their Report. I think that is unfortunate. We shall
certainly make better advancement if we can sift out all we think good, and honestly recognise and use that
as a foundation for our further progress. (Hear, hear.) In one or two instances, the Commissioners have,
I think, been slightly—well, they have not been sufficiently regardful of the laws of logic. (Laughter.) I
notice, for example, that a few instances of what must have been described as decided cases of human
eccentricity have been used as a basis for strong generalisations. One or two instances might be quoted;
but I do not want to give any emphasis to this aspect of the report because, again, that is one of the minor
elements of the serious business we have in hand. The Commissioners have taken up one or two important
questions that I think a few remarks might be made on to day, and I wish to say that in whatever strictures
I may make lam speaking my own opinion only. The Commissioners are perfectly right in putting our
system of training teachers at the very foundation of the fabric. (Hear, hear.) And, in doing so, they
have given to us what they consider to be an ideal system of training. That ideal system has been mainly
drawn from Germany and Switzerland. Now, in looking at the educational practice of such countries as
Germany and Switzerland, we must remember the human material with which we have to deal here and
in Germany. (True, true.) The child here is not German; it is not even English or Scotch; it is
Australian. And whatever we may copy from other countries, we must remember that what is
done there must be adapted entirely to Australian conditions. (Hear, hear.) Not merely to the
climatic conditions, but to the conditions under which human nature, boy nature and girl nature, are
developed in this country ; and our boys and girls are not German, English, or Scotch boys and girls.
Furthermore, if we come to consider the ideal system of training, I would even then not adopt what has
been set before us by the Commissioners as the most perfect system. Let us look at the condition of things
in New South Wales. I will speak in round numbers. There are 2,900 schools in the State, and out of
that number there are 2,300 schools with less than fifty children in them. To these 2,300 there is one
teacher each. Now, our rural problem is a difficult one, and we must not minimise its importance because
three-fourths of our schools are rural schools. We then require for them 2,300 teachers. Then, again, we
have 2,000 positions in the Department for class teachers apart from schools with one teacher. And, again,
we have 800 positions in the Department for teachers who are to be managers of schools, not mere
teachers—a totally different class again, men and women whose business it is to organise large schools of
from 50 to 1,500 pupils in attendance; whose business it is to manage the staff, to superintend the
teachers, and whose business it is to direct the higher education of these boys and girls who have got
beyond the limits of the strictly primary course of education in our superior public schools. We have, then,
out of 5,100 teachers, three different classes of teachers, each one of whom requires a definite training.
(Hear, hear.) The question theq arises, “Is any one system of training the best for these three divisions
of


of our service 1 ” and with that in view one might propose two or three training arrangements. That which
we have in force now, represented by what we understand to be the pupil-teacher system, is in its entirety
defended by no one in the Department or out of it—to my knowledge. (Hear, hear.) I certainly know
of no one inside the Department who wishes to maintain the pupil system exactly as we have it in
operation now. Then, setting that on one side, what are the lines of progress that we are to lay down with
regard to this question, for it seems to me that it is of no use our proposing some fine scheme to be brought
into operation next Monday morning without regard to the probability of the expenditure being allowed
for it. What we want to show our legislators, and the electors of the country who stand behind them, is
that we have a definite scheme by which we can develop the organisation in the Service to that ideal we
have in view. We should be able to lay down a scheme which we can carry up to perfection. (Hear,
hear.) What, then, is such a scheme! In the first place, we have the pupil-teacher system, and one
scheme would be such a modification of that pupil-teacher system as would remove what are now its most
serious defects. (Hear, hear.) I might enumerate them. First—the admission of pupil-teachers at more
advanced age. Second—the requirement that our pupil-teachers, before they are appointed—admitted—to
the Service should have an education which extends well beyond the primary course. (Hear, hear.)
Third—that when they are appointed they should be relieved of a certain amount of responsibility ; and,
again, that they should be appointed in schools which are in the charge of men who are capable in every
respect to give them the necessary training, and who have freedom with respect to time to do so. If we
can frame a pupil-teacher system on these grounds, we should have an arrangement by which we would
have made one step further forward without unduly adding to the expensiveness of our system ; for even
for that we must have several thousands. But we must remember that the perfect system of training
requires several thousands more, and it is to pave the way for further growth that such a modification of
the pupil-teacher system would be perhaps acceptable. Again, another system of training would have in
view the large body of teachers we require for the small schools of this country, of which I told you there
are 2,300 out of 2,900. For these we may depend partly upon the recruiting we could do from the pupil-
teacher service, and we must also depend upon the admission of persons who have not gone through such a
course. It is there I would suggest—and this again is a feature of the training system that I think our
Commissioners have overlooked—l would suggest, there, that persons desirous of entering the Service from
outside—not as pupil-teachers, but probably as candidates who have reached the age of from 20 to 30—
might be admitted by competitive examination to local training-schools attached to four or five of the
principal schools in country centres for the period of from six to twelve months. Mind, the small schools
require as well-trained a teacher as the large schools, but the country at present cannot afford to pay for
them for every school throughout the country. We have, therefore, to look for some middle stage from
which we can lead to the higher, and it is this I propose here—the six or twelve months’ training in local
training-schools. And we must also, in this question, look to the fact that if we train 2,900 teachers up to
the highest perfection, how many of them would be willing to accept positions in small country localities
where they find very little sympathy, sometimes, and get a salary of from £BB to £l5O per year.
(Applause.) It is very little use putting a highly-trained man or woman into positions where they cannot
help but be discontented. Again, we come to the third system, which is that recommended by the
Commissioners—a complete two or three years’ course or training in training-schools before the candidate
becomes a teacher. Now, I would advise—if I am not too rash in doing so—to propose an improvement
on the ideal scheme. (Hear, hear.) The ideal scheme of training recognises one fact with which Iso
cordially agree that I wish to emphasise it—that scheme of training includes a thorough study of the
philosophy of education. (Applause.) In that lam entirely at one with the Commissioners. The
Commissioners have given to us a text-book on the philosophy of education. (Hear, hear.) lam sure it
is very pleasing to every student of educational theory to see that the Commissioners, in their philosophy,
have gone along such familiar and orthodox lines. It is pleasing to see—and I have already congratulated
Mr. Knibbs on the fact—it is pleasing to see that he is such a good Froebelian, and that Herbart “in him
being dead yet speaketh.” But it is most important that we should emphasise the essential philosophy
of education as specially requisite in the training of our teachers. And no system—-whether
it is a six months’ one for the teacher of the small school, or one that leaps up from the
pupil period, or one that trains them entirely before they go out to work—no system can
be complete that leaves out this element, and I think, whatever we do, we must make sure that the
scientific side of educational theory and the development of that theory in the history of our leading
educationists is not overlooked, because the practical every-day teaching is of the highest importance. It
is on that point that there is something to be said. In Germany every teacher has a thorough training in
educational psychology, but it seems to me that there is a slight gap between the educational psychology
of the training-schools and the practical every-day teaching of the teacher before his class. (Hear, hear.)
I think that somewhere there is a missing link. We have seen it elsewhere. We know that there is a
science of political economy—l am not going to talk politics, Mr. Chairman—but, theoretically, every
member of Parliament would be better for a course of study in the science of politics before he entered the
legislative hall. His work in that Legislature would be vastly improved if he had gone through a course
in the science of politics ; but when all that is done we would not have the finest member of Parliament.
We can imagine what a tame member of Parliament such a political philosopher as Carlyle or Ruskin
would make in the House of Commons. These were men who understood a great deal about political
economy, but they were not men who were able to bring their science of politics into close practical contact
with the every-day things of life. (Hear, hear.) I find in that—particularly the German—system of
training the question is “ How is the psychology of the class-room to be brought into the practical work of
the teacher 1" It is there that the weakness of this system of training appears to come. Mr. Knibbs, I
know, has an answer ; but as he has given it to me, and he has not satisfied me, I leave him to give it to
you. In the first place, to make up for this deficiency, we must try to find its fault. The candidate at the
age of 18 enters the ideal training-college on these lines. Now, that young man of 18 knows something,
and is prepared to argue about everything in this universe, but the one thing he knows nothing about at
that age is “ child nature.” (Hear, hear.) We take him into the training-school and teach him the
psychological development of the child before he has had any study whatever of the child himself in the
concrete. Need I say anything to a gathering of teachers about the necessity of studying things in the
concrete before we come to the abstract 1 I think not. What, therefore, should we do before we put out
34013 G raw


raw candidates into our ideal training-school ? Let us put him in the position where he can come into
direct contact with child life as represented in the school. Let us bring him into close touch with children.
We shall do this by letting him devote portion of his time to observation in the school and practice
teaching, but that observation and practice of teaching under the conditions that would be necessary in
the ideal training-school would not give him an insight into the every-day working of an ordinary school,
and that is the point I wish to emphasise. He sees the work of a practical school going on under conditions
that are not the conditions of an ordinary school. (Hear, hear.) And for that reason I would propose
this improvement, as I said, upon the ideal school, that before we take our candidate into our training-
school we should put him in an ordinary school—certainly a school specially chosen for the purpose, so that
he would not learn what is philosophically and practically wrong. But that being done, let us put him
into a school where he has the opportunity of observation of the different natures of children under
ordinary circumstances, but, under proper supervision, let us give him opportunities to come into direct
personal contact with them by actual work. That being done, 1 think he will have a thorough under-
standing to fit him for his future training. (Hear, hear.) I have very little more to say, because the most
I have to say on the other practical questions of the time I have already written in my report. The
question of inspection has come up, and I have already said that I think a system of inspection that
embraces examination in certain subjects according to the necessities of the case could be adopted throughout,
and that that inspection should have as a preliminary condition the rearrangement of our school curriculum,
and it is to that rearrangement of school subjects that I should attach a great deal of importance. (Hear,
hear.) I think, Mr. Chairman, I have taken up as much time as is necessary for me to occupy, but there
is one point I should like to touch on. I think the time has come when it should be made plain to the
public, that while the Department is prepared to give a pound’s worth of education for every £1 the
country spends, it cannot give 30s. worth, and to get 30s. worth the country must pay £1 10s. Now,
comparing our educational expenditure with what we see in other countries, it is here extremely small.
The average expenditure in Boston is over £5 per head of children to average attendance. Here it reaches
a little over £4, and that disparity is increased threefold when we remember that Boston has provided
funds for a concentrated population, but we have provided funds for a widely scattered community.
(Applause.) The only way to compare the expense of our system with the expense of other countries is
to take the expenditure for Sydney and suburbs in comparison with London, Edinburgh, or Boston. We
have then a comparison on a fair basis, for we must remember that while our education system is costing
£4 per head for 2,900 schools scattered over the country, that many are costing from £5 to £9 per head.
If we take the schools of Sydney and suburbs—unfortunately, I have not the figures separately
A Voice : Fort street is £2 14s. per head.
Mr. Board : Thank you. Then, taking Sydney throughout, we might take as an outside limit
£2 10s. per head. Now, comparing that with £5 per head for Boston and £4 10s. for London, you get
a fair representation of what the people of Sydney and suburbs are paying for their education. (Applause.)
Now, it is said that the finances of our country will not admit of a very heavy increase of expenditure just
now, but we may ask this—that the moderate amount of expenditure required for improving our system be
paid now, and year by year increments be granted that will lead up to the ideal —and we may ask that the
first increment be granted this coming year, for we can see its importance. Unfortunately, the profit arising
from education is invisible, and consequently the people are not prepared for what they cannot see—it lies
too far in the future. The result of what is being done will be seen in ten, fifteen, aye, twenty years’ time,
and the difficulty is to convince the people of this country that what is to be in ten years’ time must be
paid for now ; but, on the other hand, we have a parallel case, for perhaps we have heard in times gone
by of railways being built in which the profits were so far in the future as to be invisible. (Continued
applause.)
Mr. Bridges : I may announce to you that copies of Mr. Board’s report will be ordered and sent to
every school under the Department. The Commissioners’ Report is now being forwarded to those schools
that have not yet received it. I thought Mr. Board’s report so interesting when he gave it to me that I
submitted it to the Minister, and he approved of it being printed. It has been printed, and it will be sent,
if possible, to every school. I think the Department is to be congratulated on possessing an officer of
Mr. Board’s ability among the inspectors. (Applause )
Mr. D. T. Wiley (Superior Public School, Newtown) : I understand we are to have the opportunity
this afternoon of asking questions. I have had the opportunity of a week to spare, so that I might go
through the Report, but I am not clear about some of the items in it, and I am going to ask Mr. Turner,
who saw a good deal of the American schools, if he can clear up some difficulties I have as to American
systems and American schools. Some of us had the opportunity of hearing a lecture on American education
a few months ago by the present consul in Sydney, Mr. Baker, who was almost a life long teacher, and he
gave us a certain view of the American system of teaching and American education. I had the privilege
of having three weeks with him on a previous occasion, when he gave me his experience, and I want to ask
Mr. Turner if he saw anything of the kind I am mentioning, and if he will explain the discrepancy between
the remarks he makes and what lam about to make. We want to get daylight on the subject; it may be
that there are two sides to the one question ; I have heard one, and Mr. Turner has another. I noticed, of
course, that in American schools almost all the teachers are ladies. I asked my friend how that occurred.
His reply was astonishing : “ There is no professional teacher amongst men in America ; no man, who is
self-respecting, can afford to be a professional teacher in the States. The men who take it up take it up as
a stepping-stone to something else, hoping to get out of it very soon. The appointment of teachers is in the
hands of local committees, in suburban places at least. A teacher who wants to be appointed must go
round to the local committee and canvass for votes ; he must show his credentials ; in some cases he even
has to state what his salary will be, and there is a chance of his being beaten down and forced to take a
little less than the one who had the position before—for the appointment is for a year at a time, rarely
more. I asked some young ladies the question :“ Do you like this change of teachers V They said, 1 Oh, yes ;
it is very nice to have a change of teachers.’ ” That is virtually the opinion I got from one who has been
teaching for many years. Yet in the Report we only get one side of the question, that is, the splendid
training-schools there. What kind of men teachers do the States get 1 Do men not hold the office because
of the unpleasantness in connection with it 1 Would it be wise to adopt the electoral system of teachers 1
I really want to know. There are in the School of Arts some eight volumes of reports on various European
and


and American schools. I read them most carefully, and my heart sank within me as I saw the ideal put
up there—to my mind an impossible deal. I have tried to think about the matter. lam not hide-bound ;
I was not brought up in the system, so you cannot say the system binds me, because, unfortunately, I was
not a pupil-teacher ; and I have seen outside things. But, on reading reports, lam very often in great
difficulty. There are two reports I have read in the London Times; one on education in Germany by a
correspondent who has been dealing carefully with German matters for the London Times, and I must
suppose he knows his business; the other is a part of the Moseley Commission’s Report on American
schools, and the Commissioner for America says : “ I did not see certain things, bad conduct, in the
American schools; if they had been there, I suppose my attention would certainly not have been drawn to
them.” In reading reports we do not always see the every-day aspect of things. If I may be permitted a
moment or two, I may say that when visiting Europe I asked to see a school at Cologne ; I went to the
Department of Public Instruction, and was sent down to what I supposed a good school. It certainly was
not a modern school, as far as arrangements were concerned; a dingy building, right up close to the street;
a playground very little larger than this platform ; and in many other ways it was not a palace by any
means. The attainments in the school were primary attainments. Our primary school covers a good deal
more than what is known as primary education in Germany and America. Of course I know that palaces
are built at the expense of up to £45,000 for a school to hold 1,500 children. I may say the finest school
I saw was in Scotland. The Scotch have certainly built some very good schools. There is the school at
Rowan Hill; the air there is filtered before it passes into the building. But I got < a my feet to ask
Mr. Turner, “ Can he explain how the statements I have made about American schools will agree with
what he saw or what he found ?”
Mr. Turner : I think it only fair for me to ask Mr. Wiley to what State in America he refers ?
Mr. Wiley : lam not refering to what I saw. lam referring to what the American Consul told
us at a public lecture on this subject a few months ago.
Mr. Turner : It is a fact that the majority of teachers in the public schools of the United States
belongs to the female side, and they do their work well. I visited Washington; I did not see any school
there, because my time was largely taken up in conversation with that celebrated American educationist,
Dr. W. T. Harris. But I saw the public schools of Philadelphia; I saw the public schools of New York.
There are male teachers as well as female teachers in the public schools of New York ; the lady teachers
predominate. I have already stated, in this hall too, that those lady teachers are paid higher rates than if
they were teaching girls alone. The schools there are largely on the co-educational principle, and if 40 per
cent, of the children in the public school classes are boys, the lady teachers in charge of those classes are
are paid higher rates. The lady teacher predominates in New York. The male teachers—it may be for
the reasons Mr. Wiley has said—are not numerous ; they move away ; they may make use of the profession
and its studies as a stepping-stone to other positions. But lam afraid America is not going to be alone in
that respect; we are losing the best of our men ; they are passing away from us to other professions, and
to other branches, and we shall not retain them any more than they retain them in America until they are
better paid. In Boston I saw several public schools; the “ Paul Revere ” School is one of the finest
institutions in Boston. It is unique in its way, because it is not on the co-educational principle ; it is a
girls’ school presided over by a male teacher, but I think the principal is the only male teacher in the
establishment. Ido not know whether the American boy is more easily disciplined than the Australian
boy, but the American woman is a disciplinarian. When I went to Canada, Montreal, and Toronto, I
found the lady teacher again. The principals were chiefly male teachers. In Detroit, male teachers were
at the head, and some male assistants, but female teachers again doing a great deal of the work, doing
some of the science work, and doing some of the mathematical work. In San Francisco, again, lady teachers
are employed, and the work done well, and I saw them at the head of the Grammar School, and at the
head of the elementary school. The Grammar School in America is for ages from 10 to 14. In Spring-
field, Massachusetts, I saw excellent work done ; a male sometimes at the head, sometimes the female, but
largely the female teacher employed. The male teacher gets employment in other professions, perhaps
better paid, or there may be other reasons. But I know the work is well done under the supervision of
the male principal with a large staff of female assistants.
Mr. Wiley : I understood that they were elected by vote ; that they had to go down and canvass
for votes. Do they have any elaborate training with the prospect of such a life as that!
Mr. Turner : That never came under my experience. In all the States I visited I saw the
centralised system, as good as our own system and as honorable. I know nothing of these actions at all;
they did not come under my notice. It may be so in some of the States, but it was not so in the States I
have visited, and I have enumerated those I visited.
A Lady Teacher : Is it not a fact that the male teacher passing away in America is due to the
co-educational system ?
Mr. Turner : I would not think so. I think the lady teacher in America is doing her work, and
doing it well. I saw a lady in New York with about forty boys, and she was disciplining that class as
well as any man. Well, the master of the school told me that she was really wearing herself out in dealing
with them, but I do not think she was wearing herself out, excepting that it was her nature, like many of
yourselves, and like ourselves, whose hearts are in our work. I did not think she was wearing herself
out—she was doing extra good work through devotion to her calling.
A Voice : Some of them do it here.
Mr. Kemp (Public School, Menangle) : I would like to respectfully offer a suggestion. It seems
very difficult for fellows like myself to have the face and the conscience and the nerve to get up to even
express our thoughts when we are surrounded by so many excellent, efficient men. (Laughter.) At the
same time I have no doubt that we cannot have lived in the country without having gained some
experience. As one deeply interested in teaching—l was going to say I was a born teacher—(laughter)—
the suggestion that I would make is: How would it be if all the teachers who have not read the report
were to sit down and write out what they think should be done. (Laughter.) I have in my mind this
idea : Many of us can see little ways that, perhaps, those that are in authority have also seen, but by reason
of the many ties and demands upon their attention, they, perhaps, have forgotten them. lam one who is
continually on the alert and listening, as though I were going for a labour membership. 'Laughter.) lam
anxious to get the opinions of those with whom I come in contact. We have to go out and get the people


up to the mark, and it is by getting them up to the mark that they will know that wo are worth so much.
That, I maintain, is the great thing that we should have in view. If the people once begin to see that we
are worth the salt we get, they will stick to us—make no mistake about it. I say if each teacher were to
write down what he thinks would be some means of improving the system, or allowed to offer suggestions
—not through the Inspectors, because I really think that they are not half so well paid for the work they
do as they should be. (Uproar.) I would suggest that each teacher be permitted to send direct to our
venerable chief the ideas that he has for the improvement of the system. Here is the point: This next
conference that the Minister intends to call. Fancy the position we will be in 1 Everybody will want to
say something. I will want to say something ; I will be overlapping somebody else. (Uproar.) Now, I
really think if we could only sit down and write our suggestions, and send them to the Under-Secretary,
you would discover that Smith and Jones and Robinson have some worthy ideas, and it might be passed
on then to the arranging committee. I would like to know if the Commissioners in their travels have
discovered any means by which something may be done for such as myself—(Laughter)—who has never
had the privilege of being a pupil-teacher. I fancy there are many of us who are as greatly interested in
this great movement as the rest of yoti. Did the Commissioners discover any means by which (say) a
teacher like myself may exchange for a short time 1 (Laughter.) Send an assistant up to take my place.
I would not want to bring my wife and family with me. (Uproar.)
Mr. Broome (Superior Public School, Stanmore): As a some-time prominent member of the Teachers’
Association in New South Wales who, I think, had a great deal to do in sending our Commissioners away
out of the State, I would like to say a few words. I wish, first of all, to congratulate Mr. Board on his
speech. He has saved me a good deal of trouble ;he has said pretty well what I wanted to say, and has
said it, I think, better than I could. The idea we, as teachers, had in asking the Minister to send a
Commission away to the other parts of the world was that, although we felt that we had in Australia a
good system of education, we wanted to know, and know from men on the spot, what was being done in
other parts of the world ; and Mr. Perry has told you he asked the Commissioners to go it pretty strong,
and I think you will agree with me that they did go it pretty strong. I have no objection to that. Had
the Commissioners come back and flattered us, and told us that we had the best system in the world, I should
have rather regarded the expenditure as a waste of money. I think it was the duty of the Commissioners to
find out and emphasise where other parts of the world were doing better than we were. Ido not blame the
Commissioners for putting forward many things that are probably idealistic, and at present, at all events, outside
the range of practicability. That is the business of the public purse, and Parliament afterwards. It is the
Commissioners’ business to point out what there was to be copied in other parts of the world ; as to whether
we could put it into practice or not, that all depends on circumstances. As some of you may know, I had
an opportunity of going through the older lands, but I must tell you at once that I left here for what I
regarded as a well-earned holiday, and I had it. I did not make it my business to specially go into
educational questions ; still I saw some little matters, and I should like for a few minutes to give you some
little account of what I did see. To begin with, I did not investigate anything on the Continent in the
matter of schools at all. My experience, limited as it was, was confined entirely to England and, to some
extent, to Wales. First of all, in the matter of buildings. The majority of the buildings that I saw were
considerably worse than the buildings in New South Wales. Now, I want to explain to you thoroughly
what I mean. You must remember that the great majority of the schools in England, as far as they came
under my knowledge, are old church schools. Only in large towns have the Board Schools yet made their
existence felt. The great majority of the rural schools of England are schools that were built under the old
church regime, and as much for Sabbath Schools as ordinary, and, so far as my experience was concerned,
the buildings wore not as suitable for ordinary educational purposes as ours. Although our buildings do
not come up to the ideal Mr. Knibbs wishes for, they were still built for educational purposes, and educa-
tional purposes only, while the others were not—they were built for various other matters. At the same
time I did see schools—l saw a couple of Board Schools in Birkenhead and two in Birmingham—that were
in many respects superior to the best schools I know in this city, mainly as regards, first of all, furniture.
It is not for me to discuss that. That matter is touched on in the Report, and I think I can commend that
Report to the earnest study of every teacher in the State. It is, in my opinion, a good report; not that I
agree with all in it—with some of it I very much disagree. I think, in some matters at least, I know
nearly as much as the Commissioners. Still, lam not going to say anything against the Report, in that it
is an able Report, and one that will do good to every man and woman engaged in teaching in New South
Wales ; they should read it through and study it well. In the Board Schools that I saw, the division into
separate rooms was a distinct advantage. Then, in most of the Board Schools I saw, I found, as Mr. Knibbs
states in his Report, a large central hall, where the whole of the children could be collected at once in order
to give them addresses on matters that might apply to the whole. That, no doubt, is a distinct advantage.
But, as Mr. Board so ably put it to you, that is entirely a matter of £s. d. It is not what we would like
in New South Wales entirely ; it is what we can afford. And, as Mr. Board pointed out, it is not the city
school that is the expensive school in the State, it is the small school with twelve or thirteen children; that
is where the great expense lies. Yet these people have to be attended to ; they require attention even more
than the city boy. The city boy has thousands of advantages that the far-away boy has not, and it is not
for us, and it is not for any ratepayer in New South Wales, to complain of the cost of teaching those small
schools. I wish to say a little, also, in connection with the co-ordination of schools, as far as it came
under my notice. In the schools that were not Board Schools I found the boys and girls divided, as we
have them in most of the larger schools in the city. I want to emphasise this, that where the
hoys and girls were divided, in every case the girls’ school had much the superior appearance;
but I want also to say that not even the best girls’ school compared at all with the school where boys and girls
were taught together. I think that is a matter that we will have to consider in this State of New South
Wales, more particularly in our large schools, and more especially if we are going to advance from where
we are now and take up the position of scientific teaching. Scientific teaching will require specially trained
teachers and special apparatus. Are we going to duplicate these 1 Are we not going to put our senior
boys and senior girls into the one class, where the one specially trained teacher and the one set of apparatus
will do for them both 1 Or can we afford to duplicate them? Now, I also wish to give you what little
experience I had in the matter of pupil-teachers. Our Commissioners state very strongly that the pupil-
teacher system must go. I state that it must not. Everyone will admit that it would be better, if it were
practicable


practicable, if we could have men and women of 20 and 21 years of age in charge of our schools ; but 1
want to know how is it going to be done! How are we going to serve 2,300 small schools in the country
with highly trained teachers ! Is there any one of you who is a parent, who is prepared to send a boy of
17 or 18 years of age to a training college, to keep him there for three years, and then send him out at the
age of 21 to earn from £72 to £B4 a year ! Are you prepared! Would you not sooner make him almost
a street-sweeper! No matter how high the ideal of a teacher’s life or work may be, he still must live. He
must have a living wage ; and this highly-trained scheme, much as I admire it, and would like to see it put
into operation, is, for the great bulk of our schools, entirely impracticable, and we must think of some other
scheme. Mr. Board has thought one out, and, although we have not had time to think it over, there seems
an amount of practicability in it; and when we have our conference a few months hence, I have no doubt
we will be able to evolve some scheme better than we have now. My idea is that the pupil-teacher system
should exist, but it should be confined entirely to large centres, such as in the Metropolis, Newcastle,
Broken Hill; that no pupil-teacher should teach more than half the day; that the other half the day they
should be collected into special schools of instruction ; that the teacher of a school, such as myself, should
not be asked to devote time to giving the actual instruction to pupil-teachers, because I contend it is an
absolute waste of my energy. 1 have in my school seven, or eight, or nine, or ten, as the case may be,
pupil-teachers, divided usually into four different sections—Classes I, 11, 111, and IV. Now, even supposing
I was the best teacher in the world, is it not a waste of time for me to divide my energies up into those
four sections! Would it not be better to bring them under a central school, and put them under the
tuition of specially trained men and women. Mr. Bridges reminds me that that has been proposed by the
Inspectors’ Conference. I know our senior officers are doing the best they can with the means at their
disposal. My object at the moment I was speaking was to speak to the public, and to impress upon the
public that these things must be done, and that they will have to pay for them. While in England, I
attended for a short time, not a conference of the great body of teachers in England, but a county conference
in Somersetshire, my native county ; and the one thing that I found there was the whole of the teachers were
against what we will have to go against, no matter what it costs —the system of pupil-teachers who have no
training at all, except what they get as pupil-teachers. In England they are known as teachers, Article
GB—that is, the poor, inferior pupil-teacher, who has struggled through four years of very hard work—and
I think most of you know who have struggled through our system that it is a hard life to teach
all day and study half the night, and then go up for a final examination, where 75 per cent, are
going to fail ; and I hope our Minister, in one of his reforms, will do something for them—
will see that every pupil-teacher should get the advantage of our training colleges, unless at the end of his
term his senior officer should decide whether he should quit the Department; and I think it should be
found out before the expiration of four years. If there is a square peg in a round hole, it ought to be
found out in four years. If we allow them to remain in the Department for four years, everyone should
get the advantage of our training colleges. Now, as to the training of teachers. Everyone who has ever
read or thought on the matter of education knows that the better training you can give the teacher the
better for the State in which he lives. Mr Knibbs emphasises that matter very strongly in his Beport,
and, as Mr. Board congratulates him, so, also, do I. lam glad to know that he is orthodox in that respect.
We know that it has been our misfortune that we have not been able to carry out the system of training
as widely and as fully as we would have liked. There was a time when we had teachers in our training
colleges for two years, and gave them the benefit of a University course at that time. That was dropped
because the financial position of the country could not stand it. As Mr. Bridges told you this morning, it
was the aim of a former Minister for Public Instruction—and I have no doubt the present Minister is
quite as willing—to have built a special training college, if I remember rightly, within the University
grounds, to be attached to the University, where our teachers would receive the University lectures, and
get special instruction in the art of teaching. I agree with Mr. Knibbs that what the teacher wants is not
merely an Arts course at the University ; that is good, but not good enough. I think with him that we
must have a chair of pedogogy in the University. I care not whether it is in the University or in our
training college. I prefer myself to see it attached to the University, because lam a great believer in the
certificate issued by a world-wide authority like the University. If I go to Victoria, and I tell them I
hold a 1 A certificate, it conveys nothing to their minds at all; but if I tell them that I hold a B.E. degree
from the chair of pedagogy, it would mean something, not only in Victoria, but in Germany, Switzerland,
and all over the world. Mr. Perry assures me that the Chancellor of the University already has the matter
under consideration, and that something will be done very shortly in the matter. (Applause.) I think it
rather unfortunate that the great bulk of our children must for centuries to come be taught in the
small schools of our mountains and western districts, and we would have been very glad to know how this
difficulty has been met with in lands older than our own. I was very pleased to hear from Mr. Turner
that, in his opinion, our small schools are as well conducted, under their special circumstances, as they are in
any other part of the world. The only rural school I saw r was in the village where I was born. I
made it my business that the first school I visited would be the little one, not that I went to, but where
my father and mother went. I found a little school of about 150 children, and I found it admirably
conducted. I found there a man who had been there a long time—he had not been built in a pushing way,
and for some reason or other there had not been any prospects of advancement. But I admit it was one of
the best conducted schools I found. Coming to town schools, in Birmingham I saw the dirtiest collection
of children in a school that I ever saw in my life. I saw children there that lam persuaded had not had
a wash for a fortnight ; honestly speaking, I did not think any such thing existed. At the same time, I
must say that I saw a splendid school in Birmingham. It was in Birkenhead, I think, that I saw the bath
which Mr. Knibbs speaks of. I was very glad to hear from Mr. Turner this morning that he has developed
his ideas in connection with the aims of our superior schools. There has been too much—“ Can we help him
on to the University, or help him through the Public Service! ” This State is not going to be built up by
public servants. It has to be built up by people who receive an industrial, scientific, and agricultural
education. The long coat and white shirt people have to go out of our schools. I am very glad to hear
from Mr. Turner that he is strongly convinced that we will have to alter our line of conduct in that respect.
My experience has taught me that Australia has not the great possibilities that I always thought it had.
I have learnt that there are other parts of the world besides Australia, and notwithstanding what I have
been told about Australia being the greatest possible nation in the world, I have come back with a totally
different


different idea. One word more. Mr. Turner was very loud in his praise of the American lady teacher.
Now, I have had very little experience. I was not in America, but when in Paris I met, I suppose, some
hundreds of American young ladies. (Loud laughter.) I want to point out to you what seemed to me the
difference between the American girl and the Colonial girl. The American girl thinks nothing of going
away from America on a tour through England, Switzerland, or France, or all over Europe. She is self-
reliant. As far as I know, the Australian girl would not dare to do it. (Cries of “ No,” “ Give us a
chance.”) It is that feeling of self-reliance among our female sex that we want to cultivate more strongly.
A Lady Teacher : You do not know them, Mr. Broome.
Mr. Broome : I thank you very much for your patience in listening to me. lam very glad to have
had the opportunity to say a few words on what I saw, and I hope the result of this Commission and the
stir that has been made in educational matters will be of the highest good to the State.
Herr Alpen : I am not here to make a speech, but to ask a simple question, because I think you
all are more or less interested in it. I have read the report, and I found nothing about music, excepting
two small lines in Mr. Turner’s report. lam going to put the question pointedly to him: How does our
system of musical education—how do the musical attainments of our children—compare with those in other
countries ? I believe Australia to be a most musical country. T believe it will become one of the great
musical countries in the world, and having looked for any mortal suggestion or hint that might have been
contained in the report—Alas ;it is not there—l now, therefore, ask the question verbally 1
Mr. Turner : On page 485, chapter 56, you will find the following :
The tonic sol-fa method is very general in the schools of the United Kingdom, and pupils show great proficiency in
singing from this notation. In no country where the singing was heard are the results in reading at sight from staff
notation equal to those of our own children. Great care is given to voice production in the schools of Ireland, England,
Holland, and America, and the singing in many of these schools is characterised by softness and sweetness.
I will just say a few words in addition. I made a point in finding out what was done in singing in other
parts of the world. I love singing myself, and, with many of you, I give the annual concert. I know
what the singing of our children is, both from a country and town standpoint. During the experience of
the last forty years, and taking in my term of pupil-teachership, I can honestly say, whether from the
tonic sol-fa or the old notation, our singing from sight reading is far in advance of anything I have heard
either in America, or on the Continent, or in England. (Applause.) But whether due to climatic reasons
or otherwise, Ido not think our tone production is as good. I think that is a subject, while it i 3 interesting
many of our teachers at the present time—l am not going to say this in any dictatorial spirit—l would
like to see tone production and voice production more general throughout our schools.
Mr. Knibbs : There is one point that I think my colleague has forgotten, and that is—our
impressions of the Italian children’s singing. I was led to expect from the musical reputation of Italy that
we would be astonished at the greater results of the Italian children’s singing as compared with what we
have heard in our own country ; but I think—speaking from memory—my colleague will agree with me,
that we liked the voices of our own children better than the Italian, and that is not what we anticipated.
Mr. W. Swann (Superior Public School, Parramatta North) : When I got up this morning I did not
know we were going to have speeches on all kinds of education, otherwise I might have been tempted to
say a little more. Ido not want to do it now. There is always one point in connection with the pupil-
teacher system that has always “ stuck in my throat.” I have a family, of course ; a good many of us have.
We want to put them into something in which they can earn a living. If I want to make my boy a
carpenter, he is not expected to stand quite so high in the social scale as a teacher. I have to let him go
as an apprentice, and he gets 2s. 6d. a week the first year, and, perhaps, ss. the second. I have to sacrifice
myself for the sake of giving the boy a trade. The Trades Hall people are already beginning to grumble
that the apprentices are allowed in too easily ; and yet from the start we give the pupil-teachers a living
wage.
Members : No, no !
Mr. Swann : Yes, we do. We know what it costs to keep a person. Give me so much a week and
I will board them. I contend that we do not throw any responsibility on their parents. The parents try
to get their children in as pupil-teachers, not because they think the child has any special aptitude for
teaching, but because it is the easiest way of getting the child off their hands.
Members : No !
Mr. Swann : That is my opinion. You may have your opinion, and I have mine. It has been said
by Mr. Board—a gentleman for whom I have always had great respect—that these pupil-teachers should
be given a great work.
Members : No, no !
Mr. Swann : Let us see what it means. If you want a surgeon to amputate a limb, you do not
secure the services of a medical student who has had no experience. Those men who merely deal with the
physical frame, deal with dead bodies that cannot feel ; but Mr. Board implied that we should give the
pupil-teacher something to do with the living mind which, if badly treated by a pupil-teacher, may never
recover. That is why we should give them all the training we can before allowing them to practice
teaching. If a scientist could make something that would take the place of a child, it would be a good
thing, but that is an impossibility. I think we ought to give them some psychological knowledge before
they begin to teach to keep them from doing the damage that may never be repaired.
Mr. Inspector Hunt (Wollongong) : We sent two Commissioners to the older countries, and they
visited various schools in Europe and America. One of these gentlemen knows something about the
working of the schools of this State. lam rising to ask what the Commissioner, Mr. Knibbs, knows about
the working of the public schools in New South Wales. Before writing down any system, I think it is
quite as fully necessary for a man to know all about that system as to know all about any other system he
may be writing about. Now, ladies and gentlemen, I ask you, if you take that report, and especially Mr.
Knibbs’ portion of it, if you must not say that he has written down our system. I was not prepared for
it. You will see that what he says is either correct or it is not correct. I believe that he believes what
he has written is correct; but Ido not believe it. (Laughter.) Then I want to know where he has gained
his information. You may read all about Inspectors’ reports, and all about a curriculum, but there is a
vast difference between having a curriculum and having that curriculum faithfully carried out. Now, I
ask,


ask, has Mr. Commissioner Knibbs been in our schools ? Is he conversant with the working of our schools ?
Has he attended inspections that have been held in our schools 1 Has he seen our children at work in the
schools 1 He must know something about them ; and hence I say I was not prepared to read what I did
read. I was prepared to know that our system needed to be expanded, and, 1 might say, in some instances
improved, but I am not prepared to admit that our system is so far in the background as he says it is.
The greatest of all authorities has said “By their fruits ye shall know them,” and I am prepared to allow
our education to be tested by its fruits. Some of our best men were public school boys. Our Minister,
our esteemed Under Secretary, and others were public school boys. (Applause.) I say that, although I
have not been travelling abroad, I have been travelling about. I have been over half New South Wales
inspecting schools. I have rubbed shoulders with well-read men and men of ability—men whose very
isolation gives them an opportunity to read. They are up-to-date men, conversant with many magnificent
magazines, and I have not heard any one instance that we are not educating the children of the State ; but,
with our chairman, I have heard them say that we are over-educating them. It was not my opinion, it was
theirs. Therefore, lam not prepared to believe that our system is so far in the background, and I want to
know this afternoon on what ground it is that our Commissioner said that we are so much in the back-
ground. Dr. Waugh came into a public school and said, “ I have come to spend five minutes.” He spent
upwards of an hour, and said to me, and the children heard it, “ Is this a specimen of the public schools of
the State 1 It is the first I have been in.” I said, “ Yes.” He said, “ Are there many public schools in
the State as good as this 1” I said, “ Many, and a good many better.” He said, “ I will tell you that the
education the children are receiving in the public schools is quite as good as I could receive in a collegiate
course in England.” I ask the two Commissioners now : did the teachers of the schools they visited in
other countries know they were coming as Commissioners to their schools, because there is a great difference
between seeing a school in its Sunday dress and seeing it in its ordinary dress.
Mr. Knibbs : Ladies and gentlemen : I will answer the last question first, and my answer is that in
nearly every case the visits of the Commissioners were surprise visits. There was a letter in the public
press over a now de plume, which is very similar in tone to the queries of Mr. Inspector Hunt. I would
like to say that I was a public school boy myself, that I have travelled over a good portion of the State, and
that I have always taken an interest in school matters.
Mr. Inspector Hunt : I wish to say that I keep the regulations, and have never written to the
papers.
Mr. Knibbs : I have spoken to teachers about educational matters for a very long time past ; and,
although I am not going to disclose my sources of information, I know exactly what goes on in your
schools. Another thing I wish to say : I had the pleasure of travelling for nearly twelve months ■with one
of yourselves—with a gentleman who stands at the head of an active part of your system—the Training
College. And since that time I have taken every opportunity to verify, by independent sources of
information, what I could, and I went round to see such of your schools as were deemed representative
ones. lam not done with visiting schools yet—as soon as I come to the secondary grade. However
uncertain Mr. Hunt may feel about the source of my information, I have no doubt myself that I have full
knowledge of your training system and schools. Any questions of that character I do not propose, in
future, to answer. I think the whole question we have to consider is how we can all co-operate in
improving the education of the country ; and I would like to say that if there is anything in the Report
hostile to the existing state of things, that is only true in the sense that I would like to see our whole
effort carried forward, and that is only what your Minister, your Under Secretary, and your Inspectors
feel. It is no use going on to these personal questions. The Minister may have been very ill-advised when
he appointed Mr. Commissioner Knibbs to do this work (No !); but you can rest assured that, while I had
not quite the advantages in regard to a knowledge of the primary schools that my colleague had, I
endeavoured to place myself in a proper state of mind in regard to them, and to learn all that was to be
learnt about our system ; and if any of you think that, in speaking as I have, it has been in ignorance of
the system, you are making a great mistake. And I know, too, that much of what I have said you all
hoped would be possible through the support of the public of New South Wales.
Mr. Turner : I beg to assure Mr. Inspector Hunt that no official visit was paid in any one case.
They were all surprise visits, and the work was seen under its ordinary aspect.
Mr. J. J. Herliiiy (Superior Public School, Erskineville) : Is it a fact that before these visits can
be paid permission has to be obtained from the Consuls 1 Consequently, I cannot see how the
Commissioners would be able to make surprise visits.
Mr. Perry : I was not so silly as to send the Commissioners away without communicating with the
Consuls of the various countries they were going to visit, asking them to give letters of introduction to the
gentlemen comprising the Commission, and they did open the doors as wide as it was possible to do. And
when I appointed the Commission I did not appoint gentlemen who I thought would do their work in such
a slipshod fashion as to send word a few days ahead of their intention to visit the schools they did visit.
The gentlemen comprising the Commission are common-sense men, and lam quite sure they did their work
thoroughly well, and that they were not asses enough to send word to the teachers of a school of their
intention to visit it. I was so sure of it that I would not ask the question myself.
Mr. Herlihy (Superior Public School, Erskineville) : Surely the school must be apprised in some
way. The Consuls were thanked.
Mr. Perry : The Department of Public Instruction was also especially thanked. They were
thanked simply because they are the acknowledgments of courtesies received by the Commissioners in their
travels.
Mr. E. T. Wiley (Superior Public School, Newtown) : The question asked by Mr. Inspector Hunt
has been asked by a good many, and was not asked from a wrong motive, and when Mr. Knibbsfsaid he
knew all that went on in our schools, his remark “I will answer no more questions of that kind” was
hardly called for. We were not saying anything impertinent at all.
Mr. Perry : In regard to adjourning, I may say lam prepared to stay here till midnight. If any
teacher has any doubt on what has been touched upon to-day, now is the time to speak. It is no use saying,
when you go away, if you had an opportunity you would have said so and so. I am quite sure the
Commissioners will give you any information that it is possible to give. lam not going to ask you to kill
the Under Secretary by inviting each teacher to put his views of I'ie Report in writing and to submit them
for


for that gentleman’s consideration. Considering that there are over 5,000 teachers, it would take a very
long time. Ido hope, however, that what you do read you will thoroughly consider, and consider it in the
spirit in which it has been written, and come to the Conference fully prepared to take advantage of any
debate that may take place.
Miss A. Golding (Superior Public School, West Leichhardt) : When the Conference meets again
will we have a programme of the principal questions that will be touched on 1
Mr. Perry : Undoubtedly.
Mr. Faulkes (Superior Public School, Cobar) : I will read an extract from Mr. Field’s Report :
In the provincial schools of Prussia, excluding only Berlin, the proportion of teachers to children in 1596 was 1 to
60. There were 5,236,826 children. The normal maximum of a “Klasse” (that is, a school or a division of a school
under one teacher) is nominally fixed at 80 for a one-klasse school and 70 for any other. Even these high limits are not
by any means always observed. In case of defective supply the procedure is tedious and complicated, and the Minister
finds it difficult to compel compliance.
In 1896 there were 17,165 of these abnormal Klasses, representing 18 per cent, of all the Klasses. The number of
scholars affected was 1,320,515, or 26 per cent, of all the schools.
These abnormal “ Klasses ” were divided as follows :—ln one-klasse schools with from 81 to 100 children, 1,622 ;
from 101 to 150, 388 ; over 150, 10. Total, 2,020.
There were 72 schools (comprising 10,242 pupils) in which there were over 150 in a one-klasse school or over 120 in
a two-klasse school.
There were four onc-klasse schools with over 170 children in each, and one four-klasse school with SOS children.
Mr. Knibbs : Wo did not see any such schools in Prussia, and the schoolrooms would not carry the
number. I suppose that statement refers to some of the old schools that the Prussians are rapidly demolishing.
There is no doubt the Prussians themselves have raised a hornet’s nest in regard to the overcrowding of
schools, and all action in Prussia is for the remedying of that state of affairs. We did not see a single example
of it. We had not time to go all round the country to look for the evil examples. At Strasburg and
Karlsruhe we saw examples of the lowest type of school that came under our observation during our travels.
Mr. W T . T. Anderson (Superior Public School, Parramatta South) asked how the teaching of art in
Europe and America compared with its teaching in New South Wales 1
Mr. Turner : One of the most practical improvements in education in the United Kingdom is in
the direction of art work. One of the things that struck me most forcibly when I went into the higher
grades of schools of London and the principal towns of England, of Scotland, and of Ireland, too, to some
extent, one of the greatest improvements that I noticed, and one of the most prominent features of the
work, was in the matter of drawing. In Chapter XX, I devote some pages to drawing in the London
Board Schools and in the schools of San Francisco. On my way back through San Francisco I saw another
development, where all conventionality is thrown aside and all originality of the child’s mind is encouraged.
I have given a long account of both systems. Ido not think it is wise, for me to go into details now,
because other speakers have to follow me. I think the drawing here is on good lines under Mr. Branch,
who succeeded Mr. Woodhouse ; but I think we will have to get one of the best trained men from England.
We are right away from what is being done in other parts. I would suggest to Mr. Anderson to put
himself in communication with the Perry Magazine Company in Massachusetts, and he will get some most
up-to-date ideas of what is being done in the American schools. If one thing stands out prominently in
the London Board Schools it is the teaching of art.
Mr. G. Boland (Public School, Arncliffe) : I would ask the Commissioners if, considering the
amount of money that is annually voted by Parliament for purposes of education, the best possible system
has not been given us.
Mr. Turner : It is not the best system, because we could introduce more kindergarten without very
much expense. We can have that manual training linking on the kindergarten to our Superior School
work without very much expense. I prefer cardboard work to the plasticine. I dare say when we come
up to the Superior Schools we shall require to indulge in some further expense. But expense or not we
must get our schools on to other lines. Mr. Broome has corroborated me to that extent. We must get on
to science, agriculture, and art. We must get away from sending our children for the Senior and Junior
and Public Service Examinations. That line will not develop the wealth of this great State ; and expense
must come in that direction. Expense must come in reforming the pupil-teacher system ; but, I think,
many of the reforms I have suggested can be introduced with very little expense.
Mr. Perry : I would like to point out that we are making the money go as far as we possibly can, and
we often find ourselves in the position to have to refuse to do things for the want of a little more money.
I have no doubt as the population increases, and as we bring about these alterations, that the cost to the
taxpayer will be considerably reduced. In Switzerland, of course, you know they have a very small area
with a very large population. We have to meet here a large area with a small population. I think there
need be no fear in the minds of the taxpayers that they are going to be very heavily taxed. We can make
a great many improvements without asking for more taxation from the people.
Mr. Irwin (Superior Public School, Wollongong) asked Mr. Turner what number of hours teachers
in other parts devoted to instruction per day, and how many subjects they taught.
Mr. Turner : I have dealt with that in regard to France. France has developed the upper primary
system. In Chapters VIII, IX, and X, I have given the most full information I could obtain, and a
general outline of the primary schools system. But in brief, I can say that the hours are longer and the
subjects are as numerous. Chapter VIII deals with the primary school system of France. Chapter IX
with the upper primary schools of France, and Chapter X with the public schools of Paris.
Mr. Callaghan (Superior Public School, Hamilton) : In proposing that this meeting do now
adjourn, I have pleasure in proposing a hearty vote of thanks to the Minister for bringing this
Conference here to-day. lam afraid we have not thoroughly studied the Report, and it will be well
for those of us who are to be here to study it closely and in the broadest spirit. The Commission may
have made blunders, and, perhaps, in some respects they may be wrong; but there can be no
question as to the value of the Report, if it is only in directing the attention of parents especially
to the condition of educational affairs in this country, as compared with educational affairs in other
countries. Our own system has splendid advantages and splendid features, and no defects which are
unknown in older countries. We have gone on making improvements year after year. Ido not think
anyone in this audience will say that everything is as well as it might be. Improvements must be made,
and


and the awakening of public attention will help the Minister and the officers to bring improvements that are
certainly necessary into effect. I beg to move that this meeting adjourn until Mr. Perry convenes it again,
and that our best thanks is due to him for convening this Conference to-day, and presiding over it.
Mr. Swann (Superior Public School, Parramatta North) : I have very much pleasure in seconding
this motion and vote of thanks. I think of all men who have occupied the position of Minister of Public
Instruction, Mr. Perry is, perhaps, most deserving of our thanks. I, and other officers, have had to visit Mr.
Perry in the interests of the teachers, and he has always been sympathetic, and, what is really wonderful,
has shown that he is familiar with the technicalities of our profession, with subjects that you would not
expect a politician to study. However we may view his actions or the Commissioners’ Report, Mr. Perry
is deserving of our warmest praise.
The motion was carried by acclamation.
Mr. Perry : I am very gratified indeed if, during my occupancy of the office of Minister of Public
Instruction, T have been able to do some little towards advancing educational matters in this State. I have
said to a good many of my friends—and I know a good many in this hall to-day—-that I entered that office
with a great deal of fear and, I may say at once, with a great deal of ignorance. I had not at any time
given very much attention to it. It was not an office that I thought I could fill, but, as I was called upon
to fill it, I made up my mind to do the best I could. Whether that has been well or ill done, it is for you
to say, and from the very warm opinions that have been expressed, I take it that you consider that I have
not done amiss. If there is one thing that I feel proud of it is that the action I have taken, on the advice
of those within the Department, has had the result of bringing about a greater amount of public interest in
educational matters than existed before. lam very hopeful indeed. I did think at one time that perhaps
it might be necessary, in order to allay the misapprehensions of the public, to pass a resolution here to-day
to the effect that the teaching staff of this State are prepared to loyally carry out any innovations that may
possibly come about as a result of the Commissioners’ Report, but I do not think there is any necessity for
doing anything of the sort. The reporters will have noted the tone of this meeting, and they can take that
for granted. It will be my duty to call the next meeting at the earliest possible moment, because every
day that passes without doing something, when we are going to do it, is lost to the children of this State.
Therefore, if we are going to do something, it must be done as soon as possible. And lam quite confident,
from the numerous responses to my invitation to meet here to-day, that on the next occasion this hall will
not be large enough, and that we shall have to take the Town Hall. I have to thank the Commissioners for
their report, and lam looking with a great deal of interest for their reports on other subjects. I want
also to thank Mr. Board for having devoted a great portion of his holiday in the way he did. I want to
say that the manuscript of his Report reached me before the Commissioners’ Report did, and I immediately
sent it to be printed, as I want that report to be in the hands of the teachers, together with the
Commissioners’ Report. I feel that I owe him an apology for not sending him back his manuscript, in order
that he might make any alterations he might think necessary before it was printed. I thought the
information contained in it would be a very valuable addition to what we have from the Commissioners.
The Commissioners have dealt with the question of truancy. In regard to that question, lam pleased to
say that the Bill I introduced into Parliament meets pretty well the whole of the requirements of
the case. You may ask me why I did not proceed with the Bill. 1 had read reports of the
Department, going some years back, and in almost every one there was reference to the question
of truancy and the provisions we had made being inadequate to cope with the evil. I thought that
during my term of office I would have the honor of dealing with this question in the way in which
it ought to be dealt with. I was asked to open a school in one of the suburbs, and I asked one
of the officers to prepare a statement showing the enrolment and attendance, and the number we had
accommodation for in the public schools, and I found that if I passed that Bill I would not have room to
put the youngsters in. lam not going to say one word in reference to my predecessors, because I felt the
pinch of poverty, so to speak, myself. While the school population in the city and suburbs had increased
by something like 25 per cent., the accommodation had only increased 5 per cent. We have spent over
£50,000 to keep the accommodation to something like up to the attendance. I have to press that Bill on
during the coming year, and I know of nothing that will be of greater benefit to this community than a
satisfactory solution of the truancy problem. I take the opportunity of wishing you all a very prosperous
new year. I hope every one of you will get a good report from your Inspector. I have realised all that
has been put before me. I think that the teachers have not been, as one gentleman seems to think, rather
looked down upon. My experience of the teacher in the country is that he is sought after if they are
getting up a concert or an entertainment for any good object, and that to keep out of trouble he must be a
man of very great tact. In regard to teachers who, through no fault of their own, are in schools that do
not carry a salary of £l5O per annum, I think that a man who does his work well ought to be encouraged,
and I have, therefore, sent to the Public Service Board, for their approval, a regulation under which such
a teacher will receive a yearly increment of £lO till his salary reaches £l5O per annum, on getting an
award of merit from his Inspector. We have fixed it at £l5O per annum, because we can put that down
as a living wage. The Department is not slow to take advantage of things that show themselves to it.
Quite recently a terrible calamity occurred in Chicago, and the whole place was plunged into sorrow. Miss
Ferguson, a very energetic teacher, drew my attention to the fact that there would be a very great difficulty
in getting the children out of one of the Balmain Public Schools in case of fire, and I instructed the
architect to visit all the schools and see what means exist for emptying each school, and if there is a
necessity to provide a further exit for any school it will be our duty to find the money for that purpose.
We have had no accidents yet, but we never know when one will occur. We are going to place an alarm
apparatus on the wall of the school ; and, although there will be no particular time for sounding it, directly
it is sounded, the teacher will show the children what to do in the matter of “ alarm drill.” I think the
idea is a very good one, and it may possibly eventuate that the public school children will set an example
to the older ones, and prevent anything in the shape of a panic in the community. I thank you very much
for your attendance here to-day. It shows our critics that you do take a great interest in this question, and
that it is not merely a matter of pounds, shillings, and pence to you, but of giving the children the best
education that it is possible to give them ; and that, I am quite sure, is the spirit that will animate every one
of you in the conduct of your schools. I thank you very much for your attendance here to-day, and for the
kind manner in which you have responded to the vote of thanks to me for presiding over this Conference.
[The Conference then, at 4'55 p.m., adjourned till Mr. Perry convenes it again.]
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer—l9o4.
34013 D
