

1951.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
CONFERENCE
OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
MINISTERS
ON
DEFENCE,
HELD AT
CANBERRA,
2ND MARCH, 1951.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONFERENCE.
By Authority:
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
1349.


CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS, HELD
AT CANBERRA, 2ND MARCH, 1951.
REPRESENTATIVES.
Commonwealth.
The Right Honorable R. G. Menzies, M.P. .. .. Prime Minister.
The Right Honorable A. W. Fadden, M.P. . . . . Treasurer.
New South Wales.
The Honorable J. McGirr, M.L.A. .. .. .. Premier and Colonial Treasurer.
Victoria.
The Honorable J. G. B. McDonald, M.L.A. .. .. Premier and Treasurer.
Queensland.
The Honorable E. M. Hanlon, M.L.A. .. . . .. Premier and Chief Secretary.
South Australia.
The Honorable T. Playford, M.H.A. . . . . .. Premier, Treasurer, Minister of Immigration, and Minister
of Industry and Employment.
Western Australia.
The Honorable A. F. Watts, M.L.A. .. .. .. Acting Premier and Minister for Education, Child Welfare
and Industrial Development.
Tasmania.
The Honorable R. Cosgrove, M.H.A, . . . . Premier and Minister for Education.


CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS, HELD
AT CANBERRA, FRIDAY. 2 ND MARCH, 1950.
The conference met at Parliament House, Canberra,
at 10.30 a.m., Mr. Menzies being in the chair.
DEFENCE.
Mr. MENZIES. —I have asked you to meet me
to-day in order to lay before you what I believe to be a
problem which the States and the Commonwealth have
in common. I thought that when I had done that we
might adjourn briefly because there are certain supple-
mentary matters that I should like to place before you
which, perhaps, I should do in private. We could then
resume, and if we found in the course of discussion
that we had a common basis of approach, certain
matters of detail or the machinery for investigating
those matters could be considered.
I am very sorry, indeed, that I should have to ask
you to attend at very short notice, because you are all
very heavily engaged with your own responsibilities.
My reason for doing so is this: In recent weeks —the
last month or two —as you know, I have had some
occasion not only to consider certain international
problems on the spot but also to have a series of dis-
cussions with other Prime Ministers of the British
Commonwealth and to give consideration to certain
problems in consultation with the Chiefs of Staff and
technical officers in London. I have returned to tell my
colleagues in the Commonwealth Government —and I
think they support my view—that the international
position is an extremely disturbing one. I shall deem
it necessary next week to put this matter to the Com-
monwealth Parliament in considerable detail, and
through the Parliament to the people, because I should
like to say at once I believe that we cannot expect to
have a popular realization of some of these things
unless a great deal more is put before the people than
we have been in the habit of putting before them in the
past.
My conclusion is this—l state it right away—that
the possibilities of war are so real and so serious that
Australia cannot, with justice to itself or its allies,
grant itself a day more than three years in which to get
ready. That view is not peculiar to me —and I am not
regarded by my colleagues, in the Cabinet at any rate,
as an excitable person. It is extremely significant that
in the United Kingdom, the Government of which has
experienced very great difficulties and pre-occupations
of all kinds in maintaining the export drive and keep-
ing the over-all trade balance healthy, the estimated
defence budget for 1951-52 has risen to 13 per cent, of
the total national income compared with 8 per cent, of
the total national income in 1950-51. That is a
phenomenal rise in one year, and it is by no means the
last. It is quite clear that the international situation
is regarded with immense gravity in the United
Kingdom.
In the United States there is an extremely strong
feeling of insecurity. So strong is it, indeed, that the
1951-52 over-all provision for defence expenditure of
all kinds in that country will be actually 20 per cent, of
the national income—not 20 per cent, of its public
revenues but 20 per cent, of the national income. That
will be the equivalent of an expenditure in excess of
£IOO per head of the population expressed in terms of
Australian currency.
Those two great countries do not pursue policies and
programmes of that kind without the most powerful
sense of reality and of urgency. It is quite true that,
when we are asked about the possibilities of war, we all
say, and with sense, that war is not inevitable, that is
to say, it is not unavoidable; but I believe that it is
avoidable only by the efforts of ourselves and of our
friends and that there is an acute time limit to the
putting forward of those efforts. We have not
unlimited time. All the circumstances of the world
indicate that we are on a tight programme. Indeed,
the quarrel that I could have with some extremely well-
informed people in the world is that they regard my
three years as rather too liberal an estimate. How-
ever, I simply state it as what I believe to be the utmost
limit of time. Therefore, I believe that if the western
democracies, including ourselves, fail to prepare them-
selves in three years, they may regard a war of aggres-
sion against them as in the highest degree probable.
Everything depends on what we do in the next three
years; and when I say “What we do” please under-
stand that I have brought you here not to lecture you
but to talk to you about what I believe to be the common
duty of all governments in Australia. If we prepare,
and if we are adequately armed for full participation
in a war from the very moment it begins, there is a
real chance that the war may not begin and that the
potential enemy, 'confronted by strength and by the
real risk of defeat, may open the doors of negotiation
and decide that the world should be one in which
nations and peoples may live decently at peace with
each other.
In Australia we adopted a five years’ defence pro-
gramme, which began under the authority of my pre-
decessor, and which was to run from 1947 to 1952.
That programme was reconsidered last year and the
remaining two years’ programmes were merged into a
three years’ programme Horn June, 1951, to June,
1953, on which we have been hitherto engaged. I
do not need to say to you, gentlemen, that nothing
could be more fatal to our security than the
very comfortable assumption, which has a great deal
of currency, that when governments talk of five years’
or three years’ defence programmes they visualize plans
wh\c!i, in due course, will be succeeded by another
three years’ or five years’ programme, and that there-
fore, the shortness of the programming does not
connote any real degree of urgency. I want to make it
deer that when I talk about a three years’ programme
I visualize it not as a part of a long string of pro-
grammes but as what I regard as a limit of time within
which w r e must, at our peril, be ready.
It is disturbing to find that in certain places in
Australia, a rather comfortable view is held—that if
and when another great -war breaks out and we are
involved in it we shall be able to start from scratch to
enlist men and to train and equip them. We are
encouraged in that belief by the recollection that on two
former occasions nine months, a year or fifteen months
elapsed before our forces were engaged. It is not con-
ceivable that such an interval would occur again. Let
me say at once, and there is no occasion to conceal it,
that if we are right in our belief that we have three
years in which to prepare, then we must be considering
the possibility of an aggressive war by one group of
people, the Communist forces of the world, and no
other; and if the Communist forces attack, it is quite
clear that they will launch their attack at a time that
suits themselves, when they feel that they have the
necessary strength, and that the attack will not be a


slowly developing one but a suddenly developing one.
We cannot gamble the liberty of this country or the
success of the democratic powers on the hope that we
may have time to spare. We must be ready on the day,
and if we are to be ready, we cannot, and must not, give
ourselves a day more than three years in which to
prepare.
You may very properly ask, “ What are your reasons
for that view ? ” I shall state them as compactly as I
can. During the last six months, in Korea, where we
have had all the elements of Communist intervention,
in Indo-China, where the French have been heavily
engaged and, frequently, unsuccessfully engaged, and
in Malaya, where, at any rate, some success has been
attending the Brigg plan —we have seen the clearest
possible evidence that Communist world strategy is
being vigorously directed to a new techique of engaging
the democratic forces in areas which, whilst they are
intrinsically significant in themselves, have no direct
relation to the vital theatres of possible war such as
Western Europe and the Middle East. But, after all,
it is in Western Europe and the Middle East that Com-
munist aggression will culminate, if it is to come at all,
and it is in those areas that the world’s fate for the
time being will be determined. As I see it, Communist
world strategy, both positive and negative, is now
clearly laid bare. It began in Europe by absorption of
a series of countries by typical Communist methods of
white-anting, followed by quickly successful revolu-
tionary movement. In brief, Europe has been partly
conquered by the Communist forces and the conquered
portion is quite clearly becoming a base for attack. It
is known to the rest of the world that Western Europe
is in a poor posture of defence and that in an effort to
rescue Western Europe from its hopelessly inadequate
state of defence General Eisenhower has been appointed
to assemble and organize defence forces. So much for
Europe. In Asia all sorts of activities have been
encouraged and aided with the design of dividing the
democratic forces and, therefore, of weakening them in
the west. It is not without significance that Chinese
Communist activity should be prominent at this time,
because on that matter Great Britain, having recog-
nized the Communist Government in China, and the
United States not having recognized that Government,
the Communists hoped that some real point of difference
might have been exacerbated between the United States
and the United Kingdom. Shortly after the conference
of Commonwealth Prime Ministers, there was a period
of a week or a fortnight in which feelings became tense
on both sides of the Atlantic. So, positively and nega-
tively, by building up strength in Europe and dividing
strength in Asia, Communist world strategy is clear.
There is another thing that greatly affects us, and
that is a matter which, like Korea, we may not
even have thought about twelve months ago. I refer
to the effect that is being produced in the Indian sub-
continent by the Kashmir dispute, and, to a lesser
degree, although its significance may grow, the dispute
over Afghanistan. While those disputes continue,
there is a powerful movement, becoming more and
more vocal and more and more pressing in Egypt, for
the evacuation of the Suez Canal zone by all British
forces. Although Kashmir is a small country and is of
no intrinsic military significance—its population is
only 4,500,000, or 1 per cent, of the entire population
of the Indian sub-continent —so much importance is
attached by both India and Pakistan to securing its
accession to one or the other that, although they have
agreed that the issue should be determined by popular
vote, it has been completely impossible in the last two
years to arrange the preliminaries of such a plebiscite
and, in particular, to-arrange to demilitarize Kashmir
during the currency of the vote. I shall not go into the
details of that matter at this stage, but I shall take the
opportunity at a convenient time to tell you personally
something more about it because it is extremely impor-
tant. However, in the result, two things are happening
in India and Pakistan. India is devoting 50 per cent,
and Pakistan at least 70 per cent, of public revenue to
defence preparations against each other. The feeling
runs so high that one can only be apprehensive about
the outcome of one false step or provocative action.
Let us imagine what the position would be in this
country if we had to devote 50 per cent, or 70 per cent,
of our public revenue to defensive preparations against
some other country whilst, at the same time, within
our boundaries, there were millions of people living in
the most depressed conditions, urgently needing better
health services and social services of all kinds. The
effect of this intense preoccupation with possible inter-
necine war in the Indian sub-continent, is inevitably to
continue avoidable human misery for vast masses. In
these circumstances it is obvious that the governments
concerned, although strongly opposed to communism,
will find it difficult to resist a substantial infiltration
by normal Communist means.
If the Communist aims are peaceable, there is no
explanation of the events that we have witnessed in the
last year or two; if the Communist aims are really
those of world mastery, then practically every inter-
national event in the last two years falls neatly into a
set pattern. I have stated my views on this matter to
my colleagues in the Australian Government and they
have been put before the various departments, particu-
larly the service departments. My views have been
accepted, they are to be acted upon, and we have deter-
mined on a concentration of effort during the next two
or three years which will enable us to be ready on the
day. That is the new charter that has been given to the
service departments and its effect on existing pro-
grammes is now being determined. I shall state the
position to the people of Australia fully and frankly
within the next few days.
The one thing in the world to-day which gives us any
instant superiority is the atomic bomb. If the time
comes when we cease to have that instant superiority,
the whole balance of the world will have changed
unless, in the meantime, in normal conventional
weapons and forces, we have so strengthened ourselves
that it would be dangerous for a potential aggressor to
attack; us. There will be great danger for all of us if
the Communists are encouraged to misjudge our
temper and resoluteness, or our capacity for national
and individual effort. It is against that background
that I want to talk to you briefly as my colleagues in
the responsibility of government in Australia. I use
that description because this is a great common prob-
lem. If you see in this a new approach on my part,
then I shall accept that because, after all, this job can-
not be done by the Commonwealth alone or by the
States alone. The Commonwealth has a primary
responsibility for defence which it accepts. We also
have a great responsibility to endeavour to fit what we
do into the pattern of what you do and what the com-
munity generally does, so that we may be as ready as
possible, and our economy may be strengthened as far
as possible in the time that we have.
There is one other matter about which I should like
to talk to you. There are great divisions of opinions
on it, but it is my duty to put the Commonwealth’s
view before you quite frankly. It is clear that if the
war against which we are guarding is a war whicii may
happen soon, the enemy is already identified. It will
not be against some new power that may emerge,
because no power can prepare for an aggressive war
in a month or two Or a year or two. Therefore, it is
possible and necessary for us in making our prepara-
tions, to compare the nature of any third war with the


nature of its predecessors. On the last occasion, Aus-
tralia was gravely threatened because both our enemies
were oceanic powers. Our nearest enemy, Japan, was
not only a great oceanic power, hut also had a strong
mercantile marine and was therefore in a position to
establish mastery of the seas in the short run, and also
to move great masses of troops from one island to
another. Indeed, it was Japanese sea power, covered
by air power, that made the early successes of our
enemy possible. The prospective enemy on this occa-
sion is not an oceanic power in the true sense, although
admittedly we should have to contend with long-
distance submarines. That affects our whole considera-
tion of war preparations. It means that air and naval
provisions must be directed to the particular kind of
problems with which our Air Force and Navy may be
expected to deal, having regard to the identity of the
prospective enemy. I am speaking frankly about this
matter. I have had enough of the tradition that every-
thing bearing on defence must be “hush, hush”. The
people of Australia and their leaders are quite capable
of looking at this problem, It is clear that, although
we must be ready to deal with local considerations such
as raids on our shipping, the vital theatres of war will
be not here, but elsewhere. I have entered into no
obligations. No government can hind any other govern-
ment in these matters. I make that quite clear. In
the event of a war whatever government is in office will
determine those matters. However, it is essential that,
if we are to participate effectively in a war, we must
have, at the outbreak of war, such forces as will enable
us to co-operate instantly with our great friends. It is
not much to the point for us to say to the United States
of America, “We would like some guarantee of our
security in this part of the world ”, unless we are pre-
pared to accept the reciprocal obligations that must
necessarily go with such an assurance. That, as I nave
said, means that we must be ready not twelve months or
two years after the day, but on the day. Our obliga-
tions in that regard are twofold. First, we must build
up our services—particularly the Army in the light
of present figures—to the necessary strength. It is not
for me to determine what is the necessary strength.
That has been considered many times by experts both
here and elsewhere. On mobilization of the Navy, we
shall need at least 7,000 more trained men than we have
to-day. We may even need 10,000 more. A sailor can-
not be made overnight. His training takes a long time.
At the end of three years we shall require at least
90,000 more soldiers than are at present in sight.
These are not extravagant figures; they are perfectly
sober assessments. Although recruiting to the Air
Force has been fairly brisk, we are still many
thousands short of our ultimate need. If we build tip
the man-power .strength of the services—l shall probably
announce to the Parliament by what means we propose
to do that —there must inevitably he a subtraction of
labour from ordinary civil tasks.
All I can say to you on that point is that if we fall
into the error of thinking that trained military forces
are of minor importance and that we can expect to
perform our function merely by being a source of
supply, then we shall he contracting out of what may
very well be grave responsibilities in vital places.
Indeed, the effect of that might he to weaken hope-
lessly the democratic position in certain places. I do
not make that remark lightly. We might weaken the
entire democratic effort.
The second point, which I scarcely need mention to
you, is that the Navy, the Army and the Air Force
cannot fight successfully without modern equipment.
Some of it can be got from overseas. In recent months
we have obtained jet fighters, and we are now in course
of obtaining a new long distance reconnaisance bomber
from the Lockheed people in America. We shall con-
stantly seek to be up to date and effective with equip-
ment. But, of course, to a very large extent the provi-
sion of equipment must make substantial demands on
Australian industry. How much those over-all figures
are will be clear to you when I tell you that, in the
present three years’ defence programme, provision for
material requirements amounts to £84,000,000. That
is in a three years’ programme, envisaged as perhaps
something to be followed by another three years’ pro-
gramme or a five years’ programme. But, if this time-
table of urgency that I have mentioned is right—and I
most certainly and profoundly believe it to be right—
that £84,000,000 must become something over
£300,000,000 in the same time if we are to have not
only forces of the right size but also equipment that
will enable them to fight with prospects of success.
That is on the positive side of our needs.
I am not telling you this because I want you to hand
me over something on these matters. lam telling you
only in order that you may know how this problem
looks from our point of view. However, it also involves
a complete reconsideration of our public investment
programmes as a whole. You may retort to that —and
1 accept it at once —that public investment programmes
in Australia are only a fraction of private investment
programmes. That is true. It presents us with another
problem which I shall be happy to discuss with you
at an appropriate time. I think it will be agreed that
we cannot make this enormously increased call upon
man-power and upon material supplies without recon-
sidering some of our civil public investment pro-
grammes —some of yours and some of mine. Ido not
seek for one moment to draw distinctions in this matter.
If anything is to go into the melting pot, ours must go
in just as much as anybody elses. But if we are to be
ready for war in three years and if we are to be fit to
maintain the war effort thereafter, obviously our public
capital expenditures must be urgently reconsidered.
That does not mean, as some people lightly think, that
programmes ought to be cut just for the sake of cutting
them. What it does mean is that every government
will need to plan its programmes in the light of the
relevancy of any individual item to the preparation of
the country for a great trial. I shall give an illustra-
tion —and I point out that I offer no opinion, because
I am not in a position to offer any expert view. It
might be that the Commonwealth had some power
scheme which, in some aspects, would not bear fruit for
twenty years. It might be that a State had a power
scheme which would bear abundant fruit in three years,
or five years. It would not seem sensible to me, con-
fronting this real danger and this urgent time-table, to
waste effort on the long-range plan at the expense of
completing the short-range plan. The test of relevancy
to the preparation for war and the strengthening of
the economy for war would at once be applied. In
short, I should like to approach this matter in positive
terms.
We want to do everything that we can do in the
next three years to perform the task of war prepara-
tion and also to strengthen the economy of the nation
in ways that are relevant to that preparation and to
the national strength needed for the conduct of a war.
What is unnecessary or irrelevant by those tests must
fall into a secondary position.
1 should like to put another aspect of that matter
into your minds. When we talk about concentrating
our resources on preparation for war in the direct
sense of services and the things that they will use, we
must also realize that there are certain civil activities
and developments without which the economy of the
country cannot maintain a war effort. Both sides of
lids picture have to he examined and, in the case of
civil investment, we must keep in mind the fact that


during the last war, quite properly, there was actually
a debit entry on public civil investment. Your rail-
ways fell into disorder from want of repair. There
was a cutting down of capital investments by way of
replacement and repair which normally would have
taken place. Therefore, from the public point of view,
whatever happened on the industrial side, w r e came out
of the war a little further back in terms of public
civil investment than we were when we went into it.
That means that, in considering a three years’ pro-
gramme of strengthening the civil economy, we must
have in mind the fact that that sort of leeway wall occur
again in the event of war. Therefore, we must con-
centrate in three years the w r ork of four years or as
much work as we can do. That means that we have an
enormously high demand on the military side and an
enormously high demand on the civil side. We must
concentrate upon the tasks that have to be done and at
the same time we must do something to prevent exces-
sive private demand from delaying or impairing our
defence preparations. Unless we can do those things
with calm judgment and a great deal of firmness, this
time-table will be merely a thing of paper without
meaning.
At present we need to find and train over a period
of three years w’ell over 100,000 or 110,000 more men
than we now have. There will, of course, be a great
expansion of direct defence expenditure. In 1949-50,
the expenditure by the Commonwealth was £54,000,000.
In 1950-51, w 7 e may expend something of the order of
£100,000,000. Next year’s estimates, of course, are not
ready, but from some of the figures that I have seen 1
shall be very surprised if the direct defence expenditure
in that period does not exceed £200,000,000. Apart
altogether from those needs, wm have indirect expendi-
tures which bear on defence, and expenditures which
are not in any sense defence expenditures but which are
vital to the building up of that strong economy that
will enable Australia to resist the strain and shock of
the war.
I believe that the task of adjusting our economic
■structure is far beyond the capacity of any one govern-
ment. We have to do our best to rectify our economic
weaknesses in a limited time. The task can be accom-
plished in that time only by the combined effort of the
Commonwealth, the States and the people of Australia.
My main object at this stage, notwithstanding specula-
tions to the contrary, is not to put a lot of broad pro-
posals before you and say, “ Yow swallow those or we
cannot do business ”. I very much prefer that, if we
find ourselves with a common approach to this prob-
lem, we should then determine freely amongst ourselves
what ways and means can be devised. At that stage, I
should be very happy to put before you a few ideas
which may be of value but which certainly will not be
in any sense dogmatic.
The first thing to do is to see that w r e are co-operative
on this matter. It is not always realized that, although
the industrial potential of the Australian economy is
greater than it was in 1939, our economy is in certain
respects weaker for the contemplation of a w r ar. The
economy is out of balance as we all know, because it is
a problem that has troubled every one of us. There are
far too many people engaged in satisfying needs of low 7
priority and far too few engaged in satisfying the basic
requirements of the nation. That w t c have no resources
of unused man-powmr or materials from a social point
of view, gives everybody extreme satisfaction. Our
economy is at full strain, though it is out of balance
in the w j ay that I have described. If w T e are to get rid
of the disabilities that arise from this want of balance,
w 7 e all must co-operate. The Oommonwmalth, of course,
wall use its defence power. It will use such powers
as it has over trade, external affairs, currency and
banking to the limit in order to deal wdth matters that
are peculiarly within its responsibility. But many of
the jobs tliat have to be done fall within the province
of tlie .States, and others just cannot be done sensibly
except by co-operation between the Commonwealth and
the States. Although I say that to you, I want to add
that basically the real effort must come from the Aus-
tralian people. They are the same people whether
they are under the jurisdiction of the States or under
the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth. It is up to the
people to put forward a great effort if they accept, as
they should, the gravity of this problem. In the last
resort, it is only a sense of urgency and of individual
patriotic responsibility that will enable us to perform
the greatest three years’ effort that we have ever been
called upon to perform in time of peace.
All these things have induced us to believe that the
time has come when we should forget pro tem. any
differences of opinion that we may have had on finan-
cial or other matters. This is a problem of co-opera-
tion. By co-operation I do not mean the sort of co-
operation achieved between the tiger and the young
lady of Riga. What I mean is that we must concen-
trate on a variety of things if we are to be ready. I
mean such things as problems of power, problems of
basic materials and problems of transportation. We
should be prepared to devise ways and means of getting
the right things done at the right time.
I do not propose to say at this conference that the
States must keep their hands off the Commonwealth’s
plans. Our plans must be examined with exactly the
same care and in accordance with exactly the same
standards as will be applied to any State works. In
other words, I am suggesting genuine, open and
friendly co-operation in attacking a problem, the
details of which perhaps we at this table understand
better than most people could be expected to understand
them. I believe that only on the basis of co-operation
of that kind can this country be made fully ready for
the threatened war.
The first thing that I should like you to turn over
in your minds is whether you agree that the general
nature of this problem is as I have put it to you and
whether the time has come for us, in a sense, to pool
our resources in this matter. In the States there is
an immense pool of most competent administrators and
experienced men. Indeed you have complained lately
that we have drawn upon it a little too much. We
must pool our resources and be prepared to get together.
If, when you have turned this matter over in your
minds, you find that you have the same general
approach to it as I have, I suggest that we should
endeavour at once to see whether w T e can devise ways
and means of tackling this problem on a co-operative
basis.
There are one or two supplementary matters that
I feel I ought to mention. I do not think that they
lend themselves to general public statement. They
do not qualify in any way what I have said, but I
think you will be interested to know of them. I suggest
that we should adjourn for half an hour. Then, having
turned this problem over in your minds, you could
inform me of your general feeling upon it and, of
course, raise any queries that you wished to raise. If
we find then, as I hope we shall do, that we have a
common starting point—because, after all, we are all
Australians—we could usefully go on to consider the
ways and means by which we can reach the next stage.
I do not suggest that we should discuss details, because
we do not want to make detailed arrangements to-day.
Sifting suspended from 11.35 a.m. to 2.25 p.m.
Mr. McGIRR.—I listened with a great deal of
interest to the case presented by the Prime Minister
this morning, particularly his remarks concerning the
international situation prior to the outbreak of World


War 11., when Japan which is so close, geographically
speaking, to Australia, possessed such a powerful naval
force. I realize the significance of the point that he
made in that connexion.
Various matters closely affecting the States are
involved in increasing our defence preparedness. I
realize that Australia’s primary role in previous wars
has been not so much to furnish man-power as to
produce the food and other munitions of war necessary
not only to maintain our own forces but also to sustain
our allies in other parts of the world. Any acceleration
of such production must vitally concern ISTew South
Wales. At present we have many major works in hand
that have a direct bearing on our war potential. I
instance the provision and improvement of transport
facilities, housing, electrical power generation, water
conservation and irrigation schemes and other develop-
mental works, which are estimated to cost approxi-
mately £36,000,000. All that work has a special
defence significance.
Unfortunately, although you have called the Premiers
together and imparted certain important informa-
tion to them, you have not indicated in what way
you think we should approach the consideration of the
difficulties confronting Australia because of the need
to increase our defence preparations. I think that
it would have been preferable for you to have outlined
your proposals to us before calling us together so
that we could have given some prior consideration
to them. Had that been done we should have been
better equipped to discuss the important details of
the broad matters that you placed before us this
morning. I desire to remind you, Mr. Prime Minister,
that the cost of living is an important factor in any
large-scale defence programme. The effect upon the
national economy of any futher increase of the cost
of living will be disastrous. Although the Common-
wealth Government must be as greatly concerned as
are the State Governments about the spiralling cost
of living, in the past the Commonwealth has not given
very much assistance to the States in their attempts
to halt rising prices. I think that the Commonwealth
should now devise some method by which it can
render greater assistance to the States and co-operate
more satisfactorily with them in tackling this problem.
Some time ago, State Ministers met in Canberra in an
endeavour to evolve some satisfactory method of con-
trolling the prices of goods. An organization was
established for this purpose by the State Governments,
but because of certain weaknesses which became
apparent in the organization, the Ministers in the
States who were responsible for prices control sought
the aid of the Commonwealth. A request was made
last November for a senior Commonwealth Minister
to participate with State Prices Ministers in Prices
Control, but this proposal was not acceptable to the
Commonwealth, which proposed instead an arrange-
ment under which Commonwealth officers would be
made available. This arrangement was accepted
reluctantly by the Conference of Prices Ministers on
the basis of a six months’ trial. I have.mentioned the
subject of prices control because I feel that it is one of
the matters with which the Commonwealth Government
should deal quickly and effectively as an earnest
of its sincerity in asking the States to co-operate
with it. Other matters with which the Commonwealth
should deal promptly and effectively that occur to
me at the moment are the licensing of exports of goods
in short supply, the introduction of credit control and
limitation of excess profits. All of them have a direct
bearing on the cost of living.
Concerning the broad matters to which you referred
this morning, I do not propose to say very much because
you have not placed before us sufficient detail to enable
us to discuss them at present. I assume that you
intend to call us together later and place certain specific
proposals before us, and that we shall then be asked to
examine them in detail. All I point out at this stage
is that developmental schemes generally, including,
of course, transport, roads, electrical power schemes
and other projects, concern the States very considerably,
quite apart from their defence significance, because
they affect the ordinary Australian very closely in his
daily life. For developmental works of the kind that
I have mentioned the New South Wales Government
has entered into commitments through the Loan Council
totalling from £16,000,000 to £18,000,000. That total
does not include our housing programme, in respect of
which we have already incurred a very substantial
liability. Large sums of money are also being expended
on vast schemes for the generation of electrical power,
particularly in country areas. The New South Wales
Government has been making special efforts to increase
the generation, and to extend the distribution, of
electrical power. For that purpose we have established
an authority to co-ordinate the production and distri-
bution of electrical power. It is estimated that the
completion of our various power projects will cost
£8,000,000. We have also entered into commitments
totalling £4,000,000 in respect of water supply schemes,
and w r e have incurred further heavy liabilities in
respect of the extension and improvement of health
services and education facilities. Our water conserva-
tion and irrigation programme is estimated to cost
between £3,000,000 and £4,000,000. I have no doubt
that everyone present at the conference realizes that
the development of this country and the improvement
of our economy have been retarded in the past because
of our failure to provide adequate water supplies in
the hinterland. Australia’s economy is based upon
primary production, and the prosperity of our wool
industry depends upon the provision of an adequate
water supply in the interior. New South Wales has
therefore embarked on an extensive programme of dam
construction for water conservation, which is estimated
to cost from £3,000,000 to £4,000,000. I have
mentioned those matters, Mr. Prime Minister, in order
to emphasize the necessity for you to place before us
details of the broad proposals that you outlined this
morning, and I trust that you will do so when you
place your programme before us. I have nothing
further to say at this stage.
Mr. McDonald.—You may assume, without any
doubt, Mr. Prime Minister, that the Government of
Victoria will co-operate with the Commonwealth
Government in giving effect to its defence policy. How-
ever, the prime responsibility for informing the people
of Australia of the needs of the Commonwealth, and
the means which you propose to adopt to meet those
needs, rests with you. I do not think that the State
governments should be called upon to do more than
carry out the part assigned to them in that policy by
the provision of man-power and materials. I presume
that you will outline what you have in mind concerning
the future implementation of works projects not only
of State governments and instrumentalities but also
of major private enterprises. I take it, therefore, that
you will acquaint all the public authorities concerned
with the means that you believe to be necessary to
attain your Government’s defence objectives.
I do not think that it is necessary for me to outline
now the public works programme of Victoria. Our
projects are fairly well known, but, in any event, I
do not consider this to be the appropriate time to
enumerate them. Speaking generally, all our public
works, with the exception of hospital and school con-
struction projects, are concerned with increasing the
supply of electrical power. They serve the dual purpose
of providing irrigation for the growing of foodstuffs
and the generation of power for rail transport. Apart
from financial considerations, our railways had a


unique experience during the last war. Very heavy
traffic services had to be provided at any cost, and were
made possible only at the expense of maintenance and
replacements. We are trying to overtake the lag in
those items to-day.
These are our problems are we see them. I suggest,
Mr. Prime Minister, that you outline your proposals
in greater detail. Then, perhaps, the Premiers could
meet and discuss them after you had your defence
plans and commitments into which I do not suggest the
States should intrude. In support of defence strategy
other measures must follow, and it is to those measures
that I refer when I suggest greater detail. Possibly
the officers of the Commonwealth and of the States
could then discuss the details of the Commonwealth’s
plans as was done during the war. By this means we
could achieve the desired co-ordination. I have heard
what Mr. MoGirr has said about finance and economy.
I do not propose to touch on this aspect of the problem,
other than to say that any acceleration of our defence
programme must have a very serious effect on the
already difficult man-power and materials position.
It is obvious to any thinking person that the Com-
munists have been successful in denying to us a peace-
time industrial potential which could rapidly be
translated into a war-time potential, and that if they
continue to dominate our industrial field as they have
done in the past, the prospect of successfully preparing
this country for war in the three-year period mentioned
by the Prime Minister this morning does not look very
encouraging. The States will support proper action
by the Commonwealth to prevent this from happening.
This is all I have to say at this juncture. I suggest,
Mr. Prime Minister, that you outline your proposals.
We shall then examine them and arrange for the
detailed programme to be considered by Commonwealth
and State officers in conference. In this way we shall
get efficient co-operation throughout the whole of Aus-
tralia on the part of governments and semi-
governmental bodies. The public will accept whatever
is decided upon as the proper action to meet the
emergency with which we are faced.
Mr. HAHLOH.—-The Government of Queensland
is very conscious of the need to place the defence of
this country on a proper basis. This is natural, if
only for the reason that Queensland is the nearest State
to a potential enemy. We are very concerned by
the inadequacy of our present defence preparations.
A slowing down of war preparedness naturally occurs
in every country after a war has ended. The peoples
of the victorious nations naturally say, “ That puts
them to bed for a long time ”; and navy, army and
air force activities become, somewhat unpopular.
We shall re-examine our capital works programme,
and we shall be only too happy to do what we can to
assist in diverting labour to the production of war
materials. Offhand, I canot recall any item that we
could write off our programme at present. In this
respect, Queensland is in the same position as are the
other States. We are making provision for roads,
ports, railways, domestic transport, schools, water,
sewerage and electricity services and health services.
The bulk of our expenditure is being incurred on items
of this kind, and I doubt whether you, Mr. Prime
Minister, would recommend that we cut down expen-
diture on essential services. At the, conclusion of
World War 11. we had a six years’ lag in our public
works programme which we have not yet overtaken.
The slowing up of the provision of these services is
making them more expensive as time goes by. Works
that we could have undertaken for a given sum of
money a few years ago have doubled in cost to-day.
With the continual increase of costs, local authorities,
harbour boards and similar bodies are flat out trying
to get some of tlieir works completed before inflation
goes further. It would be difficult to cut out any major
works on our programme. All of those that I have
mentioned are essential to the defence of the Common-
wealth. As you know, we are seriously behind with
our housing and schools programmes. If we are to
increase our population we must provide greater
numbers of schools and houses. Before coming to
Canberra I had a look at our loan expenditure pro-
gramme which was approved by the Loan Council at
its meeting in August last. It will be recalled that we
then agreed that we should probably need not more than
75 per cent, on the approved loan allocations to carry
out the works that we could put in hand during the
year. However, I find that, because of the tremendous
rise of costs we shall now need more than 75 per cent,
of loan allocation to finance less than 75 per cent, of the
works on our programme. Thus, we shall require to
increase our loan budget without accomplishing the
volume that we originally planned to carry out.
I should like to refer to one commodity that has a
most important bearing on this subject of defence, and
I hope that you will not regard me as harping about
something about which I may he supposed to have a
“ bug ”. I refer to coal. Most of our heavy produc-
tion —and much of our lighter production, which, in
turn, depends upon the production of heavy goods—
depends upon the availability of coal. This is the only
country in the world that is abundantly supplied with
coal, and yet we are being strangled for want of it.
That position is worth studying. I received a com-
munication from an American firm a few weeks ago
relating to the development of the Blair Athol coal-
field. When I was overseas on a mission for the Com-
monwealth with respect to sugar, a group of Hew York
businessmen assured me that they could have Blair
Athol in production within eighteen months. lam not
an engineer and I do not know whether that could be
done; but if they could do it, we can do it if we have
the requisite resolution and put our mind to the task.
There are immense quantities of coal and coking coal
in Queensland. It has been demonstrated that under
the coal at the open-cut at Hebo there is excellent coking
coal. Those deposits are close to the modern harbour
at Mackay.
Wo should also bear in mind that the Pacific area as
a whole is badly in need of coal. There is an immense
demand for coal in the Philippines, the Hear East and
Japan as well as in our own country. The only other
source of large-scale supplies for the Pacific is Man-
churia, where there is an immense open-cut show that
is comparable with Blair Athol; but those deposits are
in Soviet hands. Malaya, Indo-China and the Philip-
pines want our coal; and those countries are the sources
of supply of strategic materials. They will have to
send those materials to countries from which they can
get coal. If we do not attempt to meet the coal require-
ments of the Pacific area, those countries will send their
tin, rubber and other goods to Soviet countries from
which they will obtain the coal that they must have in
order to carry on their industries. Therefore, I suggest
that very careful consideration should he given to the
development of coal resources in this country. I should
whole-heartedly support the development of coal
resources in other States. By our failure to develop
our resources of coal we placed ourselves in an absurd
position. Ho particular government can be blamed
for it, but it is an anomaly that a country who has
abundant resources of coal should allow its industrial
capacity to be strangled by the shortage of iron, steel,
:ement and electric power, the production of all of
which depends upon adequate supplies of coal. I
suggest that the problem must be considered in planning
the future defence of our area.


As you said this morning, Mr. Prime Minister, our
frontier is not the beaches of Australia, it lies further
afield. I assure you that we shall re-examine our
capital expenditure programme and help the Common-
wealth as much as we are able to do. The contribution
that the State governments can make is not great,
because almost all of the non-essential goods manufac-
tured in this country are manufactured by private
enterprise. The Commonwealth is tackling the aspect
of the problem through its recently reconstituted
capital issues control.
Whether or not it would be possible for the Common-
wealth in time of peace to divert labour from luxury
production to the production of essential goods, I do
not know. Unless the Commonwealth has a proposi-
tion to put to us, I do not see how we can do very much
in that direction. However, we shall do our best to
co-operate in any plans that the Commonwealth may
have.
Mr. PLAYFOED. —I welcome this conference. Ido
not think there is any one in Australia who is not most
concerned about the difficult situation that is arising.
Quite apart from the Commonwealth defence pro-
gramme, which must of necessity be very large, there
is already keen competition in industry for available
resources. Unless we can attack this problem on
common ground costs will continue to rise, and we shall
nullify the effectiveness of our work by insane competi-
tion for already inadequate resources. Therefore, at
the outset, I agree with what has been said by the
Premier of Hew South Wales, the Premier of Victoria,
and the Premier of Queensland. I assure the Com-
monwealth that South Australia will do everything
that is practicable to assist in the general programme
that has been put forward.
The problem can be tackled in two ways. It can be
tackled effectively first by reducing our demands upon
the nation’s resources. Such a proposal would require,
in my opinion, very close examination by all govern-
ments. I am sure, Mr. Prime Minister, that you do
not expect us to-day to decide what projects could be
abandoned.
Mr. MEHZIES.—Ho.
Mr. PLAYFOED. —Ho State has embarked upon a
spending spree. They have all undertaken important
work, many of which will have a direct defence value.
I understand that another Premiers Conference is to
be called by the Commonwealth to consider other
matters in the not distant future, and I would suggest
that, in the meantime, a communication should be sent
by the Commonwealth to each State setting out the
views of the Commonwealth on works priorities in rela-
tion to the defence needs of this country. We should
then be able to work to a common line. That is a
matter to which the Hational Eesourees Board could
direct some attention. The States, upon receipt of such
a communication, could then systematically examine
their works programmes to ascertain to what extent the
wishes of the Commonwealth could be met. That would
be at least some contribution to a solution of the general
problem. Ho doubt the Commonwealth itself, upon
reconsideration of its own works programme, will be
able to make a similar contribution. You have indi-
cated, Mr. Prime Minister, that you are prepared to
work on those lines. However, in my opinion a mere
curtailment of State and Commonwealth works pro-
grammes will not be sufficient to meet the needs of the
situation that has been outlined to us to-day. The
expenditure of large sums of money on defence, and the
training of at least 100,000 additional men in our armed
forces, will make heavy demands upon our already
“ supercharged ” economy. Clearly the curtailment of
the loan programmes of the States and of the Common-
wealth will not be sufficient to meet the problem
entirely. Some demand will also have to be made upon
the capital spending of industry. I understand that the
the Commonwealth has already given consideration to
capital issues control and the control of overdrafts. In
my opinion a most important factor in inflation at
present is time-payment sales. Such sales are placing
a. heavy demand upon goods, which otherwise would not
be paid for. That activity should be examined.
I believe, too, that our programme could be assisted
by the mobilization of certain resources which so far
have escaped attention. Mr. McGirr has mentioned
housing. It is common knowledge that some vital
materials which are not normally used in home
construction are now being diverted to this work. For
instance, the shortage of timber has led to the erection
of steel-framed houses. At the same time, large quan-
tities of suitable timber are being exported. South
Australia depends upon Western Australia for its
timber supplies. Western Australia also places a sub-
stantial demand on its own forests. There is a
shortage of timber in almost every State, although sub-
stantial quantities are being exported to South Africa
and Great Britain. We are importing prefabricated
bouses in an attempt to meet a demand for homes in
this country. The use of steel in the construction of
houses, necessitated by the shortage of timber, is some-
thing that could well be examined by the Hational
Resources Board. The Board should give the fullest
consideration to the mobilization of our assets to ensure
that they are put to the most effective use. That,
of course, brings us to the question of controlling the
use of essential materials in this country. In South
Australia, and I am sure in all States, essential
materials are being used in non-essential production. I
doubt whether in peace-time the Commonwealth can
control the distribution of materials to individual con-
sumers, The Commonwealth undoubtedly has power to
seize the materials that it requires for its defence
programme, but having done that, I do not think that
it can govern distribution. If that is the position,
the Government of South Australia is prepared to
participate in a general plan which will ensure that
essential industries have first call on available material.
The other States will, I am sure, do likewise. Such
a plan will probably be necessary if the Common-
wealth’s defence programme is to be effective. Some of
the States have already taken similar action in respect
of housing. The principle has been accepted by the
State parliaments that diversion of essential materials
to essential purposes is desirable.
I strongly advocate a high level approach to the
Government of the United Kingdom on the subject of
steel deliveries to this country. The position as I_
understand it is that the Government of the United
Kingdom has introduced a quota system for the
delivery of steel to other countries. As Australia has
become a purchaser only since the war, its quota is
unfavorable. If we are to control steel and to divert
it mainly to defence work, there is a strong case to be
made out to the British Government for some improve-
ment of Australia’s allocation. Steel production in
this country is totally inadequate for our needs and
unless we can import substantial quantities, the works
programmes of the States and the 'Commonwealth
defence programmes must fall heavily to the ground.
Again I say that I welcome this conference.
Throughout Australia to-day there is a great need for
a realization that this country is in a difficult position
which speedily could become dangerous, and that now
is the time to put our house in order. I assure the
Commonwealth that South Australia is prepared to
co-operate in any way possible.
Mr. WATTS. —Western Australia has always dis-
played willingness, subject to the limitations of
resources and population, to co-operate in any national


effort in the defence of the country. It is not likely
that the Government of Western Ausralia will depart
from that line of approach now. I am prepared to
ask it to do anything which is conceived to be reasonably
necessary to enable the defence of Australia to be put on
a firmer basis.
Nobody could have failed to be impressed by th:
information that you supplied to us this morning, Mr.
Prime Minister. Although we had some appreciation
of the international situation, the picture has been made
clearer by the careful resume that you have given us.
Bearing all the facts in mind, I have to realize, and
ask you to realize, that Western Australia is the largest
State and also includes within its boundaries the
most undeveloped sections of any part of the Common-
wealth. Only in recent years has Western Australia
tackled on a major scale the task of developing and
making those areas more habitable and productive.
That brings me to the question of the degree to
which restrictions can be imposed upon the programme
of works that has been undertaken in that State. The
major works are those of water supply, with the support
of the Commonwealth; railways rehabilitation, which
is essential if any transportation of commodities on a
large scale is to be effectively continued; power schemes,
which, by comparison with those envisaged in the
eastern part of Australia, are comparatively small but
nevertheless of extreme importance; port develop-
ment, which is connected with transport; and the
construction of houses and public buildings. Therefore,
it is very difficult for me to say what works, if any,
could he reduced. Western Australia has not engaged
in works other than those that are essential. I think
that no decision could he given on this subject without
first having a very close discussion with the principal
State officers concerned, particularly the Director of
Works. I suggest that the Director of Works from
each State, or the comparable officer, should be called
into consultation with Commonwealth officers so that
all cards may be placed on the table. Their views could
be conveyed to a meeting of Premiers, which could be
held about the same time as the meeting which is to
be held for the purpose of discussing our financial
relationships about four weeks hence.
If the Commonwealth is to continue its policy of
encouraging large numbers of immigrants—l believe
that it must do so and you did not say anything to
the contrary, Mr. Prime Minister —it is obvious that
the needs of that increased population will have to be
met. Western Australia is taking a fair share of
immigrants and is making use of them. At the same
time, their arrival complicates some of our problems —
perhaps more so in Western Australia than in other
States with larger populations.
I agree with the remarks of Mr. Playford about
the importation of steel. I am firmly convinced that if
high-level discussions were undertaken with the British
Government, and that if that Government understood
that any steel supplied to Australia would be used solely
in the national interest by a national organization, it
would lend a responsive ear to our appeals. I presume
that ultimately we should have to discuss some method
of control even of our own sources of supply. That
would involve some discussion on the subject of legis-
lation. The authority of the Commonwealth, even if
it should be desirable to exercise it at this juncture,
might not be sufficient to cover controls. You said
this morning, Mr. Prime Minister, that you considered
that the appropriate way in which to deal with this
matter was on a purely co-operative basis, allowing the
people of Australia, as represented by the Common-
wealth Government and the State governments, to
handle the problem on a nationwide basis with con-
sideration for all major interests.
I suggest that any legislation that might be con-
sidered necessary should not be enacted by means of a
reference of authority to the Commonwealth. That
process would be fraught with much greater difficulty
than would be an attempt to pass State legislation
and complementary Commonwealth legislation of a
uniform character which would entrust the vital con-
siderations that we are discussing to a joint authority
representative of the States and the Commonwealth in
reasonable proportions.
I do not think that we should have much difficulty in
extending legislation such as we have in Western
Australia dealing with building materials, to materials
that are necessary for the defence of the country and
for developmental work associated directly or indirectly
with defence. I think that legislation of that type
would meet with greater success, in Western Australia
at least, than would legislation that simply referred
power to the Commonwealth. It would ensure complete
co-operation between all governmental authorities in
the national interest. As you have said, Mr. Prime
Minister, we are citizens of Australia and we have to
pay attention to what is best in the national interest.
We must not let the present situation pass without
taking appropriate action. Otherwise a time might
come when we should have neither State governments
nor a Commonwealth government. I shall ask the
Government of Western Australia to discuss these
matters in detail. lam sure that it will do everything
that it can do, consonant with the fact that a certain
amount of development must go on in that State in the
national interest as well as in the State interest, to assist
the Commonwealth to put itself in a posture of defence
provided that the Commonwealth and the other States
bear their equitable proportions of the sacrifice that
has to be made.
Mr. COSGROVE.—I realize that, in the disturbed
conditions of the world to-day, Australia must be
prepared. I agree that it is very much better to prepare
now than to wait until the time would be too short
to allow of thorough preparation. lam confident that
the Government of Tasmania will co-operate with the
Commonwealth Government in making necessary
preparations.
Any crisis makes demands upon the people that in
normal times no government would be inclined to ask
them to suffer. In a time of crisis we must ask the
people to give away some of their liberty and some of
their non-essential pleasures and to concentrate on the
production of the essential requirements of the nation.
The Government of Tasmania is willing to do that and
I am sure that it can be of some value to the nation
in preparing for defence.
The bulk of Tasmania’s hydro-electric power to-day
is used in the production of materials, such as zinc,
carbide and copper, which are of defence value. There
is an ever-growing need for additional power. In order
to make additional power available, it is necessary that
Tasmania should get some of the basic materials which
cannot be purchased in Australia to-day but which
could be produced here. Like Mr. Playford and Mr.
Watts, I think that it is necessary not only that there
should be control of basic materials in Australia, but
also that pressure should be brought to bear upon
European countries to supply steel and other materials
to Australia. This defence effort will be directed not
only to the security of Australia, but also to the security
of tlm democracies generally. Therefore, European
countries should be interested in ensuring that some of
the steel that we need is made available to us.
The difficulty that we envisage can be illustrated
simply by reference to the position of the Hydro-
Electric Commission in Tasmania. It has on order
6,500 tons of boiler plate steel. The orders were


accepted and firm deliveries were promised, but the
commission has been notified now that the steel cannot
be delivered. This means that there will be great
difficulty in completing power schemes, particularly the
scheme for the provision of power for the aluminium
industry. Some steel may be diverted from other
sources, but it is not always possible to get the particular
type of steel that is required for that work. Therefore,
1 join with the other Premiers in asking the Prime
Minister to ascertain whether arrangements can be
made to obtain steel of that description.
I cannot say how Tasmania’s works programme
could be re-arranged, and I think the best plan would be
to have a conference of State officers, who could then
meet officers of the Commonwealth and prepare an
over-all picture of essential works throughout Aus-
tralia. Then the Premiers and Commonwealth
Ministers could meet and make a final decision in
relation to the relative importance of all projects.
This procedure should not take very long because all
States have officers in charge of works who are in touch
with the various departments concerned. They could
very quickly lay the picture of the situation in each
State before Commonwealth officers. From that, there
could come recommendations to us for consideration.
I should prefer it to be done in that way rather than
for the Commonwealth to make proposals to us. I
assure you of the co-operation of Tasmania in any work
that the Commonwealth is proposing to do that will
strengthen the security of Australia.
Mr. MENZIES. —I am immensely obliged to you for
your co-operative approach to this problem. As Mr.
Cosgrove has said, we shall not get satisfaction, once
you have established your willingness to co-operate, by
having the Commonwealth saying to you, “ This is what
you are to do ”, If there is to be co-operation, it must
be genuine co-operation, so that we meet as partners in
an enterprise.
I want to emphasize something that, perhaps, I did
not make sufficiently clear earlier. I am not talking
merely about restricting some works programme or
programmes. It might very well be that an examination
by State and Commonwealth officers would reveal that
some work designed to be done in five years ought
to be accelerated and, if possible, done in three years.
I am not speaking merely in terms of restriction, nor
are my remarks necessarily confined to works. What
I am suggesting is that there should be co-operation
between us in all fields in which co-operation is possible,
and that that co-operation should be directed to
strengthening the economy of the country for war.
That does not necessarily mean works programmes only.
It includes matters such as the availability of power,
improvement of transportation, control of materials
and various other things that have been mentioned in
the course of your remarks.
So far as works programmes are concerned, I agree
that government programmes, although they are very
important, are not the dominating factor. It has been
estimated that in 1950-51 gross private investments in
xlustralia will amount to £685,000,000 and the gross
public investment to £262,000,000. The total volume
of private investment is between two and three times as
great as is the total volume of public investment. As
far as private investment is concerned, we have there
another field for co-operative effort. There are certain
functions that belong particularly to the Common-
wealth. For example, we have the banking power and,
therefore, are in a position to say something about bank
credit nolicy. We have instituted capital issues con-
trol. There are other functions of the Commonwealth
which have an obvious bearing on investment pro-
grammes, even one so unpopular as taxation. The
Commonwealth is directing its attention and its activi-
ties to all those matters, but there are others, such as
the control of building and of the use of materials, that
have a direct bearing upon private investment, includ-
ing private industrial investment, and, as things now
stand, they cannot be handled satisfactorily unless we
co-operate completely with each other. There are
certain things that the States can do and certain things
that the Commonwealth can do.
Each State has its co-ordinator of works and a Public
Works Department of great experience and skill. It
has never occurred to me to think that in relation to
any work in the programmes of the Commonwealth
and the States somebody cannot put up a sound case
for that work to be done. All these works are, in them-
selves, intrinsically good things. We should look at
works programmes only to apply the test of relevancy,
having regard to the time-table that I have suggested
to you. We might say, “In the light of present circum-
stances, we should go ahead with this work and
accelerate that one”. For all I know some proposed
Commonwealth works might have to be put into the
“ cooler ” because they have not sufficient relevancy to
the problem.
What we want to achieve from this meeting, in the
spirit in which we have met, is an instant and com-
petent examination of our weaknesses, having regard to
the task that confronts us, and of means by which we
can fit our essential programmes into our available
resources of man-power and materials. I believe that a
real example of prompt co-operative action by the
governments represented at this conference would have
a profound moral effect upon the Australian people
and, therefore, would tend to get rid of some of the non-
sense that we all know goes on to-day and which, in
some instances, is not the result of wickedness but of
unawareness of the danger that confronts us and of the
urgency of the problem. We are quite capable of a
much greater man effort and of producing many more
indigenous materials if we have a real all-round con-
centration on the job.
It was never any part of my intention that this after-
noon we should endeavour to get down to a series of
detailed matters, because we have no facilities for doing
that at the moment. I suggest that each government
should appoint to a panel a top-level official whom it
trusts. That panel could at once begin to examine the
problems that emerge to-day and to make quick recom-
mendations to us regarding the machinery that it con-
siders should be established to deal with individual
matters. It would be a kind of preliminary steering
committee, composed of people whom we trust.
With that suggestion in mind, let me mention a few
of the particular cases that seem to us to arise. Mr.
Hanlon raised the question of power a little while ago
and indicated—l think very properly —that there was
a great need for a conference on this question in order
that we might know where we are going and what we
are getting at. I made no secret of my own view that,
while power is vital and our deficiency of power is per-
haps the greatest of all our operative physical deficien-
cies, we ought not merely to say that any proposal that
will produce power some day is, therefore, a good one.
If we really believe that we have some time limit, I
think that we must concentrate upon projects that are
urgent and can give us the power that we need, or a
large portion of it, in the stipulated time. It might be
that some power scheme could be re-arranged so that a
section of it will bear fruit while work on another
section proceeds more slowly or is postponed. Each
State Government has some expert officer dealing with
the subject of power generation. It is true that in
recent times the Premiers have been claiming that the
Commonwealth has been stealing some of their experts
—I have heard Mr. Casey defend us against that charge
more than once —but surely we can, between us, produce
seven officers who can sit down together and discuss the


problem of power, having been instructed that neither
fear, favour nor affection is to be shown and that indi-
vidual cases must be treated on their merits. They
would be men of skill and uprightness and good Aus-
tralians. I think that, as the result of the establishment
of machinery of that kind, we should quickly achieve
some good results and that some very valuable sugges-
tions for improvement would he made. Those men
would know the facts and would not have to conduct
years of research into the matters they were considering.
With regard to transportation, if I were the Premier
of a State, I should be looking at my own railway
system and saying that it was hideously run down and
required a vast expenditure of men and materials, hut
if we devoted ourselves only to rehabilitating our own
railway systems we should go grievously short of some-
thing else that we needed. I have no doubt that each
Premier has had to look at the railway system of his
State with a degree of selectivity and to ask himself
what were the jobs that need most urgently to be done.
Let me give an example. The question is asked, “ Why
do you not produce more open-cut coal in New South
Wales or Queensland? It is available”. The difficulty
of getting the coal out of the ground would be by
no means insuperable, but the problem of transporting
the coal to points of delivery would be a difficult one.
Mr. McGirr would say, very properly, “ If I am to be
in a position to transport this coal, I must rehabilitate
certain railway lines, improve my rolling-stock and
get diesel locomotives. As he knows, we have had
transactions upon that matter. Fortunately, because
of the dollar loan, some of those things have been made
materially easier to do. I have in mind a panel of
transport experts, not looking at every transportation
proposal in Australia and saying, “ They are all lovely
and ought all to he done at the same time ”, hut deciding
which of them has an immediate and intimate hearing
upon the two problems of equipping the country for
war and strengthening its economy in order that it
could withstand the strain of a war. I should like to
see a body of top-level State and Commonwealth
officers set up to deal with the question of transporta-
tion.
In reply to a very natural query that Mr. McDonald
raised in correspondence not long ago, I say that I
am not contemplating some wretched thing like a
royal commission that would occupy the time of officers
and go round asking questions. We want people who
know the relevant facts in their own States.
Let us take the next problem, which hears heavily
upon the problem of excessive private investment
demand. This investment demand is exerting tre-
mendous pressure upon our currency and everything
else in Australia. The States, having the machinery
and the experience, are abundantly qualified to deal
with the problem of the control of factory and other
buildings. I do not desire to butt in on that problem,
but I believe that, as a result of the very careful expert
assistance that we are getting from the National
Security Resources Board —which is not a representa-
tive body but consists of individuals who have been
selected because of their particular experience, includ-
ing persons like Mr. Kemp, who is famous throughout
Australia as an authority on his own line of country —
we should be in a position to indicate various directions
in which we thought building ought to be encouraged or
discouraged.
We shall bring it into the pool of knowledge. We
cannot control the matter except, in a limited and
indirect way, by restricting capital issues and by
imposing similar limitations. I should like a committee
to be appointed to control building and materials. I
know that once we have agreed on the broad principles
and have established effective co-operation, every State
will be delighted to fit itself into the general pattern
that lias been agreed upon after proper discussion.
Then we shall all bo operating on a national plan. If
some individual approaches a State government for
authority to erect some building that will not be of
any value to the defence effort, the Government of his
State will be in the happy position, when it withholds
permission, of knowing that all other State governments
are doing likewise.
Mr. COSGROVE. —I suppose that a similar check
will be kept upon the defence chiefs?
Mr. MENZIES. —I am glad that you mentioned that
matter. Let me say at once that I do not accept the
proposition that merely because a building project
is labelled as a defence work it should be beyond
examination. Of couse, it may be necessary to limit
and to shorten the examination of such a project
because of its nature. .However, I can assure the con-
ference that all projects, whether or not they are
regarded as defence works, will be subject to proper
examination in order to decide whether they are really
necessary. After all, it is well known that defence
authorities are quite capable of wasting money.
Two matters that are of tremendous importance
to our economy and our defence preparedness are the
end-use of materials, and control of prices. In con-
nexion with the end-use of materials, I point out at
once that, so far as the members of my Government
know, the Commonwealth has not, the constitutional
power to regulate the end-use of materials. We cannot
dictate to the end-users of materials just to what use,
and in what form, they shall apply materials. State
governments may possess the legal power to do so, but,
in any event, if State governments make available
freely the services and advice of persons experienced in
such matters we may be able to exercise some effective
control over the end-use of materials. The ability
to exercise such control may be very important at a
vital stage of war preparation. For instance, the
preparation of foodstuffs is dependent upon the supply
of tinplate, and if a sufficient supply of tinplate is not
available our commodity production effort may bo
paralysed. Again, consider the end-use of credit, which
is a matter that I have discussed in two major countries
overseas. Hire purchase, time payment and similar
schemes play a very considerable part in aggravating-
inflation. The Commonwealth can exercise some con-
trol over the operation of such schemes. It can do so
by the control of credit through the central bank,
which issues directions to the trading banks on credit
policy, and it can also restrict, to some extent, the
activities of persons who desire to raise capital through
public companies and by other means for projects that
have no defence or economic value. However, I stress
the fact that it is impracticable for the Commonwealth
to exercise any real control even in such matters unless
there is uniformity of view between the Commonwealth
and the State authorities.
I propose to say something now concerning prices
control. That subject is related to the defence effort,
because all unnecessary expenditure of the financial
resources of the country must diminish our real
economic strength. Furthermore, the existence of a
stable economy is vitally important to the contentment
and vigour of the community. Mr. Playford will
remember that I met and discussed this matter with
him and various State Ministers administering price
control towards the end of last year. On that occasion
we agreed that we should appoint an officer of my
department to act as a liaison officer with the State
Prices Ministers. The Commonwealth authorities have
given considerable thought to the matter of prices
control, and, quite frankly, wo are at present uncertain
in our views on it. At the moment we do not know
exactly what constitutional powers we possess in the
field of defence preparedness. For example, we do not


know the exact nature of our constitutional power to
deal with the Communists; but we shall know in due
course. However, my colleagues and I believe that if
the present state of international tension continues,
or worse still, increases, we shall have to lay claim to
the right to exercise certain legislative powers, and to
allow' our supposed powers to be tested in the courts.
We have in mind the introduction of a measure to
authorize general defence preparations, which will lay
claim to a number of intermediate powers and will also
provide for taking a number of intermediate steps. I
mention that matter now not as an alternative to
co-operation between the Commonwealth and the
States, but merely as an indication of our intentions
and of the attention that we have given to this matter.
I repeat, however, that the necessary controls can be
exercised effectively only if we obtain the maximum
co-operation from the States. As a result of that
co-operation we shall be able to discover jointly what
steps should be taken, and w r e shall then attempt to
implement those proposals by legislation.
Prices control has been exercised by the States
for some time. The Commonwealth possesses legal
authority to exercise such control within its territory.
Undoubtedly, the path of political prudence does not
indicate that it is always advisable to intrude in
matters in respect of which a government’s constitu-
tional powers are doubtful. Bearing that fact in
mind, we have given considerable thought to the whole
subject of prices control. Let me emphasize once again
the sincerity of our desire for a genuine co-operative
effort. Co-operation means giving as well as taking,
and w r e are prepared to give. The Commonwealth has
decided that it should appoint some one to assist the
States in the administration of prices control. We
have further decided that we should appoint, not an
officer of my department, but an individual who
possesses considerable knowledge and experience of the
administration of prices control. The person selected
will act as Commonwealth Prices Consultant. I can
reveal that the Government is contemplating appoint-
ing Mr. McCarthy, the present Chairman of the Tariff
Board, who administered prices control when it was
a Commonwealth function. Mr. McCarthy has had
long and intimate experience of the administration of
prices control. Indeed, when that control was first
instituted he was appointed Secretary of the Prices
Commission. We have in mind that the Common-
wealth Prices Consultant should act closely with State
price-fixing authorities. We consider that that official
should function as a centre of reference for all matters
concerned with the administration of prices control.
1 know, of course, that under the present arrangement
it may be necessary for a State Prices Minister to deal
with as many as twelve Commonwealth Ministers before
arriving at finality, or obtaining action, in a particular
matter. We desire to eliminate all such circumlocution
by setting up a kind of clearing house through which
all Commonwealth departmental activities' that might
affect prices will have to pass.
The proposed Commonwealth Prices Consultant will
keep in view all current subsidies and advise us from
time to time on their counter-inflationary efficacy.
He will collaborate for that purpose with the Treasury,
and will co-ordinate in advance administrative plans
that may affect prices. The appointment of such an
official should ensure that if, and when, war occurs
prices control in this country will not have to start
from scratch. I particularly desire to emphasize that
the appointment of a Commonwealth prices consultant
would assist the State governments. He will be in a
position—and I attach particular importance to this—
to advise the Commonwealth whether any legislative or
administrative action is necessary to fill gaps in the
existing price control structure. Prom time to time
State Premiers have had occasion to speak to me about
action taken by Commonwealth departments that cuts
across effective prices control. Unfortunately, I must
admit that in some instances considerable delay has
occurred in rectifying the cause of complaint. The
appointment of a Commonwealth prices authority
should do a great deal to make prices control effective.
State governments may find that loopholes in their
legislation could be effectively closed by the passage of
certain legislation by the Commonwealth Government.
They would consult our expert, who, from his fund
of expert knowledge and intimate acquaintance with
such problems throughout Australia, would be able to
suggest the most effective method of closing the gap.
lie would act as a liaison officer between Common-
wealth and State departments. Immediately on his
appointment he could act as a link between State
Prices Ministers and the Commonwealth Minister for
Commerce and Agriculture.
Mr. McGlßß.—Would the Commonwealth Prices
Consultant be empowered to make recommendations
concerning the payment of subsidies on such com-
modities as meat?
Mr. MENZIES. —Yes. That is the type of matter
that he would watch very closely. The position calls
for a top-line man, and, as I have already said, we con-
template appointing Mr. McCarthy to it. Another
function of the Commonwealth Prices Consultant
would be to keep under the notice of the State price-
fixing authorities any matter that might affect the
Commonwealth’s defence plans. The consultant would
also be expected to place at the disposal of the State
prices authorities the whole store of his administrative
knowledge. I have no doubt that Mr. McCarthy knows
very intimately the officers who are at present carrying
out this work for the State governments, and equally
I have no doubt that he would be able to obtain the
maximum co-operation from them.
Mr. MCDONALD.—I take it, Mr. Prime Minister,
that you accept the principle of the desirability of
continuing prices control, and that you also accept the
possibility of it being extended to cover almost all
commodities, and particularly those related to the
defence effort ?
Mr. MENZIES.—That is so. I .am now directing
my mind to ways and means of making that control
more effective—assuming, of course, that the present
distribution of constitutional powers between the
Commonwealth and the States continues.
Mr. McGlßß.—Have you considered subsidies?
Mr. MENZIES.—Yes, The individual appointed
as Commonwealth Prices Consultant would be called
upon to give advice on subsidies.
Mr. McDONALD. —It is important for the govern-
ments of the States and the people in the States to
know that your view is that price control should be
continued and that it is possible that it should be
widened to include almost all commodities. I think
that your assurance on that point would almost cover
the position.
Mr. MENZIES.—Since we are living in a period of
scarcity of certain materials and particularly since we
are living in a time of emergency such as I have
described to the conference, the value of prices control
cannot be dismissed by describing prices control as
being merely a price-recording mechanism. Of course,
at the same time, I believe that prices control cannot be
made effective unless we include all the other types of
controls to which I have referred. I accept the pro-
position that prices control by the States should con-
tinue, and I express the view of the Commonwealth
Government by saying that we are prepared to make
that control effective and to assist the States in filling
in any gaps in the existing machinery.


I suggest that there should he an immediate discus-
sion between a number of top-line officers of the
Commonwealth and the States, who could form what is
called in some countries, a “ steering committee ”.
This preliminary committee would advise what com-
mittees should be established to deal with specific
matters.
When those committees have been established and
we find, as I am sure we shall in the right atmosphere,
that they are producing good results and bringing
harmony into the efforts that we are all making to
attack these problems, the Premiers and the Prime
Mlinister should he constituted as. a National Security
Council which should meet regularly, not to consider
matters that are normally the subject of gatherings
such as this, but to receive and consider progress reports
and, where necessary, to lay down the policy having
regard to what has been ascertained. I do not place
before you a cast-iron proposition. I do not want you
to feel that you have come here to consider ready-made
ideas. I suggest that we take these three steps; First,
discussion between high-level officers; secondly, estab-
lishment of individual machinery in the various groups,
such as power, transport, &c.; and, thirdly, the estab-
lishment of a National Security Council, on the lines
I have suggested, to consider matters of policy. I
believe that the establishment of such machinery would
not only be intrinsically useful but wmuld also be clear
evidence that we regard this problem as a real one
which we are determined to confront together.
Mr. HANLON. —Mr. Lyons, when his Government
was preparing its approach to the last war, contem-
plated making the State governments the construction
executives for the Commonwealth in order to avoid
overlapping and duplication of work. Nothing came
of the proposal, and in all the military construction
work that followed, two construction authorities
operated in each State. A vast body was set up by the
Commonwealth Government, and the States had their
own organizations, with the result that there was a
colossal overlapping of work. I am sure that if each
Premier on the proposed national security council
undertook to give due priority to war and defence
construction, duplication would be avoided.
Mr. MENZIES.—I think that there is a good deal
of force in the argument against overlapping of
activities. That is one of twenty things I have
sought to avoid in the machinery that I have generally
indicated. If seven persons sit down to discuss ques-
tions of power and transport, for example, they will
very soon come to conclusion that it is of no use for
two of them to. fight each other for resources and that
their efforts must be rationalized.
Sitting suspended from 3.55 to I h ls p.m.
Mr. MENZIES. —I suggest that each of the
Premiers should consider whom he would like to repre-
sent him on the preliminary committee. I shall do
likewise. I should like to have your nominations
within say, three or four days.
Mr. McDONALD. —The proposal as I understand
it is that there will be several committees.
Mr. MENZIES.—Yes. The preliminary committee
will advise you which committees are necessary to deal
with vital matters. Nominees should be persons who
have a broad outlook on the problem with which we are
confronted and who know the departmental organiza-
tion of the States that they represent. The preliminary
committee could determine quickly what committees
should be set up to deal with specific matters.
Mr. HANLON. —That would not cut across the work
of the National Security Resources Board, would it?
Mr. MENZIES.—No. That body advises us on
the general problem. The results of its investigation 3
will be made available to the various committees that
arc to be constituted in accordance with the proposal
now under consideration. I may add that, should any-
thing of value emerge from time to time, we should
be happy to let the State Premiers know of it.
Mr. McDONALD.—I gather that you also propose
that a National Security Council should he formed con-
sisting of yourself ami the Premiers.
Mr. MENZIES. —Yes, at some later stage, provided
the scheme is acceptable and is working satisfactorily.
Mr. McDONALD. —In the meantime, you want each
of the States to nominate one person for appointment to
the preliminary committee which will consider the
necessity for the establishment of other committees to
deal with specific problems and will determine the
machinery that is to be used ?
Mr. MENZIES. —Yes. The preliminary committee
will be merely an ad hoc body which will recommend
the type of machinery that is required. It will then go
out of existence.
Mr. HANLON. —The preliminary committee will
have information supplied to it by the National
Security Resources Board ?
Mr. MENZIES.—Yes.
Mr. MoGIIHI.—I take it that the matters to be
considered by the steering or preliminary committee
will include those discussed this afternoon, such as the
introduction by the Commonwealth of legislation to
deal with excess profits.
Mr. MENZIES. —No. The committee will concern
itself with recommending procedure. It will decide the
matters on which it considers co-operative action
between the Commonwealth and the States to be
necessary, and will recommend the type of machinery
that should be established to deal with such matters.
Eor instance, in relation to electric power, the com-
mittee will probably recommend the formation of a
special committee consisting of power experts from
each State and from the Commonwealth. It would
be a waste of time to discuss details at this conference.
The preliminary committee will advise the Common-
wealth and the States on the question of the necessary
machinery.
Mr. McGIRR. —It will consist of a nominee from
each State and one from the Commonwealth
Mr. MENZIES. —Yes, but they will not address them-
selves to individual problems. They will merely
recommend w-hat committees should be established and
how they should set about their task. If there is
general agreement on this matter we can leave it at this
stage. I should like to have the names of the State
nominees within the next few days.
Mr. McGIRR. —I take it that the proposal that the
Premiers and the Prime Minister should form a
National Security Council will be left in abeyance until
the Premiers have had an opportunity to consult their
governments on it,
Mr. MENZIES. —Yes. Let us get our steering com-
mittee appointed immediately so that it can formulate
some ideas on what machinery is required. If we find
that the scheme works, as I am sure it will, I propose
that the recommendations of the steering committee
should go to the National Security Council constituted
by the Prime Minister and the Premiers. Naturally,
I do not ask for an immediate decision on the appoint-
ment of the latter body because I feel that you, like
myself, wall want to see how things go.
Mr. McGIRR.—The establishment of such a council
is a matter that I should have to discuss with my
Cabinet.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —The appointment of a senior
officer by the Commonwealth to collaborate with the
States on prices control will be welcomed by the State


Prices Ministers. We liave felt for some time that
prices control can be carried out effectively only in close
collaboration with the Commonwealth. There will be
a conference of Prices Ministers in the near future
and I should like to know whether it would be possible
to arrange for the Commonwealth officer to be present.
I understand that the conference is to be held on the
6th April.
Mr. McGIEH.—You could give him an indication of
the Commonwealth’s policy on the question of subsidies
to keep down the prices of necessary commodities.
Mr. MENZIES. —I shall arrange for the Common-
wealth officer to be present at the next meeting. He
will be constantly in touch with me and with the
Government on matters of policy.
DATE OE NEXT MEETING.
Resolved —
That the proposed conference of Common wealth and State
Ministers to discuss Commonwealth and State financial rela-
tions be held on Monday and Tuesday the 9th and 10th April,
1931.
At Jj.,25 p.m. the conference concluded.
Authority: L. P. Johnston, Commonwealth Governn.uc.l i'l inter, (.uni en a.
