







COPYRIGHT RESERVED.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
’Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne- 1933), 1929- 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8782
CONFERENCE
of
REPRESENTATIVES OF MISSIONS, SOCIETIES, AND
ASSOCIATIONS INTERESTED IN THE WELFARE OF
ABORIGINALS TO CONSIDER THE REPORT AND
RECOMMENDATIONS SUBMITTED TO THE COHMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENT BY J. W. BLEAKLEY ESQ. ,
Convened by
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOME AFFAIRS OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
(Hon. C.L.A. Abbott, M.P.)
Held in
MASONIC HALL, COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
on
FRIDAY, 12th APRIL, 1929.
REPORT OF DEBATES
(By the Reporting Branch, Attorney-General’s Department).
The Conference met at 10.30 a.m.
Present:
Hon. C.L.A. Abbott, Minister for Home Affairs,
(In the Chair).
Mr. P. E. Dean, Secretary, Department of Home Affairs.
Mr. J. Carrodus, Chief Clerk, Department of Home Affairs.
Mr. D. Chapman, Private Secretary to Minister for Home
Affair s.
Mr. G. J. Edwards, Northern Territory Lessees’ Assn.
Mr. H. E. Thonemann, Northern Territory Lessees' Assn.
Rev. J. W. Burton, M.A., Methodist Missionary Society of
Australia.
M r. Morley, Association for Protection of Native Races of
Australasia and Polynesia.
Rev. J. S. Needham, Australian Board of Missions, Sydney.
Rev. J. H. Sexton , Aborigines Friends Association (Inc.),
South Australia
1-2/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
’Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’? 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
• R * a x. Holden, Method ist Inland Mission, Melbourne.
Pastor J. Riedel, Chairman, Fir.keRiver Mission, Central /t-
Australia. •
Rev. Abbott Catalan, of Western Australia. /1 '
jjj S , w. lernent Cooke, Women's Non-Party f ,
South Australia and the Australian Federation
of Women Voters- , T . .
■Rev. John Jones, Australian Board of Missions. /-
jtrs. James, Victorian Women’s Citizea Movement, and \
Australian Federation of Women Voters.
. Mrs. Jones, Victorian Women 1 s Citizen Movement, and )
Australian federation of Women "Voters.
*Rev. Mgr. King, R.C. Relegate from oydney.j
/Rev. Fleming, R.C. Relegate from Sydney, j *
✓-Rev. Creagh, R.C, Relegate from Sydney. /
, A. E. Gerard, South Australian Council of United /***
Australian Aboriginal Mission. ' •
-Rev. Kellaway, Church Missionary Society, Melbourne. S
"Rev, Thornburgh. Church Missionary Society, Melbourne. \ 5 v
"Mr. Perriman, Church Missionary Society, Melbourne. /
"Rev. H. G. Hinsby 5 Church Missionary Society,
/Rev. Eddy, National Missionary Council of Australia. \ _
✓'Rev. Sitripendorfer, National Missionary Council of Aust.V
ARev. Thompson, National Missionary Council of Austidia./
J. G-. Genders, Aborigines r Protection League of
South Australia. . f
✓'Rev. R. C. Nicholson, Methodist foreign Mission, o.A. / m-
H. Rotherham, United Aborigines' Mission,
/'Mr. P. Graham, United Aborigines' Mission, Melbourne,
/Miss Mathews, Goulburn Island Mission. \ R.*/
/Mr. H. E. Read, Goulburn Island Mission./' .
/Mrs. Orames, National Council of Women ,^Victoria. , .
✓-Mr. J. C. Je nr* Ison, Anthropological oociety ol Stn. Aaot.A-
Mr. James, Aboriginal Missionary.
THE MINISTERi
. I have the privilege of opening this Conference on _
what is undoubtedly a most important matter. I take true
opportunity of welcoming you to the Conference, and 0..
thanking you for coming here at personal inconvenience. .
am impressed with the number of people who have the welfare
of the aboriginals at heart. There are many difficulties
and perplexities we have to encounter, but I feel very
hopeful that we shall be able to arrive at a right and
proper solution of those difficulties, when I see so many
public spirited people present. V&y I touch, in passing,
on a rather sordid matter, that is, that you have come here
without any expense tothe Department. The* is a
remarkable and, I think, a unique occurrence. _ I think
that this is the first Conference ever called in Australia
by the Minister in charge cf Home Affairs in regard to
North and Central Australia, to discuss the welfare Ou. tne
aboriginals. I must apologise for so suddenly changing
the venue of this meeting, but when we realised that so
many representatives could not be accommodated in the
Cabinet room at the Commonwealth offices, we were able, _
through the courtesy of Hr. Stewart, the secretary ol this
magnificent building, to get this very fine room. I hope
we will be able'to talk about our business in a iree ana
fra.nk manner.
OPENING REMARKS, 12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)% - 1 933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
V/e have come to discuss, in the main, the report of
the Chief rrotector of Aboriginals, Queensland (fr. J.W,
Bleakley), who was appointed last year a Commission to
inquire into the welfare of aboriginals in the Commonwealth
Territories of North and Centre 1 Australia, There are
certain recommendations in his report. Ido not want;to
hold you altogether to the spirit of the report. There are,
perhaps, matters which can be improved, and there are points
on which you have opinions of your own. I have prepared and
had circulated to you an agenda which contains certain
matters which have certainly perplexed me, as the person who
at present is administering the Department, I am sure your
suggestions will be most helpful, V/e have men and women
here of all denominations, who have been in this vast country,
and v/ho have helped to bring relief and elevation to the
blacks, and, for that reason, I think you will be able to
make some very valuable suggestions of which I will advise
the Government, and on which, I hope, we will be able to act,
My belief is that the Commonwealth Government has faced this
problem, and has tried to do a great deal. It has been
criticised in regard to some things, but, in other things,
I think it is entitled to a meed of praise. When v/e took
over the territories of North and Central Australia, the
first thing v/e did was, to lay down an Aboriginals ! Ordinance,
which provides, among other things, for the followings-
(a) the appointment of a Chief Protector and Protectors, v
and a definition of the duties of such offices,'
(if) the declaration of prohibited areas and reserves;
(c) the establishment of Aboriginal Institutions;
(and) the employment of Aboriginals;
(e) the use of firearms by Aboriginals;
(f) the protection and management of the property of
Aboriginals;
(g) the maintenance of half-caste children;
(h) the ill-treatment of Aboriginals;
and
(i) offences against females,
V/e have, therefore, I claim, acknowledged our obligations
in a practical way.
When dealing with, the question of the aboriginals in
Australia as a whole, v/e are met with this difficulty; that
the States deal with matters concerning the aboriginals within
their own State boundaries, while the terrain of the Common-
wealth is the territories of North and Central Australia,
and v/e are faced v/ith a great many problems which are not
applicable to the difficulties confronting the States. Our
problems are very different indeed. There are, in the pages
of the history of Australia, episodes which reflect credit on
nobody; but we .cannot erase the past so v/e must look to the
future with hopeful aspirations for better things to come.
The history of Australia, in connection with the settlement
of this vast area, is very much the same as that of every
Opening Remarks, 12/4/29


Full bloods
Half-castes
South Australia
2,615
1,565
Victoria
53
607
New South Wales
1,197
6 ,846
Queensland
13.193
4,421
Western Australia
12,597
2,437
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '1933)’? 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8782
country in the world, where settlement has progressed. 'ie
have the slowly advancing tide of resolute white settlers,
and a receding tide of natives, sullen and naturally r^° en
ful. That position has been the same in Africa, America,
Australia, and the Pacific. We have had massacres and ill-
treatment, and there has been the same trouble, wnere abo-
riginals were concerned, all over the world. I say it
quite frankly, these things end in the same way - in the
domination by the whites. We then get the problem ox trie
half-castes, and the demoralisation of the native races, anm
a certain amount of degradation of those races. We are
not concerned with what has happened in the past; v/ a we
want to do is to make things better for the future.
I come now to my own peculiar problems in the administ-
ration of North and Central Australia. Those two terntor-
ies - which I intend to visit in June next -comprise an
enormous tract of country. In the two territories there
are approximately 524,000 square miles, and, of tnis aiea,
276,000 square miles are unalienated, and unoccupied by any
white settlers whatever. We have set apart in that area
approximately 30,000 square miles as an aboriginal reserve,
and, for the purpose of comparison* that area is a lit vie
larger than the State of Tasmania. I think^ it canbe
claimed, therefore,, that, at present, a fair amount
of land, v/here the aboriginal can carry on in his wild fc'a c,
untrammelled by the demoralisation which always comes with
the advance of civilisation.
So far as can be ascertained, the total aboriginal
population of both territories is 21,000 including 800
half-castes. I have here a very fine puhlicatl on, the
reoort of the Aborigines' Friends' Association of oouth
Australia, and, from that document, I have taken the figures
of a census of the aboriginal population of the whole
Australia, I have no doubt these figures are authoritative,
and, in the main, they bear out the ligures prepared by my
Department. The figures are as follows
Altogether that means that, including the Commonwealth
Territories, there are in Australia spproximately 50,000 lull
bloods, and 17,000 half-castes. It seems to me that the
problems the Commonwealth Government has to face in Worth and
Central Australia are almost id entical with the problems
that have to be faced by the State of Western Australia. I n
our territories, and in the north-west of Western Australia,
there are wild nomadic tribes which exist nowhere else in
Australia, and, therefore, I hope we will be able to arrive -
as far as the nomadic tribes are concerned - at a solution
which can be carried out by the Commonwealth in conjunction
with the State of Western Australia, because it seems that we
can work on the same basis. Coming to the other States -
that is not in my domain at all, but I mention it in passing
one finds a different set of problems altogether. In Queens-
land, where I have lived, the aboriginals are almost absorbed
Opening Remarks. 12/A-/2 9


General
Expend i ture
Mis si on
Subsidies
Total
North Australia
£3,261
£1,575
£4,836
Central Australia
£2,706
£4-00
£3,106
£7,942
Department of the Interior. Correspondence Sin |£* ■ Number SerleS '
■Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933) , 1929 - ’933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
■by cattle stations, but the half-caste problem is ever
increasing. It is the experience of my Department that,
although there are fewer half-castes than full-blood abo-
riginals, the problem of the half-castes is much greater.
That is one of the matters regarding which I ask for your
advice and suggestions.
About the time Mr. Bleakley made his investigations, the
half-caste problem at Alice Springs threatened to be consider-
able. There was a half-caste settlement at Alice Springs,
and the railway was approaching in that direction. The
conditions, I say frankly, were not pleasing, and the scarcity
of water added to our worries. Through the goodness of the
Pinke River Mission, the ailing and infirm blacks were got
out there and looked after. I am thankful to say that,
since Mr. Bleakley made his investigations, we have been able
to establish the half-castes at Jay Creek, 27 miles from
Alice Springs, and other dangers and difficulties, which Mr.
Bleakley feared, have been obviated because there has been
rain and, at present, there is an adequate supply of water.
I do not propose to make a long address to you. I leave
it to you to give me concise facts and suggestions. I wish to
outline a few things before I sit down. I take it that our
main task is this: as a Department we have to secure the
aboriginals from privation, protect their hunting grounds
wherever possible, and relieve sickness and destitution. We
also desire to advance their moral and material welfare. The
Commonwealth Government have been very mindful of their
responsibilities. I have before me the figures of expenditure
on the blacks in North and Central Australia, not counting the
salaries of officers of the Administration who act as Protectors
of Aboriginals and perform other duties connected with abo-
riginal welfare.
During the year 1927*1928, the following amounts were
expended by the Government in connection with the welfare of
aboriginals in North Australia and Central: Australia:-
I do not propose to discuss, and I do not think you will
either, any form of spiritual assistance. I feel from ray own
knowledge of the territories, and from the reports I have read,
that every mission is doing a great deal of valuable work, and
that they cannot he too highly commended for the work carried
on there. I feel, however, that these problems, with which
we are confronted, can only be solved, to a great extent, by
the local men on the spot - men who understand the conditions,
and men of public spirit who are doing their utmost for these
people. But we, as a Government, Iso have the responsibility
of the white settlers, as well as tec responsibility of the
aboriginals, who were the original occupants of the country.
I feel that; in making Australia a great nation, the welfare
of the white settlers must be studied, as well as the welfare
of the aboriginals, I wlll quote an extract from the report
Opening Remarks. 12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Dumber Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CHS A 1 item 33/8?82
of the Aborigines * friends 1 Association, shoving that tht-y
* also have realised the difficulties. In this connection,
although I do not wish to single out anybody, I hrvc always
been impressed by the tremendously valuable work carried out
in Central Australia by the Pinke River Aission. The
following paragraph appears in the last annual report oi the
Aborigines*- Priende V Association •_
"The Association considered it necessary to
provide counsel for the defence of fourteen
prisoners tried at Port Augusta recently for
spearing in the country beyond Oodnadatta. The
natives were found guilty on their own confession,
their plea being "Too much hungry". It is evident to
your Committee that, while doing the best possible for
the prisoners, there is need for sympathy to be
tended to hardworking outback settlers who lose their
stock by the natives spe.-ring them and who have no
redress and cannot do otherwise than appeel to the
•Courts for protection."
That is very true; it also adds to the difficulties we have
to face, and I feel sure you yi ill realise those difficulties
and help me to overcome them.
Prom my experience in Queensland, I say that the natives
make good stockmen and cattlemen; th£ir services are valuable
and, indeed, almost vital to the continuance of the successful
policy of settlement in North and Central Australia. There
is rio doubt that their association with civilisation has
weakened * the grip of the dead hand of the past, which has
kept in existence those dreadful tribal customs which you
know so well are carried on in the north-west of Western
Australia and in the territories of- North Australia and Central
Australia.
• We have asked you to come here, and an agenda has been
prepared of subjects which'we consider, bear most strongly on
tk j welfare- of. the aboriginals. I would say this: No not
waste your eloquence on me; I know the facts, I am convinced
that something must be done for the welfare of the aboriginals,
and why I have ventured to call this Conference together is
to ask you men and women, who’.know the difficulties, to assist
me in arriving at;a solution. I want to hear from you
concrete suggestions. Po not let us go back into criticism.
I may have to refer later to the very severe criticism which
•has been levelled by certain societies on the killing of
seventeen aboriginals in the Territory; but let us get down
to concrete facts, and endeavour to reach a solution.
In conclusion, I would say I have come here today setting
the day apart to listen to ideas and suggestions as to the
future. It may be you would like, to get together during the
Conference and form committees on certain matters, and then
put forward definite suggestions for me to recommend to
Cabinet. I propose to stay for the whole day until four
o’clock, and by then.we will have got down to bedrock with
our facts and suggestions. You will probably form committees
to go into certain .matters, and those committees, I hope, will
send'their considered opinions to me at Canberra. I hope
this Conference will bo fraught with a great deal of valuable
help to the future of the aboriginals of Australia.
Opening Remarks. 12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CHS A 1 item 33/8?82
I now declare the Conference open. The agenda is
as follows
1, Nomadic aboriginals.
2, Aboriginals in employment.
3, Aboriginals camped on Stations.
4, Aboriginals housed in Institutions.
5, Half-castes.
6, Committees,
Do you desire that it bo taken item by item?
HRS. JOHN JONES, J.Pi I suggest that we have one particular section
to deal with women only.
THE MINISTER; That suggestion is not in the agenda, but I will note it.
IBEV. J. H, SEXTON: Under the heading "Nomadic Aborigines 11 is it
intended to deal with the question of Reserves.
THE MINISTERS Yes. Would it be convenient to discuss that aspect
now 7 ?
REV. J. H. SEXTONS I think so. It seems to me that when dealing with
I Nomadic Aborigines, consideration must necessarily b g
to the question of Reserves. These people pass in and out
from Reserves to ordinary territory. The Aborigines
Association of South Australia has given much attention to
this matter and suggested that the Reserves, including t,.0.e
in South Australia, West Australia and Central Australia,
should be treated as one. Sometimes Nomadic Aborigines
are in South Australia's and, sometimes, in West Australian
territory -it depends upon their food supply. 1 with
me a large map which illustrates the position. The natives,
who now live a wandering life, suffer great hardship through
lack of food because kangaroos and emus are getting scarce.
Consequently they seek refuge on cattle stations.
Association thinks that, if this Reserve could b. developed,
sheep or goats could be kept there, with open depots, and
aborigir.es assisted particularly in times of droug .
This provision would prevent law breaking, in the lorn
cattle stealing, which arises when the aborigines are all e .
to go hungry. The people you have referred to in C entral
Australia! with the exception of those at Hermannsburg, are
nomadic and cover hundreds of miles of territory.
THE ICIKXGTER- I suggest that you move a motion along the line.j you
have indicated.
REV. SEXTON: I.moves-
That the three Reserves in Central Australia,
totalling *9,000 square miles, be treated as
one whole, and that the Federal Government be
asked to approach the States of ia
and West Australia with a view to having the
whole developed as one area in the interests o t
the aborigines.
Nomad ic Aboriginals r Reserve
12/4/29 *


Department of the Interior, Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
•Aboriginal v'/elfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8?82
I would like to illustrate the position from the map.
Vi/'e two explorers, who started from Alice Springs, came
across to Western Australia, and traversed around. We
think the three areas concerned could be dealt with as one
proposition; and I know the t is the view of the Protector
of Aborigines in South Australia. In that way, we think
we would be able to deal with the whole of the migratory
tribes. They go right across the whole area up the
McDonell Ranges. The report shows that there is ample food
in the mountains. We think that, if sheep or goats could be
bred there, there need not be much expense connected with the
project, and we would be able to find food for.the natives
in times of drought. We think something should be done to
start a station at Opperine, where there are flowing springs.
It is suggested in Mr. Bleakley’s report that a station be
made at Lake Amadeus, There are other places in the Peterman
Ranges where there is a good supply of water. We suggest
that, in order to utilise this great tract of country to the
best advantage, it should be set apart for the wandering
tribes. We think the others could go to Hermannsburg; the
half-caste is a different problem. We sent two special
explorers there, and expended a large amount of money finding
out the resources of the country.
;iR. A. x, GiIRARD ; Our present South Australian branch has sent two
sets of missionaries through that territory. We have marked
out a large portion of the ground which the aborigines pass
through. As Mr. Sexton says, in that particular territory
(.•here are, at present, not many aborigines gathered. They
are a wandering people and do not settle there. There are
difficulties but they would be largely overcome if that
territory was under one rule. 'Without adding more, I have
much pleasure in seconding the resolution.
LaS, Yv, TERNENT COOKE; Before we carry any resolution on such an
important proposition, I think we should be quite sure that
it will be for the benefit of the natives. We should be
certain that the reserves will be under proper control, if
handed over to the Federal Government. We should be careful
that there will be no exploitation. If there should be a
station, the proceeds should be for the benefit of the aborigin-
es. I have no objection, as a South Australian, to handing
over our portion of the Reserve if it is entirely for the
benefit of the natives.
-R. J. C, JENNISON; The portion that Mrs. Cooke refers to represents
22,600 square miles, I had something to do with that Reserve,
as I originated the idea some years ago. At that time we
proposed that 88,000 square miles should be reserved, and that
proposal was favorably received. It was subsequently cut down,
me first portion was granted by the Commonwealth Government
when Hr. Boynton was Minister. That was followed later by
the gazetting of the strip hp the Western Australian side;
acd later the South Australian Government moved and we acouired
tne square made up by three separate reserves. I support Mr,
Sexton in the proposal that it should be under one control.
If it is in order, I am prepared to move that the control of
the aborigines throughout Australia be handed over to the
Commonwealth Government, and that the States be approached to
that effect’, so that t<he Commonwealth Government may have control,
not merely of those three, but of all the Reserves and of the
management of the Australian aborigines. It would simplify
matters if that were done. Instead of a number of codes and


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8782
regulations, we would have one. If it is in accordance with
the agenda, I would like to move that later. In the mean-
time, I support Mr, Sexton’s motion, although my proposal
would make this motion unnecessary,
THE MINISTER! I think we had "better take the motions one "by one.
UR. J, C. JENNISON: Very well. Opperine Springs is the best site
in that region for a station - not Lake Amadeus,
MRS. COOKS» Should our South Australian portion "be given into the
hands of the Federal authorities, I hope they v/ill not per-
petuate the mistakes made in that territory. At present
there are prospectors’ rights that have "been given to people
in South Australian Reserves; they should "be revoked.
REV. J. RIEDEL. Before I vote on the motion I would like to "be clear.
May I ask Mr, Sexton, through the Minister, under whose
administration the terr it or y wou Id "be? V/hat is going to
he done to the natives? Are they to have food and relief
depots, or schools? What is to he done?
THE MINISTER; You will elaborate the proposition if you bring in >he
different sections now. I suggest that we take the main
motion moved by Mr. Sexton to the Conference. If that be
done, there will be ample time later to debate upon the
various difficulties and objections that may arise. I do
not think we are in a position to cover them at this meeting,
although they could be discussed by the Committees that are
f ormed.
REV, JOHN JONES• Some of us would like to know whether, in case a
reserve of ttiis kind was formed, any private interests would
be allowed, apart from the interests of the blacks concerned?
THE MINISTER: I think the Government would try to exercise control on
the lines of the Indian Reservations in the United States and
Canada,
NR. J. C. GENDERS s I think it is fortunate that there are some areas
in Australia still in the possession of nomadic tribes whi v n
have not been encroached on i« any way by the white population,
because it affords the Commonwealth Government the opportunity
to do, as regards those natives, what should have been done at
the beginning. The initial error made by the Governments was
in allowing the black man’s tribal lands to be overrun, without
assisting him in the transition from an age-long nomadic life
to more settled conditions, by keeping his tribes intact,
finding him agricultural teachers and giving him allpossible
assistance. In connection with this matter, we must remember
th t the day is fast approaching when the natives of Australia
will not be able to live a nomadic life. That is a point w. ich
should have been recognised before we handed over the land of
the natives to the pastoralists and others. Through not
doing that, the result is, having taken and overrun the
country from which these people obtained their food, v/e have
smashed their wonderful tribal systems of government. It
follows that we have de-tribalised and demoralised them and, as
v/e know, large numbers have become diseased. That is the
indictment against Australia today. I heartily support the
motion by Mr. Sexton, but I move an amendment
That taking the aborigine boundaries, we should not
. consider latitude and longitude, but act in
accordance with the land of the aboriginals.
Nomad i <\ Aboriginals .-Reservf


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '1933)’? -
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/S?S2
THE MINISTERi You. mean that we should take the natural configurations
of the land?
.a, GENDERS i Yes, that the land , taking the aboriginal boundaries,
should be allotted in perpetuity to the aborigines, that
they should be allowed to govern it rs far as they are able
with the assistance of teachers and others, and that no
white person be allowed into the territory without a permit,
I move that as an amendment to the motion,
THE MINISTER; I suggest you move that as a separate motion, rather
than confuse the issue now before us,
liR, Gr.KND.diRS I think the resolution raises all sorts of questions on
the matter of development, which should be left to the .
aboriginals.
THE V/e must remember Mrs. Beeton’s recipe, "First catch
your hare".
R. GENDERS 1 I take it that I will not be debarred from moving the
amendment later as a motion?
’ THE MINISTERS Nou
IfR. GENDERS. In those circumstances, I have much pleasure in supporting
the motion moved by Mr. Sexton.
HIE MINISTERS You have heard the motion which has been proposed and
seconded, and I now put it to the meeting,
CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY,
RnV. CReAGEj Is it proposed to define what a "reserve" will mean, and
exactly v/hat v/ill be included in the term?
THE MINISTER •» w e have defined "reserve" in our ordinances as land set
apart for aboriginals only, that is that they are the pro-
prietors of that land.
CREAGH: That does not define any rights to them,
Tliu, MINISTER, No, We could not define rights. I think the whole
question would rest upon the administration of the paramount-
authority,
REV, CREAGH 1 I take it that v/ould be the Government.
I THE MINISTERS Yes, or whatever form was decided the administration
should take,
[MiSS MATHEWS s I suggest that the reserves be called sanctuaries.
Naturalists now have sanctuaries lor native animals, and
birds, and Ido not see why there should not be sanctuaries
for the aborigines. Ihey v/ould be places of protection and
refuge for tnese people. They should not be f creed to
them, but I think they should have places they could
go to ±or protection and in which they could make their homes,
p SV * ABBOTT CATALANi Would all the natives in Western Australia have
to go to the place set aside as a reserve?
m MINISTERS I take' it you desire to know whether, if a main reserve
Nomadic Aboriginals ~ Reserves,
12/4/29.


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File, Annual Single Number Series,
‘Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)' » 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CHS A 1 item 33/57&2
were fixed, the reserves in the States would disappear?
REV. ABBOTT CATALANS That is the purport of rny question.
THE MINISTER? I should not think those reserves would go, hut that
would he a matter for the States concerned.
REV„ ABBOTT CATALANI take it that it is not proposed to assemble in
the one reserve all the natives of the Commonwealth?
THE MINISTER: No. Mr, Genders, I will now take your motion.
MR . GENDERS i I move:-
That to the nomadic tribes who still have their
tribal governments intact, land, taking the
aboriginal boundaries, be allotted in perpetuity,
and that they be allowed to govern it as far as
they are able with the assistance of teachers and
others, and that no white person be allowed in
the territory without a permit.
I would like it to be understood thet I mean this to apply
to all nomadic tribes who have their governments still intact.
I can .produce evidence from a number of quarters pointing out
that the present reserves are not satisfactory. In connect-
ion with the central Australian reserves, I think it is
fortunate that Mr. Sexton moved that they be united into one
reserve, as that will me?~n a more strict supervision. X
understand that miners' rights were issued by the South
Australian Government over the portion of the land allotted
by that Government for the natives. That is something
which is absurd 5 the country should be for the natives only.
MR. JENNISON: But those rights were not used.
MR. GENDERS• We have taken away the land from the aborigines, and now
it is due to us to give them back some of it. We know that
the aborigine will have to change his present form of nomadic
life, and we cannot allow him to have the whole of Australia
over which to roam, but the area in which he can roam must be
reasonable. That is what is intended by the motion, that
certain areas should be handed over in perpetuity to the
aborigines, and that they be given opportunity to work out
their destiny in their own way, I think past experience
shows that our system of control has been it is
time v/e recognised that we cannot take over an intelligent
people and tell them how to run their own business. They
know how to do that better than we.
MRS. COOKS; I have pleasure in seconding the motion.
REV. BURTON• A point I wish to make is that I do not think it wise for
us to bind ourselves in perpetuity. All sorts of things may
happen in the future regarding these people, and we may find
ourselves hampered if v/e make reserves in perpetuity. I
think all that is required is that the reserves be made for
an indefinite time.
THE MINISTER* I did not interrupt Mr. Genders, because he v/as criticising
a matter for which my Government is not responsible, and was
dealing with the general question. I think in a case like this
Nomadic Aboriginals - Reserves
12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933) \ 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
tnis speakers are at liberty to mention matters which, are
extianeous from my point of view, and I think the point now
taken is a sound one. 7e must not make the thing tight for
ail time as that will mean we will have, as I mentioned before,
the dead hand of the past reaching out to us o The motion by
Mr# Genders has been seconded by Mrs. Cooke.
RiW. CREACH 2 Is it possible to have a State within a State governed
na^ives ’ • Genders’ motion seems to point that
THE MINISTER: I take it you do not want to bind the Conference to the
creation of a State for the natives?
REV. CRRAGH; That is so. if it were in perpetuity, I think it '
would mean the establishment of such a State.
MI. ROTHERHAM! In my opinion, the motion means that we are goln* to
th , e power of self-government to the aborigines, and
Lprovfment 0 or Ot d On d ° GS f Gf?r t 0 teachers ’ 1 cannot see’what
be allow-ri to advancement will occur if the natives are to
in the past! themselves in the manner adopted by them
HR. GiIRDERS ; I shall amend my motion slightly. The proposed tribal
community could be a State, noA State sLth
within a°Stto UStr m ll n ° r Western Australia, but a territory
Federal .1 ,f hSt 18 merel y a change of name. In the'
trj ; these reserves would be States, but in the
-hti'i !+ ey would be territories within those States. I
snail alter my motion as follows;-
That nomadic tribes, still with their tribal
ni -? ntS n n land ' takirj g the aboriginal boundaries,
o ?J 0uld allotted in perpetuity, and that they
should be allowed to govern that land, as far as
ey are able, with the assistance of a government
resident and teachers and that no white person be
allowed into the territory without a permit.
Leaeue ’ that iB «ie least which can be
done fox the aborigines. I repeat that this presents an
begin! , d ,° what should hav e been done in the
thfv wilf'hP I! 1 ". ma ! n feature in the proposal is that
-y r.i LI be allowed to continue their age-long tribal customs.
'HE MISTER! Before putting the motion to the meeting, I wish to state
that, while there are many admirable things in the motion I
think you are a little ahead of your time, Mr. Genders. ’
GEjJDERSj It could be started in a very small way.
* EllilSTE ?' , J Sy B tfte»ent is influenced by the fact that I feel that
ix your motion is put to the meeting, it is doubtful if u
/il! bfc earned, I suggest that this matter be referred to
ne of tne committees rather than that v/e should take uo tht
time of the Conference in dealing with it. In addition mv
own time is limited and I want you to assist me with the
questions which directly concern me rather than to deal with
the big general questions which must be considered bv suWonpnt
conferences. I want to deal with the portions affecting mv
Department, as outlined in Mr. Bioakley's report. For that
reason, I suggest you withdraw the motion and ask that it be
Nomadic Aboriginals ~ Reserves
12/4/29 o


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’, 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CHS A 1 item 33/8?82
considered by a committee which can be appointed to deal
with questions arising out of the matter of making reserves.
iR. GENDERS. I must at once adopt your suggestion, Sir, and I will be
content for you to hand my motion over to the committee for
considerat ion.
THE MINISTERS Is it the pleasure of the Conference that this motion be
withdrawn and subsequently handed over to the committee which
is to be appointed?
CARRIED t
REV. HINSBY • I moves.-
That this Conference moves the adoption of the
suggestion by Mr. Bleakley in reference to
Arnhem Land Reserve, on page 34 of his report,
and I would also add, if it meets with' the
approval of our Roman Catholic friends, that the
suggestion in regard to Melville Island Reserve
also be adopted.
DR. PEHRIMAN: I second that motion. As Mr. Bleakley has put it in
his report, it would be very acceptable for the blacks and
the cause with which we are all sympathetic.
m. JE UNISON, I would point out that the suggested plan leaves out the
Peninsula, and a certain amount of the coast down to
the Lutneran Mission, I presume it is intended to exclude
that portion.
xHE MINISTER. I think, the best thing for us to do rs to approve of
the general principle to reserve all of Arnhem Land,
HR. JERRISONs You are not dealing with the details at present.
THE MINISt ERs No * We wish to have your opinions on the motion, as to
the practicabilities. It is obvious that we could not take
a citraight line for the boundary,
JENNISON: I support the motion.
-OU LORLEY; It appears to me that the Commonwealth Government is
practically committed to this recommendation from its dealings
with the matter. Some time ago our Association wrote to Sir
Neville Bowse in regard to the question, asking that the whole
of tms land should be reserved. The reply received was that
such a reserve had been set apart and, before any further
question of white settlement was dealt with, the remainder of
,f area would be considered, and no leases would be issued
which would interfere with the probable requirements of the
natives, I strongly support the recommendation by Mr. Bleakley.
®. G. ,r, EDWARDS s My Association has considered the proposal for the
making of Arnhem Land into a reserve, and agrees not as to the
wnole of; it but in regard to a selected area, v/hich, I see, is
practically what Mr. Bleakley has reported. He wants to take
the unalienated portion and create a reserve there} our
Association agrees to that. We have not considered the
question of icolville Island, The two cases are no-t parallel.
Arnnem Land -is Crown land, but Melville Island, being alienated
many years ago, presents quite a different problem.
womadic Aboriginals - Reserves.
12/4/29.


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series
ioongxnal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’♦ 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
jij-j Llljloi-iiK• I know that it presents difficulties in the way of
compensation, and that sort of thing, hut, if we adopt the
general principle of having a reserve there, we can finalise
the details subsequently,
KBV. BURTON! % Association is interested in this particular area,
and I would like to know, if it is to be permanently
reserved, whether miners' rights, or oil prospecting rights,
or any other such rights, will be granted. We received a
grant from the Government for our work, put down our plant,
and had hardly got it working when an oil lease was granted.
Ihe oil people erected their plant right at our front door,
and it was not possible for us to continue our operations.
The oil plant has now gone out of exist ence'but we want to
be assured of some permanency in the matter. lam not
asking that we be granted protection in perpetuity, but I
submit it is unfair that, v/hen a Missionary Society spends a
great deal of money, it should have the whole of its work
dislocated. Is it the intention to exclude mining and oil
prospecting rights from this country?
THA MINISTERS I cannot answer that question offhand. However, I
realise your point and the difficulties in that regard. I
will make a very strong recommendation to the Government in
connection with the matter.
MOTION CARRIED.
REV. RIEDEL; I move;-
That,the suggestion by Mr* Bleakley in regard to*
tiic Lakc Amadeus Reserve, page 33 of his report,
be accepted.
THE MINISTERS I suggest you move that it be approved by this Conference
and the recommendation forwarded to the Government.
Ri5V. RIEDEL: I have much pleasure in doing that. We are particularly
interested in this area and the adjoining country, and it
will naturally be in our favour if the reserve be established.
THE MINISTER! I take it that you move that the suggested Mission at
Lake Amadeus Reserve be approved by this Conference and
recommended to the Government for consideration.
KBV. RIEDEL; Yus.
-CR. LOR LEY; I second the motion.
MOTION CARRIED.
rev. SEXTON! We have agreed to the resolution that the whole of the
reserves mentioned should be made, and I take it that we
will not now deal with questions concerning the administration
of those areas?
1
jJNISTERi The position is that we have expressed a favorable
attitude, toward the recommendations by Hr. Bleakley, but
detailed discussions on these matters would really be in
legard to -something which may or may not occur, as the whole
subject depends on the acquiescence of the States concerned.
Administration of Areas.
12/4/29.


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933) 1 , 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
SEKTON; fix r Bleakley has made certain suggestions in regard to
the work of different societies in the reserves, hut, in
the administration of these areas, the Government will have t
he considered in some respects, and, therefore, I think it woi
he better for us to keep on the safe side hy not dealing with
questions of administration for the present.
TUB MINISTER; Shall we put it this way; that Conference does not
commit itself to a definite statement in regard to these
matters?
RE/, RIEDEL; You will remember, Sir, that I raised a question at
the beginning of our meeting as to the matter of administrat-
ion* and how that would be carried out,
iHe MINISTER* I think Mr, Sexton is right when he says that it would.
be better for us not to start a discussion on administration
until the v/hole question is adjusted, I thought you put
your motion for Conference to accept the idea underlying the
recommendation by Mr. Bleakley.
MRS. COOKE: v7e are not committing ourselves to anything definite. I
presume that^ it is your desire, Sir, to test the feeling of
the meeting in connection with these various matters,
IHe MINIoiER. Yes. Bor thst reason the motion was put to the meeting,
and has been approved.
MR, JENN IS ON: Would Ibe in order in moving that the whole of the
control be with the Commonwealth Government? That will give
you an expression of opinion of Conference on the subject?
THE MINISTER; My view is thf t this Conference is entitled to bring that
matter forward, but that I should not express any opinion on
it* 1 suggest you embody in your resolution the reference
of the matter to the Conference between the Premiers of the
States and the Commonwealth Government.
MR., JENN I SON * I move the following;-
That in the opinion of this Conference the control
of the aborigines throughout the Commonwealth be
placed in the hands of the Commonwealth Government,
and to this end the State Governments be approached
, to transfer their rights over the required areas
to the Commonwealth Government.
- m MINISTER: X would like you to add "That the matter he recommended
foi the consideration of the forthcoming Conference between
the States and the C ‘/mmonwealth u ,
JENNISON; I will include that addition with pleasure. I have
been in touch with Government officials in all parts of
Australia and I believe that, on the whole, State officials
would favor the proposed move. I know that is the position
in South Australia, where the proposal is favored because it
is lelt tnat the different regulations in the various States
make the control of the aborigines very difficult. They
have the right to wander about from State to State. In
. *’ . ••• Australia, during the course of a year, the natives
live in Western Australia for part of the time, for part jf
the time in Central Australia, and spend the balance in South
Austialia. In South Australia, we have already passed a
Control of Aboriginals. 12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File, Annual Single Number Series,
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’t 1929 - 1 933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/87^2
resolution that there should he one control. I think that,
throughout the whole of Australia, it is desirable that one
control he established. I think it is the feeling of the
people generally that the control of the natives is a
Coraraonwealth matter rather than a r sponsihility of the
States. Under such control, I think a better deal would be
given to the aborigines of the Commonwealth. At present, it
certainly pays the aborigines better to live in New South
Wales than in South Australia, but I do not think I need
deal with these details. Some States are more parsimonious
than others.
THE TUNISTEH; Some States are not as well off as others.
i.E. JHiNNISQNs 'ntuite so, and I think that, if the natives were consulted,
they would favor the transfer of the control to the Common-
wealth Government, as they would consider by that means they
would be given a better deal. In my opinion, that certainly
would be the result, as the present regulations hamper the
control in many respects. I know of instances where
natives have been transferred from one State to another and
lost sight of to some extent, Ido not think that has
been in their interests, and they have not been able to
obtain any redress. After having fought for this question
for a long time, and having seen what has been done "in the
difierent States, It is my opinion that unified control is
the mos l. desirable thing. I have much pleasure in moving
the motion.
j.H. j. OR LEY: I have much pleasure in seconding the motion. The report
oy Mr, Eleakley has opened the door of hope to the aborigines,
and is something for which they have been looking for a
long time. I think it only needs this motion to be carried
into effect to open wide that door, and to make a new era
for the natives. The Society I represent has been in
existence for about eighteen years, and, during the whole of
that period, it has advocated that the care of the aborigines
should be under Federal control, I feel that is the only
satisfactory way to bring about a settlement of this matter
o.nj that one authority, instead of six differing bodies,
snould deal with the question. Unified control, in our opinion,
would mean happiness to the people concerned. I presume it
is within the knowledge of all present that the Bleakley
Commission originated from an appeal by the Sydney people to
the Federal Government for an enquiry to report on the conditions
in all of the States. The Right Hon. the Prime Minister
lound that the States would not co-operate, and he initiated
an enquiry into the conditions in the Territory with which the
Commonwealth is concerned. The report by Mr. Bleakley estab-
isnes a very high standard. I think he has not recommended
anything in his report which is not already substantially
practised in Queensland, where very much has been done for the
naives. Therefore, I feel sure that Queensland would consent
to the proposed arrangement. There may be a difficulty with
regard to Western Australia, but I have no doubt that it cold
be overcome, and the States, who have a very small number of
aborigines, would probably consent. I think the matter of
the jederalisation of the care of aborigines is regarded in
a very different light by many people since the report by
Mr. Bleakl*£&as&as been made public.
\
RCT. JONES: 'Am Ito understand that Mr, Bleakley approves of the idea
of the Commonwealth Government taking control of all aborigines?
CONTROL OF ABORIGINES. c
12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Dumber Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 19.-0 * vl?
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item
THE MINISTERs I do not think he mentions that in his report - he
could not do so, very well.
REV. JONES• I gathered from the last speaker that a suggestion to
that end was embodied in the report by Mr* Bleakley.
THE MIIISTER* Ido not think Mr* Morley implied that. He stated
that the Queensland Government would probably fall in with
the suggestion.
RifV. THOMPSONS A commission went through the country some little time
ago and took evidence in regard to this question, I was
present at its sittings, as Secretary of the National Council,
and was asked to give opinions as to the conditions and treat-
rnent of the aborigines in the various States. I believe
that a considerable volume of such evidence was taken by
that Royal Commission, and I would like to know if its de-
cisions have been published?
THE MINISTER* I presume you are referring to the Royal Commission on
the Constitution of Australia, which is no - !; completing its
report,
HxbV. BURTON; In considering this proposal, I have put myself in the
place of a man in Queenslandwhere such excellent management
hss been displayed in regard to the aborigines; and I think,
to ask Queensland to hand over its control to a body, which
has not been tried, is asking for something v/hi&h is not
likely to be granted, We must not forget that the circum-
stances in each State differ, that the conditions v/hich suit
Western Australia perfectly may not suit Queensland at all,
and those which suit central Australia would not necessarily
be satisfactory in South Australia. Then, there is the
question of the degree of the relations between the blacks
and the whites. I think it would be better if this Conference
were to do something concrete v/ith regard to North Australia
and Central Australia rather than to spread itself on the
geneial question. At this stage, I think we arc going a
l-otle too far, as we do not see the whole situation clearly
yet in relation to the aborigines. I think it would be better
if we left this particular matter and concentrated our efforts
upon the more immediate problems which confront us,
LIE MINISTER; It was my intention to point out that you are cutting
into my time to a great extent, and I was going to suggest
that, after this particular matter had been finalised,°we
should deal v/ith the questions which immediately concern us.
-R. GANDERS: I think the opinion of my League is rather against the
proposal, because we are not altogether favorable to centralis-
ation of control. The strongest reason against it is thrt
the States own the land, and tremendous difficulties will
arise in that respect. I shall refrain from voting on this
question.
THE MINISTER; Bo you wish to continue v/ith the motion?
m ' TENNIS ON; I would like to see it put to the meeting.
RaV. CREAGH: Would not the difficulties mentioned in connection with
the different States be obviated by having Commonwealth officers
in the different States? At present, there are protectors
in each Stake, and, if similar officers were appointed by the
CONTROL OF ABORIGINES,
IP/4./PQ.


Commonwealth to safeguard the interests of the natives in
each State, it is my opinion that co-ordination would he
obtained,
TH2 1 can see great difficulties in connection with that
matter. I understand that, now and again, there is slight
friction between the Commonwealth and the States, and it "is
possible that that position would be accentuated by officers
elonging to tne States and the CommonwealtUa. mixing their
duties ir the way suggested. That is a point need in* grave
consideration. ’ &
Hi. EOTfUiBHAI'i In my opinion, the States hsve been managing this
business for a number of years, and probably they are as
capable of doing the work as a Federal body, I think it
would be better for the Federal authorities to mind their
h™ P tf ticular business, take over the Territory, and see
that it is better managed than the areas under State control.
(CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE)
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '1933)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CHS A 1 item 33/8782
CONTROL 01? A'ROT?TriTT,r..-’c'


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '1933)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CR3 A 1 item 33/8782
HR. JAMES; In the interests of the aboriginals, I think it would
be better if the Federal Government took charge of the
responsibility for them. I can point out many instah<£6'&
of failures because of mismanagement. Ido not wish 1 tldP
offend anyone, but I wish to bring before you the ci-e-’a#*
facts of the case. I am speaking of the aboriginals/
generally in order to bring before your minds the condiiidh
of the aboriginals in Northern Australia and the interior'*
THE MINISTERS Have you been there?
HR. JAMES; Unfortunately, no. First of all the aboriginal must
be educated, and he can come up to # the white man’s expecta-
tion if given the opportunities. (Hear! hear I) Under the
present management, the aboriginal does not get the oppor-
tunities he should. I know one particular case* My
father was the head teacher of a school. He worked hard
for an aboriginal girl and educated her and finally she
got a certificate for accountancy in Stott & Hoare*s
business college. That girl is still working as a domes-
tic. She has repeatedly applied for a but,
under our protection, she has not been able to get one. We
have been denied our privileges. Some of us are intellec-
tually fit to take positions in the Government service, in
the railways and tramways and other departments.
THE MINISTER; I do not wish to restrict your remarks in any way?
but, if you are going to initiate a general debate on the
question of the aboriginals throughout Australia, you are
going to frustrate the very purpose for which I called
this conference, - which is to deal with the problems con-
fronting the aboriginals in Central and Northern Australia.
At the opening of the conference, I said we a,ll realized
the worries and trials that the aboriginals had. What I
want is to be advised on the problems regarding the natives.
MISS MATTHEWS: , I think Mr. James is hoping to suggest something
that would prevent similar things occurring among the natives
in the North, where I have lived.
THE MINISTER; In fairness to the conference, I cannot allow Mr.
James to make a speech on the general aspect of the abori-
ginals. This conference has come from practically all over
Australia, and if you all desire to hea,r Mr, James on a
matter which does not affect the purpose for which this con-
ference was called, I am quite prepared to accede to your
wish. I will put the question I have just indicated.
(Question put and resolved in the negative). lam sorry,
Mr. James? we will have to get on with the general business.
MRS. JONES: I will propose an amendment which I had the honor to
propose to the Royal Commission, namely;
"That the Commonwealth Government institute steps
to establish co-operative government with the
various States concerned in the protection of the
aboriginals."
The Commonwealth and State Governments are able to act co-
operatively in financial and other matters, and it would be
a very happy arrangement if the Commonwealth could take
steps to act in co-operation with the States in matters
concerning the aboriginals.
REV. JONES: I beg to second that amendment.
THE MINISTER;. We do not desire to be absolutely formal in our
deliberations, therefore, I suggest that this question be
Control of Aboriginals
12/4/29


Department ° f the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
Aboriginal welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’, 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8?82 ’
deferred. I do not want to see motions lost. If necessary
it could be'discussed by a Committee.
QUESTION - That the matter be referred to a committee -
Resolved in the affirmative.
THE MINISTERS I suggest that we leave item No.l of the agenda
"Nomadic aboriginals”, and go on to the questions which parti-
cularly affect the territories. Item N 0 .2 is "Aboriginals
in Employment". On that question Mr. Bieakley recommended
that certain amended regulations be framed providing
(1) for a definite scale of v/ages for permanent
worker s ac cording to value of services?
(2) that, as far as possible, cash payments direct
to natives be discontinued and wages be drawn
in goods, as required through the employers or
the local Protectory
(3) for the deduction of a percentage of the native’s
earnings for compulsory savings .
(4) for the provision of better living conditions for
permanent employees.
HR. HeSoTHONEMANNs I desire to move a motion as follows £
That this conference agree with the principle of
the payment of aboriginals employed, but considers it
desirable that such payments should usually be other-
wise than in cash, and that due regard be given to the
economic position of the white settlers.
The pastoralists in the territory generally feel that the
aboriginal is worthy of his hire. The pastoralists have been
blamed for maltreating the aboriginals. I think that before
you, Mr. Minister, took over this portfolio, it was our
association which asked that a competent person be appointed
to investigate the alleged maltreatment of the aboriginals,
and I think Hr. Bleakley’s report bears out that the abori-
ginals on the stations arc generally fairly well treated. We
do not desire in any way. to exploit them. We realise that
they are essential to the progress of the territory. The
stations - I am speaking particularly of the northern and
v/estern parts, - could not carry on without their assistance,
and anything that is done to prevent us using those abori-
ginal services, or to put us out of business, is going to
affect very seriously the outlook for the blacks in those
districts. We do, however, wish to guard particularly
against the exploitation of the blacks by an undesirable cla.ss
of whites. I am referring to the average black, where indi-
gent blacks are camped around the stations, and my remarks do
not apply to the eastern portion of Australia. If you pay
those blacks in cash, where they have no means of spending it
legitimately - the only possible place is the white store -
you are going to get an undesirable class of paupers coming
round, not for the purpose of supplying the aboriginals’
requirements, but for the purpose of taking the cash from
them. We pastoralists say that the black should be properly
clothed and fed, s.nd given tobacco and luxuries, such as in
certain cases he deserves. I have been three times in the
territory, and have had a good deal to do with the blacks.
The average black does not know the value of coin, and to
give him coin is going to lower his status and not raise it.
The conditions of employment should be uplifted and, when an
aboriginal desires, as he often does, to go "walk-about”, he
Control of Aboriginals
I2A/29


Department of the Intpri r
’Aboriginal Welfare Conference Nuraber Series.
Australian Archives: CBS A 1 item 33/8782 ' ’ 929 ' 1933
should be allowed to walk about. They should not be made
slaves, * I do not think that any one with knowledge would say
that, generally, they are made slaves, - and no aboriginal
should be employed against his own will at a station. I
think that this resolution, coming from a member of the Pas-
toralists ’ Association, will show you that it is not our
desire to exploit the aboriginal, but to endeavour to uplift
him. We desire to work hand in hand with the missions - and
I would like to pay a tribute to the work I have seen at the
mission stations - but there are two things I ask you to guard
against; the first Is giving the aboriginals In the back-
blocks cash, and, secondly, putting the stations out of
business# If you put the stations out of business, you are
going to make the problem of giving employment to these abori-
ginals very much worse# Mr. Bleakley, in his report, states
•that at least 80 per cent of the aboriginals are employed on
the stations. As a station owner, I can say definitely
that, if any hard and fast scale of payment were introduced,
we would have no option but to move the whole of our cattle
to Queensland and abandon the station# That is not an
isolated case, but a statement of the general position where
the blacks really run the stations. I may be on dangerous
- grounds, but we came here to speak our minds# Mr# Bleakley
states that quite 80 per cent of black labour is absorbed by
cattle stations, and the rest of his remarks regarding pay-
ment deal with privileges on cattle stations. He suggests
a scale of wages from 5/~ to .€1 for camp stations. Is an
aboriginal permanently employed by a station to be paid from
5/“ to £1 when an aboriginal permanently employed and doing
similar work on a mission station is not to get anything?
is a very serious question. We say the labourer is
worthy of his hire. We are prepared to give him that value \
are the mission stations? (Voices? lf Yes u ) I hope srou5 r ou
are. If you are going to give payment in cash, perhaps v/e
should, but if you are going to give it in kind, you should
not ask that we give it in cash. That is the crux of the
remarks I have to make. I also consider that the various
areas should be treated on an entirely different basis.
In Queensland aboriginal stockmen get up to £2 per week,
whereas in the Territory, just across the border, they get
from £1 to $O/~ per week. But in those areas they ha,ve
not indigent relatives to look after. On the Hoper River -
■ nd my remarks principal3.y apply to the Hoper River - there
are a large number of old and indigent blacks who have to
be continually fed. Mr. Bleakley suggests in his report,
that, when fixing the rents of these areas, the cost of
feeding these indigent blacks was taken into consideration#
I would not like to give a flat denial, but I go as far as
possible without doing so. My colleague, Mr. Edwards, and
at length with the Government on the question
01 leases , and, to our knowledge and that of our executives,
the question of the feeding of the indigent blacks was never
• taken into consideration when fixing the leases. I have
pleasure in moving the motion, and I hope this conference
will pass it unanimously#
REV. NEEDHAM; I beg to second it.
, BURTON: Does the latter part of the motion - lf and that due
regard bo given to the economic position of the white
settlers* - mean that, if a man is hard up, he has to take
wages at a lower rate, and that, if a station cannot carry
on on what is considered a fair wage, an unfair wage should
be given?
Payment of Aboriginals
12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annua] Single Number Series.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1955)'t 1 - 1935
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8/82
MR, THONEMANN s In answer to that question, I would not suggest
exploitation in any circumstances whatever, hut I do say
that, if the aboriginal in the western part of Queensland
is properly fed, and clothed, and given tobacco, and is
given an occasional trip and little luxuries and better
living conditions, he is better off than if he gets wages.
If the Government thinks fit to impose a big payment,
v/hether paid to the aboriginal himself or to the Protector,
the effect is going to be that we will have to shut up our
stations, take the cattle to Queensland and sell them
thereo This is not idle talk. At our own station, we
have had two offers for the whole 'of our cattle to take
them into Queensland.
THE MINISTER? How is the "economic position of the v/hite settlers"
relevant to the motion?
MR. THONEMANN? In Mr. Bleakley’s report I think it is suggested
that pastoralists should give the natives food, tobacco,
and clothes and pay them from 5/~ to P er week. lam
certain that, if our stations allowed aboriginals those
items and that scale of pay, it would put us on an un-
economic basis. We can hardly carry on today" and, if
we are required to pay £1 a week and supply food, tobacco
and clothes for all those individuals, the sooner we close
up the better.
THE MINISTERS If a comparatively high wage is paid to the man who
is working, his dependents may be cleared off the stations.
When I was on a station, I think we employed four blacks,
and kept about forty. That is a point I think you should
take into consideration when discussing this question.
REV. MONTAGUE G. HINSBYs I ask the mover of the motion (Mr.
Thonemann) whether it would not be well for his motion to
cover the four recommendations on page 9 of Mr. Bleakley’s
report. The first is for "a definite scale of wages for
permanent workers according to value of services." I
assume the pastoralists are willing to pay for the service
they are given. The second is that "as far as
ash payments direct to natives be discontinued and wages
be drawn in goods, as required, through the employers or
the local protector." That is what Mr. Thonemann wants.
Then the third is for "the deduction of a percentage of
the native’s earnings for compulsory saving." I think
everybody feels that that is a good plan. The fourth
is for "the provision of better living conditions for
permanent employees." If we expressed our assent to those
four recommendations, would we not do everything the
pastoralists want and put it in a definite form. I would
like to move an amendment to the effect that we approve of
those four recommendations.
THE MINISTER? What have you to say to that suggestion, Mr.
Thonemann?
HR. THONEMANN: We have considered the matter and I would like my
motion to stand as I have moved it. It embodies the four
resolutions but is not quite the same in detail. We are
of opinion that this Conference should deal with broad
issues rather than with detail, I assume that, if this
motion is passed in its present form, a sub-committee will
Payment of Aboriginals,
12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)'» 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/^782
be formed and matters dealt with in detail.
THE MINISTERS Mr. Bleakley’s recommendation is not for any
definite amount. It is "according to the value of
services." It seems to me that this is not loaded
in any way.
MR. THONEMANNs We have had difficulty in the past over the
territorial divisions, particularly with the rents. When
the question of the rents came up some time ago there were
territorial divisions. We maintain that an aboriginal
on the Barkly Tableland is worth more than an aboriginal
in Northern or Western Queensland. The words "for a*
definite scale of wages", although it is to be "accord-
ing to the value of services I', 1 ', to my mind, are too
definite for a Conference to pass. We would like to
adopt the principle and deal with the details in com-
mittee.
THE MINISTERS Would you like the quest ion of a definition of
"scale of wages" referred to a committee to discuss?
RJIV. JONES; I understand the motion is that the blacks employed
on stationsbe paid in kind and not in money. Some
of these blacks hold responsible positions, and if they
are paid in kind, and not in money, they will never have
the opportunity of saving anything at all. I under-
stand, also, that what is going to regulate the wages is
not their work but the economic conditions of the indus-
try. Who is to judge the economic conditions, or
profits, but the people who are controlling the industry?
V/ould we regard that as a fair way of reckoning wages in
any other community or in any.other branch of life in
Australia? I v/ould like, in passing, to touch on the
point raised by the mover of the motion, - that he is
prepared to pay the same rate for work done as the mission
people. Are the cattle people there for the welfare of
the native, or for profit? The Mission Stations are
prepared to produce the balance sheets of all mission
stations for the past 25 years and show exactly where the
r ney has gone. Are the cattle people prepared to do
the same?
THE MINISTER? I do not think you should go too much on those
lines. Things are pretty bad up there.
REV. JONES t lam one of those people who think that we must work
,m with the cattle owners. The best thing for the black
people is to ensure that they are able to get employment
under good conditions, but I shall not vote for a motion
saying that the blacks should be paid according to the
economic conditions oi the industry. The employers have
no right to judge the economic conditions of this indus-
try. The judges under the present proposal are the
people r/no are paying the wages. If the Government were
the judges, I would say "Yes," I think we should adoj-M
Mr. Bleakley T s recommendation, and I, personally, am
prepared to second the amendment.
RMV . W cJcEri'Ys I think it v/ould be very unfortunate if v/e had a
division 01 opinion as to the meaning of the motion in
Payment of Aboriginals,
1 2/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Humber oenes.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1953)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/S?B2
tliis instance. We have listened with interest t*-nd
satisfaction to the address of the representative of
the Pastoralist Lessees’ Association. It has been
delightful to realise that they speak through their
representative as they have done. It was naturally a
satisfaction to us that our friend, Mr. Needham, was
able to second his motion. I would like to suggest
to the representatives of the Association that
should endeavor to fix some way for them to embody in
their motion such recommendations as Mr. Bleakley made.
Then the points could be collated and submitted to us
as one motion ; and not as a motion and amendment on the
motion. I suggest that this motion includes clause 3?
which allows for the deduction of a- percentage of the
natives’ earnings for compulsory saving. That provi-
sion is important. The idea is not that.they should *
be paid in goods as against cash, but that, as far as
possible, cash payments should be discontinued as a
general principle. The wisdom of the course has
surely been made clear to us in the address to which we
have listened. I would therefore like to urge that the
framer of the original motion be requested to embody in
his motion a statement of general approval of the
recommendations made by Mr. Bleakley in his report as
they appear on page 9» Then, I think we can carry it
unanimously. I cannot imagine a more important matter
being brought before us. It affects the question of
employment 5 it affects the question of the relations
of white and black in a definite way. On the question
of religion there may be differences; but we are at
one to see that this question of wages and employment
and the general oversight of the blacks by those in
charge of stations is settled in the most satisfactory
way. I suggest that if a motion can be put to us on
the lines I have indicated it will be carried unanimous-
ly. 0 *
MR 0 CENTERS I I regret I am not able to support either the
motion or the amendment. The amendment would be a little
better because it implies putting a few shillings away
on behalf of the black. I look upon it as a discrimina-
tion against the black. The black man has a right to
accept or decline employment all over Australia. Ke had
a perfect fight to say for what v/ages he will work, and
a perfect right to say how he wishes his wages paid. I
think the less we attempt to discriminate against the
black man the better. I have drafted a motion which I
will not move unless I have some indication that it is
considered favorably. It is this s-
"That the aboriginals have a right to accept
employment anywhere in Australia, that all
employers of aboriginals, including half-
castes, etc., should be licensed, and that a
license may be cancelled on an Inspector’s
report that conditions arc in any way un-
satisfactory. ”
THE MINISTERS Would it meet the wish of Conference if the
proposer and seconder of the motion and the proposer
and seconder of the amendment conferred to see if they
can frame a general resolution?
Payment of Aboriginals
12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File Annual Single Nnmber Series.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - Ws) , 1 9<-9
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item J>3/0702
KR* THONEMANNs I suggest that you add to the end of my motion
the words ’'for the provision of hotter conditions for
the aboriginal*”, to show that the desire is not to
exploit, but rather to uplift, the native.
THE MINISTER; We will form a committee this afternoon,
SITTING SUSPENDED FROM 12,4? P,M. TO ■ 2 P,H,
UPON RESUMING AT 2 P,M, -
THE MINISTERS Before the lunch adjournment, we were discuss-
ing the motion submitted in connection with payments
to aboriginals. It was decided that the mover and
seconder of the original motion should meet the mover
and seconder of the amendment, to see if they could
prepare a joint motion acceptable to both sides. Has
anything been done in that way?
MR, EDWARDS; In connection with this matter, one speaker
stressed the necessity for the insertion in the motion
of a reference to the economic position. If he is a
business man, no doubt he will realise that, whether
it be included or not, in point of hard fact, every-
thing is subject to the economic conditions. Even
the Commonwealth Government at times has to pay regard
to the economic conditions.
THE MINISTER; It has to do that invariably.
MR, EDWARDS; But more so on some occasions than on others. I
understand that the Federal Government has instructed
the Judges of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court that
they are to pay due regard to the economic position.
What I think the Pastoralists have in mind in includ-
ing those words is : Fix this matter up as you like
and in the best way possible for the natives, but,
under present conditions, whatever is done, do not add
to the cost of the Pastoralists in employing abori-
ginals, because v/e cannot stand any more. To paying
10/- or £1 per week on the Barclay tablelands perhaps
to highly educated natives, they agree, but they only
agree to pay the men concerned. When they employ a
man in the Northern Territory they have to feed that
man, his lubra, children, and possibly his parents.
The cost of food for those dependents is obviously in
the way of remuneration to the man who is working,
and I think that is what the Pastoralists have in mind.
You can say that every worker is to receive £1 per
week, but, in that event, you may cast out all the
dependents of the men who arc working. Perhaps some
of those present have had no practical experience in
the matter of the cost of the food for these depen-
dents. On the other hand, there arc present those
who are actively engaged in running Mission Stations,
and they know something about this question. For
those whose knowledge is merely theoretical, I wish to
point out. that one can buy flour in Melbourne for 2d
Payment of Aboriginals
12/4/29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Dumber Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CBS A 1 item 33/8?B2
per lb. , but the cost is Bd. per lb. on the stations.
You can buy sugar here for about 4d. per lb. but it
costs us 10d., and the natives are very fond of that
commodity o The cost of all these goods is lifted
by a very high percentage., and although it may not be
a big thing to give a loaf of bread to a poor man
down here, the cost to us to do the same thing is
five times the cost to you. That will give you an
idea of the expense to us of feeding these dependents.
The point was also stressed that we must look after
the white settler as well as the aboriginesand with
that I entirely agree« With your permission. Sir,
my colleague will again address the Conference on this
subj ec t.
THE MINISTERS I think that Conference will have no objection
to Mr. Thonemann speaking again on this matter, be-
cause we wish to arrive at a satisfactory understanding.
MRo THONEMANN: During the luncheon interval, I had an oppor-
tunity of discussing this matter with some of the
gentlemen present, and although the motion I propose to
submit does not go as far as they would like, it does
not in any way run counter to their desires. With
your permission, I propose to delete from the motion I
have submitted the words “due regard being had to the
economic position of the white settlers" I realise
that factor will have to bo taken into consideration
whether ft is contained in the motion or not. There
are objections from the point of view of some to in-
cluding those words with which I am in accord, so that
with your permission I moves
That this Conference agree to the principle
of the payment of aboriginals employed but
it is considered desirable that such payments
shall be usually otherwise than in cash.
REVo NEEDHAMs As seconder of the original motion, I agree to
the'alteration.
THE MINISTER? You have heard the alteration to the original
motion. Will the proposer and seconder of the amend-
ment agree to this motion in its altered form?
REV. HINSBYs I agree to that as a statement in regard to item
N 0.2, but it entirely ignores items 1, 3 an d 4 in the
report by Mr. Bleckley, and I think they should be
touched upon. In my opinion, Mr. Thonemann*s hands
arc tied, and ho cannot go beyond the instructions he
has received. I suggest that instead of Clause 1, we
should have something on the linos suggested and that
the wages for permanent workers should be fixed by the
chief protector after consultation with the Pastoralists,
as to the basis of the value of the services rendered
in particular areas. It seems to me that the
Pastoralists could not reasonably object to that course.
I would-leave item N 0.2 as it stands. There are many
people who think that item N 0.3.3 should be touched upon
and, consequently, I suggest that, where native workers
have become sufficiently civilised to make possible a
Payment of Aboriginals
10 7/1 /on


Australian Archives: CBS A 1 item 53/8782 * * '
record of their subsequent movements, a percentage
of their earnings be deducted as compulsory savings.
It is no use starting a bank account for a man who
will go bush and who will not be heard of again, but,
where things arc fairly settled, it is possible to
introduce a system by which money could be put aside
for these people. I agree with recommendation H 0,4,,4,
and I do not think the Pastoralists r Association could
object to it. It is ray feeling that the suggested
amendment to the resolution is quite good if it is
only to be substituted for recommendation H 0.2. If
it is not possible for this Conference to deal with.the
other recommendations, they could be left to the Com-
mittee, but I do not think we should entirely ignore
the matters contained in Mr. Bleakley’s report.
MR. JE HIT IS OH s I wish to speak in regard to the coastal na-
tives who are not employed by pastoralists. Le.rge
numbers of them are employed on the luggers coming into
and going out of Darwin, etc. It frequently happens
that boats sail out of Darwin with an inadequate crew,
they go around the coast 200 miles or more from Darwin
where they pick up the men required, never referring to
any protector. Quite frequently, lam sorry to say,
the natives are treated fairly well for a while but''only
until the diving is completed. They receive no wages
on the lugger, all they are given being flour, sugar,
tobacco, and some clothing. Often they are treated in
such a way that, on returning to their home coast, they
swim to land as soon as they are within swimming dis-
tance, and no payment is made to them for wages/ The
coastal blacks must be considered as well as those in
the interior, and my suggestion to meet the present
situation is that there should be three points of control
The first point I think should be at Bowen Straits, as
practically all luggers pass through there. The next
point of control should be at the middle entrance to
Badel Straits, through which practically all eastern gulf
boats must pass, I think that the protectors should
have the right to board every boat, and that the boats
should be compelled to report the men they have on board.
I think the third control point should be at the
Victoria River, as the coastal employment is not being
controlled at present, and these men are called upon to
work for no pay at all.
THE MINISTERS I will read your remarks carefully, and give this
matter close personal attention. Therefore, not
think we require any specific motion from the Conference
in regard to it. I am desirous of reaching finality
on the question with which we are now dealing.
REV. HEEDHAMs Would it be possible for the motion to be put
first and the amendment then taken as a separate motion?
THE MINISTER: We must be careful in dealing with these matters
to show clearly how we stand in regard to the two motions.
MRS. COOKEs Mr. Bleakley’s report is by a totally disinterested
poison, which should be a convincing argument in its
favour. It seems to me there is the possibility that it
Payment of Aboriginals
12/4/29


'Aboriginal .'.liar,
Australian Archives: CBS A 1 item 33/8782 "
may oc said we are exploiting the natives if we pay
them only in kind* I think that there should be pro-
vision made for savings by them, and I support the proposal
by Hr. Bleakley in that regard.
THE MINISTER: It seems to me the idea Mr. Bleakely had is
that, while a definite scale of wages is laid down, he
does not desire any payment in cash to be made to the
natives except under a system of deferred payments,
from the point of view of effecting savings lor them,
as he says that, as far as possible, cash payments direct
to the natives should be discontinued. I tninx that
Conference can pass the motion moved by Mr* Thonemannj
That this Conference agrees to the principle of
the payment of cboriginals employed but it is
considered desirable thr t such pc.yments shall
be usually othcrv;ise than in cash*
MOTJBON CARRIED.
/
THE MINISTER; The amendment has been withdrawn. It becomes a
separate motion, and is:
That this Conference approves of the recommendations
regarding wages, which appear on page 9 the report
submitted to the Commonwealth Government by Mr.
Blcakley.
REV. EDDY; I have much pleasure in seconding that motion.
MR. GENDERS : The resolution just moved will conflict with the
•ne we have carried, which says that usually the pay-
ments should not be in cash. The resolution now proposed
approves of payments in ash to certain men*
THE MINISTER: I do not think that is exactly the position, as
Mr. 31ca Hey ’s recommendation is thet cash payments to
natives be discontinued, as far as possible.
MR. GENDERS; But is not the proposed resolution in opposition
to the one wo have carried?
THE MINISTER; I will not rule in that way. I think they will
both tend to an improvement in the conditions, and I
am agreeable to accepting them in that regard*
MOTION CARRIED.
THE MINISTER: I think that resolution disposes of Item No. 2 of
the Agenda.
I promised that, at 2.30 p.m. we would discuss
the appointment of committees. lie agreed, I think,
fhat a committee should be formed to discuss the ques-
tion of'bringing all aborigines under the control of
the Commonwealth, that there should be a second com-
mittee in regard to the employment of aboriginals, and
a third with respect to half-castes. We have not yet
reached the last L question on the agenda paper, and it
may not be necessary to do so at this stage. In
ABORIGINALS IN EMPLOYMENT
12/4/29.


P ~ correspondence File. Annual Single Humber Series
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1953)’ 1929 - 1953
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 55/8?82
• discussion this morning, we agreed to form committees,
in respect of N 0 ,1 of the agenda,namely, in connection
with the general treatment of Nomadic Aboriginals and
the question of bringing them under Commonwealth
control. I do not think it is necessary to form a
committee in regard to the first resolution carried,
namely, the formation of a Reserve, because I can
assure you I will take up that matter with my Govern-
ment and the other Governments concerned and try to
arrive at finality. If we arrive at an agreement on
that issue, we can go into the question of the boundary,
and other aspects arising therefrom, and discuss them
with the various bodies interested. I would like to
have your viev/s as to committees. I would now like
recommendations for the committee to discuss, the ques-
tion of bringing all Aboriginals under the control of
the Commonwealth. I do not think you need a large
personel. Perhaps this committee could arrive at some
conclusion this afternoon or tomorrow and let me know
the result. I think you should form a' committee of
five.
REV. C.T .KELLEWAY : Do you think it is necessary to form a
committee? It seems to me the time has not yet arrived
when we should ask the Commonwealth to take control.
THE MINISTER. 0 But, as we promised the mover of the motion, I
feel I should put It that this committee be appointed,
to report to me.
REVo J.W,BURTONs There are many people at this Conference who
are not in favor of this scheme, therefore a committee
of five may put forward one side only for consideration.
THE MINISTER; I see the difficulty. A small committee may
express views which may not be the considered opinion
of the whole conference.
REV. BURTON; If, for instance, a committee be compos..d of
ropr^ssntctivcs of Missions,, it might come to conclu-
sions with which the whole conference would not agree,
yet we might all be bound.
THE MINISTER: Would this procedure be satisfactory - that a
committee be formed with directions to report to me
and that I refer its report to those present for their
views?
REV. BURTON: I am not prepared to pledge my society to accept
the opinions of a small committee.
THE MINISTER; If we refer that committee’s report to your
society, your society can express its views upon it.
REV. SEXTON: Would it not be better to form ourselves into a
committee and deal with the questions while we are
here? I understand you want an expression of opinion
on certain points. It is hardly likely that we will
meet again,
THE MINISTER: You may meet here tomorrow - the hall is avail-
Formation of Committees
12/4/29


ahle for you - and discuss these questions. Would
that suit you?
REV. JcS.NEEDHAMs I think we should form the committees you
suggest; then those committees could meet tonight
and report to conference tomorrow.
CONTINUED Oh PAGE •
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’? 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives! CRs A 1 item 33/3?82
Formation of Committees
12/4/29


Series!
Australian. Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82 J ? 9-9 1 933
THE I IVI3TER; I suggest that a committee be formed of the mover
and seconder of each motion,
(A committee was formed consisting of Mr.Jennison,
kr .korley, Mrs,Jones and Mr. Thompson.)
Mr.Jennison will ce the convenor of that committee .
The committee will put in its re -ort to me and I
will circulate that to all interested bodies.
I think the question of a committee in regard to the
employment of aboriginals is obviated by the fact that
you have carried both those resolutions. I will leave the
question of a committee on that subject for the present.
I thiniv we will taxe N 0.3.3 on the agenda - the question
of aboriginals camped on stations. That is connected with
the question of^ aboriginols in employment,.because the
employed aboriginal has family connections. I now asx. the
conference to let me have their views on N 0.3.3 of the agenda.
In tnis connection ,Mr. Bleakley made the following recom-
mendations: -
(a) Re-considerat ion, if possible, of the rents of
pastoral properties (if, as thought, that when
fixed originally, allowance was made for cost of
maintaining dependent blacks) and assumption by
Department of responsibility for their relief;
(b) Issue of supplementary relief where the able-
bodied by their earnings are not able to supoort
the indigents;
(c) Extend laws for suppressing prostitution and
moral abuses;
(d) Apply pressure where necessary upon employers
of labor to compel them to co-operate in
enforcing the moral laws and prefer married
employees.
Those are the four main points tnat Mr.Bleakley touches
upon in that regard. I should be glad to have your views;
particularly the views of those of you vho know the con-
ditions .
MR. G. J .EDWARDS: It is perhaps fitting that I should express the
views of ray Association on this recommentation. In regard
to (a), we consider that this is based on the assumption
that there has been more or less a commutation of the rents
for keeping blacks. As we pay the rents to the Government,
the Government is aware that this is a misapprehension
on Mr.Bleakley ’s part. The matter has not been mentioned
to me officially. In regard to (c), the pastoralists
are with you heart and soul. As for as we can,we will do
what is necessary to reduce the evil or wipe it out if
that is possible. I am afraid (d) is rather too far
advanced. One cannot_ compel an employee in Melbourne to
marry and I do not think any lav/ can compel me to prefer
married employees. Compulsion, or applying pressure to
domestic matters, is out of the question,, But there
is a much larger question involved. The welfare of the
aborigine of Australia, will be enormously improved if we
can get more white men and white women in this part.
Why there not more married people there? Deputations
have made representations to the Government, but the position
remains i.hat the t ,laoo is net ready for white women.
Aboriginals camped in stations


Dc part me nt oT the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1935)% 1929 - 1935
Australian Archives; CRS A 1 item 33/8782
Very few white vo men can be taxen there because of the
very limited means of communication, You cannot tale
white 7/omen there to live in peril. They must have
access to a doctor and to at least another white woman.
The way to get ever this difficulty is to make it
possible for white men to take white wives up there
by providing doctors and means of c o mrnuni. cs ti on . This
matter is under consideration, I understand w® are
to get a doctor by aeroplane. By the provision ef
telegraphic and wireless communication many lives in the
Territory can be saved. We cannot havo doctors ©very
hundred miles; but, with some expenditure ,on .roads
it will enable us to improve our means of communication
and tne doctor can cover a very wide area. It may be
some years before we have married stock men up there.
The stock man would be away too much. But managers
can be married men when there is a fair chanco of white
women maintaining their lives and health. Once you
make it possible to get white women there, you get the
nucleus of decent settlement and half the abuses will be
done away with. Just one or tv/o settlements would go
a long way towards the welfare of tne blacKS. The way
to solve the problem is to make conditions better for
tne whites.
THE MINISTER; In regard_to this point, I have realised the
need ior more married men there. I hope to carry out a
policy of putting our police in comparatively com-
fortable houses and having married men. That I think
will be of great benefit to themselves and the country
as a whole.
MR. EDWARDS; It is desirable that the policemen, who are
protectors, should be married men. But, the position
is that, they are not disposed to have wives there when
they stand a chance of losing them through adverse
conditions.
MxR. GERHARD; Is it not the practice of Government Departments
to send single men to the Territory^
THE MINIoTER: It has been, because tnere is no accommodation
xor married men. We-hope, as civilization advances, to
have those circumstances altered.
M. GARRARD: Does this relate to natives wording on pastoral
grounds? In the northern part of South Australia
there are natives camping on pastoral leases.
IHL MIN la IHR. But are not they usually related to peoole wording
on the stations?
MR. GERRARD: No, there may be IJO natives, all told, in a
camp and only one or two working on the station. In
leasing the ground, the usual camping ground of the natives
should be reserved for them.
iHE ivilL IS TER; T£iat is a point we could note for consideration.
-.ißo. COOKE; I would particularly like to mention (c). As a
representative ol a Woman’s Society working for women,
(c) seems to me to be one of the most important points
as l egards the future welfare of the Aborigines. Once
the womea are respected and placed upon an equal footing
itwil] help to suppress the need for those women to
solicit, or be at the mercy of white men. I would
particularly like to mention the good laws of the
Northern Territory. We have had them for many years;
-Aboriginals camped on Stations.
12.4.29


’ Aboriginal Welfare " Single Number Series.
Australian Archives: CHS h Item |?/8 782 ~ 933) ’ 1929 ' 1935
buttho weakness lies in the fact that they are not eniorcecl.
If there was more police protection, provided the police
are married men, it would help tremendously. I have been
in this territory and I know the men around say that, where
there are white women, it has made all the difference.
It would ce well if we could only do what Canada has
done. In Canada, for immoral relationship with Indian women
the penalty is seven years, not three months, as it is
in the Northern Territory, or a fine. The penalty is
seven years imprisonment, and usually the penalty is
enforced. .Also, where there is a fine, the police pro-
tector receives half the fine - which is certainly an
encouragement to the police protector.
THE MINISTER; Your remarks are noted, and will be remembered.
REV. R. C. NICHOLSON; In regard to employers of Aborigines I
wish to move: - 11 That all employers of Aborigines and
half castes should be licensed and that a license may be
cancelled on an Inspector’s report that conditions are
in any way unsatisfactory.” Those in touch with primi-
timc people know that there is a peculiar instinct in the
primitive man, that gives him an idea whether or not a
man is favorable to him and, when they get the ides that
any white people are hostile to their interests, they dis-
appear. Any contact of whites with blacks must be a
sympathetic contact. We must encourage them to become
interested in their ; own development; we must help their
own racial respect in every way. If there are any whites
in the Northern Territory who are not prepared to give
the aborigine sympathetic treatment, they should net
employ them.
MR .EDWARDS; They are licensed at present.
THE MINISTER: Does that apply to pastoralists?
MR. EDWARDS: Yes.
REV. R. C. NICHOLSON: Is this in force at the present time?
THE MINISTER: In the Northern Territory it is. I will see that
the system of licenses gets close supervision.
REV. SAXTON: As to indigent camps; on page 11 of Mr .Bleokley ’s
report, under the heading of "(2) Other Indigent Camps” -
there is "(c) Establishment of relief depots under capable
missionaries.” When I went to Central Australia I found
that the depots were about 100 miles apart, and were in
the hands of the police. If relief depots were to be
placed where there are no capable missionaries, the dis-
tribution of rations could be done by men and women who
have proved their capability, I move that, after the
word "missionaries” the words "and other suitable persons”
be added.
REV. JONES:
I second it.
MOTION AGREED TO.
REV. JONES ; I move:
"That the recommendations of Mr.Bleakley regard-
ing station camps and other indigent camps be approved.”
THE MINISTER; T suggest that you say "The Conference approves of
these recommendations of Mr.Bleakley ana recommends them
to the’ Government for fa vourable considersti on . ”
Natives in institutions.


'Aboriginal Welfare Number Series.
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/878 2 ' ?33) ’ 1929 ' 1 933
MR. SEXTON: If that is put in the form of a motion, I will second
i t.
MOTION MOVED AND AGREED TO.
MR. JENNISGN: I move:
"That the name of the Rev. Thompson be aoded
to the committee re "Commonwealth Control 1 ".
MOTION AGREED TO.
THE MINISTER: We now come to Mr.Bleakley 1 s recommendations re
natives in aboriginal institutions. They are as follows:
(1) The present site for the compound on Kahlin Beach
be retailed.
(2) The rule that aboriginal servants return to the
Compound at night and bo prohibited from the
town area and attendance at picture shows with-
out permit be adhered to.
(3) The aboriginal Clinic be transferred from the
Compound to a site near the General Hospital and
a properly equipped hospital be built. Natives
to be trained and used as assistants to nursing
staff.
(4) The Compound to be re-organised on attractive
village lines and
(a) encourage inmates to improve their homes and
living conditions;
build separate dormitory for unattached women.
(c) cultivate profitable occupations for the idle,
(d) organise night occupations and recreations -
night school - religious services - entertain-
ments - picture show - brass band - also outdoor
sports for holidays, and
(e) establish a canteen or retail store.
(5) A separate whole time superintendent and matron
be appointed, with uniformed native police for
night watch duties.
MRS. JONES: I would like to call attention to 4(b). We must not
pass too lightly over any kind of reform by which we can
ameliorate the very bad moral conditions existing amonr
the natives at the present time. In the Darwin Eompound
the girls who go to work in the town during the dav end'
should be built for the unattached girls to slee! in USe r
move that as a resolution. . leet - m. I
■MRS. JAMS; I second.
MOTION AGREED TO.
/THE MINISTER; I will be in Darwin in June and T n
fully into this question and invos tigf? e °i t!"
Nohivos in Ins hi tut inn »


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)', 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8/82
P ‘ ,: ' V ■ BWJgOii ; 1 thin*, that, if Mrs.. Tones had been in that co.noound
oh would realise that core than what she has proposed' is
necessary. .Are we in order in giving general approval to
THE JaiSrER. oißy x SU gge 3 t that the conference gives its general
piilBnlily n inleiti|lti W IStM "
MISS MATHEWS: I was in Darwin quite recently, and I think the
wnole Compound is to be done away with.
■ think rscommendation No . 9 will be an immense
safeguard and will greatly improve the conditions if a
ouitajjle person or persons can be found for that duty,
i had a long experience of the Compound, and taught in
a“nd fif! SCh ? C h ' A ' hich 1 organised to a certain extent,
Cnmnonnrt mN®*' the conditions are. I do not think the
Compouno will ever be done away with. I think it serves
i ? e ~ ana ii is in a sense necessary to the
?V lf ° Darwin ' The work people must be accom-
modated somehow; I do not think the Compound could be
moved further away. I do not know any more suitacle
place than hohlin Beach. ■ .
HALF-CASTE /HOME, DARWIN.
THE MINISTER: Me now come to the recommendstions of Mr.Lleaklev
wi ,h regard to the half caste home, Darwin, They are
as fellows: - J
(1) The proposed establishment of an Industrial
Home for half-castes in Darwin be net proceeded
with;
(2) ihe half-caste children in Darwin Home, with 90
per cent or more, aboriginal blood , or a pre-
ponderance of other dark blood, be divided between
Bathurst Island and Goulburn Island Aboriginal
Missions, to be trained with the civilised abor-
children in rural school subjects - where
possicie in stock work, saddlery, blacksmithing .
carpentering end use of Push tools;
(3) The object of the training be to fit them to take
a useful place in the development of the Torrit-
ory industries;
(4) Those with preponderance of European or Chinese
blood be placed in some European institution
such as the Convent at Darwin; ?
(5) The Government grant a sum, say £JOO, to each of
above Missions, towards cost of necessary
additional accommodation and plant for vocational
.raining
(6) The Government allow a sustentation grant to each
mission of 3/6 per weea per head of these
industrial school children;
(7) The Administration supervise the working of these
industrial schools ana the eventual disposal of
ihe trainees in employmcnt.
Home i. or 11a 1 f C 9 so?
12.4 .29


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)' 1929 - " " ~
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8782
MRS. JONES: -There are good reasons for not proceeding with the
proposed establishment of a half-caste home. Hirst of all
it would cost some thousands' of pounds. The .... -
stations in the vicinity already have accomiQodation for the
number of children for whom accommodation is required, but,
as Mr.Eleakley ooints out, it would be necessary to make
a grant towards the missions for the provision of plant for
vocational training. If you, Mr. Minister, look at'the plan
of the proposed new building, at the back of the report,
you will see that the matter requires a little thought.
There are three or four times as many girls in the half-caste
home as boys.- The reason is apparent; whereas the half-
saste boys are generally retained at the stations because
they are useful, and are more easily protected than the
girls, the girls are sent away. The plan of the proposed
home maices equal provision for boys and girls; there
are 23 bath rooms on one side and 23 on the other; there
are an equal number of washbasins and beds and linen
cupborards which I do not think are needed at all. The
plan does not seem to have been thought out on the lines
of what is actually necessary. The chief thing that should be
thought of is the schooling and religious education, for
which no provision is made in the plan. The carrying out of
the plan would cost thousands of pounds, which ®ould bo
better spent in sending the children to the mission stations
where men and women are waiting to receive them and teach
them, I think it is a question whether half-castes only
should be brought up together; there is much to ce said for
it when a mission station, such as Groote Island, which is
only for half-castes, carries on the work so successfully.
Bo you realise that one man and one woman in Port Barwin
are looking after a compound where there is a clinic with
80 people - some of them with very repulsive diseases - a
home containing 74 children of all ages and colours, and a
compound for 120 young men and women who wo tk in Barwin in
the daytime, and are obliged'to be brought back at night
because the employers cannot be trusted with those young
women. As one who has had experience with aboriginal
servants, I say that you can make angels of them if you
look after them properly,
THE MINT.TER: I would like to hear the views of some of the
representatives of the missionary societies on these
particular recommend?tions of Mr.Bleakley 1 s regarding
half-castes. To my mind the greatest difficulty in
connection with the whole aboriginal question is the pro-
blem of the half-castes. While the problem is not of such
terrific size as it is in the States, it is looming up
very largely in the Territory.
MR. JEMNISON: I would like to asix, in reference to recommends ti cn
N 0.2,.2, whether it is proposed that the children shall have any
say as to which particular place they shall go tb, or are
they simply to be disposed of by a Court?
THE MINISTER: I suppose it would be as vacancies are available.
IIR. JENNISON: There are children in the Compound who have received
religious training for a long time. Would they have any
say as to where they should go. There are children under
the care of the Sisters of Roman Catholic schools, and they
ought not to be compelled to go to Goullurn Island, which
is a Methodist mission, or vice versa.
THW MINISTER: That is a question which needs to be answered
locally ’and on the merits of each individual child- It is a
point which will have to be considered if a change is made.
Home for Half-Castes.
12.4.29


Departnent of the -Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933) 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
REV.. BURTON: We cannot pass a motion regarding this; it will ha c.
to ce a matter of negotiation between the respective missions.
The whole thing wants a great deal of thinning oat. 11
you are going to have a big compound where all^ the halt-
castes are herded together, I woulo not touch it, tut 11 V° u
are going to have cottage homes, I would be in favour 01
It. If you were met by the representatives of tne missions
on the spot, I daresay the whole thing could bo settled.
I am not prepared to say whether <£9oo will be sufficient to
provide the plant, or whether 3/6 sustentation grant will
be sufficient for each child.
THE MINISTER; I do not Know if v/e could carry any particular
motion, I can refer to what has been said here.
REV. MGR. KING; We desire to be most helpful to the Government
and not embarrass it. I feel that the attention of tne
Conference is concentrated on a point where v/e can safely
leave it to the good judgment of the Government Re artment.
The question of the drafting of these children from the
respective mission stations can be safely left to the kino
dispensation of the Department concerned. (Hear, hear.)
THE MINISTER: This half-caste problem gives me a great deal of
worry. We take a child, we train it, we teach it, it grows
to the age of 16 or sc; what then becomes of it? That is
whqt has me worried. Perhaps it is not a question we can
discuss here,*
MRS. JONES: There is no difficulty once they are on the mission
station, because they have their own little house and garden
and they marry, sometimes with full blooded aboriginals,
and sometimes with half-castes, and they can live their own
lives in their own villages.
REV. BURTON: When we discuss this, we should include the aboriginals
also. I do not think either the Government or tne missions
have thought this thing through. What is to become of the
aboriginals brought up on the mission stations? There is no
future for them, V/e must have an objective and work towards
that end. V/e cannot deal with itthis afternoon. It re-
quires careful and scientific thought by the missionary
societies and, I would say, by anthropologists.
THE MINISTER: I discussed this point with Professor Radcliffe Brown
and I have arranged, as far as I can do it, lor all officials,
particularly doctors, who are going to the Territory, to
take a course in anthropology, so that they can understand
these problems,
REV. BURTON: /II missionaries ought to take a similar course of
study,
Mr. JENNISON: Every mission ought to be helped to be an industrial
mission.
THE MINISTER: Industrial in what?
MR. JENNISON: In the industry of any particular place. /il kinds
cf possi deities open up, There is, for instance , the
possibility along the nprthern coast of a fishing industry
bigger than anything in the "world. The Government would be
wise to appoint a man to investigate everything along,
those lines for the sake of the development ot the Territory.
There is the question of the wonderful growth of grass, which
gets burnt, away over thousands of miles, it would be a
really vsl uable/thing if an industry were worked up.
Home for Pie If-Castes .
12.4.2^


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
ADong:nal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)*, 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CBS A 1 item 33/8?82
MR. PEHRIMAN: We are doing rather unique work on Groote Island
in segregating these people, Mr.Bleaxley questions
whether we are successful. Those people will he most use-
ful to the residents in the development of the Territory.
I would like this Conference to consider what shall be
done with them when they become men and women. They
becomes whites in the eyes of the law ana nave a vote .
When a girl becomes 21 years of age she is placed on the
electoral roll. The girls there are three times as
numerous as the boys, and their future welfare is a serious
problem. One question is - should they be kept on the
island if they can be useful in the Territory, We must
consider the future of these children.
MR. MOBLEY: Is it in order' for me to speak at this stage on 'the
general subject of the Australian aborigine?
THE MINISTER: This morning I stated that I would be glad to hear
anything which affects my Department, but I do not want
a general discussion on all kinas of matters, if I can
avoid it.
MR. MORLEY: Could not this Conference send a message to the
churches with the imprimatur of the Government, making
an appeal for bigger and better worii with missions among the
aborigines? I thina in that way we could ac more than
we have done up to the present. Some of the churches are
doing splendid work in this direction, although I think
their representatives would be the first to admit that
they coul 1 do a great deal more; but seme of the churches
are doing practically nothing. I saw a published state-
ment some time ago that approximately £97,000 is raised
annually in Victoria for missions at Home and abroad, but
just a bare fragment is devoted to worn amongst our
aborigines. I think that is characteristic of the present'
position in all the States and that only a small uittance is
spent on aboriginal work. We are about a hundred years
behind "the times in the matter of churches and missions
for the aborigines. Taking Papua as an example, civili-
sation there began with missionaries, and 20 or 30 years
after them Government control was introduced. There is a
native situation in Papua today which is splendid, and all
the industrial work we have mentioned today is being
can led on there with the greatest efficiency. The same
thing applies in tnc South Sea Islands, Missionaries went
there long before.the Government toox control. The same
with Africa, where the missions went first. When Stanley
went Horae after searching for Livingstone, he addressed
an appeal to the British Churches for missions to go to
that great continent and evangelise it, the Churches took
the matter up, and the result is the splendid development
ana civilisation of Africa. But we are a long way behind
in this matter. With us, Government in the person of the
first settler came here, and it was left in that way for
0 long while before mission work was introduced , X would
like to see an appeal made, as it seems to me that the time
is opportune for an urgent appeal to be addressed to the
Churches that they increase the work in this
connection. If we can send out of Australia large 3 urns of
money for evangelisation abroad, surely we can do all that
is required for our people here. An appeal from the
present gathering, with the imprimatur of the Government
in ray opinion would find a ready response with the Churches.
1 strongly recommend my suggestion to the consideration of
Conference.
Horae for Half -Castes.
12.4.29


■Aboriginal T Series -
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8782 ’ 99 933
I’HH MINISTER; If it so desires, Conference can pass a resolution
on this subject, but it is extraneous from the subjects
for which the Conference has been convened. However, I ou.
prepared to take such a motion if it is .thought desirable
•but I ask you to consider whether or not it is advisable.
REV. EDDY: In connection with the question of the half-castes, I
wish to refer to the. recommendations contained on page 29
of tiie re nor t by Mr .Bleakley ,• They seem to go further
than we have already gone in this connection.
THE MINISTER: We have discussed the question of the half-castes'
home at Darwin and the other things recommended by Mr.
Bleakley. I think these are matters to be gone into fully
at a later stage, and that nothing would be gained by the
Conference dealing with the subject to any great extent;
but, in regard to the general principles relating to half-
castes as outlined on page 29 - of the report, I am quite
prepared to listen to anything Conference has to say. I
take it that you are referring to the recommended policy of
Mr.Bleakley?
REV. EDDY; xes, at the annual meeting of the National Missionary
Council yesterday, at which 17 missionary societies were
represented, many of whom operate amongst the aborigines,
the most intense satisfaction was expressed concerning
Mr.Bleakley ! s report. We did not go into details; we
did not commit ourselves to the endorsement of every
suggestion, but as a report we considered it was ideal,,
and we felt that we were justified in giving it our support.
We recognise firstly, that, if the Government intended to
act japon the suggestions, it would ire an considerable expense;
secondly, that it would mean considerable expense to the
pastors lists and others concerned with the aborigines; and,
thirdly, that it would mean considerable expense to the mis-
sionary sacieties and the churches at the back of those
societies. But I can assure you that, from the tone,of our
conference yesterday, the Government will be supported by
the Churches in any effort made to give effect to the
resolutions embodied in the report by Mr.Bleakley. I have
consulted our secretary, Rey. Thompson, and he.endorses
my statements on that point. With regard to the particular
suggestions now be!ore conference, I am sorry that I have
not had time to consider them except in a general way, but
they seem to go to the root of the matter. They deal with
the important questions of checking the production of
lalf-casteg, caring for the half-castes already in our
m^ st frora edu estional stand point, exercising a more
effective oversight in regard to them, and giving certain
exemptions where such are necessary. I thinK it will
be quite sufficient for us to express our general approval of
the recommended of Mr .Bleaitley as shown on page 29
of the report, I move to that end.
REV. KELEEWAY: 1 have pleasure in seconding the motion.
MR. THONEMANN: A Conference was held in Sydney on lBth April
between some of the missionary societies and the N.T.
Lessees Association, when this subject was discussed very
, x u V/as a greed that where adequate training and
educational facilities were feiven in the homes of the
residents cl the Territory it was undesirable that the
hall-castes should be remcrad; but, where those features
l .fc was a s reed that the half-castes should
e gathered in institutions for training. However the
representatives agreed that the age limit should be 14 not
16 years. >hen a helf-ooste is removed to a missionary
Horne for Half-castes,
12.4.2 S


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '1933)’, 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/8?82
mature' ’ ;he Doy b ° oomes M °re or less
tribes and from the * aken from their own
homes to receive ns, and put into missionary
into the trite.'" They^lose^elPtf ib 8 !" 8 not r f ceivßd back
we strongly urge tha + tSf® t 1 t: r i bab connection, and
training half-cantd " ’uu *' IIC stations are adequately
station!. Cn our o®n £* ey Bhould ba left with those J
has been trained from we have . a half-caste who
years old, he could rida eginning, Wnen he was sor 6
capable stoc. boys in the’ he ,„ ls one of the ,nost
the point that when" half y * I* stron S ly stress
stations thev should f 7? dSt f s are bGln g trained by
• iney snould be allowed to remain.
the' male half-castoa' « wUh^he^emaL^^ 6 33 BCUte With
RS * J °because^the^aborigina l worn ha - f ~f a ! te ' is a bi S Problem
which have been mfn?ionPH H ls + b ® hlnd the troubles
that woman, and I believe that Wo want to hel P
by the direct aodh-tim bex P can only be achieved
problem. I move* 1 ° 01 the mind of women to this
T of t ncr+h he fUtUre mana sewent of the aborigines
women be g LeTa lef[nit/ U& * uall * ied '
p nnnM] , a aellni te place on any advi^orv
council which may be formed by the Government/
1 also move:
T !?OMme a f n appointments ba ”ade as speedily a s
contends tha Women Should be °°“' nenda tr ° n > but ra y Society
has suggested that o e %ro Mr - Blea * l9y '
appointed in north and nL// < / aborigines be
be an assistant protector fnr us '' rs lia and that there
north and al/ fL i/* £ the P r °tectcr in the
also pointed°out that white®^ 01, ln the south - He has
Australia if prooer melioi? could live in central
I suggest that a’protector // 111 tlbS were sv ailable.
medical woman +o act a- n ppointed, preferably a
1 -oteotors. If [ew * G each of the other
Australia and for central appolnted for northern
should bo women, medical officers' if"-.!?,X lnlcn tbey
move : - UJS > 11 possible. i also
1 camps. lailway construction
our co 1 cted °womon l lhere^by & makin^°^ *h should hel P
In England last vear a -uch appointments.
Slavery Society which dealt Sith a ?h f ld by the *nti-
of the League of Nations and I ,/ hat question on bekalf
large heading in one ot h,T 1/ ***. Bur P*«ed to see a
was slavery under tho British/f 1™ In the . effect that there
such an announcement called forth*- A «3trana. Naturally
Mr. Jones, if a woman whefhr protest from
the control of her body ’ Teil ■° T T Waok ' has
protector, or a wi n i ° a " iave * a woman
in the Terri tor v"'much rorrl C powers » WGre stationed
sssstt « S 3 of
, m.O. ror « ;£.v l s;
Pi closed Appointment
of women officials
12.4.2 V


department of the Interi JR 1
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference Tm^Ibourne 6 Sin & le Number Series.
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8?82 ? 1929 “ 1933
appoint police men; they should appoint police women as
- ^3 question hinges almost wholly on the
position of the black woman, the position will be improved
11 women are appointed to Boards and other activities, I
move that motion,
THE MASTER? I think we must finish the first motion, moved
Dy Mr-M ? rl ey and seconded by Mr. Eddy. 1 would like to take
your mo 'ion, not as an amendment, but as a separate motion.
11 you will allow me I will put to the meeting the motion out
forward by Mr. Morley and Mr. Eddy.
(Motion moved by Mr. Morley and seconded by Mr,Eddy
put to the meeting and carried, unanimously.)
Mrs. Jones has moved, very eloquently, a motion in regard
to certain phases connected with the Administration in con-
nection with the appointment of women as assistant protectors
et CBetra - 1 would like your views on that motion.
MRS .BRITOMARTE JAMES: I have constituted nyselJT an observer'at
mis bonieisnce because I do not know very much about the
questions under consideration. Mrs. Jones has a mandate from
W ? are a constituent body of the federation
of women voters. I want to support her. I think you are
to be congratulated upon having in her one who can speak
with authority on this subject. We cannot speak of these
things with the intimate knowledge that she has, and so we
willingly leave it in her hands. But we assure you that we
are giving her our greatest support. We are looking to the
men to help us in this matter. We feel that we are at a
aisa vantage in that at present we can only come and ask the
men to do what we would like to be in a position to do if we
had more power. I haye very much pleasure in seconding the
resolution proposed by Mrs. Jones.
J,ißj ’ G(^ 0K E: I would like to support the motion. We have in
ohndrM 8 a £ out 30,000 aboriginal and half-caste women and
children. Surely tnose numbers need representation by women
M‘M° an anu « rst a rid their needs perhaps far better than men,
heut-zer kindly disposed they may be. It is for that reason
we feel that women protectors arc urgently needed,- We are
?ntrR S M tn I,ederBl Territory, and you mentioned in your
ArßrR U R y J£ eo ? h that thare sre 21 - 000 natives in North
and Central Australia and only about 800 half-
5 a 5„5 a ’, .. lVhen we consider that there are only 3,000 or
4,000 white men, women and children in the Territory that
annnfnßd" I+, 1 +, n °t very creditable. As regards women being
appointee with police powers, I support what Mrs. Jones “
ido said : -hey could work in conjunction with men but do
work the men cannot do.
THE MINISTER: fou have heard thc/iotion. Before I put it to
Conference I w.uld like to say that I will very carefully
lead and consider what has been said here today, and go
into this whole position when I am in the Territory, "it seems
to me that I cannot say what I will do until I thoroughly
understand what the conditions are and can form my own
opinions helped by the knowledge and advice you have given
today. I will put the motion. g Ven
(Motion moved by Mrs,Jones and seconded by Mrs.
Britomarte James carried unanimously).
REV.N.g hinsßY: May 1 suggest that wo take a further resolution,
foJ lows'- rttellsl ono one 1 thlnk we may pass. I move as
Proposed appointment of
women officials, 12.4.29


Department of the Interior* Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
•Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)** 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CPS A 1 item 33/8782
‘'Referring to the recommendat ion on page 27, this
Conference welcomes the suggestion that grants to
missions should be increased so .as to permit the
Government more adequately to share the cost of
caring for the Aborigines.
I do not think 1 will speak to my motion. It is patent
that the pro.ortion of the contributions by the Govern-
ment to this work, as compared with the cost to the
Missions, is very small.
REV.C. T. KELLEWAY: I second that motion. The amount contribu-
ted by the Government is very small compared to that
contributed by the Mission societies. For instance, on
two Missions, the Missionary Society paid over £2,000 a
year while the Government Grant is, I think, £250. So we
are spending eight or ten times as much as the Government
on those two missions.
THE MINISTER: The Government is called upon to contribute to
many activities. It spent, I think, approximately,
£9,000 on the we If are of the aboriginals. If every State
spent as much on an approximate basis, it would be a very
good thing for Australia. I will take the resolution and
promise to give it very sympathetic consideration.
REV. HINSEY: I welcome the suggestion made in the report.
THE MINISTER: I v/ill make representations to Cabinet on this
matter.
REV. NEEDHAM: We have referred to half-castes generally. Is
Conference going to deal with the recommendations on page 19?
THE MINISTER: - I have ajlist of the recommendations on that page.
It has crossed my mind whether Conference should cL scuss
that list now or whether it would be better for me to dis-
cuss it with the representatives of the Hormannsburg
Mission who are here. For that reason I have made an
appointment for tomorrow morning.
REV. NEEDHAM: You will remember that the Federal Government was
anxious that the Board of Missions, I represent, should
undertake the care of that Institution. It is a matter
with which we are concerned and we are anxious to help in
any way possible. But we could not undertake the charge of
it as re-constituted under Mr.Bleakley f s recommendations.
THE MINISTER; I will discuss that point with you tomorrow’.
REV. NEEDHAM: Yes, that would be better.
THE MINISTER: In regard to Mr.Bleakley f s recommendstion, we have
moved the aboriginals to Jay’s Creek. in their own interests
We wanted • to get them away from Alice Springs at the
earliest possible moment, because the railway is coming
through there. It is purely a temporary matter because
of the uncertainty of water facilities. This is a matter
I have listed for my personal investigation when I go there
MR. PERRIMAN: I would like to say a word or two about some im L ,or
ant work that Mr.Bleakley recommends - that is, the appoint
ment of a visiting doctor and getting him to visit Groote T
Island and Roper River. I fear that we have leper cases an*
other serious diseases. We do not know much about segre-
gation. A doctor has been promising to come for four years.
Grants to Missions.


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '1933)* . 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives; CHS A 1 item 33/8782
THE MINISTER; Will Mataranka help you?
MR - PERRIIiAN; A visiting doctor would help us best. If a doctor
could visit stations even once in three years it would be
a great help.
THE MINISTER; I think I can hint that there will be more medical
men there in the near future.
T would be glad now to discuss with the conference
any further matters you care to- mention in connection with
these particular Territories.
REV. JONES: Are there not some recommendations on page 39 v/ith
which we have not dealt. It is on that particular page that
Mr.lernman will find what he has asked for recommended
by Mr .Bleakley. Some eight or nine years ago, the
Australian Board of Missions appointed a doctor to visit the
Missions connected with the Board of Missions and other
Missions on the Queensland side of the Gulf of Carpentaria
and re'ort. The doctor did most valuable work, because he
was able to tell the missionaries how to treat, and the
natives how to avoid, particular diseases, and to set on
loou a process of amelioration in respect of several
diseases. I hope it is possible to appoint a chief pro-
tector for the North who is a medical man.
THE MINISTER; Doctor Cook is the protector.
REV. JONES: I hope that he will be left free to do the work of
the chief protector and not called upon to do detail work
as well, as I understand he is at present.
MR, JENNISON: I move: -
j-hat as far as possible all protectors be
required to take a course in Anthropology as a prelim-
inary to entering upon their work among the natives.’
MR. ROTHERHAM: I beg to second that motion.
MR, JAMES: I think the scheme suggested for the betterment of
my people will take concrete form very soon, judging by
the atmosphere of this conference. I am deeply interested
in m, people and their welfare, and I think the suggestions
placed before the.- Minister and his colleagues will be for
«na l L Bd^ an v Ce ? ent ' 1 Can only ex P ress my opinion in a crude
ad unpoiished way, but I feel that you, Mr. Minister, are
dee ply interested in the aboriginals. This is the first
J^ 6 Government has made such a
decisive effort to help our people. Their conditions still
remain a problem, but I think that, in the course of time
the proolem will be solved. I noticed, not long ago that
Mr.Bleakley recommended that native protectors ?e Appointed,
THE MINISTER: I do not think that is so. The only thing be recorn
Compound? 3 " appolnt “ ent of native to assist in the
ite nNn ptTNh a sug f estion for 5 committee to consider
' tte agenda );spcr ’ regarding aborigines in
employment. It xs suggested that the committee consist
reverend gentlemen, two pastoralists, and one with
exporlenoe ’ namel >' : Rev. Needham, Rev. Burton
Looors.Edwards, Rotherham and Thonemann. *
visiting doctors
12.4.21


Department of the Interior. Correspondence File, Annual Single Number Series.
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - d 933) 1 * 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8?82
COMMITTEE AS SUGGESTED APPOINTED.
SUGGESTION FOR "ABORIGINAL DAY".
MISS MATHEWS: I heard somebody remark, "It will all fizzle out
again”. This is an exceptional opportunity to prove that
v/e are in earnest, and I would suggest that a day be set
apart once a year, called "Aboriginal Day", which will speak
for itself.
MR. H.E.READ: I beg to second that suggestion.
REV. EDDY: Where is the machinery for giving effect to such a
suggestion? I am afraid that if we endeavoured to run in
another National Day, we would discourage a movement which
is now going on so happily.
THE; MINISTER: I do not know whether any good purpose would be
served by having such a day. We have societies which are
interested in the aboriginals, and this Conference is
sufficient evidence of the interest which is taking in the
welfare of aborigines throughout Australia. I would put
your motion, but I would bo sorry -to see it lost, because
it might give a wrong impression of this Conference.
MISS MATHEV/S: I am quite satisfied to withdraw the motion if there
is something better.
MR, MORLEY: I think the desired object may better be achieved
by appealing to the Synods, Church Unions, and similar
organisations, asking them to make it a live subject.
THE MINISTER * That is a matter for you, if you desire to discuss
the subject with such august bodies.
REV, NEEDHAM; I would not like this conference to close, Sir,
without an expression of our appreciation to you for calling
u.. together and for your deep interest in the worx in which
we are engaged, namely, the answering of the aboriginal
problem. Ever since you have accepted the responsibility
of the Government towards this question, we have felt
sincerely that there is someone with whom it will be a
pleasure to co-operate in finding a solution to this problem,
.and we feel certain that it is a joy to all of us to
know that you occupy your present position. (Applause). V/e
are deeply grateful to you, Sir, for the courtesy you have
expressed towards us and the manner in which you have guided
this conference, I take it upon myself to move a hearty
vote of thanks for what you have done and what you have
promised to do.
REV. BURTON: I have very great pleasure in seconding this
motion. We appreciate deeply the s, irit in which you have
conducted this meeting, V/e are people with divergent views,
but there has been no friction at this Conference. I think
the happy solution of some of the questions discussed today
has been due to the manner in which you have presided over'
our meeting.
CONCLUDING REMARKS .
i O a o.n


hn. THoiiEJANiT: On behalf of the Pas toralis ts , I have much
pleasure in supporting the motion. You, Sir, are the
first Minister for the northern Territory, who has managed
to get so many colleagues in the Cabinet to visit the
territory. That is quite an achievement. When you have
seen the problems for yourself, we are sure you will learn
our difficulties, not that you will be able to do any more
tnan you are doing at present.
AhV, iaGR . KING: On behalf of the delegation from Sydney, I
extend to you our sincere appreciation for your wisdom
in summoning this Conference, Perhaps it was a daring
thing to bring us all together in the one room, but we feel
uh at we nave been among friends and that the conference
has been helpful from the economic as well as the religious
aspects of these important questions. We tender our
appreciation and congratulations to you for the way you have
conducted our meeting.
CARRIED WITH ACCLAMATION.
Thu MINISTER: I very much appreciate the vote of thanxs which
has been carried so unanimously. It is ray belief that good
will come out of this Conference. The v/ords you have
uttered, and the experiences you have mentioned, have teen
reported, and they will be of great assistance to me when
visi* the Territory in June. lam glad that there has
been such a large attendance at this Conference; all
the speakers have impressed me with the fact that they
possess a wide knowledge of the subject. I will give‘ close
consideration to the views which they have advanced, and
i hope I will be able to do something to bring them into
oeing. Ig has been a great pleasure to me to be with you
today, and it is my earnest desire that our meeting will
bear good fruit.
THE CONFERENCE AT 4.30 P.M. ADJOURNED SINE DIE.
Department of the Interior
Au stralian s: 929 **1 um^er Seri ...
ADJOURNMENT.
12.4.29


OFFICERS
Federal President:
Mrs. RISCHBIETH. J. P.
(Western Australia)
Federal Vice-Presidents:
Mrs. F BROMILOW
(Western Australia)
Mrs. E. A. WATERWORTH
(Tasmania)
Miss BLANCHE STEPHENS
(South Australia)
Miss GILMAN JONES (Cantab.)
(Victoria)
Mrs. EMILY BENNETT. J. P.
(New South Wales)
Mrs. M. H. ARUNDEL
(Queensland)
Hoa. Secretary :
Miss ELLINOR WALKER
(South Australia)
Hon. Treasurer:
Mrs. D. JOHNSTON
(Western Australia)
Overseas Liaison Officer:
Miss RUBY RICH (London)
(New South Wales)
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD.
Western Australia ;
Mrs. F. Bromilow
Mrs. A. E. Joyner
Mrs. M. B. Vallance
Mrs. W.H. Evans
South Australia:
Miss Blanche Stephens
Miss Dorothy Vaughan, J.P.
Mrs. Jeanne Young, J.P.
Miss Ellinor Walker
Tasmania :
Mrs. F.. A. Waterworth
Mrs. G. O. Smith B.Sc.
Mrs. Calvert
Miss L. Overeli
Victoria:
Miss Gilman Jones (Cantab)
Mrs. Britomarte James, J.F.
Mrs. Rapke, J.P.
Mrs. Warren Kerr
New South Wales :
Mrs. Emily Bennett, J.P.
Mrs. H. F. Bennett
Mrs. Linda P. Littlejohn
Mrs. Jessie Street
Queensland :
Mrs. M. H. Arundel
Mrs. A. Mason Beatty
Mrs. Graham Wilson
Mrs. Roy Farley
Australian Federation of Women Voters
(Non-Party)
Affiliated with the Internationa) Alliance of Women for Suffrage and Equal
Citizenship, the British Commonwealth League (London) the Australian
Women’s Co-operating Committee of Federal Organisations, and the Aus-
tralian Pan-Pacific Women’s Conference Committee.
■ Headquarters :
PERTH
fvNj WESTERN AUSTRALIA
. *
NftHVTfal H'ous e, /3
l 6 t h No y 6 193 3.
The Hon. 3(?r« Perkins,
Minister lor the Interior.
Pear Mr, Perkins,
It has been mentioned that your Government is likely
to call a conference on the question of the aborigines and
if such is the case, on behalf of the above Federation,
I respectfully request that our Organisation be allowed
representation at such a convention.
Our units in each State are very interested in
this national problem and desire to render any possible hd
to the Government,
Thanking you in anticipation,
I beg to remain,
Yours sincerely,
Federal President Australian
Federation of Women Voters,
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Nu-ber - •
/-.original Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)* 1929 * -enes.
Australian Archives: CPS A 1 item 33/8782 1933


sc* / V'
, CABBSHHA,' XJth November, 1933*
Boar r.adfiun,
With reference to your letter of the 12th
November, 1 aeeire to state that no dec 1 cion has yet
been arrived at as to the holding of a conference in
connection with the welfare of aboriginals*
If it bo decided to hold such a conferences
the request of your Association to bo represented thereat
will be borne in mind*
Yours faithfully,
(J\ A. Perkins)•
Has Blanche Stephens,
Secretary,
Women'o Hon-Party Assoc tation
of South Australia,
Harvard Chaaber a,
198 liorth Terrace,
ABBLAIBB. S.A.
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series,
•Aboriginal Welfare - Conference (Melbourne - 1933)% 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8782


Women’s Non-Party Association
of South Australia
(League of Women Voters)
Affiliated with Australian Federation of Women Voters.
President : HARVARD CHAMBERS.
Miss Dorothy Vaughan J.P. £. J 198 NORTH TERRACE,
bccttlary •
Miss Blanche Stephen*
(Tel. U 6410) ADELAIDE, 12th Nov. 193 3
Hon. J.A,Perkins,
Minister for the Interior,
Canberra, P.C.T.
. bear Sir,
The Women s Non-Party Association has heard that there
is a possibility of your calling a Convention of Missionary and
other societies interested in the welfare of the-Aborigines.
Therefore we are writing to ask if that is your intention, and
if so, will you extend an invitation to our Aecociation to be
represented at that gathering?
We were represented at a previous Convention on
Aboriginal Welfare, called by one of your predecessors in
office, and held in Melbourne some years ago 0 That
Convention, we consider, did a great deal of good.
Trusting that our information was correct, and that
v;e shall duly receive an invitation,
Yours faithfully,
I3X' __
Hon. Secretary.
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series
Aboriginal Welfare-Conference (Melbourne - 1933)', 1929 - 19^
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8?82 '


Australian Archives: C3S A 1 item 33/8?82
If, on the other hand, the Minister decides
to hold a general conference, it would be advisable to
ask representatives of all bodies to attend.


DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR.
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File, Annual Single Number Series,
'Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - '•953)’, 1929 - 1933
Australian Archives: CHS A 1 item 33/8?82
EG,
no. 33/3782
MEMORANDUM:
CONFERENCE PIT ABORIGINAL MATTERS.
The Minister is considering the question of holding
a. Conference to discuss matters relating to the protection of
aboriginals. The following observations are submitted.
In April, 1929» the Minister for Home Affairs, Hon.
C.L.A, Abbott, called a conference of representatives of
Missions, and Societies and Associations interested in the
welfare of aboriginals to consider the report and recommendations
made by Mr, J.W. Bleakley, -Chief Protector of Aboriginals of
Queensland, on the northern Territory aboriginals and half-castes.
Mr, Bleakley had been commissioned by the Commonwealth
Government to visit the Territory and report on the conditions
and status of aboriginals and half-castes.
At the 1929 Conference, there were representatives
present of 33 different organisations. A copy of the report
of the Conference is attached hereto.
The experience of that Conference, at.which I was
present, does not justify confidence in any success being
achieved by a similar assembly of representatives. It was
quite evident that many of the speakers had no first hand
knowledge of aboriginals, particularly the aboriginals of
the northern Territory,
At the same time, if a Conference is held, it will
be found extremely difficult to deny representation to any of
the Associations who are interested in the welfare of aboriginals.
Several applications for permission to be represented have
already been received,
A Conference of Missionary workers is to be held
early in December next at Melbourne. According to the Agenda,
copy of which has been supplied to the Department, many
important subjects will be discussed.
In my opinion, if the Government decides to call a
Conference, the best results will be obtained by holding a
Conference of the Chief Protectors of Aboriginals in the
States and the northern Territory, and a few anthropologists,
say Dr, Elkin of the Department of Anthropology, University
of Sydney, possibly Mr. Kenyon of Melbourne, and Dr, Cleland
of Adelaide.
It might be suggested to the Associations interested
in the welfare of aboriginals, who are not actually connected
with missionary bodies (such as the Association for the Protection
of Native Races, the Women’s Non-Party Association, etc.) that
they should themselves hold a conference and submit their
recommendations to the Government.
If the foregoing action were taken, the Department
would be in possession of the views of all parties, viz.-
(a) The Missions actually working amongst aboriginals;
(b) The Chief Protectors actually controlling, and administering
Acts relating to, the protection of aboriginals;
(c) The Anthropologists; and
(d) The Associations, who from humanitarian and other motives,
are interested in aboriginals.


CONFERENCE WITH HON. C.L.A. ABBOTT
ON
ABORIGINAL PROBLEMS.
Resolution from Committee on Commonwealth ,_g_ogtr > 01.
"In view of the nature of Aboriginal
.
problems and the unsatisfactory character of any solution
thereof owing to the artificiality of State boundaries,
this Conference respectfully recommends that at the next
Conference of Premiers with the Prime Minister they take
into consideration the whole question of one proper co-
ordination and adjustments with a view ultimately to
Commonwealth control. 11
sks F i9t ) f n ioß singie
Australian Archives: CSS A 1 item 33/8782 ’ 929 ' 1933


R3POHT of FETING of the CO MITT 03 chosen at a
CONFERENC3 held between the MINISTER FOR HOMS
AFFAIRS,and representatives of Institutions
interested in the wei.fare of the Aborigines,
held in MELBOURNE, on the 13th day of APRIL,
■1929.
Present: Rev. J.S. Needham (Chairman), Chairman of Australian
Board of Missions#
RevJ J.W. Burton, General Secretary of the
Methodist Missionary
Society.
Rev* H. Rotherham, Chairman of'Sxecutive of
the United Aborigines
Mission,
Messrs, G.J. Edwards and ] Members of the Executive
H. 3. Thonemann ) of the Northern Territory
/ Pastoral Lessees Associa-
tion.
I have the honour to report that the members
of this Committee took; into consideration:-
Ist. Domestic and laboring employment in towns.
(a) They were of the opinion that it is not entirely
in the best interests of the aborigines that they
should be employed in towns, but that the conditions
of the North demand that the European married people
should have domestic help. Therefore we agree that
any employment of natives in towns should be specially
safeguarded,
(b) With regard to natives employed permanently in
towns, we approve of the recommendations on Page 9,
but we suggest that a definite scale of wages should
be fixed, after consultation with the employers
concerned,
(c) The Committee recognise that it is impossible
for employers to improve the conditions under which
employed aborigines are living, until the Government
has set a better example by improving the conditions
in the Kahlin Compound.
2nd. Domestic and vStock Work on Cattle Stations.
(a) While not interfering with the efficient working
of reputable stations, the greatest care should be
exercised in granting licences to employers of
aborigines,.
/(b)
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File, Annual Single Number Series
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)*, 1929 ~ 1933
Australian Archives; CPS A 1 item 33/8?82


fb) With reference to the power cf granting licences,
some discretion should be given to J; he .^* g ® r •
a Station to allow him temporarily to issue a sub-
sidiary licence to his white employees, to be el to
tive until confirmation of same is obtamed but
taking full responsibility for the actions of ouch
employees®
(o) In considering the question of remuneration for
aborigines employed on stations, due
must be given to the extent to which these stations
are accustomed to feeding indigent aborigines an
the relations of the aborigine employees*
(d) That efforts should be made to induce station
holders to do more than has been generally done in
the past to uplift -the aborigines and^ generally
improve their conditions, and that this is more
important than the question of monetary •
(e) We are of the opinion that boys shouldnot be
allowed to take part in the working of scations,
but they should be permitted to accompany thei
parents or natural guardians round the stati n
by so doing they are fitting themselves for their
future occupations*.
(f) That provision should be made for suitable edu-
cation for aborigine children,
3rd and The Committee is of the opinion that the greatest
"TEET care should be taken in the granting of licences t 0
all* employers of aborigines employed as sleeper ,
cutters, buffalo hunters, teamsters, trepang
etc, and that there should be regular inspection
of the conditions of aborigines employed in such
occupations
In conclusion the Committee earnestly requests
that the Government appoint suitable protectors, who shall
regularly inspect the conditions of all employed aborigines
and shall report to the Chief Protector, who shall have power
to insist on improved conditions,
(SgdJ NSEDHAM,
Chairman*
Department of the Interior. Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)' 1929 -) qzz
Australian Archives: CRS A 1 item 33/B?h2 '


sc.
CANSSHHA, 22nd Ho vember, 1933*
Bear .^adum,
With reference to your letter of the loth
November, I desire to inform you that no decision has
yet bean arrived at In regard to the calling of a
conference on the question of aborigines*
Should such a conference be decided upon,
the request of your organ! oat ion to be represented
thereat vail be borne in mind.
Yours faithfully,
(J. A. Perkins),
ITra. 8,11. Hischbieth,
Pederal President,
Australian federation of
r.'ouen Vo l. era (Poa-Party ) ,
xso
Block Arcade, /
Hll z uboth dt ree t s
Department of the Inferior, Correspondence File. Annual Single Number Series
Aboriginal Welfare Conference (Melbourne - 1933)’ 1929 1933
Australian Archives; CRS A 1 item 33/878 2


