

1937.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
CONFERENCE
OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
MINISTERS
ON
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
AND THE
40-HOUR WEEK
HELD IN
CANBERRA, 13TH AUGUST, 1937.
PROCEEDINGS AND DECISIONS OF CONFERENCE.




CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS ON
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AND THE 40-HOUR WEEK HELD
IN CANBERRA, 13th AUGUST, 1937.
REPRESENTATIVES:
Commonwealth.
The Rt. Hon. J. A. Lyons, C.H., M.P. .. Prime Minister.
The Et. Hon. E. C. G. Page, M.P. . . Minister for Commerce.
Senator the Rt. Hon. Sir George Pearce, Minister for External Affairs.
K.C.V.O.
The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, K.C., M.P. Attorney-General.
The Hon. Sir Archdale Parkhill, K.C.M.G.. Minister for Defence.
M.P.
The Hon. R. G. Casey, D. 5.0., M.C., M.P. Treasurer.
Senator The Hon. T. C. Brennan, K.C. Minister without portfolio, assisting the Minister for Commerce and the
Minister for Industry.
New South Wales.
The Hon. B. S. Stevens, M.L.A. .. Premier and Treasurer.
Victoria.
The Hon. A. A. Dunstan, M.L.A. .. Premier and Treasurer.
The Hon. E. J. Mackrell, M.L.A. . . Minister for Labour.
Queensland.
The Hon. M. P. Hynes, M.L.A. .. Minister for Labour and Industry.
South Australia.
The Hon. S. W. Jeffries, M.P. . . Attorney-General, Minister of Education and Minister of Industry and
Employment.
Tasmania.
The Hon. E. Dwyer-Gray, M.H.A. .. Acting Premier and Treasurer.
The Hon. T. G. D’Alton, M.H.A. .. Chief Secretary and Minister for Transport.
Also 'present —
Common wealth.
Sir Harry Sheehan, K.B.E. .. Secretary to Treasury.
Dr. R. Wilson . . . . .. Commonwealth Statistician and Economic Adviser to Treasury.
Mr. H. C. Green .. .. Assistant Statistician.
New South Wales,
Mr. C. Gostelow .. . . Government Actuary.
Mr. S. R. Carver .. .. Assistant Government Statistician.
Victoria.
Mr. H. A. Pitt, C.M.G., 0.8. E. .. Director of Finance.
Mr. U. Gawler . . . . .. Government Statist.
Queensland.
Mr. T. F. Lyons .. .. Director of Labour.
South Australia.
Mr. W. P. Bishop .. .. Commissioner of Taxes.
Mr. C. L. Johnston .. .. Secretary, Attorney-General’s Department.
Tasmania.
Professor F. R. E. Maul don .. Economic Adviser to the Government.
Secretary to Conference,
H. C. GREEN.




UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE CONFERENCE.
The Conference met at Parliament House, Canberra,
at 11 a.m. Mr. Lyons in the chair.
Mr. LYONS.—We all regret that Air. Wise, the
Minister who was to represent Western Australia at
this Conference, met with an accident in Brisbane, and
consequently will be unable to participate in our
deliberations.
It gives me great pleasure to welcome the repre-
sentatives of the various States to this Conference
to-day. I am particularly grateful to the State
governments for their ready response to the Com-
monwealth Government’.-* invitation to semi representa-
tives to meet in conference to consider this important
subject.
Lor souh! years the problem of the relief of unem-
ployment has been one of tins greatest which govern-
ments in Australia, and in most other countries, have
had to face. It reached alarming proportions in
Australia five years ago when unemployment rose to
the maximum rate of 30 per cent., but, fortunately, the
rate has been steadily reduced down to the present
comparatively low level of 9.7 per cent. Notwithstand-
ing the great improvement in the position, however,
the problem is still with us.
In order to ensure the financial success of any
organized scheme for the relief of unemployment,
it is essential that the scheme be instituted at a
time of decreasing unemployment. It is, therefore,
an urgent necessity that we take advantage of the
present improving conditions to arrange adequate
machinery to meet the position should we again, un-
fortunately, be faced with increasing unemployment.
Seasonal and intermittent employment is a feature of
primary industries, while industrial activity generally
has experienced more or less regularly recurring trade
cycles of alternate periods of expansion and contrac-
tion with resultant fluctuations in the volume of
employment.
Considerable investigations have been made by the
Commonwealth Government concerning the nature and
(tstent of the problem, and as to the methods which have
been adopted elsewhere for the alleviation of unem-
ployment. These methods are numerous and differ
considerably. Intermittent relief work, work for sus-
tenance, and sustenance without work have been adopted
as temporary measures for relieving the immediate
situation in Australia. These, however, are only tem-
porary measures, are exceedingly costly, and are by no
•means a satisfactory solution of the problem. The
position in regard to unemployment in Australia
became so serious during the years 1930 to 1933 that
the State governments realized that special afetion
was needed to provide additional funds for the allevia-
tion of distress. Special unemployment relief taxation
was introduced in the States of New South Wales,
Victoria and Queensland, a financial emergency tax
in Western Australia, and a special income and wages
tax in Tasmania. The rate of tax payable on tin-
weekly wage is substantia! and varies considerably in
the several States. This special legislation is still
operating.
The only method which appears to offer a perma-
nent mean’s of relief is that of national insur-
ance against unemployment. The principle is
universal I y established that unemployment is a risk
which may be insured against, and the most satis-
factory schemes are those which are founded on an
insurance basis of regular contributions guaranteeing
entitlement to benefits. In Great Britain a national
system of unemployment insurance was instituted in
1911, ami has since functioned successfully, whilst the
success of a similar system has been operating in
Queensland for a period of fourteen years indicates the
satisfactory results which may bo obtained by the insti-
tution of a system of insurance for the relief of the
unemployed.
Whilst it is not claimed that national insurance
against unemployment is a complete solution of the
problem, it has been x>roved that considerable progress
towards a solution is achieved by this method of spread-
ing the risk to the individual over the community, from
locality to locality, and from year to year. It also
enables detailed and authoritative information to he
obtained as to the incidence and duration of unem-
ployment. It thus provides a sound foundation upon
which, as such information is made available, a pro-
gressive programme for the extension of the scope of
the scheme may be evolved.
As the result of its investigations the Common-
wealth Government decided to ask the British Govern-
ment to make available the services of two officer’s,
who wore experienced in the administration of national
insurance in Great Britain, for the purpose of advising
the Commonwealth Government as to the practicability
of instituting a similar system in Australia. The
British Government very generously made avail-
able the services of Sir Walter Kinnear, Con-
troller of Health and Pensions Insurance at the Minis-
try of Health, London, for the purpose of reporting
upon health and pensions insurance, and also Mr.
Godfrey 11. luce, Chief Insurance Officer at the Minis-
try of Labour, London, to report upon unemployment
insurance.
These two experts arrived in Australia in August,
1930, and spent several months in close examination
of the particular phases of the problems with which
(hey were directly interested in the several States of
the Commonwealth. I express my appreciation of the
arrangements so willingly made by the State govern-
ments by which the visiting officers had every oppor-
tunity of conferring with the officers of the State
departments concerned; we are particularly indebted
to the Queensland Government for facilitating the
inquiry into the operations of the unemployment
insurance scheme in that State. Sir Walter Kinnear
and Mr. Inee were also provided by the Commonwealth
Government with the best actuarial advice and other
assistance available.
Mr. luce’s report on unemployment insurance was
furnished to the State governments some weeks
ago, and it is hoped that, in the time available, you
gentlemen have been able to examine this report, and
to give consideration to the recommendations con-
tained therein. Sir Waiter Kinnear’s report was
received later, and copies will he distributed to the
members of the Conference this morning, hut as
neither the Commonwealth Government nor you,
gentlemen, have as yet had the opportunity to study this
report upon health and pensions insurance it. is not
proposed to discuss it at this conference, but
to concentrate upon Mr. Ince’s report with respect
to unemployment insurance. It appears clear, however,
that any such scheme as has been recommended
by Sir Walter Kinuear will hr; of considerable direct
and indirect benefit to the States, and will call for close
co-operation between the Commonwealth and State
Governments.
Mr. Ince has reported that his investigations Jed
him to the conclusion that while- the institution of a
system of unemployment insurance presents a number


of difficulties, a scheme based on the principles of that
operating in Britain and modified to suit the conditions
existing in Australia is quite practicable. The con-
sideration which the Commonwealth Government has
given to this matter has emphasized that its applica-
tion in Australia does present many difficulties. At
present, the provision of unemployment relief is being
administered by the six States separately on
differing bases. As the result of your exami-
nation of the report you all are aware, no doubt,
of the difficulties of launching a scheme in Aus-
tralia owing to the great concentration of population in
a few cities and the sparse distribution of the remainder
of the population over a very wide area. There are
also difficulties associated with the frequent migration
of people from State to State and resulting from the
competitive trade between States and from the extent to
which numerous public enterprises in Australia have
necessarily been placed under governmental control.
It is also realized that any scheme at its inception
could not be all-embracing and could not cover the
whole duration of unemployment. But 1 feel confident
that after examination of the subject you will agree
that these difficulties are not insuperable, and that the
institution of a national system of unemployment insur-
ance in Australia is practicable.
Mr. luce has submitted throe systems for considera-
tion, viz.:—
(i) A series of separate State schemes under the
independent control of the State Govern-
ments ;
(ii) An Australia-wide scheme under the control
of the Commonwealth Government.
(Scheme “ A ”.)
(iii) A series of uniform State schemes with a
measure of Commonwealth control to secure
uniformity. (Scheme “B”.)
The first method leaves the initiative with the several
State Governments. The second, which is referred
to in the report as Scheme “ A ”, places an Australia-
wide scheme under the complete and independent con-
trol of the Commonwealth Government. The third
alternative (Scheme “ B ”) envisages a series of State
schemes on a uniform basis administered by the States,
but with a measure of centralized supervision in the
interests of uniformity.
The schemes are generally similar with respect to
main principles. The rates of benefit (e.g. 15s. a
week for a single man, 275. a week for a married
man plus 4s. 6d. a week for each dependent child
up to four in number) are the same for both schemes,
although the maximum duration of benefit is for a
longer period in Scheme “A ” than the varying
duration in the several States under Scheme “B ”. I n
order to spread the financial burden, contributions arc
on the three-party basis, being divided equally between
the insured person, his employer, and the Government.
The insured person’s contribution entitles him to benefit
when unemployed, the employer’s contribution is indus-
try’s share of the cost to cover periods of industrial
inactivity, and the Government contribution is a recog-
nition that the welfare of the people is a major con-
sideration of the governments. The contribution by
each of the three parties under Scheme “A” (9d. a
week for an adult male) is slightly higher than that
required finder Scheme “B” (Bd. a week) and the
cost of administration is also higher.
Mr. Ince recommends that the scope of each scheme
should cover all persons between 18 and 05 years of
age whose wages are fixed by a State or Common-
wealth tribunal. This differs from the scope of the
British scheme which provides that all persons between
the ages of 14 and 65 w 7 ho are employed under a con-
tract of service are to be insured, with certain excep-
tions, mainly non-manual workers with incomes exceed-
ing £230 ner annum.
Although there is necessarily a difference In the
detailed methods of administration recommended for
Scheme “A ” and “B ”, Mr. Ince recommends
the central supervision of both schemes by a
Commonwealth Unemployment .Insurance Statutory
Commission with an Advisory Committee in each
State. lit order to obtain uniformity Mr. luce
recommends that the regulations governing either
scheme shall be in accordance with those drafted by the
Statutory Commission, which will he responsible also
for reporting upon the financial condition of the scheme
and for recommending such amendments as it considers
essential to make the scheme solvent or for the disposal
of any surplus. Each scheme is to be locally’ adminis-
tered through the employment exchanges controlled by
the State Governments. An efficient employment
exchange service is an essential feature of any scheme,
as it provides the requisite machinery for the local
administration of unemployment insurance and also per-
forms very important functions as a national employ-
ment agency.
Jt appears essential that the schemes should be
uniform throughout the Commonwealth with respect to
scope, rates of contributions and amount of benefit, and
if the Commonwealth Government is to make a con-
tribution towards a series of States schemes the ques-
tion of uniformity in these schemes must assume very
groat importance. The Commonwealth Government has
no fixed ideas as to the type of scheme which should be
introduced, neither has it come to any hard and fast
decisions concerning the details of the alternative
suggested, but it has called this conference with the
States so that the whole matter may be the sub-
ject of open discussion in a genuine endeavour to evolve
a generally acceptable and workable plan. I feel
confident that representatives of all governments will
co-operate fully in these discussions.
It is hoped that by the close association of the Com-
monwealth and State Governments it will be possible
to avoid duplication of effort, and that as a result of
this co-operation the greatest benefit possible may be
provided at the minimum cost. To this end the
Commonwealth Government is prepared to place
all its instrumentalities at the disposal of the
scheme for the purpose of the collection of contribu-
tions and payment of benefits.
It is not expected that it will be possible to roach
finality on all phases of the matter at a single meeting;
but it is hoped that as a result of the discussions at
this conference, which may he regarded as an essential
preliminary, and by our sincere efforts, a practical
scheme will be finally evolved.
If Ministers would like an adjournment to study
the position which I have just outlined, perhaps we
could suspend the sitting for a brief period.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—Is the C emmonwealth in a posi-
tion to state which of the three schemes mentioned it
prefers ?
Mr. TATUM S.—l thought it hotter to make a general
statement on behalf of the Commonwealth, and then to
obtain the views of the States in the hope that we may
be able to devise some scheme acceptable to all. A
uniform scheme is essential. If the States were under-
taking unemployment insurance individually the Com-
monwealth would not he concerned, but if the Com-
monwealth is to he involved, it is essential that we
should adopt one of the schemes outlined or some
variant thereof.
Air. HYNES.—The scheme at present in operation
in Queensland is costing the Government of that State
in subvention £lBB,OOO and as an employer £40,000
annually. We should like to know what proportion of
that expenditure would be shouldered by the Common-
wealth if one of the schemes suggested by Mr. Ince
were adopted, or whether the Commonwealth would
agree to pay the whole of it-
6


Mr. LYONS.—There is no desire on the part of the
Commonwealth to take over the Queensland scheme,
which has been working very satisfactorily. We should,
however, like to devise a uniform scheme for all States.
That-is a subject we are prepared to discuss at this
Conference.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—Has the statement of the Prime
Minister really given us anything more than we already
know? It has not, for example, indicated what the
Commonwealth Government is prepared to contribute
if a scheme be adopted.
Mr. CASEY.—That would depend upon the kind
of scheme adopted. We are anxious to get uni-
formity and not necessarily on the lines of the schemes
suggested in Mr. Inee’s report. There may be other
ways of achieving uniformity. The Commonwealth
Government does not propose to take over the whole
of this problem. It hopes that the representatives of
the States will discuss the Prime Minister’s statement
with the object of ascertaining whether any of the
schemes or any variant of them would be acceptable.
The amount of Commonwealth contribution, it seems Jo
me, would be dependent upon the nature of the scheme
ultimately agreed to.
Mr. IVALTON. —Has the Commonwealth Govern-
ment any definite recommendation?
Mr. CASEY.—No. We are not attempting to dic-
tate any policy to the States. The State Governments
must necessarily have a very considerable measure of
administration in any scheme that is evolved.
Mr. LYONS. —The Commonwealth has decided
that a scheme, but not any particular scheme, should
be adopted. The particular form of the scheme will
be decided largely by the attitude of the State Govern-
ments. We have definitely adopted the principle and
will go ahead, but we need the co-operation of the
States. ,
Mr. HYNES.—The statement made by the Prime
Minister is simply a review of the Ince report. We
should like to know to what extent the Commonwealth
Government would be prepared to assist financially. .
Mr. D’ALTON.—Is it suggested that the scheme
adopted will be a substitute for the present method of
dealing with unemployment, so that the present un-
employment relief tax may be abolished, or is this to
be something in addition?
Mr. LYONS. —Some of the States could not pos-
sibly do without the unemployment relief tax.
Mr. HYNES.—The scheme makes no provision for
persons who have been out of work for two or three
years. The State Governments would still need to
provide for their maintenance.
Mr. MENZIES.—The Ince-report makes it very
clear that if any one of the schemes proposed is put
into operation a good deal of other unemployment relief
will still be needed.
Mr. D’ALTON.—That is so.
Mr. MENZIES.—On the other hand the State Go-
vernments would need to make some contribution
towards the revenue of any insurance scheme.
Mr. LYONS.—The amount expended by the Govern-
ment of Queensland on its unemployment insurance is
a very small proportion of its total expenditure on un-
employment relief.
Mr. HYNES.—Our total expenditure on unemploy-
ment relief is about, £2,500,000 annually.
Mr. CASEY.—Any one of the schemes now proposed
would not cope with more than a relatively small pro-
portion of the total amount of unemployment.
Mr. JEFFRIES. —It would really, be only a
palliative.
Mr. CASEY.—The Tnee report makes that clear.
You cannot initiate a scheme which, at the outset, would
cope with all sections of the population in all parts
of the Commonwealth; but a beginning can be made
with a scheme and its scope can be extended as
experience of it is gained. The British scheme started
in a relatively small way but has grown tremendously.
Only recently agricultural and household workers were
brought within its scope.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—Tf the Commonwealth could
indicate; which scheme it preferred of the three men-
tioned in the report our discussion might be shortened.
The Commonwealth has reviewed the position. If it
gave us a lead we might be able to concentrate ,our
thoughts on a particular proposal.
Mr. STEVENS. —I do not see how we can expect
any particular lead to be given at this juncture by
the Commonwealth, particularly unless some indica-
tion is given by the States of their view of the Ince
recommendations.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—Who should give the lead?
Mr. STEVENS.—The whole subject needs discussion
in a comprehensive way. A tremendous lot of mis-
conception exists about , unemployment insurance.
Taking the British scheme as a basis for dis-
cussion, it will be found that it gives a benefit to
people who insure themselves for that benefit, but
only for a limited period. Experience has shown that
when that limited period expires some kind of subsidy
has to be paid from the Exchequer and that subsidy
is nearly as great as the amount paid from all other
sources. We can take the Queensland scheme as an
illustration. In that State the amount expended on
unemployment relief, apart from the amount involved
in the unemployment insurance relief, is very great.
Mr. HYNES.—That is so.
Mr. STEVENS.—This shows that limited schemes
of unemployment insurance do not really touch the
heart of the problem. I agree with the Prime
Minister, that it is vitally necessary that the
States should be a party to some discussion and some
expert inquiry in which State officers can take part,
before the real form of any scheme of unemployment
insurance is adopted.
Mr. D’ALTON.—It is not possible for us to say that
any definite scheme is acceptable to us until we have
referred the matter to our governments.
Mr. LYONS.—It might help us if we could have the
whole story before us, and if the States would
take us into their confidence. This is not
necessarily a Commonwealth responsibility; it is the
responsibility of all of us. For that reason it is desir-
able that we should evolve a scheme acceptable to all.
It is the desire of the Commonwealth that, if possible,
a Commonwealth-wide scheme should be evolved in
which the States and the Commonwealth would be
concerned. We do not -desire a completely Common-
wealth scheme or completely State schemes which may
differ. Our preference would be for a com-
bination of the two with a certain amount of con-
trol and supervision by the Commonwealth, which
would co-operate in providing finance. If we could
adjourn at this stage it might be possible for the State
representatives to consider how such co-operation could
be effected, with the object of evolving a scheme that
would be satisfactory not only to our various Cabinets,
but also to the people concerned—those engaged in
industry and others. •
Mr. JEFFRIES.—I cannot see that we shall gain
much by adjourning.
Mr. LYONS.—Are the representatives of the States
prepared to indicate the attitude of their Governments
on the subject ? .
Mr. 1)V \ ER-GRAI —lt seems to me that the
Prime Minister is asking that the States should hold
a consultation between themselves.
Mr. LYONS.—That might help.
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—The financial aspect is of
concern to all of us. Australia is spending
£21.000,000 a year on unemployment relief. I want to
ask Mr. Lyons a very frank question. The. Total


amount proposed to be contributed towards the cost of
scheme “A” is £2,329,000. Of this amount the Com-
monwealth contribution, as an employer, would be
£79,000. Is that the only amount that the Common-
wealth Government is prepared to contribute?
Mr. CASEY.—I think the Prime Minister made it
clear that, if a uniform scheme w r ere evolved which
would be generally acceptable, the Commonwealth
Government would he prepared to make a contribu-
tion apart from its contribution as an employer.
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—-Could we be given some idea
of the extent of that contribution?
Mr. JEFFRIES. —That is very important.
Mr. CASEY.—I do not think that that can be given
until we get some idea of the nature of the scheme.
At any rate it is not essential to our discussion at the
moment.
Mr. D’ALTON.—If wo adopted scheme “A” -what,
would the Commonwealth Government he prepared to
do?
Mr. CASEY. —We think there would he very great
practical difficulty in connexion with scheme “ A ”.
We do not think that, as formulated, it is feasible. We
therefore suggest consideration of some other scheme,
or some modification of scheme “ A ”,
Mr. JEFFRIES.—What is the nature of the diffi-
culty that the Treasurer sees? Is it administrative?
Mr. CASEY. —Difficulties would he caused by the
varying incidence of unemployment in the different
States. Obviously under that scheme a State with a
low unemployment figure would be contributing towards
the cost of the scheme in a State with a higher unem-
ployment figure. That political difficulty is obvious.
Mr. HYNES.—The schemes that have been submitted
to us really concern people who have had some period
of employment, but they do not cover the most neces-
sitious and destitute people.
Mr. LYON'S.—Of course, the States would still have
to carry a load in connexion with those people.
Mr. D’ALTON.—It seems that the schemes only
attempt to deal with short-term unemployment. During
the depression period many people were out of employ-
ment for three or four years. If such a scheme of
unemployment insurance as is now proposed had been
in operation then, relief would have been provided for
only a limited period.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—It seems to us that the benefit
to South Australia under these schemes would not he
commensurate with its expenditure.
Mr. LYONS.—The Commonwealth Government
wishes to hear the views of the States on the difficulties
that occur to them. We have been examining these
schemes closely, and realize that there are difficulties,
but definite schemes of unemployment insurance have
been put into operation in Great Britain and Queens-
land, and there the difficulties have been overcome to
some extent. It seems to us, therefore, that, with a
measure of co-operation, such difficulties could he sur-
mounted in a Commonwealth-wide scheme. We should
like to hear the difficulties of the States in order that we
may consider the extent to which we can co-operate.
Mr. D : ALTON.—-The State representatives would
like to hear something first about the difficulties of the
Commonwealth. Why not indicate them to us?
Mr. LYONS.—I outlined in my statement the posi-
tion as we saw it, and suggested that the representatives
of the States might also give their views. Perhaps it
would he better to adjourn at this stage in order to
enable the States to consider their position.
Sitting suspended from ll.fo a.m. to 2 p.m.
Mr. STEVENS.—I suggested this morning that a
mistaken idea was widely held regarding what an
unemployment insurance scheme really meant and did.
Maavpeople are under the impression that such schemes
confer greater benefits upon the unemployed than
is actually the case. The report of Mr. Ince, and the
recommendations contained therein, are based largely
upon British experience. His proposal postulates the
payment of a given sum each week to insured persons
in the event of their losing their employment. He has
tried to apply the British scheme to Australian con-
ditions, and we should be grateful to him for the capable
way in which he has set forth the details of an in-
surance scheme for this country. It is well, however,
for us, as representatives of the States upon whom the
greater burden of unemployment costs fall, to remem-
ber that unemployment insurance, of itself, is not
designed to provide all the relief necessary in regard
to unemployment. It is essentially a scheme providing
a scale of benefits for persons who are insured.
When I was in Great Britain recently, I studied the
.British scheme, and learned that not more than one-
half of the persons receiving help because of unem-
ployment were covered by the scheme of insurance. It
is one thing to insure against unemployment, and quite
another thing to benefit when unemployed. The
scheme provides that when an insured person becomes
unemployed he shall receive benefits at a fixed rate for a
stipulated period, say, three months, but at the expira-
tion of that time he ceases to receive payment from the
fund, and then becomes a charge on the Treasury,
from which he draws approximately the same amount
each week as he did from the insurance fund. The
only experience we have in Australia to guide us in
regard to unemployment insurance is the scheme which
has been operating in Queensland for some time. In
that State the unemployment fund contributes £450,000
a year towards benefits received by unemployed persons,
but this represents not more than 20 per cent, of the
total expenditure on unemployment relief.
Senator Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—Do those figures
apx>ly to a normal period ?
Mr. STEVENS.—I am cuing the 1936 figures. In
Yew South Wales, we pay each year £6,150,000 to
persons receiving sustenance or engaged upon relief
work. Victoria pays £4,300,000, and Queensland
£2,300,000. Tims, in New South Wales, the cost is
approximately £2 ss. per capita, while in Victoria it
is £2 6s. In Now South Wales, the benefits of an un-
employment insurance scheme would extend to not more
than 10 per cent, of those who are now dependent on
t he State for sustenance, relief work and other benefits.
This percentage is based on the 1935-36 figures, and, of
course, if the percentage of unemployment were to drop,
the insurance scheme would naturally cover a greater
proportion of the field.
The British insurance scheme makes no provision
for many of the social services which exist in the Aus-
tralian States at the present time. It certainly pro-
vides some benefits in respect of unemployment, but
much of the field now covered by social services in
Australia it does not touch. Even if the insurance
scheme for Australia wore entirely a Commonwealth
one, so that the Commonwealth levied on each employer
in respect of wages paid, and on each employee in
respect of wages received, and itself made a contribution
to the fund, leaving the State Governments out alto-
gether, those Governments would still ho faced with
social service obligations which would make on them
much heavier demands than the burden which would
be placed on the Commonwealth under the insurance
scheme.
Mr. luce's report places nothing definite before us
regarding the -costs of a {lommouwoalth-wide scheme.
His estimate's have been based on rough approxima-
tions, and, indeed, he states in one part of his report
that he was unable to obtain accurate data in some of
the States. That makes it important that we should
inquire closely into the matter of costs before com-
mitting ourselves. However, jf we adopt the fiwiM he


has placed before us, we find that it would be neces-
sary to pay into the fund 2s. to 2s. 3d. a week on behalf
of each employed person, which means that each of the
contributing parties, the employer, the employee and
the Government, would have to put in Bd. or l)d. a week.
This fund would have to accumulate for at least sis
mouths before any benefits could be paid from it. It
is apparent, therefore, that, so far as Xew South Wales
is concerned, the scheme offers no immediate attrac-
tion. Those who now have to be provided for by the
State would not, for the most part, benefit under the
new scheme at all. For- many months after the
inauguration of the scheme I, as State Treasurer,
would have to go on finding the same amount for relief
purposes as I have to find now. In Xew South Wales,
Ihe benefits provided include food relief, sustenance,
bousing, clothing and footwear, special diets, milk for
mothers and children, special precautions against mal-
nutrition, and free medical services for unemployed
persons and those! on relief work. Under a national
insurance scheme, those benefits would be provided for
only a small proportion of those now in receipt of
them; the great majority would still remain the
responsibility of the State.
I feed, therefore, that our immediate task is to assess
foe actual cost of an unemployment insurance scheme!
before committing ourselves more definitely to it. It
should be regarded as something outside the immediate
services at present under the control of the States—
something, indeed, for the future. All of us hope that
we have passed through the worst of the depression,
and we know that unemployment is steadily declining.
We hope that the drain on the revenues from the unem-
ployment tux and emergency taxes will decline also, and
in Xew South Wales we are proposing substantial
reductions of these taxes. However, there will always
be a considerable demand upon State revenues for social
services of one kind and another. National insurance
will make no provision for unemployed youths who
need to receive technical training. A service of that
kind is .something which was not contemplated when
the English national insurance scheme was evolved.
I am in favour of evolving some long-visioned scheme
under which a fund will be built up for the payment
of benefits to those now in employment when they get
out of work, and my Government is prepared to become
a party to such a scheme. Such matters as food relief,
sustenance, technical training and medical benefits are
the concern of the States under the Commonwealth
Constitution ns it now stands, hut there is still room
for a long-range insurance scheme which would be
more properly the. concern of the Commonwealth than
of the States. If such a scheme can be developed it
will have my support.
Mr. Ince, in his report, assumes that the unemploy-
ment ratio will remain at something about 12 per cent.
That seems abnormally high. At present it is down
to approximately 8 per cent. As a normal rate of
unemployment 12 per cent, is probably too high; the
figures for 1937 are much lower.
Mr. MEXZIES.—It is desirable to consider some
scheme when unemployment is decreasing.
Mr. STEVEXS.—Yes, during a period of diminish-
ing unemployment there is an opportunity to consider
a long-range scheme. Only experts can estimate
approximately the normal ratio of unemployment
against which we have to insure. Xew South Wales is
prepared to join with the Commonwealth in investigat-
ing the present position, and in ascertaining the facts, in
an endeavour to evolve an unemployment insurance
scheme on a Commonwealth-wide basis. Wo do not
think that purely State schemes should he encouraged.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Can a Commonwealth scheme
operate successfully without State agencies?
Mr. STEYEXS.—Xo. In the matter of adminis-
tration, our food relief scheme and employment
bureau could work in conjunction with the Common-
wealth. An unemployment insurance scheme means
setting up a fund from which certain persons would
receive benefits. Such a scheme should be on a Com-
monwealth basis, leaving to the States residual prob-
lems, involving the care of persons who have been out
of work for years, and who cannot contribute. For
instance, we have to deal with payments to youths
during the period in which they are receiving voca-
tional training. So far as I understand the scheme
outlined by Mr. Ince, for the first six months the fund
would have to.ho built up by the contributions of the
three parties concerned. During that period the with-
drawals would have to he very moderate. Even with
the scheme in operation, the States would have to deal
with cognate problems with which the Commonwealth
would not be concerned. We should follow the prac-
tice adopted in Great Britain, and appoint a committee,
representative of the Commonwealth and the States, to
go into the incidence of a scheme. Personally, 1
would like to see a Commonwealth scheme definitely
established by legislative enactment, but not until we
know the normal ratio of unemployment against which
we have to insure, and the proportion of the cost likely
(o be borne by the Commonwealth Government. We
have also to consider the effect of the adoption of the
recommendations of Sir Walter Kinnear in respect of
health and pensions. If the recommendations in his
report were adopted by the Commonwealth, the con-
tributions levied -would be fairly substantial; if Is. 3d.
weekly is to be levied from employees in respect of
health insurance, that will have a bearing upon the
amount to bo levied in respect of unemployment
insurance. The facts can he obtained only after patient
and export investigation which may occupy a month or
two. In Great, Britain a statutory committee deals
with such problems, and if the Commonwealth is agree-
able to appoint such a committee, Commonwealth and
State officers could collaborate. I regret that I cannot
speak more definitely on this important subject. I
am afraid that some persons regard a system of unem-
ployment insurance as a complete panacea. The adop-
tion of the scheme suggested by the British expert will
not bring about the millennium in the matter of unem-
ployment, as we shall still have the hard core of the
problem to tackle. Those who have been out of work
for years would be unable to contribute to an insurance
scheme. A long-range policy should come within the
purview of the Commonwealth, which may he able to
contribute in such a way as to build up a fund for the
future. If we can help in any way we shall he only
too pleased to do so.
Mr. MEXZIES.—I understood Mr. Stevens to say
that the adoption of the system of unemployment
insurance suggested by Mr. Ince would not affect more
than perhaps 10 per cent, of the existing relief prob-
lems in Hew South Wales. Does he disagree with what
Mr. Ince states in paragraph 50 of his report —
An endeavour has been made to estimate the saving to the
States that would be effected in their present expenditure on
unemployment relief if the Australian-wide scheme of unem-
ployment insurance under the control of the Commonwealth
Government were in operation ... It has not been found
possible to make such an estimate.with any precision, but the
analysis which has been made indicates that a saving to the
extent of not less than one-half of the amount to be paid in
unemployment insurance benefit would be effected, except in
the case of South Australia, where the saving would he less,
owing to the fact that there arc no unemployment relief works
in that State.
If that estimate he correct, there may be a saving of,
perhaps, £2,500,000.
Mr. STEVEXS.—I believe that that estimate is
inaccurate. It may he fairly in accord with the posi-
tion in Great Britain. After my return from Great
Britain I prepared a memorandum in which I set out
the exact distribution of the payments in_ respect of


unemployment as between the funds and the British
Treasury. Tinder the British system the payments to
the unemployed out of the fund were £44,000,000, and
those from the British Treasury £42,200,000. The
only actual governmental experience we have in Aus-
tralia to guide us is that of Queensland, where
the expenditure last year from the Queensland
unemployment insurance fund was £450,000. That
State's payment for other unemployment relief works
was £1,860,000, and the total for unemployment
relief works and unemployment insurance £2,300,000.
Roughly, SO per cent, of that State’s payments
were from the unemployment tax. I do not think
that that would be the experience in Yew South
Wales. If a Commonwealth insurance scheme were
established the relief to the State budgets would bo not
more than 10 or 15 per cent.
Mr. CASEY.—There would be a saving.
Mr. STEVENS. —Yes; if the Commonwealth intro-
duced a health insurance scheme the saving would bo
bigger. In New South Wales it is more a matter of
ascertaining how long men have been out of work, and
if they have any aptitude for certain classes of employ-
ment. If they have, we can train them, but meanwhile
they have to be sustained. I believe that 90 per cent,
of the people unemployed in New South Wales have
been out of work for some years.
Mr. CASEY.—There is a prospective saving in
respect of child endowment.
Mr. STEVENS.-—Yes; there again the payment
would be less than we now provide.
Mr. CASEY.—Not much.
Mr. STEVENS. —A payment of 4s. 6d. a week for
each child is suggested. Our experience is that the
bulk of the child endowment in Now South Wales is
paid to persons who probably would not come under an
unemployment insurance scheme.
Mr. MENZIES. —You are inclined to think that the
saving in New South Wales would be not more than,
perhaps, £500,000 or £600,000?
Air. STEVENS.—Not more than £600,000 on the
basis of the 1936 figures. The luce report is a valu-
able document, but it lacks definiteness. Mr. Ince had
to assume quite a number of things, and I feel that a
fuller investigation of the various points he has raised
would be worth while. I believe in national insurance
in order, more particularly, to insure against the con-
ditions which existed in 1931. But, for the time being,
1 am more concerned in ensuring employment than in
insuring against unemployment. Wo have a public
works policy to provide employment rather than to
give sustenance. Tinder an unemployment insurance
scheme the unemployed would seek assistance, as they
would have a perfect right to do; but they would
he receiving something which they had not earned.
If we were to start a scheme in New South Wales,
where we have 35,000 persons drawing sustenance who
did not contribute anything, a difficult problem would
arise.
Mr. CASEY. —Mr. Ince appears to have made broad
assumptions on the subject of unemployment. He had
the figures for Queensland, showing the number of men
unemployed over various periods.
Air. STEVENS.- —Yes. If a long-range scheme of
unemployment insurance were adopted, it would be
undesirable to assume an abnormal ratio of unemploy-
ment. It is the duty of some responsible authority to
ascertain the normal ratio. Moreover, any committee
of experts should include a representative of the Com-
monwealth Bank who understands the trend of
monetary policy in Australia. Banking policy has an
important hearing upon our economic position.
Mr. BIINSTAN.—I am somewhat surprised and
disappointed to find that on such an important subject
the Commonwealth has not given the States a lead.
• >r - ° —~Kr»t
Mr. DUNSTAH.—Had such a lead been given dis-
cussion could have been curtailed, and we might have
been able to proceed much further than appears likely
at present. So far, we have merely reviewed the pre-
sent position, and expressed a desire to introduce some
new system to relieve the problem of unemployment.
We have been asked to offer some comment concerning
the three schemes submitted by Mr. Ince. We are not
expected to discuss the report of Sir Walter Kinnear,
which has been circulated, but which is not now before
us, although 1 understand that it contains some very
valuable information. So far as I have been able to
ascertain, the weakness of the schemes submitted by
Mr. Ince, from the view-point of the States, is that they
all provide for benefits over onlv a limited period. The
figures which I have show that short-term unemploy-
ment represents only a small proportion of unemploy-
ment, not only in Victoria, but also throughout Aus-
tralia. The unemployment figures for males in the
Commonwealth at the 30th June, 1933, were:—
Unemployed less than 24 weeks .. .. 82,837
Unemployed 24 weeks to 52 weeks .. 50,347
Unemployed one year continuously .. 230,604
Unemployed not stated .. .. .. 35,391
405,269
Mr. CASEY.—That was the worst point in Aus-
tralia’s history.
Mr. DTIXSTAK. —This scheme would not cover a
depression period; no scheme could do so which did
not cover long-term unemployment. Short-term unem-
ployment has never constituted our major problem.
Many people who are unemployed for short periods
do not trouble to register for relief. We have made
inquiries in Victoria, and have gone to a good deal
of trouble to ascertain the position in this regard, and
we have concluded that only 33 per cent, of the people
unemployed for short terms bother to register. I am
sure, though, that if a scheme of unemployment insur-
ance were put into operation every one of those people
would register for the benefits obtainable. The prin-
cipal objection to the present method of dealing with
unemployment is, of course, the demoralizing dole
system, with its unsatisfactory results from the point
of view' of the recipients and the State. The schemes
outlined in the Ince report would not abolish the dole
system. Such schemes might meet the first shock
of an economic depression, but after six months they
would become quite useless, for all funds would he
exhausted and the dole would have to he resumed. The
policy of my government is to provide relief work
for the unemployed as far as funds permit. We
realize that we do not get full value for the money
so expended. This is partly for the reason that some
of the unemployment relief works put in hand are not
suitable for manual labour, and as a result some
of the persons employed do not give 100 per cent,
return for the money they receive. We recognize
however, that some assets arc being created by the ex-
penditure of the money in this way, and some beneficial
results are accruing to the characters of the persons
employed. An essential of any scheme of unemploy-
ment insurance is that it shall obviate the harmful
effects of the dole. Ho such scheme has yet been
propounded. Another objection to the schemes before
us is that they provide for contributions from per-
manent government employees. In Victoria, for
example, 50,000 government employees would be
called upon to contribute. This is objectionable, first,
because such persons are permanent employees and
would never receive any benefits from their contribu-
tions; and, secondly, because they are already con-
tributing to superannuation funds. Another objection
is that the Government, as the employing agency,
would also be called upon to contribute in respect of
those persons. Public and semi-public bodies, such as


the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, the
Harbour Trust, the Savings Bank, the Eire Brigades
Board and other similar authorities, as well as a num-
ber of the larger municipalities, also have superannua-
tion funds of one kind or another for their employees,
who would object to paying into a second fund which
could not afford them any benefits. It has been said
that wo should have a Commonwealth-wide scheme.
I agree that any scheme should ho Commonwealth-
wide, Uniformity should be secured as far as possible.
In respect of Victoria, the Government’s contribution
to these schemes would he in the neighbourhood of
£550,000 a year. Which, government would contribute
that sum —the State or the Commonwealth? Or would
the contribution be partly by the State and partly by
the Commonwealth? The Government of Victoria
is not opposed to the contribution of some proportion
of that amount, provided that equivalent savings can
be made in other directions. lam sure that there would
also be strong objection on the part of employees
generally to a contribution of 9d. a week for unem-
ployment insurance, in addition, to the unemployment
relief tax which they now pay. The payments fo
unemployment insurance obviously cannot be regarded
as a substitute for the unemployment relief tax,
J’eople would strongly object to paying both.
Mr. STEVENS.—They object in any case.
Mr. DUNSTAN, —We have to face the fact that
although the unemployment relief tax may he reduced
from time to time it has come to stay. We know
that perfectly well. Victoria, for example, has to pay
about £350,000 a year in interest on money borrowed
for unemployment relief works.
Mr. MENZIES.—AII this, of course, is without
prejudice.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —Of course. I am aware that the
press is present at this discussion, but everybody knows
that what I have said is true. It is desirable that the
unemployment relief tax should ho kept at the lowest
possible level; nevertheless, we cannot get away from
it altogether, for unemployed persons will he hen*
always. The Victorian Government proposes this year
to reduce its unemployment tax by 20 per cent., hut it
will certainly need to continue the tax, because the
community recognizes its obligation to care for the
unfortunate section of the people.
Mr. DWYER GRAY. —You arc putting up a good
case for me!
Mr. DUNSTAN.—It would be perhaps all right to
appoint a committee to investigate this position
thoroughly, and to make recommendations for the
consideration of a later conference; hut I am certain
that we cannot get very far by simply reviewing the
present position. Victoria would he quite prepared
to join with the other States in making a contribution
towards an unemployment insurance scheme, hut we
would need to be assured of an equivalent saving in
some other direction; otherwise we should achieve
nothing. Provision should be made in any scheme for
a longer period of benefit than six months. In normal
times we are able to meet the situation; what we
require is a scheme that will cope with the abnormal
times.
Dr. EARLE PAGE. —Have you made an estimate
of the amount that would he saved by Victoria under
this scheme?
Mr. DUNSTAN. —No. I thought we would have
been given a lead by the Commonwealth at this con-
ference, and I was waiting for it.
Dr. EARLE PAGE. —Can you give any idea of
what your saving would be?
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I do not think it would be very
great —perhaps about £200,000.
Dr. EARLE PAGE. —Only the Victorian authori-
ties could give us this information.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —I realize that; but the saving
would be very small. Not by any stretch of the
imagination could this scheme be regarded as a sub-
stitute, for the present system of dealing with unem-
ployment. It would _be useful in the first six months
of a depression period, but after that period funds
would become exhausted and the State would have to
carry on as at present.
Mr. CASEY.—The unemployment insurance
scheme was of great benefit to Great Britain during
the depression.
Mr. DUNS TAN.—About 1921 the proportion of
short-term unemployment in Victoria was greater than
in 1931 or 1933; but, as everybody knows, in 1933
we had between 400,000 and 500,000 unemployed per-
sons put upon our resources suddenly with no prospect
of their re-absorption in industry. Such schemes' as
those now before us could not cope with such a
situation.
Dr. EARLE PAGE. —You have referred to a Coin-
monwealth-wide scheme. Can you suggest how such
a scheme could be administered, apart from State
agencies ?
Mr. DUNSTAN.—No; the full co-operation of the
States would he necessary. We have the machinery
in Victoria and would he prepared to co-operate fully.
My view is, however, that wo need a scheme which
would be practicable in a depression period.
Mr. STEVENS.- —Such a scheme could do some-
thing to cope with a depression.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —That is so. Probably if we had
a succession of good seasons the fund would he built
up to silch substantial dimensions that it could carry
us over a depression of some magnitude; hut unless the
fund had been built up in a number of prosperous
years it would not stand the strain of a depression.
The Commonwealth Government should accept more
responsibility in this connexion than it has
done so far. Of course, no government can be
held responsible for the exceptional circumstances
of the depression we have just experienced, but
the Commonwealth Government should, in the
national interest, carry a great deal more of a
burden of this kind than it has done in the past.
It is practically impossible for a State to carry the
responsibility for unemployment in a depression period.
Wo have done our best during the last few years, hut
the burden has been too great for us to bear, and I
regret that the Commonwealth has not, like other
federal governments, such as those of the United
States of America and Canada, provided the hulk
of the money to deal with unemployment.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Our constitutional position
does not permit us to deal directly with unemployment.
Mr. Stevens emphasized that point.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—There is nothing to prevent the
Commonwealth Government from making a substan-
tial contribution to the States for this purpose.
Mr. MENZIES.—You are not losing sight of the
largely increased benefits accorded by the Common-
wealth to the States in the last few years?
Mr. DUNSTAN. —No; hut I think also of the
increased Commonwealth revenue. It is all
a matter of pounds, shillings and pence. If
wo arc to get anywhere on this subject
there must he full co-operation by the Commonwealth
and State Governments. So far, the Commonwealth
has evaded its responsibilities in this matter. By a
direct grant to the States the Commonwealth could
do something to alleviate the position.
Ur. EARLE PAGE.—How has it evaded its
responsibilities? It has obtained this report and
sought your co-operation.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—The report will do nothing to
solve the problem. It is only the first step.


Dr. EARLE PAGE. —It lias given ns a basis for
discussion. *
Mr. DUNSTAN. —But this will not get us very far,
for the simple reason that the Commonwealth has not
given us any lead in the matter.
Dr. EARLE PAGE. —If wo had brought forward
a definite scheme you might have said that we were
dictating. We preferred to seek the views of the
States.
Mr. DUYBTA Y. —Some one should give the lead.
Yo one is more entitled to give it than the Com-
monwealth.
Mr. MEYZIES. —You are having 10s. each way.
Mr. DUN’S TAN”.—Oh, no. If it is not possible for
a scheme of this nature to be brought into force at
an early date the Commonwealth should make a sub-
stantial contribution to the States for unemployment
relief purposes.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Do you think that if a Com-
monwealth-wide scheme is prepared the States should
contribute in proportion to the reduction that would
result in their present expenditure upon unemployment
relief?
Mr. DIINSTAN.—Yes, Victoria would bo prepared
to do that; but it would need to be assured that such
savings would be effected. It would be impossible
to impose additional taxation.
Mr. CASEY.—But you would make savings,
irrespective of any Commonwealth contribution. One
of the points in Mr. luce’s report was that savings
of about half the amount at present expended by the
States would ho effected. Mr. Stevens said that ho
did not think that the savings would lie so substantial.
Mr. DIJYSTAY. —We do not think that they would
be anything like so great.
Mr. CASEY.—How much do you think that they
would he for Victoria?
Mr. DUYSTAY.—The figures show very much less
than the estimate given by Mr, Ince. The saving would
probably be less than half his estimate. However,
Victoria would be prepared to contribute au amount
equivalent to any saving effected. I do not believe that
tlie scheme would relieve the present position to any
great extent, because in times of depression, it would
break down.
Dr. EAELE PAGE. —Do you favour Mr. Stevens’
suggestion that a committee of experts be set up to
consider the matter further?
Mr. DUYSTAY. —Such a committee might serve a
useful purpose, and 1 have no objection to its appoint-
ment.
Mr. lIYYES. —Mr. Lyons indicated tin’s morning
that a scheme of unemployment insurance completely
controlled by the Commonwealth Government was not
regarded as suitable, and that consideration might be
given to separate State schemes administered by the
States, towards the cost of which the Commonwealth
Government would contribute. Mr. luce has formu-
lated a proposal for separate State schemes, adminis-
tered by the States, but in which the policy to be
followed would be controlled by a commission on which
the Commonwealth would have the balance of power,
enabling it, if it deemed fit at any time, to withhold its
subvention. This alternative scheme provides for lower
rates of contribution, which would be made possible by
a reduction of the maximum period for which benefits
would be payable. Tbe alternative proposal of separate
State schemes outlined by Mr. Inee does not appeal to
the State of Queensland, which, by reason of the
arbitrary powers of the statutory commission, would
have no security after it had become committed to
obligations, which would he greater than those which
it now undertakes. Having fully considered both the
“ A ” and the “ B ” schemes formulated by Mr. luce.
I am of tbe opinion that the present Queensland scheme,
which has operated most satisfactorily, should be
retained until such time as a more favorable scheme
may bo promulgated. In Queensland wc have success-
fully operated au unemployment insurance scheme for
the last fourteen years, and it has given satisfaction
to all parties concerned.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Your scheme provides benefits
for a period of fifteen weeks, does it not?
Mr. HYNES. —That is the maximum.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Has there been any complaint
that the period is too short?
Mr. JIYYES.—It has been found that the period
is suitable for seasonal workers who are unemployed
between seasons. About 33 per cent, of the -benefits
are paid to employees in the sugar industry.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Mr. Dunstan mentioned the
position of permanently employed persons in safe jobs,
who would be contributing to the fund without the
prospect of over drawing anything out of it. Do such
workers in Queensland complain regarding the scheme
there ?
Mr. llYYES.—Naturally there is complaint from
those who pay in to the scheme, and do nor benefit
from it, but it is necessary to obtain contributions from
such persons in order to make the scheme actnarially
sound.
Mr. CASEY. —In Queensland, the same persons have
to contribute to the insurance scheme and pay un-
employment relief tax as well?
Mr." lIYYES.—Yes.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Have you been able to make
provision for agricultural and rural workers?
Mr. lIYYES. —Yo; the scheme covers only those
who 'work under court awards. It also covers public
servants, with the exception of the police,
Mr. MKYZIES.—So that public .servants have to
pay three times —once to the unemployment insurance
scheme, once by way of unemployment relief tax, and
again to their own superannuation fund ?
Mr, lIYYES.—Public servants draw on the super-
annuation fund only when they cease to bo workers.
There is no real relation between an unemployment
insurance scheme and an unemployment relief scheme.
The one is au insurance against unemployment. Yo
insurance scheme would of itself do away with the need
for unemployment relief taxation.
Mr. DIJYSTAY.—Has it been found, in fact, Pint
tlie unemployment relief tax is lower because of the
operation of the insurance scheme
Mr. lIYYES.—It may be a little lowin', but not
uiucli. The point is that the two schemes concern two
different sets of people.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Do you favour the setting up
of a special committee to inquire into the proposal ?
Mr. lIYYES.—I do not oppose it, but we are of
opinion that the Queensland scheme is quite satisfac-
tory for the present.
Mr. CASEY". —Mr. Lyons, an officer in your Public
Service, was of great assistance to Mr. luce in the
making of his inquiries, and we should be glad to have
Lis services if a further investigation were undertaken.
Mr. lIYYES.—I think it would he possible to make
his services available for such an investigation,
Mr. JEFFRIES. —In my opinion, sufficient has been
said at tins conference to justify the sotting up of a
committee of experts to consider the proposal further.
South Australia is in a different position from the
other States, in that it has no unemployment tax, and
no relief works; therefore, a comparison cannot be
made between the position in that State and the position
elsewhere. I strongly urge the necessity for uniformity
in any scheme which may he determined upon. It would
he fatal to have separate and probably differing schemes
operating in the various States. In South Australia,
the sustenance charges are practically the only expenses
w<; incur in regard to unemployment, and they are
falling in a very satisfactory manner. In 1933-34


they amounted to £500,000; next year they fell to
£433,000; in the following year, to £372,000; and for
the year just ended, the amount paid out was £306,000.
My officers have pointed out that thy cost to the Govern-
ment of South Australia as an employer under the
“ A ” scheme would be £32,000, and under tbe “ B ”
scheme £29,000. If the Government, as a government,
had to contribute one-third of the payments into the
fund, that would amount to £150,000 under the “ A ”
scheme, or £133,000 under the “B” scheme. It is
evident, therefore, that South Australia would gain
very little by the introduction of a scheme of national
insurance; iu fact, it might quite possibly lose. How-
ever, my government is quite prepared to' have, the
matter further examined by a committee of experts,
and believes that now is the time to take the matter in
hand. If action is to he taken at all, it should he taken
when unemployment is decreasing, rather than when
it is increasing.
Mr. HYNES. —Has it occurred to you that there
might he political difficulties in the way of building
up a big fund during prosperous times? On the one
side (here would he the unemployed asking for greater
benefits, and, on the other, the taxpayers asking for
reduction of taxes.
Mr. JEFFRlES.—Nevertheless, I believe that now
is the time to go ahead with the inquiry. Once the
scheme is launched, it should have the support of all
the States. I think that Mr. Stevens’ proposal is an
admirable one, and (he only one we can adopt at this
stage. South Australia would be only too pleased to
make its State instrumentalities available for tbe pur-
pose of implementing a scheme if one were agreed upon.
Mr. D’ALTON.—After listening to the discussion
to-day, and particularly to that part of it contributed
by representatives of the Federal Government, I can
only say that I feel gravely disappointed. We had
hoped, as representatives of the States, that we would
receive from the Commonwealth a lead in the choiee_
of a scheme which might he adopted by all the States.
However, after hearing the statement of the Prime
Minister, I was very disappointed, and I regret that
the Federal Government did not give us the necessary
lead.
Mr. CASE AY —You mean that it has not, yet done so.
Mr. D’ALTON.—The fact remains that the Com-
monwealth did not. give ns the lead which we expected.
The Tasmanian Government regrets that the Prime
Minister did not submit a definite scheme to the con-
ference, and that he has not indicated what, contribu-
tion the Federal Government, as a government, proposes
(o make to tho general expenses of an unemployment
insurance scheme. My Government further considers
that any Commonwealth proposal should have been
brought forward at a more favorable period. It rejects
the whole of the Ince proposals as insufficient and
unsatisfactory, and as certain to result in the workers
carrying a heavier burden than at the present time, and
for smaller benefits. At the same time, my government
is prepared to consider any definite scheme to which
these objections do not apply. I was interested in the
figures submitted by Mr. Dunstan, particularly in
regard io short-term employment, and the savings which
the States will allegedly make. I am convinced that
those savings will not eventuate.
Dr. EARLE PAGE. —Mr. Dunstan cited figures for
1933 when the depression was at its worst. The figures
for 1937 show 47,000 workers on intermittent relief
work, 33,000 on work for sustenance and 47,000 on
sustenance without work.
Mr. D’ALTON. —I am still of opinion that those
who come under the scheme will make a contribution
for the benefit of those who do not now receive benefits
at all. For instance, artisans do not even register.
Mr. STEVENS. —That does not apply in New South
Wales.
Mi-. D’ALTON. —It does in Tasmania and in
Victoria.
Mr. JEFFRIES. —And to our motor body-building
industry in South Australia.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —Tests disclose that only 33 per
cent, of casual workers, who would come under this
scheme, actually register.
Mr. D’ALTON. —At present Tasmania has the
lowest unemployment tax of any State;. We have an
exemption up to £lB2, and the rate of tax is graduated
from 4d. to a maximum of about Is. on salaries up to
£2,000. For every employed man who will come under
this scheme £4 3s. must be paid annually, and that will
represent increased indirect taxation. The employer
must pay 41s. 6d., and the employee a similar amount;
these contributions will have a serious effect upon State
budgets. Reference was made this morning to a health
insurance scheme involving a weekly contribution of
which, with an unemployment contribution of 9d.,
would bring the weekly payment by each worker to
Is. apart from the wages tax. I say most
definitely that we view this proposal with a good deal
of disfavour, because, if adopted, it would place a
further burden upon the workers. I agree with Mr.
Dunstan that the financial responsibility in this respect
should be shouldered by the Commonwealth. We have
to consider the disability that will be imposed upon an
employer who has 1,000 in his employment, whereas
investors will go scot free. The reports on the British
scheme do not disclose a very satisfactory state of
affairs. I believe that at one stage the fund had a
deficit of £100,000,000.
Mr. CABKY.—In the worst years of the depression;
but that is being repaid at the rate of £5,000,000 a
year.
Mr. D’ALTON. —It is being reduced because; there
is less unemployment in England, due mainly to abnor-
mal activity in the production of armaments. This is
reflected in the fact that Australian governmental
instrumentalities find it almost impossible to obtain
delivery of metals from England in less than twelve
to eighteen months. The tremendous increase of
employment has enabled the deficit of the unemploy-
ment insurance fund to he reduced. Having studied
all the reports on this subject, I have come to the
definite conclusion that we cannot support any proposal
which will increase the already heavy burdens borne
by tlio workers.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Do you favour the appoint-
ment of a committee of Commonwealth and State
experts?
Mr. D’ALTON.—That is all that you arc seeking.
The appointment of such a committe would delay the
matter until after the federal elections
Mr. CASEY • —You are now speaking politically.
Mr. D’ALTON.—This subject should have been
investigated months ago. I doubt very much whether
the information desired could he obtained by a com-
mittee within two mouths, as was suggested by Mr.
Jeffries.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—I based my assertion on Mr.
Stevens’s statement.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Mr. Ince has been engaged
on the work for a year, and for two years the Com-
monwealth Government has had the assistance of two
actuaries. A previous investigation of a health insur-
ance scheme took five years.
Mr, D’ALTON. —And you expect the States to arrive
at a decision on this problem within two months.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—The ground-work is in the Ince
report.
Air. D’ALTON.—I do not agree with that. There
an; figures in that report which the Treasurer has not
explained.
Mr. CASEY.—I shall when I get an opportunity.


Mr. D’ALTON. —At the outset the Commonwealth
should have given us further information, or submitted
some concrete proposal. Had such information been
given earlier the comments I am now making might
have been unnecessary. Tasmania is prepared to give
consideration to any definite scheme that will ease the
problem with which we are now confronted; but I am
afraid that the proposal to appoint a committee is
based on political considerations.
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—As the Treasurer of Tas-
mania, I am naturally interested in the proposal to
institute a scheme of unemployment insurance. The
first point we have to consider is the accuracy of
Mr. Ince’s risk basis. I believe that it is inadequate.
I cannot support the views expressed by Mr. Stevens.
In view of the abnormal forces now operating to pro-
long and intensify the rising prosperity, we should be
prepared for an average rate of unemployment over the
coming eight years much higher than 9 to 11
per cent. This figure should perhaps be 16
per cent, on the assumption that the figure
for Australia as a whole will have fallen from
29 per cent, in 1932 to say 7 per cent, in 1940, and
have risen to say 29 per cent, in 1944. I understand
that the Unemployment Insurance Statutory Com-
mittee in Great Britain, working under the chairman-
ship of Sir William Beveridge, has forecast that for the
eight years from 1936 that an average of 16 per cent,
of the working population of the United Kingdom
and Northern Ireland will be unemployed. This per-
centage approximates to the average of 16.7 per cent,
for Great Britain for the eight years, 1929 to 1936, so
that for the next eight years the risk to be covered
will be about the same as in the last eight years. lam
not making any attempt to ascertain whether the
percentage in Tasmania during the next eight years
will be higher or lower. The financial provisions of
Mr. Ince’s scheme, on which its stability is based, make
no allowance for unemployment at 16 per cent. What-
ever proposal may be considered, allowance will have
to be made for a higher percentage of unemployment
than that mentioned in the Ince report. It is stated
that the total savings to be effected by the governments
of the Commonwealth would be £2,731,000, but I do
not believe that that figure can be substantiated, I
believe that Mr. Reddaway, an eminent young econo-
mist, who was recently associated with the Bank of
England, said that no governmental savings at all would
be effected. I understand that it has been estimated
that Tasmania would save £75,000 annually; but I
do not believe that that would be the case.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —How much do you propose to
contribute ?
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—We would have to contribute
£55,000.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—On what basis?
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—That would be made up of
a government contribution as such, and a further
amount from the Government as an employer.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —What proportion would be paid
by the Commonwealth as such?
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—None at all. Under these
proposals the Commonwealth Government would contri-
bute about £79,000, but only as an employer. The
Commonwealth representatives should state definitely
what amount the Commonwealth Government, as a
government, proposes to contribute. Is its quota to be
on a£l for £1 basis? I am not prepared to support
any of the proposals contained in the Ince report,
because I believe that the adoption of any one of them
would result in the workers being victimized. They
would not receive benefits any greater than those they
are getting to-day. I am prepared to study carefully
any concrete proposal submitted for our consideration,
but at present I am of the opinion that the adoption
of any of the schemes mentioned would not benefit the
State financially, and would impose additional burdens
on taxpayers, particularly the workers. The Common-
wealth Government has had this matter under con-
sideration for about six years, and now, on the eve of
a federal election, is asking the States to co-operate
in the formulation of what it believes will be an effec-
tive unemployment insurance scheme. Why did not
the Commonwealth Government move in this matter
two years ago?
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—We did not have the report.
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—Reports could have heen
obtained earlier concerning not only the working of the
British scheme, but also schemes in operation in other
parts of the world. The Tasmanian Government is
willing to consider any definite proposal submitted to
it, but the schemes embodied in Mr. Inee’s report are
unsatisfactory to us.
Mr. CASEY.—It was thought appropriate by the
Commonwealth Government that at this Conference we
should approach this problem with a fairly open mind.
If we had at once propounded any particular scheme
we might have been accused, with some justification, of
seeking to thrust something down the throats of the
State Ministers. That was not our desire at all. Un-
employment is constitutionally a State problem.
. Mr. DUNSTAN.—Why?
Mr. CASEY.—The Commonwealth has not the
power to deal with it. It is constitutionally, and has
been practically, the problem of the States, and the
Commonwealth has done its best to assist the States
through the worst of the depression. But it is a State
problem. The report before us is the result of an
expert and impartial investigation of one means of
coping, in part, with the problem; it does not set out
to do anything more than that. Therefore, the Com-
monwealth Government came to this Conference with
an open, mind to discuss the whole subject with the
States. At the same time, the Commonwealth Govern-
-1 ment has given a great deal of attention to the three
proposals put forward in the report, and I shall attempt
to analyse them. Taking the Australia-wide scheme,
first, it has the advantage of universality and uni-
formity throughout the Commonwealth; both those
features commend themselves to the Government. On
the other hand it has two disadvantages that we think
would make it largely unworkable. First, we have a
varying incidence of unemployment in Australia, and
under a completely uniform scheme, employers and
employees in States with low proportions of unemploy-
ment would, in actual fact, contribute for the benefit
of States with higher ratios of unemployment. The
second factor is that the State governments have all
the administrative machinery at their hands. They have
unemployment bureaux and offices, and the Common-
wealth Government has none. It would be anomalous
if a scheme which was nominally under Common-
wealth Government control had to be practicably
administered by the States. If the first of Mr. Ince’s
proposals were adopted, Commonwealth officers and
State officers would be sitting side by side in State
labour bureaux throughout the Commonwealth,
attempting to do joint work in respect of employment
and unemployment relief. The Commonwealth Go-
vernment thinks that this would inevitably lead to
undesirable friction in the administration of the scheme.
Mr. D’ALTON.—That does not occur in regard to
taxation.
Mr. CASEY.—Taxation is very different. In regard
to unemployment insurance you would have State
officers putting their “ say so ” on a man’s card and
then passing it over to a Commonwealth man who
might frequently disagree.
Mr. D’ALTON.—Not necessarily.
Mr. CASEY.—It might happen very frequently in
regard to a man’s certification card.


Mr. HYNES.—Joint administration would be
absolutely impracticable.
Mr. CASEY.—The Commonwealth Government
thinks that at any rate’ it would conduce to friction
in hundreds of cases every day. The second scheme
propounded by Mr. Ince takes into account the varying
incidence of unemployment. It is uniform insofar as
contributions and benefits are concerned, but varies
from State to State in a degree corresponding with the
unemployment in each State. It provides for the greatest
duration of unemployment benefit in States with
a small amount of unemployment, and in larger States
with the major unemployment there would be a cor-
responding decrease of the period for which a man
would draw benefits. Such a scheme would have an
unequal incidence on unemployed persons in the
various States. The Commonwealth Government
believes that uniformity in this regard is essential in
any scheme of this sort. The real reason why the
Commonwealth injects itself into this problem is to
try to bring about in friendly co-operation with the
States an unemployment insurance scheme, which
would be uniform throughout Australia, at any rate,
so far as employer and employee are concerned.
Mr. D’ALTON.—Is that the only reason?
Mr. CASEY.—No; but I am putting the various
merits of the schemes against their demerits. The
Prime Minister, in his opening address, gave the
reasons why the Government has interested itself in
this subject. I am not attempting to take political
points, as some Ministers did earlier this afternoon. I
am giving practical reasons for the support of one
scheme as against another.' We had hoped that the
representatives of the Tasmanian and other State Go-
vernments would have discussed these points. The
second scheme has a considerable degree of merit, but
we do not believe that even it would be satisfactory.
We wish to see a scheme in force which would allow
the workers to move freely from one State to another,
taking their unemployment insurance cards with them,
arid being sure of the identical benefits in each State.
Scheme “B ” does not bring this about. The outstand-
ing condition that w r e would like to see established is
uniformity in respect of both employer and employee;
this would not necessarily mean uniformity as between
governments. We think that a modification might be
possible of either “ A ” scheme or “ B ” scheme to bring
that about. We, therefore, bring forward our proposal
believing that in any scheme which is to be successful
there should be throughout Australia equal contribu-
tions by employers and employees for equivalent bene-
fits. Let us say that 9d. is the unit of contribution,
though the Government is not by any means wedded to
that amount. For such a contribution employees
throughout the Commonwealth should be assured of
the same benefits and the same duration of benefits.
They should also be assured of uniform conditions in
regard to the waiting period and other matters.
Mr. HYNES. —What about the States with a lower
ratio of unemployment?
Mr. CASEY. —I shall come to that point. So far,
I have not touched the subject of governmental con-
tributions. It is obvious that if we have equal contribu-
tions and uniform conditions in respect of employers
and employees throughout Australia we cannot, because
of the varying degrees of unemployment in the dif-
ferent States, also have equal government contributions.
Assume for a moment that 9d. is the contribution of
employers and employees and the benefit is 15s. for
a given period. To arrive at the period of benefit we
could take either the Queensland basis or the basis
adopted by Mr. Ince, which is slightly different from
that of Queensland. To ensure equality of benefits an
adjustment of the governmental contribution as
between the Commonwealth and State Governments
might be necessary to cope with the varying degrees
of unemployment in different States. As we have the
Ince calculations and also those of our own experts, and
the actuaries, it should be possible to draft a scheme
that would provide for uniform benefits and for uni-
form contributions by employers and employees, but
allow for a variation of governmental contributions.
In such a case the Commonwealth Government would
be prepared to make a contribution, apart altogether
from its contribution as an employer—and I say this
particularly to Mr. Dwyer-Gray—equal to one-third
of the employers’ and employees’ contributions. That
is to say, if those contributions were 9d. each, the Com-
monwealth Government would be prepared to con-
tribute 3d. per insured person. That would mean that
States with average unemployment would have to con-
tribute 6d. and States with a higher or lower figure
than the average would have to pay something a
little more or a little less than 6d. The Common-
wealth Government would be prepared to go to this
extent in order to ensure a uniform system of contribu-
tions and benefits.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—In other words, the .Common-
wealth would pay one-third and the States two-thirds
of the Government contribution?
Mr. CASEY.—The Commonwealth contribution
would not necessarily be one-third.
Mr. D’ALTON.—It would be one-ninth of the total
contribution. f
Mr. CASEY.—That detail is not significant at the
moment. The proportion might vary a little as
between States, in accordance with the varying ratios
of unemployment.
Mr. JEFFRIES. —The employers’ and employees’
contributions would provide two-thirds and the other
one-third would be divided as between the governments
in accordance with your suggestion?
Mr. CASEY.—Yes. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment has arrived at this proposal after very careful
consideration of the Ince report which, as Mr. Stevens
said, is a very good jumping-off point. A tremendous
amount of work has gone into the compilation of its
relatively few pages. As we have the benefit of the
Ince calculations and could also obtain the assistance
of our own experts and actuaries, it should not be a
great task to evolve a scheme on the basis that I have
suggested.
Mr. ITYYES. —The weakness of that scheme would
be that the State with the best unemployment relief
measures would suffer a degree of disability as com-
pared with other States.
Mr. CASEY.—It is very difficult for the Common-
w T ealth to go into that aspect of the subject; that is the
concern of the States, which are infinitely more
familiar with the details than' we can-possibly be.
We see readily that there would be difficulties, but such
difficulties as existed in Queensland have, in a measure,
been surmounted. Queensland has been able -to collect
an unemployment relief tax and require an
unemployment insurance contribution at the same
time, and all parties appear to be reasonably
happy. The Commonwealth Government is not
wedded to a contribution of 9d. It may be
that after some ’discussion a different 'figure
will appear to be more satisfactory; possibly the
Queensland basis will prove acceptable. There is no
particular merit in 9d. Our main objective should be
to make a start. It may be better to start with 6d.
and work up. Mr. Stevens mentioned that the calcula-
tions in the Ince report were based on a somewhat
higher ratio of unemployment than at present obtains.
That is true. Mr. Ince took the figures for 1935-36.
That average was about 15 per cent., whereas the trade
union returns to-day show only 9.7 per cent, of unem-
ployment amongst their members. I have available a
graph which shows the unemployment percentage for
Australia, according to trade unions returns, for the


last twenty years. We realize, of course, that the
trade union returns are not anything like a complete
basis. It happened that they corresponded reasonably
with the census returns obtained in 1933, but I am
not at all sure that that was not just chance; the
Queensland figures rather show that it was. The Ince
report has been prepared on the basis of a cycle of eight
years, taking in' some bad times and some good times.
I suggest that it would be better for us to make our
basis a little higher than the present figure. That
would give some opportunity, we may hope, of build-
ing up the fund to some extent, and allow of a partial
swing the other way. Mr. Stevens referred to the
basis on which Mr. Ince had calculated the spread of
unemployment, and Mr. Hynes said that that was not
a very firm basis. That may be true except in relation
to Queensland, but it was the best basis available to
Mr. Ince, who also brought to bear on the problem his
knowledge of unemployment overseas. He does not
think that the figure will be found to be very much out.
At any rate, he had no better basis to work on.
He also pointed out that there is a large number of
persons in Australia who are permanently unemployed
or unemployable, and would never contribute to a
scheme of this kind. That is well known, and Mr. Ince,
I have no doubt, took it into account. Mr. Dunstan
made a point of the fact that this scheme is not a cure
for the unemployment problem.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I said that it was not a substitute
for the existing unemployment relief measures.
Mr. CASEY. —That is so. There probably is no
absolute cure for unemployment; at least, no country
has so far produced one. However, this proposal is at
least a beginning. Unemployment insurance has been
of tremendous benefit in Great Britain, which is the
principal country in which such a scheme is operating.
Unemployment insurance schemes of one kind or
another are operating in about twenty different coun-
tries, and we have examined all of them, but only that
in Great Britain is worth our attention. In other
countries the benefits received are trivial by our stan-
dards, and the administrative methods would not be
suitable. The British scheme has proved itself over 25
years, and we have no apologies to make for taking it
as the model for our own proposal. Moreover, the
Queensland scheme is based very closely upon the
British one, and it has worked satisfactorily for four-
teen years.
Mr. STEVENS. —It is necessary to make it clear
to the public just what the scheme will do. Many
people think that it will be a substitute for unemploy-
ment relief, and they will be seriously disillusioned
when they learn differently.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —-The public think that once this
scheme is brought into operation unemployment relief
taxes will disappear.
Mr. CASEY.—WeII, I hope that the press will help
us to acquaint the public with just what the scheme
proposes.
Mr. HYNES.—In Queensland we operate a parity
system between the various districts, but the English
scheme, and the proposed scheme for Australia, provide
for a Hat rate.
Mr. D’ALTON.—The fact is that the scheme, if put
into operation, would mean increased taxes.
Mr. CASEY. —Mr. Ince’s figures do not support that
view, and I am disposed to place some reliance on them.
He says that the scheme will effect a saving of
£2,500,000 a year over the whole of Australia. That
may not be accurate, but it is not likely to be much
out. However, even if the saving were only £1,500,000,
I should not be dismayed; that would represent a worth-
while saving to all of the States. Even if the Common-
wealth made no contribution to the scheme at all, the
estimated saving to the States is the amount I have
mentioned. ’
Mr. D’ALTON.—I am speaking from the point of
view of the worker; he would be worse off by 9d. a
week.
Mr. CASEY.—The difficulty from the point of view
of the States is how to fit a scheme of this kind into
the present financial fabric of the States, so that people
will not have to pay twice for the same benefit.
Mr. STEVENS.—CouId not those States which now
levy unemployment relief taxes contribute their share
of the insurance costs out of the proceeds of those
taxes ? In that way double taxation would be avoided.
Mr. D’ALTON.—The worker would be paying twice.
He would contribute his share of what the State govern-
ment had to find for the scheme, and he would have to
pay his 9d. a week as well.
Mr. STEVENS.—In New South Wales, we spend
£6,000,000 a year on relief and social services. I
doubt whether the workers provide half of that amount.
Tlie rest comes out of industry, and from other sources.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—The proposal is that the Com-
monwealth should contribute one-ninth of the levy, is
it not?
Mr. CASEY. —The Commonwealth wcfuld contri-
bute 3d. for each insured person, in addition to what
it would contribute as an employer. The cost to the
various governments, as governments, would be
£1,900,000 a year. On that basis the Commonwealth
would provide £650,000 a year in a ninepenny scheme.
Mr. HYNES'.—The. Commonwealth contribution
would fluctuate in the various States.
Mr. CASEY. —Yes, according to the number insured
under the scheme. The State contributions would vary
to an even greater extent, because they would be
governed by the number out of employment. There
are several points which need to be considered. The
first is whether or not the State governments favour,
broadly, a scheme such as the Commonwealth suggests.
Then we must consider whether the scheme, in its
initial stages, should be based on a nineoenny or six-
penny contribution. Again, there is the big problem
of whether or not public servants, and persons with
fixed and practically guaranteed employment, should
be brought under the scheme. Public servants are not
included in the scheme in Great Britain, hut they are
included in \he Queensland scheme. We must remem-
ber that the number of public servants in Australia is
comparatively large. If we exclude them, the contri-
butions for any given benefit will be higher, and to that
extent the scheme will be less attractive.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—If public servants are excluded,
the contributions of governments, as employers, will also
be reduced.
Mr. CASEY.—That is so. If public servants are
excluded, the scheme, actuarially, will not he so sound.
Then there are tens of thousands employed in banks
and insurance companies, whose employment is prac-
tically as certain as that of public servants, and if
public servants were excluded we may be certain that
applications for exclusion would be received from those
persons also.
Mr. HYNES.—What is the proposal of the Com-
monwealth regarding public servants?
Mr. CASEY. —The matter has not been specifically
considered yet. We wish to discuss it with the repre-
sentatives of the States.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —A public servant with security of
tenure, and his superannuation to look forward to when
he retires, would naturally object to contributing to a
national insurance fund.
Mr. D’ALTON. —Public servants cannot regard
their employment as absolutely certain. That was
demonstrated during the depression.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —I think that it would be a very
hard thing to bring public servants under a scheme of
this kind.


Mr. HYNES.—There would be a tremendous out-
cry in Queensland if the contribution of public servants
were to be increased from 6d. to 9d. They object
strongly now to paying the 6d.
Mr. CASEY.—Another problem is how to specify
qualification for entry into the scheme. In Queens-
land, the scheme covers all persons working under
awards, State or Federal. In Great Britain, the scheme
covers all persons between the ages of 14 and 65 work-
ing under a contract of service, with certain exceptions,
mainly non-manual workers receiving less than a
certain wage. Mr. luce suggests the Queensland
qualification, hut the Commonwealth Government
is not very keen on it. It thinks that the British
qualification is better, and would bring in more
contributions.
Mr. HYNES.—Our objection is that our taxpayers
would be paying 50 per cent, more under the “ A ”
scheme than they would have to pay now, while they
would receive no compensating advantage.
Mr. CASEY. —We are not bound to the 9d. pro-
posal. If we all agree, we could make it 6d.
Mr. STEVENS.—WouId it be possible for one State
to contract itself out of the scheme?
Mr. CASEY. —I think that we should have all the
States in it.
Mr. D’ALTON.—The workers would be definitely
worse off under the proposed scheme than they are at
present. In Tasmania, an unemployed person can
draw more by way of sustenance than he would receive
under the proposed scheme.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—In South Australia, an unem-
ployed man who is in danger of eviction from his
house, is given one day’s work a week at award rates in
order to enable him to pay his rent. In addition, he
draws sustenance. !
Mr. HYNES.—The Queensland scheme is based on
a daily contribution, whereas that suggested by Mr.
Ince is based on a weekly contribution.
Mr. CASEY. —Mr. Ince refers particularly to the
Queensland scheme, and eventually comes to the con-
clusion that his proposal is preferable. Of course, we
are not bound by any of the proposals now before the
conference, and the Commonwealth will be quite willing
to consider any suggestions.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I should like to hear more con-
cerning the administration.
Mr. CASEY.—If we adopt the scheme outlined, the
general administration would come under the “B ”
scheme which places the whole of the administration
in each State within the State, with a centralized co-
ordinating committee which would report as to increases
or decreases of contributions and benefits.
Mr. D’ALTON. —The State representatives are over-
looking the fact that under the scheme suggested by the
Commonwealth Government the whole of the adminis-
trative costs would be borne by the States, and in the
end the States would have to make up an amount
equivalent to that contributed by the Commonwealth.
Mr. HYNES. —The Commonwealth Government
would have a majority of the representation on the
proposed statutory committee.
Mr. CASEY. —The committee would not be a con-
trolling body, but merely an authority to ensure the
stability of the scheme. • It would be an equalization
committee.
Mr. JEFFRIES. —The contribution of the States
would vary according to the percentage of unemploy-
ment in them; that would penalize the State suffering
most through disabilities.
Mr. CASEY.—That would be made up by the amount
recommended by the Commonwealth Grants Commis-
sion. It would be not a disability but a “ need ”.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—WiII this he a further “ need ” to
he met 8
Mr. CASEY.—I am quite sure that the Common-
wealth Grants Commission or whatever body may be
considering financial assistance to the States, will deal
with the matter as fairly as it has been dealt with in
the past.
Mr. STEVENS.—We have also to consider the
position of the employer. This impost would be a first
charge against his business regardless of whether he was
or was not making a profit. Every employer would
have to contribute so much for each employee, and that
contribution would be included in his costs. I rather
favour k scheme under which the contributions would
vary according to the wages paid. The New South
Wales Railways Department employs 50,000 persons,
and a payment of 9d. a week in respect of each would
add considerably to the working cost of that depart-
ment. An unsound principle in the British scheme is
that employers contribute on the same basis regardless
of whether they are or are not making a profit.
Mr. D’ALTON.—A man employing 1,000 men may
be losing money, and he will have to carry a greater
load than a small employer who is making a substantial
profit.
Mr. CASEY.—Mr. Inee suggested that at the out-
set thinly populated areas should be excluded from the
scheme owing to the difficulties of administration. He
proposed certain limitations in the early stages, and
said that with more experience gradual extensions could
be made.
Mr. HYNES.—In Queensland we cover all workers.
Mr. STEVENS.—We should consider the possibility
of making employers contribute in accordance with the
wages paid.
Mr. D’ALTON.—WouId you make the same
suggestion in respect of employees?
Mr. STEVENS.—Yes. ■
Mr. MACKRELL.—With varying benefits?
Mr. STEVENS.—Yes.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—In Germany they have a
graduated scale, hut difficulties arise in respect of pay-
ments.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I consider that a Commonwealth
contribution of threepence would be entirely inadequate.
Mr. CASEY.—It would amount to £650,000 a year.
Mr. D’ALTON.—On a 9d. basis the worker and the
employer would be paying six times as much as the
Commonwealth.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—In the final analysis the
employer and the worker actually pay the lot for the
governmental contributions must come from taxes.
Mr. HYNES.—In Queensland, the percentage of
revenue to the benefits is 86.9, hut under the Common-
wealth scheme it would be 81.9.
Mr. STEVENS.—Is the Commonwealth to make
the whole of the contributions to a health insurance
scheme ?
Mr. D’ALTON.—In addition to other imposts, is it
proposed to inflict further direct taxation upon the
workers by asking them to pay weekly in respect
of health insurance? Such a load would be too heavy
for them to carry. Are the States prepared to agree
to a scheme of unemployment insurance involving com-
pulsory contributions ?
Mr. JEFFRIES.—We are not agreeing to anything.
Mr. D’ALTON.—Are the States in favour of a con-
tributory basis ?
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—That will be investigated by
the committee.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—The committee will be able to tell
us more definitely what the scheme will cost.
Mr. CASEY.—The committee will have the pro-
posals of the Commonwealth before it, and as all the
figures are available its investigation should not take
long.


Mr. DUNSTAN.—I understand that the committee
will have to investigate the schemes set out in the luce
report.
Senator Sir GEORG'S PEARCE.—And the modi-
fication outlined by Mr. Casey.
Mr. DUNSTAhI.—It will not be necessary for the
committee to travel.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—No; it will deal only with
the information already available.
Mr. HYNES.—What will be the position if one
State wishes to bring before the committee a scheme
which it thinks should be acceptable to the Cdmmon-
wealth?
Mr. CASEY.—We should confine the work of the
committee in the main to the scheme which I put for-
ward on behalf of the Commonwealth; it is really a
modification of Mr. Ince’s “ B ” scheme.
Mr. STEYENS. —Will the committee determine
whether a 9d. contribution is satisfactory? ,
Mr. CASEY.—Mr. Ince has based his recommenda-
tion on 15 per cent., whereas the percentage of
unemployment is now only 9.7 per cent. We have to
build up a fund. It may be possible to reduce con-
tributions later, but I suggest that an unemployment
ratio of not less than 14 per cent, should be the basis.
The proposed committee might produce figures based
on a contribution of 6d.
Mr. HYNES.—It is not suggested that during the
transition period the Queensland taxpayers should be
asked to pay twice ?
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—It is anticipated that there
would be sufficient funds in the Queensland scheme to
keep it operative for six months. ~, /.
Mr. D’ALTON.—That is asking Queensland to carry
an additional load.
Mr. HYNES.—We have a reserve of £250,000.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—The Queensland people would
be deriving benefits while those in the other States were
working up to the stage at which some return could
be expected.
Mr. HYNES.—No provision is made for the
transition period. •«
Mr. STEVENS. —I suggest that the committee should
investigate “ B ” scheme on a basis of 10 per cent, of
unemployment, or on varying ratios. I also believe
that an actuary of the Commonwealth Bank should be
on the committee.
Mr. CASEY. —We have had two actuaries working
full time on this subject, and they are familiar with
the figures.
Mr. STEVENS.—Our actuary says that the ratio
of unemployment adopted by Mr. Ince is too high.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I am satisfied that all the
information necessary could be supplied within a week.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—If a committee is appointed it
can proceed with the work at once.
Mr. D’ALTON.—Tasmania will not agree to a fiat
rate contributory basis.
Mr. STEVENS. —Tasmania would be represented
on the committee.
Mr. D’ALTON.—Yes, but we will not agree to a flat
rate contribution. I suggest that the Commonwealth
should pay two-thirds of the employees’ contributions.
Mr. CASEY. —Then you do not believe in an
unemployment insurance scheme.
Mr. D’ALTON.—I hold very strong opinions ’con-
cerning the Commonwealth Government’s responsi-
bilities. The employees should not be asked to con-
tribute so much as is proposed. If the Government
is anxious to assist the employees it should pay two-
thirds at least of their contribution. The worker is
already carrying his full share of the load in con-
nexion with unemployment, and I am not willing to
saddle him with one-third of the total contribution to
this scheme. Mr. Casey’s reference to the press makes
me sav that. If there is to be any disillusioning of
the mind of the public with regard to the wages tax,
I want the fact to be clearly understood that the
workers are doing their part.
Mr. CASE Y.—My • only reference to the press was
in relation to unemployment insurance. I did not
mention anything that was a concern' of the State
itself. - ■ < '
Mr. D’ALTON. —As we would require the present
method of wages taxation to continue I do not think
it is reasonable to suggest that the workers should pay
another contribution on top of it. The Common-
wealth Government should assist the employees rather
than the State.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—lnsofar as the State would
make a saving through this scheme, it could afford
relief to its own people.
Mr. D’ALTON.—I do not think that there will be
any particular saving, and. even if there is, the State
Governments can use such money to assist the unem-
ployed. Mr. Stevens mentioned the rural districts.
I agree with what he said. It seems to me that the
people who will receive assistance from this scheme
will be the people who will not be most in need of it.
Mr. STEVENS.—-Surely you would not object to
the Commonwealth making it possible for you to assist
a section of the people, even though it could not make
it possible for you to assist all of them.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—If Tasmania got 3d. for each
insured person from the Commonwealth it could surely
pass the benefit on.
Mr. D’ALTON.—Such a contribution by the Com-
monwealth would not be sufficient.
Mr. STEVENS.—At any rate it would be some-
thing you are not getting now.
Mr. D’ALTON.—The committee should also con-
sider the field of employment to be covered. Public
servants and railway workers have been mentioned.
If they are not brought within the scheme, I do not
think that there will be any prospect of it being
effective.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—If on investigation it is found
that this scheme is not practicable, will the Common-
wealth Government make available to the States for
unemployment relief the amount it is now prepared
to provide for the purposes of this scheme?
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—No; because we are talking
about unemployment insurance, not unemployment
relief.
Mr. STEVENS.—At any rate, it is for the States
to determine ultimately whether they will participate
in any scheme or not.
Mr. D’ALTON.—I do not think the work that it is
proposed to refer to this committee can be done in
a few weeks. It will require a lot of research. A great
deal of investigation will be necessary to discover
whether persons casually unemployed do, in practice,
register for relief.
Mr. HYNES.—In the event of a State refusing to
come into the scheme, could it be forced to do so?
Mr. MENZIES.—That would depend upon the
nature of the scheme. If a scheme were propounded
to be operated by the States themselves, no compulsion
could be imposed. If the Commonwealth decided to
exercise its own separate legislative power, it could
take action entirely apart from the States.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—Is there any doubt as to whether
the Commonwealth has power to set up an entirely
Commonwealth i unemployment insurance scheme?
Mr. MENZIES.—I should not think so. The Com-
monwealth has power in respect of insurance. '
Mr. HYNES.—In the event of a State declining
to participate in a scheme, could it be forced to do so?
Mr. MENZIES.—No force could be exerted on it
in regard to a State scheme, but an entirely Common-
wealth scheme could be implemented.


Mr. JEFFRIES. —Is the Commonwealth’s offer of
3d. for each insured person applicable only to
employees working under awards? ’
Mr. CASEY. —No; the Commonwealth Govern-
ment does not make that qualification.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—I assume that it is generally
agreed that the committee should be set up.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—How long would it take the com-
mittee to prepare a report?
Mr. CASEY. —About a month.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—I will ask that the names of
the State representatives should be furnished to the
Commonwealth Treasurer, who will convene the
committee.
Mr. D’ALTON.—There should be not more than
two from each State.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—The committee will be asked
to deal with the following points:—The ratio of unem-
ployment on different bases; the scope of workers
covered; the rate of contribution on different bases; the
rate of benefit; the duration and conditions of benefit;
and the effect on State and Commonwealth budgets.
There could also be a general provision to allow for
other matters to be investigated.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—The effect on State budgets of
the different incidence of unemployment in the States
should be considered.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—Must the committee regard the
3d. for each insured person as the maximum contribu-
tion by the Commonwealth? Could it not consider
different bases ?
Mr. CASEY.—No, because this is a Commonwealth
proposal. The committee should not consider matters
of political consequence.
Mr. HYNES. —I wish to make it clear that my
government will not consider itself bound by the
decisions of the committee.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—That applies all round.
Mr.' JEFFRIES. —Governments will not be more
bound by this committee’s decisions than they are by
the Ince report.
Mr. D’ALTON.—The committee should calculate
what amount will be involved if the Commonwealth-
contribution were set against the employees’ contribu-
tions instead of against the State contributions.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—That could easily be ascer-
tained.
Mr. CASEY.—But that consideration introduces a
political factor.
Mr. D’ALTON.—It is not more political than the
Government’s proposal to contribute 3d.
Mr. CASEY.—We are Ministers, and the com-
mittee will consist of officers.
Mr. D’ALTON.—I want the committee to bring
in a report on a basis that will be acceptable to Tas-
mania.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—The Commonwealth Govern-
ment has indicated what it is prepared to do. That
is a political consideration. It would not be proper
for officers to say that we ought to do more.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I do not think we can get very
far in this matter unless we are prepared to give and
take somewhat. I suggest that the committee should be
given the widest powers.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—It is an insult to the intel-
ligence of the actuaries to suggest that they should
make a calculation oi the kind mentioned. It is not a
matter for the officers to deal with.
Mr. D’ALTON.—I have no wish to insult the
officers; in fact, I have, perhaps, more respect for
them than for some of the Ministers. , I desire to point
out, however, that Tasmania will not accept a flat rate
contribution as a basis. What is the use of appointing
a committee to bring in a report, if it may include in
that_ report something which we are not likely to
accept ?
Mr. HYNES.—Under either the “A” or the “B”
scheme, Queensland would lose something which it
now enjoys, and would receive no compensating advan-
tage. I referred to the parity scheme as between
the various parts of the State. I suggest that the
committee might go into that also.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—There would be no objection
to that.
Mr. HYNES.—Has the personnel of the committee
been suggested? "
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—Each Government will nomi-
nate its own representatives.
Resolved —
That a committee of experts, representing the respective
governments —no government to have more than two repre-
sentatives—be appointed to investigate and report upon the
scheme outlined by Mr. Casey in respect of—
(1) Cost on ratios of 10 per cent., 12 per cent., and 14
per cent, of unemployment;
(2) Scope of operation;
(3) Alternative contributions of 6d. and 9d.;
(4) Rate, duration, and conditions of benefits;
(5) Effect on Commonwealth and State budgets; and
(0) Any other directly relevant matters.
40-HOUR WORKING WEEK.
Mr. HYNES. —My Government is very anxious that
the Commonwealth Government should make some
effort to bring about a universal 40-hour working
week within the Commonwealth. The question of
reducing the number of working hours is closely related
to that of unemployment. I do not claim that the
shortening of the working week would be a panacea
for all our economic ills, hut I do think that it would
be a considerable contribution towards the solution of
the unemployment problem. The present policy of
the Queensland Government is a statutory 44-hour
week, with a reduction of hours to 40 by the court
where possible. Under that scheme we have imposed
conditions in the awards which enable 16 per cent, of
the workers to enjoy the benefit of a 40-hour week.
Throughout the world to-day there seems to be a
concerted effort on the part of governments to shorten
the working week, because they recognize that by so
doing employment can be found for more people. If
the Commonwealth Government could assist by agree-
ing to the passing of a resolution at this Conference 1
affirming the principle of a 40-hour working week,
that would be an important step in the right direction.
It will, perhaps, be suggested that those State govern-
ments which believe that, there should be a 40-hour
week should forthwith pass legislation to bring such
a scheme into effect. I point out, however, that if we
in Queensland were to take that action, our manu-
facturing industries would suffer as the result of unfair
competition from other States. It is not practicable
for any one State to introduce a 40-hour working week.
The principle must necessarily be general in its applica-
tion. This is a matter which is agitating the minds of
all sections of responsible opinion, not only in those
States which have Labour governments, but in others
also. Unless something is done speedily we may have
to fSce the issue on a different field. I believe that the
organized workers of Australia are prepared to put up
a fight for the reduction of the number of working
hours. The Commonwealth Government should con-
sider whether it is prepared to wait until the existing
dissatisfaction culminates in strikes, which will be
detrimental to the country as a whole. I believe that
it would be possible to work a 40-hour week in most
of our industries without inflicting economic hardship.
At the last Premiers Conference, in Adelaide, my
Premier submitted a motion, which was not agreed to.


I now place the same motion before this Conference;
I move— . ■
That in view of the changing economic life of Australia and
the necessity for adjustment to meet these changing conditions,
together with the obvious necessity for a practical solution of
the social and economic problems arising out of unemploy-
ment, this Conference affirms the necessity for the early intro-
duction by the Commonwealth and the States of legislation
designed to provide for a national 40-hour week. ■
The mechanization of industry, and the improvement
of machinery, are constantly displacing human labour.
The time is not far distant when those persons who are
working will be taxed to support those who cannot find
employment. Eventually, the number of unemployed
will become so great that the system will break down.
I communicated with the Premier of Western Aus-
tralia in order to find out the attitude of his Govern-
ment towards this matter. I forwarded a copy of the
motion, and asked the Premier to intimate whether
he would authorize me to associate his Government
with the proposal. I received the following reply:—
Desire to support national 40-hour week, and authorize you
to associate my Government with this proposal.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —I was under the impression that
this Conference was called for the specific purpose of
discussing unemployment insurance. So long as it is
understood that when a Conference of Ministers is called
for a specific purpose, any State may bring forward
other matters, I have no objection. I merely point out
that I have had no opportunity to discuss this present
proposal with my Government.
Mr. MENZIES.—It was fully discussed at Adelaide,
and voted on.
Dr. EAELE PAGE.—Mr. Hynes wrote to the Com-
monwealth some time ago in regard to this matter, and
a communication was also received from Mr. Dwyer-
Gray. It was impossible to call a conference at that
time, and a suggestion was made that the matter might
be discussed at this Conference.
Mr. D’ALTON.—We have letters here from the
Commonwealth intimating that the matter would be
discussed at this Conference.
Mr. D W YEE-GEAY.—The Acting Premier of
Queensland wrote to the Chairman of the Loan Council
suggesting that the 40-hour week proposal 'should be
considered by that body. The chairman properly
indicated that that would not be suitable, but suggested
that the matter might he discussed at this Conference.
Mr. D’ALTON.—I second the motion. Tasmania
will support the proposal outlined by Mr. Hynes-. In
view of the fact that the necessity to discuss the subject
at this conference had been brought under the notice of
the Commonwealth authorities, I suggest that discussion
of it should now proceed.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—If the Premiers are agreeable I
have no objection.
Mr. MENZIES.—This motion was rejected at the
Adelaide conference. Is there anything fresh to bring
forward ? -
Mr. D’ALTON. —Is the Commonwealth Government
prepared to ratify the international convention, par-
ticularly in respect of the various sections which it
instructed its delegate to support? The Commonwealth
Attorney-General has stated previously that the Com-
monwealth Constitution is somewhat obscure on the
subject of hours of labour, and we feel that the only
way to remove that obscurity is for the Commonwealth
Government to legislate for a 40-hour week, and then
to allow some employer to test the constitutionality of
the law. The workers of Australia should not be
penalized by the inactivity of the Federal Government.
If the Commonwealth Government will legislate as is
expected of it, the States will do their part.
Senator Sir GEOEGE PEAECE. —The motion sub-
mitted by Mr. Hynes is exactly the same as that
moved at the conference of Commonwealth and State
Ministers held in Adelaide in August last. Mr. D’Alton
has suggested the ratification of the so-called convention
for a 40-hour working week.
Mr. D’ALTON”.—Why a “so-called” convention?
Senator Sir GEOEGE PEAECE. —Because there
is in the public mind a good deal of misapprehension
concerning the convention. The report of the con-
ference held in 1935, which dealt with a 40-hour week,
reads—
Each member of the International Labour Organization
which ratifies this convention declares its approval of —
. (o) the principle of a 40-hour week applied in such a
manner that the standard of living is not reduced
in consequence; and
(5) the taking or facilitating of such measures as may
be judged ’ appropriate to secure this end, and
undertakes to apply this principle to classes of
employment in accordance with the detailed pro-
visions to lie prescribed by such separate conven-
tions as are ratified by that member.
The State representatives attending this Conference will
see that that convention referred merely to something
that was to follow. There were to be separate conven-
tions dealing with particular industries, and those
who ratified this general convention bound them-
selves only to apply this principle to classes of employ-
ment in accordance with the detailed provisions to be
prescribed by separate conventions. Further, the Com-
monwealth’s support of the convention was subject to
the general reservations made at that time. The
instructions issued by the Commonwealth Government
to its delegate in respect of a proposed reduction of
hours read —
(o) The constitutional position of the Commonwealth and
of the Australian States in relation to determining hours of
work is that the Commonwealth can legislate only as to the
working hours of its own employees and also for the setting
np of a court of conciliation and arbitration for the prevention
and settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond the
limits of one State. In all other respects industrial powers
belong to the State Parliaments.
(6) In a few isolated cases the State Parliaments have
passed laws directly regulating hours, but in substance the
industrial policy’ of Australia has been to set up tribunals
with compulsory powers, and to leave it to those tribunals
to fix, within the limits of their jurisdiction, wages and work-
ing hours and conditions generally.
(c) The people of Australia have repeatedly approved of
this policy which enables industrial problems to be dealt with
on their merits and after adequate inquiry.
(d) The Commonwealth Government adheres strongly to
this policy, which it regards as of vital importance both to
employers and employees, and which has, in fact, been the
means of effecting steady’ reductions in the working week as
circumstances justify them, until at present the average work-
ing week in Australia is approximately 45 hours.
(c) While it is satisfied that the Australian system of
independent industrial tribunals and its policy of enforc-
ing their decisions should be continued, the Commonwealth
Government agrees that the adoption of an international
standard of working hours in respect of particular industries
would be most desirable, provided, of course, that it was inter-
national in the sense that it commanded the adherence of the
majority of competing countries, and provided further that it
was actually effectuated by those countries. It would accord-
ingly be prepared to co-operate in any manner within its
limited powers in any agreement having such an objective
though it thinks it proper to point out that the differences
between industrial workers and those engaged in country
industries present problems of great complexity, some solu-
tion of which must accompany any measures taken to bring
about an all-round reduction in the hours of industrial
workers.
~h
The position of the Commonwealth in respect of over-
seas competition corresponds with that of Queensland
in respect of interstate competition. The Common-
wealth has to take cognizance of international com-
petition.
Mr. HYNES.—The Commonwealth can provide
tariff protection in that respect.
Senator Sir GEOEGE PEAECE.—Tariff protection
will not help the exporting industries. The' instructions
continued —
(/) Subject to the clear expression of these views the
Government delegate is authorized to vote for the adoption
of the specific conventions to he considered by the conference,


namely, (o) the textile industry; (6) the printing and
kindred trades; and (c) the chemical industry, provided that
he also indicates that the Government of the Commonwealth
of Australia would make it a condition of its ratification of
these conventions that the principal countries engaged in these
industries should have adhered to such conventions.
( g ) To avoid any misunderstanding the Government dele-
gate should make it clear that adherence to any such con-
vention by the Commonwealth cannot, as the constitutional
position now stands, confer upon the Parliament of the Com-
monwealth a legislative power which it does not now possess,
but that such adherence would be significant as (i) an indi-
cation of the policy of the Government in the circumstances
then existing; and (ii) giving an opportunity to the Parlia-
ments of the States to exercise their own powers in relation
to the matter.
Subsequent to the adoption of that principle two
draft conventions have been adopted by the Inter-
national Labour- Conference—one in 1936 dealing
with public works, and another in 1937 in relation
to the, textile industry. It is significant that so far
no country has yet ratified any convention for the
adoption of a 40-hour week. The public works con-
vention was adopted by the International Labour Con-
ference, but it has not been ratified by any country.
The Commonwealth appointed a committee to investi-
gate the effect of ratification insofar as it affected
the Commonwealth, and the committee reported that
it would cost the Commonwealth as an employer
£500,000 a year, and that the ratification by the Com-
monwealth would also involve the States. It is almost
certain that had the Commonwealth ratified a con-
vention covering Commonwealth services, the States
would, as a matter of course, have also to implement it.
The cost to the States has not been ascertained, but,
having regard to the ramifications of State industries,
we may assume that the cost to the more populous
States would he even greater than that to the Com-
monwealth. The textile convention was adopted by
the International Labour Conference in June last, but
no action upon it has yet been taken, because the final
text of the proceedings of that convention has not yet
reached the Department of External Affairs. When
it is received it will be forwarded to the States for
their consideration. The Commonwealth considers
that it cannot legislate in connexion with the textile
industry. That is a matter for the States, and until
the States have been supplied with the particulars of
the convention, they cannot be expected to say whether
they will or will not legislate to implement it. I
repeat, that there are only two conventions which could
be ratified; the one dealing with public works has been
examined by the Commonwealth with the result men-
tioned. I am not sure whether any State Government
has examined it; it has been referred to the States.
If the governments of the States are prepared
to implement it they possess the power to
pass the necessary legislation; when they have
legislated on the subject the Commonwealth Par-
liament may proceed to do its part. , Rut it
would be injudicious to carry a motion such
as that moved by Mr. Hynes before the whole
subject has been inquired into by the States and the
effect upon their finances ascertained. The textile
industry is the subject of fierce international com-
petition, and if Australia were to ratify a 40-hour
week in that industry before any other nation had
done so the effect would be serious. It would be unwise
to ratify such conventions before considering the effect
of ratification upon State finances and particular
industries.
Mr. HYNES.—I am asking the conference to affirm
the necessity to legislate for a 40-hour week.
Senator Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—I have already
stated what would be the effect of carrying such a
motion. .
Mr. HYNES.—I would likd the Commonwealth
to affirm the principle.
Senator Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—Has the Queens-
land Government investigated the position in respect
of public works?
Mr. HYNES.—A 40-hour week is now worked in
connexion'with such undertakings.
Sir ARCHDALE PARKHILL.—Are the railway
men working 40 hours ?
Mr. HYNES.—They are working 44 hours.
Mr. DWYER-GRAY.—We have previously advo-
cated the introduction of a 40-hour week without any
reduction of pay. It is true, as stated by Sir George
Pearce, that no country has yet ratified any conven-
tion in connexion with a 40-hour week; nevertheless,
a 40-hour week is worked in France, the United States
of America, New Zealand, and several other countries.
I feel that the time has arrived to take a definite stand
on this principle.
Senator Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—The 1936 con-
vention in respeef of public works reads—
(l) This convention applies to persons directly employed
on building or civil engineering works financed or subsidized
by central governments.
(2) For the purpose of .this convention the precise scope
of the term, “ building or civil engineering ”, “ finance ” and
“ subsidized ” shall be delimited by the competent authority
after consultation with the organizations of employers and
workers concerned, where such exist. .
Mr. DUNSTAN.—This subject was discussed very
fully at the conference of Commonwealth and State
Ministers held in Adelaide about twelve months ago,
and I have nothing to add to the remarks I then made.
If a 40-hour week were adopted it would have to apply
to the whole Commonwealth. Two points must be
considered: The possible benefit to the workers con-
cerned, and the effect upon industry. I believe that
hours of work can reasonably be reduced, but to what
degree I cannot say. I am not in a position to deter-
mine that point. This question deserves the fullest
investigation, for it might have far-reaching effects.
This evening we have referred to a committee of experts
the subject of unemployment insurance. The subject
of the hours of work, which is much more far-reaching,
could also be referred to a committee of experts for
investigation. A tribunal consisting of representatives
of the employers and employees with an independent
chairman could be set up to advise the various govern-
ments on the subject. Ido not know whether industry
is in a position to stand a 40-hour week, and we should
have that information before we vote on any motion
on the subject. The tribunal that was proposed to he
set up some time ago did not function. It would be
wise, therefore, to set up an impartial tribunal at this
juncture to deal with the subject.
Mr. MENZIES.—It could be dealt with next week in
the Commonwealth Arbitration Court.
Mr. DUNSTAN.—I think it could not be dealt with
quite so rapidly as that. I am not prepared to affirm
the principle without knowing the full effects of it.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—The position of the Common-
wealth in this connexion has not altered since the
Adelaide conference was held.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—I have nothing to add to what I
said at the Adelaide conference. As the Commonwealth
Attorney-General has observed, the Arbitration Court
is the proper tribunal to deal with the subject.
Mr. STEVENS.—I was not at the Adelaide con-
ference. It does not appear to me that this is a proper
opportunity to argue the economic effects of this pro-
posal. I should be prepared to do so, if time permitted.
I have always held the view that this is a subject for
judicial determination. In 1932, a measure was passed
by the Parliament of New South Wales withdrawing
from the Parliament the power to deal with standard
hours of work, and referring the subject to the court.
The court has since fixed a 44-hour working week.
Some industries, though, work 40 hours a week. I do
not think it is ungenerous to say that, this subject is


obviously being used as a stalking horse for party
politics. Those who advocate the general adoption of a
40-hour week would find great difficulty in putting it
into effect. I do not think that any one has discovered
the real effect upon industry of tinkering with the hours
of work. I would rather increase usages than tinker
with working hours. I do not think a shortening of
the hours of work would be followed by any compensat-
ing increase of the purchasing power of the people. Such
a move would increase leisure, but not purchasing power.
During the depression we did not reduce the working
week. We have since steadily increased the volume of
production. Wages also are steadily returning to their
former standard. There should be the fullest inquiry
by a court before a change of this description is made
in our industrial practice. The recent judicial inquiry
which resulted in an increase of wages by 6s. a week
was thorough, and the court apparently decided that
such an increase was preferable to a reduction of work-
ing hours. The Government of New South Wales
would be pleased to approve of a State judge co-
operating with the Commonwealth Arbitration Court
in investigating this subject.
Mr. DUNSTAN. —There is no doubt that the court
is the proper tribunal.
Mr. MENZIES. —The policy of the Commonwealth
Government is similar to that of the Government of
New South Wales. We think this is a matter for the
court. . •
Mr. HYNES.—I regret that Mr. Stevens used the
phrase “ stalking horse ” in eonnexion with this subject.
The 40-hour week is a live issue in Queensland, which
is the most highly industrialized State in the Com-
monwealth. I am quite certain that if Queensland
could be satisfied that it would suffer no disability in
regard to unfair competition from other States through
providing for a universal 40-hour week, it would do it
at once.
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—The Queensland position in
relation to the competition of other States is exactly
the Commonwealth problem with regard to the com-
petition of other countries. We do not wish to risk
unfair competition.
Mr. HYNES.—The positions are not exactly
analagons.
Dr. EARLE .PAGE. —I think they are, and more so
since the defeat of the marketing referendum. It
would be possible by tariff action to protect a 40-hour
week for workers in secondary industries, but it would
not be possible so to protect a 40-hour week for workers
in primary industries.
Mr. IPALTON.—WouId you favour a 40-hour week
if you could be assured of freedom from unfair inter-
national competition?
Dr. EARLE PAGE.—I have never been able to deal
effectively with hypothetical questions. I find actual
facts difficult enough.
Mr. ITALTON. —Since the Adelaide conference, Mr.
Menzies has frequently stated that this subject should
be dealt with by the Arbitration Court. " '
Mr. DTI NS TAN.—I again ask: Is any one in a
position to say whether industry can stand "a 40-hour
week ?
Mr. HYNES.—We think it can.
Mr. JEFFRIES. —I am prepared to move an amend-
ment to the effect that in the opinion of this con-
ference the subject of hours of work should be decided
by the proper tribunal having jurisdiction in regard
to it.
Mr. STEYENS.—I would be prepared to second
such an amendment.
‘ Mr. DUNSTAN.—I do not think that it is a subject
for an amendment. We should be for or against the
motion. At any rate, if Mr. Jeffries moves his amend-
ment, I shall give notice of a further amendment to the
effect that the matter be referred to a tribunal consist-
ing of representatives of the employers and employees,
with an independent chairman.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—I do not particularly wish to
move the amendment.
On the-motion being put the Commonwealth, New
South 'Wales, Victoria and South Australia voted in
the negative, and Queensland, Western Australia and
Tasmania in the affirmative.
•' Motion thus resolved in the negative.
At 6.J+5 p.m. the conference terminated.
By Authority: L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
