





f rn+
CONFERENCE ADDRESSES
DELIVERED AT
(Si daulficli),
MINISTERS AND LAYMEN OE DIFFERENT
DENOMINATIONS,
AUGUST, 1875.
EDITED BY REV. H. B. MACARTNEY, M.A»
Ipetetme:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West,




PREFACE.
f'C ■
J
The reader of the second series of Conference Addresses
will quickly find, that personal experience hold s a place in
each speaker’s mind, entirely subordinate to his view of that
“ Mighty God,” that “ Everlasting Father,” who, by His own
power, produces experience in the soul.
1
Nevertheless, we maintain that the eye that is lighted with
the light of the Spirit, that feasts upon the written records of
divine tenderness, that gazes on the matchless beauty of the
living Christ, and that sparkles in hope of His appearing—
such an eye, we say, with such an object, will affect the heart
of the believer and all its issues in a divine and perfect way,
a way of God’s own appointing.
Above all, we hold that any man to whose discouraged
soul the Holy Spirit clearly reveals the Lord Jesus as “ a
Saviour from sin,” is, by his faith, saved from sin ; and of
.such an one the Apostle testifies, “ He shall be a vessel unto
honour, sanctified, and meet for the Master’s use, and prepared
unto every good work.” Spiritual aspirations can hardly
soar higher. Would that, in all God’s people, they soared
so high !
If this volume helps but a single member of the flock into
a more excellent knowledge of Christ, and into a richer ex-
perience of His boundless love, it will not have been published
in vain. Thousands who have been led to a knowledge of
the truth, by equally unpretending instruments, will magnify
throughout eternity the amazing grace of Him Who has given
us “ all things ” in Christ—Who has made “ all things pos-
sible to him that believeth.” _____
Parsonage, Caulfield,
December Ist, 1575. ff V*
So * K0V1992 ~
V *




CAULFIELD ADDRESSES.
First Day.—Wednesday, August 18, 1875.
Rubied: “PffUnm"
About one hundred persons assembled at five o’clock
p.m. in the old Church of St. Mary’s, Caulfield, and
continued for an hour in supplication and prayer. Re-
freshments were partaken of for half an hour, and half
an hour more was spent in singing the Conference
hymns. Soon after seven o’clock the building was over-
crowded, and many, unable to obtain admission, were
reluctantly obliged to retrace their steps to the railway,
and thence to Melbourne, a distance of six miles.
At half-past seven the Chairman rose and said : —The
first act of our Conference must be a tribute of welcome
and praise to Him whose face and whose truth we have
come to seek on earth, and whom God has crowned in
heaven as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. How can
we offer Him more acceptable worship or render Him
greater homage than by confessing, in the words of a
beautiful hymn, that He has become the great necessity
of our lives, that “ without Him we can do nothing 1”
The hymn—
“ I cannot do without Thee,
Any moment, of my life,”
having been sung, the Chairman read selected portions


of Scripture ; and the opening prayer was offered, as on
July 21, 1874, by Rev. M. H. Becher. The Chairman
(Rev. H. B. Macartney) then delivered the following
OPENING ADDRESS.
My Brethren, Sisters, and Fathers in Chuist
—lt is impossible to stand again in the midst of
you without the thronging in of a thousand thoughts,
and emotions, and memories of the past, which almost
unfit me for calm and unimpassioned utterance. I
therefore entreat your prayers, not only for myself, but
for every speaker, that we may be kept throughout the
Conference in a spirit of childlike dependence upon
God for grace to perceive, and for power to manifest
each glorious aspect of the truth as it is in Jesus. I
did think of referring to the gracious manner in which
God blessed the first Conference and the first volume of
Conference Addresses; and my heart grows sorrowful
when I look around and miss jive who worshipped with
us last year, who are now among the sainted dead.
But from these and other kindred subjects I turn aside
to the all-absorbing, all-fruitful topic of to-night, “ Holi-
ness to the Lord.” I know that many of you, perhaps
all of you, wish to be holy. Some of you yearn for a
closer walk with God, a calm and heavenly frame. You
cannot “ mount up with wings, as eaglesand in order
to have the mighty power of God exercised in a
more complete renewal—in conscious light, joy, love,
and liberty—you would sacrifice everything, even life
itself. You are thirsting to be holy. This thirst is in
itself a work of God the Holy Ghost. May He now
open your eyes, as He did Hagar’s, to see in Jesus a
well of water, from which drinking you shall never
thirst again.
In my own pursuit of holiness I have bad many ups


and downs, have erred and strayed like a lost sheep,
have longed for other people’s experience, have agonised
and wept, have searched about for faith, have put aside
the most pressing work in order to get “the blessing,”
have read books and papers, have gone many a time
straight to my knees from their perusal with tearful
eyes and a longing heart, and yet I have quickly yielded
to some old temptation, and have confessed in bitter
self-reproach, “I have not saved myself from this sin,
and God has not saved me either.” Once I had spent
an hour, looking for faith , for I knew that without
faith it was impossible to please God, when a voice
came to me, as real as if it was audible, “It is not faith
that you want, but Jesus." I was greatly comforted,
and from that time I have sought not less after a faith
which “ groweth exceedingly,” but far more after the
Lord Jesus Himself, “that I may know Him, and the
power of His Resurrection, and the fellowship of His
sufferings,” Faith, without God as its object, without
Christ, without facts and promises, is a mere phantom.
Arrive first at “ the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ,” and faith will follow easily. “Faith!" said an
eminent Christian to me in a letter lately received,
“ We Christians may not {way for faith, for really to
know God in what He is, itself involves and necessi-
tates faith. The moment we really know, we must trust.”
My mind has long since come to a safe anchorage on that
text, “Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free;” and that other text, “ This is life
eternal, to know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus.”
I confess that my eyes, like a babe’s, seem only just
opening to see something of Him in whom are hid all
the treasures of grace, and wisdom, and knowledge ;
but then two fresh longings come with each fresh revela-
tion —(l)Thatl may perfectly know God’s will,and do it;
and (2) that I may know Him so well as my Saviour from
b 2


sin and care, that I shall just be able in confiding love
to indicate to Him my weakness or my want, and then
to leave it wholly in His hands. The one brings about
the activity of faith, the other leads us to rest and to
victory.
ASSURANCE OF SALVATION.
And now, altogether apart from my own or anybody
else’s experience, I would briefly point out a few truths,
without the knowledge of which you cannot rightly
know God, or make real headway against evil. And,
first, there can be no rest to the soul and no satisfactory
growth in grace without full assurance. “ Have you no
fears ?” said a good man to a dying girl. “ No, none.”
“No doubts ]” “No; why should I 1 I see it all
clearly. I’m only a poor sinner, and Jesus died for me,
and / believe in Him, and God says I am saved, and so
I know I am,” A few days before she had said, “ I
am lost—l know I’m lost—because I’m a sinner, and
God’s word says so.” Here was assurance—assurance of
perdition—followed by assurance of salvation, both
based on the truth of the Bible. As believers, we
have to do with God’s word, and that only; and I
unhesitatingly affirm that the sins of believers —all of
them— are put away, and they ought to know it. St.
John says to little children in the faith, “Your sins are
forgiven; ’ and again he says, “ I have written unto
you, that ye may know that ye have eternal life.” The
same Scripture which testifies of God that He “ justifieth
the ungodly,” testifies of men that “ all that believe
are justified. Believe that God is a Saviour; believe
that every believer is safe, and give thanks accordingly.
“ Look unto Me, and be ye saved.” Not to be sure of
Gods salvation is not to be sure of God. You must
learn your Bible better, trembling heart, and cease to
fear.


DEAD TO SIN.
Again, every believer is dead to sin, dead to sin, and
he ought to know it. This is a truth of first-rate im-
portance. It is a key to our whole position as saints.
“ Though an host of men rise up against me, in this
will Ibe confident.” God has said it, not once, but
many times, and He lays great stress upon it. You reply,
“ But my whole experience disproves that statement. 1
am keenly alive to sin; and I commit sin, and I knov
I do.” I answer, “ God has commanded you not
to sin, and God says that you are dead to sin.
You have no strength to obey the command
until you believe the fact. Have you believed God
where He says, ‘ How shall we that are dead to sin live
any longer therein V and where He repeats the same
truth seven times more in Romans vi. 1” You answer,
“That means judicially, legally dead.” lanswer, “Exactly
so, and that glorious death of the Lord Jesus has a
power in it not only for pardon, but for cessation from
sin. ‘He bore our sins in His own body on the tree,
that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteous-
ness.’ I see in the cross not only an end of my sin, but
an end of myself. I was crucified with Christ; so was
Paul; so were you; so were all believers. ‘ The sub-
stitution of Jesus for the believing sinner on the cross,'
said a gifted writer years ago, ‘ has blotted out from
before God not only the guilt of his soul, but also the
very remembrance of his person as a man naturally alive
—a fleshly man. Death and burial, which the Holy One
underwent, are the realities of God, wherein the eye of
faith beholds its emancipation from the yoke of sin.
“He that hath died hath been set free from sin.” ’ ” I
again assert it, beloved brethren, Christ by dying freed
Himself from sin ; you died with Him, in God’s
reckoning; therefore He freed you too; and you are free
—you are dead to sin. God says so ; give Him credit


for speaking the truth. By faith you reckon yourself
forgiven because God says your are, and you enjoy
peace. By faith, then, “ reckon yourself dead to sin,”
because God says you are, and you will not sin in the
old way. You will not be without sin, but you will not
commit former iniquity. Take an illustration : Abraham’s
body was dead, and so was Sarah’s, as far as children
were concerned. God told Abraham that his body was
not dead, and Abraham believed God, and it was counted
unto him for righteousness. So with us, who are pain-
fully alive to sin. Our own experience conflicts with
the truth of God. Now, experience must give way to
truth in all cases; and God says we are dead to sin.
Let us believe it, and we shall bring forth fruit unto
holiness. The argument stands briefly thus :
We are dead to sin judicially.
We are alive to sin actually.
We become dead to sin practically, by faith in
Christ,
Dr. Chalmers is very clear on this point. He says—
“ What you have distinctly to do, my brethren, in the
heat and urgency of your besetting temptations, is to set
up your death in Christ as your defence against the
further authority of sin over you. Who ever tried this
and failed V I would here remind you that though
your death to sin is as plainly taught in Scripture as the
doctrine of imputed righteousness, you will not and
cannot understand it, or make it of practical utility,
until it has been carried home to your souls by the
special power and grace of the Holy Spirit. Ask for
illumination on this point, as on all others as yet but
dimly seen; and ask in faith, expecting to receive.
ALIVE PROM THE DEAD.
The next important fact to which I would direct your
attention is this : —Every believer is alive unto God.


This truth receives a far readier assent now-a-days than
the other ; and yet, strange to say, it lies upon the
other as on a foundation. There must be union with
Christ in His death before there can be union with
Christ in His life. “ Now, if we be dead with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with Him.” In the
case of our blessed Lord, the way to life lay through
death. So with us. A man must die to sin in order
to live to God. This is the drift of St. Paul’s argument
in Homans vi. A man naturally dead cannot be said
to be “freed” or “justified” from sin, for after death
comes judgment. Freedom from sin—as regards con-
tinuance in it—is the privilege of those who have
judicially died with Christ—a privilege which few have
understood or enjoyed, and which many have denied
with vehemence. But we have not to do with men,
but with God and with His Word. And St. Paul says,
xi l was crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live.”
This is the twofold grace of a baptism from above, as
beautifully taught in our catechism—“A death unto
sin, and a new birth unto righteousnesss.” There is a
very definite transition from a state of death in sin
to a glorious death to sin; and this death to sin is of
necessity linked-up with a life unto God, for we derive
both the life to God and the death to sin from Jesus, by
union with Him. Is Christ divided ? Can He cause
you to be alive to God, and yet not dead to sin ] Does
He portion-out fragments of blessing to one and to
another? No, beloved. “Ye are complete in Him.”
The weakest believer in the world is as dead to sin in
God’s estimation, and as alive to righteousness, as the
strongest; for God’s eye looks at Christ, at His death,
His burial, His resurrection, His royal session in
heaven; and all believers are looked at in Christ, and
are only seen through the radiant colouring of His per-
fections. But by reason of indwelling sin, and of the


old Adam ; and by reason of ignorance of the present
power of Jesus to save His people from their sins and
to purify the heart; and by reason of unbelief and love of
the world, there is an awful chasm of difference between
the Holy Jesus whom God beholds in heaven and His
members which are on the earth. This difference will
always be vast; but it is God’s grand design to
make it less vast than it is, that we should
“grow up” unto Christ in all things, and be more
perfectly conformed to His most lovely image.
And the way He has appointed of bridging-over
this gulf is a twofold way—facts and faith. The facts
are the doctrines which I am endeavouring to state.
The believer is in living union with the living Christ.
He is, therefore, “alive from the dead,” and made
“free from sin” (Rom. vi. 13, 22). This is the fact.
Now faith comes in. He praises God for this exalted
standing in Christ, and he proceeds to make his daily
life correspond with the life of Jesus. This he does by
“ reckoning himself dead unto sin and alive unto God
through Jesus Christ.” He surveys the wondrous cross
on which the Prince of glory died, where Paul was cruci-
fied, yea, where all believers were associated together
in a death to sin with Jesus. He surveys the grave
from which He rose who is the Resurrection and the
Life, the beginning of the new creation. He surveys
himself, and what does he see ? He sees himself
“ born of God,” “ begotten again by the Father, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.” “ God
begets (I quote the words of a commentator) by the-
word of His truth children who resemble Himself.
This act of divine power is absolute, and from its very
nature subject to no change. The unalterable qualities
of a nature which is divine in its source, and imparted
b y immediate communication from the Father, remain
independent of all circumstances which may bear


externally on the believer for good or for evil. The
new nature of a child of God is essentially holy. As
man in his natural state runs instinctively into sin
in his desire to please himself, so the spiritual man
obeys an instinct of holiness which is inseparable from
his nature as born of God. And so it is said, ‘He
cannot sin, because he is born of God.’ Conversion to
God is not a change of opinion merely; it is a renewal
of nature. But because the flesh lusts still against the
spirit, and active conflict is the result, we need a
weapon of stronger temper than a doctrine, whose appeal
may seem in part addressed to the subjective conscious-
ness of the believer. While, therefore, the Spirit of
God affirms the proper characteristics of the new man,
His means of practically exemplifying in the Christian
this participation in the divine nature (2 Pet. i. 4) is
by keeping ever before his mind the person of Christ.
It is in Him that the believer finds and maintains his
standing as a child of God. Faith—receiving its in-
struction, not from internal suggestions, but from the
true sayings of God—finds the term and cessation of
natural life in the cross of the Son of God. Hence-
forth, therefore, the believer, taught by the Spirit to
avert his eye from self as from a dead and forgotten
thing, looks forth to seek for and to find his present
life, as well as his future hope, in Jesus. Satan’s desire
is to limit, by all means, the growth of God’s saints in
the knowledge of God— to make self in some way the
secret centre of the believer’s thoughts—to keep the
soul within the small and dark circle of its own experi-
ences. The effectual security against this danger is the
Word, when fed upon by faith. Faith thus exercised
produces knowledge, and that knowledge is indeed
power. A Christ-fed believer understands the nature of
his calling, and in the calm assurance that the God who
alone has any right to judge him, has become in Christ


his Saviour and his Rest, he can boldly look his
adversary in the face. Hence, in proportion to the
direct simplicity of our faith in seeing Jesus, will ever
be our available power against sin, our practical victory
over the world, even as we are in Him, already, more
than conquerors.”
Such a life, beloved friends, will not be a sinless life ;
God forbid that any one should say so. Whoever says
that the old nature ever in this life ceases to exist, or
ceases to evolve the poison of sin (and that incessantly,
though the believer is walking all the while with a clear
conscience and with a rejoicing heart) ; whoever thinks
that we may ever attain to such a state of purity as to
need no cleansing in the blood, no interceding voice of
Jesus, no covering in a robe of divine righteousness;
whoever holds such views is propagating error, and
needs a return to truth. Ho, my brethren; such a
life is not sinless, but it is a life that daily is becoming
less sinful, because it is a life spent with Jesus, and He
does save His trusting people from their sins. He
enables them to cease habitually from sins which they
deplore. They walk in ever-increasing liberty, because
they walk in the Spirit; and Christ conquers all
enemies for them, because they are unable to conquer
even the smallest enemy in their own strength.
THE ABIDING PRESENCE OF THE LORD JESUS,
And this leads us to another truth, another fact of
transcendent importance in our search after holiness ;
and that is, the absolute certainty of the continual
presence of Christ with each of His believing people,
apart altogether from their conscious enjoyment of it.
I need not cite many passages among Bible-taught
Christians. Let these suffice —“ lam with you always .”
“ I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.” “ The
beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by Him, and


the Lord shall cover him all the day long .” Scripture is
literally brimming over with assurances of this divine
companionship, and I do not know a doctrine more
calculated to fill the child of God with peace, and hope,
and with ineffable delight; with peace, because who
can set on us to hurt us if Jesus is near? with hope,
because further journeyings with Jesus can only lead to
a more holy fellowship with Himself and with His
Father; and with ineffable Joy, because we have, by our
side, the Lord of life and love, the King of glory. The
desires even of the regenerated heart can go no further
than this—Jesus is here, and Jesus is mine. Do not tax
your memory to remember His perpetual presence. The
carnal memory cannot bear the strain, and the brain
wearies in the effort of recollection. So doing you can-
not but fail. It is impossible to the flesh. But rather
obtain from God a new faculty (you will not under-
stand what I mean until you get it), whereby you will
walk easily, joyously, in the light and in the love of the
living Christ.
THE INDWELLING OF THE HOLY GHOST.
Again (for the night draws on, and I must be brief),
when thanking God for a free pardon, for a death to
sin, for all the energies of a divine life, and for the
priceless treasure of His dear Son’s eternal presence, do
not forget to thank Him for the gift of His Holy Spirit.
That spirit you have, believers. “He dwelleth in you,”
as a matter of fact, and you ought gratefully to own it.
You may have the Spirit without knowing it or feeling
it. That does not alter the Word of God, which clearly
testifies to the truth that your bodies are the temples of
the Holy Ghost, You may—nay, you must —suffer irre-
parable loss by not being aware of it. But take it as
true, as part of God’s record, and see what will follow.
You will seek not to grieve the Spirit; you will seek to


be filled with the Spirit; you will, through the Spirit,
mortify the deeds of the flesh; you will become mighty
in word, as the mouthpiece of the Holy Spirit; you will
become mighty in prayer, praying in the Holy Ghost.
Above all, you will be led by the Spirit to fix your eager
gaze on Jesus, as revealed in the Word ; and gazing, you
will grow like Him. You will please. Him, in some
sort, as He pleased the Father. You will, by the Spirit,
be changed into the same image.
THE MARRIAGE TIE.
And that gaze will grow moi’e eager, more ardent,
when you understand fully the sweet relationship already
existing between you and Him. Rom. vii. 4 lets us into
a new apartment in our Father’s house, in which, as it
were, we see Jesus in a new light—the light not of a
bridegroom, but actually of a spouse. As sinners we were
married to a first husband —to the law; a husband holy
and just and good, but without mercy ; a husband who
said, “Do this, or die who said, “ Thou shalt,’ ; or
“Thou shaltnot;” a husband whom we could never
please, never satisfy, because of our radical corruption
and hatred of his godly ways. At this husband’s hands
we had to die; at his hands we did die, for the wages
of sin is death—but it was in the person of our Substi-
tute. When Jesus “ died for all, all died.” We became
“ dead to the law” by the dead body of Christ, and
being “ raised with Him” are now “married to Another,”
even to Christ Himself. God raised us up together with
Him, and we are now united to Him, “ that we should
bring forth fruit unto God.” Think over this relation-
ship, beloved friends; it is full of meaning and blessing;
it will do you good.
WHAT SEEK YE 1
And now, in conclusion, let me ask you, wherefore
ye have come 1 Is it to become possessed of a new


experience ? If so, 0 let me say that if you come with
that desire alone, it is sin, it is idolatry. You have my
full sympathy in your longings after a cloudless peace,
after subjugated lusts, after a flame of love to God and to
man that even consumes you ; and what is far better, this
is God’s will concerning you ; but to be restless and ill
at ease because without certain emotions and thrilling
sensations, is to be dissatisfied with Jesus. Having
Him, you have enough. Search after fuller knowledge
of Him. Experience must flow from fellowship, or it is
worse than worthless. “Is not all this,” writes a friend
to me, “but the outgoings of what in some sense is
carnal 1 A desire for experience, personal, pleasant,
ecstatic, and defined ! * After all these things do the
Gentiles seek.’ One of the things which the Lord
taught me, before He took full possession of my heart,
was to renounce my craving and demand for certain and
varied experiences. 0 experience ! experience ! how
subtle, attractive, delusive, selfish, it often is : —and yet,
as God selects and confers, continues or revokes it, how
valuable ! Like fire or water, a good servant, but a bad
master.” These are the words of another, and as one
who has suffered in a search after spiritual experiences,
I cordially endorse them. But, beloved, lam persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany salva-
tion, though I thus speak. I know that ye seek, not
experience, but Jesus which was crucified. He is here
to-night, and He is here laden with blessings. We want
no other Saviour-Lord, to make life more easy and
delightful; but we do want eyes to behold, and ears to
hear, and hearts to understand, and feet to follow that
Blessed One whom God has given us. We want no other
Jesus. To know God’s Jesus is to be satisfied.
At the conclusion of this address, the hymn—
“ I am trusting, Lord, in Thee,
Dear Lamb of Calvary,”


was sung, and the second address was delivered—as was
the case last year—by our beloved and venerated friend
from Cromarty—
REV. D. S. m‘eACHRAN.
} fHer i 16: '“§e ne pal#, for I am fois.”
The subject proposed for our consideration to-night is
holiness, I would like to say something with regard
to the holiness of God, but as the time allotted me will
not permit me to do so, I shall content myself with
saying a few plain and practical things with regard to
the holiness which we are called to press after.
Now, I do not need to tell you that holiness consists
in perfect love to God, and perfect love to man ; and if
you wish to see what that implies, consider it as it is deve-
loped in the ten commandments and in the Scriptures,
and as it is exhibited in the lives of the best and holiest
men, and especially as it is exhibited in the life of Him
who—the image of the Invisible God —was holy, harm-
less, and undefiled, and separate from sinners.
(1.) There is a sense in which the love which all true
believers bear to God is perfect. They serve God with
a perfect heart. They have that perfect love which
casteth out fear, even the fear that hath torment. They
have that perfect love which gives them boldness in
view of the day of judgment. They love God supremely,
more than father or mother, or brethren or sisters,
or houses or lands. They make a perfect—an honest—
and entire, surrender of themselves to God, keeping
nothing back. They do not bring the lame and the
blind for sacrifice, but, constrained by God’s mercies,
they present themselves body and soul and spirit, a
whole burnt-offering on God’s altar. Their consecration
to God is perfect. They conceal or cherish no sin.
They do not seek to bring God to a compromise. They


do not seek to serve God and Mammon. They
are clean. Their eye is single. Their heart is pure,
and in their spirits there is no guile. They are
thoroughly loyal to God. Their prayer is—“ Search
me, O God, and try me, and see if there be any wicked
way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.” The
man who cannot pray that prayer is no Christian. For
as the needle in the compass, which may be shaken now
to one side and now to the other by the tossing of the
ship, yet hath that principle in it which causes it when
left to itself to point steadily to the pole, so, however much
the child of God may be turned aside for a time from
the right way by the temptations of sin and Satan, yet
hath he that in him which causes him, when left to
himself, to point steadily towards God and the keeping
of His commandments. Accordingly it is said, “ Who-
soever is born of God doth not commit sin ; for his
seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin because he is
born of God.” Being born of God he cannot sin
knowingly and wilfully; or the new nature in him
cannot sin. And hence when he is betrayed into sin
against his will, that need not shake his confidence in
his integrity ; but he may say with the apostle, “ Now
if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwelleth in me.”
But while the love which true believers bear to God
is perfect in respect of its sincerity , it is by no means
perfect in respect of its strength. In this respect there
are great differences between them. Some Christians
are much holier and more devoted to God than others.
Some are much more tender, watchful, prayerful, and
heavenly-minded than others. In some the love of God
is like a feeble spark ; in others it is like a mighty con-
suming flame. In some the love of God is so weak and
the love of the world so strong that their lives have a
limping, inconsistent aspect, and you are compelled to


stand in doubt of them. In others the love of God is
so strong that there is a beautiful consistency in their
whole lives, and you stand in no manner of doubt of
them. Some are slothful, while others are diligent.
Some are dull of learning, while others are apt scholars
in Christ’s school. Some are babes, while others are
men in Christ.
But great as are the differences in this respect
between true Christians, yet how low are the attain-
ments of the best and holiest! How cold is their love !
How far are they from loving the Lord their God with
all their heart and with all their soul, with all their
strength and with all their mind ! How far are they
from that perfect love which the Son bare to the
Father !
And here, that there may be no mistake, let it be
observed that the test of love to God is the doing of
His will. Liveliness of feeling is one thing, and
strength of principle is another and a very different
thing. We are apt to impose upon ourselves with
regard to this matter. We are apt to measure
our love to God by the liveliness of our feelings;
but in so doing we may greatly err. Let us not
be satisfied without lively feelings; let us seek to
have our hearts a-glow with love to God ; but let us
remember that the test of our love to God is not the
liveliness of our emotions, but the steadiness of our
obedience. Let us bless God when we are called to be
with Him on the Mount; but let us remember that the
evidence of our being with Him on the Mount is that
our faces shine with His glory when we go down again
into the world, and go out and in among our fellow-
men. It has been said of some that in the house of
God they seem to be angels, but in their own houses
they seem to be devils. O, let such religion be far
from us. The child who loves his father best is not he


who is most demonstrative in his affection, but he who
most studies to obey his commandments. When King
Saul spared the fattest of the sheep from the spoils of
the Amalekites, on the pretext that he wished to present
them to God as a burnt-offering, the indignant answer
of Samuel was, “ Hath the Lord as great delight in
burnt-offerings as in obeying the voice of the Lord 1
Behold ! to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of rams.” Abraham showed the sincerity
and strength of his love to God when he was ready to
offer up his son Isaac at His command. “ How know
I,” said God, “ that thou fearest God, seeing that thou
hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from Me.”
And the great proof which Jesus gave of His love to
God was that He was obedient to death, even the death
of the cross. The grand evidence of love to God is
when we are ready to do and endure all His will; for in
this world of sorrow there must be enduring as well as
doing, and waiting as well as working. The man who
is most holy is not he who is loudest in his professions
or his praises, but he who is most in the fear of the
Lord all the day long.
Let it be borne in mind, again, that we show our love
to God when—keeping to the sphere in which He has
placed us—we do the work which He hath given us to
do. Grace does not destroy a man’s individuality. The
stones in Aaron’s breastplate were all different —one was
a sardius, another a topaz, another a carbuncle, another
an emerald, another a sapphire, another a diamond,
and so on. Even so God’s people are all designed to
be precious gems, but gems of various hue and colour.
The trees in God’s garden all bring forth fruit, but
they all bring forth fruit each one after his kind.
Each man has his own gifts and his own place. The
great Master hath many servants, and He hat!
appointed to every man his work. Now, we show our


love to our Master, not when we attempt to do the
work of another servant, but when we do the work
which He hath appointed to us. The eye cannot say
to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the hand to
the eye, I have no need of thee : but it were absurd
for the hand to attempt to do the work of the eye, and
it were absurd for the eye to attempt to do the work of
the hand. Who, by taking thought, can add to his stature
one cubit 1 Grace does not change the stature of our
minds any more than it changes the stature of our
bodies. We cannot all be Chalmerses, or Candlishes, or
Spurgeons, or even Moodys. We cannot even all be
ministers. Nor is that required of us. What is
required of us is that we serve God in our respective
callings—that the servant serve Him as a servant, and
the master serve Him as a master, and the judge serve
Him on the Bench, and the merchant serve Him in his
warehouse or his shop, and the legislator serve Him in
the Assembly; and, in short, that every one use the
talents which He has given him—be they many or be
they few—for His glory and in accordance with His will.
(2.) The second branch of holiness is love to man,
Without this there can be no love to God. My brethren,
let me be plain with you. I have known men profess
great love to God who were very wanting in love to
their fellowmen, I have known men profess to be very
spiritual who were vain, conceited, proud, covetous,
unwatchful, bad-tempered, intemperate. But let us
never forget that the love which we bear to man is the
measure of the love which we bear to God. If we love
not our brother whom we have seen, how can we love
God, whom we have not seen 1 “ Whoso hath this
world’s good and seeth his brother have need, and
shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwelleth the love of God in himl” There are few things
that more clearly show how wanting we are in love to


God than the fact that we are so wanting in love to our
neighbour. Who is there that can say that he loves his
neighbour as himself ? Who is there that would be
ready, if need were, to lay down his life for his brother,
as Christ laid, down His life for His brethren 1 It
may well humble us to read the description which
Paul gives of love, in 1 Corinthians xiii.—“ Love
suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not ; love
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave
itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily pro-
voked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth
all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things,”
Ah, brethren, let us not be satisfied till we mani-
fest these fruits of love. “ Love worketh no ill to
his neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of the
law.” “The end of the commandment is love, out of a
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned.”
Such, then, is the holiness which we are to seek after
—perfect love to God, and perfect love to man. But
let it not be forgotten that this holiness cannot be
reached all at once. Weary with the struggle with sin,
and indolently wishing, perhaps, to be free in the future
from the necessity of such struggle, we pray fervently
for holiness, with the latent hope that God will at once
fulfil our request, and make us holy, as He is holy. But
that is not God’s way. The Canaanite is east out only
little by little. The child does not become a man all
at once. We are justified at once, but we are not sanc-
tified at once. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, but it cannot be said that there is
no sin in them. “ There is not a just man upon earth,
that doeth good, and sinneth not.” “If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not
in us.” Who is there that can say that he is holy,
c 2


harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, as was
the Son of Man ? The holier we become, the more
sinful do we see ourselves to be. Just as the sunbeam
shining into a room reveals motes, and spots, and
blemishes which before were unobserved, so the more
we grow in the knowledge of God, the more do we grow
in the knowledge of our own sinfulness. When Isaiah
saw the vision of the glory of the Lord, he fell down
before Him, and cried out, “ Woe is me! for I am
undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.” When
Job obtained a fresh discovery of God’s holiness, he
said, “ I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear;
but now mine eye seeth Thee: wherefore I abhor
myself, and repent in dust and ashes.”
But be that as it may, the falls of the best and
holiest of men are sufficient to show us that they were
not free from that heart which is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. After having witnessed
for God for the space of a hundred and twenty years,
and having been saved in the Ark from that flood
which overwhelmed the world of the ungodly, who
would have thought that the holy sainted Noah
should have so far forgotten God, and so far forgotten
himself, as a few years after his deliverance to fall into
the sin of drunkenness 1 Meek above all men that
dwelt upon the face of the earth, and on the very eve
of departing for glory, who would have thought that
Moses should have failed in the very grace in which he
was pre-eminent, and have spoken unadvisedly with
his lips ? After the lofty devotion, after the panting
and thirsting after God and after holiness, which appear
in his Psalms, who would have thought that David—
the man after God’s own heart—should have fallen into
the treble sin of deceit, adultery, and murder 1 After that


most marvellous prayer which Solomon offered upon the
occasion of the dedication of the Temple, who would have
thought that in his old age he should be seduced to go
after strange gods, and to erect an high place on the hill
before Jerusalem for Chemosh,the abomination of Moab,
and another for Moloch, the abomination of the children
of Ammon ? Just after having given utterance to his
great confession, and being so highly commended and
distinguished by Christ on account of it, who would
have thought that Peter would require to be rebuked as
savouring not the things which be of God, but the things
which be of men ? Ah! brethren, let us not be high-
minded, but fear. These things show the strength and
deceitfulness of sin in the best, and holiest, and ripest
saints. They teach us that our worst foes are those of
our own household, and that we can never lay aside our
watching and praying, for we are never safe against the
stratagems, and wiles, and machinations of the sin that
dwelleth in us.
But while we must lay our account with this conflict
while we live, let not that be a reason why we should
be contented with a low measure of godliness. On
the contrary, as the house of Saul waxed weaker and
weaker, and the house of David waxed stronger and
stronger, so our aim must be that the old man in us be
steadily growing weaker, and that the new man be
steadily growing stronger. In other words, our aim
must be that the love of the world become steadily
weaker in us, and that the love of God become steadily
stronger.
And in fighting this good fight you have no reason to
be discouraged. “ Greater is He that is in you than he
that is in the world.” The Captain of the Lord’s host
goeth before you. Fight on then ;be strong in the
Lord and in the power of His might; and take to
you the whole armour of God, and victory is certain.


Meanwhile the promise is yours : “ Sin shall not have
dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but
under grace and in the end your victory shall be
complete. Fight on, and your path shall be like that of
the shining light which, though often beclouded, yet
shineth more and more unto the perfect day. “ Beloved,
now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be; but we know that when He shall
appear we shall be like Him ; for we shall see Him as
He is.”
At the conclusion of this address, we joined together
in singing the beautiful hymn, “In the Eifted Rock
I’m resting,” and the third address was delivered with
extraordinary zeal and animation by an aged Christian
man—Mr. Henry Reed, of Launceston —upon “ Walking
in the Light.” His promised manuscript has not yet
come to hand (October 23rd), but I trust that it will
reach Melbourne in time to be published in an
Appendix. The last address on Wednesday evening
was delivered by
MR, W. COERIE JOHNSTONE,
' ( %a\mzw t\iz lirtjjrigjjt 0f
Brethren — Our subject is Holiness. When first men-
tioned to me by our Chairman, I think it was put in this
form—Holiness the Birthright of Every Believer. If a man
is asked what his birthright is, he naturally thinks of what
his father was, of what his father possessed, and of what
comes to be his own in virtue of his being his father’s
son. Now, what is my birthright as a son of God?
With this thought in my mind I turned to my Bible to
look again at how my Heavenly Father was presented
there, and to think for a little of what holiness might
be mine on account of being His son.


We hear Moses singing of Him, “ Who is like unto
Thee, 0 Lord, among the gods ? Who is like unto
Thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders'?” (Ex. xv. 11.) Then, in prophetic vision, we
hear the seraphim, as they cover their faces with their
wings, crying, “ Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts;
the whole earth is full of His glory” (Is. vi. 3). Yet
again we hear the well-beloved Son, “ who only knoweth
the Father,” calling Him “ Holy Father,” “ Righteous
Father” (John xvii. 11, 25). When such is the
character of the believer’s Father, is he presuming if he
claims holiness as his birthright ? Shall not the children
bear the Father’s image? Is not this the exhortation of
the Spirit —“ Be ye holy, for lam holy”? (1 Pet. i. 16).
We find that the holiness of the children is the
Father’s choice. “According as He hath chosen us in
Him before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy and without blame before Him in love” (Eph.
i. 4). “ Brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath
from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth”
(2 Thess. ii. 13). What God has deliberately chosen
shall certainly be accomplished, and His children shall
be made holy. Their holiness is shown to be the
Father’s design. “ For whom He did foreknow He also
did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His
Son, that He might be the first-born among many
brethren” (Rom. viii. 29). If we know what Christ is,
we know what Christians are to be, “He is holy, harm-
less, undefiled, separate from sinners.” Believers must
yet be the same. He is the eider brother, and is “ not
ashamed to call them brethren.” They shall yet be
worthy of the name, for they are predestinated to be
conformed to His image. This is certainly “ glorious
predestination.”
This holiness of the children is connected with the


Father’s oath which ratifies “ His holy covenant.”
“ The oath which He sware to our father Abraham,
that He would grant unto us, that we, being delivered
from the hand of our enemies, might serve Him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before Him all the
days of our life” (Luke i. 73-75). It might be said of
the former passages that they cannot be fully realised
by the believer on earth, but this last seems to speak
expressly of the holiness attainable here. We have the
“ two immutable things, in which it is impossible for
God to lie,” upon which to ground our faith for the
realisation of this holiness. It begins in the heart of
the sinner with the Father’s calling. £ ‘For God hath
not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness”
(1 Thess. iv. 7). Ye are “chosen to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth;
whereunto He called you by our gospel, to the
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ”
(2 Thess. ii. 13-14). Paul writes to the Corinthians
of this calling—“ Jesus Christ shall also confirm you
to the end, that ye may be blameless in the day
of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by
whom ye were called unto the fellowship of His Son
Jesus Christ our Lord (1 Cor. i. 8,9). And for the
Ephesians Paul prays, “ That ye may know what is the
hope of His calling, and what the riches of the glory of
His inheritance in the saints” (Eph. i. 18). Then we
are further assured that what was the Father’s choice,
design, oath, and calling , continues to be His will. We
have it from Christ Himself, who came to do that will.
“ This is the will of Him that sent Me, that every one
which seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, may have
everlasting life ; and I will raise him up at the last day”
(John vi. 40). Paul writes to the Thessalonians—“ We
beseech you, brethren, and exhort you, by the Lord
Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to


walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and
more. For ye know what commandments we gave you
by the Lord Jesus. For this is the will of God, even
your sanctification.” And the Galatians are told that
“ Jesus Christ gave Himself for our sins that He might
deliver us from this present evil world, according to the
will of God and our Father” (Gal. i. 4).
How, if we still search the Scriptures and keep
this thought of holiness being the birthright of every
believer, in our hand like a magnet, that it may attract
to itself what is said of Christ, we open up another large
field of inquiry. It is declared to be the purpose of
Christ’s coming. “ Thou shalt call His name Jesus; for
He shall save His people from their sins” (Mat. i. 21).
“ For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that
He might destroy the works of the devil” (1 John
iii. 8). My heart leapt up when I heard the father who
has spoken refer to his experience in connexion with
this passage, as I remember of it coming to me with
like power. Yes ; our sin, our misery, our ruin, are the
works of the devil, and consequently just what the
Son of God was manifested to destroy—even to eradi-
cate or abolish, as the word signifies. The walls of the
old building are not to be partially taken down and
repaired, but the building is to be rased to its founda-
tions, and an entirely new structure reared in its place
by our divine Architect; and the last stone shall be
laid with “ shoutings, crying—Grace, grace unto it.”
Brethren, you know from sad experience that Satan
has access to your hearts, and can fan the sparks of
passion into a flame. But is He who made the heart to
be denied like access'? Can the Son of God not touch the
source of all our thoughts and bring them into harmony
with His own ? If the one can reach our hearts to
further our ruin, can the other not reach them also to
further our renewal ? “ The king’s heart is in the hand


of the Lord, as the rivers of water ; He turneth it
whithersoever He will.” The Christian’s heart is in the
hands of Christ, and Christ’s power to purify is greater
than Satan’s power to pollute. He is the “Son of
God with power,” and “He was manifested that He
might destroy the works of the devil,”
This was also the object of His life. He has left us
“ an example that we should follow in His steps, who
did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth (1
Pet. ii. 21-22).” There are the footprints before you on
the way ; see that you attend to them. “He that saith
he abideth in Him, ought himself also to walk even as
He walked” (1 John ii. 6). This was His first, His last,
His all-embracing commandment—“ Follow thou Me.”
Then think of His teaching. Not to go outside the
Sermon on the Mount (that divine commentary on the
ten commandments, which shows the spirituality of
the law, that the commandments are exceeding broad),
Christ does not lower the standard of holiness to us,
but seeks to bring us up to its level. “Be ye, there-
fore, perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect” (Mat. v. 48).
For this holiness on the part of His people He
'prayed. “ I pray not that Thou shouldst take them out
of the world, but that Thou shouldst keep them from
the evil” (John xvii. 15). The petition is here
revealed, but who can tell with what weight and
frequency it pressed upon the Saviour’s spirit during
those nights which He spent all alone in prayer. He
said to at least one erring follower, “ I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not” (Luke xxii. 32).
But the culminating point of the holiness of believers
is connected with the death of Christ. “ Who His own
self bare our sins in His own body on the tree, that we,
being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness” (1
Pet. ii. 24). “ Who gave Himself for us, that He might


redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works” (Tit. ii. 14).
We are apt to think too exclusively of Christ’s death as
merely the means of our justification, instead of also
looking to that death as the ground of our sanctification.
Dr. Chalmers says—“ The cross of Christ, by the same
mighty and decisive stroke wherewith it moved the curse
of sin away from us, also moves away the power and love
of it from over us.” When we come to make Christ’s
death our own in simple faith, it reaches away back and
makes an end of the sins that are past, it brings peace
to the troubled conscience for the present, and it
stretches away into the future to deliver us from Satan’s
dominion. Yes, on the cross sin receives its deathblow
by the head of the serpent being bruised, and it must
yet be said of all believers, “ They overcame him by the
blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony”
(Rev. xii. 10).
It is for the achievement of this victory for all
His people that the Redeemer lives. “It is Christ that
died ; yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even
at the right hand of God, who also maketh inter-
cession for us” (Rom. viii. 34). “He is able also
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God
by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession
for them ” (Heb. vii. 25). We often use this last text
to encourage the vilest to trust Christ, and God
honours it as the truth. But look at it again; it is they
who come unto Him. We who are Christians have
come unto Him, and because He ever lives He is able to
save us from our shortcomings. He can heal our back-
slidings. He can quench our lusts. He can vanquish
every passion. He knows our sorrows. He can bear
our cares. He lives as—
“ The Saviour who almay doth save.”
That this salvation may be realised, the Spirit has been.


given. As we have seen, we are “ chosen to salvation
through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth.” The great mission of the Holy Ghost when He
first comes to our hearts is to convince us of sin (John
xvi. 8), and He continues to convince the believer of
sin. He sheds His light around and within, and carries
on His sanctifying work by revealing sins unnoticed
before, and taking of the things of Christ and showing
them unto us. He does not speak of Himself, but
shows Christ’s suitableness and sufficiency for every
newly revealed need; so that we, through the Spirit,
do mortify the deeds of the body (Rom. viii, 13).
Then the Spirit has given us the Word, and in the
Word “ His divine power hath given unto us all things
that pertain to life and godliness, through the know-
ledge of Him that hath called us to glory and virtue,
whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises; that by these we might be partakers of the
divine nature ” (2 Peter i. 3,4).
How, since the holiness of every believer is the pur-
pose and will of God, since holiness is the Alpha and
Omega of Christ’s work, and since such abundant
provision is made for its realisation, shall any believer
be content to remain unholy 1 Let us now make this a
very practical question. It is not desirable that it
should be put off. Are you ready to say honestly, how
may I become holy 1 Would you not afford your Father
pleasure by laying claim to your birthright 1 Ho not
say, “ It is not for me.”
The key to the attainment of holiness, as well as the
guarantee that every believer may aspire to it, seems to
me to lie in Rom. iv. 16—“ Therefore it is of faith, that
it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be
sure to all the seed ; not to that only which is of the
law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham,
who is the father of us all.” How, what is the promise


here mentioned 1 ? It is nothing less than the great
promise confirmed by the oath of God to Abraham. It
includes justification, sanctification, full and final deliver-
ance from sin. We know that will be realised in heaven,
but we have seen that much may be attained here, for
we are to be “ delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
that we might serve God without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before Him, all the days of our life.”
Then the obtaining of the blessings not only begins, but
goes on, and ends in faith; that faith which “worketh by
love,” and which is power.
“ Therefore, it is of faith.” Why 1 “ That it might
be by grace.” The contrast seems to be between law
and grace —Moses and Christ (John i. 17). Where
there is law, obedience is required, and the reward is
obtained by doing. Where there is grace, faith is
required, and the blessing is obtained by receiving. I
become holy, not by what I do, but by what I receive.
Doing, resolving, suffering, bring no blessing. But
believing does, and it will be unto us according to our
faith. “If by grace, then it is no more of works :
otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works,
then it is no more grace : otherwise work is no more
work” (Rom. xi. 6). Then it is by grace through faith
(Eph, ii. 8), that “the promise might be sure to all the
seed.” All in the promise is for all of the seed; and
“If ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and
heirs according to the promise.” Therefore, child of
God, holiness is for thee, and it can only be thine
through faith; for it is not by the works of the law,
but by the hearing of faith (Gal. iii. 3).
Now, realise that faith is the hand with which you,
are to grasp Christ’s power for every increase in holi-
ness ; and any increase must come on the ground of the
great fact that you have been crucified with Christ.
“ Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him,


that the body of sin might be destroyed, that hence-
forth we should not serve sin” (Rom. vi. 6). It is a
common yet a great mistake, that men want to do
in themselves what was done by Christ on the Cross.
As anxious souls desiring forgiveness often seek the
feeling of it in their own hearts instead of looking to
the Crucified, and believing His testimony, “It is
finished so, many Christians longing for deliverance
from indwelling sin, seek in themselves the feeling that
the flesh is crucified, instead of looking to the cross, and
believing that they have been crucified with Christ.
In either case the blessing is expected by a process
revealed to their feelings , while in reality it comes through
a fact grasped by their faith. The sinner has peace with
God by believing that Christ has died for him. The
saint gets the victory over sin by believing that he has
died to sin, with Christ. As believers, you assert that
Christ has died for you. Why not take the whole
truth, and assert that you have died with Christ. The
realising of both facts are equally the work of faith.
Though your faith has only as yet grasped the fact that
Christ has died for you, and cannot yet connect your
own death to sin with His death, both are equally true.
You found the first a reality when you trusted Christ
for forgiveness. The second will become as real when
faith ventures to grasp it, and use it for the constant
victory over sin. To believe that we have been
crucified with Christ; that the body of sin might be
destroyed ; that henceforth we should not serve sin,
may seem at first difficult and mysterious, but—
“ The footsteps of faith fall on the seeming void,
To find a rock beneath.”
It is our privilege to reckon ourselves to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord (Rom. vi. 11). If we go on in unbelief
and reckon ourselves to be alive to sin, ever fearing a


fresh outbreak, or expecting to fall through temptation,
it will be unto us according to our unbelief, and we shall
soon find sin having dominion over us. But if we
reckon ourselves to be dead, being made free from sin,
and go forth expecting to overcome, we shall find that
Christ makes the reckoning good, and brings us off more
than conquerors. We may then, like Jehoshaphat,
confidently meet our enemies, relying upon Christ’s
promise to fight for us, while we stand still and see the
salvation of God. Oh, brethren, no sin can have
dominion over us if we stedfastly trust Christ. This
blessed discovery, that Christ can and does save us from
sinning when we definitely trust Him, will become a
holy habit, and grow stronger and stronger day by day.
We may therefore take the same platform as the
apostle, and say from conscious experience, “ I live by
the faith of the Son of God,” Seek to realise this great
thought. As your natural life is sustained by breathing,
so your spiritual life may be sustained by trusting.
Moment by moment you inhale life from the atmosphere,
and moment by moment by faith you may draw spiritual
health and vigour from the Son of God. If you would
claim your birthright of holiness, venture to say with
Paul, “I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live ;
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me ; and the life which
I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave Himself for me.”
This address brought the first evening of Conference to
a close, and after singing the stirring and inspiring hymn,
“ This is the glorious Gospel Word—
Jesus saves thee now,’’
we separated for the night, thanking God for what we
had heard, and anxiously looking forward To all that
was to follow.


Second Day.—Thursday, August 19.
jJttbjwt: Utos of @>xm”
The 5 o’clock prayer-meeting was largely attended,
and the voice of prayer was indeed “ without ceasing”
for one hour. At a quarter-past 7 the hymn “ All to
Christ I owe” was sung, and after the reading of
special portions of Scripture, prayer was offered by
Rev. A. Simpson, and then the first address was
delivered by
THE DEAN OP MELBOURNE.
: u Jjaiptuw lleMwjj i\ft |mis as a
JSafoiom from jJin”
The subject on which I have been requested to
address you is “ Scripture Revealing the Lord Jesus as
a Saviour from Sin.” The natural course might be to
take the passage in its order, and to consider—first,
Scripture in its testimony to the Lord Jesus; and
secondly, His character as the Saviour from sin. So
much, however, has lately been said and written
upon this latter subject that I think it better to begin
with it.
Language is very inadequate to express our ideas.
Two persons may use the very same words with very
different meanings, or they may mean the same thing
while they use different words. I cannot, therefore, say
whether I agree or disagree with much that has been
said or written on the subject of the Christian’s victory
over sin ; but I will endeavour to state what I believe
to be the truth as clearly as I can. In dealing with
this question we have nothing to do with man’s opinion,


or his real or imaginary experiences. “ Let God be
true and every man a liar.” We must look solely to
the declarations of the Word of God; and if every
Christian man—from the death of St. John to the
present time —were to declare that he had obtained a
perfect victory over indwelling sin, while an inspired
apostle says, “I delight in the law of God after the
inward man, but I find another law in mj' members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me
into subjection to the law of sin which is in my
members,” we must receive the testimony of the Word,
and reject the declarations of men. It has been said
indeed that the apostle is personating a Jew, or
some other unbeliever, or that he is speaking of his
own state before his conversion, or while he was yet a
babe in Christ; but if “I” means someone that is not
the person speaking, or if “I am” means “ I was,” there
is an end of all fair interpretation, and the Bible may
be made to mean anything the reader chooses that it
shall mean. In the passage before us the apostle draws
a marked distinction between what he was and what he
is. In the 9th verse he says, “I was alive without the
law once” —not that he was ever ignorant of the law in its
statement, but ignorant of its spiritual character and
power, and therefore blind, self-satisfied, and self-
approved, and ready to say, “ God, I thank Thee
that I am not as other men* are.” But when the
Lord Jesus revealed Himself in him, the true
character of the law was manifested, it came with
power to his soul; sin was seen, by the now-understood
commandment, to be exceeding sinful, and his vain self-
righteous hope died. Then, and not till then, began
the conflict in which sin is ever conquered, but ever
rising up to renew the conflict —or, like the corpse of a
conquered enemy entangled in our harness, impeding
every movement and defiling every joy. Well may


he ask, “ Who shall deliver me V’ But the war is not
for long, the result is not doubtful, nor is the face of
our Father which is in heaven turned from us because
of the near presence of the oft-defeated enemy. “ I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then
with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but with
the flesh the law of sin. There is therefore now no
condemnation for those which are in Christ Jesus, who
(though their walk may be, and often is, impeded or
unsteady) walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.”
St. John bears a similar testimony. “We know,” he
says, “ that when He shall appear we shall be like
Him.” Surely if he knew that there could be here a
full conformity to the Saviour’s image, the beloved
disciple would not deceive us, and try to blind us to our
present privileges, by putting off the time of perfect
conformity to the time of the Saviour’s appearing. You
will, I am sure, pardon me if I use a very homely
illustration in the hope of making the subject clear.
We may suppose—what so often happens here—an
old gentleman, having built a fine house and laid out
beautiful pleasure-grounds, to go home for a year or two,
leaving his place in the charge of a stranger. He
returns, and looking the next morning towards his
flower-beds he sees a vast crop of thistles from four
to six feet high having full possession of the place,
and utterly hiding the plants he had so carefully
nourished. He sends his gardener to root them out,
and the next day he rejoices to see the thistles
laid in one great heap ready to be burnt, and some
of his favourite plants appearing, and the beds
looking green and bright. He goes to enjoy a
nearer view, and finds groundsel, and a number of
similar weeds that the thistles had hid, covering the
ground as effectually as it had been covered by the taller
growths. He sends to have these removed, and


then, going to walk in the garden, he finds countless
shoots of grass and of low-growing intruders,
not covering the earth indeed, or choking the
flowers, but growing in such hopeless numbers
that in despair he orders the whole to be dug
up. It is done, and he looks with joy from his window
on the clear brown earth; and after two days’ rain he
goes out in the bright sunshine with his daughter to
enjoy the victory. “ Now,” he cries, “we have got rid
of the weeds.” His daughter rejoins, “ Sir, if you would
use your glasses you would see that they are springing
up again.” “Who can have done this 1 ?” “ The earth
is full of weeds and roots; they spring from it.” I need
hardly explain my meaning. When a soul is brought to
God, all the heinous sins—fornication, lies, blasphemy,
and such like—are put away at once. But the believer,
if dealing honestly with himself, will soon find temper,
covetousness, love of praise, &c., springing up to trouble
him. Through grace they are conquered; and yet a
heart, anxious, self-searching—cold in divine service hy
itself\ though warm when stimulated by example or
sympathy—still forces him to cry, “Unclean! Unclean!”
He seeks a higher life, a further effort, a making all
things new; and yet, when he looks upon himself with
a vision quickened by the power of the Holy Ghost, he
sees innumerable evils filling his breast, and manifesting
his utter corruption more fully than did a few gross
scandals which everyone knows a little principle and a
little effort can root out. Whence comes the evil 1 We
are not left in doubt. Our blessed Lord expressly tells
us that “ Out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders,” and so forth. As the
keeper of a well-cultured garden has not to struggle
with gigantic roots, but with the countless ever-rising
growths that spring from the soil —in fact, with the soil
itself, lying as it does under the curse—so the believer
d 2


who walks closely with God has not so much to mourn
over sins as over sinfulness —the ever-present, ever-rising
corruption from within. The believer may fall, like
David, or like Peter; but that is not to be looked for.
It must be borne in mind that, from the giving of the
law to the end of Revelation—for a period of more than
1300 years—we have a record of only two what we could
call “ falls ” in those whom we have satisfactory reason
to regard as the people*of God ; and the case of Peter
stands alone in the New Testament. While, therefore,
we earnestly protest against the idea of any one fancying
that he lives a sinless life, except through a frightful
degree of spiritual blindness, we maintain that it
is the Christian’s privilege in the conflict with
sin to go on, like his blessed Master, “ conquering and
to conquer.” Yea, that we are “ more than conquerors,”
for the victor in an earthly conflict is wearied and
exhausted with the struggles : as a famous general once
said, “ One more such victory and we are undone,”
while believers gain more strength at every encounter,
as it is written, “ They that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength.” The history of Israel, from
Egypt to their settlement in Canaan, is not only typical
of the Church’s trials and triumphs, but of the life
of faith in every individual believer. And we may be
sure that when Joshua called on the captains of Israel
to put their feet upon the necks of the kings whom he
was about to put to death, he did it not in the
insolence of triumph or in cruel mockery of their
humiliation, but he did it as a lesson to all future ages.
But even while we feel our great enemy, sin, to be
living and active, it is a foe whose power is broken and
whose end is near. In this connexion I would venture
to add, though I cannot support it by plain Scripture
proof, that as the Israelites were warned that if they
did not cut off the inhabitants of Canaan at once, they


should remain to be “ scourges in their sides and thorns
in their eyes,” so if, when first brought to God, we
make friends with some darling sins, it commonly ensues
that they remain with power to torture and hinder us
through the whole of our pilgrimage.
We now come to consider what should have been
the first part of the subject—“ Scripture revealing the
Lord Jesus.” There is no more remarkable internal
evidence of the divine origin of the Bible than the
unity in diversity which it so strikingly exhibits. The
writers not only belong to various and contrasted
periods of the world’s history, but to all classes of rank,
education, and intellect, from Solomon to the gatherer
of sycamore fruit, from the learned Paul to the
fisherman of Galilee ; and yet, in different styles and in
divers manners, they all testify to the one grand truth
—the Saviour expected or received. From the creatures
in whose skins our first parents were clothed, and
the lamb which Abel offered; from the ram which
God “ provided,” to take the place of the sentenced
Isaac ; or the lamb on whose blood the Lord looked,
and caused the destroying angel to pass over the house
where the victim was slain, to the morning and
evening sacrifice in the Temple —all pointed to Him whom
Isaiah describes as a Lamb led to the slaughter ; all pre-
pared the way for the prophet-priest to cry, “ Behold the
Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world
and for the entranced apostle to know what the vision
meant when he saw in the midst of the throne “ a
Lamb as it had been slain;” or what was that glorious
company described as “ the bride, the Lamb’s wife.”
In the vestments of the high priests for glory and for
beauty, and the spotless robes of his brethren, in the
gorgeous Temple, and hallowed bread, we see the excel-
ling glory of that dispensation of grace, whose forerunner
gladly left the splendid Temple for the desert wilderness,


the sacred robes for the leathern girdle and the raiment
of camels’ hair, the hallowed bread for the locusts and
wild honey of the desert, that he might at a distance
behold Him to whom all those ordinances pointed, and
say, not sadly but in the self-abnegation of satisfied love,
“He must increase, but I must decrease.” Time will
not permit me to follow the cherubic emblems from the
gate of Eden to the tabernacle of Moses or the Temple
of Solomon, to the Psalms of David, the prayer of
Hezekiah, or the vision of Isaiah, till Ezekiel saw these
wondrous emblems, departing indeed from the doomed
temple, but only to go forth to a wider field of mercy;
from the chosen but disobedient nation, to carry light to
the Gentiles ; and again to reveal to the beloved apostle
the unchanging treasures of divine grace. Nor can I wait
to trace the golden candlestick, with its seven lamps, to
the sevenfold gifts of the Spirit resting on the “ Stem
of Jesse,” till Zechariah beholds in vision the supplying
of the golden oil, and John is informed that the Son of
Man “ walking in the midst of the seven golden candle-
sticks” signifies the Saviour’s constant presence with the
churches, even though their sins require Him to reprove,
to threaten, or condemn. We must, however, leave this
most inviting theme, having merely pointed out how
Scripture interlaces with Scripture; how the New Testa-
ment throws light upon the Old, and the Old Testament
gives distinctness to the New; so that it is not wonderful
that those who confine their studies to one portion of
the sacred volume should stumble at the word, while
those who really and practically receive it as a whole,
find the commandment pure, enlightening the eyes, and
find that “ the spirit of prophecy” is indeed “ the
testimony of Jesus.”
After the Dean had concluded (and it is interesting
to know that one person who had come in uninvited was


awakened to a deep sense of sin while he was speaking),
we again sang “ I cannot do without Thee,” and the
second address was delivered by
ME. EOBEET GILLESPIE.
Subject: “ Wjft Cfemtiftn’s f tm,”
It was the last legacy of the Redeemer; left by will
to His disciples after the Supper, and after Judas had
gone out. “ Peace I leave with you,” He said ; “My
peace I give unto you ; not as the world giveth give I
unto you.” And when He ceased to speak to them He
lifted up His eyes to heaven and prayed for them; and
not for them only, but for us also, who believe on Him
through their word.
The peace of Jesus left to us ! Let us meditate for
a little on its character and on its source.
It was evidently an abiding peace. He was a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief, and we hid, as it
were, our faces from Him ; but amidst all His troubles,
with one exception, He seems to have enjoyed perfect
inward calm and serenity.
He had not where to lay His head, was hungry and
thirsty, was weary and fatigued. Who so poor as
He ! yet He was at peace. He was scoffed at and
ridiculed, taunted and maligned, who so despised as
He ! and yet at peace. His life was often threatened ;
who so oft in perils as He ! His enemies led Him to
the edge of the hill intending to cast Him down head-
long, but the majesty of His calmness overpowered
them, and passing through the midst of them He
went His way. Overcome with weariness, He fell
asleep in the stern of the little boat; a sleep so
sound that the roar of the storm and the heaving
of the waves could not awake Him; but the cry of
distress from His brethren reached Him, and He


arose, and at His word of “ Peace” even the elements
were still, and there was a great calm. Outward cir-
cumstances could not affect His inward peace. It is
true that He wept over Jerusalem ; it is true that He
groaned in spirit at the grave of Lazarus; yet, as the
wildest storm cannot invade the stillness of the depths
of ocean, so these passing troubles left untouched His
deep-seated serenity.
His, then, was an abiding peace. It was the peace
of God, which passeth all understanding.
And it had its source in His oneness with the God of
peace. We have said that it failed once —but only
once. It failed in that awful hour when the hand of
the Almighty pressed Him sore, and His moisture (His,
who is the fountain of living water) His moisture was
turned into the drought of summer; but the suffering,
the agony which_ He bore, was the chastisement of our
peace laid upon Him; and He bore it that in Him we
might have peace. That hour of His extremity indi-
cates to us the secret source from whence His peace
had flowed. His last words —“It is finished”—were
uttered when the agony was past; His last cry was
a cry of triumph. The depth of darkness was just
before , when He cried out, “ My God ! my God ! why
hast Thou forsaken Me V’ When He was made sin for
us, the Father hid His face from Him. This was the
acme of His distress. This was the bitter cup that He
entreated might pass from Him when He was in the
garden of Gethsemane; and His distress at the hiding
of His Father’s countenance shows us that His oneness
with the Father had been the source of the abiding
peace of His soul.
In Jesus we see the reason why God at the first said,
“ Let us make man in our image, after our likeness,”
even that in the fulness of time He might Himself
come and dwell in our nature, in the person of His


Son. He took not on Him the nature of angels, for
the body was prepared for the Son. And when the
work of the sixth day of creation was accomplished,
and man, fearfully and wonderfully made, was placed in
the garden of Eden, he dwelt there in tranquillity. Not
only was there nothing there to vex or grieve, but, till
the tempter came, the first Adam’s will was in harmony
with the will of God; so that neither without nor
within was there anything to disturb his calm. But
the peace of the second Adam, although of a similar
kind, flowed from a far deeper source, Adam might
rejoice in God with the unfallen angels, but to which of
these said He at any time, “ Thou art My Son ; this day
have I begotten Thee ?” The tranquillity of Adam was
that of an approved and beloved servant; the peace of
Jesus was that of a beloved child. The Lord God
might talk with our first parents in the garden in the
cool of the day; but the Son was daily His delight,
rejoicing always before Him.
And thus, when he took upon Him our nature,
this ceaseless delight in the Father underwent no
change. The spotless human soul was in perfect
harmony with that indwelling nature in whose image it
had at first been made. His whole being seems to have
been swallowed up in God. Bemember what He says
of Himself —“ The Son can do nothing of Himself but
what He seeth the Father do. The living Father hath
sent Me, and Hive by the Father. I am not alone, but
I and the Father that sent Me. As the Father knoweth
Me, even so know I the Father. He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father. All things that the Father hath
are Mine. I and My Father are one.” Language fails
in its power to express a more perfect harmony than
this, yet this harmony has existed already between God
and man (for, let us never forget that our Saviour had
not only a true body, but also a reasonable soul), and in


this perfect harmony we discover the source of the peace
of Jesus.
Behold, then, your heritage, brethren ; an ever-abiding
peace, springing from a perfect harmony with God. It
is a present inheritance, not a reversion. He does not
promise that we shall hereafter enter into it; in heaven
we enter into rest, but even now we may enter into
abiding peace. The words of the will are plain, “ Peace
I leave with you ; My peace I give unto you,” and the
testator has died. Why should we not enter upon the
full possession of our inheritance 1 It is a purchased
possession—and at what a price ! It is for all His
people ; there is no one of us who may not have it, for
His prayer included all who should believe on Him.
And there is no condition attached to its full enjoyment,
except that we abide in Him, according to His word.
We have seen that the source of the peace of His soul
was his oneness with the Father, and the position He
would have us occupy is to be one with Him. “As
Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also
may be one in us.” No longer as our first parents, even
when unfallen —our bodies are now the temples of the
Holy Spirit, and we have Christ in us, the hope of
glory. “I in them, and Thou in Me.”
What can disturb our peace when we are in Him ?'
Who shall pluck us out of our Father’s handl Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ t Having this
peace, the Christian sustains the cares of the busiest
life with an untroubled brow, and is himself sustained
amid its deepest trials in an inward serenity and calm ;
his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. The living
water which he has received from his Lord is in him, a
well of water springing up into everlasting life. The
numberless annoyances he meets with, the misunder-
standing of friends, the scorning of those that are at
ease, and the contempt of the proud, are all quenched


there. “ Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose-
mind is stayed on Thee, because he trusteth in Thee.”
Perhaps the heart of some child of God present tes-
tifies that it is not so with him. He cannot question
his interest in the great salvation ; he knows that he
has passed from death unto life ; and he has tasted of a
peace that passes all understanding. But this peace has
been enjoyed fitfully, like an intermittent spring, and he
cannot see how, with such hearts as ours, with the-
unhealthy atmosphere around us of a world lying in
wickedness, and with the ever-watchful adversary seek-
ing our destruction, it is possible to have an abiding
peace. Sin is so dreadful an evil, and we are so prone
to sin ; even when kept back from presumptuous sin
our secret faults are so numberless; while, if we had
done all our duty, we would still have to confess that
we are unprofitable servants: the thought of these
things seems to forbid the hope of a constant peace. Yet
let my brother remember that in his own experience there
have been times when he has tasted it, and that these
imes were those when heart and conscience were fresh-
?prinkled with the peace-speaking blood; and he will see
;hat the oftener he has recourse to that fountain, the more
ontinuous will his inward peace become. It follows that
E he may abide there, that peace may become like a
onstant stream. But is it possible so to abide 1 With
iuties requiring our utmost attention—perhaps with
lumberless cares engaging every minute of each busy
ay—how can one in any strict sense be said to abide
a Christ 1 I reply that it must be possible, otherwise
ur Lord would not have requested it; and this He has
.one most pointedly. Among ourselves it would be a
iollow hypocrisy for one to invite another when he
nows the invitation cannot be accepted. And when
ur blessed Redeemer says, “ Abide in Me,” surely we
lust believe that He means it, and does not mock us.


Moreover, many of us are conscious of a singulai
duality in our mental operations; so that while oui
hands, and even our thoughts, are busily engaged aboul
one object, our affections —and possibly even our con
templations—may be engrossed with quite another. li
such a power exists, with whom should our hearts b(
pre-occupied, even amid our pressing earthly occupations
compared with Him, who is the chiefest among ter
thousand and the altogether lovely 1
But if not —if we are so constituted, or if our duties
are of such a nature that there can be no twofolc
operation of our powers—still we may abide in Him
He has so constituted us that we may recall the fact o
His constant presence with us in an immeasurablj
brief space of time. The swiftness of thought is {
proverb. Cowper writes—
“ How fleet is the glance of the mind !
Compared with the speed of its flight,
The tempest itself lags behind,
And the swift-winged arrows of light;
And by it our Lord has enabled each of us t<
remember Him, so swiftly that no appreciable thm
is consumed in the act; and, like an electric current
His life may thereby become connected with ours by ;
chain of innumerable and constantly-recurring points o
contact —heart glances , if I may be allowed the expres
sion.
The conscious enjoyment of His loving favour wil
thus abide, and our seasons of devotion, when we hav
undisturbed fellowship with Him, will be linket
together by this blessed chain throughout the mult:
farious duties of the busiest life. We will be carefn
for nothing, but in everything by prayer and suppl:
cation, with thanksgiving, will make our requests know
to Him; and He has promised that the peace of Goc
which passeth all understanding, shall keep our heart


ind minds in Him. We will then know what it is to
>ray without ceasing, and to rejoice evermore.
But what of the resisting of Satan, and the over-
coming of the world, and the subduing of sin ?
are all, doubtless, before us \ but surely, when
he wolf is at hand, that sheep is safest which is nearest
o the Shepherd !
If we have consecrated ourselves, body, soul, and
pirit, to Him (and unless we have done so we are none
f His), then our warfare becomes the good fight of
%ith ; not of struggling with the world, the devfl, arid
ie flesh ourselves , but a striving to keep the eye of the
eart fixed upon the Captain of our salvation; and,
'hile running the race set before us, to continue
looking unto Jesus.” In this attitude we cannot be
/ercome —severed from Him we can do nothing ; but
irough Christ, who strengtheneth us, we can do all
mgs.
Thus living, our peace will become like a river,
nstant in its flowing, and ever increasing in its depth,
1 it loses itself in the ocean of His love.
Mr. Gillespie was followed by Mr. W. G. Marsh, the
mch-valued Secretary of the Melbourne Young Men’s
Ihristian Association, who spoke very feelingly but for
very few moments on “I live, yet not I, but Christ
veth in me.” In the unavoidable absence of an invited
jeaker, Mr. W. C. Johnstone most kindly came forward
?ain and gave a comprehensive address, reviewing
1 those doctrines pertaining to the Higher Christian
ife which would bear the test of Scripture, and
ressing home the acceptance, there and then, of the Lord
3sus as a Saviour at all times, and a Saviour from
I knoivn sin, with as much earnestness as if he
ere pleading with the unforgiven to accept Him as
icir surety. Nor, lam told, was the appeal in vain.


For when seen to be a Saviour from sin, who, that
abhors sin and groans for deliverance, can reject “ so great
salvation ?” Jesus, whenever revealed to a seeking soul
by the Holy Ghost as a Deliverer , is joyfully received as
such. And here I would beseech any who may have,
from their conversion onwards, tasted the deliverance
which God gives from tempers, passions, and worldly
desires—l would beseech them not to deter others who
have never seen our blessed Lord in this light from
seeking full and instant salvation at His hands. I
know it is nothing new that “Jesus saves,” but it is
new to thousands who have never been rightly instructed
in this most precious truth. Either they are to con-
tinue in sin, or to yield themselves to the Lord Jesus as
a Saviour from sin ; for one thing is most certain—they
cannot save themselves .
The Hev. T. Holme, of Daylesford, was to have
delivered the closing address on “ Humility of Mind
but though he was present, he could not speak—God
having but ten days previously removed from her
earthly tabernacle the spirit of one who had been for
many years the light of his home and the joy of his
heart. In his stead the closing address for Thursday
was delivered by the Chairman—
HEV. H. B. MACARTNEY.
jstobi«t: “Apodal Ulrans of ace."
On an occasion like the present I need not refer tc
such means of grace as Baptism and the Lord’s Supper
the Lord’s Day, the “ not forsaking the assembling
of ourselves together,” Christian intercourse, Christiar
literature, the visitation of the sick, and so forth
With these you are familiar, and in these paths you havi
met with, and do meet with, the Lord Himself con


tinually. Nor need I point you again to the great Foun-
tain-head. You know that the source of all grace is
the “ God of all grace,” and that grace flows from Him
through the Lord Jesus, and reaches us by the Holy
Spirit. I will therefore select to-night a few “ means,”
concerning which a few remarks may be helpful, espe-
cially to younger Christians, Before all other means of
grace, I place—
THE BIBLE.
It is nothing short of this—it is the voice of God
speaking freshly to our souls. It should never be other-
wise regarded. How will that thought prepare and
purify the heart! All the accurate knowledge that we
have of God comes from His Word. There can be no
complete acquaintance with Him until there be a com-
plete acquaintance with the Bible —book by book,
chapter by chapter, syllable by syllable. Ask me who
best knows the Lord. I would answer, “He who best
knows his Bible.” I do not mean the critical know-
ledge of the text, nor do I mean the memory of the
language merely —some of the holiest are very defective
in both these points—but I do mean that kind of know-
ledge that comes from drinking-in, verse by verse, the
character of God, and the character of the sinner, under
the clear light and teaching of the Holy Ghost. There
is such a thing as “ reading in the Spirit,” as well as
“ praying in the Spirit /’ and such reading enriches
the soul beyond all expression, I would rather see the
face of God in His Word twice a day, than be caught
up into the third heaven once a week. Visions, and
seasons of overwhelming emotion, are good occasionally ;
but they are not solid soul-sustaining food, or else God
would supply them day by day. The best views of Christ
are in the Book—in those touches, sketches, paintings,
narratives, doctrines of the Holy Spirit, who loves Him
with a love not a whit less than the love of the Father.


No one can so well know the sinner’s need as the Holy-
Ghost, and He has given us this full-length picture of
God—God in nature and God in grace, God in succes-
sive dispensations, God in heaven and God in earth \
God in His dealings with the sinner and God in His
dealings with the saint ] and, above all, God in the face
of Jesus Christ. Therefore, to “ Know Thyself,” and
to “Know Thy Lord,” believer, “Know Thy Bible.”
To be practical—you cannot grow strong in the
Word of God without time , and that time ought to be
a set time. Until you give a certain portion of time to
the reading of the Scripture you will never be really
wise unto salvation. There is no time to compare with
“ very early in the morning.” You can easily under-
stand why that calm, still, holy season is the best of
all. M'Cheyne made it the rule of his life always to
see the face of God before he saw the face of man.
And what was the result 1 He carried the traces of God’s
glory about with him all the day. Men saw his face
as it had been the face of an angel. But here you may
be met with a difficulty common to many, a lust of the
flesh, and that is, a love of sleep. Often have you said
it, “a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands and the terrible prediction of Prov. vii. 11 has
been fulfilled in your experience—spiritual “ poverty”
came on you, and “ want” in the hour of need. Now
you must fairly confront this question—“ I love sleep,
and I love Christ; but which do I love best 1” Of
course as a believer you will decide for Christ, and in
your own strength you will struggle against your
infirmity, and—as is always the case —you will fall
again and again into sin. Even in so small a matter
you must learn that your strength lies with Christ, and
not with yourself. You must make it the subject of
believing prayer, and it will be to you according to His
word. I may mention what I myself have found in


answer to prayer, that to rise at once on waking, or on
being awakened, makes the effort of rising absolutely
painless. From a similar experience you may learn two
lessons—first of all, that the Lord Jesus does save us
from committing sins of this description, when prayer-
fully trusted to do it, after confession; and, secondly,
that He saves His people not by miracle, as we would
say, but by the use of means. He provides a gracious
yet seemingly natural way of escape.
Having arisen and sought your solitude, what should
next be done 1 Perhaps you have tried prayer first, and
then the Bible; or, the Bible first, and then prayer. You
have, it may be, found neither method absolutely satis-
fying. I would, therefore, strongly recommend you to
read and pray together. Convert your Bible into a
prayer-book, into a praise-book, into a lesson-book all
in one. Open your Bible, and while He speaks to you
do you speak to Him, in praise, in prayer, in love, in con-
fidence. Make it the constant medium of communication
between God and your soul. Hold yourself open to
receive any divine impression which may be needed for
growth in grace, or for immediate usefulness. Think
with fear and trembling of a day spent among three
such subtle, malignant enemies as the world, the flesh,
and the devil, without this early interview with your
Lord and Master. You will cease to wonder that so
many Christian lives are miserable failures, when you
know how little time they spend alone with God.
Make sure, beloved friends, of this, or of some other
early hour; but do not let that be the only season of
meditation. Carry your Bible or a little Testament with
you wherever you go ; and while you feel yourself at full
liberty to read other profitable books, be very jealous of
yourself if you find in your heart a preference for a
“memoir” of some Christian hero, or the more frag-
mentary “experiences” of some happy saint. It cannot


be going well with you if you love even the glowing
literature of the “ higher life” better than the writings
of God Himself. I would also recommend marking
your Bible with pen or pencil, and committing portions
to memory for protection in an evil hour. Even the
Lord Jesus encased Himself with the Word as defensive
armour, and girded Himself with it as with a sword.
Quick as lightning came the sayings of God to His mind,
and with a thrice repeated “It is written” He turned
His adversary to flight. Have you heard how a poor
martyr cheered himself and his sorrowing friends when,
hearing that he was condemned, and was to go at once
to the stake, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and joyfully
exclaimed, “I was glad when they said unto me, Let us
go unto the house of the Lord.”
0 be always ready with the words of God, uttered or
unexpressed, for every moment of sadness or of
joy. Do you remember how Solomon speaks of the
“Father’s commandments,” in Prov. vi. 21, 22
“ Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them
about thy neck; when thou goest it shall lead thee ;
when thou sleepest it shall keep thee ; and when thou
awakest, it shall talk with thee.” If this is true of the
written Word, how much more beautifully true of Jesus,
the everlasting, living Word. Wherever the Word of
God is, there is the Son of God ■with His “ real presence.”
Find the “ promise ” and you find the “ Promiser,” for
Jesus is in the Word. This is one of His special means
of saving His people from transgression. “ 0 let me not
wander from Thy commandments,” is the believer’s
aspiration; and the remedy is this —“ Thy Word have I
hid in my heart that I might not sin against Thee.”
One thing more ; While the prayerful study of Scrip-
ture will make you covet whole-hearted consecration to
God, and whole-hearted confidence in God, it will cure
you of all ideas of “ Perfectionism ” in the flesh. It


will indeed show you how to walk “ holy, and justly,
and unblamably” as St. Paul did in Thessalonica, and
as God Himself was willing to witness ; it will show
you how to “abide in Christ” without sinning (1 John
iii. 6) all the day long, and so to believe in Jesus a?
to “ rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory f
it will show you how to “ take pleasure” in infirmities,
distresses, and reproaches; it will show you your
perfect standing in a perfect Saviour; but it will als©
show you your miserable imperfections, shortcomings,
sinfulness. It will show you how indwelling sin lies
in heavy dark masses below the surface, and daily, and
hourly, and always lies, an abominable, evil thing, under
the very eye of God; it will show you that though again,,
like Paul, you “are conscious of” nothing against your-
self, God knows “ all ” about you, and in that “ all *
is there, think you, more of evil than of holiness? Search
and see. “I ” worship God in the spirit, says Paul
the man who walked with a good conscience, and wdtla
many a boast of what Christ, who lived in him, did for
him to make him and to keep him pure. “I” rejoice
in Christ Jesus, but “I” have no confidence in the
flesh. The more he knew of it, the less he trusted it,
for it was radically and incurably corrupt. The happy
child of God cannot know of the great evil that
is in him except by looking into his Bible. There he
finds out the whole truth; the sword of the Spirit
gashes him open to the bone, and shows him what
perhaps he neither knew nor felt—■“ In me, that is
in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing.” If you think
there is inconsistency here, so there is; but it is
a sublime and a scriptural inconsistency. God is
responsible, and He alone, for the words which say,
“In many things we offend all,” and “ Whosoever
sinneth hath not seen Him nor known Him.” “ Bless-
ed are they that keep His testimonies, that seek
E 2


Him with the whole heart. They also do no iniquity
They walk in His ways.”
PRAISE.
Next to the Bible and prayer, there is nothing I know
of likely to bring such grace to the soul as Praise.
“ Praise is comely for the upright.” It glorifies God.
If I may so say, it gratifies Him, it pleases Him. It
is easy to praise God in the heights of joy, but not so
easy in the depths of sorrow. And yet God looks for
this from His believing people, and we ought to render
it. Praise is a blessed thing for us to give; it is a blessed
thing that God will receive it; and it is more blessed
that He gives us grace in return for it, coming down, as
He did to Solomon’s temple, and filling the temple of
the thankful heart with heavenly fragrance. How much
better we feel for meeting a praising Christian. How
much good it does us to break forth ourselves into
singing. Our woes are easily counted, but our mercies,
who can utter 1 Put your cares and calamities and
frivolous fears into one scale, and then put your God,
your Redeemer, your Comforter, your Heaven into the
other, and see what wealth is yours, what exceeding great
possessions. O, clap your hands to see such light affliction
over against such an exceeding weight of glory. If
there is one verse in the Bible calculated to carry you
through life on eagles’ wings, it is this—“ In everything
give thanks.” This “ everything” suggests another
means of grace of no mean importance. It is—
A SUBJUGATED WILL.
Where the natural will is unsubdued, God may act in
sovereign power, and do us good, as it were, against
ourselves ; but He cannot do us all the good He wishes,
in the way He wishes, until we have thoroughly learned
this lesson —to know no will but His. Submit to His
will we must; acquiesce in His will we may; but to


delight in His will, even when it leads to a furnace or to
a cross, this is to be holy, this is indeed to be conformed
to Christ, who said in the bitterest moment that was
ever spent on earth —“ Not as I will, but as Thou wilt. 1
I do not know of anything which so hinders grace as
judging of things immediately around us by the light of
nature. We pass sentence on persons, events, circum-
stances, sensations, sights, sounds, and so forth, as dis-
agreeable, unfortunate, frightful, and discordant —utterly
regardless of God who has so surrounded us, pledging
Himself at the same time that “all things work
together” for our good, that “ not a sparrow” falls with-
out His knowledge, that even “ the very hairs of our
head are all numbered.” To find fault with, or to
complain over, or to murmur at anything may be a sin
of ignorance, but it is a sin just the same, and when
known to be sinful, should never be committed again.
It stays God’s grace.
One who lived in thick darkness saw, nevertheless, a
great light concerning this very thing, and wrote it
down for our learning many years ago. “ Oh, how
happy is the soul which, in dying to itself entirely, loses
its will in all things. If to such a one thou shouldst put
the question at any time, saying, ‘ What dost thou desire,
oh soul, in heaven or in earth V it would answer in the
spirit of humble acquiescence, ‘ I desire what I now have ,'
and it gives this answer because it recognises in the facts
and events of every moment an expression of the
divine will—that will which is not more characterised
by its supremacy than by its wisdom and by its good-
ness. He who loses his will finds God, and in becoming
nothing secures the possession of all things both in
heaven and in earth. Acting in God’s independent
strength he stands forth victorious over self and the
world ; over sin and Satan ; over sorrow and anguish.
He who complains, or thinks he has a right to complain.


because he is called in God’s providence to suffering,
las something within him which needs to be taken
away. Sorrow 7 may exist, but complaint never." Friends,
I believe in my heart that unmeasured grace will flow
into your souls when you obtain answers to this prayer—
“ Renew my will from day to day,
Blend it with Thine, and take away
Whatever makes it hard to say,
Thy will be done,”
“ HE THAT OVERCOMETH.”
Victory is a glorious means of grace. An overthrow
aiay in one sense be a channel of good ; it may teach
us to examine wherein our weakness lies, and to search
about for the grace that is in Christ Jesus; but a vic-
tory ! O how it gladdens the heart, and leads to
a thousand more. I would press upon you the
absolute necessity for victory, and that continuously.
Apart from its exceeding sinfulness, imagine how even
one failure retards the Christian. It checks his growth ;
it mars his usefulness; it withers his joy ; it defiles his
sonscience ; it damps his courage ; the world despises,
and believers mourn. The grand question then is this,
How is victory to be obtained ? Three answers may be
givenl. By the believer alone; 2. By the believer and
Christ together; 3. By Christ alone. Now with regard to
the first we are all agreed that the believer alone is
simply a poor earthen vessel —a heap of dust and ashes.
Apart from Christ he can do nothing. Take then the
second method; add the strength of the believer to
the strength of Christ, and what have we got I —a
mixture of something and nothing, of faith and works,
®f God and man ; that is, Christ is invited to join His
strength with the most utter corruption. I ask you, as
enlightened Christians, can such a junction of force and
impotence ever be effected ? Can the effort end in any-
filing but failure 1 If our life is the life of Christ in us,


then all our fruit, energy, work, triumph, must be
directly His. In Him we live ; behind Him, as our
shield, we fight. It is He who giveth us the victory.
Believe me, the way to win is not trusting in self
plus Christ, but trusting in Christ minus self. Israel
must put on harness, set themselves in battle array,
blow the trumpets, fight in the midst of confused noise
and garments rolled in blood; but on whom is their
trust stayed before a sword is drawn ? “ Let God
arise,” they say; “ let His enemies be scattered.” On
whom is all their dependence in the red-heat of war ?
“ When Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed.” And
to whom did the glory belong when all was over ? “ O
sing unto the Lord a new song; for He hath done
marvellous things; His right hand and His holy arm
hath gotten Him the victory,” Away, then, with the
thought that the “ overcoming life” is partly by human
energy and partly by divine. “ Cease ye from man.”
Now try the third way of conquering—“ Christ
alone.” It seems as though I had only to mention that
beloved name to gain both your instant consent and
your joyful confidence. Yes, Christ overcometh. He
has never known defeat, either in His own person, or
in the person of His people when they abide in Him.
“ They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion,
which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever.” Ask
an experienced believer the secret of his strength—he
will answer, “ Jesus.” Ask him to whom his hands are
uplifted in the hour of trial-—‘‘To the Lord alone,”
will be his reply. Ask him to whom does he return
thanks after some great deliverance —he will say, “ My
God is all my salvation,” Ask him to whom does he
direct others—he answers according to the gospel teach-
ing, “ Deliver us from evil, O our Father, for Thine is
the power for ever and ever. Amen.”
If this be true (and who can doubt it?), no mischief


can accrue from excluding the believer from any share
in the conflict, except that of manfully confronting the
foe, his bosom heaving with mingled emotions of exalta-
tion and humility as he reflects —“ lam nothing, but
my God shall supply all my need. I rejoice in Christ
Jesus, but I have no confidence in the flesh.” May I
put the matter in a strong light 1 Do two win, or One ?
If two win they divide the glory, and God cannot have
it all. I once heard a beautiful illustration of this :
A man of lordly bearing is crossing the mountains, and
coming to the Hill of Zion. By his side he leads a
sheep, blind, and lame, and weary. Every now and
then the good shepherd pauses in some green pasture,
or by some running water, or under some shady tree
to refresh his tender charge. Thus “ they two go on
ogether” till tsuddenly they come to a thicket, and in
that thicket there lurks a wolf, and with glittering eye
and greedy teeth he crouches to spring upon his prey.
There is to be a conflict now. It is inevitable ; but the
question is, Is the conflict to be between the wolf and
the sheep, or between the wolf and the shepherd ? The
question contains its own answer. I may add that for
the sheep to take any part in the struggle, except that of
trusting and beholding, would only embarrass her de-
fender. The Lord Jesus is enough. He is enough for
the soul’s trust—enough for Satan’s overthrow. The
“mighty God” does not need our help, but He beseeches
our confidence.
Take then, dearly beloved, this practical step. Make
an end of striving and struggling with Satan. Tell him
that you recognise your folly in so long maintaining the
fight against His superior power, wounded, stricken down,
and disheartened ; but tell him that Christ has been
revealed to you, as He manifested Himself to Abraham,
saying, “ I am thy shield.” Tell him, “ The contest
is over between you and me. Henceforth it must be


between you and Christ. I shelter behind my shield,
and I know you no more, except as the enemy whom
the God of my peace bruises beneath His feet.” Words
fail me to describe the blessedness of such a position
—Christ between us and the foe.
I will only add one other scripture, Deut. xx. 2,3, 4
“ And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the battle,
that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people,
and shall say unto them—Hear, 0 Israel, ye approach this
day unto battle against your enemies ; let not your
hearts fail, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye
terrified because of them ; for the Lord your God is He
that goeth with you, to fight for you against your
enemies, to save you''
CONCLUSION.
Time will not permit me to speak of other means of
grace at any length. I will only briefly glance at a few.
Keeping under the body. —Have you ever observed how-
some Christians with great spiritual fervour, and with
high and lofty aspirations, fall at times an easy prey to
lusts of the flesh 1 I especially allude to the pleasures
of the table. Hear what St. Peter says by the Holy-
Ghost —“ Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers
and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against
the soul." Hear what St. Paul says—“ Let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” And again,
speaking of mere worldly attainments, he lays it down
as a first principle of success—“ Every man that
striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things.” To
fast so as to be hungry unfits the soul for prayer (Acts,
x. 10), and lays the soul open to the most fiery assaults
of the devil, by reducing ourselves to a state of physical
weakness, to which the God of love is utterly opposed.
To eat so as to be full—this was the “iniquity of thy


sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness and this was the prayer of Agar—“ Feed me
with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny
Thee, and say ‘ Who is the Lord V” It is well for the
man who can “ eat his meat with gladness and singleness
of heart, praising Godand who never knows the
sadness of having his communion with God interrupted
by the abuse of God’s gifts. The same remarks will
apply to all the lower appetites, to the lust of the eye,
to the love of dress, or of music, or of society. The axe
must be laid at the root of everything which hinders
the soul from unclouded peace and spiritual joy. The
means of grace themselves may become snares, and
really hinder grace. A means of grace without Jesus is
like a river bed without its silvery flood. It may
attract, but cannot satisfy. The golden rule is, “ walk
in the Spirit.” The Holy One will keep the soul in such
a heavenly condition, so intent on, so occupied with
Christ, that we “shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh.”
Humility is another special means of grace. I was
deeply hurt a few weeks ago by a fellow-Christian. His
letter was bursting with spiritual pride, while he charged
me with sin in connexion with this Conference ; and
the poisoned arrow kept rankling in my heart till I recol-
lected the “ sovereign balm for every wound,” and
looking up unto Jesus, I was in a moment healed by a
simple remedy. Part of a text came into my memory
(Gal. vi. 3) —“ If a man think himself to be something,
when he is nothing .” That fragment was enough. If
I was nothing why should I be distressed or mortified ?
O brethren, it is a glorious thing to be nothing, and to
know it. It leaves no room for self-acting, for man is
but a shadow. It leaves no room for self-assertion, for
“ He came into the world to save sinners, of whom I
am chief. It leaves no room for self in any shape or
form—that according as it is written, “ He that glorieth,


let him glory in the Lord.” It is comparatively easy to
abase ourselves before God and to yield to His decrees,
but true religion goes very far beyond this. We are
bidden, “ Yea, all of you, be subject one to another , and
be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud,
and giveth grace to the humble.”
Another blessed means of grace is Christian com-
munion. I need not enlarge upon it, for most of you
prize it—some of you, perhaps, too highly. This is the
case wherever it is sought as a joy in itself, instead of
as a means to this one end—a more excellent knowledge
and experience of God. Suffer me only to suggest, that
under whatever circumstances you meet with each other,
let it be tacitly understood that your converse should be
of Christ, of His work, His person, His power, His
kingdom, and His glory. Kecognise God in everything ,
and let your speech in any society be always with grace,
seasoned with salt. In church, or in meetings, or in
more private communion, let no eloquence, music, or
other delight cause you to forget the joy of all joys—
the divine and personal presence of the Lord Jesus.
Shall I call giving a means of grace 1 By all means,
“It is more blessed to give than to receive.” “ The
liberal soul shall be made fat.” The words, “ God loveth
a cheerful giver” are linked with the words “ God is able
to make all grace abound towards you.” There are
three classes of givers—the rich man, who gives what
he cannot miss; the good man, who counts himself a
steward, and gives stated sums in proportion to his
income; and the Macedonian believer, who deems that,
whether rich or poor, he can never give enough. This
last marvellous liberality was not only a fruit of grace
already bestowed (2 Cor. viii. 1), but was a means of
its further bestowal.
Need I say that watchfulness is a means of grace ?
Like humility, watchfulness is both a grace and a means


of grace. I give the evidence of one who was strongly,
and even bitterly opposed to the life of trust, but to whose
troubled soul the Comforter was sent to take of the things
of Christ, and to reveal Him in the glorious majesty
of His saving strength. “ There was,” he says, after
this, “ a singular power of watchfulness imparted to the
mind; the ability to guard the heart, the passions, the
feelings, and appetites, with a singular ability to stay
the tongue in silence. These were not new organs
given to the soul, but a new power of using those
already possessed. I had no sense of ‘ perfection,’ but
I saw more clearly than it was possible to see before,
my own utter imperfection and total dependence on
Jesus for all things. My mental frame was sweet, calm,
and unanxious, with a wonderful power of watchfulness
as a means of abiding in faith and love.”
One word more, and I have done ; that word is
afiliction. We -all know hundreds who never came to
the life of utter self-abandonment, who never were
reduced to a very childishness of trust in God, till they
came to know Him in the furnace. 0 how the flame of
earth’s fiery trial sheds a perfect blaze of light on the
imperishable wisdom, and righteousness, and redeeming
and sanctifying grace that God has treasured up in
Christ ! how it causes the love of the world to die
within our hearts ! how it exposes the utter hollowness
of that world itself ! how it sends its piercing rays into
the dark and filthy caverns of our own hearts, to show
us what we are ! Brethren, let us bless God for affliction,
as a peculiar, most pre-eminent means of grace. What
we cannot, or will not, learn from our Bibles, and from
the Holy Spirit’s teaching, God makes us learn in the
school of adversity. He will have His children
instructed in the odiousness of the flesh, in the cunning
of Satan, in the lying vanities of the world ; He will
have them instructed in the deep things of His own


character and purposes, in the attributes and offices of
Christ; and where they “ count it all joy” to learn such
lessons even at such a cost, He takes them still deeper
into that inner sanctuary, where both joys and sorrows
find the mind equable, and calm, and trusting :—this
morning, it may be, “caught up into paradise”—and this
evening, “ glorying in infirmity, taking pleasure in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses.”
Paul was a man who used every means of grace, and
drank more deeply than most men at the Fountain
Head ; and what was the result 1 The power of Christ
rested upon him in suffering, and when he was weak
then he was strong. Let it be our ambition to avail
ourselves of every means of becoming practically and
personally acquainted with God Himself, until we
come to this experience and to this confession—“ I am
nothing. lam less than the least of all saints. But lam
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation.
I am kept abiding in Christ, and Christ abides in me.
And of His fulness do I daily now receive, and grace for
grace.”
This was the last address delivered upon Thursday,
August 19th, and after we had sung the beautiful all-
surrendering hymn, “ Anywhere with Jesus,” the Con-
ference broke up at about ten o’clock.


Third Day.—Friday, August 20.
JJttbject; u llork BSitjjflttt anb Hitfrin.”
The prayer-meeting at five o’clock was very numer-
ously attended, and the “ requests” laid upon the table,
as on other evenings, revealed an extraordinary degree
of domestic sorrow, of unsatisfied spiritual yearnings, of
heart-crying after unconverted relations and friends,
which made the hour full of sadness, and yet of thrilling
interest and joy, as we spread each petition open before
the throne of Christ, and knew that He could not and
would not turn away. Every now and then a request
for “ thanksgiving” tended to confirm our faith, and to
strengthen our hands in God. At a quarter past seven
the old church was again filled, and after singing, reading
chosen passages of Scripture, and prayer, the first and
second addresses were delivered as follows ;
REV. F. SOUTBR,
jsuhiwt:
Revival implies the previous quickening of the
soul. It is “ every branch in the vine that beareth
fruit” that the husbandman purges, with a view
to increased fertility. Life must precede liveliness.
This most desirable state of soul is produced in various
ways by the Holy Spirit. The truths of God’s Word
are sometimes so lighted up that their fulness and suit-
ability are seen with such enlargement of spiritual
vision as to resemble a fresh revelation of the grace of
God. Such glorious truths as the imputed righteous-
ness of Christ, the believer’s oneness with his exalted
Head, the coming glory of Christ and of His ransomed


Church, when seen in the fresh glowing light I have
mentioned, impart such increase of joyous confidence
and strength, and lead to such heartfelt thanksgiving
and self-consecration, that the soul may be well said to
have experienced “Revival.”
On the other hand, the word “ revival” may fitly de-
scribe restoration to the joy of conscious fellowship with
Christ after such a low state of spiritual feeling as is caused
by self-indulgence, conformity to the world, unwatchful-
ness, or inactivity in doing the will of God. Rebuked
and chastened, if need be, by the Lord in loving faith-
fulness, the soul is awakened to a sense of shame in the
view of past backsliding, and this is accompanied with
tearful confession and humble supplication for pardon
and for peace. New joy fills the soul; an enlarged
realisation of sonship is experienced, the only adequate
word to express which is “ Revival.”
It may be said again that an individual soul has
been revived when warm sympathy with the Lord Jesus
is felt regarding the unsaved all around. In this case
the believing disciple becomes so absorbed with the
realities of eternity that his pleadings with God for the
unsaved, and his dealings with them in the matter of
salvation, are characterised by so much increased vivid
earnestness and importunity that he even seems to others
to be “ beside himself.” This is illustrated from what
is told of the Rev. William C. Burns, the well-known
evangelist and missionary, who, while passing along the
crowded streets of Glasgow, was so much impressed with
the thought of the eternity into which so many were
heedlessly sinking, that his dearly-loved mother, who had
come into the city, passed by him altogether unnoticed.
He did not recognise her, and when questioned about
it on the next opportunity, he gave this absorption
of soul regarding the unsaved around him as the expla-
nation of his apparent unkindness. May this Confer-


ence be largely used by tbe Holy Spirit for promoting
such revival in its individual members !
Revival in the church may be viewed as the repetition
on a large scale of what has just been described.' When
many believing souls in various parts, and in one land
after another, are refreshed with the spiritual rain, and
are strengthened with all might by the Spirit in the inner
man, there is occurring a time of blessing from above in
the earthly kingdom of the Lord Jesus.
Revival in the church has, however, a much more
extended meaning generally attached to it. It is usually
taken to mean conversion, for alas ! “ all are not Israel
who are of Israel.” In addition to the insincere, who,
from some unworthy motive, retain connexion with the
church, there are others who are trying—often with
great and long-continued assiduity and earnestness—
to work out a righteousness of their own. Pride and
spiritual ignorance prevent them from submitting them-
selves to the righteousness of God. Such persons work
for life, not from life.
A season of revival is a trying time for both these
classes. Joyful hearts, beaming countenances, holy activi-
ties, all the fruits of a great awakening, ill comport
with insincerity, and greatly disturb the toiler after a
righteousness of his own. To all such the existence,
nay the very mention, of revival is intolerable. Hence
arises much unfriendly criticism of the “ revival move-
ment.” Faults and imperfections which their keen
search has espied, are published abroad, and the saying
of the Master is verified —“ I am not come to send
peace, but a sword.” Meanwhile, the voice of suppli-
cation is ascending on their behalf; fervid, affectionate
appeals are made ; the great things of God’s law
are set before them, they are plied with the truths and
promises of the gospel, and earnestly besought “to be
reconciled to God.” Such prayers and efforts have


been often largely, always in some measure, blessed.
From among the insincere and self-righteous have come
converts —trophies at once of the Father’s long suffering,
of the bloodshedding and intercession of the Son, and
of the almighty power of the Holy Spirit.
It is worthy of note that when such men are converted
none are so effective in dealing with similar cases, as they
can most entirely enter into, and with intense sympathy
pity, the condition which was once their own. In this
way the holy fire spreads, and souls are daily added to
the Lord.
At such a time the younger members of families
and children in our Sabbath-schools are brought to
decision. The joy of harvest is felt in many a broken
circle. Long-continued supplications and sustained
efforts to guide younger feet into the way of peace are at
length crowned with success, and they who went forth
weeping, bearing precious seed, now come again with
rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them. The
revived church unitedly sings—“ The Lord hath done
great things for us, whereof we are glad.”
Revival in the church uniformly leads to the origina-
tion and prosecution of efforts among the lapsed masses
at home and the heathen abroad. Open-air preaching,
free breakfasts, with many ingenious, winsome ways on
the part of visitors from house to house, are diligently
plied, and not without encouraging success. These
means were being extensively used in Edinburgh and
Glasgow, as I can personally testify, for I passed
through those cities on my way to this colony. To
show how widely extended are the sympathies of re-
vived Christians in Scotland, I may mention that besides
petitions for particular places in the colonies, Australia
was prayed for on each day that I was privileged
to attend. Yon may well believe that I heard that name
pronounced with new interest and hope.


On recalling the history of revivals during the last
two centuries, I find that desires were uniformly
awakened and longings felt in the hearts of God’s
children for such outpourings of the Holy Spirit. It
was so at the Kirk of Shotts in the seventeenth century,
when, under one sermon, 500 souls were hopefully con-
verted. A few loving disciples, chiefly among the higher
classes in the district, spoke to the Lord in prayer and to
one another about this matter. A suitable opportunity
was sought for introducing into the field a man full
of faith and of the Holy Ghost. Their efforts were suc-
cessful. During the previous night continuous prayer
ascended from the meeting to the Throne, with the
glorious result on the morrow which I have already stated.
What I have said of this old revival is characteristic
of those which have occurred since. It is pre-eminently
true of the work of God now progressing so rapidly
throughout the British empire.
Are we to have such a blessing in Australia 1 This is
doubtless the anxious question arising from many a
heart in these colonies and in this Conference. From
what we hear in our afternoon meetings, it is cheering to
know that souls are being saved ; and though no general
movement is discernible, yet we are not without hope
that ere long the waters of Bethesda may be mightily
stirred by the Holy Spirit, and that many sin-sick souls,
long remembered in the hearts, will then be led in by
the hands of loving, praying men and women, and be
made whole of whatsoever disease they have.
Meanwhile let us consecrate ourselves anew to the
Lord and to this service by His will, ceaselessly raising
the cry, “ Come from the four winds, O breath, and
breathe upon these slain, that they may live !”
Will my Fathers and brethren in the holy ministry
permit me to say one word more 1 It is this —While
seasons of revival and wide-spread awakenings are to


be ardently desired, fervently prayed for, and gladly
welcomed, present results in our congregations should
surely be expected. Is there not reason to fear that
there is something wrong when large numbers of
unsaved souls can sit unmoved under our ministry from
year to year ? It was not so with holy Baxter at
Kidderminster, or Henry Venn at Huddersfield ; it was
not so with Robert Murray M‘Cheyne at Dundee ; and
it is not so now, and has not been so through the
lengthened ministry of his biographer —Andrewßonar, of
Glasgow. One of his former co-presbyters told me that
while ministering the bread of life in a thinly-peopled
district, and while none of the other ministers around
had anxious souls to deal with, the minister of Collace
had always more or less of that blessed work on hand: —
and I notice that as the result of the revival in Glasgow,
the increase of converts in Dr. A. Bonar’s congregation
exceeds the increase in any other. oto be like-minded
servants of the blessed Master !
After this most earnest address, the Chairman re-
marked that unless the eyes of God’s people were
thoroughly turned away from all agents and agencies to
God Himself, and until the Church was thoroughly
instructed in her own position, as the ministering
channel of divine grace, it was in vain to look for
surprising or immediate results. The next address war
then delivered
' !> REV. S. C. KENT.
|ttlness of C|rnst. n
There are many who have a name to live, who are
nominally Christ’s, without any abiding consciousness of
His indwelling, or enjoyment of His love. They are
filled to overflowing with the world’s concerns, pursuits,
cares, and pleasures, leaving no room for Him who if
f 2


their rightful Lord, and who should be in all their
thoughts. In their hearts He would be an intruder, as
inconvenient and unwelcome as He proved to be, when,
in the days of His flesh, He entered His Father’s house
at Jerusalem, to the dismay of the money-changers and
traffickers by whom it was defiled; and everything
within them would have to be revolutionised and
reformed before His presence could prove a delight.
The love of Christ and the love of the world cannot
co-exist. The service of Christ and the service of sin
are antagonistic. “ These are contrary the one to the
other.” When Christ enters, it is true He says—
“ Peace be to this house but in order to permanent,
settled, abiding peace, there must first be the expulsion
of all that is opposed thereto, and many are keeping
Him without, because they will not give up their
cherished idols and their darling sins, and are not pre-
pared in all things to submit their wills to His, and
allow Him to rule without a rival. With Christ in the
heart the fire of love brightly burns and glows, con-
suming everything that is opposed to Him ; and incon-
sistency, self-seeking, and lukewarmness, give place to
entire consecration, unreserved devotion, and ardent
affection.
Paul distinctly told the members of the church at
Corinth that weakness, sickness, and death had come
among them because of their evil state. Christ said to
the Laodiceans —“ As many as I loje I rebuke and
chasten; be zealous, therefore, and Repent. Behold, I
stand at the door and knock; if any man hear My voice
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with Me.” Rebukes and chastisement
come to us from Him with the design of arresting our
attention and securing our regard. They are knocks
from His band and calls from His voice. By them He
says, “ Open to Me,” Instead of standing outside,


forgotten and neglected, He would fain sit in the chief
seat of our hearts, honoured and loved, and fulfilling
His word—“ If a man love Me he will keep My words,
and My Father will love him, and We will come unto
him and make Our abode with him.” They err sadly
who suppose that only now and then they may be
privileged to realise that Christ is theirs and they are
His. This should be our habitual experience. As
John reclined on the bosom of Jesus at supper, and was
permitted to whisper into His ear and learn His secret
mind, so may we constantly “ know, and taste, and feel
the joys that cannot be expressed.” Many have only
just enough religion to make them miserable. They
have too much to be happy in sin, and too little to be
happy in Christ. They are convinced of sin, but not
delivered from bondage; and they know not, by blessed
experience, that their sins, which were many, are all
forgiven them ; that Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth, and that
whosoever believeth on Him shall not be ashamed. O,
that such would open the doors of their hearts to Him
who “ has waited long, is waiting still,” and whose head
is filled with dew, and His locks with the drops of the
night. No word of reproach would be spoken by His
lips, and no look of anger would burn from His eyes.
The past would, at once and for ever, be all forgiven
and forgotten. The last great revival of religion in
New York was preceded by a time of severe commercial
depression and disaster. There are men there, now in
the enjoyment of vital religion, who could tell you that
in the hot race after wealth they had all but made ship-
wreck of faith and a good conscience, when Christ, in
mercy to their souls, overwhelmed them in temporal
bankruptcy. Trusting in God as the hearer and
answerer of believing prayer, we are expecting in
Melbourne a notable revival of religion ; but if we


eannot be roused from our Laodicean state by gentle
means—by the call of love—we shall be roused there-
from by knocks so loud and a voice so awful that we
shall no longer dare to disregard. “By terrible things
in righteousness wilt Thou answer us, O God of our
salvation.”
The true way to revival is to be found in the total
and unconditional surrender of our whole being to
Christ, that He may fill us with Himself, and by His
Holy Spirit may dwell in us, and speak and act through
us. We are inclined to think that if we could secure
the presence and aid of certain men, whom God has
greatly honoured elsewhere, then our desires would be
realised and our prayers answered. But these men are
nothing apart from Christ and His Spirit, and can
accomplish nothing. Each one of us may receive of
Christ’s fulness, and so become qualified for His work.
He is as ready to fill us and use us as them, and to
speak in and by us, as in and by them. The secret of
power is an ever-present, indwelling, risen Redeemer
and King, strengthening us with might by His Spirit in
the inner man, so that, although in ourselves we have
no might, we may fulfil the word, which is an enabling
as well as a directing word —“ Be strong in the Lord
and in the power of His might.” The vine-branch
severed from the vine is fruitless, sapless, and lifeless.
The member severed from the body is bloodless, strength-
less, and useless. It is only as we are in living union
with the living Saviour that we can be fruitful in good
works, and effective in service. He is the root and
heart and head of all true life and power. A city may
have waterpipes and gaspipes laid along its streets, but
if there be no junction between them and the pipes
in the houses, the inhabitants may perish from thirst,
and through the night have no light in their dwellings.
Taith is that which joins us to Christ, so that a living


personal union is established with the living personal
Saviour; and all that is in Christ has free passage into
our souls —His life becoming ours, and His power also ;
and we are able truly to say—“ I live, yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me ; and the life which I now live in
the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave Himself for me.” When this is so,
the words which have been given me as the subject of
this paper express a most delightful and gladsome truth
—“ Of His fulness have all we received, and grace for
grace.”
In Colossians we read—“lt pleased the Father that
in Him should all fulness dwell.” “In Him dwelleth
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are com-
plete in Him;” or, as it may be read, “ filled full in
Him— i.e., filled with all the fulness of God.” “The
church, which is His body,” is spoken of as “ the ful-
ness of Him that filleth all in all.” It is the divine
pleasure that we should “ all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect (full-grown) man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fulness of Christ.”
Christ was “ full of grace,” in whatever sense we
understand the word, whether as signifying mercy, or
favour, or strength, or excellence, or beauty, or all these
combined. “ The exceeding riches of His grace,” no
words can express nor imagination conceive.
“ The love of Jesus—what it is,
None but His loved ones know.”
“ Thou art fairer than the children of men ; grace is
poured into thy lips.”
Christ was “ full of truth.” He was “ the truth,” in
opposition to all falsehood, and in fulfilment of all that
was typical and figurative and prophetic. He was “ the
true light,” “ the true bread,” “ the true vine,” “ the


faithful and true witness,” “ the true God and eternal
life,” the truth of God and the God of truth.
“ Thou art the truth divine ;
Its fulness may I see,
Believe, and find the promise Mine—
The truth shall make you free.”
All that Christ is is ours, and all that is in Christ is in
Him for us. He is the exhaustless fountain of grace,
ever flowing, yet ever full. From Him we receive the
grace of 'pardon. We are justified freely by His grace.
There is now no condemnation to them who are in
Christ Jesus. “We have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access, by
faith, into this grace wherein we stand.” “We have
redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of His grace.” From Him we
receive the grace of purity. Prior to His birth the
angel of the Lord said to Joseph, “Thou shalt call His
name Jesus ; for He shall save His people from their
sins.” To those whom He delivers He says, “ Go, and
sin no more.” Paul writes—“ Shall we continue in sin
that grace may abound 1 God forbid. How shall we
that are dead to sin live any longer therein ?” “He
that is dead is freed from sin.” “ Eeckon ye also your-
selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin, therefore,
reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your members as instru-
ments of unrighteousness unto sin ; but yield yourselves
unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and
your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.
For SIN SHALL NOT HAVE DOMINION OVER YOU ; for ye
are not under the law, but under grace.” From Christ
we receive the grace of power. “My grace is sufficient
for thee,” is His assurance. “ Lo, I am with you
alway,” is His promise. Whatever there is for us to


bear, Christ is with us and in us, enabling us to endure
it. The angel of His presence saves us. Whatever
there is for us to do, Christ is with us and in us,
enabling us to perform it. Whether He calls to suffering
or to service, He gives the necessary grace. For our
support and encouragement He has said—“ He that
believeth on Me, the works that I do shall he do also ;
and greater works than these shall he do.” We, then,
confiding in Him, may say, “ I can do all things through
Christ, who strengtheneth me.”
“ I can do all things, or can bear
All sufferings, if my Lord be there.”
He is the spotless, ever-shining Sun of Grace. “In
him was life, and the life was the light of men.” We
are to be as mirrors, reflecting His light. He is to see
Himself in us. For every grace in Him there is to be
an answering, corresponding grace in us. “ Grace for
grace not only grace upon grace, but grace like unto
grace. As a mirror accurately reflects the features of
him who stands before it, down to the minutest detail,
so the believer is to reflect his Lord. His beauty is not
his own, but the beauty of the Lord his God upon him;
and there is no beauty whatever to be seen in him
excepting that of his Lord. In him is fulfilled the
word, “ Thy renown went forth among the heathen for
thy beauty; for it was perfect through My comeliness
which I had put upon thee.” It is the Christian’s
calling and privilege to be like Christ, and this he can
be, only by setting the Lord always before him, and by
keeping ever in the light of His countenance; so that
he may give back every ray of excellence and beam of
beauty that streams from Him. Christ was “ made
flesh”—became a man, became like us—that we might
become like Him, and might bear His image; and that
for every grace in Him there might be a reflected grace
in us. Are we tempted at any time to congratulate


ourselves on our own holiness and Christ-likeness, as if
we had produced it, or as if it were inherent in us ?
Let us remember that we can only be holy because our
Lord is holy, that there can be nothing good in us that
is not in Him, and that does not shine back from us as
received from him ; and that it is only as Christ is
revealed to us by his Holy Spirit—whose office it is to
take of the things of Christ and show them to us—to set
them before us—that we can become Christ-like. A
poor, valueless piece of glass may become inexpressibly
precious when it has photographed upon it the image
of a beloved object. There are photographs which no
money could buy from their possessors. That likeness
you have—the only one in your possession—of a
deceased brother, or sister, or parent, or child, or hus-
band, or wife—would you sell it? Ho; you would
sooner part with the finest work of art, or the most
necessary article of furniture. The believer is precious
to God, because he reflects the likeness of His well-
beloved Son. He is His photograph. And the believer
is precious to his brother believer, because each discerns
in the other Christ’s likeness. We could not help but
love one another with a pure heart fervently, if we all
kept ourselves ever in the sunlight of Christ’s presence,
so as to show forth continually the praises (the virtues)
of Him who hath called us out of darkness into His
marvellous light.
Some have received of Christ’s fulness for justifica-
tion. They trust to Christ, and Christ only, for the
remission of sins. But they do not, as they might and
should, receive of Christ’s fulness for power against sin,
although it is written : —“ If we walk in the light, as
He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another,
and the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth us
from all sin. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our


sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that
we have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word
is not in us. My little children, these things write I
unto you, that ye sin not.” Christ, and Christ only,
can cleanse and keep us clean. Some suppose that by
efforts of their own they are to make and keep them-
selves holy ; that by Bible-reading, and praying, and
striving, they are, little by little, and after many failures
and bitter disappointments, and frequent backslidings,
to bring themselves into something like conformity to
Him whose name they bear. Dear brethren, leave
yourselves alone. Let Christ shine on you. Stand in
the full sunlight of His presence. Believe in Him, and
trust to Him, and you will not be able to help Bible-
reading, for there will be no book so interesting to you.
It will be sweet unto your taste —sweeter than honey
and the honey-comb. And you will not be able to help
praying, for prayer will be as your vital breath. You
will delight in nothing so much as in communion with
Jesus. But instead of mourning over failure, you will
rejoice in victory—for this is the victory that over-
cometh, even your faith—you will rejoice that “ of Him
are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption; that according as it is written, He that
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.” You will have
power for service. One shall chase a thousand, and
two put ten thousand to flight, and it shall be seen that
“of His fulness have all we received, and grace for
grace.”
After this there was a pause. The Chairman made a
few remarks upon that tender love of God which, when
it is shed abroad in our hearts, enables us not only to
bear with the sinful infirmities or doctrinal blindness of


our fellow-believers, but also enables us to bury contro-
versy altogether at a time like this, and to regard each
other, not from a human or from a denominational
point of view, but as a group of accepted worshippers,
as members of one divine body, as heirs together of
the grace of life, as objects of God’s free unfettered
love, as travellers Zionward, as priests and kings
going up to be robed and crowned, and then to reign
with Christ, in sight of, in communion with each other,
for ever and for ever. Then we sang that gem of truth
and beauty, “The precious name of Jesus,” and the
third address was delivered by
REV. W. C. RUNNING.
jJubieft: of
Brethren in Christ: Let us inquire—7. What is the
burden of soulsl The expression conveys the idea
of a sense of weight pressing upon a renewed heart from
a painful apprehension of the condition in which unsaved
souls lie, and the dangers to which they are exposed.
It is a burden, and there are many selfish burdens in
this life, but there is no selfishness in this one—it is a
spark from the holy flame of divine love.
In one aspect this burden appears to be the very
highest form of that noblest impulse of our nature,
viz., to save life. On Cain the burden of innocent
blood fell till he groaned out, “ My punishment is greater
than I can bear.” He reaped the consequences of
guiltily denying that love ought to have made him his
brother’s keeper. The burden of the blood, not of inno-
cent, but of guilty and lost souls, God will certainly lay
upon those who deny or neglect their accountability for
souls. This is proved by Ezek. xxxiii., by Paul’s fare-
well of the Ephesian elders—“ I take you to record this
day that I am pure from the blood of all, for I have not


shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God
and by such passages as Prov. xxix, 11, 12—“ If thou
forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and
those that are ready to be slain ; if thou sayest, Behold,
we knew it not; doth not He that pondereth the heart
consider it ? and He that keepeth thy soul, doth not He
know it ? and shall not He render to every man accord-
ing to his works ?” For who are “ drawn unto death”—
i.e., have the lot cast against them, the sentence of death
pronounced, and the rope of execution about their necks
—so truly as those on whom, through unbelief, the wrath
of God abides ? Who so “ ready to be slain,” not merely
by their slender hold, and the thousand uncertainties of
life, but as the sure result of their sinful habits, as those
masses of our fellow-creatures who are without God,
without hope, without the restraints of the Holy Spirit,
and strangers to the marvellous love of God in Christ?
If we ignore these things, the guilt of those old wreckers
who by false lights lured homeward-bound ships to the
rocks and destruction —such guilt may not be ours; but
surely the guilt of those who, lying securely at home,
hear borne on the gusts of the wild night-wind the
shriek of despair, the boom of the signal gun of
distress, and who refuse either to launch the life-boat
for the rescue, or to show the guiding lighthouse flame
—that guilt will be ours.
The burden of souls lay in this way upon the greatest
saints of Scripture. Enoch was not so absorbed in
communion with God that he could forget sinners, or
neglect to remonstrate with them and warn them. By
the very closeness of his companionship with the Most
High, he knew better than others how God feels towards
sinners. This burden kept Noah faithful to his work as
a preacher of righteousness through all those 120 years
in which the longsuffering of God waited. Where did
Abraham learn to use that remarkable argument in


prayer, and make it an appeal to justice that God should
spare the guilty for the sake of the righteous. Where,
but from his Almighty Friend ? O how well do we see
that the friend of God must be the true friend of souls !
Moses would rather sink into nothingness than behold
the ruin of Israel, although God had promised to re-found
the nation through him. Then it was that one praying
man, burdened with souls and of Herculean faith, held
back the collected flood-waters of deserved destruction
from a whole people, Paul, however we understand his
words, gave utterance to a wish as passionate in its love
as that of Moses, when he said he “ could wish himself
accursed (or separated) from Christ for Israel’s sake.” Is
it needful that I should remind you how this burden
pressed upon the Man Christ Jesus ? He saw harvests
of souls; He saw labouring and heavily laden souls; He
saw wilful souls sealing their own ruin, and He wept
over them.
In another aspect of this question, What is the burden
of souls 'I we may gather from the tenor of all Scripture,
that the burden of the Lord is the burden of souls. You
remember that the utterances of the prophets, especially
if predicting judgment and doom, are styled “burdens.”
They could not foretell the inevitable woe, near or in
the remote future, whether to heathen nations or to the
Israel of God, without having their spirits burdened.
It is the same to-day. Wherever a regenerated man or
woman is filled with divine truth by the inbreathing
Spirit, that must bring with it anxious thought about the
relation of other souls to that truth. Indeed, I believe
that no person can be fully charged with gospel truth
without that truth shaping itself into a divine message,
both to saved and unsaved. It is looking at God’s truth
until it glows, burns, and lives before the mind that
must give us a burden to tell out. Like the prophet
who resolved not to speak in Jehovah’s name to the


people any more, because his preaching stirred up bitter
animosity, but who found that the unuttered burden
became “ in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my
bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not
stay so will it be with you. We must have Jehovah’s
heart throb against our hearts, before we can feel about
souls as He does. We must know what Jesus meant
when He said, “ My meat is to do the will of Him that
sent Me, and to finish His work,” and when He felt that
His soul was pressed, burdened, straitened until that
baptism of blood was accomplished. O friends, where
did the burden of souls rest first, if not on “ God, who
so loved the world V’ Where does it rest most tenderly
noiv, if not on the ever-living Intercessor ? The salva-
tion of souls through a crucified Jesus is :e the 'pleasure
of the Lord.” When we know that, and when we are
filled with God’s mind, and “ the mind of Christ,” the
burden of the Lord will be the burden of souls to us.
11. What Reasons are there for the Pressure of this
Burden upon us ? —I have necessarily anticipated a part
of the reply to this inquiry. But it may be briefly said,
this burden comes upon us from being both near to God
and near to souls. Being near to God causes a
wonderful longing for His glory in the salvation of
men. It fills us with unutterable yearnings that Jesu’s
travail may thus be satisfied, His name honoured,
His will done, and sin brought to an end. Being
near to souls keeps us in mind of the joy they
are losing, of the guilt they are increasing, of the
misery they are feeling, and of the eternal loss they may
at any moment experience. My friends, nearness to
God never can place you at a distance from unsaved
souls in this life, though it may do so in another
life. By the grace of God you are lifted to a position
from which you can see sinners, as they cannot
see one another. In the degree to which you are


so raised, you are nearer God’s view of souls. The
angels get their interest in souls from being near to
'God, hence their glad ministries “ to them who shall be
heirs of salvation.”
“ About God all the sanctities of Heaven
Stand thick as stars, and from His sight receive
Beatitude past utterance.”
One way to that beatitude for you, is bearing for Jesus
the burden of souls.
111. How does this Burden show itself ?—lt must
discover itself, primarily, before God. In secret the
soul so laden will tell out all the details of its anxiety.
There, even when no opportunity to speak for Christ
has yet been given, names will be mentioned, and the
knowledge of particular cases used. There, when the
supplicant can never hope to reach those borne upon his
heart, the burden will send him. Sure of a patient hear-
ing, and sure of timely help and wisdom, you will pour
out your heart and gather up your strength. There, too,
you will return when your soul-travail appears to be
fruitless. How touching is Jeremiah’s message and
resolution to the souls about him (xiii. 15-17) —“ Hear
ye, and give ear, for the Lord hath spoken. Give glory
to the Lord your God before He cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and
while ye look for light, He turn it into the shadow of
death, and make it gross darkness. But if ye will not
hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride,
and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears.”
It was to God that the psalmist said —“ Horror hath
taken hold of me, because of the wicked that forsake
Thy law.” “ I beheld the transgressors and was grieved,
because they kept not Thy word.” In the Revelation,
the church of Christ, labouring that Jesus may be
brought more into the world, is represented “ as a woman
crying, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.”


But this burden will also discover itself before men.
Not so intensely as before God, and never ostentatiously :
yet it cannot but speak the things which it has seen
and heard. In short, it believes, and therefore speaks.
Coming, as it does, from the light of God, and speaking,
as it must, with spiritual verities more real to it than
any material things, it possesses an element of power an
unburdened soul can never have. Is it wanting in
charity to say that if the outer life is an index to the
secret life before God, this burden of souls must be a
rare experience 1 Must it not be confessed that the
cool indifference of multitudes of Christians —nay, that
our ordinary state of feeling about souls—is dreadful I
An impulse of power is wanted in our inner life, in our
pulpit and pastoral work, in our Sunday-school work, in
our tract distribution, in all our outside effort to reach
the sick, the vicious, the poor, the scoffing, and the
sceptical, which a sense of the burden of souls alone can
supply, 0 let us acknowledge it, we do not see souls
as drawn unto death and ready to be slain. Any occa-
sional flashes of thought upon their condition make us
uncomfortable, because we do not let them move us to
prayer or effort \ and so it is still true that whilst the
devil, Judas, and a Sadducean priesthood can keep
awake all night, the Lord’s disciples fall off to sleep
again and again—the Master agonising or interceding
the while. Oh, ye witnesses for Christ, are ye bearing
false witness against your nearest neighbour! We all
act strongly or feebly, according to the degree in which
we are affected by any object. Our affections represent
the motive power of the soul.
Let us see the objects which have moved the great
and useful souls in the church of the past, as they saw
them, and we shall be moved to immediate prayer and
work as they were. Let us give time for the patient
study of the agencies at work to destroy souls. Let us


become acquainted with the corrupting nature and
the enormous quantity of pernicious literature; get
accurately before the soul the effects of the drink-
curse, especially as it cuts off masses of the working,
and other classes from the house of God, from
Christian influences, and from all pure thought;
go over the thousand subtle forms in which sensuality
is appealed to in the young, the middle-aged, and the
old; add to these the bias to all evil, which is innate to
souls, and then think of the eternal issues of all these
things, and can our eyes be dry ? can our hearts refuse to
burn? shall we not be compelled like Joseph to find a
secret place to weep there? Friends, when these bruised
and wounded masses of our fellow-men see us coming
after them, as the Good Samaritan came “ where they
are,” with tearful eyes and loving hearts, they will
believe that our religion has something in it; but
whilst, as priest and Levite, we “ pass by on the other
side,” they scoff at us as hollow shams. Men’s hearts
are hard, but “ God usually breaks hard hearts by
tender hearts.”
Yet a gleam of gladness spreads over our minds as
we perceive that the Spirit of God is beginning to place
the burden of souls upon not a few hearts. When, at
this time of year, we see the soil breaking to let the
rows of tender blades through, we hail it as a proof of
life; so, when among Christians the hard surface of
neglect or indifference to souls is breaking up and
giving way, we hail that as a proof of life. Here a
Christian is getting anxious about his neighbours;
there the rescue of a poor fallen one is set about by two
believers ; in another direction you see one member of
the church going after a brother or a sister who has
wandered. A delicious feeling of spring time comes
over us, and we sing—“ The winter is past, the rain is
over and gone, the flowers appear upon the earth, the


time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of
the turtle dove is heard in our land.”
IV. The Encouragements and Rewards of those who
hear this Burden. —Your affections, life, and work move
in the same direct line as those of Jesus. “We then
as workers together with Him. ... As sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, yet possessing all things.”
By the weight with which the burden has pressed
upon you, may be measured the ineffable joy you know
when souls are born again. It is small joy to hear of a
great work of God to those who never weep over souls.
The angels rejoice over one sinner that repenteth. I
am sure their joy is high and holy; but it cannot have
all the elements of intense delight which you, a
ransomed sinner, shall know when a brand is plucked
from the burning, and placed by grace beneath the
sheltering blood. Oh, beloved, the satisfaction of the
blessed Christ grew out of the travail of His soul! The
joy set before Him sustained Him under the cross and
shame !
Think what promises you can claim who are thus bur-
dened. You “shall, doubtless, come again with rejoicing.”
You “ shall save a soul from death, and hide a multi-
tude of sins.” You “ shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever.”
Immediate results shall gladden your hearts. “As
soon as Zion travailed she brought forth children.” Any
true movement and arousing among the people of God
is sure to be followed by corresponding effects among
the unconverted. A stirring up within the church to lay
hold of God in prayer, is sure to be accompanied by a
stirring up without the church to lay hold of souls, to
u compel them to come in,”
At the end of last summer I observed in my garden
a number of young trees appearing simultaneously above
g 2


the earth. A friend explained that electricity had burst
the seeds lying in the ground, and they at once germi-
nated. “ Under other circumstances,” he said, “ they
would require almost boiling heat, and moisture, to
start their growth.” Now I am convinced that there
are truths and convictions lying in your hearts, which,
if started into life, would fill your lives with a power
surprising to yourselves. 0, for the fire of God to run
along the ground, to quicken the truth you know, and
to begin life in dead souls ! “ Then shall the earth
yield her increase, and God, even our God, shall bless
us,” for Christ’s sake. Amen.
The next speaker was a clergyman from Table Cape,
on the north-west coast of Tasmania, who has the high
honour of being the first to introduce Christian Con-
ferences into the Southern Hemisphere, and whose
labours both as pastor and as evangelist on a wild and
distant shore have been for several years past crowned
with remarkable success.
REV. RICHARD SMITH.
: il ‘fafrom.”
My Christian Friends: I have only a short time allotted
to me to speak to you upon the subject of “ Work
Within and Without,” and I trust I may be kept from the
danger of darkening counsel by words without know-
ledge. Should the Lord now send a message to you, which
you feel comes home to you as a rebuke, let me exhort
you not to be grieved or angry that you are reproved,
but take it as from the Lord. Most of you who are
here are in some way or other workers for the Lord;
and have you not come to the Conference asking the
Lord Himself to speak to you, and to teach you how
you may work for Him to the best advantage? Now


if the Lord shall answer your prayer by showing you
any matter in which your practice has not been in
accordance with His mind, and by setting before you a
more excellent way—would it not be your wisdom to
receive thankfully what He sends, and to walk in the
light '? Already during the meeting of Conference we
have been faithfully spoken to, and I trust such faithful
messages have hot been spoken in vain.
No one is fitted to go forth and work successfully for
the Lord until there has been a work of experience and
discipline within his own soul. This is one of the blessings
which we hope to realise at the Conference. We hope to
learn something by which we shall be better qualified for
Christian work. The Christian, when he first believes,
is not in all respects fully qualified for the work which
his Master intends him to engage in. Moses was
not fit for the work of delivering Israel from Egyptian
bondage at that time when, full of self-confidence and
self-sufficiency, he rashly killed the Egyptian. The Lord
had to send him away to spend forty years in the land
of Midian, that there he might learn to know something
of his own heart, and that he might be humbled by
this knowledge. When forty years had elapsed, and
Moses was sent back to Egypt to undertake the
task of delivering the children of Israel, he was ready
to say — “ Who am I that I should go unto Pharoah,
and that I should bring forth the children of Israel
out of Egypt ?” “0, my Lord, send, I pray Thee,
by the hand of him whom Thou wilt send.” He
was humbled now. He saw his own insufficiency
for the work. There had been this needful work within
by which he had been fitted for the special service upon
which he was now sent forth. We must not wonder if
the Lord also teaches us humbling lessons about our-
selves, in order to fit us for future usefulness. This is,
doubtless, the meaning of much of the severe discipline


and conflict which Christians often pass through in the
early days of their experience.
If we would work successfully for our Master, it is
essential that we should serve Him faithfully. I believe
that very much of the failure which is noticeable in the
Lord’s work, arises from its being carried out in a way
which is dishonouring to Him. It is dishonouring to
God when His people form unholy alliances with the
world to accomplish His work; when, in this respect,
they are unequally yoked with unbelievers; when, in
order to gain the approbation of the world and to get
the world’s money, they institute bazaars and concerts
and other worldly amusements. All this is dishonouring
to God. How much better to trust in Him to whom
the gold and silver belong. He will honour those
who trust Him; but if any cannot trust Him—if they
have recourse to modes of working which they know
cannot meet with His approval—He will set them aside
and work by other means.
The success of Christian work will, I believe, greatly
depend upon the way in which the gospel is set before
men. The simple gospel must be taught. It must be
seen that we ourselves can trust the gospel, that we
have confidence in it; that we believe its reception into
the heart will bring instant salvation. This is a point
upon which there is much failure. I was once told that
it would never do to preach such a gospel as that—to
tell sinners that they could be justified by faith—that
believing on the Son of God they have everlasting life.
It was said that the result of such preaching would be
that the ungodly would eagerly flock around and accept
salvation on such easy terms, and then live on in sin as
they had formerly done. Since that time experience
has taught me that there is no such danger to be
feared. I have known cases where the gospel has been
preached in this way, and where men and women have


run away and hid themselves like timid children, for
fear lest salvation, without money and without price,
should be urged upon their acceptance. They
did not, as it had been said they would, presume
upon the offer of salvation being made upon such
easy terms; indeed, no one ever will or can believe that
Jesus has taken away his sins, whilst he is yet purposed
to live on in sin. And that is the belief which saves
the soul: not a belief in the facts stated in the Gospel
concerning Christ Jesus, but a trust of the heart in Him,
a resting with satisfaction in the atonement which He
has made for my sin. St. Paul says in Rom. i. 16—“ I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that be-
lieveth.” We must have St. Paul’s confidence in the
gospel if we would be successful in using it; and when
we find a troubled soul that is able to say, “I can trust in
the blood of Jesus now to wash out my sin, and in my
heart I come to Him now for the promised pardon for
my sin,” we need not be in any fear lest the promise
of Jesus should not after all be fulfilled to the troubled
soul accepting His invitation to come and get rest. A
case which occurred a few months ago will illustrate
this. I was directed to a cottage where there was a
young woman under concern about her soul. On being
asked if she had found salvation, she said she had not.
I asked her if she was really willing to be a child of
God. She said that was what she wished to be ; but
she did not know how she was to be brought into such
a blessed state. The willingness of God to receive her
as a child was then pointed out, and the proof which
we have of that willingness, inasmuch as He sent His
Son to die for sinners and to bring them to Himself.
She saw that it was so, and that there could therefore
be no difficulty in the way of her acceptance with God ;
but how could she know that she had the pardon of sin 1


I said, “If the Lord Jesus were here now in person, as
He was once present in the days of His flesh, when the
people could go to Him and touch the border of His
garment, or converse with Him without fear—just
as you can converse with me now—and if, seeing
you in your troubled state because of sin, He
were to speak lovingly to you, and say— ‘ Poor,
weary, heavy-laden sinner, come to Me and I will
take your load of guilt away,’ would you go to
Him?” “ Yes,” she said earnestly, “ I would go to Him.”
“ But,” I said, “ Jesus is the same loving Saviour now
as He was then; and though gone away in person to
heaven, still does He invite heavy-laden sinners to come
to Him. He has caused His invitation to be written
down in the 11th chapter of St. Matthew, so that it
shall stand there for all weary sinners who are willing
to be saved as you are now. You cannot go up to
heaven to Him when He says, ‘ Come to Me;’ the
coming, therefore, must be the coming of the heart.
Jesus now invites you to come to Him for the pardon
which He has purchased for you with His blood. Do
you, in your heart, accept the invitation and come 1” She
said, “Yes, in my heart, I come to Him.” Here, then,
was a clear compliance with the only condition laid
down by the Lord Jesus in order to a sinner’s finding
rest from the burden of sin; what now remained to be
done 1 Would it have been the right course to express
a hope that she might soon feel that the burden was
removed ; and that she might soon be able to go on her
way in peace I Hot so; we looked simply at the
promise of Jesus. What did He say He would do
for the weary sinner coming to Him 1 He said, “ I
will give you rest.” I said, “ Now I have no reason at
all to doubt your sincerity in what you say to me; I
believe that in your heart you do now come to Jesus;
and if I have this confidence in you, how much more


fully do I rely on His fulfilment of His promise to you.
He said, when you came you should have rest. It is
no question about your feeling anything, but about
Jesus fulfilling His promise to you. It is impossible
that He could fail to do what He said, since you have
just now fulfilled the only condition which He Himself
laid down, by coming to Him.” Whilst I was thus speak-
ing she seemed to be buried in thought about the import-
ance of the crisis to which she had come, and to
be filled with wonder that so great a blessing was
to be found in such a simple way as this. Then,
as if to close the matter finally, half rising from her
seat, and clasping her hands together, she exclaimed,
“ I come now.” We then knelt down and praised the
Lord for His mercy and love in taking away the burden
of sin from her troubled conscience. Immediately upon
rising from our knees there was a precious evidence of
the reality of a work of grace in that heart. The first
words she uttered were, “ Oh, my poor brother ; I have
a brother unsaved : I wish that he could find peace too.”
This desire of her heart for her brother was granted
before the day closed. We had a meeting for gospel
preaching in a neighbouring barn, at which one
other evangelist and myself were present. After I
had spoken I began to inquire for the young man,
having heard that he was to be present. I learned that
he had just gone out at the door. I followed, and as it
was too cold to remain there long in conversation, we
went into the house, and as it was with the sister in the
morning, so was it with the brother now. He gladly
accepted Christ as his Saviour, being fully persuaded of
the efficacy of His blood to wash away his sin. He, too,
knelt down and thanked the Lord for his salvation. On
rising from his knees he was very much overcome by
emotion, and, seeing some one come into the room, he
said, “Go and bring my sister in.” She was yet out in


the barn where the meeting was still going on. The
sister soon arrived, and brother and sister fell into one
another’s arms and wept for joy, because they were now
both safe in the arms of Jesus.
The Chairman expressed his thankfulness to God for
such a plain statement of the gospel message, and said
that when the Holy Ghost acted in concert with a
warm, loving heart within, and a clear gospel on the
lips, the life of the working Christian would be of such
a character that success would be the rule, and failure
the exception.
The next address was delivered by
EEV. SPENCER WILLIAMS.
®ft* |Ufo f*axt,”
The religion of Jesus must ever be regarded as pre-
eminently a religion of the heart. It pertains to the
will and affections as its proper seat, its centre of
power. We may have it in our Bibles, we may have it
in our intellect, we may have it on our lips, but if it has
no room in our hearts it will avail us nothing, for the
greatest wants of our nature will be left unsupplied, and
the greatest sorrows of life will remain unalleviated.
We may apply the laws of religion to an outward life,
and endeavour to conform our outward character to their
benign requirements, but the greatest success in all this
is but disappointment and failure, because the fountain
of all sin and impurity and misery will be left untouched.
No ! If our religion is to do us good in any way, it must
reach the heart —the constitutional leader of the moral
man—and so operate upon it as to effect in it a most
thorough renovation.
The religion of Jesus claims not only a place in the
heart, but in the whole heart, in the undivided heart with-


out reservation or condition —and nothing will suffice till
the complete surrender is made. Such a claim, lam sure,,
you are all prepared to admit to be both reasonable and
just. Surely we can conceive of no spectacle more painful
and sad than that of a heart wrestling with its Maker.
The claim which the religion of Jesus makes upon our
hearts is, moreover, full of benefit to ourselves, for
when the benign demand is fully recognised, and
the unconditional surrender is made, then and there, to
the unutterable joy of its possessor, the heart is freed
from the dominion of sin, for it becomes the temple of the
indwelling God. Sin can have no place where He reigns,
supreme, and so we often sing—
“ When Jesus makes my heart His home
My sin shall all depart.”
By that complete surrender to God which the religion of
Jesus requires, the heart of the believer is dedicated to
God —consecrated to His service. And when that is
done, the Lord in His infinite mercy and wondrous love
condescends to accept it, and graciously to signify that
acceptance by entering in and dwelling there. He
hallows and consecrates it with His presence by the
Holy Spirit.
You remember that when Moses had completed the
tabernacle, which at the command of God he had
erected at the foot of Sinai “ according to the pattern
showed to him on the mount,” the mystic cloud, which
was the well-known symbol of the divine presence,
“ covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of
the Lord filled the tabernacle,” That was its conse-
cration by God, and the signal of His approbation.
In like manner, when Solomon had finished the house
of the Lord, and had brought into it all that he had
prepared for it, and when he had ended the prayer of
dedication, “ fire came down from heaven and consumed
the sacrifice, and the glory of the Lord filled the temple.’"
This was its consecration.


Then, again, when our blessed Saviour had “ finished ”
his mediatorial work on earth; when He had by His
one offering of Himself made perfect atonement for the
sins of the world, He entered into the holy places—
“ not the holy places made with hands, which were the
figures of the true, but into heaven itself”—and in that
glorious intercession which He established there, He dedi-
cated, so to speak, His new-formed church on earth—an
edifice in harmony with both Tabernacle and Temple,
but in a form more glorious and more spiritual. The
Father was pleased to signify His gracious accept-
ance of it; for “ suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all
the house where” the chief members of His waiting
church were “ with one accord assembled, and there
appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and
it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost.” In this way we may say that the
church of the new dispensation was consecrated as the
habitation of God through the Spirit
Now, as with the community of Christians, may we
not say—analogically at least—so it is with the indi-
vidual saint ? When the heart is prepared and uncondi-
tionally surrendered to the Lord, He does —and to His
name be everlasting glory and praise—He does conde-
scend to stoop so low as to accept it, and enter into it,
and take possession of it, and consecrate it to Himself,
and give the wonted signal by filling it with His glory ,
diffusing light, and peace, and love, and purity, and joy.
I feel confident that I am now speaking of what many of
you—and I thank God that I can join in with you—have
by actual experience realised and enjoyed. When you
yielded yourself to God, when without reserve you gave
yourselves up to Him, you could indeed say with the
apostle —“ The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost given unto us and you proved the


promise of the Saviour—“ We will come unto you and
make our abode with you,” to be faithful and true. He
never disappoints. Oh what a wondrous change is
this in the poor heart of man ! From being a throne
for the prince of darkness —“ the spirit which now
worketh in the children of disobedience 3” a deep well
of deceit and wdckedness, a fountain of corruption and
misery—it has now become “ the temple of the living
God.” 0 think of it—a heart illumined with light divine,
warmed and animated with love divine, cheered with
comfort divine, and furnished with the precious gifts of
the Father’s wondrous grace. The triune God is
enshrined there, and as the apostle teaches, is “ sancti-
fied ” there—known, revered, trusted, loved, and adored.
And to that hallowed worship all the powers of our
moral nature are drawn, and in it are united and conse-
crated to the service of God for ever.
Oh, my brethren, how blessed is the state of that man
in whose heart the Deity is thus enshrined ! From that
inner temple—the centre of our moral nature, the spring
of all moral action, flow pure streams of healing and
refreshing power into every part of our nature, neutral-
ising the evil, restoring the vigour of the moral consti-
tution, and adorning the character with “ whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely and of good report,” clothing it with
all the virtues of the salvation of God.
Then man lives to help and bless his fellows. The
principle of universal benevolence, which the grace of
God has implanted in his soul, creates a longing in his
heart to see others becoming partakers of the same rich
mercy in Christ which he has himself received. The bene-
volent “work within" produces benevolent “work without."
I need scarcely remind you, my dear friends, that this
renewed state of heart is essential to honest and sue-


cessful work for Christ. I may, however, just mention
three things which I trust plainly show its necessity :
1. Without it there can be no true earnestness—no
real heart in the Lord’s work. It is said of the people
who repaired the walls of Jerusalem in the days of
Nehemiah, that “they had a mind”—a heart —“to
work.” The natural heart has no sympathy with the
work of God, and a divided heart has but little more.
God’s work requires that His servants be God-like.
The same kind of love—not the same degree of cause,
but the same kind of love in which the great work was
originated—must be the predominant principle, the
constraining power in carrying it on.
2. Without it there will be wanting proper authority
to work. I cannot conceive of God’s sending rebels to
implore men to be reconciled to Him. His ambassadors
of all sorts and degrees must be loyal to His throne, and
their loyalty must be such as will recognise no rival.
3. Without this, the one only efficient power will b 9
absent. The work is not to be accomplished by human
wisdom, or by human power. “ Not by might, nor by
power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord.”
Is it not plain then, that if our hearts are not the
subjects of His saving grace and sanctifying power we
cannot work earnestly, or authoritatively, or effectively?
Oh then, let us lay our hearts at His feet; let us
surrender ourselves fully to' the Lord, to be His and
His only for ever. The Lord help us to do it, and to
do it now.
These warm, fervent words wakened emotions in
many a breast, both of sorrow and of joy—sorrow that
we had known and felt so little of the actual indwelling
of God; but joy that we had the facts before us now,
and that the experience might be all ours, if “ Christ
dwelt in the heart by faith." The next speaker was


REV, W. H. LAWRENCE.
Subject: "% Cansdena Shrib #£ Mena.”
Beloved Friends—The words which have been given
me as the ground-work of my address form part
of Paul’s address before Felix. Tertullus, the orator,
had charged him with being a pestilent fellow, a
mover of sedition, and a ringleader of the sect of thei /
Nazarenes. The latter part of this charge he admitted
to be true; the former part of it he emphatically denied.
Jesus, the crucified Nazarene, was, he admitted, his
Lord and Master; but instead of His doctrines leading
to sedition and strife amongst men, they produced the
opposite result. These doctrines had led him to
exercise himself so to live and so to act that he might
“ have always a conscience void of offence towards God
and towards men.”
In these words we find the apostle characterising the
whole of his life, since the time of his conversion.
Looking back to the day when Jesus met with him on
the road to Damascus, he could say that he had earnestly
endeavoured so to order his conduct that his conscience
might not condemn him of doing anything displeasing
to God or injurious to men. Behold, then, brethren,
the portrait of a noble, Christlike life; a life that God
honoured in the winning of souls for His heavenly
kingdom as he has honoured only a few.
And the question arises—Gan we, the Christians of
this nineteenth century, realise such a high standard of
excellence. And, beloved, I for one rejoice exceedingly
in the desire that is manifested in all sections of tl
church to attain to this conformity to the mind
Christ. Surely our loving Saviour has not
earnest spirit of inquiry, and the strong d
more entire consecration, which are to be m
all hands, without intending to lift us up


Himself. And when this shall be accomplished—when
the Holy Spirit shall put “ the same mind in us which
was also in Him”—then we shall be able to live a life
which will secure the divine blessing on the one
hand, and put no cause of stumbling before men on the
other.
To achieve such a life as this, the apostle tells us
he “ exercised himself”—that is, he earnestly endea-
voured to go in and oubamongst men, that he might give
no offence or cause of stumbling either to the Jew or to
the Gentile, or to the church of the living God ; he
aimed at keeping a conscience void of offence towards
God and towards men.
What, then, it may be asked, is the province of con-
science ? It is the alarm-bell so placed by the Great
Creator within us, as to accuse or excuse us in every
thought, word, and deed. But then it must be clear to
all that before conscience can perform this sacred
function aright, it must be enlightened by the Word of
God. There is such a thing as a “ seared conscience,”
whose approval is not worth having ; and do we not all
know that it is possible to be conscientiously wrong as
well as conscientiously right. Conscience must be
instructed by the written word, if it is to do
that which God intended it to do. The Bible
must be searched in order that the judgment may
be informed; we must learn our duty as portrayed
first in the life of Christ, and second in the writings of
His apostles ; we must see from these “ what manner of
men we ought to be in all holy conversation and godli-
ness j” and if we do all this, if we strive to be well
informed as to what the gospel requires, and if our heart
condemn u& not —then “ have we confidence towards
God.”
Oh, for such a conscience within the breast! —a
conscience so thoroughly enlightened by the word, so


completely in harmony with the truth, so tender towards
sin, and so keenly alive to all that is holy, that it shall
be like a well-hung bell, giving notice of the first
approaches of temptation, and raising the alarm when-
ever the foe is near. With such a conscience we too
shall endeavour to live “ void of offence towards God
and towards men.”
Now, it is quite clear that the Apostle Paul set great
store by an approving conscience. He told the council
at Jerusalem that “he had lived in all good conscience
before God;” he tells the Roman Christians that his
conscience bore him witness of the truth of what he was
writing ; he tells the Corinthians that his glory was this
—“ the testimony of his conscience”; he informs
Timothy that “he served God in pure conscience,”
whilst he could write to the Hebrews, “We trust we
have a good conscience, in all things willing to live
honestly.” My brethren in Christ, it is to be feared
that we have come to be satisfied with a much lower
standard of piety than these words imply. Surely there
can be nothing more beautiful on this side of the grave
than a life so clear, so transparent, so Christ-like, that
even the enlightened conscience approves of all that is
done ; and if Paul, a man of like passions with our-
selves, “ exercised himself to have such a conscience
always,” we ought to do the same ; if nothing less than
this satisfied him, nothing less should satisfy us.
But perhaps it is said by some in answer to this,
that the apostle does not say that he realised this high
ideal, merely that he laboured after it. Now, whilst I
do not think that he would lay claim to perfection, yet
I do think that he was far nearer to it than many of us
have thought possible; in fact, unless we are prepared
to say that he used words in the passages quoted (which
taken literally convey to our minds an idea of greater
holiness than he attained to), we must believe that he


largely succeeded in that for which he exercised himself
—“ a conscience void of offence”—and if such was his
daily life, why may it not be ours ?
How then are we to attain to it 1 I know of no
other way but doing as Paul did, living daily, hourly,
constantly, “ a life of faith upon the Son of God.” If
there is one thing that strikes us more than another
in the life and writings of the apostle, it is his intense
devotion to Christ. Did he live 1 No, “ but Christ lived
in him.” Did he seek to gain the favour of the world 1
No, for by the cross of Christ he was crucified to it and
it to him. Did he ever regret the choice he had made
in following Christ 1 No, on the contrary, he had no
words strong enough to express his attachment to his
Master, for whom he had suffered the loss of all things,
and did count them but dung. Christ was all in all to him.
He was determined to know nothing among men but Jesus
Christ and Him crucified. Whatever duty he enjoins,
or whatever obligation he enforces, all is illustrated
and enforced by a direct reference to the life of Christ,
and I take it that this was the secret of his holy and
useful life. I take it that it was on account of the
reality and the constancy of his communion with Christ
that he was what he was. He felt that Christ was with
him, he knew that Christ was in him, and that His
body was in very deed “ the temple of the Holy Ghost.”
Unless he had obeyed the command, “ keep yourselves
in the love of God,” and unless he had enjoyed hourly
“ fellowship with the Father, and with His Son, Jesus
Christ,” he could not have maintained a “ conscience
void of offence toward God and toward men.”
And what this entire consecration to Jesus did for
Paul it can now do for us—the victory that it gave him
over sin it can give to us. Oh, then, for stronger and
larger faith in Jesus as an ever-present, ever-helping
Saviour. And are we not warranted to expect it lls


He not able to do for us “ exceeding abundantly above
all that we can ask or think T Will he not strengthen
us with all might in our inner man, and may we not,
through Him, be “ more than conquerors” over the
world, the flesh, and the devil 1 Was not Timothy
exhorted as a man of God to be perfect % Was it not
the desire of Paul’s heart for the Hebrews that God
would make them perfect in every good word and work 1 ?
and is it not expressly declared to be “ the will of God,
even our sanctification ?” And how is all this to be
realised but by constant fellowship and union with our
perfect Lord %
Surely this is to be “ filled with the Spirit!” Surely
this is so to live ‘‘that whether present or absent
we may be accepted of Him;” and surely, too, sup-
plies of grace are ready to enable us to reach this
holiness, for has He not said —“ My grace is sufficient
for thee 1” and ought we not to be able to say, “ Out of
His fulness have all we received, and grace for grace 1”
Let us then do as the apostle did, always, yes, always
“ exercise ourselves ” to have this approving conscience.
And in order that we may have it, be it ours to abide in
Christ. A living faith in a living Saviour is the only
power that can give us the victory over sin. We have
to wrestle “ not with flesh and blood, but with princi-
palities and powers of darkness.” We have to cope with
secret, sworn, eternal foes; our great adversary the devil
goes about seeking whom he may devour, and only by
taking to ourselves the whole armour of God can we
stand in the evil day. Whilst of ourselves we are not
sufficient to do any good thing, nevertheless we may
make bold to say, “ I can do all things through Christ
that strengthened me.” Living and abiding in Him,
having constant fellowship with Him, and going up
through this wilderness world, “ leaning upon the arm
of our Beloved,” we may, like the apostle, exercise our-
H 2


selves to have always a conscience void of offence
towards God and towards men.
This address concluded soon after ten o’clock, and
though the hour was late we passed over —as had been
previously arranged —to the new church ; and there
seventy-nine of such as were able to remain joined in
our touching and beautiful Communion service, and then
we ate together from the same loaf, and drank together of
the same cup, knowing only this—that we were poor, vile
sinners whom Jesus had saved by His death, and that
this death we were now celebrating in gratitude, in joy,
and in wondering love ; —knowing only that we were
His, and that He was ours, and that He was there, not
in the bread or in the wine, but manifesting His real
royal presence to every believing heart; —knowing only
that being one with Him, we were inseparably one with
each other ; —knowing only that it was a pilgrim’s feast,
a traveller’s resting-place, to make the hours of His
absence seem less long till He Himself should come.


Fourth Day.—August 21.
Saturday Afternoon.
There was a special meeting this afternoon, at four
o’clock, partly for the sake of hearing two addresses,
for which there had not been sufficient time on the
previous evening ; partly for special concluding prayer ;
and partly for the sake of a free and informal conference
concerning the nature and requirements of Scriptural
consecration.
The following address had been prepared for Friday,
by one of the most active and earnest members of the
Melbourne Young Men’s Christian Association,
MR. HENRY COOMBS.
JStthiejtt: “ jSottls Mon, oxxx tofon of fumcing.”
The Apostle John, in one of those sublime visions
which were vouchsafed to him, beheld our glorified
Redeemer riding forth to war and victory ; “ His eyes
were as a flame of fire, and on His head were many
crowns; and He had a name written which no man
knew but He Himself.”
In reading this description of the majesty of our
blessed Lord, we cannot help thinking with humility
and awe of those other words of the beloved disciple :
“ We shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.”
How far this likeness will extend it is not our province
at this time to inquire; but certainly it will extend
further than many of us now think. In one point, at
any rate, it seems certain that we shall be like Him :


not only upon the head once pierced with thorns will
many crowns be placed, but also upon the head of every
one of His true and humble followers. “ Father, I
will that they also whom Thou hast given Me be with
Me where I am ; that they may behold My glory, which
Thou hast given Me.” “To him that overcometh will
I grant to sit with Me in My Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with My Father in His
throne.” “If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him.”
True it is that there will always remain this difference :
the crowns He wears are His of right—some of them
belonging to His essential Godhead, others the reward
of His sacrificial work—while those which we shall
wear will be, all of them, the gift of His love;
but they will be none the less glorious or precious to
us on this account. I wish now to hold up for a little
while one of God’s crowns, in order that we may glance
at it, and that thus our hearts may be more and more fired
with a longing to possess it. And as we contemplate
its brightness, and are animated by the thought that it
may be ours, may we, trusting in the power of God
alone, “press towards the mark” for this “ the prize of
our high calling of God in Christ Jesus.”
“souls won, our crown of rejoicing.”
God’s way of working through the believer is just as
wonderful as His way of working in the believer. He
gives us all that is needed for doing the work, and
when the work is done He rewards us just as if we had
done it all ourselves. Having emptied us of self and
filled us with His own Spirit, He makes us instruments
in His hands for the winning of souls, “ choosing the
weak things of this world to confound the mighty,
and the foolish things of this world to confound the
wise, and things which are despised—yea, and things
which are not—to bring to nought things which ar®.”


Then having accomplished His own work by means of
His own power, He calls the unworthy, foolish, weak,
trembling believer to His feet, greets him with the
loving words —“ Well done, good and faithful servant,”
and wreathes a crown of victory around his brows. This
He does once and again, even in this life. Though the
dull eyes of the world cannot see it, there is upon the
head of the soul-winner, even now, a crown of glory and
of rejoicing. What a dignity attaches itself to this
work! To render the winning of souls possible
Gethsemane’s soil was bedewed with blood, and
Calvary’s side was climbed, and the dark grave passed
through. To effect this was that triumphal procession
made, when captivity was led captive, and heaven
received the Conqueror till the times of the restitution
come. For this was the Holy Spirit given, and for this
has He lovingly wrought for eighteen centuries in the
church and in the world. God, through the instrumen-
tality of any man wise to win souls, is effecting the most
glorious work to which He can lay His hand; the draw-
ing back to Himself of wandering stars, now drifting
towards the blackness of darkness, that He may set them
as shining gems on His own diadem. And what a joy
settles upon the believer’s heart as he humbly toils on
in this work. I remember the first soul I was ever
permitted consciously to lead to Jesus. I think I shall
never forget the gladness which thrilled through my whole
being. As I went home, it almost seemed as if instead
of the sin-stained streets of Melbourne, the golden pave-
ment was beneath my feet; rude voices around me
were not heard, for the music of a new-found pleasure
was filling my heart. I could then enter faintly into the
meaning of the words of the apostle —“ For what is our
hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing 1 Are not even
ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at His
coming ?”


Not only in this world, however, does God make souls
won our crown of rejoicing ; but by-and-bye, when we
enter into our final reward, they will be so in a still
more marked, still more manifest, sense. The nobles
of earth hold their rank for many different reasons—
some of them by virtue of inheritance, some on account
of their own merit, some because of their wealth; but on
fixing the rank of the nobility of heaven, God has but one
rule—“ Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will
make thee ruler over many things.” “They that be wise
shall shine above the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever.” I often think that those who have
never tried to win a soul for Christ, if opportunity
were given them, must, when the time comes to
meet Him, approach with a strange mixture of joy
and shame. But the soul which has been faithful
to this great charge will fly to His feet as the arrow
from the bow, and how rapturous will be the greeting,
u Come, ye blessed children of My Father”—like Him in
this, that ye yearned over the lost, and were willing to
give up anything that they might be saved—“ inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.” Dearest, most joyous far, this welcome from
the lips of the Beloved One. Dearest, most joyous far,
the clasp of His pierced hand ; but joyous too the
whisper from one and another, a familiar voice which
will thrill through our hearts with a music more raptur-
ous than even the chorus of the mighty host around,
“ You remember the day when you spoke to me of Jesus,
I trusted in His blood, and lam here.” Then, once more
at the feet of the Crucified all crowns will be cast, to
Him all the glory ascribed, while, amid the waving of
victorious palms, the shout of the mighty host of the
redeemed ascends to His throne—“ Unto Him that hath
loved us, and washed us from our sins in His own blood,


and hath made us kings and priests unto God and His
Father, to Him be glory and dominion forever and ever.
Amen.” “ Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power,
be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever.”
Are you working for this welcome ? Are you likely
to receive this “ abundant entrance into the kingdom of
our God and Saviour Jesus Christ 1” I speak to those
who have realised that He is precious to their own
souls. Are you, can you be content to go to glory
alone ? If you have not begun to work for Christ I
beseech you, as you love your Lord, delay no longer.
Rob not Him who bought you with His blood of the
glory which is His due, of the service which you owe
Him ! Rob not the Church of Christ of your labour
towards the accomplishment of that end for which she
is left in the world ! Rob not your own soul of its
crown of rejoicing—souls, precious souls, won from
Satan, for Christ, and holiness, and heaven ! When
shall you begin 1 Here ! At once ! Now ! How can you
begin thus —“ What is the first step?” do you ask. The
answer is easy to speak, hard to perform. You must get
rid of self, the most tenacious of all foes. If you would
work successfully in the winning of souls for Jesus, self-
will, self-love, self-trust must be nailed to the cross.
Consecrate, by a deliberate act of self-sacrifice, body, soul,
spirit, time, talents, energy, emotions, intellect, will, a
whole burnt-offering upon the altar, and wait in silent
expectancy the descent of the fire from heaven. Go,
like Isaiah of old, into the holy place of God’s imme-
diate presence, and as you gaze upon His exceeding
glory a sense of your own pollution and weakness will
penetrate your being,till theory is forced from your lips—
“ Woe is me ! for I am undone ; because I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips : for mine eyes have seen the King, the


Lord of hosts.” Then as you bend, thus emptied of
strength and self-righteousness, a messenger from Him
whose glory is so manifest to your soul, shall touch
with a live coal your lips, as a token that your sin is
purged; and when the voice comes, “ Whom shall I
send, and who will go for us ?” you will be able to
answer, “ Here am I; send me.” If you go without
this commission, you may as well, nay, you had better
not go at all. Count w r ell the cost—nights of anxiety,
the burden of souls upon you, secret wrestlings with
God, bitter tears over frequent failures through unbelief !
Count well the reward —Christ as a co-worker, His
power made perfect in your weakness, His promise ever
sure, His grace sufficient, and at last the glad, the public
reception—the meeting in the skies with souls whom
we have saved. Oh, who can hesitate when such
a choice is to be made 1 Who would not gladly and
freely bear all, and sacrifice all, and do all that,
even at a distance so infinite, he might follow in
the blessed footprints of Jesus h By the ineffable
mystery of self-sacrifice, of which the cross is a symbol,
and which is still the wonder of angels and men, oh,
hesitate no longer to make this choice ! Now ! now I
decide that, God helping you and giving you the needed
wisdom and grace, you will no longer keep locked in
your bosom His message of mercy to a ruined world.
One word to any Christian worker who may feel dis-
couraged in the way. Brother, well can we sympathise
with you. There are times which come to every soul-
winner when he is tempted to say, “ There is nothing
for it but to give up and die.” Why are such trials
sent 1 Simply to show us that if for a moment, or in
the most minute degree, we trust self, or ascribe any
glory to self, failure will come in. Instead of weaken-
ing our trust in Jesus, they are intended to strengthen
it. God has to force, as it were, most of us into a


perfect surrender and a perfect trust. But let us not
doubt that if that perfect surrender is made, and that
perfect trust exercised, moment by moment the blessing
will be given, and when it is given we shall be able to
see—in part, at any rate—why it was previously with-
held. “He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again rejoicings
bringing his sheaves with him.”
Let trust—deeper, more thorough trust —be born
from every experience of failure and disappointment.
Let praise—louder, more heartfelt praise—ascend after
every victory. He who hath conquered for us and in
us, will conquer hy us. This part of Christian service
cannot well be an easy one. If it were it would not
be like that trodden by the feet of Him whom we love.
But what though it be long, and steep, and dangerous;,
we have a strong arm on which to lean, a loving heart
on which to trust, moment hy moment , as we climb
upwards to God. Let us not, then, be weary or faint
by the way ; beneath are the footprints of many who
have now reached the summit. Their voices cheer us
from above. A hand which bears a mark we know
well, holds out an immortal garland, while He, the best
beloved of all, whispers to our heart —
“Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee &
crown of life.”
The second address was prepared and delivered by
KEY. A. DAVIDSON.
Rubied: " 'Qziltbtx, k liking ®pistU”
I am invited to contribute to the edification of the
body of Christ by addressing the Conference on “ The
Believer, a living epistle known and read of all men!
And, first of all, let me say that the subject is peculiarly


appropriate to the occasion. We are here, I understand,
representing various denominations of Christians, and I
hail such meetings as these, as setting forth the sub-
stantial agreement of Christians which underlies the
accidental differences of name and form by which they
are distinguished from each other. And do we not, by
our meeting thus on such terms of brotherhood—
showing the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace
—do we not hereby become epistles of Christ 1 Do we
not hereby proclaim to the world the efficacy of that
prayer which He breathed forth to His and our Father,
that those who were given Him might be one 1 These
were His words :—“ That they all may be one, as
Thou, Father, art in me, and lin Thee; that they also
may he one in Us, that the world may believe that Thou
hast sent Me.” Mark His words—“ That the world
may believe.” Thus, in manifesting the unity of the
Spirit, do we become living epistles of Christ—read of
the world—a testimony to the world of the truth and
divinity of Christ’s mission.
But I am to speak a little more particularly, but still
very briefly, of this living epistle.
You know, my friends, that an epistle or a letter is
the representative of its writer. An old colonist, who
has acquired some property in this country, returns to
England, we shall suppose, and settles there. He has
still much business to transact here, but it is sufficient
for this that he writes about it. The letter bearing his
signature is accepted as his representative, and action is
taken upon it. Now, just so should Christians who
are living epistles of Christ be His representatives.
Consider, then, for a moment your high calling,
fellow-Christians. Is it not a high calling—a precious
privilege 1 Oh, surely. That we are to set forth Christ
visibly, now that He in His own Person is invisible to
men. That our lives are to be the records of Christ’s


will. That they are to be the writing of that invisible
hand, testifying to men what He would have them to he
and to do. That our lives moreover are to breathe His
Spirit , as a letter does that of its writer. Cannot you
often tell the spirit of a man by the letter he writes 1
Of course you can. So, then, saith the Scripture, “If
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of
His he does not represent Him, he is not His epistle.
And, again, the apostle John writes, “ Hereby know we
that He abideth in us, by the Spirit which He has given
us.” And, yet again, it is enjoined upon us, “ Let the
same mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.”
This, then, is our high calling—to be the living repre-
sentatives of Christ here on earth, of His character and
will. Behold what honour the Lord hath put upon us
in thus condescending to write His will upon our hearts,
and to manifest His character in our lives ! It is as if
He had said, “Do any wish to know Me 1 Let them
look at these My disciples. Let them see in them My
epistle.” It is indeed a high privilege, on which we may
congratulate ourselves, and for which we ought thank-
fully to praise the Lord who hath chosen us to it; not
for any merit in ourselves, oh no, but only and alto-
gether by His grace.
;i Sovereign grace ! o’er sin abounding,
Eansom’d souls the tidings swell;
Tis a deep that knows no sounding,
Who its breadth or length can tell ?
On its glories
Let my soul for ever dwell I”
But now, brethren, it is not enough that we should'
congratulate ourselves, we must admonish one another.
Every privilege implies a corresponding responsibility,
and we shall do well to look at this office which the
Christian sustains to Christ in this aspect —Are we thus
representatives of Christ ? How careful should we be
that we do not wuVrepresent Him.


Ah ! it is to be feared that many professing Christians
are sadly at fault in this matter; that many are very
forgetful of this their high calling, and of the obliga-
tions which appertain thereto. Of some, alas ! it must
be said that they are forged and spurious documents,
going forth under Christ’s name, but not of His writing
at all; and such as, when they are critically tested, give
internal evidence against themselves. You who profess
the Christian name, who go forth bearing the name of
Christ, and therefore invite the world to read in your
lives and character what true Christianity is—yea, what
Christ is Himself—beware of a mere profession. Oh,
let us search and try our hearts. Let our prayer to God
be—“ Search Thou us, 0 God.” Let us search, and see
whether the image and superscription of Christ be
indeed there; whether the Spirit of the living God hath
indeed written there the truth as it is in Jesus, that we
should be thus His living epistles. Dread indeed must
be the condemnation of those who shall turn out after
all to be but false epistles. Think how such blind
leaders of the blind, such false representatives of Christ,
shall be reproached at the last by those whom they have
misled. Nor are they who are truly Christ’s, truly
taught and indwelt by the Spirit of God, exempt from
the necessity of care, lest they in any wise misrepresent
Christ. I will particularise but a very little.
Christians have need to be reminded of their obliga-
tion to he for Christ and like Christ. To he for Christ,
I say. Never ashamed to own Him, or to defend His
cause—
“ Maintain the glory of His Cross,
And honour all His laws.”
To be ready to “stand up for Jesus” when occasion
demands it; to commend Him to others, and by all
means win them to embrace Him by faith. And in
order to our being for Christ we must be like Him.


We must, as says the apostle, “grow in grace;” must
cultivate in our lives the graces which shone in Christ’s
character while yet He was on earth; make His blessed
example the model, and His holy will the rule, of our
lives. Like Him, we shall be devoted to the service of
God. “ I delight to do Thy will, 0 my God.” “My
meat and my drink is to do the will of my Father in
heaven.” Like Him, we shall be humble. “ Learn of
Me,” said He, “ for I am meek and lowly in heart.”
Like Him, we shall be holy. “ Holy, harmless, unde-
filed, and separate from sinners.” “As He which hath
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation.” Like Him we shall be self-denying.
“Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became
poor, that ye through His poverty might be rich.”
Like Him, too, we shall yearn over the souls of men
with something of that pathos which welled up from
the depths of His great heart when He complained, “Ye
will not come unto Me that ye might have lifeor
when He wept over the doomed, because incorrigible,
Jerusalemites—“ O, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not.” This, dear brethren,
this being like Christ is the best way of being for
Christ, and it is a way of being for Him from which
none, not even the humblest, is excluded. Jesus
only needs to be truly known that He may be loved.
The most effectual way, therefore, of commending Him
is just to represent His character truly in our lives. Let
this, then, be our high endeavour.
And if we would thus be for Christ and like Christ,
and so be living epistles of Him, we must needs be much
with Him. Would we be like Him 1 Then surely we


must know Him—know Him intimately—know Him
by experience. Hot simply as one of whom we have
heard or read, but, like that little child of whom we
heard from our dear brother last night, we must know
Him to speak to. Would we be epistles of Him 1 Then
must we submit ourselves to be written upon by Him—
to receive His impress. And these we do by commu-
nion with Him. Oh yes, friends, this is the secret of
our Christ-likeness. It is living, loving communion
with Him that sustains and beautifies and enriches and
fructifies our inner life, so that we bud and blossom and
bring forth fruit unto perfection. It is our abiding in
Him, as the branch abides in the parent stem, and our
receiving out of His fulness, as the branch draws nutri-
ment from the vine, that enables us to grow in grace.
Christ is all. Without Him we can do nothing. But
oh, blessed be God, “We can do all things through
Christ, who strengtheneth us.” Let us give glory to
Christ. Let us own Him, crown Him, Lord of all. Be
much—yea, be always—with Christ. Then shall ye
become living epistles of Him, known and read of all
men.
When Moses came back to the camp of Israel from
speaking with God, his face, we are told, shone. He
brought away with him some reflection of the excellent
glory. And just so does the Christian who is oft in
communion with Christ carry about with him the
savour of Christ. He cannot help doing so. Cannot
help it, I say ; and hence that characteristic of the living
epistle of Christ —that it is known and read of all men.
It is as natural for the Christian who, by communion
with Christ, gets His Spirit infused into his soul, to show
that spirit, as it is for the flower to breathe its fragrance.
So, then, let Christians know that their Christianity is
not to be hidden, or kept to themselves. It is not meant
to be so. It is diffusive in its influence. No man when


be lights a candle puts it under a bushel, or otherwise
covers it up. So neither is the light of Christianity to
be hidden. Ye Christians are the light of the world.
“ Let your light ” then “ so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven.” Be ye “living epistles of Christ, known
and read of all men.”
Do I need to offer you any stimulus to the fulfilling
of this your high calling h I would enforce your being
for Christ by the consideration of how He has been,
and what He has been , for you. Think of His cross
and passion. Think of the precious blood wherewith
He bought you. “He was wounded for our transgres-
sions, and bruised for our iniquities ; the chastisement
of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we
are healed.” Think of all this; His pain and shame
which He endured for us men and our salvation. Oh,
how He loved ! Shall we not love Him who so first
loved us ? Then shall love make any labour for Him
light.
And I would just in a word further enforce our being
both for and like Christ by this consideration—that we
are soon to be with Him in nearer and dearer fellowship
in heaven. Am Ito be with Christ soon—as all of us
of course must soon go hence 1 ? Then, surely, we ought
to be up and doing for Him. There is one joy
which w~e can have here ; but which if we have it
not here, we cannot have in heaven. I mean the
joy of being personally the means of saving souls.
A very special reward is in store for them who are for
Christ in this way of winning souls. But what our
Lord said of the work given Him to do on earth applies
to this work which we may do on earth. “ I must work
the works of Him that sent Me while it is day; the night
cometh, when no man can work.” And then, again, if
we are to be with Christ we must be like Him ; for how


else shall we enjoy His fellowship 1 ? Like draws to like.
Unless we be of a heavenly mind, how shall we be
happy there ? Heaven, in that case, would be no heaven
to us. So, then, let us seek to be with Him here, that
we may be meet to be with Him “ over there.” “ Oh,
think of the home over there ! ” “If ye be risen with
Christ, set your affections on things above, where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of the Father.” Thus by the
intimacy of our walk with Him, let us grow in likeness
to Him.
Closer and closer let us cleave
To His beloved embrace ;
Expect His fulness to receive,
And grace to answer grace.”
Beholding the glory of the Lord, we shall be changed
into the same image, from glory to glory, till that day
shall dawn when we shall be quite like Him, for we shall
see Him as He is.
Now unto Him who loved us and washed us from our
sins in His own blood, and hath made us kings and
priests unto God even His Father, to Him be glory
and dominion, both now and ever. Amen,
After this we sang a hymn, and gave ourselves up
to the question of the hour—the meaning of, and the
necessity for, consecration. The Chairman asked:
What would the unconverted think of us, if they came
in and found Christians of long standing, and of much
experience, talking about consecration at so late a period
of their spiritual history 1 It gives us an insight into a
most melancholy fact—that thousands of believers are
hardly instructed at all in the grand and fundamental
principles of “ taking all,” and “ forsaking all.” It is
true they receive Christ as a Saviour from wrath, but
they know next to nothing about Him in His varied
and couatless relationships, as a peace-giving, all-satis-


lying Portion. The result is, that instead of consciously
“ possessing all things” in Him, or being ignorant of the
things which are “freely given them of God,” they satisfy
themselves with the very things which the taking of Christ
in His fulness would have involved their forsaking. This
is, I admit, matter of teaching and education from day
to day. It is only as Christ is discovered that we
abandon habits inconsistent with that discovery. We
hold fast the withered wild-flowers till we are given the
garden-rose and the lily of the valley. We cannot hold
both, so we cast what is worthless away. All earthly
lights grow pale and colourless when “ the King in His
beauty” comes shining by. And yet we cannot too
strenuously maintain that the love of the world, of vain
amusements or of money, with pride, passion, appetite,
self-seeking, and all the lusts of the flesh, should have
received a death-blow (as far, at least, as practice
is concerned) at the very first sight of the cross of
Christ. Gladly do we preach—“Go to the Lord Jesus;
go as you are; go with your sins. He will welcome you
with a hundred thousand welcomes. He will forgive
you joyfully. He will love you freely.” But have we
been faithful enough in causing the sinner to count the
costl “If any man come to Me, and hate not his
father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren,
and sisters—yea, and his own life also —he CANNOT
BE MY DISCIPLE. And whosoever doth not hear his
cross, and come after Me, cannot be My disciple.” (Luke
xiv. 26, 27.) Thus it should be insisted that consecra-
tion is an essential element in the new birth; but full
consecration is often not known either as a duty or as
a privilege, until after years of a miserable halting
between God and His gifts, between Christ and the
world. Consecration becomes fuller with fuller know-
ledge. As faith perceives and appropriates new blessings
of grace, or of position in Christ, consecration lets go old
I 2


and carnal advantages. A cistern full of filthy water
may be perfectly purified by turning into it a stream of
clear water. One empties out the other, not by over-
throw, but by ceaseless flowing. So Jesus grows
within the soul till the soul is full. There was
once “no room” for Him. Now there is no room
for any other.
Speaking just now of the new birth, it occurred to
me that many are well-nigh broken-hearted because
they cannot sing, “ I have entered the Valley of
Blessing.” Their life is so uncomfortable, so unlike
the life of the saints of Jesus, that they bemoan them-
selves as though they were kept standing outside the
gates of an earthly Paradise—the Paradise of a quiet
mind, of an undefiled conscience, and of a daily walk
with God. 0 believer, don’t so wrong your Heavenly
Father’s love. You have entered the Valley of Blessing.
lon were horn there, and there you live , and there you
are. Perhaps you never knew it; then know it now.
You are in Christ, and Christ is in the Holiest with God.
There is only one without , the desert place of the unre-
generate. There is only one within, and you are stand-
ing there, in heavenly places, side by side with the most
eminent saints, though your knowledge is so imperfect,
and your experience so deplorable. Take fast hold of
what God has said of all believers in His own Book ;
and then walk straight forward in blind faith, declaring
your independence of feeling—l could almost say setting
inward sensations at defiance. The heart that has cast
anchor in God Himself is too much engrossed with the
glory and goodness of God to waste its energies in reach-
ing after experiences which are valueless without Him,
and which, with Him, though exquisitely delightful, are
neither necessary to perfect health in the inward parts,
nor to winning the praise of God.
Seek God, my friends, seek God ; and I can promise


you that in finding Him in all His fulness, you
will find in Him a constant peace and a holy joy,
and you will be the subject of more habitual and more
gracious experiences than if you sought experience as
an object in itself. “The rich man’s wealth is his strong
city j” and our wealth is not our gifts, our graces, or our
feelings, but Jesus, the Source and Giver of them all.
Mr. W. Johnstone then spoke, and brought out a
wondrous chain of Scripture evidence to show that
Christ has a right to reign in every regenerate heart, and
to reign supreme; that “perfect peace” cannot be enjoyed
where the government of our whole life, down to its
minutest details, is not willingly and gladly laid upon
His shoulders. His address brought the Saturday-
afternoon meeting to a close.
Saturday Evening.
As this was the last meeting of the series, and as the
subject of the second coming of Christ was dearer than
almost any other to most members of the Conference,
the attendance was very large. The hymns were
selected from the collection of 1874 ; and after a chain
of passages of Scripture, bearing on the subject, had been
read by the Chairman, prayer was offered, and the first
address was delivered by
KEY. A. J. CAMPBELL.
JJtthjwt: “C&je firpe flf
The last piece of Armour which the Roman Soldier
put on was the Helmet. In the Christian’s Armour
this Piece has not been forgotten—“ For an Helmet the
Hope of salvation.” Let me try to set this blessed
Hope before you. Let me try, on this last night of your


meetings, to put upon your heads this last Piece of the
whole Armour of God.
I suppose that we all have our own Thoughts, and
Hopes, and Wishes about Heaven. Some of them, I
doubt not, are right ; some of them, I am afraid, are
foolish. If we were Soldiers on parade, who had no
fighting to do, it might not matter very much what we
made our Helmets of ; we might give them what beauty
of form and splendour of appearance we chose. But I
need not tell you that there is much hard work of fight-
ing to be done—many foes and many fiery darts ; and
while the Shield of Faith guards the Heart, the Helmet
of Hope is needed to protect the Head. It is needed
to lift it up, and hold it up, above all our enemies—
above all the noise, and stir, and blinding smoke of the
continual Conflict.
The difference between the Shield and the Helmet, —
between Faith and Hope, is this :—Faith deals with the
Promise, Hope with the Thing promised. Faith says—
“ The Promise is true,” and you grasp it; Hope says—
“ The Thing promised is good,” and you look and long
for it. But as no one thinks of making a Shield for
himself, neither should any one think of making a
Helmet for himself. If he does —if he fashions a
Helmet out of His own hope—one day it will make
him ashamed. Even his Church is not to do it for him ;
it may assist him in finding it and putting it on. But
if the Armour is to be “ whole”—complete and sound
in every piece—it must be altogether of God.
I have been asked to introduce the Subject of this
evening—“ The Hope of Glory”—by saying a few words
to you upon “ The Bride, the Lamb’s Wife.” My dear
Brother could not have set me a harder task. And if I
had been required to give anything like a dogmatic
statement on the subject, I could not have done it. But
if you will be contented with a simple exhibition of


John’s Great Picture of the Bride, I shall show you
(with God’s help) the blessed Light it sheds on our
Hope of glory.
John had been “talking” with the Angel of the
plagues, probably with reference to the New Jerusalem
which he had just seen coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.
The Conversation closed with an Invitation from the Angel,
“ Come hither; I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb’s
wife.” Now, Ido not know what John expected to
see, but certainly the strange Vision that burst upon
him comes to us with a surprise. Is that the Bride, the
Lamb’s wife ? Even in her militant state, the Church
had been pictured in the glorious Comeliness of a
Woman clothed with the Sun, with the Moon under her
feet, and a Crown of stars upon her head. But here
we are presented with the Solid Masonry of a City,
whose form, at least—a cube—seems to us anything but
beautiful.* Now lam not going to tell you that that
City was the Bride ; I am not going to spiritualise
the Stones, and Pearls, and plates of Gold, with which
it was built and embellished. I don’t believe that these
beautiful Things were the Bride. They were the Bride’s
adorning. That City was her Home, not Herself; even
that Place transcending all human Thought, which God
has prepared for them that love Him. John knew that
the Bride was not brought home yet—that she was still
leading a hidden life in Heaven or on Earth; and that
the time of her Manifestation was not yet come. Until
that time came, he did not expect that it would “ appear
what we shall be.” I have no doubt, however, that after
this insight into her future Home, John felt that he
could form a much more vivid conception of the Bride
* It has been suggested to me that a Pyramid would
equally fulfil the conditions of John’s description.


than he had been able to do before, and of the Nature
and the Grandeur of her future life.
But is her Home to be a City'? We would have pre-
ferred a Garden. City Life does not seem to us the
purest and the happiest Life. With the City we con-
nect the press of business, and the wear and tear of
Men’s souls and characters. We think, too, of the Sins
and Sorrows of the Streets. And there are some of us,
perhaps, who have trembled when we put our Sons
within reach of the Whirl of the City’s pleasures. Never-
theless, we must recollect that the City is the Seat and
Heart of National Life. The Thrones of Judgment are
there. The Great things of Government and Learning
and Philanthropy are done there. And from it the
forces and impulses of good as well as evil go forth
upon the population. That the Home of the Bride is
to be a City seems to say that She is to occupy a com-
manding position at the Centre of the New Creation,
and to have Royal work to do, “ Thou hast redeemed
us to God by Thy blood, and hast made us unto our
God Kings and Priests; and we shall reign on the
Earth.”
I may remind you further that the Garden was tried
first, and (shall I say it) proved a failure. It was too
open and accessible. In that Strong City, whose walls are
Salvation, the Bride shall at least be safe. There shall
in nowise enter into it anything that defileth, neither
whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a lie. It
was this fact, I suppose, that recommended it to the Old
Testament Believers. When Abraham left Ur of the
Chaldees, he went in quest not of another Country upon
Earth, but of a City which hath foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God. And God w T as not ashamed
to be called his God. Why not 1 Because He had
prepared for him a City. So that you see that this
Apocalyptic City is not a New Idea. It is not even a


New Erection. It is as old at least as the days of
Abraham.
The Psalmist, too, while he cherished the hope of
dwelling for ever in the House of the Lord, knew that
when all the Redeemed were gathered from the Wilder-
ness no House would hold them. They must have “ a
City of Habitation.”
Our Lord’s familiar and much-loved words about His
Father’s House favour the idea that a distinct Portion of
that House is to be allotted to His Church. “Igo to
prepare a Place for you.” But that Place must spread
out into the amplitudes of a City if it is to give accom-
modation to the multitude which no man can number.
Even Paul—whose thoughts of Heaven rise to the
highest spiritual elevation—did not seem able to divest
himself of the wish for some solid Environment for the
Soul. “If our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.”
Peter’s outlook embraced a wider range. “We look
for a New Heaven and a New Earth.” That completes the
Picture. It furnishes the Background —in the fore-front
of which John plants the New Jerusalem, which turns
out to be the Tabernacle of God, as well as the Home of
the Bride. “ And I heard a great voice out of Heaven,
saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men ; and
He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people,
and God Himself shall be with them, and be their
God.”
No one stumbles now at a literal rendering of Peter’s
words. Science has told us strange stories of this world’s
past history. It bears witness to some twenty-six succes-
sive Catastrophes and Revolutions of its Surface. It
cannot refuse to admit the possibility, or even the likeli-
hood, of another. It testifies moreover to a continually
ascending progress and improvement in the successive


re-adjustments of the earth. Why should that long Line
of progress and improvement stop here 1 Why should it
not go on from strength to strength, and, if it is to close,
terminate in a fairer world, and a purer, happier Race
than this 1 Again and again, it seems, God has shaken
the Earth. Why should he not shake it once more 1 and
not the Earth only, but the Heavens also—the moral as
well as the material creation —that those things which
cannot be Shaken—which have been built on the great
Foundation Stone—may remain. That is what we do
look for. And lam not sure that there may not come
out of the Furnace and the fervent heat of that final Con-
flagration material creations, whose Splendour shall excel
even the gorgeous colours of John’s Gem-built City. Mr.
Ruskin, speaking of the beautiful process of crystallisa-
tion, thinks that he can perceive in it “ N ature’s effort
to advance this world to a lovelier order of architecture,
and a more deeply animated rest.” And he tells us how
the Slime and Mire of our manufacturing Cities may be
converted into the Amethyst and Opal and Diamond.
Is this possibility never to be realised ? Is Nature to
be always baulked in its effort to build up the beautiful
Things of Earth to the Glory of God 1 Little glory
God gets from them just now —from our Gold and Jewels
and costly Pearls. They flourish in the Crowns of
Kings. They sparkle on the Breast of Beauty. They
minister to our Pride. Never, save on the Breast-plate
of the High Priest, have they done much else as yet.
And I am not ashamed to confess it as an element in my
Hope of glory that when the Creation is delivered from
the bondage of corruption, these beautiful but desecrated
things shall re-appear in the New Jerusalem. “ Behold,
I will lay thy Stones with gay colours; and I will lay
thy foundations with Sapphires.”
But now, if we wish to know the Manner of
the Bride’s Life in her new Home, we have just to


look at John’s account of it, and to observe what he
missed from it and what he saw in it, to be satisfied
of the fulness of its joy and the perfection of its holi-
ness.
Of the Six Things that make up the mass of human
misery not one was there.
There was no Want, “ They hunger no more,” for
they have a right to eat of the Tree of Life. “ Neither
do they thirst any more,” for the Lamb that is in the
midst of the Throne shall lead them to living fountains
of waters.
There was no Pain. Jehovah-Rophi was there,
saying, “I am the Lord that healeth thee.” The Inha-
bitant shall never say any more, “ I am sick.”
There was no Sorrow and no more Crying, “ For the
Ransomed of the Lord shall return. They shall come
to Zion with Songs, and everlasting joy upon their
heads. They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall fiee away.” Goo shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.
There was no Danger —no Ocean storms; for
“ there shall be no more Sea.” And no terrors of the
night; for “ there shall be no Night there.” Why
there should be no more Sea seems strange to some, and
Horace Bonar hopes that the Landscapes of Heaven
won’t altogether want the beautiful Lake-scenery. The
Night, I suppose, we shall all let go willingly—with its
dark fears and hours of weariness and suffering. Beneath
Melrose Abbey sleeps a little child, who went down the
Valley of Death when he was four years old. The
Incline was very gentle, and the hours of Daylight
passed pleasantly enough. But the long dark nights
seemed very irksome, and the Thought of Heaven that
he liked best was just that one —that there would be
no night there. That was one bright bit of his Hope
of glory, and it has been inscribed upon his Tombstone.


There were two other things John was especially
glad to miss from that Bridal City. There was no
Death there. “ The last Enemy shall be destroyed
Death.” When this Mortal shall put on immortality,
Death shall be swallowed up of life.
And there was no more Curse. Which is equivalent
to saying that there was no more Sin. For the Curse
came in with Sin, and its repeal and disappearance shall
be the signal to the Universe that now at last Sin has
been put away from man, and the everlasting Righteous-
ness of God has come in.
But, now, what was there ?
Two things, at least—the one giving grandeur, the
other bringing joy to the City.
1. The Throne of GOD and op the Lamb was
there j and from it went forth the all-revealing, all-
glorifying Light, whose effulgence dims the highest
brightness of Sun and Moon. Now observe that even in
this last display of the Lord Jesus Christ, John still
styles Him “ The Lamb.” It was his favourite name.
Twice only, and only by one man —the Baptist—had
that name been used before. The Evangelists never
used it. The Apostles never used it. But here, in the
Apocalypse of the exalted and enthroned Redeemer,
John uses almost no other. Twenty-five times Christ is
set before us under that lowliest Title. Evidently the
recollections of the Cross, and its wondrous burden of
Sin-offering and Sacrifice, are not to be forgotten in the
New Heaven and the New Earth. This single circum-
stance discloses the nature of Christ’s Government, and
the unchanging policy of His Throne ; for if there is to
be no break in the continuity of His character as the
Lamb of God, there can be none in the objects of His
heavenly administration. We know what that cha-
racter was, and how it was formed. It was formed
here in the trial of obedience which issued in the


triumph of Love. Because He loved the Father, and
became obedient even unto death, and because He
loved Righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore His
Throne shall be established for ever. Righteousness
shall be the Sceptre of His Kingdom, and “In His
presence there shall be fulness of joy; and at His right
hand there shall be pleasures for evermore.”
2. And they shall see His Face. That is the
other notable Thing which John saw. There was open
Vision of God there. This is the joy-bringing element
in the Hope of Glory. What was denied to Moses—
the Man who got nearest God — what was declared
impossible for man in the Old Economy, shall be real-
ised in the New Jerusalem. The Pure in heart shall
see God. The Bride shall see the Bridegroom without
a Veil between.
Without a Veil, except thatwhich Christ put on upon
Earth—when he became God manifest in the flesh ; and
which, being clarified from the Mist of sorrow that
obscured it here, shall make clear display of the Ever-
blessed God. What a delightful Saying—“ They shall
see His Face.” The face is the Index of the Soul, You
read a Person’s feelings in his face. Christ is the Face of
God. He is the Visible Image of the Invisible God.
There, as in a glass, the Bride shall contemplate the
ineffable perfections of God. And as she gazes into
that face—once so marred, now so radiant —she shall
grow up into the same likeness from glory to glory.
Blessed Hope. Well might the Psalmist, when he saw
this promise afar off, exclaim—“As for me, I will
behold Thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied
when I awake with Thy likeness.” Satisfied—yes !
But surely we shall be much more than satisfied—filled
with a joy unspeakable—full of strength and exhilara-
tion, and infinite repose. “0 !” said a dying man to his
aged wife, who was comforting him with the thought


that she would soon follow him, “ O ! But it will be a
hundred years before I will take my eyes off Christ to
look at you.”
It is in this Vision of the Face of God that Christ’s
great Prayer for his People shall be answered. “ I will
that those whom Thou hast given Me be with Me, that
they may behold My glory, which Thou hast given Me.”
May Behold and Share it —share it in its consummation,
as they had begun to share it in its commencement.
“ For the glory which Thou gavest Me,” Christ said on
earth, “ I have given them, that they might be one, even
as We are one”—one with Ua and one with each other
in the design and doing of that work which Thou hast
given Me to do. Here, then, we reach the highest
elevation of the Hope of Glory. For the Consum-
mation to which Christ points in that great “ I will,”
the glory which He has received and shall communi-
cate to His Church, is the Everlasting Love of God —
the Love wherewith the Father loved Him before the
foundation of the world, but which received a new and
wonderful accession while He was on earth. “ There-
fore doth my Father love Me, because I lay down My
life that I might take it up again." That Love of the
Father which was of old, and this new Love which was
born at the Cross, are the Gifts which Christ craved from
His Father for His Church. “ Love Her as Thou hast
loved Me.” He wished no richer Dowry for the Bride,
the Lamb’s wife.
I have spoken to you too long already. But I must
add this one other feature of John’s Picture. The all-re-
vealing Light of Heaven falling on the forehead of the
Bride showed the Name of her Beloved there, (“ and
his Name shall be on their foreheads”), and that
name shall win for her a joyful recognition among all
peoples of the Universe, while the all-excelling Love of
God shed abroad upon her heart shall engage her in the


high employments of the Kingdom, and equip Her for
them. “His Servants shall serve Him,” not as Servants,,
however, but as Sons. What the Nature of their Service
shall be, I cannot tell you. Honourable and delightful,
of course; tasking the Prerogatives of the Spiritual Body,
and the exalted capacities of the Soul, but never straining
them to weariness, nor feebleness, nor decay. One
characteristic of this Service we may surely take for
granted. It shall not be carried on in the face of any
hostile Power. It shall be Work, not warfare ; gracious
Ministry, not dreary Conflict. This at least is certain.
Not only because we shall be removed from the Seat of
Conflict, but because the Conflict itself is to be put an
end to. This Strife and rebellion of the Creature against
his Creator is to be put down for ever. It would be a
drawback on the Hope of glory if it did not assure us
of that. Even though we and our children after us
were to make our escape from this Sodom, it would be
a miserable thought that it was to stand for ever, and
to go on increasing in its bulk and increasing in its
wickedness for ever. Thank God, we know that the
disturbance which Sin has caused, and which has spread
itself beyond the limits of this world, is to cease. The
Power of Sin is to be conclusively broken, and although
there will be the Outer Darkness, which shall cover the
workers of iniquity, and the Lake, and the Pit, the great
Gulf that is fixed shall make an impassable and everlast-
ing separation between the Kighteous and the wicked.
And now it is not needful for me to press these Great
Truths upon you by any appeal of mine. Let me repeat
to you these words of God :
Beloved, now are we the Sons of God ; and though
it doth not yet appear what we shall be, we know that
when He appears we shall be like Him, for we shall see
Him as He is, and every man that hath this Hope in Him
purifieth Himself, even as He is pure. (John iii. 2,3.)


Seeing, then, that all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy con-
versation and godliness ?
Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day
of God, wherein the Heavens, being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat.
Nevertheless we, according to His promise, look for
a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness.
Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for Such
things, be diligent that ye may be found of Him in
peace, without spot, and blameless. (2 Peter, iii. 11-
14.)
These words raised our hearts to little less than
enthusiasm concerning our heavenly inheritance ; and
after we had sung Dr. Bonar’s beautiful hymn—“ Oh !
’tis heaven at last,” the second address was delivered
by
THE DEAN OF MELBOURNE.
jsttbieH: “ jtonh tcnrsihmh ns oite link
in tjtf t|rnin of dkb’s fnrhibmt”
The subject given me for this evening is “ Christ’s
coming a second time, a link in the chain of God’s
eternal councils.”
It would be highly unreasonable to suppose that God
would make a new world with all the appearance of
age, or that He would form that world of new materials,
giving them the appearance of being the works of a
former creation. We are, therefore, compelled to accept
as true the conclusions of geologists—that ages upon ages
have passed since the earth was created, and that vast
changes and revolutions, amounting to thousands on
thousands of years, have passed, not only on the surface


of this globe, but in its internal structure —changes set
forth in the first chapter of Genesis as wrought on the
separate days of creation, according to the divine com-
mand. These days, then, appear—according to the
frequent use of the word “day” in Scripture —to repre-
sent indefinite periods of time. The testimony, which is
full and abundant, as to the vast age of the world, fails
altogether those who endeavour to make out a similar
antiquity for man; and nothing can be more childish
than the efforts which have sought to stretch the
period of our existence beyond the date usually
assigned to the creation of Adam. But whatever
may have been the antiquity of the material creation,
it is certain that spiritual beings existed before it;
for it is said that when God laid the foundations
of the earth we dwell on, “ The morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for
joy.” We find, then, that for vast, and by us unmea-
sured, periods of time, there were in existence two lines
of creation—the material and the immaterial—utterly
separate one from the other ; and the angels must have
looked with wonder on the beautiful and growing, but
apparently useless, formation which lay side by side
with them without one single point of contact. At
length they saw, formed of the dust of the earth,
altogether and exclusively material, a creature into which
God Himself breathed the breath of life. He was not made
like the beasts that perish, a living thing ; his life was
the result of two distinct actions—the formation of
the body, and the in-breathing of the spirit by God
Himself; and thus the two apparently parallel lines of
creation—lines that seemed destined never to meet—
were united in this individual man; and this new-formed
being, this point of union between the material and the
spiritual, was appointed as God’s representative, to reign
over the visible world. This new-formed creature was


made in the image of God, and consequently had an
independent will; but there cannot be two wills in
existence without collision, unless, either by love or by
experience, the one will voluntarily submit to the other.
When we enter a railway carriage or a packet, we are as
completely subject to the will of the conductor or the
mariner as if we were prisoners, but we continually
and wisely make this surrender of our will for a certain
object, and we never regard ourselves as, by so doing,
degraded from our high position as intelligent beings
possessed of the power of guiding their own affairs. If,
then, men could be brought to see that their safety and
happiness depended on the willing surrender of their
will to that of the Lord of all things, their happiness
might be secured, but not till then. To accomplish
this, two things must be established and made
obvious to us —the ruin brought by the ungoverned
exercise of the created will, and the safety secured
by dependence on the perfect wisdom and good-
ness of the divine will. But something more is neces-
sary. There is one thing, and one thing only, that will
reconcile us to a surrender of our individuality. That
is love. The perfection of goodness may satisfy our
understanding, but the heart is not given to abstract
excellence, and without the heart there is no real con-
fidence. The heart is given to the heart, and to nothing
else. The lessons necessary for the safety and happiness
of the race of men were these—first, the certainty of ruin
from the exercise of their own will; and secondly, the
individualising personal love of the all-wise, all-powerful
Ruler of the universe. And to teach these lessons
seems to be the great object of the divine counsels.
Adam was given one prohibition as the one token of his
allegiance, the one exercise of an independent but regu-
lated will. He disregarded that prohibition, and
assumed an attitude of counter-divinity. “Ye shall be


as gods.” Then carae the curse, showing the evil of
the unregulated will, and the promise, showing that
there was in the mercy of God a refuge even for the
vilest; and Adam and his posterity lived long enough
to learn wisdom, and to hand down that wisdom by
direct oral communication to remote posterity—Adam
to Methuselah, and Methuselah to Shem. Never-
theless the race, removed but by one interval from
those who knew what it was to enjoy, and what it was
to lose, Paradise, fell utterly away from God, and Noah
stood alone. The flood both cleared the earth of the
offenders and taught a fresh and awful lesson of the
evil of sin; while the ark pointed once more to sparing
mercy, and showed that the life of an individual was
precious in the sight of the Omnipotent Judge. The
lessons thus taught were soon forgotten, and for seven-
teen hundred years the world was, as it were, left to
its own devices, and an elect people drawn out. Thus
there came the call to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob —•
each chosen and called from among his brethren —till
the people multiplied, and were, by a series of
providences and miracles, separated from all other
nations. To them was given a law, in one aspect
pointing to its own extinction and to a better covenant,
but in another, and more obvious view, arranging for the
whole of the outward life of the nation. The ruler
was to punish sins against God ; and God, as in the case
of suspected adultery, undertook Himself to punish
sins against man. Command, obedience, sin, reward,
punishment, were all open, tangible, and intelligible to
the dullest or most prejudiced understanding. Hope
and fear, self-interest and gratitude, were all appealed
to, and all in vain; and the nation either ran after other
gods, or corrupted the worship of God Himself into a
mere form, and used the externals of religion to crush
its spirit.


Then appeared the wonder of wonders. The two
lines of creation were united in the first Adam. All
creation, material and spiritual, was united with the
Creator in the second ; and the only creature-perfection
shown to be in the union of the created with the
Uncreate. By Him the law was obeyed, and full un-
wavering submission was given, not only to the written
law in all its ordinances, but to the law of Pro-
vidence, even when it seemed to run most counter
to the very purposes for which the Divine Being
emptied Himself of all His power and glory. In the
full vigour of healthy activity He could say—“ My meat
is to do the will of Him that sent Me, and to finish
His work;” and in the hour of agony and weakness,
both of body and mind, He could say—“ Nevertheless
not My will, but Thine be done.” There is here the
declared existence of a separate will, and its ready sub-
jection to the will of the Father.
In the incarnation of Christ, in His holy life, and
still more in His sufferings and death, God has given
to us the highest possible manifestation of His love;
but there remains still to be learnt yet greater depths of
the hopeless depravity of His creatures, and the glorious
results of the love manifested on the cross. The law
addressed itself to fallen man made from the dust of
the earth. Its temple and temple furniture, its priest-
hood by natural descent, its sacrifices, incense,
robes, and so forth; its workings, pilgrimages, its
prayers to be said, its offerings to be made—all
addressed themselves to men living in a body,
though indeed possessed of a mind capable of regu-
lating that body’s action. The light of a higher
life shone forth here and there, like the rifts in a
clouded sky, but these gleams were the exceptions, not
the rule, except where grace was given to pierce through
the visible to the invisible, and to see in the lamb, the


priest, the incense, the glorious realities of spiritual
things. The gospel addresses man as a spirit living in
the body, and, except in the two Sacraments, it gives us
nothing material, and, except in the Lord’s Prayer, gives
us nothing formal. It addresses itself to man altogether
as a spiritual being, having indeed a body to keep under
and regulate. It returns, as before the call of Abraham,
to address not one nation but all nations, and yet, while
addressing all the races of mankind, it speaks to the
individual. Hope and fear, though still recognised, as
they ever must be, are thrown into the background, and
love becomes the constraining power. No fire from
heaven consumes the blasphemer ; no earthly tribunal
drags him forth to be stoned; no land of milk and
honey rewards the faithful ; no rivers open to let them
pass; no heavens pour down manna for their food :
—love, the love which gave life for them, speaks, and
speaks to the heart, and the message goes forth accom-
panied by the power of that mysterious presence of the
ever blessed Trinity, who is emphatically called the
Spirit. Souls are won; lives are changed. In lands
where the gospel is received, minds are purified; and
yet, partly from the weakness of faith in the children of
God, and partly from the enmity of the natural heart to
God, the Christian world is more heathen than Chris-
tian, and the far greater portion of mankind discard
even the name of Christ. Believers have failed to carry
the message to the world at large, and the world has
rejected the message when presented. God has humbled
Himself to the dust to reach our hearts, and we have
trodden Him down. Well may it be said—“ What
could have been done in My vineyard that I have not
done in it?” Yet, as regards the human family at large,
what is the result? The unfitness of the creature to
work out good for himself or his fellows is only more
fully exhibited.


But it is not to be always thus. God’s law is not to
be always defied, or His people always trampled on.
He who died in agony on the cross will come again, in
the fulness of power and glory, to tread down His
enemies, and to gather in His people. As under the
law God will rule, as under the gospel the rod of His
power will only be seen—like that which Aaron carried
—by the fruits and flowers it bears, “ The earth shall
be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord as
the waters cover the sea.” But even this dispensation
shall come to an end. Satan, who had been bound,
shall be loosed out of prison, and shall go forth to chain
the nations. And among the descendants of the millen-
nial saints, even as among the descendants of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, he will find an easy prey. Like
Amalek of old, who attacked Israel when marching
under the cloud and pillar, they will besiege the holy
city, and be destroyed by fire from heaven. Here
is the last lesson. No longer led away by the evil
example of nations or individuals around, no longer
oppressed or misled by human government, or a feeble
or apostate ministry; ruled over by the present God,
and yet knowing that their glorious Ruler had once hung
on the cross for them; surrounded by every conceivable
advantage, and delivered from every external temptation,
the human will rises in rebellion against the good, and
deliberately chooses evil. What shall we say? Shall
we not cast our crowns before the feet of our Saviour
God, and cry, “ O do Thou keep us in spite of ourselves ;
O do Thou choose for us, think for us, will for us.
The powers Thou hast bestowed upon us, we surrender
back to Thee. Keep us as the apple of Tbine eye. Hide
us under the shadow of Thy wings.”
But granting that all these thousands of years, with
their accumulated horrors, were necessary for the
instruction of our race, we may ask—Why was it neces-


sary that we should be so instructed 1 Here we are not
left in doubt or darkness. The destiny of our race is to
be something inconceivably great—Kings and Priests
unto God. The threatenings of God may be, and in
some cases have been, averted or modified; but the
promises of God are always fulfilled, not only
to the letter, but far beyond what the letter would
lead us to expect. We have no reason to think
that the countless spheres that roll in the heavens are
inhabited, and it would be most unreasonable to sup-
pose they are intended to lie for ever waste. The six
thousand years of our being are but a speck in the
vast periods revealed to us by the discoveries of geology
or astronomy. We are as yet in the infancy of our
being, and God may have for His people what “ eye
hath not seen nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
mind to conceive f but in that glory our cry must be,
not, “ Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth
to me,” but, “ Make me as one of Thy hired servants
that as “ the eyes of a servant wait upon the hand of
his master, so our eyes may wait upon Theethat the
language of our souls may be, “ Not my will, but
Thine be done.”
As, then, the cross of Christ is the ground of our hope,
so His return is the object of our hope, the link that
binds the humiliation of the cross to the glory that is
to be revealed; the link that unites the original pur-
pose of a material creation, ruled over by a race that
shall combine the material to the spiritual, with
the glorious consummation, when the kingdom shall
be delivered unto the Father, and in the presence
of a rejoicing universe, of a people crowned, but
willingly casting their crowns at His feet, God may be
all in all.
Herewe paused again for a little, as for breathing-


time, in the midst of thoughts that made our bosoms
swell, and then we sang—
“ Christ is coming, let creation
From her groans and travail cease
and when the hymn was ended, the third address was
delivered by
REV. R. HAMILTON.
jsubicct: “ Utonifestatian of tfre jions of Itob.”
The scheme of redemption is beyond all imagination
wonderful. It is marvellous in its inception in the
divine mind, marvellous in its finish on Calvary’s cross,
and marvellous in its results amid the glories of heaven.
It excites the astonishment of man on the earth ; it is
the theme of wonder in the world above. It has called
forth the admiration of wise and good and great men of
all times, and it will form the subject of praise in strains
of ecstacy throughout the years of an unending future.
It is like all God’s works—essentially grand and
glorious. The unfolding of an insignificant seed into
the dimensions of a gigantic tree is most mysterious.
So is the development of the tiny-looking promise,
“ The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s
head.” Who in the highest flight of his imagination
could have dreamed that this small elementary seed of
the inspired Word could have unfolded itself into a tree
six thousand years old, laden with the fruit of myriads
of ransomed souls that shall bring honour and glory to
the God of salvation through the ages of eternity ?
Let us consider what this manifestation of the Sons
of God implies. Looking to the chapter {Rom. viii.)
from which this expression is taken, it is evident that
the idea conveyed is the coming glory of the Church of
Christ, and is associated with a total revolution in the
existing state of the world. This manifestation implies
a variety of interesting and important particulars.


First. The sons of God are now comparatively hid ;
and they are hid in two respects.
(a.) They are hid from, one another. This will be
easily understood. Christians of the present day
throughout the world are not known to each other,
except to a very limited extent. Perhaps no Christian
can boast of knowing more than a few hundreds, at most,
of the real children of God ; and very few Christians, it
may be affirmed, can know intimately more than a few
scores of true believers; and where a large number may
be known, in every case it must necessarily be in a very
imperfect way. Of those who are known, whatever be
the number, how much uncertainty and ignorance
must exist in reference to their inner experience and
their real character. Some who are regarded as true
Christians may not be changed in heart. Peter and
John did not know Simon Magus. Others whose
Christian character is regarded as doubtful may be
indeed the very salt of the earth, the seed of the
blessed. Eli did not know Hannah. Elijah did not
know anything of the seven thousand in Israel who
had not bowed the knee to Baal. Then think of the
vast multitude of believers throughout the earth in the
present day, of every kindred, and people, and tongue,
of whose principles, character, and modes of life in
general it is impossible in this state to ascertain any-
thing at all, except by mere general features. Their
names, their conditions, their private and social life as
the people of God, must remain altogether unknown,
except to a mere handful of acquaintances, until the
great day of revelations.
Besides, look to the incalculable myriads of God’s
children in the past ages of the world of whom abso-
lutely nothing can be known to that portion of the
church now in existence. The same can be affirmed of
the church of any other generation. An impenetrable


cloud necessarily hangs over the whole, excepting the
insignificant fraction whose names have been handed
down to posterity in inspired and ecclesiastical history.
Whether the church of the departed now in Abra-
ham’s bosom knows to any extent the members of the
family of God on earth, need not be considered, seeing
that, although it could be proved such knowledge were
possessed in the highest degree, it still holds good that
there is no manifestation of true believers in the sense
intended by the apostle.
(b.J They are also hid from the world. The great
mass of mankind have always been in the darkest,
densest ignorance of the real character of God’s regen-
erated people. “ The world knoweth us not, because it
knew Him not.” There never has been, never can be,
any real alliance, friendship, or sympathy between the
church and the world. So far from this, there has
always been on the part of the world deadly enmity
against the family of the faithful. The history of the
church is a history of cruelties and wrongs, oppressions
and murders. Her members, as a general rule, have
had “ cruel mockings and scourgings, bonds and impri-
sonments ; have been stoned, sawn asunder, tempted,
slain with the sword.” They have not been known in
their real character as the chosen of heaven and the
heirs of eternal life. It is indispensably necessary, how-
ever, to the ends of God’s righteous administration, that
there should be in due time an open manifestation of
all who have been really on God’s side in every genera-
tion, notwithstanding that they have left the earth
with characters blackened by their fellow-men.
Again. The Dispensations under which the Church of
God has always existed have been dark.
These have not admitted of the children of God being
well known and openly manifested. The occasion of this
darkness has just been prevailing sin. The apostle Paul


in this most remarkable chapter (Rom. viii.) refers to
the effects of sin in a variety of points. Under ail ages
there have been great manifestations and sad results of
sin. It is sin that has darkened the intellects, hardened
the hearts, degraded the lives, and ruined the souls of
men. Sin has spread its deep dark shadow over all
men in their diversified ranks, conditions, and relation-
ships in life. That purity which has been introduced
into the earth ; that heavenly influence which by God’s
interposing grace always marks His children, ever
seems as if at any time it might be smothered by the
prevailing mass of corruption. Truth and everything
beautiful and grand about the church have a continual
struggle for existence. The good seed lies in the soil
with the bad, and appears always liable to be choked.
All the excellencies which adorn Christian life, constantly
encounter a vast amount of seething corruption in the
world, and are in danger of being utterly blasted.
Light from heaven requires to penetrate a thick
darkness which envelopes the earth, and is in danger of
being extinguished. Tares spring up while men sleep.
The enemy works while men are at ease. The weeds
grow in spite of none but good seed being scattered by
the sower. In the experience of all true believers, while
the spirit is willing the flesh is always weak. The very
elect are in danger of perishing but for the shortening
of the days of tribulation. Even the Son of God is not
tolerated on earth. Infinite beauty shines in the charac-
ter of the holy Jesus, but it is detested and expelled by
murderous hands. The body is a dead weight on the
soul of every Christian. The world hangs on the skirts
of the church, to mar her beauty, to paralyse her ener-
gies, to kill her spirit. The dragon is ever sending a
flood out of its mouth to drown the bride, the Lamb’s
wife. The corruption and darkness of the grave look-
like threatening to plunge the interests of the ChurcL
of the living God into final and everlasting gloom.


Further. There are bright days for God’s children
coming.
It shall not be always darkness with the sons of
God. At the present time there are bright—very
bright—streaks on the horizon of Christ’s great empire.
Throughout the church we can see an intense eagerness
in putting the question—“ Watchman, what of the
night 1 watchman, what of the night ?” The prophetic
answer is cheering. The watchman replies —“ The
morning cometh, and also the night. If ye will
enquire, enquire ye; return, come.” The reign of
error, unbelief, and ungodliness; the reign of gospel
rejection ; the reign of Christ’s crucifixion—has a period
as fixed and determined as the natural night which is
succeeded by day ; as the winter which is followed by
summer; as the seed time which gives place to the
harvest; as the eclipse which disappears in the full
splendours of the orb of day ; as the scaffolding and the
heaps of rubbish which are removed out of sight whenever
the mansion is complete. All the darkness which has
reigned for six thousand years has a limit, and will be
succeeded by the dominion of light stretching through
an everlasting age of triumph.
The beauty and excellency, the rank and dignity, the
majesty and glory of the church shall be fully disclosed,
and shall be all absorbed in the infinite glories of her
Lord. The prospects before the church are those of
unparallelled exaltation ; of unprecedented blessedness ;
of infinite grandeur and glory. The full glories of the
church will consist in the wonderful and all-comprehen-
sive element of likeness to Jesus Christ. This like-
ness will be the perfection of all beauty, the highest
summit of all ambition, the consummation of all happi-
ness.
But this element of assimilation to the glorified
Redeemer necessarily implies conformity both in body


and in soul to the divine Saviour. Hence the glories of
the church cannot be complete till the period of the
archangel’s trumpet.
Observe, then : The resurrection from the dead is
necessary to the manifested glory of the church of the
future.
The Saviour Himself will be first manifested when
He appears in ' the clouds of heaven with power and
great glory. The risen saints and the living saints shall
together be caught up to meet the Lord in the air.
He shall openly acknowledge his children. He shall
not only acquit, but publicly confess them. But oh,
what a revolution in the condition and experience of
the church this will involve ! Who can fancy it 1
Who can describe it I The futile powers of human
intellect are confounded in the attempt. We can only
stand in awe, gaze in joyous wonder, confess our weak-
ness, and wait in silent and rapt expectation. “It doth
not yet appear what we shall be.”
Notice one or two things which Scripture teaches
respecting the mighty transformation which we are
warranted to anticipate, at this great manifestation.
(a.) The glory of each believer. At the resurrection
the constitution of each Christian which has been
wrecked by death shall be remedied. The soul of the
believer now in paradise —now in the intermediate
state—while perfect in holiness and bliss according to
its fullest capacities, is yet not complete humanity.
The resurrection will restore the union of soul and body,
and make the disciple complete as the Master is, the
child complete as the Father is. Conceive, then, if you
can, the bright pattern of the believer after rising from
the dead. His body is to be “ fashioned like unto
Christ’s glorious body.” At that period the resemblance
of the Christian to his redeeming God will be perfect,
and each one will shine forth as a worthy son of the


infinite Monarch of heaven and earth. Every one will
be a resplendent star sprung from the Sun of Righteous-
ness, revolving around the central luminary, reflecting
His brightness, and sparkling with His infinite radiance.
The poor frail mortal body, which was for a time the
covering—the tabernacle—of the soul, shall then give
place to the house of God, the resurrection body, a new
and an astonishing creation, the Christ-made mansion of
the soul, the dwelling not made with created hands,
destined and fitted to endure through immortality.
(h.) The glory of the completed number of the saved.
At the resurrection the number of the redeemed church
will present no defect. Up till the present moment the
ransomed people of God are not complete in numbers.
The multitude that no man can number has not yet
received its final accessions. There are still being added
to the church those who shall be saved. Not one of
them can be lost. Every member of the family must
be brought home from the perils of the deep. When the
archangel’s trump is blown, the last sinner shall have
been converted under the present dispensation. The
net shall be drawn to shore as soon as it is full. Then
the happiness and the glory of the redeemed household
shall be supreme.
The glory of the whole ransomed church must surpass
all imagination. When all the lost sheep have been
gathered into the fold ; when the prodigal children have
been all redeemed and brought back to the Father’s
house, what a home of love and brightness that will be !
Let the virgins of sixty centuries, all pure in heart and
clad in the gorgeous array of the Redeemer’s spotless
loveliness, who have been waiting for the Bridegroom
up till the midnight of the world’s day of grace, only end
their watching and enter the marriage supper of the
Lamb, 0 what an aspect of spiritual beauty and splen-
dour, of angelic joy and grandeur, of celestial peace,


purity, unity, and ecstacy, of divine glory and majesty,
shall the whole festive scene present! Then will be
heard the “ voice as of much people in heaven, saying
Alleluia, salvation and glory and honour and power
unto the Lord our God.” “ Alleluia, for the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice and
give honour unto Him, for the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and His wife hath made herself ready,”
Moreover : At the second advent of Christ, and the
manifestation of God’s people at the resurrection, there
shall be the unravelling of the mystery and the expansion
of the glory of the Old Testament tabernacle.
(a.) In reference to the inner sanctuary. There shall
then be realised the full typical meaning of the holy of
holies, with its mysterious cherubim, ark, and cloudy
pillar. There will be altogether a new element infused
into heaven’s glories. The fruits of redemption-work
shall be brought home from the cultivated soil of the
cursed earth, and shall replenish the garner of heaven.
“The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.”
The new element of glorified humanity shall be found
in hallowed union to the Godhead, and shall occupy
the central seat of divine government with the eternal
Father. The songs of heaven shall no longer be those
only of holy and unfallen angels, but also of resurrection
saints, of glorified men, of the Lamb’s wife. Now there
will be the extraordinary outburst of ecstatic joy from
myriads of ransomed sinners—“ Unto Him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and
hath made us kings and priests unto God and His
Father, to Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.”
The splendid raiment worn will not be that of original
and unfallen beauty, like the holy angels, but that of robes


that have been washed —washed in the sacrificial blood.
The wreaths of immortality which shall deck the brows
of all the unnumbered throng of those arrayed in
white shall be wreaths of victory—victory gained on
the battle-field of earth, and achieved through the
merits of the Lamb in the midst of the throne. The
colour of crimson shall shed anew its rich and gorgeous
complexion on all the interior of the imperial palace,
while the white linen of the saints, the colour which
blends into one all the beauteous rainbow tints, shall
reflect the glories of the Redeemer, and shine in conse-
quence in infinite effulgence.
(h.) In reference to the outer sanctuary. Besides the
unutterable splendour of the immediate dwelling-place
of the divine Bridegroom with the glorified and blood-
bought bride in the holy of holies, all creation shall
be arrayed in sympathetic and harmonious bridal dress,
the renewed earth forming the holy place. The world,
which has been the tabernacle of the church for six
thousand years, shall be taken down and remodelled. Its
atmospheric covering shall be removed, the heavens
being dissolved and the elements melting with fervent
heat. The earthly tent shall then be destroyed, and the
works thereof burned. Now at length there are the
long-foretold new heavens and new earth, the most holy
and holy places, the interior palace and the exterior
empire of the Redeemer King.
Then the devastations of sin shall be removed both
from the physical and the spiritual departments of
the world. Human life shall be purified. Pride and
worldliness, pomp and vanity, idolatry, infidelity, and all
uncleanness shall be swept for ever away. The earth
shall be cleansed from its former abominations and the
church from her corruptions. There shall be no more
anywhere groaning and travailing in pain. Sickness,
suffering, and death shall be, to a marvellous extent,


abolished. The tabernacle of God is at length with
men on earth living to an extreme age in the highest
health, holiness, and joy. Their dwelling is the outer
sanctuary attached to —intimately connected with—the
inner sanctuary, the Holy of Holies, where the Redeemer
and His bride are in their resurrection glory.
(c.) The two sanctuaries together with their immortal
and their mortal inhabitants respectively form the one
new and glorious tabernacle. God dwells with men —in
the fulness of His glory with redeemed men, who have
been conformed to Christ in conflict, suffering, and death
—and in His milder glory with the inhabitants of the new
earth who have been saved from the judgments on the
nations, who are freed from all sorrow and trial in the
service of their Lord, and who enjoy the triumphs of
redemption without molestation, because all things are
made new and the enemy is chained in the bottom-
less pit. They are His people. He is their God, and
God Himself shall wipe away all tears from off all
faces.
Finally: When the sons of God are manifested, then
will be the fulness of God's dispensations. “In the
dispensation of the fulness of times the Father will
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which
are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in Christ.”
Heaven and earth will be brought into perfect accord
as before the original introduction of sin. The earth,
the sky, the heaven of heavens, will be in harmony.
Angels and men will be only class-members of the same
great family. The song of glory to God and the Lamb
will resound throughout the redeemed, restored, and
perfected universe. Jarring and discord, sin and all its
dire results, shall be buried in the everlasting abyss,
and there shall be nothing but “ Glory, glory, glory, in
Emanuel’s land.” “ Blessed be the Lord God, the God
of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things, and blessed


be His glorious name for ever. And let the whole
earth be filled with His glory. Amen and amen.”
O brethren, what bright and enrapturing prospects
are in Scripture set before us, as members of the great
family of redemption in Christ ! Let us see that the
animating hopes which are inspired by the glorious
gospel lead us into all holiness of heart and life.
“ Every man that hath this hope in him purifieth him-
self even as God is pure.” What encouragement we
have to persevere in the service of our Redeemer with
all zeal, patience, and perseverance! It well becomes
us to bear the afflictions, the trials, the tribulations of
time, with all meekness and submission. Let us so work
under the authority of our gracious Lord winning souls
for Christ, that when at length we are rewarded
according to our works, we may have a high place among
the constellations of the new heavens—that we may
have a place as near as possible to the Saviour at His
table in the kingdom of heaven. For our encourage-
ment we are informed that “ in due time we shall reap
if we faint not.” “Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life,” “ The Lord God shall
be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
glory.”
As the hour was already late, Mr. Hamilton was
immediately followed by—
REV. S. L. CHASE.
JJahjtct: " fwrifiaticm hg iojß ”
I have been entrusted with the duty of speaking to
you on the inspired declaration, “ And every man that
hath this hope in Him purifieth himself even as He is
pure.”—l John iii. 3.
It is a joy to my soul to meditate on the blessed truths
suggested by this passage, and I will endeavour, by God’s


help, to bring those truths before you. “ Lord, pour
out Thy spirit unto us; make known Thy words unto
us.”
The pith and marrow of all I have to say may be
thrown out in one or two words. Let thoughtful minds
observe—
I. God favours His people by giving them for their
portion “Hope.”
It is a great point to know in what direction God
favours His people. If persons simply want to have a
better portion than others in this life, they are not
invited to seek it through Christ. St. Paul said, “If
in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all
men most miserable.” The ungodly have their portions
in this life. We are not to look for the saint’s portion
in the present age. The portion God assigns His
servants is in things to come ; in things about to be, not
yet attainable. Of Old Testament saints it is written,,
“ These all died in faith, not having received the
promises.” The church’s portion is the coming of the
Lord, and the benefits then bestowed. At the descent
of the Lord from heaven the dead in Christ shall rise,
the living saints shall be changed, and both the
living and the dead shall see their Lord as He
is, and be changed into the same image. With
bodies incorruptible, immortal, with souls all pure
and holy, the saints shall be caught up into the clouds
to meet their Lord in the air, and the heavenly
King will then present them faultless before the pre-
sence of His glory with exceeding joy; and the saints
shall commence an endless reign, and they shall take
possession of a glorious kingdom, and their inheritance
will be incorruptible, undefiled —one that fadeth not
away. Contrast this future with the present. At pre-
sent absent from the Lord, at present sinful, at present
corruptible and mortal, at present in good things imper-
il 2


feet, at present troubled, groaning, panting; at present
compassed with infirmities, at present hated by a hostile
world. God’s favour towards His saints is not intended
to be displayed in this life; but no heart can rise to
the fulness of bliss promised to saints at their Master’s
appearing. They are to be like Jesus; they are to be
with Jesus; they are to share His kingdom; and they
are to serve Him world without end.
This, then, is my first observation— God favours his
people hy gimng them, for their portion, Hope.
Observe, 11. God inspires His people thankfully to
accept for their portion the “ Hope” set before them.
It greatly honours God when His word is so trusted
that men give Him praise beforehand for what He is
about to do. Thus did the children of Israel at the
Eed Sea, saying, “ Thou shalt bring them in, and plant
them in the mountain of Thine inheritance, in the place,
0 Lord, which Thou hast made for Thee to dwell in.”
Thus did Moses, with his last words, “ Happy art thou,
O Israel; who is like unto thee, 0 people saved by the
Lord, who is the shield of thine help and the sword of
thine excellency; and thine enemies shall be found liars
unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places.”
Thus did Hannah —“ The adversaries of the Lord shall
be broken in pieces, out o'f heaven shall be thunder upon
them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and
He shall give strength unto His king, and exalt the
horn of His anointed.” Thus did Paul—“O Death,
where is thy sting 1 0 Grave, where is thy victory.
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law ; but thanks be unto God, who giveth us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
By the grace of God saints are enabled to take God
at His word, and in imitation of their Father they can
account things which he not as though they were. Things
which do appear saints can trace back to their origin,


and by faith they “ understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God, so that things which are
seen were not made of things which do appearand in
like manner things not seen as yet can be made real by
faith, for the mouth of the Lord bath spoken. Faith
gives reality to things hoped for, and faith in the word
of God gives confidence in things unseen. The living
God purposes things to come, He makes known His pur-
poses by His word, His saints give credence to that
word, and God inspires His people to accept for their
portion what God has promised to bring to pass. They
reckon on things unseen as if they were; they embrace
the coming of the Lord, the resurrection of the dead,
and the life of the world to come.
I have one more word to press on your attention.
Observe, 111. God tests His people by requiring a life
conformable to their hope. “And every man that hath
this hope in the Son of God purifieth himself even as
the Son of God is pure.” Saints are required not only
to anticipate salvation, but to live a life corresponding
•with their future position; they must walk worthy of
God’s kingdom and glory to which they are called.
Abraham was not allowed to stay in his own country
after God had promised him another country, and so he
went out from the land of his birth, and out from his
kindred, not knowing whither he went. The Church
must come out from the world. “ Come out from
among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing.” Christ saith of His
servants, “ They are not of the world, even as I am not
of the world.”
At the second advent there will be the fulfilment of
every promise ; but in the meantime the heirs of God’s
promises are required to live answerably to their
heavenly expectations. St. Peter teaches us they are a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a


peculiar people, to show forth the virtues of Him who
hath called them out of darkness into His marvellous
light.” St. Paul puts the matter in equally strong
terms, and shows that the blessed hope of the glorious
appearing of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ
creates a necessity for denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and for living soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; and St. John confirms the word of
both St. Peter and St. Paul by saying, “ Beloved, now
are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be; but we know that when He shall
appear we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as
He is; and every man that hath this hope in Him
purifieth himself even as He is pure.”
This purifying of the saints tests the reality of faith
in God, If saints are persuaded of a portion beyond
the present age, they must live in accordance with that
holy condition, that pure light, that heavenly atmos-
phere, that undefiled company, that blessed service, to
which they are predestinated. “ Brethren,” saith St.
Paul, “be followers together of me, and mark them
which walk so as ye have us for an ensample; for many
walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell, even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind
earthly things; for our conversation is in heaven, from
whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be
fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to the
working whereby He is able to subdue all things to
Himself. Therefore, my brethren, dearly beloved and
longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord,
my dearly beloved.”
So you see St. Paul was enabled by divine grace not
only to anticipate the things which God hath promised,


but by grace he was able to change his life into one
of a heavenly character, a life in conformity with his
future position. “ Our conversation is in heaven.”
This test is divinely applied to the people of God.
When disobedient souls indulge a hope of sharing the
glories of the heavenly inheritance, Christ will say unto
them, “ I never knew you.” Those are citizens of Zion,
and those only, who by grace so anticipated their
promised portion as to live soberly, righteously, and
godly, looking for that blessed hope—the glorious ap-
pearing of their Lord. These, then, are the things which
I would press on the attention of all ray brethren :
1. God favours His people by giving them for their
portion, hope.
2. God inspires His people thankfully to accept for
their portion the hope set before them.
3. God tests His people by requiring a life conform-
able to their hope.
Set before your eyes, beloved brethren, the coming of
the Lord, the exceeding joy, the eternal service, the
purity, the perfection, the glory to be revealed.
This is the soul’s first duty : to hear what God hath
foretold by the mouth of all His holy prophets. Get
on Pisgah’s height and survey the future. The Son of
Man is coming in His glory, and He is gathering His
people to Himself, commanding them to take possession
of His glorious kingdom. This sight is for your eyes to
feast on. See these saints, all pure in heart, all radiant
in body, all incorruptible, immortal ; and they are for
ever with the Lord, and serve Him day and night in
His temple, holy, happy, honourable, blest.
And, brethren, do more than recall to mind God’s
promises. You must by faith make them your own.
You must embrace for your portion the hope set before
you. Let this world no longer have dominion over you;
let this world go, with all its follies, its ambitions, its


schemes, its pleasures, its delicacies, its hopes, its fears.
Take your part in things temporal as men who hold in
their heart and their hand things eternal. Weep as
though you wept not. Rejoice as though you rejoiced
not. Buy as those who possessed not. Is it a great
matter for saints to sit loose to the world 1
“ As by the light of opening day
The stars are all concealed,
So earthly pleasures fade away
When Jesus is revealed.”
If your portion is in this life, no wonder if you grovel
in the dust ; but God hath chosen you in Christ to a
better portion—that is, a heavenly.
Take, I beseech you, for your portion the things about
to be. Robe yourselves in the garments of immortality,
eat of the fruit of the tree of life, walk in the golden
streets, kiss the royal feet, drink of the pleasures at
God’s right hand, keep company with apostles, prophets,
martyrs, saints, and angels. This honour have all His
saints, and this it is to honour the word of the Heavenly
King, even betimes 1 to anticipate the unfolding doors of
light, and to enter in through the gates into the new
Jerusalem by faith. “Ye are come unto Mount Zion,”
And then, beloved brethren, all this must be made
conducive to holy practice. Till you are taken out
of the world you must be in it, yet not of it
you must prove that your hope hath heavenly efficacy.
Self-denial, purity, immovability, service, peace, rejoicing,
patience, all spring up from Christian hope. Christians
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, looking for their
blessed hope; so also hoping in Christ’s appearing, they
purify themselves as the Son of God is pure; for a helmet
they take the hope of salvation; hope is the anchor of
the soul, sure and steadfast; hoping for the resurrection
they serve day and night; the God of hope fills them with
all joy and peace in believing, and hoping for that which


they see not, they are enabled with patience to wait for
it. Thus you see, brethren beloved, the standard you
have to work up to, and also you see the standard you
must judge yourselves by. The standard you have to
work up to is this: to live on earth the life of heaven—
a life in conformity with what is promised to be your
life for ever ; and that heavenly life is also the standard
you must judge yourselves by. You are no hypocrite
deceiving yourself if you so anticipate the future that
you fill the present life with its brightness. Walk worthy
of the vocation wherewith you are called with all lowli-
ness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love. Walk up and down in the world as a
man who has put off the old man, and has put on the
new man ; as a man whose conversation is in heaven,
from whence you look for the Saviour. “When He
shall appear we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him
as He is ; and therefore let every man that hath thia
hope in the Son of God purify himself even as the Son
of God is pure.”
Our hoped-for salvation is only possible because we
have to do with an Almighty Being, and it avails those
only who can trust an Almighty Being ; who trust both
his ability to perform and His faithfulness to fulfil His
promises. With Abraham believe God, believe that He
is able to perform His word ; also, dear brethren, with
Sarah judge Him faithful who hath promised. Then
are ye made partakers of Christ by holding fast the
confidence, and the rejoicing of this hope given, unto the
end.
When this address was concluded, the Chairman
expressed great regret that at so late an hour he waa
unable to read more than a few passages from a paper
written by a gentleman in the country, who was unable
to be present. The whole address was as follows ;


MR. H. SANDLIMAN.
pop. ,r
Beloved Brethren —Seeing that all our hopes and
expectations are centred in Christ Jesus, His appear-
ance to take us to Himself may well be singled out and
distinguished above all other hopes, as it is by the
Apostle Paul to Titus as “ that Blessed Hope.” This
coming event has been placed before the saints of God
in all ages as an incentive to patience, purity, love, and
joy; but, above all, as a most precious means of com-
fort under trials, of whatever kind they might be. The
saints are called in view of the advent of Christ, not
only to be comforted themselves, but to “ comfort one
another with these words.”
The Church of Christ in every stage of its history
needs comfort, and if there is any service of love to
which the Lord might be pleased to appoint the writer
of this paper, there is none to which he would go
forward with more alacrity and joy than the gracious
ministry of comfort. “ Comfort ye, comfort ye my
people, saith your God.” Doubtless the Thessalonians had
need of special comfort under the terrible persecutions
which they had to endure at the hands of the heathen
around them. The particulars of their afflictions are not
specifically stated, but the apostle says —“ We glory in
you in the churches of God, for your patience and faith
in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure.”
In no epistle is the second coming of Christ so fre-
quently referred to as in the two letters to the Thessa-
lonians ; but although we are not persecuted in the
same way by imprisonment, torture, or death, we also
are in need of comfort as well as they. We live in an
age of unbelief concerning these things; the voice of
the scoffer is heard on every side saying — ll Where is
the promise of His coming V’ The reproach of being


wild enthusiasts has to be borne by all who are waiting
for the heavenly Bridegroom ; and though the devil has
abandoned for the present the openly hostile attitude,
yet secretly, in a thousand subtle ways, he assails us, to
despoil us of that blessed hope, making us to walk sad
and downcast. Yes, there are unseen forces at work in
this day; principalities and powers seeking continually
to take advantage of our weakness, to beset us so that we
are “in heaviness through manifold temptations.” But,
beloved brethren and sisters in Christ, be not afraid, lift
up your heads, the Lord is at hand; soon you will be able
to say to every power, human or devilish, which is against
you now—“ Lo, this is our God ;we have waited for
Him.” Soon the wilderness journey, with all its harass-
ing temptations, will come to an end, and we shall rise to
meet the Lord in the air, and be for ever with Him. Now
this is the special joy of that Blessed Hope —we shall be
with Him, we-shall see Him. The most precious part
of the promise to the thief on the cross was “ with Me.”
Saved from wrath to come, escaped from the jaws of
hell, a brand plucked from the burning, to be in Paradise
—mighty deliverance ! Blessed prospect ! But the
crown of the blessing is in the words, “ with Meß
Brethren, I cannot picture to you on this Advent evening
the glory of that morning of joy which is about to dawn
upon us with a burst of unspeakable splendour, when
the Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel and the trump of
God. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive
such a picture ; all I can find words to say to you is,
that we shall see Jesus ; you and I shall look on Him,
Whom having not seen we love. Who shall attempt to
describe the glory of that scene when the ransomed of
the Lord shall meet their glorified Redeemer 1 We are
compelled, on thinking of it, to lose sight of the


thronging millions of His saints, and grasp it individu-
ally; even as in the day when we saw the Lord as our
Saviour, and gazing on the Crucified One, we were
enabled to appropriate Him as ours individually.
“ When by faith I saw Him on the tree,
Heard His still small whisper, ‘ ’Tis for thee,'
From my heart the burden rolled away—
Happy day !”
For me He bled, for me He suffered, for me He came
from heaven’s glory, when first He appeared ; and to get
the full blessing of His second appearing, I must endea-
vour to realise the fact that He is coming again for me.
There have been many controversies about how He
will come, and when He will come. Possibly a right
understanding about these things may be for our edifi-
cation ; but the simplest, weakest child of God, who
has no head for prophecy and no heart for controversy,
can turn from the strife of tongues and exclaim with
rapture and exultation, “He is coming for me when,
I know not— -how, I know not; He is coming for me.
I shall see Him as He is. He will descend and I will
ascend, and we shall meet. Stand on one side, ye
angels; make way, 0 ye ministering hosts; here is
a ransomed sinner who wants to look upon his Saviour.
“I want to see the Man that died for me; let me gaze
upon that head once crowned with thorns, those hands
and feet once pierced for me. I long to look on Him
who sought me in the wilderness, a wandering wayward
sheep, and brought me home rejoicing to His fold ; who
by His word, ministered to me by the gracious gentle
Spirit, revealed Himself as my Redeemer. Who among
the sons of men may be compared to Him ? He is the
chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely,
and He is mine and I am His.”
Beloved, let me tell you that this meeting of Christ
and His Church is the event nearest and dearest to the


heart of Jesus. Over and over again in the gospels He
refers to it, and all through the epistles this rapturous
meeting is constantly spoken of as the delight of His
heart, “ For the joy that was set before Him, He
endured the cross, despising the shame.” And what
was the joy ? Was it not this very joy we are speaking
of ? —the delight of meeting His redeemed Church, pur-
chased with His own blood. And oh, beloved, if our dear
Lord’s heart is bounding with joyful expectation in view of
meeting us, shall we be indifferent on the subject, shall
we not too rejoice with exceeding great joy in the
prospect of our meeting with Him ? He is looking
down to us with longing desire, and shall we not, like
the men of Galilee, stand gazing up into Heaven expect-
ing that cloud which took Him up out of our sight to
bring Him back to our view, for we shall see Him as He
is, “ This same Jesus shall so come in like manner as
ye have seen Him go into heaven.” Shall we not seek
to be found with our loins girt and our lamps burning,
like men that wait for their Lord ? But while in spirit
we stand gazing up into heaven, let us not be idle gazers
but active workers, doing His will till He come. The
faithful, loving wife, whose husband has long been away
in distant lands, sighing for his return, busies herself
with such preparations as she knows that he would like
to find done: no weary task to her to watch, and work,
and wait. Oh how she would shrink from positions or
occupations which she knows he would not be pleased
to find her engaged in, should he suddenly come
home. Her neighbours might try to persuade her there
is no harm in this pursuit or that enjoyment, they
might reason with her ever so forcibly; but the simple
question with her would be, “Would he like it? Would
my lord give me a word of approval if he came and found
me in the middle of it?” Oh, how contemptuously
love casts aside the cold rules of expediency:—ls it right


to do so-and-so 1 or wrong to do such a thing ? There
is a unison of feeling and sentiment between lovers
that urges them to have the same tastes and inclina-
tions; his will is her will, his delight her delight. “If ye
love Me, keep My commandments.” His rules are written
on her heart, and ’tis her delight to anticipate Ills wishes
who is longing to meet her, and may now be nearer
than she imagines. “ Every one that hath this hope in
Him, purifieth himself even as He is pure.” “They that
sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken are
drunken in the night; but let us, who are of the day,
be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love,
and for an helmet, the hope of salvation ; for God hath
not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation
through Jesus Christ; who died for us, that whether
we wake or sleep, we should live together with Him”
Therefore, dearly beloved, let us not be found asking
one another doubtfully how far we may go in the direc-
tion and course of this world—how far we may indulge
in this amusement or that frivolity without transgress-
ing the rules of the church 1 ? Why should we grieve
the gentle Spirit who is leading the purchased Bride
home to Himself by such cold-hearted calculations'?
Such enjoyments as admit of His presence are pleasing
to us, but such as we cannot enjoy with Him we reject
unhesitatingly.
“ Oh, ’tis not in joy to charm me,
Were that joy unmixed with Thee.”
Judge everything in the light of the glorious appearing
of Jesus; and if you find that you cannot look up from
the ball-room, the opera, or the racecourse, and say,
“Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly” —don’t go there. If
it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes strong
drink, why should the saints of the Most High seek
worldly pleasures 1 These can add nothing to the joy
that is already theirs—the joy of “that blessed hope”


We shall enjoy ourselves when Jesus comes; we
watch, and we wait, to hear the sound of His chariot-
wheels, and our hearts are not here.
“ Our hearts are with Him on the throne,
And ill can brook delay ;
Each moment listening for his voice—
‘ Eise up and come away.’ ”
Like Mephibosheth of old, our affections are away
with King David, who loved us when we were enemies ;
and we are not going to bow and cringe to the proud
usurper who sits upon the throne of this world, instead
of Him whose right it is to rule. We are mourners till
He comes back, and would be glad to be such faithful
witnesses for our absent Lord, that we shall be a discord
in the music of a demented world; just like the son of
Saul, whose uncombed beard and unwashed face must
have been a terrible eyesore in the city and court of the
false king Absalom. Yes, brethren, we are mourners;
but it Is only for a little while. “ Weeping may endure
for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.” Jesus
will soon come ;He w 7 ill give us the garment of praise
for the spirit of heaviness, the oil of joy for mourning.
“ Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh”
(Luke vi. 21). “Verily, I say unto you, that ye shall
weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and ye
shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy.” “ I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice.” Such precious, sweet words of love He has
left behind Him to cheer and encourage us on our
wilderness journey, and even as we press forward
on our toilsome march, the Spirit and the bride
—the leading One and the led one —say with a
united fervent cry, “Come.” “Even so, come, Lord
Jesus.”
But we do not only look up to Him and cry come.
We also stretch forth our hands to our perishing fellow-


men, and in the bowels and compassions of Christ
Jesus we utter with yearning entreaty that same
warm, loving word of invitation, Come; “ Let him that
is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take of the
water of life freely.” St. Peter tells us that the delay
in the coming of Christ is not slackness or slowness on
His part, but we are to count that the long-suffering of
the Lord is salvation, not willing that any should
perish. The more earnestly we long for the coming of
our Lord, the more urgent will be our entreaties to poor
sinners to flee to Jesus.
The Millennarian, whose views on the “ Second
Coming” may be ever so clear and scripturally correct,
is at best but a cold-hearted speculator on prophetic
truth, if he is without gospel sympathies. It is
not for us to suppress the cry of “Come, Lord Jesus,”
for the sake of those who have not yet come to
Jesus. We cannot, we may not do that; but we are
to join the iipw&rd cry to the onward cry; looking up
we say, “Come;” looking around we say, “Come.” Are
there any here to-night to whom the coming of Christ
would be a terror 1 Oh, we would warn you, by His
coming, to make no delay, but come to Him who is now
waiting with open arms to receive you. “ Behold, He
cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see Him.” But
who may abide the day of His coming 1 Come to Him
ere He comes to you. Gome to Him for mercy, and
pardon, and justification ; His blood is now available
for whosoever will. The Spirit and the Bride are now
saying to you, “Come to Jesus;” He who waited so
long for us is now waiting for you, but He will not
always wait. The cry, “Come, Lord Jesus !” is going
up louder and louder from a groaning creation, from a
longing church, out of the depths of a heart wearying
for her long-absent Lord. The Spirit with groanings
which cannot be uttered is raising that cry. The signs of


His approach are manifesting themselves : everywhere
iniquity abounds; the love of many waxes cold; there are
famines and earthquakes in divers places; wars and
rumours of wars. The nations of Europe, armed to the
teeth, look with dismay and alarm one at another,
wondering with astonishment at the things that are
coming on the earth. “ Now,” says Jesus, “ when these
things begin to come to pass, lift up your heads, for
your redemption draweth nigh.” A little while, and
He that shall come will come, and will not tarry ; soon
shall we hear His voice calling on us to rise to meet
Him in the air; and even as a child drops its playthings
at the call of its loving parent, so shall we drop our
earthly pursuits, whatever they may be, and rise to His
embrace. He will put a new song in our mouth, even
praise to His name; yea, He will give us a part to sing
specially for ourselves. The mighty hosts of cherubim,
seraphim, and angels, with whom we shall join to
sing the praises of the Lamb, will have to be silent
while we sing our part of the music—
“Worthy the Lamb that died, they cry,
To be exalted thus ;
Worthy the Lamb, our lips reply,
For He was slain for us."
Only the redeemed of the Lord can sing that last lin§ :
the sweetest music of all the anthems that shall ring
through the arch of Heaven shall be our part—“He was
slain for us.”
I had a kinsman once, a quiet, unassuming man; one
in whom the meekness and gentleness of Christ shone
with an even, steady light; and he used to tell with
beaming eye and radiant face how for years after his
conversion he knew scarcely anything of the joy of that
blessed hope; but there came a time in his Christian
pilgrimage when the Lord caused the light of the glory of
His advent to burst upon his soul with a force of grandeur,


with a power of such a character, that he declared
it was to him like a second conversion. He was a man
seldom moved to transports, and poetical ecstasies were
quite out of his temperament; yet after his death there
were found in his desk some lines of poetry written
about twenty years prior to his decease. It proved to
be a love-song, celebrating the glory and joy of
the meeting of Christ and His Church. The power
of that mighty visitation of which my relative had
spoken so often, had evidently so wrought upon his
spirit, that he had to seek relief in this overflow of
song—
Else, My love, and come away
(Hear thy Lord and Saviour say);
Morning breaks, the shadows flee,
Rise, My fair one, come with Me,
In that blest eternal home
Pain nor death shall ever come ;
Sorrow, sighing, flee away
From those realms of happy day.
There doth flow the crystal flood,
Springing from the Fount of God—
Fount of Life, of whose supply
Thou shalt drink eternally.
In that pure and bright abode
Thou shalt see the face of God ;
He upon thy brow shall see
Jesu’s name, who died for thee.
Night ne’er falls within that sphere,
Sun nor candle need they there ;
God Himself thy sun shall be,
In His light thou light shalt see.
Rise, My fair one, come with Me,
Earth is not a home for thee ;
Enter thine eternal rest,
In My love for ever blest.
Jesus, at Thy word I’ll rise,
Swift to meet Thee in the skies ;
Take me, Saviour, to Thy home,
Come, Lord Jesus, quickly come.


THE CHAIRMAN’S CONCLUDING ADDRESS
Was something as follows ; —The practical question
before us at the present moment is this—What is to be
the outcome of the Conference 1 Not, I trust, a going
back, or a standing still; but a going forward with fresh
and heavenly energy. Christ has been very strikingly
set before us for a few evenings past as the glorious
possession of each believer, as our Strength for warfare,
our Treasury for grace, our Master for work, our Hope
for eternity, our heart’s Resting-place moment by
moment —yea, and our very Life itself. Everything has
tended to deepen the reality of that truth which we put
in the fore-front of our Conference —“ Lord Jesus, we
cannot do without Thee.” Follow this up, beloved
friends. Strain every nerve in the “ winning” of Christ,
in the pursuit of His holiness, in the growing up to
resemble Him in all things, in accumulating that know-
ledge of Him which the Word and the fellowship of the
Spirit alone supply. Settle it in your hearts that
Christ is your Life, is your Hope, is your Joy, is your
Shield and your exceeding great Reward, and move
gladly onward in the strength of these mighty realities
to subdue kingdoms, to work righteousness, to obtain
promises, to stop the mouths of lions, to quench the
violence of fire, to escape the edge of the sword, out of
weakness to be made strong, to wax valiant in fight, to
turn to flight the armies of the aliens. Oh! who can
measure the prosperity of a believer who knows and
who abides in Christ. “He shall be like a tree planted
by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in
bis season; his leaf also shall not wither, and what-
soever he doeth shall prosper.”
Let me for a moment touch upon another subject.
While Mr. Campbell was painting the Celestial City,
with its waters, gardens, palaces, and people, and
“ Christ Himself its living splendour,” a thought came


into my mind concerning something that we should
miss, and it cast a gloom over my whole heart. Parents,
brothers, sisters, wives, husbands, relatives, and friends
will be missing from many a circle. Oh ! say,
believers, are you content to let the matter rest in
uncertainty 1 Can you let the God of Jacob go, till you
have wrestled and prevailed for those of your own
house, concerning whom you have “ exceeding great and
precious promises” ? Are you more exercised regarding
unbelief without your home, than for unbelief within ?
Think how you would suffer in the Holy City if God
let loose the demon of regret, of self-reproach ! Why, it
would make heaven itself wretched if Jesus did not
remove the bitterness as well as the sin of lost oppor-
tunities. Think of what you would feel, if called on
to behold the carcasses of the men that transgressed
against God, and for whose salvation you so faintly
cried, lying where the worm dieth not, where the
fire is not quenched !
Let me ask any who may be present here to-night,
who are still ignorant of God, and yet have heard of
God’s glorious city, let me ask you—Shall you be there ?
Have you your right to the Tree of Life ? Can you
read your title clear to mansions in the skies 1 And if
not, why not ? And if not, why not to-night 1 Unite
yourself with the Lord Jesus, just by ceasing from fruit-
less efforts, just by trusting to His sure promise, and to
His finished work—and He becomes yours, and salvation
becomes yours, and heaven becomes yours, without any
more ado. It is so simple. Come trusting, and while
you trust He achieves your deliverance. His part of
saving is simultaneous with your part of believing. One
cannot be without the other. And if you believe that
He does save all who come, you may, in coming,
believe that you are saved —you may at once begin
to rejoice with joy unspeakable.


So also with you who are believers of longer standing.
While you are trusting in the Lord to deliver you from
some sin, or difficulty, or care, you have a right to
believe that He is keeping faith with you, and is
delivering you, and therefore that you are delivered.
This is the climax of faith. So with spiritual blessings.
Make yourself familiar with 1 John v. 14, 15, and learn
that while you are asking, He is giving; in other words,
you ask in faith and receive at the same time. Without
any physical consciousness, you are calmly yet fully
persuaded that what God has promised, God has per-
formed ; and you reckon that peace, or power, or any
desired grace is actually lodged within you for use “in
due season.” Above all things I would urge you to seek
Love. “All Christ’s biddings are enablings,” and He
who commanded us to love Himself with the whole
heart, has not so constructed His new creation that this
ehall.be impossible. Each believer has the organ or
instrument of love already, as the possessor of a new
heart; but our grand aim must be to be filled with
love, to have that particular grace shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost. God’s love for Christ, com-
municated to us (John xvii. 26), is the most constraining,
the most attractive, the most all-subduing, the most soul-
refreshing, as well as the most rare of all spiritual
blessings. Happy is the man who cannot help loving,
who loves with his whole strength.
And now, one word about our Lord’s return. “Oh !
for a pencil dipt in living light,” to make this blessed
prospect more beautifully clear to every eye, I would
have this subject as vividly impressed upon you as
the necessity for “ abiding in Christ.” The practical
influence of a hope that may at any moment be realised
is simply immeasurable. It helps us to let things
pass without vexation or fretting care. It causes us to
'“redeem the time.” It keeps us in the attitude of


expectation, “ waiting for His Son from heaven.” It
makes us patient, watchful, thankful, prayerful, and
pure. Above all, it does what is most of all needed in
vital religion —it keeps prominently before the mind
the glorious person of Christ. A band of Christians
who live daily in the love of His appearing—who are
intent upon Him as their Highest Good —who reach
through texts, doctrines, and ordinances, to His very
feet—who worship and adore Him as the Great Reality,
and are moment by moment expecting His glory to be
unveiled—who cry “ Thy kingdom come” with fervent,
impassioned longings—such Christians are dear as
John to the Lord Jesus. They lie close upon His
heart. They “ come behind in no gift, waiting for His
coming.” Will you be one of them ?■ Will you
desire Christ above your chief joyl Will you bring
your soul into this earthly paradise—the hope, the joy,
of seeing Him soon 1 Yes, of seeing Him soon. He
cannot be very long away. He said, “ A little while
and He is only waiting for the last of the elect to be
gathered in, and then He will come. Who and where
that last one is we do not know. He may be
here, or there, or yet unborn, or yet unconverted,
or yet in a rough and rugged state, unpolished
for the Temple. But one thing is certain. In a
moment —in the twinkling of an eye —at the last
trump, the Lord Himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout. The dead in Christ shall rise first; we
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds
we shall be changed into His image; we shall be for ever
with the Lord.
This is Christ’s dealing with His Bride, the Church-
He loves her best; He cares for her first; He celebrates
the Marriage Supper, and introduces her to the city of
God. Afterwards, when the Jews are gathered to their
own land again, He descends with His saints to th&


Mount of Olives; He delivers Jerusalem from her
enemies ; He opens to her inhabitants the fountain for sin
and for uncleanness ■ He restores them to their glorious
pre-eminence amongst the nations of earth; He beauti-
fies with his presence Immanuel’s Land. After this
again He addresses Himself to the conversion of the
Gentiles, using the Jews as His ambassadors, and the
saints as His rulers, till the earth is filled with the
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.
The distant future is all mapped out before us as plainly
as on a chart; but the immediate future is hidden by a
veil. We know not what shall befall us in another hour.
We know not what a day may bring forth. This walking
in deep darkness is intended as a trial of faith ; but when
we tread the path with Jesus, the darkness seems no
darkness at all, and the anticipation of an immediate
outburst of heavenly glory is in itself a most sweet fore-
taste of heaven. Let me beseech you so to think, and so
to live, that His coming at any hour may be no surprise,
but only the fulfilment of your most cherished hope.
Expect Him, and you will not be overtaken. Expect
Him, and he will keep you from falling. Expect Him,
and you will be found of Him in peace, without spot
and blameless. Expect Him, and He will present you
faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding
joy. Expect Him while you love Him. Expect Him
while you trust Him. Couple the life of hope with the
life of affection and the life of faith, and you will have
attained to the Highest Life. Your prayer will not
only be, “ Wash me,” or “ Illuminate me,” but
“ Blessed Jesus, keep me white ;
Keep me walking in the light.”
And now, brethren, farewell. God the Father has
* highly exalted” His blessed Son, and we can never be
very far wrong when we are exalting Him too. The
Conference is over ; but Oh, may its fruits be found in


your increased knowledge of God, in your childlike
faith—in love, and joy, and peace—in long-suffering
and gentleness—in goodness, meekness, and temperance--
Look back to your salvation from wrath, and look back:
to your death to sin, on Calvary, and while you behold 1
yourself in such marvellous death-union with the Lamb
that was slain—lean upon, love, and hope in the Living
Christ Himself; and say, with a shout and a song of
victory, “It is finished. They that are Christ’s have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.” Then,,
in the power of Death-truth, and Eesurrection-truthj
proceed to mortify every earthly member, and grow
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fulness of Christ.
THE END,


Sixth oi Jl-omans.
“ Btjeied with Christ,” and raised with Him too,
What is there left for me to do ?
Simply to cease from struggling and strife,
Simply to “ walk in newness of life.”
Risen with Christ,” my glorious Head,
Holiness now is the pathway I tread;
Beautiful thought, as I walk therein,
“ He that is dead is freed from sin.”
Living with Christ, who “ dieth no more,”
Following Christ, who goeth before ;
I am from bondage utterly freed,
Beckoning self “ to be dead indeed.”
Living for Christ, my members I yield,
“ Servants of righteousness,” evermore sealed,
“ Not under law,” I’m now “ under grace,”
Sin is dethron’d, and Christ takes its place.
Growing in Christ; no more shall be named
Sinful things whereof I’m ashamed;
“ Fruit unto holiness” now will I bear,
“ Life everlasting, the end,” I shall share.




MAS ON, FIRTH AND m'CUTCHEON,
PRINTERS,
'FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


—f "'a
J
6i6iv
F f(34~ l
* /
fl/ f / I .--7
I




CONFERENCE ADDRESSES FOR 1874,
PRICE SIXPENCE
CONFERENCE HYMNS for 1875,
Neatly Bound, with Music, One Penny each.
“The Missionary, at Home & Abroad,”
IS PUBLISHED ON THE goth OP EACH MONTH,
EDITED BY REV. H. B. MACARTNEY.
Contains Intelligence chiefly of Christian Work among the
Aborigines and Chinese of Yictoiia; in India, as also of
Work in Melbourne, Sydney, and Tasmania, and in the
Melanesian Islands.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
By Post, 25.; 3 Copies, 45.; 6 Copies, Bs. per Annum.
POST OFFICE ORDERS PAYABLE TO
MR. W. E. MORRIS,
Diocesan Registry, William Street, Melbourne.
“The Missionary Child,”
A Volume of Addresses to Children, Letters from living
Missionaries, Anecdotes, Select Poetry, &c.
EDITED BY REV. H. B. MACARTNEY.
Neatly Bound in blue and gold, Price Is. 6d.; by post, Is. 9d.
“FIRST COMMUNION,”
A CONFIRMATION ADDRESS. Phicb 6d.
“THE WINNING OF SOULS.”
PRICE ONE PENNY.
WILL SHORTLY BE REPUBLISHED—
“Up Higher,” and “The Doctrine of the Higher
Christian Life.”
PRICE ONE PENNY EACH.
At A. J. SMITH’S, 35 Swanston Street.
