

1949
CONF. OF AUTH. ON AUST. FAUNA & FLORA TAS,
2 799.026 AUS




CONFERENCE OF AUTHORITIES
ON
AUSTRALIAN FAUNA AND FLORA
HELD AT HOBART, TASMANIA
7th-9th December, 1949
Convened by the Animals and Birds Protection
Board of Tasmania.


CONFERENCE OF AUTHORITIES
ON
AUSTRALIAN FAUNA AND FLORA
HELD AT HOBART, TASMANIA
7th-9th December, 1949
Convened by the Animals and Birds Protection
Board of Tasmania.
67628


NOMINEES
New South Wales:—
Mr, F. J. Griffiths: Chief Guardian of Fauna, and Chairman, Fauna
Protection Panel.
Mr. E. J. Hallstrom: Deputy Chairman of the Fauna Protection
Panel and President of the Taronga Zoological Park Trust.
South Australia: —
Mr. F. W. Moorhouse: Chief Inspector of Fisheries and Game.
Western Australia :
Mr. A. J. Fraser: Chief Guardian of Game, and Chairman of Fauna
Advisory Committee.
Dr. D. L. Serventy: Chief Research Officer, C.5.1.R.0. (Fisheries
Division).
Victoria:—
Senior Inspector C. M. Clift: Department of Fisheries and Game.
Mr. J. McNally: Fauna Biologist.
Tasmania: —
The Hon. J, J. Dwyer, V.C., M.H.A.: Minister for Agriculture.
Dr. J. Pearson: Director of Tasmanian Museum, Hobart.
Mr. M. T. Dowling: Commissioner of Police, Hobart.
Mr. 0. H. Hedberg: Member of Animals and Birds’ Protection Board,
Hobart.


SUBJECTS FOR DISCUSSION
1. Uniform Policy regarding control of Marsupials in portions of States
which adjoin other States. (New South Wales.)
2. Co-operation with World Wide Organisation such as International
Union for Protection of Nature. (New South Wales.)
3. Re-afforestation projects and their influence on bird life. (New South
Wales.)
4. The keeping of protected Fauna under permit. (Victoria.)
o. Importation of Fauna from other States. (Victoria and Tasmania.)
6. Control of the introduction of Fauna from Overseas. (Victoria.)
7. Co-operation of States with the C.5.1.R.0. Wild Life Section.
(Victoria.)
8. Relation of Fauna to Agriculture and assessment of actual damage.
(Victoria.)
9. Game management, banding of game birds and Interstate co-operation
in recording and recovery of banded birds. (Victoria.)
10. Steps taken to conserve Native Fauna. (Tasmania.) W. A. Letter.
11. Species showing serious decline and causes. (Tasmania.)
12. Sanctuaries and National Parks. (Tasmania.)
13. Control of animals destroying crops. (Tasmania.)
14. Faunal reserves for breeding rare animals. (Tasmania.)
15. Branding of skins. (Tasmania.)
16. Mutton Bird Industry. (Tasmania.)
17. The use of traps or otherwise for taking Native Fauna. (Tasmania.)
18. Any other matters for discussion.
18a. Protection of species which prey upon pests.
18b. Thei question of affiliation with the International Union for the
Protection of Nature.


CONFERENCE OF AUSTRALIAN FAUNA AND FLORA
AUTHORITIES
HELD AT HOBART, TASMANIA
7th-9th DECEMBER, 1949
PRESENT.
N.S.W. Mr. F. J. Griffiths : Chief Guardian of Fauna, and Chairman, Fauna Protection Panel.
Mr. E. J. Hallstrom : Deputy Chairman of the Fauna Protection Panel and President
of the Taronga Zoological Pai’k Trust.
W.A. Mr. A. J. Fraser; Chief Guardian of Game and Chairman of the Fauna Advisory
Committee.
S.A. Mr, F. W. Moorhouse: Chief Inspector of Fishexnes and Game.
Vic, Mr. J. McNally; Fauna Biologist.
Senior Inspector C. M. Clift: Department of Fisheries and Game.
Tas. The Hon. J. J. Dwyer (Chairman) : Minister for Agriculture.
Dr. J. Pearson: Director of Tasmanian Museum,
Mr. M, T. Dowling: Commissioner of Police.
Mr. N. D. McIntyre: Inspector of Game and Fisheries.
Mr. P. Wigg: n
Mr. T. Stancombe: / Members, Animals and Birds’ Protection Board of
Mr. W. Rainbird: ( Tasmania.
Mr. H. R. Reynolds: )
Mr. J. T. Shea; Secretary, Animals and Birds’ Protection Board.
Dr. Pearson. —Mine is a very pleasant duty. It
is to ask the Attorney-General, Mr. Fagan, to open
the proceedings. As you probably know, the
Attorney-General is the Minister in charge of the
Board which controls the protection and conser-
vation of our native fauna in Tasmania. I will
ask the Attorney-General to be good enough to
open the Conference.
Attorney-General. —Dr. Pearson, Mr. Minister
and Gentlemen, first of all I would like to welcome
you who have come from other States to Tas-
mania. I was just asking if this was an Annual
Conference. I feel in these modern times there is
a disease going about which, for want of a better
term I am inclined to call “ conferenceitis,” but
apparently it has not yet spread to those inter-
ested in flora and fauna because I am told that in
sixteen years you have had only two conferences,
and I would say that is not enough. Ido welcome
those of you who come from other States,
especially as it is the first occasion on which this
Conference has been held in Tasmania. I am
sure while you are here you will find sufficient
things of interest in the particular subjects which
you are discussing to make you feel it will be
to your advantage to come here again. In Tas-
mania I suppose we have organizations somewhat
similar to those in other States, but we are hope-
ful, as a result of your visit here, your criticisms
of what we are doing and the information you
can give us as to what you are doing in the other
States, we will learn a great deal from your visit.
I have no doubt Dr. Pearson will be coming to
see me on a matter that he often comes to see me
about, and that is money. I don’t know how you
get on with your Ministers in other States. I
am quite sure there is a feeling abroad amongst
those concerned with fauna and flora that their
work is not sufficiently recognised by the public,
and they have an awful job to get Ministers of
the Crown to appreciate that it is of importance.
We in this State do not regard the work as
unimportant at all; in fact we take so much
interest in it that, despite the fact that I happen
to be the Minister in control, my colleague the
Minister for Agriculture is Chairman of our
Animals and Birds’ Protection Board. He says
he would gladly hand it over to me, but I think
it would be a wrench for him.
I have no doubt that, while the public are not
very vociferous about what you have done, never-
theless there is a wide appreciation of the work
you do. You don’t hear very much of the activit-
ies of the people engaged in this particular work
but we all know that if it were not for the efforts
you make, disasters would overtake us in the
disappearance of many of those things which we
really treasure very much. There was a time
here in Tasmania when we thought we were going
to lose the platypus, and that would have been
a great shame on us which we could never have
overcome, but by the efforts of the Board and of
other people interested, we have averted that
disaster. Some people are now inclined to think
there are too many. However, that is one of your
great problems, to preserve a proper balance in
these things. You have to do what the Socialists
are accused of doing—a very great amount of
planning—and I believe in this State and in other
States it has been done, in spite of all your diffi-
culties, with a great deal of success.
I thing perhaps you do not make your work
sufficiently well known to the public. I feel this
work you are doing is of great importance, and


I think you ought sometimes to devote some of
your energies to informing the people more
adequately than is being done at present of the
real things you are doing for the State and the
Commonwealth of Australia. You know that
from time to time you find it necessary to employ
more staff, spend more money, and no-one is
able to see any tangible results from what you
have done, but if by the publication of booklets,
literature, press statements and so on you are
able to educate the public more and inform them
in some way of what you are doing and the
importance of it, I feel perhaps you would have
much greater public support than sometimes you
have had in the past.
Now gentlemen, this is not an occasion for a
long speech. I do hope this Conference will be
successful. I feel that great advantage should
accrue from the interchange of ideas and your
informing each other of what is happening in the
respective States in connection with your work.
I hope while you are here you will take advantage
of seeing those things which interest you partic-
ularly in the various parts of Tasmania, and that
in every respect your Conference will be a great
success. I now have pleasure in declaring this
Conference open.
Minister for Agriculture. —Before we get down
to business I would like to inform you that the
position will be I shall be in the chair for this
morning but for any other day our worthy friend
Dr. Pearson will take over the chair because I
have some yery important Ministerial duties to
perform which will prevent my attendance here.
Dr. Pearson. —l would suggest that we meet at
10 a.m. and close the conference today at 12.45
and have the afternoon programme.
Carried.
Item No. I. —Uniform policy regarding control
of marsupials in portions of States which
adjoin other States.
Mr. Griffiths. —This first item has been placed
on the agenda by the Fauna Protection Panel of
New South Wales, and it is the old problem of
the control of marsupials. It has arisen because
of the fact that in the far western parts of New
South Wales, in some areas at any rate, kangaroos
are looked on as a menace, and the idea of placing
the item on the agenda is that there may be some
information that we can get that will help us in
dealing with this particular problem, that is the
problem of differentiating treatment within the
one State. At present in New South Wales the
control of marsupials is done in two ways:
(i) by the issue of licences and permits to
landholders to destroy a number of
animals on their own property; and
(ii) by a declaration of open seasons.
. There is no open season fixed for any particular
time of the year or for the whole of the State.
The declarations are made at times for particular
areas where it is felt to be necessary. Now in the
far west of New South Wales kangaroos are some-
times a menace to the grazing industry and it is
necessary to take some steps to deal with them
because of the damage they are doing. In Queens-
land, one of the neighbouring States, there is no
protection from the Kangaroos, and I am very
sorry that there are no Queensland representa-
tives here as I would like to know their experience
in those areas adjoining New South Wales. I
thing South Australia might be able to say some-
thing about_ this question of the control of mar-
supials in different areas, and particularly where
those areas adjoin other States. Various solutions
to the problem have been suggested, and one
ihat has been made which we will have to look
at before very long is that protection should be
removed entirely. That, of course, raises a num-
bei of pioblems. It raises the problem of how
you can prevent killing for skins in other parts
ot the State, and on this point we may be able to
get some assistance from the representatives of
the other States.
—South Australia is adjoining
iNew South Wales on the west. Since marsupials
have been spoken of I will reduce it to one mar-
supial, the kangaroo, because it is the principal
one. We have a partly protected period for the
kangaroo throughout the State, but on stations
where kangaroos are very prevalent the period
ot protection has in many instances been removed
that means the kangaroo can then be destroyed
throughout the twelve months, but in destroying
it the property owner must still be in possession
ot a game licence if he markets the skins of
S™™ al ® If ken ‘ A num A ber of vei T big Stations
Season V Annually South Australia
markets approximately 70,000 skins. Thev
mainly go to the U.S.A. where they are used for
upholstery of motor cars. If kangaroos damage
ops and break down fences during the close
season the property owner can get a permit
nIt er u mqUII Z- b ' y t pobc€ an d a favourable report
has been obtained, to destroy a limited number
of kangaroos. This is not very often taken
f° f b ® caus ® the open season gives suffi-
cient time lo reduce the number of animals The
close season is from October to March inclusive
that is, during the breeding period. Recently
there were complaints from Victoria that damage
SmeT^hif ll^ 0 T PS and propert Y> an d it was
claimed that the Kangaroos came over from
feouth Australia. In these areas of ours there
Jw° CI S S( k SeaSo ?’ that is the animal may be
destroyed through the whole 12 months. We
naturally had to make no move in South Australia
to give protective permits because the settler or
farmer can himself destroy without any permit.
It the Victorian farmers’ statements are correct
namely, that the kangaroos were coming from
South Australia I maintain that our open season
h as not been detrimental to the kangaroo in
South Australia. The wallaby on Kanagaroo
Island is totally unprotected. It has been so for
many years. Recently there has been talk of
having it destroyed as vermin.
Our Minister for Agriculture, Sir George Jen-
vi ns ’ lß in b e^*est e d in a big property on the
Northern portion of Eyre Peninsula. He has shot
very few kangaroos on his property, nor allowed
any shooting, although there is an open season,
the kangaroos are becoming so numerous on his
property he will have to do something about it.
What I would like to see Mr. Chairman, is if
we have a regulation in South Australia which
allows the destruction of an animal which we
after due report, are satisfied is doing damage'
the adjoining State not regulating against the
import or sale of the product, viz., the skin I
desire free trade between the States. I refer now
to water-rat skins. But it goes deeper. We allow
the taking of crayfish during a certain period.
Victoria says they shall not be taken in Victorian
8


waters during a slightly longer period, viz., the
month of November. In November we may take
crayfish, and we have been exporting them to
Victoria. Victoria has been condemning them.
It is the same as if they said nobody who makes
an alarm clock in South Australia in November
can sell it in Victoria that month. To other
things too, even refrigerators it could apply. I
stress we may legally taken the water-rat in
South Australia, yet Victoria has a regulation
which prohibits the sale in Victoria of water-rat
skins even though legally taken in South Aus-
tralia. It is wrong.
Dr. Pearson. —When your skins are sent over
from South Australia to Victoria are they not
stamped ?
Mr. Moorhouse. —No, because they are not
royalty bearing.
Dr. Pearson. —Would not stamping get over the
whole trouble?
Mr. Moorhouse. —ln the case of a partly pro-
tected beast which may be legally taken in the
open season there is no stamping because there
is no royalty. We can’t understand why there is
a restriction on the one and not the other.
Mr. Rainbird. —We have the same thing in
Tasmania. It has been taken up with the other
Boards recently and Victoria would not agree to
it.
Mr. Moorhouse. — We can’t have a uniform
policy in the protection of our animals. Con-
ditions differ so. South Australia reserves the
right to say we shall or shall not adopt any
resolution arising from this Conference.
Mr. Griffiths. — I take it that is presumed, and
we hope to all learn something from the con-
ference.
Mr. Hallstrom. — lf the position were reversed
and animals were legally taken in some other
State and sent to your State what action would
you take? Would you accept them or condemn
them as has been done against your State ?
Mr. Moorhouse. — We take the view that we
have no right to restrict the sale. Western Aus-
tralia sends to us kangaroo skins, New South
Wales also sends kangaroo skins. All we ask is
are they legally taken—has the sender permis-
sion to take those animals. If he has and sends
the skins to us they are passed on through
ordinary trade channels,
Mr. Fraser. — ln Western Australia we stamp
all skins regardless of whether royalty is paid or
not. At the request of New South Wales we
decided to put a stamp on all skins sent from our
State. All skins which are taken outside a certain
line are taken legally and no royalty is charge-
able on them at all. If a skin is taken illegally,
we seize and sell it, giving ourselves royalty
out of the proceeds of the sale. It is then stamped.
Mr. Clift. — As far as Victoria is concerned, we
have no objections whatever to kangaroo skins
coming from other States. The position with
water-rats is totally different. They are not
dealt with in an ordinary way. There is a pro-
vision in the Victorian Act which was originally
brought in to protect Egrets and to prohibit the
possession of Egrets, their feathers or other por-
tions of them no matter where they come from.
The Governor-in-Council may extend that pro-
vision to any other bird or animal, which must,
of course, be indigenous to Victoria. As to
whether that is right or wrong has to be deter-
mined. Section 92 of the Commonwealth Act
is still unchartered legal sea. Every case brought
under it would still have to stand on its own
facts, on decisions given up to the present, we are
informed that there is nothing under Section 92
which prevents a State from protecting its own
game or its own people no matter what the laws
are in another State. We maintain in regard to
water-rats, firstly, we protect them because they
are parts of our Australian fauna, and, secondly,
the need for protection arose when the skins rose
to a high value—Bss. was paid for skins under
the lap, and thirdly, water-rates were being killed
at a rate which would mean their extinction.
Mr. McNally. —l think I might set out our views
in Victoria in regard to kangaroo. We don’t have
an open season at any stage. The number of
kangaroo in Victoria are restricted in the popu-
lated areas, and these cover a large portion of
the State, so that kangaroo are getting compara-
tively scarce. In the far north-west and the
Mallee, and far north-east also kangaroo are very
prevalent. They don’t do a great deal of damage.
We do have a system of reporting by people suffer-
ing damage. They report to the local policeman
and he puts them on to our State Fisheries and
Game Department, where they apply for a permit
to destroy. If we have an inspector located within
reasonable distance from the area the complaint
comes from, he proceeds there and inspects the
damage, but if this is not possible, the local police
officer is requested to make an inspection and
report as to whether the permit should be granted.
We have been closely watching these permits
lately, particularly in areas close to the capital of
the State, and wherever possible, Mr. Clift and
myself go out and make an investigation of the
complaints and the damage which has occurred.
The damage which occurs in areas not far distant
is usually very light. In a number of cases we
have gone out, been told that damage has occurred
and that large mobs of kangaroo are seen, and
in the course of our investigation we have not
only not been able to see a solitary kangaroo,
but no signs of any kangaroo have been there.
The conclusion is that therefore the complaints
have been grossly exaggerated in most cases.
When the price of skins is high the application
for permits increase tremendously. Another
reason for applying for permits is a lot of people
get amusement and sport out of hunting kangar-
oos. Unless permits are closely supervised and
investigated thoroughly the position will be out of
hand and kangaroo will be entirely eliminated.
It has occurred in some areas of the State. You
would have trouble finding a kangaroo in certain
areas formerly well supplied. In the Mallee, there
are certainly a considerable number of kangaroos
up there, and from what Mr. Moorhouse says,
the season is open in South Australia. It seems
logical that if they are shooting them in South
Australia they would move over into Victoria.
If damage is occurring and they complain to the
Fisheries and Game Department their claims will
be investigated. If the damage is occurring the
residents are perfectly entitled to a permit to
destroy these animals, and it will be readily given.


The permit is usually current for something in
the region of three months. If the permit is
given this month (December) we say the middle
of February it expires. It depends on the number
of kangaroo for which the permit is requested
to destroy. If they ask only for two or three the
permit is limited in duration.
Mr. McNally '. —People have sometimes re-
quested a permit to destroy ten and have been
given a certain period, say three months in which
to do so, and they haven’t been able to do it.
Mr. Doivling.—l should hardly think it would
warrant it.
Mr. McNally. —No, that is the point. It doesn’t
warrant it. In the north-east of Victoria, adjoin-
ing New South Wales we have had no complaint,
but the New South Wales inspector on the Mur-
ray has informed us quite unofficially that he
has seen quite a body of people shooting kangaroos
in Victoria which have come over the border.
Unfortunately we have not been able to check
up on that.
Mr. Griffiths. —No, that is one of the things
that are unavoidable. Can you tell us Mr.
McNally, who issues these licences or permits.
Mr. Clift. —The Director of Fisheries and Game,
but under the authority of the Chief Secretary.
Mr. Griffiths. —There is no decentralisation?
Mr. Clift No, they are all issued by an officer
ot the Fisheries and Game Department.
. McNally. —All the police are asked to do
is to investigate—no permit is issued without
investigation or a satisfactory report from the
police or our own inspectors.
Mi. Dowling. —The same system applies in Tas-
mania.
Mr. Griffiths. —We are faced with requests that
there should be a quicker method of issuing these
permits, the argument being that where it is a
genuine case, such as a man in the far west who
says there has been a thunderstorm, and the
grass has grown up. The kangaroo flock in
straight away and to save the pasture it is neces-
sary to have a permit immediately. By the time
e application has been made, a report obtained
and sent to Sydney and a permit issued from
there the damage is done. That is the argument
with which we are presented.
Mj. Fraser. —ln Western Australia we have a
system whereby a local officer is empowered to
issue a short term permit in cases of urgency only.
1 hese permits are not issued indiscriminately and
not very frequently at that, but a limit of one
month is placed on such a permit. That gives
us an opportunity, in Head Office, to investigate
the case properly and see that there is no abuse.
I hat is something which might be worth while
considering in other States.
n r ’ Griffiths.- I think it would be possible to
deal with cases in that way. It has been suggested
m < m r V^ a^6 an official like a Stock Inspector
could have such an authority, but it would mean
an amendment of the Act because the power at
present is in the hands of the Minister and cannot
be delegated. I venture to suggest if you gave
a temporary permit, and in one month they came
back and said they_ had investigated the matter
and couldn t grant it, the damage would be done
to the animals by then.
Mr. Fraser. —Those cases are very infrequent,
and the total damage would be very slight.
Mr. Griffiths. —If the permit were abused then
you would have a marked man.
Mr. Fraser. —Yes.
Mr. Dowling. —Mr. McNally, in supplying the
permit, _ what is stated in the application for
permission to destroy wallaby or kangaroo—how
many do they state to get a permit for three
months ?
Mr. McNally. —Generally speaking, they write
and ask for a permit to destroy, without stating
how many. We would ask the local officer to
investigate and he would make a recommendation
as to the number. Generally applicants state an
excessive number when a number is requested.
Mr. Dowling.— Must a number be stated to give
a permit?
Mr. McNally. —lt is a condition, yes.
Mr. Griffiths. —In New South Wales it is neces-
sary to have a specified number.
Dr. Pearson. —lt seems to me that in regard to
the question we are now discussing there is to
a great extent a uniform policy in the long run
because, as far as I can gather, all States which
have spoken have a system of permits which we
have, too. Apparently in some States there is
no close season. Queensland has an open season
all the year round. It is a pity there is no Queens-
land representative here because I would like to
know how that affects the population of our native
fauna. Generally speaking, we all have the per-
mit system though it is worked slightly differently
m the different States, but we do not have a
uniform policy in regard to the close season and
that appears to me to be the fundamental point.
If you have two States overlapping in a big area
which has a common climate and other conditions
then obviously you cannot deal with the control
of the population of animals unless a common
policy is adopted by both States. Here in Tas-
mania we do not have this problem as we are
an Island State. If we decide upon a close season
in any particular year we still have the permit
system which covers the farmer who claims that
his crops are being damaged. It would be an
interesting point if w r e could compare the legisla-
tion in the differing States. If we could have
such a comparison in black and white it might
provide common ground on which to form the
basis of a discussion such as this, but it seems
to me if we go on discussing things in a hap-
hazard way as we have been doing we are not
going to do much good.
Minister for Agriculture. —l am pretty well of
the same opinion.
Mr. Laird. —There is one thing I would like to
know in reference to these subjects for discussion.
As i egai ds Section 1 whether there is any uniform
policy in regard to marsupials, trapped or shot
in the different States. Do you just call them
kangaroo whether or not there is anv specific
difference in the animals?
Dr. Pearson.—We do discriminate in Tasmania.


Mr. Laird. —Because a lot of these animals are
rare, and it is doubtful if the people who hunt
them know that they are rare. I am concerned
with this as a general Australian problem more
than a Tasmaian one. lam naturally a conservist,
but I would like to have the practical side of it,
and if anyone can give me any information I
would be grateful. For instance, there are
several different kinds of opossums in Tasmania.
The ring-tail, brush-tail and another one.
Dr. Pearson. —We have a list of animals, wholly
protected, partly protected and unprotected. Each
animal is called by its common name and its
scientific name so that when we have an open
season for animal or a group of animals we know
precisely what we are talking about.
Mr. Laird. —Who names them?
Dr. Pearson. —l do.
Mr. Laird. —What I am getting at is do the
people who trap these rare animals know they are
trapping rare and disappearing animals indis-
criminately. I have been a naturalist for more
than twenty years, and know the conditions
operating in Tasmania and the other Australian
States.
Dr. Pearson. —When you set a trap you do not
know what you are going to catch in that trap.
Mr. Laird. —That is true. Rare animals are
trapped. I saw five birds shot recently and two
of them were rare birds. I asked the people who
shot them if they knew the name of the birds,
and they did not know it. It is a uniform policy
regarding control that we want. We must know
what we are controlling.
Dr. Pearson. —l think this could come under
item 19.
Mr. Laird. —l maintain that my questions come
under this heading.
Mr. Moorhouse. —ln South Australia when we
say opossum we mean brush-tail or ring-tail.
Mr. Laird. —That means if a rare species were
shot it would not be known by name, but it would
go into a pool.
Mr. McNally. —ln Victoria a similar position
exists. We do not have an open season, therefore
it is not so important. We have the Large Grey
Forester Kangaroo and some minor ones, but the
main complaint is against the large Grey. Per-
mits are issued for it to be shot. There are
certain wallabies which are protected, and for
which permits are not given, they are known
by name—common and scientific, and no attempt
is made to trap them intentionally. If they are
killed it is unfortunate and nothing can be done
about it. Permits for an opossum means brush
or ring-tail opossum.
Mr. Laird. —Do you think that is a good idea.
It means a re-education of the people with refer-
ence to trapping them.
Mr. Dowling. —-In Tasmania we have a ring-
tail and brush-tail opossum open season at the
one time.
Mr. Moorhouse. —We have one kangaroo, the
white or albino. It is totally protected in South
Australia.
Mr. Laird. —l would like to ask Mr. McNally if
he would be so kind as to tell me the method
which is used in determining the granting of per-
mits and the type of investigation which is carried
out, and how it is done. It is important to me.
Mr. McNally. —There is a section dealing with
damage by Fauna to Agriculture—Section 8—
and I think it would come under that section.
It would be wise to leave it to be dealt with
when we come to that section.
Dr. Pearson.— lf there is nothing more to be
said on this subject I move that we go on to No.
2. I suggest that we ask one representative of
each State if he would be good enough to write
down the main facts regarding the open and
close season and the system of permits so that
we can get this material together and know what
we are dealing with and then we can have this
information before us on the last day and see
what arises out of it.
Mr. Dowling. —We could have conies of the
regulations of each State.
Dr. Pearson.—l would move that each State
be asked to put in a copy of its regulations with
regard to open and close season and the question
of permits.
Seconded by Mr. Dowling and carried.
Mr. Griffiths.—ls it suggested that this will just
be information exchanged and that as a result
of the study of it we may get somewhere?
Dr. Pearson. —ln the question we have just
been discussing (uniform policy) it is important
that two neighbouring States with a common
fauna should adopt similar regulations. If they
have entirely different regulations it is incumbent
upon those two States to get together and do some-
thing about it. We cannot make an order, but we
can make suggestions.
Mr. Moorhouse. —Victoria has no open season.
Mr. Hallstrom. —ls there a difference of opinion
as to hbw the skins are disposed of. So far the
protection side has not been discussed.
Mr. Laird. —l will support the member in those
remarks. Ido not think that has been discussed
at all.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l am very interested in pro-
tection. I think it would be a good idea if it were
brought out in this conference. In the first
instance there is the koala. We are trying some-
thing in New South Wales, and already some-
thing has been achieved in Victoria, but very little
m Queensland. There is work going on in South
Australia at Kangaroo Island, For instance at
Kangaroo Island, if I am correctly informed, a
number of koalas were released some years ago
without provision being made for their food. It
was later discovered that they made provision
for this by adopting a different type of tree. On
Kangaroo Island there is a very sizable colony
of koalas. In New South Wales we are up against
a very stiff proposition. We have discovered in
recent years that there are many colonies, one
of which has nearly 1000 animals. We would
like any information that would help us in the
preservation of these animals. We find in New
South Wales although people have been advised
for years regarding the preservation of the koala,
they still chop down trees with koalas in them
and take the young. There was one instance
recently where a tree was chopped down and the
mother was killed and the youngster was found
lying in the gutter with broken limbs. It is to
stop these happenings that we are turning our
thoughts. Perhaps the Committee could deal
with the matter.


Chairman. —We will now deal with Item No.
2 on the agenda.
Mr. Griffiths. —This item was placed on the
agenda by New South Wales at a suggestion .made
by one of the Preservation Societies—the Wild
Life Preservation Society of Australia, which is
a Member of the International Union for the
Protection of Nature. The International Union
for the Protection of Nature is a new Inter-
national Organization which was established a
little over twelve months ago at a Conference
held at Paris. At the conference there were repre-
sentatives of eighteen nations, seven international,
and 107 national organizations. At the confer-
ence the International Union was established and
a constitution was adopted. Briefly, the objects
of the Union are to promote and recommend
national and international action in respect of
(a) the preservation in all parts of the world of
wild life and the natural environment, ( b) the
spread of public knowledge about nature protec-
tion, (c) the promotion of an extensive pro-
gramme of education in the field jof nature pro-
tection, and ( d ) scientific research in relation to
nature protection. Its second object is to collect,
analyse, interpret and disseminate information
about nature protection. The membership of the
Union is open to Government and organizations
both national and international which are con-
cerned with the protection of nature, which, of
course, includes the protection of fauna. To give
some idea of the scope of the work of the I.U.P.N.
I might mention that the organization has had
its first conference—it was held in August of this
year at Lake Success, and was arranged in col-
laboration with UNESCO. Among the matters
discussed at the conference were the study, by
Teams of scientists trained in ecological methods,
of certain areas which would be considered suit-
able, with the object of developing proper and
adequate methods of investigation of the whole
problem. Also among the matters discussed was
the question of the necessity for a very wide
distribution of educational material, and there
the emphasis was laid on films concerned with
conservation matters.
Another matter discussed was the effect of
large-scale projects of the natural conditions of
the regions concerned, which should, I think, be
of very great interest to us on the other side of
Bass Strait because one of the largest scale pro-
jects ever undertaken in Australia is just being
begun on the Snowy River. Another matter dis-
cussed was the effect of the introduction into an
area of exotic species. I think that is something
we have discussed in Australia at various times,
and it is something that requires constant
attention. Again there was considerable discus-
sion on the necessity for obtaining and dissemi-
nating information concerning species that appear
to be threatened with extinction, a matter which
ties up with an item on our own agenda. Among
the fauna mentioned at that particular Conference
are two Australian species—in the birds is the
Australian Ground Parakeet, and amongst the
mammals is the Tasmanian Wolf.
There was some discussion at the conference
as to whether any such list should be prepared
at all because it was felt in some quarters that it
could not be complete and in some countries the
whole of the fauna was in danger of disappear-
ance. However, it was prepared and these two
species appear on the list. At the conference
certain resolutions were passed. Unfortunately
I have only one copy of them, which members
may see at any time. It has been felt that State
organizations concerned with nature protection
could gain a great deal by affiliation, or at least
some contact, with international organizations,
and I would contend that in particular there
should be a good deal of benefit to our State
organizations from contact with this particular
organization. It has been felt that the best
method by which the States could have that con-
tact would be for the Commonwealth Government
to in some way—l am not quite clear as to how
it could best be done—become affiliated with
the International Union. That membership
would entitle the Commonwealth to representation
and to a part in the work of the Union. I think
Australia has a big part to play in the work of
International bodies, because we have a fauna
that is undoubtedly unique, and therefore we
should have an important place in the world
matters. Membership would, too, bring the Com-
monwealth into contact with world opinion, and
world thinking on this whole question of nature
protection, and could help to bring about a reali-
sation of the obligations, both moral and cultural,
there should be to protect the national fauna.
This should lead to a preparedness on the part
of the Commonwealth to assist the efforts of each
State. Now the International Union has control
of a Library, which was established some time
ago and contains information collected from all
over the world. Membership of the organization
would mean that this information would be avail-
able to members, and the availability of that
information should be of great benefit to us who
are concerned with the protection of nature, so
that I think serious consideration should be
given by this conference to steps being taken
by the States, through the Commonwealth, to
affiliate with this International organization,
though just how it is to be done I am not very
clear. I should think it would be possible for
Australia to be a national member, but it is
usually not very easy for that to happen. First
of all we would have to move the Commonwealth
Government, and the actual affiliation of a Gov-
ernment itself with an International organization
usually takes a good deal of time, but it may
be possible for representation to be obtained
through a Commonwealth instrumentality, such
as the C.5.1.R., which has established at least
a token Wild Life Section, I don’t know which
would be the best method to adopt, but suggest
after discussion it may be possible to frame a
resolution to approach the Commonwealth Gov-
ernment with a view to some affiliation being
effected with the International Union for the
Protection of Nature.
Mr. Fraser. —l feel that this International
Union, whose formation is an indication that
there is a realisation at the international level
that there is great need for the protection of
nature is doing a very worthwhile job and in that
sense the State Departments concerned at least
should consider becoming members of the Inter-
national Union. Undoubtedly all States have
had the same correspondence from the Union as
I have received, and no doubt have also received
the first two copies of their publication “ Pro
Natura”, providing quite a lot of useful and
valuable information. The suggestion made by
Mr. Griffiths that this affiliation should be a Com-
monwealth Government affiliation might be con-
sidered in the light that in relation to the pro


tection of fauna the Commonwealth under its
constitution has no powers whatever. Although
there is a Wild Life section of C.5.1.R.0., it is
not concerned with the conservation of fauna,
all its efforts being directed to the destruction
of the rabbit. It may later go into the question
of conserving fauna, but I feel that it might be
better for the States themselves to become mem-
bers of the Union, and I would like to see a
recommendation go through that the States give
consideration to the question of applying for
membership. I have read the constitution of the
Union very carefully, and cannot seen anything
to stop the States or the State Departments
becoming members. Australia has one sole
representative, that is, the Wild Life Preservation
Society. I am very doubtful indeed whether that
Society has sufficient funds to send a represen-
tative to any meetings of the Union in another
part of the world. I am positive they were not
directly represented at Lake Success in August—
there was no representation at all from Aus-
tralia—but even if we were represented it would
not necessarily mean that each State would have
to send a delegate to any meetings of the Union
but the States could select one from one State
or another to represent all States. I have no doubt
at all that we could find one officer to represent
the interests of all States. I feel the States would
be better as members than the Commonwealth
Government because the latter has no legislative
powers concerning the protection of fauna at all.
The power reposes in the States and the States
should be represented, I would like to suggest
that you consider it along those lines and pass
a resolution to the effect that a recommendation
be made to each State.
Mr. Hallstrom. —We did approach the Prime
Minister and ask him to put aside a sum of
money for the preservation or breeding of rare
specimens of Australian fauna that were likely
to become extinct, and although the request
received kindly consideration from the Prime
Minister it was referred back to the States as
he had no power to deal with the matter. There
it rests at the moment with the State Govern-
ments.
As far as being represented on this Overseas
Conference is concerned, it is a very good idea
to be in touch with world affairs and our Zoo-
logical Societies and Zoos have recently received
from Sweden information, and an invitation to
a conference of ornithologists to be held in
Sweden. We have accepted that invitation and
will be represented there in June of next year.
Some most valuable information came from
Sweden, but it does not touch fauna generally and
is concerned only with avifauna. There was
mooted a big conference in Paris in connection
with the preservation of fauna, but unfortunately
we have had no information as to when it is to
be held. It is a different one from that referred
to by Mr. Griffiths. There is one thing we must
guard against, however, and that is not to give
away the government of our fauna to some other
foreign organisation. We can learn from them,
or accept their assistance, but I think our primary
duty is to protect our fauna ourselves, and give
them in return all the information we can about
them. It is hopeless for them to try and make
survive the Tasmanian Wolf or the Ground Para-
keet. They are peculiar to Australia, and unless
we act and act quickly, then any efforts made
for their survival will be a failure. I don’t think
any good would come of an Overseas Conference
trying to do that job, I fully agree with being
represented at any conference, but not to let the
government of our own affiairs go out of our own
hands.
Mr. McNally. —What obligations would joining
this organisation entail. You have given us its
objects, but what would they require from us?
Mr. Griffiths. —I think the only real obligation
would be financial.
Mr. McNally. —ls that expensive?
Mr. Griffiths. —Well it is, rather. I don’t think
they are very financial. They provide for Govern-
ments with a population of less than five million
inhabitants, a subscription of 250 dollars a year;
that is fairly considerable. But apparently that
is not entirely fixed for they say that every
Government or institution is asked to join the
Union—each member is free to fix his own sub-
scription. The Union relies on the goodwill
of those joining it, but that figure I have just
quoted for Governments. Of course, organiza-
tions are on a very much lower scale—so dollars
a year.
However, I think that is the only obligation—
to do something towards the financing of the
scheme. The main obligation would, of course, be
a moral obligation to treat the Union as an
exchange for information. On the point that Mr.
Hallstrom raised, I think we have to remember
that with all these International Organisations
the decisions or resolutions that they carry are
invaluable, just the same as the resolution we shall
carry at this Conference, but that they are in the
nature of an expression of opinion only—they
can only be recommendations.
Mr. Moorhouse. —lf by uniting we can obtain
from world-wide organizations some basic prin-
ciples upon which they have ensured the existence
of some of their disappearing animals that in
itself would be a very fine thing, but I still main-
tain we must keep within our own organization.
We have in South Australia, regarding disappear-
ing animals, the fox, which is proving a tremend-
ous menace. Could the organization tell us how
best to get rid of it?
Dr. Pearson. —l am a little sceptical about
world-wide organizations. They spend money
and do a lot of talking, but I am not sure that
they do much good. I am thinking of UNESCO
in particular. They are spending an enormous
amount of money; they have a big staff and Aus-
tralia is spending a good deal of money on it.
If we are to go outside Australia for advice I
would feel inclined to compromise on the sugges-
tion. Why not join the Society for Preservation
of Fauna of the Empire. It has been running
for many years and has a very good journal, and
is doing good work. I think it would be in much
closer touch with us than the other one, because
their interests are restricted to the British
Empire, or what used to be the British Empire,
and while I support heartily the idea behind the
suggestion I would prefer that we restrict our-
selves, if possible, to this Empire Society. But
whatever decision is made I think it is a matter
of first importance that Australia should take
immediate action in regard to fauna protection.
We have got to teach our people the importance
of our native fauna. In Tasmania we have done
some educative work in the schools. It is of no use
trying to educate the grown man, but we can, at
least, teach the young people to protect the bush
animals.


Mr. Griffiths. —On the question of affiliation that
Dr. Pearson suggested I think we would gain a
good deal by affiliation with that particular body,
but at the same time I think that a world-wide
organization could give us a good deal more. We
do not know where the best information is to come
from, and it may be that it can come from
countries outside the British Empire. There are
many other advanced countries, such as the
Scandinavian nations which are outside the
British Empire. We can learn a good deal from
many countries outside the British Empire. I
think there is an obligation on our part not only
to do our primary job, that is to protect our
native fauna, but to supply information and to
exchange information. I would just repeat what
I said before that this International Union has
already acquired a considerable amount of infor-
mation which it took over from a voluntary
world-wide body which had been in existence for
some time, and that information would be avail-
able to us. Just one other point, and that is on
the question of the best method of affiliation. I
agree with Mr. Fraser that it would be desirable
for any State which felt that it would like to be
represented to have a direct representative, but
I am not very sure whether that is possible, or
whether Western Australia for instance, would
be considered a Government entitled to affiliation.
I would be prepared to move a resolution recom-
mending the States to give consideration to affili-
ation with the International Union for the Pro-
tection of Nature either direct or through the
Commonwealth Government. I was prepared to
move a resolution along those lines, but Mr.
Hallstrom has suggested that I might widen the
scope of the resolution and recommend the States
to obtain affiliation with International organiza-
tions, such as the International Union for the
Protection of Nature and the Society for the
Preservation of the Fauna of the Empire.
Seconded by Mr. McNally and carried.
Item No. 3,— Re-afforestation projects and their
influence on bird life. ( N.S.W .)
Mr. Griffiths. —This is a matter which I think
should be of interest to everyone because I think
we are all agreed that the bird life in many areas
has been considerably diminished by the cutting
down of trees. I recall a statement made by one
of our forestry men in New South Wales. He
gave evidence before a Fauna Investigation Com-
mittee some five years ago and on his return
from a visit to the western district of New South
Wales in which he travelled some hundreds of
miles he said he saw more birds in one day in
the near suburbs of Sydney than he had seen in
two months in the Western district. I think the
cutting down of trees has caused a great decrease
in the bird population. In the west of New South
Wales, and this applies to other portions and
to other States, the balance of nature is very fine
and can be easily upset. Bird life diminished
very quickly and substantially when water was
poisoned with the object of poisoning rabbits. It
also diminishes very quickly when the trees are
cut down and we cannot hope to restore that bird
population if we do not plant more trees. I think
the conference might express an opinion on that
conservation of forests and re-afforestation
schemes which are very important.
Dr. Pearson. —l think this problem is very
important because it is one of the things that we
have aimed at in establishing these sanctuaries
such as National Park. You have got the natural
conditions in a large area of virgin bush. You
have got the plants and the animals. If you take
any one of these things away you upset the whole
thing. You cannot separate flora and fauna in
regard to the environment in which the animals
are living.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think Mr. Griffiths was refer-
ring to those trees near the city. The general
cutting down of trees near a city produces a large
area where there are few birds—the birds mainly
just disappear. You have a second stage where
trees are planted in the gardens, and many birds
return. Other birds are affected. For instance,
the kookaburra thrives where land is partly clear,
whilst finches are driven out and many of the
smaller birds. The magpie you will find abundant
in cleared parts; the peewee takes over certain
areas, and as the country is opened more, and
becomes more or less open forests the other birds
take their place. Then again you find that as
the bushland grows up the birds that were
originally disappearing are returning. The cut-
ting down of trees does affect bird life very
considerably,
Mr. Moorhouse. —We generally leave the word
“re ” off our afforestation. We have big affores-
tation programmes, and thousands of acres have
been laid down, particularly Pinus, by the Fores-
try Department; in the South-East particularly.
These are supplying South Australia with quite
a big percentage of its softwood requirements.
We have found that the black cockatoo, mainly in
the South-East, becomes a tremendous humbug,
and we have to destroy him. The last annual
report of the Woods and Forest Department states
“ Parrots were again in large numbers and
destroyed the red ash in the green stages ”. They
mentioned “ Shooting was effective in keeping
them in check ”. As they were shot at they took
off and went to some neighbouring forest, to be
shot at there, but by that time the seeds had
grown. We are keen on afforestation projects,
but are also keen on setting aside large reserves
in various parts of the State. We are keen on
afforestation, and the leaving of trees. We get
considerable numbers of birds. I agree with the
suggestion.
Mr. McNally. —ln Victoria we have in mind the
question of trees required by the birds. The
Victorian State Forestry Commission has done
a fine job in this direction; they have the large
pine forests, and a separate section of the Depart-
ment looks after the natural forests. Every effort
is made to preserve the situation, and we agree
entirely with what Mr. Griffiths has to say,
Mr. Dowling. —Does pine forest apply to this?
Are birds in them?
Mr. McNally. —Not a great many. There are
many in the natural forest.
Mr. Fraser. —We find cockatoos a pest in the
pine forests. There is very little other bird life
there.
Mr. Stancombe. —Every State in the Common-
wealth at the present time is keen on the re-
afforestation business, realising how important
is the replanting of trees, but I am of the opinion
that Item No. 12 on the agenda deals with
recommendations to our respective States regard-
ing the necessity of making more sancturies
if we want to protect bird life.


Dr. Pearson. —l suggest we bracket 3 and 12.
Mr. Griffiths. —I do not agree with that. I am
thinking here of a re-afforestation scheme which
does not necessarily mean the establishment of
a State Forest. I particularly refer to the West-
ern District of New South Wales where there has
been a good deal of destruction of trees, and it
is possible to plant trees along rivers and creeks
that are not necessarily a sanctuary, national
park or a Forestry reserve. Re-afforestation of
such an area does not mean planting whole forests,
but it does mean planting trees, so I would dis-
associate this item from that relating to sanc-
tuaries. I have mentioned a re-afforestation
scheme, which does not necessarily mean a forest,
but if there were a resolution I would repeat what
I said at the beginning, that the resolution should
read “ That the preservation of trees and tree-
planting schemes are very important for any
scheme of fauna and flora conservation ”.
Mr. Rainbird. —The native trees grow them-
selves in Tasmania.
Chairman. —When leases under instruction by
the Forestry officer are burnt off a natural
growth comes, but if a Myrtle forest was burnt
the other timber would grow first. It (Myrtle)
has to have a certain amount of natural protec-
tion, and needs a damp locality.
Mr. Hallstrom. —Will it come up later?
Chairman. —Yes, years later.
Mr. Rainbird. —Under this resolution would it
be a good idea if each society forward each Depart-
ment a recommendation?
Chairman. —For re-afforestation, yes.
Mr. Griffiths. —As far as New South Wales is
concerned if this resolution came from this con-
ference it would be a matter for me to transmit
it to the appropriate people. We have a Depart-
ment of Conservation, which includes a Forestry
Commission.
Chairman. —The resolution of this conference
would be that this conference recommends to the
State authorities re-afforestation.
Mr. Griffiths. —I assume that is so.
The conference adjourned until 9.30 a.m., Bth
December, 1949.
Conference resumed at 9.40 a.m. on Thursday,
Bth December. Dr. Pearson in the Chair.
Item s. —lmportation of Fauna from other States.
(Victoria and Tasmania.)
Mr. McNally. —The subject of importation of
fauna from other States is one which has received
a great deal of consideration in Victoria. It is
not proposed to formulate any resolution or make
any motion in regard to this, but our object in
placing it on the agenda is to obtain the views
of the other States. All native birds and animals
in Victoria come under Section 9 of our Act, and
those that are imported into the State and which
are native to the State are in a state of complete
protection. People import birds into the State
on occasions, and if the bird is one of our native
birds it cannot be legally retained. There is
a loophole to this, however, in that aviary-bred
birds, even though they may be native in this
State can be kept and that causes trouble. The
onus of proving the bird is aviary-bred lies on
the importers, but an assertion that it is difficult
to disprove. We have found that the majority of
introduced fauna have been detrimental to our
own fauna. For example, the imported starling
is quite valuable sometimes, but does displace
our own birds from nesting hollows where timber
is scarce. Other animals, such as the fox, rapidly
became a pest in this State, and we are faced
with the necessity of eliminating them. I don’t
include the importation of commercial animals
in a dead condition, such as crayfish. By fauna
in this case we are referring purely to live animals
and birds. I don’t propose to labor the matter
further at this juncture, but I would like to hear
the views of Tasmania, who have also put this
item on the agenda.
Dr. Pearson. —ln the case of Tasmania, impor-
tation of fauna from other States is quite clearly
laid down in the Act, and as I should explain,
the Act is being revised at the present time. Sec-
tion 20 reads:—
“ The Board may recommend to the Gov-
ernor to prohibit the introduction into this
State of any kind or species whatever which
it considers would be contrary to the interests
of the State to introduce.”
That puts the onus on the Board, and it seems
to us wrong to have to designate what should be
imported. We prefer to put it this way—anyone
wishing to import should first make an applica-
tion to the Board stating what they wish to intro-
duce, and the Board would then consider the case
on its merits. At present there are many loop-
holes. Anyone could introduce from the Mainland
any member of our fauna without asking for per-
mission, and that is a grave weakness in our Act
at the moment. Another section of the Act deals
with the importation of fox, dingo, &c. Of course
we are in a very different position from the other
States because we are an Island, and have a
natural control, and the dingo and the fox have
never reached Tasmania. Therefore, to that
extent, we are immune to the attacks of large
carnivorous animals.
Mr. Rainbird. —l cannot enlarge upon your
remarks except to say we have had some trouble
with the importation of different birds into Tas-
mania, also taking them out of Tasmania. We
definitely want some control by Act of Parliament,
and a fairly substantial sum against bringing
the fox in. As regards birds, opossum, &c., going
out of the State, they do get them out, and I
agree with Dr. Pearson that the amount of the
fine, or the term of imprisonment, should be
pretty heavy. That would have a deterrent effect
on people wanting to do the same thing. It is
up to Parliament, or perhaps the Board, to draft
an amendment to the Act designed to protect our-
selves. What the other States do I don’t know.
I think Victoria has a pretty strong clause in
their Act to prevent importation into their State.
We could take a copy of that and make it to suit
ourselves.
Mr. McNally. —Regarding the situation in Vic-
toria, if someone does wish to import fauna into
the State—for instance we have organisations
which might wish to bring animals from Queens-
land or South Australia—they apply to the
Director of Fisheries and Game for permission.
Such permission is only given with the greatest of
reluctance and upon personal representation being
made. If permission is given all is well, but if
the animal or bird is brought in without permis-
sion the animal or bird is liable to seizure and
the person bringing it in is liable to prosecution.


Mr. Moorhouse. —Unfortunately No. 1 on our
Agenda deals only with marsupials when it came
to uniform policy on control. In South Australia
we do give permission to take our protected birds
and animals and to keep them in captivity, from
which permits we get a considerable amount of
revenue. The amount is 2s. 6d. for £2 10s. worth.
We allow permit-holders to keep protected birds
in captivity, and most of them enjoy a happy life.
Dr. Pearson. —That really comes under Item
No. 4.
Mr. Moorhouse. —No, I am working round to
the point. Now a person who has legally obtained
a bird in South Australia and is transferred to
Victoria wishes to take all his belongings—his
tables, chairs and his bird. He arrives in Victoria
and the bird is seized. That is nearly as bad as
taking his child and putting it in an infirmary
or a home. He has lost his bird, which was part
of his family. We maintain that if it was legally
taken in South Australia he ought to be allowed
to keep it in Victoria. We allow any person who
has a bird legally taken in another State to retain
it in his possession if he comes to South Australia.
I think it would be well to have a uniform policy
on that in all the States.
Dr. Pearson. —There is one objection to animals
being kept in captivity by private individuals, and
that is, the animals may escape or may be liber-
ated, and in such a case may become a menace.
Mr. Moorhouse. —That imported bird is prob-
ably the same species as those already in our
State. It is our own native bird.
Mr. McNally. —lt may not be the same species.
Mr. Moorhouse. —Birds fly, and given the
slightest opportunity, fly back to where they find
favourable conditions.
Dr. Pearson. —Yes, birds fly, but you know as
well as I that you get a very definite restricted
distribution of lots of birds. They don’t fly beyond
their particular range, or if they do, they just
don’t exist any more.
Mr. Moorhouse. —We have found that the galah
has travelled across fifteen miles of sea to kan-
garoo Island. They were not there a few years
ago, but there is quite a number of them there
now.
Dr. Pearson. —Are you prepared to put a reso-
lution to the Conference?
Mr. Moorhouse. —My resolution is tied up also
with Item 1, and it is—
“ That this Conference views with con-
siderable concern the infringement of the
rule of free trade between the States now
noticeably committed by Victoria, and that
it be a recommendation from this Conference
that all States abide by section 92 of the
Commonwealth Constitution.”
Mr. McNally. —l propose that that be deleted
until a later date and discussed under a separate
heading. It is a matter which requires substantial
discussion.
Dr. Pearson. —lt comes under No. 5 I think—
Importation from other States.
Mr. Griffiths. —I certainly think it would be
completely superfluous for us to pass a resolution
which says, in effect, that we have to observe
something which we have to observe in any case.
Dr. Pearson. —lf Mr. Moorhouse desires to put
his resolution before the Conference we can then
discuss it, I think that is the best thing to do.
Mr. McNally. —Mr. Moorhouse refers to free
trade between the States. I think it would be a
most detrimental state of affairs if we were to
start trading in our fauna. We have in Victoria
framed our regulations in regard to the keeping
of fauna and moving it between the States, after
much consideration of the question. We have
in the past issued permits to individuals and
organizations to keep native fauna in cap-
tivity, but recently it has been found necessary to
withdraw all these permits for reconsideration.
Previously, when a man had been given a permit
to keep animals or birds, that permit lasted
indefinitely. That man was at liberty to take
an animal; then if the animal died we had no
check on it and he could take another, and keep
on taking them. This section is to be amended
so that a yearly permit will be issued, which, if
not renewed each year, will elapse. That will give
us control over the permits. Furthermore, it is
a policy of our Department that permits will not
be issued to individuals but only to scientific
bodies and organizations who give an adequate
reason for keeping native fauna. We have found
that people who have been keeping fauna—birds
and animals—have not been keeping them in the
best of conditions. People have commercialised
the native fauna in rather a disgraceful way.
They have kept them in captivity and used them
for commercial purposes without any considera-
tion for the birds or animals. Furthermore,
people take these native fauna and keep them for
a while and look after them, then after some time
they cease to be interested in them and the animals
languish and die through lack of attention.
Others start in a small way, with a small number
of native fauna; they breed them up, particularly
birds, and ultimately are found to be keeping quite
large numbers. There is a provision in the Act
whereby native birds which are aviary-bred
are free from control. If you can prove that the
birds in your possession are aviary-bred, and
you are personally responsible for their pro-
duction you are at liberty to do what you like with
them (subject of course, to the provision of the
R.S.P.C.A.). It is rather difficult to disprove
that a bird is aviary-bred, and large collections
are likely to grow. In addition, we have had
cases of people keeping koala for example, in old
water tanks without proper attention. They have
been seized, of course, when discovered. If pro-
tected animals, live animals, are introduced from
other States it will definitely be detrimental to
our system of control in Victoria. The people
who keep them can say “ It is not a Victorian
animal; it comes from South Australia, Queens-
land or some other State,” and unless we can keep
control over this importation it will get out of
hand.
Coming to the question of importation of skins
from other States, water rat, opossum, kangaroo
and other skins, that is trade in the sense of the
word. In Victoria we have a very rigid control
over skins. As is known most of the processing
of skins in Australia is done in Victoria. The
dyers and tanners in Victoria are good trades-
men; they do their work very well, and skins are
sent to them from all over Australia for treat-
ment. We use a system of branding which
involves stamping skins with a pin-punch. Skins
from other States are stamped with a rubber
stamp; sometimes with special ink as in Western
Australia, but we find, with those, that the dye
comes off in the tanning, and it is almost impos-
sible to tell what is the origin of the skin after
tanning. For that reason we would recommend
the introduction throughout of the pin-punch
as a permanent means of marking skins.


Now the possession of water-rat skins is totally
prohibited in Victoria. Water rats in Victoria are
quite common. We have a lot of them. Their
skins are valuable—up to 15s. a skin, perhaps
more. It is a small skin and that is a high price
for a skin of that size. A fur coat made from it
would cost about £4OO, so that is an indication
of the present value. We have a total prohibition
in Victoria, but other States, South Australia
for instance have not. Any fur dealer in Vic-
toria who has water rat skins in his possession
will have them seized and he will be liable to
prosecution and a fine up to quite a high figure—
not less than ss. and not more than £5 per skin—
a very high penalty. If skins come in from other
States that breaks down our system of control
which we found necessary to have because of
extensive traffic in water rat skins. Skins were
coming in which had been taken from young
rats, immature rats, and when it comes to the
stage of taking immature animals for their skins
the population of that animal is in danger of
extermination.
It has been maintained by some authorities that
water rats cause damage and are detrimental in
other directions, and that the control or killing of
the rats would be of benefit. In Victoria we have
a large irrigation system and the water rats breed
in the irrigation channels. If they were doing
damage anywhere it would be in those channels,
but we have not yet received any complaints or
protest about it from the Water Supply Commis-
sion.
Now that the situation is in hand and there is
a total prohibition on water rat skins, things are
settling down, the rats are breeding up and we
have been enabled to keep an item of our fauna
which is a native, and which we value.
This proposal of Mr, Moorhouse regarding the
interchange of animals and animal products
between the States should, I think, be voted out.
It would be a resolution of this Conference which
I do not agree with for the reason stated, and I
will ask Mr. Clift if he has anything to say in
regard to it.
Mr. Clift. —I can only speak on the legal aspect,
and I think as the matter now stands the thing
is first of all to find out whether Section 92 of the
Constitution Act over rules Section 9 of the Game
Act. The Crown Solicitors of Melbourne and of
Tasmania have had considerable correspondence
on the matter of water rat skins from Tasmania,
and they mutually agreed that the Victorian Act
stood insofar as we do not prohibit the sale of
rat skins. What we do is prohibit the possession
of them. There have been several cases before
the Courts. There was the notorious Queensland
cattle case. Queensland refused to allow cattle to
be taken from Queensland to New South Wales,
and it was held by the High Court that they were
within their rights. There was also the New
South Wales case in which a firm of trawlers
had in their possession underweight fish taken in
Tasmanian waters. The State Full Court held
that the New South Wales Act applied to those
fish. I do not see how anyone can say we are
infringing the provisions of Section 92 until it is
tested. While on the subject I would like to
mention that we did not destroy the crayfish. K;
They go to hospitals. ” |
Mr. Moorhouse. —The same thing.
Mr. Rainbird. —On the water rat position I
cannot see why they cannot be allowed in. Any
kind of skins from Tasmania to the Mainland
have to be accompanied by a certificate. The
tanner has to have a certificate. If he has a
Government certificate for 100 water rat skins,
then your Inspector could inspect his tannery
and the 100 skins would have the brand on them.
Mr. Clift. —They go away from the tannery,
minus the brand. As the Victorian law stands
we cannot allow them in, whether branded or
not.
Mr. Moorhouse. —lf we send this resolution on
do you think your State would amend the Act?
Mr. Clift. —We have Section 9 of the Game Act.
The only clear and distinct way to find out is to
test the Victorian law.
Mr. Rainbird. —Why does it apply to water
rat and not opossum.
Mr. Clift. —I have seen many skins from half
grown animals.
Mr. Moorhouse. —We are not concerned with
your problem, and you should not be concerned
with ours.
Mr. Clift. —We are not.
Mr. Moorhouse. —l do not agree with a uniform
policy. We are concerned with our own problems.
In South Australia we can take legally opossum,
kangaroo and water rat. All the skins that go
out of South Australia carry with them the permit
of the Fisheries and Game Department.
Mr. Clift. —Every action on infringement of
Section 92 has got to stand on his own facts.
Mr. Griffiths. —In New South Wales under the
Fauna Protection Act all species, with the excep-
tion of pests, are protected and it is illegal for
anyone to sell, buy or have in his possession any
protected fauna, but the Act also provides that
the Minister by licence may permit fauna to be
imported from any State or from any country
outside the Commonwealth, and the same section
of the Act mentions that this restriction is to
be construed subject to the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act; so that the proviso
is there.
Mr. Hallstrom. —lf an animal were protected
in South Australia would you let it go to New
South Wales without a permit? Say for instance
some dealer purchased a bird protected in South
Australia, are you going to raise any objection?
Mr. Moorhouse.— The same applies to New
South Wales.
Mr. Griffiths.— Might Igo a bit further. The
water rat question of Victoria raises an issue,
and I think something similar might occur in
New South Wales. In New South Wales the
water rat is protected, but we do not prohibit
water rat skins coming from another State pro-
vided the other State permits the export of those
We have in our Act a provision similar to
the Victorian provision, but in our case it is for the
platypus. There is a prohibition on the sale of
platypus skins and platypus eggs. Ido not know
the position in regard to the platypus in other
States, but it is quite possible they are very plenti-
ful in another State. There might quite possibly
be an open season in Tasmania or South Aus-
tralia for the platypus, and I can see we might
faced with exactly the same position with which
Victoria has been faced with the water rat. We
[say it is illegal to sell a platypus skin in New
South Wales.


Dr. Pearson. —We have the same thing here.
The platypus is wholly protected by law, and
is on the increase.
Mr. Griffiths. —We may have to have that
tested. It may not be legal to prohibit the sale
of platypus skins. I just do not know. I think
it would have to be tested at law. I have sym-
pathy for the idea of free trade, but after all,
the fundamental aim of each of us is to protect
the fauna in our own States, and I think that,
generally speaking, the responsibility should be
on the exporting State. It may be, of course,
that there are cases when the responsibility
should be on the importing State, and that has
been considered in our Act and in the Queens-
land Act. Ido not know how much further we
could go. Queensland has gone further, and
actually prohibits export of fauna without per-
niission. The position in New South Wales is that
imports come from various States, and, where
an application is made to import birds, our job
is to see that the birds are well looked after
when they arrive. If the conditions are satis-
factory we issue a licence. We investigate each
case, and where the accommodation is satisfactory
and the people who are dealing with them are
reputable people, a licence is issued. I would
hesitate very much to support the motion in its
present form. Firstly, because I feel that we do
not know the whole story, and secondly, because
I think that if there is a contravention of Section
92 it is likely that it would have to be determined
by the Courts, and I do not think that can lay
down what are and what are not the States’
rights in this question.
Mr. Fraser. —l very definitely support the
proposition with reference to skins, but so far as
live fauna are concerned I am uncompromisingly
opposed to any such trade without the consent
of the State to which the fauna is being intro-
duced. We frequently get birds from South
Australia and New South Wales, and at odd times
from Victoria, and often they are not the type
of bird that we like to see flying about in
Western Australia. The notice of the despatch
of these birds is often received late, and they are
already in Western Australia before we know
they are on their way. We have an archaic Act
going back to 1913—the last amendment was in
1913. We now have new legislation under con-
sideration, which we hope will dispose of all
difficulties in this regard.
The introduction of live fauna is one matter
on which I would like to see uniformity through-
out the States, and there is definitely no uni-
formity at the present moment. In Western
Australia we now have the Kookaburra—he is
spreading very rapidly, and although he has
quite a lot of friends, with his jolly laugh, &c.,
he has quite a lot of enemies too, and it won’t be
long before we shall have seriously to consider
removing him from the protected list. Of course,
he is not indigenous to Western Australia. He
seems likely to become a pest. Then recently
we found three or four colonies of goldfinches—
until recently they had never been seen or heard
of in Western Australia. They evidently came
from the Eastern States as cage birds and some-
one apparently got tired of them and let them
loose. We are all agreed, I think that the exten-
sion of the range of goldfinches in any State
would not be to the best interests of the State.
We fortunately have no sparrows. We don’t
want the sparrow, and we want to ensure that we
don’t get him.
We feel, in relation to the skin situation, that
some of the States are too apt to pass legislation
which is useful from the point of view of the
Department and not of the people as a whole.
The fact is that in Victoria the water rat does
not receive protection by reason only of the fact
that water rat skins from other States cannot be
possessed legally. It is largely a matter of
Departmental convenience—it is easier for the
Department if the possession of water rat skins
from other States is prohibited, but I feel that
is not the sort of legislation which should be
adopted. I would like to urge the Victorian
people that, provided the skins concerned bear
marks or punches or whatever it is the Victorian
people themselves approve, to have their legis-
lation amended to allow the skins to be sold or
processed within the State of Victoria. I never
have been one to approve of making legislation
just because it happens to be convenient from the
Department’s point of view. I feel that we, as
a Fisheries and Game Department, have more to
do than that. We have to give the public what
they want, provided it does not do any great
damage to our resources, and certainly it does
not any damage to Victorian water rat resources
to allow water rat skins to come in from
Tasmania. I urge that the Victorian delegates
recommend to their Government that their legis-
lation be amended to allow properly branded
skins to come to Victoria.
Mr. Moorhouse. —lt is a general infringement
of what we in South Australia say is free trade
between States. Mr. Fraser has nicely put it
that taking skins from these animals in other
States cannot affect your water rat skins in any
way.
Mr. Clift. —In Victoria we are getting a lot
of blame because our Tanners are some of the
best in the world.
Mr. Dowling.— Tasmania have to send their
skins to London to be processed.
Mr. Clift. —Actually the trade in water rat
means only the processing in Victoria,
Mr. Doivling. —Processing is the difficulty. We
can’t send them to you, but I suggest if we brand
them as you require them to be branded we could
do our trade there. At the present time we could
get our skins over and back, and carry on the
trade.
Mr. Clift.—l can’t make any promises, but I
should say if your skins are properly branded
they would be allowed in for dressing only.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l don’t propose to say much
about water rats. The seizing of any article
belonging to me, if it were only worth sixpence,
I would strongly resent, and I would immediately
institute proceedings against you or the State
or person that had the audacity to take any
article belonging to me. To confiscate or destroy
any animal taken under a permit by me from
my State is unthinkable. It is wrong, and we
can go round the question as much as we like,
but we know well there have been cases under Sec-
tion 92 that have been tested in New South Wales
in regard to birds in possession and as a result
those birds have been handed back to the owners
of them under Section 92. I am referring now to
events of some years ago. I am going to refer
now to the birds. Our friend from Victoria
said that they were giving permits to established
organisations. Where do they begin? Who
creates the interest in the first place? Are you
going to say to a young man full of interest


“ You are not going to be allowed to do anything
because you are not a scientific institution or
organization?” I started out with birds many
years ago, as an individual, and did not belong to
any organization. Had the proposal now made
existed then I would have been refused a permit
in Victoria, and so the work I have done would
never have eventuated. Are you going to allow
those birds to remain in the bush the victim of the
fox, the cat and such like, to be destroyed for
ever? If so, you are doing a grave injury to our
fauna. I quote a case of an animal that is
extinct in a wild state —the Peru David deer.
They don’t exist in their natural habitat. There
was a war in China when these animals existed
only on the estate of the Empress of China. She
did allow a few males and females to go into
different parts of the World. The Boxer Rising
came along. Germans were billeted on her estate,
and killed and ate every animal there. They were
then extinct, but the Duke of Bedford knew there
were several specimens in different Zoos. He
bought them, took them to England, and found
that from seven animals purchased he had
only three that were capable of breeding. These
animals were carefully cared for, and were the
parents of a herd of nearly 200 animals now
on the Duke’s estate. During the last war some
people in England said “ Let us kill the Duke’s
herds for food ”. He resisted them, and the herd
survived. The Duke still feared that for some
other reason the whole herd might possibly be
wiped out. He is therefore distributing these
animals throughout the world so that they will
not be lost for ever. Some have arrived in
Sydney; some are going to Melbourne, and some
are in New York, and so the work of saving these
animals has begun. Are we going to say of our
animals (and there are many of them in Aus-
tralia nearly extinct) that we cannot allow people
to take them and put them in areas where they
will be safe because they are not a scientific
institution.
I understand that if I were to send some birds
into Victoria—and I speak of the Rock Pebbler—
you would take possession of them. If I were in
Victoria, and they were coming to me after being
taken legally in the state of origin, they would not
take possession of them without a solid fight.
Mr. McNally. —As long as they were aviary-
bred we would allow them.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l was at a Conference in New
South Wales where a representative said that
“ we will fight this thing throughout Australia
and force the other States to come into line with
this prohibition ”. I see signs of it here today.
For instance, if we can see that an aviary, before
a bird is allowed to go into it, is a proper aviary
as is done in New South Wales, then let the
man or woman capable of doing scientific work
be encouraged and given liberty to keep and
study them. Only recently you cancelled all the
permits in Victoria, and as a result no one is
entitled to handle birds now. I make this plea
in regard to people who want to keep birds. I
fear that otherwise many rare species will dis-
appear if it is said that they cannot be held
under any circumstances.
Mr. McNally. —No, we don’t say that.
Mr. Hallstrom. —lt is happening.
Mr. Clift. —We want to see avicultural interest
protected. I think co-operation between the
States will go a long way.
Mr. Moorhouse. —May I ask only one question?
It has arisen since Rock Pebblers were mentioned.
They are destroyed annually under permit in
South Australia, because they are damaging fruit.
Would you prohibit the importation of one of these
birds into Victoria?
Mr. McNally. —Yes, if not aviary-bred.
Dr. Pearson. —We will now consider Item 6 on
the Agenda.
Control of the Introduction of Fauna from
Overseas.
This is submitted by Victoria, so I will ask Mr.
McNally to speak on the subject.
Mr. McNally. —Some of what we have to say
upon this subject has already been said. There is,
of course, the health aspect, in that overseas
animals are liable to carry diseases which are not
endemic to this country. The only control we
have over overseas fauna is through the Customs
Department, and we must exercise it through the
Customs Department. For instance, horses from
America are not allowed in Australia because of
certain diseases which do not exist here—for
example, Glanders. We have in Victoria a biolo-
gist who has been appointed to investigate the
relationship of introduced animals to our own
fauna, and until we have established existing con-
ditions we do not wish to have any overseas fauna
imported. It may well be that imported fauna
may upset and displace the balance of our native
fauna, and we wish to avoid that under all circum-
stances. An animal would be subject to the closest
possible investigation before we would allow its
importation. There have been no recent cases of
imported fauna into Victoria—there have been
none for a considerable time. In early days some
importations were made—deer, for example,—
which has now become quite a pest. English
Perch were also introduced in the early stages
and they are now causing quite a disturbance
among our native fish. One is liable to a penalty
if English perch is used as bait in certain waters,
mainly to prevent the spread of it. In this regard
we do not wish to propose any motion, but we
would welcome the views of other delegates on
the subject.
Mr. Griffiths. —I think, Mr. Chairman, that the
position at present is rather an easy one from the
administrative angle, at least the administrative
angle of the State. In New South Wales as I have
stated before, the importation of fauna is pro-
hibited except with the permission of the Minister,
and that is given by him only when birds and
animals are going to a Zoo or scientific institution,
or where there is no danger of their becoming
pests. Just at present, however, things are rather
easy, because under Quarantine regulations and
under the Customs Prohibited Imports Regula-
tions there are practically no birds or animals you
can import. All birds are prohibited, with the
exception of those from New Zealand, or where
they are going to a Zoo.
Mr. Hallstrom. —That is not correct now. The
position was that no birds other than those from
New Zealand or New Guinea were permitted to
enter, but that decision has now been reversed
and birds are allowed in from America, Africa,
New Zealand and many other parts of the world.
It has been agreed not to ask the Quarantine
Department to give us anything of a poultry-like
nature because of poultry disease, and no birds
of that class come in,


Dr. Pearson. —WLen you say “ poultry ” do you
mean game birds?
Mr. Hallstrom. —Yes; ground birds, eating
grain, but the birds of the tree-tops are not
affected. Private persons cannot bring in birds
or animals of any kind.
Mr. McNally, They want to.
Mr. Hallstrom. —Well, they can’t get them.
Mr. Griffiths. —I don’t know if other delegates
are faced with the same thing that we in New
South Wales are faced with—requests from people
who want to bring birds into the country. At
present it is easy for us. We don’t have to
refuse; we let the Quarantine people do that. The
position may alter, of course; I don’t know. You
can’t bring Yorkshire canaries from England.
Dr. Pearson. —l think it is better to be on the
hard side than the easy, in these things.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think this question is hardly
worth our discussing. It is a Quarantine matter,
and they have it well in hand.
Dr. Pearson. —There is a danger in this matter,
to my mind. Quite a responsible body might get
birds for a Zoo, but very often some of the birds
escape. We have had a very bad case in Tas-
mania, of the blackbird. That used to be in the
Zoo, but it was liberated, and has become now
a serious economic menace as regards the small
fruit. There is also another point which concerns
me very much. It is the question of the permit—
the original permit—which presumably comes
from the Commonwealth.
Mr. Hallstrom. —Yes, it does.
Mr. Pearson. —The States have no control.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think they would have.
Mr. Griffiths. —The Commonwealth would not
give a permit for importation without the consent
of the State. It is very well tied up.
Dr. Pearson. —There is this trouble. The State
might say, we agree to a bird coming in, but if
the bird escapes it might affect every State in
the Commonwealth.
Mr. Hallstrom. —They have it very well in hand.
It is very well controlled by the Quarantine
Department and the Customs. Moreover, the
States themselves can make a recommendation.
Mr. Griffiths. —The procedure is that even when
birds or animals are coming to a Zoo the Customs
Department does not release them until the State
gives a permit. That permit is presented to the
Customs.
Dr. Pearson. —Do you think it would be of use
if this Conference sent to the Commonwealth
Government urging them not to slacken control?
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think it would be a very
grave mistake to do that. I would not agree to it
under any circumstances without the Zoos being
fully represented here.
Dr. Pearson. —We must not forget we are con-
cerned primarily with the protection of native
fauna. Zoos are not interested in that; they are
more interested in the exhibition of exotic forms
of life, and I don’t thing we should take much
notice of that.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l differ from your view there.
I think you should, and as the representative of
the greatest Zoo in Australia I voice my opposition
to your remarks.
Dr. Pearson. —Well then, we are on opposite
sides in this matter, but I would stress that the
bodies which are represented around this table are
concerned with one thing only—the protection of
native fauna. However, we will agree that to
write a letter to the Commonwealth Authorities
might be wrong. Still, we are dealing also with
the effect on our native fauna of the importation
of exotic animals—the blackbird, rabbit, &c.
Mr. Hallstrom. —Oh, that is ancient history. It
is easy to put these restrictions on institutions
like the Zoos, but it would be very hard for the
Zoos to exist or have any value to the public if
all these restrictions are put on them. We have
ample restrictions now, and all should be fully
aware of what may or may not be done. We
co-operate, and do not ask for permission of any
animals or birds which would become a pest.
Dr. Pearson. —ls it your wish that we do not
discuss this point any further?
Mr. Hallstrom. —l don't think we should discuss
it any further.
Items 10 and 11.— Steps Taken to Conserve Native
Fauna: Species Showing Serious Decline
and Causes.
Dr. Pearson. —l suggest we take Items 10 and
11 now, because No. 10 is going to be spoken to
by Mr. Laird and he may not be able to stay
long,
Mr. Laird. —Gentlemen, I shall have to ask for
some latitude on this matter. I propose to speak
on two problems on behalf of the organisations
which I represent. One is a matter which I think
should invite the attention of everyone here. It
is about the Antarctic fauna at Macquarie Island.
I have been asked by the Tasmanian Field
Naturalists Club and by the Hobart Walking Club
to speak before you on matters concerning Tas-
manian fauna and more adequate steps to pro-
tect our State fauna. Before going into the
matter I should like to state what our Clubs are
doing. The Field Naturalists Club consists of
some members who are skilled naturalists and
scientists, and it may be said without fear of con-
tradiction that, with the Museum authorities,
we are the sole means of collecting and disseminat-
ing public views on our native fauna. It works
with scientific methods, and can be said to be
a scientific body. The Hobart Walking Club is
closely associated with it. In many cases mem-
bers have gone far afield into the country, and
they are well qualified to speak on fauna problems.
It is not really a strictly scientific body but it
possesses scientific members, and has a scientific
outlook. We wish to say quite definitely that the
present constitution of our Animals and Birds’
Protection Board is, from a scientific point of
view, most inadequate.
Mr. Griffiths. —I don’t know if this would be a
matter for us. It would be purely for the local
body concerned.
Dr. Pearson. —l was getting rather perturbed
as to the line Mr. Laird was taking. It was my
intention personally to deal with the subject, but
I understood Mr. Laird was going to cover the
same ground. He is not a member of the Con-
ference but was invited to attend as an observer
and representative of two important organiza-
tions. However, it is a matter for the Conference
to say whether they will hear him. Do you feel we
are rather going outside the scope of our discus-
sion?


Mr. Griffiths. —If it is a matter where the
organisations feel that the protection laws of
Tasmania need some revision it would be prefer-
able for that to be treated as purely a local matter,
but if there is something that may help all of us
in our work I would say “ go ahead ”.
Dr. Pearson. —Mr. Laird, you were beginning
to criticise the set-up of the Animal and Birds’
Protection Board of Tasmania. That would really
be outside the province of this Conference.
Mr. Laird. —l am not criticising. I have been
asked to present the views of the organizations
I represent, and I think everyone in this Confer-
ence has something to gain from what I have to
say. If they prefer not to hear it I will find other
means of letting them know.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think we should accept that
challenge. I think if Mr. Laird is willing to
prepare a pamphlet and give us one personally
it would be better. I would like to have it.
Mr. Laird. —l would be pleased to do that, Mr.
Hallstrom. As you Gentlemen are not prepared
to listen to me I think the best thing I can do is
withdraw. I mean, you haven’t heard me. It is
a prior kind of judgment.
Mr. Hallstrom. —lt is not a judgment. We are
willing to hear what you have to say. I am sure
we may learn a lot from it.
Mr. Griffiths. —We would be very happy to hear
it but our time is very limited.
Mr. Laird. —lt is a very urgent matter as far
as Tasmania is concerned.
Dr. Pearson. —lf you have any remarks to make
on the general principles of conservation as it
affects the whole of the States, and based upon
what we and you know of Tasmania, I think it
might be of value for the Conference to hear it,
but you should not go into the question of the
set-up of the Fauna Board. This is not the
place to discuss that. You will appreciate that
we have a very long agenda, and we have only
another day in which to complete it, so if you
would please concentrate on the one problem we
well hear it if you are prepared to do that.
Mr. Laird. —l would like to speak on the steps
taken to conserve the native fauna. Both the
organisations which I represent state quite clearly
that the steps taken to conserve our native fauna
are inadequate. Scientists are not adequately
represented. The only scientific person on the
Board is Dr. Pearson. We wish to say that until
a biologist is employed by our Fauna Board we
will not have any proper information. We would
like to point out to other members of the Confer-
ence from other States that it would also be a
very wise thing to employ a biologist to clear up
these matters for them. In many States the work
of controlling the fauna is carried out by a num-
ber of people who have had a great deal of experi-
ence in administrative work but who have prac-
tically no knowledge of the scientific side.
Mr. Moorhouse. —South Australia has a Master
of Science in charge of its Department; so has
Victoria.
Mr. Griffiths. —We have on our Fauna Pro-
tection panel the Professor of Zoology from the
Sydney University, a Mammologist and an Orni-
thologist.
Mr. Hallstrom. —ln addition, there are a num-
ber of other Professors from the University whom
we co-opt.
Dr. Pearson. —This is a very important point,
and I myself have felt very strongly about it. In
any matter dealing with the conservation of native
fauna you must check up from the scientific point
of view. Going back to Mr. Laird’s statement,
our Board here, and many other Boards are
very inadequately represented from the scientific
side, and if Mr. Laird has done no more than bring
this point forward we should welcome him today.
Mr. Laird. —l have a few other points I would
like to mention in relation to the scientific problem
of an ecological survey of fauna. We have not one
item of positive information of the extent of our
animal population, and we have no information
whatsoever on the conditions which cause seasonal
fluctuations in numbers. We have no information
as to the ecological relationship of the population
to the natural environments. We do not know
exactly what is happening, and I have been
asked to say, for your consideration, that until this
information is gained a halt should be called to
the open and close season so that this information
may be gained in a scientific manner, which we
do not think is being done at the present time.
There is another point—we feel that anybody
who has a mercenary interest, or any business
interest in fauna, should not be eligible for
appointment to the Board. It should be a person
with strictly impartial views. We feel very
strongly on this point, and would like to emphasise
it at this stage.
The only other point I would like to draw
attention to is Macquarie Island. The Common-
wealth Government has introduced goats to Mac-
quarie Island, and it is a very small Island, and
we know from a similar thing which happened
in New Zealand that goats are very destructive.
Macquarie Island is a great sanctuary for birds,
but these goats will eventually destroy the vegeta-
tion, and during the short time they have been
there they have made great inroads on it. We
think the people should make some representation
to the Commonwealth Government on this matter,
in the nature of a protest, to have this matter
reconsidered. Most people know that Macquarie
Island is in Australian territory, but it comes
under Tasmanian jurisdiction.
Mr. Hallstrom. —What do you mean by no
person who has a financial interest in fauna being
on a Fauna Board. Would you class a Zoo as
a financial interest?
Mr. Laird. —No.
Dr. Pearson. —l would like you to go back to
your two organisations and suggest to them that
they ask the Fauna Board to meet them in order
to discuss the points which we cannot allow you
to discuss here today. We appreciate your having
prepared this, and I would like you to meet the
Fauna Board and have a full discussion with
them.
Mr. Griffiths. —I think the question of scientific
surveys is important and it is not only applicable
to Tasmania but to all States.
Dr. Pearson. —lt is a big problem to get to the
bottom of these fluctuations, and we would require
many biologists in Tasmania alone.
Mr. Laird. —l think one would be enough in
Tasmania.
21


Mr. Moorhouse. —Besides the officer I mentioned
we have in South Australia a Minister for Agri-
culture who controls animals and birds. He has
a Committee known as the Flora and Fauna
Committee. This consists of officers of the Uni-
versity, Museum, and of all Government Depart-
ments concerned, namely, Lands, Forestry, Game
and Agriculture.
Mr. Laird. —That is very interesting to hear.
In the past our Organization has met with not
exactly blank refusal, but we have not been heard.
We would very much like to be heard. I would
like to thank Dr. Pearson very much, on behalf
of the Organization, for extending an invitation
to us to discuss this problem; and also to the
other members of the Conference for their kind-
ness in listening to me this morning.
Mr. Griffiths. —This item “ Steps taken to con-
serve native fauna ” seems to cover the whole
field we are concerned with, and I don’t quite know
what direction our discussion should take. All
that I will say is that in New South Wales there
was recently passed a new Act, called the “ Fauna
Protection Act,” which contains a number of
provisions which some States have had for some
considerable time, but New South Wales has not.
A number of provisions are new to New South
Wales legislation, and all aim at the preservation
of native fauna. The first is the establishment
of a Committee called the “ Fauna Protection
Panel,” which, subject to the direction and con-
trol of the Minister, is the authority for the
protection and care of fauna. The second is a
provision in the Act for the dedication of Crown
Lands as faunal reserves. These are to be under
the control of the Fauna Protection Panel, and
the object of the establishment of such reserves
is the protection of fauna, the propagation of
fauna, and the promotion of the study of fauna.
The next point is that the Panel has been charged
with the specific duty of engaging in educational
activities with a view to awakening and main-
taining a public appreciation of the value of bird
and animal life. Fourthly, the Act contains a
specific provision for the declaration of certain
species as rare fauna, and heavier penalties are
provided for destruction of species that have been
declared rare fauna. Further, the Act provides
for something that has been in existence in many
of the States for some time but not in New South
Wales—that is, the licensing of dealers—dealers
both in fauna and in skins. The object of that
is to ensure a greater measure of protection. That
is briefly the intention of the new legislation in
New South Wales, the intention to conserve native
fauna, and those are the new provisions as far as
New South Wales is concerned.
Mr. Fraser. —A brief statement of the situation
in Western Australia may be of use. The present
Game Act there, (and I don’t like the term
“ game ” in relation to fauna) dates from 1912-
1913. It is a very archaic piece of legislation,
but new legislation is at present under considera-
tion which we hope may be introduced during the
next session. However, as an administrative act
the Government some little time ago set up a
Fauna Advisory Committee, under the Chairman-
ship of myself, and consisting of two rather
renowned Ornithologists, both past Presidents of
the R.A.O.U, Dr, D. L. Serventy and Mr. H. M.
Whittell, Mr. L. Glauert, Curator of the Perth
Museum and Mr. A. R, Tomlinson, Chief Inspector
under the Vermin Act. The Vermin Act in West-
ern Australia is administered by the Agricultural
Department, and provides for the proclamation
of certain fauna as vermin, and the Game Act,
concerning the conservation of fauna, in such
instances has no effect. The proclamation of any
fauna as vermin imposes on the local authorities
the duty of destroying all such vermin in that
district, and moreover imposes on the landholder
the duty of destroying vermin on his holding.
I think that the set-up in Western Australia, while
perhaps not ideal, goes a long way towards pro-
viding the Department with information based on
scientific observation and knowledge. The three
scientific people whose names I mentioned are
experts in either ornithology or marsupials, and
the advice which they furnish is very useful indeed
in relation to conservation problems. At the same
time, as I said before, the legislation under which
we work is definitely not up to date, and we are
hoping for improvements in the near future.
Recently the Government, on the recommendation
of the Committee, appointed a full-time game
inspector, whose function is not merely to go
around and catch offenders but also to carry out
field observations in relation to the status of our
fauna—whether they be pest fauna, or fauna
which should be conserved. We have promised
all the support we can to Mr. Ratcliff’s new
division of C.5.1.R.0., and I am hoping that before
long a formula will be worked out which will
permit our man to carry out some of the field
work in Western Australia required by Mr.
Ratcliff’s section.
We hope at an early date to put on another
field man, so that the work may be of much
wider scope, and we hope, in the course of time,
that the information brought into the Department
will be most useful in determining future policy.
Mr. McNally— The position in Victoria, apart
from the protective legislation already discussed,
is as follows: We have our own system of
inspectors—full-time inspectors and honorary
inspectors. These are not concerned solely with
fishing, but also with the game aspect of the
business. They are Inspectors of Fisheries and
Game. Any infringement of the protective Act
on game is checked, and the offenders prosecuted
by the efforts of our inspectors. In addition, we
have set up a programme of investigation into
the State Fauna resources, on a long-term
arrangement, whereby we go into the question
of the fauna population in this State, the habits
and so on of the fauna. We hope to be able to
compile accurate information on these points over
a considerable period. Information comes in
slowly, and must be checked. Special surveys are
made of particular animals which happen to be of
importance at any stage, economically important
animals for example, and in addition, all native
animals in this State receive attention and infor-
mation is gradually compiled on them. We have
seasons for game birds which are strongly con-
trolled. We do not allow long seasons under any
circumstances, and existing seasons are under
review at the moment. The quail and duck
seasons, for example, have been opened and closed
in a rather arbitrary manner up to date. The quail
season in Victoria receives much criticism from
the shooters—many of whom require it to open
earlier and close sooner, or vice versa. Many
want a longer season. However, our investiga-
tions into the quail and its habits are proceeding,
and we hope before long to have a season fair to
the shooter and to the bird itself. The same
applies to ducks. In addition to the efforts we


are making in our own Department to protect the
State Fauna we are also endeavouring to have
teaching carried on in the schools to bring up the
younger generation with a respect for the State
fauna, and educating them so that they are
interested enough to protect it themselves.
Mr. Rainbird. —As regards Tasmania, the
Board is constituted of nine members—the Minis-
er for Agriculture is the Chairman; Dr. Pearson
represents the Associations and Societies inter-
ested in the science of Zoology; there is a repre-
sentative from the Farmers and Stockowners’
Association; one skin-buyers’ representative; I
represent the Sporting bodies; there is one from
the Trappers, and the Municipal Associations
have a representative. It is constituted by all
such Societies throughout Tasmania. Of course
the seasons are all set out. I think the Board
takes a pretty fair view of them. We issue per-
mits periodically to people, with regard to
kangaroo. It is very rarely that a permit is issued
for opossum. As regards kangaroo, we in Tas-
mania would, I think, probably have more than
all the rest of Australia. Kangaroo and wallaby
are classed together, and in some places, on roads
for instance are a danger. From, say, Launceston
to George Town you might come across five or
six kangaroo or wallaby in an hour’s run. Con-
sequently, we have to use our discretion in the
way of permits or seasons. The Board in its
constitution may be different in a lot of ways from
the Mainland Boards, but we work very well to-
gether, and although there may be room for other
representation, if we get a Board too big I think
it is unwieldy. I think we administer it pretty
well in Tasmania.
Mr. Dowling. —We have our sanctuaries too,
such as Lake St. Clair; we have 38,000 acres
there and 38,000 acres at National Park; in the
Tooms Lake district we have 56,000 acres and at
Ben Lomond 78,000 acres. For our birds we have
the Schouten Peninsula, the Derwent and South
Esk Rivers, Port Sorell and the River Tamar,
so we are well off that way, I think. We have
these places where our fauna can be wholly pro-
tected, and we have Inspectors fully employed
upon that work. Our Forestry rangers also assist
in the protection and conservation of our native
fauna.
Dr. Pearson. —That seems to have covered all
the ground. I would like to make one or two
remarks from the chair.
As Mr. Griffiths has pointed out, this subject
is at the back of every subject we are discussing,
and it is really the fundamental question, how
best to conserve our native fauna. As I have
always emphasised to our own Board, that is the
first and last point in our activities. It should be,
at any rate. The question of skin-buying and
disposal is purely an incident, or should be, in our
functions as a Board.
Yesterday the Attorney-General opened our
Conference. One of his important points was the
question of publicity. There are two things linked
up with that; first, education, which has already
been referred to. Our experience has been that
it is no good trying to educate the older people.
They are too set in their ways. We are, however,
making a very good effort to educate the children.
We have posters “ Do not kill these birds ” with
pictures—l hope tomorrow to show them to you—
and we have also issued some very good illustrated
stickers. It seems to me if you take that, along
with the Gould League of Birdlovers, which is
very strong in this State in the schools, I really
think we have every hope, in due course, of get-
ting the grown-up people of tomorrow to take
a pride in their native fauna. There is one thing
I would like to stress in regard to the general
fundamental things we have to deal with; that
is the question of predatory mammals. Some
are carnivorous; they live on the flesh of other
animals, and it seems to be the general opinion
in the community that if an animal is carnivorous
it should be exterminated. The answer to that is
that these animals have been living together in
close association for millions of years, and the
predatory species have not exterminated the
others; they have found their niche in nature;
they actually live in the same surroundings, and
one does not exterminate the other, so I think it
is a great pity when people say we should kill off
things like the cormorant because it feeds on
fish, or the wedge-tailed eagle because it some-
times gets a stray lamb. They forget that
these carnivorous animals are keeping down those
other members of fauna which might become a
pest if left to themselves too long. In America
they had a good example of that when they tried
to protect the deer by killing the mountain lion.
They found then that the deer increased in num-
bers and deteriorated in quality because there
was not the natural elimination of the unfit. All
these problems are well known to every one of
you, and it is our function and duty as a Board
to keep these things in mind in every step we take.
I think what Mr. Laird said had a good deal of
truth in it. The local Board has done and is
doing very good work along sound lines. At the
same time, it is not in a position to appreciate
some of the finer problems which we have to deal
with. That can only be done by people with a
biological background, so I do think that all
the State Boards should see to it that they have
a fairly good leavening of scientific people on their
Boards to help them over these particular prob-
lems.
Now let us go on to number 11.
Species Showing Serious Decline, and Causes.
This links up with the same thing.
Mr. Griffiths. —It is a Tasmanian item.
Dr. Pearson.—Yes. it is a Tasmanian item,
but I rather gather that it is a more serious prob-
lem on the Mainland than in Tasmania. Tas-
mania is very fortunate because, with one or
two exceptions, we have maintained our fauna at
a fairly good level. One of the important excep-
tions is the “ tiger ”, which is now almost on the
verge of extinction. In the press the other day
a statement was made giving a list of a dozen
animals in different parts of the world which are
on the verge of extinction and amongst them was
the Tasmanian “ tiger ”. It gave as the reason
the depredations of domestic cats and dogs which
had been liberated in the bush, and had eaten all
the food. That is nonsense. The domestic cat
which has gone wild is a dreadful menace in the
bush, particularly to bird life, and it would appear
that the people who drew up the list did not
understand local conditions. It is difficult to say
why the tiger is almost extinct. Until compara-
tively recently a reward was paid for the destruc-
tion of the “ tiger ” but that has been stopped
and there are thousands of square miles of suit-
able country in Tasmania for the tiger to breed
in, but for some undiscovered reason it is dying
out.


Then, of course, there is the Forester Kangaroo,
which is still found in Tasmania, but apart from
one or two big mobs they are very rare. They are
totally protected. There are some smaller mar-
supials, such as the Bettong, which are common
in a few districts, but on the whole they are not
easy to get.
Then I do believe we have saved the platypus
by having it wholly protected. It was almost
exterminated twenty years ago, but it is now
very common and later on it might be necessary
to reduce the numbers. I think wise depletion of
fauna, up to a point, is good because it conserves
the best of the fauna. Sometimes the critics of
Fauna Boards are wrong. They talk about the
wickedness of having open season. I think it is
a good thing if done judiciously and if we watch
very carefully the animal populations.
Mr. Griffiths. —In New South Wales we have
a similar experience to other States. Certain
species have declined considerably, but it is inter-
esting to note that in some cases the decline has,
of recent years, ceased. It seems there is almost
a cycle in these things governed, to some extent,
by physical conditions. We have had now a
number of very good seasons and there is an
increase in the population of many species, includ-
ing lyre birds. It is quite clear there are more
than there were five years ago. The species has
not declined. They have been given proper con-
ditions and they have certainly increased. Our
experience with the platypus has been exactly
the same as in Tasmania. The platypus has been
protected for a long time and I think that the
educational work that has been done in connection
with the platypus has had considerable effect
because you do not hear of the destruction of
platypus now, and we are having reports from
many parts of New South Wales where platypus
are just existing but are in large numbers.
I hope it will not mean an open season, but it is
interesting to note that, after a period of com-
parative drought followed by a period of good
rainfall, you have rejuvenation in the case of
many species. Before we leave this specific prob-
lem we have been doing quite a lot of work in
New South Wales in connection with the koala,
and I think Mr. Hallstrom could say something
about that.
Mr. Hallstrom. —ln New South Wales the koala
was regarded as almost extinct. Man-made bush
fires constitute one of its most serious menaces.
In the district round Palm Beach and through
to Berowra there was a considerable number of
koalas.
At this stage I would like to pay a tribute to
Victoria for the work that has been done there.
It is an inspiration to us to set ourselves the
task of attempting to save our dwindling koalas.
I paid several visits to Victoria to see what was
being done, and our Zoological Societies compli-
mented Mr. Lewis and his Department on their
work, which has been a great contribution. We
took a leaf from their book and started to work.
We have done a lot at Taronga Park and had
such success with our trees that we were able
to release in a sanctuary many pairs of koalas.
I am not quite sure if we did a wise thing because
we found that a male for a female was too much,
and we would probably have done better to have
released six females to one male. We found, later,
on close examination, that there was a predomin-
ance of males, which may have had detrimental
effects on breeding. Again, for the last few
years there has been very little ammunition avail-
able, which has been beneficial, as we feel quite
sure that many koalas have fallen from the slug
of a pea rifle. The animals are now slowly
increasing in numbers. When our Fauna Board
was constituted one of the first items undertaken
was work on the koala. Mr. Griffiths and his
officers, together with members of the Museum
staff, asked for information on koalas, and were
soon astounded to learn that they were numerous
in many parts of the State. In one area there
is at least a thousand koalas, and it is known
that for many miles surrounding that area there
are koalas in small colonies. Instead of believing
they were almost extinct in the State, it was found
there are sizable colonies ready to be worked upon.
For their colonisation it was decided to make
a study of koalas in captivity or semi-captivity,
and members of the University staff have joined
in that effort. Suitable feeding houses (breeding
pens you might call them) have been established,
both at Taronga Park and in the sanctuary at
Mona Vale. There were a number of females
in the latter case. Six females were put together
with one male, and only a week ago it was noticed
that each of the females had been fertilised,
showing the benefit of having a preponderance
of feelings and danger of having too many males.
That work is proceeding, and in addition, tree
planting on a large scale is being undertaken in
the same district. The Local Council is co-opera-
ting and when the season comes for the distri-
bution of trees, trees will be distributed and an
assistant from Mona Vale made available to look
after them. Thousands of suitable trees have
been grown at Mona Vale and are now fairly well
established, and many are already 20 feet high.
This work was going on before the Fauna Board
came into existence, and Mr. Griffiths was sur-
prised that so much local work was being done.
I think that with the advice obtained from Vic-
toria (Mr. Lewis paid a visit to Sydney and gave
certain advice) and by using our own initiative
we have made the first definite forward step
towards the preservation of koalas in New South
Wales.
Dr. Pearson read the following resolution in
connection with Item No. I.—lmportation of
Fauna from other States.
“ That this Conference:—
(i) is of the opinion that no live fauna should
be exported to any State from any
other State without the prior
approval of the appropriate author-
ity in the importing State;
(ii) considers that the skin of any fauna
lawfully taken in any State should
be regarded as being lawfully held
in any other State; and
(iii) recommends that the States consider the
introduction of legislation to give
effect to these views.”
The resolution was moved by Mr. Fraser and
seconded by Mr. Dowling, and carried—Victoria
opposing.
Dr. Pearson. —We will now deal with Items 8
and 13.
Item B. —Relation of Fauna to Agriculture
and Assessment of Actual Damage.
Item 13. —Control of Animals Destroying
Crops.
Mr. Griffiths. —We have covered that to some
extent.


Mr. McNally. —This is a question of damage
by Fauna to agriculture and it is one which has
been referred to several times in the discussions
to date. The damage referred to is mainly that
done by kangaroos, wallabies, opossums and also,
to a certain extent, by some birds. Many of the
birds causing damage to agricultural interests
are not protected, and therefore it is not necessary
to take any action with regard to them. There
are birds which are protected—certain kinds of
ducks—which get into pea crops, rice crops and
grain crops generally. Mountain ducks in
thousands can be seen in the fields eating up the
grain. The farmers have had to destroy a number
of them under permit. We generally find in cases
where birds are concerned that it is not necessary
to destroy a great many; a few shots is sufficient
to scare the birds away, and if the birds are
frightened fairly regularly not much damage
results.
The kangaroo damage in Victoria is mostly done
by the large grey kangaroo and the black-faced
kangaroo in the Mallee. Most of the damage is
done by the large grey. It gets into the young
crops and causes damage by thrashing its tail
about. Ample evidence of this is available in
several areas in Victoria, and where such damage
is occurring the farmer can receive a permit to
destroy a limited number of these kangaroo. The
effect of killing a kangaroo is to frighten the
others off. Wallabies are a big cause of destruc-
tion, and a great menace in our pine plantations.
In the young plantations they strip the bark from
the trees, and in some cases ring-bark them. They
destroy the growing tips of vines by nipping them
off. Other animals that cause destruction in our
forests are rats and also wombats, which nip the
apices of the young trees.
As I mentioned yesterday the damage to agri-
culture by fauna is frequently exaggerated by the
people applying for permits. We have found it
necessary to make a very careful investigation of
each claim for damage, and it is frequently found
that where damage is claimed to have been done
there is actually no damage, or very little damage,
to be seen. The method adopted to determine
where damage has occurred in the area claimed
is this—Mr. Clift and myself as a rule make a
point of going to the area. We interview the
property owner making the complaint, examine
his property and the whole area where the damage
is said to have occurred. We go along the fences
and inspect what damage has been done to the
fences. We look for kangaroo droppings, foot
marks and tail marks, and any evidence whatever
as to the actual presence of the kangaroo. We
question not only the person making the complaint
but also the neighbouring property owners, Lands
Department officials, Forestry Department offic-
ials and Police officers in the local area, and obtain
from them any information they can give con-
cerning kangaroo in the area. We frequently find
that a man complains of damage from kangaroo,
and his neighbours say they have not seen a
kangaroo for months. The man may still have
a case, however. Where the properties are situ-
ated on the fringe of forests the kangaroo lie up
in the forests during the day and come out early
in the mornings or at night and cause what
damage they do. Where possible we lie in wait
at the appropriate time and properly concealed,
to see just what kangaroo do appear. From the
investigation we are able to build up a fairly
accurate estimate of the damage which is occur-
ring.
I may say, though, that in the majority of cases
the claims are grossly exaggerated—in some cases
we have been able to establish that no valid
grounds for a permit exists. People do request
permits for other reasons—the question of the
pelts—and, as mentioned earlier, the question of
the sporting value of the kangaroo for hunting.
Farmers like to take their friends hunting
kangaroo, and quite frankly apply for permits
solely for this reason. A certain area in Vic-
toria in the region of Port Campbell some
years ago was noted for kangaroo damage.
There are large areas of forest down there,
and in fact the land in the area of Port
Campbell was sold as vermin-infested land,
kangaroo under these circumstances being
regarded as vermin, and the people buying these
properties fully understood the position and
received their properties at a discount. In this
area of Port Campbell the kangaroo is not at the
moment doing so much damage. One or two
properties may suffer heavily, but their certainly
are not many. Many people who previously
obtained permits regularly have not valid grounds
for continuing to apply for permits.
We would be most interested to hear the position
in other States regarding kangaroo damage.
Other States have an open season at different
times—we, on the other hand, do not have any
open season. We consider the kangaroo popula-
tion is not sufficiently great, and the damage it
causes is not sufficiently extensive to warrant an
open season. We control the whole matter by
permits where required.
Mr. Fraser. —ln addition to the assessment of
damage done, has any attempt been made to assess
the value of the animal to agriculture?
Mr. McNally. —No, not so far, but it is a point
worth considering.
Mr. Moorhouse. —What damage does Mr.
McNally consider should be done before a permit
is granted?
Mr. McNally. —lt depends largely on the cir-
cumstances. I would not like to say offhand
without the circumstances before me, whether a
permit would be granted or not, but the damage
must be greater than that which would be taken
as a normal agricultural hazard.
Mr. Moorhouse. —lt would outweigh the value
of the animal to agriculture? lam asking what
is the value of damage you allow to be done by an
animal before you do allow permits. What is the
lowest value you will assess worthy of a permit?
Mr. McNally. —l don’t attempt to put it in
terms of cash, but if the property owner is suffer-
ing loss through damage there is no hesitation in
granting him a permit. If, on the other hand, one
or two kangaroos may have nibbled the tops off
one or two plants on his property no permit will
be given.
Mr. Moorhouse. —Do you make any allowance
for damage at a later date?
Mr. McNally. —Assuming the permit has been
refused, if at some later time he again applies,
a further investigation will be made. Permits are
not given in anticipation, however.
Mr. Fraser. —How do you get away with the
idea that some of the damage at least must be
regarded as a normal hazard of farming?


Mr. Clift. —You have not put it all on to the
kangaroo. If there are rabbits on the property
you have to allow a certain amount for that. As
soon as it is apparent there is some damage, not
necessarily great damage, and it is likely to con-
tinue and cause serious loss, then a permit can
be granted.
Mr. Fraser. —You do insist that the farmers
accept some hazard themselves as a natural
adjunct to farming?
Mr. Clift. —Yes. It is only when it is allowed
to go on, and much damage results, that permits
are granted.
Mr. Rainbird, —ln issuing these permits do you
issue them for grasslands or just for crops?
Mr. McNally. —Any pastures.
Mr. Mclntyre. —ln Victoria, if say Jack Brown
applied for a permit and it was granted, would
that allow a party, say 20 miles away, to come and
assist in shooting, or is the man who applies for
the permit to destroy them himself?
Mr. Clift. —You can’t prevent a man employing
someone to help.
Mr. Mclntyre. —What about possession of the
skins ?
Mr. McNally. —They must be sent to the Fish-
eries and Game Department, If he is given a
permit to knock off, say 10 kangaroos in two or
three months, he must state the number he has
killed and produce the skins for stamping.
Mr. Mclntyre. —lf he shot 100 and destroyed
the skins you would not know?
Mr. McNally. —We could not know that.
Mr. Fraser. —ln Western Australia grey kan-
garoos are strictly preserved in practically the
whole of the South-Western Land Division—no
protection is granted to any other species of
kangaroo in any part of the State. One or two
of the wallabies, e.g., Rottnest wallaby, quokka,
boodie-rat are strictly preserved throughout the
State.
The Vermin Act, under which any fauna reach-
ing pest proportions may be proclaimed vermin,
over-rides the Game Act. At the same time,
the Fisheries and Game Department is always
consulted nowadays before any Proclamation is
issued under the Vermin Act. In districts in
which kangaroos are vermin the Fisheries and
Game Department has not any control over them
at all.
In closed areas, two forms of permits to kill may
be granted:—
Under Section 12A.—For food purposes, i.e.,
for human consumption, and
Under Section 21.—1 n cases where damage
is done to crops, pastures, property, &c.
A permit in both cases is granted, after investi-
gation and inspection by a Departmental officer
or police officer, by the Chief Guardian of Game,
under delegation from the Minister. In cases
of urgency a police officer or guardian of game
may issue a short-time permit, subject to con-
firmation or rejection by Head Office.
Section 12A permits (food permits) all expire
on the 31st December next following the date of
issue.
Section 21 permits may, under the Act, be
granted for a period not exceeding tfrree months.
These may be renewed. No fees are payable for
either of such permits.
Conference adjourned until 9.30 a.m. tomorrow,
9th December, 1949.
Friday, 9th December, 1949. Conference
resumed 9.30 a.m.
Dr. Pearson. —When we adjourned yesterday
we were dealing with Numbers 8 and 13. We still
have a lot of business to do and I think, as soon
as we have finished these two items, we had
better discuss the order of priority of the remain-
ing items.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think it would be a good idea
if we sat this afternoon. I would suggest that.
Dr. Pearson. —What do members of the Con-
ference thing of that?
(Various members having expressed their
willingness to sit during the afternoon,
it was agreed that the Conference resume
at 2.15 p.m. if necessary.)
Mr. Hallstrom. —There has been some corres-
pondence addressed to the Conference and I think
it would be a good idea to take it now.
Mr. Griffiths. —Would it be possible to have the
correspondence read when we are dealing with
the revelant item on the Agenda, unless it is of
a general nature?
Dr. Pearson. —Yes, I think we might do that.
We shall now continue the discussion on Numbers
8 and 13.
Mr. McNally. —l would like to make a few
remarks on the position in Victoria.—Yesterday,
I outlined what we do in Victoria regarding
damage done by kangaroo. It has been suggested
by Mr. Butcher that the damage attributed to
kangaroo is, to a large degree, the responsibility
of other animals such as rabbits, and he has
proposed that an experimental area be set up,
completely fenced off, stocked with kangaroo and
nothing else, and a record taken of the amount of
pasture consumed by them over a definite period.
We hope by that means to gain some idea of the
damage done. Other experimental plots would
have larger numbers of kangaroo on them, and
we would have an idea of the amount of fodder
eaten and the damage done by threshing about.
That is the project we have in mind. We have not
yet put it into effect. In conclusion, we consider
that the kangaroo and wallaby also, to some
extent, do not do nearly the amount of damage
attributed to them. In Victoria the kangaroo is
becoming scarcer, and we may have to give him
a further degree of protection than he has had
in the past.
Dr. Pearson. —Are there any other remarks on
that subject/ If not, we will leave items 8 and
13, and we should consider the question of priority
of the remaining items—Numbers 4,9, 12 and
14, which are bracketed together although they
don’t entirely go together—and Numbers 15, 16,
17 and 18. Has anyone any express wish about
any of those? I think some of them can be dealt
with quite briefly. For instance the mutton bird
industry, No. 16. I have a report from Dr. Ser-
venty, and have made an abstract of it. It is
a report to our local Fauna Board rather than
to this Conference. It is interesting, but is not
quite the thing to submit to this Conference
because it is only an incomplete investigation. It
will take some year’s to complete.


Mr. Hallstrom. —l subscribe to your idea that it
is a matter for your own Board.
Dr. Pearson. —Then shall we agree to delete
No. 16 from the Agenda?
Mr. Griffiths. —I think, at the same time, it
would be interesting for many of us to have that
material of Dr. Serventy’s made available to us.
Dr. Pearson. —lt will be, as soon as it has been
put into sufficient shape to publish as a report.
Mr. Hallstrom. —Will it be a C.5.1.R.0. report
or a Tasmanian Board report?
Dr. Pearson. —That has not been decided yet.
The C.5.1.R.0. are doing the work for us, but I
think it will probably be published by the Royal
Society of Tasmania.
Mr. Griffiths. —Well, I think we should like to
see it.
Dr. Pearson. —Very well. Two copies of Dr.
Serventy’s report will be tabled at this Conference
for information and perusal, and return.
Mr. Griffiths. —As to No. 15.—Branding of
Skins—we have already had some discussion about
that and it links up, to some extent, with our
previous discussion on marsupials.
Mr. Rainbird. —The only thing is, Victoria
might accept our skins if they were peg-branded
instead of branded with ink.
Dr. Pearson. —l think any action that might be
considered necessary should be between individual
States in the matter of branding.
Mr. Rainbird. —lf we had peg-branding similar
to theirs they might accept our water-rat skins.
Mr. Griffiths. —There is one other issue con-
nected with this. In think all of us here subscribe
to branding in some form or other, but the only
State not represented here—Queensland— doesn’t
brand its skins. We have numbers of kangaroo
skins come to us from Queensland and they are
not branded, the bales are marked, but the skins
themselves are not branded. It has been a matter
of some concern to us to have unbranded skins
coming in and possibly circulated. It has not
been a very important issue recently, as we have
had no cases coming under notice where we think
the circulation of unbranded skins has been pre-
judicial to our protection laws, but I think, at
the same time, it is something that this Conference
might record its opinion upon, by way of resolu-
tion or otherwise, to the effect that this Con-
ference considers that the branding of skins is
essential in the interests of the protection laws
of the States.” That is a resolution which might
possibly come from this Conference.
Mr. Moorhouse. —That would have to go to
South Australia for consideration, and South
Australia brands only skins of protected animals;
we don’t brand unprotected animal skins.
Mr. Rainbird. —What about the Northern Ter-
ritory. Do skins come from there, and do
they brand their skins? I was wondering if
kangaroo would be branded or not.
Dr. Pearson.—— This is not such a simple matter
as it appears; if we want to discuss it further,
that is all right, but is it justified in view of the
shortness of time?
Mr. Rainbird.— There’s only this, Mr. Chair-
man. As Queensland is not represented at this
Conference could we send them a letter pointing
out the necessity for branding all protected animal
skins and asking them to fall into line with other
States in this matter?
Dr. Pearson. —lf you wish to propose that I will
deal with it as a resolution.
Mr. Rainbird. —l will, or perhaps Mr. Griffiths
will.
Mr. Griffiths. —No, I wouldn’t propose a resolu-
tion in that form.
Mr. Rainbird. —Well, put it in a form that is
suitable to you and I will agree.
Mr. Griffiths. —The effect of it is quite useless if
you confine it to the protected animals because the
position is different in each State. Queensland
may already do that, but the kangaroo is not
protected there.
Dr. Pearson. —That is what I had in mind.
Mr. Griffiths. —The only resolution that I think
would be of any use is a resolution that it be a
recommendation to all States that arrangements
be made for the stamping of skins exported from
the State. I don’t know, of course, whether it
can be put into effect.
Mr. McNally. —l do not think there is any pro-
posal that would be acceptable to the meeting.
Dr. Pearson. —Then we will leave this matter,
and go on with item No. 4.
No. 4. —The Keeping of Protected Fauna under
Permit.
Mr. McNally. —Well Mr. Chairman, I think we
have already given our views on this question.
The granting of permits to individuals to keep
native fauna in captivity is not done in our State
unless there is some very specific reason for
keeping this fauna, and generally speaking, the
reason required is that they wish to do some in-
vestigation of a scientific nature with a view to
promoting the welfare of the fauna concerned.
The keeping of fauna by individuals is not looked
on with any great favour. Scientific organis-
ations and scientific workers, and also workers
not necessarily scientific in the academic sense
of the word but qualified to keep animals and
who are doing work in connection with them,
are gianted permits without any objections being
raised.
The permit system is under revision, and it
has been found that many permits have been in
existence for a considerable time. People have
been given permits in the past with no term
set, and such individuals holding such permits
were at liberty to take native animals and replace
them when they died, and generally speaking to
keep them indefinitely. All permits are now being
lecaUed with a view to having some cancelled or
to review them, to decide whether in fact the
people holding the permits still have the native
animals in their possession, and if not if they
wish to have them in their possession. We are
arranging for a regulation to be gazetted to make
a permit current for a specified period. The
permit will be current for one year, and if it is
intended to keep the animal longer than a year
wl V 1 l\ e necessa *y to renew the permit each year
When the permits were recalled for review it was
found the system had reached such a stage that
many of the permit holders died or left the country
or destroyed the animals or, at all events, were not
interested in continuing the permit. We con-
sidered that we would have greater control over
the animals generally if we issued the permits
obiecWom To fu- S1S ‘ 1 know there will be some
, thls arrangement, and I shall be
to say on d it ° What the ° ther delegates ha ve


Dr. Pearson. —ln regard to Tasmania we have
a provision in the Act which allows protected
animals to be kept for educational and scientific
purposes, and also to be given to such institutions
as Zoos and so on.
Mr. Griffiths. —As far as New South Wales is
concerned partly protected fauna—by that I
mean species for which, at times, there are open
seasons—may be kept in confinement, or in a
domesticated state but not for sale, if they have
been taken in accordance with the requirements
of the Act, and the onus of proof that they are
obtained legally rests with the person in whose
possession they are. The keeping of fully pro-
tected fauna is illegal, except in the case of
scientific institutions, or where they do not
originate in N.S.W. The Act provides that a
licence may be issued for fauna to be taken for
scientific purposes and for any other purpose
indicated in the licence, which is fairly far-reach-
ing, and I think it would be possible for permits
to be issued for the keeping of fauna for any
purpose.
Dr. Pearson. —You treat everything on its
merits.
Mr. Griffiths. —Yes. As a general rule licences
are restricted to scientific purposes.
Mr. Hallstrom. —Mr. Chairman, there is very
little opportunity in some States for the avicui-
turist to set up and commence work of interest
in birds. I think an annual licence is very bad.
If you take a pair of any particular birds which
are fully protected in your State and the avicul-
turist wants to find out some facts about those
particular birds it would probably take three
years. If he secured his licence in September or
October he may miss the breeding season and his
licence would be due for renewal before he actually
commenced the work nearly twelve months later.
I think, once you are satisfied that a person is a
fit and proper person to do the work, he should
not be hampered with a licence that only lasts for
twelve months.
Mr. Clift. —It could be renewed.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think a licence should be
given for a pair of birds for'their life, or unless
it is cancelled for some sound reason such as
if the licensee has an unclean aviary and is found
not to be a fit and proper person, and then I do
not think they should wait twelve months to cancel
the licence. There should be a power to cancel
at any time. I would not like to have to renew
my licence every year for a particular pair of
birds. I would have to have a clerk to do the
job, I hold a B class licence, and I suppose this
would have sympathetic consideration.
Dr. Pearson. —Are you suggesting that it should
be indefinite?
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think the licence for a pair
of birds should be for the life-time of those
particular birds, and the licence called up if the
holder is found to be unsatisfactory. There are
such men as Dr. Lendon (and I must say that
he has done a really wonderful job), who under-
take a class of work that I would like to see
encouraged. A considerable amount of success-
ful breeding has been done by Dr. Lendon which
will be of great value, not only to Australia, but
to other parts of the world. For instance, the
Princess Alexandra Parrot, but for the avicul-
turist, would never have been seen by many
Australians. A few were bought at £75 a pair
and were put into aviaries in South Australia,
and much credit is due to that State for the work
that was done. To-day these birds can be bought
from most aviaries and most States, and they are
now really common in captivity and may be pur-
chased at a price of not more than about £l2 a
pair. A still more beautiful bird, through some
change of nature, is fast disappearing. I refer
now to the Paradise Parrakeet which is confined
to the North of N.S.W. and Southern Queensland.
If we don’t do something very quickly and get
these birds in the care of aviculturists like Dr,
Lendon they will be lost for all time.
Chairman. —Are you prepared to put forward
a resolution in regard to No. 4?
Mr. Halstrom. —Yes, I will do that. I wanted to
get it into the records because on a later occasion
we may need it. I don’t want to see our fauna
lost in an attempt to save it in the mistaken
belief that it should be left to its own resources.
Mr. Moorhouse. —South Australia—in fact all
States, apparently allow the killing of even their
protected animals for the protection of crops, &c.
South Australia goes further and says “if you
can kill the birds to protect your crop you can
actually take some of those birds and keep them
in captivity.” I think, from the birds’ point of
view, that is a far more humane method of
getting them out of the way. You can take pro-
tected birds under permit for keeping in captivity
in South Australia. From the permit system
revenue is obtained. The revenue makes my
Department self-supporting, in fact, revenue-pro-
ducing.
We don’t normally take any money for grant-
ing of permits to kill, but we do take money for
granting permits to keep.
Thanks to Mr. Hallstrom for giving the story.
Our system in South Australia is proving a very
sound one. I would like to see other States adopt
that system rather than the rigid closing down
on the keeping of protected birds.
Item No. 7.— Co-operation of States with the
C.5.1.R.0. Wild Life Section.
Mr. McNally. —ln Victoria there has been, for
some time, quite close co-operation with the
C.5.1.R.0., not purely in respect of the Wild Life
Section but with C.5.1.R.0 generally. In our
Fisheries and Game Department in Melbourne
we have working with us three members of the
C.5.1.R.0. Fisheries Division, in intimate contact
with our Department. The C.5.1.R.0. have a
number of field stations throughout Victoria.
Occasionally they require certain assistance from
us which is readily provided. For instance, there
is a station located at Bright, Victoria, in the
mountains, where the C.5.1.R.0. has a research
team working on the St. Johns Wort. The St.
Johns Wort is a noxious weed and has become very
troublesome in some parts of the State. It causes
disease to cattle and other animals. It produces
an effect resembling acute sunburn on the exposed
portions of flesh. The C.5.1.R.0. have been
working on this project for some time and have
imported into the State certain beetles from
England and France which are the natural para-
site of this plant. The beetles are at present
destroying the weed by defoliation. The C.5.1.R.0.
have been investigating the action of the beetles
for some time, and they have found that the
birds in the area are eating a number of the
beetles. These birds include a considerable number
of protected birds under the Victorian Act
Permission was sought by the C.5.1.R.0. to destroy


these birds with a view to analysing the stomach
contents. An amicable arrangement was reached,
whereby the C.5.1.R.0, were allowed to destroy
these birds, the skins being sent to the Melbourne
Museum, and information concerning them sup-
plied to our Department.
All this is leading up to the question of the
Wild Life Section of the C.5.1.R.0. The Section
which is controlled by Mr. Francis Ratcliffe, has
been created for one specific purpose, that is, the
investigation and control of the rabbit pest. Mr.
Ratcliffe has paid a number of visits to the
Melbourne Fisheries and Game Department, and
has been in close touch with Mr. Butcher. Just
before coming to this Conference we received a
letter from Mr. Ratcliffe, in which he expressed
his extreme regret at being unable to be here.
He mentioned in his letter that he has discussed
the matters contained in the letter with Dr.
Serventy, and hoped he would be here.
The C.5.1.R.0. are concerned with economic
problems mainly, and the allocations provided for
the Wild Life Section are only sufficient to enable
investigation of the rabbit plague. No funds
are available at present for other projects. Mr.
Ratcliffe is most sympathetic to representations
made to him by States to do something about our
Australian fauna on a Federal level. If at a later
date an opportunity occurs to do something, and
the money and staff are available, he proposes
that the status of all native species of the country
be investigated that suitable reserves be proposed
and an overall conservation plan formulated. It
is suggested that to initiate activities in this
direction amongst States the States should make a
survey of their national parks and reserves and
an analysis of the existing fauna in those areas.
I assume, as we have in Victoria, that most States
have their sanctuaries and national reserves, and
probably some work has been done on this. When
the Federal authority does come into the field it
will be of considerable value for information from
each State to be available to them as a starting
off point. Mr. Ratcliffe is unable to raise this
matter at this stage on an official level, since he
has no authority to do that, and he has asked
Mr. Butcher to put these views before the con-
ference here in an unofficial fashion with a view
to testing the feeling.
The R.A.O.U. for some time has been advocating
that the Federal Government do something about
a National Bird Banding Organisation with a
view to producing co-operation between all States.
When the Wild Life Section was set up this
seemed a golden opportunity, and Mr. Ratcliffe
was approached to see if he would initiate a
Central Bird Banding Bureau in the Wild Life
Section. The R.A.O.U. was very keen on the
thing, and other bird bodies were also keen.
Unfortunately, owing to the restriction of his
activities, Mr. Ratcliffe was unable to do anything
in this regard. I would like the views of the other
States regarding this suggestion put forward by
Mr. Ratcliffe.
Dr. Pearson. —l have personally taken a great
interest in this question of the Wild Life Section,
I think your statement in regard to the early
history of the Wild Life Section is perhaps not
quite correct. My impression was that the Wild
Life Section came into being because of the
repeated urging by the Zoological Section, that
is, Section D, of the A.N.Z.A.A.S., to found a
biological survey of the whole of Australia. I
happened to be President of that section at the
Congress at Adelaide, and Mr. Ratcliffe was pre-
sent on that occasion and we discussed it very
fully. We wanted to have a Central Board which
would act in an advisory capacity to the States in
regard to scientific maters. I think the C.5.1.R.0.
ultimately decided to found a Division to deal
ultimately with these things, but in the first place
the rabbit problem will occupy the whole time of
the small staff. But I think it not quite right
to say it was founded entirely on account of the
rabbit. It is an important matter that we, as
State bodies, should co-operate with Mr. Ratcliffe
in this matter. In Tasmania we have had Bio-
logical Survey for many years, which is quite
independent of the Animals and Birds’ Protection
Board.
Mr. Griffiths. —It is just a question of whether
we in Conference here can make any move in this
matter. I have discussed this question with Mr.
Troughton, who has been intimately connected
with A.N.Z.A.A.S., and it was a result of a
resolution of the 1947 Conference that the Wild
Life Section of the C.5.1.R.0. was established, and
Mr. Troughton expressed to me the same view
that we have just heard came from Mr. Ratcliffe,
and that is, the first effective step should be the
survey of the fauna reserves and national parks
in each State. It is just a question of whether
this Conference, as a Conference, should express
itself as desirous of the extension of the Wild
Life Section by the provision of adequate resources
and adequate staff to expend on this work, and I
would not like to be responsible for making a
resolution in that direction because I feel some
hesitation, as a State representative, in proposing
a resolution which might result in greater Com-
monwealth control instead of Commonwealth
participation.
If it could be confined to participation, and if
we could be certain that the work of the States
would be greatly assisted by the extension of the
Wild Life Section, I would have no hesitation, but
I would like to hear whether any other members
have any ideas on the position.
Mr. Fraser. —l was a member of the Biological
Committee at the Conference of A.N.Z.A.A.S. in
Perth, and I know Mr. Ratcliffe is anxious, at
some later date, to take over the study of all native
animals as opportunity offers.
I think we must all admit that the rabbit
problem is a very urgent one, and in that sense
should be proceeded with. I don’t think, if we
took a vote to-day, that any two of us would be
agreed as to what would be the next bird or
animal to study. It is all very well to speak
vaguely about making a biological survey, but this
Conference could not undertake to work out a pro-
gramme in order of priority, and it would be
wrong for us to pass any resolution which might
be construed as being a direction to C.5.1.R.0.
Mr. Ratcliffe himself feels he cannot undertake
a thorough survey until he has a wider appreci-
ation of the problems in the various States. This
survey of National Parks and so on which he
suggests should be undertaken by all States is
as far as we can go at the moment.
Mr. Moorhouse. —South Australia is happy to
have the co-operation of all States and that of the
C.5.1.R.0. Wild Life Section but South Australia
would be most unhappy if the Agenda read
“ Control by C.5.1.R.0.”


Dr. Pearson. —That was not intended. I think
no harm would be done if we passed a general
resolution commending the idea that C.5.1.R.0.
ultimately should take up, as far as possible, the
question of a Biological Survey, without going
into any detail at all. I think they might be
interested to know that we are watching this
question, because we know that this thing started
in C.5.1.R.0. and there might be a danger, unless
it is watched carefully, that they would say “ Well,
we have solved the rabbit problem; now what
other practical problem of that sort have we got.”
Mr. Hallstrom. —lf it depends on the rabbit
problem they will never have any free time.
Dr. Pearson. —lf there is no further discussion
on No. 7 I propose that we go on to No. 9. That
is the next one in order of priority.
Item No. 9.— Game Management, Banding of
Gaw.e Birds and Interstate Co-operation in
Recording and Recovery of Banded Birds.
Dr. Pearson. —This is introduced by Victoria,
so I will ask Mr. McNally to speak on it.
Mr. McNally. —Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
I do not propose to say much about the manage-
ment of game, at this stage. It is something
which is not carried out a great deal in Victoria.
We have, however, a programme of management
of our koalas. It is a programme with which Mr.
Griffiths has been intimately concerned. The
bears have been dying out in certain areas owing
to lack of proper food trees. We have moved them
from the unsuitable areas to some more suitable
ones in an endeavour to keep up the population.
In addition, suitable trees have been planted in
various places so that they may be kept supplied
with food.
To come now to the question of game birds and
the banding thereof. We have observed for some
time in Victoria that game birds, principally ducks
and quail, are moving from one part of the State
to another, for no obvious reason, and to the
great annoyance of the shooters, just at the time
when they have come to expect that the birds
will be there for the shooting season. The shooters
have watched their movements very closely, and
just as the season opens all the quail disappear
and re-appear somewhere else. The same applies
to ducks. In one season the ducks are good, and
are seen everywhere, but in another season there
are very few ducks to be seen. We are most
anxious to find out what movements these birds
perform. The question of food supplies is un-
doubtedly involved, but there are other aspects.
America has investigated the position very closely
and they have established that the game birds
follow certain roads called “ fly-ways ” over which
they move in regular fashion from one area of
country to another. We in Victoria are anxious
to determine whether we have such “ fly-ways ”
in our State, and whether the birds follow them
regularly.
You may have gathered from my remarks that
our efforts are directed towards better shooting
for the sportsmen, but that is not the case. They
have a claim on our activities, of course, but our
efforts are mainly directed towards the conserv-
ation of the birds themselves. If we can establish
what are the fly-ways, where are the breeding
areas and what movements the birds undertake
and for what reason, we shall be making a sub-
stantial contribution towards the protection of
the fauna. We have been in touch with Dr.
Gabrielson of America to obtain from him par-
ticulars of the system adopted in America for
the banding of birds in general and game birds
in particular. He has very kindly sent us samples
of the bands they use, and the mounts. He sets
out the procedure to be adopted in handling the
birds and making statistical observations on them,
and, generally speaking, the whole procedure.
I have a copy here if anyone would like to see it.
Our scheme is insignificant in comparison with
theirs, but we are anxious to get something
started. We are making arrangements to have
bands made, but we have found that suitable metal
is not readily available. We may be forced to
import the bands from America as they do in
New Zealand at present. The point I wish to make
concerns the manner of retrieving of the bands.
The movements of the birds are liable to be
interstate—l am fairly confident that it does take
place interstate—and if we cannot obtain the co-
operation of other States in retrieving and return-
ing the bands, together with relevant information,
our programme is doomed to failure. It cannot
be carried on wholly and solely in our own State,
and I would like to obtain from delegates of other
States here to-day their views as to our proposal
to band these birds and obtain from them their
assurance—if they are prepared to give it—that
they will give us their co-operation in returning
the bands and reporting on the movements of the
birds.
Mr. Rainhird. —As regards Tasmania, I don’t
know if our ducks emigrate to the Mainland. The
water has a big effect in Tasmania. We have very
few Stubble, or Grey birds here; they are mostly
brown birds, and in a dry season they seem to
migrate to the heavy timber country. When the
rain comes they will come back to the low country.
In a wet season you will see any amount of bevies
of birds; we have no trouble to get a bag. This
last year was a dry season and in the places where
we usually shoot birds you could hardly find one.
I think water has a big tendency towards migra-
tion to different districts. Food also is a big
factor. When the lagoons dry up you will find
the ducks in the rivers. When the rivers get low,
or the water comes back to the lagoons, the birds
flock back to the lagoons again. That seems to
be the position here. I don’t know if they migrate
to other States, but I shouldn’t think so.
Mr. McNally. —lt would be very unlikely, I
think.
Mr. Rainhird. —The grey birds have dropped
out, but we have a lot of brown birds. We have
dozens of ducks—black duck and shovellers and
the little musk teal, but the water has a big effect
on where they are. Along the Tamar for 30 miles
we have dozens of ducks; they have a good sanc-
tuary there both down at the Heads and near
Launceston, and it is always alive with ducks—
they very seldom leave it.
Mr. Fraser.—Western Australia has in mind
the commencement of a duck-banding programme
in the very near future. We desire to know
“ where our ducks go in the winter-time ” so
to speak, and although I am perfectly willing to
return to Mr. McNally any bands of his which may
be retrieved in W.A. I don’t think there would
really be much chance.
I rather commend this idea of bird-banding
generally but I think it is something which might
best be achieved by adopting the American system
of having the whole work centralised in such a
body as the C.5.1.R.0.


Mr. Moorhouse. —That is not possible, I’m
afraid.
Mr. Fraser. —We could make a recommendation,
perhaps. It is expensive and inconvenient for each
local organisation to provide its own bands, with
conflicting series of numbers, and a uniform
scheme which could be put into operation through-
out Australia, with centralisation of records,
would be much better. If we could recommend
that C.5.1.R.0. be asked to manage the scheme on
similar lines to that operating in America it would
not unduly involve C.5.1.R.0. We would actually
be doing the work but C.5.1.R.0. would secure the
bands and distribute them to local organisations
such as our Departments, interested ornithologists
and other naturalists who are interested in this
work. The records of release of bands would then
be centralised, and it would be possible to do
the work more effectively than if each State
undertook its own work. Victoria and W.A.
might be the only ones doing it, and we would
have to make ourselves fully responsible. At the
same time, even if C.5.1.R.0. does not come in,
it might be possible to set up some controlling
body by arrangement between all participating
States.
I am not submitting a resolution on the matter,
but just express my views on the subject.
Mr. Moorhouse. —South Australia will co-
operate if you will let us know what birds you
are banding.
Mr. Griffiths. —I think I can say that New South
Wales will , co-operate as far as is possible. The
position is a little bit different in N.S.W, because
we have no regular open seasons for game birds,
so we should have to be extremely careful in our
approach to the question. We have limited open
seasons in certain localities, and while I say we
will co-operate as far as possible, we shall have to
watch it carefully.
Mr. McNally. —That is an obstacle, certainly.
Mr. Griffiths. —We don’t want to advertise the
fact that we want the bands returned or we might
have everybody shooting the birds to get the bands.
Dr. Pearson.—Yon raised the point of difficulty
of getting bands. Dr. Serventy, in his mutton
bird work, has been doing banding and I have an
idea that he got his bands in Melbourne. You
might care to get in touch with him about that.
Mr. Moorhouse. —What type of bands, celluloid?
Mr. McNally. —l think they are more likely to
be metal.
Dr. Pearson. —Already Dr. Serventy has
obtained some very interesting results. Incident-
ally, the course of migration is rather interesting.
The mutton bird leaves Tasmania and goes over
the ocean along the East Coast of Australia, New
Caledonia, Japan, the Aleutian Islands, sweeps
round California and returns across the South
Pacific. It is a most amazing migratory course,
but apart from that the banding process has
shown already two interesting points. Banding
experiments have shown that when the young
birds return next season they don’t necessarily
return to the same island, but they do come back
to the same district. The mature birds return,
either to the burrows they had made the previous
year, or to burrows in the immediate vicinity on
the same island.
We will now go on to items 12 and 14.
Item 12. —Sanctuaries and National Parks.
Item 14. —Faunal Reserves for Breeding Rare
Animals.
Mr. Rainbird. —There is not much I can say as
regards National Park which is a reserve for all
flora and fauna and a bird sanctuary. There is a
considerable number of sanctuaries throughout
Tasmania that are reserves for all bird life—ducks
and other birds. If any particular Association
puts up the need for a sanctuary to us we inspect
these areas and have a look over them, and get
in touch with the land-owners, and if they agree
we have the necessary legislation put through.
We have a Sanctuary at King Island, but not one
at Flinders Island. There are some islands on
which we do not allow people on account of the
bird life. There are Sanctuaries such as Lake
St. Clair and Cradle Mountain, 300,000 acres;
National Park, 38,000 acres; Tooms Lake, 56,000
acres; Ben Lomond 78,000 acres and Schouten
Peninsula. These are for birds. The River
Derwent—birds, South Esk River, Longford; Port
Sorell and the River Tamar. You will see we have
a lot of land tied up in sanctuaries in Tasmania.
Mr. McNally.—ln Victoria we have a similar
system to that described by Mr. Rainbird. We
have 326 sanctuaries in the State. These include
a large number of quite small sanctuaries but
they also include some very extensive ones. We
have Anglesea, Evelyn and Buln-Buln State Forest
(500,000 acres) ; and Wyperfeld National Park,
137,000 acres. We have another extensive area
in the process of being established at Glenelg.
Mr. Fraser. —We have a similar system in
operation to that of Victoria and Tasmania. We
have set aside a number of areas for sanctuaries.
I think that the main fault with the sanctuaries
in Western Australia, and maybe the same thing
also applies in other States, is that many of the
sanctuaries are reserves in name only, and that
the supervision which is so essential is not pro-
vided.
There is on thing Mr. Rainbird mentioned, that
is, the setting aside of private reserves. I am
afraid that these very often become reserves for
the owners to provide shooting for their friends.
I feel that we ought to ensure that we set aside
large areas of primitive land because it is im-
possible to maintain the whole of Australia in
its virgin state. At the same time it is not enough
to proclaim those areas, but we must see that they
are properly cared for. I would like to read an
extract from “ The Road to Survival ” by William
Vogt, who has studied this question very care-
fully:—
“ The Need for Setting Aside Primitive Areas.
Quite apart from possible commercial uses
to which they might be put, it would be of
enormous advantage to mankind to set aside
primitive areas typical of all major plant and
animal associations. The world has been
extremely remiss in recognising the importance
of such areas; many types have been destroyed
and, of course, can never be restored. One of
the principal values of such primitive areas is
as an outdoor laboratory. Scientific investig-
ations of them can teach us so much about the
sort of life to which the land is adapted that
such studies have considerable practical value
to agriculture, forestry, wild life management,
&c. A partial explanation of the Russians
superb scientific work on soils is that they could
begin their investigations with undisturbed,
virgin tracts of land. This made possible
studies of plant climaxes, normal successions,
primitive soil structures and soil fauna.


With an understanding of the environment as
it had developed over hundreds of centuries
under natural climatic and other conditions
they are much better prepared to adjust human
management of the land to natural limitations
than are soil scientists who, in other parts of
the world, may have to guess at normal, natural
conditions. The cultural value of primitive
tracts, with their rich complex of species and
relationships that expresses the culmination of
natural forces over millions of years of evolu-
tion, will undoubtedly be widely recognised one
day. Some universities are now beginning to
maintain research stations in such areas. The
danger is that the recognition will come too late
to save most primitive areas from destruction.
Ecologists in the United States have for four
years been trying to have established a grass-
lands preserve in which the environment under
natural conditions might be available for study.
Thus far their efforts have been fruitless.
Recognition of the importance of such areas
was given by the Convention on Nature Pro-
tection and Wild Life Preservation in the
Western Hemisphere, which has been ratified
by eleven American Governments. One of the
expressed purposes of the treaty is to give
permanent preservation, where possible, to
primitive areas. Unfortunately, relatively
little has been done to implement it.
It should be obvious that the use man makes
of any piece of land must be adapted to the
natural laws operating upon it, and that the
first of these is that the relationship between
any land area and water must be respected.
There are many others, such as conforming
to imperatives of plant successions, maintain-
ing a balance—even in altered associations—
among competing species, not introducing
species that might become pests, not permitting
excess numbers of any species, such as the
overprotected white-tailed deer, &c. During
millions of years Nature has maintained, by a
beneficient circle, its marvellous richness on the
surface of the earth; it has constantly returned
to the earth by slow soil building and natural
fertilisation what ever has sprung from it.”
This brings me back to my first point, namely,
that it is practically useless to proclaim sanctuaries
unless we are prepared to go the whole hog and
provide proper supervision. By the same token,
if worthwhile sanctuaries are not set aside, it will
not be long before our indigenous fauna are wiped
out.
Mr. Rainbird. —lf a sanctuary is proclaimed on
private property under our Act the owner cannot
destroy anything on it. > He cannot even carry a
gun on it. On King Island, on Mr. Hardy’s pro-
perty, a sanctuary has been declared for pheasants,
and he goes around and puts notices up with the
word “ sanctuary ” and no-one is allowed to shoot
there.
Mr. Fraser. —l am very glad to hear that.
Mr. Griffiths. —He cannot shoot rabbits on his
own property?
Mr. Fraser. —lf you wanted to make, for
example, the Kingborough Municipality a sanc-
tuary, would you need to have the consent of all
the land owners?
Mr. Rainbird. —Yes. We cannot declare a sanc-
tuary without the permission of the owner.
Dr. Pearson. —Once an area has been declared
a sanctuary nothing can be shot on it.
Mr, Moorhouse. —That applies in South
Australia, but if the land is a sanctuary and
damaging pests like rabbits are causing trouble,
the owner can obtain a permit from the Minister
to destroy the rabbits. Otherwise the owner even
must not carry a rifle.
Mr. Moorhouse. —We have a flora and fauna
Committee which is an advisory body to assist
the Minister. This body is considering more and
more the taking of large virgin areas, keeping
them as Crown land, and declaring them sanc-
tuaries. We feel we must have the trees if we
want the animals and birds. Some very large
areas have been set aside, especially on Eyre
Peninsula. We are moving to take an area on
the southern portion and make it not a closed
area never to be visited, but one open to the
people. We feel we would be doing a better
service to the citizens by allowing them to go
through our sanctuaries as a national park, though
we will allow no shooting. They will be reserves,
with rangers. I think we have a very good scheme
and we are backed by the Ornithological Society
which says we must have trees, scrub, water and
so on. No dogs will be allowed in.
Mr. Griffiths. —The position in New South Wales
is very similar to what we have heard from repre-
sentatives of the other States. A sanctuary is a
proclaimed area where the destruction of birds
and animals is prohibited, with the exception of
a few pests. For instance you can destroy the
rabbit in a sanctuary—it is not a sanctuary for
rabbits. Sanctuaries are created by proclamation
and they are not supervised areas, Mr. Fraser has
said that in Western Australia that is one of the
troubles. The areas are declared sanctuaries and
in many cases that is all we do about it. About
350 sanctuaries have been proclaimed in N.S.W.,
and in addition all State forests are sanctuaries,
and there is a considerable area of State forest in
N.S.W. All land, within a radius of one mile
from a school, is sanctuary, and there are some
extensive areas proclaimed. For instance there
is a coastal strip from the Manning River to
south of Botany Bay which is a sanctuary, an
area of perhaps 3000 square miles. There are, of
course, small sanctuaries and there are large
sanctuaries. With regard to National Parks, we
have near Sydney two national parks, one known
as National Park and the other as Kur-ring-gai
Chase. In each case there is an area of above
40,000 acres, and they are controlled and are
protected areas. The object of a national park
is to provide recreation for the people, and
although in many cases, particularly in Kur-ring-
gai Chase every effort is made to preserve the
native flora and fauna that is not the primary
purpose of the dedication of the area. In N.S.W.
there was instituted by Act of Parliament the
Kosciusko State Park, and that Park, which is
controlled by a trust, has an area of about 1|
million acres. It is planned to develop the national
park along the lines of national parks overseas—
in America and Africa, and there is a prohibition
on the hunting or destruction of birds and animals
throughout the area, except with the consent of
the trustees. Actually the plan has not gone very
far yet, so we can’t say just how far there will
be game shooting in the Kosciusko State Park—
it is possible there will be. The other interesting
thing about the Kosciusko project is that a large


area within the park is to be considered as a
primitive area. That raises a number of issues
as to what we mean by “ primitive,” and one of
the issues raised is do you permit any destruction
at all. That covers the sanctuaries and the
national park, but this question of faunal reserves
which has concerned all our State administrations
for a great many years has been dealt with by
N.S.W. in the Fauna Protection Act of 1948, and
that Act provides for the dedication of Crown
Lands as faunal reserves, specifically for the pro-
tection and care of fauna, propagation of fauna
and the study of fauna, and provides further that
some faunal reserves must be primitive areas,
for the study of fauna in its natural state. These
reserves are to be under the control and manage-
ment of the Fauna Protection Panel, and they will
differ from the sanctuaries inasmuch as they will
be properly managed and controlled areas with
a ranger, or warden, system. It is necessary when
it is proposed to establish a faunal reserve for a
distinct plan to be prepared. The whole project
is very new, and so far we have not any faunal
reserves; in fact we are finding it rather difficult
to find Crown Land suitable for these reserves.
We do plan, however, to establish a number of
Faunal reserves in areas, each of which will be
representative of a particular type of country,
so that we will cover the whole fauna of the State,
The question of grazing, which was mentioned,
is provided for and the Fauna Protection Panel
has absolute power over these faunal reserves and
can prevent any occupancy whatever. We feel
that this is the most important move that has
ever been made in our State towards the pro-
tection of our native fauna and its conservation.
The people of our State are looking to us to
implement it and we are hopeful of considerable
success.
Item No. 17 of the Agenda. Use of traps or
otherwise for the talcing of native fauna.
Mr. Rainhird. —This item was probably put on
the agenda to ascertain the views of other States,
particularly in relation to opossum. In Tasmania
it used to be open to shooting and trapping, and in
the last two seasons trapping only was allowed,
and the item was probably put on the agenda to
ascertain what methods other States used, whether
poison, shooting, snaring, or otherwise how they
destroy them.
Mr. Clift. —In Victoria there have been two
open seasons for opossum and the taking of the
animals was limited to trapping and snaring.
The trapping of animals is a cruel method, but
I can’t think of any other feasible way in which
they can be taken in numbers except snaring.
Under the permit system in Victoria they are
allowed to shoot opossums.
Mr. Dowling. —The object was to see what this
meeting could suggest to prevent the use of spring
traps on the ground of cruelty. It is a crude
method, which causes unnecessary suffering to
animals. Could it possibly be done away with?
Mr. Clift. —I don’t see that you can take any
quantity of animals without the use of traps.
Snaring is a slow method and alright in mountain-
ous country, but not so effective in the lowlands.
Mr. Dowling. —Snaring means a slow death.
The old brush opossum would hang for days.
The ringtail avoids that.
Mr. Hallstrom. —lt is a very cruel method.
Mr. Rainhird.— This has been taken up by the
R.S.P.C.A. here a lot. There were letters in the
paper about it. The traps must be visited every
36 hours. That is a provision of our law for the
taking of kangaroo and opossums. It may not
be applicable to other States but that is the
position in Tasmania. Trapping, in my opinion,
has a tendency to catch more brush opossum than
ringtail. The brush opossum come down to the
ground but the ringtail rarely come down if he
can get along from tree to tree. When guns were
allowed the hunters used to have dogs and the
dogs would tree the opossum and the hunters
would shoot him. In an open season they might
take from a million to a million and a quarter
ringtails and brush opossum under the trapping
system, but there were always more brush opossum
than ringtail. Trapping is a cruel method. With
shooting the animal is put out of its misery
quickly but the skin is damaged much more.
You don’t get as good a fur. Someone else may
be able to say something about that aspect. I
would like the views of the various States to
see if there are any other methods of taking
them.
Dr. Pearson. —-There is a strong public feeling
in Tasmania against the use of snares and traps.
The public says it is very , cruel. My impression
is that my Board is rather inclined to go back to
the idea of allowing shooting instead of trapping.
Mr. Fraser. —Are you going to prohibit trap-
ping?
Dr. Pearson. —That is the proposal, I think,
to prohibit trapping. The outcry in the papers
is definitely along that line. They will say we
should shoot them, irrespective of whether the
skins are spoilt or not.
Mr. Moorhouse. —We have no open season for
opossum in South Australia. We have a lot of
trouble with them and we grant permits for the
destruction of the animal. These permits apply
not only in country areas but also right in the
heart of Adelaide where shooting is out. We
are actually recommending the use of rabbit trap,
set with an apple. There is no leaving of the
trap for three or four days. As a rule when a
householder hears the trap he is out and on to
the opossum. We have a lot of opossum on
Kangaroo Island. The wallaby is a menace there,
so the settlers say. The wallaby makes a pad.
Over the pad the settler drops a fairly heavy limb
which he so regulates that it is about a foot above
the pad. The wallaby, instead of jumping over the
limb scrambles underneath it. After it has done
that uninterruptedly for several days the settler
places a snare in the way. But the opossum
also uses the pad and he also get into the snare.
I spent some time on Kangaroo Island looking
into this matter and I found in the morning that
the opossum in the snare was sitting patiently
waiting for release. He hadn’t struggled but just
sat tight and was absolutely unharmed. We took
him by the tail, released the noose with a stick and
away he went. So the snare over ground-travell-
ing animals is not harmful to the opposum. A
permit is given to retain the skins of a certain
number of opossums. The settlers are happy
about that because it gives them a small return,
and the Animals and Birds’ Protection Board
is also happy because it gets a royalty—2s per
cent of the gross market value. Spot-lighting of
opossums is prohibited by law and poisoning is
likewise prohibited. Trappers can shoot, but
they must not use a spotlight.


Mr. Clift. —We have the same trouble in
Melbourne, but they use box-traps and they are
very effective.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l was going to mention box
traps or wire traps. The cage traps are very
effective for catching the opossum and are not
very expensive. They can be made from a fruit
case with a simple arrangement for a trap door.
I have seen them used and quite frequently two
opossums will be caught in the one trap. It
would overcome the cruelty part of the ordinary
rabbit trap and would be much better. Large
numbers of opossums can be trapped that way.
Mr. Fraser. —ln Western Australia we have had
only one very short open season for opossums
since 1936. During an open season opossums are
invariably caught by snaring. There is no pro-
hibition against other methods but hunters prefer
the snare, and during 1942 open season 55,000
skins which were marketed were taken wholly
oy snares. As far as other animals are concerned,
traps are not used for kangaroos. They are shot
or hunted with dogs. We do not poison water
holes in Western Australia, as has often been
suggested. The opossum, which is doing damage
to some extent round the city between the roofs
and the ceilings, are normally shot under permit
from the Department. The only other form of
prohibition is against poisoning, and against bird-
lime.
Mr. Clift. —We discriminate between poison and
cyanide.
Mr. Griffiths. —We prohibit cyanide entirely, but
also prohibit the use of any poison for killing
protected fauna,
Mr. McNally. —When phosphorus treated wheat
is laid the birds die in large numbers.
Mr. Rainbird. —There is a tremendous lot of
poison used in Tasmania.
Dr. Pearson. —Now if there is no further dis-
cussion on Item No. 17 we will pass on to the
next item.
Mr. Griffiths. —We didn’t deal with No. 14.
I don’t know where that comes in.
Dr. Pearson. —No. 14 deals with “ Faunal
Reserves for Breeding Rare Animals ” I think
it was one that Mr. Hedberg wanted. Personally
I don’t believe, if your animal gets rare, you are
going to do any good by trying to specify a faunal
reserve for it. It has plenty of reserves at present.
Many of the animals which have become rare have
done so because the township has encroached on
their natural country and they have been pushed
farther into the bush, I don’t see what the point
is in having a faunal reserve for a rare animal.
Mr. Rainbird. —Mr. Dowling has a note from
Mr. Hedberg saying there is no money available
for carrying out that experiment. That is all
the comment he made on it.
Dr. Pearson. —l think that was his own item.
However, I think it would be money wasted to
try and keep rare animals in reserves.
Mr. Hallstrom. —lt may have come out of the
matter of Zoo Societies which asked the Com-
monwealth Government to make provision for
rare animals. I think what was meant was
taking them into captivity and breeding from
them.
Dr. Pearson. —Rare animals are difficult to
breed in captivity.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l think the only thing is to
take it into captivity. I quoted that instance of
the Pere David Deer—the Chinese name for it
means “ Four parts that do not fit.” For instance,
it has the tail of a donkey, extraordinary antlers,
the neck of a camel and the feet of a cow,
Mr. Moorhouse. —ln South Australia the koala
was particularly rare, but specimens have been
brought to S.A. from Queensland and they have
bred to such an extent that quite recently a large
number was liberated at Kangaroo Island. Dr.
Schneider is doing the same in the Adelaide Hills.
He has a very fine property on the outskirts of
Adelaide, and he too has the Queensland koala.
He has liberated some on his property along the
River Murray, so that, instead of the State taking
over faunal reserves for breeding rare animals
the best way to get them into circulation is to
give the lover of animals a chance to carry on,
Mr. Griffiths. —We have the same plan in N.S.W,
regarding koala but we intend to breed in captivity
with the object of release in areas where the koala
has a good chance of survival, which means a
bushfire-free area. We are going to exercise
extreme care in our selection of areas. We don’t
want to breed koalas for release into areas where
they will be destroyed by bush fires.
Mr. Clift. —It is difficult to find a bushfire free
area.
Dr. Pearson. —l thought you mentioned the
other day that you had discovered several colonies
of koala which are gradually increasing.
Mr. Hallstrom. —ln areas where there are plenty
now, a few years ago there was hardly one to be
seen. They have increased in numbers very con-
siderably and to-day the koala is to be seen in
many places.
Dr. Pearson here read a letter received from
Sydney, dealing with this subject.
Mr. Griffiths. —That is in line with the Fauna
reserve I have already referred to.
Dr. Pearson. —Mr, Fraser of Western Australia
would like to discuss a matter which is not on the
agenda—protection of species which prey upon
pests.
Mr. Fraser. —The item I sent for the agenda
crossed the letter sent to me with the agenda,
I put on this item for the purpose of hearing
whether there is actually a policy in other States
for the protection of fauna which destroy pests.
I refer particularly to the Wedge-tail eagle and
various types of snakes—it seems to be a case of
“ give a dog a bad name.” Occasionally the wedge-
tail takes a lamb and the farmers forthwith raise
a clamour. The carpet snake if often kept by
farmers to kill mice and other vermin. We have
no protection in Western Australia for either of
these species, but I would like to learn the policy
of other States, and to know whether any steps
have been taken to protect these types of fauna.
Mr. Rainbird. —-The wedge-tail eagle is pro-
tected in Tasmania.
Mr. Griffiths. —We have recently begun further
inquiries with a view to determining whether it
should or should not be protected in N.S.W.
Mr. McNally. —ln Victoria we are having a big
controversy regarding the wedge-tail eagle, and
as is usually the case the newspapers have been
somewhat indiscriminate in their publicity. Cer-
tain farmers in the area of the Grampians com-
plain frequently, and one particular farmer has


offered a reward of £5 per head for every wedge-
tail eagle shot on his property. There have been
photos of properties in the Grampians showing
the wire fences with a line of ten or fifteen
eagles shot on the property, displayed with out-
stretched wings, and the farmers are crying out
about the whole thing. On the other hand people
interested in the eagles take an entirely different
view. They say that the eagle is of value in that
he keeps down the rabbit pest. One farmer
admits that they destroy the rabbits, but he keeps
stud sheep and if an eagle destroys even one
sheep he loses £lO. He does not care how many
rabbits are destroyed in addition. We are trying
to get some reliable data on this subject,
Mr. Fraser. —Have you any objection to snakes.
Mr. McNally. —Carpet snakes are often kept
in the shearing sheds as mousers.
Mr. Moorhouse. —Our Act says “ animal ” shall
be “ mammal ” therefore snakes are not listed on
our protected list. The wedge-tail eagle and the
crow are both unprotected, but the sane farmer
would not think of destroying even one crow.
Although they are unprotected the people still do
not wish to shoot them.
Dr. Pearson. —Our wedge-tail eagle is protected.
We had a photograph in the “ Mercury ” recently
of a man with a wedge-tail eagle he had shot.
Mr. McNally. —Do you take proceedings against
people shooting the wedge-tail eagle?
Dr. Pearson. —We called for a report, and it
was stated that the eagle attacked him.
Mr. Hallstrom. —l will move the following
resolution:—
“ That in view of the great value of work
done by aviculturists in the scientific study of
birds and in preserving certain species in
danger of extinction, this Conference recom-
mends to each State that aviculturists be en-
couraged by being permitted to keep protected
birds subject to proper safeguards.”
Seconded by Mr. Moorhouse, and carried.
Chairman. —It may be advisable for this Con-
ference to make a recommendation regarding the
next Conference. I think it would be a good
idea if we could have a Conference every two
years, at any rate. We might even go so far as
to decide tentatively where the next Conference
will be held.
Mr. Griffiths.— Perhaps we could express the
opinion first that Conferences should be held every
second year. I propose—
“ That a Conference be held every second
year.”
Seconded by Mr. Rainbird, and carried.
Mr. Griffiths. —The question is, who is to be
responsible, at this stage, for the next move?
Chairman. —As we are the hosts I think all
correspondence should be forwarded to us, and
we will see that each State is advised.
On behalf of the Conference Mr. Griffiths pro-
posed a vote of appreciation to the Chairman for
the excellent manner in which he had presided
over the Conference, and also to the Minister for
Agriculture who officiated at the early stages,
and this was carried unanimously.
The Conference then concluded.
H H. Pimblett, Government Printer, Tasmania.






