

a
NEW SOUTH WALES
LAND LAW REFORM
ALLIANCE.
CONFERENCE OF 1883,
SITTING IN TOWN HALL, SYDNEY,
From October 25th to November sth, 1883.
JJrrsilicnt —Me. JOHN GALE.
Hicc-IJrcsibcnt—Me. JOHN BOULDING.
cSccrctavics— Messes. J. CARROLL and E. PINKSTONE.
&yd;rtey $
BATSON & ATWATER, PRINTERS




i» ' -o .-.in
: 9iojj toct n r i
MANIFESTO.
The following Manifesto embodies the conclusions of the Con-
ference on matters of Land Law Reform :
1. Territorial division of the colony into Eastern, Central, and Western
Divisions.
2. Local Land Boards—. Chairman to be appointed by the Governor in
Council; other four members to be elected by selectors or hona fide
owners of not less than 40 acres; Chairman to have one vote only ; Board
to give decision on all cases, with the right of appeal from its decisions
to the Land Court.
3. Land Court of Appeal constituted as proposed in the Land Bill, to be
presided over by the Minister for Lands, and to be an open court, but not
more than half the panel of assessors to consist of officers in the public
service.
4. No lands to be acquired by virtue of improvements.
5. Conditional purchaser in Central Division to be allowed to take up
640 acres, and to lease 1,920 acres adjoining or contiguous, and to make
additional conditional purchases from his lease every five years, provided
he has faithfully complied with the legal conditions.
6. No person to be permitted to hold or make more than one original
conditional purchase in fifteen years.
7. No family selections.
8. Fencing term, three years.
9. Conditional purchase on proclaimed goldfields, as provided by Clause
49 of Land Bill, approved.
10. Auction sales abolished, except of towns and suburban lands.
11. No sales to be allowed without public competition.
12. Division of runs and fixity of tenure in Western Division. In the
Central and Eastern Divisions the lands to remain open for conditional
purchase and homestead lease as far as practicable.
13. Residents in cities and towns to select up to 320 acres; to fence
within one year; to cultivate one-sixth of the area for eight years succes-
sively ; no residence necessary, but no transfer for 15 years ; the price of
such land to be £2 per acre, ss. deposit, and 14 annual payments of
2s. 6d. each.
14. No money deposits to be required in instituting proceedings before
local Land Boards or Land Courts affecting compliance with the law or
rights to land.
15. No person to hold more than one annual lease.
16. Homestead leases in the Western and Central Divisions approved ;
no person to hold such lease by way of mortgage.


17. Deposits and modes of payments, one t tailing per acre deposit, and
19 annual instalments of one shilling per acre; legal notice to occupy to
be issued within three months from the approval of application by Land
Board, and survey to be completed within six months from date of
confirmation by Land Board.
18. Lessees to have no rights in resumed areas.
19. Clause 134 of Land Bill on trespass disapproved, but Clause 132 to
apply to all classes of landholders.
20. Land may be selected on any business day, Saturday excepted.
21. Clause 91 of Bill referring to scrub lands disapproved.
22. Where two or more simultaneous applications are received for one
portion of land, the local Land Board shall decide as to the bonafides of
the applicants, and then by lot or otherwise as to who shall have the land.
23. That where reserves are thrown open to selection the selector shall
only be required to pay for such improvements as are necessary and
useful to him in the opinion of the local Land Board.
24. All roads, as soon as surveyed, should be declared open for public use.
25. Mim'mnm rents of timber land to be £5 per section, but that the
local Land Boards have power to increase such rent.
26. Daughters between the ages of 16 and 21 of conditional purchasers
residing upon their land should not be required to fulfil the residence
condition, if living with their parents.
27. Eeserves not required for public use to be thrown open for
selection.
28. That the law of trespass with regard to stock should be amended.
29. That the holders of conditional purchases at the passing of the
new Act shall not be allowed to make an additional conditional purchase
byjvirtue of more than one such conditional purchase to the maximum
area allowed by the Act.


their names ;—
Name of Association
Delegates.
Cooyal and Mudgee P. S. A.
W. C. Wall
Corowa Branch L. Alliance.
L. H. Levin
Forbes F. S. A.
Chas. E. Thatcher
Ginninderra P. S. A.
Percy C. Hodgkinson
Gunbah P. S. A.
John Flanagan
Gunnedah
E. Clemesha
Hume Farmers’ Union
David Draffin
Kempsey Land League
E. Rudder
Moruya and Bungonia L. L. E. A.
George E. Ranken
Moama L. L. R. A.
J. M. Chanter
Murray District F. S. A.
R. H. Cheriton
Quean bey an Land and Roads
t John Gale
( George De Sails
Quirindi Farmers
Robert Wilson
Quirindi Free Selectors
J. J. Poole
MINUTES OF CONFERENCE.
First Sitting.
Minutes of meeting of Conference Delegates, held in the Town
Hall, Sydney, Thursday, 25 th October, 1883.
Mr. John Gale, as convener of the Conference, was tempo-
rarily voted to the chair.
The following Delegates were present, and produced certifi-
cates of their election to represent the Associations attached to
( G. Brown H. S. S. Bond
Sydney P. and P. Reform League !J. B. Douglas E. C. Luscombe
I W. Richardson
Urangaline and Brookong Selectors M. O’Connell
Wheeo and Grabben Gullen F. S. Martin Tully
Yass Plains F. S. John Boulding
Dubbo F. S. W. P. Crick
Gwyder F. S. James Carroll
The Chairman explained that the Conference had been
convened by him in accordance with a resolution of the last
Conference of Free Selectors’ Delegates. In fixing the actual
date he had been guided by a resolution arrived at by a prelimi-
nary meeting held at Gunning. He announced that thirty-three
Associations had expressed their intention of being represented
at the Conference.
On the motion of Mr. Cheriton, seconded by Mr. Boulding,
it was resolved —“ That Mr. Gale be President of the Conference,


and that the cordial thanks of the Delegates be accorded to him
for his successful efforts in the interval since the closing of the
prior Conference.”
Eesolved—“That Mr. John Boulding be appointed Vice-
President of the Conference, and Messrs. James Carroll and
J. C. Hodgkinson, Joint Secretaries.”
The following correspondence was laid on the table :—Nume-
rous letters from secretaries of Land Associations in reference
to the appointment of Delegates; telegrams from Messrs. P.
Pinkstone and P. Gr. Piggott, Delegates for Yammatree and
Mitta respectively, announcing their inability to arrive in time
for the first sitting ; memorandum from the Minister for Lands,
forwarding fifty copies of map of the colony, showing division
of districts.
Messrs. Gr. Morris and Gr. Eanken were introduced by Mr.
Luscombe, and offered their co-operation in furthering the
objects of the Conference, stating that they had in preparation
a series of notes and comments on the Land Bill now before
Parliament, and w T hich they hojied would be printed and placed
at the disposal of the Conference in a few days.
The following gentlemen were appointed to act on Sub-
Committees, on the motion of Mr. Eichardson, seconded by Mr.
Planagan ;
Standing Orders Sub-Committee.
Messrs. Chanter, Wall, Eudder, Tully.
Progress Sub-Committee.
Messrs. Gale, Tully, Boulding, Oheritou, Thatcher, Wilson, Clemesha.
Finance Committee.
On the motion of Mr. Chanter, seconded by Mr. Wall —
Messrs. Flanagan, Poole, Eichardson, and Crick.
A discussion having arisen as to the matter of plurality of
representation, it -was determined to refer the question to the
Orders Committee.
It was resolved —“ That a cordial vote of thanks be accorded
to Messrs. Morris and Eanken for their able report on laud
matters.”
Confirmed. John Gtale, President.
Town Hall, Sydney, 26th October, 1883.
Second Sitting.
Held at the Toim Hall. Sydney, 26th October , 1883.
The minutes of the last meeting were read and confirmed, and
correspondence read.


The report of the Standing Orders Committee was received,
and, after discussion, adopted as follows :
RULES OE ORDER.
1. That each Association have one vote only. Any Delegate representing
two or more Associations shall be allowed to record one vote for
each Association so represented.
2. Any Association represented at this Conference by more than one
Delegate, each Delegate shall have the right of debate, the voting
power to be reduced to one vote.
3. No Delegate shall be allowed to speak more than once to each motion,
the mover only having the right of reply.
4 That all motions, or notices of motion, be in writing, and be dealt with
in the order received.
5. That no motion be debated, when notice of the same has been given,
until the day that on which notice of motion was tabled.
6. That no motion be rescinded until notice to rescind such motion has
been given one clear day before it becomes the order of debate.
7. That an amendment on an amendment be the full extent to which a
motion can be extended.
8. That the decision of the Chairman on every point of order be final.
The following additional Delegates joined the Conference,
viz.:—Messrs. F. J. Piggott, Wagga F. S. A.; Gr. Day, Albury;
E. Barbour, Wamboota ; W. B. Christie, Delegate for the Fair
Play League of New South Wales ; E. Killen, Jerilderie Pro-
gress Committee ; J. Pearse, Argoon and Kulki.
Air. W. B. Christie presented fifty copies of his pamphlet on
the Land Laws of New South Wales.
Thirty-five copies of the new Land Bill were received from
the Grovernment Printer.
Moved by Mr. J. M. Chanter without notice, seconded by
Mr. W. Eichardson, and carried —“ That this meeting of Dele-
gates do now proceed to the consideration of the new Land
Bill; that it be read and considered, clause by clause, until the
whole is concluded.
Clauses 1 to 7 of the new Bill were read.
Clause 8, page 2, read.
Moved by Mr. W. B. Christie, seconded by Mr. W. Eichard-
son —“ That in the opinion of this Conference the geographical
division of the colony, as proposed in Clause 8, is fraught witb
danger to the best interests of the future welfare of the people."
Moved, as an amendment, by Mr. Piggott, and seconded by
Mr. Flanagan —That this Conference approves of the divisions
as proposed in the Grovernment Land Bill.”
Messrs. Crick, Cheriton, Barbour, Howard, Wall, and Pearse
supported the amendment. Messrs. Eudder and Carroll opposed
the amendment.
The motion was still under consideration when the Conference
adjourned until 9.30 a.m. next day.
John Hale, President.
Town Hall, Sydney, 27th October, 1883.


Third Sitting.
Held at the Town Hall, Sydney, Saturday, 27th October, 1883.
The minutes of the last meeting were read and confirmed, and
the roll called.
The reading of the new Land Bill was proceeded with.
On the motion of Mr. J. M. Chanter, seconded by Mr. R. H.
Cheriton, it was resolved —“ That the question of the division of
the colony be postponed until after the principles of the area
and classification have been considered, and a final vote taken on
the same.”
On the motion of Mr. Christie, seconded by Mr. Carroll, it
was resolved —“ That Messrs. Ranken and Morris be accorded
the right of debate at the Conference.”
Reading of Land Bill continued.
Clauses 9 and 10 adopted in terms of Bill.
Clause 11, Local Land Boards. —Moved by Mr. Crick, and
seconded by Mr. Piggott —“ That in the opinion of this meeting
the Chairman of the local Land Boards should be nominated
by the Governor, and the other members be elected by ballot;
that no one shall be qualified to vote at any such election unless
such person shall be possessed of real estate of the value at
least of £2O ; that the Chairman shall receive such salary as
may be decided on, and other members shall be allowed travel-
ling expenses.”
Moved, as an amendment, by Mr. Chanter, seconded by Mr.
Carroll —“ That this Conference approves of local Land Boards
consisting of five members ; the Chairman to be appointed by
the Governor in Council, and four members to be elected by
residents of the district, being bona fide owners or selectors of
not less than forty acres of land.”
The amendment was carried.
Resolved —“ That Clause 12 be altered, giving the Chairman
of a local Land Board an original vote only.”
Clause 14, Sub-section 5.- —Moved by Mr. Christie —That
all the words after ‘ complaint,’ line 43, be omitted, with a view
to the insertion of ‘ and the Board shall, on the day appointed,
proceed to hear and determine such complaint, and the costs
shall go with the verdict in the same manner as in cases at
Courts of Petty Sessions.’”
Mr. P. Pinkstoue joined the Conference.
Moved by Mr. Richardson, seconded by Mr. Killen —“ That
Clause 18 be omitted, and the decision of Local Boards be final.”
Amendment moved by Mr. Chanter, seconded by Mr. Cheriton
—“ That this Conference agrees with the principle of Land
Courts.”


Fourth Sitting.
Monday, Oct. 29, 1883.
Minutes of proceedings held on the above day; Mr. John Gale,
President, in the chair.
The following new Delegates were received:—Messrs. H.
Hayes, Wagga Wagga Selectors’Union; James Pyle, Murray
Hut Free Selectors’ Association; J. J. Poole, ;
Roche Ardill, Buckinbah; Irwin Smith, Wallendbeen ; and
Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan, Trades and Labour Council, Sydney.
Minutes of preceding sitting were read and confirmed ; and
the President read the authorities presented by new Delegates.
Before proceeding to business, Mr, Hodgkinson rose and gave
reasons why he could not fulfil the duties of Secretary; and he
suggested that some one should be appointed in his place.
After some compliments paid to Mr. Hodgkinson, and it
being admitted that his reasons were good ones, his resignation
was accepted.
Mr. Fred. Pinkstone was elected to fill the vacancy.
Consideration of Clause 18 was then resumed ; and after a
lengthy discussion, the motion moved by Messrs. Chanter and
Cheriton, on Saturday, affirming the principle of a Land Court
of Appeal, as provided in the Land Bill, was adopted.
The Conference then considered the proposed constitution of
the Land Court; and this question provoked an animated dis-
cussion. It was eventually resolved, on motion of Messrs.
Boulding and Pearse, that the constitution of the Land Courts
remain as proposed in the Bill; the division being 12 to 11.
The following clauses, 19 to 23, were thus dealt with : —l9
was passed without debate ; in 20, the words “at least,” first
line of clause, were altered to “ not more than,” on motion of
Messrs. Christie and Pyle; 21 passed, and 22 and 23 were also
passed.
This concluded the consideration of Part 11. of the Bill; and
the Conference then reverted to Clause 14, Sub-section VI.,
which was passed.
As to Sub-section VII., it was amended, on motion of Messrs.
Christie and O’Connell, so as to make it compulsory on the Land
Board to give a decision in any case within its jurisdiction.
Clause 17. —On motion of Messrs. Boulding and Crick, it
w T as resolved to strike out the requirement of a deposit of £2O ;
and a feeling was expressed that all money deposits required by
the Bill in connection with courts and inquiries should be
struck out.
Part 111.
Clause 24 was postponed.


Clause 25.—0 n this Mr. Richardson moved, and Mr.Luscombe
seconded, the following motion —“That, in view of the large
increase of population which must necessarily take place during
the next thirty years, it is advisable, in the interests of the
public, that no further alienation of land shall take place ; but,
instead, the principle of leasing should be adopted, and be
applied to all classes of land the property of the State, whether
town, suburban, agricultural, or pastoral land.”
Messrs. Howard and Piggott moved —“ That the clause stand
part of the Bill.”
The motion was supported by Messrs. Christie, Poole, and
Tully; and w r as opposed by Messrs. Flanagan, O’Sullivan, Wall,
Rudder, Chanter, Boulding, and Pinkstone; and the attention
of the Conference was drawn to the serious and sweeping
character of the resolution.
An unpleasant contretemps here occurred, through certain
interruptions and conduct, which the Conference felt justified
in resenting with the following resolution, moved by Messrs.
Crick and Piggott:—“That the Protection and Political Reform
League be requested to withdraw Mr. Richardson, and send
another Delegate in his place.”
This was carried by a large majority; and the sitting was
adjourned till the following morning.
John G-ale, President.
Confirmed, 30/10/83.
Fifth Sitting.
Sydney, Tuesday, Oct. 30, 1883.
Minutes of proceedings held on the above date; Mr. John Gale
being in the chair.
On the minutes being read, Mr. Tully objected to allow
himself to be committed to the support of Mr. Richardson’s
motion of the previous day on the question of leasing v. alien-
ating the lands ; and thereafter the minutes were confirmed.
New Delegates were received as under: Messrs. John Wynne
and John Black, as representing the Molong Farmers’ Asso-
ciation.
Correspondence was read as follows:—(1.) Letter from Mr.
John Plummer, hon. secretary Local Self-Government Associa-
tion, asking that a deputation might be received from that body
on the subject of elective Land Boards. (2.) Letter from Mr. J.
Waddell, Orange, giving his opinion on and entering his protest
against the rent proposed in the new Land Bill on homestead
areas in the Western District. (3.) A burlesque letter, signed


“ John Tuthill.” (4.) Telegram from Mr. Robert W. Heathcote,
on behalf of the Brewarrina free selectors, referring the Confer-
ence 1o an article in the Brewarrina Express. (5.) Letter from
Marrowie Tree Selectors’ Association, with accompanying resolu-
tions on the questions under discussion by the Conference.
The correspondence was received.
On motion of Messrs. Clemesba and Howard, it was resolved —
“That, in view of the fact that the Conference had already
disposed of the question of Laud Boards, the deputation of the
Local Government Association be not received.
The debate was then resumed on Mr. Richardson’s motion on
the question of leasing v. alienation; and Mr. Chanter moved
the following amendment thereon —“ That this Conference,
while fully admitting the wisdom of the State leasing the lands
of the colony, are still of opinion that at the present time it is
more judicious to support the conditional sale of part of the
public estate, until the question of leasing has been more fully
considered by the public at large.”
This was seconded by Mr. Crick.
After debate, Mr. Richardson replied, and a vote was taken,
with the result that the amendment was carried, and the prin-
ciple of the clause in the Land Bill was affirmed.
At the close of this debate, Mr. Christie moved for the sus-
pension of the Standing Orders, with a view to the reinstatement
of Mr. Richardson ; but the motion was rejected.
Clauses 25 and 26 of the Bill were postponed.
On Clause 27, Messrs. O’Connell and Draffin moved—“ That
the maximum area allowed in the Central and Eastern Divisions
be 1280 acres, with family selections to the amount of 320 acres
for other members of the family (children only) ; and that resi-
dence on the part of the parents be sufficient.”
Postponed.
Clause 8 was then taken up again (a minute of a former
sitting being rescinded to allow of this) ; and Mr. Christie
moved —“That the geographical division of the colony, as pro-
posed in Clause 8 of the new Land Bill, is fraught with danger
to the best interests of the future welfare of the people.”
An amendment standing in the minutes of the 26th instant,
in the name of Messrs. Piggott and Flanagan —“ That the Con-
ference approves of the divisions as proposed in the Land Bill,”
was also put; and the result was that the amendment was
carried.
Clause 24 was next considered, when Mr. Click moved, on
Sub-section II. —“ That those persons who hold hona fide selec-
tions under any of the repealed Acts, situate in the Western
Division, should have a right to select as additional selections
any area, so that the area so selected and their original selec-


tions do not in the aggregate exceed 2,560 acres. (2.) That
such right be exercised within six months from the passing of
the new Land Bill.”
Seconded by Mr. Carroll.
Mr. Pinkstone moved, as an amendment —“ That we should
not admit the principle that any part of the country shall he set
apart by legislation to the exclusive benefit of any one particular
industry.”
Seconded by Mr. Plauagan.
Mr. Poole moved, further—“ That Sub-section 11., Clause 24,
Part 111., stand part of the Bill.”
Seconded by Mr. Draffin.
After a lengthy discussion, the amendment, that the clause
stand unaltered, was carried.
The President replied to questions as to obtaining the railway
refunds for members who had paid their fares to the Conference.
Sub-section 111., Clause 24. —Mr. Crick moved, and it was
seconded by Mr. O’Sullivan, and carried —-“That in the opinion
of this meeting it is a great hardship and gross injustice that no
provision is made for selectors whose holdings are situated on
the leasehold area. 2. That Sections 45 and 46 apply to selec-
tions as well on the leasehold area as on the resumed area.
3. That Sub-section 111. of Clause 24 be altered so as to allow
of such application.”
Sub-sections IY. and Y. were passed, YI. postponed, and YII.
passed ; YIII. passed.
As to Sub-section IX., Mr. Planagan moved a motion, which
he afterwards withdrew in favour of the following by Mr.
Crick, which was seconded by Mr. Pearse, and carried, namely —
“ That inasmuch as this meeting is opposed to allowing the run-
holder to occupy the resumed area, Sub-section IX. of Clause
24 be struck out. 2. That this meeting further considers that
Section 44 will effectually deal justice to the owner of improve-
ments. 8. That that part of Section 24 after the words
‘ Repealed Acts under this Act,’ be struck out.”
An extension of time beyond 4 o’clock was agreed to.
Before closing, Mr. Boulding moved (as a result of the speech
by Mr. Chanter in the preceding debate) —“ That this Confer-
ence unanimously ask Messrs. Day, Levin, and De Salis to
move, in their places in Parliament, for all papers re the Perri-
coota Reserves, to be laid on the table of the House.”
Seconded by Mr. Chanter, and carried nem. con.
The sitting was then closed.
John Gale, President.
31/10/83.


Sixth Sitting.
"Wednesday, Oct. 81, 1883.
Minutes of ‘proceedings of the above, held on the above date;
Mr. John Gale, President, in the chair.
Minutes of the preceding sitting were confirmed.
Discussion was resumed on Clause 25, when Mr. Rudder
moved to the effect —“ That no person should be permitted to
make more than one conditional purchase under the new Act in
fifteen years.”
Seconded by Mr. Thatcher. ?
Mr. Wall moved the insertion of the words “ held or ’ before
the word “ make,” in line 49, and the word “ made ” before the
word “ under,” in same line. Seconded by Mr. Flanagan.
Messrs. Clemesha and Piggott moved —“ That the clause
stand as part of the Bill.”
After a long debate, Mr Wall’s amendment was carried.
Clause 26. —Postponed for next one.
Clause 27. —On reading this clause, Mr. O’Connell moved
“ That the maximum area allowed in the Central Division be
1,280 acres, with family selection to the amount of 320 acres ;
and in the Eastern Division 1,280 acres only; and that the
Western Division remain as provided for in the new Land Bill
now under discussion.” Seconded by Mr. Dralfin.
On this motion, Messrs. Crick and Piggott moved ‘ That the
clause stand part of the Bill.”
Messrs. Pearse and Tully moved an amendment further in
favour of the clause, with the addition of providing for family
selection of 320 acres in the Central Division. This was rejected.
Messrs. Carroll and Pearse moved a substitute amendment,
embracing the principle of family selection ; and it was rejected.
Messrs. Pyle and Flanagan moved a further substitute amend-
ment to regulate the areas in the Central Division ; and it was
also rejected.
Messrs. Chanter and Wall moved a further substitute amend-
ment as follows “ That this Conference recommends the
Government to insert a clause in the Bill to the following
effect; The conditional purchaser in the Central Division to be
allowed to take up 640 acres as a conditional purchase, and to
lease 1,920 acres adjoining, or as near thereto as possible ; and
that he be allowed to make further conditional purchases of 640
acres from his lease every five years, provided that he has faith-
fully carried out the conditions of the law as applied to his
holding.” This was carried.
Messrs. Hodgkinson and Flanagan moved here “ That the
Government be requested to insert a clause to provide for
family selections which was put to the vote, and a division


called for, with the following result —ayes, 12; noes, 15. The
motion was therefore rejected.
At this stage, after some remarks from Mr. Wall, it was
resolved to adjourn for fifteen minutes, and that in the interim
the Progress Committee should prepare a platform of the remain-
ing main features of the new Land Bill and principles of Land
Law Eeform, and submit them to the Conference for con-
sideration. This course was taken with the view of facilitating
business.
The following platform was submitted, on resuming, by the
Progress Committee
1. Division of runs and fixity of tenure.
2. Classification of lands.
3. Improvements on purchases and leaseholds.
4. Annual leases on resumed areas.
5. Homestead leases on resumed areas.
6. Deposits and modes of payments.
7. Limitation of date of survey.
8. Should pre-leases be abolished p
9. Should goldfield reserves debar settlement ?
The foregoing platform being approved, but understood not
to prevent additions thereto,
Mr. Hodgkinson moved—“ That in the opinion of this Con-
ference the division of runs and security of tenure, as proposed
by the new Land Bill, are detrimental to the best interests of
the country.”
Mr. O’Connell seconded the motion.
Mr. O’Sullivan moved —“ That the Conference, while object-
ing to the division of runs, sees no objection to granting fair
fixity of tenure on purely pastoral land.”
Seconded by Mr. Carroll.
Mr. Chanter further moved—“ That in the Westeru Division
it is advisable that a reasonable fixity of tenure be given to the
pastoral occupants for the occupation of their runs, providing
that in no case shall the Government part with the fee simple
of the whole or any part of the lands so occupied. That iu the
Central and Eastern Divisions no fixity of tenure be given, but
all the lands remaining unalienated from the Crown shall be
thrown open for honnfide selection and settlement under the
conditions of this Bill.”
This was seconded by Mr. Boulding.
Messrs. Flanagan, Rudder, and Clemesha spoke against the
principles of division of runs and fixity of tenure; and the last-
named gentleman had possession of the floor when the sitting
was adjourned till the following day.
John Gale, President.
Read and confirmed, Ist Nov., 1883.


Seventh Sitting
Thursday, Nov. 1, 1883.
Minutes of Meeting held on the above date; Mr. John Gale,
President, in the chair.
Minutes of preceding meeting were read and confirmed.
Before resuming the debate, the Conference accepted an
exposition of the intentions of the Land Bill, given by Mr.
Ranken (of Messrs. Morris and Ranken), on the question of
division of runs and consolidation of same.
New Delegate. —A letter was read authorising Mr. Alderman
Burke to act as delegate on behalf of Tamworth farmers and
free selectors. (2.) A telegram was read from J. Connor, at
Glen Innes, as follows: —“ None in town. You are quite safe
in acting, at least on our behalf.” Addressed to Mr. Christie.
The President made a statement again re railway passes ; and,
further, that the Finance Committee recommended a levy of £2
to be made on each society or body represented at the Confer-
ence, to form a fund for covering the expenses thereof.
On the motion of Mr. Cheriton, the recommendation as to the
levy was adopted.
A question as to expenses and claims was raised, when the
previous question was carried; and the debate on the division
of runs and fixity of tenure was resumed.
Debate resumed by Mr. Clemesha, and he was followed bv
Messrs. Cheriton, Levin, Wall, Draffin, Pearse, Ardill, Burke,
Crick, Christie, and Pinkstone; and Mr. Hodgkinson replied.
At the close of the debate, the amendment on the amendment
moved by Mr. Chanter was rejected. Mr. O’Sullivan’s amend-
ment was also rejected; and on the original motion, the
following division occurred :
Ayes. Noes.
Mr. Ardill Mr. Wynne
Wall Poole
Clemesha Howard
Pyle Chanter
Pearse Eanken
Wilson Thatcher
O’Sullivan De Salis
O’Connell Tully
Burke Draffin
Smith Levin
Flanagan Christie
Rudder Cheriton
Hodgkinson Cheriton
Pinkstone Crick
The votes being equal, the Vice-Chairman (who was presiding
in the absence of the President) gave his casting-vote with the
•“ Noes.”


lI.—CLASSIFICATION OF LANDS.
On this, the second question in the platform,
Mr. Christie moved—“ That the principle be approved.”
Mr. Carroll seconded the motion.
At this stage it was resolved, on motion of Mr. Howard —
“That each speaker for the future shall be confined to ten
minutes on each question.”
Messrs. Rudder and Flanagan spoke to the question, when
Mr. Crick moved —“ That this meeting does not approve of any
system of classification, as that principle involves survey before
selection.”
Mr. Wall seconded Mr. Crick’s amendment.
Further debate followed, and Mr. Christie replied, when the
Conference disapproved, without division, of the principle of
classification.
lII.—IMPROVEMENTS ON PURCHASES AND LEASE-
HOLDS.
Under this head the discussion was confined to the question as
to the term of fencing.
Messrs. Crick and Rudder moved to the effect that the term
allowed for fencing should be three years ; Messrs. Flanagan and
Wall in favour of five years ; and Messrs. Hodgkinson _ and
Cheriton moved a further amendment in favour of requiring
durable improvements to the value of 10s. per acre within five
years ; or, in lieu thereof, a ring fence within three years.
After debate, the decision was in favour of requiring fencing
within three years.
A report was put in by Mr. Flanagan re passes.
IV.—ANNUAL LEASES ON RESUMED AREAS.
Mr. Wall moved—“ That Clause 89 of the new Land Bill, with
Sub-sections 1 to 9, be struck out.”
Seconded by Mr. Carroll.
Messrs. Crick and Pearse moved—“ That the clause stand part
of the Bill, with the addition of this Sub-section, ‘ that no person
hold more than one annual lease.’ ”
Both were put, and rejected.
Mr. Hodgkinson moved thereupon —“ That the clause stand
part of the Bill.”
This was also rejected, and the sitting was adjourned.
John Dale, President.
Confirmed, 2nd November, 1883.


Eighth Sitting.
Friday, Nov. 2, 1883.
Minutes of Meeting held on the above date; Mr. John Gale, President,
in the chair.
Minutes of previous meeting were read and confirmed.
An application made by Mr. Levy for permission to address
the Conference as a visitor was not complied with.
A letter from the Hon. Secretary of the Protection and Political
Reform League, Sydney, was read, conveying a resolution which
declined to withdraw Mr. Richardson from the Conference.
A letter was read from Mr. George Ranken, having reference
to the business of the Conference.
On resuming the debate on Mr. Wall’s motion of the previous
sitting—“ That Clause 89 of the new Land Bill be disapproved,
with sub-sections 1 to 9 (under the question of Annual Leases on
Resumed Areas)” —Messrs. Cheriton and O’Connell moved an
amendment —“ That the clause remain, with the exception that
no person should be allowed to hold more than two leases.”
Messrs. Crick and Rudder moved a further amendment as
follows :—“ That in the opinion of this meeting the most effectual
way to prevent dummyism, and to ensure the legitimate disposal
of Crown lands to bona fide selectors, is not to allow the lessee or
run-holder to occupy the resumed area under an occupation
license; that the lessee or run-holder should not be allowed to
have any right, title, or interest in or to the resumed area ; that
Clause 89 be struck out.”
This amendment on the amendment, striking out the clause,
was carried.
V.—HOMESTEAD LEASES.
Mr. Cheriton moved, and it was seconded by Mr. Crick, and
carried —■“ That the area of a homestead lease shall not be more
than as provided for in the Bill; and that no pea-son should have
the right of holding such homestead lease by way of mortgage.”
YL— DEPOSITS AND MODES OF PAYMENT.
After ample discussion of several motions and amendments on
this matter, the following was resolved, upon a motion of Messrs.
Tully and Draffin —“ That the deposit on selections be Is. per
acre, with 19 annual instalments of Is. per acre ; then title-deeds
to be issued.”
Messrs. Chanter and Pyle moved a further amendment on this
matter, but it was rejected.
Mr. Chanter thereupon moved—“ That within three months
from date of recommendation of conditional purchase by any


local Land Board, the Governor in Council should issue to the
conditional purchaser a legal notice to occupy such land.”
The previous motion was moved by Messrs. Carroll and Howard;
but the motion was carried by the casting-vote of the Chairman
(Mr. Boulding).
YIL—LIMITATION OF DATE OF SUEVEi.
By large majority, on motion of Messrs. Crick and Howard,
the term for completing surveys was fixed at six months.
YIII. —SHOULD PEE-LEASES BE ABOLISHED?
Mr. Pinkstone moved —“ That under the new land system
existing rights in pre-leases, where claimed, should be permitted
on the conditions of the present law.”
This was seconded by Mr. Cheriton, and it was put and carried ;
but the division was questioned, and it was agreed to take the
division again, when the former decision was reversed. Some
members declined to vote the second time.
IX.—SHOULD GOLDFIELD EESEEYES DEBAE
SETTLEMENT ?
The provisions of Clause 49 of the Land Bill on this head
were approved, on the motion of Messrs. Chanter and Carroll.
X.—AUCTION SALES.
Mr. O’Connell moved, and Mr. Boulding seconded— 1 “ That
auction sales be abolished, except for town and suburban lands.”
This motion was carried unanimously.
XI.—NON-EESIDENTIAL CONDITIONAL PUECHASES.
On this subject Mr. O’Sullivan moved a motion in favour of it,
with the exception of requiring fencing within 12 months, and
not allowing transfer until fifteen years.
This was seconded by Mr. Crick, and, though discussed at some
length, was rejected, on division, by 13 to 12, by show of hands.
Messrs. O’Sullivan and Eudder thereupon moved the following
—“ That residents of cities and towns be allowed to select up to
320 acres, to fence within one year, and cultivate one-sixth
portion of the whole area selected after the first two years for
eight years successively ; no residence necessary, but no transfer
allowed for fifteen years; the price of such land to be £2 per
per acre, ss. deposit, and 14 annual instalments of 2s. 6d. per
acre.” This motion was put to the meeting, and carried.
This concluded the discussion of the platform as brought up
from the Progress Committee.


On the question of Trespass, Mr. Bo aiding- moved—“ That
Clause 134 of the new Land Bill be struck out.”
Seconded by Mr. O’Connell.
An amendment was moved ; but the motion was carried.
Selection Day.—lt was resolved unanimously, on motion of
Messrs. Chanter and Pyle—“ That applications for conditional
purchases shall be received at any land office upon any business
da} r , except Saturday.”
As to the system of deciding by lot, the following resolution
(also moved by Mr. Chanter, and for which he was complimented
by the members) was also carried unanimously—“ That where
two or more applications for one portion have been received by
the local Land Board, the Board shall decide, by lot or other-
wise, after taking evidence of bona fides , as to who shall have the
land so applied for.”
Referring to the provisions of the Land Bill on Scrub Lands,
Messrs. O’Connell and Draffin moved to have Clause 91 expunged;
but on division the votes were equal, and the Chairman (Mr.
Boulding) gave his casting-vote to expunge the clause.
Mr. Carroll made an effort to re-open the question of division
of runs and fixity of tenure ; but before any conclusion was come
to as to proceeding with it, the sitting Avas adjourned till 7
o’clock same evening.
Before adjourning, however, Messrs. Carroll and Burke had
moved the following motion—That in the opinion of this Con-
ference the theory propounded by the Government of dividing
the runs of the colony is impracticable, unless the existing
rights of alienees be disregarded ; and the security of tenure to
lessees of half their runs would facilitate their acquiring, by
objectionable means, the resumed moiety thereof, and effectually
check bona fide selection, and thereby retard further settlement,
particularly in the Eastern and Central Divisions.”
Messrs. Tally and Flanagan moved for the postponement of
the question.
Messrs. Chanter and Gale moved further—“ That this Confer-
ence approves of division of runs and fixity of tenure as regards
the Crown lands contained within the Western Division, but are
of opinion that all unalienated lands in the Central and Eastern
Divisions be throAvn open to conditional purchase and homestead
lease, as far as practicable.”
After debate, Mr. Carroll replied.
Mr. Chanter’s amendment was carried ; and although fur-
ther attempts were made, to arrive at a different conclusion,
the proposal of Messrs. Chanter and Gale was again affirmed,
and became the final resolution.
The following miscellaneous resolutions Avere arrived at:—
Moved by Messrs. Cheriton and Flanagan —“ That where a
road between two holdings shall be allowed to remain fenced on


tlie one side only, the one neglecting to fence shall pay half the
cost of the fence erected by the other holder.”
This was carried without opposition.
On the motion of Messrs. Thatcher and Pyle, it was unani-
mously resolved that all advertisements affecting land should he
published in the local papers, as well as in the Government
Gazette.
On the motion of Messrs. Pyle and Cheriton, it was resolved—
“ That where a reserve is thrown open for selection containing
unnecessary or superfluous improvements, the selector shall only
pay for such improvements as are necessary and useful to him,
subject to the opinion of the local Land Board.”
By Messrs. Boulding and Cheriton—“ That all roads should
be dpen to the public use as soon as surveyed.” This was carried
without division.
By Messrs. Chanter and Flanagan—“ That no sales be allowed
without public competition.” Carried.
Mr. Rudder introduced the question of preservation or con-
servation of timber, which was discussed at some length, with
the following ultimate conclusion (moved as an amendment by
Messrs. Burke and Flanagan)—“That the Crown retain 400
additional acres of land in the centre of every 2560-acre block
issued to every conditional purchaser; and that all purchasers
adjoining such lands may enclose them and use them for grazing
at a nominal rental, provided always that timber growing upon
such land shall be protected and conserved.”
The sitting was then closed, at a little after 10 o’clock.
John Gale, President.
Confirmed 9.45 p.m., 3/11/83.
Ninth Sitting.
Saturday, 3rd November, 1883.
Minutes of Meeting held on above date ; Mr. J. Gale , President , in
the chair.
Minutes of last meeting read and confirmed.
Mr. J. Broderick made Ids first appearance, and took his seat
as the duly appointed Delegate of the Crookwell Free Selectors’
Association.
Mr. Rudder proposed —“ That no person be allowed to acquire
or hold by direct purchase from the Crown or otherwise more
than a certain specified area of land in any of the three Divisions
of the country, such areas to increase as the quality falls, and
to decrease as the quality rises. That such areas shall not be
more than 15,000 acres second-class pastoral, and 640 acres first-
class agricultural.”


Negatived, after it liad received Messrs. Flanagan and Tally’s
support.
Mr. Chanter proposed—“ That this Conference agrees with the
principle of limitation of area, and requests the Government to
seriously consider the subject, with a view to introducing legis-
lation that will prevent remaining Crown lands of the colony
being held by a few monopolists in fee simple.”
Seconded by Mr. Howard, and carried.
Mr. Pyle proposed, and Mr. Cheriton seconded —“ That female
conditional purchasers under the age of 21 years be allowed to
reside at home with their parents, who are selectors.”
Mr. Carroll proposed, as an amendment, which was seconded
by Mr. O’Connell—“ That the Government be requested to pro-
vide in the new Bill for family selections, adjoining or contiguous
to the parents’ original holdings, in the ease of females under
21 and males under 16 years; and that the maximum area of
such selections should not exceed 320 acres in the Central Divi-
sion and 160 acres in the Eastern Division.” Negatived.
The motion was carried, and was supported by the mover and
seconder of the amendment.
At this stage Mr. Poole, of the Finance Committee moved the
adjournment of the debate, with a view of directing attention to
the fact that some delegates objected to payment of the levy
of £2.
Mr. Wall took advantage of the adjournment to address the
Conference on the subject of Annual Leases. As that question
had been duly considered and decided the day previously,
Mr. Wall was ruled out of order.
Whereupon, business being resumed, Mr. Pinkstone proposed,
and Mr. Crick seconded—“ That the Finance Committee be
directed to submit a statement of all claims made against the
Conference in time for their settlement before the final adjourn-
ment.” Carried.
Mr. Thatcher proposed, and Mr. O’Connell seconded—“ That
with reference to Section 118 of Part 111., the minimum rent of
640 acres of timber land be £5 per annum, instead of £lO, in the
Central Division.” Lost.
Mr. Wall and Mr. Carroll proposed—“ That the minimum
price be £5, but that local Land Board have the power to
increase the rent.”
Mr. Pyle proposed—“ That the law of trespass, as it at
present stands with regard to stock, should be amended.”
Mr. O’Sullivan proposed—“ That the Conference approves of
progressive land tax.”
Mr. Chanter and Mr. Howard proposed—“ That this Conference
does not consider the time has yet arrived when it would be Arise
or judicious to consider a land tax policy.” Carried.


Mr. O’Sullivan thought the holders of 7,000 acres of freehold
should be taxed.
Mr. Carroll thought that area too high; but he would not
object to a tax upon holders of freeholds and even conditional
purchasers of not less than 2,560 acres.
Mr. Pinkstone moved, and Mr. Carroll seconded —“ That we
resolve ourselves into a committee of the whole to draft a platform
embodying the principles of Land Law Eeform to be finally
adopted by the Conference.”
Mr. Chanter and Mr. Cheriton proposed “ That the
Secretaries be instructed to have one hundred copies of the
minutes of the proceedings printed, showing the number of
sittings, the number of attendances of individual Delegates,
and that copies be issued to Delegates.” Carried.
At this stage Mr. Eudder contended to be heard upon the
subject of “ Eemission of Interest.” Several members con-
sidered it inopportune to advert to that question; but as
Mr. Eudder persisted in moving a resolution, it was proposed
that that gentleman be heard without discussion.
The Vice-President (in the chair) ruled that the last resolu-
tion was irregular, and out of order; and further stated that
if Mr. Eudder was to be heard at all, the discussion arising
from his motion could not be suppressed.
Whereupon Mr. Eudder moved —“ That on all selections on
which the conditions of residence and improvement have been
fulfilled, which shall have been resided on by the applicant,
or, if transferred, by the transferree, for the term of fifteen
years, which at the time of making application shall be the
lona fide home of the original holder, or, if transferred, by the
transferree —that, on application, all interest paid on such
selections shall be remitted, or stand in lieu of principal.”
Mr. Chanter and Mr. Carroll were in favour of the “ abolition
of interest,” which the Conference had provided for previously
under the head of “ Payments,” and they considered that asking
the Treasury to disgorge so large a sum —some millions
would be asking too much, and that a retrospective law of that
kind is not advisable.
Mr. Planagan supported and seconded Mr. Eudder’s motion,
which was put and negatived.
Mr. Chanter proposed, as an amendment on Mr. Pinkstone’s
motion —“ That this Conference close its discussions upon the
principles of the Land Bill at 12.45 this day, after which hour
no further proposition shall be entertained, in order that
a committee may be appointed to immediately draw up a
manifesto for presentation to the Minister for Lands and to
members of Parliament.” Mr. Gale seconded; and carried.
Messrs. Chanter, Eudder, Wall, Planagan, and Office-bearers


were appointed a committee to draw up a manifesto, on the
motion of Messrs. Flanagan and Burke.
Manifesto prepared and read. Mr. Clieriton and Mr. Draffin
moved its adoption. Carried.
John Gale, President.
Approved, sth November, 1883.
Tenth Sitting.
Monday, sth November, 1883.
Minutes of Meeting held on Monday , sth November ; Mr. John
Gale in the chair.
Minutes of previous meeting were read and confirmed ; and
the manifesto drawn up on Saturday was again read.
A letter was received from Mr. W. B. Christie defending
himself from strictures made upon him in the Conference.
Mr. Pyle moved for the insertion of the following in the
manifesto —“ That the law of trespass, as it at present stands
with regard to stock, should be amended.” This was seconded,
and canned.
As to a claim made by Mr. DeCourcy Browne, it was stated
by the President that he would undertake to see Mr. Browne
on the matter.
On motion of Mr. Chanter, it was agreed to ask Mr. H. Levin
to send to the President (Mr. Gale) the minutes and papers
of last Conference.
The Conference declined to entertain the claim submitted by
Mr. DeCourcy Browne.
On motion of Messrs. Chanter and O’Sullivan, it was resolved
to give all Associations interested in Land Law Reform combi-
nation, under the following title —“The Land Law Reform
Alliance.”
The following gentlemen were appointed as a committee,
with power to convene Conferences : —Messrs. Gale, Rudder,
Chanter, Boulding, Wall, Clemesha, S. W. Carrigan, and J.
Flanagan—with the President (Mr. Gale) as correspondent.
On motion of Messrs Carroll and Clemesha, it was resolved —
“ That the holders of conditional purchases at the passing of the
new Act shall not be allowed to make an additional conditional
purchase by virtue of more than one such conditional purchase
to the maximum area allowed by the Act.”
Thanks were passed to the Mayor for granting the use of the
Town Hall ; to the Government for granting free railway
passes to the Delegates; to the Secretaries of the Conference ;
to the President and Vice-President; and it w r as resolved to


present souvenirs to the President, Vice-President, and Secre-
taries, in recognition of their services.
An amount of £3 3s. was voted to he distributed among those
servants of the Mayor who had attended to the rooms occupied
by the Conference.
It was then resolved —“ That a deputation of the whole should
wait on the Minister for Lands to lay the manifesto before him.”
Eleventh Sitting.
Tuesday, November 6, 1883.
Minutes of Meeting held on the above date; Mr. J. Gale in the
chair.
Minutes read and confirmed.
Mr. Gale was appointed, on the suggestion of Mr. Elanagan,
Treasurer of the Alliance, who was directed to prepare a balance-
sheet of the finances of the Conference. It was stated that some
£5O had been paid in levies, and that about £72 in all was
expected to he paid in.
A cordial vote of thanks was passed to Messrs. Poole and
Elanagan for their services as members of the Einance Com-
mittee.
A telegram was here sent to the Colonial Secretary to know
when it would be convenient to receive the deputation with the
manifesto.
Jawes Carroll | Joint Secretaries.
Fred. Pinkstone )


ATTENDANCE OF DELEGATES.
The following is a record of the attendance of the Delegates :
Sittings.
Sittings
Ardill, J. E.
Barbour, E.
Black, J.
Killen, E. ... ... ... 5
3
2
Levin, L. H. ... ... 3
Luscombe, E. C. ... ... 4
Bond, H. S. S.
Boulding, J. ..
O’Sullivan ... ... ... 4
O’Connell, M. ... ... 11
Bourke, Alderman
Broderick, J. ...
Pearse, J. ... ... ... 7
Piggott, E. J. ... ... 4
Brown, G.
Poole, J. J 8
Carroll, James
Crick, W. P. ..
Pinkstone, F. ... ... 10
Pyle ... 7
Chanter, J. M.
Cheritou
Eanken, G. E. ... ... 9
Eichardson ... ... ... 4
Clemesha, E. ...
Christie, W. B.
Day, George ...
De Salis, G. F.
Draffin, D.
Eudder, E 8
Smith, Irwin ... ... 9
Thatcher, C. E 9
Tully, M 10
Wall, W. C.
Flanagan, John
Gale, John
Wilson, E. ... ... ... 10
Wynne, John ... ... 4
Hodgkinson, T. C.
Howard, J.
Ware, S. J 4


INTERVIEW WITH MINISTER FOR LANDS.
The Land Law Eeform Conference, which has been sitting in
Sydney during the past fortnight, waited as a deputation, on
Tuesday, 6th November, upon the Minister for Lands. Mr.
Levin, M.L.A., having briefly introduced the deputation,
Mr. Gale, President of the Conference, stated that the mem-
bers of the deputation represented numerous Associations from
all parts of the colony, from the extreme north to the extreme
south and the west. They had been occupied for the last fort-
night in deliberations upon the momentous subject now agitating
the whole of the colony—that of obtaining a Land Law which
would be better adapted than any previous law to the require-
ments of the country. He trusted that the Ministers and the
members of the Cabinet would form their estimate of the worth
of the Conference by the result of their deliberations more than
from any reports which had appeared in the Press, and which
might be more or less prejudicial, inasmuch as they were not
quite accurate. They had carefully considered the Land Bill of
the present Government, and it now remained for him to say
that the result of their deliberations on that measure was, that
it did not meet with their entire approbation. Hence, certain
suggestions were made by them for modification of that measure,
which, in their opinion, would be more acceptable to the public
than the Bill in its present shape. It remained for him merely
to read the summary of their deliberations, as comprised in the
following manifesto :
[Manifesto read.]
Mr. Parnell: Do you give any reasons for approval or
disapjjroval of the proposals of the Bill ?
Mr. Gale: We could give reasons, but they have already
appeared from day to day in the reports of the daily Press.
Mr. Parnell: There is nothing in this Bill about family
selections, referred to in this manifesto.
Mr. Gale : No, but the Conference thinks, as indicated in one
of these resolutions, that it would be perilous to the virtue
of young women to take up land, and then go away from their
parents to occupy such land. This manifesto embraces the
whole of the conclusions of the Conference, many of those
conclusions being more or less at variance with the principal


features of the present Bill. The deputation, therefore, appear
before you to-day to ask you to take the whole matter into
consideration, which we are quite satisfied you will do.
Mr. Wall: With reference to forfeited conditional purchases,
I think I express the sentiments of the Conference when I say
that they should be occupied in the same manner as other
lands, and that the value of improvements should be assessed
by the Local Boards, such values to be paid by the incoming
tenant. Instead of disposing of forfeited selections by auction,
they should be allowed to be alienated, and the value assessed
by the local Land Board, so that the incoming tenant should
pay the value of the improvements.
Mr. Burke : With regard to scrub lands, I think the Conference
decided it to have the appearance of classification of lands, to
which the Conference is decidedly opposed, and it was also
pointed out as likely to be taken advantage of to the detriment
of the settlement of the country. According to the new Bill,
leaseholders are permitted, on application to the Minister, to
take up scrub lands at a mere nominal rental for the clearing
of it. Great advantage has already been taken of such clauses
in the existing law.
Mr. Wall: Some of the best pastoral lands in the colony may
be classified as scrub lands—such as myall forest.
Mr. Barn ell: Nothing of the kind. Myall forest is not scrub
land, but really profitable pastoral land.
Mr. Wall: With reference to the annual licenses, this
Conference thinks that by virtue of these annixal leases it might
be possible for the pastoralist to occupy the whole of the resumed
portion of his run under these annual licenses. The Act distinctly
states that these annual licenses may bo renewed on payment of
an amount named. By virtue of these licenses it might be quite
possible for the pastoral lessee to occupy the whole of the resumed
portion of his run. These licenses in the Western Division are
protected from homestead leases.
Mr. Barn ell: I think you have misunderstood the Bill. The
provision as to the resumed area, which is only resumed in name
as distinguishing it from the leasehold, is that it is to be held
under annual licenses instead of five years’ leases ; but the whole
of that land will be open to people to take up either for homestead
leases or conditional purchases. In the Western Division the
homestead lessee is the same as the conditional purchaser, only
it is leasehold instead of alienation.
Mr. Wall : 1 think, if you will read the Act, you will find
that it is quite possible for the pastoral tenant in the Western
Division to take possession of the resumed portion for pastoral
purposes. If you will read Sub-section Bof Clause 89 you will
find that leases under that section axe not exempt from sale or
conditional leases.


Mr. Levin : As 1 understand it, the lessee could get an annual
lease on the resumed portion of the run.
Mr. Farnell: These are annual auction leases, and no connec-
tion with the resumed area at all —just the same as it is now in
the law.
Mr, Wall; Could these annual auction leases he applied on
the resumed portion ?
Mr. Farnell: Of course, in some cases. A man could buy
ten of these lots of 1,920 acres each ; but could get no security.
Anybody could take up the land.
Mr. IV all: In the Western Division a man could not take it
for a homestead lease.
Mr. Farnell : Certainly he could. In the Western Division
there are only three classes of holdings—leasehold, occupation
licenses for a year, and homestead leases.
Mr. Bonlding : With regard to Section 134 of the Bill, the
feeling of the Conference is that all landowners should have equal
rights of ownership.
Mr. Farnell: If we could bring that about, it would be a good
thing ; but I am afraid it will be many thousands of years before
we can do that.
Mr. Bonlding : Abu make special provision for the pastoral
lessee by Section 134, but you fairly shunt off the homestead
lessees, the conditional purchasers, and the occupation lessees.
Mr. Farnell: Clause 134 applies to actions for trespass.
Mr. Bonlding : By that clause they have merely a nominal right
of ownership, and the pastoral lessee could eat them out with
impunity. The lessee could keep the land as bare as the table,
so that the incoming conditional purchaser could never keep his
stock alive until he fenced. This is making provision against
the blackmailers, who are a small class, to the detriment of the
lona fide selectors, who are a large class.
Mr. Farnell: Under the present circumstances hona fide men
have to contend against the pastoral tenant on the one hand and
the blackmailer on the other.
Mr. Boulding: That section will assist them against the hona fide
man.
Mr. Farnell: I do not think so.
Mr. Boulding ; I am satisfied that if you had practical expe-
rience you would see that it would.
Mr. larnell: I think I have had a good deaf of experience.
Mr. Boulding : You are making special provision for the rights
of ownership of one class, but fairly shunting off the other
classes with only nominal ownership.
Mr. Farnell: I see exactly what you mean—that, while it
provides for the conditional purchaser, it does not provide for
the pastoral tenant at the same time.
Mr. Levin : What Mr. Boulding wishes to explain is, I think


that as soon as a selector takes up his selection, the pastoral
tenant will at once put such a lot of stock on the ground
that they will not leave a hlade of grass for the conditional
purchaser to feed his stock, and consequently it will take him
perhaps twelve mouths or more to recover what he has lost up
to the time he was able to fence the ground. The Conference
wishes to prevent such a thing taking place under this Bill.
Mr. Boulding : If the lessee is entitled to sue for trespass, the
conditional purchaser should have the same right.
Mr. Luscombe pointed out the desirableness of giving the
Land Boards the power to determine the lona fide applicants
for the land.
Mr. Barn ell: It is not an easy matter to determine whether
applicants are hona fide before they go on the land. We will
make them make a declaration to the effect that they are taking
up the land for their own benefit and use.
Mr. Levin : A properly constituted Land Board with local
knowledge will do much to prevent dummyism.
Mr. Wall: When a division of a run -takes place, will the
alienated portion of the run be comprised within the area
allotted to the pastoral lessee ?
Mr. Farnell: It is intended to divide the runs in half,
independent of the alienations.
Mr. Wall: Then, if there are 25,000 acres alienated out of a
50,000 acre run, would there be any resumption whatever ?
Mr. Farnell: I could not tell what would be done in particu-
lar cases unless they came before me, but the principle would be
to strike a dividing line through the run in equal proportions.
Mr. Crick: In the event of our suggestions regarding division
of runs not being accepted, I would like to point out that there
is no provision for the selector on the leasehold areas of the
runs being able to increase his holding to the maximum amount
allowed by the law. He has his pre-leases taken away, but he
cannot increase his holding by one acre.
Mr. Farnell: Can you tell me how it could be done ?
Mr. Crick: My proposal was to allow six months after the
division of the run for the selector to increase his holding up to
the maximum amount allowed by the Act.
Mr. Farnell: Of course all these are difficult matters, and I
should be very glad to have suggestions made to remove these
difficulties. .This is the second attempt I have made at land
legislation, and I do not think I will try another.
Mr. Wall: Are we to infer that annual leases will not apply
to the Western Division ?
Mr. Farnell: Of course they will not.
Mr. Chanter : When laying this manifesto before you, you
suggested that reasons should be given. We apprehended that
you had perused the Press pretty closely, where our reasons were


given from day to day; but, from your remark, I apprehend
that you have not done so.
Mr. Farnell: I never said so; but I thought that on some of
these points you would have put the reasons with the manifesto
itself.
Mr. Chanter: We intend to have the whole of the minutes
printed in pamphlet form. There is one particular matter upon
which I might give you a reason. Your Government have very
liberally enlarged the area to 2,500 acres; but it was felt by the
Conference that the 2s. per acre deposit would require such a
large sum that the poor man or man of moderate means would
be shut out. Hence it was thought better that it should be open
to him to take up one portion and comply with the conditions,
the balance of the 2,500 acres being reserved to him. At the end
of five years lie could then take up another portion, and so on
till he had completed his balance. With respect to the fencing,
it was felt that in some localities six months would be too short
a time in which to require fencing.
Mr. Farnell: It is not confined to six months. All those
portions of the Bill in italics are simply blanks in a Parlia-
mentary sense. The Government do not want to make people do
what is impossible.
Mr. Chanter: Tire time suggested by the Conference was
three years.
Mr. Endder : As there seems to have got abroad an erroneous
impression with regard to the intentions of the Conference, I may
state that our intentions were to assist the Government as much
as possible. We are acting on behalf of the people, and not of
any section, and desire to give the Government all the assist-
ance we can.
Mr. Farnell, in replying, said : I have only to say that I shall
give, not only my best attention to these propositions which you
have laid before me, and what you have already said on these
matters, but I shall lay them before my colleagues. lam only
one member of a Government, but I shall promise to give all
these proposals my best attention. They are all worthy of con-
sideration, and I only wish that the Parliament itself would be
actuated by the same desire that this Conference has evinced —-
that all should join together to make a good Bill for the good of
the colony, and not make a party matter of it. It ought neA r er
to be a party matter; but lam afraid that you cannot persuade
Parliament to take that view. There ought to be a principle of
give and take, with the view of making the best law, not only
for those who live in towns and follow other vocations. One
gentleman remarked that the provision with regard to scrub
lands might be abused. I think we have got honest people in
the. comm unity to tell scrub lands from other lands. There are
large areas of scrub hinds throughout this colony, which, if you


gave to men for a certain number of years, and they were made
productive, would be made a benefit to the country. We have
the evidence of a conditional purchaser who took up mallee
scrub. The land was very good land, but it required hard and
continuous labour to clear. I think, if you could get these
lands improved, the consideration of rent ought not to be thought
of ; in fact, my opinion is that the price of the land is only a
secondary consideration. The first object of the Government
should be the settlement of a bona fide population. We have
large areas of these scrub lands, which might be productive. I
believe that 40 per cent, of Victoria consists of these unproduc-
tive lands. However, lam not going to anticipate anything I
intend to say on the second reading of the Land Bill. I shall
lay the whole of this matter before my colleagues, and give your
proposals very favourable consideration.
■ ;l ' Batson & Atwater, Printers, Sydney.


1♦ # ,
* *
* ¥
J<4Fp
Wuo 1
».’■
v •
**’ v ‘
i»v
’# " *
«L
#
‘ #
' r
•-
■ *
<* # ’ * . _ -
, y*--S*0 t:
.. i ’ ‘
V *
v *
fc •
■
