

CONFERENCE
OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS
ON THE
UNIFORM CONTROL AND REGULATION OF AVIATION
1937.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
HELD AT
MELBOURNE, 16TH APRIL, 1937.
PROCEEDINGS AND DECISIONS OF CONFERENCE.
By Authority:
L. J. Johnston. Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
1902.


REPRESENTATIVES.
Commonwealth.
The Right Honorable R. G. Menziesj K.C., M.P. Attorney-General.
Senator the Right Honorable Sir G. F. Pearce, Minister for External Affairs
K.C.V.O.
The Honorable T. \V. White, D.F.C., V.D., M.P. Minister for Trade and Customs.
New South Wales.
The Honorable H. E. Manning, K.C., M.1..C .. Attorney-General and Vice-President of the Executive Council.
The Honorable L. 0. Martin, M.L.A. .. .. Minister for Justice
Victoria.
The Honorable A. V. Bussau, M.L.A. .. Minister of Tram-port, Attorney-General and Solicitor-General
The Honorable E. J. Hogan, M.L.A. . . .. Minister of Agriculture and Mines.
South Australia.
The Honorable Sir George Ritchie, K.0.M.G., Acting Premier and Chief Secretarv.
M.L.C.
The Honorable S. W. Jeffries, M.P. .. .. Attorney-General, Minister of Industry and Employment and
Minister of Education.
Western Australia
The Honorable M. E. Troy. M.L.A .. . Acting Premier and Minister for Lands.
The Honorable IT. Millington, M.L.A. .. Minister for Works and Water Supplies.
Tasmania.
The Honorable E. Dwyer Gray. M.H.A. .. Ading Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable T G de 1.. D’Alton, M.H.A. .. Minister for Transport.
Also present
Mr. M. C. Boniwell, C.B.E. .. .. Acting Solicitor-General, Commonwealth.
Capt E. C. Johnston, D.F.C. .. .. Controller-General of Civil Aviation.
Mr. E. L. Bean .. .. .. .. Parliamentary Draftsman, South Australia.
Mr. H. J. Henchman .. .. .. Ciown Solicitor, Queensland.
1902.—2


REPRESENTATIVES.
Commonwealth.
The Right Honorable R. G. Menziesj K.C., M.P. Attorney-General.
Senator the Right Honorable Sir G. F. Pearce, Minister for External Affairs
K.C.V.O.
The Honorable T. W. White, D.F.C., V.D., M.P. Minister for Trade and Customs.
New South Wales.
The Honorable H. E. Manning, K.C., M.1..C .. Attorney-General and Vice-President of the Executive Council.
The Honorable L. 0. Martin, M.L.A. .. .. Minister for Justice
Victoria.
The Honorable A. C. Bussau, M.L.A. .. Minister of T rare-port, Attorney-General and Solicitor-General
The Honorable E. J. Hogan, M.L.A. . . .. Minister of Agriculture and Mines.
South Australia.
The Honorable Sir George Ritchie, K.0.M.G., Acting Premier and Chief Secretarv.
M.L.C.
The Honorable S. W. Jeffries, M.P. .. .. Attorney-General, Minister of Industry and Employment and
Minister of Education.
Western Australia
The Honorable M. F. Troy. M.L.A .. . Acting Premier and Minister for Lands.
The Honorable IT. Millington, M.L.A. .. Minister for Works and Water Supplies.
Tasmania.
The Honorable E. Dwyer Gray. M.H.A. .. Ading Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable TG de 1.. D’Alton, M.H.A. .. Minister for Transport.
Also present
Mr. M. C. Boniwell, C.B.E. .. .. Acting Solicitor-General, Commonwealth.
Capt E. C. Johnston, D.F.C. .. .. Controller-General of Civil Aviation.
Mr. E. L. Bean .. .. .. .. Parliamentary Draftsman, South Australia.
Mr. H. J. Henchman .. .. .. Ciown Solicitor, Queensland.
1902.—2


REPRESENTATIVES.
Commonwealth.
The Right Honorable R. G. Menziesj K.C., M.P. Attorney-General.
Senator the Right Honorable Sir G. F. Pearce, Minister for External Affairs
K.C.V.O.
The Honorable T. \V. White, D.F.C., V.D., M.P. Minister for Trade and Customs.
New South Wales.
The Honorable H. E. Manning, K.C., M.1..C .. Attorney-General and Vice-President of the Executive Council.
The Honorable L. 0. Martin, M.L.A. .. .. Minister for Justice
Victoria.
The Honorable A. V. Bussau, M.L.A. .. Minister of Tram-port, Attorney-General and Solicitor-General
The Honorable E. J. Hogan, M.L.A. . . .. Minister of Agriculture and Mines.
South Australia.
The Honorable Sir George Ritchie, K.0.M.G., Acting Premier and Chief Secretarv.
M.L.C.
The Honorable S. W. Jeffries, M.P. .. .. Attorney-General, Minister of Industry and Employment and
Minister of Education.
Western Australia
The Honorable M. E. Troy. M.L.A .. . Acting Premier and Minister for Lands.
The Honorable IT. Millington, M.L.A. .. Minister for Works and Water Supplies.
Tasmania.
The Honorable E. Dwyer Gray. M.H.A. .. Ading Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable T G de 1.. D’Alton, M.H.A. .. Minister for Transport.
Also present
Mr. M. C. Boniwell, C.B.E. .. .. Acting Solicitor-General, Commonwealth.
Capt E. C. Johnston, D.F.C. .. .. Controller-General of Civil Aviation.
Mr. E. L. Bean .. .. .. .. Parliamentary Draftsman, South Australia.
Mr. H. J. Henchman .. .. .. Ciown Solicitor, Queensland.
1902.—2


CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS
ON THE UNIFORM CONTROL AND REGULATION OF AVIATION.
The Conference met at Parliament House, Mel-
urne, at 2.30 p.m., Mr. Menzies in the Chair.
Mr. MEXZIES.—The immediate reason for calling
this conference is that the recent proposals for the
amendment of the Commonwealth Constitution were
not passed by a majority of the people in a majority
of the States, although in point of fact they received
the approval of a majority of the total number of the
electors. This means that the constitutional powers-
of the Commonwealth remain where they were. As this
involves to some extent a division of power and
authority in relation to aviation, this conference has
been called to see whether it is possible by some arrange-
ment between the Commonwealth and the States to
eliminate difficulties that would otherwise occur. I.
shall occupy a few minutes in setting out the position
as 1 now understand it to be.
The Commonwealth Parliament, as you know, has
no express power to deal with aviation, but it has
power to deal with it by implication from various other
powers that it possesses. For example, under its defence
powers it controls military flying, and, perhaps, under
circumstances of war, it might be able to extend that
control to an unknown extent. It has power to deal
with aviation as part of its powers with respect to
trade and commerce with other countries and among
the States. It has complete powers in respect of its
own territories, and, therefore, it can control flying in
the Federal Capital Territory, in the Northern Terri-
tory, and so on. It also has legislative powers with
respect to postal, telegraphic, telephonic and like ser-
vices, which would, no doubt, extend to some regulation
by the Commonwealth of aeroplanes used for the pur-
pose of giving postal facilities. It also has power of
unknown extent under the heading “ External Affairs ”.
I n the view of the High Court, according to its decision
in the Goya Henry case, given last year, that power
in relation to external affairs enables the Common-
wealth Parliament to make a law for carrying out an
international air convention. Under such a convention
some of the rules may not be confined to international
or interstate flying. , That is an extension of the
Commonwealth power. Subject to these various
matters, however, the States themselves retain their
reserve of power; that is to say, they can pass laws
with respect to intra-state flying. The States, within
the limits of their territorial boundaries, can make laws
in respect of interstate flying, but in those matters
a State law would always run the risk of being invali-
dated by an inconsistent Commonwealth law. So, per-
haps, the main power of the State is the power to deal
with local flying under circumstances not covered by
the International Air Convention and not covered by
the postal or defence powers of the Commonwealth.
It may very well be, as matters now stand, that 90 per
cent, of the flying operations in Australia are subject
to some Commonwealth jurisdiction, hut it would be
a very curious state of affairs if we continued to have,
in effect, a divided control, because, under such cir-
cumstances, every now and then some flying man,
unqualified, untrained, or untested, might be able to
say in response to a prosecution —“ I was not within
the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth during this par-
ticular flight ”. Some machine might be used
when it was in an unairworthy condition, and
the similar answer might be put forward, “ I was not
subject to any Commonwealth law ”. The first thing
to consider, if we are to decide, as I feel confident
we shall, that this lnatter calls' for conference and
discussion, is whether it is thought desirable by anybody
here that there should be two different sets of laws
dealing with the actual operation of flying. I do not
think that there will be any doubt that the test of
whether an airplane is airworthy or not should be
exactly the same all over Australia. If the test is
not the same we shall have most serious anomalies
Similarly, I believe that the test of whether a man is
qualified to be a pilot ought to be uniform throughout
Australia. 1 hope I shall not encounter any difficulty
with the representatives of South Australia on that
point, because I notice there has been an argument in
that State as to whether motor car drivers should be
tested in a certain way. Uniformity in regard to
aviation is much to be desired.
Then there is the subject of the rules of air naviga-
tion. These ought to be just as certain and definite
all over Australia as the rules of sea navigation are
definite and certain all round the Australian coast.
Any failure to have uniformity in these matters would
probably have literally vital consequences for many
people in the future. I have merely instanced three
major points which have occurred to me at random.
It is surely possible to agree that there ought to be a
uniform body of regulations in regard to aviation.
The question is, how is such uniformity to be brought
about? One way of getting it is for the Commonwealth
to ask the States, as it has asked on a number of
occasions, to refer power to it to deal with this matter.
Agreements have been made to refer this power on more
than one occasion. I think Tasmania is the only State
that carried the agreement out fully at the time. There
were difficulties, of course. In one or two States the
legislation was passed and not proclaimed, whilst in
others no particular action was taken. But the method
of doing this by reference is a little cumbersome,
because it ultimately depends on uniform action by
every Parliament, and you gentlemen who repre-
sent the States are in the best position to
determine whether that is likely to be achieved. Failing
a reference of power, it seems to me that there are
two possible ways of getting uniformity in the final
result. One would be for the States and the Common-
wealth to agree, as the result of some meeting of
experts, as to what were the proper rules, and for the
Commonwealth to enact them under its powers, and
each State Parliament to enact them in relation to its
limited power over flying. That would present
the difficulty that every time a change became
necessary we should have to work it out between seven
different authorities, and the regulations might be out
of date before uniform action could be obtained. The
other possible way is for the States to say to the
Commonwealth —“ We shall pass laws providing that
in relation to such flying as is within our jurisdiction
the Commonwealth rules for the time being shall be
the State law ”. This would mean that any alteration
of the rules affecting this matter would be an altera-
tion made by the Commonwealth from time to time,
the Commonwealth having the necessary departments
to deal with these matters of detail—the Civil Aviation
Department in particular. The alteration having been
made by the Commonwealth it would then, by virtue
of the original State laws, be operative in relation
to intra-state flying. In recommending that solution
to you very strongly, I would add this reason: Where
power is referred by the State Parliament to the Com-
monwealth it may very well be that the power once


referred cannot be taken away. 1 know there are
differences, of opinion among lawyers on that, but one
view'fairlywidely : held is that once the power is
referred it is referred permanently. In the suggestion-
-1 have made to you the -States Would not he referring'
to the Commonwealth a power to make regulations in
relation to intra-state flying. They would be merely
saying that whatever the Commonwealth rules on this
matter are at any given time they shall also apply so
far as the matter lies within the jurisdiction of the
States. Then any change in the Commonwealth law
will automatically operate all over Australia; but if a
proposal were thought by a State to dangerous, that
State .would be able to amend its law. It would not
have permanently surrendered its power to deal with
the matter, ft would merely have said—“ For the
sake of uniformity we shall provide this general rule
that the Commonwealth regulations in relation to flying
shall apply, not only to the matters within the juris-
diction of the Commonwealth, but also to the matters
Within the jurisdiction of the. State ”. That arrange-
ment, so far as I can ascertain, is, in substance, one that
has been adopted in the United States of America, and
it secures complete uniformity in the safety rules and
requirements of aviation throughout the country.
■ One other matter that: has arisen is that of the
revenues derived from licensing. So far that problem
does not amount to very much, because the total revenue
of the Commonwealth from licences is only a few
hundred pounds, and does not nearly cover the ordinary
expenses of administration. I do not suppose that
anybody is contemplating the charging of licence-fees
for any purpose other than to defray a part of the
cost of administering the regulations. The licence-fees
are not contemplated as a source of revenue. ’' A good
deal of the cost of civil aviation in Australia must
inevitably be borne by the Commonwealth. That is
already shown in connexion with a number of the
major aerodromes which have particular relation to
interstate flying, and, undoubtedly, the average State
does not desire to set up a civil aviation department of
its own to duplicate the department of the Common-
wealth. So the administrative costs will fall prin-
cipally on the Commonwealth. I, therefore, suggest
that'there is no particular reason why an attempt
should be made to say that certain fees should go to
one authority, and not to 'another. Aly own view is
that there should be a uniform set of rules, and a means
of enforcing them by the States saying: “Our laws
shall be the laws'of the Commonwealth for the time
being, and we shall authorize the Commonwealth
officers, to he the enforcing authority.” "Thus you
would avoid duplication of staff and laws, and reserve
to "the States what they are entitled to have reserved
to them, that is, the ultimate power to make some other
laws in regard to intra-state flying, if they think
proper. In practice we should be'getting rid of a
series of grave anomalies. '■ ■' ' y!
Mr. MANNING.—I think it may be said that New
South. Wales agrees, in the main, with most of the pro-
positions which Air. Afenzies lias put forward, but there
are some matters that need careful, consideration, and
probably justify some modification of the 'course sug-
gested. First. I think we should understand exactly
what we are called upon to do at ,this conference. ~ I
submit that we are called upon to determine now by
which authority—the States or the Commonwealth —
the regulations in regard to aircraft and air naviga-
tion are to be made. I agree with Air. Menzies that it
is desirable that' the regulations shall be uniform
throughout Australia. I think we can also agree,
following the Goya Henry and other cases, that- the
State undoubtedly has power to regulate aircraft and
air navigation within the limits of the State. It may
be that that is not the only legislative power that exists;
there In ay be an overlapping power in the Common-
wealth, incidental to its powers in relation to defence,
trade and commerce, and posts and telegraphs. Recog-
nizing the two spheres in which the different legislative
authorities may operate, we proceed to consider what
should be our aim. Uniformity, undoubtedly, is the
major consideration. New South Wales is particu-
larly anxious to secure uniformity in the regulations,
and if v.e aim at that we are bound to consider in
detail all the regulations governing aircraft and air
navigation that may be put into operation. We have
a valuable set of precedents in the present Common-
wealth regulations, but if they are to have the authority
of the States it seems to me that it will be necessary
to hold a conference of exports in aircraft and air
navigation to determine what the regulations should
•be. The States cannot be expected to adopt blindly a
set of regulations in the hope that they may be adequate
for the purpose for which they are designed. I should
imagine that one of the first requirements is the con-
stitution of an expert committee to determine what
regulations shall be binding irrespective of the
authority from which they emanate.
•"Mr. MENZI ICS. —Would that he from time to time?
Mr. MAN XING.—I think it would need to be.
Mr. MENZIES.—So far as I know, the States have
net officers who are experts on this matter.
Mr. MANNING.—We have the Aero Club, and
people with the highest qualifications in regard to
aviation. For instance, there is Captain Hughes who
gave evidence before the Roden Commission. I realize
difficulties would arise from the existence of the com-
mittee, but if the regulations were effective and prac-
tically a copy of those now in operation, little difficulty
need be anticipated.
Mr. WHITE.—The aero clubs use.only permanent
instructors and Commonwealth aerodromes.
Mr. MANNING.—The States have power in regard
to aerodromes. "There are people in the States well
qualified to determine whether certificates should be
granted.
Mr. WHITE.—They would not make the rules dif-
ferent from the Commonwealth regulations?
Mr. MANNlNG.—Certainly not. I think this
matter should be approached with the idea of achiev-
ing uniformity, but there should first be an investiga-
tion by a committee which included certain experts
from the different States. That would enable us to
'take the proposed legislation to the State Parliaments
with more prospect of success.
Mr. .JEFFRIES.—I)o you expect difficulty?
'Air. Af ANNING.-—Not if the proposal is put to the
, State Parliaments properly, but I am afraid that there
wouhl be considerable trouble if we merely asked them
to pass a measure to provide that the Common-
wealth regulations now in force should apply so far as
the legislative power of the States in relatiou
to aviation ’ extends. The Parliament of New
South Wales would want to know what the
regulations were, whether the Commonwealth was
to he given power to alter them from time to time,
and whether the State must keep track of the altera-
tions in order to decide whether they should be made.
Put that difficulty would he overcome if at the outset
an expert committee representative of Commonwealth
and States determined what regulations should operate.
Mr. MENZIES.—This expert committee would,
ultimately, agree to regulations which would l>e given
legislative form. Each State Parliament would pass
au act saying that these regulations should govern
flying so far as it lies within its jurisdiction.
Air. MANNING.—Suppose we say that the legisla-
tion of the States shall apply to aircraft and aerial
navigation within the States?


Mr. MENZIES.—Ho you propose that the States
should adopt whatever regulations were agreed on by
this expert committee by express enactment or by
reference to the Commonwealth?
Mr. MANNING.—One way would be by express
enactment.
Air. MENZIES.—You would get uniformity by hav-
ing the same laws passed by the Commonwealth and
State Parliaments, and by having conferences between
experts every time it was suggested that there should
be some alteration?
Air. 'MANNING.—Yes.
Air. AIENZIES.—Probably there would be somebody
in every Parliament who wanted to make an alteration,
and you would be extremely lucky if you had a uniform
body of regulations.
Air. AIANNJNG.—There would be less difficulty
than would be caused by asking for blind authority to
adopt Commonwealth legislation.
Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—There are 89 regulations
and many schedules. If you wanted to amend any of
these you would call the committee together?
Air. AIANNING.—I do not say that, but there
would be difficulty in getting the State Parliament to
adopt the Commonwealth regulations. The proposal
before us is merely that the State Parliaments should
vest the Commonwealth with the power.
Mr. AIENZIES.—No; quite the contrary.
Air. WHITE.—The Commonwealth regulations are
largely based on the International Convention, and we
cannot get away from that. If the States acted inde-
pendently and the Parliaments were not sitting, flying
between the States might be prevented.
Mr. AIANNING.—It is our desire that the matte.-
should go before an expert committee. The carrying
into effect of the Paris Convention raises another diffi-
culty because, notwithstanding the Goya Henry case,
which gave rather an extensive ambit to the external
affairs power, the Privy Council has since then dealt
with the Canadian legislation arising out of the Labour
conventions under the League of Nations. The Privy
Council decided that the Dominion Parliament had not
the power to pass these acts, although they were passed
pursuant to a convention agreed to by the Dominion.
In considering the suggestions made by Air. Menzies
tne main difficulty with which I am confronted is the
criticism which may be expected from our State Parlia-
ments that we were adopting the proposals of the
Commonwealth practically in defiance of the verdict of
the people at the recent refe.eudum. It. would be
handing the power over to the Commonwealth, subject
to the right of the States to disagree. Tn the New
South AVales Parliament, during the last three or four
years, we have been met with the charge that we
are legislating by regulation, and there has been a
strong move to prevent that. We have been hampered
by that opposition. I am inclined to exercise a good
deal of caution before adopting a proposal merely to
adopt the Commonwealth regulations without prior
investigation by an expert committee., If the regula-
tions were first examined by such a committee we could
say to the Parliament that they had been considered
and approved by our own experts and could be safely
adopted, because they did not prejudice the interests
of our State.
Air. AIENZIES.—I am puzzled when you use the
expression “approved by our own experts”. As you
have no experts of your own, you must be referring to
organizations such as aero clubs which exist under
subsidy from the Commonwealth, and whose views are
from time to time represented to the Commonwealth.
Air. AIANNING.—They all are Commonwealth
experts in one sense, but they have had experience with
aircraft and air navigation in the particular States.
They would be familiar with the conditions in the
States.
Mr. AIENZIES.—They would not lose their fami-
liarity with State conditions if the Commonwealth
called them into a committee.
Mr. MANNING.—Of course not.
Mr. MENZIES.—Every flying man in Australia
conies from a State.
Mr. MANNING.—The people have more confidence
in experts in their own States who are familiar with
local conditions. The New South Wales Parliament
has a rooted objection to having State affairs managed
for it by somebody else.
Mr. MENZIES.—How would this be received by the
Parliament of New South Wales: Suppose the proposal
were that each State should pass a law providing that
the rules on air navigation to apply at any time would
be the Commonwealth rules, and that the Common-
wealth, when establishing its rules, would annex a
condition that these should be made or altered from
time to time on the recommendation of an expert com-
mittee on which the States were represented. I desire
to avoid the necessity for a special consultation between
the Commonwealth and six States every time it is
necessary slightly to alter the regulations.
Mr. MANNING.—I think you could get over that
if the original rules were subject to expert investigation.
The States wotild then follow the Commonwealth.
Sir GEORGE PEARCE. —Suppose the New South
Wales representative did not agree with the represen-
tative of the Commonwealth? Would New South
Wales then be guided by its own expert?
Mr. MARTIN.—We should have to face it in the
Parliament eventually.
Mr. MANNING.—UnIess there was some substance
in an objection to a regulation, it is not likely that
our expert would insist upon an objection, or, if he
did, that the Government would endorse his action.
The State Government could recommend that the Par-
liament should pass the regulation as suggested by the
ovher States.
Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—The only people who are
expert in the drafting of these regulations are those
who have had experience in administering regulations
for the safety of flying. Expert aviators may have had'
no experience in such administration. They may have
some peculiar idea about regulations which have been
irksome to them, although the regulations are for their
own safety and that of the public. You might never
get an agreement.
Mr. MANNING. —Thar is a criticism which you
could level against any member of an expert committee.
It could be contended on behalf of the State Parlia-
ments that the regulations had been drawn up by
people who were familiar with aviation, but not
familiar with the measures necessary to ensure safety.
What I am mostly concerned about is the necessity for
obtaining uniformity. If it were left to me I would
adopt the present regulations en bloc.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—We always have the power to
annul regulations.
Mr. MANNING.—When they are laid on the table
in the House and come up for discussion, unless they
have been investigated beforehand and there is a special
reason for adopting them, the Parliaments will always
reject them, as happened to the New South Wales
transport regulations.
Mr. MENZIES. —But there is a considerable num-
ber of convention regulations which you have no power
to alter.
Mr. MANNING.—In the Goya Ilejiry case the rock
on which the ship was wrecked was that the air regu-
lations were not in conformity with the convention.
Unless the experts can justify departure from the con-
vention the regulations ought to conform; in fact, they
ought to conform in every case. In view of the Privy
Council decision in the Canadian cases it is necessary
that the State authority should be behind a portion of


this convention legislation. The view taken by the
Frivy Council of the pow’ers of the Dominion Parlia-
ment in Canada was that it had not the poAver iri
relation to external affairs which we claim for the
Commonwealth. The Privy Council’s judgment
stated—
Xo further legislative competence was obtained by the
dominion from its accession to international status . . .
The dominion cannot by merely making promises to. foreign
countries, clothe itself with legislative authority inconsistent
witli the Constitution which gaA'e it birth.
The newspaper comment on the judgment, from
Avhich I quoted, added — l ; «
The Pi ivy Council bench then went on to point out that this
is not to deny to Canada (or, implicitly, to Australia) com-
petence to legislate for performance of treaty obligations. In
totality of legislative powers,, dominion and provincial, tho is
fully equipped. But the legislative powers, remain distributed.
Reference lias been made in the press to the possibility
of a difficulty of this kind arising if tve presented to
the State Parliaments the Commonwealth regulations
en bloc. It would be said that tve A'ere giving prac-
tically a blank cheque, and 1 think such,a suggestion
would be badly received by the Parliament of New
South Wales. •
Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—I have had a fairly
long experience of administration of air regula-
tions, and I point out that they deal with such things as
the strain and stress of machines, upon which only an
engineering expert can give useful advice, and I doubt
Avhether such advice Avould be available from
persons in the States . who are not in some
AVay’ connected Avith the CommomA'oalth. adminis-
tration. Surely it is not desired to set up engineer-
ing corps within the States .to deal with stress and
strain. I suggest that in this matter reliance should
be placed upon experts at the command of the Common-
wealth. It may be that if a State representative is
appointed he Avill be qualified to speak only \ipon
certain aspects of flying. He may haA-e no expert
knowledge at all on other matters, of vital consequence.
Air. AIANNING. —I agree with Sir George Pearce
to some extent, but I still think that it would be
desirable to appoint representatives of the State
governments to give some advice on these matters.
Then, if the Government was being submitted to
criticism in regard to, say, an accident to a particular
type of machine, it could say “ The GoA’ernment
obtained the advice of the best experts available in
making the regulations dealjng with this matter.” .
Mr. WIILTE.—Is it not preferable to have tlie Com-
monwealth to stand behind rather than to stand behind
half a dozen authorities who may be experts only on
one or two aspects of flying? If an expert on only one
aspect is appointed, he may throw a spanner into the
works and make progress impossible.
Air. A 1 ANNING. —It is not only preferable, but it
is essential, that the Commonwealth should have as
much authority as possible bn particular matters.
What I am'suggesting is an additional safeguard. , If
the representatives of the States were drawn upon to
act in an advisory capacity, it Avould make the path
of the State Minister who has to handle this matter
much easier than it would otherwise be.
..Air. MENZIES.-—I take it that Mr. Alanning is not
quarrelling Avith the proposition that each State should
at the right stage pass an act saying that “ The rules
applying to flying within our jurisdiction shall be the
Commonwealth rules as altered from time to time ”, hut,
that.he desires that when,the original rules are being
considered they shall he examined by an expert com-
mittee ,on which the States are represented. ;J
Air. MANNING.— I That is exactly it. In the pre-
liminary inquiry we should haA T e a finger in the pie.
Mr. AIENZIES.—Then the difference betAveen Mr.
Alanning and myself is that,he thinks there should be
a preliminary inquiry by an expert committee on which
the States are represented? '
Air. AIANNING.—That is so. If the inquiry were
made by such a committee, we should be able to say to
our Parliament that the regulations had been examined
by a committee of experts on which the State was repre-
sented, and that this committee was of the opinion
that the regulations were comprehensive and satisfac-
tory. On such a basis they could be recommended for
adoption by the State Parliament.
Mr. BUSSAU.—If the regulations were examined by
such a committee, it should be possible to adopt a
uniform set. I take it that Mr. Manning would be
willing after the initial set had been adopted, to adopt
subsequent variations which the Commonwealth might
make. ; ■ '■ ' ’’
Mr. ’’MARTIN.—We could do that, provided that
authority was left to the States to decline to accept
particular regulations which were not desired.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—If New South Wales is willing
to agree to accept automatically all future Common-
wealth regulations, it seems to me that it would not be
a big step to accept the existing regulations. The sub-
sequent regulations may be much more important than
the original regulations, for it is possible that great
developments will occur.
Mr. MANNING. —The existing regulations were
made after very careful inquiry, following the Paris
Convention. There may be some omissions that should
be repaired, and some provisions that should he elimi-
nated, but one can say that they constitute a compre-
hensive set. 1 If they were to receive the endorsement
of a ! committee of experts set up by the Commonwealth
and State governments, we could reasonably advise
our Parliaments to adopt them. We could also pro-
vide then that 'future regulations could be adopted
automatically unless disagreed to by the State.
Mr. BUSSAU.—I agree with the third proposal
made by Mr. Menzies, with certain provisos. We desire
to reserve the right, for instance, to deal with State-
owned aircraft if a development of that kind should
occur. Then we would desire to control purely intra-
state services which might compete with our railways.
For instance, a service is competing with the railways
between Melbourne and Hamilton. We would desire
to make that subject to transport regulations.
Mr. MENZIES.—I do not think that any of the
Hying regulations touch transport regulations.
ME BONIWELL.—That is so. They deal with air-
worthiness and such things as that.
Air. JEFFRIES.—South Australia is not willing to
surrender the 1 control that it now has over air transport.
Air. BUSSAU—W e wish to preserve the State rights
that we at present have in regard to purely intra-state
services, and we also wish' to protect our rights in
regard ,to State-owned aircraft; but apart from those
two considerations, Victoria is willing to co-operate in
the formulation of uniform regulations. We have no
objection to uniform regulations being in the hands
of the Commonwealth after having been passed by the
•States, 'provided that existing rights are preserved. So
long'’’as we are not parting with our State rights we
are willing to agree to uniform regulations drafted by
the Commonwealth.
■'Mr. MENZIES.—As to State-owned air services,
T take it that the rule as to airworthiness, pilotage,
certification of pilots and so on would apply?
Air. BUSSAU.—We should expect that.
Air. ■ AIENZIES.—The regulations would not be
likely to have any other restrictive effect in regard to
State-owned machines. If any question arose at any
time in regard to an alteration which the Common-
wealth might make the State jmthority could say “ We
are not prepared to agree to that ”. Then there Avould
be a conference and the matter would have to be
ironed out. There is nothing in the regulations at
present which confines their application to particular
routes. A machine, like a pilot, is licensed or is not


licensed. Licences are not issued to operate on par-
ticular services; Such power as Hie StateMmay have 1
af present to operate services - would 'con-
tinue, subject to anything that the High Court may
have to say on it. I appreciate the points that Mr.
Bussan has made. -
Alt. MANNING.—I thought that what Mr. Menzies
had said covered those points. That is why I did not
make-apy specific reference to them.
Air. BESSAIT. —The regulations to which we are
referring were not. set out before us, and I wished to
make it clear that we had reservations in regard to the
matters that I mentioned.
Mr. HENCHMAN.—I apologize for the unavoid-
able absence of the Acting Premier and the Attorney-
General.' Queensland, as the members of the confer-
ence know, has always been in favour of giving the
necessary power to the Commonwealth. ‘ In a way I
agree with the proposal that Air. Menzies has made,
but at present the 'State has control of intra-state
trade and commerce and the Commonwealth has power
over interstate trade and commerce and also full power
over business overseas. It seems to me that if Air.
Alenzies’ third proposal be agreed to, there may be
some difficulty in enforcing it. When the matter came
before the court there would always he the necessity
to determine whether the alleged offence fell within the
ambit of the Commonwealth authority or of
the State authority. I think we should begin
by defining Commonwealth and State powers with
the object of determining the jurisdiction in
respect of the offences which will occur. I am very
anxious to avoid fine points of law, and it may he that
unless we define the limits of authority considerable
litigation will arise and offenders may even be able
to avoid the consequences of their actions. If a man
is charged under State law it may be argued that the
alleged offence falls within the Commonwealth juris-
diction and the case may be dismissed.
Mr. MENZIES.—I suggest that that matter could
be determined in the particular cases. We should not
be able to avoid difficulty by any attempt that we
might make to delimit the jurisdiction before the offence
occurs.
Air. HENCHAIAN.—I foresee great difficulty in this
matter. Squatters and managers of stations in remote
parts of Queensland own their own small planes and
have their own landing grounds. If these should be
in the neighborhood of the overseas routes it may be
difficult to determine in a particular case whether an
alleged offence should come under Commonwealth law
or State law.
Air. MENZIES.-—I do not see how Mr. Henchman’s
proposal can possibly obviate that difficulty. If we
had one set of regulations to which both: the Common-
wealth and the States had agreed, it should be possible
to determine on the facts whether action ought to be
taken by the Commonwealth or the State-.
Mr. MANNING.—The difficulty mentioned by Mr.
Henchman cropped up in the case of Hume and
Farmer. We prosecuted under the State regulations.
The defence took the point that the action should have
been taken under Commonwealth regulations, although
the regulations of Commonwealth and State were iden-
tical ; the conviction was quashed.
Mr. MENZIES.—I do not see how Mr. Henchman’s
suggestion to delimit the sphere of jurisdiction will
overcome the difficulty.
Mr. HENCHMAN. —My proposal is that the regu-
lations, insofar as they refer to Commonwealth juris-
diction, should be passed by the Commonwealth, and,
insofar as they relate to State jurisdiction, should bo
passed by the State.
Sir GEORGE PEARCE. —But some machines are
engaged in business which brings them within both
jurisdictions.
Mr.HENCHMAN.—That may be so, but it could'
be provided that the one set of inspectors could act
in respect of both sets of regulations. If the whole field
were covered as I suggest, it would be possible to deter-
mine at once within which jurisdiction action should
be taken. . ,
Mr. MENZIES.—I do not see how you can get a
clear-cut line like that. ’ .
Mr. HEN OHM AN.—My idea is to cover, as far.as
possible, this “ No Man’s.Bail'd ”.
Mr. MENZIES.—What do you mean by “ No Man’s
Land”?
Mr. JEFFRIES.—I take it that Mr. Henchman
means that legal area in regard to which uncertainty
exists as to whether it is Commonwealth or State
territorv.
Mr. HENCHMAN.—That is so.
Mr. WHITE.—I cannot see how the difficulty is to
be avoided in the way that Mr, Henchman suggests.
Mr. HENCHMAN.—The difficulty lias, been met in
regard to harbour boards.
Mr. WHITE.—Do you suggest that it could be said
that an.aerodrome was under State control one day and,
under Commonwealth control the next? It seems to,
me that additional difficulties will arise if we have two.
sets of regulations.
Mr. HENCHMAN. —They would be identical.
Sir GEORGE PE-ARCE.—They might be iden-
tical at the beginning, but they would not be identi-
cal for very long if there were more than one regulation?,
making authority. Regulations,are difficult to operate
when, there are seven regulation-making authorities,. . •
Air. HENCHMAN.—Yes, but the regulations could
be amended in a day.
Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—That is the trouble.
Air. MENZIES. —What. Mr. Henchman is saying is,
in effect, “ Let us decide in advance what, is ..the
undoubted jurisdiction of the Commonwealth, and, what,
is the undoubted jurisdiction of the States .Of course,
there is no jurisdiction that is undoubted. It seems to
me that it would be reasonably easy to determine in
individual eases whether the alleged offences could be
dealt with by the Commonwealth or the States; At; any
rate it would be much easier to determine such a matter.,
when the facis were known than to determine it, in
advance in the wav Mr. Henchman suggests. Ido not
see how difficulty on this point can be entirely avoided;.
Awkward questions are bound to arise in regard,to ,aip
transport as they do in regard to land transport,
Air. HENCHMAN.—It must be remembered that,
we are not dealing with section 92 but with 51(1);
The facts could be ascertained and the jurisdictipn
determined upon them.
Air. MENZIES. —There would still be difficulty, For
instance, an-aeroplane may be flying, between Hobart
and Afeibourne; it may stop at Launceston. It may
carry passengers from Hobart to Launceston, and also
from Hobart to Alelbourne. Does Mr. Henchman
suggest that no difficulty may arise in determining
whether such a vessel is engaged in intra-state or inter-
state trade? ■
Air. HENCHAIAN.—I do not pretend to tell you
what the High Court cannot tell you. But I think if
my suggestion were adopted the difficulties would be
reduced. ' . ;
Mr. MENZIES.—I cannot see that that would be so.
Difficulties would not be .eliminated, I think, in that
way. But if we have a uniform body of legislation,
undoubtedly there will be some likelihood of determin-
ing where the jurisdiction lies.
Mr. HENCHMAN. —I would seek to define the
jurisdiction.
Mr.. AIENZIES.—But why undertake that difficult
task by attempting to deal with.it in general terms,
when it can be dealt with more easily in individual
cases? . ' , . ,


Mr. HENCHMAN.— Once the Commonwealth has
encroached upon a certain area covered by a State
law, the State law ceases to have effect. Unless we are
careful there will be no area of jurisdiction which will
fall for certain to one authority or the other.
Mr. JEFFRIES.—I thank Mr. Menzies for the way
in which he ha 3 submitted this business to us, and for
the clarity with which he has outlined his three pro-
posals. I gather that he - does not expect either the
first or second proposal to be acceptable to the States.
At any rate, neither of them is acceptable to South
Australia. Mr. Henchman said that Queensland is
always in favour of granting powers to the Common-
wealth. _ South Australia is willing to grant to the
Commonwealth only such powers as are absolutely
necessary for the good government of Australia. In
this particular case, we are heartily in favour of Mr.
Menzies* third proposal. I do not think that we would
have any difficulty in obtaining parliamentary approval
of it. The difficulty that Mr. Manning foresees is just
as likely to arise with amendments to the regulations
as with the original regulations. I can quite imagine
that more difficulty is likely to arise in regard to amend-
ments than in regard to the original regulations. South
Australia is very anxious to avoid a continual altering
of the regulations., Therefore the Government is pre-
pared to agree to seek parliamentary approval of the
original block of regulations and automatic approval of
any amendments, with the proviso that we retain the
right to repeal any or all of them if that course should
subsequently seem to be desirable to us, because we
thought that an encroachment was being made upon
State rights to any appreciable extent, and of such a
nature as would interfere with our transport regula-
tions.
I understand that the regulations apply to such
matters as the construction and airworthiness of air-
craft, night lighting of aerodromes and aircraft, com-
petency, certification of pilots, officers and crew, and
other similar matters, the intention being to adminis-
ter civil aviation in such a way as to make it safe in
Australia. I do not see that difficulty of the kind
visualized bv Mr. Henchman would be lessened by his
proposal. It seems to me that when a prosecution
becomes necessary the question of jurisdiction can be
determined on the facts that are known. South Aus-
tralia is heartily in accord with Mr. Menzies’ third
proposal.
Mr. MILLINGTON.—Western Australia has sought
advice on the constitutional questions involved in this
subject, and the advice that has been obtained does not
conflict with the views stated by Mr. Menzies. We
are, therefore, quite prepared to co-operate with the
Commonwealth, and are prepared to give to the Com-
monwealth power to pass legislation dealing with the
safety and design of machines, the examination of
pilots and engineers, and the oversight of services inter-
state as well as within the States. We are prepared
to pass the necessary legislation to refer such powers to
the Commonwealth, the whole idea being to get uni-
formity and to make aviation as Safe as possible within
the Commonwealth. We make this reservation, how-
ever, that we desire to retain full control of commer-
cial planes operating in Western Australia to the same
extent as we have such powers over land transport.
Mr. MENZIES.—That reservation is equivalent to
the reservation mentioned by Mr. Bussau.
Mr. MILLINGTON.—We are anxious to keep out of
any field of legislation which will involve duplication,
and, therefore, the proposal that power over civil
aviation be referred to the Commonwealth has our sup-
port, subject to the reservation that I have stated. We
shall need to have power in respect of the licensing
of planes travelling over certain routes so that we can
protect the business of our railways. Recently a dis-
pute occurred between one aviation company and our
Transport Board, because tbe board refused to issue a
licence that would entitle the plane to carry gold. Gold
is at present carried on tbe State railways, and it is a
profitable business. We are not prepared to allow such
business to Jue taken from the railways. We do not
intend to allow aircraft to rob the land transport of
business, particularly the railways in which the State
is heavily involved. I assume that we do not wish to
provide any fine points of law for the High Court to
consider. For that reason we are quite prepared to
co-operate with the other States and the Commonwealth
in this subject. I believe that if there is honest co-
operation, the difficulties can be kept to a minimum.
Mr. Bussau mentioned State-owned aircraft. We may
possibly desire to possess aircraft, but there seems to be
no difficulty in that regard. Ido not think that the
troubles that Mr. Henchman foresees are likely to be
obviated by his proposal. At any rate, if there
is satisfactory collaboration between the Commonwealth
and the States they can be minimized. Provision
could be made for a prosecution initiated by the Com-
monwealth to be carried through by the States if it
were found that the States had jurisdiction and the
Commonwealth had not, and vice versa. He would be
a brave man who would risk conflict with two govern-
ments. If he knew that if one barrel proved a dud
there was another barrel which could be fired, he would
not be likely to undertake a fight. We are impressed
with the necessity for Commonwealth control of civil
aviation, but we wish to reserve to ourselves the right to
licence transport for certain routes if we so desire. The
planes which at present engage in trade from Western
Australia to the other States are licensed by our Trans-
port Board as far as the Western xVustralian boundary,
and we desire to retain that power. We wish
such aeroplanes to have a licence from the State
Transport Board. 1 do not know that we have experts
in Western Australia of the kind mentioned by Mr.
Manning. In any case, there is a lot to be said for
giving to the Commonwealth full responsibility in this
matter. If it has the power, it must accept the respon-
sibility. If the States retain the power they will have
to retain the responsibility. Our experience is that
when anything goes wrong there is always an agitation
against ns. ft' the Commonwealth is given the power
to make these regulations, the time may arrive when
we shall have a perfect set of regulations. It also may
be necessary on occasions to alter regulations quickly.
I do not want Western Australia to be involved in diffi-
culties of that kind. Western Australia, therefore,
wholeheartedly approves of the Commonwealth having
charge of these regulations subject, of course, to the
reservations that T have mentioned. We feel that in
that way duplication can be avoided. Inspectors could
be appointed to deal with aviation for both Common-
wealth and State purposes as inspectors at present deal
with agricultural matters for , both authorities.
Genuine co-operation will, undoubtedly, overcome many
of the existing difficulties. Mr. Menzies used the.
phrase “complete control”. We are not prepared to
give “ complete control to the Commonwealth, but we
are prepared to give control with the reservations I
have mentioned. ~
Mr. DWYER GRAY.—Tbe Tasmanian Government
takes the view' that there should be qniform control
and regulation of civil aviation in Australia, and
welcomes the opportunity of discussing with repre-
sentatives of the Commonwealth and the other States
how this can best be achieved. The problem falls into
two divisions—
(a) the regulation of aircraft from the point of
view of securing the safety of flying, &c.;
(b) the regulation of air transport, namely, the
carriage of passengers and goods by air
services.


d As to (a) my government thinks that the Common-
wealth should have complete and sole control of the
regulation of aerial navigation for the purpose of
securing the safety of flying; that is, that the Com-
monwealth should control such matters as air traffic
regulations, licensing of pilots, inspection and licensing
of aeroplanes, aerodromes, &c., and all matters concern-
ing the safety of the public in respect of intra-state as
well as other aviation. We think, however, that whilst
the regulations governing aviation should be, as far as
possible, uniform, and administered by one Common-
wealth authority, some permanent consultative or
advisory body on which the States were represented
should be established to enable the interests of the
States individually to be safeguarded, and to enable a
definite scheme of State co-operation and assistance
to be put into operation. Tne Tasmanian Govern-
ment is prepared to introduce such legislation as may
be required to give effect to an arrangement on the
lines which I have indicated.
As to the control and regulation of air transport in
the sense of the carriage of passengers and goods by
aircraft, different considerations arise. Air transport
intra-state should be regulated as part of the ordinary
transport services of the State, with the ultimate object
of securing the most efficient and economic transport
facilities for the people of the State. The problem of
air transport cannot be separated from that of the
control of transport generally, which is a matter for
the States, and from the functions and duties of the
States with respect to development. It is necessary to
refer to the Tasmanian act passed in 1920 referring
to the Commonwealth Parliament the control of air
navigation. The measure is entitled the Common-
wealth Powers (Avr Navigation) Act 1920. That
measure was passed in pursuance of an agreement by
all States to refer this matter to the Commonwealth
Parliament. The agreement has not been carried out.
It is doubtful if the Commonwealth Parliament can
be said to have legislated in pursuance of the referred
power at all. Even if it has, the amendment of the
Commonwealth Air Navigation Act 1920, effected by
the Air Navigation Act 1936, indicates a definite inten-
tion not to act further under the referred power. The
Tasmanian Government takes the view that it is entitled
to repeal or amend the Act of 1920, and thereby effec-
tually to revoke or vary the reference to the Common-
wealth Parliament. It is prepared, however, to do
what is necessary to secure to the Commonwealth effec-
tive power to regulate and control intra-State air
navigation and aircraft, so far as relates to the enact-
ment of uniform rules for securing the safety of aircraft
and the public. The State reserves the right to control
intra-state air transport in conjunction with the whole
subject of the regulation of internal transport gener-
ally. It may be possible in respect of air transport to
arrange for a measure of uniform control, administered
by the Commonwealth with the assistance of an
advisory body on which the States are represented,
subject to the recognition of the power of the State
transport authorities to co-ordinate air services with
the other transport services of the State. Our position
is practically that of Western Australia. I noticed a
statement by the Acting Prime Minister that, subject
to the decision of the States, it was proposed to appoint
a committee of experts to examine the existing condi-
tions and to recommend uniform rules throughout the
Commonwealth. We say that there should be some
form of public inquiry to remove the profound distrust
that exists in regard to the administration of the Com-
monwealth Civil Aviation Department—l do not say
whether it is justified or not —particularly in Tasmania.
Recently in Sydney Mr. Thorby referred to section 5 of
the agenda, and said that there would be adequate oppor-
tunity for a complete investigation. I think we can
reach an understanding at this conference and do some-
thing useful in the interests of aviation in this country. 1
. n ,Mr. MEMZIES. —We all agree that in regard to such
matters as airworthiness, licensing,competence of
pilots,,-air traffic regulations,,and,'regulation of aero-
dromes, there ought to be complete, uniformity of rules
throughout the Commonwealth. Most of those present
appear to think that the best way to achieve that uni-
formity will be by each State passing legislation adopt-
ing, in effect, what may be the Commonwealth law on
these 'matters for the time being. Some of the repre-
sentatives add to that a proposal that, before the States
pass such a law, the existing regulations ought to be
revised by a joint committee. - I think that all make
the reservation that nothing in that arrangement is to
impair the normal right of a State to make transport
regulation laws, and nothing ought to impair the right
of a State to establish State-owned air services, if it
thinks proper. Mr. Dwyer Gray .has remarked that
Tasmania would like a public inquiry into aviation
generally. I cannot ask the conference to decide any-
thing on that matter, but I shall submit the request to
the Commonwealth Cabinet when it meets next week.
As to all the other matters we have a fair measure of
agreement.
Sir GEORGE PEARCE.—Does Mr. Manning
think that a review by the suggested committee
would give any better guarantee than the present regu-
lations which are based on the International Con-
vention ? Any experts that are to be found •in the
States have been examined or have been certificated
by the Commonwealth aviation authorities or other
Commonwealth officers.
Mr. MANMIMG.—It is of great importance in the
interests of both the Commonwealth and the States
that the matter should be examined by experts. If a
committee examines the regulations there will be com-
paratively little difficulty in having them approved
by the political parties in Mew South Wales and then
by the Parliament itself; but without that examination
the difficulty will be considerable. The regulations vary
substantially from the convention.
Mr. MENZIES.—I understand that such an exami-
nation would not take long. The present regulations
are practically a copy of the international convention.
The Commonwealth would make available to the com-
mittee the assistance of its expert advisers. It would
be most convenient if the Commonwealth drafted the
proposed bill and sent it to the States for comment.
DECISIONS OF THE CONFERENCE.
The following are the results of the discussion: —
1. All governments agreed that there ought to be
uniform rules in relation to air navigation
and aircraft, and in particular in relation
to the airworthiness of machines, the
licensing and competence of pilots, air
y traffic rules, and the regulation of aero-
dromes.
2. Each State Government reserved the right (sub-
ject to the observance of the general rules
referred to in paragraph 1) to make its
own laws with respect to transport regula-
tion and also reserved its right (subject to
the observance of the general rules referred
to in paragraph 1), to establish State-
owned air services.
3. Each State Government agreed that it will sub-
mit to Parliament a law, relating to air
navigation and aircraft, enacting that the
Commonwealth rules in force from time to
time on the matters referred to in paragraph
1 shall be extended to apply to air naviga-
tion and aircraft within the jurisdiction of
the State; but nothing in any such State law
shall affect. the reservations specified in
>OlO,O-) <*< ■ ' pa r agr a p h 2.


4. It Was agreed by all governments that, before
the laws referred to in paragraph 3 are sub-
mitted 'to the State Parliaments, a com-
mittee, representing the Commonwealth and
the States, shall sit to review the existing
regulations.
5. Each State agreed to appoint promptly its
representative on the committee mentioned
in paragraph 4. . ;
6. All States agreed that the proposed State laws
shall provide that the administration of
those laws shall be vested in the Common-
wealth.
7. It was agreed that the Commonwealth
should draft the bill proposed to be passed
by the States and send copies of the draft
; to the States for comment.
8. It was agreed that the date of meeting of the
committee mentioned in paragraph 4 should
he the 20th May next, and that it should
sit in Melbourne.
The Commonwealth undertook that the draft hill,
together with copies of the existing regulations, would
be sent out to the States by the Commonwealth by the
24th April, and that a copy of the report of the con-
ference would be sent to all States.
The conference adjourned.
By Authority: L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
