

SECRET.]
COMMONWEALTH OE AUSTRALIA.
CONFERENCE
OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE REPRESENTATIVES
ON
AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS
HELD AT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, MELBOURNE.
25th AND 26th AUGUST, 1941.
By Authority:
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
•WJO.


SECRET.]
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
CONFERENCE
OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE REPRESENTATIVES
ON
AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS
HELD AT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, MELBOURNE.
25th AbU>2<fTH 'AUGUST, 1941.
' By Authority:
L. F. .Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberni.
(Printed in Australia.)
r.fwo.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Pages.
Agenda .. .. • • •■ •• • • •• • • •• • • ■ • ■ • ®
Opening Address by the Minister for Home Security .. .. .. . ■ ■ • • • • ■ • • • • 5
Vulnerable Areas .. .. •. .. ■ • • • • • • • • • ■ • • • • • • • 7
Controlled Lighting of Aerodromes .. .. .. .. ■ • • ■ • • • • 7
Use of Wireless during Air Raids .. .. .. .. .. • • • • ■ • • ■ 7
Reservation of Trained Municipal Engineers and Stocks Accumulated for Demolition and Rescue Squads .. .. 7
Controlled Lighting ■ • • • • • • • • • 8 and 43
Air Raid Warning Systems .. .. • • • • • • • • .. 14
Fire-fighting • ■ • • .. 18
Emergency Water Supply • • ■ • .. 20
Air Raid Sirens .. . • • • • • • • ■ • .. 21
Stirrup Pumps ..21and23
First-aid Equipment • ■ .. 24
Financial Assistance to the States—Allocation of £500,000 Grant .. .. .. ■ • 27
Bomb Disposal Squads •. • • • • • • • ■ • • • • 30
Instructions to the Public . . .. . . .. .. • • • • • • ■ ■ ■ • .. 32
Badges for A.R.P. Workers.. .. .. ■ • .. •• •• .. 33
Equipment .. • ■ • • ■ • • • ■ • 33
Telephones —Use for Air Raid Precautions Purposes—Charges made for .. .. .. •. 34
Compensation for Injured Civil Defence Volunteers .. .. .. 35
Reservation of Petrol Supplies for Evacuation and Training Exercises .. .. 38
A.R.P. Measures —Commonwealth Departments .. .. ■. • • • • ■ • • • • • 38
Camouflage .. .. .. .. •• •• ..39
Disposal of the Dead .. • • • • • • ■ • ■ • ■ • ■ • .. 40
Training of Personnel Outside Vulnerable Areas .. .. .. •. •. ■. 41
Equipment of Emergency Hospitals and Transport Arrangements for Evacuation of Patients in Hospitals in Vulnerable Areas .. 41
Control Centres .. .. .. •. • • • • • ■ • • • • • • .. 42
Shelters .. •. • • • • • • ■ • .. 45
Vote of Thanks to Chairman .. .. .. ■ ■ ■. • • • • .. 50


Present :—
COMMONWEALTH.
Department of Home Security.
The Honourable J. P. Abbott, M.C., M.P., Minister for Home Security.
P. G. Shedden, Esquire, C.M.G., Secretary, Department of Home Security.
A. W. Welch, Esquire, Assistant Secretary, Department of Home Security.
Lieutenant-Colonel R. M. W. Thirkell, M.8.E., Y.D., Technical Adviser, Department of Home Security.
Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Sir Guy Royle, K.C.8., C.M.G.
Deputy Chief of General Staff, Major-General J. Northcott, C. 8., M.V.0., i.d.c., p.s.c., Department of the Army.
Deputy Chief of Air Staff, Air-Commodore W. D. Bostock, 0.8. E., Department of Air.
Service Officers.
Commander H. J. Buchanan, D. 5.0., Department of the Navy.
Lieutenant-Colonel J. J. L. McCall, D. 5.0., p.s.c., Department of the Army.
Lieutenant-Colonel C. Q. Taplin, 0.8.8., Department of the Army.
Wing Commander A. J. Biggar, Department of Air.
Department of the Treasury.
W. E. Dunk, Esquire.
Department of Trade and Customs.
J. Maher, Esquire.
Commonwealth Honorary Advisers on Controlled Light.ng
W. H. Connolly, Esquire, Engineer and Manager, Electricity Commission of Victoria (State >•
J. C. Graggs, Esquire, Distribution Superintendent, Sydney County Council.
Commonwealth Honorary Advisers on Fire Fighting.
C. D. A. Richardson, Esquire, Chief Officer, New South Wales Fire Brigades.
J. Kemp, Esquire, Chief Officer, Metropolitan Fire Brigades, Melbourne.
STATES.
New South Wales.
The Honourable R. J. Heffron, Esquire, M.L.A., Minister for National Emergency Servicer.
H. A. Bland, Esquire, Department of National Emergency Services.
J. C. Cblman, Esquire, Private Secretary to the Minister.
Victoria.
The Honourable A. A. Dunstan, Premier, Treasurer and Solicitor-General.
The Honourable Sir John Harris, K.8.E., M.D., Ch.B., M.L.C., Minister for Public Instruction and Public Health
and Chairman of the State Emergency Council for Civil Defence.
VV. J. Jungwirth, Esquire, Under Secretary, Premier’s Department.
J. E. Hunter, Esquire, Organizing Secretary, State Emergency Council for Civil Defence.
E. T. Ebbels, Esquire, State Emergency Council for Civil Defence.
C. L. McVilly, Esquire, Secretary Charities Board.
Queensland.
The Honourable E. M. Hanlon, M.L.A., Minister for Health and Home Affairs.
R. H. Robinson, Esquire, Assistant Under Secretary, Department of Health and Home Affairs.
J. V. Kelly, Esquire, Private Secretary to the Minister.
South Australia.
The Honourable T. Playford, M.H.A., Premier.
Lieutenant-Colonel G. D. Shaw, V.D., Commissioner of Civil Defence.
M. Pearce, Esquire, Private Secretary to the Premier.
Western Australia.
The Honourable A. H. Panton, M.L.A., Minister for Mines and Health.
L. E. Shapcott, Esquire, C.M.G., M.V.0., 1.5.0., Controller of Civil Defence.
Tasmania.
Major the Honourable T. H. Davies, D. 5.0., M.C., M.H.A., Minister for Lands, Works and Mines.
E. Parkes, Esquire, C.M.G., Under Secretary, Premier’s Department.
G. A. Walch, Esquire, Director of Civil Defence.


-----
Trained.
In Training.
Total.
Firemen . .
6,811
1,554
8,365
Police
9,485
5,264
14,749
Wardens . .
19,579
4,350
23,929
First Aid Personnel
23,254
5,530
28,784
75,827
CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE REPRESENTATIVES
ON AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS HELD AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
MELBOURNE.
AGENDA.
1. Opening Address by Minister.
Following which, the Deputy Chiefs of Staff
will be available to answer any questions raised
by delegates as to scale of attack, vulnerable
areas, or broad matters of policy affecting the
State air raid precautions plans.
2. Official Luncheon.
3. (Controlled Lighting.
Presentation of report on behalf of Common-
wealth Honorary Technical Advisers.
4. Air Raid Warning Systems:
(a) Submission of Commonwealth recommen-
dations.
( b ) Representations by New South Wales.
5. Fire Fighting:
(cr.) Submission of report prepared in colla-
boration with the Commonwealth
Honorary Advisers.
( b ) Representations by New South Wales and
Western Australia as to purchase and
provision of equipment.
6. First-aid Equipment.
Submissions by New South Wales and
Western Australia.
7. Training of Key Personnel.
Advice on Commonwealth proposals regard-
ing Bomb Disposal Squads.
S. Instructions to Public.
Discussion on request from New South Wales
as .to advice regarding the method of issuing.
!). Equipment.
(a) Submission by New South Wales as to the
provision of —■
(i) Steel helmets.
(ii) Uniforms for air raid precautions
personnel.
(h) Training equipment —representations by
New South Wales and Victoria as to
increase in issue of.
JO. Telephones—use for Air Raid Precautions
Purposes—Charges made for.
Submission from Victoria.
11. Compensation.
Representations by Victoria, Queensland, and
Western Australia.
12. Preservation of Petrol Supplies for Evacua-
tion and Training Exercises.
Submission from Victoria and South Aus-
tralia.
13. Air Raid Precautions Measures —Common-
wealth Departments.
Submission from Victoria.
14. Camouflage.
Report on progress in development of camou-
flage organization.
15. Disposal of the Dead.
Report on progress of Committee appointed
by the Directors at Conference in March, 1941.
16. Training of Personnel outside Vulnerable
Areas.
Submission by South Australia.
17. Equipment of Emergency Hospitals and
Transport Arrangements for Evacuation of
Patients in Hospitals in Vulnerable Areas.
Submission by Hew South Wales.
18. Control Centres.
Submission by Hew* South Wales.
19. Shelters:
(«) Statement on Commomvealth policy.
(b) Submission from Victoria on shelters.
(c) Submission from Hew South Wales regard-
ing—
(i) provision of materia! for surface
shelters;
(ii) equipment and use- of tunnels for
shelter purposes.
20. Provision of Material for Strengthening
Hospitals. Schools and Public Buildings.
Submission by Hew South Wales.
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE MINISTER FOR
HOME SECURITY (THE HON. J. P. ABBOTT).
Welcome.
In the first place, may I extend on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government a cordial 'welcome to the
Premiers* and State Ministers and officers represent-
ing the air raid precautions organizations of Aus-
tralia. The Commonwealth Government is very glad
to have been able to arrange this Conference, and
trusts that the deliberations here to-day and to-morrow
will prove of advantage to the people of Australia.
Appreciation of States' Activities.
A great amount of excellent work has been done
by the State authorities in preparing against a con-
tingency which we all trust will not happen, but
against the possibility of which we would be very
foolish if we did not prepare. In each State, air
raid precaution? plans have been developed, and
advice recently received from the States and collated
by the Department of Home Security show's that,
throughout Australia, there have been trained and
are in training in the various sections of air raid
precautions organizations, personnel totalling 95,000.
In this total are included— l


These represent only the main air raid precautions
services.
The people of Australia owe a real obligation to
the State Ministers, their officers, and the voluntary
workers who have laboured so long during the past
two or three years to build up this organization, so
essential to the defence of the civil population.
The Government of the Commonwealth has asked
me to express its thanks to the State Governments
for their assistance in a number of directions, includ-
ing the provision by two of the States of officers to
act as honorary advisers to the Commonwealth in
connexion with fire-fighting and lighting, and also in
the provision of staff for the new Department of Home
Security. Most of the staff, as State Ministers are
aware, has been recruited from the various State
Governments.
Apart from the recent conference with State
Premiers at Canberra, this is the second conference
convened by the Commonwealth Government with
State air raid precautions Ministers and executives.
March, 1941, Conference.
It will probably be recalled that, at the earlier
conference of the State air raid precautions authori-
ties in March, 1941, the following resolutions were
adopted by that conference;—
(i) That the Commonwealth appoint a Minister of State
for Civil Defence.
(ii) That the Commonwealth lay down general principles,
and that details of the State schemes be left to the States
to implement.
(iii) That there should be consultations between the
Commonwealth and expert bodies functioning in each State
to promote, wherever possible, uniformity and co-ordination
of air raid precautions plans.
(iv) That the position relating to the disposal of the dead
be reviewed.
A report on the question of the disposal of the
dead will be presented later to the Conference.
As to the other resolutions, they have been, and are
being, acted upon in practice.
Commonwealth Activities Since March, 1941.
It is just two months now since the Department of
Home Security commenced to operate. May I recapi-
tulate some of the steps taken by the Commonwealth
during this time?
A visit has been paid by me as Minister to each
State and local problems discussed on the spot with
the Minister and State officers in charge of air raid
precautions, as well as conferring with the chiefs of
the fighting services in each State, particularly in
relation to adequate liaison between those in control
of air raid precautions and the Services.
■Commonwealth advisers on fire-fighting and lighting
have been appointed.
Questionnaires on both subjects have been sent to
the States and replies received, and the Commonwealth
advisers will present to you during the course of the
Conference their observations as a result of the situa-
tion revealed by the questionnaires.
Endeavours are being made to secure appropriate
aid raid precautions equipment from abroad under
lease-lend arrangements.
Additional equipment in the way of respirators has
been supplied to the States for training purposes.
Commencement is about to he made of the issue
of steel helmets to personnel and the initial supplies
will go forward to the States in the course of a few'
days.
Regulations have been promulgated covering the
Defence State Camouflage Committees, and nomina-
tions have been sought from the States as to the
appointment of representatives of State Governments
on these committees.
A camouflage research and experimental station
lias been opened in Sydney and the first technical
course of instruction under the direction of Professor
W. J. Dakin was concluded at the end of last week.
At this school, there were present of
the State Camouflage Committees and representatives
from the Haval, Military and Air Services in each
of the States.
The main principles of a scheme of compensation
for civil defence volunteers injured during training
or during the course of hostilities will be announced
during the course of the Conference.
A better system of advice to the States concerning
air raid precautions in the United Kingdom is he;ng
instituted, and a bulletin will periodically be issued
for the information of the air raid precautions execu-
tives in the States. The first bulletin was issued last
week.
An agreement has been reached between State
Governments and the Commonwealth as to the basis
upon which the Commonwealth Government will
extend financial assistance to the States.
This latter matter was the main question outstand-
ing from the March, 1941, conference, namely, finan-
cial arrangements between the States. As Ministers
are aware, the matter was disposed of in conference
with State Premiers at Canberra on the Bth and 9th
August, 1941.
So that the Ministers who were not at the conference
may be aware of the appreciation as to the weight
and scale of attack indicated to State Premiers at the
Canberra conference this month, I have made avail-
able to them copies of my address on that occasion.
I think, also, as it touches some of the matters for
discussion, it would be of advantage to recapitulate
the proposals then advanced by the Commonwealth,
and in respect of which the agreement with the State
Premiers was reached:—
PRINCIPLES AGREED TO BY COMMONWEALTH AND
STATE PREMIERS—AS TO FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
TO STATES.
(i) The Commonwealth would be prepared to assist the
States by way of grants in regard to the first six
of the eight priorities laid down at the conference
of air raid precautions authorities, held in March
of this year.
(ii) Such grants to be made on the following conditions:—
(a) that this money should be expended on those
priorities only in the vulnerable areas of
the States, as laid down by the Common-
wealth Government on the advice of the
Defence Committee;
(b) that the money should be expended only on
projects submitted to and approved by the
appropriate Commonwealth authority—the
Ministry of Home Security;
(c) that the equipment secured as a result of
such grants will be additional to normal
peace-time equipment and that such normal
peace-time equipment must be maintained
throughout, apart from any equipment
specially provided as a result of such
grants.
(iiil With respect to the balance of the expenditure
required to carry out work on the priorities to
the stage recommended by the Commonwealth in
these areas, the States may use loan moneys.
(sv; The question of financial responsibility as between
State Governments and local authorities would be
a matter for each State Government to determine.
The Commonwealth would have no objection to the
States making grants to local authorities out of
money advanced by the Commonwealth, provided
that in no case the grant from these specific sources
exceeded" 50 per cent, of the cost of the items, and
that such grant related to an area included in the
vulnerable areas as described by the Commonwealth
Government to the States.
In effect, what the above proposals mean is that of the
expenditure necessary in the vulnerable areas to bring the
six priorities up to the standards the Commonwealth 0 con-
sider necessary, the Commonwealth, alter approval, would
be prepared to meet half the cost by way of grant up to


an amount of £500,000, and the States might use loan funds
to a similar extent on such items as represent an appropriate
capital charge.
It should be observed that the proposal does not in
any way change the position under which the States accept
responsibility for implementing air raid precautions plans
in their State along the broad policy lines conveyed to them
by the Commonwealth Government at the March, 1939, and
subsequent conferences.
It was also indicated to the conference, and con-
firmed by letter to the State Premiers, that the Com-
monwealth would support the provision by the Loan
Council to the States of loan moneys up to an amount
of £500,000 on the conditions mentioned in the
memorandum I presented to the Premiers at that
time. As, you are no doubt aware, in the communica-
tion addressed by the Prime Minister to the Premiers,
subsequent to the conference on the Bth-9th August,
1941, the States were asked to submit details of their
plans and costs in regard to the six priorities men-
tioned as being eligible for grant as they apply to
the aiWs determined by the Defence Committee. As
indicated in the letter it will, of course, be necessary
to furnish, in respect of each of the priorities, appro-
priate details including the nature and location of any
schemes in order to enable adequate consideration to
be given to the matter. This, of course,will necessarily
require to be done by correspondence. As you are
aware, these priorities are —
(1) Controlled lighting schemes.
(2) Fire-fighting schemes.
(3) First-aid organizations and medical equip-
ment.
(4) Warning systems.
(5) Incendiary bomb training of key personnel.
(6) Instructions to the general public.
Might I repeat again what was said in the Prime
Minister’s letter, that in respect of such items as
information is already available, the particulars
should at once be supplied so that these items can be
proceeded with without awaiting finality in regard
to others in respect of which inquiry by your officers
may be necessary.
As indicated by me at the conference with the
Premiers on the Bth-9th August, 1941, a review had
been made of the vulnerable areas. Further advice
in this regard was conveyed to the States following
the conference, and State Ministers will, no doubt,
be aware of the variations made so far as their own
States are concerned.
Advice has been forwarded to the various Air Com-
mands as to the reconnaissance to be made to deter-
mine the extent of the controlled lighting areas, and,
in some instances, I know communication has already
been made with the State authorities. Where that has
not already occurred, Ministers should rest assured
action in this direction will be taken in the very near
future.
Now might I say we are privileged to-day to have
with us the—
Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Sir Guy Royle,
K.C.8., C.M.G.;
Deputy Chief of General Staff, Major General J.
Northcott, C. 8., M.V.0., i.d.c., p.s.c.; and
Deputy Chief of Air Staff, Air Commodore W, D.
Bostock, 0.8. E.,
who will be prepared to answer questions raised by
State Ministers concerning vulnerable areas or other
activities associated with the development of air raid
precautions in their respective States. The representa-
tives of the Defence Committee have expressed to me
the desire that any discussion with them might take
place before the review of the items listed on the
agenda-paper. I am sure the Conference will not
wish to detain these gentlemen any longer than is
essential, and, further, I think that a talk in the
opening stages will help in directing our minds to
the real essence of the problems associated with the
matters listed for discussion.
I should point out, however, that it is felt by the
Chiefs of Staff and by myself that purely local air
raid precautions problems can best be handled by the
senior Service officers stationed in the respective
States. I would ask, therefore, that any questions
to the Chiefs of Staff might be confined to broad
matters of defence.
Agenda.
You will see before you a rather formidable agenda,
but I feel sure that discussion of these matters will
be very useful and instructive to us all, and you can
be sure it is the desire of the Department of Home
Security and myself as Minister to help in every
way possible. To facilitate the discussion of any matter
on which we have had advice collated, it is proposed
to distribute in advance copies of memoranda on the
subject.
I feel I should not conclude without making special
reference on behalf of the Commonwealth Government
of its appreciation of the action of the Victorian
Government in providing facilities for this Conference
to be held in Parliament House. Many important
conferences have been held in Melbourne, and the
Victorian Government and the parliamentary authori-
ties have always been most generous and co-operative,
and we thank them for their courtesy and help on this
occasion. I trust the deliberations here will be of
mutual benefit.
Then followed discussions with the Service Chiefs,
much of which was confidential. The essential points
arising from the discussion are briefly summarized
below: —
VULNERABLE AREAS.
The SERVICE CHIEFS indicated to Conference
the factors taken into consideration in the classification
of vulnerable areas. It was agreed that States should
be given an opportunity of submitting representations
regarding inclusion of additional areas, to the Defence
Committee, per medium of the local Command Plan-
ning Committees.
CONTROLLED LIGHTING OF AERODROMES.
Air Commodore BOSTOOK agreed to look into this
matter.
USE OF WIRELESS DURING AIR RAIDS.
The CHAIRMAN undertook to obtain information
as to the conditions under which wireless stations
might operate during an air raid.
RESERVATION OF TRAINED MUNICIPAL
ENGINEERS AND STOCKS ACCUMULATED
FOR DEMOLITION AND RESCUE SQUADS.
Mr. HEFFRON asked for an undertaking that the
New South Wales municipal engineers who had been
trained in heavy demolition and rescue work, and the
stores and materials accumulated by the New South
Wales civilian defence authorities for this purpose,
should not he commandeered by the Department of
the Army. Major-General Northcott expressed the
opinion—
(l) That the matter of the personnel would prob-
ably be covered by the Man Power Regula-
tions—he would check up on this point;
(2) That the stores collected were unlikely to be
interfered with by the Department of the
Army.


Mr. HEFFRON.—Hear, hear!
(On the motion of Mr. Hanlon, seconded by Mr.
Heffron, a vote of thanks was expressed to the Defence
chiefs for their attendance.)
The CHAIRMAN.—I would now like to make clear
the undertaking I have given in regard to the proposed
motion of Mr. Playford: It is that, with regard to the
vulnerable areas, the States will put up suggestions as
to what places, if any, they think should he included in
the vulnerable areas, and the reasons why they think
they should be included. Such suggestions will be tasks
of the local Planning Committee, who will put up their
views to the Defence Committee in Melbourne. The
decisions will be made by the Defence Committee in
Melbourne, and the recommendations will go from it to
the Commonwealth Government. I give the under-
taking that that procedure will be adopted, if that is
agreeable to you.
Suggestion agreed, to.
Item No. 3.—CONTROLLED LIGHTING.
The CHAIRMAN.—Before we go on to this item, I
would like to introduce Mr. Craggs and Mr. Connelly,
our two technical lighting advisers, and I say again
how much we appreciate the action of the Governments
of Victoria and New South Wales in making those
gentlemen’s services available to us in an advisory and
honorary capacity.
As a result of a conference with the Commonwealth
Honorary Technical Lighting Advisers, a question-
naire was addressed to each State concerning air raid
precautions lighting measures.
The reports to* hand have been perused and the
Lighting Advisers have submitted the following brief
resume of the questionnaires:—
1. Powers. —Every State has powers, except South Aus-
tralia where Bill is to he introduced.
2. Administering Departments. —-Provided for in all States.
3. Plans for Lighting Restrictions.—A ll States provide for
“ black-outs ”. South Australia will cut off electricity supply
to all except essential industry. Only Victoria and Queens-
land provide for screening (at different stages and different
degrees).
4. Declared Areas. —All States have ‘ declared ’ areas except
Tasmania and Western Australia.
5. Warning Codes. —All States, except Western Australia,
have warning codes. All substantially different.
0. Tests. —Large-scale tests have been held in four States.
None in Western Australia. Tasmania testing street lighting
in Launceston and Hobart.
7 and 8. Centralized Control of Public Lighting.—lnstalled
in certain areas of Victoria and New South Wales, and in
country towns only in South Australia. Western Australia
and Tasmania have plans. Queensland has authorized work.
9. Screened Public Lighting. —Victoria adopting generally.
Queensland at special intersections.
10. Nil.
11. Private Lighting — Preliminary Advice. —All States
apitear to have issued booklets for householders, except
Queensland where one has been prepared. Except in Western
Australia and Queensland, essential industries have had
special consideration.
12. Training A.R.P. Personnel for Lighting Restrictions. —
Undertaken in all States except South Australia, where stated
not necessary.
13. Restrictions in Essential Industry. —See 11.
14. Survey of Materials. —No surveys except in Victoria.
15. Special A.R.P. Signs. —No definite provisions yet made.
11l Vehicular Lighting. —All States appear to be following
British practice.
17.. Special Problems. —New South Wales and Queensland
have problems relating to blast furnaces, coke ovens and the
like. Queensland invites assistance.
The Lighting Advisers have submitted the following recom-
mendations :■ —■
(i) that it is desirable that there should be a more
explicit definition of Item (a) in the priorities
conveyed to the States, following the March, 1941
Conference of Air Raid Precautions Authorities.
'lbis item reads as under —
“The Commonwealth Government expressed
the opinion that development should be along
the lines and in the order of priority shown
below;—
(n) Completion of planning and consequential
work to enable Controlled Lighting
Schemes to be intro I need at short notice
at centres of population and probable
targets of national importance in
coastal and adjacent inland areas.” -
In order to make clear what was in mind concerning
this particular item, it should be pointed out firstly
that the term “ Controlled Lighting ” is used in contra-
distinction to the term “ black-out. ”.
While in both cases the aim is to achieve the same
purpose, i.e., to reduce visibility to enemy aircraft, the
result is achieved by two different methods. In the
case of the “ black-out ” there is a complete obscuration
of light visible either from the air or the ground. This
means, in effect, that all street lights, guiding lights
in ports or rivers and other exterior lights are put out,
while railway signals and vehicular traffic lights are
made invisible from the air. Lights within structures
are either extinguished or measures taken to prevent
the smallest emission of light which could be visible
either from the ground or the air.
“Controlled Lighting” was intended to indicate a
restricted form of exterior lighting that would conform
to certain standards and would not act as a guide to
enemy aircraft.
The intention of the Commonwealth Government
was that measures to this end should be taken at once,
so that at very short notice, such schemes could be
applied in full. The effect of this would be that all
materials would need to be secured and fabricated and
actually put in position as early as possible, so that all
that would remain to be done would be to commence
actual operation of the restricted lighting scheme upon
notification of the state of emergency.
Since my visit to the different States, it has become
apparent that while some States are implementing
schemes of “ Controlled Lighting ” others consider that
“ black-out ” fulfills their needs as there are difficulties
in implementing the requirements of “ Controlled
Lighting.”
In such cases, it would seem that if and when air
raids begin to take place, such States could, if they
found it necessary, then gradually change from “ black-
out ” to “ Controlled Lighting ” conditions so long as
the required invisibility from the air is achieved.
Apart from inconvenience to the civil population, of
which the individual States can best judge, then the
necessary requirements are obtained.
In small towns within controlled lighting areas,
where a central switch controls street lighting, the
advisers suggest that the position can best be met by
Ihe switching off of street lighting, unless of course the
local authorities feel they would prefer a system of
screened lighting.
The Commonwealth’s Lighting Advisers are pf the
opinion that, before “ Controlled Lighting ” or
restricted public lighting could be fully implemented
six to nine months would probably elapse because of
the necessity to manufacture special fittings, and even
this is subject to the availability of materials. This
emphasizes the need for an early commencement.
Another matter upon which the Lighting Advisers
indicate that a determination is necessary, having
regard to the views of the Defence Authorities, is the
intensity of exterior lighting allowable for public pur-
poses, for street vehicular, and public utilities under
restricted lighting conditions. They have in mind here
that the Air Force in particular should determine the
degree of lighting which they feel could safely be
allowed without acting as a guide to enemy aircraft.
Steps are to be taken urgently to secure authoritative
advice on this question, and this will be conveyed to the
States as soon as it is obtained.
It is appreciated that, until this is done, restricted
public lighting schemes cannot be carried far ahead.


Item
No.
Standard
Specification
Number.
Name.
i
BS/ARP. 14
Window Blind Material (Paper)
2
BS/ARP. 23
Obscuration Value tor Textile Material for
Curtains and Method of Testing
3
BS/ARP. 8
Galvanized Wire Netting and Cloth (for
protection against flying glass)
4
BS/ARP. 15
Light-locks at Entrances to Buildings
6
BS/ARP. 32
Illuminated and Non-illuminated A.R.P.
Signs
6
BS/ARP. 7
Electric Lighting of Report and Control
Centres
7 .
BS/ARP. 36
Headlamp Masks for Motor Vehicles
8
BS/ARP. 21
Methods for Providing Even Illumination of
Low Intensity (0.2 foot-candles)
9
BS/ARP. 20
Methods of Providing Even Illumination of
Low Intensity (0.02 foot-candles)
10
BS/ARP. 16
Methods of Providing Low Values of
Illumination (not exceeding 0.002 foot-
oandles)
11
BS/ARP. 30
Gauges for Checking Low Values of Illumina-
tion (0.0002 to 0.2 foot-candles)
12
BS/ARP. 3
Electric Hand-lamps (fitted with primary
battery or unspillable accumulator)
13
BS/ARP. 6
Shelter Lighting
14
BS/ARP. 26
A reduced Scheme for the Lightinsr of
Shelters, where A.C. Mains are available
15
BS/ARP. 35
Illuminated Display Cabinets
16
BS/ARP. 41
Front lamps for Tram-cars
Controlled Lighting Tests.
The Advisers point out, however, that while the
various lighting restrictions and black-out tests in the
different States are serving a useful purpose, the fact
remains that the non-emission of light from buildings
is in general being achieved by switching off lights
and suspending normal activities in homes, offices,
factories, &c., during the period of the test. Further
steps are, therefore, undoubtedly necessary if the real
objective is to be attained, namely to ensure that light-
ing can be left On inside buildings without being
visible from the outside.
It is suggested, therefore, that in future tests regard
should be had to this and that the time and duration
of the tests should be so arranged to ensure, as far as
possible, that business and private people will be
obliged to conform in this manner.
It is felt that, until there has been a black-out of at
least week’s duration, there can be no true test of
whether such black-out is effective or not.
The Question of Standards. —The following com-
ments have been submitted by the Advisers on the
question of standards. BiS/ARP Specifications con-
cerning Lighting have been perused and are listed here-
under in order of priority;—
Since the time element is of importance, the aim of
the Standards Association of Australia should be to
adopt the British Standards without alteration or at
most with the minimum of alteration necessary to
accord with local conditions.
An important and urgent aspect is in relation to
material for preventing the emission of light from
buildings. Owners and tenants are being urged to
equip their premises for black-out conditions and some
steps should be taken to ensure that the materials being
sold to them are suitable for the purpose.
The Standards Association should in prescribing
standards have regard to the materials which are avail-
able or could readily be manufactured in Australia and
could well suggest alternatives to the adopted standards.
It is felt there is considerable merit in securing
reasonable standards and the Commonwealth proposes
to take the matter up immediately with the Standards
Association of Australia, and will convey suitable
advice to the States.
-From what has been said previously, the following
points arise:—
1. Is there in existence in each State the necessary
legislation and regulations under such legislation for
the implementation of the control of lighting and the
institution of black-out conditions?
Note.—lt is believed this is so in all States except South
Australia. Confirmation would be appreciated.
2. As regards exterior lighting, it is the Common-
wealth’s view that the regulations should provide for
non-essential lighting to be blacked out.
3. As regards essential exterior lighting, the question
arises as to what measure of illumination, apart from
complete black-out is to be permitted during the stage
when air raids are possible but not imminent. As
mentioned earlier, advice is being sought from the
Defence authorities and will be conveyed to the States
at an early date.
4. The further question arises as to whether there
exists in all States some form of control of restricted
essential lighting so that it can be blacked out imme-
diately on receipt of an air raid warning. Do the
States consider their arrangements effective in this
regard ?
Note.— The view of the Department of Air in this regard
is that while the raid is actually in progress essential exterior
restricted lighting should be blacked out.
5. The question is raised with the States as to
whether it is desirable for some form of lighting which
could be left on under black-out conditions to be adopted
in certain locations, e.g., busy parts of cities and other
strategical points.
Note. —'! he Commonwealth’s advisers have in mind a form
of lighting known as “star-light” lighting- where the light
is distributed to produce an intensity about the equivalent of
bright star-light, and is practically invisible from the air. It
is nevertheless thought it would be of some assistance, say,
at centres where pedestrian or road traffic is heavy.
6. As regards interior lighting, the Commonwealth’s
view is that steps should he taken now to ensure that
in actual fact premises are put in a position where
normal activities can be carried on without the emission
of light.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I would like to ask whether that
report has been made available to the heads of the
various Services. The information we had supplied
to us previously by the Commonwealth was that we
were to expect one raid not more frequently than
fortnightly. If that is the case, what is the justification
for going to the very great expense of providing light-
ing to carry on essential industries or non-essential
industries, offices and such like, if there is not any more
possibility than one raid a fortnight in the whole of
Australia. Is not this report based upon English
experience, where they have raids at frequent intervals
and over prolonged periods?
The CHAIRMAN.—In March, 1941, at the Con-
ference on Air Raid Precautions which was then held,
the view was expressed—
The Commonwealth Government expressed the
opinion that development should be along the lines and
in the order of priority shown below—
(a) completion of planning and consequential
work to enable controlled lighting schemes
to be introduced at short notice at centres
of population and probable targets of
national importance in coastal and adjacent
inland areas.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —It is the interpretation that you
put upon “ Controlled Lighting ” that makes the differ-
ence. We have always put upon that the interpretation
“ lighting that you can switch off ”, but now you say
it is not lighting that you can switch off - , that it is
lighting that you can restrict. That is a totally
different thing.


The CHAIRMAN.—We say that in both cases the
aim is to achieve the same result—to reduce visibility
to enemy aircraft. That is achieved by the two
differerent methods, black-out and controlled lighting.
Later on it says—
In such cases it would seem that if and when air raids
begin to take place such States could, if they found it neces-
sary, then gradually change from “ black-out ” to “ controlled
lighting” conditions so long as the required invisibility from
the air is achieved. Apart from inconvenience to the civil
population, of which the individual States can best judge,
then the necessary requirements are obtained.
That covers the case of South Australia. When I
visited South Australia, I understood that the position
was that South Australia intended, at Adelaide, to
black-out everything except certain essential hospitals
and a few other spots. That is why we put in this
covering clause “ apart from inconvenience to the civil
population, of which the individual States can best
judge, the necessary requirements are obtained.” If
you can do it that way and the civilian population do
not object, I cannot see any reason why you should
not do it.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —If you are only going to have
such a limited number of raids as is suggested by the
Defence Chiefs, it would cost the householders in South
Australia probably £200,000.
Mr. HANLON.—Do not they say “ One raid in
fourteen days in any one area ” ?
Wing Commander BIG-GAR.—While they say that,
there would be any number of false alarms and periods
when an attack would be possible, owing to the position
of shipping. Say enemy aircraft carriers were known
to be in certain areas; such-and-such an area might
come under threat of attack. Such an area will require
some sort of restrictions in lighting much more fre-
quently than once a fortnight.
Mr. HEFFRON.—You might get a warning every
day in the week. In New Zealand they are under very
reduced lighting. It may be necessary here.
The CHAIRMAN.—But the point is, Mr. Heffron,
that if a State likes to have a total black-out, as Mr.
Playford suggests, they can get the same result as with
controlled lighting.
Mr. HEFFRON. —The black-out is dangerous and
demoralizing.
The CHAIRMAN.—If his people like that he can
continue it, but if they do not like it he can go forward
to the other method.
Mr. HEFFRON.—You will have a revolution if you
do that, Mr. Playford. The advice from England is
that the most demoralizing thing in connexion with air
raids is the black-out. When you have to go under
black-out conditions you want to be able to use lighting
inside. People do not want to sit in the dark when an
air raid takes place. What we have set out to do in
New South Wales is to let them carry on under black-
out conditions. They have run entertainments in
different places and, notwithstanding what this docu-
ment says, in New South Wales, we have asked people
to at least black-out a room. The run on black-out
paper has been enormous. The cost is not great, and
of course it is a matter of shillings and pence. You
could have very expensive types of black-outs—things
made more or less permanent, but by the use of black-
out material, hospitals and other places have been able
to carry on. Our main institutions in Sydney have
carried on in that way.
I am sure if Mr. Playford saw the actual black-out
he would be against the complete switching off of ligb ts
in houses. One of the things we have been up against
is a tendency to face up to it in a kind of carnival
spirit. Whilst we have not had one offence against
the black-out amongst 1,300,000 people, there was a
tendency to the carnival spirit in such places as Kings
Cross, where they came out in the street and marched
up and down singing songs. There was that tendency
too at Newcastle, and I spent a good deal of time
struggling against that and telling people to carry on
in their homes quite normally, because once you get
them in the street under black-out conditions you are
apt to run into difficulties of hooliganism and that
kind of thing. It is difficult to keep them inside in
the dark: they will be more inclined to go out to see
what the black-out looks like. I ask Mr. Playford not
to contemplate a position like that for South Australia.
Mr. HANLON.—That would entail switching off
power from industry, would it not?
Mr. PLAYFORD.—No.
Mr. HANLON.—It would be as well if we had the
same definitions.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—We have not had any dire
effects at all from switching off in the houses. Most
of the places have a candle they can put in.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—As far as Victoria is .con-
cerned, we are just prepared. We have had some
partial tests of outside lighting, but we are trying to
impress upon the factories—and we have a lot of them
in the city—and on householders to get properly ready.
It is not costly insurance, you know. You go and
insure your lives heavily, and yet in this thing you are
just making an insurance with a bit of black paper.
We will see on the 23rd September how things have
worked out.
Mr. HEFFRON.—The chap who gets the black-out
material and his wife are enthusiastic about it. I live
in Maroubra Bay-road, the wardens are friends of
mine, and I do not know anybody in that street who
does not attempt to blaok-out. The wardens tell me
there was not one person in that street who did not
have at least one room blacked out.
Major DAVIES.—In Tasmania, we have the traffic
stopped up to 30 minutes every fortnight. The people
are behaving very well. They have screened their
lights. We found it best to have people stop in their
houses and keep their lights on. Otherwise some people
would get into a very bad state of nerves. I think
controlled lighting is the best system providing the
householders carry it out. We have the street lighting
out and the traffic stopped. There you have the people
co-operating. I think if you put people in a dark room
you do harm. If you can make them screen their lights
in the house, stop your traffic and keep your street
lights down, I think that will have the best result.
Mr. HEFFRON.—In our State they have had full
lighting in all operating theatres. In one case in the
second blaok-out, at Balmain, they had an actual
operation. There have been quite a number of children
born during the black-out period.
I think all those things go to show the necessity for
carrying on normally. Might 1 say thal from Central
Station our trains ran to schedule and Central was
carried on under black-out conditions. Every train
was operated under black-out conditions. We had four
planes up. I think they did see the marker lights of
a couple of trains but, generally speaking, our steam
trains operated without being seen from the air. Quite
a number of the industries carried on. I think the
time has arrived when the Commonwealth should give
a direction to industry that it does not desire any
stoppage at all during the black-out; that we must face
up to the black-out and be as realistic as we can.
The CHAIRMAN.—Obscure any lighting that might
come out of the factory?
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes, but keep the light going.
'Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-We have had a great deal
of difficulty in Melbourne concerning the apathy of the
Commonwealth in regard to their public buildings and
their industries. We wish you, sir, if you possibly
can, to put something into the paper, just once if you


will, to say that you have altered your mind about this
thing—the mind that you had some eighteen months
ago.
The CHAIRMAN.—I want to know what that mind
was.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Read the report of the
Emergency Council Committee and see the foreword
that was written by the Prime Minister at that time.
It has acted tremendously against recruiting in this
city, and it is acting to-day in that none of your public
buildings until quite recently have taken the slightest
interest in A.R.P. work. They have done nothing
towards it. They simply say all the time, “Well, the
Commonwealth people know all these things. They
know all you are trying to get us to do and the Com-
monwealth are not doing anything. Until the Com-
monwealth starts to do something, we do not intend
to do anything I would like a public statement from
you.
The CHAIRMAN. —We have taken up this matter
and actually there are now proposals before the Com-
monwealth Departments.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We want a public press
statement that the Commonwealth people really think
it is necessary to carry out these six priorities.
The CHAIRMAN.—We have told them that at
Canberra.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—No, I do not think you have,
at Canberra.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are dealing with lighting
now. I thought the point you were raising was that
while everybody else was blacking-out here there was
a question that the Commonwealth factories were not.
What I am felling you now is that we have taken steps
to remedy that.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I know.
The CHAIRMAN.—That has been dealt with.
They are getting to work. I would say, however, that,
as Rome was not built in a day, I doubt very much
if they will be blaoked-out on the night of the 23rd.
Then the question arises whether those factories
engaged in 24-hour production in essential war indus-
tries should shut down for the period of the black-out.
Personally, I think they should continue production.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-So do I.
The CHAIRMAN.—And they should right the
position as quickly as they can.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It would be much better if
you would make a public statement to that effect.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are quite prepared to make
a public statement that steps are being taken to bring
all of our factories into line.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —You will assist us tre-
mendously.
The CHAIRMAN.—Do not come to us on the
morning of the 24th and say that the Commonwealth
factories have set a bad example, because we cannot
have it completed by the 23rd.
Mr. HANLON. —The Commonwealth people in
Queensland have been very helpful, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN.—They always are.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have to get on with our
public buildings, also.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are not shirking things,
Sir John; we are working hard on this job.
DAVIES. —The directors at the paper mills
at Burnie, where they work continuously throughout
the 24 hours, gave instructions not to blacken windows
with paint until war is declared.
The CHAIRMAN.—You have State regulations,
and power to enforce them.
Major DAVIES.—I know, Mr. Chairman, but we
have to stop that work during the tests.
Mr. HEPERON.—There are paper mills in my
electorate, and we have blacked-out twice without any
great difficulty.
Major DAVIES. —I do not say there is any diffi-
culty, but we have to stop the work.
Mr. HEFERON.—We have had nine black-outs.
I decided on the first hlack-out a week after I took
over. I did not arrange for it at King’s Cross, but
at Vaucluse, and it went off very well. We tried the
black-out first of all with one of the municipalities,
and then extended it to two or three. We built up to
about eight black-outs, including the bigger places
like Newcastle, and finally we had the general black-
out last Saturday night week. As I said, we had nine
black-outs altogether, and there was not one accident.
The trams and buses were limited, but the railways
ran to their full time-table. We allowed any vehicle
to run on the roads provided it hooded its lights in
accordance with our regulations. It may be that
we were lucky in regard to accidents. There was
not one case of theft or offence against property or
persons. The general response was best in places
like Waterloo and Redfern. Last Sunday night
week, when I was waiting at the Town Hall,
Waterloo, for reports telephoned from the planes, the
first thing they greeted me with was the remark that
the show put on at Waterloo, Redfern, Botany, and
Alexandria was the best of all. They are the poorest
parts of Sydney, and the places where “the boys”
make a row once in a while. If the black-out were
expected to encourage crime, I can say that it has
not worked out there. The results were amazingly
good. Everybody was most anxious to co-operate;
in fact, they have been rather over-zealous. A number
of people were furious because there was a neon
sign flashing at a tyre company. The company was
later fined £3O. Other people were fined £5 on pre-
vious occasions because they not only defied the wardens
but were abusive. There was another form of co-
operation which we do not want. A number of people
in big flats at King’s Cross would not put out their
lights. Some people collected a number of stones,
brickbats, &e., and if the lights were not put out on
their cry, “Put out your lights,” they threw the
missiles through the window. I might have felt like
doing that myself, but, of course, we do not want
to encourage that kind of thing. I mention such
incidents as an indication of how anxious the people
are to co-operate; they think they are doing some-
thing for the war effort. Our Service heads say
that the black-outs have helped recruiting and the
war_ effort generally; it has given their work quite
a big fillip. I would suggest to any representatives
present that they should not have any misgivings
about trying black-outs; it will be found that the
people will co-operate in a manner not dreamt of.
Mr. HANLON.—Two terms are used, “controlled
lighting ” and “ restricted lighting ”. In these matters,
it is desirable that we should understand definitely
what is meant when various terms are used. There
are various stages of lighting control, and I suggest
that we establish the definition of controlled lighting
as “ that state of reduction of lighting which makes
it invisible from the air ”, or something to that effect.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think this is a point at which
we might hear the views of the technical advisers.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—I think the better term is
“restricted lighting”. A city like Melbourne or
Sydney, lighted in its normal way, would be visible
for a distance of 70 or 80 miles out to sea, and
possibly 70 or 80 miles from aircraft. There are two
problems, the first dealing with the position when
there may be an aircraft carrier in the vicinity, and
air raids are possible, and visibility should be reduced.
That can be done by putting out all unnecessary light-
ing. We would include advertising signs, show
window lighting, bowling green and tennis court light-
ing. There would be restriction of essential lighting
such as street lighting, railway yards, and ports and


harbours. By those means the visibility of a city
could be reduced to 20 or 30 miles. That is what we
call “restricted lighting”. In addition, there would
probably be some means whereby that restricted light-
ing could be switched off immediately an air-raid
warning was received.
Mr. HANLON.-—ln Queensland we have the term
“ controlled lighting ” as referring to that stage where
lights must not be visible from the air. We should
know where we stand on the terms. In your report
you point out that we should go from the black-out
to the controlled lighting stage.
Mr. CO WHOLLY.—We, ourselves, would prefer
the terms “ restricted lighting ” and “ black-out ”.
Mr. HANLON. —A black-out, then, would be that
stage in which there were sufficient lights for people
to move about, but they would not be visible from the
air?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Yes, or with all exterior light-
ing put out altogether, and all inside lighting screened.
Mr. HANLON.—The starlight or twilight
effect——
Mr. CONNOLLY.—That is equivalent to dark-
ness.
Mr. HANLON.—I put in the period of a black-out
going through the streets in a car. Had there been
any necessity for - much traffic, there must have been
casualties, and I quiokly arrived at the conclusion
that there must be some method of driving through
the streets, because .ambulances, police cars, and service
corps, essential industries, &c., require movement. As
far as possible, we should attempt to procure a twi-
light effect which will enable vehicle drivers to see
the streets without the streets being visible from the
air. We need to arrive at some term which has that
meaning, so that every one will know what we are
talking about.
The CHAIRMAN”.—I agree with that.
Mr. HANLON.—The imminence of a raid requires
a different stage of lighting when there is an endeavour
to_ reduce, as much as possible without interfering
with business, the light going into the air. We call
that “controlled lighting”.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—In my own point of view, there
is not much difference between black-out and star-
light. Neither is visible from the air.
Mr. HANLON.—WouId you call it black-out?
Mr. CONNOLLY,—-Yes. You could divide the
terms into “ restricted lighting ” and two stages of
black-out, complete and starlight.
Mr. HANLON.—I think the term “black-out”
would be best, because it would convey to the people
the need for completely blacking-out.
The CHAIRMAN.—When I came to this depart-
ment, and when Mr. Welch came, there were the terms
“controlled lighting,” &c. I think they are not the
happiest terms, and I suggest that the technical light-
ing advisers should confer this evening and give the
conference a definition to-morrow. morning.
Mr. HANLON.—Yes, that would do very well.
The CHAIRMAN.—The main matters are the six
questions for consideration, the first of which is—
“ Is there in existence in each State the neces-
sary legislation and regulations under such
legislation for the implementation of the control
of lighting and the institution of black-out con-
ditions ? ”
I take it that the answer is in the affirmative with the
possible exception of South Australia.
Mr. PLAYFORD. -Our legislation has passed
through the Assembly, and is before the Council. It
will probably be passed to-morrow.
The CHAIRMAN.—So we can say the necessary
legislation and regulations are in existence in every
State.
The second point is as follows;
“ As regards exterior lighting, it is the Com-
monwealth’s view that the regulations should pro-
vide for non-essential lighting to be blacked out.”
Would that be in the regulations?
Mr. PLAYFORD.-—The Commonwealth could help
the States if it were prepared to formulate a standard
list of regulations. New South Wales could probably
supply regulations that have already been in operation.
When we start to tell people that they must put out
all non-essential lighting, an argument arises as to
what is and what is not essential lighting. We should
have similar legislation giving us power to make
regulations, and I suggest that the Commonwealth
should provide draft regulations which would cover
the position.
The CHAIRMAN.—The Commonwealth is laying
down the broad principles; I think it would be
infinitely better for the Commonwealth to adhere to
the broad principles and for each State to lay down
what it considers necessary with regard to non-essen-
tial lighting.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —With due deference, Mr. Chair-
man, I think it is desirable to get uniformity.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is it not a matter for the
States _ to agree among themselves as to what they
want in the regulations, and then each State could
implement them itself?
Major DAVIES. —Is it not a State matter only?
The —I think so. It is the Common-
wealth’s function to lay down general principles, and
the States are responsible.
Major DAVIES.—The Commonwealth would be
entering into domestic matters.
Mr. HANLON.—It is the Commonwealth’s view
that the regulations should provide for \non-essential
lighting to be blacked out. Can you say what is meant
by non-essential lighting, or what is behind that
request? We would then get some idea of what the
Commonwealth is driving at. If lam asked, “Do you
mean _ Neon signs, or certain signs outside industrial
establishments, or unnecessary lighting about indus-
tries, I would not know what to answer.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Exactly; that is what we have
done.
The CHAIRMAN.—WouId it not be best to decide
now that the whole of the States will do as New South
Wales has done, in regard to vehicle lighting, and adopt
the British standards_ as far as possible? It is the
States who are adopting the British practice in this
case, and that would be satisfactory to the Services.
Mr, HEFFRON.—We have adopted the British
practice.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think you all agree on that,
gentlemen.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It has occurred to me that,
in the ordinary course of events, there will be a large
number of vehicles travelling on the roads between
ihe big cities and their lights would act as a signal.
They might be travelling along with their lights on
and that would be a guide to aeroplanes as regards the
direction. We are only talking of stated areas which
"would be blaeked-out, but I am speaking of areas where
no provision has been made for the regulation of light-
ing to apply.- We might get warning of a raid and the
city of Melbourne might be quite ready for it, but
people in the country who were travelling to the city
would have their lights on.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Do you mean that they would
have their lights on, coming into the blacked out area ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes. We have not dealt with
that.


Mr. HEFFRON.—Over there the wardens are
patrolling during the black-out and they would stop
any one whom they found driving into a blacked out
area with the lights on.
The CHAIRMAN.—The instinctive thing to do
would be to switch the lights off under those circum-
stances.
Mr. HEFFRON.—The wardens go out and hold
them up. If the lights are not hooded the motorist has
to pull in to the side of the road and stay there until
the all-clear is sounded. We had to deal with the
matter of trains coming in from the country to the
blanked out area. The train crews had to make provision
for covering the lights. They covered the lights, pulled
down the shutters and so on. There are practical diffi-
culties there, but they are not insurmountable. We
had nc difficulty in that way. If the vehicle was not
properly equipped it would not get into the blacked-out
area.
Mr. HEFFRON. —A raiding aircraft would need no
more guidance than to pick up the main highways with
streams of well-lighted vehicles. It would be necessary
to stop cars 30 or 40 miles away from the town which
was blacked out. In black-out conditions you would
not simply black-out Sydney or Melbourne alone. Take
the black-out which we will be doing on the 21st, for
instance. We will black-out Sydney right back to the
top of the Blue Mountains because we have found, in
these black-outs, that while we had Sydney and the
suburbs blacked-out the towns all the way up the
mountains stood out and acted as indicators of the
position of Sydney.
The CHAIRMAN.—If you use Katoomba to get a
line you get a perfect line on Kembla.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Once you receive warning that
the planes are coming the whole of the area must he
blacked-out.
The CHAIRMAN.—We will get on to point 3. As
regards essential exterior lighting, the question arises
as to “ What measure of illumination . . . con-
veyed to the States at an early date That is with
regard to the effectiveness of certain restricted lighting
as viewed from the air. We believe it will be a matter
of trial and error.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We would like some advice on
that from the Service Chiefs, particularly from the
Air Force, as to what they consider the best method
of cutting down lighting. It is a matter of restriction
during periods when raids are possible but not
imminent.
The CHAIRMAN.—We thought that that would
probably not convey to the Air Force .3 or .02-foot
candle, but if those examples arejtried out the lighting-
experts will confer in technical terms.
Commander BUCHANAN.—I think it is a matter
of reducing visibility to some distance in miles, or
something to that effect.
Mr. HANLON.—Have we the warning codes, sirens
and so on at a later stage ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes. Are there any further
questions arising out of this which any of you gentle-
men wish to put to the lighting experts?
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I take it we will get that infor-
mation as soon as it is available?
The CHAIRMAN. —Yes, as soou as it is drafted.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We would regard our arrange-
ments, in the light of experience, as being fairly satis-
factory, though there is room for improvement here
and there which just requires practice. That is in
regard to item 4.
Mr. HANLON.—Item 4 is only a variation of
item 3.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Sydney and Melbourne both
have an effective form of control for putting out all
street lighting from one point.
The CHAIRMAN. —How are the other States placed
in that regard?
Mr. HEFFRON.—They are all right. Queensland,
Victoria and Tasmania are all right.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We seem to be all right,
though we have not tested it out yet. A point which
I would like to emphasize once more is that even after
you have blacked-out a city, unless there is communi-
cation in the country and it is used —I know there is
in this State —any well-lighted motor car travelling
along a highway would indicate to an aircraft which
way to come.
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it there are no other
questions arising out of that, gentlemen?
Mr. HEFFRON.—That is item 4. Are you going
on to item 5 ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes.
Mr. HEFFRON.—That has to do with star-light.
Have you anything to tell us about that?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—I take it you know what is
understood hy that term?
Major DAVIES.—Is that another expense to the
States ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—The States may decide not to
have that.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is only put as a suggestion,
in ease the States should like to adopt it. If you do
not think it is necessary you need not do it.
Item 6 is: “As regards internal lighting the Com-
monwealth’s view is that steps should be taken now
light ”. That is the case in every State, I
understand, except South Australia.
Mr. PLAT FORD.—It is certainly not the case in
South Australia to-day.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Reference has been made to non-
essential lights, such as shop lighting, lighting in
bowling greens, which are not necessary and can be
extinguished. On the other hand, we have lighting in
public places, such as railway yard lighting, dockyard
lighting, and lighting of yards in essential industries
such as we have at the B.H.P. at Newcastle and other
such centres.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Is it the idea that you have in
mind that that should be done now?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—No, but at your rehearsal, you
should comprehend, as they have done in the blacking-
out of lighting, the difference between essential and
non-essential lighting. It should be arranged so that
everybody knows where to find the switches in a state
of emergency. The non-essential lighting should be
put out and the other be put under control.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I thought you had in mind some
reduction of the glare of the essential lighting.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Once that is finalized, it will -be
communicated to the States so that they may act in
respect of their lighting services.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—What we have is a regula-
tion controlling the whole of the lighting-, but it is only
put into effect when an emergency arises. Then it goes
to the alert and so on, and it becomes absolutely effec-
tive when in the alert stage and, in the emergency
stage, it applies to the particular section.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I can see the force of that
system.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You start to get ready, and
all non-essential lights are done away with, so that
you are quite ready for your black-out when the time
comes.
Mr. HANLON. —These neon signs, for the main
part, are controlled by clock switches. If a raid were
imminent you would take time by the forelock and
wipe them out for a period. However, I should like


to ask when does an emergency arise! Does an emer-
gency arise when war breaks out with Japan or does
an emergency arise when a hostile fleet pomes into our
waters ?
The CHAIRMAN. —When the Government issues
advice. I think it is solely the duty of the Com-
monwealth to notify you in that case.
Mr, HANLON.—So that we may have our place
completely illuminated until such time as the Com-
monwealth tells us that an emergency has arisen.
Mr. SHEDDEN.—There are two stages of war.
One is the precautionary stage and the other the war
stage.
Mr. HANLON.—We are in the precautionary stage
now.
Mr. SHEDDEN.—Provision exists in that war
book, isued by the Commonwealth, setting out all the
stages. The States have copies pf that war book.
Mr. HANLON.—I am wondering what constitutes
an emergency. Is it a declaration of war?
Mr. SHEDDEN.—There are two stages given. One
is a precautionary stage and the other the war stage.
Mr. HANLON.—We are in the precautionary stage
now.
Mr. SHEDDEN. —We are in the war stage with
some countries. We are not in the precautionary stage
with Japan at the present moment.
Mr. HANLON.—Are we not ?
Mr. SHEDDEN.—No.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—WouId it be necessary to have
it done by proclamation to the States ?
Mr. HANLON,—As soon as we are attacked.
The CHAIRMAN. —It is the duty of the Common-
wealth to tell you when to put your lighting under
control.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—No one wants it done earlier
than is necessary. In the case of the Electricity
Supply Company, it may mean a considerable loss of
revenue. I think the stage of emergency is a matter
for the Commonwealth to decide.
Mr. HANLON.—As to when lighting should be
reduced or restricted, could we have a proclamation
specifying the terms as to when it begins and when if
ends, and so forth?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Yes.
Mr. HANLON.—In respect of this stage of emer-
gency, may I ask about the use of vehicles? Must the
whole of the traffic be held up during a period of
black-out or the twilight stage?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—No, I think the idea is that the
traffic shall proceed normally until such time as the
warning signal is given. When that signal is given,
all vehicles, that are not essential for public services,
would extinguish their lights and draw in at the side of
the road. Ambulance vehicles, police vehicles, elec-
tricity supply vehicles, and so on would need to be
equipped with appropriate screens so that they could
keep on moving under the black-out conditions.
Mr. HANLON. —Actually those on essential
services.
Mr. HEFFRON. —In England they carry on now
quite normally. Even when there is an air raid on,
they carry on. One time they would pull into the
gutter and stop, but that is not done now. They now
carry on under any conditions. In the early days,
everything stopped. Everything came to a standstill.
That does not exist any longer. As long as it is
humanly passible to carry on, they do so. So long as
the lights are properly hooded and shaded, they carry
on. I think that is what we should aim to do out here.
In New South Wales, as the thing was new to Aus-
tralia,. we started off, in our first regulation, to say
that all bar certain vehicles had to pull into the side
of the road and put their lights out. Now we have
directed that every vehicle, that is prepared to put a
hood on its lights, can run, whether privately owned
by a doctor, or run by the ambulance, or the fire-
brigade—they are all entitled to have full liberty of the
use of the road.
Mr. HANLON.—Or run by the baker or the grocer \
Mr. HEFFRON. —Run by anybody at all. The only
obligation we put on a man is he must have his lights
shaded as prescribed in the regulations. Last Sunday
night week we had vehicles of all kinds running. We
had trains, trams, buses, taxis, doctor’s vehicles,
ambulances and so on, and the reports that we received
from the four different planes that viewed them in
regard to the traffic were that things were eminently
satisfactory. I think that wants to be our aim, so that
we can get away from that original idea that we had.
In Sydney now we have people getting more or less
used to black-outs. If I may use the term, they are
becoming black-out minded. I think we might do
what they are now doing in the Old Country, where
they have to carry out their work each night under
black-out conditions, and get our vehicles ready for use
under black-out conditions.
The CHAIRMAN.—I suggest that you might now
hear what Colonel McCall, from the Department of the
Army, has to say in regard to certain points apper-
taining to the vehicular lighting.
Colonel MoOALL.—Mr. Minister, and gentlemen,
the only point I want to make is this: As there must
of necessity be a certain amount of civil transport
going on during the period of black-out conditions, it is
obviously most desirable that uniform vehicular light-
ing restrictions should obtain in the various States,
It would not do to have a man travelling from Victoria
to New South Wales with hoods on his vehicle in com-
pliance with the requirements of the Victorian Govern-
ment to find, when he crossed the border, that his hoods
did not comply with the New South Wales standard.
I think that is obvious to everybody here that that
would not do. Another point which largely concerns
the Services, more particularly the Army and of course
the Air Force and Navy as well, is that our vehicles
must conform to general lighting restrictions but, at
the same time, there may be peculiarities regarding
our own vehicles necessitating very special considera-
tion as to what type of hoods and shades we should put
on them and, at the same time, they should all conform
with the requirements of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. Consequently, it seems very desirable that,
before this Conference adjourns, we should provide for
uniform lighting restriction regulations to be drawn
up applicable to the whole of the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it, Mr. Heffron, that you
have adopted, or intend to adopt, the standards that
the British people have adopted?
Mr. HEFFRON.-—Exactly, that is what we have
done.
Item No. 4.—AIR RAID WARNING SYSTEMS.
The CHAIRMAN.—The next item on the agenda,
gentlemen, is No._ 4 —“ Air Raid Warning Systems”,
and I read out this short statement and comment pre-
pared by the Commonwealth:—
From reports furnished by the States on the progress of Air
Raid Precautions Plans, the following brief notes as to the
position in each State are furnished:—
New South Wales.
A survey has been made of the Sydney Metropolitan Area,
and tests have been carried out in the city proper. A warn-
ing system has been installed at Newcastle and the South
Coast has been surveyed.
Type of Signal. —-Two signals provided—
(i) “Warning”.—3o seconds on and 10 seconds off for
three minutes.
(ii) “ Raiders Passed”.- —Sirens on for two minutes.


VICTORIA-
A warning system is fully operative and is controlled from
police head-quarters. Four different types of sirens have been
installed. The sirens are operated by compressed air, with an
“ organ type ” steam whistle for use when compressed air is
not available. No electric sirens are used.
Type of Signal. —Three signals provided—
(i) “ Prepare for Raid". —iSeries of alternate short and
long blasts.
(ii) “ Raid Impending —Series of five seconds on and
two seconds off.
(iii) “ All Clear”. —On for two minutes.
Local signals by wardens also provided.
Queensland.
An electric siren system has been developed and sirens and
equipment made for installation at 40 selected points in
Brisbane. Sirens are also being installed in the main coastal
towns. A survey has been made of all steam plants, while
hand sirens have also been manufactured.
Type of Signal. —Two signals provided—
(i) “Warning”. —A “wailing” sound by running up
siren motor in three or four seconds and then
switched off for five to six seconds.
(ii) “ All Clear”. —Siren run continuously at constant
pitch.
South Australia.
A complete survey of existing warning devices has been
made. In industrial areas facilities are reasonably satis-
factory, but additional installations will be necessary. Sirens
have been obtained from Melbourne and tested. The system
has not yet advanced to the stage where it could be operated
at short notice.
Type of Signalj —Two signals provided—
(i) “Action Warning”. —Series of short blasts for two
minutes.
(ii) “Raiders Passed”. —On for two minutes.
Local signals by wardens also provided.
Being revised “in some respects ”.
Tasmania.
Air raid warning sirens operated by compressed air and
controlled from Police Head-quarters have been installed.
Type of Signal. —Three signals provided—
(i) “ Alert —Series of five seconds on and two seconds
off.
(ii) “Warning". —Continuous blast for two minutes.
(iii) “ All Clear ”,—Series of alternate long and short
blasts for two minutes.
Western Australia.
An air operated siren has been developed and satisfactory
tests have been made. In the event of an emergency these
sirens could be manufactured and erected at short notice.
Type of Signal. —Code under consideration with trials of
warning system.
Comment.
In New South Wales, Queensland and South Australia two
warning signals have been adopted. In Western Australia
a code is now under review. In Victoria and Tasmania three
signals have been adopted.
Victoria’s “ all clear ” is similar to the other States. Tas-
mania’s " all clear ”, however, is the same as the “ prepare
for raid ” signal in Victoria.
The “ warning ” or “ raid impending ” signals also vary
as between States. The following questions arise:—
(i) Whether it is desirable there should be two or three
air raid warning signals;
(ii) Whether, if three signals are retained in some States
and two in others, the “ raid impending ” or
“ warning ” and the “ all clear ” signals at least
should he uniform in all States.
In this regard, the Armed Services have expressed the
opinion that it is highly desirable that there should be
uniformity in respect of “ warning ” and “ raiders passed ”
signals,
I would suggest at this point that we might ask a
representative of one of the Services to give us their
views on the subject.
Wing Commander BIGGAR.—Do you want me
to confine myself to the question of whether there
should be two or three warnings?
The CHAIRMAN’.—You explain the matter in
whichever way you like, and stress whatever points
you wish to bring out.
Wing Commander BIGGAE.—WeII, I would feel
first that there should be uniformity. I think that
is rather obvious to us all. We have to consider move-
ments of the population from one State to another,
also, and movements of the Services from one State
to another. The question of having two or three stages
of warning; well, situated as we are here, I think
there should be three. We believe that we will
have a situation arising where raids are possible but
not imminent, and where shipping is so placed that
raids could be made; and therefore, I think we want
a warning to correspond with that period of time.
At a later stage a raid may be imminent which is
corresponding to the twenty minutes’ time warning
which we hope to get from the radio location; and
the third stage is when the raid is over; that is
the “ all clear ”, On the question of warning signals,
it largely depends upon whether your sirens are
audible in all the parts where we want the warning
to be heard. Wardens started off in the war amplify-
ing a mass warning, seeing that people took shelter,
and generally controlling traffic, and they used to use
for that blasts of whistles. When they found that
they could be better employed, because the warnings
were known to everybody, they use the wardens’ blasts
on whistles as signals for incendiary bombs, and
whether you think that is worthy of inclusion in any
air raid warning scheme, Ido not know. It is for you
to decide. I can think of nothing else which puts
a new light on it.
Mr. HEFFRON.—If you are only going to get
twenty minutes’ warning when you sound the “ alert ’’
in twenty minutes’ time the raider will he there. Say
they are making for Sydney, in twenty minutes’ time,
then you will only have twenty minutes’ notice to give
the people. It is imminent, I think, if in twenty
minutes’ time the bombs are going to drop. It seems
hardly necessary to have a second one, if you have
only twenty minutes to go.
Wing Commander BIGGAR. —You have that
twenty minutes before the bombs actually start to drop.
You think that is too short a time in which to have
two warnings?
Mr. HEFFRON.—I don’t see the necessity for
that. It seems to me that you can keep on telling
people to take cover as quickly as they possibly can.
The other signal seems to be rather unnecessary.
Perhaps I am looking at it from the viewpoint of
New South Wales, where we have an “alert” and
“ all clear ”. We want to convey to the people that
a raid is coming. That is all the signal is for.
Mr. SHEDDEN. —In London there was one warn-
ing that an aircraft was coming in. They jotted
the direction on the map, and, having determined
what is the direction of the raid, they would go to a
narrower circle. The first one they would show is
22 minutes from where they say the craft will be
over a certain point, and the next is twelve minutes,
so that the people would not run out too quickly
from the factories. I think the essential thing is to
have a standard.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I think the only thing is to have
two warnings. The public do not want to know that
a raid is possible. That is a matter for the authorities
to keep in mind. What we have to establish is what
is the signal to give the people to get ready.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-Should not we carry out the
air raid precautions instruction from Great Britain
—one, prepare for raids; second, raid impending;
and third, all clear? That is, you give warning of
the raid coming, and then you tell the people that the
raid has gone.
The CHAIRMAN. —Yes, but the point is, I think,
that Mr. Hanlon and the other gentlemen are making,
that the raid is so comparatively short that one and
two would almost automatically link themselves.


Mr. DAVIES. —I agree that we should have to some
extent an automatic service. With regard to an air
raid warning scheme, we certainly want to warn the
people. I think that in a place like this the raids
are going to be spasmodic and very few. I hope there
will be none. We have an alert system of four
blasts, and this will be a signal to prepare for an air
raid, and this will be a warning for all people to
get to their posts. Is not that necessary?
Mr. HANLON.- —But when that comes you will find
people going to their holes, too.
Mr. DAVIES. —Here we are going to take the
part of asking the States to alter their signals. I
can understand what the position is in interstate
traffic in people travelling from one State to another.
If you wanted to make this change, March was the
time to do it. You should not now turn round to
the States and say, “ Issue fresh instructions ”. I
feel that the warning is very important. Then when
you know that the air raid is coming, you know that
you have to go into action. When it is finished, you
know that all is clear. I maintain that the alert
signal is very necessary in a place where the popula-
tion is distributed over a wide area. My point is that
it is too late now. We have had our try-outs in the
last two months, and they have worked very effectively.
Other States probably want to have their own methods,
and I do not see why they should not, but I do not
want to put back the clock eighteen months. If the
other States are not ready, it is their own fault; they
have had plenty of time.
Mr. HANLON.—We are all ready, but we are all
different.
Mr. DAVIES.—Every State has its own ideas, but
now you turn round and ask me to alter ours.
The CHAIRMAN.-—When I was in Tasmania, I
discussed this matter with Mr. Walch, the Tasmanian
Director of Civil Defence, and what struck me at the
time was this: Here is Australia, a very vast con-
tinent, and the signals differ to an extent all over
Australia, but in your case there is a rather bigger
difference. I venture to say that before the collapse
of Belgium, France and Holland, there was not a
uniform air raid signal in all those countries, and
they were very much closer together than we are in
Australia. I have personally adopted the attitude
all along that it is regrettable there is not uniformity,
but iji view of the fact that you have printed your
60.000 books, and it is not only a question of issuing
60.000 new books, but of smudging the thing out of
60.000 brains, I think that, although it is desirable
to have uniformity, in this case it is better to leave
things as they are.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have printed 300,000
books, and our air raid precautions were approved of
by Defence and by the Commonwealth before we
printed the books. We are carrying out the practice.
The CHAIRMAN.—We do not suggest altering
yours.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—For instance, if you have
time, you should have a signal to prepare for a raid.
It is no use saying that you may not have time.
We grant that you may not have time to do anything,
but, nevertheless, if you have time, you want a signal
to prepare for a raid. Then “ raid impending ” is
exactly like your signal, and “ all clear ” is another
signar which the other States may have a little
different, because States all like to alter what other
States are doing; they like to be original. However,
it would be pretty expensive for us to recede, and
we have been instructing the people on this matter for
such a long time that I hope you will not ask us to
change.
Commander BUCHANAN.—I do not think that
the point about the necessity for uniformity was quite
brought out by my Air colleague. The aerodromes
are largely out in open country, and they can have
their own air raid warning systems. Perhaps it does
not matter quite so much to them, but the Naval
establishments are right in the populated areas, and
if we have to teach our recruits this complicated series
of air raid warning codes so that they will know
what to do in a particular place, and then they are
transferred from one place to another, it is making
our job much more difficult than it need be. I think
that applies largely to the Army as well. They have
a lot of other things to learn, and if this could be
simplified, I suggest that it would be a very great
help.
Mr. HEFFRON. —It is not only uniformity in
regard to signals, but you will notice that we have
in some places the motor siren, and then we have
the compressed air whistle. All of those will help
to worry the recruits as well. I do not know just
what we can do about it. In Sydney, we adopted the
English method of the wailing note for the alert, and
one long blast for the all clear. We have spent quite
a lot of money in the city. We have a loud-speaker
type of signal there, and, in addition we have in the
course of manufacture some 30 motor sirens, and we
are endeavouring to get another 30 from America.
We hope that if the “ financial gods ” are kind enough
to us, we will be able to get another 100 motor sirens.
We require all of those, and perhaps more. If we had
to scrap all those
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We are not asking you to,
but do not ask us to do so.
Mr. HEFFRON. —We see your point, and Tas-
mania’s point. You have spent a lot of money, and
apparently you are not going to receive any help
for what you have already spent. I know you are
faced with a problem, and I do not know what we
can do about it. The main worry at the moment
seems to be with the Service heads.
The CHAIRMAN- —Might I suggest that we note
the objections of the Service heads. Commander
Buchanan puts up the additional difficulty that a
recruit may have in learning these things; but, as
it means that the population of Tasmania and all the
other States would have to unlearn all they have
learned, I am afraid that, although it is sad that there
are differences, they will have to stay, and if the States
agree to that we will not press the point.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —Do you object to our having
three signs?
Mr. HEFFRON. —No. When I make my occa-
sional trip over, I will look at my guide when I get
to Albury.
Mr. HANLON.—There is another point inti-
mately associated with the warning business, and that
is the prohibition of unauthorized sirens or signals.
Some flash motorists use a wailing siren on their cars.
In Brisbane, there is a printing works which uses an
air raid siren to start and knock off, and there are
other industrial centres using them. It is important
that there should not be allowed any signal which
could be confused in any way with the air raid
signal; otherwise, the people would get panicky.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have provided for that
iii our regulation.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is not it up to the State con-
cerned to chop out such sirens?
Mr. HANLON.—Yes.
Mr. DAVIES.—I do not want to put the Services
to any inconvenience, but the Services are much easier
to control than a good many million people, and
perhaps a good many unintelligent people, in a State.


As the Services have their commands under pretty
good discipline and they are taught to be intelligent,
it is quite easy to teach them the rulings in the
different States. I do not think it would take five
minutes. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, because
it would be a very great mistake to withdraw the
instructions from the different States. You would
never get the books back. I think the matter is best
left to the States. The arrangements should have been
made at the last conference. The Services then knew
what we were doing, and have never objected until
now. I think we might let the matter drop.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is the Conference agreeable
that the matter of changing the signals be allowed to
drop ?
Suggestion agreed to.
Mr. HEFFRON.—There is one other point in
regard to sirens, in relation to procuring them. As
I said a moment ago, we are anxious to get a couple
of hundred of them if we can. Though we have gone
a fair way with sirens in the City of Sydney, as you
will realize, we have a very big city, and there is a
big suburban area to be catered for. There are also
Newcastle and Kembla, and we have up to the present
improvized somewhat by using the siren of the steel
works, and so on. We have synchronized them, and
have been able to get the necessary signals out; but,
of course, that is only for the time being, and only
because we have not been able to get the sirens. I
regard the warning signals as one of the most impor-
tant items with which we have to occupy our minds,
because it is useless to take all these precautions if
we have not the signals to tell people that danger
is imminent. This matter has worried me more
than anything else. My predecessors did make an
attempt to do something by introducing a loud-speaker
type of signal run, off a machine something like a
wireless set, which will take about twenty loud
speakers. Those have to be used in the cities where
there are high buildings, and where necessarily you
run into a lot of dead spots or sound shadows. The
siren which will go along for a distance of a block
is about the only effective way of getting over that
difficulty. You can have your siren going two or
three blocks away, but with the traffic and the high
buildings, the sound passes right over the top and will
not be heard even quite close to the siren; so we
had to evolve another type of siren for the city blocks.
We have that part done pretty well, but now we want
sirens which will cover the whole of the metropolitan
area and all our vulnerable spots, &c., and the difficulty
I desire to mention to the Conference, apart from
finance, is our inability to get the sirens. Not so long
ago we let a contract to a firm in Sydney to manu-
facture 30 of these. From memory, the price was
a little over £1,700 for the 30; but for the wiring and
the labour and incidental work those 30 would cost
about £3,500. I regard the position as desperate. I
think we should have the warning there at the earliest
possible moment. A firm told us that they could get
another 30 of these from America at short notice:
that they had them manufactured and on the shelves,
and it was only a matter of their giving the order
and we would get them inside six weeks. We gave
the order to this local firm to purchase these things
in America for us. We immediately ran into trouble
with the Customs people, who would not sanction
these sirens coming from America. WV also ran into
trouble with our own local manufacturer, who,
through the Department of Supply, was unable to get
the necessary permission to go ahead with their manu-
facture. I brought the matter under the notice of
the Minister. He took it up at once, and they are on
the job now manufacturing. On the other question,
with regard to the American sirens, I think that the
5630.—2
order has now gone. That is all right. There was,
however, a point raised that there was a firm here
in Melbourne who would have manufactured for us
all we wanted. I can assure you that anything we
can manufacture in Australia from a safety pin to
a ship I want to see manufactured here. The thing
I am concerned about is just how quickly can we
get these sirens done. I do not want to make a request
to the Minister and seek the permission of the Customs
to import another siren if we can get it here, but
the point I want to make is that we feel that we are
in a desperate position; that it is a matter of extreme
urgency, and I would like some expression from this
Conference as to what we think the Department of
Supply ought to do in regard to helping us.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is a question of priorities.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I think it should be ranked No. 1
in priority—the matter of air warnings. I would like
to see that cleared up, so that we could immediately
let contracts to the Melbourne or any other firm in
a position to manufacture for us.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I know we had some done
here, but I do not know how many.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I would like that point cleared
up and would like to feel sure that we could go back
to Sydney feeling that we could call for fresh tenders
and get those sirens, because it is to us a matter of
great urgency. If a raid happened to-morrow,
although I have only been in charge a little over three
months, I suppose the responsibility would be on my
shoulders. The Federal Minister and I .share that
responsibility, and I would like to know from the
Minister whether he could advise us that the position
is clear for us to go ahead and give those contracts.
The CHAIRMAN. —First I propose to ask Mr.
Maher, of the Customs Department, to say a few
words.
Mr. MAHER. —I know that Mr. Heffron did have
some trouble with this request for the sirens. It was
one that we felt had no greater claim on dollars than
any goods required by, say, a munitions factory. In
short, the dollars were not there. We did place a
requisition for the sirens to be procured under the
lease-lend provisions. That went away about last
Tuesday. I have no doubt we will get them. The
problem as we saw it in the first place, however, was
that when we got this request for a licence to import
the 30 sirens, tHere were protests from local manu-
facturers objecting to the licence on the ground of
conserving dollars, which has been a special point
since the outbreak of war. It was hard for us to
resist. Having contacted Mr. Heffron, I found his
difficulty was in the fact that he could not get a
priority for the manufacture of the motors in Aus-
tralia, and also for the other metal raw materials.
1 then suggested that he should approach the Depart-
ment of Supply, and get those priorities established
here in Australia—have them made in Australia. I
understand there is a local manufacturer here who has
made the sirens in Melbourne, and that they are an
immeasurably better job than those previously obtained
from Sweden. I know that from the report of the
Commissioner of Police recorded in our files. There
are at least a dozen manufacturers, to my knowledge,
here, all anxious to get into production of these sirens.
Some are in it and are anxious to expand, but their
difficulty is priorities with munitions. I think if
pressure were brought to bear on Senator MeLeay
to give an early priority for the raw materials, for
the special motors —made, I think, by Crompton
Parkinson and Australian General Electric—we would
obviate the necessity for bringing them from over-
seas, and you would have access to them much more
quickly. With Mr. Heffron, I give these things a


No. 1 rating. I think they are entitled to a high
priority in Australia. It is rather a local problem
than one involving overseas expenditure.
The CHAIRMAN.—Ia this matter, I told Mr.
Heffron I would do everything I could to get him the
sirens. I took it up with the Customs Department,
through Mr. Welch, and we got an undertaking from
the Customs that these would be allowed to come
through. The Customs’ undertaking was amended
later, and finally it led to a cable being sent to
America. In the meantime I took up the question
of getting priority release for these sirens, and that
matter is in hand now. The decision on the priorities
I have not received yet. The motors is the main
question on the priorities. We are endeavouring to
get a very high priority rating for this motor to be
released. I pointed out that it is just as essential
to get priority for air raid precautions as for any-
thing else.
Mr. HEFFRON.—If we can get the motors, I
do not care whether we get them from America
or Siam, as long as we get them. For preference,
I want them procured here; if not, we will have to
go elsewhere.
The CHAIRMAN. —We will have to try and find
out the delivery and the rate of delivery per week
the local manufacturer can give.
Mr. WELCH. —It would depend on the motor
position.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Do you think you could get us
something on that to-morrow?
The CHAIRMAN.—We will try to get you some-
thing with regard to these deliveries. We will try and
find out something about the priority, but I do not
say we will be able to tell you to-morrow that priority
has been granted.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—The Supply and Develop-
ment granted us priority and we made about 3,000.
Mr, HEFFRON. —How long ago?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Two months ago.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yours is compressed air?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes.
Mr. HEFFRON. —Our trouble is the motors.
Whilst on that, there is one other point; that is in
regard to the use of the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment telephone system.
The CHAIRMAN. —That is covered by item 10.
Item No. S.—FIRE-FIGHTING.
The CHAIRMAN.—I submit a report prepared
by the Commonwealth officers in collaboration with
the honorary technical fire-fighting advisers, Mr.
Richardson and Mr. Kemp, from Victoria and New
South Wales—
In the priorities conveyed to the March, 1941, conference,
the following was included concerning fire-fighting:—“Pro-
vision of fire-fighting equipment the basis and extent of
which is to be decided after consideration and recommenda-
tions of a conference (to be convened of fire-fighting authori-
ties of all States).
Subsequently, the Governments of New South Wales and
Victoria, kindly consented to the appointment as honorary
technical fire-fighting advisers of Messrs. C. D. A. Richardson,
Chief Officer of the New South Wales Fire Brigades, and
J. Kemp, Chief Officer of the Metropolitan Fire Brigades,
Melbourne.
On the 30th June, 1941, and Ist July, 1941, a conference
was held between these officers and the Department of Home
Security.
At that conference it became apparent that information
to enable co-ordination and uniformity regarding require-
ments in relation to fire-fighting equipment and needs for air
raids precautions purposes in Australia was necessary.
Accordingly, on the recommendations of the advisers, a
questionnaire was prepared covering all aspects of personnel
and equipment and was forwarded by the Commonwealth
to the Premiers of all States on the 10th July, 1941, with
a request that replies be furnished at the earliest possible
moment. Information in reply to the questionnaire has been
received from each State, but it is not in quite the complete
form necessary lor effective use of it. The information
received, however, has been collated and reveals the follow-
ing:'—
Personnel. —‘While this is adequate for peace-time require-
ments, present personnel is inadequate for emergency
conditions, and all States are short of the objective
sought—some to a considerable extent.
Equipment. —There is a general need in all States for
additional major and minor equipment to bring brigade
strengths up to capacity reasonably adequate to cope
with emergency conditions. It is the recommendation
of the Commonwealth advisers that suitable steps
should be taken as a matter of urgency to overcome
any deficiencies in regard to either personnel or equip-
ment. (The question of equipment is, as the States
are aware, now receiving attention.) No doubt special
attention is being given by the States to increasing
auxiliary firemen.
Other comments made by the Commonwealth advisers
are as under:—
A summary of self-contained fire engines and pumps
show that the pump capacities are varied, and consideration
should be given to the adoption of a standard which would
simplify purchases and perhaps be more satisfactory to fire
authorities and manufacturers.
In this connexion, pump capacities of 500, 350 and 200
gallons per minute at 120-lb. pressure to the square inch
would provide sufficient variation in capacities and pressures
to meet most requirements.
Summary of Trailer Pumping Units.
The range of pump capacities vary considerably and
consideration should be given to the adoption of a standard
which would simplify purchases and perhaps be more satis-
factory to the fire authorities and manufacturers. In some
instances, fire authorities have mentioned total requirements,
but no capacities or pressures were given. In these cases,
the numbers asked for have been shown under different
capacities in the schedule for the purpose of information.
In this connexion, pump capacities of 250 and 150 gallons
per minute at 120-lb. pressure to the square inch would
provide sufficient variation in capacities and pressures to
meet requirements. However, the numbers specified under
600 and 500 gallons per minute should be given further
consideration on account of their weight and portability
•before placing any orders for supply. The fire authorities
in these two instances may have intended self-contained fire
engines and pumps. In some instances, the number requested
may need review. Further information will need to be
obtained from a number of fire authorities to clarify the
position.
Some of the appliances and equipment listed must be
reviewed to enable accurate information being supplied in
regard to types of ladders and escapes, type of truck
chassis and load capacity, having in mind the purpose
for which each appliance is to be used. This is essential
before making inquiries from suppliers.
The matter of loose equipment will need further review
owing to the number of articles mentioned —and the circum-
stances of the original supply. It will be necessary to obtain
further information from the fire authorities who have not
supplied complete information in regard to equipment
required under various Items.
Schedule E is a summary of air raid precautions equip-
ment. Probably further information will be required on this
question. It is not quite clear in some of the questionnaires
whether equipment asked for is to be used wholly or partly
by fire brigade personnel. In fact, in several instances,
it would appear that there are two classifications of firemen
—those under the control of a fire authority, and those
under other control. This also applies with certain fire-
fighting appliances.
It is suggested that each authority be supplied with a
copy of A, B, C and D schedules, which is an analysis taken
from each questionnaire. They should be asked if such
information is correct, and, if not, to indicate in what
respect it is incorrect.
It is proposed that action be taken immediately
along the lines suggested by the Commonwealth
advisers, that the questionnaires he referred to the
State for further advice.
It is proposed then, if the State Ministers agree
to summon a conference of all fire brigade authorities
at the earliest possible date after receipt of the further
information sought, and with a view to determining
any outstanding matters, and particularly to dealing
with important questions of standardization of equip-
ment along the lines suggested by the Commonwealth
advisers. This is very desirable as to the question


of collating requirements in regard to lease-lend pro-
posals. It is felt that only by a round-table confer-
ence in the manner suggested could this be adequately
handled. At this conference, also, any question con-
cerning difficulties as to priorities affecting supplies
could be raised and the matter taken up with the
Supply and Development Department.
Mr. HANLON.—A conference of all fire brigade
authorities is a fairly tall order. Every town has its
own authority.
The CHAIRMAN.—‘CouId you get a representative?
That position does not apply in most of the other
States. The fire authorities are under the one head in
New South Wales, South Australia and Western
Australia, and there are only two authorities in
Victoria.
Mr. HANLON.—I do not know of anybody on the
Fire Brigade Board in Queensland that I would like
to commit the Government to what it is going to pay
for equipment. We do not permit firemen to commit
the Government to the expenditure of money.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is it not a matter of the deter-
mination of types ? The order would come from the
Queensland Government.
Mr. HANLON.—Have you not advisers here?
Sydney and Melbourne have huge fire-fighting services;
they are two of the biggest in the world.
The CHAIRMAN.—I propose to let the experts
answer this question.
Mr. HANLON.—Who determines the authority
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it the suggestion was for
a technical man,
Mr. HANLON.—Surely you will not get better
technical advice from Queensland, Western Australia
and South Australia, than from Sydney and Mel-
bourne ?
Mr. KEMP.—Various fire officers have various ideas
of the capacity of the pump they need. Fire experts
will tell you that every fire pump or appliance maker
makes his appliances for 200 gallons, 350 gallons,
500 gallons, 1,000 gallons, and so forth. A man want-
ing a pump of 150 gallons capacity can use a 200
gallon pump. The number of types required overesas
should be limited otherwise there will be orders for,
say, 100 gallons capacity and 150 gallons capacity,
which will require new types and will cost much
money. The standard types will be cheaper and just
as efficient.
Mr. HANLQN.—You are endeavouring to reduce
the number of types to a minimum?
Mr. KEMP.—Yes, that will avoid orders for pumps
of 100 gallons, 160 gallons and 200 gallons capacity,
and so on.
Mr. HANLON.—-If a man wants a 250 gallon pump,
he would not be embarrassed by having to use a 350
gallon pump, would he?
Mr. KEMP.—No, I should say not,
Mr. HANLON.—-It is the pump we want. We have
to get definite particulars of what fire-fighters really
require. What is the type used mostly in America;
that would be cheaper?
Mr. KEMP.—Yes. The pump used in England,
the trailer pump of about 350 gallons capacity, is
extremely valuable. If the w.ater supply is damaged,
these pumps can he taken over heaps of rubble and
craters, dumped into position and worked, and you are
sure to get a good stream.
This morning we tried one of the trailer pumps at
Eastern Hill, and from a 7/Bths of an inch nozzle it
shot a stream up to the glass windows of the tower.
No fire officer would wish for anything better. On
water fronts, or in places where there is accessibility
to water, a 1,600 gallon type of pump might be re-
quired. A fire officer can relay from the water front
to the fire area, and can take smaller pumps from
there. If a man requires a big pump, it would be
mostly for use where there is an unlimited supply of
water. When water mains are broken, he would have
to depend on smaller supplies and a smaller capacity
pump would be of extreme value. America, of course,
has the idea of high pressure systems. They have a
pressure in the streets of 300 lb. to the square inch.
No fireman could use that stream. They use mechani-
cal means, a monitor nozzle that trails right and left
by machines gearing. I quote the following from Fire
Engineering, July, 1941, an American publication;—
Two schools of thought have developed on the form the
auxiliary fire engine should take. One group, apparently
unfamiliar with British experiences with various types of
pumpers, favours the conventional type of self-propelled
engine, but built around low-priced commercial car chassis.
The other group, benefiting by close contact with those who
have studied the matter right on the fire grounds in blitzed
Britain, is convinced that the trailer pump alone fills the
bill.
They point out, and effectively so, that the trailer unit,
because of its small size, can be stored alongside of drive-
ways, just inside department stores, hotels, or other buildings
located in the area to be protected; they can be stored under
stairways in fire stations or at other points therein too small
to accommodate self-propelled units. Trailers have been
moved through debris-filled streets which motor propelled
units have been unable to negotiate. And, finally, the low
cost of the unit enables a department to secure better coverage
of a city for n given sum of money.
It is our opinion that British cities would not have pur-
chased over 35,000 trailer units if they were not the answer
to the problem.
When you may be working in conditions involving
shattered streets and shattered mains, you have to use
what you can in the most practicable way.
Mr, HANLON.—How is the trailer pump moved
along?
Mr. KEMP.—It is on a trailer with wheels.
The men lift the pump off its trailer carriage, take it
over the debris, and put it in position.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are getting a little away
from the original question, Mr. Hanlon. The idea
behind the minds of the authorities in this regard was
that, if we could get the different fire brigade repre-
sentatives together, and Messrs. Kemp and Richardson
could point out that a 200 gallon capacity pump would
do the job for a 150 gallons capacity pump, and so on,
and try to get_ them into the field of 200, 350, or 500
gallons per minute at 120 lb. pressure to the square
inch, there would be more uniformity and time would
be saved with correspondence, &c.
■M r - PLAYFQED.—I think we could get uniformity
more quickly if we adopted a resolution to-day that the
matter he left in the hands of the two gentlemen
mentioned.
The CHAIRMAN.—We might get into trouble
then, I think we have to hear what these people have
to say.
Mr. HANLON. I have tried to concentrate on
avoiding useless waste and I had in mind compelling
all other country fire authorities to take over our equip-
ment when we did not need it, instead of purchasing
from outside. 1 have been trying to keep the equip-
ment we are using suitable for general peace-time uses.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are not trying to force the
trailer pumps on to anybody.
Mr. HANLON.—I realize that, and I realize the
value of Mr. Kemp’s remarks. Ido not know that we
could send anybody with better technical knowledge.
The CHAIRMAN.—It was not a question of techni-
cal knowledge.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—With all due respects to our fire
officers, we have to foot the bill, and it is the Govern-
ment that has to be satisfied, not the fire officers.
The CHAIRMAN.—In the last analysis, the go-
vernments do not just take a long list of fire-fighting
equipment and say, “ That is all right ”. They turn to
a fire-fighting authority. We do not propose that the
governments should not have the final say, but if


possible it would be better to get the equipment required
for the whole of Australia in a few standard types,
which could perhaps be bought in bulk, in preference
to buying many different types and sizes. Such types
and sizes might not be manufactured in Great Britain
or America, and would have to be specially ordered.
Mr. HANLON. —WouId it not be a better way of
approaching this question, to save time and expense, if
these gentlemen were to go to each of the States, and
make recommendations for consideration?
Sir JOHN lIAEEIS.—WouId it not be better done
if those two officers, Mr. Kemp and Mr. Richardson,
were to visit each State in turn?
Mr. DAVIES.—The gentleman who just spoke, Mr.
Kemp, went to Tasmania and gave our fire brigade
advice on certain matters. 1 think it would be nice
if the Victorian Government allowed him to go, he
and one other officer, and let them advise the States on
this matter.
Mr. HEFFRON. —I should like to hear what Mr.
Richardson has to say on this point.
The CHAIRMAN.—Let us settle this point now. Let
us deal with the suggestion made. There are only two
alternatives, namely, either that these gentlemen come
to us, or else the 'Commonwealth Advisers go to the
States.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Before we decide on that point,
I want to ask this question; Are Mr. Kemp and Mr.
Richardson in agreement on this matter? What I
want to know is this: Does Mr. Richardson endorse the
remarks of Mr. Kemp?
The CHAIRMAN. —Which remarks of Mr. Kemp?
Mr. HEFFRON.—-Mr. Kemp makes out a case for
trailer pumps.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is not in question in this
matter; that is quite outside the matter under discus-
sion. Mr. Kemp rather brought in something there
that we were not discussing at all.
Mr. KEMP.—It was only brought in by me when a
gentleman asked me something about the capacities of
pumps.
Mr. RICHARDSON.—Perhaps I can throw some
light on this matter. When the questionnaire went out,
various public authorities and gentlemen interested in
fire equipment dealt with the questionnaire, but the
information was not returned in the way in which it
was required. Some of the parties said that they
wanted 50 self-contained fire engines, and some wanted
54 self-contained fire engines and, failing that, they
wanted trailer pumps and towing trucks. What is
required, in my opinion, is for the authorities to
state the pumping capacities they require. That will
answer the question. In regard to Mr. Hanlon’s in-
quiry, I may say that certain factors have to be taken
into consideration such as the topography of the
country. For example, in Queensland, they have some
difficulty in drafting water from the waterfront on
account of the height of the wharf above the surface
of the water, and the best pump, that was ever made,
will not lift water from a greater depth than
33 feet. You can get better results somewhere about
24 feet to 28 feet. In Queensland the Government pro-
poses to put down a 12-in. main, but pressure and
volume of water will be required, and this cannot be
obtained by ordinary trailer pumps with small
capacities and giving low pressures.
Mr. HANLON.—Wc propose to install a permanent
pump on the river bank and draw from that for our
fire service.
Mr. RICHARDSON.—I am glad you appreciate
that point, because I thought you might have been
misled about it. If you are going to get a proper job,
then you must have volume, and you must have
pressure.
Mr. HANLON. —We doubted the building up of a
trailer.
Mr. RICHARDSON.—The idea of this, so far as
the Minister was concerned, was to make quite sure
that everybody got what they required, rather than
to have something that would not do the job. Each
State has its own problem. Queensland has its problem
and New South Wales and Tasmania have their pro-
blems. I think that every authority concerned should
declare itself and say what it wants. If any one wants
any further advice, it can be freely given. It is just
a matter of answering questions.
The CHAIRMAN.—On that point about Messrs.
Kemp and Richardson going round the various States,
I should like to say that Messrs. Kemp and Richardson
were very kindly loaned to us for this purpose by their
State governments, and I am sure that their State
governments do not want them to be going all over
Australia and spending more time than is necessary
on this job. I think it is an advantage if you bring
the fire people to Melbourne. They may then learn
something from the experience of each other and be
able to hit on a common policy. They would not
necessarily be able to do that if you just have these
two officers going around to the various States. If
they have a meeting together here in Melbourne, where
they can all swop ideas, I believe that we would get on
better and the whole thing would merge itself into a
form in which we could go forward.
Mr. PLAYEORD. —My feeling about the whole
thing is that time is the essence of the contract in
regard to fire-fighting material, and I believe that our
problem is not quite as bad as the problem of some
of the other States, where they have more intense
population, and where they have a larger number of
wooden houses. I would feel more satisfied of adopting
this suggestion here to-day, if we definitely made
arrangements now for our fire officers to meet in con-
ference, which I think would be better than having
further correspondence on the matter.
The CHAIRMAN.—If you would move a date, then
we could arrange to send for your fire officers.
Mr, PLAYEORD.—It is a matter of getting one
over from Western Australia.
Mr. HANLON.—I let the Commonwealth have one
of my best fire officers. He is now up in the Northern
T erritory.
Mr. PANTON.—My man is ready to come over here
at any time.
Mi 1 . PLAYEORD.—I move that the fire officers from
the various States meet here in Melbourne next
Monday.
Major DAVIES.—I second that motion.
Motion carried and resolution passed.
The CHAIRMAN.—Are there any other points in
regard to fire-fighting that you want to bring forward?
EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY.
Air, HANLON.—Yes, one important point in regard
to fire-fighting is that it is a very hopeless task without
water. There are many centres in which it is possible
to have interruptions in youi water supply and to put
your fire brigade out of action. I suggest, sir, that
fire-fighting equipment requires an adequate water
uipply to be efficient. It is essential for the equipment
to be of service that additional water supply be pro-
vided in certain places. For example, Townsville is a
very important centre for the defence authorities.
I he CHAIRMAN.—And for some of the people 'of
Queensland as well.
Mr. HANLON.—Yes, and Townsville is always
liable to have a shortage of water through drought.
It has not a very strong water supply and, to give
protection to Townsville and to the aerodrome, I think
it would be necessary to install a pumping plant over-
ground to ensure a proper system there. We do not


propose to put a wall all over the main that we put
in Queensland underground. The same thing can be
done at Townsville, Rockhampton, Mackay and Glad-
stone. All those places have small water supplies so
that if anything goes wrong- they may be left without
water, unless provision is made to give them additional
facilities.
The CHAIRMAN.—That can be supplemented with
your fire-fighting demands. The matter can be con-
sidered then.
Mr. HANLON.—I move now that the equipment
for fire-fighting have with it the provision of an ade-
quate water supply. I move that an adequate water
supply for emergency purposes be included with the
fire-fighting equipment.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is now moved by Mr. Hanlon
that it be a recommendation to this conference that
where the provision of water supply is essential for
emergency purposes it be included with the fire-fighting
equipment.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think we should go into
that question. You might require to use it.
The CHAIRMAN.—Where necessary above normal
requirements.
Mr. HANLON.—You must have water available.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —We made some inquiries
from the Metropolitan Board of Works, and Mr. Kelso
spent the morning with our council in which he stated
that some mains out in that industrial area where you
are situated might require supplementation. Take the
main that serves Maribyrnong, the munition part. At
present, the supply is said to be short out there.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I can see the force of the
remarks of our friend from Queensland, but it seems
to me that our loan has been pretty heavily loaded up
before we start.
The CHAIRMAN.—I should like to put this point
to you, gentlemen. I do not think that there would be
any hope of the Commonwealth with regard to its
11500,000 of this loan, for expenses, agreeing to go in
for any enormous water supply mains that are going
fo last there after the war. I think Mr. Heffron might
quite reasonably say: put the Snowy River Scheme into
force in Sydney. He has a water supply problem as
well.
Mr. HANLON.—I would not spend a 3d. bit of
public money putting in a pump, if I had not water to
service the pump.
The CHAIRMAN.—You differ from the one that
Sir John Harris has put up.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think you had better get
in touch with Mr. Kelso, if you are inclined to be
sceptical of my remarks. If anything happens to your
munition factory out there, do not blame Victoria.
The CHAlßMAN.—Gentlemen, you have heard Mr.
Hanlon’s motion. I will now take your vote on it.
Motion carried.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is there any other point in
regard to fire-fighting equipment?
STIRRUP PUMPS.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes, I want to raise the point
about stirrup pumps. After all is said and done, this
is one of the main things of the lot, and I do hope
that the conference is not going to let this go past
without a discussion on it. One of the most useful of
fire-fighting agencies is the stirrup pump, in England.
There is one to almost every house there, so you can
just imagine how they regard the stirrup pump
over there. The Department of Information is
releasing a picture which they asked me to look at
the other day, in which they show the use of stirrup
pumps for actually dealing with the incendiary bomb
itself, notwithstanding the advice we have had not to
spray water on an incendiary bomb. In visualizing all
possible attacks on Australia, we generally think in
terms of air raids and bombs raining down on our
essential industries. We have given no attention to
the possibility of air raids in which we will have to
deal with incendiary bombs numbering many
thousands. If, instead of 70 tons of bombs, we have to
deal with nearly 70,000 incendiary bombs, we must be
prepared for them. Let us take Sydney or Newcastle
-Paddington, for instance —or any closely populated
place. The fire brigades, such as we have in New
South Wales, are organized on a peace-time basis and
would have no chance of coping with such a situation.
It seems to me that the only way to help the fire
brigades is by the provision of stirrup pumps. I
regard this —and I think other people do also —as a
very essential requirement. The question then arises
of what we are going to do about it. There are not
many stirrup pumps in Australia because there has been
no great demand for them and they have not been
manufactured. The suggestion is that they cannot
get the brass to manufacture the pumps, but a great
deal of brass is not required in the manufacture of
each individual pump. I think the provision of stirrup
pumps is just as essential as the other items of fire-
lighting equipment which we have been discussing. I
believe we must face up to that and try to work out the
number of pumps required, together with the require-
ments of each State. I would prefer to let this dis-
cussion stand over until to-morrow morning and then
have a full discussion on it. I think that, having
disposed of the other items in regard to fire-fighting,
we might "well leave this matter, which affects all
Slates, until the morning,
Mr. HANLON.—We propose to make it compulsory
for every one to install a pump in the house.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I think we should set aside a
certain amount of time for a general discussion on that
to-morrow morning.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not propose that we should
sit to-night, unless you wish it, gentlemen, and if you
tiiink we can get through this business paper to-morrow'
by starting at 9.30 a.m., I think we can adjourn now 7 .
I have definitely to leave to-morrow afternoon to attend
at another place. With regard to the statement to the
press, I would propose that we make a general state-
ment saying that we had a very general discussion
with the chiefs _of staff with regard to the whole
position concerning air raids in Australia, and also
that there w 7 as reference to the lighting reports and the
fire-fighting reports. I propose we should say that
those matters were dealt with—it would be in very
general terms —and I do not think aiiy one could take
objection to it. However, if you prefer it not to be
released until the morning, we are prepared to do that.
Mr. HANLON.—You could mention the fact that
we have decided on a conference on fire-fighting.
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes, and w 7 e could give the
opening statement which I made here to-day.
The Conference, at 6.20 p.m., adjourned until the
following day, Tuesday, 26th August, 191,1, at
9.30 a.m.
AIR RAID SIRENS.
The CHAIRMAN. —Gentlemen, the representatives
from New South Wales are not present yet, and items
5,6, 7, 8 and 9 are matters in which they are greatly
interested. I was wondering would it be possible for
the representatives now present to say what the siren
requirements in their various .States would be, and
if it is impossible to have the sirens manufactured
in Australia with reasonably quick delivery, we could
take up the question of getting them from the United
States of America under the lease and lend provisions.
Mr. PANTON.-—With regard to the siren question,
I would like to state that our Western Australian
technicians have evolved a siren which, in their


opinion, is the best yet evolved in Australia. I might
say that we obtained all the sirens we could from the
eastern States and tried them out, but we satisfied
ourselves that the one which has been evolved in
Western Australia, and which is driven by compressed
air, is the best. We put it on the top of the Post
Office in Perth, and I, together with two others,
drove round Perth. We could hear it comfortably
6 miles away. I would like to add that this par-
ticular siren was improvised, and it is estimated
that sirens of this type could be made in our own
locomotive shop for not more than £5 or £6 a piece.
I suggest that, before sending to America for sirens
—as the one of which I speak is driven purely by
compressed air, and we intend that in the outer
suburbs it will be driven from the compressed air
at service stations—this Western Australian type
should be tried out. The siren of which I speak
is in Hay-street, which, as any one familiar with
Perth knows, is a very narrow street. We went down
into the basements of Sandover’s and other buildings,
and it could still be heard clearly. I would suggest
that you get the plans from Western Australia before
sending to America for sirens, though I know that
Victoria considers they have the last thing in sirens.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We do not claim that.
Mr. PANTON.—You did at the last conference.
They gave the siren a try-out, and I listened to it up
near Victoria Barracks. The siren which we have
evolved in the West has a vibrating sound, and I
think there was a good bit of luck in its discovery,
but I do suggest that plans of it might be obtained
and tried out before sending to America. We would
be pleased to let you have our plans, and I think
we have already arranged to send them over to
Mr. Playford.
Mr. HANLON. —Our difficulty was not in making
a loud noise with the siren, but to make people hear
it above the noise of busy streets. Our engineers
made a big compressed air siren, which could be heard
miles away, but not near at hand. We also had a
series of steamship hooters, and, though they could
be heard in the suburbs, you could not hear them
in the city at all. Eventually we had to use a multi-
tude of sirens. However, I would be very glad to
receive a copy of the plans.
Major DAVIES.—In Tasmania we have copied the
Victorian siren.
Sir JOHN HAERIS.—To tell the truth, I have
not heard ours yet.
Mr. PANTON.—The trouble with the electrically-
operated siren is ' that, if the electricity supply fails,
the sirens are rendered useless.
Mr. HANLON.—We have tried a variety of steam
sirens from ships. We warned the public not to be
alarmed at the din; but, when we came to make
the test, they did not hear it at all.
Mr. HEFFRON. —We tried out the Victorian com-
pressed air siren; but of course we were more or
less committed to the electric ones, as we have so
many of them installed. Our difficulty was to deter-
mine the difference between that type of siren and
the ordinary ship’s siren. The Victorian siren was
quite loud, and we heard it over the greater part of
the city. It is quite a good siren, but the difficulty
was to make up one’s mind whether it was an air
raid siren or a ship’s siren. The electric siren with the
wailing note is distinct and unmistakable. In
England they have stuck largely to the motor type of
siren, and I think that the compressed-air type is
one which they do not use. I am not for a moment
suggesting that we have slavishly to follow England
in anything which they do in that regard. We have
our own problems and the locations of our cities to
take into account. I do not know that any great
damage is being done by the fact that Tasmania and
Victoria have compressed-air sirens, while we in New
South Wales and Queensland have electric ones. Of
course, our people in the city itself, and in all the
places where we have had tests with our mobile sirens,
have got used to the wailing note and then the straight-
out whistle for “ all clear I doubt whether they
would consider any change. Further, Mr. Panton
mentioned about the power being cut off and the
consequent stoppage of the electric sirens. Of course,
there is probably something in the idea that you might
also find a garage where there is not enough air
to blow up your tyres.
Mr. PANTON. —Of course, we have only one power
house. That is what made us switch to air.
Sir JOHN HAERIS.—I presume that when a state
of emergency is declared all city noises will as far
as possible be eliminated. I would say that private
individuals would not be able to use all sorts of sirens;
that the siren would be reserved.
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it the States would
see to it that it was.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Then I think all the argu-
ments being used by Mr. Heffron will fall to the
ground so long as you get something people will hear.
As long as people know the particular siren in New
South Wales or in Victoria, say, I do not know that
we have much to worry about.
The CHAIRMAN.—-We know that New South
Wales has certain requirements in regard to sirens
and we have been endeavouring to get them from
America. It has been suggested that, if any of the
other States want electric sirens from America, and
a total order is put in at once, we may be able to
obtain them, too. Are there any other States besides
New South Wales that want sirens?
Mr. HANLON. —We want more sirens. I think
you saw and heard ours. So far, however, we have
had ours manufactured in Australia at a much
cheaper figure than that quoted here. We give the
job to the Electricity Department of the City Council;
they purchase the motors, and so on, and assemble
them in Brisbane.
The CHAIRMAN. —The delay in the provision of
the motors has been the trouble. They are manu-
factured here, I believe, but there has been delay, and
that has been Mr. Heffron’s trouble.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Do you know the coverage of
the sirens you are proposing to bring in from
America ?
Mr. HEFFRON.—That varies. It depends on
the nature of the country. High buildings will cut
it down; hilly country will interfere with it. The
idea is to have them about a mile apart right in the
heart of the city. If the wind is against it, it rather
blows the sound away.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —You have to find a dead
place, and put one there.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes. We have had headaches in
Sydney in reference to that. Where the country is
reasonably flat, with no high buildings or hills, you
can hear them miles away. We took to Port Kembla
our mobile sirens, the same as Queensland is using,
and we heard them all over the district —over and
above the steel works’ sirens, and so on.
Mr. HANLON.—Our difficulty was this: we had
one on the Town Hall, up high, and, while it nearly
deafened everybody near the Town Hall Square, across
the block diagonally you could not hear it on the
footpath, on account of the traffic noises and noises
from the buildings. I think there is a 3-mile coverage
in the suburbs, but in Queen-street we had to put in
three, and then they could not be heard in the depart-
mental stores
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —I think they will have to
be covered separately.


Mr. HANLON.—Yes; we are going to compel
the stores and factories and buildings to put in an
alarm of their own.
The CHAIRMAN.—New South Wales, in this
particular order, are talking about 30.
Mr. HEFFRON.—That barely touches our require-
ments. That is just to improve the position quickly.
It was estimated by our engineers that we would
require about 300 for Sydney and the metropolitan
area, and also for Kembla and Newcastle. We are
improvising in those other two places.
Mr. HANLON.—We tried 43 in the black-out
recently, and, listening intently, you could hear it,
but you would never hear it unless you knew it was
coming on. That was 43 on one switch. With the
traffic noises in Sydney you would want hundreds.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—What is the cost of those?
Mr. HANLON, —They cost us £5O each.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Our requirements in South
Australia, I should say, would be somewhere in the
vicinity of 100.
The CHAIRMAN—Mr. Heffron says 300; Mr.
Playford says 100. Tasmania do not want any?
Major DAVIES—No.
The CHAIRMAN .—Queensland ?
Mr. HANLON.—We have on order here now
another eighteen, six of which are for the Defence
Department.
The CHAIRMAN.—Do you know your deliverj
date ?
Mr. HANLON. —No, we want priority. We were
getting twelve for the coastal towns, and the Defence
authorities placed six with us.
The CHAIRMAN.—Do you want more?
Mr. HANLON.—Yes, we would want another 50
at least.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I would say 200 for us, because
we already have those city blocks wired up. Then,
of course, we have 30 in the making.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the order at Wollon-
gong?
Mr. HEFFRON—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—Victoria does not want any?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—No. Our Chief Warden
says he is quite satisfied, notwithstanding that it is
blown by air.
The CHAIRMAN.—We will consider placing an
order straight away for that number of sirens under
lease and lend.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —When will we know whether
they are going to come to light?
The CHAIRMAN.—We understand from the
Customs Department that deliveries can be commenced
from America in eight weeks.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I would like to stress again that
our position in New South Wales is pretty desperate
in the vulnerable places, and I am concerned about
getting the sirens there at the earliest possible moment,
regardless of where we get them from. I see the pos-
sibility that we may have much greater delays than
would be the case if we could get the sirens manufac-
tured here, provided we can overcome the priority
business. I do not want to commit myself to the
method suggested when we could most likely get some
here. Suppose we eould get 60 manufactured here.
The CHAIRMAN.—You mean including the 30 you
are getting done now?
Mr. HEFFRON—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—Your whole position is that
time is the essence of the contract, but if this order
goes to America, there is nothing to prevent your extra
30 h'fing manufactured here, if We can get priorities;
but the information given to us was that the manufac-
turers estimated ten to twelve weeks, and they were
not sure of that.
Mr. PLAYFOED. —-Was the eight weeks from
America delivered here?
The CHAIRMAN.—I think we had better say eight
weeks delivered from the factory in America. That
may be optimistic.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—If there is any doubt about our
getting them from America in eight weeks, and we
could get a few made here, we would not order so
many from America but try to build up our own posi-
tion to a certain extent.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think that the best suggestion
would be for us to try to supply the order. If you
put your orders into the factories here, we will do our
best to get priority releases for the motors, which are
the whole trouble, apparently. At the same time, we
will try to get 50-50 of each from America under lease
and lend.
Mr. HANLON.—I have an order in for a quantity
in Australia, so we would want the 50 in addition.
Mr. HEFFRON.—In regard to local manufacture,
the people to whom we let the contract in Sydney—
I. T. Jay Limited—arranged to let us have the first
deliveries in six weeks. Of course, certain things
developed after that in regard to priorities.
The CHAIRMAN.—The question then arises, if a
sudden demand comes up for these motors, they may
jamb the lot. I take it that we will attempt to get
half the number from America under lease and lend;
you will explore your ordinary channels in Australia
for the others, and we will do our level best to get the
motors raised in their priority. Are there any other
points on Item s(b), Representations by New South
Wales and Western Australia as to purchase and pro-
vision of equipment?
STIRRUP PUMPS.
Mr. HEFFRON.—There is just the point which
arose last night as to the urgency of the stirrup pumps.
They are very valuable, not only in the event of the
mains going, but in ease of having quite a lot of fires.
Our fire brigades are organized on a peace-time basis,
and could never hope to deal with fires caused by
incendiary bombs, if the fires were numerous. In any
event, pretty well every home in England has the
stirrup pump, and that is the effective way of fire-
fighting in the homes.
Mr. HANLON.—Those pumps are manufactured
quite freely in New South Wales; all they want is the
metal.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We can manufacture them. We
hope to place a pretty extensive order, but again it is
all a matter of priority. It is a question of whether
the firms will be allowed to use the metal required for
them. I think we might make whatever representations
we possibly ,can to the Department of Supply, to see
that the metal is made available, and, in addition, in
regard to our lease-lend arrangement with America, we
should also include a supply of stirrup pumps. I
imagine that the Americans manufacture them just
as freely as they do in England; probably England
is getting supplies from there.
The CHAIRMAN. —Do you want the stirrup
pumps as a supplement to the fire brigades, or do you
propose that there should be a stirrup pump in every
house in all the vulnerable areas or only in certain
parts of those areas?
Mr. HEFFRON.—I do not suggest one for every
house. lam not quite as pessimistic as that, but there
are many densely populated places.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—There is one to every four
houses in London, and there is a notice erected.
Mr. HEFFRON.—The early arrangements in Eng-
land were to have one in each street. The neighbours
would club together and buy one between them. There
is no question about their value in fire-fighting. I sup-
pose that has been more widely realized than ever in


England, particularly after the London fire. I think
that the fire brigades should have their supply of them
as well. One has to see them in operation to appreciate
their value. We should endeavour to have provision
made for the release of sufficient material here to get
on with the work as early as possible. There are firms
in Sydney, and maybe in Melbourne, who are capable
of manufacturing them, and I believe they can be
manufactured more cheaply at round about 18s. fid.
Ihey are needed by firms, as well as people in resi-
dentials, hotels and so on.
Sir J OHN HARRIS.—WouId not it be a good plan
to place a large order and get them in Australia; they
are articles which will sell at any time?
The CHAIRMAN".—You mean under lease and
lend ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes. If you interfere with
our own effort and priorities, you will never get it.
You want to go to where they are standardized.
Mr. HEFIRON.—We will be able to manufacture
them as cheaply here as they can elsewhere.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think so, but we want
all our industries for war requirements generally.
Mr. HEFFRON.—This is very important equip-
ment.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think this is a small thing,
and if there is mass production, or big manufacturing,
in a place like America, an order should be placed
ihere. There will not be any mistake about it, stirrup
pumps are sold all the time. In any ease, any one
who has water laid on and has a hose does not need a
stirrup pump.
Mr. HEFFRON.-—With all due respect, Sir John,
I do not agree.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—That is if there is any
pressure. I know' you have not much water in New
South Wales.
Mr. HEFFRON. —The drought has broken. An
incendiary bomb often comes through a ceiling. If it
is a two-storey place, it may have to be dealt with
upstairs, and the ordinary garden hose is of no use.
With the stirrup hose, you simply get a bucket of water,
run upstairs, and operate from there.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—If you did not have the
pump, you would pour the bucket of water over the
flames.
Mr. HEFFRON.—No. one-of the difficulties is that
an incendiary bomb often stops in the rafters. You
cannot throw a bucket of water on to it then.
The CHAIRMAN.-—lt seems to me that the best
way out of this difficulty is for the Commonwealth to
put in an order under lease and lend from America.
If it is found after the question of priority has been
investigated, and balanced up with munitions and
supply requirements, that they can be manufactured
locally, we will at least have a fairly large number
fiom America, and we would still not be cramping the
Australian manufacturers. The private individual
could then buy his stirrup pump from the local manu-
facturers, and the American order could be used to
supply the Services—l am speaking of fire brigades
and Government Services,
Mr. HANLON.—The main thing with the stirrup
pump is to make it available to the people. Every
household in the Commonw'ealth will need one.
The CHAIRMAN.—If they are not available from
local manufacturers, they could be given other pumps.
Mr. HANLON.—-You would have to get permission
for the vendor to import them for sale to the public.
The CHAIRMAN.—If we can get them through
lease and lend, they will come straight out.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-If you had a large enough
order, you could distribute them so that the public
could buy the pumps.
The CHAlRMAN—'Gentlemen, do you agree to the
suggestion that we put in an order to America under
lease and lend for a considerable number of these
pumps, and then explore all the possibilities with the
munitions and supply departments under local manu-
facturers with regard to the manufacture of the pumps
here? I think a lot will be needed, so the Australian
manufacturer will not be affected by any bulk order
placed in America at the outset.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You will not lose anything
by getting them, either.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is that agreed to, gentlemen?
Agreed to.
Item No. 6.—FIRST-AID EQUIPMENT.
The CHAIRMAN.—The next item is First Aid
Equipment, No. 6, New South Wales, Victoria, and
Western Australia.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —We applied to the Common-
wealth for £12,000 worth of First Aid Equipment.
Mr. Me Villy, Chairman of the Sub-Committee of the
Emergency Council, is very concerned as to whether
you have material here in Australia to furnish first aid
posts. I think we have some ambulances, but stretchers
are required. We have provided you, Mr. Chairman,
with a list of the materials we think necessary. Mr.
McVilly wishes to know whether the Commonwealth
has this material in store, and if not if you can provide
it within a reasonable period of time. We cannot go
on with our first aid posts and commence teaching
personnel unless we have materials. We also want
this material delivered to the State; we do not want
you to keep it. I have a letter from you, Mr. Chair-
man, in which you say; “As to inquiry as to whether
the Commonwealth will meet the cost of purchases,
you will appreciate that this is a question related to
the general policy decisions reached by the Common-
wealth and States Governments at Canberra on the
Bth and 9th August ”. I want to know from you, sir,
when Victoria is going to get a look-in in connexion
with this £500,0002 At the present we have not had
a look-in, and 1 think it is about time I started to talk
on behalf of the State. I think it is about time, Mr.
Chairman, that you did say to Victoria just one little
once that we can get something out of the £500,000.
This is on a£l for £1 basis, seeing that w 7 e have already
done all of the work, with this exception, which I
believe is the only one. You refer in your letter, Mr.
Chairman, to the meeting of 9th August; was I not
present?
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes, Sir John.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —We did not define anything
at that meeting, and you told me to wait for this
conference.
ihe CHAIRMAN.—We wrote a letter to you asking
you to give the details of what you required following
the conference.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have given them. First
of all, we want to know 7 whether you have the material
here.
The CHAIRMAN.—We have taken up the matter
with Sir Alan Newton, and we have not yet received
a reply. There is no difficulty about certain materials,
I understand, but there is difficulty about others.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—If you have the material,
will you deliver £12,000 worth to the State of Vic-
toria, to be stored in the State of Victoria, not in the
Commonwealth ? It takes too long to liberate these
things, and we want them liberated.


The CHAIRMAN.—You will recollect that we
wrote a letter to the Premier of each State on the
15th August. The letter was signed by me on behalf
of the Prime Minister, and you will find it set out
in paragraph 5
It would now be appreciated if you would kindly forward
through me to the Minister for Home Security, details of
State plans and costs in regard to the six priorities men-
tioned as being eligible for grants, as they supply to the areas
determined by the Defence Committee, so that early con-
sideration may be given to the matter and advice conveyed
to your State. The six priorities, as you are aware, are—
(,l) Controlled lighting schemes.
(2) Fire-fighting schemes.
(.1) First-aid organizations, and medical equipment.
(4) Warning systems.
(o) Incendiary bomib-training of key personnel.
((!) Instructions to the general public.
It will, of course, be appreciated that it will be necessary
to furnish, in respect of each item, appropriate details,
including the nature and location of any schemes, in order
to enable proper consideration to be given to the matter.
We have not yet received those details, although
we have received this list [ indicating |.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—That is our priorities.
The CHAIRMAN.—It does not give the locations.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Do you want a plan?
The CHAIRMAN.—No, hut we wish to know
whether they are in the vulnerable areas as defined
by the Premiers at Canberra.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It is all in respect of the
metropolitan area and Geelong; we are not doing
anything in the country.
Mr. WELCH.—We are awaiting advice from your
Premier, Sir John.
Sir JOIIN HARRIS.—But you have been dealing
with stirrup-pumps this morning, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN.—As I have said, we have asked
Sir Alan Newton to nominate some medical man who
will be able, on behalf of the Department of Home
Security, to' go through lists and see exactly what
items are available, and what are in short supply,
or difficult to get. Sir Alan has promised to furnish
the name of some medical officer, and as soon as that
is done we propose to put in lists like the one sub-
mitted to him to check up. Then we will be prepared
to act direct with you, Sir John.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-When you are checking up
with the medical man, if you want any information
or collaboration, will you get Mr. McYilly to attend?
He is the Inspector of Charities here, and he is in
charge of these first aid posts. He can tell you every-
thing about it.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think it would be a very
good idea. If the medical officer wishes to discuss
anything with Mr. McYilly, let him do so. He oan
explain the difficulties he finds on his side to Mr.
McYilly, and Mr. McYilly can bring forward his
difficulties.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Coming back to the matter of
the allocation of the £500,000. I do not suppose
there is any State that could not spend the whole of
the amount in its own areas. It would be very useful
to the States, in preparing their lists, Mr. Chairman,
if you could say to-day, for example, to the State
of South Australia, “ Out of the £500,000, the Com-
monwealth proposes to subsidize, your share will be
somewhere in the vicinity of £40,000 or £50,000 ”,
or whatever the amount is that you have in mind
for South Australia. That would give us an oppor-
tunity, sir, to supply a programme for a State within
that amount of money.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think we could do that,
Mr. Playford. I take it that the money has to be
allocated with regard to the needs.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Precisely, Mr. Chairman, but
you have something in the back of your mind as to
the relative needs of New South Wales as against
the relative needs of South Australia. I know that
it would help my friends in New South Wales, as
it would help me, if they knew that out of the
£500,000 the Commonwealth proposes to make avail-
able £200,000 or £300,000, or some definite amount,
with a provision, of course, that the individual items
still have to be approved by the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Playford, if the States
would send in their requirements
Mr. PLAYFORD.—That is just the point I do not
think is fair, because every State then starts to boost
up its requirements to try to protect its allocation.
Mr. HANLON.—I think the Department of Home
Security would be able to assess real requirements
as against an inflated estimate.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I do not agree. I say we could
spend in South Australia alone £500,000 on air raid
precautions. New South Wales could spend the whole
amount On the six priorities. They would all he
genuine requirements.
Mr. HANLON.—I take it that the Department
of Home Security would not look so much at what
you propose to spend, as it would consider the
responsibilities of each State. We will get only a drop
in the ocean.
The CHAIRMAN.—If you take the six priorities,
1 do not think there is much room for a State or
States to boost their requirements. Take the control
of lighting schemes. We have technical advisers on
that, as we have in relation to fire-fighting schemes.
They will tell us if any State is becoming unreason-
able. They must have some peace-time standards
which are connected with air raid precautions in
some relation. They know what all of the States have,
and they can link it up. In regard to first aid
organization and medical equipment, we hope Sir
Alan Newton will be able to submit the name of a
medical man very shortly. In relation to warning
systems, that is a matter which we have discussed
this morning, and there was no instance of a State
wishing to cut out all its funds in warning systems.
Then we come to the incendiary bombs, training of
key personnel. That matter has to be discussed, but
you could not boost up your requirements then. There
cannot be too much boosting in regard to instructions
to the general public, so I do not think there is that
danger ahead.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—If you are so economic
in regard to the £500,000, you will have it all on your
hands at the end of the year.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are not being economic,
Sir John, and we will get on as fast as we can. But
we want you to give us a reply to section 5 of the
Prime Minister’s letter.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—This is all limited to the
two areas you declared as vulnerable.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Sir John has sent in that list,
Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN.—OnIy a medical list, and then
not with the required detail.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —Instead of getting the grant
and proceeding to spend the money, it is now pro-
posed to set up some Commonwealth authority to
check up on the State authority; there is no end to it.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think there is any
idea that way at all, hut there must be some check
on this medical matter, because the State authority
does not know what is available.
Mr. HANLON.—Two years ago the Commonwealth
requested all States to see that there were reserves
of drugs, first-aid dressings, and other equipment
on hand. Perhaps we are not all “ clean skins ” in
this regard. Have all the States done that?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have not been able to
get it.


Mr. HANLON-.—W € did.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —You have been a very
favoured individual. In each of the centres you will
find there is always one man in charge of these things.
There is a medical committee in Victoria which has
command of all the drugs in this State.
Mr. HANLON.—But it was a great deal later
that that came into operation.
Major DAVIES. —We were instructed that this
medical equipment was to be in addition to our peace-
time requirements, and in addition to those require-
ments which we had to build up at the request of
the Commonwealth. In our State we have a large
quantity of equipment which has been built up against
emergency at the request of the Commonwealth. We
have here a very comprehensive list of the stuff which
we would require in that regard. If it is now going
to be checked again and again, I doubt whether we
will have it in time for any real emergency which
may arise.
The CHAIRMAN. —I do not think it is a question
of checking up so much as an inquiry into whether
the quantities are adequate or not, but rather whether
they are actually available. Sir Alan Newton, on
looking through this list from Victoria, said there
were some items with which there would be difficulties.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Mr. McVilly, our Inspector
of Charities, has a knowledge of all this.
Mr. McVILLY.—In this State a great deal of
material, such as stretchers, tourniquets, and other
equipment, has already been purchased, but the actual
drugs and dressings have not been acquired yet,
partly through the control which has been exercised
by the Commonwealth acting through the Medical
Control Committee. The time has now arrived when
some decision should be reached. This list, which
you have from Victoria, has already been checked by
a very competent committee of medical men, and it is
on their recommendation that the list is submitted
of material to be purchased for distribution to the first-
aid posts throughout the States. It is not now a
matter of checking those requirements, but for the
Commonwealth to say whether it will supply the
material—whether the Commonwealth will supply all
States with drugs and dressings or whether the States
will be permitted to purchase their requirements
through the organizations—such as the State Tenders
Board—which are available to them.
The CHAIRMAN.—The two points arising from
that are, firstly, that the list must be approved by
the Commonwealth and, secondly, that the material is
available. As I see it, it is infinitely better for the
States to buy through their own buying organizations,
which, I believe, are very good. When that is done
and the list is approved by the Commonwealth, and
the expenditure incurred, the Commonwealth will pay
half the cost.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —The Commonwealth has limited
the amount to £500,000 at the present time. I take
it the Commonwealth will desire to see that each
State has a fair consideration. That means that, if
the State of South Australia put in its complete list
to-morrow, the Commonwealth could not deal with
that list until the last State had put in its complete
list, and that will mean a great deal of delay.
The CHAIRMAN.—No. I do not think that
position would arise.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —At the Premiers Conference
it was stated that the allocation would be made here,
and that was what this conference was called for.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think that is so.
Mr. McVlLLY.—Might I suggest that it wouM
expedite a decision in regard to medical supplies if
the Commonwealth would set up a standard list upon
which it will base its subsidy. It could then be left
to the States to purchase what other items they
required.
Major DAVIES.—You told the States to act quickly
and we immediately purchased £7,000 worth, plus
£l,OOO worth of blankets. We have since ordered
£2,500 worth of material. That was done on the
advice of the board which was set up. As the position
is to-day, that £500,000 is only a drop in the ocean.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is £1,000,000.
Major DAVIES.—I think we should make some
decision as to the spending of that £500,000
The CHAIRMAN.—We can hardly do it now.
We have no proposals from the States as to their
requirements of these items in the vulnerable areas.
Major DAVIES.-—We have ordered an additional
£2,500 worth, and I want to make this point; that
we have it from the military authorities in Tasmania
that this material will not be commandeered for any
purpose other than the purposes of the air raid pre-
cautions organization. 1 would like some assurance
from you, Mr. Chairman, that our additional orders
—we have about £9,000 worth in hand—will not be
commandeered by the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—I cannot give you that guaran-
tee. I would be making a guarantee on behalf of the
Cabinet and the Minister for the Army, and I cannot
bind them, but I will put the position before them.
Major DAVIES. —If we obtain these stores and an
emergency does come, there will be a run on that sort
of thing. We have not started fighting yet, and I
think these things should be protected.
The CHAIRMAN.—I will put the position before
Cabinet and before the Minister for the Army, but
you must realize that, if I gave you a binding guaran-
tee, such as you desire, I would be lying to you.
Major DAVIES. —But you could indicate that yon
will protect the stores which we have.
The CHAIRMAN. —I will put it up, to the best
of my ability, to the Minister for the Army that
these stores should be protected, but I cannot guaran-
tee for certain that they will be.
Major DAVIES. —It is a very important point.
The CHAIRMAN.—I realize that.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.-—Another very important
point, to my mind, is that this is one of the priorities,
and I would like a definite undertaking from you,
Mr. Chairman, that this material will be made avail-
able or, alternatively, that a subsidy will be provided
to this State on a £1 for £1 basis to obtain this
material. It is a priority, but we are not in possession
of it. Mr. McVilly can assure you that all these
first-aid posts which he is applying for are in the
vulnerable areas of this State. We want a guarantee
to the extent of that order, £1 for £l. You can
examine it if you desire to do so.
The CHAIRMAN.—We are examining it not so
much on the basis of its medical necessity, but as
regards its availability.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think you said that you
wanted to see that we were going to use the supplies in
vulnerable areas. _ I want an Undertaking this morning
that when that list is approved you, sir, will make
available half the cost, and that you will either give
your instructions to get that or will provide it out
of the stores of the Commonwealth. Will you do that ?
The CHAIRMAN.—I have no objection to doing
that, because I think that is in the same position
as the sirens. There is an urgent need for them,
and this order has come in. The amount is not so
great that it will imperil any one’s allotment. Vic-
toria is going to get more than £12,000, I hope. I
do not think there is any difficulty about it at all.
In the case of this small amount we would under-
take that, once that list is approved as to availability


by our medical people, we will then tell you to go
ahead and buy it, and we will recoup you half the
cost of it.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-I thank you. The next
point is that, providing the stuff is in the Common-
wealth and is available, we would like to know
whether you will make it available as soon as possible,
so that we can act. We understood that the Common-
wealth had a tremendous amount of equipment, either
commandeered or in store, and we would like to know
whether out of that store you will make that material
available ?
The CHAIRMAN,.—I cannot answer that, but I
will find out for you.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We would be glad if you
could let us know as soon as possible, because, if it
is not available, we will have to act for ourselves.
Mr. McVILLY.—It is a question of whether the
Commonwealth will supply these requirements or
whether the States will buy them in the open market.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the point I have put
up: that the States will buy them in the open market,
once they are approved, and then we will recoup you
half the cost.
Mr. PANTON. —-I am surprised at the tone of
this debate. I can assure you that we would not
have come over from Western Australia had we known
that the debate was to take its present form. All this
was dealt with at the earlier conference, and we were
told then, by the Chairman, that there was no use
talking finance, and that the Premiers Conference
would settle that. My Premier assured me, before
I left to come over here, that they had dealt with the
amount which it was possible to obtain, and that the
amount of £500,000 would be allocated at this Con-
ference. I think this is a most important item.
We think life is of more consequence than any
material which may be destroyed during air raids, and
we are anxious to do as much training as possible
for that purpose. It was quite obvious at the last
air raid precautions conference that every State and
city had its own difficulties. We are fortunate in
Western Australia, inasmuch as the city is not thickly
populated. We have very few wooden houses, and
most of the buildings, by law, must be on 52-ft. or
66-ft. frontages, which is vastly different from the
position in Sydney or Melbourne. On the other hand,
we of the Health Department indent and purchase all
our drugs and medical supplies for the whole of the
92 hospitals—apart from ordinary private hospitals—
in Western Australia, and so we have been building
up our equipment. However, as somebody said just
now, the Defence Department could walk in and
take it. We have had a Medical Co-ordination Com-
mittee over there for the last eighteen months.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have had one all the
time.
Mr. PANTON. —Of that committee, I think the
Principal Medical Officer of the Defence Department,
Colonel McWhae, is the chairman. To tell these
people—the medical men, the officers of the Health
Department, with Colonel McWhae in the chair—
“ You have done a good job to all intents and pur-
poses, hut we have to check it up over here ” with
all due respect to you, sir, I think is ridiculous. My
experience in Western Australia is that the Defence
Department are always short of material. I put up
two hospitals, and immediately they were up Colonel
McWhae walked in and took possession. I hope the
big new hospital will not be finished before the war
ends, because they will walk in and take that, too.
And they are probably justified in doing so. Civilians,
however, have to be protected, and that is our job.
They want to know in Western Australia what we
are going to do about medical equipment. If we have
to say, “We were led to believe that the Premiers
decided on certain matters, but the representative of
the Commonwealth now says that is not so, and we
have to wait ”, we are not going to get anywhere.
The CHAIRMAN.—-There could not have been any
misunderstanding, because in the Prime Minister’s
letter to the Premiers of the States dated 15th August,
1941, he said—
It would now be appreciated if you would kindly forward
through me, to the Minister for Home Security, details
of State plans and costs in regard to the six priorities
mentioned as being eligible for grant as they apply to the
areas determined by the Defence Committee, so that early
consideration may be given to the matter and advice conveyed
to your State. The six priorities, as you are aware, are—
tand he set them out].
It will be, of course, appreciated that it will be necessary
to furnish, in respect of each item, appropriate details,
including the nature and location of any schemes, in order
to enable proper consideration to be given to the matter.
It is suggested that, in respect of such items as informa-
tion is already available, action to the end suggested should
be taken at once, so that these particular items may be
proceeded with without awaiting finality of other matters
in respect of which further inquiries may be necessary.
The Commonwealth does not propose to be niggardly
in regard to any State, and if you tell us honestly
what you need we will give the matter every con-
sideration.
Major DAYIES.—We only got that letter on the
18th August. We are compiling that information
now, but it cannot be done in five minutes.
The CHAIRMAN.—-I realize that it is not a thing
you can do in five minutes, hut equally I say that until
we get that information we cannot in a lump sum out
up the thing now; but on some of those smaller
amounts like sirens and Sir John’s medical equipment,
which are not going to involve the whole £500,000, we
are, for the sake of safety, suggesting that they be
dealt with straightaway.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO STATES.—ALLOCATION
OF £500,000 GRANT.
Mr. PLAYPORD.—I want to voice a protest at the
proceedings the Commonwealth are proposing. I think
.1 am able to speak on this matter fairly competently,
because not only was I at the Premiers Conference,
but I have had the privilege of being at these con-
ferences, and I was on the original conference where
the Commonwealth calmly handed over to us one of the
things that the Constitution said was a Commonwealth
obligation. As honorable members here know, the
Constitution says that the defence of the country is a
Commonwealth obligation, and it does not matter how
much the State may desire to help the Commonwealth
and to come into the picture with assistance, either
financial or otherwise, the defence of Australia is still
a Commonwealth obligation. It is a sacred obligation
given by the Constitution to the Commonwealth itself.
In the original proposals Mr. Lyons put it over us.
He said, “You will do the training; we will provide
the equipment ”. The States have done the training.
In ray State we have trained half the year with three
gas helmets, and if the Commonwealth thinks that is
providing the equipment, I do not. Then the Com-
monwealth more recently, after a good deal of pressure
by the States, said they were going to come in and
assist financially. You, sir, were good enough to come
to the various States and investigate the position, and
as a result of the investigation you put up a proposal
which was accepted by the Commonwealth Government,
to the effect that they would provide £500,000 if the
States provided an additional £500,000. The States
accepted that at a conference quite recently, and that
was very generous of the States in view of the fact
that in the original agreement the equipment was to
be provided by the Commonwealth. The Premiers the
other day at a conference were generous, inasmuch as


they said, “We will participate in this financially and
we will put up £500,000 if the Commonwealth put up
£500,000 It was mentioned then quite definitely
that this conference to-day was going to get finality
with regard to it. That was quite definite. Sir John
was there.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—That is what I understood.
Mr. PLA YFORD.—My Parliament is sitting and I
would not be here to-day for any minor matter. We
get here to-day and we are told that we are to set
about providing a list of stuff and there will be certain
persons appointed by the Commonwealth to check these
lists. I might well ask, seeing that we are paying half
the cost of this, “ Why cannot our people check it as
well as the Commonwealth ? ”
The CHAIRMAN.—They will.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —But you take to yourself the
right of final decision.
Mr. PL A YFORD. —The total of our requirements
would be £112,000 under the priorities proposed in the
vulnerable area. Every State interested quite under-
stands that the Commonwealth are only interested in
some areas, but vce cannot reach any finality until every
claim of every State on every item has been anticipated
and inspected.
The CHAIRMAN.—No.
Mr, PLAYFORD.—Otherwise the State that comes
in first gets the biggest helping.
The CHAIRMAN.—We will watch that.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Then I suggest you cannot give
any fair allocation until you see the requirements of
South Australia in a defence scheme are a certain
amount of money, the requirements of Sydney are a
certain amount, and so on; and unles® we are prepared
to face up to it here to-day we are only wasting our
time, and I for one am not prepared to waste time,
particularly at a stage in our operations such as we
are in at the present time.
The CHAIRMAN.—What was actually said at the
conference, reading from the report of the conference
(.copies of which were sent to the State Premiers),
was: “In allocating this amount of £500,000 loan
money as between the States, the determining factor
must be the need in relation to making Australia safe
against attack ”. Ido not think it is possible to-day to
come to an allocation of the amount that is to be given
to each State until we get in the replies to the letter of
the 15th August. We cannot possibly do it. We will be
just stabbing in the blind if we do it. Of course I
was not at the conference two years ago—l was not
even m politics—but I understood it was agreed that
certain training equipment would be made available.
I believe those were the words used—not “ all equip-
ment
Mr. HANLON.—The thing is the Premiers walked
into it without knowing what they were doing.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I have that pamphlet. You
cannot hoodwink what was said there. Moreover, you
should not do it. Mr. Playford has pointed out that
you should not do that. Civil defence is as much
defence as defence of the country, and when you talked
about making the States responsible for civil defence
you were going outside the Constitution.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—But we have accepted that
responsibility and spent money too.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —I know. Sometimes you
have to get down to bedrock, and I think Mr. Playford
has placed the case plainly to this meeting, and I
entirely agree with that. I never did agree that the
State was responsible for the total expense of civil
defence. This is an all-in war, and if you are respon-
sible for the defence of this country as a Common-
wealth Government you are responsible for the civil
defence of it. Nevertheless I agree that the States did
take on a duty, but it was never definitely said in the
memorandum that I received at the time that was
created that the States would be responsible for the
expenditure. I challenge that. In your memorandum,
although you have a quotation, you put that in the
hands of a lawyer and he will tell you that it is too
indefinite to bind any State or any one to the excessive
expenditure that will be involved in the protection of
the civil population. I feel that this continuous ques-
tioning of the applications of the States is not worthy
of a big Government. If we send in a list of materials
we require we are not expanding it. What would we
expand it for? We do not want it; it is the necessity
of the State. There is too much of that going on in
the Commonwealth all the time—that you never trust
the State at all.
Major DAVIES. —Are we going to put back the
clock two years ? We agreed to accept some respon-
sibility. I am very dissatisfied with the allocation and
sympathize with you in attacking it. 1 am disappointed
that the States have to spend so much; but we have
accepted the responsibility and we want all the assis-
tance you can give us.
The CHAIRMAN.—Major Davies and Mr. Play-
ford and Sir John, I just want to read out to you from
the report of this meeting at Canberra, these two sen-
tences. I said this: “ If all of the States are in
general agreement with these proposals, I ask that the
proposals outlined by the memorandum be adopted.
The details can be worked out later in correspondence
with the States. Other matters can be discussed at
the forthcoming A.R.P. Conference ”. That is plain
enough. There is no doubt what they meant: that the
details were to be worked out by correspondence and
these other matters which we were dealing with yester-
day would be discussed at the forthcoming A.R.P.
Conference.
Mr. PAN TON.—A lot of the representatives were
not listening wdien that was said.
The CHAIRMAN. —I cannot help that.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I remember that statement
being made, but it was also tacitly understood that
there would be finality reached at this meeting to-day,
and all the Stales stressed the great urgency of having
this meeting on account of the finality that was to be
reached in connexion with it.
The CHAIRMAN. —It is not my fault that finality
is not being reached to-day. If the lists were all in,
we probably might have been able to reach finality.
Mr. PLAT FORD. —Our list of stuff is here.
The CHAIRMAN.—We can have yours now, per-
haps, but we have not lists from all the States.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—The point I made, and I do
ask the Commonwealth to give consideration to it, is
this: I suggest that if the Commonwealth, when they
said in the first place that they were going to provide
the equipment, had handed over to the States in some
equitable manner the £500,000 they are now proposing
to allocate, we would not now be looking for air raid
sirens; we would have had them installed. We would
not now be trying to purchase, medical equipment; it
w r ould have been here on the job, The medical equip-
ment is not here, the sirens are not here, and the other
equipment is not here because the Commonwealth has
never placed the spending of the money in the hands
of the States.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-And they did not do any-
thing themselves, either.
The CHAIRMAN.—May I read out to you this
passage from what was said by you, Mr. Playford, at
the conference at Canberra,'on 9th August, 1941:
“ Does it not then resolve itself into a matter of the
States submitting to the Commonwealth more details
of the proposals for wdiieh they ask the Commonwealth
to subsidize them to the extent of 50 per cent. Evacua-
tion and air raid shelters are not included in the six
priorities. It appears that the position is that each


State should submit to the Commonwealth details of
the proposals and of the amount it desires to expend
on the six priorities and in respect of which it requires
the subsidy from the Commonwealth? If that is the
case, my State is prepared to submit to you now a pro-
posal along those lines, so that the matter may be
finalized and definite action may be taken. I suggest
that that should be done by correspondence by all the
States as soon as possible ”.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—That was suggested, but then
the other Premiers said, “ No; we want to get finality
in this. We want a conference to be called We
have the list of stuff we want, and we are prepared to
consider it. We are now told to go home and indulge
in correspondence again.
The CHAIEMAN.—That does not appear in the
report of the Conference.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS. —Do not you remember that I
had a statement in which my State had committed
itself to a large expenditure, and I wanted to make it
retrospective. You said, “Do not consider this
to-night; we will consider it when we have a
conference ”.
The CHAIEMAN.—No. I said I would put your
views before Cabinet. The report of the proceedings
will show that.
Mr. HANLON.—If it becomes retrospective, the
whole £500,000 has gone long ago.
Mr. HEFFEON. —We have spent more than that in
New South Wales.
Mr. PANTON.—I think that our details are in.
Mr. WELCH. —No, they are not. The statement
you refer to is an earlier one—a general estimate of
costs.
Mr. PANTON.—I was told that they were for-
warded long before I left. But what I am afraid of,
and I feel sure it will happen, is that our Medical Com-.
mittee will get the details out; then we will have to
submit them to some eminent medical man, who will
have to go through them. Then he will have to write
back to Western Australia (we are not at your back
door) for some explanation of this, that or the other;
and so the correspondence will go on indefinitely. We
will never reach finality. Then we will have another
conference, which wall be like the last and the present
one, and we will never get anywhere. I certainly
agree with Mr. Playford that if we can find some
method of distribution even on a population basis, we
will know where we are,
The CHAIEMAN.—I do not think there is any pro-
posal to have a sort or re-vetting of all your require-
ments under the medical priority, but there are certain
drugs and certain equipment which we are definitely
(old are in short supply and may not be procurable,
and your medical officer in Western Australia may not
know that.
Mr. PANTON.—I am told that our list went to
the Prime Minister, and I suppose that somebody is
sitting on it.
Mr. WELCH.-—No; that is not the position. The
letter from the Prime Minister only went out to you
on the 15th August.
The CHAIEMAN. —What I said at the conference
about allocating this amount was, “ In allocating this
amount of £500,000 of loan money as between the
States, the determining factor must be the need in
relation to making Australia safe against attack”, and
however much we talk about vulnerable areas in dif-
ferent places, there must be some areas which are
relatively more vulnerable and more liable to attack
than others. We feel that, in the distribution of the
money, that aspect should be considered, but I do not
want an interminable argument about what happened
two years ago, what ought to have been done and
what has not been done. With regard to the 1939
conference, one of the gentlemen who was present said
that the Commonwealth was to provide for training
equipment and a reserve of equipment only, but I do
not propose to haggle about that. Our job is to try
to do the best we can with this money for the people
of Australia, and I will put up the proposal for a
start that as to a quarter of the amount provided by
the Commonwealth, we agree that it shall be distributed
on a population basis, and the balance can be worked
out according to the needs of the various States, having
particular regard to their vulnerability. I mean
£125,000 from the Commonwealth distributed on a
population basis, and the remaining quarter of the
Commonwealth grant distributed according to the
“ needs ”.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—A little difficulty arises in con-
nexion with this matter: the States are providing
their share of this out of loan money, and the Loan
Council is to make available £500,000 to meet the
expenditure of the States.
The CHAlEMAN.—Additional to the other amount
of £500,000 grant.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—Take the position I am in at
the moment. My loan programme for the year is
ready for Parliament. I cannot put in the figure
for equipment, because I do not yet know what my
share will be. I cannot know until this matter is
finalized here. If I am told to-day that my share
is £IO,OOO or £50,000, to-morrow I can put my loan
bill before the House; but, until that is done, the
whole loan vote of my State is held up, and I suggest,
with all due deference to the Commonwealth, that
it is about time they made up their minds how much
they are going to give each State.
The CHAIEMAN.—What formula would you
suggest ?
Mr. PLAYFOED.—You have suggested that it
should be a population basis.
The CHAIEMAN. —Ho, I have not. I have said
as to a quarter, to try to settle this trouble now.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—I am not interested in the for-
mula, and we do not take an ungenerous view of
the obligations of other States; but I do want some
finality, so as to know what we are to bring forward.
Mr. HANLON.—You are proposing, sir, that one
quarter should be allocated on a purely population
basis, so that the States will know definitely that they
are to get a certain amount. The remainder would be
allocated after examination by your department.
Mr. PANTON.—I understood the Chairman to say
a quarter of a million.
The CHAIEMAN.—A quarter of the grant and a
quarter of the loan,
Mr. HEFFEON. —Is that money to be allocated
to the States to spend on the things they order?
The CHAIEMAN. —No. As they put their require-
ments in, they get it approved. Then they buy
and are paid for it.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—My recollection is that the
Treasurer said at the Loan Council meeting that
any money made available by the States would be
entirely outside the loan programme agreed to.
The CHAlEMAN.—Additional to the £20,000,000,
yes.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—So that Mr. Playford can
balance all right.
Mr. PLAYFOED.—But I have to put my loan
programme in.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—You can do that any time;
but this £500,000 which we propose to hypothecate
to get the Commonwealth £500,000 is additional loan
money.
Mr. HANLON.—(Suppose we say that one quarter
of the subsidy be allocated to the States on the basis
of population, and the three-quarters subsequently on


the basis of the requirements for the protection of the
vulnerable areas as decided? That would give us
something definite upon which to work.
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it your suggestion
means that a quarter of the total sum of £1,000,000
will be allocated on a population basis, and as the
piecemeal requirements come in and are approved
immediately up to that amount, we then give £1 for
£l 'as you spend your money?
Mr. HANLON.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN* —Then, as soon as we have the
full lists, we go forward on the further allocation
according to vulnerable areas and the necessary
requirements?
Mr. HANLON. —Yes, that gives us a basis on which
to spend.
The CHAIRMAN.—There is just one practical
difficulty in connexion with that matter, but if you
gentlemen all say that you believe your Premiers
would be satisfied with that arrangement, it removes
the difficulty.
Mr. HANLON.—I think I can say that my Premier
would accept it.
Mr. HEFFRON.—And I, too.
Mr. PANTON. —I cannot say with what my
Premier would be satisfied. He sent me over here
with a different idea altogether. I cannot commit
him to anything, though we are always willing to
fall in with the rest; but, if you decide this matter
on a population basis, it raises the question whether it
should be the population of the State or the population
of the vulnerable areas.
The CHAIRMAN.—As to the first quarter, I think
you would be quite safe in saying on the population
of the State; but, concerning the other item, there
are several factors in relation to the population of the
vulnerable area, degree of vulnerability, and so on.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—AII those other matters
would be decided irrespective of population.
The CHAlßMAN.—Population would have to be
taken into consideration in the vulnerable areas; but
there might be other factors arising. Major Davies,
do you think that your Premier would be satisfied
with what I suggest ?
Major DAVIES.—I am inclined to accept it,-
beoause we simply intend to put the amount on our
budget £1 for £1 with what you give us. We do
not propose to borrow money for the purpose.
The CHAIRMAN. —Would you be agreeable, Sir
John ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes, I think my State would
agree.
The CHAIRMAN. —Would South Australia be
agreeable, Colonel Shaw?
Colonel SHAW.—I think the Premier would be
agreeable, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN.—That clears up the matter. Do
you all approve, gentlemen?
Agreed to.
Major DAVIES.—As to the balance, we will submit
a detailed list, as you require it.
The CHAIRMAN.—Submit a list at once. Instead
of waiting for the whole list, you could put in
portions, and, as to the allocations, they will be as
to the population up to £250,000. All the amounts are
on account of and will be applied to the purposes of
the, six priorities.
Major DAVIES.—Are you leaving it entirely to our
State Governments as to where we get the money
for air raid precautions? We are not coming back
to the Loan Council for it. We presume you are
giving this amount; have we to get it from our
budget, or loans?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It will not make any differ-
ence, will it?
Mr. HEFFRON.-—lt was made clear that it would
be an additional allocation.
The CHAIRMAN.—As these things are approved,
you get your payments..
Item No. 7.—80M8 DISPOSAL SQUADS.
Mr. HEFFRON. —This is a very important
matter, Mr. Chairman, and I should like to ask what
the proposals are.
The CHAIRMAN.—With regard to the training of
key personnel, I propose to read the following state-
ment ;
Item No. 7.— 80M8 DISPOSAL SQUADS.
Training of Key Personnel.
Statement by Commonwealth on Proposals re
Bomb Disposal Squads.
Shortly after assuming office, it came to my
notice that civil defence volunteers were being
trained in the disposal of unexploded bombs, an
arrangement made, I am aware, at the request,
and certainly with the concurrence of, the Com-
monwealth authorities. During my visit to the
States, I discussed the matter with several of the
State Ministers and officers controlling air raid
precautions, and found the same concern as was
exercising my mind.
Up to the present, I understand some 60
civilians have been trained in Australia at the
School of Military Engineering, Casula, New
South Wales, in bomb disposal work. The
syllabus of instruction at the first two schools
included—
(a) Lectures on explosives.
(b) Types of shells and bombs which might
be encountered.
(c) Demolition charges, their nature and
preparation.
(d) Exploders and detonators.
(e) Protective sandbag or earth walls around
shells or bombs to be destroyed in situ.
As I felt that this was a matter which needed
placing under Army control, I took the earliest
opportunity of discussing the question with my
colleague, the Minister for the Army, and the
Chief of the General Staff. They agreed that the
arrangement previously obtaining should be re-
viewed. I am now advised by the Department of
the Army that that department will be responsible
for the disposal of bombs on all land and build-
ings, other than those under the control of the
Departments of the Navy and Air. The ques-
tion of disposal of bombs in these establishments
will be the responsibility of those departments,
and arrangements are being made to that end.
Subject to the foregoing, the Department of the
Army will be responsible for—
(a) The provision of a bomb disposal
organization in each State and Terri-
tory of the Commonwealth where such
organization is considered to be neces-
sary.
(b) Disposal of bombs.
( c ) Issue of technical instruction on bomb
disposal.
( d ) Maintenance of a close liaison with the
civil authorities concerned.
The Department of the Army points out that it
is not possible, without further detailed Con-
sideration of the problem, to determine precisely
the extent.of the bomb disposal organization
which it will be necessary to set up in the several
States. It will be necessary to undertake the
special training of personnel additional to those
provided on the present establishment of engineer


and certain ordnance units. The extent to which
it may be possible to enlist into special bomb
disposal units any of the civilian personnel who
have already been trained at the School of Mili-
tary Engineering (Casula) will be examined.
It is considered, however, that the number who
may be obtained from this source will represent
but a very small percentage of the total number
of additional personnel required to be enlisted
into the Army to man bomb disposal units. In
this connexion, it is proposed to appoint a par-
ticular officer in each Military District who will
act as liaison officer between the bomb disposal
organization to be established and the State air
raid precautions authorities.
This arrangement, the Department of the Army
points out, will not, of course, affect the position
under which the appropriate air raid precautions
organization carries out its instructional work in
respect of the handling of incendiary bombs.
As soon as the Department of the Army has
reached a definite decision concerning the par-
ticular organization to undertake this work, fur-
ther advice will be conveyed to the States.
It should be added that the Commonwealth is
most appreciative of the work done by the States
in this regard, and I feel that its appreciation
should be conveyed to those responsible for carry-
ing on this work.
It is proposed, therefore, that, in sending con-
firmatory advice to the State Premiers in this
regard, a special note of thanks should be con-
veyed through the Premiers to this particular
group of civil defence personnel.
In going throughout Australia, I was particularly
struck by the views expressed in regard to this matter
in several States. I bad my own views, and I believe
it is absolutely essential when dealing with the dis-
posal of unexploded bombs to have disciplined military
personnel for the purpose.
Although I certainly did not see a bomb that bad
been dropped from the air, at the naval establishment
in Adelaide we were shown some of the mines that
had been washed up on the South Australian coast.
Not only were the fuses to be drawn from the horns,
but there were extra fuses inside, making a kind of
booby trap, so that anybody pulling out the plug
would blow up the whole thing. I understand that
two of the naval personnel were killed there.
I ascertained that only 60 civilians had been trained
at the School of Military Engineering at Casula, New
South Wales, and although they bad returned to the
different States to train civilians, possibly the know-
ledge would not have been fully imparted. I felt
that it was essential that there should be military
and military training connected with such
work. Civilians without proper discipline might not
only blow themselves up, but many other people as
well. Eor that reason, I took up the matter with
my colleague, the Minister for the Army. He and
the Chief of the General Staff, General Sturdee, agreed
with my view. I fully realize that it is a little hard
on the men who have done such excellent work, and
I took up the matter with the Minister to see whether
it was not possible to enlist those men in some unit
of the Army, either the Volunteer Defence Corp or
a Militia unit specially detailed for the purpose, and
the proposal is being examined. But, in view of the
small number of men that had been trained, and the
necessity for some form of complete military discip-
line, I felt that the problem should be grappled with
in the manner I have suggested. I know that South
Australia has a most excellent man in charge of
bomb disposal; he told me he had been in the Wool-
wich arsenal for fifteen years, and he knows a lot
about these things. If this gentleman could fit into
a technical position in the bomb disposal work of the
Army, be would be very valuable, but if he is doing
other air raid precautions work of importance it may
be better for him to carry on that work and leave the
other for the time being. I would ask the Conference
to adopt that proposal.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I only wish to say that we
sent a good many people from Victoria—well educated
people, engineers— -to the Military Engineering
School. We are quite willing to hand over bomb
disposal to the Defence authorities, have no fear of
that. But we do not want our key personnel recruited
into the Defence Forces. Some of our people are more
important to civil defence than they would be to bomb
disposal work.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think there is any
suggestion to do that, Sir John,
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I hope you will see to
it, Mr. Abbott.
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes.
Mr. HANLON. —Could we have any idea of what
the Army proposes to do? I notice the words, “Set
up an organization in each State ”.
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it there will be a bomb
disposal unit in each State.
Mr. HANLON.—And if there were an unexploded
bomb at Thursday Island, it would take three weeks
to get to it.
The CHAIRMAN.—No. If there were men
specially allocated for that duty, I suppose they could
destroy the bomb.
Commander BUCHANAN.—The Defence establish-
ments will each have a bomb disposal unit.
Mr. HANLON.—I am quite willing for the Army to
do the job. I thought it was one that should not have
been thrust upon me in Queensland. We sent our key
men, our local engineers, to the School of Military
Engineering in New South Wales. Since returning
they have built up squads in their own areas. They
cannot be taken over by the Army because in the advent
of trouble our local engineers have their essential
services to maintain. The bomb disposal squads must
be an entirely new organization. One squad is no good
to our State. We have a 1,500 mile north and south
line. The Army would have to undertake to establish
a bomb disposal squad in each town, otherwise we
would have to do it ourselves in any ease.
The CHAIRMAN.—I propose to ask Colonel
McCall, who has discussed this matter with the Chief
of the General Staff, to say a few words on the subject.
Colonel MoOALL.—We received details of this
scheme only on Friday last, and we have not yet had
the time to analyze what the commitment means, but
I Understand the Chief of the General Staff proposes
to inform each General Officer Commanding in the
various States of this new expected policy. Based on
the information we have available from the United
Kingdom regarding the organization of bomb disposal
units, each General Officer Commanding will be
instructed to confer with the State authorities con-
cerned regarding the size and the extent of the organi-
zation it will be necessary to create. In regard to
individuals who haVe already attended the Army
School at Casula or who have passed on instructions
to State officials or members of State Air Raids Pre-
cautions organizations, if by arrangement with the
States any of them can join military units we will be
pleased to accept them. If, as has been pointed out,
some of the men who have gone through such courses
are indispensable from the State point of view, we will
have to dispense with them and train a number of addi-
tional people to take their places. It is possible that
through the medium of the Voluntary Defence Corps
organization we may be able to obtain practically all
the men we want, but at the moment it is a commitment


the extent and ramifications of which are unknown to
us. We will have to thrash it out in detail and discuss
it without the air raid precautions organizations.
Sir JOHN HARRIS-.—Will you take into con-
sideration the number of squads in the State and their
distribution?
Colonel McCALL.—Yes. They will have to be so
located throughout the areas where bombs may be
dropped that they can get on to the job without delay.
Mr. HANLON.—The men who have been so trained
will be available and able to co-operate.
Colonel McCALL. —The details will have to be
analyzed on the spot, in view of the requirements of
the individual States. The Chief of the General Staff
has agreed that a particular military officer in each
district be appointed to act as liaison officer between
the bomb disposal organization and the air raid pre-
cautions organization.
The CHAIRMAN.—CouId you give the under-
taking asked by Sir John Harris, that you will not
take away the key personnel?
Colonel McCALL. —We will not take the key men
away from the State organizations unless the States are
agreeable.
The CHAIRMAN.—It has been moved by Mr.
Heffron that the proposals with regard to the Army
taking over bomb disposal matters be agreed to, pro-
vided that the Army does not take key personnel from
the States.
Agreed to.
Item No. 8.—INSTRUCTIONS TO PUBLIC.
Mr. HEFFRON.—'We are very concerned, Mr.
Chairman, about the method of training and the dif-
ferences that exist in the instructions which go out to
the public in different States. Within our own State
also, there appears to be a definite need for standard-
ization of the methods of instructing the public. It is
our belief that there should be a set scheme or formula
of instruction—though it should not be too hard and
fast-—and it seems to me that whatever each State
proposes to do in regard to instruction should be sub-
mitted to the Commonwealth so that we will know
what we are doing.
Mr. HANLON.—Are you referring to the general
propaganda for the people, or the training of wardens
and so on ?
Mr. HEFFRON. —I was referring to the general
propaganda. In our State we have different wardens
sending out booklets of instruction as to what should
be done during an emergency, and to-day there is a fair
amount of propaganda in circulation which is not
strictly correct. In regard to incendiary bombs, for
example, the early instruction was to use dry sand
only and on no account to use water, yet to-day that
view is altered. When fighting an incendiary bomb up
among the rafters you cannot throw sand on it and the
only remaining method of dealing with it is to fight
it with spray from the stirrup pump. I was discussing
the matter of incendiary bombs with one of my
predecessors in this capacity and he entirely disagreed
with the idea of putting water on incendiary bombs.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It may splutter a bit.
Mr. HEFFRON.—If you turned the hose full on it,
it would splutter, but it is different if you merely spray
it. The Department of Information i*; now sending
out a short picture, which you will all have the oppor-
tunity of seeing in the various States, which illustrates
this. I have given this definite illustration of the
necessity for the Commonwealth to co-ordinate and use
its influence to ensure that conflicting and confusing
matter is not circulated.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Our method is that we have
booklets —we keep them up-to-date—and we get the
approval of the Commonwealth in regard to the litera-
ture before sending it out.
The CHAIRMAN.—Has that been the case
throughout ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I think it is a matter for the
Common wealth and I believe we should agree here
that the Commonwealth should take the responsibility
for sending out general public instructions and also
for paying for it.
Mr. PANTON.—OnIy in a general way. At the
last air raid precautions conference we decided to ask
the Commonwealth to issue a pamphlet in a general
way only, because what applied to one State might not
apply to another.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I said that it should not be hard
and fast.
Ihe CHAIRMAN.—I take it you are speaking of
instructions to the general public as issued by the
States.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—You are suggesting that
similar instructions should be given throughout Aus-
tralia, but the trouble is that a lot of instructional
books which have gone out, under which people will
by different means ultimately arrive at similar ways
of handling the air raid precautions business.
Mr. HANLON.—About twelve months ago I got in
touch with the Commonwealth authorities, in regard
to the activities of go-getters who were selling all sorts
of material about what to do in an air raid. A blind
man came up from the south selling literature of that
kind, and there were extracts from various English
publications being sold at Is. each throughout the
country. I asked for regulations under the National
Security Act to prohibit the sale or distribution of
such material without the authority of the State or
Commonwealth.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think the States must have
authority in that regard, but I think the approval of
the Liaison Officer of Defence should be obtained before
a booklet is issued. That would be your Home Security
Department now.
Mr. HANLON— Would it not be possible for the
Commonwealth to issue regulations prohibiting the
sale or distribution of such instructions to the public
unless authorized by the State concerned or by the
Commonwealth ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Under the original agreement,
the Commonwealth was to advise the States on general
principles and the carrying out of air raid precautions
was to be left to the States, Under the proposal you
are putting, a complete censorship of the newspapers
would be necessary. \
Mr. HANLON.—The newspapers generally get their
mtormation from authoritative sources. Thousands of
pounds have been taken from the people of the Com-
monwcalth tluough the sale of misleading information.
The CHAIRMAN.—The States can prevent it if
they wish to do so, and I think it is a matter for them
to deal with.
Major DAVIES. Have not the States power under
their own acts?
The CHAIRMAN.:—I think so
Major DAVIES.—-I am glad that point has been
raised because people are being taken down by the
distributmn of literature which is not authorized h»
the States. At the last conference I understood that
our books of instructions were to be submitted to the
Services and that, if approved, they would be issued
I do not think instructions should be issued unless
approved of by the States, and I believe the States have
power to prohibit their being issued without approval
1 think a regulation by you would help in that regard.


The CHAIRMAN. —I see no reason why the States
could not pass their own regulations to control it.
Mr. PANTON. —It could easily be done by insisting
that it be done through the Government Printing
Works. That is what we have done.
The CHAIRMAN. —Mr. Shedden makes the sugges-
tion that the Commonwealth could do this; that nothing
with regard to air raid precaution matters should be
published before it was submitted to the censor. I refer
to the censorship of the Department of Home Security.
Major DAVIES.—I think the States have that
power and could clear it up themselves.
The CHAIRMAN. —It would probably be better if
you did that. Do you agree to handle it for yourselves
in the different States?
Agreed to.
Badges.
Mr. HANLON.—Has any thought been given to the
badges which would be suitable to identify the various
organizations—wardens, firemen, essential personnel,
gas decontamination, first aid, and so on? We
are giving them all distinct badges and arm bands, and
I propose as soon as I get back to put through an
amendment to our act making it a serious offence for
any unauthorized person to wear such a badge. If
we are attacked looters will arise, and mere possession
of an arm band or badge will mean that all sorts of
people can enter homes, with opportunities of looting.
Mr. HEFFRON.—-In New South Wales we have an
identity card and the warden has his badge.
Major DAVIES.—I suggest that this is a matter
that can be left to the States.
Commander BUCHANAN.—I would point out that
in England they use very clearly painted signs on the
steel helmets of all the air raid precautions personnel.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—But we have not any
helmets.
Commander BUCHANAN.—It will come even-
tually. I suggest that if you have different colour
codes for your markings we will be in the same posi-
tion as we are in regard to warning systems, which
is not quite satisfactory.
The CHAIRMAN. —You already have your badges
and things and you are in the same position, so I
think there is nothing to do but to leave it to the
States. Is that agreed?
Suggestion agreed to.
Item No. 9.—EQUIPMENT.
Mr. lIEFFRON.—I have raised, and the other
States also have raised, the very important matter of
steel helmets. Of course, it is an essential part of the
equipment wherever air raid precautions is
operating in the Old Country, having re-
gard for falling debris, for shrapnel and
all that the warden has to encounter where he is
really on active service. The helmet is a very essential
part of his equipment. We have tried very hard in
New South Wales to get this equipment. I personally
went to different places in Newcastle to see if I could
get them manufactured, but again it is the eternal
matter of priorities, and up to the present we have had
no success. We must have regard to the fact that the
efficiency of this organization, the members we get in,
is all based on voluntary effort, and if you want a
volunteer to do this work you have to properly equip
him. When he goes out to do warden’s duty he wants
his helmet in addition to his badge, and he wants a
very clear designation on that helmet as to whether he
is a warden, a member of the rescue party, or whatever
he happens to be. That of course will cost a fair
amount of money. We cannot be worried about that.
It is an essential thing to get that part of his equip-
ment. In addition to that, if I may couple the two,
5630.—3
there is the matter of uniforms. It is hardly a fair
thing to expect a warden going out on duty to wear
his own clothes. It is not done in England. The
warden is provided with a uniform. It was the
custom there for them to be provided with boiler suits,
the ordinary overalls, but now I am advised a two-
piece uniform is supplied—a blue type uniform, and
it is rather an inexpensive thing. I do not think
we are justified in setting out to build up a great
civilian army here and ask people to do necessary
work during a crisis not only in their own time but
in their own clothes; and the work they have to do
in many cases will put a very serious strain on their
wardrobes. I think the very least we can do, not only
for our own protection but also for their standing
with the public, is to give them a helmet and provide
a suitable type of uniform as well. I think, sir, you
might let us know what the position is in regard to
helmets. I know you have been giving it a lot of
attention.
The CHAIRMAN.—As you and the other gentle-
men know, I have been giving the matter of steel
helmets a great deal of attention ever since I was
appointed. Although the Army is very short of its
requirements, they have agreed to make an allotment
for air raid precautions personnel immediately. That
allotment will be, in the beginning, 5,000. They
are now going into the question of further allot-
ments with regard to production, continuous allot-
ments, but the production position has to be com-
pletely looked into, and the requirements of the forces.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Have you any rough idea when
they would be likely to get them?
The CHAIRMAN.—The 5,000 should start almost
immediately.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I have here our wants in
this State. This is merely for training purposes:—
Respirators, 2,500, Service or civilian, alternatively
1,750 Service and 750 civilian; protective clothing,
200 suits of light anti-gas and 200 suits of heavy
anti-gas; steel helmets, 500; stirrup pumps for the
purpose of teaching people, 1,000; training charts,
256; smelling samples, 65 sets. Are you going to use
rattles and triangles in this business? They have here
rattles and triangles, 2,000. Then we thought we
require 100 incendiary bombs per month for teaching
people how to deal with them. This list has gone
out now; we have agreed to that, but those are the
main things Victoria requires. That does not men-
tion uniforms at all; it is really things necessary in
the teaching personnel.
Mr. HANLON.—I think the steel equipment comes
a bad last in any priority of supply.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—AII the same, you have to
teach your personnel. If you have not a personnel
that is; acquainted with it, and you. do get a gas
attack, you are in a hopeless position; and this is only
for training. We are not asking for the general
community. I think I personally would rather die
than wear one.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I think the gas helmets are a
very necessary part of training equipment. After all,
you have to maintain the enthusiasm of the volun-
teers, and the man who comes along and gets into one
of these decontamination suits, pulls on gumboots and
puts on a Service respirator, feels that he is doing
some great _ job. Where you have helmets and a
number of civilian respirators hanging up round about
it looks something like a real A.R.P. developing.
I think for that reason they should have a
number to meet the requirements of the instructors.
Otherwise, I do not think we want to waste too much
time or money on gas.
Mr.. HANLON.—AII States have had an issue of
anti-gas equipment.


The CHAIRMAN.—There was some additional
equipment sent out recently.
Major DAVIES.—I think gas masks are necessary
for training, but I think it is the last thing you should
consider. The transport of gas shells is not very
light: there is a lot of trouble with leakage and
chemical action in the shell. The high explosive
is much more dangerous. But I do think, to make
the whole thing complete in training, a limited amount
of gas equipment should be acquired. The fire-fighting
people and the air wardens are the people you should
first equip.
Mr. HANLON.—The most important equipment to
be supplied for training, to my mind, is the incendiary
bomb. For the last two years I have watched the legs
of thousands of wardens and other auxiliary firemen
being pulled by a little thermite being lighted, and
they being told they were dealing with an incendiary
bomb. Those people are going to get a shock when
they have to deal with an incendiary bomb. I think
there are no such bombs available for training purposes.
The CHAIRMAN.—I understand there is great
difficulty in getting a supply of electron metal and
magnesium.
Mr. HANLON.—There should be enough to let
them see how one is dealt with. Once any one sees it
he is all right. We had a demonstration last Saturday
week in Brisbane. After a lot of trouble we secured
electron metal and we made the bombs and dropped
them. I tell you the people who had been playing
round with the thermite got a shock. We had a rehear-
sal with one, and it was a tremendously fine illustration
of how they can be dealt with. But to tell a man he
knows what an incendiary bomb is because he saw
some thermite burn is only endangering him and
endangering property. I think the Conference should
stress the importance of the importation of sufficient
electron metal. The thermite can be made locally.
Once you rob the incendiary bomb of the fear inspired
by its being a strange thing, the difficulty will be got
over.
The CHAIRMAN.—I understand that electron is
practically unprocurable from America, and magnesium
is in tremendously short supply, but I undertake that
we will make further inquiries and do all we can to
get release of it. I cannot make any promises, how-
ever.
Mr. HANLON.—It is not important from the mili-
tary angle, because we know we would not want to
attack with incendiaries. Our fighting would not be
with incendiaries, because you would be attacking ships
and so on.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—But we might receive some
of them.
Mr. HANLON.—Yes, and we do not want to be
unprepared.
The CHAIRMAN.-—I understand that there is a
world shortage of magnesium. However, we will do
everything we can to procure it, though I would not
hold out great hopes.
Mr. HANLON.—But I think you should stress the
importance of this.
The CHAIRMAN.—We will definitely do that.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—If we send in a list of this,
will you try to increase our equipment for teaching?
The CHAIRMAN. —Yes, we will do what we can
to try to increase your training equipment.
Item No. 10.—TELEPHONES—USE FOE AIR
RAID PRECAUTIONS PURPOSES—CHARGES
MADE FOR.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Our system is all linked up,
Mr. Chairman, and we find that in any demonstration
we make, the telephone is an exceedingly useful thing.
It gets the personnel to the seat of damage and injury
much more quickly than can be done by a messenger
on a bicycle; but we find that, if we establish a tele-
phone for that purpose alone in our central stations,
the Postmaster-General charges as much for it as for an
ordinary service telephone. We have applied for a
reduction, seeing that the telephone will be used only
in emergency and for teaching.
The CHAIRMAN.—And can only be used for that
purpose ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes, and he is not prepared
to make a reduction. We do think that the Common-
wealth should assist us in this respect. I suppose it is
a little of that suspicion again—that we are making
more pleasant appointments than in regard to air raid
precautions work—and we think that he might trust
us to the extent of making a reduction. Where a tele-
phone is installed for the purposes of air raid precau-
tions, it should be at a peppercorn rental.
Mr. . —More important than the telephone
to me is the rental of land-lines from our control centre
to the suburban police stations. It is costing us about
£370 a year for one set, and the sirens will be another
£3OO a year, also for one centre.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Another important aspect is that
the Postmaster-General is not only charging us the
same as he would charge a private user, but he asks
us to sign a contract to extend over a period of three
I think it is an extraordinary state of affairs.
Here is a department run by our own National Govern-
ment, and the various States are setting out to do this
work, and have done it all at their own expense up
to the present; yet before the department will put
in a telephone they want us to sign a contract for three
years. That is for something which the fates may
decree to-morrow we will not require for another six
months. I recently refused to sign quite a bundle
of contracts for three years. If it was some private
establishment which was making enormous profits, we
might expect it, but for our own public department
to ask us to do it seems to me one of the most monstrous
suggestions I have had put up to me.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—If the Postmaster-General
would get out a sort of declaration that the telephone
was only to be used for air raid precautions work, we
should really be assisted to that extent. The service
we are complaining about is used practically entirely
for air raid precautions purposes. I do not say that
a man would not use it on a special occasion, but the
telephones are installed especially for air raid pre-
cautions purposes.
The CHAIRMAN.—The cases put up stress three
different types of complaint. Your initial one is that
these telephones, which can only be used for air raid
precautions purposes, are being charged the ordinary
private rental. Mr. Hanlon’s complaint is about the
charges for land-lines. Mr. Heffron complains, I sup-
pose, with regard to the first two, but in addition he
complains about giving an undertaking that the con-
tract will extend _ over three years. The matter has
been taken up with the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment, but I understand from Mr. Welch that, except
in the case of one State where the complaint was
specific, it was taken up in general terms. I suggest
that you put up those three precise cases, stressing
the points you want to bring out. We will take it
up again with the department and see if we can get
the position altered. If we cannot shift them or do
any better, I suggest that, as an alternative, the Com-
monwealth is prepared to assist the States in this direc-
tion, and provision for charges on telephone services
essential for air raid precautions purposes, for the
I"i. f 1 grant and to implement any of the six
priorities. That is to say, these matters may be
included in any requests submitted by the States


for financial assistance within the terms of the recent
agreement. If we can get the first thing done, so much
the better, but we will have a much better chance if
you put three specific cases.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Every first-aid post should be
fitted with a telephone if we are to have efficiency.
In addition, every area has its own control centre.
In the City of Sydney, the City Council is going to
quite a lot of expense—which they tried to load on
to me, but I did not accept it —building a control
centre in one of the disused tunnels, and they propose
having round about 300 telephone lines coming in.
Of course, Sydney is not typical of the ordinary area.
In addition, we are establishing an efficient control
centre. We have one operating at head-quarters now,
but it is too exposed to be safe during a crisis, and
it is going underground, also. It will mean a terriffic
expense, with first-aid posts, control centres and the
like, and as we are, after all, doing a national job,
we should not have to pay the same as a private
individual who is using the telephone for his own
purposes. And just imagine what it means to us to
sign up contracts for three years for the whole of those
telephones.
The CHAIRMAN.—However, if you give us the
three cases precisely and stress all the points you have
made, we will represent the matter again to the
department.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Another matter concerns priori-
ties. Priority should be given to applicants who
require telephones for air raid precautions purposes.
The CHAIRMAN.—You mean applicants who are
wardens or occupy some position like that, and want
a telephone put in their house.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I would like that as well, though
it may be taking it a little further. I have been more
concerned about fitting up our first-aid posts and our
control centres. But, in any case, I think that wardens
should take precedence over private citizens.
The CHAIRMAN.—And you would be prepared to
give a certificate to the effect that priority was for
air raid precautions?
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—Then put that in your case, too.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —We will put up our case.
The CHAIRMAN.—And you will put up yours,
Mr. Hanlon?
Mr. HANLON.—Yes.
Item No. 11.—COMPENSATION.
The CHAIRMAN.—The representations on this
matter have come from Victoria, Queensland and
Western Australia, and I should say from the other
States as well, because everywhere I went in Australia
it was a burning question. These are the general prin-
ciples proposed to be applied in compensation for
injuries received by duly attested members of approved
organizations in proclaimed areas whilst under
training
(1) Principles—
(a) Temporary Disability Involving Loss of
Employment Beyond One Week. —
Weekly payment during incapacity.
( b ) Permanent Partial Disability. —(i)
Weekly payments during period unable
to follow normal occupation; (ii)
Liability to be subsequently redeemed
by lump sum payment, from which
weekly payments will be deducted.
(c) Permanent Total Disability. —Weekly
payment —not to be redeemed.
(d) Death. —Lump sum payment to
dependants.
(e) Medical and Hospital Expenses.—Rea-
sonable medical and hospital
expenses.
(/) Eligibility. —Arising out of or in the
course of training—not to include
travelling to and from training.
( g ) Entitlement. —Duly attested members of
approved organizations in proclaimed
areas.
( h ) Scale of Benefits. —Uniform seale for all
grades.
The whole matter has not yet been worked out, but
those are the principles upon which it is intended to
work.
Mr. PLAY FORD.—What is involved in the term
“ proclaimed areas ” ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Certain areas would be pro-
claimed by regulation from time to time.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I am very glad to hear what
you say, Mr. Chairihan, but any bill drafted on the
matter should be sent to each State for approval.
The CHAIRMAN.—For comment by the State?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes. Could you undertake
to do that?
The CHAIRMAN.—That is a matter for yourselves.
It will cause more delay.
Mr. HANLON.—The difficulty is that you may
approve of one town and not another. If there are air
raid precautions workers in different parts of the State,
are not they all equally eligible for compensation?
The CHAIRMAN. —The question then arises
whether air raid precautions workers should be in
certain parts of the State. I take it that this means
with regard to vulnerable areas or any other areas
which may be proclaimed from time to time.
Mr. HANLON.—If you propose to pick out parts
of the coastal area of Australia to provide for them,
and to leave out the others, I suggest that the best thing
is to keep out altogether, because it is no use two
authorities trying to arrange compensation for civil
defence workers. I would sooner the Commonwealth
did not touch it at all if they do not intend to deal
with the matter properly.
Major DAYIES.—This is a most contentious ques-
tion. I presume that the proclaimed area means an
area proclaimed by the State in its regulations?
The CHAIRMAN. —No; the Commonwealth would
proclaim the area. The Commonwealth proposes to
carry the whole of this scheme.
Major DAYIES.—I assume that this means vulner-
able areas, which will probably take in only 20 per
cent, of the personnel under air raid precautions. If
we have continuous black-outs, or if there were a state
of emergency, there would be a number of accidents.
Any worker in the Commonwealth is protecting his
property, but he is a worker in every sense of the word,
and I maintain that he should receive full compensa-
tion for accidents. The words “travelling to and
from ” or “ not travelling to and from ” are used. I
object to that. If a man is going home after serving
on duty, it is a little too narrow, particularly consider-
ing that the people are doing the work voluntarily.
The States rely on the good will of the people to join
this organization; we cannot compel them to join, and
I think these regulations should give all encouragement
possible. I think it should come under the regulations
of the States.
The CHAIRMAN. —I do not think that we could
agree, Major Davies, from the Commonwealth point
of view.
Mr. HANLON.—In the best interests of the whole
civil defence of Australia, I suggest the matter should
be handled by the States. If it cannot be done decently,
it should not be done at all. I have already made
provision in Queensland, but I omitted the training


part, so it will require extending. If the Common-
wealth deals with certain places, and leaves the States
to deal with other places, it will not do any good.
The CHAIRMAN'.—After the review of these
areas
Mr. HANLON. —I want to make it plain that I do
not anticipate for one moment that the Commonwealth
will agree that the whole 2,000 miles coastline of
Queensland is a vulnerable area, to use your own term,
Mr. Chairman. But all that coastline has to he pro-
vided with some form of .civil protection by the State.
I would not take the word of any Military, Naval or
Air Force officer in the world, as to where an enemy
will drop a bomb; nobody has yet been able to say
that. My duty then is to provide warning of raids and
protection to the people in every part of our coastline
that is affected. If the Commonwealth butts in and
says it will cover air raid workers with insurance in
Brisbane, Townsville, or Rockhampton, but not in
other places, my reply is, “ Let ofie or the other of us
do the whole job ”.
The CHAIRMAN! —What about inland areas?
Mr. HANLON.—No State would train air raid
wardens inland.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have the example of one
State that is taking air raid precautions very far
inland.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—If you are going to submit
the proposed bill for comment, Mr. Chairman, I should
like to bring up two points for you to consider. In
connexion with our air raid scheme, the whole decon-
tamination, demolition, and most of the road injuries
will be done by the personnel of different departments
and by the municipalities, paid men. But nevertheless,
if they are injured in doing that work, A.R.P. work, it
will be a tremendous drain on ordinary workers’ com-
pensation if the municipalities, who are really giving
the services of those people, are going to be mulcted in
workers’ compensation. That is one position. The
other position is that the State instrumentalities, the
State Electricity Commission, the Railways and the
Tramways, will all be working during these air raids,
and their men are known as key men. You cannot
expect either the State or those instrumentalities, where
they employ men and call on them to do these jobs
during very great danger—
The CHAIRMAN. —You are going into the posi-
tion when air raids are taking place, Sir John. That
has nothing to do with the particular aspect we have
been discussing; we are dealing with training.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You cannot have just train-
ing. This act must apply to an absolute raid, as well
as to training. It is quite a big question. If these
men are called to duty in extreme danger, they are in
exactly the same position as a soldier. You provide
compensation for soldiers.
The CHAIRMAN. —We accept that for A.R.P.
workers in time of combat, when air raids are taking
place. They are being provided for. But this is a
matter of training.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes, but you do not mention
specifically that the personnel in all key occupations
have to stay on the job in just the same way as a
soldier has to stay on the job.
The CHAIRMAN. —They are all insured.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —A private employer can say
to his personnel, “ Get off the job ; I will not pay your
workers’ compensation ”. How is the country going
to get on if these people are not included in a compen-
sation scheme ?
Mr. HANLON.—I would not suggest that the Com-
monwealth should take over workers’ compensation for
people injured in the course of their employment.
The CHAIRMAN.—Whether this is suitable or
unsuitable, all we are concerned with to-day from the
point of view of this Ministry is air raid precautions
workers. The matters you are raising, Sir John, are
much wider, and they are outside the ambit of these
proposals, and of this department.
iSir JOHN HARRIS. —I do not know whether you
have walked through the engineering buildings of the
State Electricity Commission. The Commission has
applied air raid precautions right throughout its
organization; it has provided all the protection that
can be given by an employer. But an employer cannot
prevent a bomb falling on his engine works, and if a
man is killed or injured after having been ordered by
his employer to stay there —in the interests of the
State, mind you—it becomes a big question. That is
why I think this matter should be drafted from the
standpoint of a comprehensive scheme, for the per-
sonnel really on duty.
The CHAIRMAN.—But surely, Sir John, that is
a matter for the Premiers Conference, not for this
conference ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You are bringing up the
proposal to-day, and I am not agreeing to it in its
limited scope; that is all. My Government wishes to
put up suggestions.
The CHAIRMAN.—This is another thing, applying
to volunteers for civil defence.
Major DAYIES.—Your proposal is in regard to
vulnerable areas.
The CHAIRMAN.—Or proclaimed areas. That
point was raised by you, Major Davies, but Sir John
is raising a different one.
Major DAYIES.—What is to determine a pro-
claimed area? Do you proclaim it, or do we?
The CHAIRMAN.—I said we would proclaim the
areas.
Mr. HANLON.—With all due respect, Mr. Chair-
man, the job should be done properly, however it is
done. Under our act, all wardens are regarded as
employees of the Crown during the period of the raid,
or for two hours thereafter.
The CHAIRMAN.—You do not cover them during
the training period then?
Mr. HANLON.—No, but we are going to do it.
That was over-looked. If Igo on with my amendment,
it will provide that such persons be regarded as
employees of the Crown during training periods as
well as during the raids.
Major DAYIES.—You may have' discrimination
between A.R.P. workers if one happens to be in a
vulnerable area, and another is not. We do not know
what a vulnerable area is.
The CHAIRMAN.—If we let you have the bill and
approximately the proposed areas to be covered, then
you can see what the proposal is. But the Common-
wealth cannot agree to the States deciding the areas
without regard to the defence considerations in \the
Commonwealth.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Then if the States wanted
additional iareas, they would have to take control them-
selves.
The CHAIRMAN.—They could get over the diffi-
culty in that way.
Mr. HANLON.—If we get the local authority to
arrange proper insurance, we would have a tangle; it
should be done by one authority or the other.
The CHAIRMAN. —Make any representations you
like when you see the bill.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—That is why I suggest the
principles of the bill should be sent to the States, who
might extend them. Then you might have a conference
of Crown Law authorities, and discuss the whole pro-
blem. It is much larger than you have in mind here.
The CHAIRMAN. —I say that the large problem
goes outside into very different avenues from those
which this Ministry can handle.


Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I know, but once you get
that little proposal finalized, we will never have an
opportunity to consider the larger one.
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Hanlon said he would
sooner drop this little one.
Mr. HANLON.—I would sooner have one authority
than two.
The CHAIRMAN.—You do not object to having a
look at the bill?
Mr. HANLON.—Not at all. It is desirable that
one or the other should do the whole job. As a matter
of fact, all of this insurance is the responsibility of the
Commonwealth. It is not fair to ask people of the
coastal cities to bear the cost of the work which is for
the protection of people inland as well.
Sir J OHN HARRIS,—I am surprised at Mr.
Hanlon being so magnanimous as to ask that it should
be left to the States.
Mr. HANLON.—I want to see a decent job done
for the Sir John, and I am not worried about
a few pounds.
Major DAVIES.—-Our desire is to protect the people
themselves. If we are to discriminate and protect
only a certain number, it is wrong. It is not sufficient
merely to protect the vulnerable points; we have to
make all the people secure.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —Because an A.R.P. worker
might not be in a proclaimed or vulnerable area,
decided by the Services, he will be discriminated
against; I say it is wrong, I want to see the job done
properly, and if it is not being done properly, each
State should take upon itself the responsibility of pro-
tecting these voluntary workers, not only' when at
work, but when going to and from work. We know
bow bills are rushed through, and it is very hard to get
States to go over them all, but at least we can get an
idea of what this bill means, and what regulations are
going to be added to administer it.
Major DAVIES.-I am not so much concerned
about the reading of the bill as about the regulations
you will proclaim. All this comes back to the question
of the vulnerable areas. I believe that when Ministers
leave here they will think they have given a lot away
on these vulnerable areas. The further you go the
worse the States will get.
The CHAIRMAN.—The Government at the present
time is examining the bringing down of compensation
for all civilians injured in air raids.
Major DAVIES.—And their property?
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Shedden assures me that
property will also be covered. This one relates only to
people who have been trained in A.R.P.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We are concerned about the
safety of A.R.P. personnel, whether training or doing
any work and whether in an area which is regarded
as vulnerable, or not. There are many places in New
South Wales where A.R.P. organizations are quite
strong, though they are not regarded as vulnerable
areas. While doing this preparatory work for civilian
defence, we think they are just as entitled to compensa-
tion as are the people doing it in Newcastle or Sydney.
The risk of accident during training is not great. We
have had several accidents recently—fortunately they
were not severe—for which we will have to pay.
Though we have not any compensation scheme to cover
them we have accepted the moral responsibility to
provide compensation. In regard to the matter of
injuries being caused during an air raid, we take it
that if a member of the National Emergency Services,
as we call it, is injured in Dubbo, for instance, though
the Federal authorities do not consider that a vulner-
able area at the moment, that man is entitled to com-
pensation to the game extent as if he were injured in
similar circumstances at the coast. I see no reason
why, if we are going to have compensation at all, there
5630.—4
should be any distinctions. It should be for the whole
of our personnel because, as Mr. Hanlon has said, no
one knows where a bomb will fall. We are telling all
our people to get ready and our units are spread, to a
great extent, right over New South Wales.
1 could not agree to any scheme of compensation which
did not cover all who have come forward and who are
training as volunteers.
Ihe CHAIRMAN.—Under the present appreciation
of the situation and the known length of flight of
carrier-based aircraft, there are certain towns where
A.R.P. training might be going on and where it would
be impossible for such aircraft to drop bombs.
Mr. HANLON.—Why spoil an excellent Act of
Parliament for the sake of a few pounds per year?
Mr. HEFFRON.—-We cannot look at this from the
standpoint that all air raids which might possibly be
made on Australia would be sea-borne. There is the
possibility of an army landing on part of the New
South Wales or Queensland coast, or of it acquiring a
base not very far from Australia. We would then be
up against different circumstances. The lesson we are
learning from this war ig that every day brings some-
thing unexpected. The experts have been confounded
and have been proved to be wrong in most eases. What
thej told us might happen if a plane came from an
aircraft carrier with a 500-lb. load of bombs cannot,
I think, be depended upon. Probably most of us have
given little more than the ordinary study to it, but
we know that a lot of the expert advice we were banking
on is unfounded. In due course their advice might
prove just as unreliable as the expert advice we
depended on in Greece and Crete. We should visualize
what is within the range of possibility. We must
take into consideration the possibility of a landing
being effected at Goff’s Harbour, for instance, or some
other part of the New South Wales coast. We know
that such a thing is within the bounds of possibility
and we must face up to the fact that the areas menaced
from the air might comprise a strip extending hundreds
of miles inland and not just a strip of the coastline of
Lew South Wales. In my view, therefore, when it
comes to protecting the members of our civilian army
we have to deal with the position where the population
might be evacuated over the mountains and the west.
This measure should cover every area where there are
A.R.P. people in training.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —I see your difficulty, Mr.
Chairman, and I think that if you place A.R.P. per-
sonnel in all sorts of places in Australia you will have
a big scheme of compensation. I believe the A.R.P.
must be limited to the danger areas of Australia, though
I think you should be fairly generous in this particular
act and not really limit it down. I have heard it said
that there are only three or four places in the Mel-
bourne metropolitan area which are really vulnerable
‘ places where we know there are very valuable things
m the suburbs, but we must have A.R.P. personnel
throughout the metropolitan area. It cannot be limited
to where there is a likelihood of danger. Supposing,
vru exam pl 0 > fbat an A.R.P. organization started at
Mildura, unless there was a munitions factory there to
render it necessary, I consider it unlikely that any one
would be injured or that an A..R.P. organization would
be required. I am only speaking for my own State and
J know there are inland towns where people want to
establish A.R.P. We discourage them, though w e do
appoint wardens. There are places in this State that
we do concentrate on and I presume you would agree
to those places, in your act, because they are really
chosen in conjunction with the Liaison Officers of
ml®’ , ar e going to limit it to places which
couid be called bombing areas ” and exclude the rest
of the A.R.P. personnel, I do not think your act will
he ol much use.


Mr. HANLON.-—lf bombing should start, whether
you believe your areas to be vulnerable Or not, every
town will want A.R.P. organization.
Major DAVIES.-—lf these other places are not
vulnerable, Mr. Chairman, why spoil this good bill
for the sake of a very small amount?
The CHAIRMAN.—It is not a question of the time
when the bombs come, but the training period.
Mr. HANLON.—It would not increase the Com-
monwealth’s liability by much.
The CHAIRMAN.—These matters were discussed
with the Commonwealth Treasurer, and without
further discussion I oannot give a ruling, but I will
give you an idea of the proclaimed areas and you can
give us your comments. I am then prepared to put the
views expressed here before the Treasurer and to dis-
cuss the matter again with him.
Mr. HANLON.—I think that, for the prestige of
your own department, it is well worth reconsidering.
Major DAVIES.—This question will be raised as
soon as each Minister returns to his area, and if we
are to say what your proposal here is to-day, it will
kill our organization in many centres. I think it best
not to bring in a bill until you have conferred.
The CHAIRMAN.—I would say that we have put
forward certain suggestions and we are going to submit
them in writing to you people, and that you will give
your comments on them.
Item No. 12.—RESERVATION OF PETROL
SUPPLIES FOR EVACUATION AND TRAIN-
ING EXERCISES.
Sir JOHN" HARRIS.—I think the answer to that
which we have from you is very satisfactory, and I
have nothing more to say on it. ’
The CHAIRMAN.—The notes submitted and the
answers are as follows:
PETROL SUPPLIES.
[Submitted by Victoria and New South Wales.)
la) Provision of for Air Raid Precautions Exercises;
(6) Reservation of stocks, if possible, for possible
motor evacuation.
The question of provision of petrol for air raid precautions
training exercises, and tlie reservation of stocks to meet
the possibility of motor transport being required
to supplement the railways in the event of an emer-
gency necessitating civilian evacuation has been taken up with
the Commonwealth Liquid Fuel Control Board. The Con-
troller points out that the conservation of petrol stocks at
the present time is of vital importance, and petrol consumers
are being called upon to make great sacrifices. It is therefore
essential that the use of petrol for any purpose should be
treated with the utmost care.
In regard to training exercises, the Controller has arranged
for the State Control Boards to contact the various State
Air Raid Precautions authorities with a view to obtaining
particulars of the exercises proposed and an estimate of the
probable petrol requirements. This matter will be followed
up with the Liquid Fuel Control Board by the Ministry for
Home Security.
As far as evacuation is concerned, the Controller advises
that Air Raid Precautions requirements at present rank in
class 2 of the approved order of priority and would, in the
event of an emergency, be classed as class 1.
It will be seen therefore that adequate safeguards have
been provided to ensure availability of petrol to cover require-
ments in any possible civilian evacuation.
Mr. HANLON. —That is satisfactory to me.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—-I presume that the training
will not he confined purely to your vulnerable areas.
The CHAIRMAN.—*-! do not think that point was
raised with the Liquid Fuel Controller.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—As a matter of faet, the posi-
tion is that the question has already been raised
in our State, on our local Liquid Fuel Control Board.
The CHAIRMAN.—Take it up with us, and we
will bring it before Mr. England.
Item No. 13.—AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS
MEASURES-COMMONWEALTH DEPART-
MENTS.
Sir JQHN HARRIS. —This also is largely brought
under notice because many Commonwealth buildings
in the City of Melbourne had not done anything
towards air raid precautions, and were being quoted
as an example by the general population, as showing
that the Commonwealth did not think there was any
danger, and it militated against our development. I
understand now, sir, that you are starting.
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes, I will give you a state-
ment on that.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—AIso, I want to draw atten-
tion to the fact that we really do want this black-out
to be successful, and we will he very thankful if you
will see that the Commonwealth public buildings are
attended to. I understand that it does not cost very
much to black-out a building. We are going to do our
buildings; and, again, if you do not do your
buildings the general public will simply say, “ The
Commonwealth are not doing it; why should the
States be forcing us to do it?” We cannot make our
tests complete unless you come in with us.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have given instructions that
the letters are to go out immediately drawing atten-
tion to the fact of your black-out on 23rd September,
and asking them to meet that position.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We would not like to pro-
secute, but under our National Security Act you can
be fined £5OO if you do not black-out.
The CHAIRMAN.—That might be one way of
meeting it.
Mr. HANLON.—I must say the Commonwealth
officials, Commonwealth Bank, and so on, in Queens-
land have done a wonderful job.
The CHAIRMAN.—But the position is different
here. Sir John has a very big lot of Commonwealth
factories down here.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes, and quite a lot of
public buildings, too.
The CHAIRMAN.—'Let me read this statement of
mine—
As to departments generally, the Common-
wealth departments have been furnished with
particulars of the priorities and the degree of
development desired by the Commonwealth.
Arrangements have been made for the Department
of the Interior to provide the necessary technical
advice and the preparation of plans in consulta-
tion with the local air raid precautions and fire
brigade authorities.
Organizing committees have been set up within
the major departments and these committees have
conferred with officers of the Department of Home
Security. These conferences have shown that the
departments concerned are fully seized with the
desirability of comipleting their plans at the
earliest possible date. Several of the departments
have already submitted their plans and active
steps are being taken to implement these in close
00-operfttion with the local State organizations.
We are on the job. Whether we will attain, in some
of the 24-hours munition factories, a complete black-
out on 23rd September, I cannot promise you, but we
will do our best. Are you satisfied in Sydnev Mr
Heffron? '
Mr.. HEFFRON.—Yes. Our main grouch has
been against some of the branches of the Common-
wealth Bank not putting their lights out.


Item No. 14.—CAMOUFLAGE.
The CHAIRMAN".—This is a report on the
development and control of the camouflage organiza-
tion :
At the conference with State Premiers on the
Bth-9th August, 1941, at Canberra, it was indi-
cated that financial responsibility of the Common-
wealth, the States, and private interests, in regard
to camouflage, might be left for discussion later
at a conference between State Ministers in con-
trol of air raid precautions and the Minister for
Home Security.
It is not possible at this stage to make any
specific assessment of requirements until addi-
tional information is available as to the possible
extent of camouflage in this country, and until
the various projects under review and the ques-
tion of distribution of costs has been more fully
investigated.
The following position regarding camouflage,
however, is mentioned for the information of the
States.
An organization has now been established
throughout Australia for the development and
control of camouflage.
A Defence Central Camouflage Committee has
been formed and Defence State Camouflage Com-
mittees in each of the States of the Common-
wealth. These State committees will now func-
tion under the supervision and direction of the
Central Committee. Certain State committees
have functioned for a considerable time, and much
intensive study and preliminary organization has
been carried out. The State Premiers have now
been asked to nominate a State representative
to act on each of the local Defence Committees.
The Commonwealth has been fortunate in
securing the services of Professor W. J. Dakin,
of the Sydney University, who, under the regula-
tions under the National Security Act 1939-1940,
has now been appointed Technical Director of
Camouflage.
A research station has been erected and
equipped at the School of Military Engineering
at Middle Head, Sydney, and the first course of
instruction to selected personnel of various
branches of the Services and civilian representa-
tives has just been concluded. This research
station will function as a camouflage wing, where
competent instructors will train personnel in the
principles of camouflage.
Under the regulations recently gazetted, the
Commonwealth is empowered to direct, where
necessary, that establishments shall be camou-
flaged, and the nature of the concealment or dis-
giise is required to be approved by the Defence
entral Camouflage Committee.
Extensive research work has been undertaken
and experimentation has been made on numerous
projects for the Services. Certain full-scale work
has also been undertaken to study the results of
this experimentation.
With regard to civil works, plans have been
prepared in Sydney by the Department of the
Interior in connexion with oil tank installations,
and these plans could be put into effect at very
short notice. Certain recommendations have also
been submitted to the responsible Defence Depart-
ments for full-scale camouflage of certain places
of particular military importance.
Priority lists have been supplied by the Service
departments of places of importance which should
be camouflaged, and lists from the States are
awaited.
Mr. PLAYEOED.—You said that, as far as the
oil tank installations are concerned, plans have been
prepared and they could be put into operation at
short notice. Is there any reason why oil installations
generally should be painted with that silver paint
which is so visible from the air, even at night time ?
The CHAIRMAN". —I understood that that had to
do with evaporation; that when they did it in peace-
time it was to prevent evaporation.
Mr. PLAYEOED.—On a bright moonlight
night
The CHAIRMAN. —It is a shocking thing the way
they stand out.
Mr. HEFEEON.—Professor Dakin told me that
did not prevent evaporation at all.
Mr. PLAYEOED.—We regard it as serious
because, as far as our installations are concerned,
they would probably set our harbour alight if they
were bombed.
The CHAIRMAN".—I understand that, as they
repaint, they are repainting in dull colours, but we
could take that matter up straightaway.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I wish you would. I wish
you would take up with the oil companies something
that they will do. They never would do anything
for my Emergency Council.
Mr. PLAYEOED.—Our oil tanks, I understand,
are visible for many miles on anything like a moon-
light night, and it seems to me that we should not
wait until we are actually attacked before we talk
about attending to that particular military objective.
The CHAIRMAN.—The idea of Professor Dakin
or somebody else in connexion with camouflage was
that if you did them straightaway the enemy would
know exactly where they were and what they looked
like, and it would affect the camouflage; but, if you
put the camouflage in later, which the enemy would
not know, it would then be effective.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It would not be very much
use painting them dark. You have to have a general
scheme if you are going to camouflage.
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes; the question of those oil
tanks is being looked into by the camouflage experts.
Mr. PLAYEOED.—But this is more than a ques-
tion of camouflage. Camouflage is to try and make
a thing inconspicuous. These oil tanks have been
so painted that they are most conspicuous even at
night time. They show very much further than the
ordinary buildings, and some steps should be taken,
because not only is the oil itself in jeopardy, but if
anything happens to them they will set alight to
everything round them. There is no reason why they
should be painted like bright silver paper that glows
in the night time. I have been informed by our air
officers in South Australia that they can see our oil
installations for 30 miles.
Mr. HANLON.—They are the same all over Aus-
tralia, and they are all as near the ocean as they
possibly could be.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —It is the same with private
munition factories. I have seen photographs of
Nobel’s taken from the air, with the name in bright
letters, and they will not do anything.
The CHAIRMAN.—You have power under your
acts to compel them to do things.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—-I do not think we can.
I think the Commonwealth is intimately associated
with that. As soon as we tried to interfere with
the oil tanks the Prime Minister interfered with us.
"We have a regulation drafted, and it is in abeyance
at the request of the Prime Minister.
Mr. HEFERON.—Your worry is our worry, too.
I do not know whether I agree with the idea that we
should camouflage these things after the last Japanese
has left Australia. That seems to be the tactics. I
know it is not a good plan to tell our probable enemies


just what colour we are going to camouflage those
things, but 1 am afraid that, if you wait with all this
work that you are going to do as soon as hostilities
start, you will be caught napping. There is not only
the oil tanks: there is a Commonwealth aircraft
building at Lidcombe. Our reports from the air the
other night show that the roof of it could be seen
thousands of feet up in the air. That also applied to
Bunnerong power house and other important things,
tip to the present nothing has been done, and nothing
is contemplated until hostilities actually start. At
Port Kembla, close to the steel works we have a series
of oil tanks all painted with aluminium paint, right
close to the wharfs. If anything happened they would
probably burn every ship in the place. I might say,
for the information of representatives from the other
States, that in Sydney we have faced up to it in one
way, in that the Maritime Services Board has con-
structed a type of boom, and in the event of a tank
being burst the idea is to hold the oil in so as to
stop it spreading on the harbour and keep it where
it can be effectively dealt with. We tried this out
to a limited extent by putting oil and petrol in one of
them, and Mr. Richardson brought his fire-fighting
float down and they did succeed in subduing the oil
fire, which was fairly substantial. What our Mari-
time Services Board did is very commendable, as is
the way the fire brigade handled it, but there is still
the important question of just how soon we are going
to do something to take away a very definite target.
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Welch tells me my infor-
mation is wrong about camouflaging it later, just
before the attack.
Mr. HEFFRON.—What do they say now?
Mr. WELCH. —“ The employment of camouflage is
developing fairly quickly, but it is only in its infancy.”
I think that is the answer.
Mr. HEFFRON.—That is the kind of answer we
give just before an election. What I am concerned
about is whether there has been any change in the
ideas of camouflaging these things as soon as we can
possibly get the work done. Even if the Japanese
did know that we had camouflaged these tanks, I
would rather prefer to take the risk of their knowing
it than take the risk of their coming along at very
short notice and finding them standing out as they
do in Mr. Playford’s State and every other State in
the Commonwealth. My own view is that we should
press on with that work as quickly as possible. When
I say that, I refer not only to these tanks, but to these
other vulnerable places as well. I think, too, there
should be some expression of opinion here as to who is
to stand the racket for this. I think, again, it is
essentially a Commonwealth responsibility. That is
the financial side of it.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You are not appointing the
Committee only to give advice.
Mr. HEFFRON.—They have appointed State Com-
mittees as well.
Mr. HANLON.—Is it not the private companies’
own business ? I am not going to commit my State to
pay for the cost of safeguarding the petrol companies’
installations.
Hiiting suspended from 1.5 to 2.15 p.m.
Upon resuming at 2.15 p.m.,
The CHAlßMAN.—Gentlemen, Sir John Harris
has brought along two samples of lighting equipment
from the Victorian Electricity Department. One is a
sample of restricted lighting ’apparatus, and the other
is a sample of star-light apparatus. If delegates would
like to look at these samples afterwards, they are
available. Before we commence, I might mention that
I have a good deal to do before I leave for Canberra
to-night, and if we can finish by 4.30 p.m., I shall be
very grateful. Before lunch we were finishing a dis-
cussion on camouflage. The next matter is the dis-
posal of the dead.
Item No. 15.—DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD.
The CHAIRMAN.—At the March, 1941 Con-
ference, the question of the disposal of tlxe dead was
left in the hands of the Commissioners of Police of
New South Wales and Victoria, to present a report. In
accordance with the recommendations made at that
conference, a report has been prepared by Messrs. W. J.
Mac Kay and A. M. Duncan and Lieutenant-Colonel
R. M. W. Thirkell, on the question of the disposal of
the dead. A summary of the proposals made in the
report is as under;—-
1. It should be made compulsory by regulation for persons
to wear identification discs, gay, of the type issued to military
personnel.
2. 'the National Emergency Services Organization in each
State to undertake the work of transportation to morgue of
bodies of persons who have died as a result of war operations.
3. Medical officer accompanying first aid party in National
Emergency Services Organization should give a certificate of
death on the form or label used for noting particulars of the
injured, or on a special form.
4. Certificate of Death in the case of the injured who die
at hospital.
ii. The responsibility for burial, financial or otherwise, must
rest with the Government, except that in any case where a
relative makes a claim for a body he must be given the right
to have it buried in the manner he desires by a 'bona fide
funeral director, after proof of relationship has been fur-
nished, to the police.
(i. Selection of temporary morgue accommodation.
7. Disposal of property.
8. Photographing and fingerprinting of dead bodies, &c.
y. Notification to relatives.
10. Registration of Death.
11. The co-operation of the funeral director's should be
sought in connexion with burial arrangements.
12. Co-operation of cemetery attendants.
The officers who prepared the report submit, how-
ever, that in regard to particular matters, there is some
difference of viewpoint. For instance, the question
arises as to whether all deaths should be certified by a
medical officer or whether they might be certified by an
emergency Coroner, a Commissioned Officer of the
Armed Forces, or a member of the Police Forces.
Another matter on which a divergence of view exists
relates to the question as to whether unidentified bodies
should be cremated. In this connexion, it is pointed
out that some religious bodies might have objections to
the practice of cremation. In regard to the identifica-
tion of bodies, it has been suggested that perhaps the
best method would be fingerprinting or the provision
of discs. There might, however, be objections to either
or both of these methods. It has been suggested also in
the report that draft regulations covering the disposal
of the dead might be prepared by the Commonwealth.
As, however, much of the detailed work in connexion
with the matter would be carried out by State instru-
mentalities, the Commonwealth Government is of the
view that such regulations could best be prepared by
the States. The Commonwealth Government will,
therefore, forward at an early date to all State Pre-
miers, a copy of the report for such action as each
might deem appropriate.
Mr. HANLON.—I think the whole matter is purely
a State function. If we find dead in the streets,
we have all the facilities for their disposal.
1 he CHAIRMAN. I think it is a State function,
Mr. Hanlon.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—AII manner of difficulties in
connexion with the law are liable to eventuate as a
result of deaths. If the matter is left to the States,
they should work out an accurate method of identifica-
tion. If that is not done, there will be all kinds of
property, as well as law, troubles. The whole question
of certification is involved. Not much certification is


needed if a man loses his head, but you have to certify
whether he received his injury in an air raid, or
whether he was murdered during a black-out.
Mr. HANLON. —The cause of death has to be
established.
Sir JOHN HAEEXS.—Yes. That usually means a
eoronial inquiry, but where there is a mass of dead
people, that cannot be done. It is a different thing
in civil life, but in a large air raid on a dense popula-
tion, there might be 200 or 300 dead. If they are not
identified, no court of law will certify that they are not
in existence, which will lead to all kinds of difficulties
in connexion with property and proofs of claim. So
at this conference, we have to decide whether we will
have identification discs, or in what way we will
arrange for the identification of a body which perhaps
has not its head.
The CHAIEMAN.—GouId not the States decide
that ?.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—The States can do it, but it
is a matter for discussion here.
Major DAVIES. —The States should accept all of
the responsibility and send you a report later, Mr.
Chairman.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS. —-The Chief Warden of Vic-
toria and I, myself, as a medical man, think a lot of
difficulties will be encountered unless there is an
accurate means of identification of the dead.
Mr. HANLON.—Were there identification discs in
England ?
Mr. HEFFEON.—In the early days, they put them
in carts, dug the graves with mechanical means, and
buried them.
Mr. HANLON.—They were not always found after
being killed.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—-I know, but moat of them
were. This is a subject which requires a little con-
sideration. Our State is going to consider it, so if it is
left in your hands, gentlemen, you can please your-
selves. I, personally, think it might be left to the
States.
Mr. HEFFEON.—We will consider it, Sir John.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—I suppose you "will take care
of the Mandated Territories, Mr, Chairman?
The CHAIEMAN.—Yes, we will have to do that.
Do you want any further discussion gentlemen?
Mr. HANLON. —I think that is ail we can do about
it, Mr. Chairman.
Item agreed to.
Item No. 16.—TRAINING OF PERSONNEL
OUTSIDE VULNERABLE AREAS.
Mr. PLAYFOED. —-We brought this matter forward
simply because we hoped that the other States would
support us in a suggestion that training should not be
discontinued outside the areas which the Common-
wealth has designated as vulnerable areas, but in view
of the discussion which has taken place here already,
I find that there is no need for us to stress this point.
Every State has already expressed views identical with
ours, and I move that the next item he dealt with.
Item No. 17.—EQUIPMENT OF EMERGENCY
HOSPITALS AND TRANSPORT ARRANGE-
MENTS FOR EVACUATION OF PATIENTS IN
HOSPITALS IN VULNERABLE AREAS.
Mr. HEFFEON.—This matter is one which is
giving us a good deal of concern in blew South Wales,
because a number of our hospitals are in what are
decidedly vulnerable areas. In Newcastle, which is
one of our danger spots, the public hospital is right
behind the fort, probably 100 or 200 yards away, in a
direct line, so that if the enemy marksmanship was not
foo good, the hospital would most likely be hit. There-
fore, we are face to face with complete evacuation of
a big hospital like that. The same applies to one or
two lesser hospitals there. In the city of Sydney, we
have the Prince Henry Hospital, which used to be
known as the Coast Hospital, now a very up-to-date
institution, with beds for about 650 and a staff of pretty
nearly the same number. That is situated in very
close proximity to the Cape Banks Fort, also to the
Amalgamated Wireless of Australasia wireless station,
and not so far from the Bunnerong power-house, so
that it is in an area which is positively dangerous.
Every aspect of the matter has been gone into by our
experts, and the general opinion is that we will have
to face up to complete evacuation. Sydney Hospital
itself, more in the centre of the city, is also regarded
as being one where, during a crisis, we will have to
evacuate a good number of patients. In fact, it is pro-
posed that we use only one floor, and the top floors will
be stayed up with very strong timber. Instead of
carrying about 500 patients, we may be able to carry
only about 150, and they will simply be casualty cases
This has caused us to give serious consideration to the
evacuation of the patients from those hospitals, and a
number of public institutions are similarly affected.
We have had to go into the matter of taking over suit-
able buildings outside Sydney, such as privately-owned
denominational schools and institutions. We have
decided that they would make suitable hospitals for
the time being, provided we carry out the necessary
amount of alteration and have the necessary emergency
equipment installed. All that has been worked out.
Of course, the cost has also been worked out to a very
great extent, but I hardly care about mentioning a
figure.
The CHAIEMAN.—-Lot us know roughly; it is
just as well to be frank about these matters.
Mr. HEFFEON. —It would cost us the best part of
£IOO,OOO. As you know, our immediate requirements
in New South Wales are really £1,250,000, and that
is not exaggerating anything. The institutions to
which I have referred work out at about £IOO,OOO,
but if we deal with the whole of the institutions We
ha ve in dangerous positions, it is round about £280,000.
The cost is colossal, and all the places are so danger-
ously situated that there is very little we can do except
face up to evacuation.
The CHAIEMAN.—Prince Henry Hospital runs
right down to the sea.
Mr. HEFFEON.—Yes, and it is right alongside
the fort. The position is quite impossible. We also
have the Balmain Hospital in an extremely dangerous
place. It is in a target area with a military objective
about 400 yards. We have Elliott’s big chemical
works, one of the most dangerous places in the metro-
politan area, situated there. We have Mort’s Dock,
the White Bay power station, and an explosives fac-
tory; the whole place is really dynamite. That is
one of the situations where we will be brought face
to face with more or less general evacuation, but I
am now simply dealing with the hospital side. It
means spending a colossal sum in order that we may
do the job effectively. During a crisis, we simply
cannot leave the people there, because the danger
is so great.
Sir JOHN HAEEIS.—We are in a much mere
favorable position in Victoria. The Prince Henry
Hospital, on St. Kilda-road, is close to Victoria
Barracks, and I suppose that the enemy would go for
head-quarters if they could get a shot at it, and then
we wouW be in a bombing area, but the remainder of
the hospitals are not contiguous to any objective.
However, we have developed a very large hospital
programme, and I think that Mr. McVilly could shift
most of the patients out of any particularly dan-
gerously situated hospital, and also could evacuate


in case of a bomb hit. I think that is really due to
the Dunstan Government, which has developed a very
big country hospital programme.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Do you really think the enemy
would want to bomb Victoria Barracks?
Sir JOKY HARRIS.—My liaison officers were
commenting on certain matters about General Head-
quarters, and the knowledge possessed by defence
personnel. Personally, I have a very great respect
for them. I think that they know quite a lot, but
they are, unfortunately, in the position that they
cannot tell all they know. At any rate, Mr. McYilly
would be very well able to attend to the wants of
the patients in Melbourne in our country base hos-
pitals.
Major DAVIES. —We have made arrangements to
evacuate to our subsidiary homes and institutions in
the country, and our position is quite satisfactory.
The military this time have given us full and proper
co-operation.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I do not think that the matter
worries us very much.
Mr. HANLON.—We are O.K.
Mr. PANTON.—We have all ours in the country.
The CHAIRMAN. —We will note your position,
Mr. Heffron.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I should add that, in the matter
of shelters, we are obliged to take the precautions of
making these places as safe as possible, and even under
present conditions, before evacuation, there are quite
a number which we have set out to strengthen by
means of extra timber, screening the windows and
the light, and on hospitals and public institutions,
such as asylums and so on, we are spending or con-
template spending about £50,000 for timber alone.
We have 4,000,000 feet of timber on order, and the
supplies are coming to hand and are being delivered
to the institutions daily.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—What do you propose to do
in connexion with the mentally afflicted?
Mr. HEFFRON.—We already have certain build-
ings set aside, and if we feel that the position is
dangerous for them we will simply move them to
those buildings. We have some of them quite close
to the Hawkesbury River-bridge, which, of course,
may provide quite a good target.
The CHAIRMAN.—-You mean at the little island?
Mr. HEFFRON. —Yes, Rabbit Island. There are
some of the worst mental oases in Australia there.
They are mostly sex cases.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —We have our mental institu-
tions pretty concentrated, though they are right on
the outskirts of the city. We have not considered this
matter very much, and I was asking for information.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We will be glad to send you a
report of our plans in connexion with the matter, and
also as to what has been done in England.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I suppose that, in the last
resort, you would let the patients out ?
Mr. HEFFRON.—You could, but we would not
want to do that. There are some dangerous types
that you could not very well let out. However, in
the matter of making the buildings as safe as we
can, the idea of the timber is really not to provide
against a direct hit, but against debris, blast and
splinters. We have cut the timber to length and
have it right on the spot, so that in the event of it
being required at short notice we will simply put it
in its place like a meccano set. There is no great
skill required in the work. It is after the same
principle as timbering up a mine. The timber,
much to the annoyance of the doctors, is being landed
at . the hospitals where they park their cars. They
are continually complaining about that, but it is a
matter of our being ready.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Have you ever thought of
cement bricks as a shoring-up against blast, and so
on?
Mr. HEFFRON.—-We have not yet thought of
using those.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—They are pretty good.
Mr. HEFFRON. —We have in reserve in the various
brickyards round Sydney 30,000,000 bricks, and the
cost for bricks and certain other material works out
at about £30,000. We simply must have that material.
I do not think there is much more we can let you
know about that.
Item No. 18.—CONTROL CENTRES.
The CHAIRMAN. —The next is “ Control Centres,”
submitted by New South Wales.
Mr. HEFFRON.—This is a matter which I raised
before, when we were discussing telephones this
morning. It is impossible to run any air raid pre-
cautions system without a control centre, and the
control centre must be in a place which will stand
up to a direct hit. You cannot have the control
centre in a place which is only splinter and debris
proof. We have a number of buildings which we
regard as being eminently suitable for that purpose.
It is a very large expense which we have to face up
to in Sydney, and I have promised to give the City
Council £4,000 towards theirs, which looks as though
it will cost two or three times that amount.
Each area runs its own control centre. Over
there we propose to make sure of these centres
by lumping these areas together in groups. That
is the method recommended to us by Mr. Bland
on his return from London. Newcastle and Port
Kembla must have control centres, and there must
be one under which each group of municipalities can
function. We estimate the cost at between £70,000
and £BO,OOO.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—That would give you con-
trol of air raid precautions personnel and equipment
from .surrounding centres.
Mr. HEFFRON. —That is the idea. It is really
the nerve-centre of the whole air raid precautions
system, and it is linked up with the other arms of the
Services. The amount I have mentioned is the total
amount for the State. That is not even considered
in this priority
The CHAIRMAN.—This is a priority.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—We have not done any of
that at all.
The CHAIRMAN. —I think it is perfectly fair to
consider it part of your warning system.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Very well, if you regard it in
that way. \
Sir JOHN HARRIS.- —We may have to send in a
memorandum about this, because we have only the
central control centre at present; that is the Grand
Chief Warden’s office, and he is in direct communica-
tion with defence and the whole system. I have seen,
in booklets, that in Great Britain they have
centres in the provinces from whence they can com-
municate with and get extra personnel and equipment
from surrounding centres if they are short. I think
it a good idea. We work the police stations here,
whereas New South Wales does not.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I want this Conference and you,
Mr. Chairman, to be quite clear that the warning
system which we have—l am referring to sirens—
is estimated to cost approximately £50,000, according
to the advice given us by our technical advisers.
In addition to that there are the control centres, which
will take another £70,000 or £BO,OOO. I do not want
it to be thought afterwards that we agreed to the
provision of an amount, which all along we have
regarded as just about sufficient for sirens, and that


we then came along and wanted to throw in some-
thing more for the control centres. Our control
centres at Newcastle and Port Kembla will have to
be built in pill-boxes, and that will be very expensive.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—There will be no money left
for any one but New South Wales.
The CHAIRMAN.—I take it you will put in a
supplementary return about that, Mr. Heffron? Have
you anything to say about this, Mr. Hanlon?
Mr. HANLON.—No, Mr. Chairman. The same
thing applies; I have regarded control centres as part
of the warning system. We have started off to build
one control centre and we must have an alternative
centre
RESTRICTED LIGHTING.
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Oonnolly has here that
definition of restricted or controlled lighting. Before
that is read I have here samples of the Queensland
badges for A.R.P. workers—for each branch—and
sampled of their armbands. I would like to thank Mr.
Hanlon for them. I understand that this is a gift to
the department. I will now ask Mr. Connolly to read
this definition.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Following the request of the
conference yesterday that we should endeavour to define
the terms, “ restricted or controlled lighting ” and the
term “ black-out ”, we have defined those terms as
follows;
1. Restricted (or Controlled) Lighting.
This term should be applied to the conditions obtain-
ing when- —
(«) Non-essential exterior lighting (e.g., advertis-
ing signs, shop window lighting, sports
lighting) is prohibited.
(b) Essential exterior lights (e.g. street lighting,
railway and port lighting, industrial
exterior lighting, traffic signs) are screened
or shaded to direct the light downwards
and (possibly) reduced in quantity and size
and arranged so that they can quickly be
put out on receipt of an air raid warning
signal.
(c) Arrangements have been made to prevent the
emission of light from the interiors of
buildings or in special cases to put out
lights quickly on receipt of an air raid
warning signal.
(d) Vehicles have been fitted with approved light
screening devices.
2. Black-out.
This term should be applied to the conditions when —
(a) All exterior lighting (other than specially
provided lights at air raid posts, air raid
shelters and other approved locations) is
extinguished.
(b) There is no emission of light from buildings.
(c) Vehicular traffic is stopped except to the
extent that vehicles equipped with approved
light screening devices are permitted to
move by the appropriate State authority.
Mr. HANLON. —This is very important. I take
it that the restricted or controlled lighting would come
into operation when a state of emergency was declared ?
Mr. CONNOLLY. —That is our view.
Mr. HANLON.—That would be when Japan entered
the war would it not?
The CHAIRMAN.—ProbabIy, but I take it it would
depend to an extent on the warning from our outer
aerial barrier. That would be conveyed to us by the
Defence Committee; as to whether it should be taken
from when Japan entered the war or as from some
later Aage.
Mr. HANLON.—It is very important because if we
have restricted or controlled lighting from the time
when Japan entered the war, and if the war lasted
for some,years, it would mean that for that period
there would be nothing but dim or diffused light on the
streets. No light could be emitted from houses and
there would be no lights in the streets. People could
not live under such conditions in the tropics. You
carry on with windows screened during an attack but
you could not live year after year with such subdued
light in the houses.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —But if you had your
windows closed you could have your normal lighting
inside.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—I think the point is rather that
one or two rooms in the house would be equipped with
suitable screening materials on the window's, so that
immediately on receipt of an air raid warning signal,
those rooms could be utilized and the other lights in
the house put out.
Mr. HANLON.—The average worker with a five-
roomed cottage has to live in all the different rooms
in the house.
Mr. CONNOLLY. —By proper screening you could
prevent the emission of light while allowing the
circulation of air.
Mr. HANLON. —The majority of houses in the
tropics have open windows and people live and sleep
on the verandahs.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —Could you not evolve some
plan whereby you could subscribe to that sort of
lighting, even if you lived in a tent?
Mr. HANLON.—I would not live under those con-
ditions in Queensland. I wanted to interpret the
restricted lighting as having all unnecessary outside
lights extinguished while those that were used would
be shaded so as to shine downwards and not up into
the air. On a dark night I have seen Brisbane’s lights
from Moretou Bay. To my mind, it would mean doing
away with advertising signs and cowling or reducing
the capacity of street lights and having all inside
lights at the stage where they could be put right out
immediately a warning was received.
Mr. CONNOLLY. —It is doubtful whether you could
guarantee that. People will go out and leave their
house lights on. I think it could be achieved by screen-
ing the lights.
Mr. HANLON.—-It is the 95 per cent, of the people
who are on a £5 a week basis we have to worry about.
The CHAIRMAN.—-Are you suggesting that prior
to the actual warning of the air raid they would con-
tinue their normal lighting?
Mr. HANLON. —That they have their windows
darkened so that they could shut the windows and do
with the dimmed light while the raid was on. The
light from the ordinary residence does not go up into
the air. It is your business and flood-lighting that
goes up into the air.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think we should ask the Air
Force their view on this particular item.
Wing Commander BIGGAR. —-If we are going to
accept the Chief of Staff’s appreciation, the longest
raid, under the terms of reference we are working
under, is two hours. By “black-out” I understand
that the windows will be screened so that no light
shows. If you like to open the windows, put your
lights out.
Mr, HANLON.—I am not referring to the period
during which the raid is on. During that no
lights should be on. This is to operate from the time
the war breaks out until it ends and I am talking
about this “restricted” business which shows that
we have to keep our windows screened. You cannot
do that in the tropics.
Wing Commander BIGGAR—-I read it that lights
can be put out quiekly in the event of a raid.
The CHAIRMAN.—(c) is your trouble, Mr.
Hanlon?


Mr. HANLON.—Yes: —(Reads (c)). I live in
Brisbane and I would not like to live a summer in
Brisbane with no light emitting from my house, because
[ would have to live in the dark.
Wing Commander BIGGAR.—As I understand it,
a small amount of light can be allowed out provided
there is no direct light showing out of a window.
Mr. HANLON.—You cannot paint your windows,
because people must have light. If you have a cold
westerly wind, you close your windows, but you have
to have light. We have to deal with the majority of
the people, who are workers, and we have to study the
conditions under which they live.
Commander BUCHANAN. —My own family have
lived under those conditions in England for about
eighteen months, as have all the other people in
England. I do not see that it is a great difficulty.
The CHAIRMAN. —Mr. Hanlon is putting up the
position that the tropical climate of Queensland makes
it different.
Commander BUCHANAN.—As regards the
windows, I agree.
Mr. HANLON. —You would not be able to let a
house to anybody in Queensland unless there was a
sleep-out verandah, if he could afford it. You must
have the circulation of air, otherwise you make the
house uninhabitable.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—You can make a light trap
which will let air through.
Mr. HANLON. —But then you get to the stage that
you have to have priority of labour to do it.
The CHAIRMAN.—What do you suggest with
regard to (c)?
Mr. HANLON.—My idea of the restriction of light-
ing is that from the time the emergency arises all light
at a normal establishment visible at a distance, going
up into the air, should be forbidden entirely, and that
all other light be capable of being immediately screened
or cut off. Then at the signal of an air raid approach-
ing, when the sirens went, no light must be visible
from the air at all. We have agreed previously that
during the period an air raid is on we have to try
and bring about a starlight effect in the streets.
The CHAIRMAN.—We have heard about certain
lights which are visible 70 miles at sea and as to the
distance from which the blue lights at Katoomba are
visible. I would like to ask the Air people how far
out the ordinary household light striking on a window
would be visible?
Wing Commander BIGGAR.—You would see it for
a considerable distance. Depending on weather con-
ditions, I would say ten to fifteen miles.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—How far would you see a
candlelight —ten miles, would you not?
Wing Commander BIGGAR.—I doubt it.
Mr. HANLON.-—There is a conditioin of affairs
under which we have to live while waiting to see if
any raids take place. Even down here in summer
time you get periods when you want ventilation. In
Queensland we want it all the time. I never sleep in a
room in Queensland at any time.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Do you know what is done
in Singapore?
Mr. HANLON.—(I) is all right—when a raid is
imminent or likely.
Commander BUCHANAN. —The Naval Department
are interested in this as well as the Air. In certain
areas, particularly around the coast, the question of
lights which can be seen off shore which might be of
assistance either to the navigation of an enemy or the
conduct of some particular attack has been examined.
This has not been put to this conference, but we have
recently communicated with the Minister on the sub-
ject. We think that from the time when such attacks
may be possible (whether that is the outbreak of war
or not is another question) those lights should be
screened from seaward. As far as I am concerned, I
see no objection to the people living their normal lives
inside a house, with their windows open, provided
that they have a cardboard shade or some simple device
of that kind which will prevent direct light shining to
seaward.
Mr. HANLON. —You mean direct from the bulb?
Commander BUCHANAN.—Yes. I think that
would meet Mr. Hanlon’s objection.
Mr. HANLON.—Yes.
Commander BUCHANAN.—Another aspect is that
we are going to save a considerable amount of coal
by the lighting provision in («). That, in turn, is
going to save us a considerable amount of shipping
space, and that is a very important aspect.
Mr. HANLON.—Yes. It is the house lighting
that is the real worry.
The CHAIRMAN.—It simply boils down to the
question of whether they are prepared to suffer some
inconvenience or perhaps have a bomb aimed at their
light, does it not?
Mr. HANLON.—If you put in front of “ the emis-
sion of light ”, the word “ direct ”, or “ the direct
glare of light ”, so that the ordinary basin-shaped
shade would prevent that bulb being visible a long
way away, that would cover it.
The CHAIRMAN.-—Of course, Mr. Hanlon, you
have to realize that, although we have laid down these
definitions here, it may be necessary in practice to
vary them in particular localities.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—It is only a broad provision,
and if you feel you have to apply it in a particular
way the method in your State could be adapted to
meet your needs.
Mr. HANLON.—If it was only when a raid was
likely to come it would be all right; but if it was
from the beginning to the end of the war it would be
impracticable.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Your difficulty is that you
would like what I would have liked. I would have
liked to have the black-out just at the time of the
raid, and to have lights on in between, but we found
it was very difficult to do, and it would be very
difficult to teach people to be so apt as to get rid
of the light during a raid and to have the light on
in between. When a state of emergency occurs, and
we get word from the Commonwealth that raids are
liable to eventuate, I think you must have some sort
of permanent black-out. You could not get the acme
of what you are after. I know what you are after.
I pursued it as far as I could.
Mr. HANLON.—Do not forget if it is going on
for years you cannot interfere altogether and com-
pletely with the ordinary business of the, community.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —I suggest, Mr. Abbott, that
you ought to be able to get some information from the
Middle East. Our troops are over there, our per-
sonnel is over there. They are using black-outs at
Sourabaya and other places. The Queensland climate,
I think, would come close to that climate. Whatever
they do there I would say you have to do, Mr. Hanlon,
whether you like it or not.
The CHAIRMAN.—WouId you not do what you
suggest, and then get trial and error reports from
your air forces?
Mr. HANLON.—The first stage of trouble will be
a state of war, whether declared or not. I do not
know that we should have to proceed to the No. 1
position then.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—That is not necessarily asso-
ciated with a state of war, but with a condition of
air or sea raids.
The CHAIRMAN.—-We have said that the Com-
monwealth will notify you when it thinks it is neces-
sary to adopt the precaution of restricted or controlled
lighting.


Mr. HANLON.—Do you not think that at the
outbreak of war all the fancy outdoor signs should
be prohibited? They are not essential to the
carrying on of business. They may be regarded as
essential to the selling of goods, but not to the life
of the community. On the other hand, butchers,
drapers and bakers shops are essential. I think there
should be another stage—it is not necessary that this
suggestion should be adopted to-day—setting out
what should be done immediately hostilities commence.
No. 1 in this statement should be the second stage,
and alert stage, and then the blapk-out should follow.
Could we go into the matter again and draft (a), ( h )
and (d) of paragraph 1, to be the first stage of pre-
cautions, and then (c) would be added where there
is a possibility of raids occurring. The black-out
would follow.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—I should like that advice to
stand, Mr. Hanlon. If you want to vary it in your
own State, the matter would be in your own hands.
Mr. CRAGGS.—It says only that the arrangements
will be made; they have to be ready.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —Have you any objection to
making paragraph 1 (c) read, inter alia —“. * . to
prevent the direct emission of light . . .”?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—Yes. A large amount of in-
direct light gives quite a big total volume of light. If
Mr. Hanlon wishes to vary the arrangement in Queens-
land, that State could take the responsibility.
The CHAIRMAN. —After all, this is only a defini-
tion; you may desire to alter it in Queensland, Mr.
Hanlon.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—It seems to me that there is
a good deal of difference between ( b ) and (c). Glare
that would arise from (b) would surely cover up any-
thing that would possibly come about under (c).
Mr. CONNOLLY. —Yes, but (b) can be arranged
in a matter of seconds. All exterior lighting should
be so controlled that it could be put out in a matter
of seconds. In Melbourne, it can be done in about
15 seconds.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—It is not the question of tbe
actual amount of lights that is worrying you, but
that the householder will not, in your opinion, be so
susceptible to action.
Mr. CONNOLLY. —He is not. He may be asleep,,
and may not even hear the air raid precautions
warning. Normally, I leave a light on in my house
at night, and I might not hear an air raid warning.
Mr. HANLON. —I am willing to bet you a new
hat that you would not get away with that in
Melbourne if there was a raid in the first part of
the war.
Mr. WELCH.—The policy would be adapted to meet
the circumstances existing from time to time.
The CHAIRMAN. —Would not one way be for
you to discuss the definitions with the local defence
people, the Navy, Army and Air Force, and get their
views in regard to tropical areas, Mr. Hanlon?
Mr. HANLON. —They are living there, so they
would probably see the force of my suggestions.
The CHAIRMAN. —If they decided it for you,
surely you could vary the procedure in your own
State?
Mr. HANLON.—Yes, I would have three stages;
the necessary lights first, then the alert stage, and
then the black-out stage, on warning.
Mr. PLAYFORD. —With regard to paragraph 1
( b ), you say that exterior lights such as traffic signs
are screened to direct the lighting downwards. I take
it the screen would come down a sufficient distance?
_ Sir JOHN HARRIS.—It all depends on the quan-
tity of light; there would be too much light coming
down to the footpath if you do not blacken the lamp.
[lndicates sample .]
Mr. CONNOLLY.—If you have too big a lamp,
there would be too much light.
Mr. HANLON.—A smaller bulb would be the best
way to deal with it; you would save electricity in
that way, also.
Mr. CONNOLLY.—The larger lamp is for street
work. That cuts down the intensity of the lighting,
but it would be visible some 3,000 feet up in the air.
That is a much lower standard than has been adopted
in Victoria.
Mr. HANLON.—What is the English system?
Mr. CONNOLLY.—It is on the lines of the smaller
lamp produced.
The CHAIRMAN. —Gentlemen, it is a matter for
Mr. Hanlon to say whether he chooses to discuss this
definition as it applies to Queensland. Are the repre-
sentatives of the other States willing to adopt these
definitions 1
Mr. HANLON. —I am quite agreeable to that
general proposal, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. —Are the other gentlemen agree-
able?
Agreed to.
Item No. 19.—SHELTERS.
The CHAIRMAN. —The next matter on the agenda
is “ Shelters ”. I read the following statement:—
Shelters.
1. Before giving any consideration to the question
of shelters, it is thought desirable that the States
should have a review of the position, as far as infor-
mation available in the Department of Home Security
shows it, existing in the various States. (Please see
paragraph 2et seq. below.) The information regard-
ing the States may not represent the position as at
the present date, and, if so, the States may desire
to supplement or amend the position by verbal advice
now. (I understand that applies in New South Wales.
There has been a change from what we have here.)
Attention is also invited to Appendix “A”, making
a classification of some type of shelters.
Policy of States.
2. New South Wales (extract from a report tabled
in Parliament, October, 1940) —
(“) The cost of undertaking that portion of the shelter
schemes relating to the floating population—public schools,
public hospitals, and government buildings—is the respon-
sibility of the Government.
( b) The responsibility is on the business community to
provide shelters for their employees and customers.
(c) The responsibility in regard to privately-owned schools
and hospitals belongs to the authorities concerned.
id) The responsibility rests with each individual to pro-
vide his or her own domestic shelter, except where the
density of population or local conditions prevents this being
done. In such eases, communal shelters will be necessary,
and the responsibility for their erection rests with the
Government.
{e) Protection to be considered along the lines laid down
in the British code.
(/) It is not proposed at this stage to construct bomb-
proof shelters, owing to the enormous cost. Accordingly,
the general basis of protection is from blast splinters and
debris caused by a 500-lb. bomb bursting at a distance of
about 50 feet.
3. Victoria. —ln Air Raid Precautions Bulletin No.
1, issued by tbe Victorian State Emergency Council
for Civil Defence, concerning deep aid raid shelters,
it was stated—
That after careful consideration of all aspects of the
subject, the State Emergency Council for Civil Defence
decided at a recent meeting that deep air raid shelters are
not required in Australia.
Authoritative information is not available, but it is
believed that in Victoria the responsibility is’ on business
authorities to provide protection for their employees or
customers, and upon householders to provide domestic
shelter.


4. Queensland (extracts from Report on Civil
Defence of Queensland, 1941)
Basements in building® have been surveyed lor use as
shelters. Further shelter accommodation recommended to
the Council was by trenching in parks and open areas. As
an alternative means of shelter, basement shelters would not
he satisfactory, and generally, as supplementary to base-
ments, trenching or surface shelters will be necessary.
Alternative Proposals foe Street Shelter foe Floating
Population.,
Quantities have been taken out for street apron shelters
to an approved design. Locations would be fixed in all
important shopping centres, and the availability of the
supplies of materials considered. The location of various
sites has been fixed, plans regarding trenches have been
issued to every Warden in the State, together with necessary
instructions for construction, and each local authority has
been supplied with these plans.
Owners of business premises have been advised in a general
way that they must provide shelter for their employees as in
cases of shelter for private persons. Draft regulation® have
been prepared by an expert committee, and are at present
under consideration.
5. South Australia (Report of Civil Defence Activi-
ties), dated 30th June, 1941) —
Plans and specifications have been prepared for making
shelters and a survey has been made for surface shelters
in parks around the city. (.No further information is avail-
able. )
6. Western Australia (extracts from Report by
Civil Defence Council, 21st July, 1941) —
An expert committee appointed to consider air raid shelters
deieded that the trench type of shelter, other than for com-
mercial buildings in the city, would best meet the necessities
of Perth and other large Western Australian towns, having
in view the sporadic nature of any bombing attach. Such
trenches to be framed and preferably lined with timber, and
to be constructed on a standard type; also to he covered
where possible.
Owing to lack of funds no detailed investigation has been
made of financial requirements for commercial buildings
in the city and nothing has been done in regard to under-
ground shelters. The committee has in course of preparation
a comprehensive plan of the metropolitan area, including
vacant spaces where trench shelters might be constructed.
No materials have been purchased, nor has any organiza-
tion been set up to carry out the construction of shelters.
7. Tasmania (extract from Report on Civil Defence
Activities, dated lltb July, 1941) —
A survey has been made by a competent engineer in Hobart
and Launceston of all basements that would be suitable for
air raid shelters. No further action is considered necessary
at this juncture.
APPENDIX “A.”
Classification op Shewees,
Appended hereunder are some notes, which may be of
service to some of the States, in connexion with the main
types of shelters which might be considered; —
(1) Protective basement.
(2) Surface shelter.
(3) Trenches.
(4) Shelters in buildings.
(5) Domestic type shelters,
There is no fundamental rule governing the type of shelter
to be _ adopted, but the design will be governed by local
conditions as respecting the specific problem involved. It
is suggested that protection to be provided should be con-
sidered along the lines laid down in the British code, which
gives protection against the various hazards as set out
hereunder: —
(a) Aerial machine-gun fire.
(b) Two and a quarter incendiary bomb,
(o) Blast splinters and debris from a 500-lb. high-
explosive bonjb bursting not closer than SO feet
of shelter-.
(d) Flying glass from windows.
(e) Anti-aircraft shrapnel.
In general, it can be assumed that, if protection is given
for point (o), then the other .points are automatically
covered. It should be stated that the likelihood under
present circumstances of bombs of greater weight than
those indicated being used against Australia in any quantity
is extremely remote.
That is the position in the States at the present time,
except for the alteration in respect of ISTew gomh
Wales which I referred to when reading the first para-
graph.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We do not admit what is con-
tained in 2 (a), Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is one of the alterations
you make to this statement.
Mr, HEFFRON.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—This is an extract from the
report tabled in Parliament in October, 1940.
Major DAVIES.—I suppose the game classification
applies, vulnerable points only, Mr. Chairman. May
I make our position clear ? I feel that this is the most
contentious question discussed here to-day. We have
heard from the heads of the Services, and we know
we are likely to have only short air raids and attacks
with light bombs. For this conference to adopt deep
shelters is out of the question altogether. We have
learnt from Mr. William Holmes, who recently visited
Australia from the United Kingdom and from trade
unions in Europe, that deep shelters are considered
unsatisfactory. If an attack came without warning,
one can imagine the chaos there would be if people
ran to their shelters. We know the far-reaching effects
that come from the dropping of a high explosive bomb
in the open, and the number of shock oases which
occur. As a matter of fact, we are just as likely to
have incendiary bombs as high explosive bombs. There
is no remedy for high explosive bombs, but people
should be in their own homes 1° deal with incendiary
bombs, I feel that industries should make proper
provision for workmen to retire while a raid is in
progress. In each booklet issued by the States, there
should be instructions bow to build shelter® or
ordinary blast-proof shelters, and a survey
should be made of the parks with a view to
take out trenches which can he constructed and made
use of immediately. In low-lying areas, you would
have to use breast work, as you would in rocky country;
but in cities where basements are available, they should
be at the disposal of the people to take shelter during
raids. If anything is likely to cause chaos, it is mak-
ing unlimited accommodation in deep shelters, which
would be called funk holes. I know that it is onr
duty to protect the lives of the people from the smallest
child upwards, but unless it is Commonwealth policy
to construct shelters in the cities and places where
industry is located, I feel that it is a big undertaking
for the States. Business people should be called upon
to make accommodation available for their work
people. I do not mean protection from direct hits,
but from splinters. As regards incendiary bombs, the
people are best in their own homes to protect them.
Coming to theatres, the question arises whether you
should not keep the people in the theatres and let the
entertainment go on. If yon tell them there is an
air raid imminent, you can imagine the chaos with
people getting out. We have even hesitated to drill
them too much in that regard. I believe later
you will have to close some of those theatres if a raid
is about to take place; but if the people were in the
theatres when a raid came on, I think it would be
better for them to stay there. I have made it pretty
plain that we think you should make use of parks, open
spaces, splinter-proof shelters and trenches, and 1 feel
that a big responsibility rests upon people who have
yards or areas big enough to enable the construction
of some suitable sort of trench. All our public areas
should be surveyed, and trenches or suitable shelters
marked out, but not deep shelters, so that the people
could retire in case we had a warning during the day
time when they were at work. Nothing will protect
you from a really heavy bomb, unless it is a very
deep shelter, and we say those are not satisfactory. I
understand that Sydney has underground railways.
In places like Melbourne, there are certain buildings
reinforced; but for the people living out in the small
areas such as we have in Tasmania, wq feel that our
book of instructions contains all the necessary advice,
and we do not intend to go further.


Sir JOHN HARRIS,—The scheme envisaged by
our Council provides first for the evacuation of
children. We have appointed a Director of Evacua-
tion, who has worked out a scheme. The Defence
Department has given a line along the State, and
below that we are not allowed to evacuate into any of
those areas. North of the line, we are making a census
of all accommodation. We have a regulation making
compulsory provision for billeting the evacuated people
from Melbourne, including children. Therefore, we
do not intend to make any provision for shelters for
school children. Then we appointed five very com-
petent engineers to give us an estimate of the cost of
making shelters in Melbourne, and their estimate for
the whole of this State was £8,000,000. We then asked
them to revise their plan and make one for vulnerable
areas. That amounted to £4,500,000.
Mr. HANLON.—For deep shelters?
Sir J OHN HARRIS. —No, ordinary trenches,
shored up with timber and light covering. We have
not proceeded very much further in regard to shelters,
but I personally have always considered that, for Aus-
tralia, with the sort of climate we have, trenches are
quite sufficient providing the surface is protected with
sandbags or some material to prevent water from
running into them. I would say that people could
manage to stay in the shelter for a reasonable period
of time without all the comforts that so many people
want in connexion with this matter. We have not
come to any definite conclusion on this, because we
wanted to know what the Commonwealth was prepared
to do. On this matter of civil defence, we are right
up against what I said yesterday concerning the power
of the Commonwealth to impose total taxation. The
State is not able to raise the quantity of money to
which I refer, nor half of it; so that if air raid
shelters are to be constructed under the plan of our
engineers in Victoria, I am afraid we must cry quits
with you and say that, according to the Constitution
°_f Australia, you have to shoulder your own respon-
sibility.
The CHAIRMAN.—Are not Victorians Aus-
tralians ?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Yes, but you are taking the
money out of our pockets, and the State has no power
to take any money out of the pockets of the people.
The CHAIRMAN.—The people seem to think they
have.
•Sir JOHN HARRIS.—But this is a tremendous
problem, and the plan of shelter I am discussing is
quite a moderate sort of thing; it is not elaborate at
all, and I have no reason to doubt the estimate. For
providing the population with shelters in what we call
the really vulnerable areas of Melbourne, the cost is
estimated at £4,000,000.
The CHAIRMAN.—That would not be even for the
Greater Melbourne area?
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—No, just for certain really
vulnerable areas. The experts divided their report into
three or four divisions. If we wanted it for the whole
area, it would be £12,000,000, but for these really
important areas where there is very dense population,
they estimate that it would cost £4,000,000. T would
say that those engineers are the very men you would
appoint yourselves to inquire into the matter; they are
very efficient men. Therefore, it is a very big problem,
and unless we stand firm here and say that we simply
intend to use the trench with simple shoring-up and a
little light covering, just to protect people during a
raid, I am afraid it is going to cost the Commonwealth
and the States a very great deal of money. I would
say that you could not get out of it under £50,000,000.
Mr, PANTON.—We have gone into this matter in
Western Australia, and most of you know that our
place is only a sand patch, with sand hundreds of feet
deep. Fifty million pounds would not cover a shelter
which would be of any value in our State. My infor-
mation from the Homeland is that not 3 per cent, of
the people there are using them, and I agree that if
we arrange for trenches sufficient to guard against
splinters, it is the best method we can adopt. I admit
that we have none of the Sydney or Melbourne troubles.
Ours is a scattered city, and you would be dead unlucky
to get a direct hit. If you did, all the shelters in the
world would be of no avail. I feel with Sir John
Harris that we should reach a definite decision, because
if New South Wales and Queensland, for instance, are
continually advocating shelters, it must spread to all of
us. One of our newspapers started out on shelter pro-
paganda, and everybody was worked up in a few days;
we got the repercussions. We are certainly unable to
see how we could possibly erect shelters in Western
Australia without spending millions of money, because
we would have to get the sand out, and the amount
of concrete and cement necessary would make it
impossible.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You would be able to pro-
tect yourselves from blast.
Mr. PANTON. —We could do that very quickly in
the Western Australian sand. Half a dozen good men
could do more trenching in two hours in Western Aus-
tralia than you could do in two days with your heavy
soil. I know what it is like from trying to dig a
garden at Camberwell one day. It seems to me that
while each State should work out its own destiny, it is
very difficult for one State to put up with the reper-
cussions coming from other States, if they are all
intending to spend millions. I know that when New
South Wales said it proposed to spend millions, we got
the backlash.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—(My feeling is that it would be
very useful to the States if the Commonwealth obtained
from the heads of the Services a report, in connexion
with each State, as to what amount of work should
be done by each State in this connexion. I know that
it would be very useful to us in South Australia. Then
if the report advocated certain work, the Common-
wealth could send along, a statement as to what per-
centage of the money it would be prepared to find. I
believe that it is very hard to reach a decision upon
anything of this description in a conference like this.
The vulnerability obviously varies greatly as between
State and State and between town and town. If we
had something authentic from the heads of the Services
it would be of value to us. I would like to move that
such a report be obtained.
Mr. HANLON.—The position is that the State has
not power to raise sufficient money for the purpose.
If the Commonwealth raised £50,000,000 —the figure
suggested by Sir John Harris —the position would then
arise in which material and labour could not be
obtained. In the event of an emergency arising, I pro-
pose in Queensland to divert all local Government,
State building and construction workers to provide
trench shelters, leaving it to the householder to do the
best he can in regard to his own shelter. Portion of
Brisbane is built on rock in which an ordinary man
cannot dig a shelter, while other portions are so low-
lying that a hole soon fills with water.
Sir_ JOHN HARRIS.-—Could we take the feeling
of this meeting to see if we can decide on what we
should do as regards shelters? Could we not decide
that it is not necessary in Australia to build anything
but trench shelters?
Mr. HANLON.—I would not have that. We pro-
pose to build apron shelters in some of the streets.
The CHAIRMAN.—*CouId we get agreement, in the
initial stage of this, that there should be no deep
shelters erected as deep shelters in Australia?


Mr. HANLON.—The provision of deep shelters
sufficient to safeguard the people in any State is im-
practicable.
Mr. HEFFRON.—I could not agree to anything as
sweeping as that because, while we do not contemplate
the construction of deep shelters, we have the under-
ground railway in Sydney and there are tunnels which
were constructed years ago and which have not been
used. With the expenditure of some money it is possible
to make these tunnels into very good deep shelters, and
while they are available it would be foolish not to take
advantage of them. I am having a suitable entrance
made to one which is close to Parliament House. We
have those tunnels right in the heart of the city, and
we intend to make the best possible use of them. It
will cost a fair amount of money to make suitable
entrances to them, but already we have made some.
We had a very big sewerage job going on, with a
tunnel about 9 miles long, 8 feet wide and 7 or
8 feet high, and as soon as I took charge, I
took over that tunnel, which would accommodate
50,000 or 60,000 people. We do not propose to do
anything further than that as regards deep shelters.
We have not dug any deep shelters but have taken
advantage of the tunnels that were available. The
position in Newcastle and Port Kembla is extremely
dangerous and I think we must face the fact that we
will have to build some kind of shelters in certain
places in those tw'o towns. The expert opinion is that
we should have a series of surface shelters in Newcastle
because it is very exposed in position. The same
applies to Port Kembla, and we might have to do
something like that in Balmain.
The CHAIRMAN.—But you do not suggest deep
shelters in those places?
Mr. HEFFRON.—It might mean that the location
of the place would render a deep shelter impossible,
while, on the other hand, it might make a surface
shelter impossible. Those matters must be decided in
view of the relevant circumstances. My intention is
not to have any if we can avoid it, though I feel that
in several of these places circumstances might render
it necessary.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—Do you think you might
have to construct some more tunnels?
Mr. HEFFRON.—Possibly, but it might be that we
will have to construct suitable pill-boxes in places such
as parts of Port Kembla. I do not want to agree to
this and later on have you find me digging deep
shelters over there. My view is that of all the gentle-
men round this table, in the main: that it is better
to do without deep shelters if possible. Mr. Bland’s
advice to me is that we should not go any further with
deep shelters here except in special circumstances. That
is the reason why I do nof want to commit myself
to a resolution here which I might not be able to carry
out later in the light of changed circumstances.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—WouId you be agreeable if I
moved that the Defence authorities give a report to
each State with regard to each Sate’s requirements ?
It might be helpful in resisting all sorts of pressure
which could be brought on you to build shelters which
would not be necessary.
The CHAIRMAN. —As you fully realize, all of us
here feel that if this cry for deep shelters becomes
strong it will embarrass every Government in Aus-
tralia and yet will provide the people with no protec-
tion because the shelters cannot be built in a day. A
further point is that if these raids come from aircraft
carriers—as we have been told they might—it would
be a hit-and-run raid and people might be caught in
the streets while running to the shelters. I was wonder-
ing if this resolution would cover you and yet pro-
tect you if you alter your policy in the future: “ That
unless where tunnel facilities already exist the provision
of deep bomb-proof shelters in Australia is under pre-
sent circumstances not warranted ” i
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I think my suggestion would
help us very much more and it does not commit us to
any expression of opinion here. We will get the most
competent advice possible and each Government will
deal with it as it thinks fit.
Mr. HEFFROISr.—On a number of occasions
I have publicly expressed the view—it has
also appeared in the Sydney press —that we do not
favour any further extension of deep air raid shelters,
and that we are more inclined to the English view
and experience that it is more a matter of dispersal
than of getting into deep shelters. At the same time,
I do know that there are certain danger spots, and
I do not want to commit myself too specifically'.
The CHAIRMAN. —Would you accept Mr. Play-
ford’s suggestion, which really does not commit you
to anything?
Mr. HEFFRON.—I would be glad to get that,
because it would give us something with a scientific
and technical background to act on.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think it would be a very good
suggestion. The motion, as I have it down, is as
follows: —
That reports be obtained from the heads of the Services
in the Commonwealth as to the amount of work necessary
to be done in each State with regard to air raid shelters,
and, in the event of any work being recommended, the
percentage of the cost which the Commonwealth would be
prepared to find.
Agreed to.
Major DAVIES.—Might I suggest that you make
a very carefully prepared statement on this very
subject to the press? It is a political issue to a great
extent with some people. It should be a very care-
fully prepared statement, so that the public may feel
that they have some comfort and have not been dis-
regarded, because, if a shell or bomb came down
to-night, you would have chaos, and God help the
politicians!
Mr. HEFFRON.—I want to make my position
clear on a couple of these items. Firstly, in “ A ”,
the “cost of undertaking that portion of the shelter
scheme relating to floating population—-public schools,
public hospitals and government buildings—-is the
responsibility of the Government.” That is taken from
the extract of a report tabled in Parliament in 1940,
I take it, by Colonel Bruxner, who was first Minister
for air raid precautions. That does not represent
the attitude of the present Government.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think I said at the beginning
that you would have something to say in alteration
of that.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Just as we regard it as the
responsibility' of the Federal authorities to provide
the financial assistance for fire, first aid, warnings and
all those things, we regard the finding of the necessary
protection for the civilian population to he a respon-
sibility.
The CHAIRMAN.—You are not saying that you
agree to the basis, but as there was no better basis
procurable you accepted it at Canberra?
Mr. HEFFRON.—Yes; but I might say something
more about that to-day. Last week I issued a new
set of regulations defining certain responsibilities
regarding shelter protection. In (c) the responsibility
in regard to privately-owned schools and hospitals
belongs to the authorities concerned. Again, my
predecessor, the last Premier of the State, Mr. Mair,
committed his Government to full responsibility in
regard to primary schools, whether they were public
or denominational. Although he did not provide
any actual cash, at the same rime he did commit him-
self to that responsibility in a number of letters, and


also in a certain statement made in Parliament. I
do not know just whether we can do anything about
that. I have not any intention of repudiating it, but
it is a matter that I do propose discussing with my
colleagues at the next Cabinet meeting. My own
personal view is that I have not any intention of
repudiating that arrangement he made with these
people. One other point I think should not escape
our notice: that is the responsibility which rests on
each individual to provide his or her own domestic
shelter except where the density of population and
the local conditions prevent this being done. I think
we should include in that “ except where lack of
finance or the density of population or local conditions
prevents this being done ”.
Sir JOHN HARRIS. —We laid down this proposi-
tion: that any one that was on the basic wage would
be the responsibility of the Government.
Mr. HEFFRON.—In England, the position is that
anybody in receipt of less than £7 a week is provided
with either an Anderson shelter or a Morrison mouse-
trap, or whatever type of shelter they are providing
for the houses.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—This is only tentative, with
the council. There is no Government decision.
Mr. HEFIFRON.—I do not think we should not pass
this over without some reference being made to pro-
viding for those people who, through lack of finance,
are unable to provide for themselves. I say that with-
out stating a definite figure, because I do think both
Commonwealth and States should be seized with the
principle of looking after people who are unable to
provide their own protection.
The CHAIRMAN. —Would the trouble be got over
by, first of all, getting rid of Mr. Playford’s motion,
which is unanimous, and then have it come as a
recommendation from this Conference that, in the
event of the heads of the Services reporting on the
amount of work to be done in each State, we should
consider these cases and as to how the financial
responsibilities should be met for private people?
Mr. HEFFRON.—-Yes.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I think it should be laid
down where the responsibility rests with the civil
population, as compared with governmental respon-
sibility. What my council agreed to is this: that
the State should be responsible for government build-
ings; that the Commonwealth should be responsible
for their buildings; that departmental stores, or big
stores, should provide security for the personnel
employed by them and for the people doing business
in their premises; that the walking-about population
should have municipal shelters; that each household
should provide in some way a place in which they
can shelter during an air raid, except those that are
unable, from financial circumstances, to do that for
themselves; that captains of industry and manufac-
turers should provide shelter for their personnel
during working hours. I think that covers it. That
is what we agreed to as a council, but my Government
has not made any decision on that matter, because
we have always found this thing an impossibility
as far as the State is concerned. Even laying that
clown as a proposition when we started to inquire,
we found those costs I mentioned before.
Mr. HANLON. —As well as to advice from the
Services, we have asked the extent to which the
Commonwealth is prepared to assist us in it.
iSir JOHN HARRIS.—But I would like the States
to agree to these proposals as to the responsibilities,
if we could get a decision.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—Are not we rather premature
in assuming that there is any responsibility at all,
until we have a report from the military authorities?
I think it would be very much better to wait until
we got the picture, and then to decide.
The CHAIRMAN.—There is a difference of view
round the table with regard to all those matters. What
has been said has been taken down, and I think
then it is a case for the governments individually,
when the members return, to consider their own views
on this, and we can then see if we can achieve
unanimity. I think that would be the proper way.
Mr. HANLON. —Yes, we can go into it then, when
we get your report.
The CHAIRMAN. —Yes, and each submit it to his
own Government, and see if we can come to a
unanimous code.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I should think the code
should be unanimous unless we are going to get a lot
of criticism.
The CHAIRMAN. —It would certainly be difficult
if different rulings were given in different States.
There would then be chaos again. New South Wales,
in a very generous spirit, has consented to omit one
motion.
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
Mr. HEFFRON.—-Before we go, I want to be clear
on a couple of points. Going back to my State, all
I can tell them so far is this: that it was arranged
that a quarter of that amount should be divided
between the States on a population basis.
The CHAIRMAN.—On the six priorities and the
immediate submissions they make, and when they have
been approved and the goods paid for let us know
the cost and, up to a quarter of the amount, they
will be met on a population basis.
Mr. HEFFRON.—That is clear. What I would
like to know, then, would be this: we have to make
our further submissions, and then they are to be
considered by you?
The CHAlßMAN.—Yes—with technical advisers.
I am not going to do it on my own. Then I will
determine the amount to be allocated out of the
remainder to the States. The way I would propose
to do it, and suggest to the technical advisers to do
it, would be on about three points—
(l) the number of population of the vulnerable
areas;
(2) their estimate of those vulnerable areas in
relation to any other vulnerable areas in
Australia;
(3) probably the nature of the terrain where the
population are.
I do not think you can get any three fairer proposi-
tions than that. I want to make it clear that the
quarter will be a quarter of £500,000, and the other
quarter will come out of the loan amount.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Actually it will be a quarter of
a million ?
The CHAIRMAN.—The Commonwealth does not
grant £250,000 out of the £500,000 on a population
basis; it comes out of a quarter of the total amount,
that is, the grant plus the loan.
Mr. HANLON.—You do not get £1 until you have
spent £1 on your own?
The CHAIRMAN.—That is it in a nutshell.
Sir JOHN HARRlS.—Before we close, will you
get a report of the transactions, containing the motions
and decisions, and send it to each State?
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We may depend upon those
amounts that we send in being dealt with rapidly?
The CHAIRMAN.—-We will do it as quickly as
we can.
Mr. HEFFRON.—We all understand that, holding
us back in the carrying through of our programme,
is lack of finance. We have everything ready, to be
done; all we want is money to implement our pro-
grammes. There is just one other point. I want to


take tMs opportunity of suggesting that this Confer-
ence might express its views on two things. One
is that we regard the amount advanced by the Federal
Government as being insufficient to meet the require-
ments of the various States. The second is that, in
the opinion of this Conference, the payment should
not be on a 50-50 basis, but the Commonwealth should
accept full responsibility for air raid precautions
expenditure.
The CHAIRMAN.—-I cannot accept those, Mr.
Heffron, because those matters were decided at a
conference of Premiers. Any protest in that matter
should have been made at the conference of Premiers
or the Loan Council.
Mr. HEFFRON.—The Loan Council was not
advised of all the facts. It did not understand the
basis of payment in other countries, and the time was
very limited. After all, it was not a conference at
which the matter of air raid precautions was discussed,
or the requirements of the different States. The
States have to have some medium whereby they can
express their opinion, so that the National Government
may know what our requirements are. That was not
done at Canberra; there was not a discussion of the
requirements. It was purely a discussion of an
allocation of a certain amount of money and the basis
on which it should be allocated; but the requirements
of Tasmania, of South Australia, of New South Wales
or Queensland were not in the discussion at all. The
only people really competent to discuss that are the
gentlemen who sat around this table to-day, and who
deal with the matter of air raid precautions in their
several States. It seems to me that, having gone into
every requirement of the different States, and being as
well aware of the fact that it is impossible to do the
job with the amount of money set apart, it should at
least be competent for us to tell the federal authority
that, after having deliberated on this matter for the
last two days, we are satisfied it is insufficient.
The CHAIRMAN.—But I would not admit that
it is impossible to do the six priorities on the amount
of money set apart for the vulnerable areas.
Mr. HEFFRON.—With all due respect, it by no
means meets the requirements of New South Wales.
The CHAIRMAN.—On the six priorities ? The
Premiers agreed to those six priorities.
Mr. HEFFRON.—But you are not dealing with
an essential matter like evacuation.
The CHAIRMAN.—The six priorities were agreed
to, and I cannot accept a motion to upset a conference
of Premiers.
Mr. HEFFRON.—But you walk into a conference
and say, “ It is proposed to give you a grant of
£600,000 on six priorities ” —drawn up by whom *
By yourselves.
The CHAIRMAN.—They were not drawn up by
myself; they were drawn up by the Defence Com-
mittee.
Mr. HEFFRON.—They were not drawn up by the
people in the various States who, after all, were the
ones most competent to express what their require-
ments were.
The CHAIRMAN:—They were never challenged
by the States as to the priorities.
Mr. HEFFRON.—-Ever since I have been Minister
I have been pressing as hard as I could about the
amount we required for hospitals, shelters, and all
those other things which somebody, for some reason
or other, does not regard as being of any importance.
If the evacuation of our hospitals is unimportant, if
the strengthening of them is unimportant, it seems
to me that somebody has taken rather a cock-eyed
view of the matter. I am not suggesting that to you,
sir, but to the people who have been advising you.
I think they have been advising you incorrectly.
If we do anticipate raids in this country, and if we
have to make preparations, if the job is worth doing
at all it is worth doing well, and with the cost we
have and the requirements in our State, what the
Commonwealth has advanced does not meet our
position by half.
The CHAIRMAN.—However, I say straight out
that I cannot accept your motions; but I put it to you,
as I said to the Premiers at the conference, that
the position is not static. If matters alter and it is
found, when these sums are expended, that the amount
of material under the priorities does not meet the
requirements of the States, the matter can be re-opened
and looked into again.
Mr. HEFFRON. —But is not this the place to
re-open it?
The CHAIRMAN.—No, because you do not know
till you have the material. A lot of this material might
come in under lease and lend, which alters the whole
financial position.
Mr. HEFFRON.—The raids may never come, but
we cannot live in a world of things which may or may
not happen. We have to face realities and say that
there is danger, and that we have to take the necessary
steps to provide against it.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I would like to know
whether these are final priorities. Are they the only
six things you intend the people to do*
The CHAIRMAN.—There are eight in the list.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—You have not evacuation
The CHAIRMAN.—It is in the eight.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—But this is only a con-
tribution by the Commonwealth, surely!
The CHAIRMAN.—I have told you that it is not
unalterable, like the laws of the Medes and Persians.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—But very nearly so?
The CHAIRMAN.—I am not making any pro-
phecies with regard to that; but I am afraid I cannot
accept the motions.
Major DAVIES.—I think Mr. Heffron is right, in
substance. In the eight priorities, you have made a
guess at the amount.
The CHAIRMAN.—I did not; the priorities came
from the Defence Committee, and the estimates of costs
came from the States.
Major DAVIES.—Our Premiers had given their
word to back up the Commonwealth, and it is right
that they should do so, but I say that the computa-
tions are very wrong if you go into them thoroughly.
At the same time, while we accept what our Premiers
agreed to, I am sorry they agreed to it, because it is
net nearly enough, and I hope it is only a contribution.
The CHAIRMAN.—Thank you very much, gentle-
men. With regard to the report on Mr. Playford’s
motion and our statement to the press to-night, are
you satisfied to leave it to me and my officers to
draft?
Suggestion agreed to.
VOTE OF THANKS TO CHAIRMAN.
Mr. HEFFRON.—Mr. Chairman and gentlemen,
I take this opportunity before We rise of expressing
your thanks and mine to the Minister, Mr. Abbott,
for the very able way in which he has carried out
his duties as Chairman of this Conference. Although
we are here to do the very best we can and to get as
much money as we can for the things we regard as
essential, and although I might appear to be disagree-
ing with the_ Minister, I want to pay the tribute
to him that, since he has been Minister, he has thrown
himself wholeheartedly into this work, and has, with
the limited finance at his disposal, done a very good
job. I wish to compliment him on the job he has done
up to date. I also thank him for his unfailing


courtesy and desire to do just what is required of him
if it is within his power. Then I desire to thank Mr.
Dunstan and the Government of Victoria for their
courtesy to the delegates while we have been in this
State. If Mr. Abbott continues to be the Minister for
air raid precautions, I hope the day will not be far
distant when we will be lining up again and pressing
him for more money for this very important work.
I take this opportunity of thanking you, sir, on behalf
of the representatives of the different States
assembled, and I hope that what we have requested,
particularly in connexion with money, will be very
soon forthcoming.
Sir JOHN HARRIS.—I desire to second Mr.
Heffron’s motion. I find you, sir, a very pleasant
personality, and I do congratulate you on the way in
which you conduct an important meeting. As to your
Government and the way in which it has treated
air raid precautions, I am totally at variance. I am
totally in disagreement with regard to the quantity
of money you have voted, and also with your advisers
in relation to the priorities in connexion with air raid
precautions work, because air raid precautions work
is just as important as defence. Seeing that the
Defence Department are doing a very good job in this
State, I would think they would give very good advice
with regard to the civil population. At any rate, Ido
know your financial limitations, sir, I recognize the
fact that you are only one of a team, and that you are
circumscribed absolutely by the head of your Govern-
ment and by the Treasurer. We hope that if you do
survive, you will come back and show your sympathy
with air raid precautions work, of which you have a
thorough grip. I am satisfied that you have done your
work exceedingly effectively, and I can thoroughly
recommend you to any Prime Minister who may be in
need of a Minister of Home Security. Whatever his
politics may be, I do not think that any one would
be able to sit in your chair and do the work more
effectively than you have, or grasp the situation as
quickly as you have. I thank you for sitting in our
chamber for two days, and I am glad to think that you
have been comfortable. I will convey to the head of
the Government the appreciation of the whole meeting
of the service we have been able to lend you as one of
the States of the Commonwealth.
Motion carried by acclamation.
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Heffron, Sir John Harris
and gentlemen: I thank you very much indeed for what
you have said, and I appreciate what Mr. Heffron has
said about the way in which I have conducted this
meeting. I know that you gentlemen were fighting
hard for what you wanted, and I was trying to keep
up my end; but I think you have taken entirely the
wrong attitude if you look at this little arithmetical
sum. For two years you have practically nothing; in
two months you have had £500,000 to be made avail-
able as a grant and £500,000 by loan, so work it out
and think what might happen in the next two years.
Mr. HANLON.—It is a jolly good start.
The CHAIRMAN. —It is a pretty quick reversal of
form. I appreciate very much, Mr. Heffron and Sir
John, what you have said. I went round all the States
to try to obtain a grip of the position. What I have
done is the best I am capable of doing, and I am sorry
that I cannot do better for you.
Before concluding I would like again to thank the
head of the Victorian Government for his courtesy to
us and for the way in which we have been looked after,
as well as for the very enjoyable luncheon to-day. I
would like, also, to thank the staff of Parliament House
for all they did for us.
Proceedings terminated at k. 30 p.m.
By Authority. 1.. 1 1 . Johnston, Commonwealth Government I’rinter, Canberra.
