

PAMS
OX I2j
Congregational Study Schools.
1915.
Leonardo da Vinoi. SALVATOR MUNDI
(School Motto).
Rev W. J. L. GLOSS, 8.A.,
School Organiser.
Rev. G. J. WILLIAMS,
School Leader.


".w ■
K-
■■■>
■


Congregational Study Schools
1915.
Leonardo da Vinei\ SALVATOR MUNDI.
(School Motto).
Rev W, J. L. GLOSS, 8.A.,
School Organiser.
Rev. G. J.‘WILLIAMS,
School Leader.


List of Schools so far Arranged.
Ist SCHOOL —In Camberwell Congregational Church.
For Canterbury, Camberwell and Surrey Hills - 4th to 7th May
2nd SCHOOL —In Kew Congregational Church.
For Kew, Hawthorn, Koonong and Deepdene - 25th to 28th May
3rd SCHOOL —In Elsternwick Congregational Church.
For Elsternwick, East St. Kilda, Glen Huntly and Garden Vale
Ist to 4th June
4th SCHOOL —In Richmond Congregational Church.
For Richmond and Burnley .... Bth to I Ith June
sth SCHOOL —In Brighton Congregational Church.
For Brighton, Hampton and Black Rock - 22nd to 2!
22nd to 25th June
6th SCHOOL —In Malvern Congregational Church.
For Malvern, Gardiner, E. Malvern and Oakleigh - 6th to 9th July
7th SCHOOL—In Carlton Congregational Church.
For Carlton, Brunswick, Oxford Street and East Melbourne
13th to 16th July
Bth SCHOOL—In Prahran Congregational Church.
For Prahran and Windsor .... 20th to 23rd July


Congregational Study Schools.
Why the School?
“That adding all earnestness ye may along with your
faith manifest a noble character and, with a noble character,
knowledge.
But why this Method?
Because the concentration of many minds upon one ob-
ject creates an atmosphere and enthusiasm hardly possible
in isolated individual study. Moreover, the Study Circle
Method is one of the best known methods for developing the
power of self-expression, and, as a consequence, one’s own
personality.
Why Just Now?
Because the condition of the world, especially Europe, is a
challenge to Christian faith to study more deeply than ever
our spiritual foundations, and thus to prepare the way for a
great spiritual revival in society.
What is the Purpose of the School?
The motive lying behind the School is that of deepening
the spiritual life of all our churches, with a view to fuller
efficiency. The movement is not a sectional, but a denomina-
tional one. It represents a united effort, and schools are to
be held in connection with all our Congregational Churches.
Who will Conduct the School?
The Kev. G. J. Williams is the School Leader, and he will
have the assistance of a band of trained Study Circle leaders.
Ministers of our own denomination will deliver the platform
addresses.
Who is Organising The Schools ?
A joint committee consisting of representatives from The Union
Committee, The Home Mission Committee, and The L.M. S.
Auxiliary. Thus the Schools are a combined denominational
effort.
What is Wanted?
That all the members of our Church and Congregation
should set apart these four evenings for the very special
purpose indicated. The call of the School is a new one. It
may involve some sacrifice of time, but the result arrived at
will justify s-uch sacrifice. The uniform experience of those
attending Study Schools is that these schools lead to a real
spiritual enrichment. Let each one of us do his and her best
to make this first School of the Series a memorable one.


List of Schools so far Arranged.
Ist SCHOOL—In Camberwell Congregational Church.
For Canterbury, Camberwell and Surrey Hills - 4th to 7th May
2nd SCHOOL —In Kew Congregational Church.
For Kew, Hawthorn, Koonong and Deepdene - 25th to 28th May
3rd SCHOOL —In Elsternwick Congregational Church.
For Elsternwick, East St. Kilda, Gleft Huntly and Garden Vale
Ist to 4th June
4th SCHOOL —In Richmond Congregational Church.
For Richmond and Burnley .... Bth to 1 Ith June
sth SCHOOL —In Brighton Congregational Church.
For Brighton, Hampton and Black Rock - 22nd to 2‘
22nd to 25th June
6th SCHOOL—In Malvern Congregational Church.
For Malvern, Gardiner, E. Malvern and Oakleigh - 6th to 9th July
7th SCHOOL —In Carlton Congregational Church
For Carlton, Brunswick, Oxford Street and East Melbourne
13th to 16th July
Bth SCHOOL —In Prahran Congregational Church
For Prahran and Windsor .... 20th to 23rd July


Congregational Study Schools.
Why the School?
“That adding all earnestness ye may along with your
faith manifest a noble character and, with a noble character,
knowledge.
But why this Method?
Because the concentration of many minds upon one ob-
ject creates an atmosphere and enthusiasm hardly possible
in isolated individual study. Moreover, the Study Circle
Method is one of the best known methods for developing the
power of self-expression, and, as a consequence, one’s own
personality.
Why Just Now?
Because the condition of the world, especially Europe, is a
challenge to Christian faith to study more deeply than ever
our spiritual foundations, and thus to prepare the way for a
great spiritual revival in society.
What is the Purpose of the School?
The motive lying behind the School is that of deepening
the spiritual life of all our churches, with a view to fuller
efficiency. The movement is not a sectional, but a denomina-
tional one. It represents a united effort, and schools are to
be held in connection with all our Congregational Churches.
Who will Conduct the School?
The Kev. G. J. Williams is the School Leader, and he will
have the assistance of a band of trained Study Circle leaders.
Ministers of our own denomination will deliver the platform
addresses.
Who is Organising The Schools ?
A joint committee consisting of representatives from The Union
Committee, The Home Mission Committee, and The L. M. S.
Auxiliary. Thus the Schools are a combined denominational
effort.
What is Wanted?
That all the members of our Church and Congregation
should set apart these four evenings for the very special
purpose indicated. The call of the School is a new one. It
may involve some sacrifice of time, but the result arrived at
will justify such sacrifice. The uniform experience of those
attending Study Schools is that these schools lead to a real
spiritual enrichment. Let each one of us do his and her best
to make this first School of the Series a memorable one.


Whether you are able to come or not we appeal to you to
pray for the most real and lashing success of this School,
and all those to be held throughout the winter months.
Programme for each Evening.
I. 7.45-8.45 p.m. —Study Circles on “ The Person of Christ.^ 1
11. 8.45-9.10 p.m. —Address on some one aspect of “Christian
Responsibility. ’ ’
111. 9.10-9.30 p.m.—Devotional address on some one of the
“ Great Acts of the Spiritual Life.” ■
I. Study Circles—“ The Person of Christ.”
Tuesday.—Christ’s Person in Relation to His Work.
Wednesday.—Christ’s Perfect Manhood.
Thursday.—Christ’s Divinity.
Friday.—Christ and the Divine Tri-unity.
11. Addresses on “Christian Responsibility.”
Tuesday.—‘‘The Responsibility of Church Membership.”
(a) At the Ist. 3rd. sth and 7th Schools Rev. W. J. L. Closs. B.A.
(b) At the 2nd, 4th. 6th and Bth Schools - - Rev. S. Bryant
Wednesday.—“ The Home Missionary Obligation.”
(a) At the Ist. 3rd. sth and 7th Schools - Rev. G. A. W. Legge
(b) At the 2nd. 4th. 6th and Bth Schools Rev. R. Ambrose Roberts
Thursday.— “Christ’s Missionary Manifestoes.”
At all the Schools .... R ev . G. J. Williams
Friday.—" The World’s Appeal to the Christian.”
(a) At Ist. 3rd. sth, & 7th Schools Rev. Meredith Davies, M.A.. B.D.
(b) At 2nd. 4th. 6th and Bth Schools - - Rev. F. V. Pratt. M.A.
111. Addresses on “Great Acts of the Spiritual Life.
Tuesday.—" Trusting Christ” - (All Schools) Rev. G. J. Williams
Wednesday.—" Loving Christ” - (All Schools) Rev. G. J. Williams
Thursday.—“ Serving Christ”
(a) At the Ist. 3rd, sth, and 7th Schools - - Rev. W. L. Slack
(b) At the 2nd, 4th. 6th and Bth Schools Rev. W. Christiansen. B.A.
Friday—" Adoring Christ” - - (All Schools) Rev. G. J. Williams
Note. —Each evening’s work will commence with five
minutes’ devotional exercise, and MEMBERS OF THE
SCHOOL ARE URGED TO MAKE THE NECESSARY
SPECIAL EFFORT TO BE IN GOOD TIME, SO THAT
WITHOUT ANY DISTURBANCE OR LOSS OF THE
PRECIOUS MINUTES THE WORK OF THE SCHOOL MAY
PROCEED,


The following are the outlines of study for the Circles. Those
indeMdMMjJvjMjrresentjitJheJic^
study_these_jmtlm Bible references before the School
commences. Those not able to be present are asked to follow the
study in their private devotions. The outlines follotv, in the main,
the course of thought worked out in Dr. H. R. Mackintosh's fine
work on “ The Doctrine of the Person of Christ ” (Book III.)
BIBLE STUDY:
THE PERSON OF CHRIST.
First Circle. —Christ’s Person in relation to His
Work.
General References—John v., 36; x., 25-38; xiv., 10-11
1. Jesus Christ’s Work as the Supreme Moral Authority for
Human Life Reveals His Person.
(a) The achievement of His moral supremacy was part
of the work done by Christ. He experienced our
moral struggle—Luke xxii., 28. Heb. ii., 10-18;
iv., 15.
(b) His work as moral authority seen in the unique
obedience which He demands.—Luke xiv., 26.
John xiv., 15; xv., 14, and the “Follow me”
passages.
(c) The note of authority which sounds in His sayings.—
Matthew xxiv., 35; xxviii., 18-20. John v., 27.
(d) His claim to be the final Judge.—Matt, x., 32-33;
xvi., 27; xxiv., 29-35.
The meaning of these and other related facts is that, to
be known as He really is, we must have an experiential
knowledge of Christ’s moral authority. He must be the
supreme moral authority in our own life if we are to truly
know Him as the supreme moral authority for human life.


2. The Atoning Work performed by Christ is also a Decisive
Index of His Person.
Here, again, if we are to know Ohrist as Saviour it must
be by experiencing His saving work in our own souls.
The most decisive thing we can know about Christ is that
He atones. —Rom. iii., 25; v., 10, 11. 2 Cor. v., 18, 19.
Eph. ii., 16. Col. i., 20. 1 John ii., 2. (Find other
references.)
A Redeemer can only be fully known as such by a society
of the redeemed.
3. Light is cast on Christ’s Person by His Work of bringing
Souls into Vital Union with Himself.
Union with Christ is a brief name for all that the Apostles
mean by salvation. —John xv., 1-7. Rom. viii., 1; xiv., 8, 9.
1 Cor. vi., 17. 2 Cor. v., 17. Gal. ii., 20. 1 John ii., 24.
To thus unite souls to Himself is a specifically Divine work,
and none can truly know Christ save those who have ex-
perienced this Divine work.
4. Christ’s Work as the Perfect Revealer of the Father also
interprets His Person.
The decisive witness of the New Testament to Christ’s
revealing work.—Matt xi., 27. John iii., 34, 35; xiv., 6-9.
2 Cor. iv., 6. Heb. i., 3. (Find other references.)
Once again we see that if Christ is to be truly known He
must be experimentally known in His vocation of the
Revealer (a) of God’s Will (b) of God’s Love, (c) of God’s
Character. And what else?
Study Aim.
To more fully realise that if Christ is to be truly known
by us we must enter into a deep experience of His work
within us.
Assignment 1.
What is meant by saying that the Christ of History must
become the Christ of Experience?


Assignment 2.
What are the chief particulars in which the Christian
must experience what Christ does before he can know what
Christ is?
Assignment 3.
To make the present study as effective as possible, let each
member of the Circle state what he thinks is most necessary
in order to obtain a more realistic experience of the in-
dwelling Christ.
Second Circle. —The Perfect Manhood of Christ.
It is of supreme importance to realise the real manhood
of Christ. Only as this is done can there be any adequate
conception of the reality of His sacrifice, His humiliation,
His self-emptying, His kenosis.
Christ’s veritable manhood must be apprehended if we are
to be loyal to the truth of that great passage in Philippians
ii., 6-8. Read and meditate upon this passage with great care.
Consider also Mark x., 14. Luke xxiv., 39. John ii., 1-11;
iv., 6.; xi., 35; xix., 28. Heb. ii., 17; iv., 15; v., 7-9, as
passages which illustrate the real humanity of Jesus (human
emotions, &c.).
1. The Manhood of Jesus was both Individual and Universal.
(a) He was not only Man, but a Man.
Consider the above and other passages as illustrating His
individual acts. Reflect, too, upon that characteristically
individual act, His habit of prayer. This thought of Christ
as a man is necessary in order to save us from regarding
Him as merely exhibiting in Himself, without being actually
man, the characteristics of humanity.
(b) Yet while remembering that Jesus is a man we must
remember those unique features which fit Him to
be the S&viour of all mankind. He is the Man of
all men.
Matt, xxviii., 9. Luke xxiv., 47. John iii., 17, 19; viii., 12;
ix., 5; xii., 47.


2. The most Startling Feature of the Real Manhood of Christ
is His Sinlessness.
He experienced, in reality, the moral struggles of a man
(see Heb. iv., 15). Yet He never betrayed any consciousness
of sin. He never prayed for forgiveness. The holiest are
ever those who are most conscious of sin, but Jesus never
showed any regret for anything He ever did, or said, or
thought, or felt. Being such as He was, Jesus could not
have sinned without being conscious of it. He must have
been what 1 Peter ii., 22, describes Him as having been:
If redemption is to be achieved, the Redeemer must stand
free of moral evil. As the source of victorious spiritual
energy in others He must Himself be free from sin.”
3. What is the Significance for Christian Faith of the
Veritable Manhood of Jesus Christ?.
(a) It guarantees a veritable Incarnation
If the manhood of Christ were unreal it would mean that
God had not really become incarnate nor made the great
sacrifice of which the New Testament constantly speakh.
Compare Matt, xx., 28. John i., 14. Rom. i., 3. Heb. ii., 14.
(What other references can you find?)
(b) It provides an essential basis of atonement.
By living our human life, by identifying Himself with us,
Christ wins us back to God, reconciles us to, makes us at
one with, God. See the great statement of this truth in
2 Cor. v., 19. Consult good reference Bible for other pas-
sages on same topic. Mark these other references down in
your notes.
(c) It secures the reality of a perfect example.
To help the student to develop habits of Bible Study it is
suggested that he should work out under this head references
which show that Christ’s manhood is our example.
The realisation of the real manhood of Christ is of un-
speakable importance if we are to have a vital consciousness
(a) of the reality and amazing depth of God’s sacrifice, and
(b) of the immeasurable importance of Christ’s example in
our moral struggle.


Study Aim.
To realise the profound significance for Christian faith of
the veritable manhood of Christ.
Assignment 1.
What are the main lines of thought that enable us to
realise the veritable manhood of Christ?
Assignment 2.
How would the discovery of moral imperfection in Christ’s
person affect His work?
Assignment 3.
Why is it imperative for Christian faith that it should be
as much convinced of the Manhood as of the Divinity of
Christ?
Third Circle.—The Divinity of Christ.
The distinctive attitude of believers to Christ is that of
faith. In faith’s deepest moments Christ is beheld as the
self-revelation of God.
1. The Proper Methods of Approaching the Question of
Christ’s Divinity.
(a) The experiential method.
As seen in Study 1, Christianity is not a science, but a
life, an experience. Observe the note of certainty resulting
from experience in Rom. viii., 38. 2 Tim. i., 12. 1 John ii., 3;
ii., 5; iii., 2, and many other passages. Faith’s experience is
that Christ does a more than human, a divine work in us,
and that in Him we have “a presence and power that can-
not be less than God. ’
(b) In addition to this evidence of experience we have
the revelation of Christ’s self-consciousness.
This is the final court of appeal—Christ’s witness to Him-
self. Carefully note the real inward meaning of such pas-
sages as Matt, vii., 21-3; x., 32, 33; xi., 27; xvi., 19; xviii., 20;


xxviii., 20. John iii., 36; v., 18, 23, 26; vi., 40, 47; x., 30;
xiv., 9; xvii., 2, 3.
The language used in such passages wholly inappropriate
for one who was less than Divine.
2. Aspects of Christ’s Unique Humanity which are only
Intelligible on the Ground of His True Godhead.
(a) His sinlessness.
The Divine plan of salvation could not have been carried
out through one who was Himself conquered by sin. (See
Heb. ii., 10.) Christ’s sinlessness the supreme moral miracle of
the world. Of all the myriads who have lived He alone was
without sin, and in nothing was He more Godlike than in His
Holy character.
(b) His Divine Sonship.
While all redeemed men are sons of God, Christ was Son
in a unique sense. “As there is only one Person who can
be called the Father, so there is only one who can be called
the Son.” Many great sayings of Christ leave no room for
doubting this. Compare again such passages as Matt, xi., 27.
John iii., 35, 36, &c. “This Sonship is something which gives
Christ His incomparable and transcendent status.” All this
comes to the surface in “the greatest Christological passage
in the New Testament” (Matt, xi., 25-30), the climax of
Christ’s witness to Himself.
(c) His risen life.
The Resurrection declares His uniqueness in that by it He
was declared to be the Son of God with power (Rom. i., 4).
Let the student here find out and mark down some of the
many New Testament passages w T hich state how the Resurrec-
tion shows the Divine nature of Christ’s Personality.
But specially note how the Apostles, from the Resurrection
onwards, beheld Christ in His Divine Glory.—Acts vii., 55, 56.
Eph. i., 20. Phil, ii., 9, 10. Col. iii., 1. Heb. i., 13; ix., 24,
and many other passages.
These three make a chain of facts not intelligible apart
from Christ’s Deity.


If we cannot see how Christ could be both human and
Divine we must remember (1) that multitudes of the simplest
things baffle us with their mystery; (2) that though the mind
may not grasp the hoiv, faith grasps the fact. “If Christ is
not God to me there is for me no God at all.” —Dr. Du Bose.
“Worship God through Christ and Christ only as God” is
an inviolable axiom of Christian faith.
Consider again carefully John i., 14; x., 30; xiv., 8, 9.
2 Cor. v., 19. Col. ii., 9, and other passages.
Study Aim.
To gain a more vitalising consciousness of the fact that
in Jesus Christ the deepest need of our souls is wholly satis-
fied, and that in Him we find the Living God.
Assignment 1.
Show —
(a) From the witness of Christ to Himself, and
(b) From the witness of His Apostles that Christ and
God are one.
Assignment 2.
Show how universal Christian experience corroborates the
New Testament witness as to Christ’s Deity.
Assignment 3.
Show how disastrous to our conceptions of Christ’s work
would be the idea that His Person is less than Divine.
Fourth Circle. —Christ and the Divine Tri-unity.
Christian faith is emphatically monotheistic. Its object of
worship is not three gods, but one God. Yet the Christian
position is that the God whom we worship is Father, Son,
and Spirit.
1. The New Testament Witness to the Tri-unity.
If Christ is Divine, and if the Holy Spirit is Divine, we
are driven to a Triune conception of the Godhead. This
doctrine, then, is not a speculation of the mind, but a con-


fession of the facts of Christian experience concerning the
Father, the Son, and the Spirit.
(a) The teaching of Jesus is most explicit on the identifi-
cation of Himself with the Father and with the
Spirit.
Consider the significance of such witness to Himself as is
found in Christ’s sayings recorded in Matt, xi., 27. John
vi., 46; x., 30; xiv., 1,9, 11; xvii., 3, 5. John xiv., 16, 18, 26;
xv., 26; xvi., 7-14. In the first group of these passages Jesus
plainly identifies Himself with the Father; in the second
group with the Spirit. The most comprehensive statement
in the New Testament concerning the Tri-unity proceeds
from Jesus (see Matt, xxviii., 19).
Note especially that what we have here is not "in the
names,” but "in the name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.”
See also the same amazingly close association in Matt, iii.,
16, 17. Mark i., 10, 11. Luke iii., 21, 22. Father, Son, and
Spirit are all closely associated at the Baptism of Jesus.
(b) The New Testament witness generally.
Note carefully the double salutation in 2 Cor. i., 2;
Eph. i., 2; the triple benediction in 2 Cor. xiii., 14; the New
Testament identification of the Father with the Son as seen
in such passages as 2 Cor. iv., 6, &c.; the New Testament
identification of the Son with the Spirit, expressed again and
again so intimately in such places as Rom. viii., 2,9, 10,
11; xv., 13. 2 Cor. iii., 17. Gal. v., 22, 25.
The student will be impressed by the fact that in these
and other passages "Christ” and "Spirit” are used almost
interchangeably, so complete is the identification.
From the Tri-unity started the mission of the Church.—
Matt, xxviii., 19.
So then the doctrine of the Tri-unity of God is the confes-
sion of Christian faith, as it seeks to give expression to the
New Testament conception of the Godhead. The plain teach-
ing of the New Testament, as well as the witness of the
Christian consciousness, is summarised in our confession
of faith, "I believe in God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Spirit.”


2. The Practical Value of this Doctrine.
In thus apprehending God we have a definite and personal,
instead of an abstract and impersonal, conception of God.
History has proved the worthlessness of a conception of God
which pictures Him as a bare, single, isolated unit. Consider
the profoundly significant fact that Unitarianism has never
been able to become missionary in character. Missions are im-
possible unless Christ had been able to fulfil His promise,
“Lo I am with you all the time.” If Christ is but man’
as Unitarianism believes, then, of course, He cannot be with
men all the time. That is, they have no dynamic sufficient
for missions. But the God of Christian faith is no far-off,
absentee Deity, but a God ever present with us, immanent
in our life—a God who has come to us, and comes to us still
as Christ and Holy Spirit. The doctrine of the Tri-unity
is that there is only one God, but this God is Father, Son,
and Spirit. The deep significance of this doctrine is that
“God is not an unknown principle seated at the centre of
things, blind and deaf, within the icy depths of His own
eternity,” but a God who knows and can be known, because
revealed to us as Father, as Christ (Son), and as immanent
Holy Spirit.
3. Some Help in Trying to Comprehend this Doctrine
is obtained when we remember that our “own personality
is tri-une” reason, will, emotion. “If, therefore, we are
to think of God as personal, it must be by considering Him
as possessing, in transcendent perfection, the same attributes
which are imperfectly possessed by man.”-—Dr. Illingworth.
So, too, it may help us to recall the illustration that pure
white light consists of three primary rays, yet the three are
one. At the same time we must remember that the Divine
Personality is a mystery. We need to pray to be delivered
from the entiiely false idea that it would be good to clear
up all mystery. A religion without mystery would not be a
religion worth possessing. In a religion without mystery
faith would lose its vocation, and would die of disuse. It
would be an appalling disaster if faith had no scope for its
activity. Let the student try to think out the disastrous
consequences of starving faith by destroying mystery. Con-


eider the deep spiritual meaning of the fine saying that “The
places where the great mists are found are the places where
the great rivers are born” —the great rivers that fertilise
the earth.
So, as the doctrine of gravitation is essential in view of
the facts of the physical world, the doctrine of the Triune
God is essential to faith in order to express the facts of the
Divine nature. God, as Holy Love, we name “The Father”;
the same eternal God, as making the sacrifice of love for our
redemption, we name “the Son”; God filling, as new life,
the hearts to which His Son has become a revelation, we
name “The Holy Spirit.”
In this confession we include all that has been given us
to know of the eternal God our Saviour.
Study Aim.
To attain a richer personal conviction that for the fullest
and most abounding Christian life we must know God in all
His fulness as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Assignment 1.
What are the most important sayings of Christ which wit-
ness to the Divinity Tri-unity?
Assignment 2.
How would you show from Apostolic teaching that belief
in the Divine Tri-unity is essential to Christian faith?
Assignment 3.
Let each member of the Circle state in his own w r ay why
there can be no fulness of the Christian life apart from a
-consciousness of the reality of the Divine Tri-unity.


Application Form.
Please fill in at once, and send to your
Pastor, together with Registration Fee of
One Shilling to cover expenses of printing,
Sc.
I desire to enrol as a member of the
Congregational Study School, at
Name
(Mr., Mrs., Miss)
Address
Any further particulars can be supplied by your Pastor, or
by either of the following;—
Rev. W. J. L. Gloss, Independent Hall, Collins Street
Rev. G. J. Williams, 31 5 Little Collins Street.
Please register as soon as possible, in order that
the Circles may be made up.


• •




