

pe r-n+ ivn
5 s. .83
Hfuaiojs pahs
BOX IO
CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION
OF VICTORIA.
I.—NAME.
The Society shall be called The Congregational Union and Mission of Victoria.
lI.—CONSTITUENCY.
1. It shall consist of Evangelical Churches, Mission Stations, Personal Members,
and Institutions in the colony of Victoria, constituting the Union on the tenth day of
October, 1882; admitted, formed, or affiliated after that date, as hereinafter mentioned;
subscribing to the funds of the Union in all cases hereinafter required; continuing
in membership (whether begun before or after that date) in accordance with the rules
hereof for the time being ; and coming under one or other of the following descriptions,
viz
(а) A church of the Congregational order.
(б) A church known as a Union Church, i.e., one in which neither church
membership nor tenure of office is dependent on opinions held regarding the
subjects or mode of baptism.
(c) A Congregational Minister who is a pastor or member of a Congregational or
Union Church in Victoria, or agent of any Mission Station of the Union,
or an accredited minister of any Congregational or Union Church, beyond the
colony coming to Victoria to reside in it, and who failing or ceasing to hold
the office of pastor or agent aforesaid shall be, or become within nine months
after his admission to the Union, or cessation of office as the case may be, and
shall thenceforth continue to- be a member of some Congregational or Union
Church in Victoria.
(d) A member of any Congregational or Union Church in Victoria.
(e) Congregational or Union Church Institutions formed by the Union or affiliated
thereto for all purposes of the Sucoessory Trusts Act, 1878.
2. N.B.—The Union being open to all Evangelical Churches and all institutions of
the Congregational order, against which no reasonable ground of exclusion can betaken,
and comprising all or nearly all such churches and institutions, shall be regarded as
rightfully entitled on behalf of the Congregational denomination to all property set
apart for the benefit of the same denomination and unapplied to the uses originally
intended, and concerning which no trusts for the ultimate disposal of the same shall or
may exist.
lII.—FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE.
This Union fully recognises the right of every separate church to maintain perfect
independence in the government and administration of its own affairs, and therefore it
shall not in any case assume legislative authority or right of interference, save in
the case of churches wholly or partially supported from its funds.
IV.—OBJECTS.
The following objects shall be contemplated by the Union
(а) The promotion of evangelical religion in connection with Congregational
principles of church government by missionary and other operations.
(б) The formation of Congregational Churches, and aiding them when necessary by
pecuniary assistance for a time.
(c) The introduction into the colony of accredited Congregational Ministers, and the
promotion of measures for educating young men suitable for the work of the
ministry.
(d) The cultivation of brotherly affection and cordial co-operation among the
constituent churches and personal members.


(e) The maintenance of fraternal intercourse and occasional correspondence with
Congregational Christians in other parts.
(/) The procuring of statistical and other information respecting the state of the
denomination, and of religion generally in the various districts of the colony.
(ff) The maintenance and enlargement of religious liberty, rights, and privileges, the
asserting and publishing the general opinion of the body on subjects connected
with morals, education, liberty of conscience, and legislation, bearing more or
less on the interests of religion, and generally the considering of any
matter pertinent to the denomination and the taking of any action relative
thereto. ,
V.—THE GENERAL COUNCIL.
Members.
1. The supreme control of the affairs of the Union shall be vested in a General
Council, which shall consist of the following members: —
(a) Representative members appointed by the Constituent Churches and certified by
them to the Corresponding Secretary at least three days before the Annual
Meeting of the Council. Each church to be entitled to send two
representatives, and also an additional representative for every twenty
members thereof above the first thirty.
(6) Personal members of the Union described under (c) and (d) of 11. Constituency.
2. Every representative member on being duly certified, and every personal member
on admission, shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings of the Council: the
former also forthwith to vote and hold any office to which he may be elected in
connection with the Union: the latter, however, to do so only at and after the annual or
half-yearly meeting .subsequent to that of his admission ; but still neither shall at any
time be allowed to vote where he, or the Church or Mission Station with which he may
be directly connected is concerned.
Meetings.
1. The Council shall meet for the despatch of business once at least in every year,
and, if practicable, twice. All arrangements as to time, place, and the number and
order of public services, shall be made by the Executive Committee, subject to any
instructions given by the Council.
2. Special meetings of the Council may be convened on a vote of the Council or
Executive Committee or a written requisition signed by twenty members of either body.
3. The meetings of the Council shall be summoned by advertisements in one or more
of the leading newspapers, and by a letter addressed to the pastor of each Constituent
Church, and to every personal member, and if any such Church be without a pastor, to
one of the deacons or representative members thereof. The notice shall be sent at least
twenty-one days before the time of meeting. But any omission or error in summoning
such meeting shall not invalidate either the proceedings or the meeting of the Council.
4. The standing orders of proceedings at each Annual Meeting of the Council shall be
as follows, except when, and so far as the Council by a two-thirds vote and without the
necessity of a previous notice shall direct
(а) Devotional exercises.
(б) Reading minutes of previous meeting.
(c) Presenting Report of the Executive Committee.
(d) Treasurer’s statement of finances.
(e) Transacting business arising out of Report.
(/) Appointing officers for the next year, viz.: —
Chairman Executive Committee
Treasurer Auditors
Secretaries
(ff) Receiving new Churches and personal members.
(h) Considering any general motions, those of which previous notice has been given
to take precedence.
(i) Transacting any supplementary business.
(j) Concluding devotional exercises. The same order, with the exception of
Clause (/) shall be observed at the half-yearly meetings.


5. At the yearly or half-yearly meeting of the Council, and at no other time,
Churches, and personal members may, upon motions made and seconded and votes taken
thereon, be admitted to the Union.
Powers.
The Council shall have power to do or direct to be done whatever may be necessary
to carry out the purposes contemplated by the Union, and not otherwise specifically
provided for in the rules thereof, and to determine what those purposes are, and what
shall be the construction to be put upon any rule where any reasonable doubt can
be entertained respecting any such purpose or rule ; and such determination shall only
be altered in the way in which rules can be altered under Rule XIV. Provided that
no money shall be voted or liability incurred exceeding the sum of fifty pounds, for
any other purpose than those set forth in Clauses (a) and (6) of Section IV. at any
meeting of such Council unless there shall be present at such meeting thirty members
of the Council.
VI.—OFFICERS AND THEIR DUTIES.
The Council shall annually elect as officers of the Union, and from the members of it
a Chairman, a Treasurer, one or more Secretaries (Corresponding, Financial and Minute),
an Executive Committee and Auditors, and the manner of election shall be as follows
1. Chairman.
(a) At each Annual Meeting a Chairman of the Union shall be elected, who has not
filled the offiee within five years immediately preceding, and who shall
take office at the Annual Meeting next after the one at which he is elected.
(6) Nominations for the office of Chairman must be made in writing, and signed by
not fewer than ten members of the Union, and be forwarded to the
Corresponding Secretary on or before the fifteenth day of August in each
year. No member to nominate more than one person for each election.
(c) The Corresponding Secretary shall report to the meeting of the Executive
Committee in September all nominations which have been duly forwarded to
him, and shall inform every person who has been duly nominated that
his name will be submitted to the Council at the Annual Meeting if not
previously withdrawn by him.
( d) Not less than twenty-one days before the Annual Meeting the Corresponding
Secretary shall send a printed list of the nominees and their nominators to
each member of the Union.
(e) If there be no such nomination, or if every such nomination shall be withdrawn
by the nominee thereof, the Executive Committee may at any duly convened
meeting on or before the day of election nominate one or more qualified
persons, and if none be made by them every member of the Union present at
the time for the election may by ballot vote for any qualified person.
(/) The voting for Chairman shall be by balloting papers. The person for whom
the majority of those present and voting record their votes shall be held to be
duly elected; and in the event of no one having a majority on the first
ballot, there shall be successive ballots, in which the name with the lowest
number on the list shall be struck off, until the requiste majority of those
finally present and voting has been attained by some one, or the casting vote
shall in case of a tie be given by the Chairman or his substitute on the
occasion.
( g ) If there be only one person nominated for the chair the election shall be b
open voting.
(h) Should no election take place at the Annual Meeting, or should the Chairman
or Chairman-elect die, resign, or become incapacitated for the duties of the
office, the Executive Committee shall fill the vacancy so caused.
(i) The Chairman shall be entitled to preside at all meetings of the Council and
Executive Committee, and in his absence at any of such meetings a
Chairman shall be chosen from and by the m embers present to preside until
the end or adjournment of the meeting at which the appointment was made.
2. Treasurer and Secretaries.
(a) The election of Treasurer and Secretaries shall be in such a manner as the
Council for the time being may determine.


(b) The Treasurer shall receive all contributions, pay all grants in aid, discharge
under the direction of the Executive Committee all the obligations of the
Union, and present to the Annual Meeting a statement of accounts duly
audited.
(c) He shall also fumish at the same time a list of such Churches as may be in
arrear for two years contributions or subscriptions.
(<i) The Financial Secretary (if one be appointed) shall see to all financial
arrangements, sign jointly with the Treasurer all cheques drawn on account
of the Union, and otherwise aid him in the discharge of all his duties.
(e) The Corresponding Secretary shall summon all meetings of the Council and
Executive Committee; conduct the correspondence; act as executive officer of
both, and present to the Council the Annual Report of the Executive
Committee.
(/) The Minute Secretary shall take correct minutes of the meetings of the Council
and Executive Committee, and have charge of the minute books.
3. Executive Committee.
(а) The election of the Executive Committee shall be by ballot. Nominations may
be made by Churches in the Union, and sent to the Corresponding Secretary
before the Ist day of October in each year, who shall thereupon prepare a list
of the nominees, and present it to the Annual Meeting, at which additions
maybe made to it by any member.
(б) The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chairman, Treasurer, the
Secretaries of the Union and District Associations, and eighteen members
of the Council, of whom one-half and not more shall be ministers, who shall
be elected at each Annual Meeting and shall have power to fill up vacancies
which may occur during the year among its own members, and in all the
other offices of the Union, and make by-laws compatible with these rules
for its own procedure. The duties of the Executive Committee shall be to
take measures from time to time to obtain the funds of the Union and to
apply the same to the followiug purposes
(a) Defraying the charges, in whole or in part, of bringing ministers out
from Britain or elsewhere.
(6) Engaging ministers or evangelists to labour in suitable spheres.
(c) Assisting weak Churches by grants-in-aid according to their necessities
and the state of the funds.
(d) Purchasing in special oases, as in new townships or other eligible
localities, land suitable for places of worship.
(e) Defraying travelling and other expenses incurred in carrying on the
business of the Mission.
(c) The Executive Committee shall meet once a month, or oftener if necessary.
VII.—DISTRICT ASSOCIATIONS.
1. To make the Union more effective Victoria shall from time to time, as occasion
may require, be divided by the Council into districts of convenient size. For the present
there shall be —
The Melbourne District The Ballarat District
The Geelong District The Beechworth District
The Mount Alexander District The Warrnambool District
2. The members of the Council resident in each district shall within its bounds
constitute a District Association, which shall meet once a year or oftener in such parts of
the district as may seem to it suitable. Its duties shall be ;
(а) To promote union and intercourse among the churches.
(б) To ascertain the state and progress of the several Stations and Churches within
its own district receiving pecuniary aid from the Union, and to report on the
same to the Executive Committee.
(c) To look out new spheres of evangelistic labour in its own district.
(d) To adopt such local measures as may be practicable to provide these spheres
with religious ordinances.


(e) To corresponed with the Executive Committee with a view’ to further the
work and obtain its co-operation and assistance where needed.
(/) To appoint a District Secretary, who shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the
Association and transmit to the Executive Committee an annual report of
the district one month before the Annual Meeting of the Union.
VIII.—FINANCES.
1. The funds of the Union shall be provided by contributions from the Churches,
and by individual subscriptions, donations, bequests, and other appropriate means.
2. Every Constituent Church shall make one contribution at the least every year,
and every personal member, not being a pastor of a contributing church, or agent of a
Mission station, shall annually subscribe five shillings at the least to the funds of the
Union.
3. The contributions and subscriptions shall be payable in advance.
4. The right of any member to to take part in the proceedings of the Union shall be
suspended during any non-payment thereof. And membership shall cease if the
contribution or subscription remain unpaid for two years.
IX.—MISSION REGULATIONS.
Mission Stations.
1. New fields of labour opened from time to time, to be sustained wholly or in part
by the Union, shall be called Mission Stations. In no case shall an agent give his
consent to the formation of a church in the Mission Station under his care without first
obtaining the sanction in writing of the Chairman in Council.
Mission Churches.
2. All Churches receiving continuous aid from the funds of the Union shall, except
in such cases as the Council may determine, be called Mission Churches.
3. Every Church or congregation receiving pecuniary assistance from the Union,
and not being a Mission Church or congregation, when about to choose a minister, shall
be expected to give information of its proceedings to the Executive Committee, in order
to have its concurrence in the measures, and to the maintenance of a cordial under-
standing between such Church or congregation and the| Council. The neglect or refusal
so to do shall be regarded as an intimation that further aid from the Union funds is
declined.
Appointments of Ministers and Agents.
4. The appointment to Mission Churches and Stations, and the removal therefrom of
ministers and agents shall be by the Council, or in the interval of its meetings by the
Executive Committee.
5. Any Mission Church, desiring the re-appointment of a minister will be expected to
make application to that effect two months at least before the meeting of the Council.
Re-appointments will be made at the annual meetings only.
Finances.
6. Each Mission Church and Station will be expected to contribute to the full
extent of its ability to the funds of the Union, and to forward to the Treasurer thereof all
moneys received for the minister’s or agent’s support, and also quarterly an audited
statement showing the amount raised by the Church or Station from all sources, and the
objects on which it has been expended.
7. The stipend of the ministers of Mission Churches, and agents of the Mission
Stations shall be paid monthly, and be forwarded directly to them by the Treasurer.
The amount of stipend shall be a matter of arrangement between the Council, the
minister or agent, and the Church or Station as the case may be. No expenses for
buildings or extra purposes shall be incurred by any Mission Church or Station without
the consent of the Council or Executive Committee previously obtained.
Visitation.
8. The Executive Committee shall arrange for the occasional visitation of all
Churches and Stations receiving aid from the funds of the Union.
Auxiliaries to the Mission.
9. N.B,—The Council desires urgently to press on the attention of the pastors and
deacons of Constituent Churches the importance of forming auxiliaries in their several
localities to raise funds for the sustentation and increase of the mission work.


X.-VICTORIAN CONGREGATIONAL BUILDING ASSOCIATION.
1. ThO Association, being an institution formed by the Union, shall be subject to it,
as hereinafter set forth, but not further or otherwise.
2. The object of the Association is to raise a capital by donations, subscriptions,
collections, and investment, and lend the same at interest for the building, enlarging, or
altering of Congregational Churches, parsonages, colleges, lecture halls, and school-rooms ;
the facilitating the removal of encumbrances thereon, and other things connected with
buildings or sites for the same, but not further or otherwise.
3. The funds of the Association shall be invested under the direction of the
Committee as hereinafter mentioned, in the names of three trustees of the Association,
each of whom shall be appointed from time to time by the Council, and hold office until
the resignation of it by himself, or the determination of it by the Council aforesaid.
4. The general business of the Association, as well as the direction as to loans
or advances, shall be managed by and be under the control of a Committee of five
persons, and of one or two ex-officio members, acting as Treasurer and Secretary, all of
whom shall be members of a Congregational or Union Church or Churches, and shall be
elected every year by the Council aforesaid at the annual meeting, but if no such
election shall then take place, or the said Union shall cease to exist, the retiring
Committee shall hold office from year to year until an election shall take place, as
herein provided. Any vacancy between two consecutive Annual Meetings or between
any elections herein provided for may be filled up by the continuing members of the
Committee. Three members shall form a quorum, and be competent to transact any
business of the Association.
5. Two auditors shall be appointed every year by the Council at the Annual
Meeting, to audit the accounts and report.
6. The Committee may make by-laws, not inconsistent with these Rules, for
managing the business of tbe Association and alter the same from time to time, subject
to approval, variation, or rejection by the Council, and shall present to it at every
Annual Meeting a report of proceedings for consideration and disposal.
7. This Association being an institution formed by the Union, hereby acknowledges
the representative, for the time being, of the denomination described in Rule XL (6)
as the proper representative of this Association.
8. The Council may alter any of the Rules of this Association in the way directed in
Rule XIV.
9. In case the Union should at any time cease to exist, or should fail to appoint
a Committee, as before directed, for two years in succession, then all the powers vested in
the Union shall be vested in the said Trustees for the time being, for the objects and in
the manner above stated as far as circumstances will admit.
XI.—SUCCESSORY TRUSTS ACT, 1878.
To take advantage of the Successory Trusts Act, 1878.
(a) Any Congregational Institution may, upon application and acceptance, be
affiliated to the Union, and still be managed, except as otherwise directed,
under any of the clauses of this eleventh rule as though such affiliation
had not taken place, and such affiliation may, at any Annual, Half-yearly,
or Special Meeting of the Council be discontinued at the option of the
Council, or of any person or persons duly authorised to act on behalf of such
Institution.
(6) The Council shall from time to time appoint a representative of the
denomination called the Congregational Union and Mission of Victoria for all
the purposes of the Successory Trusts Act, 1878. And such representative for
the time being shall, under that Act represent the Union and the Victorian
Congregational Building Association, formed by the Union, and also every
Church, Mission Station, and Institution associated with, belonging to,
or affiliated to it.
(c) The representative for the time being shall, in the case of every Constituent
Church (not being a Mission Church) and also of every affiliated institution,
act as such representative as though he had been directly appointed by such
Church or Institution, and solely for itself and without any interference by the
Council, and shall also in every such case upon any discontinuance of the
Association, affiliation, or other connection as before indicated in this rule,
cease to act for it as such representative, and generally shall upon his
resignation or the determination of his office by the Council for which a right
is hereby reserved, cease to be a representative of the denomination aforesaid
in every respect under the appointment made by the Council for the purposes
of the Successory Trusts Act, 1878.


XII.—INVESTIGATIONS.
1. Any two or more members of the Council may give a simple notice in writing to
the Corresponding Secretary that they intend to bring a charge against a constituent of
the Union, or representative member of the Council, and to appeal to the Council for
a decision thereon. The Corresponding Secretary shall without delay send a copy of
such notice to such constituent or representative member, and in the "case of a Church
to the pastor and one or more of the deacons thereof. And at the meeting of the
Council next ensuing after such notice has been given, a Committee shall be appointed to
investigate the case, hearing the charge, and giving the constituent or representative
every reasonable facility for making a reply thereto, and then to report thereon for the
guidance of the Council, who shall in all cases within its jurisdiction declare its decisions.
2. Every simple notice, investigation, report, and decision aforesaid, with all
appropriate action thereon, shall be privileged, and exonerate all concerned therein from
any action or damages at law.
XIII.—INTERPRETATIONS.
In the rules before set out, except where the subject or context or other provisions
require a different construction
(a) The Union shall mean The Congregational Union and Mission of Victoria.
(6) The term Victoria shall include such adjacent boundaries of neighbouring
colonies as the Council may from time to time declare.
(c) The expression Accredited Minister shall mean a minister whose credentials shall
be satisfactory to the Council or Executive Committee.
(d) The word Congregational shall also include the meaning of the word Independent.
(e) The term Council shall mean the General Council of the Congregational Union
and Mission of Victoria.
XIV.-ALTERATIONS.
The Council may alter, amend, or make additions to any of the foregoing Rules
(except Rule III) provided notice be given of an intention to propose the same by
some member or members of the Union to the Corresponding Secretary full two months
before a meeting of the Council, and the Corresponding Secretary shall notify the same
to the Executive Committee, and insert the purport thereof in a circular calling
such meeting.


MELBOURNE ;
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS,
COLLINS STREET EAST.
