





eillllSAftolAMgM, j
(
<
PAST,
PRESENT,
FUTURE.
An Appeal to the Congregationalists of
Christendom.
s
•>
}
MDCCCLXXXVI.
BRISBANE :
Printed ax the “Queensland Evangelicab Standard w Office,-
William Street. >


PREFACE.
“The first Christians received the Gospel, believed it with all their heart, and
as a natural result they became a Church—a spiritual brotherhood—and they failed
not to hold the truth that drew them thus together. It was dearer to them than
their own life, and they held it fast against the world in arms. The Church in
our time must do the same. Surely she is not to stand by and see the rushing
tide of scepticism and infidelity advance mile after mile until the whole island of
truth is covered by this great inundation and do nothing ? She must defend the
truth, contend for the faith, and raise what dykes and mounds she can to beat back
the rising deluge.” (“Divine Order,” by Thomas Jones, page 336.)
“Back of all the theories and imperfect explanations of religious truth, there
stands a silent judge, the heart of that humanity which is larger than
individual thought. Such a judge is quietly recording the infallible
verdict against all that is untrue, or approving all that is genuine
and final in the results of sincere enquiry The factors of a true
theology are ngw in our possession as they have never been before in all the
Churches history The interest in foreign missions which characterises the
Church to-day, bears witness to the deep seated conviction that the Incarnate
Christ stands in organic relation to humanity the communion of men
shall become the communion of Saints, and God shall have fulfilled the meaning
and the promise of the incarnation.” (“Continuity of Christian Thought” by
Alexander V. G, Allen).


An appeal to the
Thk last meetings of the Congregational
Unions maintain the interest felt by all in the
progress of the Christian Church. From our
own local standpoint, taking the Rev. J. T.
Waraker as the exponent of the views of the
Congregational body, it is not to he denied
that as claimed for him his address was one
of “exceptional power;” and that he pleaded
not only “for a iree theology but for greater
liberty in congregational worship, contend-
ing that there would he more life and interest
in the public services if there were less uni-
formity of method.”
Whilst acknowledging the force of such
utterances, it is to be regretted that having
gone so far, the Congregational body goes
no further; for, reviewing the avowals of
kindred Congregational Unions in the sister
colonies, we find no advance beyond the
Jubilee utterances of 1883—which, while
evidencing a sincerity of religious toleration
and acknowledgment towards all who pro-
fess the Lord Jesus Christ as our Master,
and His Word as the revealed Word of God,
there is a manifestly remarkable omission of
any allusion to Distinctive Doctrine
and the Spiritual Meaning of the Bible.
These questions cannot be evaded. The
Church of Christ must provide and lay
down sound doctrine. It is exceedingly
good when contending for religious liberty
to strike hard for a “free theology,” and
“ greater liberty of congregational worship
but the unaided human intellect will very
soon create a Babel—a confusion of tongues,—
one saying Christ is here, another saying He
is elsewhere. That this consideration is
vital the words of the Rev. George Clark
(an eminent Congregational minister in a
sermon preached by him at Hobart, on
30th August last, on Inspiration) come at an
appropriate time. He says, “It was Calvin
who set up a theory of mechanical infallibility
for the Bible as against the infallibility the
Roman Catholics claimed for the Church, and
his conception disavowed in words still
lingers loosely and almost unconsciously, in
the thoughts of some Christians to this day.
Now the importance of clearing up this point
is immense. If, on all subjects, the literal
Congreqationalists
—-»OOOcjj§oOCC«
P? 3355/rB5BB
16 ~t>~TT
of Christendom .
accuracy of every sentence in the Bible from
Genesis to Revelation, is to be insisted on,
and the truths of Christianity are to stand or
fall together, I do not for a moment hesitate
to tell you, that, as matter of argument, you
cannot keep your Christianity. If you insist
upon it that to be inspired means to be
absolutely infallible, I ask, Infallible in what ?
Is it in moral or religious truth ? Or is it
also in scientific truth, circumstantial truth,
grammatical truth, philosophical truth —truth
in geography, geology, zoology, in dates,
numbers, names, genealogies—in truth, in
short, of every kind ? Is it scientific truth to
talk of the sun rising and setting, of the sun,
moon, and stars being ministering lights to
our little planet, of the earth with its pillars
and foundation Is it circumstantial
accuracy in all the Gospels to report the title
on the Saviour’s cross, and yet for each to
give it differently.”
Row we need” not with our knowledge of
history review Mr. Clarke’s words and escape
the facts, as minds have differed, so with the
progress of religious liberty since its emancipa-
tion of the Christian Church from the
dominion of Rome the adaptation of religious
liberty has been the initiation of a thousand
and one sects, each and all calling themselves
followers of Christ.
Confining our consideration to the Congre-
gational Church we find it affirming as its
base a belief in the incarnation the atoning
sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, His
resurrection, ascension, and mediatorial reign,
and the work of the Holy Spirit in the renewal
of man ; but how are these propaganda under-
stood ?
Beyond question these are the vital and
elementary foundations upon which the
Church of Christ must be built. The incar-
nation the chief corner stone. The atoning
sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, revealed in
the 53rd chapter of Isaiah. His resurrection,
ascension, and mediatorial reign as declared to
John in Patinos, “lam the first and last, I
am he that liveth, and was dead, and behold
I am alive for evermore [and the work of the
Holy Spirit in the renewal of man], and have
the keys of hell and of death."


. We need therefore spiritual laws for en-
lightenment upon the source of spiritual life,
lest like Pilgrim we fall into the Slough of
Despond.
As spiritual beings the origin of our
spiritual life will be found in the 53rd chapter
of Isaiah, but we must first understand the
wrath of God and what it means.
The state of religious thought upon these
points amongst Congregationalists is in a state
of transition, if we may judge from the
utterances of some prominent Congregational
theologians, that we shall review respectively,
who speak as follows ; '
Henry Ward Beecher, in an English paper,
is reported to say
The only atonement that this universe
needs is that heart in God, which we see in a
woman towards her babe. And the atone-
ment of Jesus Christ is but the interpreta-
tion into human conditions of that great orb
of Divine patience and love, which is rearin°'
up its great influence through the ages, and
by the power of its redeeming love. The
love of God is the salvation of the human
family ; don t put anything else between.
You ask me what do you do with the Scrip-
tures? I wish I had time to tell you,, but not
this morning. Christ Jesus came to super-
sede the laws of the Old Testament; and the
Jews, faithful to the last to their national
belief, refused Christ, because they said, ‘We
cannot give up sacrifice.’ ‘We cannot give up
our Mosaic laws.’ Paul found it necessary,
therefore, to say to them, ‘ Christ Jesus don’t
require you to abandon it in any unfavourable
sense ; He Himself stands as a superior power
to do for you what Moses undertook to do for
you by those mechanical and vicarious
arrangements,’ And so there is an argument
running through Paul’s letters to show chat
Christ redeemed man by making the laws
honourable ; by satisfying the law as the Jews
were themselves bound by it.
“All the theologies interpret it to mean
that God had, before He could redeem man, to
satisfy some public sentiment in heaven, or
some system of laws universal and eternal ;
whereas the doctrine that Christ brought into
this world was that the love of God is so from
eternity to eternity, and that out of that love
springs both influences and possibilities for
the redemption of mankind.
“ But we are not to go on wearing
the old vestments, and the old instrm
mentations of worship of the Jewish
people to eternity. We have the liberty of
thought and feeling, and the impassioned
liberty of love of the New Testament, free
from all the rubbish of Jewish institutions.”
We have now to descend and listen to
another Congregational theologian, Dr. Cook,
who says, “ We require a light to guide us
through the darkness, which lamp He says is
in the Divine Word. He sees in the darkness
revealed in letters of glowing light the word
Atonement. As reported in the Morning
Light, of the 4th January, 1879.
ihis is another certainty in religion, and
provides the screen which can obliterate the
past. You proceed to illustrate it by a king
who had made it a law in his array that any
deserter should be punished with one thou-
sand stripes. One of his soldiers deserts;
but thinks better of it, repents and voluntarily
returns. The king’s heart is melted ; he fain
would forgive, but his law requires the
penalty. The king himself resolves to save
him. He bares his own kingly shoulders to
the lash, and, as the soldiers substitute, en-
dures say ten stripes in satisfaction of his own
law ; and then he restores the soldier to his
place in the ranks, where the soldier must still
tight and perform his duty. Yet though the
fact remains that he did desert, this punish-
ment of the king’s in his stead is as a screen
which shuts out the past. It can no more be
remembered against him. Law is satisfied.
The past is blotted out.
.Respecting the above the following words
of criticism occur in the current literature of
the day :
“If religion consists in mere subterfuges it
may pass. But it cannot be pleasing to any
one who believes in God—who regard him as
Infinite Love and Wisdom—to hear His char-
acter thus maligned. It is somewhat satis-
factory to find He realises that there is only
one God Still the horrible view He
gives, by implication from His parable of the
nature and dealings of that one God with us
His creatures, is so utterly repugnant to even
our feeble thoughts of love and mercy that the
whole head is sick, and the whole heart
grows faint with a pitying agony at the con-
templation. It may be painful, but it is
salutary to analyse it. God is a king, it says,
who has enrolled an army and made laws for
its regulations. These laws are simply the
expression of His arbitrary will. If any
soldier transgress them he must be punished
with one thousand stripes. No provision
whatever for mercy has been made in the
original law. When one deserts and returns
voluntarily repentant, it shakes the whole
scheme which had never contemplated such a
decent, conscientious, dutiful, loving act as
this. It surprises the king, touches His
heart, He feels He ought to forgive and con-
done ; bat the foolish law He has foolishly
made stands in His way, and His pride will
not permit Him at once to alter it. He tries
a compromise. He takes the deserter’s place
in semblance only, and suffers for him one
per ce.nt. of the legal penalty. , Could a more
contemptible mockery of honesty and justice
be imagined? Such conduct shows His own
contempt for the justice of His own law,”
From “ Plain Words to the perplexed about
the Soul’s Salvation,” in a tract published by


the Congregational Union of England and sin without the humiliation of confession and
Wales:—“The pardon of your sins is secured the sorrows of penitence on the part of the
by the death of Christ. God has not left offender.”
your pardon to depend on a perhaps. He
does not take security from you or from any-
thing in you in order to enable him freely and
fully to forgive you, but since He is holy He
must take security somewhere. He must
insure your pardon, not merely by attending
to His own desire to save you but by obeying
the laws of justice. If God lets the sinner
go free how is He a just God ? We can
uuderstand His kindness in such an action.
But there is something in our consciousness
which is ever asking the question, How can a
holy God receive transgressors in His favour ?
And we cannot answer that question satisfac-
torily till we believe that God sent Christ to
bear our sins for us and to suffer on the cross
for us. Christ’s death enables God honourably
to forgive you ; Christ Jesus was wounded for
your transgressions ; He bears the blow which
ought to have fallen on you ; He takes the sins
that are yours and bows before their heavy
load so that you may be freely forgiven and
released, In one word, He makes a full
atonement before God for your sins
Believe that it is the all-suffering and reason
of your salvation. You need nothing more
than His atonement. His outpoured life—
His voluntary death —His blood suffices.
Seek no further plea God declares
that Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our
sius Your sin merits death and you
know it Let this be your plea before
God .... that Christ died for sinners, and
that He died for you.”
In the above Jesus Christ is said to make a
full atonement before God. But the Chair-
men of Congregational Unions must explain
how such an assertion corresponds with the
words of Isaiah xliii. 10, 11: “Before me
there was no God formed, neither shall there
be after me. I, even I, am the Lord ; and
beside Me there is no Saviour,”
Isaiah’s words are perfectly reconcilable
with God manifest in the flesh, but “Plain
Words to the Perplexed ” distinctly asserts a
duality of Gods —Jesus Christ and God, two
distinct persons, in the face of the words,
“ Beside Me there is no Saviour,”
From this complication let us turn to the
happier views of Dr. Parker, an eminent
Congregational divine, who says in his book
“Ecce Deus,”page 238: —“It is not uncommon
to represent the sacrifice of Jesus Christ as
being a satisfaction to Divine justice, an ap-
peasing of the Divine anger, a quenching of
the fire that is in God. There is a sense in
which these terms are true, but the terms
hive been most foully abused and most
disastrously applied It is
an unjust justice that is satisfied with the
suffering of an innocent being ; but a most
holy and righteous justice that cannot pardon
An affirmation most thoroughly amplified
by a commentator of the Lord’s Church in
words which practically form a continuation
of Hr. Parker’s sentiments as follows :—■ “We
have admitted the claim of Divine justice to
satisfaction Who is to satisfy its
demands ? .... So far as it can be satisfied
at all it must be satisfied by him who offends
against it. By no other than the sinner him-
self. . . . The inviolable law of Divine justice
is, “ The soul that sinneth it shall die,” Ezek.
xviii. 20. Hot less inviolable is the law, “If
the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
hath committed, and keep my statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live, he shall not die.” Justice only can be
satisfied by the sinner’s ceasing from sin, and
doing righteousness. Every one must do this
for himself, not indeed by his own strength,
7 J wi 1 j
but by the Spirit of the Lord within him.
No Divine attribute can be satisfied except by
implanting itself in our hearts and minds so
as to make us partakers of the Divine nature.
(2 Peter i. 4.)
“Operating through His Divine Word, He
draws the souls of men to Himself, as the sun
might be supposed to draw back to itself by
an augmented power of attraction, a planet
that had wandered out of its orbit. This is
the at-one-ment in its true sense, the recou-
ciliation of man to God.” (Abridged from
Bruce’s Commentary on the Revelation xiii. 2,
which all Congregationalists are recom-
mended for their own benefit to procure and
read.)
The world around is spiritually dying and
perishing through the need of the regeneration
of the Lord Jesus Christ. “Ye must be born
again.” When man was created he was raised
above the animals by receiving the breath of
God, whereby he became a living soul; his
organisation containing a living soul from God
within an animal nature ; but when the Lord
clothed Himself with our common humanity,
our organisation became higher : we could
become recipients of heavenly influences
higher still through the fountain of our Lord’s
divine humanity. A new degree was opened
in our organisation so that we could become
temples of God.
The Rev. T. Jones, Congregation dist, says,
“Divine Order,” page 336: “The first
Christians received the Gospel, believed it
with all their heart, and as a natural result
they became a Church- a spiritual brother-
hood—and they failed not to hold the truth
that drew them thus together. It was dearer
to them than their own life, and they held
it fast against the world in arms. The Church
in our time must do the same. Surely she is
not to stand by and see the rushing tide of
scepticism and infidelity advance mile after


The Rev. Thomas Jones, Congregational
minister, in his book, “Divine Order,'’ page
246, says :—“If there be a solitary wander-
ing planet that has lost its way in the deep
heavens, let it come within the boundaries ot
the solar system This symbolises to
mile until the whole island of truth is covered carnate Christ was local; the Holy Spirit is
bv this great inundation and do nothing? universal; the fleshy Christ was a Jew ;
J . IP .1 _ ci • -A. 1_ JI l
She must defend the truth, contend for the
faith, and raise what dykes and mounds she
can to beat back the rising deluge.”
And we may ask, What is the mission of
Congregationalism now that the submerged
continent of Christian truths is re-appearing
above the surface of the deep ?
Spiritual Congregationalism claims to be the
Lord’s Church. It recognises Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists as tech-
nical definitions adapted to the peculiarly
composed minds that find in such technicalities
a definition of their religious life; they are
but each in its own form distinctive classifica-
tions of technical Congregationalism.
But Spiritual Congregationalism comes from
the “ Spirit of God, which is the teacher of the
Church, and willleadit by ever-ascending stages
of knowledge to the perfect and yet progressive
wisdom. ”--(Dr. Jefferis, Congregational Jubilee,
Sydney, 1883.) This is the Lord’s Church,
which is confined to no sect, being a new state
of life and faith in the Christian Church, in
which the Lord alone will be worshipped.
Congregationalists have no necessity to go out-
side their own denomination for the doctrine
of the Lord’s Church ; they already have it,
although they may not have appropriated it
distinctively. Let us see.
The Lord’s Church says
(I.) “There is one God, in whom there
is a Divine Trinity, and that He is
the Lord Jesus Christ, which is called
the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit.
The Father is the Divine Soul or Essential
Divinity ;the Son is the Divine body or the
human nature which God assumed, when He
was born in the world and which He glorified ;
the Holy Spirit is what proceeds from the
Lord.”
Congregationalism says
Dr. Parker, “ Ecce Deus,” chap. iii., page
27, says :—“ According to the Christian writ-
ings we know nothing of the Holy Ghost
except in connection with Jesus Christ, to
speak therefore against the Holy Ghost is to
speak against Jesus Christ Himself, not as He
appeared when He took upon Him the form of
a servant, but as He was originally in the
form of God.”
The Lord’s Church continues
“ Since this glorification is that by which the
ord is present with us, and able to regenerate
us, the soul of God could only be seen by
means of the body, hence our Saviour said, ‘ I
and My Father are one.’ ”
Congregationalism says
Dr. Parker continues :—“As we have
already said, truth is larger than the material;
the Holy Spirit greater than any personal
manifestation possibly could be. The lu-
the Spirit-revealed Christ is the brother of
every man; the embodied truth walked
within certain geographical limits, but the
spiritual truth is unlimited in range and
inexhaustible in power. ”
The Lord’s Church says
“ Since the Lord glorified the body He as-
sumed, He can be more intimately present to
help us than He was before. Hence, we read
that the Holy Spirit was not yet because that
Jesus was not yet glorified. He is now the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, for in Him
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily.”
The Lord’s Church says
(II.) “That a saving faith is to believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ as our Creator, Re-
deemer, Sanctifier, Saviour.”
Congregationalism says
some degree the relation of the believing
soul to the Saviour; it lives and moves
and has its being in Christ as its element
—in His love, in His protection, in His
holiness, in His Spirit, in His peace, and
finally in His glory. ‘Enter thou in the joy
of thy Lord.’ Paul would know the power of
Christ’s resurrection, not the power which
raised Christ from the dead, but the power
which His resurrection exercises upon the
mind that believes in Him.”
The Lord’s Church says
(ITT.) “That evils are to be shunned;
shunned, because they are of the devil, and
from the devil.”
Congregationalism says
The Rev. Thomas Jones, page 262, “Divine
Order,” says :—“There was a commotion in
the deep. First of all the the ten horns came
to sight, rose like a forest from the deep
waters ; then the ugly head, on which John
read distinctly the name of blasphemy
Hungry, eager, fierce ; the monster hovered.
.... The eyes glared to all the points of the
compass at once ; the hungry mouth seemed
eager to devour its prey ; the horns looked
ready for any destructive purpose, and every
portion of the unsightly monster quivered
with fiendish energy.
“Well, what does this vision mean’ It
means this : That the power of evil being out
of harmony with the laws of nature, we can
never fall into the order of God’s universe
while we are moved by the power of evil.
Truth is an angel of light, majestic, har-
monious, symmetrical; falsehood is a phantom


Congregationalism says
The Rev. Thomas Jones, “Divine Order,”
page 279, says ; —“It is good works that your
Father wants you to do. But .... what
are good works ? Now, to take them up to
the highest region, and look at them in the
New Testament light, good works have three
elements in them. .... 1. Good works have
Congregationalism says :
The Rev. Thomas Jones, page 281, “ Divine
n r <W ” aava :—“ To do good works inspired
by love, and inspired by God s
Holy Spirit,
this is the grand thing
Good works
are ordained of God. Created in
, Christ Jesus
unto good works which God
hath before
ordained that we should walk in them. , . .
God thought of you before you existed. He
resolved that you should be. . .
assaults of the enemy simply futile
The record of the temptation is an act of
cruelty if it have no bearing on human
strife and that everv answer is
available for every tempted man
One fact will show that the temptation of
Christ was designed to be a source of strength
to every tempted man. All the temptations
are such as might have been addressed to a
merely human being The tempta-
agly to the sight.
beauty ; wickedness is a monster having seven
heads and ten horns, which came into exis-
tence against the order of nature. Religion is
spiritual melody ; infidelity is the wild scream
of harshest discord.’’
The Lord’s Church says .
(IV.) “That good actions are to be done,
because they are of God and from God.”
their origin in love. The redemptive work of
God was caused, we are told, by love. The
life, the sufferings, the sorrows, and the
death of the Redeemer, are explained by say-
ing that He loved us, and therefore gave
Himself for us. 2. Good works are always
inspired by the Holy Ghost He
inspires the love, and the love gives existence
to the good works. 3. Created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God hath
before ordained that we should walk in
them.”
The Lord’s Church says
(V.) “That these good works are to be done
by us as from ourselves. But it ought to be
believed that they are done from the Lord,
with Him, and by Him.”
should do good works—to do good works
which belong to you alone. Just as in nature
the tree is created to bear a particular fruit.
The Lord’s Church says
“The Lord, who is Jehovah from
eternity, came into the world that He
mbdit subdue the hells and glorify His
humanity. Without this no mortal could
have been saved \ and all aie saved who be-
lieve in Him, and lead a life according to His
commandments. There now perpetually flows
forth from the glorified and Divine Humanity
a sphere of quickening life which is capable
of regenerating those who were previously
dead in trespasses and sins When
our Lord was on earth in the humanity he
sustained the temptations and direful assaults
of the infernal legions, and by the power of
the indwelling Divinity encountered and over-
Goodness is the Divine threw them. In these conflicts the humanity
of the Lord was assailed in every possible way
by the utmost malignity of the hells. But in
every struggle he was victorious and every
conflict was the means of both subduing the
hells and glorifying His humanity. It is thus
that Jehovah reconciled the world to Himself,
and accomplished the work of redemption.”
Dr. Parker, “ Ecce Deus,” page 1 :—“Deep-
est and truest amongst its lessons is the doc-
trine that man must have a Christ.”
Page 238 : “ It is not uncommon to represent
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ as being a satisfac-
tion to Divine justice, an appeasing of the
Divine anger, a quenching of the fire that is
in God. There is a sense in which these
terms are true, but the terms have been most
foully abused and most disastrously applied.”
Bruce, an eminent commentator of the
Lord’s Church says :—“ We do not object to
the principle that the justice of God required
satisfaction and His laws reparation. What
we object to is the idea that the justice of
God could be satisfied with substituted pun-
ishment, and his laws with substituted obedi-
ence. This is an impeachment of Divine jus-
tice far more injurious than any sin a man
could commit. (The above is almost identical
and has no difference in meaning with Dr.
Parker’s preceding sentence.)
Congregationalism says
Dr. Parker, however, endorses the deep sen-
timent of the Lord’s Church on the atonement
when he says (“ Ecce Deus,” page 50) : —-
“The weary aching heart cannot feed on
metaphors or the cunning sleights of rhetoric.
Give it a Christ tempted, yet victorious, and
the fact that one man has overcome the devil
will sustain its own endeavours in the same
daily conflict.” Page 53 ; “Every assault is
met on the human side. To have met the
tempter otherwise would have been to deflect
from the only course possible to man, and to
have divested the wilderness period of the
Incarnation of all th 3 features which endear
it to probationary manhood.” Pages 44 —48 :
“Christ was open to all the results of diabolic
seduction, but there was in Him that perfect
trust in God which rendered the fiercest
Christ is the Word. The Word of Cod is
tion was a movement towards humanity on the
part of Christ.” Page 53: “The tempted
man shelters himself behind the ramparts of
the written word.”


. . This was certainly Christ’s plan, of move-
ment, not in a sudden and startling manner,
bewildering the understanding with recondite
dogma. .... but charming him into deeper
companionship until . . .. . he became a
consecrated disciple.”
Dr, Rosely (Congregationalist) says: —“I
find an insuperable difficulty in accepting the
presented words of any master but the King
of Truth And further that loyal
quick and powerful. The written word is our 111. That we must shun evils as sins against
medium, our mediator between God and man. God.
Parker truly says : —“ The weary aching
heart cannot feed on metaphors or the cunning
sleights of rhetoric (page 157). Men must be
met at the points where remedial ideas are
most needed and will be best understood. . .
Christians are protesting against being bound
by the dicta of divines of the sixteenth
century, who lived in times exceptionally un-
favourable to a calm and impassioned judgment
on matters so serious and difficult.” These
are the men of whom Dr. Parker may truly
say, that through their misinterpretations the
literal sense of the 53rd chapter of Isaiah has
been foully abused and most disastrously
applied. Under the clouds of the letter in
that chapter, the Sun of Righteousnes is
shining “the profound truths of the Incarna-
tion.” Now, if you take your untutored little
boy at sunrise, and tell him the earth is
moving, he will say, as he sees it rising o ver
the tops of the trees, “Father, you are
gammoning, I see the sun moving.” So much
for appearances, and and we may hereafter
discover that all the glimpses of glory we
have seen under the clouds of the letter in the
53rd chapter of Isaiah, are insignificant to what
lays before us. As children, we imagine the
Sun of Righteousnes moves, but He is eternal
and infinite ; it is the depths of humanity
that require revolutionising, but how can
they be stirred from their depths but by an
Incarnate Christ standing in organic relation
to humanity.” Where are we to find him but
in His Word. “Search the Scriptures for they
are they wffiich testify of me.” How ; are we
to search them in their literal sense only ?
Certainly not; for to write these Divine words,
holy men of God spake as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost. (2 Peter i. 21.) We must be
so far inspired that we need the living pre-
sence of Christ to enlighten and open our
understandings, through our accomplishment
of His will which the Lord’s Church on earth
teaches us how to enter upon by acknowledg-
ing—
I, The Lord Jesus Christ as the Alpha and
Omega of our spiritual life—the first and the
last; who is, and who was, and who is to
come.
IV. We must be created in good works in
Christ Jesus.
V. That for all we accomplish to Him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever.
T >at the hope of Christendom is the
glorified humanity of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.
It is to be be presumed that when Mr.
Waraker propounds “a free theology, and
greater liberty in Congregational worship,”
he maintains the reservation of trying all
things, but holding fast to what is good.
The original mission—the procuring of
national religious liberty—for which Congre-
gationalism came into existence, has been ac-
complished, so that it is now pluming its wings
for another flight. Distinctive doctrine it
has none. Dr. Parker, Cook, Ward Beecher,
and “ Plain Words to the Perplexed,” in
their opposite utterances are irreconcilable.
Some of their sayings are manifestly from the
light and warmth of heaven ; the opposites
are the dark shadows of hell. Who will
show the true doctrine, that will make the
one shine brighter and clearer, as the shining
light unto perfect day. And dash the*
opposite Babylonish little ones, the germs of a
corrupt Church, back into hell. There is a
mistaken hypocondriacisra which says,
“ Avoid criticism,” or, “Peace, peace, when
there is no peace”; nurturing a serpent of
falsity to destroy truth. Congregationalism
must now put its foot down on the rampant
inconsistencies that are promulgated in its
name or it must pass away as a dead Church,
which has accomplished its mission, to make
room for another to follow. Its system of
Church government is complete, a perfect
model of a sound system of effectiveness.
All it wants is heavenly doctrine,
and then it will enlighten the world
from mental darkness, otherwise when the
Master comes and finds Parker and Ward
b’eecher giving one doctrine, Cook another,
and “ Plain Words to the Perplexed,” giviim
another —well, some will have to go and buy
proper oil— true doctrine —with which to
trim their lamps, and when they return the
door will be shut. We are, therefore, jus-
tified in asking, Is Congregationalism to-day
alive or dead ?
The annual meeting, May, 1878, of the Con-
gregational Union, did, in a certain sense,
re-affirm its evangelical tenets, but without
distinctness or precision, leaving unexploded
torpedoes in every direction. The old fos-
silised element sought with vigour to maintain
its compact integration, but w>as nevertheless
powerless to curb the progressive aspirations
of the Baldwin Brown’s and the Parker’s, and
so a peace was supposed to be patched up, but
the conflicting theology we have quoted,
shows that it never was a peace, or likely to
11, That we are saved by believing on Him
and trusting to Him as our Redeemer, Sancti-
fier, and Saviour.


Will it make the world better or worse ?
It is erroneously supposed by those who
have not taken the opportunity to know better
that the Lord’s Church on earth is a mystical
Church, that it does not descend to mundane
affairs. Whether such be fact or not will be
seen from the following observations of one
of its ablest commentators, Rev. W. Bruce
who says ;—
“ The main object of the sincere Christian
must ever be to allow the light of truth in his
own mind to become instrumental in effecting
in him, and by him, the will of its author. . .
. . Think not I am come to destroy the law
and the prophets. That all religion has
relation to life, and the life of religion is to
do good. Religion is justly defined to be the
bond of connection between man and his
Maker, and what can possibly connect
man with his Maker, but conformity
on the part of man to his Maker’s will,
producing in a finite manner similarity
of character ? What is God but the
source of all good. Goodness itself, that
has given origin to all things with a view to
their enjoyment of the blessings suited to
their nature, and to man especially that he
might be the subject of blessings of the highest
order, having a capacity to reflect orT his
condition and his privileges to know his God,
and to be made a partaker in His finite
measure of the perfections, and thus of the
felicity of his Creator ? . . . . Man must re-
be peace, on a solid basis. There is no chastened and purified, will become temples
denomination in Christendom that possesses a of the living God. ‘ Greater works than these
more glorious history than the Congregation-
alists ; few of its members realise it. It does
not require to go outside of itself for a creed.
Taking the advanced heavenly utterances of its
foremost men, and formulating them into
standards from time to time will make it a
progressive Church with a theology adapted
to the times.
Whenever an object is manifested to our
conscience as being right and proper, that
forms the Lord’s command to accomplish it.
Let others follow ; we have done our duty.
Columbus has sighted America, let the Old
World lag behind and starve if they prefer
to do so with a prolific continent brought
within their reach.
Congregational Unions of Christendom,
your Master calleth ; gird on your armour, and
marshal your doctrine, to release a world
from the fetters of false persuasions ; false
persuasions that are the fostering suslainers of
all the infidelity and wickedness that now
disfigures Christendom,
Whilst the Egyptians of deluded pretensions
and presumptions blasphemy, dwell in a dark-
ness that can be felt, you have light in
your dwellings wherein you can discern how
to promote the personal reign of Christ on
earth, by that condition of preparation akin to
that which John the Baptist before you
preached in the wilderness. Congregational
Unions of Christendom, your responsibility at
this era of the Christian Church is immense.
God has raised up men in your ranks, and
gifted them with light from heaven of no mean
order; with you rests the responsibdity of
conjoining all the warmth and earnestness
of your denomination, preparatory to the
influx of the indwelling spirit of Christ into
the masses of mankind. A day that will come,
a day that must come, because the mouth of
the Lord hath spoken it.
A servant of the Lord’s Church says
“When He comes again, and enters the
general body of humanity, He will occupy
standpoints in the natural plane of every man
who receives Him similar to those which
he occupied in his own material form in
Judea. When He has gathered together His
elect, and arranged and structured them into
the form and order of the heavens, the Divine
influences, through the unobstructed natural
plane of the human mind, will reconstruct the
physical universe according to the laws of
spiritual regeneration, the very elemental sub-
stances and forces of nature will be modified;
theciusesof storms, accidents, diseases, and
all disorderly phenomena will be eliminated.
I'he ferocities of the animal kingdom will
disappear, the lion will truly lay down with
the lamb, the serpent will cease to be
poisonous, and our own bodies, perfectly
shall He do because Igoto My Father.’ Oh,
the power and glory of the actual and organic
descent of that Divine Humanity.” (Dr.
Holcolrne’s Letters on Spiritual Subjects. Dr.
Holcolme is a writer of the Lord’s Church.)
That these are not vague.anticipations, the
Lord has left us the testimony of his trans-
figuration.
“Up to a certain point we have no other
idea of Him than His being a wonderful man.
We may have an abstract idea of power, but
to prevent our having an abstract idea of our
glorified Christ, He was transfigured before
His disciples in the mount; the shape of His
human body was not changed, but only its
quality—the same shape and quality He has
now ; and when we pray with our minds fixed
on the shape and quality He has given us
mentally to perceive the real presence, hear-
ing every word we utter or think. Thus
when He was on earth He made provision for
those in all time to come who believed in Him
that they should have a true idea of His
glorified body through which all good and
truth was to come to His loving children.”
(Extracts from the letter of an American
brother of the Lord’s Church.)
Does the Lord’s Church suit our times ?
act to and from the good which flows into


any respect his own, be imputed to Him, or
even dwell in Him at all. ‘ For verily I say
unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the
law till ait be fulfilled.’ .... The true
shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven.
This does not mean that a person may habitu-
ally break some of the Divine commandments
and teach others to do the same and yet go to
heaven, though he will occupy one of its
lowest places. It means that ail who are in
heaven will think little or meanly of such a
person, so that he cannot enter into their
society at ail; that the low station ho will
occupy will not be within heaven but out of
it. The angels are not beings who will des-
pise one another The most exalted
angel will never think meanly of the lowest.
They who are called least .... are such as
him from the Lord, or it cannot become in
import of these divine sayings, and that which
alone is consistent with the context is that
the moral laws delivered in the Old Testa-
ment, such as that of the Teu Commandments
and similar precepts regarding life and
practice, are not abolished, but onened and
enforced by the Gospel of Jesus Christ
Heaven and earth is a phrase that includes
the whole universe, but by them is spiritually
meant the Lord’s Church in heaven and on
earth. These never can absolutely cease ;
and therefore to say that till heaven ami
earth pass, not one jot or one tittle of the law
shall fail is the same as to say that the
Divine Law or Word can never fail; or in
other words that the Divine Truth is eternal ;
and that it really is so is obvious of itself.
“ Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of
these commandments, and shall teach men so
are least iu every characteristic of human
nature.
“The converse follows of itself, ‘Whosoever
shall do and teach them the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven.’ It
will thus be seen that he who is of a character
truly good is adapted for elevation to heavenly
greatness, this solely depending on man’s
state as to goodness ; whence in the spiritual
sense of Scripture great means good. Who-
ever keeps one of the least of the Lord’s
Commandments from a Duly reverential re-
gard to the will of their author, is in the
perpetual effort to do all the commandments,
and to do so more and more perfectly. And
in where these intentions are seen,
and are what alone are regarded, su h a
person is called great, or is accounted good
notwithstanding the imperfections which may
still adhere to him, and "which he is himself
in | the continual endeavour to surmount.
Therefore, the being called great, like the
being called least, is not made t > depend upon
conformity 10 the greatest of the command-
ments, but to the least, or those which it
requires least effort, least resistance of the
natural inclinations to comply with, because
it is seen that he who keeps even these from
a sincere regard to God in his heart, is in the
life of goodness received from Him, and would
on no account offend him by sinning against
the greater. 1 ' (Abridged from Bruce’s Com-
mentary on Matthew v.)
Such is the mission of the Lord’s Church
on earth, as explained by the Lord’s servants.
Will the Congregationalists scorn them as
doctrinal differences ? Congregational Unions
of Christendom, weigh these words with the
fact that some of your Churches denounce the
Lord’s Church (the New Church and Sweden-
borg’s teachings). (See Rev. Howdeu’s
article, in 1881, on Swedenborg and the New
Church, inserted in the Evangelical Standard,
of Queensland, as a fair specimen of the careless
ass ive Nations and thoughts of those who should
know better.) Is it true that the Young
Men’s Christian Association, of Melbourne,
would not admit the Rev. J. Thornton, the
minister of the Lord’s Church, to their mem-
bership on the alleged grounds that he was
not evangelical ? Examine your own funda-
mentals ; examine the teachings of the Lord's
Church ; be honest ; be true ; and the bound-
aries of Christendom will be enlarged by your
operations.
The signs of the times are very sig-
nificant if we go no farther tf.au Mr.
Waraker’s quotation of the Congregational
father who said, “If Gcd reveal any-
thing to you by any other instrument of
His, be as ready to receive it as ever you
were to receive it—as ever you were to
receive any truth—from my ministry. lam
VERILY PERSUADED, I AM. VERY CONFIDENT,
the Lord hath more truth yet to break
forth from His holy Word. For my part
1 cannot sufficiently bewail the conditions of
the reformed Churches, who are come to a
period in religion and will go at present no
further than the instruments of their first
reformation It is an article of your
Church covenant that you will be ready to
receive whatever truth shall be made known
unto you from the written Word of God. These
were the words of one who, 250 years ago,
suffered exile and banishment for claiming to
say that out of the undeveloped Congrega-
tionalism of Christendom the Lord hath more
truth to reveal.’' One hundred and twenty
years after this Swedenborg was the Lord’s
servant to open the spiritual meaning of the
word which now defines the Lord’s Church
on earth.
And now in our own day there is pro-
claimed from the Congregational housetops
the following memorable and significant words
(as reported in the Beaconsfield Standard, of
6th February last) :
“ Many persons in Swedenborg’s time, and
since, have concluded that he was a victim to
hallucination, and some have gone so far as to


say that he was insane. This no doubt is to
be traced to his pretentions to communions
v ith the spirit world ; but the Rev. E. Paxton
Hood has exonerated him from this charge,
in his eulogistic biography of the ‘ Seer and
Statesman’ of Stockholm, and another Con-
gregational minister in America, complaining
of the attitude of the orthodox towards the
New Jerusalem Church, speaks thus :
“ ‘ The writings of Swedenborg present the
future life an immediate and reality. His
spiritual sight was open for many years.
This gave him an abundant opportunity to
describe the terrors of bell and the glories of
heaven. His works, therefore, strengthen the
faith of Christians, and prove to the world at
large that there is such athing as a future exist-
ence, and that every human being lives for
ever either in heaven or in hell. The writings
of Swedenborg, as I look at them, come as an
answer fco the prayers ol the Church. And if
you will hereafter note carefully the prayers
of others, you will at times hear most earnest
pleadings for just such openings of Divine
Truth, just such spiritual power, and just
such heavenly light, as these writings now
offer us. Yet this light comes so unexpectedly,
and is so brilliant, that it dazzles the eyes of
those even who pray thus ; and instead of
accepting it, they forget their prayers, and,
without investigation ! ! ! commence to argue
against it. In prayer they ask for more
light and more power. In argument they
cover up the light and destroy its pow’er.
They are just like the disciples who were
praying most earnestly for Peter’s deliver-
ance from prison, who when the damsel came
and told them that their prayers were
answered, and that Peter actually stood at
the gate, exclaimed, “ Then art mad,” Look-
ing at the writings of Swedenborg from my
Congregational Church standpoint, they
neither destroy nor take away anything that
orthodox Churches now hold dear. Yet they
add new light and new beauty to every
doctrine and every hope that all devout and
honest Christians everywhere now love and
cherish. Swedenborg must have received
more Divine help than any other writer that
has lived since the Bible was completed. His
writings hear the internal and unmistakeable
evidence of this. Had all the wfise men then
living on the face of the earth been incar-
nated into one man, that one man could never
have written what Swedenborg has written
without Divine assistance. Whence, then,
comes all the present prejudice against this
greatest religious philosopher, this greatest
expounder of the Bible the world has ever
seen ? I cannot conceive, unless it be from
the fact that men’s natural hearts are so
deceitful above all things, and so despektely
wicked, that they do not care to reflect upon
the positive realities of an eternal future
existence. Fearful of hell, they drive away
the thoughts of hell. Conscious of unfitness
for heaven, they have no kelish for the
thoughts of heaven. Therefore they choose
darkness rather than light. Swedenborg may
be said to have given us a new version of
the Scriptures, He has translated them from
“letter” to “spirit;” for with the New
Churchmen it is the “ letter” that has killed
the orthodox Church, and it is the “spirit”
as revealed through Swedenborg that alone
will give life.’ ”
Tracing back 120 years it is no small
endorsement of these utterances from a Con-
gregational housetop to witness all the
reforms that have taken place on the, earth
since the light descended from heaven
through the mind of Emanuel Swedenborg.
Parker’s “ Ecce Dens,” Jones’ “Divine
Order,” amongst Congregationalists ; Thor-
rold’s “ Presence of Christ ” and Allen’s “Con-
tinuity of Christian Thought ” (Episcopalian) ;
Pope’s “Person of Christ ” (Wesleyan), would
never have been written, had not an increased
degree of illumination reached the earth, and
by the Lord’s Providence either by direct
or indirect descent, also the minds of
the authors of these and kindred books
whose name is legion, from all the
denominations of Christendom. For this
purpose the societies of the Lord’s Church
are now in organization; through their
presence and literature on the earth, light,
directly and indirectly, is flowing into every
pulpit of Christendom. For they are not
sects, but new life and faith from the Lord, in
which the Lord alone will be worshipped, and
the Word, the only authority, and keeping the
commandments the only way of life.
“If thou wilt enter into life keep the
commandments.” —Matthew xix. 17.
“ If ye love me keep my commandments.”
“Circumcision is nothing, and uncir-
cumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
commandments of God.”-—1 Cor. viii. 19.
“He that saith I know him and keepeth
not his commandments, is a liar and the truth
is not in him.”—l Jokn ii. 4.
Whence comes all the melodramatic senti-
ment which would say to a deluded sinner,
“ Only believe and you are saved.” He must
not only believe, but take hold of the life line
the Lord Jesus Christ puts in his hands,
namely, the power to keep the commandments
from Christ’s own indwelling spirit, which he
is ready to bestow on application.
“ Father glorify thy son, that Thy Son may
also glorify Thee. Thou hast given Him
power over all flesh that he may give eternal
life to all which Thou has given Him. I have
glorified thee on earth. I have finished the
work which Thou hast given Me to do. I
have manifested Thy name to the men whom
Thou hast given Me out of the world. Thine
they were and Thou hast given them to Me. . .
for all Mine are Thine, and Thine Mine.—


„ , .. f
Matthew xvii. 1 to 10. In which passages by
the Father having been given is signified that
they were from the Divine good which was
His own—thus from His proprium. Hence it
may appear what a deep and secret sense lies
concealed in all and singular the words which
the Lord spake ; also how much the sense of
the letter differs from the internal sense, and
especially from the supreme sense. The reason
why the Lord so spake was, that znan, who at
that time was in total ignorance of divine
truth, might still in his manner and measure,
apprehend the Word, and thereby receive it,
and the angels in their manner and measure,
for these latter knew that Jehovah and He
were One, and that the Father was the Divine
good, hence also they know, that when He
said that the Father gave to Him, it was to
denote that He Himself gave to Himself, and
thus it was from His own proprium. (Arcana
Ccelestia 3,705.)
The divines of the sixteenth century were
almost as much in ignorance of Divine truth
as were the men in our Saviour’s time. They
have propounded their schemes of redemption
in a sort of a way, that unenlightened men
could apprehend. Their dogmas must now be
folded up as worn out garments.
From the Congregational housetops, the
Master’s disciples—the Paxton Hoods, the
Parkers, as well as the sainted author of
“Divine Order,” —have proclaimed in the voice
of the last trumpet, “He is not in these
Dogmas. He is Risen.”
The signal is now to be discerned from the
Captain of our Salvation, Every Congrega-
tional Union oe Christendom is Expected
to do its Duty.


♦
%


