

CONQUERING
the Australian Bush
With Other Chapters
of
OLDSMOBILE
Achievement


FOREWORD
THE motor car, more than any
other factor, is making possible
the even distribution of popula-
tion throughout the world. By doing
so, it is improving and insuring the
public health and is stabilizing (if not
reducing) the cost of living. Therefore,
the automobile can no longer be re-
garded as a luxury; it must be recognized
as one of the most important factors in
the economic life of our age.
Men who, tired of crowded cities,
crave for the open spaces, now build
their homes where they please, confi-
dent that a sturdy automobile will pro-
vide them with dependable transporta-
tion. And business, too, seeking lower
rents and land values, leaves the
beaten tracks, knowing that motor
trucks and vehicles will keep them in
close touch with markets.
The modern American motor car is
husky and powerful enough to master
even the roughest roads and trails. Its
reliability gives to pioneers the courage
to settle off the main road —and the
pioneers, once settled, bring about the
construction of modern roads into their
new settlement. Good roads bring more
production and greater national wealth.


CONQUERING
THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH
The amazing story of a trip over 2000 miles of
Australian swamp and bushland —How Francis
Birtles drove an Oldsmobile across Australia
in the remarkable time of () days and g hours.
THE town of Darwin, which lies on the northern coast
of Australia, was sleeping under a blanket of wet fog.
Cold and clammy felt the air. ’Twas the hour before the
tropical dawn.
The steady roar from the open exhaust of an Oldsmobile Six
echoed and re-echoed from stone building to tin humpy. Francis
Birtles and his companion, Muller, were started at last on their
great adventure —a bold pioneer attempt to drive from Darwin to
Adelaide, over 2,000 miles of mountain and valley and bushland.
Well realizing the gamble of the great Australian game of chance,
and what might be their lot, the two adventurers were subdued
and humble.
The wet season might start at any time. Six inches of rain had
fallen already along the track. Overhead were dark, sullen, storm-
riven clouds; and to the southward vivid flashes of sheet and fork
lightning showed all the fury of a mighty battle-front. The belch-
ing of their exhaust behind them seemed to the two pioneers to
be driving them into the inferno ahead.
Powerful headlights on the Oldsmobile revealed continually
amidst the waving foliage dark, staring objects and scores of stumps,
any one of which could easily wreck the car. Millions of insects
flew about and crept over every portion of the car. They crawled
down the men’s neck, became entangled in their hair, and wrig-
gled into their ears. Huge grasshoppers dashed blindly into Birtles’
face. Spider webs, laden with the corpses of captured insects,
twined themselves around him in great festoons.
Quivering streaks of daybreak were reflected from the grassy
swamps when the adventurers stopped their car, hastily bolted on
their double back wheels, and fastened non-skid chains over all.
Backing on to a stony ridge, they changed rapidly into top gear
and then with suppressed excitement charged a wall of slush so
furiously that matted grass swirled up from the churning wheels.
Break through this dangerous crust, and the car might stay there
for weeks, with floods coming down to submerge it under JO feet
of water. Fully aware of this danger, Birtles and Muller sighed
with relief when they felt beneath their wheels the solid ground
of the first stony ridge. The Oldsmobile 30 had plowed through


The route from Port Darwin to Adelaide .
200 miles of boggy swamps and over steep washed-out mountain
ridges when the Katherine Blue Station was reached and the first
stage of the perilous journey had been accomplished.
The Second Stage
Katherine Blue Station to Alice Springs
(As related by Francis Birtles himself)
“At the Katherine Blue Station we filled our large tanks with
enough petrol and oil to carry us to Alice Springs, our next station,
800 miles beyond; and tarrying only long enough to swallow a
hasty meal of tinned fruit and peas, we pushed onward.
“A team road lay ahead of us for 200 miles. In comparison with
the track behind us, this seemed to be a splendid route. The heat
of a blazing tropical sun came to us in blasts as we speeded through
open forest country scorched to blackness by bush fires which the
aboriginals had lighted while hunting.
“Late in the afternoon, as masses of storm clouds were building up
ahead of us, the grumbling of thunder could be heard plainly above
the roar of our exhaust. Should these storms break, the rivers
would be flooded and we should be prisoners, unable for months,
perhaps, to advance or go back. As a precaution against such
delay, we had carried extra rations with us.
“Our meals —always hastily prepared and eaten —consisted of
one tin of fruit or peas. We never ate a full meal, for to do so would
make us sleepy; and sleep on such a journey must be regarded as
4
CHAPTERS OF OLDSMOBILE ACHIEVEMENT


Strong headlights kept the beasts away at night.
an enemy. Our heavy, tired eyelids had to be washed with eye
lotion three times a day and our wrists were massaged with em-
brocation.
“Darkness found us speeding along natural avenues of gum
trees and pandamis palms. Our powerful lights awoke white cock-
atoos which, with wild screeching, flew blindly into the mysterious
regions beyond. Flying foxes flopped silently to the ground. Little
three-inch kangaroo mice, confused by the glare, hopped about
excitedly and erratically. A sixteen foot snake, hunting for frogs,
was contracting and expanding across our track until a few quick
twists of my wrist brought one of our wheels over his head and
killed him.
“The shadowy outlines of a government well loomed up ahead.
As the edge of a wagon wheel came within the scope of our lights,
a bundle, lying on the ground, came suddenly to life and the sleepy
teamster, throwing off his blankets, muttered something about
airplanes.
“Pulling up at the trough, we put more water in our radiator and
then pushed onward through the rain-sodden darkness of the night.”
The Third and Fourth Stages
For miles and miles the Oldsmobile, running in low gear, pitched
and rolled courageously over a bad stretch of devil-devil plain.
Between high tussocks of grass were wide fissures into which the
wheels dropped with a walloping bump.
5


Birtles and Muller with all their equipment.
Kangaroos, sitting up, grinned at the slow progress of the car
and returned to their breakfast of grass. Over on a stony ridge,
a mangy dingo, squatting on his haunches, scratched himself,
wagged his tongue and disdainfully trotted away.
Soon the track opened out on Daly Waters, where Postmaster
Holtz treated the drivers to a breakfast. Without delaying long
after their meal. Dirties and Muller continued for the rest of the
day through miles of spinifax, mulga, salmon gum, sugar gum,
mallee and grass ten feet high. Here and there were black soil
plains, stony red ridges, washed-out creeks and sandy crossings.
Occasionally they came to a telegraph or cattle station where
hospitality was showered upon them —hospitality they dared not
accept lest sleep might overtake them.
Darkness was setting in when the two adventurers reached
Taylor’s Crossing, a sandy bed a few hundred yards across. The
river had been up and the swirling torrent had raised sand bumps
between which were soft quicksands. With the aid of an electric
torch, Birtles and Muller hastily pegged out a line for their cross-
ing, double banked the tires and charged on second, thus gaining
momentum, which alone would give them safety over the soft
patches. The pathway led right into a big gilgi, a stretch of knee-
deep water. Leaving the car, the two men explored the bottom
by wading and testing with sticks. Engine power alone could
save them, for should they stop in the gilgi, it would take days
of heavy green wood chopping and corduroying to get out. With
low gear in mesh, Birtles let in the clutch carefully and pressed the
6


Chiefs of the Northern Territory and a “ leader ” among motors of the world .
accelerator. At about seven miles an hour, he eased off. The back-
wash of the front wheels was threatening the carburetor and
ignition. More slowly each moment the car moved until one could
almost count the revolutions. The temptation to push in that
accelerator was intense. A bit of dry ground, a touch of the accel-
erator, and the car leaped in response up into second and then top.
Birtles and Muller found themselves mounting up on to tableland
slopes. From that moment their Oldsmobile was to them an object
worthy of adoration.
The Fifth Stage
Central Mount Stuart lay before them, a slab of cold purple
on the sky line. Fat rabbits were bouncing around, big gray plains
turkeys strutted about, pecking at wet, helpless grasshoppers. A
gleam of sunshine created a rainbow which hung over all. Rain
drops glistened like millions of diamonds from mulga, scrub and
spinifax. A hungry hawk circled closely overhead, watching for
small birds which, disturbed by the roaring of the car, might flit
too far from shelter.
Late in’ the afternoon the jagged outline of the Mac Donnell
Ranges showed up. The boggy travelling now gave way to stony
uplands with sandy gravel creek crossings which were managed
easily on second gear.
The Oldsmobile demonstrated a wonderful pulling power on the
troublesome grades met in this area; in fact, its phenomenal per-
7


A young bushman and his bride.
formance surprised even Birtles and Muller, who knew its qualities
so well. Soon the adventurous pair were within a few miles of
Alice Springs and driving over a well-graded track which the
local Sergeant of Police had built the year previously with a group
of natives he had mustered.
The Sixth Stage
“Alice Springs, a town 1000 miles north of Adelaide, was one
of the outstanding points along our route. There we took on sup-
plies of petrol which the storekeeper, Fogarty, had brought up
from Adelaide —700 miles by rail and then 340 miles by pack-
camel. There, too, we enjoyed the hospitality of Sergeant Stott
and his wife, who invited us for dinner.
“The last gleam of sunset was reflected in pools of water which
lay about us as we speeded on through an opening in the towering
ranges to the wide, sandy crossing of the Lodd River. In a slippery
channel a hobbled camel tried to gallop out of our way. The big
padded hoofs slithered helplessly, and down he fell a few yards in
front of the car. Dodging this obstacle, I sighted the familiar sand
crossing by the glare of our lighted lamps. I let the car get
ready to charge on second speed. At 20 miles an hour, we swung
half way across. In a fraction of a second a dark shadow loomed
a car length ahead. There was a terrific bump, then a full stop.
A storm channel ten yards wide had been formed in the sand that
afternoon; into this the car had swung, and was now fast settling
down in the quicksands.
8


Magnetic ant hills—which always point northward.
“The front wheels were on an extreme lock, and buried fore
and aft above the hubs. We had just about reached the limit of
physical and mental endurance and intended to push on to the
edge of the sandhill country, have five hours’ sleep, and get through
the heavy country early in the morning. The thoughts of this five
hours’ sleep had been our mainstay for some days.
“The situation was perilous, as a big storm was brewing up the
river and flood waters might come down at any time. Leaving
Muller in charge of the car, I started back to the town. Several
natives whom I met along the way I sent off immediately to the
scene of our misfortune. At Fogarty’s local store I secured a horse,
ropes and the aid of white men.
“The storm clouds had made the darkness intense and the rain
had turned the bogs into seas of slippery mud, over which we found
our way by the aid of a kerosene lamp which a black boy carried
before us.
“Rud Muller had taken command of the aboriginals. They had
lifted the car bodily for five yards on to firmer sand, and the Olds-
mobile covered the rest of the bad stretch under engine power.
Muller had even taken off the cross steering which was badly bent,
straightened it, and replaced it. When I sighted the car, it was
well established on the other side of the crossing, ready for the
road. Yells of delight went up when I told the “boys” that I had
given an order for £lO worth of stores for them.
“After four hours’ sleep on wet ground, we had another strenu-
ous day of travel through sand country and crammed rivers; and
9


at evening arrived at Oodnadatta Railhead, yoo‘ miles north of
Adelaide. While the storekeeper of that town replenished our sup-
plies of petrol and water, we drank several cups of tea and then,
to the cheering of the inhabitants, started off on the last day of
our adventure.”
The Seventh Stage
“Next day, the Oldsmobile Six was steadily roaring a passage
along the edges of southern Lake Eyre, crossing greasy, muddy,
salt creeks and charging steep sandhills. Nighttime found us
traversing a region of big, open plains. Here I saw a chance of
making up time. A roaring blast came from the open exhaust as,
at 65 miles an hour, the car thundered across; and at one o’clock
in the morning we speeded into Maree. The storekeeper of that
town had left our petrol supplies outside his store. With these we
hastily filled our tanks and rushed on into the darkness. Having
gained on our schedule, we treated ourselves to two hours’ sleep
and then, after more greasing and oiling and a hasty pannikin of
tea, we started toward Adelaide, 500 miles beyond.
“After traveling down the valley of the Flinders Ranges, in the
late afternoon we came to signs of civilization. Creek crossings
had their banks cut out and graded, and washouts were filled in.
The car was as good as when we started but we, ourselves, were
feeling a severe strain. Our speech was so incoherent as to give
one the impression that we were intoxicated.
“About sundown we arrived at our first metal road —a real road
with signposts on it. Then, after dark, the roadsigns disappeared.
Roads branched off in all directions. We took our course by the
stars, picking roads which seemed to be right.
“About one o’clock in the morning we met parties of farmers,
revellers coming home from a fancy dress ball. At daybreak we were
on a straightaway run to Adelaide. With metal roads all the way,
we drove steadily at high speed so that early in the afternoon we
had our first sight of the “Big Smoke” of the city. Through the
heart of the metropolitan traffic, constables gave us the right of
way and, finally, amidst the cheering crowd which had surrounded
Muller, myself and our Oldsmobile, my companion and I clasped
hands of congratulation.
“We had established a Record
of nine days, nine hours and
fifteen minutes.”
CHAPTERS OF OLDSMOBILE ACHIEVEMENT


Roads like this test the stamina of a car.
Oldsmobile Equal to Brazil’s
Worst Roads
CASSIO MUNIZ & CIA., Oldsmoblle distributors in Sao
Paulo, Brazil, recently put the Oldsmobile 30 through a test
which convinced all South America of this car’s power and
endurance. The Oldsmobile Model 30 Touring Car, running only
in high gear, conquered 1,000 kilometers of some of the worst
roads in the world.
The test started from Cecilia Square in Sao Paulo after the
low, reverse and intermediate gears had been removed and the
transmission case had been sealed in the presence of civil authorities
and officials of the local motor clubs. A few hours later it reached
Ribeirao Preto and was greeted by large crowds of interested citi-
zens, who showered much admiration on the Oldsmobile and on
its skillful driver, Sr. Justino Nigro.
The second stage of the contest was a difficult run from Ribeirao
Preto to Jaboticabal over a miserable oxcart trail —through brush,
marsh, ditches, and hub-deep ruts and mire. This stretch was
probably as difficult as any territory over which a car was ever
sent. At Jaboticabal the fuel tank and oil tank were refilled and
Senor Nigro took a much needed rest.
Refreshed after his night’s sleep, the daring driver pushed on
early the following morning over trails which were even more
difficult than those of the day before. Passing through the town
CHAPTERS OF OLDSMOBILE ACHIEVEMENT


of Bebedouro, the Oldsmobile 30 continued bravely to Araraquara,
the end of the 1,000 kilometer run.
The Oldsmobile 30 had stood the test so well that Cassio Muniz
& Company instructed the chauffeur to drive back to Sao Paulo
over the same route. So, at eight o’clock the next morning the
Oldsmobile 30 set out on its return trip.
The last stage of the journey—Ribeirao Preto to Sao Paulo —
was made through a torrential downpour. This stretch —with
countless steep grades and sharp turns —was probably even more
perilous than the earlier stages. But the Oldsmobile 30 stood it
perfectly and, arriving in Sao Paulo, was given a great ovation.
A rough road to cover in high gear.
12


The test car with an outline of the route painted on the rear.
Oldsmobile 30 in High Gear Defies All
Mountains Near Sydney
IN a high gear run of 2,044 miles —including all steep grades
within 100 miles of Sydney—Boyd Edkins, Ltd., Oldsmobile
distributors for that territory, impressed very deeply upon all
Australians the power and endurance of the Oldsmobile 30. This
demonstration was conducted under the supervision of the Royal
Automobile Club of Australia and is fully described in a certificate
issued by that organization and reading as follows;
“This is to certify that, at the request of Messrs. Boyd Ed-
kins, Ltd., 25 Wentworth Avenue, Sydney, a test under the
official observation of the Club was made of the above car
running entirely on top gear. The car was fitted with a complete
five-seater standard body minus hood. The chassis was stand-
ard and to specification in every respect after a removal of
all gear wheels from the gear box with the exception of the
top gear drive. The gear box and rear axle units were officially
sealed. The test took place on twelve successive days from the
7th to 18th of August, 1924, and successfully covered a pre-
selected route of 2,044 miles as follows: Sydney to Sydney via
Stanwell Park, Bulli Pass, Campbelltown; Sydney to Goul :
burn (via Razorback), to Orange (via Crookwell), to Sydney;
Sydney to Muswellbrook (via Wiseman’s Ferry), to Armidale,
to Casino (via Tenterfield), to Grafton (via Lismore and
Coraki), to Taree, to Newcastle, to Mudgee, to Sydney (via
Hill End and Bathhurst). Weight of car with load —2,246 lbs.
The average speed on running time was 25.16 miles per hour.
The average petrol consumption was 22.71 miles per gallon.
At the finish of the test the car was officially timed to cover a
measured mile with a flying start in 66 seconds, equal to
54.5 m.p.h.
CHAPTERS OF OLDSMOBILE ACHIEVEMENT


“ Cannonball ” Baker' s route across the United States.
CHAPTERS OF OLDSMOBILE ACHIEVEMENT


Hairpin turns on high gear—Oldsmobile made them all .
From New York to Los Angeles
in High Gear
A NEW Oldsmobile Six recently accomplished the remarkable
yLA feat of crossing the North American continent from New
JL .A. York to Los Angeles in high gear and, by doing so, estab-
lished a record that will probably stand for a long time, especially
for cars of such exceptionally low price. In covering this distance
of 3,674 miles, the Oldsmobile encountered every conceivable kind
of roads, which put to a grilling test the stamina and ability of
both the car and its driver. There were steep mountain roads which
in many places were little more than rocky pioneer trails; there were
prairies changed to seas of mud by recent heavy rains; and hot,
sandy deserts.
The car was an Oldsmobile 30 Touring car, standard in every
respect except that, to insure the run being made in top gear, the
low, intermediate and reverse gears were removed from the trans-
mission, leaving only the top or direct drive.
It was driven by E. G. (“Cannonball”) Baker, a famous trans-
continental race driver who has made the journey across America
probably more often than any other man alive. Baker has crossed
the continent by motor car and motorcycle 62 times. His most
thrilling trip, he says, was his 62nd trip in the Oldsmobile.
Although no attempt was made to establish a speed record, the
distance was covered in 12 driving days of 12 hours each.
CHAPTERS OF OLDSMOBILE ACHIEVEMENT


M
7fi • 7
C 7J3
