

i
4
| Socialist League. S'
HEAD QUARTERS—
4
j Leigh House, 233 Castlereagh St
i
I svr>mi:v.
■R
.f ~» |


CONSTITUTION AND RULES
OF THE
Australia -q Socialist league,
To come into operation on and after the Ist May , 1892.
Name.
1. That this organisation be called the Australian Socialist
League.
Objects.
2. The objects of the Australian Socialist League shall be the realisa-
tion of State Socialism.
3. The members of this League are expected to subordinate all other
political associations to the Australian Socialist League. Persons
desirous of joining shall be shown this rule, in order that they may
pledge themselves thereto; after so doing they shall be eligible for
membership, subject to the approval of the Executive.
4. The minimum subscription shall be Is. per month, payable in
advance.
5. Any comrade three months in arrears ceases to be a member of
the League, unless disabled through sickness or want of employment.
6. The general meeting of members shall be held on the first
Saturday in every month ; other Saturday evenings to be devoted to
debates on Socialism, Ac.
7. The officers of the Australian Socialist League shall consist of an
Executive of eight members. General Secretary, Financial Secretary,
Treasurer and two Trustees, five to form a quorum.
8. The election of officers to take place at the first general meetings
in January and July respectively. Vacancies may be filled at any
regular meeting, with the exception of the Trustees, who shall be elected
annually in January.
9. Any member of the Executive Committee being absent from three
consecutive meetings, without a satisfactory explanation, his seat shall
be declared vacant, and another elected in his place at the next general
meeting.
10. A complete balance sheet, with statement of assets and liabilities,
shall be presented at the general meetings in the months of January,
April, July, and October, made up to the end of the preceding month.
A statement of the finances of the League to be made at the general
meeting in each month, and at every meeting of the Executive; all
accounts for payment to be passed at such Executive Meeting.
11. The Secretary is instructed to call special meetings if ten
financial members request him to do so. The business to be transacted
at such meeting to be stated in writing to the Secretary.


12. In the event of any member acting contrary to, or betraying the
interests of the Australian Socialist League, his actions shall be first con-
sidered by the Executive, who will decide thereon, referring the matter,
if necessary, to the general body at the first regular meeting, or shall be
empowered to call a special meeting for that purpose, and the offending
member may be expelled only by a majority vote at the same meeting,
the offending member to be summoned to attend.
13. Any member having a grievance must submit the same in writing
to the Executive, who will deal with it, and, if necessary, refer it to the
general meeting for consideration.
Branches.
14. This League shall have power to form Branches in any part of
the colony. Branches shall have entire control over their own internal
affairs, subject only to the Constitution of the Australian Socialist
League.
15. A conference of delegates from all Branches will be held at least
once every six months, such conference to consist of one delegate for
every thirty members, or fraction thereof.
16. The business of the conference shall be the consideration of the
political situation, and what steps should be taken by Socialists through-
out the colony to ensure united action, and such other business as may
properly be brought before it.
17. Members of Branches have the right to speak and vote on all
questions not affecting the internal workings of other Branches. To
entitle members to this privilege Branches, including the Central Body,
will pay 10 per cent, of their subscriptions into a Central Fund. The
fund thus established to be administered by the Central Branch. This
rule does not apply to members who have been expelled from any Branch.
Duties of Officers.
18. The Chairman shall preserve order, properly conduct the busi-
ness of the meeting, decide all questions submitted to him, his decision
being final, unless dissented from in the usual manner; vacate the
chair when desiring to take part in the discussion, and have a casting
vote only.
Secretary.
19. The Secretary shall attend all the meetings of the League and
Committees, and keep correct minutes thereof, attend to correspondence
and general business, keep all accounts and supply the necessary balance
sheets as required by rule, and shall be custodian of the bank book. He
shall also supply the Chairman with a business paper at each meeting.
Treasurer.
20. The Treasurer shall receive all monies on account of the League*
pay all demands when properly authorised, shall attend all meetings,
and produce accounts of all monies received or disbursed by him. He
shall attend all audit meetings. He shall not keep in his possession
more than £2 at one time, all monies over that amount shall be banked
to the credit of the Trustees.
Auditors.
21. Two Auditors shall be appointed at a general meeting every
three months ; they shall examine and certify to the correctness or other-
wise of the account books and vouchers belonging to the League.


/S' 6 o
Teustees.
22. All monies and property of the League shall be vested in two
Trustees.
Funds.
23. The funds of the League shall be applicable for management
expenses, propaganda, and for no other purpose.
24. All cheques to be signed by the Treasurer and one of the Trustees,
and countersigned by the Secretary. All accounts to be paid by cheque.
Oedee of Business.
Receiving and confirming minutes.
Reading, receiving and considering correspondence.
Financial statement.
Reports of Committees.
Motions of which notice has been given.
Motions without notice.
Notices of Motion.
Business of importance not specially provided for may, with consent
of the League, be submitted at any part of the proceedings.
Adjournment.
Rules of Debate.
A. The first member attracting the attention of the Chairman shall
have precedence.
B. No discussion shall take place unless a motion is duly proposed
and seconded, and stated from the chair. Only one amendment upon
any motion shall be received at a time, and such amendment must be
* disposed of before any further amendment can be received. The mover
or seconder of a motion or amendment merely shall be held to have
spoken to the same in the discussion of either.
PROPAGANDA COMMITTEE.
1. That the above shall adopt the title of Centeal Peopaganda
Committee of the Austealian Socialist League.
2. That it shall be assisted by sub-committees of three persons
throughout New South Wales.
3. That it shall administrate the Propaganda Fund, and have full
control over the same. The said Fund to be raised by voluntary dona-
tions, and subsidised by all Branches of the League to the extent of 10 per
cent, of their members’ subscriptions.
4. That the said committee shall have full power to select and pub-
lish leaflets and other Socialist literature intended for the propagation of
the general principles of Socialism ; also, full power to call open-air and
other meetings, organise demonstrations, and devise means for the
furtherance of Socialism in the colony.
5. That the office of the committee be at the head-quarter of the
League.
8. D. TOWNSEND & CO., PRINTERS, 282 PITT-BT., SYDNEY.
