

CONSTITUTION AND RULES
OP THE
FREE TRADE & LIBERAL
ASSOCIATION
NEW SOUTH WALES.
flu
Sydney :
Gibbs, Shallard and Co., Printers, Bookbinders, etc.,
84a Pitt Street.
1889.




CONSTITUTION AND RULES
OF THE
FREE TRADE AND LIBERAL
ASSOCIATION
3STIE3W SOUTH WALES.
... i oQo 4 ■■
TITLE.
1. The Association shall be called “The Free Trade and
Liberal Association of New South Wales.”
OBJECTS.
2. The objects of the Association shall be, primarily, to
advocate Freedom of Trade, to oppose, by all Constitutional
means, any attempt to levy taxes through the Custom House
for the benefit of one part of the community at the expense
of the bulk of the population, and, generally, to secure good
government in this Colony, by the aid of liberal and pro-
gressive laws, as set forth in the Platform appended to
these rules.
MEMBERSHIP.
3. The minimum subscription shall be 2s. 6d. per
annum, and every person paying such subscription shall be
enrolled as a Member and receive a card of membership.
4. Annual subscriptions shall become due on the Ist
day of July for the year then commencing.


5. Every person becoming a Member of the Association
thereby undertakes—
To assist the Association in distributing information,
and, generally, to support its policy.
MANAGEMENT.
6. The Management of the Association shall be vested
in a President, four Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, and a
Council of not less than twenty-five members, who shall be
elected annually at the General Meeting in July.
COUNCIL.
7. The Council shall have power to elect additional
members of the Council from among the members of the
Association.
8. The President, Vice-Presidents, and Treasurer shall
be ex officio members of the Council. -
9. Every Branch of the Association shall be entitled to
elect two of its own members, or two members of the
Association, to represent it on the Council ; such represent-
atives shall be entitled to all the privileges of membership
of the Association.
POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.
10. The Council shall appoint the Secretary and such
paid and other officers of the Association as they deem
necessary; shall fix their salaries and remuneration, and
define and regulate their duties, and shall have power to
suspend or dismiss any of such officers.
11. The Council shall appoint from among their
members a Finance Committee and such other committees
as they shall see fit, and shall have the control of the funds
of the Association and of the expenditure thereof, and shall
generally conduct and manage the affairs and business of
the Association,


12. All the property of the Association shall be vested
in the President and Vice-Presidents for the time being, who
shall be Trustees for the Association.
CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
13. The Chairman at all meetings shall have a casting
as well as a deliberative vote.
14. The quorum at a General Meeting of the Association
shall be twenty, and at a meeting of the Council five.
15. The President, or in his absence, one of the Vice-
Presidents, shall preside at all meetings. In the absence
of the President and of the Vice-Presidents, the meeting
shall elect a chairman.
GENERAL MEETINGS.
16. A General Meeting of the Association shall be held
in the month of July every year.
17. The Council may at any time convene a Special
General Meeting, and are required to do so at any time on
receipt of a requisition for that purpose signed by fifteen
or more members. At such special meeting no business
shall be transacted except such as has been specified in
writing to the Secretary of the Association at least seven
days previous to the meeting.
POWER TO CONVENE PUBLIC MEETINGS.
18. The Council shall have power, whenever they
deem it desirable, to convene public meetings.
ANNUAL CONFERENCE.
19. In the month of August in each year a Conference
of two delegates from the Association and two delegates from
each of the Brandi Associations shall be held in Sydney.


20. Such Conference shall not be limited in its range of
action or discussion, but shall, as closely as possible, con-
centrate its attention on the best means of furthering the
objects of the Association.
21. The President, Vice-Presidents and Treasurer of the
Association shall be ex officio delegates to any Conference.
22. All moneys of the Association shall be lodged in
such bank as the Finance Committee may from time to
time direct, to the credit of the Association, and shall not
be withdrawn except by means of cheques signed by the
Chairman or some other member of the Finance Committee,
and countersigned by the Treasurer, or in the case of his
absence, by the Acting Treasurer.
23. No accounts shall be paid unless the same shall have
been previously passed by the Finance Committee.
24. The Council shall appoint two Auditors, who shall
audit the accounts of the Association, and their report shall
be presented to the Annual General Meeting.
BLANCHES.
25. Branches of the Association bearing the name of
“ Branch of the Free Trade and Liberal
Association of New South Wales,” and adopting the 2nd,
3rd, and sth of these Rules, may be from time to time
established and affiliated with the consent of the Council.
26. Such branches shall have the sole control of the
funds raised by them, and the sole conducting of their
business. They may frame their own Rules, provided they be
consistent with the Constitution and Rules of the Association.
Copies of such Rules, and any subsequent alteration thereof,
shall be sent to the Secretary of the Association.
27. It shall be the duty of the branches, as far as
possible, (1) to act in concert with the Council in promoting
the objects ot the Association and the efficiency of its


organization ; (2) to assist in the formation of freshbranches;
and (3) by their Secretaries to correspond regularly with the
Secretary of the Association.
28. The Council shall from time to time make such
By-Laws as they shall deem necessary for the establishment
or affiliation of Branches, and for regulating the affairs of
the Association, and carrying out its objects; and may repeal
or alter such By-Laws.
REGISTER OF MEMBERS, &C.
29. The Secretary shall keep a Register of all the
Members of the Association, and a List of the affiliated
Branches.
ALTERATION OF RULES.
30. None of these Rules shall be altered, added to, or
repealed, excepting by a vote of a majority at a General or
Special Meeting of the Association, and notice of any such
alteration shall be given to the Members of the Association
at least three days prior to the date of the meeting.
PLATFORM
Ist. —Financial Policy.
1. Freedom of Trade.
2. Direct Taxation.
3. Efficient control of the Public Service, and
judicious economy in public expenditure.
2nd.—Land Policy.
1. Laws to provide bona fide settlers with the most
practicable, expeditious, and liberal means of
settlement upon the Crown Lands.


2. Laws to regulate the occupation of Crown Lands
for pastoral purposes upon an equitable basis,
including provision adapted to meet the con-
dition of the Western Division.
3rd.—Mining Policy.
1. Laws to regulate mining on private property.
2. Encouragement to legitimate mining on Crown
Lands.
3. Establishment of Mining Colleges.
4th.— General Internal Policy.
1. Local Self-Government.
2. Improvement of internal communication by the
extension of our Railway system, and the opening
up of Harbours and Rivers.
3. Comprehensive system of water conservation and
Irrigation.
4. Establishment of Agricultural Schools and Model
Farms, and, generally, the extension of Tech-
nical Education.
5. Forestry Laws to regulate the use, preservation,
and growth of Timber.
sth.— Encouragement of Local Industries, by the
abolition of all existing duties on raw material.
6th.—Electoral and Parliamentary Reform.
7th. —Law Reform.
Bth.—Sanitary Reform.
Head Office of the Association—
8 TATTERSALL’S CHAMBERS,
HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.
