

(Extraprint from the Proceedings of the Royal Society of New
South Wales , 1888.)
CONSIDERATIONS OF PHYTOGRAPHIC EXPRESSIONS
AND ARRANGEMENTS;
By Baron Ferd. von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.8.W., October 3, ISSB,]


*


( Extraprint jrom the Proceedings of the Royal Society of New
South Wales , 1888.)
CONSIDERATIONS OF PHYTOGRAPHIC EXPRESSIONS
AND ARRANGEMENTS;
By Baron Feed, von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S.W., October 3, 1888. ]
The issue of a work on Victorian plants according to Lamarck’s
dichotomous method gave rise to this treatise. It seemed desirable
to discuss the merits of his mode of dealing with plants for
descriptive purposes, more especially so, as this kind of analysis
has come but slightly into use during the century. Moreover the
opportunity appeared to be an apt one for introducing to more
general notice some views on the affinity and organography of
plants, held for a long while by the writer, but to which fullest
practical expressions have now only been given in the work
indicated. It is the “ Key to the system of Victorian Plants,”
to which is referred—the elaboration of which is just drawing to
its end.
In the first edition of Lamarck’s Flore (1778, in three
volumes) the dichotomous characteristics for the main-divisions
were partly derived from the Jussieuan system, though the latter
was in full detail only published eleven years later, and partly from
the Liunean system. In this manner the “ fleurs uni ou bi-
sexuelles,” and the “ dix etamines ou moins ” and “ onze etamines
ou plus ” are notes, obtained from Linne’s classification, while the
“ fleurs petalees ou non-pebalees,” the “ ovaire dans la corolle ou
sous la corolle,” the “ fleurs complettes ou incomplettes,” the
“corolla monopetale ou polypetale,” the “corolla reguliere ou
irregaliere” indicate already a preponderance of arrangement
according to Jussieu’s principles ; but these very characteristics,
offered by Jussieu, were devised already but less strictly applied
by Tournefort, who again relied to some extent on earlier authors.
Yet the sequence of the genera in Lamarck’s work is often not
according to real affinity, inasmuch as for instance Clematis stands
far apart from Ranunculus, and (irrespective of others) Potamogeton
and Juncus are placed between them. The numbering of the
species is kept distinct.
Blindness having brought Lamarck’s labours prematurely to a
close, the great De Candolle in the early part of his luminous path
issued, 1804, a third edition, in four volumes, the second edition,


published in 1793 during a time of the worst political commotions,
being probably only a reprint. This time the dichotomous
analysis became applied only to the first volume, in which out of
piety to his preceptor and friend the artificial arrangement was
maintained by De Candolle, but for orders and genera only, so
that still Mono- and Di-cotyledonous plants were to some extent
mixed ; the 11., 111. and IV. volumes however are without any
dichotomy, and gave the full descriptions of the Flora of France,
entirely according to Jussieu’s system, which indeed is followed
also already for the species in the first volume, thereby necessitating
an independent numbering. When in 1815 a reprint of the work
appeared, De Candolle furnished a supplemental volume, which
embraced the plants discovered during the intervening ten years ;
in this additional volume the dichotomy is abandoned also.
Lamarck in the original edition followed up each of the dichotomic
notes immediately by some descriptive details, precisely as has
been deemed proper for the “Key to the system of Victorian Flora,”
although his work could not exercise here any timely influence, it
being now very rare, and could with De Candolle’s later edition
only be secured for us here a few months ago, after the printing
of the whole dichotomy of the Victorian orders, genera and many
of the species had already been done. It was the Lamarckian
analytic method, which became attractive to the logic-minded
Bentham during his stay in France; indeed it drew this
distinguished and laborious pliytographer about seventy years ago
into his illustrious career. Nevertheless he never applied this
system of dualism to any of his writings, except the “ Analytic
Key to the natural orders and anoraolous genera” of his
“ Handbook of the British Flora,” that analysis extending over
eleven pages; but the mode adopted involved some repetitions
and in no way adhered to systematic sequence.
According to Lamarck’s method hitherto only two works,
elaborated in the English language, have become accessible here;
both quite small and both of recent date, one issued by Dr. W.
Marshall Watts in 1878, “ a School Flora for elementary botanical
classes,” as indicated by B. D. Jackson’s excellent “ Guide to
Botanic literature.” Of the particulars of this work I was not
aware until some months ago, when the second edition, published
last year, was reviewed by the accomplished Mr. James Britten
in his “Journal of Botany ; ” a copy of this edition reached me
here only this month. It is intended for any students, “who
have mastered the elements of botanic science,” and is purposely
kept very brief, to serve mainly for quick reference during a
«■ country ramble,” it being understood, that for home-studies
could be consulted any of the numerous works on the British
Flora, which appeared since Hudson’s time, and among which Sir


Jos. Hooker’s Student’s Flora and Babington’s Manual—both
particularly excellent —are brought up to recent date. For its
purpose the work is as a whole well carried out; but it would be
too abridged as a sole source for information ; moreover it omits
for briefness’ sake many of the rarer plants, so that the number
of the species treated does not exceed 900, —few immigrated
plants being admitted. Nevertheless the little book is sure to
render good services in its own way, which would be greater still
if some illustrations could be added ; a pai’ticularly gratifying
feature in this work is the strict adherence to systematic sequence
.at least for species. The second work, alluded to above, is the
“ Handbook of the Plants of Tasmania” by the late Rev. W. W.
Spicer, published also in 1878, and resulting from his two years’
stay at Hobart, where the accumulated material of Gunn, Milligan
and Archer was at the reverend gentleman’s disposal, who based
his compilation on the large “ Flora Tasmania? ” by Sir Joseph
Hooker, which resulted as one of the collateral achievements of
Sir James Ross’s Antarctic Expedition. Newer observations
were obtained for Spicer’s Handbook partly from works of the
great George Bentham, and partly from volumes of the writer of
this essay. This literary gift is all the more to be appreciated,
as it was that of an invalid, whom search for health brought to
these far southern shores. Deducting introduced plants, the
number of species, treated by Mr. Spicer, is nearly a thousand,
therefore about half that occurring as indigenous in the colony of
Victoria, but nearly equal to that of Britain. The genial author
•did not feel constrained, to adhere for the dichotomous disposal of
the orders of plants to any natural system, but adopted for genera
-and species the Candollean arrangement. The numbering is
consecutive throughout, therefore perspicuous and facile. His
inexpensive book should prove even useful beyond the colony for
which it was written, as for instance the vegetation of the southern
regions of Victoria very extensively repeats that of Tasmania.
As regards the utilisation of Lamarck’s analytic method for any
large floral region beyond France on the European Continent, I
am only acquainted with the first edition of G. Lorinser’s
“ Botanisches Excursions Buch fur die Deutsch-Oesterreichischen
Kron-Laender,” published in 1854 ; but two more editions were
issued, the last in 1871. Much erudition is displayed in this
work, destined for use on botanic excursions. The orders are
disposed of without any particular adherance to systematic
arrangements, but in setting out the genera and species Prof.
Lorinser also follows strictly the system of De Candolle; the
numbering is not continued uninterruptedly, the species always
following at once the genera in each order. For its objects, this
neat and handy book must have proved of great value within the


countries for which it is furnished, it being understood that for
home-studies larger works were to be consulted variously extant
there; the dichotomy is however not limited to solitary
characteristics, and this militates against obtaining quick results;
nor are the brief definitions supported by further descriptive
notes, for guarding against possible misapprehensions. Cuerie’s
“Anleitung die Pflanzen des mittlerenund nordlichen Deutschlands
zu bestimmen,” is another work for which the dichotomy was
utilized ; it went from 1823 till 1878 through thirteen editions
partly by the later aid of Lueben and Buchenau.
The most recent work elaborated according to the Lamarckian
plan, is the “ Flore du Nord de la France et de la Belgique ” by,
Bonnier and De Layens. Here again the sequence of the orders
is independent of natural classification, the rigorous adoption of
the dichotomy for the “ families ” being particularly difficult. As
no numbering is resorted to, the species could follow in systematic
sequence at once after each genus ; in using two pages always
together, space is gained for ample schemata ; more than one
crfterion being generally used for the dichotomic phrases, further
descriptive details are dispensed with. But what renders the
work unique, is the intercalation of over 2,000 small figures of
single organs, for purposes of distinction, such as are in each
case most” decisive, so that a. mere glance at the figures will often
render it unnecessary to look at the text at all.
Besides a few limited local *• Floras ” exist for portions of the
English and German and perhaps other countries, but they
-cannot be referred to critically on this occasion, as these small
works are not accessible here.
The advantages of using a simple dichotomy are, to trace out
quickly the name of any plant irrespective of gaining thereby any
fuller direct knowledge of its characteristics —further to render
thus far any lengthened study of marks of distinction unnecessary;
the disadvantages are the scattering of the characteristics, the loss
of view over their complex, the difficulty of seizing again the thread
of affinity if once lost, and the rupture of the chain of natural
affinity. ' It has on this occasion been endeavoured to secure all
the advantages of the plan and to remove all the disadvantages.
The great difficulty of the method consists in singling out
successively solitary, invariable and very obvious marks of
distinction, by which one order or one genus or one species can
be surely separated after another, until positions —always in
a dual contrast —are exhaustively provided for all of them ; and
further to effect this uninterruptedly and yet systematically ;
whereas in ordinary treatment of plants, and indeed also of animals
for descriptive Floras and Faunas, several cardinal notes are put
together diagnostically, just as in medical science the complex of


the symptoms gives the diagnosis of the disease, any single one
possibly masked, though perhaps only exceptionally so.
In elaborating here such a plan of dichotomy, it became
necessary, to construct for the complex of orders, of genera and
also of species, whenever numerous, a tabular arrangement,
somewhat like genealogic scales, so as to render the conspect easy
at a glance ; it is contemplated, to issue these tables hereafter in
an Atlas-form, according to a design adopted by Meissner for his
“Plantarum vascularium genera,” (1836 - 1840). The expediency
of using a mere negative or some evasive expression or any general
positive is never resorted to in the work now offered, for over-
coming any difficulty in pairing off the main-passages, which to
effect clearly and contrastingly is the real gist of the whole method;
while its principal success must be sought in avoiding, that the
species of plants and also their genera and orders do not become
scattered regardless of natural alliance in perhaps a chaotic
manner, that propositions are chosen which do not combine the
utmost briefness also with logical comprehensiveness, and that the
dichotomic notes, which are to carry over to the next passus, are
wanting in obviousness and perfect reliability.
The organographic expressions, which we use at the present
time, originated already—though only to a very small extent—
with the ancients, who however did not even apply the terms
always in the present interpretations ; these terms were somewhat
augmented by mediaeval writers, became enlarged and systematized
by Joachim Jung early in the 17th century, got further improved
especially also by Ray and by Linnaeus, and since were variously
changed and augmented, to meet gradually the requirements of
later researches. In endeavouring to effect a few more alterations,
I may first assert, that for nearly 50 years I experienced difficulties,
to draw descriptively clear distinctions between the terms ribs,
nerves and veins as used in botanic language, leaving some other
anomalies in our modes of phytography just now out of consideration;
and as the present work was to be written for a young colony,
where time-honoured customs and usages also in botanic science
have hardly yet exercised any influence, or are at all events not
yet firmly established, it seemed to the writer very opportune, to
effect in the work, now under discussion, the organographic
alterations, which he so long had contemplated. Further it was
felt by him, that the botanic language needed simplification, so
that the use of two or more words for the same organ should be
abolished, and that thus the task should be eased for any
commencing learner without subsequent necessity to unlearn.
Then again he held the view for a long while, that the descriptive
terms, used in phytography, should not be identical with those
employed in human anatomy and in zoology ; to effect all this it


required thoroughness, and it was ventured therefore, though only
tentatively, to apply the proposed changes all at once to the
volume indicated ; while the new wording should in every instance
be as clear as the former or even more so, though some sacrifice
of brevity might be involved. The utility of the book itself could
by the adopted alterations not be impaired even to the slightest
extent.
To commence then, it became imperative to find a word,
applicable to the whole fibro-vascular tract not only of leaves but
also of stipules, bracts, calyx, corolla and even fruit. To the
term venules was given preference, ribs, nerves and veins in
zoology-sense not really occurring in the organisms of the empire
of plants ; the expression veinlet has long been used already in
human and .zoologic anatomy, whereas the word venule occurs as
early as in the writings of Rheede, Casearius and Commelin, the
carinular venule of sepals and petals there very properly being
called the intermediate. To this might be taken objection,
because the so called midrib, which as such term would imply,
could oidy be compared either to the sternum or spine of high-
organized animal beings, is usually of such strength and solidity,
that it could not be termed by a word implying tenderness and
formed etymologically as a diminutive. But in the Australian
Medical Journal of last year it has already been pointed out, that
the venpe-cavfe, portae, azygos &c. stand for calibre and firmness
in the same relation to the finer ramifications of the venous system
of man and animals, as the strongest portion of the venular
system of plants to its subtile anastomosis, the absolute structural
indentity of the whole venular plexus being at once apparent,
when a leaf is skeletonized. Moreover we can by applying an
adjective modify our expression, thus giving to what was called
midrib, (a berm contradictory in itself) the designation primary or
longitudinal or carinular venule, or even merely keel, and can
designate the other leaf-ribs readily as secondary or costular
venules, while veins of leaves &c. could be called tertiary or ultimate
or reticular or by any other adjective demanded in any special case.
Perhaps a happier expression can be devised than that of venules;
but it will not be easy to find a term, which is universally
applicable, when we consider, how within the genus Acacia even
from the longitudinal parallel venulation almost of a monocotyle-
donous plant all transits occur to the reticular anastomosis in the
phyllodes of respective species. If the words rhachis or rhacheole
were not already otherwise employed, they might have been chosen
for what is called the mid-rib of leaves ; if to be considered costal
at all, a diminutive from sternum would seem still more out
of place than one from rhachis for such a homogenous and
basi-fixed structure with ramifications often so numerous and so


subtile. But the carinular venule, if ever so large, is never osseous,
seldom fragile, often elastic and even flaccid, while the great veins
of animal structures show also rigidity and some supportive strength.
The remarks thus here offered should not merely apply to English
organography, but ought to hold good internationally.
Although in innumerable cases the original interpretation of
the fibro-vascular tract of the vegetative organs will remain
permanently connected with specific and generic appellations, yet
this should not militate against sounder organographic principles,
even if our former etymology and nomenclature have ever so long
been sanctioned by tradition. But it needs even in science some
time, before we can get reconciled to alterations in customary fashions
however much warranted ; and as regards the naming of plants,
ruled and fixed by rights of priority, it might not be saying too
much, that only for about one-third of the described species and
genera the names are well selected, for another third passably
and for the rest almost or quite inaptly.
The next expression, to which exception has been taken in the
elaboration of my new work, is that of ovary ; because we never
employ the term ovum for the first stage of the seed of any plant.
The inconsonance of the combination of ovary with ovule has
long been perceived. In the phytographic literature of Italy
the term gemmularium came into use with a view of bringing it
into due and congruous relation to the word gemmula, that
expression having been substituted half a century ago by Endlicher,
Schleiden and followers of theirs for ovulum ; but they thus
assigned to the word gemmula a meaning quite different to that
adopted by Richard and Bischoff, for what Linnseus, Gaertner
and most authors up to our time comprehended under the name
plumula. Much in accordance with my own views at the time,
Endlicher used the word germen for ovarium ; but considering the
question in all its aspects, nothing seems to be logically clearer
and more briefly expressive than the term ovulary, and this I
have ventured now to introduce. An ovum of an insect might
indeed become deposited not only in an ovulary but even in an
ovule of a plant.
In entering on a further course of alterations in our botanic
“glossaries,” I have adopted for uniformity’s sake several
diminutives, to separate pliytographic from zoographic expressions.
Such etymology, as we all know, does not necessarily imply, that
an organ should be of reduced size for in our branch of science
diminutive terms often simply indicate distinct portions of a
compound organ ; thus the leaflets of the leaf of a horse-chestnut-
tree remain as well folioles as the minute leaflets of our Silver-
Wattle, though comparatively of an enormous size; just as
botanically speaking the fruitlets of many plants, for instance of


the anonaceous order, or also of an Albizzia or even Entada, or
(what is nearer home to us) of a Marsdenia may be of very
conspicuous or even gigantic measurement, yet they all continue
to be fruitlets, in contrast to true integral fruits, not even
excluding such of the latter, as may be of almost invisible
minuteness; structually no differences can be drawn in these
respects, a remark which applies likewise to the other new
diminutives, which will be referred to presently. For the
introduction of the word fruitlet (as well as that of stalklet,
head let, hairlet and bristlet) into the phytographic and indeed
into the English language the writer of these lines is responsible;
but Asa Gray, whose death we have now so much to deplore,
formed already the word “nutlets” in translation of nuculae,
(although by no means always of minute size)alinguistic innovation,
approved of and practically adopted by Sir Joseph Hooker. In
extending the general term fruitlets to all kinds of apocarpic fruits,
whether nutlets or carpels (or rather carpids) or follicles or achenes
or whatever else they may be called, the purposes of a plain
elementary book are fully served; whereas strictly scientific
distinctive appellations of all sorts of fruitlets can be reserved to
professional publications according to the various views of authors.
For the same reason the separate significations of integral fruits,
such as capsule, drupe, berry, nut, caryopsis, utricle, pod and again
achenes (the two last mentioned terms still frequently applied
to fruits of totally different structures) have not been thought
requisite for the new publication, although occasionally an adjective
has in these instances been added, to render the simple
expressions, thus far used by the writer, more explicit when
specially desirable. The next difficulty, which presented itself in
bringing out in a popular form the “ Dichotomous Key to the
System "of Victorian Plants,” consisted in choosing such expressions
for vestiture as could at once be understood, even by disciples of
elementary schools, and which nevertheless should be scientifically
accurate also. Here it should be stated then, that the terms for
degree and quality of induraent are as yet of notable indefiniteness,
even in some of the best “ Floras ” of the world, partly on account
of the brevity of expression, partly because from want of that
uniformity for fixing the value of botanic terms, which Bischoffs
great work previously strove to bring about long before the middle
of this century. But in an endeavour of severing zoographic and
phytographic expressions, we must at once recognize, that the
vestiture of plants and animals is chemically very different, as may
be ascertained in a moment by heating any such over a spirit-
lamp on a platinum-plate ; and further that the animal and the
vegetable indument are not quite alike either in structure or
development. Thus I felt induced to substitute as comprehensive


the botanic word hairlet against the general zoologic term hair,
to which latter all capillaceous coating of animals can be reduced,
though for instance the hair of many insects may be even infinitely
smaller and also much more delicate than the hairlets of a vast
number of various plants. Admittedly in such a course shortness
of expression becomes to some extent sacrificed, in as much as one
or more explanatory adjectives are required for recording the
characteristics of the various kinds of hairlets, which constitute
any sort of clothing on plants. What however is lost in brevity,
is gained by greater explicity; and I have ventured to carry this
new mode of dealing descriptively with vestiture so far, as to
discontinue the words silky, downy, webby, plumous, ciliate,
bearded, all pertaining to zoology, using instead only wordings
fairly referable to vegetable organisms, such asfringy, cottony &c.,,
or changing the absolute to the comparative term in substituting
“ beset with silk-like hairlets ” for silky, or beard-like-tufted for
bearded, or ciliolate for ciliate, or lanuginous for woolly, already
Plinius having distinguished in this very sense lanuginosus from
lanosus ! In further elucidation of this subject it might still be
mentioned, that the following English diminutives have now
universally been acknowledged as correct for descriptive botanic
works: Branchlets, Leaflets, Lobules, Petiolules, Stipulets or
Stipelles, Pedicelles, Bractlets or Bracteoles, Umbellets or
Umbellules, Involucelles, Spikelets, Rhacheoles, Silicules and
Nutlets ; to which from here have now been added : Hairlets,
Bristlets, Headlets, Suturules and Fruitlets. It is also worthy of
remark, that Lamarck has already objected to the term hermaphrodite
as applied to plants, in that leaf-sheaths are only clasping leafstalks
whether of Glumacese, Umbellifera} or any other kind of plants ;
that spathes are amply developed bracts or altered floral leaves,
that a spadix represents only some peculiar form of a spike, that
glumes are simply bracts and paleie are so also, whether of Compositse
or Graminese; that Yexillum or Standard, as well as Wings and
Carina or Keel of papilionaceous flowers are as much petals, as
any other; therefore all these terms have, as cumbersome and
superfluous for an elementary work, been discarded in the “ Key.”
So early a writer as Fabius Columna has already adopted the word
Capitulum for “ flower-head ” or headlet; in French it is also
Capitule, in German Koepfchen, in Italian Capolino, all diminutives.
It must seem odd, particularly so to any tyro, when we speak of
a starchy or horny Albumen, so contrary to all his preconceived
notions. Certainly the verbal alteration proposed is but a trifling
one, nor did the expression Albumentum arise from a classic
scholar of high standing,—-it originated with Publius Yegetius—
but as Scheller, Luenernann and some other Lexicographers refer
to the word, it can be rendered available for our new purpose


Very different is it with the term placentarium, for it emanated
from so high an authority as that of Mirbel. It might be
contended that such words as ribs, mouths and head do not
exclusively belong to the domain of zoology, and that through the
systematic names of plants they have become permanently identified
with botanic science as a whole ; with regret the latter part of the
proposition must be conceded ; but it might also as well be argued,
that it would be preferable to call the mouth and head of rivers
their entrance and source, though the extension of the term ribs
to some of the framework of ships and boats must be admitted.
Although the expression “Wings” exists also in architectural and
military and even musical language, and although we may speak
figuratively of the teeth of machinery and implements, these are
not reasons against discarding any ambiguous or illogical terms from
our bio-systematology. Possibly it might in the opinion of some
systematists be preferable to construct altogether new words
instead of such as are similar; but of measures of this kind botanic
science has been too prone already, particularly in recent times.
While tentatively these changes in organography are introduced
into our Australian Phytography, no one even here is prevented
from adhering to —the certainly somewhat antiquated—so-called
glossology in our particular branch of knowledge ; nor can an
abolition of terms, clearly not-the best, impair the utilisation of
a mere “ primer-publication.” At all events, science cannot stand
still, although we should be conservative, so far as compatible with
progressive discoveries.
The term sepals is restricted in the new work to calycine
divisions free from beyond the base, so as to correspond thus far
to petals; this necessitates the adoption of calyx-lobes for
Orchidese, Amaryllideae and some other plants, to which hitherto
sepals (or in other words perianth-segments) have been attributed,
but whose calyx except in its ternary lobation quite repeats that
of Campanulacese and numerous other plants among the
Dicotyledoneae with perigynous (or epigynous) insertion of the
corolla ; the rationality of these limitations must be clear to every
beholder. The designation labellum is reluctantly kept up for
the lowest petal of all Orchidete and most Candolleace*, not
because it is necessary but because it is so innate in the respective
literature, and does not imply anything organographically
incorrect, although the changed third petal or the altered fifth
corolla-lobe is hardly ever of a truly labial form, but contrarily a
disparous organ, any counterpart being wanting. The word scape
will always continue vague ; it is not really needed, as it applies
either to a stem or a flower-stalk.
The ambiguity of our organographic language in some respects
will be further recognized in the employment of the term disk,.


Albumen ...
... Albument (Albumentum).
Apophysis
... Terminal enlargment of fruit-stalk (of Mosses
only.)
Beaked
... Upwards much attenuated.
Bristle (Seta)
... Bristlet (Setula).
Capillary ...
... Capillulary.
Caruncle ...
... Strophiole.
Chalazium
... Chalaza.
as well for any internal lining of a calyx as for the aggregation
of flowers on the receptacle of Composite; so also the word
columna comprises widely different structures, not only the
gynostemium and the starninal tube but often also the fruit-axis and
the spermatophore ; again indusium applies to two totally different
organs, the stigma-cover of Goodeniacese and the sorus-cover of
ferns ; whereas for the inner bracts of Glumacese and any ultimate
floral bracts of Composite alike the term palea? is used, though
both are not altogether identical; under achenes are frequently
comprised not merely the fruitlets of apocarpic fruits, but
likewise the simple fruits of Composite; the word ligule served
hitherto as well for the terminal membrane of leafstalks of grasses
as for the unilateral flat corolla-expansions of Composite and
some allied orders; whereas the floral envelope of Monocotyledoneae,
whether calycine or petaliue, passes generally still as perianth or
perigone, and- so the calyx of apetalous Dicotyledonese. Some
reference to this subject occurs in the eighth volume of the
“ Fragmenta Phytographite Australia? ” (1874).
In the proposed new organography the term floret among
diminutives hitherto in use would not really be requisite, not
even for the most rudimentary flowers of Glumacete, and the
word would, under the altered term now proposed, be particularly
inapplicable to the well developed individual flowers of Composite.
Thus another unnecessary word could beabolished, notwithstanding
the advocacy of diminutives in these pages, the aim of a popular
book like the “Key” being also, to narrow down the “terminology”
to such a minimum, as would still be consistent with exactitude.
It would be a good plan, if phytographers as a whole could
agree to the adoption of particular universally cultivated and
rather unvariable garden-plants as typical, not only for degree
and quality of vestiture, but also as standard-examples for form
of leaves, colour of flowers, and other organographic definitions,
concerning which Botanists and Horticulturists are by no means
yet agreed, as proved by the vague application of even many a
popular word for indument.
To sum up, then, I have placed side by side zoographic and
phytographic terms, which are in many instances collateral, taking
exceptional cases not into consideration.


Chin (Mentnm)
Cilia
Claw
Columna
Condyle
Costal
Digitate
Dorsal
Downy
Eared (Auritus)
Epidermis
Facial
Faux
Favous
Filule
Fleshy
Follicle
Fornices
Fovea (Fossa)
Genu
Gland
Hair
Head (Caput)
Hermaphrodite
Horn
Leathery (Coriaceous)
Limb
Lingula
Lips (Labia)
Medulla (Marrow)
Membrane
Mouth (Os)
Neck
Nerve
Node
Ovary
Ovum
Palate
Pedate
Pedicle
Penna
Placenta
Plumosus
Raphe
Chin-like Protrusion.
Cilioles.
Stalk-like Attenuation (of petals only).
Columella.
Protrusion into the cavity of some fruits.
Costular.
Semi-radiatingly lohed-
Posterior.
Cottony.
Auricular.
Cuticle.
Anterior.
Orifice (of corolla only).
Favulous or favular.
Filament.
Carnulent.
Anteriorily dehiscent fruit or fruitlet.
Concave appendages (at corolla-orifice only).
Foveole.
Geniculum.
Glandule.
Hairlet.
Headlet (Gapitule, Capitulum).
Bisexual Flower.
Horn-like Attenuation.
Firmly or thickly or rigidly flat.
Calycine or Corollar Expansion.
Ligule (ligula).
Sets of Corolla-lobes.
Pith.
Membranule.
Orifice.
Infra-terminal Constriction.
Venule.
Nodule.
Ovulary.
Ovulum.
Convex Protrusion of lower side of Corolla'
orifice.
Anteriorily lobed.
Peduncle.
Pinna.
Placentary (Placentarium).
Plume-like.
Eapheole.


Rib Venule.
Rugous (Wrinkled) ... Rugulous or Rugular.
Ruminate Testa intruding or Albument broken.
Scaly Scale-like (where not bracts).
Septum Dissepiment.
Silky Silk-like invested.
Spine (vertebral) ... Rhachis.
Squama (Scale) Squamula (Scalelet).
Suture Suturule.
Tail Basal Attenuation.
Teeth Denticles.
Testa Testula (of seeds).
Throat Orifice (corollar only).
Tongue Ligule (corollar only).
Toothed Denticulated or Indented.
Tubercular ... ... Verrucular.
Umbilical Cord ... ... Funicle.
Umbilicus... ... ... Hilum.
Valve ... ... ••• Valvule.
Vein Venule.
Velum Velulum.
Ventral Anterior.
Verrucous (Warty) ... Verruculous or Verrucular.
Villous Beset with long soft hairlets.
Vitellus (Yolk) Separately integumented plumule only, or also
the whole embryo within a separate
loose integument.
Webby Web-like.
■\Vrng Membranous Expansion.
Woolly Lanuginous.
Preliminary references to these organographic alterations occur
in a review of a portion of the “ Key ” by the learned editor of
the “ Victorian Naturalist,” vol. iv., p. 179-180. (February, 1888.)
With the elder Reichenbach and some others I always held the
opinion, that in a “ systerna naturae ” the identical name should
not be applied to a botanic as well as to a zoologic genus;
therefore preference was here given among Australian Orchids to
the generic appellation Sturmia, instead of Liparis. Whoever
may support this proposition will be obliged to adopt, for instance,
also Reichenbach’s Learosa for Endlicher’s Doryphora, the last
name being pre-occupied by Illiger for a coleopterous genus as far
back as 1807. Where however changes in this respect are
required, and not already made, it would be easy enough to
substitute a slight alteration to the last syllable or otherwise to
modify the generic word, without interfering with the author’s
right; and on this principle Zoograpjiers and Phytographers


might readily agree. As an instance might be cited the simian
genus Aotus of Humboldt, established six years later than the
leguminous genus of Smith, and subsequently changed into
Anotus. How far up to 1845 zoologic and botanic names already
clashed, can be seen on reference to Agassiz’s ample “ Nomenclator
Zoologicus.” Some Zoologists and Phytologists (particularly
cryptogamic Phytologists) have unfortunately introduced, as very
bewildering, the quoting of authors for species in genera which
were not even established in the life-time of these naturalists;
or, to be equally regretted, in dealing with generic alterations of
species supersede the oldest correct binominal designation, by
re-establishing the specific portion of a thus far justly discarded
appellation ; so Wolffia Michelii was purposely not called arrhiza,
because all Wolffias are rootless, though this one had as Lemna
received the name L. arrhiza. At the late evening of my life I
may be permitted to remark, that I have never deemed such a
treating of nomenclature as conducive to the real advancement
of morpho-biology.
Here it might incidentally be asked, whether Lemna polyrrhiza
and L. oligorrhiza, the fruits of which have here remained hitherto
undiscovered and perhaps generally undeveloped, could through
mineral manuring or any other nourishing processes be forced
into ready flowering and perhaps even perfect fruiting states, so
that at last we might complete the diagnosis of these minute yet
highly remarkable and not unimportant plantlets, although
Dr. Samuel Johnson, of last century’s literary celebrity, would
very likely have relegated them to the division of useless plants as
one of the two into which he would wish the vegetable kingdom
apportioned !
As an instance of particular interest in Australia, how very much
the nomenclature of plants may become complicated, the genus
Persoonia may be adduced ; its earliest name is Fentadactylon—
bestowed exactly a hundred years ago by Gaertner in his celebrated
carpologic work, the pluri-cotyledonar structure of the embi’yo
having already been then so cleverly found out—but subsequent
researches proved, that this criterion applied to but few of the
many species of that genus besides the primary one, irrespective
of the fact, that an embryonic note is so little observable. Thus
then Gaertner’s generic appellation was perhaps with injustice
discarded in favour of that of Persoonia ten years afterwards
established by Sir James Smith, who however missed to identify
it with Cavanille’s genus LAnkia , published and figured a year
earlier. Undoubtedly Persoonia should be changed into Linkia,
for although on chronologic reference the last mentioned name
will be found applied in 1805 also to Desfontainia, simply because
that genus is dedicated like Fontanesia to the same savant, yet


there is no valid reason for abolishing Delesseria , with a view of
keeping up a sole homage for Baron Benjamin de Lessert, Rules
of priority should also not 'be carried out injudiciously and
indiscriminately; therefore it would be vain to re-establish the
name Lomandra for the genus Xerotes , inasmuch as that
designation was founded on a fallacious observation, the supposed
marginal attenuation of the anthers referring only to the
rudimentary stamens of the pistillate flowers. Names in Natural
History whether of plants or animals, cannot be arbitrarily
retained in some instances and changed in other similar cases;
the rule must be uniform, and then only can it be just; but the
etymology may be unalterably faulty, or the oldest appellation
may rest on erroneous or misleading ideas or on wrong geographic
record, while on the other hand the eldest name, as in the instances
of Bassia and Stylidium may simply have been missed by a very
pardonable oversight.
Let us follow up some Australian data in this respect.
Limnanthemum stands in precisely the same relation to Villarsia
as Ipomcea aquatica to its other congeners. If Fhebalium is to
be maintained, then Boronia, the next allied genus, needs to be
divided into two genera. If Euxolus is to be abolished, then
with Portulaca requires to be united Claytonia, a sub-genus of
Montia. Bassia has become restored recently also by Schweinfurth,
Ascherson and Baillon, for Salsolacese. Like Candollea it was
clearly and fully described ; both were also illustrated at once
by delineations and have indisputable rights of precedence. The
priority of Siebera among Composite renders the homonymous
genus among Umbellifene superseded by Didiscus , a name
universally familiar to Botanists and to Horticulturists also for
the last 60 years. If the law of strict priority is not throughout
to be observed, it will be quite incomprehensible, by what code all
exceptions and deviations are to be admitted. In a case like
that of Gahnia against Cladium, the first dual name in the
former genus establishes the claim, though as a genus Cladium is
of a much earlier date ; their supposed distinctions in this case
are rendered invalid by Carex within the same complex ordinal.
Had the due restoration of such genera as Wilckia, Hybanthus ,
Bramia and Laxmannia been effected early in the century much
synonymy would have been obviated, and less hesitation existed
as to their recognition. In all this it must also be considered,
that a phytographic system is to serve for centuries, and not
merely to be in consonance with the traditions of a few
generations.
A curious intrication exists as regards the name of one of the
most common of our Senecios, which since 1803 passed as S.
australis; it has recently been ascertained that its description by


Willdenow is based on a variety of Senecio lautus from New
Zealand, where our plant does not occur, so that the formerly
current name has only the authority of A. Richard (Sert. Astrolah.
t. 39) from 1833 for it; but the plant constitutes the S. dryadeus
of Sieber, mentioned in 1826 by Sprengel (Syst. Yeget. iii., 562).
This case is merely given to show what accuracy is required for
incontestable records in phytographic writings. Todea might well
be reabsorbed in Osmunda (perhaps with exception of the section
Leptopteris) in as much as 0. hipinnata effects the transit. (See
Hooker’s Filices Exotic*, t. 9.) ....
Now only remain some concluding remarks on ordinal affinities;
for but few of these characteristics are by themselves absolute,
not even that established already by Ray in reference to the
number of Cotyledons ; thus in Australia Ceratophyllum , Nuytsia ,
some Persoonias and Callitris have more than two cotyledons,
while they are undeveloped in Cuscuta. The linear sequence of
course is the only one available for practical descriptive purposes;
so that, even in the most careful systematic arrangement, it becomes
necessary to rely not too strictly on even main distincti\e notes.
To vindicate therefore some of the changes ventured on in the
new publication, let us remember that numerous stamens occur in
the Tropic-Australian genus PisticJiostemon among Sapindace*,
and in two species of the Asiatic genus Megacarp*a among
Crucifer* ; further that one Tasmanian species of Eriostemon has
normally tetramerous flowers, that one Indian congener of
Eugenia shows always scattered leaves, and that one New Zealand
species of Prosera has quite perigynous stamens.
In transferring Yinifer* to the vicinity of Rhamnace*, as
devised by Baillon, and more particularly to the proximity of
Araliace*, as simultaneously and independently recognized by
Planchon and myself, we have to consider the enlarging fi uit as
placed superiorily merely through the small calyx remaining
stationary in its development, an analogous case being piesented
by Exocarpos, thus far anomalous in the order of bantalace*. To
the altered position which Elatine*, Plumbagine*, Thymele*, and
Plantagine* have received, reference is made in my former writings.
Further alterations may hereafter yet be effected in the positions
of some of the orders and particularly also genera. Certainly
Ceratophyllum will have to be placed with ordinal rank between
Cabombe* and the Batrachium-section of Ranunculace*, as
indicated long ago by Asa Gray and quite recently carried out
by Engler, but on an interpretation of its floral organs, different
to that previously given to it. So also may J\ajas perhaps need
a transfer to Hydrocharide*, its achlamydeous pistillate flowers
rendering the perigynism an impossibility, just as in the perhaps
halorageous Callitriche. Loranthace* and Proteace* are left


closely together; their near affinity is further demonstrated in
quite an unexpected manner by the pluricotyledonar embryo of
some of the Persoonias and of Nuytsia above alluded to, the
latter having three to four cotyledons, or according to Drummond,
several. (Hook., Journ. ii., 34, F.v.M., Fragm. vi., 252). That
mere resemblance may however be deceptive, is shown by the
genus Jacksonia, the species of which on hurried inspection might
easily be taken for proteaceous plants. The flowers of Santalacese
so far as their floral envelope is concerned, might be compared to
those of such Rubiaceae, which have a lobe-less calyx. In
assigning to Proteaceie petals, as has been done in the more recent
writings of mine, we need not take our clue from comparisons
with Loranthaceae alone, because the genera Acacia, Asterolasia and
Rhododendron, have in some or many species their calyx also
undeveloped; Anemone and Caltha, —to speak only of genera
represented in Australia—are rather esepalous than apetalous.
Diplolaena is also devoid of a calyx, and many other instances
might be referred to pertaining to this subject of systematology.
Laurineae are often far removed from Magnoliaceae and Anonaceae,
but the aromatic properties, largely developed in these orders,
point already to near cognateness.
The unison of the epigynous with the- perigynous main groups,
adhered to in later writings of mine, was effected already as early
as 1823 by Achille Richard (“ Histoire des medicamens, des
poisons et des alimens du regne vegetal,” in two volumes).
Otherwise that work follows Jussieu’s system, only the portion
comprising the Apetalae rendering that natural system, as a whole
imperfect. But what has been cursorily explained in these pages
forms but few of the thousandfold proofs, how nature in its freedom
sportively overleaps the boundaries, by which systematists vainly
endeavour to narrow the endless and marvellous forms of its
organisms for strict literary arrangement or demarcation.


*


1


