

Peth PPim
fif-£
Sigs
CONSOLATIONS AND SUPPORT DERIVABLE FROM THE
DOCTRINE OF THE DIVINE OMNIPRESENCE:
A DISCOURSE,
Delivered 7th Feb., 1858,
at the
Unitarian Christian Cjjnrdj;
EASTERN HILL, MELBOURNE,
THE
REV. HENRY HIGGINSON, MINISTER.
CHRIST PRESENT WITH HIS CHURCH TO THE END OF
THE WORLD:
A LORD’S SUPPER SERVICE,
USED AT THE SAME PLACE AND TIME.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY & CO., 81 BOURKE STREET, WEST.
1868.
[PRICE SIXPENCE.]




DISCOURSE.
John xvi., 32. “Behold the hour coineth, yea, is now come, when ye shall be
scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone. And yet, lam not alone,
because the Father is with me. ”
L\ a former Discourse on the doctrine of the Divine
Omnipresence, we considered its practical effect: —
Ist, —As a means of deterring 1 us from the commission
of evil.
2nd, —As an encouragement to the discharge of dut} r .
The 3rd division of our subject, the importance of this
doctrine, as a consolation in distress and affliction,
remained for further consideration; and to this
subject—a subject of no small moment and interest—
I at present request your attention.
The words of our Lord which I have selected as my text,
seem particularly well adapted to express the consolatory effect
of the doctrine of the Divine Omnipresence on the mind of a
good man when exposed to the influences of affliction. No one
has ever experienced greater need of this support; no one has
ever more earnestly sought for it by prayer; no one has ever
more powerfully felt its cheering and animating effect, than
Jesus. And, nowhere has he more forcibly expressed his sense
of its high importance, its inestimable value, than in those words,
“ Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.”
They occur towards the close of that most interesting and
impressive address recorded by the evangelist John, as uttered
by our Lord, immediately after the celebration of the last
Passover. The beloved disciple has recorded more fully than


liis fellow evangelists, this touching discourse; as indeed might
have been expected from the melting softness of his disposition,
and his especial friendship for his departed Lord. As the last
outpourings of the tenderness of Jesus for his apostles; his
parting words of reproof, of exhortation, and of comfort in the
near prospect of his sufferings and death ; it must ever possess
a melancholy interest with his faithful disciples. “ Having loved
his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end
and this affecting record of his love shall raise to him the ardent
affection of successive generations, so long as the name of Christ
is named on earth.
The sentiment expressed in our text—exalted and beautiful
as it is in itself—derives, however, peculiar beauty and force from
a consideration of the circumstances in which it was uttered, as
well as the connexion in which it stands with the context, Jesus,
perceiving that his hour was come, and that his ministry was
about to be closed by death, gathered together, at the table of
the Passover, those who had been the constant attendants of his
wanderings and his teachings, to spend with him the last evening
of his life on earth, and receive the parting lessons of his love.
We feel the beauty and the force of the instruction conveyed both
by his precept and his example, leading his disciples to the
practice of mutual condescension and humility ; we admire the
repeated exhortations to brotherly love, so seasonably introduced,
and so convincingly enforced. And not less must we remark the
constant endeavours of our Lord to prepare His Apostles for his
own departure from them, and for their future duties and
immortal hopes. His predictions of this melancholy event are
frequent and plain throughout his parting address to his disciples.
Yet with each repetition of them, we perceive the more plainly
that they were not understood ; so true were his words, u I have
yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.”
How acutely must our Lord have felt this want of sympathy from
his immediate disciples, at an hour so full of distressful antici-
pations. He, no doubt, pitied rather than blamed their blindness,
as the result of their Jewish education and consecpient prejudices;
and looked forward to the effusion of the Holy Spirit as the
o-rand event which should clear their vision, and reveal to them
n


the true nature of his kingdom, and the councils of the Almighty
no less in his death than in his life and conversation with them.
Yet, can we fail to perceive how distressful to one of a character
so gentle, and so formed for all the finer feelings of our nature,
must have been in the mean time the want of sympathy in his
approaching sufferings, to which a right understanding of his
predictions would he essential. For instance, John xiii. 33-37,
“ Little children, yet a little while I am with you, Ye shall seek
me; and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, } e cannot come;
so now I say to you * * * fimon Peter said unto him,
Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go,
thou canst not follow me now; hut thou shalt follow me after-
wards. Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee
now ? I will lay down my life for thy sake.” How like a
mockery of his grief at such a moment must have appeared the
too confident expression of zeal in his cause from his ardent
apostle ! How deep the feeling of pity and distress in the reply
of Jesus, exhibiting in striking contrast the supposed strength,
and the real weakness of Peter’s resolution! “Wilt thou lay
down thy life for my sake ? Verily, verily, T say unto thee, the
cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.”
Again, when his disciples could not understand that reference
to his approaching death and resurrection (xvi. 10). “ A little
while and ye shall not see me : and again a little while, and ye
shall see me, because I go to the Father.” lie repeated to them
much the same language as before; upon which, fancying that
they now understood it, they exclaimed, “ Lo, now speakest thou
plainly, and speakest no proverb. Now we are sure that thou
knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee;
by this, we believe that thou earnest forth from God..” How
doubly painful to the mind of Jesus must have been his pre-
sentiment of his Apostles’ speedy desertion of him on the first
appearance of danger, from their present profession of firm faith
in his mission, and apparent alacrity in his cause. L)o we not
perceive all this in his reply ? “Ho ye now believe ? Behold,
the hour cometh, yea is now come, that ye shall be scattered,
every man to his own, and shall leave me alone.” Alone, indeed !
Is it possible to conceive a more complete desertion than that


which Jesus foresaw awaiting* him ? While already the traitor
was leading* on the band sent forth for his apprehension, and he
knew full well the fate to which that apprehension was to consign
him, was it possible for a sense of desertion so sudden, of
abandonment so complete, to come home to his heart in all its
loneliness in any circumstances, more strongly than when sur-
rounded with faithfully attached friends, their countenances lighted
up with honest, though mistaken faith, their hearts inflamed with
well-intentioned though unsteady zeal ? While, all the time, his
knowledge of their character, and of their imperfect understanding
of his instructions, convinced him that they were about to forsake
him and flee, when first his enemies should seize him. Such then,
were the circumstances which wrung from our Lord the mournful
exclamation, “Do ye now believe ? Behold, the hour cometh,
vea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his
own, and shall leave me alone.” Such were the circumstances
under which his firmly settled feeling of the Omnipresence of God
enabled him to add with so much truth and beauty, which the
occasion tends so much more strikingly to display, “Yet I am not
alone, because the Father is with me.”
While we reverently admire the deeply-seated faith with
which Jesus, in an hour of such peculiar distress, looked up for
comfort to his ever present Father in Heaven, and witness with
wonder and awe the strength with which his conviction of his
Father’s presence supplied him, enabling him to bear the trials,
not only of that hour, but of the closing scene of his life; let not
our admiration fade away within us, without producing like-
wise the desire to profit by this noble example, and ourselves to
derive, from the doctrine of the Divine Omnipresence, a portion of
that strength .to support us in the trials and sufferings of our
lives, which we here witness so strikingly manifested in the
history of our Lord. It is indeed true —and blessed be God that
it is true —that we are not likely to be called upon to endure
trials such as we contemplate in the case of Jesus; yet if there
be in the circumstances of our lives —as in the life of every man
there are—times of trial when the spirit sinks within us, and we
feel deserted by all, and left alone to bear the burdens imposed
upon us ; such are the times when, like our Lord, we shall rejoice


to be able to look up to an ever present Father lor support and
consolation; against such times, then, let it be our care that we
cherish a firm faith in the cheering doctrine of our text.
I. When we encounter the frowns of the world, we are apt to
feel as if we were alone. With joy and gratitude indeed we
confess, that the disapprobation of the world cannot in the
present enlightened age affect our liberty or life, so long as we
obey the laws of society, and submit to those reasonable restraints
which it imposes as a condition of its protection. \et still, as
professors of a form of faith everywhere spoken against, our
opinions, however honestly formed, however temperately main-
tained, however manfully followed out to their legitimate results,
may lead us to encounter not only the opposition, but the distrust
of our fellow-men. we go, we may meet the glance of
contempt and the marks of avoidance; we may hear on all sides
our principles misrepresented without our having the advantage
of being allowed to plead in their defence; we may even find our
motives suspected, and have no opportunity of proving our
honesty. In circumstances such as these—and they are such as
may occur to any man of diligent inquiry, free thought, and
fearless honesty of purpose —how natural is the feeling of loneli-
ness which arises in his mind ! He will feel himself solitary in
the midst of crowds ; for among so many fellow beings, he finds
none that can agree with him in his opinions, sympathize in his
emotions, or even give him credit for the honesty of his principles.
How important then, in circumstances such as these, the recollec-
tion, “I am not alone, because the Father is with me!” In the
presence of that all-wise and good Father of all the families of
men, may the honest professor of a despised faith take refuge,
securely trusting that there , at least, he shall meet with just
appreciation; and that his humble searching after truth will not
be repulsed with scorn; but that, whether his creed be true or
false, his sincerity will be accepted, and his frailty forgiven.
11. Again; when, in the natural course of human life, the
family ties which so closely connected us with the dear companions
of our childhood are severed, and the pleasing intimacies of early
friendship broken off by our being ushered into the active scenes
of life, and called to untried duties in new and distant circles;


what wonder if, when once the surprise of novelty has worn away,
the heart feel a yearning 1 after its accustomed sympathies, and
we he apt to feel ourselves alone. How cheering then, the
doctrine of our text, u I am not alone, because the Father is with
me.” His all-seeing eye no less watches our sleeping bed wherever
our several lot be cast, than when wc reposed in peace under the
common roof of our earthly parent; His arm no less upholds us,
each and all, in our separate spheres of duty now, than when we
went forth each day hand in hand to our labour and our relaxations;
his ear is no less open to our solitary morning and evening song of
praise, than when we knelt together in the sacred circle of family
worship j His smile greets us no less while offering up our weekly
tribute of devotion, though in a strange sanctuary, than when we
“ took sweet counsel together, and walked to the house of God in
company.” In the presence, then, of that ever present Father in
Heaven, the several members of a family, however scattered they
may be on earth, still find themselves at home; still in a manner
feel themselves in one another’s presence. Can we then sufficiently
highly prize the doctrine by which the sweetest joys of life are
lengthened far beyond the term to which by the ordinary circum-
stances of the world they would seem to be limited; by which
besides, the purest pleasures of our earthly lot are yet further
refined and elevated by our constant employment of them, not
only in the “presence of our Heavenly Father, but through that
vresence alone.
111. If then by the firm belief in the Omnipresence of God,
we feel the pains of temporary separation from our dearest rela-
tives and truest friends immeasurably lightened, and the sense of
solitude removed ; how infinitely precious the effect of this same
great doctrine, as a consolation in that longer and more complete
separation which is sooner or later to divide us by death ! How
dreary would at first sight appear the state of loneliness of him
who finds himself the sole survivor of his family and early
friends: who has seen those who in his youthful days shared the
best affections of his heart, and whom advancing years tended
but to render doubly dear, sink one by one into the tomb, and
wakes from his dreams of earthly happiness to the sad reality of
solitude ! Yet even in such a state of desertion as this, the


Christian “is not alone, because the Father is with himHe
lives in the presence of his heavenly Father; in His presence he
knows are all whom he has lost on earth; he feels even now not
altogether destitute of the companionship of those who to the eye
of sense have left him alone:—he still enjoys the felt presence of
that God in whose sight they have with him walked through the
pilgrimage of life; —he waits but His summons again to join the
beloved companions of his mortal joys and sorrows, and to see
plainly revealed those glories of his Heavenly Father which his
mortal vision could not bear to behold in all their brightness.
IV. Farther, when in the plain path of duty, we encounter
danger in its most fearful forms : when we are called to meet
with naked breast the approach of armed violence : to face the
terrors of the tempest, and brave the stroke of the lightning:
to go forth to combat on behalf of our suffering, dying, fellow
mortals, with death in its most fearful shapes of pestilence and
famine : or by sea to entrust ourselves to the treacherous waves,
and look upon the dreadful rolling of its stormy billows, each
as it moves onward sufficient to overwhelm us in its waters :—in
dangers such as these, what wonder if our confessed weakness
should lead us to tremble, as if alone we stood before the
destroyer? “Yet are we not alone, for the Father is with us.”
The God who has so often shielded his servants from the rage of
their enemies, is at hand to rescue us from the sword of the
slayer of men. He who sheltered his chosen people from the
plagues with which he afflicted Egypt, is by to protect us from
the arrow that Hieth in darkness, and the pestilence that wasteth
at noonday. The Father who supported Jesus on the waters of
Gennesareth, has his hand prepared to snatch us from the stormy
billows. Or, if no deliverance be prepared for us, we know, at
least, that he who listened to the dying words of our Lord,
“ Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit,” is ever near to
receive our parting breath—ever ready to usher us into that
immortal life, where in His presence is fulness of joy.
V. Once more; when enfeebled by disease, and racked with
pain, we toss on our sleepless couch throughout the long watches
of the night, and look with impatience for the light of day, if not
to ease our sufferings, yet at least to restore to us the face of


nature, and the companionship of those who minister to our
comfort in our sickness; how lonely our condition, how unsup-
portable our solitude, but for the comforting- assurance that “ we
are not alone, because the Father is with us.” Yes, not only
does his eye look down upon our suffering state, but his present
hand apportions our trials to our strength —his breath fans
our fevered brow —his smile makes light the darkness which
surrounds the bed of patient resignation. With our Heavenh-
Father then, ever present to our view, even in the night w-atches
of sleepless pain and sickness, “we are not alone j” but with Him
we commune in secret, review the past, and look forward to the
future. How important then the discipline which sickness thus
improved affords to our moral character ! When health returns,
it is surely impossible for us to enter ag'ain on the duties of life,
without renewed resolutions of diligence and watchfulness; the
blessed effects of which will lead us to look back to the wakeful
hours of disease as the salutary inflictions of the Father whos
confessed presence rendered them at the time tolerable : and now
the subject of grateful remembrance.
VI. And when the bed of disease becomes the bed of lan-
guishing—and when exhausted nature perceives approaching, the
angel of death —then, if ever, does the presence of the Father
need to be felt as a support and consolation; then, if ever, shall
we confess the importance of having made the doctrine of our text
the constant sentiment of our hearts. Friends and relatives may
surround our dying couch with all the dear expressions of affec-
tion and sympathy; yet, though not alone, we must feel the
fearful sense of approaching solitude; unless, having learned to
consider our Heavenly Father as ever present with us, we be able
to look up with confidence to Him, as our guide through the
unknown scenes on which we are about to enter. Assured of His
continued protection, we may smile at the approach of the king
of terrors; “ though we walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, we will fear no evil: his rod, and his staff, they shall
comfort us.”
On a review of the whole subject, then, the doctrine of the
Divine Omnipresence claims our regard both as a doctrine of
nature, and especially, as plainly laid down, and most forcibly


exhibited in the volume of Revelation. It is impossible, alto-
gether and permanently, to banish it from our minds; the only
way, then, in which we can insure to ourselves lasting- peace of
conscience, is to make it our constant endeavour to remember that
God is ever present with us. This consciousness will operate
primarily as a means of deterring- us from the commission of evil;
then, in the progress of our moral training, as an encouragement
to obedience. And, when once we have become sufficiently con
firmed in virtuous dispositions to be worthy of so high a privilege
—in proportion as “ perfect love casteth out fear ” —the know-
ledge that 11 the Father is with us” will become our most cheering
consolation in affliction; alleviating all our sorrows, as well as
heightening and refining- all the pleasures of this mortal life, and
conducting us, with constantly increasing assurance of their
reality, to those brighter regions of Immortal being where we
shall be ever with the Father.
To Him, the ever present witness of our actions, the final
rewarder of our obedience, through His beloved Son our Saviour
Jesus Christ, be all glory and praise for ever. Amen.
LORD’S SUPPER SERVICE.
ADDRESS.
My Christian Friends,
In our attempts to represent to our conceptions the great
God of our adoration and our hope, there is apt to arise a difficulty
from the inadequacy of our imperfect powers to conceive of sub-
jects so vast as His attributes : and so remote also from our


ordinary conceptions; for, despite of the unquestionable doctrine
of the Divine Omnipresence, we must admit that we do find a
constantly recurring l difficulty in conceiving of God as being at
all times in us, and around us, and besetting us on every side.
It is on this account, that the example of Christ is of so
great benefit to us, as exhibiting in mortal form, those glorious
attributes so far as they can appertain to mortal man, and so far
as we can therefore be expected to endeavour to imitate them.
Partaking of our nature, he is “ not an high Priest wffiich cannot
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities ; but was in all
points tempted, like as we are, yet without sin,” And thus He
exhibits to us the dazzling brightness of God’s attributes toned
down (as it were) to meet our gaze; as the moon reflects upon
the earth, in milder radiance, the unbearable splendour of the mid-
day sun.
Thus, then, if the doctrine of the Divine Omnipresence be
almost too overpowering for our conceptions, and hardly capable
of our realisation to ourselves as an aid of great power towards
the religious life ; let us, in all the events of our lives, reflect on
the Lord Jesus; remembering that on leaving this earth, he is
reported by the evangelist Matthew to have said, “Lo ! I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world.”
Here, at His table, perhaps He appears most really present
with us; while we remember, in the presence of these elements
which He has consecrated to the use of this solemn service, His
blood shed, and His body broken for us in His crucifixion j a real
presence, so to speak, with our spirits, and a consecration of
our best emotions, which we trust is felt by Christians of every
name, while, under different forms, they join in this solemn com-
munion with their crucified and risen Lord.
And so, when we leave this table, let Jesus be with us in all
the circumstances of our lives. In joy—as when He blessed the
festive board at the marriage in Cana of Galilee—or as when He
took in his arms those children, in whom He has sanctified the
season of infancy ever since, beyond the power of austere priests
and barbarous creeds to undo again. In sorrow and bereavement,
let him be our comfort, as He was of Jairus weeping over his lost
daughter, and of that mourning widow at the gates of Nain. In


social life may His presence sanctify our homes, as it did that
holy house of the Sisters of Bethany. In solitude, may His
spirit brood over us while we think of Him watching- on the
mountain, and by the midnig-ht shore of the Lake of Galilee. In
the sad loss of friends, may He be beside us, to say, as to the
bereaved sisters of Lazarus, u thy brother shall rise again.” In
the last hour of death, may we see Him, as He meekly bowed
His head and said, “ Father, into Thy hands I commend my
spirit.”
“ Who,” says the Apostle Paul (Romans viii., 35—39.),
“ shall separate us from the love of Christ ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword ? * * * * Nay, in all these thing-s we are
more than conquerors through him that loved us. For, I am
persuaded, that neither death nor life, norang-els, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor thing-s present, nor thing-s to come *
* * shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
PRAYER.
Almighty, ever-present God, our Heavenly Father, most
humbly and heartily do we pray, that nothing may ever be able
to separate us from that love which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
In Him we see the crowning instance of Thy love; so loving the
world, that thou didst not spare to give Him, that the world
through Him might be saved. May we believe on Him with
unwavering faith; may we dwell on Him with ever increasing-
reverence and love. Grant that He may indeed be with us to the
end of the world; may we give our whole mind to the knowledge
of His precepts ; our whole heart to the endeavour in ourselves as
far as possible to realise His life; may our spirits be one with His,
that whatever we think, or speak, or do, may be to His glory, and
meet for Thine acceptance. And, tog-ether with Him, whom having
not seen, we love, as the best and highest of Thy sons, do Thou,


0 God, be with us, imperfect as we are, and unworthy of thy
presence; Oh Thou that inhabitest the praises of Eternity.
Inspire into us Thy Holy Spirit, we pray Thee, in such measure as
our feeble nature can bear ; that it may bring to our remembrance
all that Jesus did for us, and that it may lead us to understand
what He taught, and so far as possible, to copy His example,
and to live as faithful disciples of Him whom we call Master and
Lord;—as we love Him, grant us grace to keep His words ; —that
thus as He hath promised to His faithful disciples, Thou also, our
Father mayest love us; and come with Him to us, and make Thy
abode with us. Ever so abide with us, Heavenly Father, we
humbly entreat Thee, during this, our mortal life on earth; and
grant that after death, we may ever more abide with Thee, and
with our risen Lord, in the mansions of Thy glorious house in
Heaven above.
To thee, for ever, through him, be all Glory and Praise.
Amen.




