

CONSTITUTION OF PROVINCES,
THE RELATION OF A METROPOLITAN TO HIS
SUFFRAGANS.
The Committee appointed to examine and “ report on the law
and usage of the Church with regard to the constitution of a Pro-
vince, and the relation of a Metropolitan to his Suffragan Bishops,
and the manner in which such law and usage bear upon the Diocese
of Melbourne as now constituted,” report as follows
I. Concerning the distinction of Metropolitan and Archbishop.
Two views are put forward in the glosses to Lyndwood's Provinciale.
(1.) That an Archbishop and Metropolitan differ in dignity,
inasmuch as an Archbishop presides over Metropolitan and other
Bishops.
(2.) That they are essentially the same, the Archbishop being so
called in respect of a supremacy over other Bishops; the Metropoli-
tan from supremacy of his see over other sees. (Lyndwood, Lib. v.,
lit. 15, p. 318. Const. Dom. Oth. de Offic. Arch., p. 55.)
The former of these views is supported by a passage in the novels
of Justinian, which Bingham has quoted, “ Volumus . . . ut
sacrosanctus antistes non solum Metropolitanus sed etiam Archiepis-
copusfiat.” To this by itself your Committee would not attach much
importance, as it is merely a preamble to a novel, and the expression
might be explained away as a rhetorical antithesis. But they find it
confirmed by a passage in Bede. Thus Pope Gregory in the brief
accompanying the “ pallium” sent to Augustine says—“ Ita ut per
loca singula duodecim episcopos ordines qui tuce subjaceant ditioni
quatenus Lundinensis civitatis episcopus semper in posterum a
synodo proprid debet consecrari atque honoris pallium ab hac sanctd
et apostolicd cui Deo anctore deservio sede percipiat.” — (Bede , Hist.
Ecc., Lib 1., c. 257.) Now the “ pallium” was peculiar to Metropoli-
tans and Archbishops (see Gilbert of Limerick de statu Eccles., p.
1002; Ed. Migne, and Giraldus Gambrensis de statu et jure Menene-
vensis Eccles., p. 168, ed. Brewer). It seems to have been the inten-
tion of Pope Gregory that the Bishop of London should be a Metro-
politan under an Archbishop.
Practically, however, the distinction of Archbishop and Metropoli-
tan was not very important. Each could only obtain institution


frc tided over
sm __ me mea from very
early times seems to have been that the provinces were each to have
been self-governing, and that every Bishop was to be elected by his
comprovincial Bishops, and consecrated by not less than two or three
of them. Thus the first so-called Apostolical Canon decrees
“ Episcopus a duobus ant tribus Episcopis ordinetur," and this was
reproduced in the IV. Canon of the Nicene Council. “ The Bishop
shall be appointed by the Bishop of the Eparchy : if that is not
possible on account of pressing necessity, or on account of the length
of journeys, three Bishops at least shall meet and proceed to the
imposition of hands with the written permission of those absent.
The confirmation of what has been done belongs in each province
to the Metropolitan,” This Canon was accepted very early in the
English Church, and appears in the (spurious) Excerpts of Egbert.
11. But there is abundant evidence that the rule requiring three
Bishops to a province was perpetually violated, as also that requiring
consecration by three Bishops. For convenience sake your Com-
mittee have distinguished between the cases of provinces under
Archbishops commonly so called, and provinces under Metropolitans.
But they know of no instance in which an Archbishop was not also
a Metropolitan, and the terms are used exchangeably by Bede in his
account of the Early English Church.
(1.) Augustine, Archbishop and Metropolitan, in a.d. 601, does not
consecrate any Suffragan Bishops till a.d. 604, when he consecrates
Mellitus and Justus. (Bede, Hist. Eccl., I. 29, 11, 3.)
(2.) Augustine dies a.d. 605 ; his successor, Laurence, a.d. 619 ;
Mellitus in a.d. 624. No provision had been thought necessary for
keeping up the number of Bishops, and Justus was left the sole
Bishop of the Latin Church in England. He presently received the
“ pall” from Pope Boniface, and then consecrated Romanus Bishop
of Rochester, and soon after Paulinus Bishop of York. But the
canonical number of three Bishops was wanting from a.d. 619 to
a.d. 625.
(3.) In a.d. 625 Paulinus was made Bishop of York; in a.d. 634
he received the “ pall,” and is thenceforth called Metropolitan ( Bede,
H. E., Lib. 11., c. 17); but Oswald of Berenicia, not caring apparently
that his kingdom should be subject to a Metropolitan at York,
established Aidan, consecrated by Irish Bishops at Lindisfarne.
Nor did York have any Suffragan Bishops till Lindisfarne and
Hexham were united under Theodore in a.d. 678.
(4.) No Bishop of Whithern is known between a.d. 791 and a.d.
1133, nqr of Hexham after a.d. 821, nor of Carlisle till a.d. 1133.
Between a.d. 821 and a.d. 1133 therefore York had only one
Suffragan see—that of Lindisfarne; afterwards Chester le Street,
after Durham (see the invaluable book of Professor Stubbs on Epis-
copal Succession in England).
The Case of Metropolitans Without Suffragans. —l. —S. Kentigern,
Bishop of Glasgow in the sixth century, and who received a papal


privilege that he should be subject to no Bishop ( Vila S. Kentigern,
c. 33), seems to have been Metropolitan of the kingdom of Strath-
clyde, embracing what were afterwards th’e Dioceses of Whithern,
Carlisle, and Glasgow. But Whithern was not a Bishopric till
A.D. 681, nor Carlisle till a.d. 1133 ; nor do we hear of any other see
in that time in Strathclyde. The inference seems to be that he was
the sole Bishop in an independent province.
11. In the ninth century (probably a.d. 870) Kenstec, Bishop of
Diunurrin, in Cornwall, professed canonical obedience to the
Archbishop of Canterbury (Councils and Ecclesiastical Documents,
by Haddan and Stubbs, p. 674). The inference seems to be that
the Church of Cornwall, reduced to a single see by Saxon conquest,
had been independent under one Bishop having the position of
Metropolitan.
111. In a conversation reported between Pope Innocent 111. and
Giraldus Cambrensis, Giraldus represents himself as saying that
down to the time of Henry I, “ the Church of St. David’s had the
full dignity of a Metropolitan Church, except the use of the ‘ pall/
and owed subjection to no Church but Rome, and that immediately
like the Church of Scotland.” The Pope said, in answer, “ that
this was nothing new or unheard of; that an Episcopal Church,
though simply such (quanquam simplicem) should be under no
Metropolitan, as was the case with Lucca and Pavia, whose pastors,
though only Bishops, yet, by the grace of the Church of Rome, use
the ‘pall’ and have the cross borne before them.” From Giraldus’s
plea given in to the Pope we know that it was claimed that the
other three Welsh Bishoprics should be subject to St, David’s as to
their Metropolitan (Gir. Camb. de statu et jure Menev. Eccles., pp.
168, 175, ed. Brewer),
Your Committee have directed special attention to the Churches
of Great Britain and Ireland. But they may observe that the pro-
vince of Rhsetia Ima. had only one diocese (Bingham, ix. 5), and
that of Germanica Ilda. only two (Bingham, ix. 6). Again, Ansgar
was made the first Archbishop of Hamburg (afterwards translated
to Bremen), with the whole of Scandinavia, then Pagan, assigned to
him as a province, and with no Suffragans till he consecrated one.
So too Willibrod, apostle of the Frisians, was appointed Metro-
politan and Archbishop of their country in a.d. 696, and received
Utrecht as the seat of his see from Karl Martel. (Martin's Histoire
de France, ii., 172.) Your committee would also notice that if
they had quoted from the Eastern Church, they might very much
have extended the foregoing lists.
111. Cases of Consecration by a, single Bishop :
(1.) In a.d. 604 Augustine by himself consecrates Mellitus and
Justus. (Stubbs’s Epis. Sue.)
(2.) In a.d. 624 Justus consecrates Romanus. (Stubbs.)
(3.) In ad. 678 Archbishop Theodore consecrates Bosa of York,
Eadhed of Lindsey, and Eata of Hexham. As Wilfrid of York
had just been banished, as the see of Lindisfarne was vacant, and


that of Hexham not created, there were no comprovincial Bishops
to assist. The Southern Bishops are not mentioned as assisting, and
probably did not. (Bede, H. E., iv., c. 12.)
But the instances in the Scotch and Irish Churches are much more
numerous, and last down to the end of the eleventh century, thus:—
Dubricius and Teilo were consecrated by a single Bishop each.
(Iladdan Councils, p. 155.)
St. Serf was consecrated by Palladius singly. (Reeve, Life of St.
Columba, p. 113.)
St. Kentigern by an individual Irish Bishop. ( Vita Kentigerni, c. 11.)
Archbishops Lanfranc and Anselm speak of the practice which
they censure as existing in Ireland in their own time. (Lanfranc,
Epist., 44 ; Anselm, Epist., cxlii.) It is noticeable that Jocelin, the
biographer of St. Kentigern, in commenting on the British use,
observes that the consecration by one Bishop though irregular was
not invalid, and speaks of the other two as witnesses.
IV. The Formation of Dioceses.
Hefele (p. 382) interprets the IV. Nicene Canon to mean that
the Church accepted the political division as the basis of ecclesias-
tical division; and Bingham has proved laboriously that the two
habitually correspond. It seems more important, however, to observe
that the Church from an early period followed the changes intro-
duced by the State.
Thus the Council of Antioch, a.d. 341 (c. 9), decreed that the
Bishop in every province should own him who presided in the (civil)
metropolis; and the Council of Turin, that in case of disputed
Primacy, the Bishop of that city which is the civil metropolis is
to be Primate; and the Council of Chalcedon (c.c. 12, 17), that if
the Emperor should divide a province into two, the position of the
two dioceses may be altered to correspond.
That the Church followed these ordinances seems proved from
two novels of Justinian. One (xxviii.) consolidating two provinces
of Pontus into one, declares that the change shall not affect the
position of the two Metropolitans, and another (xxxi.) increasing
the divisions of Armenia makes the same reserve about Metro-
politan right.
“ Whatever was the cause,” says Mr. Kemble (Saxons in England,
11., p. 361) “we find at first a bishopric co-extensive with a
kingdom,” and he points out that Canterbury and Rochester were
probably capitals of two kingdoms. To form the diocese of Lincoln,
three small kingdoms were taken at various times, and the see
fluctuated between Dorchester, the capital of the South Angles,
Leicester the capital of the mid-Angies, and Sidnacester, or Lincoln,
in Lincolnshire. (Pearson’s Historical Maps, p. 49.)
Lastly, the attempt of Offa to emancipate Mercia from the
Primacy of Canterbury by establishing a Metropolitan at Lichfield,
is evidence to the same feeling as late as the eighth century ;
and it may be noticed that it was successful for a time, and was
only overthrown in a.d. 803, when Mercia had lost its political
supremacy. Your Committee would conclude therefore—


(1.) That the distinction between Archbishop and Metropolitan
is more apparent than real, though there are some cases of Metro-
politans who are not Archbishops, and none, as far as your Com-
mittee know, of Archbishops who are not Metropolitans.
(2.) That by the rule of the Church an Archbishop or Metropolitan
ought to have Suffragan Bishops.
(3.) That this rule has not always been observed when there
seemed good reasons for departing from it; and that the history of
the English Church is peculiarly rich in instances where there has
been an Archbishop or Metropolitan without Suffragans.
(4.) Similarly that by the rule of the Church three Bishops are
required for consecration ; but
(5.) That this rule has been constantly departed from where
there seemed good reason for so doing; and that the history of the
Churches in Britain is peculiarly rich in instances where only a single
Bishop has consecrated.
(6.) That the Church in regulating the boundaries of dioceses seems
habitually to have followed the civil order with even punctilious
exactness ; and in particular to have laid down the rule that where
a new province was constituted, with a new metropolis, the appoint-
ment of a new Metropolitan Bishop or the elevation of an old
Suffragan Bishop to the rank of Metropolitan followed as a matter
of course.
On the subject of limitations to the power of Metropolitans, your
Committee beg to report; —
1. That their jurisdiction was strictly limited to their own
provinces.
Thus one of the so-called Apostolical canons decrees “that
Bishops ordaining outside their own boundaries in cities or town-
ships which are not rightly under their jurisdiction . . . .
are to be deposedand this law of the Church was afterwards con-
firmed by the 16th Nicene Canon.
A remarkable passage from English Church History bears upon
this. In a.d. 1076, when the great Anselm was to be consecrated,
Thomas, Archbishop of York, refused to officiate on the ground that
the Bull of Pope Honorius designated Anselm Primate of all
Britain ; “ For inasmuch,” he said, “ as there are only two Metro-
politans of Britain, one cannot be above another.” At last it was
arranged that this obnoxious passage should be expunged, and
Thomas performed the ceremony “assistentibus fere totius provincice
co-episcopis — (T. Stubbs , Actus Pontif Ebor. c. 1707).
It need scarcely be added that a Metropolitan or Suffragan Bishop
may assist by invitation at the consecration of a Metropolitan or
Bishop in another province, or may even, as in this instance, conse-
crate.
2. That no Metropolitan has any independent power as Judge of
Appeal. The most distinguished English Canonist, William Ock-
ham, expresses himself thus on the subject:—“ It is evident that
inferiors can supply the negligence of superiors, when they can often


even correct and restrain their superiors. Witness Pope Eginus
0 Ekigenius), who says— ‘ Reserving in all things the privileges of
the Church of Rome, no Metropolitan may hear the causes of any
person without the assistance ( instantid ) of the other corn-provincial
Bishops, for they will be void unless they have been discussed in
the presence of all of them; and if he do it he may be restrained by
his brethren,’ With whom Pope Anitius (? Anicetus) seems to agree,
who says:— ‘ If any Metropolitan be puffed up and wish without the
presence of all his corn-provincial Bishops to discuss (argue) either
their causes or those which relate to his own diocese, he is to be
sharply corrected by all, lest he dare presume on such things here-
after ; but if he appear incorrigible and disobedient to them, let his
contumacy be referred to his apostolical see, to which the Bishop’s
judgments are instructed to be referred that vengeance may be taken
on him.” —(Dialogus , Book 111., Tract. 11., part 3, c. 22.)
On the formation of dioceses in England in other than the earliest
times.
1. In a.d. 1109, Henry, thinking the diocese of Lincoln too great,
carved the diocese of Ely out of it. Our chroniclers speak of it as
the King’s act {Simeon Dnnelm , c. 232, Hen. Hunt) except Malmes-
bury, who uses the vaguer phrase—“ Consilium hahitum est." It is
agreed that the Bishop of Lincoln received compensation, and the
language of Brompton—not a very trustworthy chronicler—may
seem to imply that his consent was necessary. “ This Bishopric of
Ely was taken out of the diocese of Lincoln through the instru-
mentality of Richard, Abbot of Ely, who gave the Bishop of Lincoln
fat manors and many gifts for his consent.” (Brompton , c. 1003.)
But Malmesbury’s account seems the more probable :—“ Lest the
Bishop of Lincoln should complain that his revenue was impaired,
the King’s generosity gave him of other men’s property a township
of Ely, called Spalding, to compensate the Bishop’s loss, and stay
the complaint. (Gesta. Pontif, p. 325.) This would seem to
imply that the Bishop only remonstrated, as any lay baron might
have done, at being deprived of part of his fees, and did not contest
the rights of the secular power, as such, to make the change.
2. It has been noticed that Carlisle was included in the sixth cen-
tury in the Diocese of Glasgow. In the seventh century Ecgfrid,
of Northumbria, having conquered the country, transferred Carlisle
to the See of Lindisfarne, The Danish invasions of the ninth and
tenth centuries, and the Scotch annexations of the eleventh, dis-
turbed this connexion. But in William Rufus’s reign Cumberland
became part of England again, and in 1133 Henry I. made Carlisle
the seat of a bishopric. Karleol. Rex H. initiavit ad sedem episco-
palem (says John of Hexham, c. 287). Fecit Rex novum episco-
patum apud Karloil (Hen. Hunt, p. 385). There is no trace that
the change was made by any authority but the King’s, though it
was no doubt discussed in council. Your Committee cannot dis-
cover whether the formation of the bishopric corresponded to any
change in the boundaries and position of the northern counties;


but several such changes were made during the twelfth century, and
it is noticeable that the Diocese of Carlisle does not include that
part of Cumberland which is now known as Copeland, and which,
with part of Lancashire, formed a separate political district as late
as ad. 1176. (Hoveden, 11., p. 88.) It seems probable, therefore,
that a new civil organisation suggested the formation of a new diocese.
3. In A.D. 1539 Parliament authorised Henry VIII. to constitute
new sees by Letters Patent, and to determine their Metropolitan cities,
and define their boundaries (31 Henry VIII., c. 9). Accordingly
the Sees of Peterborough and Oxford were carved out of the
Diocese of Lincoln, that of Chester out of York and Lichfield, that
of Westminster out of London, and those of Bristol and Gloucester
out of the Diocese of Worcester.
4. At the time of the Roman Catholic reaction under Queen
Mary, Pope Julius 111. commissioned Cardinal Pole, as Legate, to
reform all abuses introduced by the English Reformers. It is
noticeable that while the Bull enumerates various cases of sees left
vacant or given to heretics, it does not specify the cases of the
dioceses thus formed as an irregularity ] and though their Bishops
being Reformers were suspended, the sees in every case —except
Westminster, which was already abolished —were retained. West-
minster was reunited to London practically at the appointment of
Bishop Ridley in a.d. 1550, and legally, according to Bishop Burnet,
by Act of Parliament in ad. 1552. But your Committee cannot
discover the Act in question. (Burnet's History of the Reformation,
11., 309, 396.)
It is noticeable also that under Mary an Act of Parliament
restored the Bishopric of Durham, which had been divided by
another Act in the last year of Edward VI. s reign. (Statutes of the
Realm, Record edition, p. 160; Edward VI., vii. 12 ; Mary, iii. 3.)
These changes were not made without discussion. “ The Popish
party,” says Burnet, “ complained of the King encroaching on the
spiritual jurisdiction of the Church by dismembering dioceses and
removing churches from one jurisdiction to another. For the
division of dioceses many things were brought from the Roman law
to show that the division of the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, whether
of Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, or Bishops, was regulated by
the Emperors, of which the ancient Councils always approved. And
in England, when the Bishopric of Lincoln being judged of too great
an extent, the Bishopric of Ely was taken out of it, it was done only
by the King, with the consent of his clergy and nobles.’ (Burnet,
Vol. I, p. 603.)
4. At the time of the separation of the American colonies they
were under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. Immediately
after the separation it was felt that the ecclesiastical order must follow
the civil, and in a.d. 1784 Seabury obtained consecration in Scotland
as Bishop of Connecticut. Next year the General Convention of the
American Church petitioned the English Bishops to consecrate some
other Bishops; the English Bishops obtained an Act of Parliament


authorising them to do so, and in a.d, 1787 Bishop White and Bishop
Provoost were consecrated to the Sees of Pennsylvania and New York
respectively. (Anderson's Church of England in the Colonies,
Vols. 11., III.)
Your Committee infer that the immemorial practice of the English
Church has been to hold that the boundaries of dioceses follow the
civil order of the State, and can be remodelled at pleasure by the
civil power.
The manner in which the law and usage of the Church of England
bear upon the Diocese of Melbourne as now constituted will best be
shown by tracing the various steps taken in establishing the Church
in the colony. .
The territory of Victoria formed (as Port Phillip) a part of the
colony of New South Wales originally.
The Crown made all ecclesiastical appointments of Chaplains in
the colony, under the laws of England, having the power so to do.
The law of England on the subject of appointment and of conse-
cration of Archbishops and Bishops, was so much of the legislation
of Henry YIIL and Edward VI., which, repealed under Mary and
revived under Elizabeth, has, with slight modifications not affecting
the underlying principles, remained to this day.
The Statute 25 Henry VIII., cap. 20, so revived, required that a
Metropolitan-Elect should be presented by the King “ to one Arch-
bishop and two Bishops,” or to four such Bishops as should be
assigned by His Majesty, All Bishops were to be presented to the
Archbishop. ,
The chroniclers in the sixteenth century maintained that the
English Church conformed to the Nicene Canon* (4) which required
the assistance of all the Bishops of a province at an ordination of
a Metropolitan, if they could conveniently attend, but, failing their
attendance, allowed three Bishops to ordain.
Queen Elizabeth required at least four (of a number of enumerated)
Bishops to be present to confirm the election of Matthew Parker,
and to consecrate him as Archbishop and Pastor of the Church of
Canterbury. Accordingly Barlow, Story, Miles Coverdale, and
Hodgkins consecrated him in the chapel at Lambeth.
In the Statute 8 Elizabeth, cap. 1, it is set forth that in the time of
Henry VIII, by Statute 25 Henry VIII, cap. 20, the form of consecra-
tion of Archbishops and Bishops “ within this realm and other his do-
minions” was ordered; and that by Statute 5 and 6 Edward VI., cap 1,
there had been enjoined a certain “ order of the manner and form how
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Ministers should from
* The Council at Arles (Can. 20) considered that seven Bishops should
attend, but allowed the sufficiency of three, admitting that a single Bishop
had sometimes consecrated another. The Sardican Canon made it an act of
duty that, if only a single Bishop were to survive in a province containing
several sees, he should ordain other Bishops.— Thomassin. Vet et nov.
JEocles, Discipli., Vol. 2, p. 318.


time to time be consecrated, made, and ordered within this realm
and other his dominions that though these Acts had been repealed
subsequently, the powers of the Crown had been revived by 1 Eliza-
beth, cap. I, and that about the making and consecrating Arch-
bishops and Bishops the Queen had acted “ with as great a care and
diligence, or rather more, as ever the like was done before Her
Majesty’s time.”
Sec. 3 of 8 Elizabeth, cap. 1, confirms previous legislation, and
also “ the order and form for the consecrating of Archbishops and
Bishops, and for the making of Priests, Deacons, and Ministers, as
was set forth in the time of the late King Edward VI., and added to
the said Book of Common Prayer and authorised by Parliament in
the fifth and sixth years of the said late King,” which it declares
“ shall stand and be in full force and effect, and shall from hence-
forth be used and observed in all places within this realm and other
the Queen’s Majesty’s dominions and countries.”
It does not appear that the order has undergone any change, and
the eighth Canon Ecclesiastical (1603) stamps with the strongest
approval “ the form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons” in the Church; and in the “ form of ordain-
ing or consecrating of an Archbishop or Bishop” in the Book of
Common Prayer, the presence of an “Archbishop or some other
Bishop appointed by lawful commission” and of at least two other
Bishops is required. The thirty-sixth Article of Religion in the
Prayer Book also declares that the order of consecration of Arch-
bishops and Bishops, and Ordering of Priests and Deacons, set forth
and authorised in the time of Edward VI., contains all things
necessary to consecration and ordering, and that all persons conse-
crated and ordered according to the said rites are rightly, orderly,
and lawfully consecrated and ordered.
The Statute 26 Henry VIII, cap. 14, constituted and made pro-
vision for the future appointments of Suffragans in the Provinces of
Canterbury and York, “and elsewhere within the King’s dominions,”
and this Statute was revived by sec. 9 of the Statute 1 Elizabeth, cap. 1.
The Church Law in England, except so far as declared to be
inapplicable in the colony, governs the Church in Victoria, and must
continue to do so, inasmuch as the Act under which the Church
controls its affairs bars it from introducing changes. (18 Victoria,
No. 45.)
The Bishop of London exercised a g'Mm-superintendence over
colonial chaplains in the earliest days of the colony.
George 111., by Letters Patent (2nd May, 54th year of reign),
constituted the territory under the East India Company to be the
Bishopric of Calcutta.
George IV. (2nd October, sth year of reign) constituted an
“ Archdeaconry in and over the British territories within the colony
of New South Wales, and its dependencies to be styled the Arch-
deaconry of New South Wales, to be subject and subordinate during
the royal pleasure to the jurisdiction spiritual and ecclesiastical of
the Bishop of Calcutta.”


William IV. (13th Jane, sth year of reign) dissevered the colonies
of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land from the Bishopric
of Calcutta, and revoked the powers of the Bishop of Calcutta over
them.
William IV. (18th January, 6th year of reign) “revoked and
annulled the office or appointment of Archdeacon of the Arch-
deaconry of New South Wales, and erected all the territories and
islands comprised within or dependent upon the colonies of New
South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, and Western Australia into a
Bishop’s see or diocese, to be styled the Bishopric of Australia” —
revoked and recalled the appointment of Archdeacon Broughton, and
added, “we do further by these presents erect, found, make, ordain,
and constitute all the territories and islands comprised within or
dependent upon our said colonies of New South Wales, Van
Diemen’s Land, and Western Australia into a Bishop’s see or
diocese, and do declare and ordain that the same shall be styled the
Bishopric of Australia.”
The late Archdeacon Broughton was by the same instrument
appointed Bishop, and it provided further, “ that the Bishop of the
said See of Australia shall be subject and subordinate to the Archi-
episcopal See of Canterbury, and to the most Reverend Father in
God, William, by divine providence Archbishop of Canterbury, in
our kingdom of England, in the same manner as any Bishop of any
see within the province of Canterbury,” and “ every Bishop shall at
the time of his consecration take an oath of obedience to the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury for the time being as his Metropolitan.”
In 1841 the Crown appointed Bishop Selwyn as Bishop of New
Zealand. The separation of New Zealand as a bishopric was not
concurrent with the separation of New Zealand as a territory from
New South Wales.
A separate Governor had been sent to New Zealand in 1839,
before which period the Governor of New South Wales exercised
jurisdiction there over all Her Majesty’s subjects.
Another instance of incongruity between the civil and ecclesias-
tical status of a province was furnished at South Australia.
That province was occupied in 1836. It was excluded from the
jurisdiction of the Governor of New South Wales. Geographically
it seemed to be included within the limits of the Bishopric of Aus-
tralia, as constituted by the Letters Patent of William IV. A
question was raised on the spot in 1839 by those who could not
reconcile themselves to an admission that they, in the separate
civil province, were in any way subordinate ecclesiastically to
Bishop Broughton. The Bishop was of opinion that South Aus-
tralia was within his diocese. Reference was made to England, and
Lord John Russell requested Governor Gipps to inform the Bishop
that the case had been referred to the Queen’s Advocate, and that
functionary was of opinion that the Bishop “ had taken a correct
view of the question respecting the limits of his diocese, and that the
province of South Australia is to be considered as comprised therein.”


Queen Victoria, on the 18th August, 1842, by Letters Patent, “ did
wholly separate, divide, and exempt the City of Hobart Town, and
all that our island of Van Diemen’s Land, and all islands and
territories south of Wilson’s Promontory, and did ordain, make,
constitute, and declare the same to be the Diocese of the Bishop of
Tasmania.”
Queen Victoria, on the 25th June, 1847, ordained that “ Whereas
it has been represented to us by the Archbishop of Canterbury that
further division ” was necessary, “ with the concurrence of the
Bishop of Australia,” four other dioceses should be made, viz.:—
Sydney, Newcastle, Adelaide, and Melbourne.
“The Bishops of the said several sees of Newcastle, Adelaide,
Melbourne, and their successors, and also the Bishop of Tasmania
and his successors, and the Bishop of New Zealand and his
successors, to be subject and subordinate to the See of Sydney and
the Bishop thereof and his successors in the same manner as any
Bishop of any see within the province of Canterbury is under the
authority of the Archiepiscopal see of that province and of the
Archbishop of the same.” . . . “And we do further ordain and
declare that the said Bishop of Melbourne and his successors shall
be subject and subordinate to the Bishop of Sydney as Metropolitan
in the same manner as any Bishop of any see within the Province of
Canterbury in our Kingdom of England is under the Metropolitical
See of Canterbury and the Archbishop thereof ; and we do further
will and ordain that every Bishop of Melbourne shall take an oath
of due obedience to the Bishop of Sydney for the time being as his
Metropolitan, which oath shall and may be ministered by the said
Archbishop, or by any person duly appointed or authorised for that
purpose.”
The first Bishop of Melbourne was consecrated on the 29th June,
1847.
The Bishoprics of Brisbane, Bathurst, Grafton and Armidale, and
Goulburn have also been carved out of existing dioceses at various
periods.
In 1847 (25th June) Letters Patent translated Bishop Broughton
to the Bishopric of Sydney, and declared that he should “ be and
be deemed and taken to be Metropolitan Bishop of Australasia,
subject nevertheless to the general superintendence and revision of
the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being and subordinate
to the Archiepiscopal see of the Province of Canterbury.” The
Bishops of Newcastle, Adelaide, Melbourne, and Tasmania, were at
the same time ordained to be Suffragan Bishops to the Bishop of
Sydney and his successors.
In 1854 (19th October) Bishop Broughton having died, Letters
Patent appointed his successor, who was ordained to be Metropolitan,
and the other Bishops were made his Suffragans as they had pre-
viously been to his predecessor. Full power was given to him to
visit once in five years, or oftener if occasion should require.
The Letters Patent purported to grant to him “ full power and


authority as Metropolitan of Australia to perform all functions
peculiar and appropriate to the office of Metropolitan within the
limits of the said sees, and to exercise Metropolitan jurisdiction over
the Bishops of the said sees and their successors, and over all Arch-
deacons, dignitaries, and all other Chaplains, Ministers, Priests, and
Deacons in holy orders.”
The present Bishop of Sydney did actually hold a visitation in
Victoria on the 12th July, 1860, under the powers which it was
then supposed that he possessed by virtue of these Letters Patent.
No question as to the validity of the Letters Patent conferring
this jurisdiction disturbed the position of the Churches in the
colonies until, in the case of Long v. the Bishop of Cape Town, it
was decided that such Letters Patent issued after the establishment
of Constitutional Government could confer no jurisdiction, eccle-
siastical or civil.
The Privy Council, on appeal, declared against theif validity.
In 1865 the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, on the
petition of the Bishop of Natal, “ apprehended it to be clear, upon
principle, that after the establishment of an independent Legis-
lature there was no power in the Crown, by virtue of its prerogative
(for these Letters Patent were not granted under the provisions of
any Statute), to establish a Metropolitan see or province, or to create
an ecclesiastical corporation whose status, rights, and authority the
colony could be required to recognise.”
“ We arrive at the conclusion that, although in a Crown colony,
properly so called, or in cases where the Letters Patent are made in
pursuance of an Act of Parliament, a Bishopric may be constituted
and ecclesiastical jurisdiction conferred by the sole authority of the
Crown, yet that the Letters Patent of the Crown will not have any
such effect or operation in any colony or settlement which is
possessed of an independent Legislature.” . . . “ The attempt
to give appellate jurisdiction to the Archbishop of Canterbury is
equally invalid.”
It will be observed that the Privy Council admits the power of the
Crown to issue Letters Patent in pursuance of an Act of Parliament.
But there are no conceivable circumstances under which the
Par’iament of England would legislate on ecclesiastical affairs in a
colony.
It is therefore as positive that the Parliament will not, as it is
that the Queen cannot, confer ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Of such a
right of Parliament “Junius” spoke as merely speculative, never to
be exerted, nor ever to be renounced. Practically, the colony is now
autonomic.
The Church of England, however, is placed in this respect like
other religious bodies, for there can be no intelligence so vacuous as
to suppose that what the Queen cannot do any foreigner can do.
As to the granting of titles not conferring jurisdiction, the power
of the Queen as fountain of honour remains untouched by legisla-
tion ; but it is unnecessary to encumber this paper with a disqui-


sition as to whether a title being conferred by the Queen on a
Bishop and his successors, such title remains with his successors as a
corporation sole after the authority of the Queen to confer eccle-
siastical jurisdiction has been abrogated.
Such an independent Legislature as was contemplated by the judg-
ment of the Privy Council was in existence in New South Wales
before the Bishopric of Melbourne was founded, and therefore before
it was attempted to make it suffragan to the Bishop of Sydney as
Metropolitan.
The first Legislative Council to which the colonists of New South
Wales, including Port Phillip, sent representatives, was convened in
1843, four years before the Letters Patent were issued which pur-
ported to make the Bishop of Sydney Metropolitan over the See of
Melbourne. __
These Letters Patent were therefore, to a great extent, void, and
no argument can be based upon them.
Subsequent events would have made them inapplicable had they
been originally of virtue; for in 1851 Port Phillip became a separate
colony under the name of Victoria, with an independent Legislature;
and at latest, on the death of Bishop Broughton, all ties with the
Church in Sydney were dissevered and made impossible, except such
as by common consent might be made by the sister Churches in the
two colonies.
The Letters Patent creating, or purporting to create, the present
Bishop of Sydney Metropolitan, were issued several years after the
date at which Victoria became autonomic. '
The position of the Church in Victoria was therefore entirely
dependent upon its statutory and traditionary duties as a branch
of the Church of England to which its members professed to
belong. Those who might wish to discard such duties ceased, ipso
facto, to be members of the Church, and may be dismissed from con-
sideration.
In the judgment of Lord Bomilly, Master of the Rolls, in 1866,
the following words occurred :—“ Where there is no State religion
established by the Legislature in any colony, and in such a colony
is found a number of persons who are members of the Church of
England, and who establish a church there, with the doctrines, rites,
and ordinances of the Church of England, it is a part of the Church
of England, and the members of lit are, by implied agreement,
bound by all its laws. In other words, the association is bound by
the doctrines, rites, rules, and ordinances of the Church of England,
except so far as any Statutes may exist, which (though relating
to this subject) are confined in their operation to the limits of
the United Kingdom of England and Ireland. Accordingly, upon
reference to the civil tribunal, in the event of any resistance to
the order of the Bishop in any such colony, the Court would have
to inquire, not what were the peculiar opinions of the persons
associated together in the colony as members of the Church of
England, but what were the doctrines and discipline of the Church


of England itself, obedience to which doctrines and discipline the
Court would have to enforce.” —( Bishop of Natal v. Gladstone.)
The mode of government thus said by Lord Romilly to be possible
would be palpably too cumbersome and dilatory to control the daily
wants of a Church far removed from the supreme tribunal. Long
before the judgments were given which showed the worthlessness of
his own and of the Bishop of Sydney’s Letters Patent, the Bishop of
Melbourne (in 1851) had procured a conference of the clergy and
laity of the church in the colony of Victoria.
That conference declared its “ firm and unalterable attachment to
the doctrines, discipline, and government of the United Church of
England and Ireland.”
It was resolved also (in ignorance of the fact afterwards exposed
by the Privy Council judgments) that it was “not expedient to pro-
pose any alteration in the manner in which the royal prerogative is
exercised in the appointment of Bishops in the Australian dioceses.”
Further meetings of the members of the Church occurred periodi-
cally ; and to give form and shape to their assemblies, it was pro-
posed to ask the local Legislature to pass an Act enabling them to
“ provide for the regulation and management of the affairs” of the
Church.
The Colonial Legislature passed the Act which, reserved by the
Governor, received the royal assent (30th Nov., 1854) as the Act 18
Victoria No. 45, under which the Church Assembly has since been
regularly convened and lawfully manages the affairs of the Church.
The invalidity of the Letters Patent from the Crown, and the
inability of the Crown to appoint Bishops in autonomic colonies not
having been known in 1854, the members of the Church in framing
the bill which became the Act 18 Victoria No. 45 were careful to
leave untouched the royal prerogative, the appeal to the Queen-in-
Council and to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the Metropolitan
of the Province ; and the sth and 18th sections of the Act profess to
guard against any invasion of these supposed authorities.
Subsequent events having disclosed the fact that these supposed
authorities had no existence in relation to the Church in Victoria,
the Church Assembly in 1870 petitioned the local Legislature.
They pointed out that they had in 1854 intentionally abstained from
asking for power to appoint to the highest offices in their Church,
because at that time it was supposed that the Crown held and would
exercise the power ; that after recent legal decisions the Secretary
of State had intimated that the Crown would no longer appoint ;
and they prayed that they might therefore be left at liberty to
exercise such rights of self-government as were enjoyed by other
religious bodies.
In 1872 the Legislature of Victoria passed, and in 1873 the
Queen assented to, a supplementary Act (36 Victoria No. 454), to
be taken as part of the Act 18 Victoria No. 45, under which it was
made lawful for the Assembly of the Church, convened under the
Act 18 Victoria No. 45, “ to make provision for the appointment,


deposition, deprivation, or removal of any person bearing office” in
the Church “ of whatsoever order or degree, any rights of the Crown
to the contrary notwithstanding.”
Under the two Acts—lß Victoria No, 45, and 36 Victoria No.
454—therefore, and under them only, is there any legal government
of the Church in the colony ; tempered of course by the provisions
of the first-named Act, which refer to the Church as bound to the
faith and doctrines of the Church of England, and by the supreme
control of the law, on appeal, which, as pointed out by the Master
of the Rolls in his judgment, would prevent deviations from the
doctrines, discipline, rites, rules, and ordinances of the Church in
England.
There is no extraneous power which can appoint in Victoria a
Bishop or Metropolitan or Archbishop. The Church in the colony
has now power to appoint any functionary known to the Church.
Nevertheless, the Church in Victoria has for certain ecclesiastical
purposes by consensual compact united in General Synod with other
branches of the Church in Australia, and the Church Assembly in
Victoria has ratified a constitution of the General Synod adopted in
Sydney on the 23rd October, 1872.
Under that constitution, the Bishop of Sydney, whose supposed
Metropolitan jurisdiction was swept away by the Privy Council, was
with a due respect for the Queen’s intention, and for his own eminent
worth, constituted the Primate of the Bishops of Australia and
Tasmania.
Each colony can send representatives to the General Synod, and
its powers extend to —1. The constitution of an Appellate Tribunal,
and a tribunal for the trial of Bishops.
2. Eraming rules for formation of new dioceses and provinces.
3. Framing rules for confirmation and consecration of future
Bishops, and election and appointment of future Primates.
4. Communicating with authorities of the Church in England and
in the colonies.
5. Providing inter-communion with other reformed Episcopal
Churches, so far as is consistent with the principles of the Church
of England.
6. Regulating the relations of the Church with other branches of
the Church of Christ.
7. Promoting Home and Foreign Missions.
8. Consulting upon matters which may be brought before the
Synod affecting the well-being of the Church, and framing regula-
tions thereon.
“ Provided always that no determination of the General Synod
shall be binding upon the Church in any diocese unless and until
such determination shall be accepted by the Church in such diocese;
and the mode of accepting in any diocese the determinations of the
General Synod shall be laid down by the Church in such diocese.”
The exception in this proviso is qualified by the 14th clause of the
constitution of the Synod, which enacts that the constitution may


rSJ-u? 18
be altered, “ provided that every such determination shall have been
first approved of at one session of the General Synod, forthwith
communicated to the several Diocesan Synods, and assented to by at
least two-thirds of such dioceses as shall have adopted this con-
stitution, and finally passed at the succeeding session of the General
Synod.”
The General Synod has made rules for the confirmation and con-
secration of Bishops, and for the election of Primates ; also for the
constitution of an Appellate Tribunal, and for the constitution of a
Board of Missions of the Church in the Dioceses of Australia and
Tasmania.
Thus although the Church in Victoria has been separated from the.
parent Church in certain respects by the operation of general laws,
it has been in turn made by law autonomic, subject to restrictions
which no churchman would wish to annul ; and it has entered into
willing union with other branches of the Church to secure those
more extensive advantages of ecclesiastical government which the
limits of one or two dioceses could not afford.
As to the constitution of a province in Victoria, the Act 18
Victoria No. 45 spoke of it only in posse, and no extraneous power
could create it.
Following the prevalent though not undeviating custom of the
Church, the severance of the province from New South Wales must
be held to have severed it ecclesiastically, for the power of the Crown
in the matter had departed when Constitutional Government was
conferred as long ago as in 1842, by the Act of the Imperial Parlia-
ment, 5 and 6 Victoria, cap. 76. The Church in such a case would
make its ecclesiastical boundary coincident with the civil.
The references to a future province in the Act 18 Victoria No. 45
were made when the power of the Crown was erroneously supposed
to exist, and are therefore insignificant.
The Church Assembly, however, passed an Act (No. 1,1874) —sub-
sequently suspended by another Act (1875) until there shall be a
third diocese in Victoria—declaring the colony to be a province,
called the Province of Melbourne, and making the Bishop of Mel-
bourne for the time being the Metropolitan thereof.
The Church Assembly of the Ballaarat Diocese passed a similar
suspensory Act in 1875, and therefore the two Church Assemblies
representing the Church of England throughout the colony have
concurred in recognising that Victoria must be a separate province
so soon as three Bishops exist within it, and have so declared it.
The Bishop of Melbourne becoming at such time ipso facto Metro-
politan, the capacity of the Church for internal government of the
province will be so far complete.
Blackstone seems to hint that to complete ecclesiastical organi-
sation an Archbishop is essential, when he lays down the axioms
that “ an Archbishop is the chief of the clergy in a whole province,”
and “ a province is the circuit of an Archbishop’s jurisdiction.” It is
in the power of the Church in Victoria to crown their work by
appointing an Archbishop when a fit time may arrive.


There is, of course, no part of the United Kingdom exempt from
Archiepiscopal jurisdiction ; and Hooker speaks in some passages of
Archiepiscopal and Metropolitan functions as though they were
identical.
One passage it may be well to quote :
“ Certain prerogatives there are wherein Metropolitans excelled
other Bishops; certain also wherein Primates excelled other Metro-
politans.
“ Archiepiscopal or Metropolitan prerogatives are those mentioned
in old imperial constitutions to convocate the holy Bishops under
them within the compass of their own provinces .... to give
notice unto Bishops under them of things commanded by supreme
authority; to have the hearing and first determining of such causes
as any man had against a Bishop ; to receive the appeals of the
inferior clergy,” &c.
“ Primates,” he says, “ according to their first institution were
all, in relation unto Archbishops, the same by prerogative which
Archbishops were, being compared unto Bishops. Before the
Council of Nice, albeit there were both Metropolitans and Primates,
yet could not this be a means forcible enough to procure the peace
of the Church. . . , The Nicene Council for redress hereof
considered the bounds of every Archbishop’s ecclesiastical jurisdiction
what they had been in former times, and accordingly appointed unto
each grand part of the Christian world some one Primate, from
whose judgment no man living within his territory might appeal,
unless it were to a Council-general of all Bishops.”
The existence of a Primate in Australia and of a General Synod
of the Bishops in Australia and Tasmania is a safeguard against
many evils; but in the opinion of the Committee it is nevertheless
necessary to hasten the time when, by the existence of an Archbishop
or Metropolitan in Victoria, Church government will be as complete
as it can be made within the bounds of the colony.
H. B. MACARTNEY,
Chairman.
Mason, Firth & M‘Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.
19


