





The interest of this letter to Conrad is that it testifies to
the admiration of a woman for a book in which women and
their associations are almost absent, a book which, by
reason of its subjeff, pictures, sentiments and aims, is far
removed from the feminine consciousness and imagination.
The comparison between his work and that ofTourguenieff,
made by one who was so well qualified to make the com-
parison, gratified Conrad extremely, for, despite his dislike
of Russians in general, he never ceased to feel an unqualified
admiration for the genial author of ‘ Smoke’.


THE CEARNE
Dec. 30, iBgy
Dear Mr. Conrad,
I have been reading the 'Nigger*, parts of which I saw
as it appeared in the ‘New Review*. Two things have
struck me particularly in it, —its extraordinary reality and
the great beauty of your style. A letter of yours which
Edward showed me lately has been the warmest and most
appreciative praise I have received for my Tourguenev, and
frankly I feel that praise from you who have such mastery
of language is worth the praise of forty English reviewers.
For I feel as I have always told Edward that your brain
does not think English thoughts,—as Tourguenev*s own, —
it is more delicate, more subtle, richer and more varied than
ours. Tour use of adjeftives, so chosen—fastidious, —often
ironical, —reminds me again and again of Tourguenev*s
manner. It is really you that ought to have had the task of
translating him.
I feel so grateful for the insight you have given me into
the sailors. It is such as they that are the everlasting
fascinating masculine enigma for us women, —the artist is
more than half feminine, and him we can make shift by
glimpses to understand, —at least as well any way as he is
understood by his common fellow men.
On board the ‘ Narcissus * I have a delightful feeling, not
unmixed with awe, —of being in a new world, where I
certainly have no business and where I am picking up hints


and glimpses at every step. Though your realism rather
scares me at times! Tour storm! It left me chilled and
shivering—full of admiration for the wonderful masculine
animal that faces such and comes through it, —but a little
whipped and crushed before his overwhelming, obvious
superiority.
It gives me the greater pleasure that you should have
dedicated your book to Edward, and I am sure that in
sympathy you are never divided.
Please give my love to your wife and my warmest best
wishes for her health and strength. I wish you both much
happiness and all good luck in the New Tear.
Tours very truly,
CONSTANCE GARNETT


220 copies of this letter from Constance Garnett
to Joseph Conrad have been printed for the First
Edition Club, London, 1926, at the Curwen Press.
