

Constitution and
Rules
VICTORIAN AMATEUR CYCLISTS’
UNION.
Sole Governing Body of Amateur Cycling in Victoria.
Affiliated with the Amateur Cyclists’
Association of Australia
As Drafted and Accepted, Melbourne.
December 8th, 1936.
Price, 6d. each.


CYCLISTS
SHOULD READ
“THE AGE”
FOR FULL AND ACCURATE REPORTS
OF ALL EVENTS
(Road or Track)
The Daily for All!
ADVERTISE IN ITS COLUMNS
THEY BRING RESULTS


Constitution and
Rules
VICTORIAN AMATEUR CYCLISTS’
UNION.
Sole Governing Body of Amateur Cycling in Victoria.
Affiliated with the Amateur Cyclists’
Association of Australia
As Drafted and Accepted, Melbourne.
December Bth, 1936.
Price, 6d. each.
The Arrow Printery Pty. Ltd., III Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.




CONSTITUTION AND RULES
OF THE
VICTORIAN AMATEUR CYCLISTS’ UNION.
DRAFTED AND ACCEPTED
December 8th, 1936.
NAME.
That this Association be called the “Victorian Amateur Cyclists’
Union. The name shall neither be amended nor altered without the
consent of a three-fourths majority of members present at a
Council Meeting especially called for the purpose.
OBJECTS.
A. —To secure a fair and equitable administration of justice, as
regards the rights of cyclists on the roads and elsewhere.
B —.'To watch the course of any legislative proposals in
Parliament or elsewhere, affecting the interests of the cycling
public, and to make representations on the subject as the occasion
demands.
C. —To consider the relations between cyclists, the railway
authorities, and steamship companies, with a view of securing the
best possible tariff for the carriage of cycles, and security in their
conveyance.
D. —To assume complete control over handicapping and other
matters in connection with any cycling races held by clubs con-
tributing to the Union, and all such other races as may be held under
its auspices. (This applies only to clubs holding open events).
E. —To legislate on all disputes or difficulties amongst Amateur
cyclists in Victoria.
F. —To act with other Amateur Cyclists’ Associations or represen-
tative bodies with reference to Interstate or other Championships.
G. —To keep all authentic records of all times, results and
handicaps at race meetings recognised by the Union.
H. -To investigate all charges affecting the status of any rider,
and to frame such rules as may be necessary for the strict
preservation of Amateur Cycling in the State of Victoria.


RULES
AND THE CONSTITUTION OF THE VICTORIAN
AMATEUR CYCLISTS’ UNION.
1 The Union shall consist of Cycling Clubs, unattached riders,
and such persons interested in cycling as may be willing to join
it, subject to their election by the Council or Executive.
2. That membership shall be strictly confined to Amateurs
according to V.A.C.U. rules.
3. Members of Metropolitan affiliated clubs who desire to compete
in open events under V.A.C.U. patronage, must pay to the V.A.C.U.
a registration fee of 4/- for seniors, and juniors 1/6 per annum.
Registration fee for members of Country Clubs shall be 1/6 per*
annum. Unattached metropolitan riders shall pay a registration fee
of 5/- for seniors and 2/6 for juniors per annum.. Registration fee
for unattached Country riders shall be 2/6 per annum. Registration
fee becomes due on the Ist of April of each year. Each rider must
pay his registration fee when mak.ng his entry for his first open
event of the year. No. rider shall be permitted to compete in
any open event under V.A.C.U. patronage, unless his registration
fee has been paid.
4. All members of affiliated clubs shall pay a Capitation fee of
one shilling (1/-) per annum, to become payable on the Ist of
April each year. All capitations fees must be paid by the Ist of
June each year. Any club failing to do so may be fined or
suspended by the Executive or Council of the V.A.C.U.
5. Metropolitan Club affiliation fee to the V.A.C.U. shall be
l!1/l/-per annum, Country Clubs 10/6 per annum; payable on the
Ist of April each year.
6. Each affiliated Metropolitan Club shall be represented by two
delegates, each Country club shall be represented by one delegate,
on the Council of the V.A.C.U., each delegate being entitled to one
vote. The delegate of a Country Club shall not necessarily be
a member of the Club he represents; a Country Club may nominate
a member of a metropolitan club as a delegate, provided that he
is not already a delegate for another Club, and that no affiliated
Club shall have more than one member serving as a delegate for a
Country Club.
7. By members of a Club shall be understood those who pay a
subscription not less than the full Annual club subscription for
active members, or life members who possess in full, rights and
privileges of ordinary membership.


8. No Club shall be affiliated with this Union whose rules are
contrary to or conflicting with the rules and regulations of the
V.A.C.U.
9. A Club on first applying to join the Union, shall forward to
the Hon. Secretary a list of the names and addresses of its
members, together with Affiliation and Capitation fees for every
Club member,together with the names and addresses of the delegates
appointed to represent the club on the Council of the V.A.C.U.
Metropolitan Clubs must have at least 20 (twenty) and Country
Clubs 12 (twelve) financial members, before an application for
affiliation will be considered.
10. The Hon. Secretary of each affiliated Club of the V.A.C.U.
must forward to the Hon. Treasurer of the V.A.C.U. on an official
form a list of names and addresses of members of such clubs by not
later than the Ist of April each year. When any person makes
application to any affiliated Club for membership, the Hon. Sec-
retary of such Club shall apply to the Hon. Treasurer of the
V.A.C.U. for a membership form, which must be filled in with
all particulars by the Hon. Secretary of the Club concerned, and
signed by h'm and the new member and returned to the Hon.
Treasurer of the Union, accompanied by a capitation fee of
1/- (one shilling) within seven clear days after the election of any
member. Any Club failing to comply with this rule may be fined
not less than 5/- (five shillings) for each offence, by the Executive
or the Council of the V.A.C.U. This rule does not apply to any
member transferring from one Club to another who has already
paid his capitation fee for the financial year, viz., April Ist to
March 31st.
11. A Club affiliated with the Union whose delegate has for
eny reason ceased to serve, may elect another in his place, and
the name and address of the delegate so elected shall be sent to
the Hon. Secretary of the Union immediately after his election.
12. No delegate shall have the right to vote, or privilege of taking
part in any question arising in the Council, unless the notification
of his appointment, signed by the Secretary of the Club he repre-
sents, be then in the hands of the Hon. Secretary of the Union.
13. The proof of the election of any person to an affiliated
Club shall not necessarily make it incumbent on the Executive or
Council to accept such person as a member of the Union.
14. The production of a minute book, signed by the Chairman
of the meeting and containing the rules of the Union, or any
addition thereto, or amendment or alteration thereof, or the
production of a printed book issued by, or under, the authority of
the Union, or of a printed book containing the rules or any addition,
amendment or alteration, as aforesaid, shall be prima facie evidence
in any proceedings at law or in equity, or other however, that such


rule or rules, or any additions, alterations, or amendments, as
aforesaid, were duly passed, and are still in force and effect
15. That the V.A.C.U. shall be affiliated with the “Amateur
Cyclists’ Association of Australia.”
1 6. That the colours of the V.A.C.U. shall be white guernsey or
singlet with large blue “V” on back and front.
17. No member of the Victorian Amateur Cyclists’ Union shall
be permitted to be a member of more than one club affiliated with
the V.A.C U. Life members excepted.
18. No alteration shall be made in the constitution of the Union
without a majority of three-fourths of the members present at a
General Council Meeting duly constituted for the purpose.
INTERSTATE AND COUNTRY RACING PERMITS.
19. No member shall be allowed to compete in any interstate
or country event outside a radius of fifty (50) miles of Melbourne
without a racing permit.
20. A racing permit can be obtained on application to the Hon.
Secretary or the Hon. Racing Secretary of the V.A.C.U. No rider
shall be allowed to compete unless he produces his permit to the
official in charge.
SPECIAL ANNUAL COUNCIL MEETING.
21. The Special Annual Council Meeting of the V.A.C.U. shall be
held on the first Monday of May of each year.
22. The regular business of the Special Annual Council Meeting
which shall take precedence of all other business, shall be:—
(a) The adoption of minutes of the previous Special Annual
Council Meeting.
(b) To receive the Hon. Secretary’s report and the Hon.
Treasurer’s Balance Sheet.
(c) To elect the following officers, viz. ■ —President, Hon.
Secretary, Hon. Treasurer, Hon. Racing Secretary, and Hon.
Handicapper, the latter four being necessarily members
of the Union.
Nominations for all the foregoing positions must be made at the
April Council Meeting in each year, and must be signed by the
proposer and seconder. The Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U. shall
notify all affiliated Clubs, on or before the 3rd or March of each
year of the closing date of the nominations for the foregoing
positions.
23. All contested elections of officers shall be by ballot. Ballot
to be decided by absolute majority, each Council member to be
supplied with ballot paper with the names of the nominations
printed thereon.


24. In the event of death or resignation of any of the officials,
or any unforeseen circumstances arising, the Council of the V.A.C.U.
shall have power to elect an official to the vacant position or
positions after fourteen days’ notice has been given to all delegates
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETINGS.
25. Special General Meetings may be held on such days as will
allow of six (6) clear days’ notice being given by notice in writing
or circular to the delegates and Hon. Secretaries of affiliated Clubs,
and may be convened:—
(a) By motion of the Council.
(b) By requisition signed by not less than fifty (50) members,
and stating the business to be considered.
(c) No business except that for which the Meeting has been
called shall be transacted at any Special Council Meeting.
26. The rules relating to the conduct of the business of the
Council meetings shall apply to the General Meetings of the Union.
27. At all meetings the President shall take the chair, and in his
absence the meeting shall elect a chairman.
27a. Fifty (50) members of the Union shall form a quorum at
any General Meeting of the Union.
28. Should a “No confidence" motion in any official, officials,
office-bearer, or Committee be carried at any V.A.C.U. Council or
General Meeting, the position or positions shall become vacant
and nominations and election of same shall follow immediately.
29. The representatives elected in compliance with the foregoing
rules, together with the President, Hon. Secretary, Hon. Treasurer,
Hon. Racing Secretary, and Hon. Handicapper, shall be called the
‘‘Council of the Union,” and it shall be their business to discuss
the subject hereinbefore mentioned and other such matters as
occasion may suggest, and to pass resolutions and take orders
concerning them.
30. The General Meetings of the Council shall be held on the
first Thursday in each month.
31. Special Meetings of the Council, in addition to those on
fixed days, may be summoned: —
(a) By a resolution of the Council carried at any ordinary
meeting.
(b) By order of the Executive.
(c) On a requisition signed by not less than (20) twenty
delegates, at such dates as will allow of at least six clear
days’ notice being given to each delegate of the meeting,
thirty (30) delegates to form a quorum. The purpose
for which it is summoned shall be stated in each notice
32. The President shall take the Chair at all Council and


Executive Meetings, and in his absence the Meeting shall elect a
chairman.
33. The chairman shall have unlimited authority on every
question of order, and shall be the sole interpreter of the rules of
the Council for the purpose of such meeting. An appeal from
his ruling shall take preference of all other business. In cases of
doubt or difficulty, the usual mode of Parliamentary procedure shall
be adopted.
34. The chairman shall have the right to vote on every motion,
and in cases of equal votes shall have the casting vote.
35. Delegates wishing to bring forward motions, to alter, amend,
delete, or add a new rule, at any ordinary Council Meeting shall
forward to the Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U. notice of the same,
in writing, (28) twenty-eight clear days before the day of the
meeting, and notices of the meetings of the Council, together with
the Agenda paper of all matter to be discussed or voted on, shall
be sent by the Hon. Secretary of the Union to each delegate at
least 14 clear days before the day of the meeting The mover of
any notice of motion shall have the privilege of explaining his
reason for such motion, no debate on the motion will be permitted
at the meeting at which such notice of motion is given.
36. Should there be no Agenda paper for an ordinary Council
Meeting at the time for circulating the Agenda paper, the Executive
may suspend such meeting on giving (6) six clear days’ notice.
37. Motions relating to new business shall be accepted, unless
Notice of Motion is demanded at least by one-fourth of those
delegates present. In the latter case such motions shall be
considered at the next Council Meeting.
38. In the event of any Council Meeting lapsing, the Agenda
paper thereof, or such of it that remains undealt with, shall be
inserted in the Agenda paper of the next Council Meeting, and shall
take procedure of ordinary business.
39. Business from the Executive shall take precedence of all other
business.
40. No business shall be dealt with at an adjourned meeting of
the Council which was not on the Agenda paper of the original
meeting, except as provided in Rule 44.
41. At all Council Meetings only delegates and Office-Bearers
shall be permitted to speak or vote on any motion or question.
Any person who is not a member of the Council may have permis-
sion to speak subject to the approval of the Council.
42 No delegate shall vote on a question unless he is present
when the motion is submitted.
43. No motion to alter, delete, or amend an existing rule or to
make a new rule, of which due notice according to Rule 35 has


f-\rr- 'IT 11 Every Watch
Orricial Jewellers » supplied in
to the
V.A.C.U.
qjyjjjjp
s=°<* w l ' - ;
Ladies’ Solid Gold Baguette Wrist
Watch, Reliable 15 Jewel Swiss Lever
Movement, Written Guarantee for 5
years. With Moire Ribbon.
Price, 80/-.
«
vi
m
si
Gent’s Chromium Cased Wrist Watch,
Luminous Dial and Hands, fitted with
15 Jewel Swiss Lever Movement,
Guaranteed 5 years.
Price, 30/-
©
&
:* ■
vi/
Gent’s Chromium Cased
Wrist Watch and Band,
fitted with 15 Jewel
Swiss Lever Movement,
Guaranteed 5 years.
Price, 65/-
Similar Design in Gold
Filled Case and Band.
Price, 95/-
Dumbrells Jewellers
(E. P. S. ABRECHT)
319-21 BOURKE ST., MELB. (Directly Opp. Myer’s)


not been given, can be discussed or voted on at any meeting of the
Council.
44. The following motions may be proposed without notice of
motion.
(a) Motion to elect a Chairman.
(b) Mot-'on for adjournment.
(o) Motion for amendment.
(d) Motion for leave to withdraw a motion or amendment.
(e) Motion for vote of thanks.
(?) Motion for leave under Rule 37.
(g) Motion to deal with any correspondence.
45. Every motion, also amendment, shall require a proposer and
seconder.
46. When an amendment or any motion has been proposed and
seconded, no other amendment shall be proposed until the former
has been disposed of.
4 7 Any delegate may speak once on a substantive motion, and
once on each amendment proposed to it, but no delegate shall
speak more than once on any motion or amendment except in
explanation of a misrepresentation of statements made by him, or
as provided in Rule 48.
48. The proposer of any motion shall have the right of reply
immediately before the final vote on his motion, and also before
the vote on any amendment, if he has not already spoken on that
amendment.
49. No delegate may move more than one amendment, but any
who have only spoken during the discussion on amendments may
subsequently move an amendment.
50 When all discussion on an amendment is ended, the chairman
fh? 1 * read to the meeting the motion and amendment, and then say.
The question is, shall the motion be amended,” And according
as this is affirmed or negatived, the motion in its amended or
meeting f ° rm shall become the substantive motion before the
51. Any club whose affiliation fee to the V.A.C.U. is not paid by
the 21st day of April in each year shall not be entitled to be
represented on the Council or Executive of the V.A C.U. and in the
e c e n t .° f the efau! t continuing for one month or more, such Clubs
shall be struck off the affiliated Club list of the V.A.C.U. and shall
not be allowed to rejoin until such time as the arrears are paid,
ple s asurt n of a th’ ha^ ed C !, ub sh u U be Hable t 0 sus P ensi °n during the
p asure of the Council m the event of such Club or the officers
•?h eo i Vl ° atin s th e ru'es of the V.A.C.U. or neglecting to comply
with the directions of the Executive or Council. g comply
..] Any , , , w hile under suspension shall forfeit all rights xnA
privileges held under the V A.C.U., and its delegates sLI cease to


serve on the Executive or Council, and its members shall not be
allowed to compete at any race meeting held under the auspices
of the V.A.C.U. c
54. No person sha.ll be recognised as a member of the V.A.C.U.
who is proved to the Executive or Council to be indebted to any
affiliated Club.
55. That no person who is suspended shall be eligible to sit on
the Council or Executive of the V.A.C.U. or officiate in any capacity.
56. Any delegate addressing the chairman of a meeting, or moving
or seconding a motion or amendment must stand.
57. That motions for adjournments of the meeting be submitted
without debate.
58. That any motion for adjournment of debate can only be
made on one specific subject, to which members shall confine them-
selves, and shall not be submitted more than once at a meeting.
59. That when any Council or Executive meeting separates
later than 10.30 p.m. without the business being completed, and
without an adjournment specific day being agreed upon, such
business shall not lapse, but shall be continued at a meeting to be
held on any day within a period of fourteen days named by the
chairman.
60. That when any General or Council meeting lapses for want
of a quorum, the Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U. shall convene a
second meeting within a period of fourteen days whereat the
business may be transacted, provided the members present number
not less than half a quorum, and such business so transacted shall
be considered legal and binding.
61. The Council only shall have power to make new rules or alter
or rescind existing ones, but no such rules or alterations shall
be made without the consent of three-fourths of the delegates
present at a properly convened meeting, such new rule or alteration
to be confirmed at the next Council Meeting.
62. That any alteration of rules, or new rules duly passed by the
Council, take effect from date of passing, pending confirmation at
the next Council Meeting.
63. No motion affecting the rules shall be discussed or voted
upon under any circumstances unless due notice has been given
according to Rule 35.
64. The following motions shall require a majority of two-thirds
of the delegates present.
(1) Motion that a club be expelled under Rule 68.
(2) Motion for leave to discuss business not on the Agenda
paper. (This Clause does not'apply to Rule 63.)
65. All motions except those for which express provision has
been made in Rules 44, 61, 64, 76, shall require a simple majority of
members voting.


66. Votes on motions or amendments shall be taken by a show
of hands, but any delegate may demand a division, when tellers
may be appointed by the Chairman.
67. No delegate shall be entitled to take part in any Council
meeting unless the contribution of the Club he represents shall have
been received by the Hon. Treasurer of the V.A.C.U by the 21st
day of April each year. . .
68. If at any meeting a resolution shall have been passed by
the votes of two-thirds of the delegates present, to the effect that
a Club has rendered itself unworthy to belong to the V.A.C.U. such
Club shall thereupon cease to belong to the V.A.C.U. Such club
shall have the right of appeal to the Appeal Board whose decision
shall be final.
69. The Council of the V.A.C.U. shall nominate as the occasion
may suggest special committees to consider and report upon any
question that the Council may refer to them. The recommendations
and resolutions embodied in such reports shall, if adopted, be
considered to be standing orders of the Council.
70. The Council shall have power to refer back or to amend or
to rescind in part or in whole any report presented by any committee
or sub-committee elected by the Council.
71. The number of delegates to form a special committee, and the
number to form a quorum, shall be determined by the Council on
each occasion, but either the Hon. Secretary, President or some
other member of the Executive shall be appointed to such committee.
72. The Council shall at the March meeting, appoint two auditors
for the V.A.C.U. not necessarily members of the V.A.C.U. to audit
the accounts of the V.A.C.U. for each year ending on the last
day of March. The Hon. Secretary’s report and the Hon.
Treasurer’s Balance Sheet shall be submitted for approval at the
Special Annual Council Meeting in May.
73. The accounts so audited shall be printed, together with
the Annual report and circulated to members at least (7) seven
clear days before the Special Annual Council Meeting.
74. In the event of any question arising as to the correct
interpretation of any of the Rules of the V.A.C.U., such question
shall be referred to the Executive whose decision will be final.
75. Twenty-five (25) members of the Council shall form a quorum
at any Council meeting.
76. No opposed business shall be brought forward for discussion
after the hour of 10 p.m. except with the consent of three-fourths
of the delegates present.
77. Wherever the word ’’delegate” appears, same shall be taken
to include all officers of the Council.
78. That no notice of motion on the same subject shall be


submitted to the Council more than twice in the financial year, with
a oeriod of six months intervening ... e # • ■
79. The Council or the Executive reserve the right of refusing
any person as a member, or any entry of any member who has in the
.opinion of the Executive or Council, been guilty of an offence
against the moral or criminal law of the State.
g BO. That no “Cycle Trader” or ‘Cycle trade employee w
eligible for the Council, Executive or official position of the
V fU C 'a “Cycle Trader" shall mean a proprietor, manager, director,
or employee, or any person having any monetary interest in any
cycle trading firm, or any person the Council of Executive shall
of the Monthly Council JMeetlng which
S * ial ' minutes^oTpreviouTMonthly 0 Council Meeting.
(b) To deal with correspondence.
(c) To deal with the Executive's reports.
(d) To deal with notice of motions if any.
(e) General business properly brought forward.
83. In cases not provided for in the foregoing rules, the Council
h-s full power to legislate and arrange as necessary.
"84 These rules shall not be altered, added to °^ an £ u } led * exc ®P*
by notice of motion in writing (as provided for in Rule 35)
shall be dealt with at the following Council Meeting.
85 The V.A.C.U. official guernseys and singlets remain t e
property of the V.A.C.U., and must not be sold, exchanged, or
bartered in any way, and must be returned <rn demand the
event of a member not returning a guernsey or smglet when called
upon to do so, such member shall be liable for the cost ° f s ™
and may be fined or suspended by the Executive of the V.ACU
The official colours can only be worn in championships, by those
members who have represented Victoria at the °J S £*
V A.C.U. in Interstate championships, and should the colours
worn in any other events but championships, the offender will be
liable to be fined or disqualified by the Executive of the V.A.C.U.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
ftß The Executive shall be elected by the Council from their
hodv at the first Ordinary Council Meeting held after the special
Annual Council Meeting on the first Monday in May of each jean
Members of the Executive shall continue to serve until successors
are elected, except where members have tendered their resign t .
8 7 The Executive shall consist of the President, Hon. Secreta y
Hon. Racing Secretary, Hon. Treasurer, and Hon. Handicapper, of


the V.A.C.U. and (5) five members elected from the Council, no
two of whom sha 1 ! be members of the same club.
88. The Hon. Secretary shall have power to convene all meetings
of the Executive Committee. In his absence the President shall
have power to convene such meetings.
. ®9. Any (5) five members of the Executive which number must
include either the President, Hon. Secretary, or Hon. Treasurer,
shall form a quorum.
90. No money shall be expended on behalf of the V.A.C.U. without
the sanction of the Executive. All accounts must be submitted,
passed and endorsed by the chairman before being disbursed.
91 It shall be the duty of the Executive to carry out the
standing orders of the Council, and transact the business of the
Union where not otherwise provided and report proceedings to the
Council.
t . 92. Any vacancy in the Executive shall be elected at a subsequent
Council Meeting, of which notice will be given in the Agenda
Paper.
93. The Executive shall have power to fine, suspend, or otherwise
deal with any member unable to produce, when called upon, any
prize or trophy, won by him at any race or meeting at which
he has had permission to ride.
94. That all disputes, difficulties, or charges affecting any
member or members of the V.A.C.U. shall be dealt with by the
Executive, which body may, for a time, or permanently, suspend or
fine any club or member proved guilty of misbehaviour or unfair
practice connected with cycling, or any action detrimental to the
interests of the V.A.C.U. but anyone so suspended shall have the
right to appeal to the Appeal Board, provided that written notice
be given to the Hon Secretary of the V.A.C.U. within seven days
ot the notification of such suspension or fine, such notification to
be forwarded to him by the Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U. within
frr j ay w .V" der , this ru!e a club ma y report any of its members
to be dealt with under any of the above charges.
95. That where any principle be involved or extraordinary
business may arise, the Executive shall have power to deal with
it.
96. If any member of the Executive, Appeal Board, records,
status or any sub-committee shall absent himself from any three
consecutive meetings without satisfactory explanation his seat
shall be declared vacant by such committee.
97. The Executive only shall have power to grant patronage to
any approved promoter for any road or track races, also to
approve of the Prize list.
98- The Appeal Board shall consist of the Executive Committee
and (8) members elected from the Council of the V.A.C.U.


(a) The Powers of the Appeal Board shall be to deal with
any appeal which may be lodged with the Hon. Secretary
of the V.A.C.U. in writing and accompanied by a fee of
(5/-) five shillings, which becomes the property of the
V.A.C.U. All reports of appeals shall be forwarded to
the Council.
(b) The Appeal Board shall have power to deal with any
appeal submitted to them for enquiry of decision. They
shall investigate and question any member or person and
demand (if required) a Statutory Declaration from any
person who has given evidence or statement.
(c) The Appeal Board shall have power to quash, set aside,
alter, amend, increase, add to or reduce any fine or
disqualification or suspension, confirm or dismiss the
Referee’s and Stewards’ decision.
(d) The Appeal Board may take evidence on notes, statements,
Statutory Declaration or viva voce in any way they may
think fit.
(e) The decision of the Appeal Board shall be final and
binding on all concerned without recourse to law or any
other tribunal.
(f) In the Absence of the President the Appeal Board shall
elect a chairman.
(g) Ten members of the Appeal Board shall form a quorum.
(h) The Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U. shall notify each
member of the Appeal Board of a meeting, by at least
three (3) clear days’ notice in writing, except of an
adjourned meeting which shall be decided by the Appeal
Board.
(i) Nominations and elections for members of the Appeal
Board shall be made at the May Council Meeting each
year.
(j) The decision of the Appeal Board shall be by a majority
of the members present. In the case of equal votes the
Chairman shall have a casting vote.
RECORDS COMMITTEE.
99. This committee shall consist of the Executive, and is formed
for the purpose of verifying claims by members of the Victorian
Amateur Cyclists’ Union for having broken or established any
cycling record, and grant a certificate, if found to be correct, or
where such record is proved by the appointed officials to have been
established or broken.
100. Any member desiring to establish a record shall give
written notice of his intention of his doing so to the Hon. Secretary
of the V A.C.U. at least five (5) clear days in advance, for a road


record, and give sufficient notice for a track record, when arrange-
ments will be made to check the performance. Every such notice
must be accompanied by a fee of 5/- which becomes the property
of the V.A.C.U.
101. In track racing no record will be acknowledged unless the
rider starts from the scratch mark.
102. In all cases where practicable a member of the Records
Committee shall act as an official time-keeper at Sports Meetings.
103. No certificate will be awarded for a road record unless
ridden on a straightaway course if for a shorter distance than
five miles, or for one turn for that or a longer distance.
104. The onus of proving any record to have been established
shall rest with the applicant, but the Records Committee shall,
when they are satisfied that a record has been broken or estab-
lished, at once notify the Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U.
105. All reasonable expenses incurred by the Records Committee
in making arrangements to check an attempt to establish a record
shall be paid by the member applying for the certificate.
106. Track records may only be attempted between November
Ist and April 31st each year, and Road records between May Ist
and October 31st each year.
107. No application for a record will be granted or a certificate
awarded unless an official survey as to the correct distance of the
course is produced to the Records Committee by the Applicant or
Applicants.
108. The Executive shall be the status committee.
109. It shall be the duty of the status committee to consider
every application from cyclists desirous of regaining their amateur
status; who shall have full power to reinstate or refuse any appli-
cant and their decision shall be final and binding.
REINSTATEMENT.
110. No application for reinstatement shall be considered from
any cyclist who has seceded from any State Union after December
31st, 1932, and raced as a professional.
111. Applications for reinstatement may be considered from any
cyclist who has never belonged to any State Union, and who has
stood down for a period of not less than six (6) months, during
which time he has not infringed any clause of Rule 127 and of
definition of amateur status. All such applications for reinstate-
ment shall be accompanied by a fee of 10/- which becomes the
property of the V.A.C.U.
112. No application for reinstatement shall be considered except
in the case of a rider who has broken his amateur status in a
country town where no amateur body exists, always providing he
has never previously belonged to an amateur body, and further


• •
for easy speed
. . . for reliable performance, for steel strong
construction, for that extra bit of punch that
leaves the other fellows behind you; choose the
cycle of the champions—a Healing.
Bill Moritz, Chris. Wheeler, Tassie. Johnson, Bob
Porter, Wal. Stirling—all the greatest stars of
road and track, ride Healing Bicycles because they
know that Healing alone will bring that extra
“something” which leads to vic-
tory.
Regime?
BICYCLES
TT FOR EASY SPEED


provided that he has never competed in events in a real professional
sense, he may be reinstated by standing down for a period of six
months. In this case applicant must furnish full particulars:
(1) As to where he began racing.
(2) How long he has been competing as a professional.
(3) The approximate amount of prize money won. When
these particulars are forthcoming the Status Committee
will investigate each case and decide whether the applicant
can be reinstated or not. Under no consideration will any
application for reinstatement be considered unless the
reinstatement fee of ten (10) shillings accompanies the
application.
113. Any member of the V.A.C.U. who competes in an event not
sanctioned by the V.A.C.U. without the Sanction of the Executive
or Council of the V.A.C.U. renders itself liable to be fined or dis-
qualified for any period the Status Committee may determine.
114. Any member who competes in an unsanctioned open cycle
race shall not be eligible for election to any affiliated club, or to
this Union, for a period of at least six (6) months after having
competed in such race, always providing that competitors in races
strictly confined to members of one club not at such time affiliated
to this Union, or to residents of one particular suburb or township,
shall not be considered to have infringed this Rule.
115. All officials and office-bearers must act with decorum and
shall not applaud at the result of any cycle race, or manifest any
sympathy or personal interest in any competitor engaged in any
race, other than official duties.
116. No official or office-bearer shall coach, massage, act as
mentor or trainer or directly or indirectly be interested in any
member or competitor unless instructed by the Executive or Council.
117. No member shall be allowed to speak or broadcast over any
radio (wireless) station, on amateur cycling or racing, without the
sanction of the Executive or Council of the V.A.C.U.
118. Any member wishing to compete in any local, district, social
or business firm’s cycle races, other than events conducted by the
V.A.C.U. should apply to the V.A.C.U. for permission to do so.
Competing in such events without permission to do so, renders mem-
bers liable to a fine or suspension according to rules.
119. It shall be the duty of the Status Committee, if they or
the Executive think it necessary, to inquire into the status of any
person nominated for membership, and to advise the Council there-
on.


DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
HONORARY SECRETARY.
120. The Hon. Secretary or the Hon. Racing Secretary, shall take
notes of the meetings, which minutes shall be submitted to the
next Council meeting for confirmation.
121. It shall be the duty of the Hon. Secretary to conduct the
business of the V.A.C.U. in accordance with the rules and under
the instructions of the Executive or Council.
122. He shall keep in his custody the records of the Union, in-
cluding the minute book and the names and addresses of all mem-
bers of the Union. The minutes of the Council shall be open for
inspection to any member of the Counc'l only; the minutes of any
General or Special General meeting shall be open to inspection
of all members of the Union on giving reasonable notice to the
Hon. Secretary of the Union.
123. It shall be the duty of the Hon. Racing Secretary to make
arrangements for all races promoted by the V.A.C.U. to receive
all entry and registration fees, and to arrange for the welfare of
competitors, dressing room accommodation, etc., and in conjunction
with the Hon. Secretary to attend to necessary printing matter such
as advertising and programmes for road and track events when
instructed by the Council or Executive, attend races promoted by
the V.A.C.U. or when patronage has been granted in the Metro-
po’itan area to any clubs or promoters. He shall hand over to
the Hon. Treasurer any moneys received by him on behalf of the
V.A.C.U.. The Hon. Racing Secretary shall so arrange the despatch
or de'ivery to the necessary addresses, of all declared handicaps
for Union races as will ensure their publication in the following
newspapers;—“Age,” “Argus," “Herald,” “Sporting Globe" and
"Sun.”
The primary publication of the aforesaid handicaps will be per
the medium of the Morning Metropolitan Journals.
124. The Hon. Treasurer shall have charge of the V.A.C.U. funds.
It shall be his duty to apply for and receive all subscriptions and
other moneys payable to the V.A.C.U. to make authorised dis-
bursements on its behalf; to keep proper accounts; and to submit
such accounts to the Executive or Council when called upon to do
so. He shall make no disbursements without the authority of the
Executive. All accounts over one pound (£1) sterling shall be
paid by cheque signed by any two of the following officers: Presi-
dent, Hon. Secretary, Hon. Treasurer.
HON. HANDICAPPER.
125. It shall be the duty of the Hon. Handicapper to receive
from the Hon. Racing Secretary, and him only, the entries for all


open events held under the auspices of the V.A.C.U. and to return
them to him after handicapping. He shall also keep a record of
times of each heat or event and all the names of the starters and
winners thereof.
(a) All handicaps and classifications for races under the
patronage of the V.A.C.U. shall be framed by the V.A.C.U.
handicapper, unless otherwise arranged by the Executive
of the V.A.C.U.
(b) The handicapper shall allot handicaps, arrange heats and
semi-finals, and supply the referee with a copy of same.
(c) The handicapper shall not recognise any entry which is
not made on an official entry form, or is not in accordance
with the rules of the V.A.C.U.
(d) No alterations shall be made of handicaps, allotments,
or classification officially declared by the handicapper with-
out his consent.
(e) Any winner of any prize, after the declaration of handi-
caps may be re-handicapped by the V.A.C.U. handicapper.
126. "Amateur” shall mean one who has never competed for
money, whether in form of a prize, staked bet, or declared wager,
nor knowingly competed with or against a professional for a prize
of any description, not taught, pursued, or assisted in the practice
of any athletic exercise as a means of livelihood or for pecuniary
gain.
FORFEITURE OF AMATEUR STATUS.
127. An amateur forfeits his status and becomes a professional
by:—
(a) Any infringement of the above definition.
(b) Knowingly competing with or pace-making for a pro-
fessional or person under suspension in public or for a
prize.
(c) Personally teaching, training, or coaching any other person
for any game or athletic exercise either as a means of
livelihood or pecuniary gain.
(d) Pawning, selling, bartering, or otherwise turning into cash
any prize won by him.
(e) Accepting any remuneration directly or indirectly from
any person in any competition in which he is an entrant or
competitor.
(f) Wagering or being in any way interested in a money stake,
bet, or wager made in connection with any competition
under the jurisdiction of the V.A.C.U.
(g) Entering for any athletic event for which a money prize is
offered, or for which a money prize or trophy i$ offered


as an alternative, or any event open to professionals or
issuing or allowing to be issued on his behalf, any chal-
lenge to compete against any professional or for money.
(h) Accepting any travelling or hotel expenses from any
Association club, or sports promoter, except at the special
sanction of the body governing the particular athletic
exercise in connection with which same is accepted.
(i) Accepting directly or indirectly any money payment what-
soever whether as compensation for loss of time, salary,
or otherwise for any competition in which he is a com-
petitor, except as provided in Sub-Clause H.
(j) Entering for, or competing in any athletic exercise under
a fictitious name without first obtaining the sanction
of the body controlling the particular branch of athletic
exercise concerned. . ~
(k) That no member, official, or office-bearer of the V.A.C.U.
shall promote or assist or officiate in the control of any
professional sport or vice-versa.
(l) Any member of a Union which is affiliated with the Amateur
Cyclists' Association of Australia who infringes Rule 123
and clauses A to L.
Note. Wheel manufacturers and agents as such are not con-
sidered to be professionals, but are cautioned that to teach wheel
riding as a means to effect a sale of a machine will be taken as
an infringement.
EXCEPTIONS.
128. The following exceptions shall be made:
(a) Any persons who have been reinstated by each of the
Governing bodies by whom they fihve been declared pro-
fessionals, or whose regulations they have infringed, and
who have not infringed their status since the date of such
reinstatement, shall be considered amateurs. (See Rule 11 1
also.)
(b) Amateurs shall not lose their status by competing with
or against professionals in any game (for list of games
see jurisdiction clause below) for which no money prize
is offered for the amateur.
(c) Competitions-at-arms between volunteers or regulars. Fire
Brigade Competitions (pure and simple), the pastime of
shooting and sailing, and all other pastimes not coming
within the definition of “athletic exercises” (for list of
athletic exercises see jurisdiction clause below) shall not
be considered as coming within the scope of these rules.
(d) Competitions open only to volunteers or regulars at
naval or military athletic meetings, such events being for


trophies only, shall be exempt from any rule disqualifying
persons for competing against professionals.
(e) Receiving any remuneration for any office connected with
athletic sport, if sanctioned by the body governing the
branch of sport concerned, will not constitute a person
a professional.
(f) Teaching athletic exercises at school will not constitute
a professional, provided his engagement bona-fide includes
scholastic duties at the same institution.
DISQUALIFICATION & REINSTATEMENT.
129. That:—
(a) Applicants for reinstatement must in the first place apply
to the Association against the rules of which they of-
fended. In no case shall the V.A.C.U. Status Committee
reinstate an athlete who has offended against the rules
of a kindred association until that body shall have first
reinstated such an applicant. (See Rules 111, 126 and
127.)
(b) When any person has forfeited his Status under any
particular Association, notice should be given by that
Association to all kindred Associations, stating such dis-
qualification.
130. In deciding upon the amateur status of any person, the
V.A.C.U. (in common with other bodies recognise the following as:—
ATHLETIC EXERCISES.
Baseball, boating, bowling, boxing, cycling, motor cycling,
cricket, croquet, cross-country running, fencing, football, golf,
gymnastics, running (all distances), skating, swimming, natatorial’
exercises, throwing the hammer, throwing the cricket ball, hand
ball, fives, hockey, hurdle racing, hurling, jumping (of any kind),
lacrosse, lawn tennis, pole vaulting, putting the shot, quoits (field),
racquets, rowing and sculling, throwing weights, throwing the disc,
tug-of-war, walking (all distances), wrestling, motoring, aviation,
woodchopping, wood sawing and canoeing; and the following as: —-
GAMES.
131. Baseball, cricket, football, golf, hurling and badminton.
RULES REFERRING TO OPEN RACES AND RACE MEETINGS.
132. In open races and race meetings held under the patronage
of the V.A.C.U. the following rules with reference to the management
of such meetings must be observed:—
Any club or managing body wishing to hold an open race or
race meeting shall first make written application to the Union, to-


W. E. Occleshaw, f.v.o.a.
Sight Testing
OPTICIAN
(Late with ALFRED NOTT)
SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS MADE
TO MEMBERS OF V.A.C.U.
PUBLIC BENEFIT BUILDINGS, Ist Floor,
323 BOURKE STREET,
MELBOURNE, C.l.
Phone: F 6068.


pether with a guarantee to the value of prizes, submitting pro-
gramme and date for such meeting prior to the advertising of
same which application shall be dealt with by the Executive
forthwith, should patronage be granted to any promoter or pro-
moters all entry fees for any event or events shall be received
by* * the' Hon Racing Secretary of the V.A.C.U. Programmes or
any advertising matter must have pr.nted thereon in bold type.
Under the patronage of the V.A.C.U. promoters must provide a
conveyance to take officials to the starting point of any road
event and the conveyance must follow the race throughout the
full course with Ambulance Officer. Promoters must pay expenses
of any V A C.U. official or officials necessary to conduct any track
meeting or road race. Promoters are requested to note that sashes
and badges are reserved for championship events only. All pro-
moters of track events shall issue to all V.A.C.U. track officials and
members of the Executive, a complimentary ticket which shall admit
them to any track meeting or race.
133 An open race shall mean a race for which all affiliated
members of the V.A.C.U. are eligible to enter or compete. Premier-
ships and teams events are open events.
134 All lists of entries to be handicapped must be handed to
the Hon. Racing Secretary at least fourteen (14) clear days before
the date of the race, or by such date as the Executive or
Council may determine.
135 No entries shall be received from cyclists who are not
members of the V.A.C.U. or of other cycling bodies recognised
by the V.A.C.U. This rule does not apply to boys races.
136. Any member being treated or massaged by any person in
any piace other than the training quarters allotted for the purpose
shall be fined or disqualified for any period the referee and stew-
ards may determine.
13 7. That no cycle race or cycle race meeting shall be described
or advertised as ••International,” ‘‘Champion,” or ‘‘Championship
(excepting club championships), without the sanction of the Execu-
tive or Council of the V.A.C.U. ~ ,
138 That no club member shall be allowed to compete in more
than one clubs’ road and track championships in each Union year,
viz. April Ist to March 31st. In the event of any club becoming
defunct, the members shall apply to the Union for the privilege
to join another affiliated club should they so desire..
139. That all affiliated clubs must register their club colours
and designs with the V.A.C.U. No member of any other club or
unattached member shall be permitted to ride in any other regis-
tered club colour or design in open events. For breach of this
rule, clubs or members may be fined.


140. All members of affiliated clubs must wear their registered
club colours when competing in alll open V.A.C.U. road events. For
breach of this rule offenders will be fined by the Referee and
Stewards.
TRANSFERS.
141 Any member wishing to transfer from one club to another
must first make written application to his club for a
clearance he shall then forward such clearance accompanied by
a written application for a transfer and a fee of 2/- to. the Hon.
Secretary of the V.A.C.U. who shall place such application before
the Executive or Council to be dealt with. Any affiliated club
accepting an ex-member of another club as a member before such
member obtains a transfer from the Union shall be fined. No
application for a transfer will be considered unless accompanied
by a transfer fee of 2/-. Any member who has been refused a
clearance by his club shall have the right of appeal to the Execu-
tive of the V.A.C.U. who shall have full power to grant or refuse
any application for a transfer.
PRIZES.
142. Prizes shall consist of trophies and open orders, such open
orders to be issued by the Hon. Treasurer of the V.A.C.U. (acting
on the instructions of the Executive.) Cheques or trophies for
all races must be lodged with the Hon. Treasurer of the V.A.C.U.
at least seven clear days before such race or races. In the event of
trophies or value thereof not being lodged with the Ho* Treasurer
of the Union, within the given time such patronage will be with-
drawn by the Hon. Treasurer.
143. In no race shall an open order be issued except under the
following conditions: —
(a) The order must be returned to the Hon. Treasurer of
the V.A.C.U. with a full account of the goods purchased.
Two members of the Executive will, within two clear days,
inspect the goods, and append their signatures.
(b) The order subject to the conditions provided in clause
G of this rule, will not be honoured unless presented
within fourteen days from the date of issue, but shall
then be cancelled, and a trophy to the value of the order
purchased by the Executive or Council, and handed to
the winner within fourteen days. Clauses A and B of
this rule may be waived at the discretion of the Executive
or Council.
(c) The Council of the V.A.C.U. will not be responsible for the
amount unless these conditions are complied with.


(d) All trophies purchased with these orders shall have en-
graved thereon, the name of the winner, description of
event, and date of the meeting.
(e) That all open orders will only be issued on approved firms
selected by the Executive.
(f) That successive open orders may accumulate for any
period not exceeding twelve months, provided that written
notice be given to the Hon. Treasurer of the V.A.C.U,
within five clear days after winning each of the orders,
but no receiver of an open order shall be allowed to add
to his order to a greater extent than 10 per cent of the
total value of such order or orders.
(g) Any article coming under the following headings will not
be admitted as a trophy, viz., soft goods (including all
drapery) wearing apparel of any description, kitchen uten-
sils of any description, groceries, or ordinary household
crockery, or anything not approved of by the Executive
of the V.A.C.U.
(h) No open order shall be issued by the V.A.C.U. or affiliated
clubs to the winners of trophies for the purchase of
bicycles, or bicycle parts, or any cycle accessories, or any
article in Clause G.
(i) All open orders or trophies not claimed within two years
of date of winning, shall become the property of the
V.A.C.U.
(j) All promoters shall engrave all trophies before presen-
tation to the winners.
(k) No trophy shall be presented to the winner until such
time as the official report of such race or races is adopted
by the Executive of the V.A.C.U. or Council.
(l) The Executive will appoint proxies to act for them where
deemed advisable.
144. That the Secretary or responsible officers of any sports
meeting shall, if required by the Executive, produce satisfactory
evidence as to the value of a trophy which may be disputed.
145. No member will be permitted to compete in any road or track
race who has lost the use of any limb or: —
(a) Lost three or more fingers or two fingers and thumb of
either hand.
(b) Lost half of either foot.
(c) The referee and stewards have power, not to allow any
member to compete who is not physically fit, or maimed,
or who has been seriously injured in a previous event.
The referee and stewards shall obtain advice from a
medical authority before allowing a rider to compete, who
has been injured.


“YOU BUY SUPER
SERVICE
yy
WITH
DUNLOP
CYCLE
TYRES
On road and track for nearly
fifty years Dunlop cycle
tyres have been famed for
speed, comfort, and relia-
bility.
Your nearest dealer can
supply you with a type to
suit your purpose.
THE CHOICE OF CHAMPIONS.


ENTRIES.
146. That all entries for open events under the patroage of
the V.A.C.U. shall close with the Hon. Racing Secretary of the
Union, or his deputy as arranged by the Executive.
147. All entries must be accompanied by the entrance fee,
otherwise they will not be accepted. _
148 Competitors in handicaps shall be required to send with
their entries a statement that they are amateurs according to the
definition of the V.A.C.U., also full and definite particulars of their
last six (6) performances. Any competitor furnishing false,
misleading, or incomplete informatoin shall be disqualified by the
referee and stewards, Executive or Council, for any term that
they may determine. Any member disqualified or fined over the
sum of one pound (£1) shall have the right of appeal to the
Appeal Board within three (3) days of the official decision, such
appeal must be made in writing and accompanied by a fee of
five (5) shillings, wh : ch shall become the property of the V.A.C.U.
149. All entries must be sent in on V.A.C.U. entry form,
otherwise they will not be accepted. Entry forms can be obtained
from the V.A.C.U officials.
150. All entries must be made and races run in the real name of
the competitor, excepting under rule 127, clause (j), referring to
this matter.
151. That no condition or conditions shall be applied to any
race or races by any promoter that is contrary to the racing
rules of the V.A.C.U. without the sanction of the Executive of the
V.A.C.U.
152. Entry fee and acceptance fee for any senior or combined
graded or handicap open road race shall not exceed two (2)
shillings, for 50 miles and under; not to exceed 3/6 for 51 miles
and over. Entry fee and acceptance fee for any junior graded or
handicap open road race shall not exceed 1/- for 50 miles and
under. Entry fee for all track handicap and scratch races
(championships excepted) shall not exceed 1/6. Entry fee for all
championships shall not exceed 2/6.
PATRONAGE AND HANDICAPPING FEES.
153. That all promoters other than affiliated clubs, holding a
race or races under the patronage of the V.A.C.U. shall be charged
a patronage fee of £ 1/1/- one race or more per day, and a
handicapping fee of sixpence per entry. . Affiliated clubs shall
pay a patronage and handicapping fee of £2/2/.
COMBINED CLUB EVENTS.
154. Affiliated clubs who intend to hoid combined club races
must first make written application to the Executive or Council


of the V.A.C.U. for permission to do so. Such applications must
be signed by the Hon. Secretary of each club v/ho intend to take
part In the event. Any club holding combined events without the
sanction of the V.A.C.U. shall be fined or suspended by the
Executive. Any combined event open to eight or more
clubs shall be deemed an open event, and the club or clubs shall
comply with the open race conditions.
JUNIOR RACES.
155 Juniors must, when required by the Executive or Council
of the V.A.C.U. furnish a birth certificate or other satisfactory
evidence as to correct age. . . . .
156. That any member who competes as a junior either in club
or open events after he has attained the age of 18 years will incur
disqualification for a time ranging from one to three years,
according to the nature of the offence. A junior is deemed to bo
18 at the beginning of the day of his 18th birthday.
157 In the event of a junior race or event being postponed, and
any junior becoming 18 years of age during the postponement, he
shall be eligible to compete in such race or event.
158 No junior rider shall be allowed to compete in any senior
track or road championship without the sanction of the Executive
159 Any junior rider having received sanction and competed
in a senior championship, shall not be allowed to compete in any
junior championship. This rule does not apply to the 1000 Metres
Time Trial.
district clubs.
160 Only one club shall be allowed in each district (Educational
schools excepted) and that municipal boundaries will be recognised
as boundary lines in the metropolitan area or inland city, su .t> ur b.
and country districts. No new application for affiliation will be
considered in any municipal boundary where a club or clubs already
exists.
CLUB EVENTS ON OPEN EVENTS DAY.
161. No affiliated metropolitan club shall hold a race on the
day which is set apart for any V.A.C.U. open event or events under
thJ natronage of the V.A.C.U. without first obtaining the sanction
of the Exefutive or Council of the V.A.C.U., any club failing to
comply with this rule shall be liable to be fined or suspended.
Thus rule applies only to clubs in the metropolitan area.
RULE BOOKS.
162. Every member of the V.A.C.U. must obtain from the Hon.


Secretary a Book or Rules, and read it through as ignorance of
rules will not be taken as an excuse. PRICE 6d. per copy.
ELECTION OF LIFE MEMBERS OF THE V.A.C.U.
163.
(a) That the Council have power to elect a life member on the
recommendation of the Executive.
(b) That the nomination for a life membership must be lodged
at the April Council meeting, signed by the proposer and
seconder.
(c) That no member be elected a life member unless he has
rendered distinguished services and has been an official
of the V.A.C.U. in an honorary capacity for at least ten
(10) years.
(d) A member cannot be elected a life member unless recom-
mended by the Executive and/or with a report to the
Council stating the reason why such member is eligible
for election for a life membership.
(e) That only one member can be recommended for a life mem-
bership in the V.A.C. Union year.
(f) The election of a life member can only be held at the
Council meeting held on the first Thursday in May of- each
year.
(g) A life membership medal must be of uniform design, the
cost not to exceed £2/2/, and presented to the member
elected.
(h) A life member may be suspended from the life membership
list if he is guilty at any time of conduct detrimental
to the interest of Amateur sport or the V.A.C.U. generally
or the infringement of any rule.
(i) A life member can only be suspended at a meeting of the
Council of which the member concerned must have seven
days’ notice in writing, so that he may attend and show
cause why his name should not be removed from the life
membership list.
(j) In the event of the name of any member being so removed
from the life membership list, the life membership medallion
must be returned to the Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U.
within three (3) days thereof.
(k) A two-thirds majority of members present will be necessary
to remove a member's name from the life membership
list.
TRACK CHAMPIONSHIPS.
164. The following prizes must be awarded for all Victorian
Track Championships.:—


SENIOR:—Ist.—Sash and badge, or medal value® at not less
than £3/3/-.
SENIOR:—2nd—Standard gold medal or open order to the value
of £l/1/-.
JUNlOß:—lst.—Sash and badge or medal valued at not less than
£2/5/-.
JUNIOR: —2nd —Standard gold medal or open order valued at
£l/1/-
165. That should any competitor in the 1000 metres and one
mile senior and one mile junior championships meet with a
puncture, mechanical mishap to his machine, or fall, before the
last 220 yards of the event is entered on, the race will be re-run.
166. That in the 5 and 10 miles senior and 5 miles junior
championships a flying start be effected and that when the
starter’s pistol has been fired for the commencement of the race
no allowance will be made for any puncture, fall, or mishap of any
kind.
167. The 1,5, and 10 miles senior and 1 and 5 miles junior
championships shall be paced, such pacers to be under the control
of the referee and stewards.
168. That rule 165 apply to the 1000 metre time trial with the
exception of the portion dealing with the last 220 yards
169. That the 1000 Metre Time Trial be run under Olympic
conditions as follows: —Front wheel of the machine to rest on the
starting mark, pushers off must not overstep the starting mark,
each competitor may use his own pusher off.
170. A junior may compete in the 1000 Metre Time Trial
championship without forfeiting his junior status.
171. Competitors in all V.A.C.U. Championships, must have
been a bona fide resident of Victoria for six months immediately
prior to the date of such championship, and a financial member of
the V.A.C.U. for at least three months.
172. Sashes and badges are reserved for championships only,
and must not be given or donated as trophies for any other event
or events.
173. When points score races are to be held the Executive of
the V.A.C.U. shall draw up conditions as the occasion may arise.
PROTESTS.
174. Protests in reference to any event must be made in
writing, and handed to the Hon. Racing Secretary or referee of the
V.A.C.U. within fifteen minutes of such events, and shall be
accompanied by a deposit of 5/- which will be forfeited if the
protest is deemed a frivolous one.
175. All protests and disputes shall be dealt with by the
referee and stewards, with the right of appeal to the Appeal


Board of the V.A.C.U. if made within three days after the intimation
of the decision. Such appeal shall be dealt with within fourteen
176. Any competitor who is fined has not the right of appeal
unless the fine is £ 1 or over. , ,
17 7. Any member disqualified or fined £1 or over shall have tne
right to a representative at any appeal to appear in company on
his behalf to the Appeal Board of the V.A.C.U.
178 Such representative must be a financial member of an
affiliated club or V.A.C.U. at least ninety (90) days, and not
employed by any legal firm or in Crown Law Department, or practice
as a solicitor or barrister or counsel, or assist or be employed by
any solicitor or barrister-at-law.
RULES FOR TRACK RACING.
179. Not more than one attendant will be allowed to each
competitor. Any competitor’s attendant or supporter who coaches
or advises any competitor during the progress of a race, from
the inside of the arena, will be dealt with by the officials if a
member of the Union, and if an outsider, the rider encouraged or
advised may be dealt with.
180. The clerk of the Course shall have power to act as he
think fit in cases of misconduct by attendants.
181. None but the officials of the meeting, V.A.C.U. office-
bearers, handicapper, press, attendants, and competitors shall
be allowed within the enclosure.
182. Attendants must, immediately after the start retire to a
place allotted to them by the Clerk of the Course.
183. Two whistles will be blown, and the start effected by the
report of a pistol, or by any means the referee and stewards agree to,
and all competitors advised.
184. The judges shall not place any competitor who has started
without a riding number.
185. No competitor shall be allowed to start unless he wears
a skull cap and complete clothing from neck to knee, with full or
half sleeves. Socks are optional, arid knickers must be black or
navy blue and of sufficiently heavy texture to the satisfaction
of the dressing-room steward or the Clerk of the Course.
186. Attendants when starting competitors, must keep both
feet behind the mark from which the competitor actually starts.
Should the attendant cross such mark with either foot while
starting suoh competitor, the competitor shall be liable to be
fined or disqualified.
18 7. In starting the foremost part of the competitor’s machine
in contact with the ground must be placed on the mark from
which the competitor actually starts.


steel strong
silk smooth to ride . ♦
With the wind whistling past your ears, the
wheels burning up the track, and the thrill of the
race in your blood, the Healing gives you that
little added “zip” that sends you out of the ruck
to victory. Join the champions in their choice—
Bill Moritz, Tas. Johnson, Chris. Wheeler, Bob
Porter, Ted Stubenrauch —and hundreds more.
Every Healing Bicycle is an individual master-
piece—built for quality and ser-
vice.
lAealiiva
———
BI CYCLES
FOR EASY SPEED


-188. Any competitor starting before the signal may be put
back at the discretion of the starter, not exceeding 10 yards for
the race in question; and on a repetition of the offence may be
disqualified. It shall be the duty of each competitor to see that
he starts from the correct mark, and in default may be disqualified
from the race in question. A competitor upon being disqualified,
shall forfeit any fee or fees he may have paid.
189. As far as possible the times on the programme shall be
adhered to, but no heat may be started before time, except with the
consent of all the competitors in each heat.
190. Competitors in all track racing events shall not start from
a mark distant more than 2 feet from the pole line or inner
circle of the racing track, except when a number of competitors
are allotted the same start or position, they shall be ranged as
near as possible to each other. Lots for position may be drawn
under the supervision of the referee, counting from the pole line
or inner circle of the track.
191. Competitors must not look back or round during the
progress of the race; a fine not exceeding 20/- may be inflicted for
this offence.
192. If any accident should occur, competitors may dismount
during a race at their pleasure, and may run their machines, but
chey must keep to the extreme outside of the track whenever
dismounted, (except in an obstacle or medley race).
193. A competitor overtaking another must always pass him on
the outside (unless man passed has dismounted or retired from
the track, or is manifestly riding wide), and must be a clear
machine’s length (six feet) ahead before taking ground in front
of his opponent. The inside man must allow room for his opponent
to pass outside, and any competitor guilty of foul or unfair
riding shall be liable to be fined or disqualified.
194. The leading competitor, when finishing any race, shall ride
the last 100 yards in a line parallel to the left side of the track.
No rider shall check his speed, suddenly swerve, remove his hands
from the handle bars look back or around, or commit any other
offence likely to imperil the safety of the riders during the race,
or immediately after he has crossed the finishing line. Any
offender renders himself liable to a fine or disqualification.
195. Competitors whose names have been inadvertently omitted
from the programme shall be allowed to compete, but the Clerk
of the Course shall inform each competitor in the race of the
fact, together with the start allowed to such competitor.
196. The committee of the body holding the race meeting, with
the consent of the officials of the V.A.C.U. shall have power of
postponing all or any of the races in cases where they think


it is necessary. On no account will the entrance fee be returned,
or expenses allowed, to any competitor in case of such postponement.
19 7. The referee and stewards of the meeting shall have the
right of adjudicating on any point not herein provided for.
198. All tracks shall be measured twelve inches from the inner
side of the path, and all races shall be run left handed inside
when possible.
199. The finish of all races shall be judged by the first part of
the machine that touches the finishing mark.
200. A bell shall be rung when the leading man begins the last lap
of each heat or race.
201. Wing nuts attached to machines are not permitted in any
track events.
202. The referee and stewards shall have power to debar any
rider from competing in any event if, in their opinion, the competi-
tor’s machine or part of the machine, is unsafe for riding, This
rule applies also to a pacemaker.
TRACK TEAMS PREMIERSHIP.
203. Clubs may enter eight (8) members for track teams
premiership but not more than five will be permitted to start in
event, three members of a team must finish or team will not be
placed. No more than three teams will be permitted to start in
any heat. Event to be contested as pursuit race. Entry fee
five shillings per team. Juniors may compete with senior riders
in this event. Prizes for track premiership will be:—
Ist—Five (5) open orders £l/1/- each and pennant,
2nd —Penant.
Competitors in all V.A.C.U. premierships must have been a
member of the club he represents for at least ninety (90) days
prior to such premiership, and financial member of the V.A.C.U.
ELECTION OF ROAD AND TRACK OFFICIALS.
204. Nominations for road and track officials shall be lodged
at the April Council meeting, and the election of such officials
shall be held at the May Council meeting each year.
205. Any V.A.C.U. Track or Road Official absenting himself
from three consecutive race meetings without satisfactory explana-
tion, the Council or Executive shall declare the position vacant
and appoint an official in his place.
OFFICIALS.
206. The race officials shall consist of a Chief Judge, three or
more assistant judges, four or more umpires, one referee, two
stewards, one starter, two or more timekeepers, one clerk of the
course, two lap scorers, turning point steward, one or more dress-


ing-room stewards, number steward, and such other officials as may
be appointed by the Executive or Council of the V.A.C.U.
20 7. The referee and stewards shall have power to make all
arrangements subject to these rules, for the conduct of the racing,
and determine all questions and disputes that may or may not be
referred to them as they deem fit, and to regulate and control
all race officials and all competitors and their attendants. They
shall have power to question any entry, and may call upon any com-
petitor or member to declare by statutory Declaration, before a
Justice of the Peace, within any time that they may specify, the
truth of particulars contained in the entry, or of a statement made
by a member, competitor, or person or persons.
208. The referee and stewards shall have full power to control
and regulate competitors in all events, and to direct them in a
manner in which, in their opinion, is productive of good racing.
The referee and stewards shall have full power to remove from
the arena, or to fine or disqualify, any rider or other person subject
to their control.
209. That all road and track officials shall give a written notice
to the Hon. Secretary of the Union at least two weeks prior to any
country track meeting or road race, finishing outside the metropoli-
tan area, stating that their services are available for any such
track meeting or road race.
210. In the event of a dead heat for first place, the competitors
finishing such dead heat, if only two shall be entitled to first and
second prizes; if three, shall be entitled to first, second, and third
prizes. Likewise, in a dead heat for second place, the competitors
shall be entitled to second and third prizes and in a dead heat
for third place, if no fourth prize be given, shall be entitled to third
prize. If trophies are donated the referees and stewards shall
decide the run off. If the prizes are open orders, the dead he*t
competitors shall divide, provided that the time will not permit
of the dead heat being run off the same day.
211. All fines inflicted on competitors and members for offences
against these rules shall become the property of the V.A.C.U. and
any competitor or member upon whom a fine is inflicted shall
stand suspended until such fine is paid.
212. No member under suspension or disqualification is entitled
to admission into the arena or dressing-rooms during a race meeting,
or allowed to attend or assist a competitor.
213. No member of the V.A.C.U. who is entitled to compete under
these rules shall be allowed to ride a match race in public, or
any member riding on rollers, home trainer, or mechanical contriv-
ance, in public or in any shop window, or at any display, without
the sanction of the Executive or Council of the V.A.C.U. shall be
fined or disqualified for any period they may determine.


214. In the event of a protest or objection being lodged against
a competitor, all prizes affected shall be withheld until the referee
and stewards or (in the event of an appeal) the Appeal Board
have given their decision as to who is entitled to the prizes.
215. The Chief Judge shall give a written report or marked
programme of the result or results of race or races, and times ot
each event given by the timekeeper to the referee.
216 The referee shall forward within three days of a race or
races a written report of the results, times and/or fines, dis-
qualifications and remarks, etc., to the Hon. Secretary of the
V.A.C.U. ... „
217. The referee and stewards shall hold an inquiry into all
falls, accidents, etc., and report the results of such inquiry to the
Executive or Council of the V.A.C.U.
218. The Hon. Secretary of the V.A.C.U.. shall forward to the
Hon. Handicapper and promoter a copy of all results received
from the referee. . , . -it
219 If any competitor rides within the inner circle ot tne
track or pole line, or on the wrong side of a post or mark that
marks the boundary of the track, without justifiable cause, in the
opinion of the referee or stewards, they shall disqualify or fine such
C °22o. No official of a road race or track meeting shall be permitted
to compete in any road or track race. , , ,
221. It shall be the duty of the Judges to declare the placed
men in each heat or race. They shall have power to alter their
decision within fifteen minutes if they find that they have made
an error, the majority of the judges to decide and their decision is
final and without appeal. -
222. The referee and stewards shall have power to fine or
disqualify any competitor reported to them by the umpires or
other officials for unfair riding.
223. It shall be the duty of the umpires to watch the riding
and report to the referee and stewards any competitor or pace-
maker whose riding or behaviour they consider dangerous, improper,
or unfair. In track events it shall be their duty to watch the start-
ing of competitors starting near them, and to report to the referee
and stewards any unfairness or infringement of the rules, either
by competitors or attendants.
224 It shall be the duty of the starter when it has been reported
to him by the Clerk of the Course that all competitors are ready,
to effect the start by the report of a pistol of any other way that
has been arranged by the referee and stewards.
225. In the case of a false start, the competitors will be called
back by the starter and re-started. Any competitor refusing to


obey the starter will be fined or disqualified by the referee- and
stewards.
228. The referee and stewards shall have power to stop any
track event or race where they think that a race has not been
run on its merits, or in their opinion a satisfactory racing speed
has not been maintained. They also have power to declare a
‘‘No race” or order the event to be re-run, or abandon the event;
in such cases all prizes and trophies cannot be claimed by any
of the competitors or any entry fee refunded. Their decision
shall be final.
22 7. It shall be the duty of the timekeepers to keep the times
of the first in each heat and any other times as the Secretary ol
the meeting or the handicapper may have previously arranged.
228. It shall be the duty of the Clerk of the Course to call over
the names of the competitors before the starting of each heat,
and to see that they are on their appointed marks and have their
proper numbers, and when ready, to report to the starter, and to
keep the course clear and report misconduct to the referee and
stewards, and in scratch races to see that each competitor is in his
proper place. A flying start may be adopted if deemed necessary.
Any competitor refusing to comply with the instructions of the
Clerk of the Course shall be liable to be fined or disqualified by
the referee and stewards.
229. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary,
a fine not exceeding 20/- may be inflicted at the discretion of the
referee or stewards.
230. Any Competitor failing to pay a fine will be prevented
from starting in any races until such fine is paid.
231. The foregoing rules referring to the management of race
meetings are subject to revision by the V.A.C.U. which reserves
to itself the right of adjudicating in any case of dispute or appeal.
ROAD RACING RULES.
23 2. Any competitor found guilty of holding on to any moving
vehicle during the progress of a race will be fined or disqualified
by the referee or stewards.
233. Competitors must not roll up or remove their numbers
during the progress of a race, offenders will be fined or disqualified
by the referee or stewards.
234. Competitors must keep to the correct side of the road,
offenders will be fined or disqualified by the referee and stewards!
235. Competitors must return numbers on the day of the race,
any competitor failing to do so will be fined a sum of not less than
2/6 for each offence, except in the case of an accident.


Official Jewellers to the V.A.C.U.
Any Ring may
be supplied at
the Price you
wish to pay.
Cl 55—£15.
IBct. Gold and Pure
Platinum, one fine Large
and ten smaller Dia-
monds. Others from
£6/10/- to £25.
C 23 7—£lo.
18ct. Gold and Pure
Platinum, three Fine
Quality Large and four
smaller Diamonds.
Others from £6/10/- to
£2O.
ssssia»t
C206—£16.
18ct. Gold and Pure
Platinum, two Fine Qua-
lity Large and four
smaller Diamonds.
Others from £l2/10/ to
£25.
DM3 —£13/10/-
18ct. White Gold and
Pure Platinum, five Fine
Quality Diamonds.
Others from £lO to £3O.
.v
Satisfaction
Guaranteed or
Your Money
Refunded in Full.
D 1 12—£15.
18ct. Gold and
Platinum, three
Quality Large and Two
smaller Diamonds.
Others, £lO to £3O.
DlO0 —£10/10/-
IBct. Gold and Pure
Platinum, one fine qua-
lity Large and four
smal er Diamonds.
Others from £6 to £l5.
Pure
Fine
I lustrations are
the Actual Size
and Exact
Reproduct'on of
the Original Ring.
Dumbrells Jewellers
(E. P. S. ABRECHT)
319-21 BOURKE ST., MELB (Directly Opp. Myer’s)


236. A flag or sign will be placed at the turning point; all
competitors on reaching the turn must slow down and go around
the flag and hand their checks to the turning point officials.
237. Competitors not going to the turning point and riding with
or pacing riders in the race will be fined or disqualified.
238. Competitors who have not been to the turning point riding
over the finishing line with or without a number will be fined or
disqualified.
239. Competitors failing to give up their checks to the official
checking stewards will be fined or disqualified.
240. Competitors failing to be on their marks at the allotted
time, or when called on, will be fined. . ,
241. Competitors’ numbers must be checked prior to the start
by the officials. ....
242. Club members riding among or near the competitors s “ a
be dealt with by the referee and stewards, and render their club
or competitor liable to be fined or disqualified.
243 All persons that enter for any race controlled or governed
by the V.A.C.U. Rules shall be known or named as a rider, compe-
titor or club member.
244. For any breach of any rule the competitor is liable to be
disqualified or fined by the referee and stewards.
245. And rider or member disqualified for any period shall not
be permitted to start in any cycle race, road or track, until the
expiration of the term of the disqualification.
246. Any rider or member fined for any breach of any rule
shall not be permitted to start or compete in any cycle race, track
or road until such fine is paid.
24 7. All competitors and club members on the day ot any
race are under the control of the referee and stewards.
248 All competitors must wear a number supplied by the Hon.
Racing Secretary or Number Stewards. The number must be
carried on the lower part of the back, and tied around the waist.
Same must be displayed throughout the race, and must not be
covered with any wearing apparel sweater, guernsey, food-bag or any
other material. For breach of Rule any rider may be fined by the
Referee and stewards.
249 Any competitor in any race failing to have his number
checked or who does not assist the officials to record his number
shall be fined by the referee and stewards. , . .
250 Any Competitor changing his official number in the race
will be fined or disqualified by the referee and stewards. _
251. Any rider, competitor, or club member, using undesirable
or obscene language in a race, or on the road, or at any place
where a road race is in progress or being arranged, or at the


finish of a race will be fined or disqualified by the referee and
stewards.
252. Any member riding over the road course of a race, or
riding near the competitors, giving advice or coaching will be
fined or disqualified by the referee and stewards.
253. Any rider or competitor in any road race taking or
accepting outside pace or sheltering, shall be disqualified for
any period the referee and stewards may determine, and forfeit
all claim to any open order or trophy from the race, except
any trophy won prior to the alleged breach of rules.
254. “Outside Pace” shall mean any competitor riding behind or
on either side of a cyclist or cyclists who are non-competitors, or a
motor cycle or motor car, or any other moving vehicle the referee
and stewards may consider to be of assistance or advantage over
the competitors in the race.
255. All protests must be made in writing and lodged with the
Hon. Secretary, Hon. Racing Secretary, or referee of the V.A.C.U.
within thirty minutes after the time limit of each race accompanied
with a deposit of five (5) shillings which will be forfeited if the
protest is deemed frivolous.
256. The time limit of road races (time to be taken when the
rider or riders leave). All handicap road races will be held under
time limit as fixed by the V.A.C.U. and at the expiration of
such time limits shall be the end or the finish of such race as
follows: —5 miles, 20 minutes; 10 miles 40 minutes; 15 miles, I
hour; 20 miles, 1 hour and 20 minutes; 25 miles, 1 hour and 40
minutes; 30 miles, 2 hours; 35 miles, 2 hours 20 minutes; 40 miles,
2 hours and 40 minutes; 45 miles, 3 hours; 50 miles, 3 hours 20
minutes; 55 miles, 3 hours 40 minutes; 60 miles, 4 hours; 65 miles,
4 hours 20 minutes; 70 miles, 4 hours 40 minutes; 75
miles, 5 hours; 80 miles, 5 hours 20 minutes; 85
miles, 5 hours 40 minutes; 90 miles, 6 hours; 95 miles, 6 hours
20 minutes; 100 miles, 7 hours; 110 miles, 7 hours 45 minutes;
120 miles, 8 hours 20 minutes; 130 miles, 9 hours; 140 miles, 9
hours, 40 minutes; 150 miles, 10 hours 20 minutes; 160 miles,
II hours; 170 miles; 12 hours; 180 miles, 12 hours 40 minutes;
190 miles, 13 hours 20 minutes; 200 miles, 14 hours 30 minutes.
25 7. All protests, disputes, or any breach of road racing rules
shall be dealt with by the referee and stewards, who hall have full
power to hold inquiry at any time, and fine or disqualify any
competitor or club member for any period as they may determine.
258. All appeals against the referee and stewards' decision must
be made in writing and lodged with the Hon. Secretary of the
V.A.C.U- within three days of the referee and stewards' decision,
together with a fee of 5/- which becomes the property of the
V.A.C.U.


259. In all road races competitors must be ready and mounted
on machines when the signal is given to start. Any competitor
or competitors falling or colliding with any person, or his machine
coming temporarily disabled may remount and continue in the
race. The other competitors shall not be recalled or re-started on
account of the collision or fall.
260. Any competitor or competitors who unfairly interfere or
attempt to interfere by suddenly crossing, using the elbow to upset
a competitor or in any way prevent a competitor from making
fast racing will be disqualified or fined by the referee and stewards.
261. The referee and stewards have full power to declare “no
race” if, in their opinion, the race has been unfairly contested, or
the proper distance of the road race not traversed, or through
the weather conditions being adverse to the competitors to complete
the distance.
262. The referee, handicapper, and Hon. Racing Secretary have
full power to extend the time limit to any race on the day of the
event, or during the progress of a race through adverse weather
conditions.
263. Any rider, club member, or competitor or club member
refusing to give evidence, or refusing to answer any questions at an
inquiry, or attempting to hinder the rules of the V.A.C.U. being
administered shall be fined.
264. Any rider, competitor, or club member refusing to attend
an inquiry when requested by an official, shall be fined or disquali-
fied.
265. No person or persons other than V.A.C.U. officials shall
"onduct an inquiry on any dispute, protest, or breach of any
racing rules of the V.A.C.U.
266. Any club member or rider committing a breach of the
V.A.C.U. Rules at any race or place where a race is being arranged,
or a race is in progress, or after the finish of a race, shall be fined
or disqualified by the referee and stewards.
26 7. Any club member or rider who is not a competitor in
a race, and who assists a competitor in a race or gives pace or
sheltering from the wind will be fined or suspended.
268. All competitors must start on the mark or time handicap
allotted to them by the Hon. Handicapper. Any competitor starting
from a mark in front of that allotted by the Hon. Handicapper shall
be fined or disqualified by the referee and stewards.
269. All competitors, riders, or club members are only accepted
as competitors in any race or competition on the condition that
they agree to race under the rules and conditions of the V.A.C.U.
2 70. All competitors must wear a racing costume in all races,
the guernsey or sweater must fit close to the neck, and the sleeves


must reach to the elbow. The knickers or breaches must be
black in colour, and must reach from the waist to close to the
knees. Socks and shoes must be worn (socks may be waived at
the discretion of the referee and stewards.) and all competitors
must be clean and tidy at the start of the race. For breaches
of this rule offenders shall be fined or disqualified from competing.
271. The judges will not place a competitor who finishes over
the finishing line without a racing number.
272. No competitor will be allowed to wear or display in a race
track or road, a sweater, guernsey or any wearing apparel bearing
a trade name or motto, any design, monogram, emblem, lettering,
or advertisement of any discription.
273. At all road races the starter shall give two sharp sounds
of his whistle, warning the competitors to get ready. Three
whistles the competitors must be ready, to start. Any competitor
delaying the race will be fined.
274. All entries must be accompanied by the fee, otherwise they
will not be accepted.
275. All fines over £1 sterling, and disqualifications imposed by
the referee and stewards are subject to appeal to the Appeal
Board of the V.A.C.U.
2 76. All riders competing in premierships, championships, or
teams races, or inter-clubs competitions held by the V.A.C.U. or
under its patronage must be a financial member of an affiliated
club.
27 7. A maiden rider shall be a competitor who has not won
or dead-heated a race, or won a first prize, at the time of starting
in the event in any cycle race on track or road.
278. A novice rider shall be a competitor who has never at the
time of starting in the event won a prize in a cycle race on track
or road.
2 79. In the event of two or more club teams scoring an equal
number of points or aggregate points in any competition, the
referees and the stewards shall decide how the prizes shall be
awarded, or another race contested.
280. Any competitor changing his machine or accepting any
part or parts of a bicycle from any person or persons during the
progress of the race shall be disqualified or fined.
281. Wing nuts may be used in all road races, must not project
more than one inch from the back stay.
282. Only metal food or liquid containers are permitted to be
used in all road races.
283. The President, Secretary, or Racing Secretary of the
V.A.C.U., and in their absence the senior official present shall have
full power to appoint any person to carry out any duty when an
official is absent.


284. Should any official or officials not be in attendance at the
turning point to take riders’ checks and record competitors’ num-
bers, the referee and stewards shall have full power to declare "no
race."
285. The referee and stewards shall have full power to suspend
or dismiss any official (office-bearers excepted) who is incapable
of carrying out the official duties allotted to him.
287. Competitors with clutches and free wheels shall not be
permitted to have any assistance in starting in any road race of
33 miles or over.
288. An official is a person elected, or appointed, or deputed by
the V.A.C.U. to administer the Rules of the V.A.C.U. and conditions
of the race, and to report to the referee any competitor or club
member for breach of any rule or condition governing the race.
289. Any competitor or club member insulting, abusing, disobey-
ing, or using obscene language to an official shall be fined or
disqualified.
290. Any competitor desiring to enter for any event under an
assumed name must notify the Hon. Racing Secretary and the Hon.
Handicapper of the V.A.C.U.
291. In cases not provided for in the foregoing rules, the
Council has full power to legislate and arrange as necessary.
292. Any competitor receiving or accepting any refreshments
(food or liquid) from any person or persons other than the officials
appointed by the V.A.C.U. will be disqualified or fined.
293. Not more than one attendant will be permitted to each
competitor. Any attendant or supporter who coaches or advises
any competitor during the progress of a race will be dealt with by
the referee and stewards if a member of the Union, and if an
outsider the rider encouraged or advised will be dealt with.
294. The referee and stewards of the meeting or race have tha
right of adjudicating.
295. All unpaced championships and time tests shall be from
a standing start.
296. The referee and stewards shall have power to debar
any rider to compete in any race, if in their opinion, the Competi-
tor's machine or a part of the machine is unsafe for racing. This
rule also applies to a pacemaker.
297. The Victorian Senior 62, 14 miles, and junior 25 miles
road championships shall be run under the same conditions as the
Australian Road Championships.
298. Prizes for the Victorian Senior 62, 14 miles and junior
25 miles shall be:- —


SENIOR—Ist —Sash and badge or gold medal valued £3/3/-.
SENIOR —2nd —Gold medal or open order valued .. .. £l/10/-.
JUNIOR —1st —Sash and badge or gold medal valued £2/2/-.
JUNIOR —2nd—Gold medal or open order valued ... £l/1/-.
299. Road Premierships. The distance shall be senior 20 miles
and junior 15 miles on an out and back course. Teams of eight
from each club may be entered. Four in each club team allowed
to start, three members of the team must finish or no time will be
taken by the official timekeepers. Draw for position of starting
will be made by the Executive of the V.A.C.U. Enrty fee for
each club team shall be:—Seniors 10/-, Juniors 5/-. The names of
the club team must accompany the entry fee. No entry will be
accepted without the entry fee. Fastest time club team will be
declared the winners in each event. Time to be taken from the
start of each team to the finish of the first and third
team rider over the finishing line. Change of team after
entry has been made will not be permitted. Sections
for Senior and Junior Country teams are included.
At least three teams in each of the Country Sections
must start before any pennant be awarded. Any club winning the
shield on three successive occasions or four times in all, shall become
the permanent holders of such shield. Prizes: —Senior —Ist, Four
gold medals valued £2/2/- each and pennant; 2nd pennant.
Juniors —Ist, Four gold medals valued £l/10/- each and pennant.
2nd, pennant. Country Section Senior —Ist, pennant; 2nd, pennant.
Junior —Ist, pennant; 2nd, pennant. The winners in the
Junior and Senior section shall hold the premiership shields for
twelve months, shields must be returned to the Hon. Secretary
of the V.A.C.U. at least seven days before the premierships are
listed to be contested.
300. No fines or disqualifications shall be inflicted by the
referee and stewards on any member of the V.A.C.U. without
first giving such member a hearing in his defence.
301. These rules shall not be altered, added to, or annulled,
except by notice of motion in writing as provided for in Rule 3 5
at a Council meeting and shall be dealt with at the following Council
Meeting.
These rules were adopted at a special meeting of delegates of the
Victorian Amateur Cyclists' Union on the Bth December, 1936.
G. PERUGIA, President.
C. A. COLLIER, Hon. Secretary.


V.A.C.U. REGISTERED CLUB COLOURS.
Colours registered by clubs must not be used in open events by
members of any other club.
ARARAT—BIack body and sleeves, with white collar and cuffs,
white band with lettering A.C.C. in black.
BRUNSWICK—BIack body and sleeves, with two narrow white
bands round collar, body and cuffs, Brunswick in white
across chest.
BOX HlLL—White body and sleeves, with royal blue star and
letters B.H.A.C.C. on chest.
BENDIGO —Royal blue body and sleeves, gold band and lettering
Bendigo A.C.C. in blue across chest.
COBURG —Light blue body and sleeves, 6 inch dark blue band round
centre, lettering Coburg in dark blue across back of shoulders.
CITY OF MELBOURNE AND CARLTON—Navy blue body and
sleeves, narrow white band on collar and cuffs, lettering C. of
M. in white on chest.
CASTLEMAINE—Dark blue body and sleeves, piped with pale blue
with lettering C.D.A.C.C. in pale blue on chest.
COLAC —Dark Maroon body and sleeves, black collar and cuffs,
C.A.C. in white on chest.
COBDEN —Green body and sleeves, with tangerine band around
waist and elbow, lettering Cobden in red on back.
CARNEGIE —All black with lettering Carnegie in red on chest.
CHELSEA —Royal blue body and sleeves, | inch white band on
cuffs, collar and waist.
DANDENONG—Maroon body and sleeves, royal blue V yoke, collar,
cuffs and band on bottom, lettering Dandenong in white
across back.
ESSENDON —Black body and sleeves, red collar and cuffs, lettering
Essendon A.C.C. in red across chest.
ECHUCA—AII white.
ELSTERNWICK —All black, with lettering E.K. in white on back
FITZROY —Maroon top, blue bottom and blue collar.
FAIRFIELD—Red and white, with letter F. in red and white on
chest and back.
FOOTSCRAY- —Blue top, white centre and red bottom, sleeves to
match.
FAWKNER—RoyaI blue, gold band round centre, two gold line«
on cuffs, lettering Fawkner in gold across chest.
GARDEN VALE —Sky blue body, two red bands round collar,
cuffs and waist, red monogram G.V.A.C.C. on chest.


GEELONG —All royal blue, two white bands on cuffs, collar and
body, lettering G.A.C.C. in white on chest.
GEELONG WEST—Royal blue body and sleeves, gold band across
chest, lettering G.W.A.C.C. in white.
CITY OF CAMBERWELL—GoId body and sleeves, two purple bands
round chest, neck and cuffs.
HAWTHORN —Brown body and sleeves, gold collar, gold band at
waist and cuffs.
KEW —Half light and half dark blue, with letter Q in white on
back and front, with the word Kew thereon.
KENSINGTON —Blue body with vertical gold stripe down front
and back, lettering K.A.C.C. in blue and gold on back and
front.
MORDIALLOC—CardinaI, white facings with 5 inch hoop, wheel
and wings lettering Mordialloc in white on back.
MALVERN —White body and sleeves, blue badge wheel and wings,
Malvern A.C.C. on left breast.
MITCHAM —Royal blue with red star and red cuffs.
MARIBYRNONG —Royal blue, lettering Maribyrniong in gold across
back.
MILDURA —Navy blue, white monogram on chest M.D.A.C.C.
MURCHISON —Light red body and sleeves, blue collar and cuffs.
NORTH MELBOURNE —Royal blue body and sleeves, white and
gold piping on collar and at Elbow.
NORTHCOTE—Light blue and white, blue and white N. on back.
NEWPORT —Green with gold vertical stripe back and front, gold
band at cuffs.
NOORAT —Green body and sleeves, Maroon collar and cuffs,
N.A.C.C. in gold on back.
PRESTON —Red with white vertical stripe through centre, red
collar and white cuffs.
ROBINVALE—
SOUTH MELBOURNE —Dark blue body and sleeves, white band
round centre, white piping on cuffs and collar, lettering
South Melbourne in white on back.
RICHMOND —All black, with yellow diamond on chest and back.
SHEPPARTON—AII green, two white bands on collar, waist and
cuffs, lettering Shepparton A.C.C. on chest in white over wheel
and wings.
SWAN HILL —Royal blue, with gold lettering on chest S.H.A.C.C.
SMYTHESDALE —Purple body and sleeves, gold collar and cuffs,
lettering Smythesdale A.C.C. in gold across chest.
STAWELL —Royal blue, yellow collar and cuffs, yellow monogram
on chest S.D.A.C.C.
SANDRINGHAM—Light blue with royal blue vertical stripe width
of collar back and front, royal blue cuffs.


ST. KlLDA—Black body and sleeves, red and white yoke and cuffs,
TERANG- —Vertical half white and green, green collar.
TONGALA—
WOODEND —All green with gold V on neck.
WALWA—
OAKLEIGH—Turquoise blue body and sleeves, 4 inch black band
round chest and back.
BALLARAT —Blue and white body, white sleeves, blue at bottom
of body and on cuffs.
RUPANYUP —Red body and sleeves, Royal blue collar and cuffs,
lettering R.D.A.C.C. in blue across chest.


AFFILIATED CLUBS—1936-37.
Ararat
Ballarat
Brunswick
Box Hill
Bendigo
Beeac
City of Camberwell
Coburg
City of Melbourne Carlton.
Castlemaine
Colac
Cobden
City of Mordialloc
Carnegie-Caulfield
Chelsea
Dandenong
Essendon
Echuca
Elsternwick
Fitzroy x
Fairfield
Footscray
Fawkner
Frankston
Garden Vale
Geelong
Geelong West
Hawthorn
Kew
Kensington
Lake Boga
Malvern
Mitcham
Mildura
Maribyrnong
Murchison
North Melbourne
Northcote
Newport
Noorat
Oakleigh,
Preston
Prahran
Rupanyup
Richmond
Sandringham
South Melbourne
Shepparton
Swan Hill
Smythesdale
Stawell
St. Kilda
Tongala
Terang
Timboon-Port CaaipbeM
Tallangatta
Woodend
Walwa


VICTORIAN AMATEUR CYCLISTS’ UNION
New Rules, Alterations and Additions to Rules as from
1st January, 1037.
NEYV RULES.
Any member of the V.A.C.U. who has seceded from the
amateur ranks and raced as a professional, and who has
then become reinstated as an amateur, shall not represent
this State in an Australian championship.
Any member of the V.A.C.U. who has raced as a pro-
fessional up to the age of eighteen (18) years, before
becoming reinstated as an Amateur, shall not represent
this State in an Australian championship.
Any affiliated metropolitan club who twice in succession
are not represented at V.A.C.U. Council meetings, without
a written apology, shall be fined or disqualified by the
executive Committee.
That the title of V.A.C.U. track champion be given to
the member gaining the highest number of points in the
following State championships, 1,000 metres sprint, one
mile, five miles, 10 miles and 1,000 metres time trial.
Points to be allocated as follows:—lst 9, 2nd 3, 3rd 1.
The winner of such title shall be presented by the V.A.C.U.
with a guernsey, and he shall hold such title until a new
champion is declared, and he must then cease to wear
the guernsey in competition. No member other than the
declared title holder shall be permitted to wear such
color and design of guernsey, and any member committing
a breach of this rule shall be fined or disqualified. Design
and color of guernsey, white body and quarter sleeves, polar
collar with gold, black and green bands, 1J inch gold,
black and green bands at waist, V.A.C.U. track champion
and year in green lettering on back.


That the machine of every competitor in club and open
races during- the road season be equipped with two
efficient and independent brakes.
That all competitors in track events must have the
ends of their handle bars properly corked.
That no club shall be granted permission to compete
with more than one promoting club in combined races on
the same day.
That members must wear skull caps while training on
all tracks.
That the V.A.C.U. accepts the designs of safety helmet
and arm guards as submitted, and that they be adopted
as standard racing helmet and arm guards of the V.A.C.U.
Helmet consists of eight bars, protection for ears and
and strap and buckle.
ALTERATIONS TO RULES.
Rules 21 & 73:
That for the duration of the war the Annual Special
Council Meeting be held on the same night, and prior to
the ordinary Council meeting, and that the annual report
and balance-sheet shall not be printed, and a copy of
same be forwarded to club Hon. Secretaries and delegates.
Rule 72:
Add after the word each, “half year ending on the last
day of September and March.
Rule 87:
Delete (5) insert (6).
Rule 124:
Delete the word “President, insert Hon. Racing Secre-
tary, Hon. Handicapper.
Rule 140:
That rule be deleted for the duration of the war, and
for a period of twelve months after.


Rule 152:
That entry fee for all track handicap and scratch races
(championship excepted) shall not exceed 1/6, for trophies
below £7, 2/- under £l6, and 2/6 for £l6 and upwards.
Rule 160:
Add after the word exists, “Without the special recom-
mendation of the Executive Committee.
Rule 204:
Delete April, insert March, delete May, insert April.
Rule 236:
Insert after the word “and,” “get stamped or.”
Rule 239:
Insert after the word “to,” “get stamped or.”
Rule 284:
Insert after the word “numbers,” “or get stamped.”
Rule 287:
Competitors with clutches and free-wheels shall not be
permitted to have any assistance in starting in any road
race.
Rule 293:
Any person who coaches or advises any competitor
during the progress of a race, will be dealt with by the
referee and stewards if a member of the Union, and if an
outsider the rider encouraged or advised will be dealt with.
Rule* 299:
Road Premierships.—Five members in each club team
allowed to start, three members of the team must finish
or no time will be taken by the official timekeepers. Draw
for position of starting will be made by the Executive
Committee of the V.A.C.U. Entry fee for each club team
shall be: —Seniors 10/-, Juniors 5/-, No entry will be
accepted without entry fee. Fastest time club team will
be declared the winners in each event. Time to be taken
from the start of each team to the finish of the first and


third team rider over the finishing line. team not
ready to take its position in order of the draw shall not
be permitted to start. Sections for Senior and Junior
Country teams are included. At least three teams in each
of the Country sections must start before any pennant be
awarded. Prizes: —Senior—Ist, five gold medals valued
£2/2/- each and pennant; 2nd, pennant. Juniors —Ist, five
gold medals valued £l/10/- each and pennant; 2nd, pen-
nant. Country Section—Senior —Ist, pennant: 2nd, pennant.
Junior—lst, pennant; 2nd, pennant. The winners in the
Senior and Junior sections shall hold the shields for
twelve months. Shields must be returned to the Hon.
Secretary of the V.A.C.U. at least seven days before the
premierships are listed to be run.




famous
in quality since 1896
For over 40 years Healing manufacture has
been one of progression, built on goodwill. Re-
liable workmanship and first quality components
have gone hand in hand towards producing the
finest cycle in Australia.
Chosen by the greatest racing cyclists in the
Commonwealth, adding fresh laurels every day to
an already stupendous list of successes, the Heal-
ing is the cycle that leaves the ***
field behind. "
FOR EASY SPEED


Official Jewellers to the V.A.C.U.
W
We Specialise in
Championship
Sashes for all
Sports.
Prices ranging
from 21/-,
without Badge,
and
from 32/6
upwards
with Badge.
$0
Designs & Prices
submitted for
Sashes and
Badges of any
Description.
W
Our Clients are
advised that our
Mr. J. C. Gardner
personally attends to
all Sporting Require-
ments, and his ex-
pert advice may be
obtained at all times.
Dumbrells Jewellers
(E. P. S. ABRECHT)
319-21 BOURKE ST., MELB. (Directly Opp. Myer’s)
The Arrow Printery Pty. Ltd., 11! Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.
