

CONSCIENTIOUS CLERICAL NONCONFORMITY.
A DISCOURSE,
DELIVERED AT
Cl LAI )W ELL STREET CHAPEL, PENTONYILLE,
ON MONDAY, APRIL 15, 1839,
OX OCCASION OF ITS RE-OPEKING, FOR THE USE OF
RIDLEY 11. HERSGHELL,
A CONVERTED.JEW,
THOMAS BINNEY.
REPRINTED, WITH ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS,
BY THE AUTHOR.
ADELAIDE :
PLAITS, BINDLEY STREET ; WIGG, RUN RLE STREET.
1859.




CONSCIENTIOUS CLERICAL NONCONFORMITY.
A DISCOURSE,
DELIVERED AT
CHADWELL STREET CHAPEL, PBNTONYILLE,
ON MONDAY, APRIL 15, 1839,
ON OCCASION OP ITS EE-OPENING, POE THE USE OF
RIDLEY H. HERSCHELL,
A CONVERTED JEW,
THOMAS BINNEY.
REPRINTED, WITH ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS
BY THE AUTHOR.
ADELAIDE :
PLATTS, BINDLEY STREET ; WIGG, BUNDLE STREET,


PRINTED AT THE EE6ISTEB AND OB3EEVEE GENERAL PEINIING OEEXCE,
GBENEEEL STREET, ADELAIDE,


CONSCIENTIOUS CLERICAL NONCONFORMITY.
Evangelical Nonconformity “is a stand not merely for the claims of Scripture
and the supremacy of Christ —not merely for the liberty of all to consult his
will, and to follow their convictions, and thus to render to Him a reasonable service ;
but it is a stand for the recognition of all as Christian brethren ‘who hold the head ;’
it is a stand for mutual indulgence to secondary differences, grounded on agreement
in what is supreme ; it is a stand for substantial and visible unity, by being a stand
for universal Christian communion—for the unrestricted intercourse of ministers and
churches, in spite of the diversity of forms of discipline.”* This is the spirit of
Evangelical Dissent. It is equally opposed to imposition and exclusiveness, to the
dictates of power and the selfishness of party. It is alike intolerant to the mere
human authority, that would either fetter the mind or limit the affections. It
acknowledges Christ as the Lord of both. It receives as true whatever He teaches.
It loves as brethren all that are like Him. It bows before Him as the “ only
Potentate.” It cannot receive whom He rejects. It dare not disown whom He has
received. . . ...
Thesej and kindred principles, it has often been my privilege, in common with
many of my ministerial brethren, to advocate and enforce. Acting upon them some
of us are here this day. The occasion and the service are somewhat peculiar. After
briefly adverting to one or two circumstances which it would seem necessary to notice
I propose to examine and discuss a subject, which no one, I imagine, will consider
inappropriate..
The gentleman who in future will occupy this place, and speak unto those that
“may resort hither,” was by birth a Jew. “ He was carefully educated in the Jews’
religion, his parents and relatives not only being “ devout persons,’’ according to the
principles of their ancient faith, but some of them of chief account in the synagogue.
When a very young man he was led to examine the claims of Christianity—or rather,
to speak more scripturally, the “ God of his fathers,” who at “first commanded the
light to shine in the darkness, shined into his heart,” disturbed its repose, and revealed
its corruption, and thus led him at once to see his necessities, and to enquire anxiously
how they could be met. He did not find in the surviving fragments of Jewish institu-
tions what satisfied or allayed that hunger of the heart which Divine mercy had
excited within him. The desire for peace—peace of conscience—pressed upon
and impelled him as with the force of an appetite. He inwardly longed, though he
knew it not, for the blessings typified to “ the church in the wilderness,” by
the water from the rock, and the manna from heaven. He was wishing for, and
“ feeling after,” that “ better hope” which the tabernacle and the priesthood intro-
duced “in a figure.” In this state of mind he sought, in his ignorance, advice and
direction from a dignified Romanist. The Popish Archbishop held out to him the
crucifix. His whole soul within him revolted. It was seeking for something con-
genial with itself; its very essence was stirred; all its affections were kindled
together ;” it was “ thirsting after God;” longing “to know where it might find Him,
that it might come even to his seat;” and it was met with a “nehusMari’—a, piece of
brass!
He narrowly escaped, however, attempts which were subsequently made to detain
him. But he did escape, and coming to England obtained the friendship of some
members of the Established Church, who placed before him the simple elements of
“ the glorious gospel of the blessed God” —“ the cross of Christ not the crucifix
that “ which is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth, to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek.” In this truth our enquirer discovered what he needed
and sought. He soon “ submitted to the righteousness of God.” He received
“ the Apostle and High Priest of our profession.” He imbibed the spirit, and
could appreciate the language, of one who was also cc of the stock of Abraham, o
the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews”—” What things were gain to me.
♦ See the Author’s “ Dissent not Schism,”


those I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord : for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found
in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.”
Professing “repentance towards God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,” our
brother was admitted into the Christian Church by the rite of baptism, which he
received according to the forms of the Episcopal branch of it. His first friends were all
ministers or members of the Establishment. With such he formed many and endeared
connections. In the midst of them he has spent several years, and in the course of
these years has been much engaged in conducting the exercises of domestic worship,
in expounding the Scriptures at such services, where “ many have often been gathered
together,” and even in attending, in a more public manner, to the moral and spiritual
wants of a neighbourhood. Under all the circumstances, nothing certainly would have
seemed so natural as that he should have taken orders in the National Church. To this
step he was repeatedly urged. His immediate friends made arrangements for the pur-
pose. Ordination was ready if he would receive it. Much lay upon the side of con-
formity ; much to attract, if not to tempt him. One thing, however, in his case was
not there—“ a good conscience —and for the sake of that he dissented, and is here.
After this statement it cannot, I think, by any one be considered improper to inves-
tigate the subject of Clerical Conformity to the Church of England. Many ministers
who are said to dissent from it never were in it, and if they had, some of them at
least would not likely have served at its altars. They have grown up in their state of
separation, and may be suspected, when enumerating their grounds of dissent, to be
only doing what is very natural—fortifying the position in which they find themselves,
without suspecting that the accident of birth, or the force and concurrence of early
circumstances, might have made them as eager on the other side. In all churches
there are of very necessity such men—men who are what they are, not from personal
and independent election, not from thought, not because they voluntarily decided
their position, but because their position decided them. Multitudes of men are stand-
ing where they do just and merely because they could not help it; or because considera-
tions decided their choice which they do not like to remember or admit, or which,
it may be, they do not believe. “ The heart,” we are often reminded, “is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked,” and there can be no doubt that those
who are loudest in the proclamation of the malady are often its subjects without being
aware of it. It is still true, however, that many, both in the Church and out of it,
have fairly investigated the ground they occupy—occupy alike from original con-
nections—and are prepared to defend it as sincerely and solidly as if it had been as-
sumed at first from conviction. It is also true that some Churchmen become Dis-
senters, and some Dissenters become Churchmen; they must be supposed to have exa-
mined the matter, and to have acted from reasons which they are ready to avow. And
it is further true that some among the sects have been so placed as to have had every
inducement to take orders—to have had circumstances and influences operating upon
them urging them to enter the ministry of the Establishment, but who, in spite of
them all, have been compelled to conclude that they could not do it. It is this case
that I wish to examine. I wish to realize the position and the feelings of such a
person, and to ascertain, if possible, the why and the wherefore he could not conform.
In doing this let it be understood that I shall describe only an imaginary character;
that is, I shall endeavour to associate with a particular individual of evangelical senti-
ments everything I can think of as likely to induce him to take orders ; I shall put
these things in the strongest way against this coalescing with Dissenters and Dissent;
and I shall then enquire if, in his case, there be not one other thing—just one—of
power enough to compel him to act in an opposite manner to that which he would
willingly find reasons to pursue. Ido not know that all that lam going to mention
ever met, in their combined influence, on any one mind, and therefore I call the cha-
racter imaginary ; but that each of the particulars does affect, more or less, separate
persons, will be generally admitted ; and hence it must be remembered that what fancy
combines fact furnishes, and therefore that the supposed case in its several parts is a
living reality.
1. Let us suppose, then, in the first place, that our anxious enquirer has no objec-
tion to the principle of Establishments. Let us imagine that he could express him-
self honestly in such terms as these Every man ought to rise into life with an
4


impression in favour of all the institutions of that nation into which he is born ; at-
tachment to them should be of the nature of a prejudice ; he should take for granted
their perfect propriety until he discovers ivhat forces him to doubt it. lam an English-
man, and as such have imbibed from my birth a respect and reverence for the institu-
tions of my country. They embody the wisdom of past ages. They have received
the sanction of successive generations. Genius and Virtue have alike and often
spoken in their praise. lam not forbidden to investigate their claims nor to admit
the possibility of lofty intellects and holy men having consecrated an error; and,
misled by the prejudices or blinded by the ignorance of their times, being seduced into
the admiration of political blunders and ecclesiastical mistakes ; still, I do feel that it
is not becoming hastily to conclude that this has been the case. Modesty certainly
would seem to forbid it. lam bound, I think, as a Christian Englishman, as my first
duty, to be a member of the Established Church, unless there be weighty reasons
against that would render dissent a duty and conformity a sin. In the
mere principle of an Establishment I see no such reasons. Such an institution
having been common to almost all nations would seem to have in it something
congenial to the elements of our nature—to the reason and the judgment, the wants
and the sympathies, of social man. Such an institution having been sanctioned
by God, it would seem to be impossible that, abstractedly considered, its principle can
have anything of evil in itself; and as the maintenance of an Establishment is the
only way by which a nation, as such, can unequivocally express its reverence for
religion, and as it would seem to be admirably adapted for preserving the unity and
uniformity of the Church, if so constituted as to be sufficiently comprehensive and
catholic, I do not see that the principle of the institution should prevent my adherence
—I rather feel it to attract than repel.”
2. In the second place, let us imagine that the individual before us is alive and awake
to all the secondary, secular advantages of adherence to the Establishment, and
especially to those which attach to clergymen. “ The Church,” he may say, “as a
national institution, has its national endowments. Its ministers are a recognised body
in the State. They acquire by their office an admitted and respectable standing in so-
ciety. Some of them are on a level with nobles and princes. Many are themselves
persons of distinction. All are admissible into any circle, and are qualified for this, or
in general are qualified, by the education they receive and the habits they cultivate.
Why should I renounce what all this involves ? When I ascend the summit of one of
our cathedrals and survey its vast and valuable domain, this, I reflect, and all similar
property, belongs to the public of which lam a part; it belongs to it as a means to be
employed for its advantage; it belongs, for positive and pecuniary benefit, to that
class which is devoted to the securing for it the advantage in question. Of that class
I may be one. That class my children may enter. Doing so, I, or they, may honour-
ably possess, for our natural lives, a portion of that which, as belonging to the
public, is already our patrimony. We may rise to the level of those favourites of
fortune who are separated from the masses of common humanity by the circumstance
of birth; distinctions drawn by the very hand of nature may be annihilated or passed ;
or if not (for such superiority can fall to few), lesser dignities and more limited por-
tions of the general stock of property and rank may become ours ; they are open to
competition ; they may be won by us as well as by others, and may be as honourably
attained as they may be openly enjoyed. Or if this even should not be, still, last and
lowest in the scale, simply as a clergyman , I shall possess a certain status in society.
I shall have access to circles from which, as a Dissenter, I should be for ever excluded.
I shall mingle naturally with the aristocratic and the educated—the classes and the
characters who are distinguished by habits of cultivation and refinement. Members of
the other recognised professions will recognise me; and, in that which will be my
own, I shall meet with many illustrious by talents, eminent for virtue, of varied
information, of solid learning, of high connections, of opulent fortune, I shall move
among the people clothed with a recognised legal authority ; I may visit in my offi -
cial or professional character; but I shall neither be supposed nor expected to be
familiar with the vulgar and the illiterate, the low and the ill-bred ; nor shall I be con-
fined for friends and associates to respectable shopkeepers, second-class merchants,
or to a body of ministers—pious, excellent, worthy on the whole —but including many
who never have been, and never can be, companions for gentlemen. Why should I sacri-
fice advantages like these ? I see their force ; I feel their attraction ; I cannot but be
alive and awake to their importance. If this be wrong, lam wrong, I fear, in com-
mon with all the world—wrong with many in the sects themselves who are eloquent
and indignant at secular inducements having any influence in the sacred profession.


Even in an Establishment, when plain and poor, the ministry is contemptible; none
of the higher classes, and few of those born to riches and refinement, dream of adopt-
ing it. And as to the sects, the families whose circumstances confer upon their
children education and wealth, seldom, if ever, furnish a minister—so that while they
avoid the ministry because it presents to them no secular inducements, they abandon
it to a class to whom it does! Why should Ibe ashamed of what everybody
feels?”
3. In the third place, let us suppose that the individual in question has not only
no objection to Episcopacy, to uniform rites, clerical habits, and liturgical forms,
but that he positively prefers them all—prefers them from reason, from association,
and from taste. Let us imagine that he considers Episcopal government as not only
the natural result of the common-sense principles of subordination and superinten-
dency, which reason requires for the combined and harmonious action of numbers, but
that it has for its essence, if not for its modem accidents and attributes, the pre-
sumed sanction of apostolic appointment and the admitted practice of the primitive
Church. Let us suppose that he thinks the principle of the system, simply considered
as such, receives the homage of presbyteries and conferences, of boards and unions,
and missionary societies. Let us suppose that he sees nothing in gowns and scarfs
but the becoming symbols of academic honour—nothing in the surplice —nothing
in the varied robes of dignified priests and mitred prelates—in purple, scarlet, linen,
and lawn —nothing but what is decent and decorous, appropriate to the sober and
subdued splendour of a Protestant church, and at least not inconsistent with “the sim-
plicity of Christ.” Let us suppose that, with the perfect consciousness of possessing
the ability for extemporary devotion, and with the calm hope that he could conduct it
himself in sincerity and faith, he yet shrinks from the awful and perilous thing —from
an engagement which he conceives to be difficult and oppressive just in proportion
as the mind is awake to what is to be done, and the heart fitted for doing it aright.
Let us suppose that with such feelings, and as a really spiritual and devout man, he
finds a rest and a refuge for his soul as a worshipper, in the employment in public of
liturgical forms. And let us still further imagine here that his tastes and preferences
are mostly met by the prayers and collects of the Established Church; that their
language, at once simple and dignified—-in general calm, but at times rising into the
earnest and impassioned ; their brevity, as separate exercises of devotion; their
variety and comprehensiveness, considered as a whole; their allotment to the people
of much that is vocal and active in the service—let us suppose that all this draws
and attracts him towards the Establishment. Nor let him be insensible to the thrilling
thought that, in her worship, his lips utter the identical supplications, breathe his wants
in the very words, glorify God in the same high and hallowed hymns, that were heard
in the services of the ancient Church, or have swelled for centuries in the sacred
edifices where they echo still. Nor let him be indifferent to the architecture and ac-
cidents of these edifices themselves; let habits and associations sanctify, as it were,
their arches and pillars, their religious light, their grave aspect. Let him have learnt
to admire the massiveness of some, of some the simplicity, of others the richness,
of all the effect. Let him approve also and enjoy the artificial accompaniment to
the human voice, which peals from the noblest of all instruments, filling the temple
with the tide of sound, and filling the heart with the tide of emotion. Let all this,
and all that is of a kind with this, be supposed and admitted; let the individual in
question be so deeply affected by, and so feelingly alive to it, as almost to imagine
that to divest religion and religious worship of such accessories would be like stripping
nature of her robes and coronet—of the colours of earth and the stars of heaven.
4. In the last place, let us suppose that the person we describe has no repugnance to
the mere circumstance of subscription to a creed; that the principle of requiring a solemn,
deliberate, public pledge of their adherence to “ a form of sound words,” from the
candidates for office in a particular church, has his entire concurrence; and thence he
has, and can have, no quarrel with the Establishment, on the ground, abstractedly, of
its requiring his assent to articles of faith of human composition. On this matter
let us imagine that he might be tempted to express himself with freedom and
warmth, and towards some individuals in ridicule or resentment. “ I hold very
cheap,” we will suppose him to say, “ I hold very cheap a great deal of the modem
eloquent declamation upon this subject. * The Bible, and the Bible only,’ whatever
may be pretended, is not the religion of Protestants in fact; it is not the religion of
either Churchmen or Sectaries, or at least of the Church or the Sects as such. Each,
whatever it may say, provides for the preservation, propagation, and defence, not of
the Bible, but of its own view of it. It is for this that it builds its edifices, admits
6


its ministers, and devotes its property ; and not for the purpose of simply acting, or of
continuing to act, on the ‘ exclusive authority of Holy Scripture’ —‘ the right and
duty of private judgment ’ —‘the privilege and obligation of a Church of Christ, in-
dependently and always, to consult nothing but the Lord’s will.’ They compel them-
selves, and they do their best to compel others, to consult something else. The
very Sects—advocate as they may ‘ liberty of conscience,’ * freedom from restraint in
religious things,’ ‘ security from imposition of creeds and catechisms’ —as soon as ever
they realize tangible property, they immediately betray—by their trust-deeds —that they
do not mean either that their successors shall go further than they, or that they in
future shall surpass themselves. They bind themselves by a penalty to enquire no
more. They legally unite and attach together certain property and certain opinions ;
they make the qualification for holding the one the profession of parties that they
hold the other; and they constitute the secular tribunals of the nation the protec-
tors and guardians of the true faith. If I enter the Church I must profess a creed,
and myself and my people can never depart from it, except at the expense of our build-
ing and endowments, and the loss of caste in that particular community ; and if 1
enter a Sect the principle is the same, though the things in jeopardy are of leps
value. The Bible only is not trusted. Go where I may I shall find myself in
precisely the same circumstances. The little church, Independent or Baptist, in
the village conventicle, can no more alter its creed and keep its possessions without the
sanction of an Act of Parliament, than can that Church whose highest ministers
mingle and act in Parliament itself. Each alike does it at its peril. Ido not object
to this. Inconsistent as it may be with the professed principles of certain individuals
of both parties, it is not so with mine, I consider the Church to be the keeper of the
Scriptures, and the living witness of what they contain. She is bound to exact from
her ministers and adherents the full recognition of Gospel truth, of so much at least
as is essential and saving ; and every Church , however mean, ignorant, or obscure,
acts for itself upon this principle. On the right and on the left I shall be required
to recognise it. lam willing to do so. I cannot but feel, however, that I would
rather, if I could, do so in connection with an august body, that has something about
it to inspire respect, something even to produce awe—a fair right, if any Protestant
community has a right, to claim, as a lody , a real connection with apostolic times,
and a direct descent from apostolic men—l would rather recognise the truths of the
Gospel on my admission to orders in such a Church, than in taking my ministerial
standing in a sect whose credenda as to truth may be as ‘weighty,’ but whose
‘ bodily presence’ in comparison is ‘ contemptible.’ ”
Time, I find, would fail me to introduce everything I once intended, to ex-
hibit the variety and strength of inducement which may attract an individual towards
the Establishment. Enough, however, has probably been said to make it obvious
that what would keep out of it such a person as has hitherto been described, must
be something of extraordinary power of resistance. It will bo our next business to
discover, if possible, this something.
If so many of the Dissenting reasons for Nonconformity are unfelt by our
supposed type of clerical solicitude, his Nonconformity, if he ultimately declares for
it, must be forced upon him from other points. As he is not repelled by the mere
act of Conformity, we must examine if there be anything to repel him in the terms.
Whatever may be the terms of lay-churchmanship —whether, in practice, there _be
any or none—the terms of ministerial conformity are known, and a solemn profession
of their acceptance exacted. We shall proceed to show what these terms are, and
consider briefly what they involve.
Every individual who takes orders in the Established Church, or who, as a
clergyman, enters at any time on a benefice, is required to sign the three articles of
the 36th Canon; that entire canon is as follows : —■ _ ...
“No person shall hereafter be received into the Ministry, nor either by institution
or collation admitted to any Ecclesiastical Living, nor suffered to preach, to cate-
chise, or to be a Lecturer or Reader of Divinity in either University, or in any
Cathedral or Collegiate Church, City or Market-town, Parish-church, Chapel, or m
any other place within this realm, except he be licensed either by the Archbishop, or
by the Bishop of the diocese, where he is to be placed, under their hands and seals,
or by one of the two Universities, under their seal likewise; and except he shall first
subscribe to these three Articles following, in such manner and sort as we have here
appointed.


“I. That the King’s Majesty, under God, is the only supreme Governor of this
realm, and of all other his Highness’s dominions and countries, as well in all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal, and that no foreign prince, person,
prelate, state, or potentate hath, or ought to have, any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within his Majesty’s said realms
dominions, and countries.
“H. That the Book of Common Prayer, and of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, containeth in it nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may
lawfully he so used ; and that he himself will use the form in the said Book prescribed,
in Public Prayer, and in administration of the Sacraments, and none other.
“ 111. That he alloweth the Book of Articles of Religion agreed upon by the Arch-
bishops and Bishops of both provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation
holden at London in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred sixty and
two; and tjiat he acknowledged all and every the Articles therein contained, being in
number nine and thirty, besides the Ratification, to be agreeable to the Word of God.
“ To these three Articles whosoever shall subscribe, he shall, for the avoiding of all
ambiguities, subscribe in this order and form of words, setting down both his Christian
and Surname, viz. 7, N. N. do willingly and ex animo subscribe to these three Articles
above mentioned , and to all things that are contained in them. And if any Bishop
shall ordain, admit, or license any, as is aforesaid, except he first have subscribed in
manner and form as here we have appointed, he shall be suspended from giving of
orders and licences to preach, for the space of twelve months. But if either of the
Universities shall offend therein, we leave them to the danger of the law, and his
Majesty’s censure.”
Upon this we remark, that the prescribed and enforced form of subscription is, you
will observe, singularly distinct, unequivocal, and solemn. One “ order and form of
words” are to be used by the subscriber, and no other. He is to set down at length
his Christian and Surname, and to declare that willingly, and ex animo —that is,
sincerely—with all his heart—from his very soul—“ he subscribes to the three Articles
of the Canon, and to all things that are contained in them.'” And it is further to be
observed, that this precise form is so scrupulously exacted, for the very purpose, it is
said, of “ avoiding all ambiguities.” As the subscription is that of a minister
of religion, in the act of qualifying for his sacred duties, imposed upon him
by spiritual authority, with a view to the preservation of the Church of God from
erroneous doctrine—we may fairly consider the entire procedure as partaking of the
nature of a religious solemnity, and the language as equivalent to the apostolical
appcaJ, “ I call God for a record upon my soul,”
Among the things subscribed in these Articles are the three following :—That
the king is supreme in spiritual or ecclesiastical things :—That nothing—no one thing
—in the Book of Common Prayer, and of ordering (that is of ordaining) Bishops
Priests, and Deacons, is contrary to the Word of God ;—and that all and everv of the
thirty-nine Articles are agreeable to the Word of God.
( The manner in which these Articles are enforced by the person recognised in the
Canon as the supreme governor of the Church ; and the way in which he wills them
to be interpreted, may be seen by the following “ declaration,” by which they are pre-
ceded, when received, as it were, by the clerical subscriber, from the royal hand.
“ Being by God’s Ordinance, according to Our just Title, Defender of the Faith,
and supreme Governour of the Church , within these Our dominions , We hold it most
agreeable to this Our Kingly Office, and Our own religious zeal, to conserve and main-
tain the Church committed to Our charge, in unity of true religion, and in the bond
of peace ; and not to suffer unnecessary disputations, altercations, or questions to be
raised, which may nourish faction both in the Church and Commonwealth. We have
therefore, upon mature deliberation, and with the advice of so many of Our Bishops
as might conveniently be called together, thought fit to make this Declaration fol-
lowing:—
That the Articles of the Church of England (which have been allowed and
authorized heretofore, and which Our Clergy generally have subscribed unto) do con-
tain the true doctrine of the Church of England agreeable to God’s Word • which We
do therefore ratify and confirm requiring all Our loving subjects to continue in the
urn 01 m profession thereof, and prohibiting the least difference from the said Articles;
which to that end We command to be new printed, and this Our declaration to be
published therewith.
“That we are Supreme Governour of the Church of England ; and that if any dif-
ference arise about the external policy, concerning the Injunctions, Canons, and other


Constitutions whatsoever thereto belonging, the Clergy in their Convocation is to
order and settle them, having first obtained leave under our broad seal so to do : and
We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions; providing that none be made
contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land.
“ That out of Our princely care that the Churchmen may do the work which is
proper unto them, the Bishops and Clergy, from time to time in Convocation, upon
their humble desire, shall have Licence under Our broad seal to deliberate of, and to
do all such things, as, being made plain by them, and assented unto by Us, shall con-
cern the settled continuance of the doctrine and discipline of the Church of England,
now established ; from which We will not endure any varying or departing in the least
degree.
“ That for the present, though some differences have been ill raised, yet We take
comfort in this, that all Clergymen within Our realm have always most willingly sub-
scribed to the Articles established ; which is an argument to us that they all agree in
the true, usual, literal meaning of the said Articles ; and that even in those curious
points, in which the present differences he, men of all sorts take the Articles of the
Church of England to be for them ; which is an argument again that none of them
intend any desertion of the Articles established.
“ That therefore in these both curious and unhappy differences, which have for so
many hundred years, in different times and places, exercised the Church of Christ,
We will, that all further curious search be laid aside, and these disputes shut up in
God’s promises, as they be generally set forth to us in the Holy Scriptures, and the
general meaning of the Articles of the Church of England according to them. And
that no man hereafter shall either print , or preachy to draw the Article aside any way ,
hut shall submit to it in the plain and full meaning thereof; and shall not put his own
sense or comment to he the meaning of the Article , hut shall take it in the literal and
grammatical seme.
“ That if any publick Reader in either of Our Universities, or any Head or Master
of a College, or any other person respectively in either of them, shall affix any new
sense to any Article, or shall publickly read, determine, or hold any publick dispu-
tation, or suffer any such to be held either way, in either the Universities or Colleges
respectively; or if any Divine in the Universities shall preach or print any thing
either way, other than is already established in Convocation with Our royal assent;
he, or they the Offenders, shall be liable to Our displeasure, and the Church’s censure
in Our commission Ecclesiastical, as well as any other: And We will see there shall
be due execution upon them.”
I quote this entire, for though printed in the Prayer Book, it is seldom read ; and
it ought to be read in order to understand what clergymen subscribe to in admitting
the king’s spiritual supremacy. To us, and others who have not subscribed to any
such thing, the whole of the above is simply ridiculous. To a clergyman, however, it
is another matter. He has distinctly and solemnly, and in the presence of God,
recognised the right of the king’s majesty to speak to him thus. He has no alterna-
tive but to listen and obey. The only thing, however, that we wish to remark in the
document is this, that it strictly enjoins the following manner of interpreting the
Articles :—“ No man hereafter shall either print, or preach, to draw the Articles aside
any way, but shall submit to it in the plain and full meaning thereof; and shall not
put his own sense or comment to be the meaning of the Article, but shall take it in
the literal and grammatical sense.”
The Articles, then, admitted in the act of subscription to be all true, are here ex-
plained to be admitted as true , in their “ plain, literal, and grammatical sense." In a
similar manner, the same authority submitted to as supreme by the clerical subscriber,
enjoins on him the reception of all the canons. The following are his words printed
at the end of them. We may just intimate that they amount in all to One Hundred
and Eorty-one.
“We of our princely inclination and royal care for the maintenance of the present
state and government of the Church of England, by the laws of this our Realm now
settled and established, having diligently, with great contentment and comfort, read
and considered of all these their said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions,
agreed upon, as is before expressed ; and finding the same such as we are persuaded
will be very profitable, not only to our Clergy, but to the whole Church ot this our
Kingdom, and to all the true Members of it, if they be well observed ; have therefore
for us, our Heirs , and lawful Successors, of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and
mere motion given, and by these presents do give our royal assent, according to the
form of the said Statute or Act of Parliament aforesaid, to all and every of the said


Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and to all and every thing in them
contained, as they are before written.
“ And furthermore, we do not only by our said Prerogative Royal, and supreme
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish, by these our Letters
Patent, the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and all and every thing in
them contained,as is aforesaid; but do likewise propound, publish, and straightway enjoin
and command by our said Authority, and by these our Letters Patent, the same to be
diligently observed, executed and equally kept by all our loving Subjects, of this our
Kingdom, both within the Provinces of Canterbury and York, in all points wherein
they do or may concern every or any of them, according to this our will and pleasure
hereby signified and expressed ; and that likewise, for the better observation of them,
every Minister, by what name or title soever he be called, shall in the Parish-church
or Chapel, where he hath charge, read all the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances,
and Constitutions, once every year, upon some Sundays or Holy-days, in the After-
noon, before Divine Service, dividing the same in such sort, as that the one half may
be read one day, and the other another day; the Book of the said Canons to be
provided at the charge of the Parish, betwixt this and the Least of the Nativity of our
Lord God next ensuing; straightly charging and commanding all Archbishops,
Bishops, and all other that exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm,
every man in his place, to see, and procure (so much as in them lieth) all and every
of the same Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, to be in all points duly
observed; not sparing to execute the penalties in them severally mentioned, upon any
that shall wittingly or wilfully break or neglect to observe the same, as they tender the
honour of God, the peace of the Church, the tranquillity of the Kingdom, and their
duties and service to us their King and Sovereign.”
It would thus seem that the terms and conditions of clerical conformity in the
Church of England are these: —Eibst, the admission of the Canons, as containing the
law of Ecclesiastical obedience, —as expressive, moreover, of certain points of Eccle-
siastical opinion,— and illustrative of the spirit of the Church as a Church, Second,
the admission of the Articles, every one of them, in their “ grammatical sense,” as
being “ agreeable to the word of God,” and constituting the standard of religious
belief. Third, the admission of the Prayer Book, every part of it, its liturgy and
offices ; and, the admission of the several forms of ordination and consecration, as con-
taining in them “ nothing contrary to the word of God,” and accepted as the exclu-
sive rule for the performance of all public, clerical duty.
If I have not misinterpreted the terms of conformity (and if I have, I have done it
by mistake, it has not been an intentional misrepresentation,) —if I have not misin-
terpreted the terms of conformity, I frankly confess, that they appear to me perfectly
terrible. Time would fail me to illustrate their character at length. It is not my
purpose to attempt this. I intend to pass over a multitude of things, which might
fairly be specified, and to fix attention—the attention of the serious, the evangelical,
and the conscientious—on only three or four at the most. In passing, however, per-
mit me to remark, it is thought by some, that the terms include what is self-contra-
dictory, and involve particulars, the whole of which, no individual, nor class of indi-
viduals, in the clerical body, either do or can believe. All in the Prayer Book—all in
the Articles—all in the Canons—are implicitly received, if our interpretation be right.
Now, the Articles involve the approbation of the Homilies, and sanction the public
reading of the Apocrypha. But the Homilies stigmatize Rome as Antichrist, as “ a
withered, old, filthy, harlotwhile many clergymen admire it as a true and Apostolic
Church, and lament that it will not recognise theirs! The Apocrypha, again, is by
others regarded as replete with imposture, absurdity, and lies ; but they subscribe to
its being read —I quote the words—“for example of life, and instruction of manners!”
One article, according to the “ plain, grammatical sense,” asserts that Christ descended
to Hell; another states that birth-sin, or what every child brings with him into the
world, deserves, in the child, “ God’s wrath and damnation.” I inquire not at present
whether these things are true, but it is true, that there are many of the clergy that
believe neither believe, that is, in the “ plain, grammatical sense of the words.” As
to election, the Calvinistic, the Arminian, or the Primitive idea, can none of them, as
it seems to me, be consistently held in connection with all that the subscriber admits.
The Calvinist surely has the seventeenth article, but the “ offices” continually subvert
his creed. The Arminian may rejoice in the tenor of the Prayer Book, but the seven-
teenth article confutes him. The man who believes differently from both, may cherish
the term as it occurs in the catechism, but he will find it difficult to make everything
else harmonize with that. If subscription be attempted to be got rid of altogether, as


if it bound to nothing but the Bible, because one of the articles recognises the Scrip-
tures, and limits the authority of the Church, admitting plainly that it has no power
to enforce what cannot be proved by them—this will stand the parties in no stead, for
they have solemnly signed their names to the declaration that all that the Church
enforces is scriptural.
It is not, however, my intention to rest anything on the foregoing matters; and
hence, if none of them strike you as very forcible, you are welcome to suffer them to
go for nothing. I introduce again our clerical inquirer, and request you to notice the
points which particularly affect his mind. We must remind you, that we conceive of
him as a pious, Evangelical Christian; catholic in spirit; loving whosoever loves
Christ 5 regarding the cross as “ God’s great ordinance for saving the world ’ expect-
ing nothing but from the Atoning Sacrifice and the Sanctifying Spirit; confiding in
the divine virtue of the first, whoever exhibits it; and believing that by the second,
through the word of truth, men are born again. We conceive of him, moreover, as
a plain Protestant , rejecting alike sacerdotal pretensions, and the supposed power,
whether magic or mechanism, asserted by some to reside in the sacraments. This
man we bring before you, as anxious, if possible, to take orders ; as attached to the
ministry in the Established Church, by his wishes and tastes, his habits and predilec-
tions ; and as urged to conformity by influences from others, the persuasion of friends,
and the promise of preferment; and we ask, if there be any thing that offers resist-
ance to this pressure alike from without and from within ?
We shall see.
In order to see it, we proceed to suppose, that our inquirer sets himself to study
the entire whole of what he will be required to assent to and believe, to say, and do :
—the Articles and Liturgy, the Clerical Offices, the Books of Ordination, Homilies,
Canons, Apocrypha, and all. He reads, digests, selects, compares. Confused at first
by the multiplicity of matters—the mysterious, the questionable, the opposite, the
obscure —he presses on, and still presses, attempting to arrange the immense mass
into something like shape, consistency, order. Wearied and exhausted by the pro-
longed effort, he at last fixes on two or three points, and interrogates his conscience
on the propriety of admitting them. The inquiry concentrates on these specific par-
ticulars, and the questions are virtually reduced to one. He has simply to ask himself,
as a plain, honest, truth-loving man, whether he can, with a good conscience, act
towards men as he will have to act, and say to God what is appointed him to say ?
We suppose him in the first place to open the “ Constitutions and Canons Eccle-
siastical,” and to take from the second to the twelfth inclusive, and to place them
beneath his eye, as we do here, and to “ read, mark, learn, digest them.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the King’s Majesty hath not the same
authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had amongst the Jews and
Christian Emperors of the primitive Church ; or impeach any part of his regal supre-
macy in the said causes restored to the Crown, and by the laws of this realm therein
established; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the
Archbishop, after his repentance, and public revocation of those his wicked errors.”
“Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Church of England by law established
under the King’s Majesty, is not a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and main-
taining the doctrine of the Apostles ; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not
restored, but only by the Archbishop, after his repentance, and public revocation of
this his wicked error.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the form of God’s worship in the Church
of England, established by law, and contained in the Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful worship of
God, or containeth any thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures ; let him be
excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but by the Bishop of the place, or Arch-
bishop, after his repentance, and public revocation of such his wicked errors.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That any of the nine-and-thirty Articles, agreed
upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both provinces, and the whole Clergy, in a
Convocation holden at London, in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hun-
dred sixty-two, for avoiding diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of con-
sent touching true Religion, are in any part superstitious or erroneous, or such as he
may not with a good conscience subscribe unto; let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not restored, but only by the Archbishop, after his repentance, and public revoca-
tion of such his wicked errors.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church


of England by law established are wicked, antichristian, or superstitious, or such as,
being commanded by lawful authority, men, who are zealously and godly affected,
may not with good conscience approve them, use them, or, as occasion requireth, sub-
scribe unto them ; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored until he
repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.”'
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the
rest that bear office in the same, is antichristian, ani repugnant to the W ord of God ;
let him be excommunicated ipso facto , and so continue until he repent, and publicly
revoke such his wicked errors.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach, That the form and manner of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, containcth anything in it that is repugnant
to the Word of God, or that they who are made Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, in that
form, are not lawfully made, nor ought to be accounted, either by themselves or others,
to be truly either Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, until they have some other calling to
those divine offices ; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, not to be restored until he
repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints, as
it is approved by the Apostles’ Rules, in the Church of England, and combine them-
selves together in a new brotherhood, accounting the Christians, who are conformable
to the doctrine, government, rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, to be
profane, and unmeet for them to join with in Christian profession ; let them be ex-
communicated ipso facto , and not restored but by the Archbishop, after their re-
pentance, and public revocation of such their wicked errors,”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That such Ministers as refuse to subscribe to
the form and manner of God’s worship in the Church of England, prescribed in the
Communion Book, and their adherents, may truly take unto them the name of another
Church not established by law, and dare presume to publish it. That this their pre-
tended Church hath of long time groaned under the burden of certain grievances imposed
upon it, and upon the members thereof before mentioned, by the Church of England, and
the Orders and Constitutions therein by law established, let them be excommunicated,
and not restored until they repent, and publicly revoke such their wicked errors.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, That there are within this realm
other meetings, assemblies, or congregations of the King’s born subjects, than such as
by the laws of this land are held and allowed, which may rightly challenge to them-
selves the name of true and lawful Churches; let him be excommunicated, and not
restored, but by the Archbishop, after his repentance, and public revocation of such
his wicked errors.”
“ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That it is lawful for any sort of Ministers or
Lay-persons, or of either of them, to join together, and make rules, orders, or con-
stitutions, in Causes Ecclesiastical, without the King’s authority, and shall submit
themselves to be ruled and governed by them ; let them be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not be restored until they repent, and publicly revoke those their wicked and
Anabaptistical errors.”
Perusing and re-perusing the above Canons, we suppose our inquirer to be shocked
and staggered by their sweeping anathemas. One after another utters its report,
frightening with its thunders the charitable affections. Loaded as they are with “ ex-
communications,” they seem intended to inflict capital punishment—for excommuni-
cation is the highest form in which the spiritual displeasure of the Church can be
expressed. Who then are the delinquents at whom the terrible contents of these pieces
are discharged ? Who are the persons whose exposure to such punishment our inquirer ,
if he subscribe, must in theory approve? These delinquents, it would appear, are just
all the inhabitants of the entire realm, except those who are prepared to approve every
jot and tittle of the English Establishment!—lf any part of the king’s supremacy is
impeached; if any thing in the Prayer Book is by any affirmed to be repugnant to
the Scriptures ; —it any of the Articles is in any part said to be “ erroneous —if the
church is denied to be true and apostolical;—if Episcopacy or Prelacy be represented
as repugnant to the word of God; —if any individuals say that they belong to other
churches ; whether these churches are ancient or modern ; whether they be that from
which the English reformed, or those which profess to have reformed from it: in all
these cases, criminality is assumed and punishment provided ; for every offender there
is the same, or nearly the same sentence—a sentence direct, brief, bloody—“ cut him
asunder. I speak in a figure. The sword of the spirit—a thing never to be trifled
with, never to be flourished in bravado or sport—the sword of the spirit is drawn


from the scabbard; it glitters under the frowns and flashes of the countenance, the
angry countenance of Holy Church ; and falls (or threatens it) on the hapless denier
of any of her claims—the adherents of her own ancient faith —or the consistent ad-
vocates of an appeal to Scripture—a principle she professes to have taught them her-
self. If these Canons are right, it is not only true, as we are taught from Oxford,
and consistently taught, that the Episcopal body is the “ only body in this realm that
is a churchthat the Church of Scotland, and other Presbyterians, and all the sects,
are not Churches, their ministers not ministers, their sacramentr not sacraments ;
but it is also true, which Oxford, I believe, teaches not, that the Romanist community
is alike destitute of any just claims to the honours of churchhood.
Without stopping to explore at present “ the searchings of heart” which this first
prospect produces on our enquirer, we suppose him to advance, and we advance with
him, and observe him as he turns his eye upon another. Having seen something of
the exclusive spirit of the Church as a whole, we now imagine him to contract his
survey, and to limit his attention to the official claims and character of its clergy. If
he subscribes, he is to acknowledge as scriptural “ every thing in the Book of Com-
mon Prayer, and of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacms.” On examining
these, in relation to the one thing now before us, he finds he is to be made and con-
stituted a Priest by the following form uttered by the Bishop : —“ Receive the Holy
Ghost for the office and work of a Priest in the Church of God, now committed unto
thee by the imposition of our hands. Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven;
and whose sins thou dost retain , they are retained ,” &c. In consistency with this he
finds the following words standing in the Prayer Book, in the Visitation of the Sick,
for himself to use, under certain circumstances. Addressing the sick man, he would
be required to say, “ Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to
absolve all sinners who truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee
thine offences : and by his authority committed to me, I absolvt thee from all thy sins,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.” If,
like the Articles, it is willed by her Majesty that no man “ shill put his own sense or
comment to the meaning” of the form of absolution, but shall take it in the “ plain,
literal, and grammatical sense,” then it will be impossible to deny that a peculiar and
awful official prerogative is claimed to be possessed and exercised here. All doubt on
our inquirer’s mind, as to the absolution being officially authoritative, or merely declara-
tory of an evangelical truth, having nothing to do with mystic cr mischievous sacerdotal
pretensions,—all doubt on this matter would appear to vanish before the following
facts. In making a Deacon, he observes, the Bishop does not confer the Holy Ghost;
that is reserved to qualify for the mysteries of the priestly function; the consequence
is, that a Deacon, when he reads the regular Liturgical service of the Church, must
omit the form of absolution, which occurs both in the morning and evening prayer ;
he has not received power to pronounce to the people “ the absolution and remission
of their sins ;” he may, however, pray for it; and, therefore, many, while they remain
in Deacon’s orders, instead of the omitted absolution, which is put in a form to be
authoritatively uttered to, or over, the people, read the following prayer for the same
blessing, which occurs in the service for Ash Wednesday, and which itself,
ot course, humbly and directly to God :—“ O Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear
our prayers, and spare all those who confess their sins unto thee, that they whose con-
sciences by sin are accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ
our Lord. Amen,” The fact is, the rationale, or philosophy, so to speal, of the
public absolution, and of the place where it occurs in the service, is said to be this : —■
As men under sin, and of course under the divine displeasure, cannot worihily ap-
proach to worship, unless cleansed from their disqualification ; this is to be secured
by the union of the people’s personal and the Priest’s official act; the penitence of
the one, and the pronunciation of their remission by the other. This done, they can
“ enter with boldness into the Holy place,” and join in the presentation of 41 spiritual
sacrifices,” which may now be offered, and will now be acceptable.
Again we pass on, having simply ascertained what it is that our inquirer discovers;
—we pass on with him to the last point of observation and remark. Having seen the
spirit of the Church as a church, and the official character it supposes in its ministers,
he now fixes on specific expressions, which, as a minister, he would be required to
employ ;— to employ in solemn addresses to God, in relation to the members of the
Church individually. Examining the office for the baptism of infants, and passing
over the astounding and startling fact, that he would actually, in the course of it,
have to interrogate a babe, and to receive its replies through the lips of adults, who
answer for it; which adults promise what they have no power to perform —and


promise, it may be, to do for the child, or that the child shall do, what they have never
thought of doing for themselves. Passing over these things, our inquirer observes,
that in a direct address to Almighty God, he has positively to assume and affirm as a
fact—assume and affirm in relation to every infant he may ever baptize— what it is utterly
impossible for him to know of any. We take the following prayer from the form for
the private baptism of children, partly because it is shorter than the parallel thanks-
giving in the public form, and partly because, in this case, as there are no questions
ashed by the priest, raid no profession of faith, or repentance, or renouncing of the world,
the flesh, and the devil, made by the babe, or for if through its sponsors, there can be
no ground for assuming the existence of the fact in question, in consequence of its
vicarious confession cf Christ. This is said, in the Catechism, to be the reason why
children are baptize! at all; and there are those who regard it as a ground for
hoping that they enjop that which the rite symbolizes. But in private baptism this
confession is not made, and yet the one is administered and the other affirmed. The
priest, without such h
immediately to expresi
nified :—“We yield ti
thee to regenerate this ;
child by adoption, anc
beseech thee to grant, i
he may be also of his i
inherit thine everlastin
Amen.”
Now the fact assume:
to God, is this —that G[
that the infant has becc
ward relationship to tin
in a connection not recq
is asserted that God hat
asked for in one of thei
would appear to be ra
outward sign; for, previ
diately after, it is affirf
conceivable change has i
the moment before the a
which the article declare
moment after, he is anoi
fonfession, applies to the child the sacred sign, and then has
i himself as follows, respecting its possession of the thing sig-
aee hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it hath pleased
infant with tht Holy Spieit ; to receive him for thine own
c to incorporate him into thy holy church. And we humbly
that as he is now made a partaker of the death of thy Son, so
resurrection : and finally, with the residue of thy saints, he may
ig kingdom, through the same, thy Sou, Jesus Christ, our Lord.
I and affirmed in this language, and affirmed in words spoken
)D has regenerated the child with his Holy Spieit. It is not
me ceremonially regenerate; that, by an outward rite, his out-
outward or visible church is altered, and that he stands to it
gnised before. This our inquirer could understand. But it
regenerated him with the Holy Spieit, or given him, as is
prayers in the public form, “ spiritual regeneration .” This
garded as occurring in connection with the application of the
ious to that, the blessing is spoken of as not possessed; imme-
ned to have descended. In this brief interval, the greatest
taken place in the spiritual condition of an immortal mind;
pplication of the mystic element, the child is in that state in
B that it deserved “ God’s eternal wrath and damnation the
Qier being—has another nature; words waft to God from the
lips of the priest the thrilling thanksgiving—“ he is now made a partaker of the death
of thy Son.” In an instant—in the twinkling of an eye —in like manner as at “ the
last trump,” physical corruption shall be transformed into the likeness of glorified
humanity—with such suddenness, in consequence of the act of an ecclesiastical official
—the “ birth-sin” of a corrupt and carnal mind vanishes away, and it becomes “ the
temple of the Holy Ghost | ”
In consistency with this, it strikes our inquirer that the other parts of the Prayer
Book are constructed. The Catechism puts into the mouth of the child the same
affirmation that at first flowed from the lip of the priest; it tells him, in explaining
the nature of a sacrament, that the “outward sign” is a “ means” of his receiving the
spiritual grace; and in harmony with this, instructs him to sav, that in baptism he
obtained that, by which, from a “ child of wrath” be became “ an inheritor of the
kingdon of heaven.” In like manner, in the order of Confirmation the Bishop himself
reasserts the fact already referred to, and does so, like the Presbyter, in language
directly addressed to God. As if to manifest, moreover, that the regeneration recog-
nised in the baptismal formulary, is spiritual and real, he employs the phrase there
employed, in such a manner, as to show that this is the sense intended : —“Almighty
and ever.asting God, who has vouchsafed to regenerate these thy servants, by water
and the Holy Ghost.” The Holy Ghost here cannot be something different from the
same thing described in the previous ceremony in the same words; it is, however,
something different and additional to regeneration by water; and it is this higher
something that every priest of the English Establishment has to affirm, in a manner
the most solemn, as positively occurring to every infant baptised by his hands, and
occurring to it at, and because of, its baptism.
Such are the things which we suppose to be selected by the individual before us,
and on which he hesitates about proceeding to the priesthood. We shall now draw
our remarks to a conclusion, by putting into the form of reflections, uttered by our in-
14


quirer, some of the thoughts which, in meditating on the above, pass through his soul,
and decide for him the question of Clerical Conformity.
“ These Canons, offices, and acts,” —we suppose him to say —“ these Canons, offices,
and acts, if I conceive of them aright, appear to involve the three following things :
Ecclesiastical exclusiveness — sacerdotal pretensions —and spiritual regeneration as oc-
curring in baptism. My impression is, that, as a clergyman, I must sanction the first
in the act of subscription; realize the second perpetually in myself; and affirm the
third, in so many words—in words directly addressed to God. I may certainly be
mistaken. I may be mistaken as to the meaning of the formularies; or I may be
mistaken in my views of evangelical truth. Eight in my interpretation of the terms
of subscription, and the language of the offices, the terms and the language may be
right too. It may be right to be in spirit as exclusive as the Canons ; it may be right
to pretend to what appears to he claimed by both Presbyter and Prelate ; and it may
be positively true that God in baptism does regenerate by the Holy Ohost. If so, and
if I sincerely, and ‘ from my soul,’ believe all this, I can take orders. If not, what
am I to do ? _
«I do not believe. If I am right in my interpretation of the three things lying
before me, they are wrong. I regard them as unscriptural. I deem them dangerous.
They who think otherwise —and there are many such —can have no difficulties. Their
path is plain. With a ‘ good conscience’ they can call ‘ God for a record upon their
souls,’ that they approve all they assent to in subscription, and believe all thatthey address
to Him. I cannot do this. Still I may be wrong—wrong in my interpretation of the
Canons and offices. The sense of both may be different from what they appear to me
to say; and if so, and if I could be sure of this, then I could subscribe, without feel-
ing that I had either incurred the Divine displeasure, or for ever forfeited my own
respect. But I must be sure of it, I must be free from misgivings. ‘ Whosoever
doubteth is damned if he eat , because he eateth not of faith (of the full and satisfied
persuasion of the mind) : for whatsoever is not of faith (the offspring of such per-
suasion) is sin'
«I wish I could be sure that the real meaning of what at present confronts me, is
altogether different from what it appears. This would effectually smooth my path,
because it would fully satisfy my conscience. I might perhaps be brought to regard
the Canons with little concern. It is said they were never ratified by Parliament. It
is also said, however, that without this, they bear upon and bind the clerical body,
because they received the royal sanction —the sanction and approval of that authority,
which is acknowledged in subscription as supreme by itself in spiritual things. Still,
acts of Parliament may have since passed, and passed of course with the king s con-
currence, which have altered the law in relation to the parties, or in relation to some
of them, whose excommunication was once approved ; and, by such laws, have not
the Canons lost their original rigour ? Perhaps. Yet —I don’t know. This I know,
' that there are cases in which what would be legally wrong would be ecclesiastically
right, as in that of the admission into the pulpits of the Establishment of scotch,
and American Episcopalians.* It may be, therefore, that other things legally right
may be canonically wrong. - !' Parliaments may have enacted what the church dare
* This was written before the alteration of the law which excluded the Scotch and American Episco-
palians from the pulpits of the English Church; a state of.thingsL° f Dr. Hook eomplmned, by
saying, that if a clergyman admitted an American or Scottish brother into his pulpit, he exposed im
self to a civil penalty; and if he did not, he was guilty of schism,
,i. T zs ra s.S r fsrwzs
wished it to sleep in a pm therMlntto ADnbntd, £1 I
wisneci it to sleep in a grave tuey nau iu mo cuuii/uj«iu, ~ . .
request him to perform the service. He said “he could not do it conscientiously ; he dared not to vio-
late his convictions; he did not regard the child as baptized according to the meaning “e Chu .
“ But you know," I said, “ that it has very recently been decided in the Court of Arches that lay bap-
tism is valid, and that you have no legal ground of refusal.” “ I know the decision; but I cannot accept
it: I must decline.” “ You are aware that the consequences of refusal may be very serious. w Yes,, 1
know that; God, I hope, will support me, but I must obey my conscience. Well, my dear bir 1 said,
“ God forbid that we should do anything to hurt any man s conscience, I will bury the child myself,
for I can do it in a way which will entail no evil consequences on either of us. The poor man seemed
greatly relieved. I could not go into the churchyard, to bnry the
mouth on consecrated ground would have exposed me to a prosecution; but I went to the outside of the
rail*, near to which the poor little innocent’s grave happened to be. The weeping taends stood round
it. I prayed and spoke,—addressing words of comfort to the bereaved parents ; and I then explained
to the people who had’gathered about, the reason of the singular spectacle hat attracted
them. I thus saved the clergyman’s conscience, which compelled him to resist the law^t 1 certainly
thought that either such laws should not exist, or that such men faf^jruster
other case was worse than the foregoing. A friend of mine, who had been a most useful minister
15


not acknowledge or accept. But if not—how far have such relaxing enactments pro-
ceeded ? How many have there been P Where are they to be met with ? What is
the extent and limit of the liberty they have conferred upon Churchmen ? After sub-
scribing, could I, or could I not, acknowledge the church-state, the ministry, and
sacraments of the northern Establishment ? If I could legally, because it is an Estab-
lishment—could I canonically, since it is Presbyterian? Could I acknowledge any of
the minor Christian communities ? Durst I believe—or ought Ito profess it, if I did
believe —or could I consistently profess it, if I did so—that Independent, Baptist,
Methodist teachers, are ministers of Christ, or any such society a church of God ?
Whatever might be my private opinion, could I recognise in John Howe, Matthew
Henry, Dr. Watts, Robert Hall, or in any such, living or dead—men really ministers
—having a valid right to preach the Gospel, and dispense the ordinances ? I fear
not. But even if it were not so—even if exclusiveness is not to be professed, and need
not be defended—if my heart be free from the necessity of narrowness, still I must
act on the repudiated principle. My hands, and my feet, and my tongue, must be
bound. As a clergyman, I could have public, ministerial communion in the services
of the church, with none but the members of my own order. Any one of them I
might legally and canonically admit into my pulpit, whatever his character, or what-
ever his creed; all others I must treat as intruders among holy things, though each of
them, in fact, were as pure as a seraph, or as sound as an apostle. Many, I know, do
not feel this. They think it right. They honestly believe all it implies. Presbyterian,
Independent, Methodist ministers, are really accounted by them presumptuous pre-
tenders to the sacred office. Instead, therefore, of wishing to encourage or countenance
an enormity like this, they affirm and think, that Churchmen ought, as a duty, reli-
giously to guard the ‘ great gulf ’ between others and themselves, and to deem it at
once as impassable in itself, and as perfectly agreeable to the will of God, as that
which divided the rich man and Lazarus. Be it so. These men have their opinions, and
they have a right to have them. It becomes me to think that they were perfectly con-
scientious in adopting them at first, and are sincere in professing and adhering to them
still. But these opinions are not mine. I have no sympathy with what I consider
their pretension and intolerance, and I shrink from a station in which I must act as
if I had.
“As to absolution (public and private), Ido not see what can be said. The language
of the bishop in ordaining a priest —the language of the priest to the prostrate peni-
tent—the abstinence of the deacon from a particular part of the public service—and
the abstinence of the bishop from endowing him with a singular and awful gift, and
thus fitting him for fulfilling the function in question—all this can only be accounted
for, as it seems to me, on the principle of admitting sacerdotal pretensions. It may
be urged, indeed, that my life may pass without my ever being required to read the
form of absolution for the dying. But this does not meet my difficulty. The form
in public worship is not only left unaffected by this circumstance; but my subscrip-
tion is to be, not merely to what I may read out of the Prayer Book, but to every jot
and tittle that is in it. Ido not believe in any priestly character as belonging to
the ministers of the Hew Covenant. I reject the idea of official absolution. What is
merely declaratory—a simple statement that God through Christ pardons and absolves
all who repent; why, as a statement, this might be made by any individual; its
power is in its truth, and its truth is independent of the lips that utter it. The abso-
lution of the Church of England is not this. It is something more—something im-
mensely more ; something partaking of a mystic character, and therefore reserved to
be spoken with ‘ authority’ by one who has been qualified by a mystic gift. He that
can believe that it is not this, let him believe it; he may conform, though he thinks
as Ido on the general truth. He who believes that it is this, and that this it ought
to be—he too may conform, because in subscription he would not have to sign what
to him would be a falsehood. But I—l believing that it is this, and that this it
ought not to be —believing that here there is a positive departure in the Book of Man
from the Book of God—what am Itodo ? Am Ito assert, and to subscribe to the
in the town where he had resided some 30 years, died. He had a vault, his own property, in the church-
yard, in which lay two of his children. He, it happened, had been baptized in the Church of England.
The clergyman, however, refused to bury him on the ground that he had been a schismatical Dissenting
teacher; for, though baptized in the Church, and never formally excommunicated, he had, by being a
Dissenting teacher, ipso facto canonically excommunicated himself. Nothing could move the man.
The family had not the means of going to law; nor would they have gone if they had. There was no
general cemetery in the place, or my friend’s family-vault would not have been in the churchyard, nor
would a stranger have been required to bury him. A grave was dug in the chapel in which he had
preached,—in the front of the pulpit,—and there we laid him.


assertion, that there is not the discrepancy which I feel there is ? Am Ito do that ?■
Who will say so ?
“ But may not the words in the Baptismal Service admit of explanation ? Perhaps.
To me, however, at present, they seem to mean just what they say. As a clergyman,
I must assert to God, that every infant, baptized by my hands, has been regenerated
by Him with the Holt Ghost. There is nothing hesitating, hypothetic, or equi-
vocal about it. It is not merely the affirmation of an outward ceremonial change,
but of a real and spiritual operation on the soul. In plain words then— do 1 believe
this ? Can I say it in good faith ? Shall I, or shall I not, in the act of uttering the
thanksgiving before me, possess the consciousness of doing and saying ‘ the thing that is
right ? ’ The use of this form comes to be a matter to be met and settled by common
morality. If the words mean what they say, and a person believes it, he may of
course use them in speaking either to God or man. If the words do not mean what
they say, and another person knows this, and knows what they do mean, and means
that by them and nothing else, he may bring himself to use them too. But he who
believes that they cannot be made, by any fair and equitable means, to utter any thing
else than their obvious sense; he who shrinks from the use of language in divine wor-
ship, which would proceed from his own lips in one sense, and enter the ears of his
auditors in another —in which he would express one thing to God, and convey
another to the minds of mortals ; he Vho, moreover, feeling bound to take the words
in their ‘plain, literal, and grammatical’ meaning, believes that meaning positively to
assert what is either not known, or what is not true; he surely has no alternative but
to decline doing what, with his views, would be at once an act of impiety and hypo-
crisy ; —impiety and hypocrisy committed by a priest;—committed by a priest in the
most solemn circumstances —while actually officiating on the floor of the temple, and
lifting his voice to the Divinity that fills it.
“ Still I may be wrong. I may be under the influence of mistaken views both of
truth and duty. The language of the offices may be capable of being understood in
some other sense from that which appears ; and if so, and if I use it in that sense, I
am not accountable for the false impressions others may receive from it. May it not
be possible, then, to bring myself to believe that this is the case ? After all, may it
not be, that the terms of subscription, however enormous they may appear at first,
are yet easy, or at least tolerable ; and that expressions, which sound contrary to the
known belief of the subscriber, may yet be taken in such a sense, as to justify or
allow his consenting to use them ? This may be. It seems, however, dangerous and
delicate ground. I cannot but think, too, that the effort must be immense, the labour
infinite, to explain, to the entire satisfaction of one’s conscience, the meaning of cer-
tain of the sentences before me. Still it might be done. But why should I doit?
Why should I take such extreme pains, to get my understanding to inform my con.
science, that there is nothing in the terms of clerical conformity, and nothing in the
doings and sayings of the priesthood, at which it need revolt ? Let me put to my
soul a plain question. Should I take all this trouble under other circumstances ?
Should I for a moment think of attempting any such thing, if the terms in question
were proposed to me by a poor and persecuted sect ? If admission to the ministry of
a voluntary conventicle was to be purchased at the price of using the offices of the
English Church, should I in that case, with my views, have any doubt about the mean-
ing of the words, or set myself to find, with huge labour, some principles of mild and
moderating exposition P I don’t know. I have my fears. If I really believed the
scriptural correctness of the Spirit and Pretensions, the Language and Offices, of a
particular community, I hope I should be able to conform or adhere to it, though
obscure, and scattered, and unendowed ; but, doubting, as I do, all this, in respect to
the Establishment, why, under these circumstances, should it occur to me, or to any
man, to bribe his conscience to submit to conformity ? Would we do this, if it were
not, that by entering the church we enter the world ; that society at large opens to
receive us; that natural tastes and preferences are gratified ; that much that would
be mortifying and vulgar is avoided ; and that instead of having to herd with many
whom it will be time enough to know in heaven, we may move forward, in our way
thither, surrounded by the regards and the respectabilities of earth ?
“I am jealous of myself. If I sincerely felt that I could assent to subscription,
without exposing the act to my own suspicions, of course I should subscribe. But I
am tortured with doubt. If I take orders, let me do it considerately, calmly, honestly.
The terms terrify me. The act of subscription must surely be meant to intimate that
the subscriber admits what he signs. I am told not. Whatever it was intended to
signify at first, it now signifies anything or nothing; it binds no one. This is strange


doctrine. To utter it, would seem to calumniate the clergy; but they say it them-
selves b) indisputable facts. Many of them appear to have paid, in subscription, a
price for the privilege of preaching in the church, the opposite of all they acknowledge
at the threshold. Every party into which the clerical body is divided, is chargeable,
it seems, with dissenting from something—from one or other of the many points to
all of which they all subscribed. But is this right ? Is it right to exercise a liberty of
thought and utterance which violates a solemn religious pledge ? Is it right to reduce
such a pledge to a mere formula ?—to make the net of qualifying for the sacred office
as little a reality as a legal fiction ? Are the consequences of this publicly decent ?
Such as, that parties of God’s ministers, brethren by profession, of the same eccle-
siastical stock and lineage, should come forward and charge each other with official
falsehood, or official unfaithfulness ?Is it seemly—is it likely to mend the public morals
—for clergymen to have to memorialize the Heads of the Church, against books and
men, described as the depositaries and disseminators of error—books and men, sanc-
tioned by these Heads of the Church themselves, or sanctioned by some of them ?
The one party or the‘other must be acting in violation of their vows and subscriptions;
or all must have agreed to vow and subscribe, what none amongst them can con-
sistently keep. In either way, the act of subscribing must have taken place without
thought, or against it, or upon the principle of its meaning nothing. —Nothing! ‘to
call God for a record upon one’s soul!’—Can Ido this ? Would it be right ? No :
it never can be right, sanctioned, as it may be, by Cathedrals or Colleges—by bodies
sacred, venerable, august—it never can be right, to trifle with anything of the nature
of an oath, or to reduce to a formula what was meant for a reality. Any man who
sincerely believes what he signs, though he sign the absurdities of Trent itself, is for
that act accountable only to the God he swears to; but he who subscribes what he
disbelieves, and who evinces his disbelief by a life in contradiction to his solemn pro-
fessions —that man is answerable to earth as well as heaven —answerable to Society for
his pestilent example. In proportion to the eminence of the station he holds, and
especially in proportion to its sacred character, is the insult he offers to Public Virtue.
Numbers of such men, devoted by profession to the advancement of this, and exem-
plifying in themselves a perpetual contempt for its very appearance, may, certainly,
impose on the ignorant, puzzle the conscientious, bewilder the simple, stagger and
surprise the manly and the moral, but are not likely to breast and confront the current
of corruption, or ‘ to commend Truth’ and truthfulness to a keen-sighted scoffer.
“ But the sects differ. They differ from each other as much as the clergy differ
among themselves. I know it: and I know also, that in each sect, respectively, the
views of its ministers are so uniform, as to tempt one to ascribe it as much to the
force of opinion within the sect, as to the freedom of inquiry within the men. Still,
this latter is an evil infinitely less than the open contempt of solemn subscriptions.
As for the former, since the different bodies are ostensibly founded on their differences
—stand separate and distinct because of their known and acknowledged disagreement
—this is a thing positively virtuous, in comparison of that of a number of men pro-
fessing to be one, by common subscription to a common creed, and yet existing as
many from oppositions of opinion. If any thing like this existed among the sects—
if the Methodist Conference, a body of ministers who have given their adherence to
one and the same system of faith; if, in spite of this, it was broken into parties, one
charging the other with Popery, and that again denouncing the first as unfaithful;
some being described as violating their articles, and subverting the Gospel; and other
some, as saying at the font what they ascend the pulpit to uns&y ; denying to man
what they affirm to God ; countenancing error in their official formularies, and con-
tending for the truth in their personal capacity—if the Methodist Conference pre-
sented to the public any thing like this, no man would hesitate to pronounce at once
upon its real character —no one would be blind to its openly sanctioning contempt for
principle in public men ; no one would believe that it could admit of defence, or that
any would defend it; all would fear that a class of persons, ostensibly devoted to the
interests of truth, morals, and religion, would, in fact, endanger the interests of each,
by exposing to the remarks of the ungodly and profane, in their own conduct, what
would seem to be either decidedly bad, or at the very best but equivocally virtuous.
“What am Itodo ? I see these things—l feel them. I cannot advance to the act of
subscription, as if it were a thing that meant nothing. Shameless enormities flow
from this. It is both in itself an act of wickedness, and necessarily the parent of
many more. To promise to do what I never purpose doing at all; solemnly
to say before God that I believe, and to bind and pledge myself to his church
to teach, what I neither believe nor intend to inculcate; to reduce subscription to a


mockery and a jest, by reserving the liberty of contradicting after it, what in it I should
recognise us scriptural and true; —this, to me, seems like deliberately entering on pro-
fessional life in a way to render it, from beginning to end, an impudent, acted, living
lie. 4 How can Ido this great wickedness, and sin against God ? ’ I will not do it.
Can I then, with my views, do any thing else? Is there any principle, which will
harmonize with the terms and results of subscription, the feelings of one who regards
as I do, Ecclesiastical exclusiveness , — sacerdotal pretensions, —and the question of
spiritual regeneration in baptism f I fear not. To become a clergyman, I must not
only sacrifice the liberty of acting as I think the Gospel prescribes and prompts-—the
liberty of loving, and of proving that I love, all whom I believe to be 4 men of God,
showing to otters the way of salvation but I must adopt, I think in order to get rid
of expressions that perplex me, such a mode of interpreting language—such special
pleading, wriggling, and reservation —such strange and unsatisfactory admissions, to
find a sense for words, or to evade it—as would not be tolerated in any straightfor-
ward business in ordinary life, or permitted to have a place in the conduct and the
covenanting of worldly men. Such, unhappily, are my present impressions. The
views I take of evangelical truth compel me to come to this conclusion. Others may
not think and feel as I do. Holding sentiments identical with mine, they may be able
to do without scruple, what I shrink from as a positive immorality. I judge them
not. 4 To their own Master they stand or fall' I envy them indeed; for with my
predilections, preferences, and tastes, I would willingly advance where they advance,
and serve at the altar where they serve. I cannot do it. I envy and congratulate
those who can. I envy them at once their opinions and their repose—the views that
permit them to do what they do, and the feelings that enable them to do it, and
live. I felicitate them on their tranquillity—on their calm persuasion that they do
right—their unruffled reflections in the review of their path—their enjoyment of a
blessedness I can never share. 4 Happy is he who condemneth not himself in the
thing that he alloweth.’
44 With my views I should he condemned. Masked or mitigated as subscription
might be, it would often, I fear, rise before me in its true character—cover me with
confusion —fill me with bitterness. Eetaining my sentiments as scriptural and true;
yet admitting as such, and promising to use, and actually using, language apparently
the very reverse —what would this demand ?—to what would it expose me ? I must
sophisticate my understanding. I must fetter my intellect. I must shut ray eyes,
and close my ears, to much that at present seems distinct and loud. I must call
things by their wrong names, and that, too, where mistake may be infinitely hazardous.
I must say to God, in an act of worship, what I should repudiate to man in confi-
dential conversation. Acts like these would be pregnant with painful and punitive
consequences, I should lose, I fear, the love of truth; or the power of pursuing,
acknowledging, maintaining it. 1 should cease, perhaps, to be affected by evidence ;
plain words might come to be lost upon me; if I got over some that are lying here,
I seem to feel that I could get over anything—that there would be no language I
could not pervert, parry, resist, or explain away. With my views, the act of sub-
scription would either indicate the death within me of the moral man, or it would
inflict such a wound that he would soon die—die, I mean, so far as those things are
concerned which must be lost sight of to subscribe at all, and ot those which are to be
done and said after subscribing; or if he lived, and continued to live, I should be
daily obliged to be doing something, which would lacerate, and pain him, and pierce
him to the soul. The very services of religion would be sources of anguish. Prayer
itself would consist, at times, of words which I feel I can never approve, and which,
ever as I uttered them, would renew my misgivings, and disturb my peace. My
nature, in its highest essence, would be injured. My moral sense would be sacrificed
or seduced. I cannot do it. I will not. This, too, would be 4 great wickedness,
and sin against God.’ It would be sin against myself, I never will consent to pay
such a price for the advantages which clerical conformity can confer. I see them all.
I feel their attraction. Principle as to some —preference as to others —taste, habit,
assocafcion as to most—strongly induce and impel me towards them. I could wish
them mine. I should be glad to secure them. I would give for them anything con-
sistent with honour. It should not he heroism to refuse that. I determine to refuse
it. To all the inducements to enter the Establishment, I oppose one thing, and but
one. With my predilections, I have little else; but with my opinions, I ought to
have that — a living conscience. By God’s help I will strive to retain it. It shall be
kept by me, and kept alive. It and I must part company, if I offend it by delibe-
rately doing what is wrong. God of my strength, preserve me from this ; 4 let thy


grace be sufficient for me ‘ keep back thy servant from presumptuous sinwith the
light which Thou, I trust, hast poured into my soul, and the love with which Thou
hast replenished my heart, I dare not permit myself to sanction and to say, what I
feel I must, if I consent to use these forms and offices. ‘ A good conscience ’ is to be
found only in withholding that consent. I am determined to withhold it. Igo no-
where unless conscience can go with me. lam satisfied to remain wherever it remains.
This is my feeling; and on account of this—and of this only—l here resolve to refuse
orders.” •
POSTSCRIPT.
No person, it is conceived, can possibly imagine that the subject of the foregoing
discourse was inappropriate to the occasion on which it was delivered. The author
hopes to stand acquitted of having gone out of his way to discuss a topic which may
certainly give pain to some whom he respects. It is not his wish to offend any man,
or any body of men. The present times, however, would seem to require the public
attention to be recalled to the points which are here attempted to be examined. The
principle of establishments in general, has of late been so exclusively regarded, that
the objections to the Church of England in particular, have been in danger of being
lost sight of. But these, in the estimation of Evangelical Dissenters, are intimately
connected with spiritual religion and apostolical Christianity; these it was, that occa-
sioned the nonconformity of their fathers—their positive and personal secession from
the Church, although they saw nothing unscriptural or wrong in a national religious
establishment as such. The rise and prevalence, in the present day, of what is called
the Oxford party, appears to invest the subject with fresh importance. Many of the
statements of that party seem to Dissenters to be nothing but the necessary results of
the fair and full maintenance of what every clergyman professes to approve in his act
of subscription.
The subject is felt to be very imperfectly presented in the preceding pages. A
number of particulars are necessarily omitted, which might have been adverted to,
had the discussion taken another form; but it was the object of the writer to allow,
as much as possible, in the individual described, in favour of the Establishment, and
yet to show that, with all this, Evangelical truth and scrupulous conscientiousness
might lead him to feel it impossible to submit to the tremendous demand made by the
church on the candidate for orders.
It will be very foolish for any person to impute to the writer himself every senti*
ment which he felt called upon to express for his imaginary enquirer. It is enough if
there are persons (and there are such) who feel reconciled to the Establishment, or
attracted towards it, by the reasonings sketched, and the topics illustrated, in the
second part of the discourse, whether they are either sound or legitimate, and who
might yet be repelled by the serious considerations subsequently introduced. With
some, indeed, of the enquirer’s feelings the writer professes to have a good deal of
sympathy, and in some of his views he perfectly coincides. It would be very absurd,
however, to think it necessary to point out which these are. Had the author com-
pleted his original idea, another section or two would have been added, showing, that
if one like the enquirer, with so many opinions in favour of the Establishment, might
yet be conceived to have serious difficulties in relation to conformity ; how much more
might Dissenters stand excused, who, as the result of investigating those very
opinions, have found, as they think, reasons for regarding them as unscriptural and
wrong. It was also his purpose to have glanced at the subject of lay-conformity,
and to have attempted to depict the responsibility of those, who, denying the doc-
trines, condemning the tendency, and lamenting the results of the offices of the
church, yet not only sanction all they dissent from, but uphold and perpetuate what
is admitted to press deeply and painfully on the consciences and character of great
numbers of the clerical body.
At least, such things have been. Whether, indeed, there be any clergymen, or any
candidate for orders, in the present day, who so far hold what was once understood
to be common to the advocates of Evangelical Religion, as to sympathize with the
Jeelings of the individual pourtrayed in the preceding discourse—the writer really does
not know. Time was, when evangelical clergymen recognised, or were thought to
recognise, Presbyterian, Independent, and other ministers, as ministers of Christ; to
admit that the Episcopal was not the exclusive and only church; to reject the notion
of priesthood under the Christian dispensation, except as applying literally to Christ,


and figuratively to the entire body of the faithful; and to deny that regeneration by
the Holy Ohost could, in any sense , be considered as effected through baptism. Such
men were not, perhaps, the best Churchmen, but they were the best Apostolicals ; and
Dissenters willingly rejoiced in their success, and overlooked in their conduct what
they did not understand, for the sake of that in their character which they did. So
far, however, have the Puseyite doctrines imbued the minds of the Evangelical party,
that it is difficult to know whether the exclusive and unscriptural side of the above-
mentioned points is not now generally advocated by its adherents. This, it is feared
by some among us, need excite no wonder; as Oxford divinity in so many of its
features is nothing else than orthodox Anglicanism. Painful, indeed, is the position
of men, who are so placed by what they subscribe, that they must of necessity be in-
consistent with the one of two things —with the meaning of the formularies they
accept and use, or with the principles and spirit of Evangelical Religion.
The writer has just received, by the post, a piece of a newspaper, sent by some one,
probably, who heard his Discourse, containing extracts from a pamphlet of the Rev.
Mr. Head, in which this difficulty is attempted to be met. That gentleman (who
recently brought himself prominently before the public, by addressing his bishop in a
way which the writer, for one, thought clerically indefensible), in what appears to be a
Letter on National Education, asks, “What are the principles of the Church of
England ? ” —To which he answers, “ Not everything contained in the Book of
Common Prayer. The great cardinal principle of the Church of England is, that she
recognises nothing to he received as matter of faith which may not he proved from
,'Scripture .” (The capitals and italics are Mr. Head’s.) He afterwards adds :
“ When intelligent Dissenters, such as require a text when a doctrine is propounded,
inquire of Churchmen ‘On what authority do you build the doctrine that a child is
regenerate because baptized?’ it would be useless to reply, ‘ This doctrine must be
right because it is in the Ritual.’ We answer objections more satisfactorily by alleging
that our ‘ absurdities ’ are not our principles; but that, on the contrary, they are
nullified and neutralized by the Articles, the sixth especially. They are, however, very
pernicious, as tending to countenance false doctrine. And so far from having got rid
of them, we have been verging back to Popery ever since the Reformation ; and by the
Hampton Court conference we have bound these ‘ absurdities ’ upon ourselves closer
than ever, as the sacramental part of the Catechism may witness. Do our bishops,
then, help the church in time of need ? Ho they address themselves to the Protestant
and therefore Apostolic work of expunging from our Rituals the doctrines above
referred to ? Do they discountenance their enforcement upon the consciences of
men ? Do the Right Reverend Prelates remember that zeal for the Catechism is one
thing, and that zeal for the Bible is another; and that the work which the great
Bishop has assigned to his stewards is, that they should be found distributing portions
of meat from thence?'
Now to all this the reply is obvious : —“ He that can be satisfied with it, let him be
satisfied.” It does not satisfy the present writer. He would not, however, “condemn
another man’s servant; to his own master he standeth or falleth.” “ Sappy is he
that condemneth not himself in the thing that he alloweth.” Mr. Head s case is met
and answered in the preceding Discourse. He has no right to reject anything m
the Prayer Book as contrary to the Scriptures, after having solemnly subscribed,
ex animo, the statement that there is nothing in it thus contrary. If after subscribing
the thirty-sixth Canon a person is at liberty to reject everything he has admitted to be
agreeable to the Word of God, which he may come to think is not agreeable to it—
subscription is a farce ; it can bind no man ; it is a mere recognition of the Bible,
leaving the subscriber to his own private interpretation of the text. He that isi satisfied
that this is what the act of subscription means, and that he is justified before God, and
feels in his conscience that he is justified, in thus subscribing putting his name to
the declaration that everything in certain books is scriptural, and then denying this
very declaration—he that can be satisfied with this, the writer again says, “ let him be
satisfied
A thick pamphlet, entitled “ Reasons for ref using to sign the Lay Address to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, &c., bv Thomas Edwards, LL.D., has fallen into the
author’s hands since the delivery of the foregoing Discourse. He finds most ot Jus
remarks confirmed and corroborated by it; expressions and language, however, are
employed, much more strong and offensive, he thinks, than his: yet Dr. Edwards
appears to be a zealous and pious Churchman. An Appendix exhibits, through
“ Memorials,” &c., the view taken by many such, of the errors and evils ot the
“ Cheistxan Knowledge Society.”


One or two strong terms towards the close of the Discourse, especially the phrase
in which the inquirer describes (p. 19) what his whole professional life would become,
on the principle of signing what he disbelieved, might seem to need an apology. It
would be easy, however, to show that such language is quite authorized by those
who have a right to be heard on such subjects. It was intended to have given several
instances of this, but the following, as being most recent, shall suffice. The extracts
are taken from a small pamphlet, entitled “ A Woed of Explanation addressed to
the Inhabitants of Wytnondham, by Jheir Curate, on his dismission in consequence
of refusing to apply to them indiscriminately the occasional Services of the Established
Church.” The author, it would seem, in spite of what his conscience has compelled
him to relinquish, still cherishes an attachment to the Establishment, and a preference
for Episcopacy :
“Whenever an infant is baptized, the minister says: ‘Forasmuch as our Saviour
Christ saith, none can enter into the kingdom of God, except he be regenerated and
born anew of water and of the Holy Gftiost,’ Ac.; and ‘ Dive thy Holy Spirit to this
infant, that he may be born again,’ &c. And then in the space of a few minutes he
adds, ‘ Seeing now that this child is regenerated,’&c. And, ‘We yield thee hearty
thanks, most merciful Father, that it hath pleased thee to regenerate this infant with
thy Holy Spirit, to receive him for thy own child by adoption,’ &c. These are signi-
ficant words, and solemn indeed are the subjects they treat of. We can but feel that
any insincerity—the least semblance of guile, the slightest approach towards 4 a lie,' in
such connexion as this, is like carrying the works of darkness to the very coniines of
heaven; and brings to mind the dreadful charge contained in the fourth and ninth
verses of the fifth chapter of Acts, 4 Thou hast not lied unto men hut unto God.'
“Even with believing parents, sponsors, and congregations, the statements made in
our baptismal office do not appear to me to be supported by Holy Scripture. And
when the attendants are thoughtless and irreligious, the object sought, a name or re-
gistration, without any appearance of faith in the parent or sponsor; and the congre-
gation dispersed, because the service is esteemed a wearisome interruption rather than
as an interesting exercise of the strongest faith ; —in this case the baptismal service,
used by me, would not be the language of faith, hut a tissue of falsehood told unto God
in the solemn language of prayer and thanksgiving. And were I induced to do so, lor
the sake of continuing to minister here, my conduct would be a despicable compound
of folly and wickedness.”
After referring to the Confirmation and Burial Services, the writer adds :
“ All this, and much more to the same effect, I should be applying to converted and
unconverted, godly and ungodly, in hundreds of cases, were I to use our services as
(I admit with grief) they are very commonly used, even by those whose constant effort
it is in their pulpit ministrations , and private intercourse with their flock, to efface those
impressions of false security, which their official declarations (if they are understood
to mean any thing at all) are calculated to produce.
“ How ill would such an application of our baptismal and other services accord
with the whole of my ministry, in which 1 have endeavoured to teaeh that men are by
nature in a state of apostacy from God, and exposed to his righteous indignation ;
to preach Christ and reconciliation to God through his blood; —and to show that
those who being effectually called by God’s grace have power given them to become
the sons of God, are the ‘ regenerate ,’ 4 members of Christ, the children of God, and
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven ; ’ in distinction from all others who either refuse
to hear the Gospel of Christ, or hearing it, remain unrenewed in the spirit of their
mind.”
Believing, as the writer does, that there is something wrong in all Churches (for
“there are many Antichrists;”) that some of the spirit of the “man of sin,” though
“in diversities of manifestation,” is to be met with everywhere; he would ponder
himself, and invite others to ponder too, the following awful words of Dr. Doddridge,
admonitory, perhaps, to all Protestants, though certainly to some more than others.
On the words, in Revelation, xiii. 11—“ They have no rest, day nor night, who
worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name;”
the devout author just mentioned adds, in his Commentary, the following note: —
“ When I seriously reflect on this text, and how directly the force of it lies against
those who, contrary to the light of their conscience, continue in the communion of the
Church of Rome, for secular advantage, or to avoid the terror of persecution, it almost
makes me tremble: and I heartily wish that all others, who connive at those things,
in the discipline and worship of Protestant Churches, which they, in their consciences,
think to be sinful remains of Popish superstition and corruption, would seriously
22


attend to this passage, which is one of the most dreadful in the whole Book of God,
and weigh its awful contents, that they may keep at the greatest possible distance from
this horrible curse, which is sufficient to make the ears of every one that heareth it to
tingle .”
Having a little space, I avail myself of it for an additional remark. In page 14, it
is stated, that I take the words of the baptismal service from the form for its private
administration, because in that no profession of faith and repentance is made for the
child by godfathers and godmothers ; and after this it is added —“ This is said, in the
Catechism, to be the reason why children are baptized at all; and there are those who
regard it as a ground for hoping that they enjoy that which the rite symbolizes .” When
I wrote this, I knew that it was correct, though I could not recollect where I had
seen the idea expressed. I have since discovered that it was in the Christian Observer,
It occurs in page 791 of the volume for 1836. The editor of that work, in the course
of a note to the letter of a correspondent, expresses himself as follows :
“We have never been extreme in our views respecting the language used in our
liturgy respecting baptism. We have thought that the words might be consistently
used, either in reference to the undoubted privileges of Christian baptism, or in faith
and charity, upon the principle stated in the Catechism , where it is said,‘Why then
are infants baptized, when, by reason of their tender age, they cannot perform them ?
(faith and repentance.) Because they promise them both by their sureties ; which
promise, when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.’ Upon either of
these principles we can cheerfully use our baptismal service.”
I dare not trust myself to remark on the above, further than to say, that I cannot
comprehend how any man can “ consistently”—(consistently, I suppose, as to his own
complacency in the act) —affirm to God, in a solemn prayer, that He (God) has
actually regenerated a child by his Holy Spirit, because three adults have promised,
that, at a future time, he shall “ repent and believe the Gospel.” Even this, however,
is not done when the rite is administered in private; and hence the other alternative
alone remains—“ the undoubted privileges of Christian baptism.” What, then, are
these, in the estimation of Evangelical clergymen, that they can warrant their “ con-
sistently” and “ cheerfully” saying what they say ? Do they believe that they amount
to God’s regeneration of the child by his Holy Spirit f” If not, how can they
affirm it ? _
The following language occurs in the same article, from which the above extract is
taken, in reference to the writers of the Oxford Tracts. I quote it in the hope that
Evangelical Churchmen will excuse any warmth of expression into which I may have
fallen, when they see how clergymen write of each other, Ido not apply it, let it be
understood, to the preceding extract and its author : —“ The absurdity, the irrational
fanaticism, the intellectual drivelling under the abused name of faith, which . dictates
such sentiments . . . must disgust every intelligent man, and make him an infidel, if
he is really led to believe that Christianity is a system so utterly opposed to common
sense.”


