

Australian
League of Loyalty.
New South Wales Section.
Constitution.
NAME.
Australian League of Loyalty, for the pro-
tection of Civil and Religious Rights.
OBJECTS.
1. To maintain loyalty to the Throne, the
unity of the Empire, and to promote the social,
moral and religious development of Australia.
2. To uphold civil and religious freedom and
equality for all citizens.
3. To resist any encroachment on the rights
and privileges of the people by any church or
organisation.
4. To maintain the national system of edu-
cation, without endowment to any denomina-
tional or private schools.
5. To promote Religious Instruction in Pub-
lic Schools according to the Act.
6. To resist sectarianism in the distribution
of patronage, employment and promotion in
the Public Service of the State.
MEMBERSHIP.
Open to all persons of 18 years and up-
wards, whose views are in accord with the
objects of the League, on payment of an an-
nual subscription of not less than one shilling.
Candidates for Membership shall be nomi-
nated by two members, and received, on the
vote of a majority of those present at any
meeting of the Central Council, District
Council, or Executive of a Branch.


CENTRAL COUNCIL.
1. A Central Council shall be appointed at
the annual meeting of the League, held in
Sydney, or such other centre as may be agreed
upon.
2. The Central Council shall consist of not
more than fifty members, in addition to repre-
sentatives from District Councils.
3. The members of the Council elected at
the annual meeting shall be in the proportion
of two ministers to three laymen.
4. The Central Council shall appoint an
Executive Committee of not exceeding fifteen
members, in addition to the officers.
OFFICERS shall be elected at the Annual
Meeting, and consist of President, Vice-Presi-
dents, Treasurer, Secretaries. The Council shall
have power to fill up any vacancies occurring
during the interval between the Annual Meet-
ings.
DISTRICT COUNCILS.
To be established at centres suitably situated
which the Central Executive may arrange, for
the furtherance of the objects of the League.
1. Shall be composed of one Delegate from
each Branch v/ithin its District.
2. Each District Council shall appoint two
Delegates to represent it on the Central Coun-
cil.
3. The expenses of the District Council to bo
borne by the Branches composing the Council,
in proportion to their membership.
CENTRAL EXECUTIVE.
1. To control and administer the policy and
working of the League in conformity with its
,Objective Platform, and Principles.
2. To decide 'and sdttle all matters sub-
mitted to it by any Branch, and the decision
of the Executive shall be final.
3. To call any general meetings of the League
that may be deemed necessary, amd to deter-
mine the length of notice required.


4. To make by-laws for the general manage-
ment of the League, provided they are not in-
consistent with the purposes of the League.
5. To arrange Inter-State Conferences of the
League and similar bodies.
6. To conduct enquiries in respect of any mat-
ter appertaining to the welfare of the League
and its members.
7. It may appoint sub-committees from
among the members of the League for any pur-
poses considered desirable.
8. The Executive shall arrange for the Annual
Meeting during September of each year, or at
such other time as may be decided upon.
9. Any alteration of the Objects, Platform,
Constitution or Rules of the League shall only
be made at the Annual Meeting, and any
suggested alteration must be submitted by
Branches to the General Secretary not later
than Ist July in each year.
10. Every such suggested alteration shall be
considered by the Executive before being dealt
with by the Annual Meeting.
11. All meetings of the Executive shall be
called by not less than three days' notice from
the Secretary to each member.
12. The ordinary meetings of the Executive
shall be held once a month. The Secretary or
Chairman may call special meetings at any
time, or at the written request of five mem-
bers.
BRANCHES.
Branches of the League may be formed in
the suburbs of Sydney or in any country dis-
trict for the promotion of the aims of the
League within their several areas.
RULES OF BRANCHES.
1. Officers to be elected by the members of
the Branch: President, Vice-Presidents, Secre-
tary, Treasurer, Auditors, Committee, Delegate
to the District Council.


2. Make (subject to the approval of the Cen-
tral Executive) Rules and Regulations for the
management of the Branch. f
3. Make all necessary arrangements for the
raising of funds.
4. Each branch shall have power to expend
one-half of the amount of funds collected by it
for its own benefit in furtherance of the objects
of the League, and the balance of the funds so
collected shall be remitted to the Central Ex-
ecutive for the purposes of the League.
5. Each Branch shall appoint one delegate to
represent it on the nearest District Council.
6. Each Branch shall send to the Secretary of
the Central Executive an annual report con-
taining a revised list of financial members,
and addresses, and an audited balance sheet,
all duly signed by the President and Secre-
tary of the Branch for the year ending 30th
June.
7. Each Branch shall hold regular meetings
for the promotion of the objects of the League.
N.B. —It is recommended that, in addition to
other business, each Branch should arrange a
syllabus of lectures, essays and discussions of
appropriate subjects, with any other method cal-
culated to educate the members in the principles
and value of our civil and religious liberties.
It is also recommended that all meetings shall
be opened with prayer and reading of the
Scriptures.
GENERAL.
Members are urged to extend the operations of
this League so as to make it as general and power-
ful as possible.
Membership fees are fixed at I/- per annum ; but
members are urged to supplement this by donations
and subscriptions so as to provide sufficient finan-
ces for the operations of this movement.
Literature, Application Forms, Constitutions and
Membership Cards are supplied by the Head Office.
ADDRESS : —The Secretary, Australian League
of Loyalty, Floor 5, Rooms 3 and 5, “ Daily
Telegraph” Buildings, Sydnejr,
Office Open Daily 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Saturday, 10 a.m. to 12 noon.
H. Cook & Co., Print, 200 Castlereagn-st, Sydney.
