

WAR LITERATURE
SOCIETY
Patron:
The Hon. Sir. William Cullen, K.C.M.G.
Chief Justice. Chancellor of the University of Sydney
President:
The Hon. George Earp, M.L.C.
Committee:
The Hon. the Premier, Mr. W. A. Holman, M.L.A.
Major-General G. L. Lee, C.M.G., D.S-O.
The State Commandant
His Honour Judge Backhouse
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney
Colonel J. Lamrock, C. 8., V.D.
Camp Commandant, Liverpool
Colonel R. E. Roth, C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
The Hon. Sir Thos. Hughes, M.L.C.
Major J. H. Strong, V.D.
Captain Chaplain Colwell
Professor W. E. Cooke
Government Astronomer
Mr. John Sulman
Mr. William Gillanders, B A.
Gen. Sec. Y. M.C. A.
Mrs. W. A. Holman
Mrs. George Earp
Mrs. G. L Lee
Mrs. William McMurray
Mrs. John Waugh
Captain H. G. Grace, V. D.
Mr. H. C. Macfie, F.C.P.A.
Hon. Secretary;
Major J. H Strong
Assistant Sec.:
(Missl M. E. Hannah
VALE a PEARSON. PRINTERS. SYDNEY


War Literature Society
CONSTITUTION
1. The name of the Society shall be “The War
Literature Society.”
2. The aims and objects of the Society shall be :
To Disseminate information regarding the Empire, The
War and National Affairs, in such ways as may be
deemed most advisable.
3. The Society shall be composed of members,
proposed or introduced by a member, the subscription
being not less than 2/6 (two shillings and sixpence) per
annum. The Society shall have the power to appoint
Honorary Members.
4. The management of the Society shall be vested
in a Committee of men and women comprising not more
than twenty members (including the President and
Treasurer) all of whom shall be elected annually, but
the Committee may at any time fill up any vacancies
by co-option.
5. Meetings of the Committee shall be held by
direction of the President when necessary for the tran-
saction of business.
6. Four members of the Committee shall form a
quorum.
7. The President in addition to his deliberative vote,
shall have a casting vote on any question on which the
voting is equal.
8. The Committee may appoint an Executive Com-
mittee, consisting of the President, Treasurer and other
members of the Committee to carry on the work of the
Society between the meetings of the Committee ; three
members of the Executive shall form a quorum.


9. The Hon. Treasurer shall receive all monies and
deposit same in an account at the Bank of N.S.VV. He
shall pay all accounts after same have been passed by
the Committee and shall submit a balance sheet duly
audited to the Society annually. All cheques shall be
signed by the Hon. Treasurer and Secretary.
10. Any member of the Committee desiring to bring
forward a motion shall send notice of same in writing to
the Secretary at least seven days before the date of
meeting.
11. An Annual General Meeting shall be held at such
date, hour and place as the Committee may appoint after
giving not less than three days notice by post to each
member.
12. The Committee may at any time, and shall upon
the written requisition sent to the Secretary by twenty
members, call a Special General Meeting of the members
giving not less than seven days notice by post stating
the purpose of such meeting. At such meeting one-fourth
of the total membership shall form a quorum.
13. At the Annual General Meeting a report by the
Committee on the transactions of the Society and an
audited statement of accounts shall be presented for
adoption.
14, These rules may be altered at the Annual General
Meeting or any Special General Meeting convened in
due form and with due notice for that purpose.
15. The Committee may form branches and appoint
agents or local Committees in any part of Australia for
the purposes of the Society under such rules and regula-
tions as the Committee may deem desirable.
16. The Society may co-operate with other Societies
having similar aims or objects in harmony in any manner
the Committee may think fit.
