

Conscription
Under
Camouflage
Compulsory Military
Training
In Australasia








CONSCRIPTION UNDER
CAMOUFLAGE.
AN ACCOUNT OF
COMPULSORY MILITARY
TRAINING
IN AUSTRALASIA
DOWN TO THE OUTBREAK OF
THE GREAT WAR.
Price, in Paper Cover, Is.; in Cloth Cover, 1s. 6d. nett.
JOHN PERCY FLETCHER
AND
JOHN FRANCIS HILLS.


DEDICATION.
TO ALL THOSE
who, in upholding
SANCTITY OF CONSCIENCE,
LIBERTY OF THE SUBJECT,
or the
/
BROTHERHOOD OF MAN,
have suffered in Australasia
under the Compulsory Clauses of
the Defence Acts,
this little book is dedicated.


PUBLISHER’S PREFACE.
Nearly four yeays ago my friend John P. Fletcher (now in
England) and myself wrote this book for the purpose of placing
before the public in a definite, concrete form the case against
Compulsory Military Training in Australia.
Partly because we felt that the prolonged world war that
raged from 1914 to 1918 was entirely occupying the public
mind and so rendering unlikely any careful consideration of
the subject, and partly for other reasons, the publishing of the-
book was again and again postponed.
As a consequence, what was written early in 1915 does not
see the light till 1919.
The reader is asked to bear in mind that this is an account
of Australasian Conscription, not up to the present year,,
but HP TO AUGUST, * 1914, when the Great War, with its.
fever of patriotism, produced a set of conditions which for
years rendered impossible our further investigation of any
part of the Defence System.
Of these war conditions the one which chiefly prevented
us from obtaining knowledge as to the working of our
compulsory military training was the military censorship,
which naturally would keep out of the press nearly everything
considered by it likely to prejudice a plan of Defence on which
our leading military men have so set their hearts.
To bring the book up to date would mean greatly enlarg-
ing and also partly rewriting some of its chapters: the re-
writing would have to be done under insurmountable diffi-
culties, in spite of the fact that owing to the cessation of
hostilities between the Associated Powers and the Central
Powers the reticence of the authorities has somewhat relaxed-
-1 have decided, therefore, to publish the book almost exactly
as it was written, merely adding fresh footnotes here and there,,
sometimes to put right any statement that may have become
misleading owing to effluxion of time, and sometimes to stress
something needing additional emphasis.
These footnotes are in larger type, than the others and
bear the date 1919 and my initials. Nearly all the appendix
matter has also been written quite recently.
The issue, on the 28th of July, 1916, of many of our
familiar Australian Military Regulations in a new book with
fresh arrangement and fresh numbering to the regulations
renders out-of-date the numbering as quoted by us. To enable
the reader who. wishes to pursue the matter further to do so,
or to check our references, I give in Appendix A (in parallel
columns) the old and new numbers of the more important
regulations.


I have been carefully through this new book of regulations.
Let no one imagine that there is one line in it in any way
relaxing the grip of military law upon our youths and young
men. On the contrary, as 1 have shown in Appendix G, there
are inconspicuous but subtle alterations even further increas-
ing the might of the officer class, bestowing additional powers,
i.e., to compel attendance of the adult trainee at camp or
parade without the intervention of the civil magistrate. To
what extent these fresh powers have been used it is impossible
to discover for reasons akin to those given above. The point
to be noted and emphasised is that they have been given.
The critical attitude of the Federal Labor Party towards the
system, and the resolutions passed at recent State Labor
Conferences demanding the entire repeal of the compulsory
clauses, will account for any hesitation to make use of new
authority, which, in the matter of adult trainees accused of not
fulfilling the service required by the Act, will throw the
magistrate on the scrap heap. The uneasiness of the Labor
people will also account for the recent reduction in the number
of Saturday afternoon drills.
It is w T ell to emphasise here that the figures upon which
we base our contention that at the time of the outbreak of the
European War (since which time investigation has not been
possible) the Compulsory Training System was hopelessly
breaking down through trainees not being at the drills, are not
our figures, but the Military Department’s own, issued from
time to time by accredited officials. I refer in Appendix J to
later figures. There is little consolation in them for the
upholders of boy conscription. That the department issued no
further returns is in itself a matter for explanation. lam
confident that when full publicity is the order of the day it
will be shown that our Compulsory System is as much on the
rocks now as it was in 1914. Be that as it may, the agitation
for repeal, which is not confined to members of one political
party, gathers strength daily; and it is our hope that our little
handbook, packed with relevant and concise facts, will prove
useful to sympathetic public speakers, whose lack of leisure
or wide range of interests has prevented their making a special
study of a very momentous question.
JOHN FRANCIS HILLS
21 Seawall South,
Glenelg,
South Australia.
January, 1919.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
I. General Introduction.
11. Special Introductory Matter.
111. The Junior Cadet.
. The Older Boy: The Young Man.
Y. Military Law and Courts-Martial.
VI. Will Parliament Protect the Trainee?
VII. The Future of the Court-Martial.
VIII. Conscript and Volunteer Under Military Law.
IX. Is It Conscription?
X. llow Australian Conscription Affects the Schoolmaster.
XI. Good for the Boy?
XII. Rubbing Shoulder to Shoulder. Is it so?
XIII. A Little About Finance.
XIV. Conscription and the Australian Workers*.
XV. Who Are the “Shirkers”?
XVI. The First Stand.
XVII. A Police Court Trial.
XA HI. The Breakdown of Compulsory Parental Registration.
XIX. Prosecutions and Imprisonments.
XX. Further Signs of “Popularity.”
XXL Boyhood’s Tribute to “Military Necessity. ”
XXII. A National Sin.
XXIII. Hunger as Conscience Breaker.
XXIV. The Black Hole at Fort Largs.
XXV. Herbert Ingle at Fort Largs.
XXVI. Harry Flintoff’s First Imprisonment.
XXVII. Shameful Treatment of Harry Flintoff.
XXVIII. How Thomas Roberts Won Through.
XXIX. Conscription in New Zealand.
XXX. Towards Breaking Down Conscription in New Zealand.
XXXI. Some Happenings at Ripa Island.
XXXII. Ripa Island: Continuation of Reg. Williams’ Narrative.
XXXIII. Conclusion.
APPENDICES:—
A. Old and New Numbering.
B. Ten Gross Mis-statements.
C. The Officer in loco parentis.
D. Labor Resolutions.
E. The Citizen Trainee and Domestic Violence.
F. Vivian Yeo Treated as a Felon.
G. Further Scrapping of the Magistrate.
H. The Reservist.
I. Secret Regulations.
J. Latest Figures as to Prosecutions and Imprisonments.




CHAPTER I.
General Introduction.
MBgazTn h e%or tr Mav Ct0 1917 hae oni« aS nf P T iOUBIy bee J? p l! bli ' she(i ' namely, in Ross's
“'Federal wOiO'i Be‘,d. T 'Eett!” «"
I'i-om one point of view Conscription may be described as the last
word of militarism.
When the Church in the Middle Ages could compel all men to come
to its priests, worship at its altars, and pay it homage, it stood at the
zenith of its world-power, having, in the holy name of Christ the meek
and lowly, placed its foot upon the necks of the Many and done all
it could to crush the soul and to exploit the sacred mysteries for the
worldly benefit of the Few. To-day Militarism, now nearing its zenith,
is seeking to force a universal acceptance of its worship—to force every
man to become a soldier.
We hear much of military necessity, and the great war nowt raging
greatly occupies the thoughts of all. Many of us now, like the Pharisee,
thank God that we Britishers are not as those bad Germans are, or even
as those Austrians and Turks. But let us, one and all, remember that
German Militarism is, in its essence, not distinct from our own, whose
banners our priests bless. It is the same thing, more scientifically
developed, based on the same defence axioms more logically and
thoroughly applied. The claims of military necessity led to the terrorism
of the Belgians by fire and sword, so that fewer German soldiers would
be needed on the lines of communication. They led Senators Pearce
and Millen, during two years and a half between January 1, 1912, and
June 30, 1914, to institute no less than 27,749 prosecutions, involving
fines in mfiny cases, but in no less than 5,732 the imprisonment of boys
and youths m fortresses and other military places, or in civil prisons.
Conscription is not merely a bye-product of militarism. The com-
bined labors of militarism and capitalism have produced a Frankenstein
monster which we distinguish as Modern Militarism.
Conscription has invoked the fear-devil: it has set its trust in num-
bers; it has ■ organised, not exorcised, cowardice.
The French Conscript Act of 1798 was all that the apologist for
Conscription in the “Encyclopaedia Britannica” claims for it. Taking
out the perhaps,' ’ we may say that “no law jm the statute books of
any nation has exercised or is destined to exercise a more far-reaching
influence.”
Conscription, copied and perfected by Prussia, has forced the pace;
it has hurried forward a world-crisis which will either end not only
Conscription, but the Militarism that has given it birth, or else will
leave humanity a marred and mangled thing, and civilisation the prey
tWritten early in 1915.


of a military caste. Of that world-conflict the present European struggle
is only one part. Before us lie times of great suffering, but, as a brave
man once wrote —
“These are the times that try men’s souls,”
“But will you endanger the existence of your State?” one is asked.
Faced with this world-wrecking Militarism, and called upon to break it
down, we say that the State must take its chance. Nothing that is
good in any nationality can be killed by the sword. Everything that
is good in all nationalities will be killed by sword-worship. For to
the strikingly evident evils wrought by warfare itself there is added
the less conspicuous, but'equally great —or, it may be, greater —evils
of the tyranny of military training and universal war preparation.
Humanity can do without the German Empire; it can do without
the British Empire; it can no longer do with Militarism. Militarism
must go, or humanity will go down.
Most men have forgotten nowadays that the State is not humanity.
During the last century our minds have been so directed to the preser-
vation of the scaffolding that we have forgotten the house and the
Master-builder. We have been urged to do so by the vested interests
that live on or are buttressed by Militarism —interests to which those
connected with drink, gambling, and prostitution are mere pigmies. A
monster vampire has settled upon mankind.
Old-time Militarism was the survival of the half-brute, half-devil
pugnacity of the early dawn of Man. The modern phenomenon is not
brutal; it is below the brute. With a pure-devil Militarism are we
faced to-day; scientific, long-headed worship of military necessity whose
present cry is numbers.
In press and pulpit the Money Power has taken up this cry; for
Conscription disciplines the people, or, subordinates all men and
makes them docile to authority. With its help Big Money hopes to
destroy Democracy and establish a new industrial feudalism without the
chivalry and human touch of the feudalism of the baron and the king.
The merest few of us have yet realised what Conscription has
already done in places where it has been long established. It has gripped
with military law and silenced the young men; and it is those in all
lands that are the force that would make for progress. It has created
a militarist atmosphere. It has fixed its octopus clutch on every branch
of national life in most European countries. Helped by "press, pulpit,
and Governmental influence and contriving, it has so regimented the
world and made so tense the strain of rival nationality that, when the
time comes, ten make a quarrel, and ten million men rush to the
trenches with the frenzy of destruction, hailing a maelstrom of slauglitei
a holy war.
Granted the continuance of might-worship, our present holy war
will not end war. The apotheosis of the sword will, on the other hand,
blight and blast the human race. Our world-war may prove the
beginning of an era of alternating fiendish struggle and armed, sus-
picious, fretful peace —each struggle more acute and each peace less
peace-like.


Or perhaps Revolution may take a hand and overturn the seats
of the diplomats and the tables of the money-changers.
Be that as it may, modern militarism makes slaves of men while
directing them to fight for freedom; it wages war in the interests of
a peace that even before 1914 had become an armed truce; it honors
God by dishonoring man made in His image; it proclaims itself holy
and practises all unholiness.
Let no one doubt that great is the coming struggle; the biggesi
moral upheaval since countless Christians faced death in the Roman
arena. But the sword is not the weapon. War will not break down
war, but the individual’s resistance, with God’s help, can and will.
Neither in the form of foreign bombs nor of our rulers’ threats should
terror decide for us the question, "Shall we take the sword?’’
And one word as to methods. Spreading the sweetness and light
of peace truths is all very well, but it is preaching and sacrifice that
count —and by preaching is not meant mere parson-patter. Pacifists who
merely argue and expound will never break down Militarism; we want
prophets to denounce its sin, to lash its folly, to expose its frauds, to
instil active resistance —of the Christ, not of the big-stick sort—to
military drill, flag-worship, and fighting. Reasoning, apart from per-
sonal devotion and personal inspiration, is little good. It is those who
suffer that lift the world forward.
A new outburst of social and moral energy will come. For this we
look to that "unconscious Christianity’’ that the Christian, John Bright,
saw in the Atheist, Charles Bradlaugh, when the latter stood pleading
for manhood against mummery at the bar of a mocking House of Com-
mons; to that Highest Sense that will unite all good and true men, of
whatever race and creed, to stand stoutly together and say to their
militarised State, "In the sacred name of Humanity we will spurn, not
serve, your idol; do with us as you list.’’


CHAPTER II.
Special Introductory Matter.
“The worst enemy of each nation is not without, hut within its frontiers, and
none has the courage to fight against it Every nation to a greater or
lesser extent has an imperialism of its own, and whether it be military, financial,
feudal, republican, social or intellectual, it is always the octopus sucking the best
blood of Europe. Let the free men of all countries of Europe when this war is
over take up again the motto of Voltaire: “Ecrasez l’infame.’’—Romaine Rolland.
Those politicians who fathered the conscript system, or, as they
prefer to call it, the Universal Military Training system, upon the
Australian public told us that it was a measure to save our freedom.
To save this precious freedom from the inroads of foreign tyranny was,
we were told, the ultimate and overwhelming argument for the setting
up of compulsory military training. We, then, will to a large extent
limit our vision to freedom and consider especially the bearing of the
Defence Act on liberty and civil government.
We shall not talk in generalities; we shall quote section and sub-
section of the Defence Act; we shall give clear and distinct references;
we shall give quotations from the Federal Hansard and from newspapers
which support conscription; we shall leave to the supporters of the Act
the impossible task of explaining away the contents of our quotations.
They stand here in plain black and white. Either the English language
has no meaning, or else they import the levelling down of our free
institutions to those of the most blighted militarist countries. If a man
or woman born in the comparatively free atmosphere of British countries
can read without indignation what is written in the following chapters,
then he or she has already unconsciously become the blind or heartless
tool of the militarist influences at present gripping the world. Militarism
is stealing upon the nations with the silent persistence of drifting snow
and the pitiless power and overwhelming sweep of the ocean tide.
Before we begin to set forth what is contained in this, our “ Black
Statute,” let us remind the public of what one of its chief upholders
said when the scheme, in a much milder form, was mooted in 1901.
Senator Pearce, not yet our jingo Minister of Defence, but plain Mr.
Pearce, standing on boxes at street corners or in public parks, said, in
the course of a speech at Adelaide on August 4, 1901: —
“In this Bill we are face to face with one of the greatest dangers
that have ever confronted the people of Australia. . . . Born
as we are in the atmosphere of liberty and free government, we
will not become part of a force which strikes deeply at the root
of free government as this Bill does. . . . The Bill had its
origin in the mind of the military commandants, but the string they
played upon to dupe a credulous public was our White Australia
policy. We have insulted our neighbors, not by the object of our
desire, but by the method we have adopted to attain it, and there-
fore we fear reprisals. ’ ’
But so great is the blinding nature of a fear of foreign invasion,
and so bad are the effects of success in politics, or of the corrupting
influence of the National Service League and the military aristocracy
of London, that the man who spoke these words has been largely respon-
sible for putting into practice in 1911, in a more definite and more
extreme form, the very thing he denounced ten years before!


One more special foreword, and then we will turn to the Act itself.
Champions of a Defence Act which defends liberty by destroying it
tell us that compulsory military service and compulsory education are
akin, and that as one has been welcomed as a blessing bo should the
other. We discuss conscription’s ‘‘welcome” in the subsequent pages.
Here we will content ourselves with destroying, once and for all, the
pretty legend of the family relationship between our new conscription
and compulsory school attendance. To expose the ridiculous falsity of
the analogy, there is no need for us to do more than quote one or two
clauses of the Defence Act and substitute therein the word “educa-
tional” for the word “military ”«(or “martial”) or make similar
changes.
For instance, does the Education Act of any of our Australian States
or of any British country contain clauses or part-clauses like these ?
“Any offence against this Act or its regulations is an ‘educa-
tional’ offence.” (C.f. Defence Act, Section 4.)
“Any ‘scholar’ or ‘teacher’ charged with any offence against
this Act shall be tried and punished either by ‘court-educational’
or by civil court.” (C.f. Defence Act, Section 102.)
“A district ‘court-educational’ shall consist of not less than three
‘inspectors’ or ‘headmasters,’ each of whom must have ‘been in
the service during’ not less than two whole years.” (C.f. Common-
wealth Military Regulations, No. 816.)
“No proceedings of any court-educational constituted or appointed
under this Act shall be set aside or .deemed void for want of form,
or be removed by certiorari or otherwise into any civil court.” (C.f.
Defence Act, Section 100.)
Were an Education Act drafted on similar lines of repression and
on a like denial of the fundamentals of what we have been taught to
regard as our superior British justice, the -public would say at once,
‘ ‘ These headmasters and inspectors have a great deal more at the back
of their skulls besides compulsory school attendance and the welfare of
our children. These men need watching. ”
Needless to say, our Education Acts are not so drafted; our sclioo'
trainees are not withdrawn from the protection of the civil courts. The
analogy between compulsory education and compulsory military law
wholly falls to the ground.
Who ever heard of educational law, educational courts, educational
offences, and educational prisons?
•
*****
And yet one more foreword. The 1908-1914 Australian Defence
Acts set up compulsory military drill. Peace, folk and militarist alike
realise that it makes it compulsory for all able-bodied youths to learn
the art of human slaughter. While the hot debate (whether boys should
be taught soldiering or not) goes forward, both sides forget or ignore
that wider outcome of our new conscription, the destruction of -jliat
very civil and religious freedom for which, we are told, our flag stands,
and for the preservation of which, we are assured, the compulsory
training of a nation, in arms is a necessity!


CHAPTER III.
Training and Fines: the Junior Cadet.
Even a child of Hi years is a conscript in Australia. Herein we are worse*
than Russia. The future manhood of the country is being blighted in the green
leaf. The boy belongs, not to his parents, not to his teachers, but to the military
officer.
Look at the penalties and remember that it is for children of lli to 14 years
of age. Penalty for evading service, one hundred pounds.
In addition to this fine the child may be committed to confinement in barracks
and fortresses for periods of time.
Is this free Australia, when the responsible Minister of a free democracy
recommends that children whp will not come willingly under military control shall
be confined in barracks and fortresses? >.
—Australian Freedom League Pamphlet.
“Had the men of our land been asked to undergo what is now being put upon
helpless boys, their votes would have long ago driven the Government from office.
Hence it is said: ‘Boy compulsory training must be; we cannot save our country
without it.’ The voteless boy bears the brunt of the burden; the politician peace-
fully remains in office; the manly man looks on!’’ ,
—“Child Conscription: Our Country’s Shame.’’
We* have no quarrel with many of the things taught in the Junior
Cadet Course. The physical training is excellent. The sad thing is
that the Government makes no attempt to subsidise the useful and
popular subjects, except when they play the part of alluring jam to'
cover the bitter powder of child conscription.
As to this Junior Cadet organisation, we believe that it exists largely
for the sake of its Record Books*, and also for the purpose of enabling
the officer class of. the future to get a grip on education in the way
shown in detail in Chapter X. The true inwardness of the Record
Books will readily be realised when we point out that from the details
which arc entered therein by the schoolmaster (as to the trainee’s age,
address, and so on), the area officer gathers the information that will
enable him to fill in, two years later, the same lad’s Senior Cadet regis-
tration form, should the parent prove recalcitrant.
We now quote from the “Regulations and Instructions for Universal
Training: Part 4—Junior Cadets.” Separate books are published for
the Junior Cadets, Senior Cadets, and Citizen Forces, showing in a very
clear way the details of training, organisation, and conditions under
which the young conscript must serve during his three stages of training.
In reading the following extracts, remember that they deal with boys
of from 12 to 14 years of age.
Defence Act.
Section 125.
Persons who are
liable to be trained.
Page 3.
“All male inhabitants of Australia (excepting those
w ho are exempted by this Act) who have resided
therein for six months, and are British subjects, shall
be liable to be trained as prescribed, as follows: —
(a) From 12 years to 14 years of age, in the Junior
Cadets.
*i.e., C.M. Form M. 1., Amended Sept., 1912.


Defence Act.
Section i 26.
Page's.
Defenpe Act.
Section 127.
ing. Page 6.
“(1) The training in the Junior Cadets shall begin
on the Ist day of July in the year in which the persons
liable reach the age of 12 years, and shall continue for
two years.
.‘ ‘ The prescribed training shall be, in each year end-
ing the 30th day of June, of the following duration: —
(a) In the Junior Cadets, ninety hours.
Again we would remind the reader to remember, while perusing the
following paragraphs, that they refer to boys between the ages of 12
and 14. ,
Defence Act.
Penalty for° evading
service. Page 8.
Regulation 70.
Discipline.
Defence Act.
Section 62 (5)
Commandants.
Page 10.
“(1) Every person who in any year, without lawful
excuse > evades or fails to render the personal service
required by this part shall be guilty of an offence, and
shall, in addition to the liability under Section 133
of this Act, be liable to a penalty not exceeding £lOO.
'‘(la) Every person who, being a person liable to
training under this part —
(a) fails without lawful excuse to attend a
compulsory drill, or
(b) commits a breach of discipline wdiile on
parade,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall, in addition to
any liability under Section 133 of this Act, be liable
to a penalty not exceeding £5.
(4) In addition to any penalty imposed, or where
the court is of opinion that the imposition of a penalty
would involve undue hardship, in lieu of imposing any
penalty, the court may, if it .thinks fit, commit the
offender to confinement in the custody of any pre-
scribed authority for such time not exceeding twenty
days as it thinks fit, or for a time corresponding in
duration to the time which, in the opinion of the court,
would be taken up in rendering the personal service
required.
(5) Any person committed to the custody of a pre-
scribed authority in pursuance of this section may be
detained by that authority at any prescribed institu-
tion or place, and while so detained shall be subject
to the regulations governing that institution or place,
and to training and discipline as prescribed.
“(1) Discipline shall ordinarily be maintained by
requiring those Junior Cadets who fail to obey the
orders of the instructors or give due attention to their
training to attend a lengthened period of instruction,
but such additional instruction shall not exceed half
an hour on each occasion.
“(2) Serious breaches of discipline shall be dealt
with under Section 135 of the Act.
“(5) All cadets in a military district shall be under
the or d ers 0 f the Military "Commandant of that dis-
tnct, excepting such as are allotted to the naval forces,
who shall be under the orders of the Naval Com-
mandant. ’ ’
We need merely add that in the “Junior Cadet Kecord” form (C.M.
No. 1), under Table 3 for “Medical Examination,” two lines are left
for details of “marks or sears, to be described.” One wonders “Military
Thoroughness” did not arrange for finger-prints to be taken.« The


resemblance to criminal identification would then have been complete,
and the work of the human sleuthhounds in years to come made even
easier.
On the above extracts from the Defence Act add the Junior Cadet
Regulations, just a few comments.
A statute that enables the authorities to place and train under
military law children not yet in their teens must surely have been
drafted or put into force in some time of national emergency, when a
country was in danger of being invaded or a nation was at'the last gasp
of its existence. One wonders what desperate crisis was prevailing in
1911, when these things came into operation; how many thousands and
tens of thousands of MEN had gone to the drill-ground under compul-
sory military training, when the galling collar of military necessity w r as
placed upon the neck of the child of 11A years.* No crisis was there,
no raging or threatened war, no shortage of adults able to bear arms,
had they chosen to bear them, no desperate death-throes of a nation;
peace and unexampled prosperity reigned. Australians were proud of
their free institutions, their enlightened methods of treating and training
their children; and yet —they allowed the hand of some would-be Plehve
or Bobrikoff to draft those monstrous articles for school children.
As one reads them one wonders what malefactors had to be brought
under; what burly, savage criminals to be subdued. Fine of one hundred
pounds and the additional penalty of imprisonment in a fortress! ! ! !
Such things sound creepy and uncanny as punishments for small boys
upon whom the meaning of life has not yet dawned. As one reads them
one almost expects to hear the cry of “Fee, fi, fo, fum! lots of children’s
bodies to come,” from some ogre round the corner.
And the children, looking out upon the fresh, green world of life
and but dimly comprehending it all; what strange, perplexing thoughts
must be raised in them by all this military pother and prescribed penalty!
God rules only in Heaven, they will think; a big devil, called military
necessity, stalks through the earth, threatening to seize all who will not
come and begin to learn how to kill their fellow-men.
*As the boy commences drHling in July of the year in which he becomes 12,
this makes many of the trainees to be under 12 when they “come under’’ the
Military Commandant.


CHAPTER IV.
Training and Fines: the Older Boy, or
Youth: the Young Man.
“The great fault staring us in the face at the moment is that compulsion—in
the only form that civil and military authority can compel—is failing perilously;
that a greater proportion of hoys are ignoring their duty; that default of that sort
soon becomes infectious; and that as soon as disobedience becomes at all general—
and is recognised as being general—compulsory service will break down. It is
evident that the boy isn’t at all atracted by it—he is repelled When the
policy was initiated a great many things were discussed—but the thing last and;
least considered seems to have been the mind, temperament and inclinations of the
boy. And upon the mind of’the boy, after all, a good deal turns. You can’t ‘chop
logic’ with him to the point of conviction, nor, in the bulk, can you drive him.
You must either persuade him or attract him. The form of attraction used so far
is almost that of the ‘press-gang’ in its latest developments.”
—Donald McDonald, Melbourne “Argus” South African War Correspondent,
17th August, 1912.
' At fourteen, an age when very many boys leave school, the Junior
Caclet conscript has to become a Senior Cadet conscript. This means
the more formidable step of military registration, stronger discipline,
more military law, drills at night, and (when the system is developed)
camps.
Here again we give actual extracts from the Military Regulations
for Universal Training of Senior Cadets, published July 25, 1913. (C. 652.
Price 6d.)
Defence Act. ’
Section 2 l2s
Persons who are
liable to be trained,
Page 31.
Regulation 26.
Required by?he g Act.
Page 57.
Regulation 3.
aUeml S for a inspec USt
tion. Page 47.
Regulation 4.
Don ne p ;i °ge r 47 1Stra
“All male inhabitants of Australia (excepting those
who are exempted by this Act) who have resided
therein for six months, and are British subjects, shall
be liable to be trained as follows: —
(b) From 14 to 18 years of age, in the Senior
Cadets.
“(1) The prescribed training in the Senior Cadets
*? each year ending the 30th day of June shall be:—
hour whole-day drills, twelve half-day drills, twenty-
four night drills. Provided that the duration of a
whole-day drill shall not be less than four hours, of
a half-day drill not less than two hours, and of a night
drill not less than one' hour.*
“(2) All persons liable to be trained shall attend
at the Prescribed times and places for inspection, and
shall give such information as is prescribed, and shall
submit to the prescribed medical examination.
“Registration shall be carried out as follows: —
(Then are given details as to filling in of forms.)
“(2) Parents, guardians, and other persons acting
in loco parentis of those persons who are liable to be
registered are hereby required to register such per-
sons as above prescribed.
“(3) Section 35 of the Act prescribes a penalty not
exceeding £lO for a contravention of this regula-
tion. ’ ’
A new regulation—one of the 223 smuggled through Parliament
without discussion during the first few days of the new Parliament in
*“X«t less than” : a minimum, but no maximum length of drill is stated.


1913 —allows the area officer to act in loco parentis and register the
child of parents who refuse or neglect to register.*
Penalties for failing to attend drill are the same for our fourteen-
year conscript as when he was twelve. Thus he can, under Section 135,
be fined
£lOO for evading all drills in a year (1), or
£5 for missing a single drill (2).
And, in addition to or in lieu of any penalty, ‘ ‘ he may be committed
to the custody of any prescribed authority” (4) (of Section 135), and
while there “shall be subject to the regulations governing {hat institu-
tion or place, and to training or discipline as prescribed” (5).
Regulation 30.
Prescribed author-
ities, etc.
Page 60.
“The following shall be the prescribed ‘institution’
or ‘place’ referred to in Section 135, Sub-Section (5)
of the Act: —‘Any place kept or used for military pur-
poses, or any other institution or place approved by
the Minister. ’ ’ ’
An added penalty is contained in Section 136, which sets up a
military test for Public Service positions. A military order states that
applicants for positions must send to the Public Service Commissioner a
certificate from the area officer showing that the applicant has satis-
factorily discharged his military duties.
Regulation 30a.
Persons who evade
service ineligible
for employment
Commonwealth
Public Service.
(D.A. 136.)
Page 60.
‘ ‘ Every person who, without lawful excuse, evades
or fails to render the personal service required by the
Act shall, unless and until he has performed equivalent
personal service as prescribed, be and remain ineligible
for employment of any kind in the Public Service of
the Commonwealth.”
“In order to comply with the provisions of Section
13 of the Defence Act, the Public Service Commis-
sioner has notified that he will require certificates from
persons desiring employment to show that they are
rendering the necessary service or have been granted
exemption. ’ ’t
This revival, in a particularly vicious form, of the dead-and-gone
tests of past days, with their shameful Test Acts, is worthy
of notice.
* * * * *
At eighteen, three years before he is considered fit to vote, the
conscript passes into the Citizen Forces, where he remains for- eight
years. The prescribed training is:—
“In the citizen forces sixteen whole day drills, or their equivalent,
of which not less than eight shall be in camps of continuous train-
ing. ” (Defence Act, Sec. 126).
His compulsion takes the form of the same fines and imprisonment
*To this question, and the complete breakdown of the attempt to force the
parents to register their boys, we return later on. See Chapter XVII.
TThe certificate is to be in the following form:—
Certificate of Area Officer regarding who is a candidate for appointment
to the Public Service of the Commonwealth.
Training Area.
State of
I certify that is* personal service under Part 12
of the Defence Act, 1903-1912.
(Signature) Area Officer.
(Date)
*The Area Officer should insert in this space the words “rendering,” “not
rendering,” or “exempt from,” as the case may be.


as when he was a cadet, with the added pressure of court-martial for
any offence against the Act.
‘ ‘ Any meipber of the Defence Force charged with any offence
against this Act may be tried and punished either by court-martial
or by a civil court.” (Defence Act, Sec. 102).
That he is brought fully under military law will be seen on reading
the following regulation:—
Regulation 175.
Application of
Commonwealth
Military Regula-
tions. Page 74.
“All ranks of those undergoing training under Part
12 of the Act shall be subject generally to the Com-
monwealth Military Regulations in force for the
Militia; and with respect to discipline, with such addi-
tions and modifications as are herein prescribed. Pro-
vided that dismissal or discharge shall not be awarded
as a punishment, unless by sentence of court-
martial ”
So all the old Militia regulations of the Commonwealth stand valid,
unless definitely repealed by these new Universal Training Regulations
(and, so far as we can see,* only a part of one regulation has been
modified, and that to the greater detriment of the conscript). The con-
script soldier is liable to court-martial whenever his officers choose to
lay a charge of his breaking conduct regulations. (Defence Act, Section
102.) He may not, without military permission, prosecute an officer for
breaking regulations to his prejudice or ill-treating him. (Defence Act,
Section 110.) He must take the military oatht if it is tendered, under
a penalty of six months ’ imprisonment, without the option of a fine.
(Defence Aet, Section 76.)
*The reader is again reminded that this was written in 1915. There are other
changes in the book of regulations issued on July 28th, 1916, some of which are
most insidious. See Appendix 6of this book.
fQuite an orgy of swearing-in, even of cadets, began in Tasmania in 1912.
This led to a stir among the Australian Labor Unions, and, consequently, Attorney-
General Hughes made the discovery that the Act did not mean that the citizen
soldier was compelled by this section to take the oath. This convenient discovery
eased the situation, but no opponent of Citizen Military Training was deceived by
the temporary abandonment of the oath, wihich is to the militarist as the apple of
his eye!


CHAPTER V.
Military Law and Courts-Martial.
“There is one thing quite certain, that as the citizen merges into the soldier,
so does the State into tlie army, and freedom dies. Where the military spirit
prevails ‘the inhabitants of a country may be constitutionally assured of equal
justice, supremacy of civil over military power, freedom of speech and vote, yet
see the Constitution cunningly evaded, gracefully waved aside, or bluntly repudiated,
according to the character and position .of the assailant.’ ’’
C. R. Ford: “Case Against Compulsory Military Training.”
“I fear that there is growing up here that despotism of navalism and militarism
that always seems in every nation to get possession of the people and override the
general interests of the community in the interests of its own personal desires and
requirements While seeking to build up an esprit de corps in our country
in Defence matters, we have no means by which we can safeguard our youths, who
are becoming the basis of that system, from any wrong-doing that may emanate
from the brains of officers ”
—The late Mr. Robert Howe, Labor Member for Dailey in Federal Parliament,
22nd October, 1913.
Even the Junior Cadet is under military law.
But in this chapter we will discuss more fully the Senior Cadet and
his later status as an adult Citizen Soldier under our Conscription Act in
the year of grace 1915. At fourteen John Smith becomes a Senior Cadet.
Senior Cadet Regulation 45 reads: —‘‘Members of the x Senior Cadet
units shall, at all times when on duty or in uniform, be subject to>
military law.” The second paragraph states what is repeated in Regula-
tion 177 of the Citizen Force Regulations, that “for purposes of dis-
cipline” he “shall be considered to have been on duty, although not
in uniform, in respect to any act done, or omitted to be done, by hjm
in a military capacity, or with intentional reference on his part to his
military capacity. ’ ’
With the help of that elastic phrase “on duty,” and of the phrase
“intentional reference on his part to his military capacity,” military
men can decide that John Smith is on ctutv and therefore under military
law at almost any time. Why, the lad has only to complain about his
military training, and he places himself “on duty,” for he is inten-
tionally referring to his military Capacity.
A footnote to the foregoing Regulation 45 states that “details of
military offences and punishments are contained in the Defence Act and
Commonwealth Military Regulations and Standing Orders,” while Sec-
tion 4 of the Defence Act states that “ ‘Naval or Military Offence ’
means any offence against this Act, the [British] Army Act, or the Naval
Discipline Act. ’ ’
We will see, first of all, what freedom John Smith has of vindicating
himself in case of wrong done to him. We will put a case, by no means
hard to imagine, where an officer, for personal reasons or in the interests
of discipline, deliberately wrongs a conscript trainee. John Smith seeks
redress. From whom?
Military law is very clear on this point.
Regulation 225 (page 72).—“1f any soldier thinks himself wronged
in any matter by any officer other than his captain or by any other
soldier he may complain thereof to his captain.” If his captain
gives him no redress or wrongs him he may “complain” to his
commanding officer. If his commanding officer fails him, he may
“complain” to the district commandant. “If he thinks himself
wronged by his district commandant .... he may complain thereof,


through the proper channel, to the Military Board.”
His appeal all along is to military officers steeped in military caste.
Against them the ordinary conscript private has no chance.
If a gross wrong has been done him and he seeks legal redress
against the offending officer, he is faced with Seation 110 (Sub-Section
2) of the Defence Act, which says: —“A prosecution against an officer
of the military forces shall be brought by, or by the authority of, the*
District Commandant. ’ ’
Now, on the other hand, we will see what happens to John Smith,
the young conscript, when an officer brings a charge against him. It
may be for any one of the specific military .offences named in the fifty-
five paragraphs of Regulation 236 (page 73), or it 'can come under the*
drag-net of paragraph 45 of that Regulation, whereby he is charged with
being ‘ ‘ guilty of any act, conduct, disorder, or neglect to the prejudice
of good order and military discipline. ’ ’
In such cases the conscript ‘ ‘ may be tried and punished either by
court-martial or by a civil court. (Defence Act, Section 102.)*
But if the conscript, after he has been forced by his officers to
undergo court-martial, and has been unjustly sentenced by them, seeks-
the protection of a civil court, he is met by Section 100 of the Defence-
Act:—
“No proceedings of any court-martial constituted under this Act
shall be set aside or deemed void for any want of form, or be re-
• moved by certiorari or otherwise into any civil court. ’ ’
Baffled in his appeal to the courts, he decides to appeal to the public.
In this he is stopped by Military Standing Orders 115 and 116 (page-
-134).
115. Officers and soldiers are forbidden to publish or communicate
to the press, any information, without special authority, either
directly or indirectly. They will be held responsible for all state-
ments contained in communications to their friends which may be-
subsequently published in the press.
116. They are not to attempt to prejudge questions under investiga-
tion by the publication, anonymously or otherwise, of their opinions,
and they are not to attempt to raise a discussion in public about
orders, regulations, or instructions issued by their superiors.
As the meaning of the military system unfolds itself ,to him, the
young conscript gradually realises that he stands before men who by
merely accusing him of committing a military offence while on duty can-
get him into their hands and out of the protection of the civil courts.
As the lad stands before his officer he is looking into the face of
a man who, if he (the lad) offends or enrages him by any action, good
or bad, thoughtful or thoughtless, can, in the years to come, by simply
preferring a military charge, deprive him of liberty till the military
courts have done with him. With what awe will the lad view the man
who in time of peace can and may do what no parent, no schoolmaster,
no magistrate, no judge and jury can and may do —namely, by a mere
laying of an accusation ensure that the truth or otherwise of that charge-
shall be settled (if fellow military men concur) by men of their own caste,
without the'“interference” of a supreme civil court?
*At present the Senior Cadet is not to be tried by Court-martial. See Regula-
tion No. 46 (Senior Cadets), which, however, is revocable at any time by
Regulation. See Acts Interpretation Act.


SUPREME LAW, ORDER, AND JUSTICE ARE EMBODIED
BEFORE THE EYES OF THE RISING GENERATION, NOT IN
A MAGISTRATE OR JURY, BUT IN A MACHINE IN LEATHER
AND KHAKI, FROM WHICH THERE IS NO APPEAL, BUT TO
OR THROUGH OTHER MACHINES IN LEATHER AND KHAKI,
AND FROM THESE MACHINES NO LAW COURT CAN PROTECT
HIM. The machine’s business is to produce “military efficiency,’’ and
its usual defence for its action is “military necessity.”
So our authorities have won back a “right” that human progress
■has taken from the feudal baron and from crowned heads. And all this
owing to alleged military necessity. If such involves the destruction
of the fundamental principles of fair play and freedom, our militarised
civilisation will be as highly explosive a compound as dynamite.
It is no use for militarist apologists to say that these powers are
not in general use. That argument merely amounts to this: The Act
allows us military men to compel obedience, and we mean to; but we
are not doing it yet, because we cannot, because our discipline is not
yet strong enough, and because the public are not yet used to our
military ways.
Continental experience confirms anti-militarists in the certain belief
that the attempt will be made to obtain the requisite discipline, and
that these Standing Orders will be rigidly enforced. Words are not
put in military regulations just to occupy the printers. They are there
for a purpose.
And here let us impress upon our readers the fact that Military Law
is not Law at all, in its usual sense, but rather the negation of Law.
With all its failings, Civil Law attempts to secure for a man a fair
trial, a trial by disinterested persons. Military Law works through trials
by interested persons, who desire that a man be fairly tried if their idea
of military necessity and the defence considerations allow it, and un-
fairly if they do not.
Few of us have thought what military law really is. It is a thousand
times more harmful than its ogre-brother, Martial Law. The latter
acts only in emergencies, real or alleged. Military law acts continuously,
even through years and generations of so-called peace. The former is
like the noisy tempest, that comes, ravages, and goes; the latter, like
the silent malaria, comes, permeates, and stays.
Military law, though set up in the alleged interests of nationality,
is in its essence absolutely non-national. The civil law of different
lands varies vastly, according to the local and prevailing idea of freedom,
but there is a gruesome similarity between the essentials of military
law in all countries.
Let us examine its main features and so realise what sort of “law”
•our Conscription Act places on all Australian youth.
(1) A set of offences known as military offences is created. These
include any breach of any military regulation by any member
of the force.
(2) The officer class allege that the soldier’s act is a military
offence.
(3) The officer class decide that it is or is not a military offence.


(4) The officer class sentence the accused..
(5) The officer class punish him in a military place, i.e., one con-
trolled by military regulations.
(6) There is no civil appeal from the sentence given bv the officer
class.
(7) Regulations forbid complaint except to the officer class.
(8) If the man’s friends champion his cause in the press and so-
forth, he is liable to punishment by the officer class.
To sum up: by merely laying a military charge the officer class,
if their discipline is efficient, can in conscription countries maroon any
young man, to whom they have an objection, from human fellowship and
from civil protection as completely as if they had deported him to some-
Devil’s Island in the ocean waste.
When Scharnhorst persuaded the German people in 1808 to copy
the victorious French and to submit to conscription there was the fine
talk —so familiar in other countries since—about citizen soldiery, the
democracy of universal training, a nation in arms, and so on; and also
assuring talk about the retention by the man in training of his citizen
rights. In this retention there is just one reservation which a heedless
public overlooks—i.e., except in the matter of military offences!
Only those who have studied the regulations see that this saving
phrase means “only as much civil protection as the officers wish’’ —to
wit, at the limit, none at all.
Thus, armed with all but absolute power and free from outside
interference, except when a crop of suicides raises a brief scandal, the
military caste in conscription countries sets to work upon the immature-,
manhood, upon pretty much the entire youth of the nation, and begins
the shaping and moulding process.
The strong, independent will is worn down by low diet and cell;
the weaker nature is coaxed, wheedled, and cajoled. Every method of
compulsion, every alluring art of persuasion, is used to instil into those
unformed minds militarist ideals, notions of regimental honor, contempt
for things civilian, for human rights and human worth.
As the months, and the years, in barracks and camps go by, the
tie that binds a man to his home friends, to his fellow-craftsmen, to
his trades union, grows weaker. The military bond gains strength, and
in time in many of the more -pliant natures there arises a spaniel-like-
inclination to lick the hand of the man who has cowed them and to bite
his enemies—the advocates of civil rights.
“But,” says the Australian conscriptionist, our compulsory system
does not contemplate years of camp and barrack life.” True, there is
no such long period at present specified; but this is an administrative
detail that can be rectified later on.
That this is probable in the very near future, unless Australians
abolish the whole compulsory system, is indicated by the quotations,
towards the end of Chapter IX., upon which, when he reaches them,,
we urge our reader to ponder and reflect.


CHAPTER VI.
Will Parliament Protect the Trainee?
“From many matters which have come under my notice it has been proved that
it is useless to appeal to the Defence Department for information or to have wrongs
redressed. If honorable members put questions concerning the administration of
defence on the notice paper they will find that the Minister representing the
Minister for Defence will ask them to bo good enough to let the matter in which they
are interested stand over till next Thursday. On next Thursday they will be asked
to put it off until the following week. Last session I put some questions on the
paper to which lying answers were given, and I was put off until Parliament was
again dissolved. I nad to wait undl we met again this year to get answers to
questions I submitted last October.”
—Mr. Matthews, Labor Member for Port Melbourne, in> Federal Parliament,
23th October, 1913. (Hansard, p. 2601).
“Mr. Joseph Cook (Prime Minister): I am going to answer this series of ques-
tions, but I desire to express the hope that at the beginning of our new naval
training system honorable members will not bring to this House questions of
■ordinary discipline.
‘‘Mr. Howe: I sincerely hope that we shall do se, and I tell the Prime Minister
that he will get them. , .. . '
“Mr. Cook: Then I can only say that if matters of ordinary discipline are
brought up here they will be ignored.”
—Federal Hansard, October 24th, 1913, p. 2151.
A military regulation becomes law as a provisional regulation when
merely signeA by the Governor-General and gazetted. Each regulation
must then lie for fifteen days on the table of each House of Parliament,
_and during this time it may be blocked by a resolution of either House.
That is the theory' of the thing, and it sounds reassuring—as if
Parliament had control. But how does it work out in practice? One
sentence will give the answer. Out of thousands of new or amended
Defence Department regulations laid before Parliament since the be-
ginning of the conscription system, only one, we think (a matter of kilts
..for Australian Scots), has been blocked. The rest have slipped through
their fifteen days, and in hardly a single case has there been a solitary
syllable of discussion.
The Act further provides that the regulations must be laid before
Parliament fourteen days after the making, and if Parliament is not
then sitting, within fourteen days after its next meeting. So the
Military Board can make their most drastic regulations during Parlia-
mentary vacation, when they can have an uninterrupted run for months.
It is significant that Nos. 1 and 2 of the Federal Hansard of 1913, which
cover the proceedings of a new Parliament, report no less than 223 new
or newly amended naval and military regulations which had come into
operation during the Parliamentary' recess. And when they reached
Parliament there was not one single line of discussion on any of them.
They lay their statutory 15 days on the tables, and now, by Sections 4
and 124 of the Defence Act, are part of the law of Australia.
Anti-militarists attempting to change a Defence Act have to face


a more colossal power than the drink, gambling, and vice interests all
rolled into one.
Wo have often had to meet the argument that the Minister of
Defence, representing the Civil Power, is able to protect the civil rights
of the conscript and is a satisfactory substitute for the protection of
the civil courts. Any case can, it is said, reach the Minister “through
the proper channel, ” that is, through the military channel, as provided
for in Regulation 225. But this arrangement exists in France and
probably in Russia A It is the custom in all conscript systems to allow
this nominal right of military appeal. But it is likely that very few
appeals reach the Military Board, and fewer still in practice will reach
the civilian ears of the Minister of Defence. We cannot overlook the
helplessness of the Minister of Defence, who has, necessarily, to deal
with such matters through his military officials. Were he a trained
judge he could not decide the questions, for to hear personally the
complaints of thousands of soldiers is impossible. As it is, he is a
busy politician with all the other calls of his department upon his
time. He must leave such matters to the military men and accept their
advice. Even if-a Minister of Defence means well, he can do little,
fm lie cannot get at the facts first-hand. The records of the first court-
martial will be generally such that a person reading them will conclude
that the defendant had no case. In practice, only when something
astoundingly scandalous, like the Dreyfus affair, takes place does the
civilian world in Continental countries ever hear even a fraction of
the facts.
Although conscription in Australia has been set up so recently,
there is already sufficient evidence that the Minister of Defence and
his fellow-members of Parliament are helpless in their efforts to control
the military machine. Members of Parliament are continually being
approached by their constituents on behalf of lads who have suffered
under conscription, and in their efforts to protect the trainees they are
made aware of their impotence. Listen to the late Mr. Howe, then
Labor member for Dailey, who was a supporter of compulsory military
training:—
A day or two ago I asked that certain regulations in regard to
military matters should be framed and embodied in book form
so that we as members of the House might know precisely where we
stood in connection with our defence system. We do not know this
to-day. We have our defence Acts embodied in such books as are
handed to us, but there is not one man in this House knows what the
Regulations are, and almost every day every- membej' is challenged
with questions by his constituents regarding the treatment of our
youths. This is most objectionable. It seems to me that instead of
the Minister controlling his Department, the Department is con-
trolling him.”—(Federal Hansard, 22nd October, 1913, page 2378).
And not only are the published Regulations so difficult to get at
and obscure, but it is clear that certain regulations are unpublished
and kept secret* Between these difficulties the member of Parliament
*This was written in 1915, when Russia was the awful example of a tvrant-
ndden country. J


I surely in a helpless position. For note the following, spoken nine
EeS-lX -SatiS in d r£ e rto solidary W
'"•‘Mt. Kelly-re. I may info™ 11
there is a regulation ln lorce aeaii g Defence. I can obtain a
it was put in force by the late Minister I had it in my
copy for the honorable membera number to the House at
hands the other day, and I think I gave the nu blished> 0 f
the time. If the honorable member
course it will be publishec. tbe responsibility for the
£rSlt£i* *£* fol of punishment. ’ ’ (Federal Hansard)
4,1,1 to this secrecy of the very military law that °° nt ™ ls
• + oftnnl secrecy and circumlocution of the Mill
rr d Port - Oetoher 23,
W! “„ the officers are the man who they kee^back
who have been
-kin g g repress.’ -(Federal Hansard,
given. And these . » Minis ter Mr. Matthews’ own party col-
it was controlled by a L political party lovaltv in Australia
league. Those who know the department,
will know how strong must have been the ease g
and how great the speaker’s indignation, for him to si
° f '*r 4vT Parliament protect the trainee? Not while the following is
t of'the military la wof Australia. We quote again, without apology,
it: these SUntog Orders cut at the root of citisenshi,, and civil pro-
teCt,°nMilitary Standing Orders
to publish or communicate to „ V I indirectly They will be held
special authority. either ’ co r mnm „ieatio.,» to their
responsible for all st tl be pu in the press.
f "m They ire not to attempt to prejudge questions under investiga-
ti<m publication, anonymously J>r otherwise, of^their^opinions,
::l* a ?egXtr‘s, to ortS:tl.sTsled by their superiors.
* Little has, as yet, come of this promise.-J.F.H. (1919).


CHAPTER VII.
The Future and the Court-Martial.
/w anyone is inclined to think that tyranny could not develop in this countrv
and) owing to its free institutions, let them remember the way in which
militarism has acted and reacted, always and everywhere, on free institutions On
mentioning this possibility of the occurrence of acts of tyranny and injustice to one
of our members of Parliament some months ago, he stated that such things could
not happen in New Zealand the members of Parliament were too easily accessible.
That same M.P. voted against the late Mr. T. E. Taylor’s proposed amendment to
the Act, which gave the soldier the right to appeal to tKivil power on the
grounds that it would militate against the maintenance of discipline' 1 * That amend-
ment was not carried, and to-day in New Zealand the citizen-soldier is deprived of
his ordinary rights of citizenship in so far as he is a soldier. Paragraph 176 of the
Regulations states: “At all times, and in all places the r>nnH,nt X
soldiers, as such, is regulated by military law.” Paragraon 200 Ixpressl? brings
The members of the Territorial Force under the disciplinary provisions of the Im-
perial Army Act, which has been well described as ‘barbarous’ and ‘out-of-date’ ’’
u. ±t. x ora: The Case Against Compulsory Military Training.”
In my time I have attended many courts-martial in various capacities This
I can say with the most serious conviction, that, from the standpoint of impartial
justice, they are, as a rule, no better than a farce. The judges, as a body have no
capacity for eliciting facts or weighing evidence—how can they have? al are
U teee° fl a s r ?he h r jl t dgm f nt |‘ They are mostly as little akin to justice, even
rough justice, as the Cockney’s English is to Greek.” J
—“John Bull's Army from Within” (Unwin, 1907).
By June 30, 1914, the Australian Defence Department had had, ac-
cording to its official figures, to institute over 27,000 civil prosecutions of
lads who had evaded drills. The Act, since its inauguration three years
previously, had been driving up in front of it, like a mass of snow in
fiont of a snow-bound train, a huge obstacle—an ever-increasing mass
of resisting lads. For every five lads in training it had been necessary
to launch a prosecution against one (so-called) “shirker.”
Again. Parental registration, as required by Section 142 of the
Act, had so completely broken down, in spite of the £lO penalty, that
it had been found necessary to enable, by regulation, the officer to
register the child.*
Never was a statute in such dire straits. No wonder, then, that
a discreet Military Board made little use of its terrible court-martial
powers and was economical, rather than lavish, in its use of military
law.
Yet, with a cheery sense that he is knocking your case into a
cocked hat, some Major Smith or Brown will break in: “I do not think
you could mention any prosecution of a trainee that has taken place
in a military court.” Dear, innocent man! ! The point is: “What
powers do these contents give to the military?”—not “What use have
the military yet made of them?”
There are very obvious reasons why they do not yet [Easter, 1915]
use them. They dare not. To have frequent recourse to court-martial
w r ould attract public attention to the meaning of the contents of the
Conscription Act before that Act is out of the shallow, rock-strewn
waters of administrative difficulties. It would illustrate its true
meaning. It would “give away the whole show-.” Hence it is neces-
sary to go slowly. Hence, too, the Senior Cadet Regulation 46, excusing
*See Appendix C.


the boy under 18 from court-martial; hence the reluctance to use the
military courts, even for adults. With tens of thousands of civil prose-
cutions and thousands of imprisonments in fortresses to their discredit
the Board will move very circumspectly and not cause avoidab
from the Act and Regulations will already have
shown the fair reader that the court-martial is to play an impoitan
part in the disciplining of the so-called citizen soldier Jo further
clinch the argument, we will quote from Regulation 2331 of the Com-
monwealth Military Regulations (page 73), which, as it is not repealed
in the Citizen Forces Book of Regulations, controls the citizen soldier.
T hc as a ru i e , be tried by court-martial, when the offence
is not of a military character.”
Two kinds of offences are, therefore, contemplated here:—l. Military
offences (defined by Section 4 of the Act as meaning my offence
< i 00-ainst this Act, the Army Act, and the Naval Discipline Act
and 2, Non-military Offences, such as arson, theft, etc. In thlß
tion the Board recommends that class 2 (non-military offences) should
Is a rule” be referred to the civil courts; by implication it recommends
that military offences (any breach of regulations) be not so
The next Regulation, 234, advises the Commanding Office! himself
to punish the bulk of the cases summarily, but to remand the senou
Not only have the officers permission to punish
military offences, in a military court at which a single mi Italy oihe
shall decide the guilt and, within limits, the penalty, hut they a , y
Regulation 233, clearly advised to do so.
“t US quote the end of Kegulation 234, as showing what
military law in the future may do to our young men. Among
the cases that the Commanding Officer is not to fettle himself _»um-
marily but to refer to court-martial, are cases where it is necessary
to*make an example of an offence in the general interests of d.s-
C ‘ PU Here*is a blank cheque on the bank of military necessity It is
easy to imagine the kind of “examples” that will be made. We ask
the reader to remember this power possessed by the military officer when
he is read-' the accounts we give later of the imprisonment in fortresses
£Us who" rightly refused to become conscripts. The conscripw>
punishment will furnish the terrible example may not be a unit
or a riotous man at all, but a young man whom the system holds vntua y
ns a hostage that his own and his relatives’ activities shall not be
displeasing to the Military Board or likely to lessen the military
power.
tin the new boot ot Gon.t.l R.snUUone l.eued on 28/7/’l6, old Emulation.
phrase, and consequently from e that it was there, and gave us an.
drawn. The> Aurtratog t P^c^end -J.F.H. (1919).
inkling of what our


CHAPTER VIII.
The Conscript and the Volunteer Under
Military Law.
The defenders of our conscript system never tire of pointing out that
many of the penal regulations and much of the penal procedure of our
-compulsory system may be found, expressed in other or identical words, in
the military publications of the British Regular Army, of the British
Territorial System, and of the old Voluntary System of Australia; and
that consequently they constitute no menace to our freedom.
Our answer to this is as follows. Regulations and Standing' Orders
can be used, and can be abused. The risk of abuse under a system where
enlistment is compulsory is increased a hundredfold. Under a volunteer
system the training must be kept popular. Even in the case of a man
whom the pinch of poverty is driving into the permanent forces; such a
man, if he knows that the officers are tyrannical, that fines and stoppages
for barrack-damages are frequent and outrageous, and that brutal
punishments are common, will prefer the free, if hard, life of the tramp
to the slavery of a harshly conducted military institution. Even in the
■case of the permanent force, officers have to be careful that the time-
expired soldiers are rendered by fair treatment so devoted to the army
that their tales of camp and barrack life told to the outside world may
attract others. With ex-soldiers decrying the service, the recruiting
sergeant is powerless: little notice will be taken of his fine stories and
glowing words of praise for the soldier’s life. The merest gossip of
serious ill-treatment, and enlistment dwindles. The officer class in any
voluntary system must, as a rule, walk circumspectly: they dare not be
“rough with the stuff” or there would be no recruits.
The voluntary system, too, with its comparatively small numbers,
■embraces, in the permanent force, only a fraction of the young men of the
country; while the grip of military law on the territorial volunteer
will never be very great. The latter’s effectiveness as a soldier will
•depend more on his enthusiasm, self-reliance, and sturdy manhood than
on servile submission to authority. He may be, technically, under certain
severe-looking regulations, but so long as his enlistment is voluntary and
his time of training not liable to arbitrary extension by the officers on
the alleged grounds of non-efficiency,* he will talk; and his friends and
the general public will get uneasy.
Section 133 of our Defence Act runs: “At the termination of each annual
training in the Senior Cadets and Citizen Forces, each member SHALL BE
CLASSIFIED BY THE OFFICER APPOINTED ON THAT BEHALF as “efficient”
or non-efficient,” either for failure to attend during the prescribed period or
because they have NOT ATTAINED A SUFFICIENT STANDARD OF EFFICIENCY,
shall be required to attend AN EQUIVALENT ADDITIONAL TRAINING for each
year in which they are non-efficient” There is here an opportunity for the officers to
indefinitely prolong the term of service of an Australian conscript who has offended
them by letting his tongue run about grievances. There is no civil appeal against
such prolongation. The prospect of even one extra year’s conscription would tend
to make the trainee jiut up with wrong treatment rather than reveal it in the public
interest: the likelihood of an indefinite extension of the liability to be tormented
will make him inclined to hold his tongue about torment that has a prospect of


Conscription, however, puts practically the whole young manhood of
a country under military law. The officer class, as their discipline
becomes effective, will by means of the rigorous application of standing
orders and regulations PREVENT ALL PUBLIC PROTESTS AND
VENTILATION OP GRIEVANCES. So the lad is theirs to drill,
theirs to shape and fashion; theirs to court-martial; theirs to imprison
in the solitary cell; he is shut off from the outside world, and is as much
exiled from civil life and ordinary freedom as they choose. It he com-
plins, even to a member of Parliament, he is committing an offence
punishable with hard-labor imprisonment, and by that very act of pub.
protest Is destroying his own case/ . , ,
He becomes lust the officer’s “THING”; a thing to he when told,
to burn when told; to slay when told-an efficient instrument of destrue-
tion and tvrannv, but no longer a man.
Compulsory enrolment removes the natural check on oppression.
Each vouth MUST enrol and CANNOT resign. In other Government
departments a man, if he is ill-treated and cannot get satisfaction from
a departmental enquiry, is free to resign and conduct an outside campaign
against his oppressors. And so are the military officers themselves if
thev are above the age of training. But the conscript is bound to the
machine. Even if he should get temporary redress for what his oppressors
have done he must remain in their clutches. However treated, all he can
do is to use Regulation 225 and appeal to his captain,t a mess-mate anc
dear old crony of the very man who is ill-using lam.
ISiSf Hi s.;S’;ra » *“
the position of a me, " t ? er )f |^ e l rec ognised official channel. Any attempt to
by me ““:
pany” in the position previously occupied 2 6th 1916 and coming into force on
l oVo 6 A n lS.mVttV«"“ f ”;^
«. T .f w
to the officer commanding Ins company, and it ne of h _ g complaint no t being
officer commanding his he may complain thereof to his corn-
redressed, or in respect of any other matter ne y ‘’ omnlan(li[lK officer either
manding officer, and it he thinks b >™f el \V™ n S > d or any other matter,
in respect of his complaint not bem^ is^fc r t 6SSe Comman dant; and every
he may complain thereof to made in pursuance of this regulation
officer to whom a complaint is ™ ad % n^ire 7 i nto , and shall. if on
shall cause such complaint justice of the complaint so made,
enquiry he is satisfied np( , pq o irv f o r giving full redress to the corn-
take such steps as ?»»>' b ® blamedof S If he thinks himself wronged by
it'uSUJtToSirt a;“er r in°s£p* e c« of rSo*™”
complaint in writing. . .. miutarv channel, it is pretty easy to realise
The “proper channel” being the military cnanuei, e block the.
that one or other of the officials .in. . ‘‘Hansards,” 1912-14,
complaint. On this point the Renresentatives made by Mr. Jas. Matthews,
sßll important extracts from which we give elsewhere, i.e.,
Chapter VI. —J.T.H. (1919).


While emphasising the certainty and the huge extent of officer
domination and abuse of power that will follow if conscription is allowed
to stand part of the law of Australia, we do not wish to imply that the
majority, or even a large minority, of our present military men are tyrants
or even men who would be deliberately unfair in the use of regulations.
The system with us is so young that it has not yet had time to bring forth
its fruits. The central thought is this: As shown by careful reasoning in
the previous chapters the system gives the officer class unlimited power
over the trainee (i.e., the entire rising generation of males) inasmuch as
from the time a military charge is laid against him the latter cannot
appeal to Magna Carta, Habeas Corpus, the Bill of Rights, or any other
great bulwark of personal freedom to shelter him from that charge and
pnsure a fair, unbiassed enquiry. HE BECOMES DEAD TO CIVIL
LAW, so far as that accusation is concerned. Great statutes bought by
rivers of blood and oceans of tears become “scraps of paper, ” for the
officer class just take him in hand and break him.
Now this means colossal and practically unlimited power for a class
of men over their fellows: it is the denial of democracy: it is a thousand
times worse than that, it is the denial of fundamental human right and
justice.
Absolute power is a CURSE to the individual exercising it: it is no
less a curse to a class of people, especially to one becoming a caste
NOT ONE OF US HUMAN BEINGS, AND NO SET OF US, however
tried and staid, is tit to be trusted with ABSOLUTE POWER, SUCH
INVARIABLY RUINS HUMAN NATURE, AND BREEDS THE
TYRANT.
Could Stein and Scharnhorst have foreseen in 1808 the effect upon
theii ideal citizen officers of long years of absolute control over the lives
of the rising generations of German youth they would have been less
enthusiastic about the wonderful virtues of National Service!
Me have recently observed “officerism” in excelsis in evidence and
triumphant at Zabern; but nationality and race do not account for it, for
we have seen it equally evident and all-but triumphant in the Dreyfus
case. Had Alfred Dreyfus not had rich and powerful friends he would
have died unvindicated on Devil's Island —died a military felon, as many
hundred innocent men, the world over, have done before him. Only the
very rich Rave the slightest hope of success in fighting a national con-
scriptive machine.
Like causes produce like effects. Give to the officer class absolute
power, and in a few years your officers become brutalised barbarians.
An excessive national vanity leads some of our countrymen to think
that our British blood is proof against such a downfall. We reply: Even
if difference of national character be granted, there remains THE
IRRESISTIBLE INFLUENCE OF MORAL AND ECONOMIC LAWS
acting upon individuals over long periods of time, and that in the end
LIKE CAUSES MUST HAVE LIKE RESULTS.
When, too, we remember that, fundamentally, human nature is tl>e
same everywhere, we realise upon what shaky ground our perfervid
patriots take their stand who declare that our officers can be permitted


to drink the poison of absolutism, and that they will suffer, no moral ill-
Whatever may be the excellence of the twentieth century Australian
officer he is a man, and .not a super-man: and that he possesses a man »
frailties there is plenty of evidence even in this little book '
We will now illustrate the vast difference between the soldiei s lot
as a volunteer and as a conscript trainee by again referring to our
the trainee , under Part 12 of the Act [that is,
the compulsory soldier, who comprises practically the whole of our peace
armvl is under the old Commonwealth Military Regulations with such
additions and modifications” as are prescribed in the Universal Training
Keg N a o^h o ing shows so much the already changed attitude of our officers
towards the so-called citizen in the ranks as the modification of Begu a
tion 298, sub-section 6. The trainee’s convenience is not now to 1
considered: military necessity alone, as interpreted by the
to be studied: The old method of treatment was expressed thus m
"Regulation 298 (6).—”The offence of absence without leave re-
r 6S I fvved re This paragraph is to be carefully explained to all soldiers
“large under sections 40, 4), 108, and 112 of the Act
compare this reasonable treatment of the volunteer with the present
harsh treatment of the conscript: £8 One for missing one , rU,
imprisonment in fortresses for lads whose business o. ill-health
prevented them attending a camp or series of dn s. military
The conscript system enormously increases the evil y
CASTE The very construction of a conscript army welds the office s
Lt a permanent" compact instrument to crush or twist an unwilling
PeoP Let us not forget that it is the LEISURED CLASS who have time
to study for the qualifications, and who generally get the commissions
Will on" conscriptionists tell us how many working-men officers there are
Z the French or German army? To come nearer home,
what percentage of the cadets training to be officers at the Austral a
Military College at Duntroon are the sons of weekly-wage earners
flonbt if 5 per cent, of these lads are, in spite of the effoits to mane
the college unlike Sandhurst in its exclusiveness. And when t ey g
their commissions, whatever salaries may be given on
enabling office, -
adopting’extravagant habits in connection with their mess-room life and


social functions, so that the poor man who cannot ‘‘go the pace’’ must
drop out. Conscription offers no remedy for this evil: it enhances it
rather than lessens it.
One thought morO: The officer class we are forming in Australia is
a permanent and closely-knit body, especially in its higher grades. The
tens of thousands of conscripts who pass through their hands are a looselv
connected, floating population, who are with the colors for a compara-
tively shoit time, and then pass into the reserve, and fresh swarms
succeed. \\ hat childishness to call such an arrangement a free citizen
soldiery. The private is a helpless, disconnected unit. Were he to try
and organise a soldiers’ union' for the purpose of protecting his most
elementaly civil lights, he would be imprisoned in a fortress; in some
countries, flogged and shot. Over him is the all-powerful caste with its
cry of military necessity.
» higher officers are informally leagued together in a sort of military
freemasonrj, the subordinate officers are not allowed to form an honest trades union.
An attempt to form such a union m Melbourne within the first year of conscription
was quickly broken down. The Melbourne “Age” of 31st May, 1912, reports: “To
a man they (Cadet Officers) are dissatisfied with the treatment to which they are
n U C 3 -ffiet d OffiVor<.>l e \d ,n g .spirits among them called a meeting for the formation of
a Cadet Officers Association, and the statement of their grievances. They had
onartfrs d p , lace ’ ? nd b , een assured of a large attendance, when head-
quarters (afraid of the strength such an association would gain) nipped the move-
ment in the bud, and directed that the gathering must not take place.”


CHAPTER IX.
Is It Conscription?
“I repeat, in case of misunderstanding, that under a Regular system men are
trained in barracks by professional soldiers. Under a Militia system, all ranks are
composed of citizens living in their own homes. Armies are divided materially into
two categories, Regular and Militia; morally, also, into two categories, Voluntary or
Conscript. These divisions are perfectly clear and cannot be confounded by
question-begging epithets. General sir lan Hamilton. “Compulsory Service.”
“In a general and non-technical sense all methods of compulsory enlistment are
conscriptive, especially where the liability to serve is legally established as it would
be under the National Service League’s proposals, or under those of the promoters
of Universal Military Service.” Gaaette „ sth February , 19U .
Thieves do not call their trade theft, nor do the National Service
League and its Australian fellow-conspirators call the object they worship
Conscription. Mr. Shee did when he first issued his book, ‘ ‘ The Briton’s
First Duty: the Case for Conscription,” but that was a sad error and soon
to be corrected in the next edition.
To give a bad thing a good name is half the battle. Hence we meet
the fair-sounding name “Citizen Soldier.”*
Will our conscriptionists kindly try to answer this question? If they
will honestly make the attempt they will at once expose the rottenness
of all this high-falutin talk about their citizen service as something
different from Continental conscription. Here is the question: “In what
wav are the citizen and other rights of the Australian and New Zealand
adult trainee better protected from officer aggression than those of, say,
the French or German conscript?”
While he is reflecting we will supply the chief points of resemblance
to Continental conscription. Like the European conscript:
1. The Australian citizen soldier is compelled to enrol for military
training. This compulsion to enrol is the meaning of conscription given
in Webster’s Dictionary.
2. If a conscientious objector to war and war-training, he must
either violate his conscience or spend long periods in military prisons.
(Defence Act, Section 135.)
3. The citizen soldier is liable to be' tried and punished by court-
martial. (Defence Act, Section 102.)
4. He is distinctly forbidden appeal from the sentence of a court-
martial to any civil court whatever. (Defence Act, Section 100.)
5. He must take the military oath of obedience. (Defence Act, Sec-
tion 37.) t
*A country’s conscription usually begins with fine talk about
Soldiers ”“A Nation in Arms.” and ‘‘National Service. De Servan used these
same plirases in France in 1792; they were used in Germany by Scharnhorst m
1808; and by conscriptionists in Australia and New Zealand in lJii.
tThe administering of the oath to compulsory trainees has been temporarily
dropped. The oath, however, still stands in the Act. and Section 37 plainly compels
those enlisting to take it, under penalty of six months imprisonment (Section 76-).
See Appendix F. —J.F.H. (1919).


6. His lips aie scaled regarding liis treatment as a conscript. (Stand-
ing Orders 106, 115, and 116.)
7. Where the Military Board choose to define him as being “on
iduty he is under military law (Citizen Force Regulation 177). Ilis
mere refening to his military capacity, which he cannot help doing when
he complains about treatment, places him “on duty” in the eyes of
the Board.
°R* <?er bleaks a regulation in his treatment of a private, the
latter cannot, without military permission, sue him in a civil court, as
the information must be laid “by or by the authority of the District
Commandant.” (Defence Act, Section 110.)
9. If convicted by a court-martial of a military offence the free-born
British citizen can be arrested on a warrant signed merely by a military
officer and taken to a military prison. (Defence Act, Sections 115
116.)
10. At courts-martial, raw young officers of comparatively low rank
and little experience can inflict terms of imprisonment (Regulation 236)
with hard labor, setting upon the citizen the indelible stain of criminal
incarceration in gaol or military fortress. (Defence Act, Sections 102,
116.) Hoi does the punishment end with one term of imprisonment for
three months. While in prison lie may be accused of fresh “offences”
and fresh punishments may be heaped upon him, till the free man returns
to the ranks a broken thing.
We see, then, that the phrase “citizen soldier” is a cruel mockery.
There is no guarantee whatever that the civil rights of the trainee will
be lespected. In the light of the above there is no more “citizen” about
the citizen soldier than the Military Board choose to allow. He
is just an OFFICER’S ITEM. He is no citizen soldier, but just a
conscript whose barracks are not yet ready for him, and whose term
of continuous training is, owing to the present state of Australian feel-
ing, yet a matter of weeks.
No one will deny that if the training remains at its present length
there is a difference of degree, if not of kind, between the two systems.
But what indication have we that the present short period—which
•experts and military officers say is of little use for producing the soldier—
is anything more than the thin end of the wedge which, with each big
■war-scare or yellow-press armament boom, will be driven more deeply
into the living flesh of our British institutions?
Lord Roberts, in his book advocating compulsory military training
in England, says:—
“Discipline cannot be imparted in small doses It is for
this reason that the National Service League insists on four to six
months continuous training as the irreducible minimum
This mention of four months has, I know, caused profound discontent
amongst a considerable number of people who .... cavil at the
idea that reasonable efficiency can be obtained in so short a period of
* tiaming. . . . . The National Service League has no special pre-
dilection for this particular period. Its desire is to see the principle
of universal service for home defence accepted .... there will then
be no difficulty in adjusting the details of the scheme which will be
necessary to reduce theory into practice. ’ ’


Lord Dudley, late Governor-General of Australia, on his return to>
England, speaking of the conscript system in Australia, said:
‘ ‘ He felt sure they would have to increase the length of training,,
for he did not believe that .... sixteen days’ training in a year
was sufficient .... but they were right to go slow. . . It was
tactful and politic not to make the term of service too arduous at
first, and to let it grow. ’ ’
And Australian politicians are already beginning to talk in the same
strain. The late Liberal Prime Minister, speaking in Sydney on March
13, 1913, said:— . \ ,
“It was impossible that a fortnight a year training could produce
the military efficiency that existed, sav, in Germany or Japan. It
on o-ht to be said as to what Lord Kitchener recommended, that it
waVnot yet being carried out in its entirety. Lord Kitchener was
very strong on one point, that besides compulsory training there was
to be continuous home training, with compulsory camps to test the
value of the home training.”*
The conscript principle has been set up in Australia and the con-
script ’s status defined on Continental lines. That is sufficient for tle
militarist conspirators at present. The period of training will increase
as soon as the people are lulled into apathy.
Citizen soldier? An impossible thing. Citizen and soldier are two
opposite terms. Civil law and military law are two opposite legal sys-
tems. Civil law tries to protect the individual; military law protects the
” UU The conscriptionist realises that in the present state of popular
opinion it is essential that the public should be blindfolded. The system
which in France, Germany, and Eussia [written in 1915] is conscription,
but in Australia and New Zealand is “national service, is not one
to defend our people, but to enslave them: to wreck their spirit of inde-
pendence and make them submissive “food for powder, the helpless pawns-
on the chessboard of .the financial magnate, the politician, and the mili-
tarist.”
*gydney “Morning Herald,’’ 14th March, 1913.


CHAPTER X.
How Conscription Affects the Schoolmaster.
Nothing in the Black Statute is so subtle and far-reaching in its
nature as the Junior Cadet Regulations when considered in their effect
upon the education of youth. For the Military Board of the future will
hold the schoolmaster in the hollow of its hand.
To illustrate this astounding truth we quote in full a letter written
in 1912 by one of the authors of this book, who was then a private
schoolmaster. The letter is addressed to the Acting Area Officer, who
had requested him to register the boys of Junior Cadet age (12 years
old) in his school:—
‘‘27tli June, 1912.
‘‘Dear Sir—
“l have to acknowledge your letter of June Ist last, written on
behalf of Area Officer 758, absent on leave, also the receipt of the Junior
Cadet registration forms. Some days previously to the receipt, of your
communication I had written to the Chief of the Staff, with a view
to obtaining information as to what the registration precisely is, and'
what it entails. I have had no reply, so must form my own opinions
as to its meaning, in the light of the Act, the Regulations, and recent
military news in the press. I had hoped that this Junior Cadet regis-
tration was merely little more than medical inspection, but am now led
to believe that it is not so.
“Before setting forth some of the reasons for my inability to comply
with the request expressed in your memorandum, that I should register
the boys in my school of the age concerned —a matter which doubtless-
can be arranged between the area officer and the parents concerned, with-
out my participation—l would like to state that I have no objection,
conscientious or otherwise, to the contents of the Junior Cadet syllabus
as such, for so long as they are taught by an unbound schoolmaster at
school there is little, if anything, in them that the strongest anti-
militarist can feel against his conviction. The course laid down makes-
physical culture and squad drill without arms compulsory; each school
must also give efficient training in two of the following four optional
subjects:—Ambulance, organised games, miniature rifle shooting, and
swimming. So, even should the rifle shooting mentioned in the syllabus
turn out to be a distinctly military feature, yet, owing to the choice off
subjects, no schoolmaster is compelled to do anything in the training
which is specifically military. The physical culture is an excellent thing;
the modicum of drill set forth in the syllabus is not enough to make
boys wooden, nor to induce that military spirit to which I am averse.
The optional subjects,-moreover, are most useful. I hold that the rifle
should be an honored instrument in every school, because of the training
of the eye and nerve undergone in learning to use one well, and partly
because many Australian boys require, when they grow up, to use the


rifle in everyday life in the bush. lam a firm believer in non-military
rifle training
**' * * *
“A careful perusal of the registration forms sent me, and of the
] 908-1911 Acts, and the regulations issued under it, leads me to believe
that the Junior Cadet,-when once he has been ‘signed on,’ becomes part
and parcel of a military organisation, being, in fact, as soon as the form
is filled in, a conscript unit, more or less under military law. All Cadets,
the Act informs me (Section 62, Sub-Section 5), are under the orders
of the Commandant, and so are no longer in their previous condition of
.civil freedom, but have passed under the control of the Military Board.
“The conscription of mere children is something not only new to
the free traditions of the British Empire, but of our civilisation, even
Russia has shrunk from placing mere children under military control.
Never before in the history of the world, I think, has any nation forced
children at the beginning of their teens to be enrolled and bound irrevoc-
ably during a large portion of their lives to a military organisation.
“I note in the forms sent me (on the page where the modical report
is made) the doctor is instructed to fill in, on the assigned blank space,
the boy ’s scars and other bodily marks. If the Junior Cadet registration
is merely a formality, and if the military nexus does not bind the boy
until he is a Senior Cadet or till he takes the oath at 18 as a militia
man, then why—l ask myself—is this identification, more suitable for
slaves or criminals, carried out?
< ‘ Another thing occurs to my mind in this connection. Statistical
information issued from time to time by the military authorities has
shown how great a difficulty is being experienced in the matter of Senior
■Cadet registrations, owing largely to the disinclination of the people of
Australia to register their children, and perhaps partly owing to the
fact that the head of another Government department has refused to
grant the military authorities access to the census returns. The form
lam asked to fill in will supply all the information needed for full Cadet
registration and, as far as 1 can see, render superfluous’ the same lad’s
Senior Cadet enrolment two years later; it will certainly make such
enrolment much easier. It is against my conscience to assist the military
in this way. I note that Section 4of the Act says that all regulations
made from time to time by the Military Board become part of the Act.
There is nothing, then, to prevent the Board from issuing, in a few
weeks or months, an ordar to the effect that all Junior Cadets become,
bv mere effluxion of time, Senior Cadets, without special registration.
Thus a boy entered for what is ostensibly physical training will find
himself as much bound to the military machine as if he had been
definitely enrolled as a Senior Cadet whose training is admittedly mili-
tary. I must respectfully decline to help bait the military mousetrap
*ln less than a year, on June 17tli, 1913, a Regulation was issued having,
practically, this effect. It allows Area Officers themselves to register the lads
whose parents refuse to do so. They now. as a matter of practice, attend ea
school in January and February of each year and enrol the lads who reach the age
.of 14 in that year. The lads who have left can be traced, and the necessary
particulars got from the Junior Cadet record books.


with the cheese of physical training. Give the training I will willingly.
bnt register the boy I will not; as to registration, I refer you to the-
parent, whom it most intimately concerns.
“ The registration of Junior Cadets—ostensibly for physical training,,
but really to. get them attached to the military machine in the most
enticing manner-is at present being carried out all over Australia in
the schools, in the absence and without the direct cognisance of the
parents. Ido not criticise my fellow-schoolmasters for complying with
the wishes of the military authorities— each man is the keeper of his-
own conscience.
The printed enrolment form has no printed heading and no allotted
space for the parent’s signature; it has for the schoolmaster’s. It is
evidently the intention of those who drafted these forms that the parent
should not come into the matter. Your request that I should register
my pupils points the same way.
“ There are some cases where a request or even a hint are as serious
to resist as an order. lam wondering whether this is one of them
“The schoolmaster’s position in this Junior Cadet question is a most
delicate one. The military regulations—which, according to its 4th
Section, are a part of the Act—say that the lad of Junior Cadet age
must receive instruction in the course daily at a centre approved by an
officer of the Military Board. The same regulations inform me that
where the military authorities are not satisfied with the training as
given by any particular schoolmaster his school will be publicly declared
as not an approved centre, and the parents of his pupils of the age
concerned will be notified to that effect. Now no boy can be at one
school for his ordinary school work and at another for this daily phvsical
training course, and I do not think the Military Department meditate
making children of 12 to 14 go to night drill. So it becomes a question
of changing schools, if the school attended by the boy is condemned by
the Military Board. Any parent would feel that a boy’s education would
be hopelessly disturbed by his having to attend a second school daily
for physical training, even if the nearest approved centre were just
across the street. A MILITARY OFFICER DECLARING AGAINST
A SCHOOL’S EFFICIENCY WILL VIRTUALLY COMPEL ALL
BOYS OF JUNIOR CADET AGE (12 TO 14) TO LEAVE THAT
SCHOOL ALTOGETHER. The schoolmaster whose physical training
is condemned as inefficient (“not sufficient” is the euphemism) has no
appeal to 5 a civil court or any opportunity of publicly vindicating his
efficiency. So among the extraordinary powers the Military Board
possesses is that of closing private schools and (indirectly) deciding
whether or not a particular man shall be in charge of a public or of
a denominational one. A headmaster who is honestly giving the required
training, but \vhose lack of militarising zeal may have brought him into
disfavor with an over-zealous, not to say unjust, officer (and there are
unjust men in all departments of life), is absolutely at the mercy of
the man he has offended and of that man’s judgment as to his efficiency.
“The inroads that certain parts of the Junior Cadet regulations
make into our national educational freedom is colossal Without casting.


any reflection upon our present Military Board, which may have^uc .such
intentions, I say that ANY FUTURE BOARD CAN IF IT CHOOSER
•RV EXERTING SUBTLE PRESSURE, EFFECTIVELY CONTROL
XOT ™eS THE WAY A BOY’S PHYSICAL TRAINING SHALL
Zl" AND FASHION HIM, BUT ALSO CONTROL OUR
WHOLE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM. For it can eventually ensure
that the headmasters throughout the continent shall be as compliant as
‘The outcome of this present system, if it stands, must be the com-
plete capture" of the schools by the Defence Department and ultimately
by a carefully read the Act and most of its Regulations, which
make tip a big book,i but I cannot find that the schoolmaster is bound
to register his pupils. Possibly it may be claimed that lam liable to
a penalty; perhaps under Section 74, Sub-Section 1, wine 1 a ows an
officer to ask any person for enrolment information, and which allows
the prescribed court to fine anyone who withholds information five pounds
for each item of information held back.
‘ ‘ Whatever trouble it brings me, I must foiled my conscience. As
a man I am against this , boy conscription, because it is unspeakab .
mean, putting the burden upon the helpless boy because the politician
of neither party dare offend the voter by putting it on him As a
..citizen, I am against our compulsory system, because many of
in the Act (especially Sections 4, 74, 94, 95, 100, 101, 1 , ’ ’ ’
“ 5) can he used by a Military Board .0 utterly destroy the Brrtrsh
liberty we enjoy and reduce Australia to the level of Servia 01 Tu y.
‘ ‘ Fin all v, as one who holds Quaker views with regard to war la
not only against this, but against all military training of any kind, and
further am compelled bv my conscience to take the grave lespoi y
,of breaking the law, if need be, rather than assist in the slightest degree
- this military enrolment. ’ ’
•I might .... ..id, "H*. «P «« f “ MlU, “ y * W,I * UO " *”
Uegion.—J.F.H. (J.919)-


CHAPTER XI.
Good for the Boy.
What is happening under our system? Instead of taking hoys off the streets,
as I have heard the argument used, we put many boys on the streets at night when
returning at 10 o clock from their drills; we expose them in the cities to the
solicitations of women, which have never come within their ken before; and to the
"temptations of drink. If honorable members think that I am exaggerating, let them
examine some of those boys after they have been dismissed from their drills at night.
I may be said to have some prejudice upon the matter, but I have made it my business
to make many observations, and in every case the result in this respect has been
"unsatisfactory indeed. Long before their time has expired, young boys, who were
pure in mind and body before commencing their drills at night, or in* camps, are
likely to be decayed in body and cankered in soul by the vicious training they are
given.’ ’
Mr. Conroy in the Federal Parliament, May 21st, 1913. (Hansard, p. 1227).
“If by discipline is meant self-discipline, the element of self-control, the
power to refuse what is pleasant, to choose what is hard, that certainly is a most,
precious quality. That is, indeed, precisely the quality for the promotion of which
liberty is necessary Discipline, then, in the military sense, means something
different. It means, I apprehend, obedience, what is called in military language
subordination.’’
Lord Hugh Cecil in a lecture to the Associate Societies of Edinburgh
University.
“The demands of universal military training interfere with the attendance
.of many very good boys, especially towards the end of the quarter, when short
.attendances have to be made good.’’
Report of the Inspector of Continuation Schools in New South Wales, 1913.
Many of our. fellow-citizens believe that it is part of a man’s duty,
a part of manliness, to defend the country by killing its enemies and
by preparing oneself to become a high-grade killing machine. But docs
it not strike you, manly fellow-men, that there is something particularly
unmanly in familiarising the tender minds of the young with the idea
•of knowing how to be a good slaughterer? Does it ever occur to the
mind of the officer, looking into the eyes of that bright youth whom he
is instructing in the way to thrust a bayonet into a human body, what
mental anguish he may be inflicting on the finest young souls, and how
he imperils weak ones by overwhelming them with that worst infidelity,
a crushing disbelief in human nature? Mrs. Browning’s factory children
felt in their despair that the world was, somehow, wrongly built. Will
our boys, as they are brought face to face with this slaughter-craft while
their characters are unformed, feel so, too?
Business life and life in general are full of hard, jagged things that
cut into the quick, even of adults. As human progress goes on, as the
spirit of that Nazareth Workingman soaks into the world, we do all we
•can to screen from the eyes of the young and tender the hard, cruel things
that Providence mysteriously allows yet to exist in the framework of the
universe—the awful forms that pain and evil take. We do not take
the boy of 12 into the operating chamber, that he may be the better
doctor when he grows up; the moral shock were a "greater loss than the
•extra morsel of "experience” gained. In rearing our young we temper
the wind to the shorn lamb. Our militarists, without realising it, are
•driving the lamb out into a soul-blasting east wind, for at the most
critical age, when his views of life are being formed, they place the
boy, parents willy-nilly, in surroundings where all energy and stir are
upon preparation for killing, where slaughter is lightly spoken of, and
where physical bravery is regarded as the highest earthly virtue.
The specific military training of boys must brutalise them, for there
iis constantly present the thought, "I am going through all this prepara


rrSsrJS^'-CK".
do to deck with aco impressively. Warfare is set
dead men’s bones—all this is clone o is
, i, nv nc , +he crown of manhood: he is ieu to imiu.
b<? 7 like the olory of battle. Abstract right, justice, and moVa
no glory like the o . ~ . h influe nce on the march
courage become P-, ™ ght alone set tles things. He
of mankind. lie . display, for show-off
learns, too, to be boastful, vain glorious, and fond ot display,
is the life-blood of parade. Defence \ct inflicts on the
Not the least of: the, wro numberß of ca refully-reared
community veil bethe » companionship with the worst
!a,ls tliat inevitably icnuH from training ,„ us t stand and
elements of society. A ... t merely of the loose lads
list,.., to the blasphemes and obse b; ~ inclined ones. Apolo-
°f t retort that the lad must be a muff and a weakling
n,:: to **™**™r3»--jmz
ment proves too much, guarded "upbringing of our children, lest we
should do away « all educationists would be
make mu s screen the unformed character of the boy
• f„„l language of vicious companions, of the world s worst
’of the sapping *>**■•£■ tat ‘di-^
conversation the “spells” of rest, or whenever talktng is
m be-probably will he-tent-ma.es
such; chance may decide with a number of such. The
-This enforced association t l fousa < nds h of S <iecently P brought up lads of
d '"‘ * “ h ; 01 ;
"“fiS b X o n .id in reply to this that V°.V“w& ok*rrf«Uy
S di i,f,pSll/?o.“. d ?e &* “L“dXt I ‘S.»pa“orc“d|.. C ».
nnlsorv Military Training can fail to be convince caBt as to render the
Btssef*
i riI MAXIMUM. B Consequent iy ' the MiUtary l come
ss ssf&s^r&^e fea t 1 ss: zssfssstt
The institntion of y (m9)
compulsory system


having control of the tent may himself be a larrikin whose domineering
and driving power has recommended him to the officers as a useful i nan
International competition for the most efficient battle-winning machine
prevents even a conscientious commander from giving much heed to
character, except m a very limited sense. Be he himself a General
Gordon or a Headley Vicars, he cannot afford to refuse to make use of
the services of those who are best at drilling and commanding. “An
army’s business is to drill to win battles,” the officer will say; “we must
promote the most efficient; we can only consider character in a very
limited way, namely, its bearing on battle-winning.” So the boy during
camp-time—and there must be plenty of camps if our military system
m to hold its own against others-may be at the mercy of what an anti-
militarist justly describes in the press as “swanky young bullies”- he
may even be at the mercy of worse.
The late Mary E. Everett, a lady well known in Australian tem-
perance and peace societies, and one who spent much of her time upon
work ot love for the uplift of people, wrote as follows, some three years
ago, in her book entitled “Our Boys and the Defence Act”:
“Superficial observers, or partisans of militarism, are always telling
us that the compulsory training does good by keeping boys off the street.
The grain of truth is that the worst lads of a district, the wild, dissolute
fellows who perambulate the thoroughfares and constitute what is known
familiarly as the local ‘pushes'-these, perhaps, are found a better
occupation for the hour or two that the drill may last. But, judging
irom recent disturbances, in many cases so serious as to be reported in
the press, they show their vexation at the restraint by annoying the
public with increased racket, even riot. The mountain of error in the
militarist argument is the fact that the bulk of Australian lads of cadet
age, who are neither lawless nor vicious nor in the habit of gathering
for evil on the streets, are brought into contact with these worst youths
and, when the drill is over, are tempted, by a boy’s love of excitement
and daring, to follow these ‘pushes’ instead of going straight home, and
may end by becoming habitual members of them. This is no idle con-
jecture. Reports made in my hearing by some persons who recently
cam ass.ed the opinions of the working-class mothers in a typical large
country-township spoke of the mothers’ absolutely unanimous condem-
nation of night drills and gave also sad stories, narrated by several
parents, of the utter downfall of steady lads through forced society with
the bad. Most of you mothers that read this will recall not a few
similar cases that have come under your notice. And the training is
not yet a year old!
Is it tor this, mothers, that you are nourishing your
sons? Can you bear to think, as you look at their innocent
clasp their little hands so lovingly, that one day those very hands may
he dyed with their brothers’ blood; that your son may cause the keenest
anguish to another mother’s heart and make some home desolate? And
for what? Perhaps for no reason that will stand the test of common-
sense. Do you realise that it may mean training so as to fight the
quarrels of the financial classes of the world and to help stifle industrial
liberty?”


CHAPTER XII.
Rubbing Shoulder to Shoulder.
A deputation representing the^ Trades ( SStor r pearce) yesterday
did not drill in their sc , -j *i, a f h? did not like the
” s, £?'*>» boy, of «e P».r«
SsreTwe beUig mode crimlmH of. — „ .. A ,gus.” sth Aw* 1912.
But is it not lair that the burden of defence should he equally borne
by all classes of the community! asaumes that tbe conscript system
This is mere* Mmmes that all boys, of all classes
is one of equality ot sacrince. conditions. It assumes
are mixed together and tr *“® . Ü bleMed << universal” training all social
that by the introduction separate classes merged into
W The be op b pSt e e n isrc a al the The P couscript systems of Aus-
"alia and Now Zealand are 'cbilege boy.”
To show this we have on y o _ . should explain that
For the ben'efit of readers ““‘“alLut”'’boys attending collegiate schools
-srsstr - -
her run to several thousands. .. following conditions: —
They may do their compulsory drill as stu(lent s
‘‘ 25a. (1) Educational be a u?wcd to have
Evenings, Saturday
ftefnoolft le ami e whoTe <ray public hoUdayst for the drudgery of drilling,
- -KSSS §S S S
s^ltf^lSKSsas


fhe college boy is allowed by our democratic Act to take his drill in a
■comfortable and select way. His training is made part of the school
routine, involving, perhaps, a slight lengthening of the afternoon period
.at school or a shortening of the time given to games during the school
day.
The boy of poor parents, however, who generally leaves the ele-
mentary school at 14 years of age, or a very little later, has to put in
his drills at night and on Saturday afternoons. At night, after, he
leaves work, he drills, often in bad weather, in badly-lighted streets, or
in the squares and park lands.*
AN ARRANGEMENT THAT ALLOWS THE BOY OF WEALTHY
PARENTS TO DRILL APART FROM THE WORKING LAD ON THE
PUBLIC DRILL GROUND KNOCKS EQUALITY OUT OF THIS ACT.
The children of the well-to-do ARE given a large measure of
•exemption. They do their drill under conditions that mean little
drudgery and inconvenience; they are not forced into the bad society
of the street corner element, as the working-class lad is when he goes
to parade. These great concessions cannot be shared by the masses,
except by a very few who are lucky enough to have won a college
scholarship, or whose parents are able to arrange for them to attend
metropolitan High Schools. But any parent of the comfortable class
can send his boy to a large collegiate school, either as a boarder or a
day scholar, so that the boy escapes the drudgery.
The inevitable result of this state of things was put before Parlia-
ment by the late Mr. Arthur, Labor member for Bendigo, who was him-
self a supporter of the principle of compulsory military training. On
December 4, 1913, he said:— .
‘ ‘ There was growing up a distinction between school cadets and
what might be called industrial cadets. In the public and other
schools the cadets were able to do their drills practically during
school hours, and are not under the same disabilities as those who
have to do their drills at nights under the street lamps.
Nor does the discrimination cease at 18, when the youth, ceases to
be a cadet. Regulation 110 (page 53) of the Citizen Forces reads: —
“Extra-territorial units may be organised and trained at Univer-
sities and other educational institutions, under Section 128 of the
Act, provided that of the annual quota of students becoming liable
for training in each year and found fit, not less than twenty elect to
serve in such unit. ’ ’
The plain English of this is that so long as a father can afford to
keep his boy at college, or university he can drill separately from'the
football and cricket matches. These diversions, however, mean less time for
military training, and render it from the point of view of military usefulness even
more of a farce.—J.F.H. (1919).
tit is now two or three years since I noticed cadets drilling on a public
holiday; the practice has possibly been abandoned.—J.F.H. (1919).
*One thoughtful military regulation, put into force shortly AFTER a motor-car
had dashed into a squad of cadets near Sydney, nearly killing one of them, reads:
“As a precaution against accidents, when Senior Cadets are drilling at night in
unlighted places, provision is to be made for the carrying of lights; hurricane
lamps or other illuminant to be provided. When drilling in line a light to be carried
a few paces from both flanks; when marching in a column or route, the company
should be preceded and followed by a cadet carrying a light. On the approach of a
motor-car or other vehicle, the cadet should be instructed to swing the light.’’—
Senior Cadet Regulations (page 57).


~ . . my.« verv existence of these special units—a sop to the
cLeS. in itself a denial o, the eguality elated foe
‘ h ° ButTeyond this deliberate partiality-the separation of the rich
fro,n the poor-ther. are indications of a more subtle favorrtrsm-the
“errfrauo^yt^ee
uinff military man —with -delightful candor has
us°his"oididon'of secret excusing of the well-to-do tramurg-
„„ l;l ' ,<i l4 Maior G. A. Bourke, commanding the 17th Inta. y,
mlde l'spirited s’peccJ at Sydney against political interference rn m.h-
tary “ who were sons ofwealthy aria-
political parents, the whole scheme would break rl excusc was
weight. It was always eas T “ pt Reiving instructions from
desired; but he strongly objected cQmmand had
Melbourne stating that a certain tt ever being referred
been granted an exemption without the the fetter and
Se h 3ri? of°X a Act n that 'wealthy youths could obtam =P Uon,
Xor o re“Mngs‘n'ore g democ;atica e iTy managed in New Zealand. A»
interesting debate occurred in it. had'%Tbeen iablcd,
Appeared'from'” a C
rj=. s
Liberal Party when it introduced the Bill—Mi. vvittv,
carton—said indignantly:— # who i iave not been
“What we want to jL n ?™ 109 been convicted; why have the
compelled to enrol; why ha ’ tbe 43 beeu convicted three
241 been twice convicted; others or there should not
times. They should be enrolled .like the others o That
have been any convictions at any Thcy
Ji—ri &S.-S
Sxious TO SAVE IT FROM MSCREMT.
*
Fine thing, this rubbing together of ZJ^^/^^^'lecUmcrs
The speeches and PJP I^* 3 * °,ing shoulder to shoulder,” “duke’s
and writers are ful of it 1 „ busi „e SS . Such shoulder-
"is NOT
found in Australasian conscription.
* Melbourne “Herald,” 30th July, 1914.


CHAPTER XIII.
The Financial Burden.
r±V nt f°^ e Guard ?.’ but systernatf^and. 6 sSenttftc^ef^in'the 4 govornm^nt l^
the world instead if preparing ® he^eoDleV 911 ®
rousLg^ormUnonrwo r u U l d d“e n sUlI unsolved? aCtUal f °° d and B clothing 0 fn°d
SWtreXu^ye^ 6 resttlt ° f «*«* attain SMt
battlefiel^^r^ativefy b a*triiUn S g^matter— but r t'hose owho°dieT^an 0 who°dieT^and r Those a whose )1 lives
as the J e S u ? of lleglect whlch comes from diverting energies
ownignorance.’- emy WhlCh m Wait for us ’ t 0 that ene “y we haveVeaSed byoS
Norman Angell, in “War and the Workers.”
I\e are not entering fully into the financial and economic aspect of
the Australian Defence Acts, but a little must be said describing the
attack made on the defence expenditure, in the interests of economy and
sound finance, during the latter half of 1913. Mr. W. G. Higgs opened
the attack in Parliament on October 22. He quoted figures showing that
the Defence Expenditure had increased from £861,218 in the year 1901-2
to £5,438,364 for 1912-13, and referred to the 1913-14 Estimates, where
the figures stood at £5,631,853. He said:—
“Our defence expenditure, per head of the population, during the
last twelve years, has increased from 4s. 6d. to 235. 6d. per annum.”
And he pointed out that only Great Britain and France spent more per
bead on war preparation.
As to the cause of this, he went on to say:—
‘ ‘ The capitalists of London, and other great cities, have got the
major portion of the world absolutely deluded. In their opinion it is
necessary to have a huge navy to protect their large investments of
money abroad.”
While as to the armament firms and other capitalistic bodies that,
ni the words of the great Liebknecht, ‘‘coin discord into gold” and make
dividends out of death, he said: —
“All these facts show how little patriotism there'is in the capital-
ists; and their attitude is supported by the press. If, for instance a
reporter were to report the speech I am now making, it would be cut
down by the editor; and I am sure that I will not be given thirtv
lines to-morrow.” J
Mr. Higgs was a true prophet. The contents of his speech, as dis-
tinct from a scene between him and the Liberal leader, were ignored by
the papers. Yet Mr. Higgs is a prominent member of the House.
A few months later, on December 4, 1913, the late Mr. Arthur, Labor
member for Bendigo, said:—


“There is no doubt money has been the admin-
unnecessarily, and I think: the.root of adyice o£ th*
i stratum of defence must migi • •__ u ave been done upon the
oSTot the military a* some people are
advice of the officers, the gUt spurreu to be taken by the
pleased to call them Their advic of a purely citizen
Minister. We should have set beto e only the minimum of
soldiery 1 , citizen in Hs With such an ideal before-
professional regulation and inte t £ar more economy. Tim
"■ ho - bMmd " 1 ” t0 a g
extent, by the chains of tradition. __
And later on in the same speech Mr. if Lord
KittAen^^sche™^ completed with, the PER
' world has ever been asked ■ £>***‘ h(?ad . of the population for the
Canada . ' de fen C e, a whereas Australia is, P a ?J ng 0f 2 £g per head in a
Eh-y-r’We & be a crime to attempt
credit of being the « ££/If «£
wild extravagance on defence is c followed by the Editor
‘ ‘ Australian Review of Reviews. was , (Age ~ The
of that shrewd and woldly-wrse newsp P friend of Labor, but
“Age- is no lover of antr-militaiis • d he diBC usses.
its Editor probably knows uha office there appeared, during
Australian financial qnes ions. Lading articles on what he callec
the next few months, a series « a strong indictment of
“Frenzied Militarism, aitn ts a\ i preparation and on Australian
«- rr -“*■* systcm " as
wastefulness. *JJ 2 4, 1913, the “Age” wrote
emphasised. On A oven , was in full opera*
“Lord Kitchener estimated tlia 'j¥£ ence> the annual cost to the
tion, in the seventh year o b tQ the manner in which t
country would be £1,884,( • ; s difficult to distinguish between
Defence estimates are compiled, i It ments. The total sum it
STe finances of the naval and military The actual
is proposed to spend 011 defence 1 , and ammunition is put
oM S tore“’ ot which nearly one nullum the smallest
administration. We ah ,°“A system this year will cost
degree i* “““o 0 00 or nearly £l,ooo,i>oo more than the esfma
IramTl’by Lord Kitchener to the P O T the movement ex-
„eeded'the h a a s V s e nmld u&ate ontlay hy so large a sum, what wt.l
*Mr. after he ha^been


the position of affairs when all the cadets now undergoing training,
or who may be enrolled during the next few years, have passed out
of the citizen forces and joined the reserve? In his budget speech
the Treasurer (Sir John Forrest) stated that as each new batch of
boys passed from the junior to the senior cadets, and the lads of
eighteen went into the citizen forces, a sum of £200,000 will be added
automatically to the military cost. ’’*
Three months later, on February 18, 1914, this newspaper was even more
outspoken:—
. PThe scheme has only as yet been roughly initiated, but it has
already plunged us into a morass of expenditure that makes the
Kitchener figures look ridiculous. We are spending so wildly, indeed,
that we hardly dare look forward to the completion of the system,
for it threatens, before it emerges from its swaddling clothes, to cost
us twice what Lord Kitchener estimated would be the cost of its
maturity; and it is burdened, moreover, with a purely automatic
increase of £200,000 per annum. ’ ’
“ . . . . It is, unhappily for us all, absolutely indisputable that our
military burden is growing at a rate that will soon cause it to become
intolerable. Possibly we may not need to cut down the scheme itself,
but it is 'quite necessary in any case to cut down the cost of the
scheme, for the day is already within sight when we shall be unable
to raise the money for its maintenance. ’ ’
The storm raged intermittently for some weeks in both Houses, the
Labor rank and file doing most of the talking. The Lab,or leaders,
although they were in opposition, threw on the heated criticism all the
cold water possible, but in vain. Not a few of the Liberals joined in,
and the Liberal Government, to save an actual defeat on its Estimates,
had to proimse a substantial retrenchment before the Budget was
accepted.
The Prime Minister’s “weakness” in the face of this outcry, and
his putting popular pressure before ‘ ‘ military necessity ’ ’ and Imperial
demands, is doubtless the reason why that scourge of Labor and of pro-
gressive humanity, the London ‘ ‘ Times, ’ ’ sided with the Australian
Labor Party just before the Australian general election of 1913. When
the ‘ ‘ Times ’ ’ pretends to take the Labor side, let lovers of freedom and
of national righteousness be particularly watchful!
Since the speeches referred to in this chapter were made Australia has incurred
a war debt of over 200 million pounds sterling. In addition to meeting the annual
interest bill on this big sum, the national exchequer will have, during the years*
immediately following the great war, to pay big sums for repatriation and for the
founding of a sinking fund. There is also the very important question of pensions.
To continue, on the top of this liability, to spend five millions annually on defence
would be the height of madness.—J.F.H. (1919).
*For purpose of comparison, the population, of Australia is about one-ninth
that of the United Kingdom. Five millions as against forty-five.


CHAPTER XIV.
Conscription and the Australian Workers.
Kf &3S?ffi3g^
SS, <d Industry, .“'%“» p.W.tic -*»&..
be ,:^x.
training in' its platfoim, < them were persuaded to
Brisbane Conference and & army , plenty
r;« hy r^"« " tz cr
cipline and subordination.
The men Who S .ooa as
meant, but the rank and tile Mnot took what » h eir leaders
Tllc y opened M.M. and , ihutt. fte oapitalisti e press the
gave them. And th j g , , « ena tor Dobson —one of the
whole woriS over clamors been advocating tor
most conservative o V of citizen Army,
years conscription, under te ] P n delegates and their leagues
It is easy to see how press had worked up a feeling of
came to swallow A Th f uppOTe d intention of Japan; and
unrest over the lumns 0 f the London papers. So
the German spectre stalked in y woul d attack Australia
the ingenious theory was ani & This altogether unjustified
while England was busy ? political charlatans, whether
alarm was always in tie mou 1901 refused the Japanese
Labor or Liberal.* The men who had subjects from
Government’s offer, by vo un ar “above” treating with
"ys” U fnd "brown dogs” and the leaders of “Asiatic hordes,
♦English readers are reminded that no phrty in Australia calls
eervative.


and by a piece of political larrikinism had banged and bolted the gates
of Australia upon the Japanese people.*
Well, the great German war has come, and Australia is sending away
from her shores as many men as she can; and the Japanese—these
degraded monkeys ’ have heaped coals of fire upon the heads of the
Australian great-little statesmen by sending Japanese warships to escort
across the Indian Ocean transports filled with Australian soldiers, t
Although so unjustified, it was doubtless this fear of the East that
led the Brisbane conference to fall into the snare prepared for them
by a handful of jingo Labor leaders! who were closely in touch with
the London War Office and with the National Service League with its
ideal of a I an-Britannic militia, based upon compulsion.
Ihe Australian Labor delegate is now a sadder and wiser man. The
expeiiences of three years of conscription have shown him the meaning
of the Act. His first shock came when he read that his new' “citizen
army could be used against himself—as an army has always been used
and,, we say, will always be used so long as it lasts—to ' oppress the
workers in time of struggle. Labor rank and file did not like the look
of Clause 51 of the Defence Act, which reads:—
51. Where the Governor of a State has proclaimed that domestic
violence exists therein, the Governor-General, upon the application of
the Executive Government of the State, may, by proclamation,
declare that domestic violence exists in that State, and may call out
• 6 P e ? manen t forces, and in the event of their numbers being
insufficient, may also call out the militia and volunteer forces as may
be necessary for the protection of that State, and the services of the
forces so called out may be utilised accordingly for the' protection of
that State against domestic violence. ’ ’
At the next triennial conference, held at Hobart in 1912, the delegates
carried a resolution instructing its Parliamentary party to repeal Sec-
tion 51.
1 lie ! ai liamentarv leaders who were at the Hobart Coiiference spoke
and voted against the resolution. Although a Labor Government was
in power at the time, it took no steps to carry out the instruction of
? expressed in this paragraph must not he interpreted as im-
fntrofimtfnVnf tMs b , ock . f avor a policy of immigration that allows the
™ U .er i ° f Sangs of men under indenture (or even under contract) to cheapen
wages and lower Australia’s standard of comfort.—J.F.H. (1919). P
v'„, hi e th *? is happening. Senator Pearce boasts that the boy conscript and
the baby navy have saved Australia. It is a queer use of the word “saved.” But
’v J D f the milltarist . sense we will say that what has saved Australia has not
df fen ce preparations but the goodwill of Japan to the English Government,
d evf • W !\! ch tJwi hoodh ! m insults of Australian politicians of both parties
ln rr,^ e ..n Car r nS of ,, th * Sydney “Bulletin,” have done tffeir best
I® *° r^eit 'i? * heathen men, thus far, have, however, shown themselves better
in» P Per« < in ’ tleS tha « f h . e hoiy Christians who signed the scraps of paper regard-
ing Persia, Morocco, Belgium, and Egypt. 1 6
~ ost these misleaders showed their true colours at the Overseas Conscrip-
tion Referendum in 1916, and to its credit the Labor Party has cast them out. Some
of them, however, deeming it opportune to fall in with the Labor leagues’ attitude at
that and the subsequent referendum have saved their political skins for a while
and still remain in the party. Tho presence of these conscriptionists lying doggo in
tke Pf rty ls a source of great danger to Australian democracy. The baleful influence
ol this conscriptionist rump” was shown recently, namely, at Labor’s Triennial
Continental Conference, held at Perth in June, 1918. These survivors of the old
Parliamentary gang induced the delegates, in the face of resolutions from the various
state Labor Conferences demanding the entire repeal of the compulsory clauses to
accept very radical alteration instead of repeal. Readers will find details as to these
lmporta-nt resolutions given in on* of the appendices of this book.—J.F.H.


the party And when Senator Arthur Eae moved in the Senate that
Section 51 should he repealed, the Labor Minister of Defence spoke and
voted against him, and‘only three other Labor members dared to sup-
port the decision of the rank and file against the leaders.
*’° rt But Labor got uneasy and restless. As the months went by, and
as the prosecutions mounted up, and they saw their boys being carted
off to fortress prisons, they became indignant. The various bo.ua
Societies,* by affiliation to the Political Labor Party made
strong protests, and their fellow-workmen in the trades unions followed
their lead The great Australian Miners’ Association at Newcastle and
Broken Hill—the latter branch refusing to inarch in the annual Hosp
p ones ion with cadets in uniform-the unions of Dockers and Drivers
L South Australia, and the United Laborers' Unions and
passed resolutions demanding the repeal of conscription. In Janu”y,
’tori during the Melbourne Trades Hall Council’s discussion of the Laboi
OoSrnm nt’s treatment of the lads, there was bitter altercation and
outcries of “Puppet Pearce.” Senator Pearce himself was severely
h ekled in the Idelaide Town Hall on March 28, 1913, a city where
Labor sweeps the poll with overwhelming majorities or secures unopposed
return, The report of his meeting in the local press stated that while
The speaker got a good hearing on other subjects he was badly received
when he dealt with the question of the Defence Act. In the previous
vear the South Australian United Labor Party came near to voting down
conscription, the figures being as two to three.
The a-itation increased. In 1914 a specially appointed committee
of the Metropolitan Council of the Australian Labor Federation, of Peit
Western Australia, carried the following resolution:
“That this Committee declares its belief that unless an army be
of democratic constitution and ga ,r"
S“CsmS wtch W ar. afl of despotic
=?5 _ *
The committee then goes onL,
pl‘“punh.g n into force the Hobar, resolution (Repeal of Section
5D- 'every conscript should keep bis own arms and .equipment, o tic
appointed and elected from the ranks”; conscripts to have
fldl power to ventilate grievances “on the platform and through the
press” no courts-martial in time of peace; no oath to be taken; and
members of Parliament were instructed to “devote eution to
the Regulations and Standing Orders when such are laid on
’ h T e he H r„ S uual Conference of the Victorian Political Labor Party, at
Melbourne in May, 1914, passed very similar L>bor .
The least thought given to these proposals will show that the LaD
Party are trying to square a circle, trying to retain the principle of con-


scription—so loved by their leaders —without losing the inherent freedom
of the citizen. One does not need to be a military expert to realise that
no army, compulsory or voluntary, could be run on the lines therein laid
down. Fancy an army choosing and dismissing its officers!
The day of the full, bitter awakening of the Labor Party has yet
to come—the day when he realises that his citizen army is very con-
scription, and that he must—cost what it may in family jars—purge the
Labor movement from it and follow the example of the New Zealand
Social Democratic Party* in the sister Dominion.
Not ftntil November, 1914, did the Parliamentary Labor leaders
allow the Hobart resolution to bear fruit. And, as we will show, the
reason they allowed it was, first, to allay agitation in the Labor unions
and leagues, and, secondly, because the amendment would be adminis-
tratively unworkable.
On November 19, 1914, Senator Stewart, when the Defence Act was
under discussion, moved —
“That the following new clause be inserted: —‘7a. Section fifty-
one of the principal Act is amended by inserting at the end of the
section the words: ‘Provided always that the Citizen Forces of the
Comonwealth shall not be called out or utilised in connection with an
industrial dispute.’ ”
Senator Pearce (Minister of Defence) said: —
“The Government propose to accept the clause, NOT BECAUSE
IT CARRIES US VERY FAR, but because we recognise that the
argument that the military have been, and may still be, used for the
purpose indicated by Senator Stewart has been employed by these
opponents of the Defence Act as one of their stock arguments against
the Act. If this clause is passed by Parliament, EVEN IF IT HAS
NO LEGAL EFFECT and does NOT affect a constitutional provision
relating to the question, it will still be a declaration by this Parlia-
ment, and will serve to rob the opponents of the Defence Act of that
argument They are able to get a great number of sympa-
thisers and a great deal of sympathy by continually trotting out the
argument that the Defence Forces are going to be used to shoot down
strikers. Should the clause do nothing else; it will achieve some
good if it kills that contention.”
But Senator Bakhap was more outspoken when he said: —
“I am no lawyer, but I take the responsibility of saying that if
this question ever comes before the interpreting authority it will
be laid down that this amendment is an attempted abrogation of
Section 119 of the Constitution, and is ULTRA VIRES. The Section
reads: ‘The Commonwealth shall protect every State against violence
and, on the application of the Executive Government of the State,
against domestic violence.”
The Senate passed the amendment unanimously. It is not worth
the paper on which it is written. Once again the military-controlled
leaders played with and thwarted the rank and file of the Labor Party.
Little the people ,count in these days of machine-made, militarist
politics! !
Briand, in the Paris transport strike; Canaljas, in the Barcelona
strike; and, most plainly of all, Botha in his breaking' down the peaceful
Transvaal strike and transporting the leaders, in January, 1913, have
♦Since endorsed by the New Zealand Labor Party.—J.F.H. (1919).


given object-lessons in the way the conscription machine can be used
- >•*:, s “s—f
b ? * <drm?eles will be more than the overthrow of
£ present "Sfwat may delay this, bnt it will also
make the final result more sudden and startling.
*The coming world-solidarity of Labor ‘is Btrike in
k |ealaU h^ 8 n t e C 0 o f asf Miners, to
The Government, sought coal from apa , pkins were white and not brown),
scab on their New Zealand fellows <^\X g i t iKaratoe of Capital the, Transvaal
4 n h ts th - e oo C d° B hH Bd of to ne^s g0 wa f s r0 publis a ised rl in th P e Christchurch ‘Tress of 18th
November, 1913.


CHAPTER XV.
Who are the Shirkers?
“Prosecution of Cadets, Sydney.—The hearing of cases against 188 senior
cadets and youths from the citizen forces who were charged with offences under the;
Defence Act at the Water Police Court on March 27th, before Mr. Clarke, S.M.
excited considerable interest. The court presented an unusually animated appear-
ance. Most of the lads were in uniform, carrying rifles and gear, and in many cases
their mothers, sisters, and friends attended. The court was too small to hold the
gathering
Melbourne “Age,” 24th March, 1914.
“W;hen these (Defence) cases come up for hearing the court will be requested
to commit the offenders to the custody of an oflicer of the Royal Australian Garrison
"~™. er y> s 0 that they may be detained in barracks for a period of ten days, in.
addition to the time required to be made up for neglected service. All the cadets
charged will appear in court in uniform, and the Commandants in each State are ta
provide a guard of unarmed soldiers to wait outside and take charge of the shirkers
committed to their care. The cadets will then be marched with this escort to the
barracks where they are to spend their penalty time.”
From a statement by the Minister of Defence, published in the Melbourne
“Argus,” 17th December, 1912.
As one stands in the police courts when batches of boys are being
tried, one is struck at once by the respectability and earnest look in
the faces of many. They are not of the larrikin class. They do not
enjoy the publicity; they are obviously uncomfortable and feel keenly
the fact that they are standing at the bar of a police court. Some few
of them are accompanied by their mother or father, who try to assist
their boy in putting his side of the case to the magistrate. By the
prosecuting military officer and the militarist newspaper reporter they
are all lumped together as “shirkers” and “slackers.” All of them
are there because they have committed military offences. In some cases
they have not drilled at all; in others they are only a few hours short
of the minimum required. Among the throng every variety of honestr
reason would be found, if opportunity were given to every lad to speak,
and if he could overcome his nervousness and unfold tha reasons that
had led him to face the ordeal of court prosecution.
Some are there because a sense of injustice has prevented them from
drilling; they have seen their fellow-lads of wealthier parents playing
cricket, football, or boating while they, the working lads, had to drill,
in all weathers, in the public square or in the park lands. Others will
have the same sense of injustice, begotten of the thought that the men
who have votes are taking their pastime and putting on the boy the
man’s burden. Very many —by far the majority —are there because ill-
health, accidents, the conditions of their work and work hours have
absolutely prevented them getting in the quota of hours on the drill-
ground. For, let us remember, the lad is at work until sor 6 o’clock
at night, and till 12 o’clock on Saturdays, and has to rush home some
miles to get inside his uniform and outside his dinner, and again rush
some distance to the area parade ground in time for drill.*
If you are living within five miles of the drill-ground you can be
compelled to be there, wet or fine. We say, without fear of contra


diction, a large number of defaulter are those who are UNABLE to
put in their drills. “Military necessity” takes no account of this,
but catches them and mangles them with its penalties.
■With others there is the stout resolve not to be compelled to pass
under military law. Has not the choice to be a soldier or not been
one of the boasted liberties of the Anglo-Saxons? In others there .
the desire to obey their .parents, who havfe conscientious objection to
war and military preparation, reasons concerning int_ernat mnal
hood, or religious views of a stricter kind than those of Berkeley
Square,” views of Christians who cannot see the Christ in the soldie .
Then, in the case of the citizen soldier, there is the hardship of
leaving one’s business .to serve the days in camp each year. Let the
reader put himself in the position of a struggling young hairdresser, of
a young fellow with a milk-round, of a student whose examination is
near a farmer with only a widowed mother and some little brothers and
•sisters to leave in charge of the farm. A farm may suffer grievously
in the master’s absence, and a business goodwill may pass m o someone
else’s possession or be dissipated by an incompetent muddler left i
.charge Only in a very few cases will the surrender of those sixteen
: C g .;=m a small matte. It is only the “ rolling stone - type of youth
that will find little trouble in going to camp.
That these are not imaginary cases we can show from the files o
the newspapers of the Commonwealth: .
“I would sooner go to gaol than do the drills, and lam qui p
Charles Osborne, of Chatswood, who appeared at orth
lyl^emoLV 'wHh'emoUon aTt pleaded™ defence full of human
feeling, but he was unflinching. ;, -i -^ r Love,
• “It is very unwise for you to speak like that,
S '“ I mean it ’ ’ was the boy’s reply. ‘‘ I have a good character from
,uv employer Ido my work faithfully, and I have long hours My
"i, "dead. My mother only fm,r montlmago.
ns S as I nfn ,lo to'looh after the house which
g”a s«aasr*m^ : - g t A
h„™Ili I am m St b a S’’ MhllTZtte's‘of a father.
Osborne—l am trying to better myself, and I wouldn t be able to
Osborne lam ■’ , .1:11 jf court orders me to do
make
Osborne —I can’t pay them. •
Love —I won’t discuss the matter. . 1010
Mr ‘ Adelaide ‘ ‘ Advertiser, ’ ’ 30th August 1912.
\t the Glebe Police Court, Sydney, on November 1-, • •> <■
year-old cadet was charged with failing to- do his full hours of drill.
.He pleaded: —


“I am the only support of the family. My mother is dead, and
my father can t work. I am a greengrocer and have to get away
early m the morning, and don’t get home till late at night. ’’
The lad was ordered 20 days’ detention at Middle Head camp and
to pay 3s. costs, in default 24 hours’ imprisonment.
At the Paddington Police Court, Sydney, on September 22, 1913,
.there were 31 trainees summoned, but only 16 appeared. One lad said:—
He was the support of his mother and sister and could not get
away to drill on Saturday afternoons. The magistrate said that the
boy s position appealed to their sympathy, but the circumstances
could not be taken as an excuse under the Act.—Sydney » i 1 Dailv
Telegraph,” 23/9/’l3. J J *
At Brighton (Melbourne) Police Court on July 18, 1913,
Frederick Fenton was charged with not having attended an eight-
days camp. Captain Durrant said that Fenton was a consistent
shirker.- Fenton said he was the main support of the family, and if
he attended camp the rent of the house would not have been paid.
Constable Kir wen said that Fenton practically kept the family.
Fenton was sentenced to eight days military detention at Queenscliff
1 orts.—Melbourne papers, 19th July, 1919.
At the Central Police Court, Sydney,
A batch of 20 cadets were prosecuted before Mr. Love.
After having pleaded guilty, one of the group of cadets handed the
magistrate a letter written by a Mr. Illingworth, of Enmore Taber-
nacle. The writer stated that the boy was running a milk business,
and that to take him away from his work would mean ruining his
milk business.
Air. Love, after reading the letter, said to the cadet, “Defending
your country is of more consideration than selling milk.”
To another cadet who complained that the camp was six inches
deep in mud and water, Mr. Love remarked, ‘ ‘ That is the way to make
soldiers of /ou. The more hardships you go througli, the better
soldiers you will be.”—“Sydney Alorning Herald,” 14th June, 1913.
\\ illiam Arthur Dawes, a Seventh Day Adventist, was charged at
Burwood, Sydney. He pleaded not guilty, alleging that he had attended
all week-day drills, but had exemption from Saturday or Friday drills
•on account of his religious convictions.
The Alagistrate—l am afraid your religious convictions will not
help you here.
Dawes—l have a printed form from the Minister of Defence.
The prosecuting officer stated that Dawes was 24 hours short. The
Alagistrate adjourned the case for a month to give the boy a chance
to make up his drills, and remarked: “Do your drills and keep your
religious convictions in your pocket in future.”
A lad named Harper, aged 17, who is a constant sufferer from
pneumonia and has aneurism of the heart, was passed by the area
doctor as tit for training, though he did not use the stetiiescope in
making his examination.
Three months later the. lad was ordered to drill, but as he was ill
in bed, his father went to the drill hall where, after waiting two
hours, he reported to the area officer that his son could not" drill.
The officer then promised to send the area doctor to examine the boy
and grant exemption if he thought the case merited it.
The area doctor was never sent, and the lad was prosecuted for
not drilling, though there was medical evidence to show that the boy
was not fit to drill, and a statutory declaration made by the father
showing that he had reported his' son’s illness to the ' area officer.
TJie court sentenced this delicate lad to 12 days’ detention at Aliddle


Head Defaulters’ Camp— Melbourne “Socialist,” loth December,.
From the matter lying before us we could fill chapters with similar
reports from all parts of Australia.
So much for the reasons and motives for refusing to drill. I hey
are mainly good ones; but remember, reader, had such been no higher
than a healthy boy’s desire to play or rest on his Saturday afternoon,
after his week’s work, no able-bodied man who was not drilling himself
had any right to cry “Shirker.” •
To understand the real working of conscription it is necessaiy to
attend a sitting of a police court when a magistrate almost takes the
form of an automatic punishing machine worked by the military authori-
ties and “works off” lads at the rate of 25 or more per hour. The
following account was written of such a trial, in Melbourne City Police
Court, by Leyton Richards, M.A., then minister of Collms-street Indepen-
dent Church: — ~ ~
“You are committed to the custody of the officer commanding the
Royal Australian Garrison Artillery at Port Philip Fortress for
twentv days.” This sentence was uttered without emotion the
mere mechanical repetition of a formula —more than fifty turns
the course of a couple of hours. After each utterance a bov was
passed out by soldiers in waiting and placed in a military ambulance
waggon when this was full, it drove off, with outriders and armed
guards in attendance, and another took its place. . w a J[
all under 18 years of age, their crime a healthy loi e of liberty, anci
vet the scene was not tyrant-ridden Russia, but a daughter-nation of
free England—the Commonwealth of Australia. , ~
The Idea is to make soldiers of the boys; but to watch the sullen,
dogged resentment as each boy takes his place before the magistrate
is to realise that Australia is making rebels by the score and liund .
For this -oes on week after week, and the business of some of the
courts is "’becoming hopelessly congested with these military cases.
Most 9 of the bovs wlm appear in the court are decent, respectable
S of the working-class; they have felt out rather than thought out
their objection to militarism; it is a violation of inherited libeities,
snd in tlieir dumb, nervous, inarticulate way they are suffering
persecution^it wilt tellTow’ with a coward s
« of the
‘ < aliirkors” and call them heroes. . , .
For so they are. It needs no little courage for a youth in las
SW-'rf a* military offeree, punishable without reference to the
sharks. ’ ’


CHAPTER XVI.
The First Stand.
‘‘We owe allegiance to the State, but deeper, truer, more,
To the sympathies that God has set within our Spirit’s core.
Our country claims our fealty; we grant it so, but then
Before man made us citizens, great Nature made us men.”
—Lowell.
The honor of being the first to stand firm and suffer in the fight
against Australian conscription belongs to two International Socialists
and their sons.
The Defence authorities, armed with the clause allowing them a
hundred pounds fine, and uneasy at the increasing host of “shirkers,”
determined to make an example, if not in the interests of discipline, at
any rate in the interests of “military necessity.” For did not the
salvation of the State depend on their success in forcing these children
of ]4 to drill? So they came down upon Mr. Henry E. Holland, then
Editor of the Sydney “Socialist,” and, to their surprise, struck upon
a granite rock.
Henry Holland would not let his son drill. The lad, respecting his
father’s ideas of human brotherhood, took back his uniform and outfit
to the area officer with an explanatory letter. So a fearful example
must be made of the rebel father. A Supreme Court barrister was
sent to the Police Court to argue that the magistrate must inflict the
maximum penalty. The maximum penalty of £IOO was inflicted.
Holland announced his determination to go to gaol rather than yield.
An old battler for Labor, he had vivid memories of the way in which
gaol breaks down the vigorous, able-bodied man, but he would face it
all again if needs be. Meanwhile he appealed to the Supreme Court
for the magistrate’s decision to be nullified, with the result that the
fine was reduced to £lO, but that was never paid.*
Another International Socialist had, about the same time, challenged
the military hierarchy. Mr. Alfred Giles, a journeyman -butcher, of
Broken Hill, told the local officers that he refused to let liis son drill.
Result: fine one hundred pounds. On'declaring that he would not pay the
fine, Mr. Giles was imprisoned. Strenuous efforts were made by the local
* Summons. To Edmund Henry Holland, of Annandalfe, in the State of New-
South Wales. Whereas information has this day been laid before the undersigned,
one of His Majesty’s Justices of the Peace in and for the said State of New South
Wales, for that between the Ist day of July, 1911, and the 29th February, 1912,
at the Metropolitan Police District, you were a parent who prevented your son.
who is liable to serve in the cadets, from rendering the personal service required of
him by Part 12 of the Defence Act, 1903 to 1911. These are, therefore, to command
you, in His Majesty’s name, to be and appear, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of
March, 1912, at ten of the clock in the forenoon, at the Glebe Police Office, Glebe,
in the said State, before such Stipendiary Magistrate for the Metropolitan Police
District, in the said State, as may be there, to answer the said information, and
to be further dealt with according to law. Given under my hand and seal this 14th
day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twelve, at
Glebe, in the said State. (Signed) Geo. A. Lloyd, J.P.
Directly after the decision of the Supreme Court, Mr. Holland went to New
Zea’and on a lecturing tour for the Socialist Party, and. later, was appointed Editor
of the “Maoriland Worker,” a position he now (March, 1915) holds.


branch of the Australian Miners’
trades unions r.nthe appea i t 0 the Supreme
same time Mr. G , -iudae declaring that no technical
Court. The appeal £ military officer. The
evidence whatever had been tonight 7 a ll owe d to Alfred
magistrate’s decision was quashed, and costs
Giles. . hroueht against a Methodist
Six months later a J'^ U^ lfred M adsen, who was equally deter-
minister of Melbourne, • refused to register Ins son,
"X 1 The following is the newspaper
rtl ‘‘ In the C °l liag T°d A^d MadS d rmimster e o?the^'ethodist
the Defence regulations for not g
registered his son as a c . a < t oues tioned the son of defendant
3£
‘defendant with the result to what I
“Defendant—The Act reqm eollvictions .
that
1 V^^S?^-"tnTe 8 r» subiect. Will you register
—I am opposed to it.
“Mr. Morrison —Well, >' ou y e , ~l ternat ive imprisonment?
“Defendant-Can you make the alterna, P distresß . The
“Mr. Morrison-No; the d alt«, occasion”*
iTe" centre
d n re re 9 rr «. - -
military officer, Captain Hoad, said- masijluim penalty, as the
“111 this case, your woiShip, I ask t conscientious objections to
defendant lias not . on ?J “S/hS aon, but by letters to the press has
prevent him from legis • their sons from registering.
encouraged otheM in preventing merit9 .„»
Magistrate: We will decia . ht against William
At the same court a similar c migt w military officers,
Ingle, a Quaker. Evidence having been given by
the defendant said: , a Christian, as a follower of
“My defence is that l ai Ac J m v conscience and mv religion
Christ: and to obey this Defe : j oll J w Christ, whose message to
will be violated. To do it I c f e n o w-men, irrespective of color,
ffie earth was to love and serve therefore I
creed, or caste. I have not an enemy tQ allow my children
have no need to fea y to do with the military forces.’’,
to have anything shortly, you object to this Act. ~
Magistrate: "To put it_ short y, ser J ve his f e llow-men if
Ingle: "How can my c 1
;SaTd?‘‘Re“ist a er; ;; 2«h AprTl^ 1912 '


Magistrate: “We don’t want that. That is more a matter for the
churches. ’!
Ingle: “I was told there was a conscience clause, but my child
would be compelled to take an oath to serve the King. If a child
agrees to join the military and in a battle an officer said to him,
■ Carry that box of ammunition to the men fightingis he compelled
to obey that officer!”
Magistrate: “Don’t you understand discipline? The officer must
be obeyed.”
Ingle: “ \ es. Well, there is no difference between carrying the
ammunition and shooting a man. ’ ’
Ingle s observation was applauded by a number of people in court,
but the disturbers were promptly suppressed.
He was ordered to pay £1 10s., in default fourteen days ’ imprison-
ment. ' J F
“Thank you,” he remarked; “I will pav nothing; I will have the
fourteen days. ”*
In July, 191.5, Joshua Ratcliff, a Rationalist, of Melbourne, was
charged with preventing his two boys from drilling. He objected to
militarism in all its forms. “Compulsory military training,” he said,
“resulted in the physical and moral degradation of the country.” He
was fined £l2 ss. on the two cases.
About the same time, Christopher Flinn, a Quaker, of Melbourne, was
fined £2 and costs for refusing to register his son.
William Henry Bennett, of Dulwich Hill, Sydney, was charged at
Newtown Police Court, on November 21st, 1913, with “being the parent
of Arthur S. Bennett, who is liable to serve under the Defence Act, did
prevent his son from rendering the personal service required of him.”
Mr. Clegg, who appeared on behalf of the accused, argued that the
defendant was not a law-breaker, and bore a good name, but his
grounds for refusing to allow his boy to train as a soldier were
because of the strong conscientious objection to the system. He had
been imprisoned before for a similar offence, but, after serving a
couple of days, his wife had paid the fine.
Bennett (to the magistrate): “I am not a law-breaker, and do not
wish to break the law. I have always gone straight, but I have a
conscientious objection to my boy being compelled against his will to
become a soldier.”
Magistrate: “I believe this man to be conscientiously opposed to
the system, but the law must be administered.”
Mr. Clegg: “I fully understand the law must be administered, but
why should the defendant be penalised in this way? Something like
60,000 parents who have failed to register their sons (judging by the
estimates based on Knibbs’ Australian Year Book figures) get off
scot free, and this man is to be prosecuted. I claim that the others
should be treated in a like manner, and there should be no special
cases as this picked one. If it is wrong for one, it is wrong for
60,000. It is not justice.”
Magistrate: “I should like to show all the leniency possible.”
A fine of £2 was imposed, t
So far as we have been able to discover, there are' very few cases of
parents who have been so prosecuted. And these prosecutions completely
failed. The parents fined would not pay the fines. William Ingle, Alfred
*See Adelaide press, 25th April, 1913.
tMelbourne “Socialist,” sth December, 1913.


Giles, sna William Bennett went to gaol; the others had their goo
dlSt "n„ difference; they f«
and only Mr. Bennett was
was to prosecute the boys. 0J ’ Th e ot i ie rs, so far [Easter, 1915]
r dr« - - ** “ «■ imifora ” or done
a moment’s drill.


CHAPTER XVII.
A Police Court Trial.
“Parliament did not dare to try and trap those who had nower to make
reprisals They seized upon the hapless, helpless youth of the country.
*£ s of the old Press-gang of George 111. became the ethics of our legis-
lators, minus the courage, because the press-gang at least chose full-grown men
Expe ?< 1 ™ 1 1 i cy was resorted to, and the least resisting method was adopted.
Tast Joot e /in Ct J of our ex P en diency are now being brought home to us every day.
P rose ? uted at Fremantle for not attending drill. Pro-
0f th , em . a . d ever been inside the precincts of a court before. They
n ° w ?, eal l y made their debut as criminals. They will never be able to say with
nr T,«^ n r dredS ° f - ? r ® wn ; up J Persons do, that they have never been inside a
court or before a magistrate in their lives/*
''^ianTa^orMinistry ß ’" by H ° n ‘ J- E ' Dodd ’ Member of Western Austra-
As one reads the following account by Miss Rebecca Swann, of
Sydney, of a civil trial of defaulters, and remembers that, in all, 27,749
prosecutions have occurred in three years, one gets some idea of the
c\ il done to Australian lads in familiarising them with the sordid
atmosphere of police courts.
A ery few prosecutions took place during the first year of the
training scheme (1911-12), the Military Department contenting itself wfth
tin eats, but at the end of that year (June, 1912) it was announced that
over 1 /,000 cadets were liable to prosecution. Since then the prosecutions
have averaged 262 per week f«r the second, and 271 per week for the
third training year.
The procedure differs in detail in different courts, but in principle it
is the same. A military officer is prosecutor and either acts as witness
himself or calls other officers to give evidence. The conversations
between the prosecuting officer and the magistrate, often carried on in
an undertone, make such a trial a travesty of justice.
Miss Swann’s account is as follows:
“On Friday, 17th April, 1913, I went to the Charge Division of the
Water Police Court, Sydney, to hear the case against Arthur Bennett,
who had been summoned to appear to answer a charge of failing to attend
compulsory drill.
“Before giving particulars of Bennett’s case, however, I should like
to mention other matters.
1, in common, I am sure, with many others, was under .the impression
that children under 16 years of age, charged with any offence against the
law, were always brought befoxe a Children’s Court and that every
possible care was taken to prevent their coming in contact with ordinary
police court surroundings or hearing police court cases. Now I find that
such is not the case. Several lads under 16 were cited to appear at the
court which I attended. So far as I could gather they were all charged
with some breach of the Defence Acts. They had been summoned to
appear at 10 a.m. A children’s court was constituted at 10.45 a.m., at
which their cases were heard. But both before and after the hearing of


their eases these ycang boys were about Btoo j „„ the
to stand. Others, apparently w * liaten , 0 ordinary police
person. Thes ' jtsor“derly eoadnet, stealing, etc., or stood in
court cases-eharges of < .sorde taMe .l ook in g men who were
groups outside. Several times ... these lads . I was consider-
standing about enter into con Versa respectable working-class
" a time, seems to me a matter
that urgently calls for reform * case . it was called on between
“With regard to Arthur Be , , g Court being now con-
-12 and 1 o’clock. The sitting o Bennett stood with
eluded, the doors of ,“ ofTe 0 fTe dock ! They were all charged with
four or five others in fioit . d ltv ’ and was ordered
failing to attend drill. Benne P ea< \ having been dealt
to sit down. The cases of those who pie * ‘ er from Mr. Clegg,
with, Bennett was again called defeild the case, asked that it be
the solicitor who had been eng g h ad not yet arrived. The
held over for a few minutes Be nnett had to speak for himself.
Magistrate refused this request, , The magistrate,
‘My father will abmv ina must not consider
rt^^ what the law requires. You must drill,
interposed, ltn g l
clerical or other non-combatant duties Bennett if be would
answered that he would have to consult his
it - txz
had been dealt with, Mr Clegg api Mr. Bennett, senior,
that his son Should take clerical
duties. Regarding the other along the
by name. They came into com * R fr i end in the courthouse. An
floor. None of them appearec t h (clerk of the court) said: ‘You
; ’ he iU4 not Blve
dates or particulars of the charges.*
*At the .diournm.;* |0« ,•«»» Hi. father -ad
ssssai* I jjag.«“ s- •a-g-aSr’ts
the IX o‘h«° civilian l i re,ent w.. co th r e ' court crier In the^.a^as.
outriders to t&K *


•‘Each boy was then called on separately to plead; those who said
guilty remained standing, three who pleaded ‘not guilty’ were ordered
to sit down. The magistrate then addressed each lad who had pleaded
‘guilty,’ sayinfc, ‘Have you anything to say?’ Most of them replied,
o, sii ; and after the magistrate had consulted with the military
officer who stood in the witness-box, the boy was sentenced to a term of
detention and to pay three shillings costs, or forty-eight hours’ imprison-
ment with haul labor. A few asked for time to pay and were allowed two
months.
“One lad who had pleaded guilty, when asked if he had anything
to say, declared that he had never missed a drill and that there was some
mistake. The magistrate spoke wrathfully to him, saying, ‘You were
charged with failing to attend drill on the 14th and you pleaded guilty,
now what do you mean?’ (No such charge had been made personally to
the lad and no date mentioned: as I said before, the boys were charged in
bulk.) In answer to the magistrate, the boy again reiterated his state-
ment about not missing any drills, adding that he had not spoken before
as he thought he had to wait ‘until the proper time came.’ Quite
evidently this lad had not understood what he was doing when he pleaded
guilty. The magistrate told him to sit down and he would enquire into
the case later on. He was a very childish-looking lad, I should think very
little over sixteen. He seemed very nervous when addressing the magis-
trate. 1 had to leave the court before his case came on again.
‘ ‘ I also heard the case of a boy who was charged with a breach of
discipline, to wit, talking in the ranks. The mother of this lad spoke to
the magistrate from the floor of the court. She began a somewhat
rambling statement as to why her lad missed certain drills. The
magistrate interrupted her, saying that the boy was not charged with
missing drills, but with talking in the ranks. She spoke again, and it was
evident that there was some connection between the lad’s absenting him-
self from drill and his disorderly conduct, and that she was anxious to
explain this to the magistrate. However, he interrupted her again, asking
her to sit down, and saying that he would not be too hard upon the boy.
She sat near me, trembling, and saying under her breath, ‘lt’s*a cruel,
cruel, wicked shame.’ The boy was ordered to pay a fine of ss. and
costs. The mother, looking greatly relieved, paid the fine and went away.
“Some points which struck me during my attendance at court were:
“1. That the consultation between the magistrate and the military-
officer as to what sentence should be inflicted was carried on in a tone of
voice that could not be heard by the lads concerned. 'Thus it was im-
possible for the boys to question any statement the officer made.
2. The lads were placed too far from the magistrate. From conversa-
tions I heard outside, I know many of them meant to put forward various
excuses, but they lost their nerve and weakly replied, ‘No, sir,’ when
asked if they had anything to say. I am sure they would have found
sentencing of boys to military imprisonment was broken by the discovery that two
boys had been sentenced and driven off to the barracks under the names of two
other boys who had not turned up in court. They were afterwards brought back
from the barracks and re-sentenced under their right names.


it easier to make their statements had they been placed as near to the
magistrate as was the prosecuting officer.
<%. The magistrate did not always speak distinctly when addressing
th<? -4 S The lads were not each charged separately with failing to attend
on specified dates, hut a general charge of failing to attend compulsory
drill was made against them. . .
‘‘ 5 The officer who gave what was practically evidence was not, to
the best of my knowledge, a sworn witness. (He may have been sworn
in connection with other cases before I entered the com .)
“6 The lads were kept standing on a stone pavement foi hours
before their cases were called on.' Many of them looked very weary
■is they stood on the floor of the court. Their physical weariness must
have affected their nerves and made them less able to defend themselves
than they otherwise would have been. ■
.. Altogether, it seemed to me that the statement made by one hoy
as he stood on the pavement was justified: he said, ‘lnnocent or guilty,
“ chaps have no show once we are accused, unless we can fork, out
twenty-one bob for a lawyer.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Some Striking Statistics: The Failure of
Parental Registration of Senior Cadets.
_ A i thoU g h effort has been made to trace the missing lads born in 1898
the numbers are still a long way behind those of previous years. A careful canvass
Austra fi a has been made, and the assistance of schoolmasters
throughout Australia secured, but the combined efforts of all branches of the
Melbourne “Argus,” 13th March, 1913.
“Sydney Morning Herald,” 13th March, 1913.
1 2-042 registrations of the last batch of cadets have been made
since January Ist, and this is regarded by the military authorities as satisfactory.* ’
Ibid.
We must now take the readers'into figures. Let it be borne in mind
that they are not our figures, but those which the Military Department
have supplied directly or indirectly to the Commonwealth Statistician,
to the Press, to the Australian Freedom League, or to Parliament.
It will be impossible to repudiate them, even those taken from the
T less; for their simultaneous appearance in the daily papers of the
Commonwealth makes it plain that, even if not officially communicated,
the department intentionally allowed their becoming public.*
Military underlings do not blab secrets. Besides, whence could the
devoted press have got these elaborate statistics, worked out to the very
unit, if not from the Military Department?
It will be remembered that by Section 142 of the Defence Act “all
male inhabitants of Australia .... shall register themselves, or be
registered by a parent, guardian, or other person acting in loco' parentis, ”
in the year in which they reach the age of 34, and that the penalty for
failing to register is £lO.
In the Official Year-Book of the Commonwealth of Australia for
1912, page 1236, we find that the 1911 Census showed 43,134 Australian
fourteen-year-old boys. Deducting from this number, say, 500 imbeciles
and about 2,500 lads in the back-blocks we get 40,000, approximately.
We will treat this number as the normal quota for any one year.
If we were exacting the full pound of flesh, we would sav 43,000, ap-
proximately, since (as the Minister of Defence said in Parliament as late
as November. 14th, 1914) “the Act requires all youths in Australia over
a certain age to register.” But we will make him a present of the odd
thousands, and put the quota at 40,000.
Turning again to the Official Year-Book (page 1245) we find that,
up to April, 1912, 3 79,032 senior cadets had been registered. These would
be the boys born in 1894, 1895, 1896, and 1897 who were compelled to
■ An example of such information appearing simultaneously in dailv news-
papers hundreds of miles'apart is given at the top of this page. We give
the references to its appearing on the same day in morning papers in Sydney and
Melbourne. If the flies of the morning papers in each State capital of the 13th
March, 1913, were searched, we have no doubt whatever that the same information
■would be found in each paper.


register in January, 1911, and part of those born in 1898, who had to>
register in January, 1912.
At first things looked well for the Military Department. The first
four quotas had rolled up readily; nearly 40,000 names represented each-
year.
On July Ist, 1911, the training began: by January, 1912, the novelty
had worn off, the parents were finding out the meaning of their sons being
‘ ‘ under military law. ’ ’ They were beginning to form their own —as;
distinct from the newspapers’ —opinions of the educational and moral
value of the system.
For now a change comes over the scene. We have said that the-
-179,029 registrations (April, 1912) contained some part of the 1898 quota.
We will discuss this fateful set in more detail.
By January 31st, the last date for enrolment, 40,000 parents should
have registered “young hopeful”: only 17,000 “young hopefuls” were-
registered. Over 20,000 parents had incurred the liability of the £lO
fine. A big slump this. Let us examine more fully what it means.*
It is easy to be patriotic with other people’s children: and parents-
who had at first thoughtlessly welcomed the training, took a more
thoughtful view of the matter when it was brought to their own door-
step and the State said to them, “Give up YOUR child.” When their
time to register came, they remembered neighbours’ unfavorable reports
as to the influence of the drill, and hung back.
So the parents of the boys born in 1898, when the time came to
register, were very backward in coming forward. Coaxing and threats
alike failed, and on July 24th, 1912, the Minister tabled statistics in
Parliament which showed that only 28,681 enrolments had taken place up
to the time when their training should have started in July.t Over
30 per cent, of the lads had not registered. Over eleven thousand had
avoided giving their names to the Military Board. Here was sorrow
for a sorely perplexed Defence Minister. The newspapers bristled with;
threats of prosecutions, but the parents still hung back.
And the following year, 1913, showed a much greater shrinkage in
the number of enrolments. When the last date (extended now from.'
January 31st to February 28th) came, only 12,042 out of the total of'
40,000 parents had registered their boys.} Here was a further shortage
of 28,000.
Something drastic had to be done. So then it was that the depart-
ment came down upon a few parents to frighten the others. In
April, 1913, Mr. Arthur Henzell and Mr. William Ingle, of Adelaide, were-
summoned and fined. Neither paid his fine, and Mr. Ingle went to gaol.
While he was in gaol a big demonstration on behalf of freedom of'
conscience took place in Adelaide. The Military Board had again struck
*The Military Department desired to have access to the Census returns to-
help them in tracing the missing lads. The confidential nature of these returns,
must surely give way to military necessity. The Minister for Home Affairs (Mr.
King O’Malley) refused the request, saying that if he did allow their use he would!
never expect to get another Census.
fSee Adelaide “Register,” 25th July, 1912.
jSee daily papers of 13th March, 1913.


a rock. Changing the metaphor, we may say that as they could not untie
the knot, they decided to cut it. By a new military regulation the area
officers were empowered to reckon themselves as the lads’ parents and
enrol such of them as they could trace.*
This regulation fixes the date of the downfall of parental enlistment.
By a piece of executive trickery the parent was brushed aside and the
child taken. It was easier to gaol children than men.
About this time a new arm was added to the conscript army organ-
isation in the shape of a department of military police. “Provost Staff, ’ r
it was called, and its work was to trace out the missing lads and bring
them within the clutch of the law.
Now that by that military law the area officer could regard himself as
military father to the young conscript and, as he discovered him, him-
self register each boy of fourteen, all further registration figures are
worthless. It is simply a matter of book-keeping. The Defence Depart-
ment has continued to issue statistics as to registration, but these are
manifestly meant to cover up their failure. The figures now are merely
evidence that the department has, to its own satisfaction, found the
whereabouts of the boy and identified him. Not a difficult matter when
there are the junior cadet records kept by the school-teachers.
Even if future military returns as to parental registration are
conscientiously arrived at they will show nothing except the
success of the military trackers and their clerking industry in filling in
schedule blank to the greater glory of Moloch.
*For the text of this regulation, see Appendix C.


CHAPTER XIX.
Some Striking Statistics: Prosecutions and
Imprisonment.
Conflicting Press Information.
Melbourne “Argus,” 29th July,
1019 •
1 “London, July 26th.
‘‘A good deal of interest has been
aroused by a statement as to the break-
down of compulsory military service in
Australia. The Adelaide correspondent
of the “Daily News” is responsible for
the report. He says that there have
been 10,000 prosecutions in ) Australia
for refusal to drill. . . • •”
“Position Explained. —The military
authorities claim that the cable message
from Adelaide was sent to London witn-
out full knowledge of the facts. . • • •
The Minister for Defence (Senator
Pearce) contended yesterday that the
whole statement was a ‘gross exaggera-
tion.’ No such number of prosecutions
was at all likely.” _ . ~
London “Daily News and Leader,
27th August, 1812:
“A difficult situation has now to be
faced by the Comonwealth Labor Go-
vernment, writes a- correspondent.
Twenty thousand boys between 14 and
18 years of age have to be prosecuted
under the compulsory military training
scheme, the first year of which ended in
June.. . t 0 end of March
34 000 boys (38 per cent.) had evaded
regular drills. Arrangements were
made, however, that these should be
made up during June, and by means oi
threats of heavy fines and imprison-
ment many boys were rushed through.
But when this was done there remained
10.000 boys who, in spite of the penal-
ties, refused to drill. The Minister
•of Defence has announced that all these
must be prosecuted.
. By the end of January only
17*000 had registered, and in July,
when the year’s training should com-
mence, at least 10,000 boys were miss-
ing.”
Adelaide “Advertiser” (and other
Australian daily papers), 30th July,
*
“Melbourne, July 29th.
<‘A table issued from the district
headquarters to-day indicates that a
large proportion of compulsory trainees
during the year ending June 30 failed
to make good. The figures given in
the return are those for Victoria, which
has 6,296 liable to prosecution, and
Senator Pearce remarked on them:—
‘lt seems that there will be nearly
three times the number of inefiicients
in the Commonwealth, and that there
will be 18,000 liable for prosecu-
tion.’ ”
London “Military Mail,” 13th Sep-
tember, 1912.. Other English papers,
September 9th: —
‘‘Sir George Reid, the High Com-
missioner for Australia, states that he
has already combated these criti-
cisms, but in order to do so more
effectively he has telegraphed to his
Government and has now received in
reply the following cable message,
which has been commmunicated to
Reuter’s Agency:— ,
“ ‘With reference to your telegram
of 27th August, final returns show
that 81 per cent, have fully complied
with Universing Training Defence Act.
The majority of the remainder are only
a few hours short. No cadet will be
prosecuted who undertakes to make up
deficiencies. The statements as to
20.000 prosecutions are grossly exag-
gerated; there will be only 643 in New
South Wales, and in the other States
considerably less.’ ”
The returns furnished by the Australian Defence Department to the
Australian Freedom League in the middle of 1914 give the number o
■conscripts liable to training as 123,487. Had the department not made
wholesale exemptions, the number so liable would have been near y a
quarter of a million. Let us see what an enormous trouble has been
involved in inducing these 123,497 boys to drill at all.
How many have put in all their drills we do not know. That is
another story. The question is, what amount of punishment has been
necessary to secure the presence at all on the drill-ground of half the
youths in Australia of the ages affected by universal military training


SUMMARY OF PROSECUTIONS UNDER THE DEFENCE ACT.
No. of Yearly * No. of
prosecutions average prosecutions Total
Military District. for first two for first for year for
year& ending two ending three
30/6/’l3. years. 30/6/’l4. years..
1. Queensland 1,249 .. 624 .. 1,422 .. 2,671
2. New South Wales . . 4,871 .. 2,436 .. 6,211 .. 11,082
3. Victoria 4,573 .. 2,286 .. 3,513 .. 8,086
4. South Australia .. 1,327 .. 664 .. 1,372 .. 2,699
5. Western Australia . 860 . . 430 .. 889 . . 1,749
6. Tasmania 775 . . 388 . . 687 . . 1,462
Total 13,655 . . 6,828 . . 14,094 . . 27,749
These are the official figures furnished by Mr. S. A. Pethebridgey
Secretary of the Defence Department, to Mr. Arthur Watts, then organ*
iser of the Australian Freedom League.
To begin with, note that more than half of these 27,749 prosecutions
took place during the last military year. Yet we were told in our press
during all the year, and it was officially reported in the English press,
that the Act was popular and resistance was dying down.*
Next note the amazing number of lads thus dragged into the
degrading influence of the police court: the entire number of compulsory
trainees in Western Australia, Tasmania, and South Australia, taken
together, is only 22,575. t
Was ever Act broken as this Act is? Fancy prosecuting in 27,749*
cases in order to get a strength of 123,497 trainees. ONE PROSECU-
TION FOR EVERY FOUR-AND-A-HALF LADS DRILLING: 22.5 per-
cent. of the whole number.
The Minister of Defence sought to make us believe that the educa-
tional prosecutions were as bad, implying that compulsory education
was on an equality with compulsory militarism. But here are the school
figures (as supplied by the Commonwealth Statistician) for the last three
available years.!
Year. Enrolment of Prosecutions. Percentage.
Scholars.
1910 .. 786.604 .. 12.259 .. 1.56
1911 . . 799,644 . . 5,354 . . .67
1912 .. 826,661 .. 7,832 .. .95
From these figures we get the average of one prosecution for every
hundred scholars. Compulsory military training is not yet as popular
as compulsory education.
*An official statement was issued from the Commonwealth. Offices in London
replying to the statements made by a correspondent of the “Daily News and
Leader’’ on the subject of the impending prosecution of cadets who had evaded
compulsory military training. It appeared in the “Evening Standard and St.
James’ Gazette’’ of August 27th, 1912, and in the “Daily News and Leader’’ of
the day following. It was, apparently, sent to all the leading English papers. Th&
last paragraph reads: “During his speech Mr. Pearce (Minister of Defence) ex-
pressed the belief that there is less opposition to our defence system to-day than
there was six months ago, and that there wil be less opposition to it in six
months’ time than there is now. As the people understood it, they were beginning
to appreciate it.’’ .
t Supposing the Australian scheme of conscription were introduced into the
United Kingdom, and the same proportion of prosecutions were necessary—and we
think the English lad has as strong a sense of injustice and desire for freedom as
has his Australian brother —there would be the huge total of 138,745 prosecutions
of lads in less than three years.
t Supplied to the Australian Freedom League by Mr.. G. H. Knibbs, the
Commonwealth Statistician.


We will now take a grimmer form of punishment, a form which
compulsory education does not employ, imprisonment m barracks
“eflrst of such imprisonments took place in February 21st 1913
A question asked in Parliament by Mr. Bamford in August 1913
t Hansard p 111), drew the information that up to June 30th, 1913, no
( H ansar l p. so impriaoned . Early in 1914 the Secretary
, v,i/t977 nnfl three months later, figuies supplied
the number had reached V 77 > ancl tlllLe u * 7 *.0
bv the Department brought the number to the appalling total of 5,73..
' m sixteen months Australia had imprisoned in fortresses, some
icl and fortresses nearly 6,000 of its lads. The “military neces-
Ld to tMs also led the Australian .press to utter, and the
English press to echo, the lying parrot-cry that compulsoiy mi i y
training was popular.
The reader should now turn to Appendix J.—J.F.H. (1919).


CHAPTER XX.
Further Signs of “Popularity.”
“It was at Newtown. Court where the first hatch of 162 summonses were
"issued on July Ist. The cases were decided a week later. Of this total 125 boyd
were fined.
Returns obtained from the other courts show that at Balmain the summonses
already issued and being issued total 354, but most of these cases have yet to be
heard. At the Glebe fully 300 summonses have been issued, and already 200 boys
have been fined. At the Central Police Court 276 summonses are being issued, and
the first batch of cases will be dealt with to-day. At the Water Police Court 200
summonses are now being issued in two batches. The first batch of 100 cases will
be dealt with on Friday of this week. At Redfern between 300 and 400 informa-
tions have been laid. Of these 106 cases have been disposed of, resulting in 60 per
cent, of the boys being fined, while the others were either ordered to complete their
drills without fine, or the lads could not be found to serve the summonses on them.
“At Paddington 133 summonses have already been issued. Of these, 26 were
fined in one batch. The other cases have yet to be heard, and in addition, there
are two areas yet to be dealt with in this particular court.
“So far, North Sydney, Ashfield, Burwood, and Manly courts have not been
troubled with cases. But at each of these centres informations are expected to be
laid within a few days, so that by the time the prosecutions are at an end it is
anticipated that something like 5,000 boys will have been proceeded against in'
Sydney for failing to render the personal service required of them.’’
“Sydney Morning Herald,’’ 24th July, 1912.
During the last military year (1913-14) prosecutions of lads took
place at the rate of 269 per week, or over fifty per court day. Human
"beings cannot be ‘ ‘ tried ’ ’ at the rate of over a score an hour, yet this is
the common practice in dealing with the Australasian conscript. Lads
are told to respect the law and honor the State. How can they honor
the State or respect its law when they see the military representative of
the State extract from the compliant magistrate representing the law
mechanical convictions which send them to fortress prisons?
Ninety-four youths appeared to-dav at the Auckland (New
Zealand) Magistrate’s Court, charged with failing to attend parades.
The hearing of the charges occupied the magistrate two
Adelaide “Advertiser,” Bth November, 1913.
These “free and independent” British subjects must have been
tried at the rate of one every li minutes, or else lumped together and
■dealt with in bulk as Fouquier-Tinville got through his guillotine batches
in 1794.
At Perth (Western Australia) in the middle of 1913, a drove of over
a hundred lads went through their civil trial in one court day.
At Christchurch, New Zealand, on October 28tli, 1913,
The Magistrate’s Court presented a busy appearance, when fully
190 cases were dealt with, mostly charges for failing to render
military service.
S. H. Hobbs, fined £4 and deprived of civil rights for 3 years.
W. M. Giles, fined £2 and deprived of civil rights for 3 years.
F. J. Perham, fined £2 and deprived of civil rights for 2 years.
J. S. D. Porter, fined £3 and deprived of civil rights for 3 years.
W. H. Thackwell, fined £4 and deprived of civil rights for 3 years.
Three other youths were heavily fined and deprived of their civil
rights for three years.”
There was an unusually large number of defaulting cadets at the
* “Lyttelton Times,’’ 20th October, 1913.


Paddington Court, Sydney. One batch alone comprised 101, against
whom the summonses had been returned, while in many cases the
order to appear had not been served.*
On Thursday 120 summonses were taken out at the Redfern Court
of Petty Sessions, Sydney, against compulsory trainees of Area 23a
for failing to attend the necessary number of drills.!
At Footscray, Melbourne, yesterday, over 100 cadets were
sentenced, and a crowd of from 300 to 400 cheered each cadet as he
left the building.{
About September, 1912, in Port Adelaide, South Australia (popula-
tion, 21,000), 94 compulsory trainees were tried in one day by Mr. J. H.
Sinclair, S.M.
We could make our list of these “drove” prosecutions much longer,
but we will close it with the following item: —
Sydney, March 27th.
The hearing of cases against 188 senior cadets and youths from
the Citizen Forces, who were charged with offences against the
Defence Act at the Water Police Court to-dav, excited considerable
interest. The court presented an unusually animated appearance.s
Here is an account of a trial at Port Pirie, South Australia, on
October 22nd, 1912. We quote from the Adelaide “Register,” a paper
which strongly supports conscription: —
Port Pirie, October 22nd.
Fifty-one boys of tender age appeared in the public court-house
to-dav before Mr. S. J. Mitchell, S.M., and were charged by Major
Watts, of-Wallaroo, with not having attended the necessary drill
parades as required by the Commonwealth „Def ence Acts. All the
defendants pleaded guilty. The excuses for non-attendance at drills
were manv and varied. One little chap, Claude Farrell, aged 16, had
a deficiency of 474 hours. He worked at the smelters and said he was
the sole support of his widowed mother. He could not afford to lose
the time from his work to attend drills, as there was no one else to
care for his parent. He was ordered to pay 20s. costs and committed
to the care of the military authorities.
David William Fitzgerald was 444 hours in arrears with his drills.
He said he lived 44 miles out of the town and had no horse to bring
him in. He worked from daylight to dark, and when he had finished
he was too tired to drill.
Magistrate—lf there was a football match on you would soon
walk in.
The father of the boy said it was impossible for his son to attend
drills as he had no way of getting in to the port and it was too far
for him to walk.
Magistrate—You must get him a horse, then.
A fine of £5 and 15s. costs was then imposed, in default six weeks
in the reformatory.
Alfred Clare Hall said his working hours were from 6 a.m. until
5 p.m., and it was hard for him to find time to drill. He promised
to do so in the future, and was ordered to pay 20s. costs and make
up the balance of parades.
Six boys out of the fifty-one charged said they could not pay the
fines.
About half the boys were fined £5 and 15/ costs. The others had
to pav costs, and were ordered to make up their drills and appear at
*Sydney “Evening News,’’ 14tli August, 1912.
tSydney “Daily Telegraph.” sth April, 1913.
{Melbourne “Argus,” 29th August, 1913.
§ Adelaide “Express,” 27th March, 1914.


a later date. A large crowd of men and youths waited outside the
court-house, and when the six youths who could not pay their fines
were marfched through the main street in charge of a constable,
lusty cheers were given for the little fellows. A large section of the
public who were previously in favor of the Act were deeply moved
by seeing the boys taken to the police cells and locked up for the
night. —Thus the Adelaide “ Register. ”
We ask ourselves what will happen in the courts-martial of the
future if the civil courts of the present are so accommodating and
expeditious under the pressure of militarism.
Political party discipline—a strong thing in Australia —prevents our
75 Representatives and 36 Senators from saying all they think and know
on a question where the party heads seem to have bound themselves hand
and foot to tne British National Service League. The follow'ing state-
ments, therefore, are all the more significant.
Senator Ferricks said in the Senate: —
‘ ‘ Before the war occurred we were in a position to gauge public
opinion regarding the defence system. Judging from my experience
in Queensland, which no doubt is typical of Australia,* the Australian
people as a whole were only tolerating the defence system.”—
Hansard, 1914 (p. 985).
1 Mr. McGrath, Labor member for Ballarat, Victoria, when questioning
the Prime Minister on May 8th concerning the railway travelling of
cadets to their drills, said: —
“Many cadets have either to pay their fares on the railways or
walk some distance in order to attend drill. The drill is unpopular
enough without calling upon parents to pay railway fares.”—
Hansard, 1914 (p. 833).
While Mr. Anstey, Labor member for Bourke, Victoria, said on June
11th, 1914:—
“The whole system is fizzling out.”
And Mr. Burns, Labor member for Illawarra, N.S.W., said eight
days later: —
“I fought my pre-election campaign upon this question, and I
fought my election upon it. I was sent to this Parliament because
I had the courage to say that I was opposed to the whole system.”


CHAPTER XXI.
The Boys’ Contribution to Military Necessity.
“About SO per cent, of the soldiers who went into camp on February 13th
were eighteen-year-old youths, who were subject to the compulsory clauses of the
Defence Act. For many of these life under service conditions proves distasteful, and
a large number of pessimistic letters were written. One youth writes familiarly
from Waubra Camp (which was about 13 miles distant from the Light Horse Camp),
and tells a thrilling story of his adventures in the following words:
“Y.M.C.A. Marquee, Military Camp, Waubra, Feb. 16, 1913.
“Dear Jim I suppose you wonderd what become of me on thursday mornin g
not being in well I was not to go away until the thursday but the Sgt. Major told
me on wednesray night that I would have to go away on thursday morning without
fail. I tried to pitch him a tail but he wouldnt come at it so I looked up the
station while we was there but I never see you or Frank to tell you I had come to
this dam place. . is up here with the Yarraville cadets and he is shaking
them up he Wont give them a minutes rest he is all the time drilling with them.
I will be in friday without fail that is if I am not dead they give us rotten meat
one potato each and one loaf of bread between sixteen of us and we have average
twenty mile a day on that while we are here we are up live every morning ready
to drill at six o’clock then knock off at eight have breakfast of half a sausage and 1
potato each and coffee with salts in it then for dinner we have stew made out oi
corn beef and potatoes one of the cadets found a big maggot about an inch long in
the corn beef so he showed it to the doctor and he told him if he didnt eat it somebody
else would. There was a lot of light Horse got into the officers tent and shook four
bottles of whiskey and they got drunk and started riding their horses all over the
town so they sent the Victorian rangers after the, and they arrested them and they
got shot in in the guards tent for the rest of he encampment. There is a lot of
them getting shick (drunk) up here every night nearly they go down to the pub
It is about half a mile away and they stop there nearly all night playing two-up
and even betting on the light horse races. They race every night .there is a bit
of a bookmaker in the Light horse and he bets you a twenty to one shot lobs every
night, I think it is got up on ns as a different horse wins every night. Thip is all
I have to say excuse the writing I remain yours truly I have to start drilling in
five minutes.”
Melbourne “Argus,” 26th February, 1913.
“Hardship and pain are good things: they toughen, and make good
fibre. ’ ’ The folk that say this of the Australian conscript system do
not go to drill themselves and do not mean to. The statement, moreover,
is but one side of the matter. It is equally true that hardship and pain
are bad things and crush and blight. It may be added, too, that
injustice embitters: and that the Australian youth is getting his share
of all three.
We will now deal with some of the hardships imposed in connection
with the training itself.
At the Guildford Remount Depot (Western Australia) early in 1914,
before an officer who stood laughing as boy after boy was thrown, a
nervous lad named Cann was forced —after refusal —to mount a horse
The horse bolted into the bush and threw him on to a stump, breaking
his back.
“He is paralysed from his waist downwards, but still lives, to the
surprise of all. He is the youngest son of his mother, who is a widow
working very hard on the goldfields to support herself and her family.
She had apprenticed Cann as a fitter in the Government railway
workshops, and when his time was up in a couple of years, she hoped
with his help to have a little home in Perth, and not have such a hard
time as she has had up till now. It is a terrible trouble to all his
family to have his life wrecked in this way. If he lives on he will
be a helpless cripple.’ ’


The Melbourne “Argus” reported, on the 9th March, 1914, that the
- Military Board had recommended that compensation amounting to £l9l,
at the rate of 3/6 per day, should be paid to the mother. On this the
■“Federal Independent” wrote: —
“Here is compulsory militarism in all its nakedness —£191 ior a
broken spine, a broken life, and a mother’s broken heart. This is the
valuation militarism puts on human life; £l9l for a broken back!
As much has been paid in a civil court for a broken arm, and with
not a tithe of its culpable negligence. ’’*
Because there is a lack of drill-halls, drilling in the rain, and, at
other seasons, in a shade temperature of over a hundred degrees, is not
infrequent.
Mr. Fenton (Maribyrnong)—l am rather surprised to hear from
the honorable member for Illawarra and others that cadets have been
called,upon to drill in drenching rain.
Mr. Fuller —Only last week, in Sydney, I saw cadets wet through.
—Federal Hansard, 1913 (p. 1287).
On several occasions camps have been badly placed and the lads
flooded out. To resume, from Hansard: —
Mr. Burns —. . . . At the recent encampment at Liverpool some
thousands of boys were forced to remain under canvas during some
of the most trying weather that New South Wales had ever ex-
perienced. I saw a photograph of the camp at Liverpool taken five
liours after the flood waters had passed through, and the lads were
then standing knee-deep in water, and their clothing and blankets
were so w r et they were unable to use them. I understand that some
of the boys in my district were stricken down, and were incapacitated
from work for some days.”—Hansard, 1914 (p. 365).
In spite of Mr. Burns’ exposures the military—above being in-
structed by a mere civilian —again- put the tents at Liverpool camp on
low ground, and again the tents were flooded out. The sufferings of these
lads in their teens are of no account to “military necessity.”
As for the lads ’ time, it is poured out like water. In 1912 a party of
cadets at Brighton, South Australia, on musketry training, had tq leave
home at about 11 o’clock, after getting on their uniforms and eating a
hurried dinner, tram or walk or cycle into Glenelg (three miles), train
to Adelaide (six miles), again train to Port Adelaide (six miles), walk
from the Port to the butts (two miles), and then, if lucky, they got ten
or a dozen shots. It was impossible for most of them to get home before
7 o’clock in the evening. For sacrificing nearly the whole of Saturday,
they would be credited with just the one full drill.
The late Mr. Arthur, Labor member for Bendigo, dealt with the same
matter in Parliament. He said:—
“The Bendigo senior cadets have to drill on Saturday afternoons
at a place four miles from the city. The lads leave off work at 1
o’clock, or thereabouts, and then have to hurry home, change into
their uniforms, and be on the drill-grounds at half-past two o’clock.
As no conveyance is provided they have to walk both ways. In many
cases these cadets have to support their families. The Chewton
cadets have a similar grievance. They, as a rule, are employed at
*\Ve would like to take this occasion of expressing our appreciation of the
great help the “Federal Independent’’ has been in opposing conscription in Aus-
tralia. It has been rightly described as “A fearless Sydney paper.’’


Castlemaine, and, after leaving work, have to walk three miles to
Chewton to their homes, and return to Castlemaine to drill.”
It is frequently said that the hoys have only to give up 64 hours a
year. This is untrue. In many cases, to drill his evening hour, the lad.
loses the rest of the evening in getting to and from the drill-ground,
which may he nearly five miles off. To put in his ordinary Saturday
drill of two hours, the cadet must often lose in a similar way at least
four hours.
And this is what may happen to the older lads on a whole-day drill:—
On a recent Saturday a suburban battalion was marched down to
the Williamstown (Victoria) butts for a day’s rifle practice. They
left for their destination at 8 a.m. There were 500 of them, and
' they were armed with just ten rifles. When they got to the butts,
ten youths practised firing, while 490 passed the time as best they
pould. It took all day for the rifles to go round, and the boys did not
get home till 8 p.m. They were twelve hours on duty, and were
credited by the niggardly department with only six hours’ drill.—
“Liberty and Progress,” 25th April, 1914 (the organ of the Victorian
Employers ’ Federation).
The Australian conscriptionist press makes much of grand parades
and reviews. We all know why they are held, and the luring charm of
martial music and the thousands of bodies marching in unison. Only
here and there does an independent editor give the other side of the
picture.
The farce of regarding boys as soldiers still continues. Some
18,000 Melbourne youths of very immature age, between 14 and 17,
were paraded (masqueraded would perhaps be the better term)
before one of our big Imperial Generals, Sir lan Hamilton, on
March 14th. These are the boys who figure in the newspapers as
“Australia’s Young Guard.” To a general who has looked upon
war in some of its grimmest aspects, perhaps it was also not discon-
certing to see many of the boys “dropping down like flies,” to use
a well-used war-correspondent’s expression. But in this case they
had not been shot; they had only fainted. Boys between the ages of
fourteen and seventeen have no great powers of endurance; generally
they are overgrown. Yet on the eve of inspection they were kept
“under arms” for over five hours. Most of them, no doubt, had not
had a proper dinner. Previous to the inspection they had been
marched, quite unnecessarily, for between two or three hours, and
were kept for long periods at “attention.”
Any water taps that the lads might have got at were carefully
guarded. It is, therefore, no wonder that many of the boys fainted
before the general’s eyes, or that some of them were in such a way
that they had to be carried off in an ambulance to the hospital. As
these unfortunate incidents are not catalogued in the afternoon’s
parade, notice of them in the press appears to have been suppressed.
It is an extraordinary thing to suppose that the safety of Australia
depends upon putting a large number of young and tender youths to
the torture of a five-hours’ parade on a hot day without the least
attempt being shown to provide them with those natural necessities
of the system which, if animals were deprived of them, would
probably lead to prosecutions by the police. —“ Liberty and Pro-
gress,” 25th March, 1914.
The Melbourne “Age” is not noted for being unduly supplied with
the bowels of compassion, but the things that went on at the 1914
Victorian Camp at Lilydale drew from it the following:—


Turning to more recent events still, evidence is not wanting that
' the troops which were in training at Lilydale last week were over-
worked. Since their return to town, many cases have been reported,
though none officially, of youths who were unable to return at once to
their civil occupations owing to fatigue and' foot weariness
A medical examination made indiscriminately down the firing line
by an army medical officer revealed the startling fact that ten
trainees were suffering from acute dilation of the heart. When the
troops returned to camp —the last unit filed in at 7 p.m., having been
in the field since 9 a.m., they were practically ready to drop from
exhaustion. The lads lay about in their tents, too tired even to walk,
too exhausted almost to sleep, and their feet were swollen and
blistered. —Melbourne “Age,” 3 7th February, 1914.
The following makes one shudder at the thought of what some lads
at the Liverpool (N.S.W.) Camp in 1913 had to endure. Mr. Conroy,
in Parliament —
I may inform h’onorable members that some of the blankets used at
the camp in the Liverpool area were filthy with vermin. In some
cases they were covered with excrement, because some of those in
camp were too filthy and lazy to get up to relieve themselves. Those
blankets were issued fresh to youths coming into the camp, and is it
any wonder that there should have been an outcry on their part?
I am speaking of facts, of which the representatives of the Sydney
•“Daily Telegraph” and the “ Sydifey Morning Herald” were
cognisant. The doctors want money to prepare and clean those
.blankets, or those blankets should not be used.
Mr. Page—That is nothing. I have seen a whole army lousy.
Mr. Conroy—That does not make the conditions of affairs in Aus-
tralia any better, and it does not absolve the Minister of Defence
from responsibility for not seeing to a matter like this.
—Hansard, 1913 (page 1227).
As the Defence Department was then controlled by a fellow-Liberal,
Senator Milieu, Mr. Conroy’s words cannot be set down to party spirit.
It may be said in palliation of the state of things revealed in the
foregoing paragraphs, that such happenings are incidental to all camps,
and are to be expected in the early days of a big administrative step such
as the setting going of universal compulsory training.
We reply:
1. That there is no lessening, but rather an increase of such crop of
hardships.
2. That military law tries to prevent the existence of camp hardships
being made public. The Standing Orders are clear (115 and 116) about
no communications to the press, and no attempt at public protests.
3. That under conscription, discipline soon becomes so strong that
these silencing regulations can be effectually used.
4. That under a compulsory system the officers need not bother about
making the training popular: the lad can be clubbed into drilling by
fines and military imprisonment.
5. That it is useless to expect Parliament to protect the trainee when
it is a military offence for the trainee to complain even to his member of
Parliament.


CHAPTER XXII.
A National Sin.
From the “Barrier Daily Truth,’’ September 28th, 1912.
‘ ‘My friend, if thou had all the artillery of Woolwich trundling at thy back in
support of an unjust thing and infinite bonfires visibly waiting ahead of thee, to
blaze centuries long for thy victory on behalf of it—l would advise thee to call
halt, to fling down the baton, and say: ‘ln God’s name, No!’ Thy ‘success’? Poor
devil, what will thy success amount to? If the thing is unjust thou hast not
succeeded; no, not though bonfires blazed from north to south, and bells rang and
editors wrote leading articles, and the Just thing lay trampled out of sight, an
abolished and annihilated thing! Success? In a few years thou wilt be dead and
dark—all cold, eyeless, deaf; no blaze of bonfire, ding-dong of bells or leading
articles visible or audible to thee again at all for ever: What kind of a success is
that?’’
The above prophetic utterance of Thomas Carlyle against the
ravening wolf of militarism is applicable to the condition of Australia
to-day. Successful Labor has risen to the seat of power; successful
Labor, drunk with the wine of office, would shackle the free thoughts and
free souls of the men unon whose votes it rose to power and upon whose
bent backs it has built its support. The spirit of militarism stalks abroad
in the land, armed to the teeth, a hideous, grinnihg spectre, horrible
to behold. And the people of Australia, at the call of this grisly skeleton
of European barbarism, stand to attention and salute the image. God
servile nations—can such things be?
*****
To-day we believe Alfred Francis Giles will be released from prison,
whither he was condemned because he refused to learn the trade of
murder. We call upon the workers of Broken Hill to meet him as he-
leaves the prison and give voice to a strong, full-blooded protest against
the injustice heaped upon this noble son of a militant worker —against
the imprisonment of the growing manhood of Australia for refusing to
bow down to the Baal of militarism. When, with ringing cheers, we
hailed the assumption by Labor of the government of this glorious
Commonwealth and thought we were facing the dawn of the new era of
peace on earth, goodwill to men, little did we dream that before its short
term of office expired this same Labor party would bind the free minds
of free men in the callous bonds of slavery to the War Moloch.
* * * * _ *
Professing Protestant Christians of the Barrier, what are you going
to do about it?
This boy, Alfred Francis Giles, has been punished for what? For
doing what hundreds have done that you regard as the martyrs of your
faith —standing true to his conscientious convictions! For being honest
and sincere. Are honesty and sincerity to be treated henceforth as
crimes?
He has been punished for declaring that he would not disobey, even
in part, the command of YOUR God: “Thou slialt not kill”!
Is to obey your God a crime?
* * * * *


“Put up the- sword; for they that take the sword shall perish by the
sword. ’ ’ #
Thus spake Jesus. Is your Saviour Christ a liar? Are His most far-
reaching commands to be treated as if he ne’er had uttered them? The
Christianity of Christ had nothing whatever in common with killing or
learning to kill. Did He not say: “My Kingdom is not of this world,
else would my children fight?” Has the conflict between Christ and
Caesar ceased? When? Did not the early followers of Christ refuse to
bear arms and suffer death in various ways because of their fealty to
their faith? Did not Celsus, writing in the second century against the
Christians, say: —
“You will not bear arms in the service of the Empire when your
services are needed”?
Have you not been taught to look back upon this stand of the early
Christians as their glory ? How comes it that that ‘ 1 glory ’ ’ should now
,be made a reproach and a crime, and that the bearing of arms, which
THEY LOOKED UPON WITH LOATHING, YOUK CHILDREN
SHOULD BE TAUGHT TO LOVE?
*****
, And Gibbon, in his immortal ,l ‘ Decline and 'Fall of the Roman
Empire, ’ ’ tells us that those of the Christian faith
“ Would not be convinced that it was lawful, on ANY occasion,
to shed the blood of their fellow-creatures, either by the sword of
justice or that of war.”
What has happened that you should espouse that which Christ
denounced? That you should hail with acclaim that which the founders
of your faith resisted to the death? Is Christ, then, Anti-Christ? Is
Christianity a lie?
*****
Christian Roman Catholics of the Barrier, what are you going to do
in regard to this Government infamy?
Look back over the past three centuries of the history of your
Church even in freedom-loving, enlightened England. What are these
you see marking the years like milestones? They are the gravestones
of those of your faith who, for conscience sake, paid the PENALTY
UPON OPINION. Think of the damnahle crimes against your Irish
forefathers from the seventeenth century down to quite modern times!
And now, when by the aid of the pen, the voice, and the vote of liberty-
loving Britishers you have obtained liberty of conscience, are you
going to stand idly by and see it denied to others —those others the
children of the men who helped to make you free?
*****
Military officers of the Defence Department, what are you going
to do about it?
Can your bread and butter be sweet to your, palate bought at such
a price to your manhood' and your self-respect? Do you think that
by oppression, persecution, and intolerance you are going to make
men change their minds and adopt your opinions? At best you can
succeed only in making cowards conceal their true disposition towards


you and your law, and appear to be that which they are not. You set
a premium upon hypocrisy and induce them to become mere con-
formers to commonplace, or time-servers for truth, whose arguments
on all great subjects are meant for their hearers, and are not those
which have convinced themselves.
*** * * !
1 ‘ Thou shalt not kill. ’ ’ This is the corner stone, the foundation
principle of the teaching of Jesus of Nazareth. Every Sunday,
pastors, priests, Plj-mouth Brethren, Salvation Army captains, and a
host of others proclaim the Brotherhood of Man as taught by Christ.
What does it all mean? Can true brotherhood be brought nearer by-
assuring our neighbour that we are better prepared to, cut his throat
than he is to cut ours?
To-day your priests, pastors, politicians, for a mess of pottage,
seem prepared to make the worse seem the better cause. Again, as
often in the past, the common people must rely on themselves. Oh,
for one week of that old-time literal Christianity that we might put
some backbone into the political and industrial Labor movement.
*****
It hath been written: “A little child shall lead them.” Herein
let it be fulfilled.


CHAPTER XXIII.
Hunger as Conscience-Breaker.
The Story of Alfred Francis Giles and of Victor Yeo,
of Broken Hill.
Broken Hill, in the district knpwn as “The'Barrier,” is famous for
its mines and miners; the former for their wealth, the latter for their
Tugged, manly independence. Public spirit, criticism of local happenings,
and interest in public affairs are probably keener in Broken Hill than
in any other Australian town.
The Barrier has not taken conscription lying down. For many
months the Act was a dead letter there; not even now, we believe, have
the military authorities produced a quietude and called it peace.
During the first two years of the system three cases—among the
hundreds that occupied the attention of the local magistrates—stand out
by reason of the great public interest they aroused and the vindictive
punishments given. We refer to those of Alfred Giles, his son, Alfred
Francis Giles, and Victor Yeo.
The popularity of conscription throughout the land is shown by the
thousands of prosecutions and imprisonments in gaol, guard-tent, or fort.
It is also shown by the nature of the punishment inflicted upon lads
standing out on high principle. The State must be “saved,” says the
preacher of military necessity. What, then, is the crushing of a child ’s
heart? “It was expedient,” said old Caiaphas nearly two thousand vears
ago, “that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation
perish not.” Caiaphas in the modern pulpit, and his friends the capi-
talist deacon in his office chair and the respectable labor leader who
lives not for but ON Labor, are not so easily satisfied. To them, although
they have not yet put their creed into actual words, it is expedient that
not one, but ALL WHO DEFY THE GODHEAD OF THE MILITARIST
STATE, SHOULD PERISH.' “EITHER DRILL OR GET OFF THE
PLANET ’ ’ is the unwritten law of these interpreters of the darkness of
this world.
Alfred Francis Giles, the son of Alfred Giles, the well-known Barrier
Socialist, had refused on conscientious grounds to be taught to kill his
fellow-man. His stand for human brotherhood should be respected by
all who follow Christ’s teaching. Some months after his father had
been prosecuted for preventing him from drilling, this brave lad was
.-seized at his work, taken to the court, sentenced to a fortnight’s im-
prisonment, and an attempt made, while there, to starve him into sur-
render. s
“On making enquiries at the gaol the father of the lad was in-
formed that he would be permitted to send his son food during his
incarceration; but last night a police officer called at his house and


informed him that* the permission given to send the lad food had
been cancelled, and that for the first seven days he would have to-
subsist on 1 LB. OF BREAD PER DAY, and as much water as lie-
cared to drink. Barrier Truth.”
Very strong resentment at this barbarous treatment was shown by
the working men of Broken Hill, but they were unable to shorten young
Giles’ imprisonment. On his release the Barrier branch of the Aus-
tralian Miners’ Association presented him with a gold medal for his
brave stand. And this great union was so incensed at these happenings,
and so opposed to conscription, that it would only join in the annual
Hospital procession on condition that military companies were not
present.* . ,
It w&s at this time, the eve of the release of Alfred Francis Giles,,
that the “Barrier Daily Truth,” the local Labor paper, came out with
the forceful leading article which we reprinted as our previous chapter.
We ask our readers to reperuse that chapter and then consider the-
kindred case of Victor Yeo.
*****
Victor Yeo is the son of a thoroughly respectable, well-read working
man, an old Devonshire miner of the best type, who is opposed to war
on humanitarian and economic grounds. His elder son, Vivian, true to
his father’s teachings, had already served a fortnight’s imprisonment
for not attending drill. The younger son, Victor, on November 15, 1912,
was fined £5 at the Children’s Police Court, in default to serve two-
months’ imprisonment.
In the January following, military necessity, under a New South
Wales State Act, seized the lad and put him in gaol. Mr. John Fletcher,
on behalf of the Australian Freedom League, saw Mr. Josiah Thomas,,
member for the Barrier, in Melbourne, who at once took steps with the-
military and prison authorities to have the lad released. He was let
out after serving ten days in gaol. Even the strongly jingo Sydney
“Daily Telegraph” had to admit that
‘‘ In this case there was a good deal of resentment shown by
Broken Hill people, because this was the second lad in the same-
family over whom trouble had arisen, the father being opposed to-
military training.” (February 6, 1913.)
To cover up the tracks of the military people and to make it appear
that they were, not to blame for the matter, the paper went on to
say:—
“Senator Pearce stated to-day that the Federal authorities had
not foreseen that imprisonment could thus be inflicted for breaches of'
the Defence Act; and the matter had been referred to the Attorney-
General for consideration.”!
*That they have kept to this determination is shown by the following:—
“Miners and Militarism. —Broken Hill, Thursday.—The Children’s Ward League-
last night, in making arrangements for the opening of the ward at the hospital
next month, passed a resolution that the military and cadets be excluded from all
participation in the demonstration. Mr. S. Deed, representing the Miners’ Associa-
tion, said that if the military were not debarred the delegates from the A.M.A.
would withdraw from all connection with the function. It was agreed that boys,
as boys could join in the procession, but they must not wear uniform.’’—Mel-
bourne “Argus,” 31st July, 1914.
tSenator Pearce’s convenient memory had not carried along the ease of the-
lad Giles, about which Broken Hill had been seething some months previously.


But Victor Yeo was again charged, this time with refusing to be
examined by the military doctor, and again fined, with one month’s
imprisonment in default. He was again committed, on August 25, 1913,
six months after his first imprisonment, to Broken Hill gaol. His food
consisted of dry bread and water for the first seven days, with only
one hour’s exercise in the morning ?-d one in the afternoon. He was
not permitted to speak to the other prisoners. This practically amounted
to solitary confinement. *
Let the reader place himself in the position of this bov of 15f shut
TWENTY-TWO HOURS DAILY IN A CELL AND FED ON BARE
BREAD. To young, active life a few hours’ confinement away from
human companionship is a painful ordeal. We men can in part live, so
far as our minds are concerned, on our thoughts, and, in. a way, the
ADULT MIND CAN IN SOME STRONGEST NATURES BECOME
“ITS OWN PLACE.” BUT WHAT MUST BE THE UNSPEAKABLE
TORTI RE OF THE SOLITARY CELL ON A CHILD WEAKENED
AND DEPRESSED THROUGH LACK OF PROPER FOOD?
To this valiant little piece of humanity—the miserable “shirker”
of the reporting hacks who spin the penny-a-line patriotic trash of our
newspapers—there appeared on the third or fourth morning of the
breaking-in process the Tempter, in the person of the prison doctor. He
said, “You are not looking too well. You need a cnange of diet.”*
Then probably after an interval for the prospect of proper food to
work its effect upon the yearning young body—came the enquiry: Would
the boy submit to the medical examination if the diet were altered?
“No,” said the brave lad. “Then stop on bread and water,” said the-
humane doctor, and left the cell.
But the lad s weakened bodj’’ and evident failing powers made the-
authorities anxious, and at the expiration of the seventh day they saw
they had failed to wreck the lad’s will by suffering. So during the
second week he received the bad fare on alternate days only.
By this time news of what was happening reached influential folk
outside, and to lessen the scandal the Minister of Defence, on September
16, issued a warrant for his release. But with more low cunning of
the Spenlow and Jorkins variety the various authorities concerned so-
delayed things that THE RELEASE WAS NOT EFFECTED TILL THE
SENTENCE EXPIRED, ON SEPTEMBER 24.
Senator Arthur Rae, speaking in Parliament on October 22, 1913,
about the imprisonment of Yeo, said:—-
“Ilis (Yeo’s) sentence expired while circumlocutory action was
being taken by the Defence Department. I never did have much
time for military people, and I am quite certain that if Senator
Millenf is content to take —as too many Ministers are in the habit
of doing a report as to what has been done from those who were-
head and front of the offenders, from those who were practically doing
*We accept with entire assurance the lad’s account of what was said. We
nave enquired fully into his character and home surroundings, and have absolute
confidence in his word.
tA change of Government had occurred in the middle of 1913, and Senator
Pearce s place as Minister of Defence was now filled by Senator Milieu The
elections in September, 1914, brought back Senator Pearce to. his old post


it, or ordering it, he will never get anything but faked reports. . I
for one shall continue to make a ‘dickens’ of a row 7 over this kind
- of thing, unless I get a satisfactory assurance that when such reports
are circulated the men who are accused shall not be applied to for
their version of what happened, but that some independent person
shall be appealed to to report, and to report fairly.”—(Hansard,
p. 2298).
In reply to a series of questions by Mr. William G. Higgs in the
House of Representatives, a report was produced on October 22. Whether
it was a fair or a faked one, the reader can judge at once by reading
the following question and answer: —
Mr. Higgs (upon notice): .... (2) Is it a fact that during his
incarceration his diet consisted of bread and water only'J
Mr. Kellv (representing the Minister of Defence}: Yes, by order
of the medical officer of Broken Hill gaol, for refusing to obey the
rules laid down for prison discipline. —(Hansard, p. 225 d).
The military Spenlow and the civil Jorkins between them COA-
TpRIVE TO MAKE REFUSAL TO UNDERGO MILITARY MEDICAL
EXAMINATION APPEAR AS INSUBORDINATION TO PRISON
DISCIPLINE, because, forsooth, the order to be so examined was finally
put into the mouth of the gaol authority.
We conclude this chapter with extracts from tw 7 o letters to the local
press —one from the lad’s father, the other from Mrs. Sayce, a Bioken
Hill Quakeress.
The father says: —
‘‘Mv boy believes, like thousands of our fellow-workers, that
training in the art of killing one’s fellow-man is a denial of the
brotherhood of mankind, and he is brave enough to refuse to do that
which is absolutely wrong. For this he is perpetually prosecuted.
I would like to ask if this revival of the persecution of past ages is
what the Labor Party bargained for wdien they sanctioned the
Defence Act for Australia. The military authorities seem to be
prosecutor, judge, and executioner, and this they call the ‘justice
of a free land.”
Mrs. Sayce says: —
‘‘Last evening I met the lad for the first time. A quiet, gentle
boy, evidently well brought up, with no trace of the larrikin element;
not a boaster; taking his punishment bravely and without complaint,
but with quiet determination, in spite of the very evident effects of
the treatment upon his health. A boy that any parent might be
proud to own.”
Shirker? Instead of his forty drills, this young hero endured
-over one thousand hours in gaol, hungering for days on insufficient food,
and longing for the free life without. . If this is shirking, our common
words have lost their meaning.
CASE OF VICTOR* YEO.
Mr. Burns asked the Minister representing the Minister of Defence,
upon notice: —-
1. Is it a fact that the Minister of Defence issued an order that
Victor Yeo, who had been sentenced to one month’s imprisonment
at Broken Hill in August last for failing to render personal service,
*The punishment of this boy in a so-called progressive community is so
barbarous that it is difficult to think it possible. That there may he no shadow
pf doubt on the matter in the reader’s mind we give a quotation from Hansard
the official answers given in Parliament by the Minister of Defence.


should be released after having served 20 days; if so,-is it a fact
that such order has been ignored, and who was the officer or who
were the officers responsible for not carrying out the order?
2. Is it a fact that as soon as he had served his term of one month
another prosecution -was entered upon?
4. Will the Minister cause a full enquiry to be made into this case?'
Mr. Kelly—The answers to the honorable member’s questions,
are: —
1. When it is desired to remit a penalty imposed on cadets for
failing to attend for medical examination, the necessary procedure
entails the obtaining of a warrant signed by the Governor-General.
On the 16tli September the Minister approved of steps being taken to
obtain Victor Yeo’s release. The warrant, however, could not be-
completed until the 24th September, on which date Yeo’s sentence
expired.
2. Yes, by order of the medical officer of Broken Hill gaol, for
refusing to observe the rules laid down for prison discipline.
3. On Leo's release he v r as served with a summons to appear for
failing to attend a compulsory parade on 9th August, 1913. In-
structions were, however, issued that the summons was not to bo-
further proceeded with.
4. No -further enquiry appears necessary. The papers show that
Victor Yeo has openly defied the law. He was proceeded against at
the Children’s Court, Broken Hill, in November, 1912, for refusing
to attend for medical examination, and fined £5, in default, two
months’ imprisonment. He w r as given two months to pay the fine,
and, on still refusing to do so, was put in prison. He was released
after serving ten days. At the commencement of the present
financial year, he was again requested to attend for medical examina-
tion, but on refusing to do so he was, in August, fined £5, or one
month’s imprisonment. Having declined to pay the fine, he had
served the month’s imprisonment, with light labor, before the
warrant for his.release was executed.
—Federal Hansard, 22nd October, 1913 (p. 2352-3).
They did not try to KILL young Victor Yeo. True. It would have
been very bad for them to have him die on their hands. Had his starved
body and overstrained nerves collapsed, had he fallen dead in his cell
under the strain (as under a different strain a New Zealand boy fell
dead almost at the feet of General Sir lan Hamilton at the review at
Invercargill on Apri 28, 1914) things would have been awkward, and
the most pious parson, the sleekest capitalist, the oiliest professional
politician, would have found it difficult to explain away that awkward-
ness. Our prison houses do not yet hold their secrets like the walls of
old-time Bastilles and castle dungeons. The affair happening in a civil
gaol would have been public property, and many a pair of lips would
have pleaded
“Like angels, trumpet-tongued,
Against the deep damnation of his taking off. ’’
So not to kill his body, but his SPIRIT, was their task: to break
him down so utterly that the young lad —he was under 16—would only
be a hysterical bundle of compliant submissiveness—that was their aim.
And in that they FAILED.*
*For further harassing of the Yeo family, of Broken Hill, see Appendix F.—
J.F.H. (1919).


CHAPTER XXIV.
The Black Hole at Fort Largs.
What John and William Size Suffered.
A few miles'outside Adelaide, in the hill country of the Mount Lofty
‘.Ranges, lies the hamlet of Oakbank. Here may be found the humble
.but industrious home containing a large family of brothers. These fine
country lads, with the warm and active sympathy of a devoted mother
and the full approval of their father, have stood out, on principle, against
-compulsory military training; and, as we gather [1915] in a recent letter
from the mother, not one of them has drilled a single step as a con-
script. The position of Mrs. Size and her sons is this:* Compulsory
military training is conscription; conscription means the degradation of
manhood and the destruction of our old British freedom; no lad from
the Size home shall enter the conscription machine. This does not mean
that the family consider all war to be wrong. It is noteworthy
that the two elder sons, whom the worst deeds of our South Australian
Zabernists failed to crush, and who would not bow their British knees,
are, at the time of this writing, training as volunteer members of the
Expeditionary Force, because, as their mother puts it, they want to help
kill the black snake of German militarism.
So,,before these words reach the printer, these so-called “shirkers,”
upon whom our local “black snakes” have wasted not a little of the
ink of abuse, will probably be in the thick and the danger of the
European battle-zone.
We recommend their story to those especially who, while not holding
our peace views, are still anxious for the retention of the most funda-
mental liberties of the human being.
John and William Size —aged respectively 19 and 18 years—were
sentenced at Woodside Court, South Australia, to twenty days’ military
detention at Fort Largs. Fort Largs is a squat, commonplace, smallish
fort lying a mile north of Largs jetty. We will not describe it further,
lest our military friends deem us to be supplying military information
to the enemy and so have an excuse for suppressing this book.
On September 23, 1913, the brothers were taken to this fort. The
next morning, refusing to drill, they were put into a cell, about 12 feet
by 9 feet, placed on a diet of bread and water, and had to sleep on
the floor, \tith only one blanket each. One night they had to share the
cell with seven other trainees, all except two having to sleep on the
bare floor. The following is part of their statutory declaration describ-
ing their treatment: —
“We slept that night (i.e., the first night at the fort) in the tents
with the rest. An officer called us all next morning and gave us five
minutes to fall in. At the ‘fall-in’ all fell into rank except us. We


drill‘d a Th« t nffil f ; a ' d ° Z?n ya Y ]a aWay - We feel wrong to submit to
1 ut the grips pn them,’ ‘Get them by the scruff of the neck
them round,’ ‘Put your knee into them and break their ’ H?
™ Head, kiled '
Sv of 55*2
b°e n «e e rT„ a ti, d l^ d *£ "YS That'' > fi"
«mce,- S fomul that starving ns made Tio impression on “s ’thev"ga ! c
Zmt ZT l e r ep s when other lads were sent to sEe the 51l
ceU was about e i2 So'/"? I'’ 1 '’ ° nCe for three da >'* 011 end. The
otheJ were nut fnS I® ’ We should judge< one night seven
tners were put into it, besides ourselves. There was plank bed for
«™> or tried to, withont any bed sfx on the
ae;;fal S ot m „? ly „h d a e t C, b a a^S:l the
(Signed) JOHN SIZE.
“Date, ,sth December, 3913 WILLIAM SIZE.
“DedTred 0 Twi ??/° rt *om September 23rd till October 13th.
S2 this “ d
“ (Signed) J. RAMSAY THOMPSON, J.P. ”
On November 5, in the Senate, Senator Blakey drew the Defence
Minister s attention to a leaflet circulated amongst members of the
Senate, in which there was a report of the Size case. He asked the
Minister if the report was true, and if he would see that a repetition
of such an incident did not occur. The Minister, in reply, said that
he knew nothing of the circumstances, but if Senator Blakey would hand
him a copy of the leaflet he would cause full enquiries to be made.
Five weeks later, December 12, 1913, Senator Blakey said:—
nf twn i 1 1 asked a question recently in connection with the case
of, I! a * named Size, who were incarcerated at Fort Largs in
South Australia. The Minister did me the courtesy to show me a
copy of the report received from the officer in charge. .1 am not
complaining of the Minister’s action in the matter, but only a few
moments ago 1 received a letter from a gentleman who is taking an
nterest m the case, which is creating some dfscussion in the sfate.
He informs me that the statement which I was able to supply him
t the C nffi teSy -° f n he Minister - was purely an ex parte'state-
ment of the officer in charge, and has been denied by the boys
at n° rt * args No matter how fair an officer
vrifiiiJ* l ? e P artinent may b <b if his action or statements be
criticised by a trainee or the mother of a trainee who has come
under his ban, he naturally puts the best side to London. ’’—Hansard.


All attempts to get the lads to drill having failed, they were again
sentenced by a magistrate to a farther period of detention, and arrested
in February, 1914. The older brother was taken to Fort Largs again;
the younger was kept from his brother’s influence by being kept prisoner
at the-neighboring fort at Glanville. h pon John Size was inflicted the
savage punishment of TEN DAYS’ SOLITAR\ CONFINEMENT.
Even this failed to break him.
It was the privilege of one of us, with military permit, to visit this
lad at the fort just after the solitary confinement was relaxed. As the
officer called him he came out of the sweltering tent (outside shade
temperature nearly 100) on the sandy hillock outside the fort. They had
inflicted on him the. indignity of taking away his boots —a thing that
stung him intensely, as he had no intention of running away. So, bare-
footed, he came out to meet me, and we had a few minutes’ talk, in the
presence of the officer, and gave him messages from his home.
Needless to say, neither brother drilled a step, nor have the
younger ones passed into the boy conscript army. So the flag of freedom
is still waving over the little farm at Oakbank.
* Since the detention of the brothers Size at Fort Largs, so I am informed,
superior cell accommodation has been provided. I havei not yet bad an
nf eomnlinff these superior places of confinement, but from what I hear it is
quantity rather than quality of housing that has been provided. Whatever may
be the condition of these places, the accommodation «*P e rienced by T J T °5i
and Wiliam Size at the fort fully justifies the title that heads this chapter. J.F.H.
(1919).


CHAPTER XXV.
Herbert Ingle at Fort Largs.
A Threat that Failed to Act
ihe ingle family came to Australia about four years ago. They are
an industrious, simple, God-fearing family. Mr. Ingle worked as a
laborer at Hectorville, near Adelaide. He is a member of the religious
Society of Friends, usually known as Quakers. He has taught his children
the Quaker doctrine that all war and war-preparation is forbidden to the
Christian.
For not registering his boy as a military trainee, William Ingle served
a fortnight in Adelaide gaol in May, 1913. After his release, desiring to
\ isit an inmate of the gaol, he was refused on the ground that as he
himself had served a fortnight in gaol he was NOW CONSIDERED A
CRIMINAL.
The gaoling of William Ingle, and the prosecution of others for
refusing to enrol their sons as cadets, led to a big and enthusiastic
demonstration in favor of freedom of conscience in the Victoria Hall,
Adelaide, towards the end of May, 1913. Professor Darnley Naylor, of
Adelaide University, presided, and prominent clergymen and others
delivered stirring addresses. A few days later, on June 17, the Minister
of Defence issued the new regulation which empowered the area officers
to act in loco parentis, and themselves enrol the boys.* Using this new
power, the local area officer enrolled young Herbert Ingle who, refusing
to drill, was sentenced by the magistrate to 15 days ’ detention at Fort
Largs.
What happened during this imprisonment is set forth in the following
statutory declaration made by Herbert Ingle and his father, the originals
of which are in our possession. The remarks inserted in brackets at
various points are those of Major C. H. Brand, Commanding Officer for
South Australia, written on a solicitor’s copy of the declaration which
was sent him. These, taken in conjunction with the letter with which
he returned the copy, are more eloquent than we could be in revealing
the mind of military necessity.
V e, WILLIAM INGLE, of 29 Tindall Street, Scarborough, in the
County of York, gardener, and HERBERT AMBROSE INGLE, of the
above address, son of the said William Ingle, do solemnly and sincerely
declare as follows:
IIRST, I, the said Herbert Ingle, for myself, say as follows:
In the year one thousand nine hundred and thirteen I was living
with my father in the Colony of South Australia, and on the eighth day
of December last, I was sentenced to fifteen days’ detention for refusing
*See Chapter XVIII., The Failure of Registration, Page 67.


to Obey the Defence Act of the colony, for refusing on conscientious
c-rounds to obey. I was then taken to Fort Largs, and was there searched
and afterwards allotted to my tent. I was then asked to form m line
which I refused to do. The officer told me I should be put m a cell
if I refused. I said, ‘I will go how if you like,’ and he said, Wait
there until I call the roll,’ and'then I had to take all my things to the
door of the cell. The officer said, ‘ Just wait there until I see the
Sergeant-Major.’ When the Sergeant-Major came he asked me if I had
conscientious objections, and then he said, ‘Are you a Quaker? an
answered ‘Yes.’ The Sergeant-Major ordered me back to the camp.
As far as I saw, the only drills done by any of the cadets detained was
-to form lines and march to the beach and back. On the twelfth of the
twelfth month last I was taken to the cook and* told that I was to he p
the cook and get all my meals down there, and only go to the camp to
sleep. I answered, ‘I am going to do nothing the time lam undei
military orders.’ (Nice spirit, this.-C.H.8.) I was taken to the Ser-
geant, and he said, ‘I don’t know what to do with you I think we
shall have to hand you over to the civil authorities and lie told me
to go back to the camp. I was then taken to one of the head officers
of the fort. He said, ‘ What would you do if anyone was murdering
your father and mother, or burning your house down or if the Japs,
were to come?’ I did not answer him. He told me that I had tog
to my tent and eat my dinner, and that whilst I was eating it to think
that I was eating a good man’s dinner. -
“When Captain Page came to the camp we were all asked to form
lines. I sat down on the side of the-tent, and Captain Page said, What
are you doing there? Get up and go to the end of the lines I icfus
to do so, and sat still. He then got behind me and said G ® t U P’ or
will hit you with this stick.’ The stick was a cane. (Absolute lie, so
Captain Page informs me.—C.H.B.) I still continued sitting down, and
he then told one of the under-officers, called Reed, to carry me into hne.
"When he left go of me I went and sat down away from the line Cap
iain Page then ordered that I was to be put in the cell at Fort Gian-
ville. I was taken there in the afternoon of Saturday the thirteenth
December last, and put in cell on No. 1 diet, wh.ch eons.sts of
of dry bread and a mug of tea, without sugar or milk, three times a
day ' All there was in the cell was a straw mattress, on the floor, an
t h fee blankets. I was only allowed out to wash my hands and face
foiTabouthalf an hour on the Sunday night. I was kept m cell on
this diet for two days and then taken back to Fort Largs Win st
was at Fort Glanville my father and mother and little brother
see me and I told them what I have now stated. • • •
thing I heard was that we were going to have an enquiry, when my
father and a friend were coming to see me, on Sunday, December twenty-
filSt“AND NEXT, I, the said William Ingle, for myself, say as fol-
loWS<J visited my son, the declarant, Herbert Ambrose Ingle, along with
his motherland Uttle brother, at Fort Glanville. I had been told by


the boys at Fort Largs that my son had been taken to Fort Glanville,
mid they made to me'a similar statement to that contained above as to
what had taken place. The boys said, ‘We will eat our hats if they
make him drill. We did think when the head one came he would give
way, but not he.’
“On the twenty-second of December the boys were all ordered into
the large tent, and Major Brand, D. 5.0., Acting Commander for South
Australia, and Captain Page came with me into the tent. Major Brand
.asked the boys if they were having plenty to eat, and, with the excep-
tion of a minor complaint, all said ‘Yes.’ I then said, ‘This is not
what I have come for, ’ and asked if I could put my complaint to the
boys. (And Major Brand did so, showing that the military authorities
have nothing to hide.—C.H.B.) I said, ‘I have come for a truthful
statement of the treatment of my boy, and I have not come here with
a grain of ill-will to any officer or man, and I don’t want any officer’s
name mentioned; I don’t want any boy punished for any statement that
he may make. I only want the truth.’ I then asked them if it was
true that my boy was ordered to form lines and that he went and
sat down, and that he was threatened with a cane or stick if he did
not get up and go to the end of the line, and that he was carried into
the line and then sat down, and when the officer let go of him he went
away and sat down. I then said, ‘All I ask is, is that a true statement?’
And without one dissent all the boys said, ‘Yes.’ Then the Sergeant
said, ‘You were there,’ turning to one of the officers, which was Captain
Page. Then the officer in charge of the boys said, ‘lt is a lie, and I
demand the name of the officer; and the individual who says it shall
be punished.’ (An absolute lie. —C.H.8.) Then I spoke and said, ‘I
will have no one punished, for I made‘that a condition.’ (Don’t remem-
ber Mr. Ingle saying this.—C.H.B.). But he said, ‘Let the individual
who saw it stand out,’ so I called on my boy, and the officer asked
him, ‘Who threatened to strike you?’ and he answered, ‘Captain Page,’
.and that it was Reed who carried him into the line. Then I told Captain
Page that it was a disgrace to stand by and see me charge another officer,
and to bring me all this way when I had written him, and that I would
Relieve the men as much as any officer, but no more. Then the officer
in charge threatened the boys they would be punished if they told such
lies —(No. —C.H.B.) —and he asked them if the officer who threatened
my boy was present, and they said, ‘No, it was Reed; Captain Page
was present.’ When my boy was liberated he told me that Reed only
■carried him into the lines and had no cane or stick in his hands, and
that it was Captain Page who threatened him.
“I had promised that I would let Major Brand see my statement
Before it was published, as he said he wanted it inserted in all the
Adelaide papers and made as public as possible; and I made him a
■declaration, together with my son, the declarant, Herbert Ambrose Ingle,
before Smith Pearson, Esquire, Justice of the Peace, Hectorville, just
Before leaving Australia, and asked that a copy should be sent to Major
Brand. (Which was not done. The mere fact of my wanting the public
press to get Ingle’s statement showed that this threatening business


was only a storm in a teacup, pure Freedom League bias and prejudice-. —
C.H.B.)' I had not time to put it into proper form, but it was sub-
stantially to the same effect as this, our present declaration. I have
not a grain of ill-will against any of the officers, for so long as the
law stands it is their duty to put it into force; but both I and mine
will sacrifice anything rather than our freedom to God and our love for
our fellow-man.
“And we make this solemn declaration, conscientiously believing
the same to be true and by virtue of the provisions of the Statutory
Declaration Act 1835.
“(Signed) WILLIAM INGLE.
“H. A. INGLE.
1 ‘ Subscribed and Declared by the said Herbert Ambrose*
Ingle and William Ingle, at Scarborough, in the County of York, this
4th day of March, 1914, before me.
'' (Signed) Edgar J. Birdsall,
“A Commissioner for Oaths.
“ (I hold 40 statements from youths that the greater portion of these
statements are not strictly in accordance with facts. C.H.8.,
.21/5/'14.) ”
It is only fair that we should publish Major Brand’s letter to us when
he returned the foregoing declaration:
Military Staff Office, Adelaide.
Unlev Barracks, West Wavville.
21/5/14.
Mr. J. F.. Hills,
Glenelg.
Dear Sir, — * T ,
Thanks for sending me Mr. Ingle’s declaration. I return same
with mv pencil notes. The document is no use to me.
The fact that I left my office on December 22nd to accompany
Mr Ingle to Fort Largs to enable an investigation to be made,
showed that the Head Military Authorities only wanted justice; and
the fact that before saying good-bye to Ml-. Ingle I specially asked
that the result of the investigation be made public through the press
is in itself sufficient proof that the whole thing was an exaggeration
and a mis-statement. I was satisfied young Ingle was not threatened
with a cane; and this lad’s statement ('get up, or I will hit you with
this stick’’) that Captain Page had used these words, is m keeping
with the whole document. __ ~. .
I always looked upon the Quakers as God-fearing, Christian people,
apart from their opinions as regards military service. I hold other
views now.
Yours, &c.,
(Signed) C. H. BRAND.
I am surprised to see a man of your intelligence associating with
these people.
We might very well retort that the last two statements contained in
Major Brand’s letter are in keeping with the whole of his remarks, but
the matter is too serious a one for joking. Major Brand expects the
public to be satisfied with the “enquiry” that was held. The public
will want to know what enquiry -was held. Neither Mr. Ingle’s nor his
son’s statements of what happened, nor Major Brand’s denials make an


•enquiry. By all the rules of modern investigation of disputes (apart
from “military necessity”) a full, open enquiry by INDEPENDENT
PERSONS, at which the disputants state their case, is necessary before
the decision can be received as authoritative. Such public enquiry has
not been held; so all we can do is to publish the facts.
Enough to say that we believe young Ingle’s statement. We
Relieve that Captain Page did threaten him with a cane, as well as
sentence him to solitary confinement on bread and water for two days.
A leaflet covering the whole position, challenging Major Brand to
produce his “forty statements,” and containing the deliberate statement
that Captain Page had threatened to hit the boy was widely circulated
at the time of the occurrence. The challenge was never taken up by the
military authorities, nor were the “forty statements” produced.
Whatever Major Brand’s opinion of the Quakers and of William
Ingle and his son may be, it is clear that the South Australian Quakers
have confidence in them and believe their statements. They issued the
following minute, which was published in the local press of July 11,
1914:
“It having come to our knowledge that through the published
statements of the military authorities, the truthfulness of William
Ingle and his son has been brought into disrepute in the eyes of the
public, we hereby affirm our full confidence in their uprightness of
character, and that we believe that their statements that the lad was
threatened with physical violence and placed in solitary confinement
with ‘ one slice of bread and a mug of tea without sugar or milk
three times a day’ are absolutely true.”
**** * * *
These conscience cases reveal a little of the nature of the NEO-
PAGAN CONCEPTION OF THE STATE AS GOD. In our mad
militarist times, God is treated by military necessity as a piece of
antiquated lumber unless tribalised in a bit of battle-bunting; humanity
is deemed a trifle that can be explained away by Bernhardi in a small-
print footnote; CONSCIENCE, a DISEASE OF THE INDIVIDUAL,
which a wise and provident Defence Department will cure in times of
peace by the solitary cell, a bare bread diet, and —if needs be—the
application of the rod.


CHAPTER XXVI.
Harry Flintoff's First Imprisonment.
The suburbs of Melbourne known as Footscray and Richmond
contain a large working-class population. As at Broken Hill, Port Pme,
and other centres where the laboring element is large, the opposition
of the young conscripts has been most vigorous. At the lootsciai
Police Court on 29th August;, 1913—as we have already noted—one
hundred lads were tried in a single day for offences against the Defence
Act, and we quoted from a leading conscriptionist newspaper the
description of the scene outside the courthouse at the end of the trial
when a large crowd of their fellow working-men cheered the lads as they
were driven off to fortress prisons in the ambulance waggons that serve
the military as * ‘ Black Marias. ’ ’
The struggle was not ended by this despatching of droves of un-
willing conscripts to military detention. Richmond and the parts
round continued to seethe with the spirit of freedom and resistance, and
prominent amongst the scores of lads who stood out on principle for the
basic rights of manhood they were entering, none was more to the front
than Harry Flintoff, a young Socialist cabinet-maker, Secretary of the
Richmond Branch of the Australian Freedom League, and the leader m
a passive resistance movement amongst the lads of his district. The
story of his first imprisonment is best told in his own words; .
< < DECLARATION by Harry Flintoff, of Richmond, \ ictoria, on the
subject of the treatment received by him and Walter Kryggei, during
their detention by the military at Queenscliff in December, 1913.
<‘ i hold it wrong to pass under military law and to place my con-
science in the keeping of an officer and his superior, whose commands,
whether moral or immoral, I must obey. I decline oil principle to par
with the foundation right of manhood, the right to follow my hones
convictions. , . ~ ,
‘ * After four summonses I was sentenced by the District Court,
Melbourne, on December 12th, 1913, and was taken the same evening to
the punishment camp on the island at Queenscliff. My detention lasted
12 days.
“At 6.30 on the morning after my arrival I was called up and told
to have a wash. I found the water very greasy and it had a strong
smell. The well is three feet in diameter and contains about thirty
inches of water. The water is pumped up and goes back through the
open boards over the well. This same water has been used by over 3b
lads every morning. . .
“We fell in and I had my name taken. The order was given
double-march. I stood still, so the offlcer said: ‘What! you are not
coins' to drill V I replied, ‘No; I have conscientious convictions and 1
am not going to violate them.’ He said; ‘Come on; don’t thmlc you are
not going to drill; we have the means to make you.’ He then caught me


Dy the arm and started pushing me along. I caught hold of a fence.
“After breakfast we were escorted to the military doctor, who took
my description as if I were a criminal. I stayed at the barracks till 2.30.
when I was escorted back to the camp.
* On the following Monday I was again told to fall-in, and I refused.
Another officer asked me to take part in. some exercises. I said: “1
will do nothing under your COMMAND, but as you ASK me I will.”
So after breakfast I helped in cleaning up the tents.
“On Monday night I walked to the guard’s tent to meet Waltei
Krygger, and was surprised to hear he had got 28 days. We decided to
stand together. He objects to the drill on religious grounds.
‘ ‘ The officers told us to fall-in for roll-call. The order was given
to double-march. We both stood still. The officer ordered two lads
to fall-out, namely, Nunan and Rose. The officer said: “Take them.”
Nunan, who is known in the boxing ring, got hold of me and pushed
me round the ground. He then let me go, and went to join Rose, who
was dealing with Krygger. I stood near the end of the ranks and
WATCHED THE OFFICERS LAUGHING AT NUNAN AND ROSE,
WHO WERE TWISTING KR AGGER’S ARMS BEHIND HIS BACK.
The boy still refused to walk. So Nunan then hit him, FELLING
HIM TO THE GROUND. They took him to the opposite end of the
ranks to where I was. I heard Krygger say: “I will summon you
for that.” Nunan then hit him again. I BOTH SAW AND HEARD
HIM HIT. The two officers stood by and looked on. One told us
he would put us in the cells. We answered we would stand it rather
than drill.
‘ ‘ Krygger wrote to his mother, who forwarded the letter to a mem-
ber of Parliament, and an enquiry was ordered. Being under 18, it is
not a military offence for him to publicly protest in this way, through
his parent; but I have no doubt his doing so will be stored up against
him.
* ‘ The enquiry, so-called, began on Friday at Queenscliff. Major
Taylor had charge. BEFORE WE LEFT CAMP TO GO TO IT, THE
OFFICER SPOKE TO EACH LAD, except the ones he knew would
support our statement. In my opinion, he told each to say that they
had not seen any hitting.
“The enquiry began. The Major said: ‘Fall-out, anyone who saw
Krygger hit.’ Three fell out. He then said: ‘Fall-out, anyone who-
believes there was hitting, but did not see it.’ Five fell out. Krygger
suggested they be cross-examined. This was done. THREE LADS
TOOK AN OATH THEY SAW KRYGGER HIT BY NUNAN. The
remainder only signed their names to their evidence. The officers denied
that they saw him hit.
“Krygger suffered a day in bed with his head, and was attenaer
by the doctor. While I was there I found our tent let down and every-
thing scattered about. AT NIGHTS WOODEN MALLETS WERE
THROWN ON OUR TENT. I left there on Friday without having
drilled a step. About thirty lads spent their Christmas at the fort.


“The above is a true and careful statement of what happened during
my first, imprisonment at Queenscliff detention quarters.”
We also give the chief part of the correspondence that passed
■between the assaulted lad, Krygger (and his fellow-prisoner, Flint off),
and the outside world during the days following Krygger’s being felled
"by the boxer’s cruel blow. If his letters show a lack of perspective as
to the relative importance of things, the reader is asked to bear in
mind that Walter Krygger was little more than a child and was in the
doctor’s hands. Militarists are welcome to all the advantage and com-
fort they may derive from the lad’s overwrought and agitated state
of mind. Boys experiencing “justice” and being treated with the
soothing syrup known as Boxer’s Fist are expected by them to show
the calmness and resignation of an apostle. If they do not, they are
‘ ‘ neurotics, ” “ exaggerating shirkers, ’ ’ and 11 defiant rebels. ’ ’
The general reader will think otherwise, and will be more affected
by the utter helplessness of Krygger’s letters than by any amount of
official verbiage and explanation.
Walter Krygger wrote to his mother:—
“We had to drill about half-past seven this morning, and they all
formed up and started off. I fell out with Harry Flintoff, and the
officer came up and dragged me round the ground. Then he called
two boys, one a champion boxer, to get me and push me round; this
boxer, Jack Nunan by name, dug his fingers into my neck, screwed
my arm almost out of its socket till I cried out with the pain, then
he punched me on the face twice and knocked me on the ground.
I was almost stunned.
‘ 1 Then when I got up I said I would summon him, and he struck me
siich a brutal blow and sent me clean over, and now there is an awful
lump on my face My arm is nearly dropping off, and I have
not eaten a bit for breakfast My face is all puffed out.
The officer stood by and said nothing, only that if I didn’t drill I
should get it worse, twice as bad as I had had it.
“He told me he put me in a cell and I would starve. I
walked out to him in front of all the boys and told him to do it.
“At breakfast I was given a dirty mug, a tin one, I could scrape
the dirt out of it. Breakfast was a piece of steak half-cooked, with
a junk of bread. I did not eat a scrap; I just had a drink of tea,
A day or two later Mrs. Krygger received a further letter: —
“Swan Island, Dec. IStli, 1913.
“This is Thursday morning. I have not done any drill yet, as I
have been too ill to do so.
“Yesterday I was sent to the Queenscliff forts to see the 'doctor.
They thought I might have to go to bed. The doctor wrote a pre-
scription and I had to go to the hospital and get the medicine, and
have to take it regularly The head of Queenscliff, Major
Tavlor, come down yesterday, and I had a long talk with him. He
told me to write my objections on paper with ink, and he would
forward them to Parliament, also the same about the way I was
treated and punched, and he would send that in also. W hat shall
I do? Shall I write them? When I was hit, the officer stood by and
-did nothing; but, mother, don’t mention about the officer, for when
the major was down yesterday I told,him the officer was by my side
all the time, and he (the major) was going to give it hot to the officer,
so I put in a word for him, and afterwards he thanked me. Now
lie is trying to repay me for my. kindness. ’ ’


But, to us, the most touching letter, revealing the helplessness of
these lads in the face of ill-treatment, and at the same time their
•determination to refuse to drill, is that written by Harry Flinto'ff to
Mrs. Krygger:—
‘ ‘ Swan Island, Queenscliff, Dec. 18th, 1913.
“My dear Friend,—
“We are brothers who are fighting for freedom.
“I am always with Walter, and do not be afraid of anything
happening, because I will stand by him night and day. But, Mrs.
Krygger, will you kindly write encouraging letters to Walter, not
sad ones; don’t tell him you are broken-hearted, as you are making
him lose his courage.
“So please don’t worry, it’s no use.
“ In regard to the lad hitting Walter, I would not take any action
until we are released, because it makes it worse for us.
. “Do this, my dear friend, and I shall be obliged.
“Ever sincerely,
“ Harry. ’ ’
It is important to note that the enquiry was not a civil one, but
was THE USUAL MILITARY FARCE OF MILITARY MEN ENQUIR-
ING, AT A MILITARY PLACE, INTO THE MISDEEDS OF MILI-
TARY MEN: as witnesses, boy conscripts, cog-wheels in the military
machine, and fixed absolutely in that machine, liable to unknown but
very real pains, in years to come, from officers smarting under the
memories of bold, outspoken evidence on their deeds. Such an enquiry
Is no enquiry; and the wonder is that even eight lads, with the Goliath
of “military necessity’’ towering above them, were brave enough to say
what they did, when it was so easy to temporise and so hard to speak
out. Moreover, where did Krygger stand when hit? If at the side
or behind the ranks, few would be likely to SEE him hit.
We say Krygger was felled by Nunan, and that the officers present
were responsible. LET THE OFFICERS INSTITUTE CIVIL PRO-
CEEDINGS FOR SLANDER AS SOON AS THEY LIKE.


CHAPTER XXVII.
Shameful Treatment of Harry Flintoff.
“The Defence Department’s Excuse.—The Secretary of t he . Defence Depart-
mtravp as an excuse for the severity of the punishment that Flintoff had*
distributed pamphlets against universal service and that he had endeavoured to
persuade other lads to object to drill. He further hinted that FUntoft had pos ,
as a martvr’ for the sake of the Australian Freedom League. . . . . _ . _
“The Department is apparently, not aware that its letter to Mr. Tudor,
M H R Th i3 in possesion of the League. It states that ‘Flintoff was detained apart.
other trainees in a place set apart for the detention of permanent soldiers.
It will be realised that unless the administration of the Act is to be turned into
a toce it is necessary S obedience should be, required from those who are.
committed to custody to perform their tral ™}f iralian Fleedom League Circular.
Harry Flintoff did not drill or perforin any alternative service
during liis first imprisonment. To some persons, liis refusal to accept
non-combatant duties may appear to be unreasonable. We ask such
critics this question: “IF YOU WERE HOLDING THE COATS OF
TWO MEN FIGHTING, WOULD YOU NOT FEEL THAT YOU WERE
AIDING AND ABETTING THE FIGHT?” And, again: “If either
pugilist killed the other, would you not, in part, be responsible for Ins.
death?” . ~
The whole question of non-combatant duties has been disposed ot
in a few sentences by Leyton Richards, M.A., in a fine sermon delivered
to his (then) congregation in the Collins-street Independent Church,
Melbourne. He said: —
‘‘ Do the framers of the Act imagine for one moment that they
can hoodwink conscientious men and women by a verbal distinction
between combatant and non-combatant? An army is an engine of
combat in all its branches. It is not against the- mere firing of a
rifle that conscience rebels; it is against the whole spirit and pur-
pose of combat for which the military machine is called into being.
Had Flintoff been merely a shirker, he would have welcomed the
slight duties that have been in some conscience cases offered to objectors-
and have saved himself the terrible ordeal of his second and third im-
prisonments.
On March 17th, 1914, he appeared at the City Court, Melbourne, to-
answer a charge of' failing to render the personal service required by
the Defence Act. His second Statutory Declaration, made April 30th,
1914, tells what followed:— ‘
“I was sentenced to detention for twenty days. On March 18th
I was ordered to fall-in on parade on Swan Island, but, not being able
to do so conscientiously, refused. The demand was repeated each morn-
ing up to the 24th, with the same result, On that day I was taken
before the Commanding Officer of the Royal Australian Garrison Artil-
lery at the Queenscliff Barracks. On again refusing military training
of any kind I was sentenced by the Commanding Officer to seven days
in the cells. The cell which I occupied was constructed of wood, with


an iron door, and was about TEN FEET SQUARE. It contained a
wooden bed, the bedding of which was taken away at 6.30 each morning
and returned twelve hours later, but no other furniture. THE CELL.
WAS HALF-DARK, BEING LIGHTED BY AN OPENING ABOUT
ONE FOOT SIX INCHES BY SIX INCHES NEAR THE CEILING,
AND IT WAS ONLY POSSIBLE TO READ WITH COMFORT ABOUT
THE MIDDLE OF THE DAY. For three days I received the ordinary
rations, but for the last four was on reduced diet, which consisted of
bread and water, with hominy, for breakfast, and a chop and potatoes
for dinner. THE ONLY EXERCISE ALLOWED WAS FIFTEEN
MINUTES with an escort each morning and afternoon. After being
released from the cells I was taken back to Swan Island, and when I
ref used-to drill an officer threatened me with ‘cells’ again, though the*
threat was not put into execution.”
A boy’s tales! No, reader! Here is cold, unsympathetic con-
firmation from the conscriptionist press:—
PENAL DIET.
CADET SHIRKER IMPRISONED.
Melbourne, April 3rd.
‘ ‘ A complaint was made on Saturday that a lad who did not carry-
out his military duties because he had conscientious objections had
been placed in a cell in Queensland. The military authorities explain
that the defaulting lad, whose name is Harry Flintoff, had con-
sistently refused to discharge his duties while under detention, and
somewhat severe measures had to be taken with him. The cell in
which he was confined at Queenscliff was one of those in which
permanent soldiers who misbehaved were sometimes locked up..
Flintoff had been informed that he might drill as a non-combatant
member of the force apd undertake duties as a stretcher-bearer, but
he still refused to obey orders. For that he was placed in a cell
and put on a penal diet of bread and water for a week.”
Senator Rae, writing to the Secretary of the Victorian Council of
the Australian Freedom League, said of this treatment of Flintoff: —
“Committal to the ‘cells/ as described in his case, is ‘solitary
confinement,’ and is a form of inhuman torture which has been
abandoned, so far as this State (New South Wales) is concerned,
in the case of the most vicious criminals, and I shall at any time
be prepared to do my utmost by vote and voice to make such a
system impossible in the future.”*
A second time all efforts to crush this brave lad, Harry Flintoff,
had failed.
Although tens of thousands of those parents ancl boys who since
July Ist, 1911, have defied the Defence Act, and its claims upon them
have not been prosecuted ohee, yet three times in less than six months
*At the “war” election in September. 1914. this stalwart champion of the
helpless cadet, this fine old warrior for Labor, Arthur Rae. who himself, in Labor’s
cause, has lain in a prison cell, lost his seat. A few strongly militarist and weak-
kneed laborites —probably, relatives and friends of the hundreds of officers and
thousands of fledgling officers Senator Pearce has created—gave one of their six
votes to a Liberal, and succeeded in punishing Rae. But his name will be honored
in Australia when that of Senator Pearce will be cursed from Cape York to Bass
Strait as the FALLEN ANGEL OF AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRACY AND ARCH-
BETRAYER OF AUSTRALIAN FREEDOM.


• did the Defence Department come down upon Harry Flintoff, singling
him out with the same vindictiveness as was shown in New Zealand
towards Cuthbert L. Beary, Reginald Williams, and other passive
resisters. And why this victimising? Simply because the .lad was
standing out on PRINCIPLE and making vigorous efforts to UPHOLD
AND SPREAD the truth he held.
On May 12th, 1914, Flintoff was again sent to Queenseliff for 20
• days, making a total of 52 days in five months. The treatment of this
boy should be quite sufficient warning of the possibilities of conscription
in these new countries. The following is extracted from a letter of
Flintoff’s, dated Queenseliff, May 18th: —
"Last Thursday we went to the doctor’s, and while we were wait-
ing an officer of the Queenseliff fort gave an order to fall-in, and he
started drilling us. So I fell-out, and was taken to my cell. Later,
to my surprise, three other lads were sent in, and they fold me that
one of them said to the officer who was drilling them: ‘You only
called this parade for the one chap’ (meaning me). Someone else
said: ‘We will go on strike.’ Twelve refused to drill. The officer
said: ‘All right; there are thirty cells,’ so nine fell-in. The other
three were taken before the Commanding Officer, and one chap said
he would drill, but I and the other two said: ‘We won’t,’ and
were sentenced to seven days’ cells. We did five on bread and
water, and were then taken before the C. 0., who offered to let us
go if we would drill. The other two chaps gave in, but I said I
would not drill, so they asked me to do non-combatant duties. I
first refused, but finally gave in to do it. I could not stand any
more. I still feel sick and weak, and it is hard to have to do
this, but I must look after my health There are 86 lads
here, nearly all over 18 years of age.”
The letter is signed: ‘‘Your broken-hearted friend.”
The lad’s stand was so long and so faithful that few can blame
him if, with body weakened through poor diet, his spirit dulled with
• confinement, and an entire breakdown in health threatening him, he
bowed the knee in the house of Rimmon.
His gaolers did not long feast their eyes on their ‘‘conquest.” A
few days later Ilarrv Flintoff gave them the slip, escaped, from the
fortress, and, thanks to the good offices of sympathisers, disappeared
into the ‘ ‘ backblocks. ” When the outbreak of the world-war occupied
the military mind, found other uses for Queenseliff forts, and gave the
persecuted Australian youths some respite from imprisonment therein,
he paid a visit to Melbourne and was welcomed by his Socialist and
anti-militarist friends, who know him as a steady, hardworking young
man.
Harry Flintoff’s is the most active and determined stand against
the deliberate persecution of Australian youths by the Australian
Military Board. Lovers of freedom, not only in Australia, but in all
lands, will honor and admire his courage—a thousand times greater than
the soldier’s, which not infrequently rises from the excitement of battle.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
How Thomas Roberts Won.
“For he endured as seeing Him who is invisible.’’—The Bible.
. . , is duty of every State . . . . remorsely to put an end to all tendencies
mimical to the full development of the power of defence.’’.—Bernhardi.
We have had much talk about ‘barbarous punishment,’ and, perhaps, solitary
confinement is out of date; but what is to be done with these lads? If I had my
way, I would take them down to Port Melbourne, or some other port, put them
on a steamer, and send them to another country. If they are not prepared to take
part m the work of defence, Australia ought to have no room for them.’’—Senator
Stewart in the Federal Parliament, June 10th, 1914 (Hansard, p. 1933).
“When solitary confinement has been abolished throughout the civilized world
even in the hulss and convict prisons, surely there ought to be in this House a)
party who would abolish this form of punishment in the case of at least children.
Deal with the parent if you like—gaol them, or do what you like with them—but
do not deal with the children in an inhuman manner. No matter who the man was
even though he were a criminal, I would be against solitary confinement for him
because I know it breaks down the mind.’’—Mr. Conroy in the Federal Parlia-
ment, June 11th, 1914 (Hansard, p. 2068).
(Treat relief and not a little jubilation must have been felt by the
military officefs and the heads of the Defence Department when Harry
llintofl’s resistance was broken. One can imagine the "strong men”'
amongst them rubbing their hands—or, more likely, tapping their canes
against their leggings—and saying: "We told you so. Only a little-
firmness is necessary, and all this foolishness will stop."
In this jubilant spirit, and flushed with success, the Queenscliff
officers, during the early days of June, 1914, took in hand the Quaker
hud, Tom Roberts, aged 16, for his first term of imprisonment for 21
days.* Although no worse than that of several others —Flintoff, Size,
Yeo, and Giles—the treatment of this boy was destined to give full
publicity to the shameful happenings taking place under the name of
military discipline in the military prisons. His affair, coming so soon
after and so much resembling Flintoff’s, could not be ignored, even by
Parliamentarians determined to whitewash conscription.
Here, again, we prefer to let the lad’s case be told rather than tell
it. So the next paragraphs are just a cutting from the FEDERAL
HANSARD of June 18th, 1914. Mr. Higgs is speaking. He says: —
"Only to-dav I received the following letter:—
"125 New-street, Middle Brighton,
"19th June, 1914.
Dear Sir —
"Finding I am unable to obtain justice from the Defence Depart-
ment, I write earnestly appealing to you to kindly use your influence-
in connection with the unjust treatment of our latl, "who, through
loyalty to his parents’ views of Christian teaching, is undergoing
solitary confinement in the cells at Queenscliff fortress.
‘ ‘ Tom is a lad of sixteen, and was sent to Queenscliff on Wed-
nesday last for 21 days, for refusing to train under the Defence
Act. My wife and I are members of the Society of Friends and
*The discrimination shown by the Defence Department in the matter of
prosecutions is evident in the fact that before Roberts had served one term of
imprisonment, Flintoff had served three. Yet neither of them had ever drilled.
Roberts was served with a second summons shortly after his release from Queens-
cliff, hut it was stated in court that, On instructions from the Minister of Defence,
the summons would be withdrawn.


hold strong views on the matter of militarism, which is a vital one
m the religion of the Quakers, and, however you may differ from
me on this point, I am quite sure, as a man, you will agree that this
is not the treatment for a boy of sixteen, even if he had committed '
a crime.
i i For continuing in his refusal the boy was placed in a cell next
the guard-room on Thursday night, where he was confined until 11
o’clock on Saturday morning, and then court-martialled. The mili-
tary court then ordered him to be placed, in the cell for seven days.
He'is locked in a cell 10 feet by 10 feet, built of wood, with an
iron door. It has no window, the light coming in through a grating.
He has a wooden stretcher; the mattress and blankets are taken
away in the morning and not brought back till dark. He has half
an hour’s exercise in the morning, and again in the afternoon. He
is on half diet; has not been allowed to read, nor to write to his.
parents.
“We were quite unaware of this treatment of him until we visited
Queenscliff on Monday, when we found him looking worse than when
seen five days previously. This we attributed to the mental strain
of the solitary confinement, a recent illness of a month in bed, and
to the reduced diet—after lunch on Saturday he received only bread
.and water until breakfast on Sunday.
‘ ‘ The civil court ordered the boy into military custody, but surely
it is going beyond the intentions of the citizen army for a court-
martial to be allowed to step in after a case has been dealt with
by the civil court. Furthermore, solitary confinement should never
be ordered. The question mav well be asked: Is this a citizen army,
controlled by Parliament, or a military army, controlled by the
Military Board? A Melbourne lawyer states that solitary confine-
ment is considered inhuman and only used in the case of refractory
■criminals of the worst type. . . . ~
“My wife and I earnestly appeal for your influence in this dis-
tressing matter. ...
“Yours very sincerely,
“(Signed) F. J. ROBERTS.
That letter only reached me to-day (continued Mr. Higgs). I
understand that the boy has now been taken out of solitary confine-
ment All authorities are opposed to solitary confinement as a
punishment, even for prisoners who have committed crimes like
theft. Imagine a boy being placed in a room by himself and kept
there day and night, without being allowed to read or write, for a
period of a week.
Mr. Bamford: It is scandalous. . , , ,
Mr Higgs: It is scandalous. Ido not think that any member
of either House would say that a cadet refusing to drill should be
punished with solitary confinement. It would have been better to
compel this lad to read than to prevent him from reading. _ Authori-
ties in various parts of the world are challenging the wisdom of
imprisoning as a means of reforming the adult criminal, and surely/
it is, to say the least, an abnormality to put into solitary confinement
boys who, under the direction of their parents, refuse to dn .
Previous to this, Senator Rae, being informed of the sufferings of
.young Roberts, had, in the other House, asked the Minister of Defence
A series of searching questions. Senator Millen’s replies indicated delays.
-■Senator Rae was insistent.
Senator Rae: I would press the Minister for a reply to the
substantial part of my question. Is he prepared to release the lad
or order his release from solitary confinement, and prevent tfiat
barbarous punishment from being again inflicted upon offendeis.


Senator Millen: Certainly not, upon the information that I have
aiow to hand.
Senator Rae: We will upset your military system if you do not.
'The practice is barbarous, atrocious, scoundrelly.
—Hansard, June Ith, 1914 (p. 1924).
The next day Senator Rae again opened tire.
Senator Rae: Has the Minister of Defence any information to
give the Senate, in pursuance of the promise he made yesterday
to communicate first thing this morning by telegraph, with regard
to the detention of Cadet Roberts in solitary confinement, and my
statement that he was committed by a court-martial subsequent to
civil proceedings f
Senator Millen: I have caused enquiries to be made, and am
informed that there was no court-martial.
Senator Guthrie: What was it?
Senator Millen: The action of the Commandant there was respon-
sible for what has taken place.
Senator Guthrie: Was that legal?
Senator Millen: It has been the law ever since the Defence Act
has been in force.
Senator Guthrie: Can an officer put a man in prison?
Senator Millen: That is the procedure that exists all over Australia
to-day and has existed for some time. lam not saying whether
it is good, bad, or indifferent.
—Hansard, June 11th, 1914 (p. 1991).*
Tom Roberts se'rved his FULL WEEK IN THE SOLITARY CELL.
IT WAS A WINDOWLESS DUNGEON, BADLY VENTILATED. His
father furnished the following statement, which he was prepared to put
in the form of a Statutory Declaration, if necessary: —
“Three military officers adjudicated at my son’s case, at a table
in a room in the Queenscliff fortress, on Saturday morning, 6th June.
Three military witnesses were called, and altogether there were seven
persons present—six military officers and my son. A statement of
the charge was made, and witnesses were called to give evidence,
and then the sentence of seven days’ solitary confinemnt was
ordered.
‘ ‘ The door was locked for five days, and not until Senator Rae
had brought the matter before the Senate was the chain used to
keep the door ajar.
‘‘ My wife and I visited Queenscliff on the Monday. The boy
had had half an hour’s exercise in the morning, and again in the
afternoon of the preceding day. This was subsequently increased
to an hour, morning and afternoon. Also, after we visited him the
letters he had written to us several days earlier were forwarded
on. ’ ’
Senator Millen had described the cell as having two windows and
/gave other equally incorrect details. But Senator RaC exposed to the
House the baseness of the military attempt to COVER UP THEIR
MISDEEDS. THE ROOM DESCRIBED BY THE MINISTER OF
*This last damning admission of the Minister of Defence proves to the hilt
what members of the Australian Freedom League in their speeches and leaflets
have been maintaining as to the meaning of the Act. For two years they had been
abused hy a militarist press, mocked by military men as bush-lawyers, and told
•over and over again that the - Act did not allow military men to punish. An Adelaide
K.C. termed the League’s literature “pestiferous rubbish,’’ and gave half a promise
to refute it. The refutation has not been forthcoming, but instead the irresistible
logic of events has shown that the. “pestiferous rubbish’’ was correct interpreta-
tion of the subtle, stealthy Statute known as the Australian Defence Act.


DEFENCE WAS NOT THE LAD’S CELL AT ALL, BET THE
ADJOINING GUARD-ROOM.
The lad came through the ordeal unbroken, in spite of the sufferings
of those seven tedious, dark days.
But Tom Roberts did not suffer in vain. His stand made members
of Parliament tumble over each other in their eagerness to promise their
support to an amending Act to abolish solitary confinement, and the right
of officers to punish without civil trial those handed over to military
detention. Not only private members, but the Prime Minister and the
Minister of Defence, undertook—for the sake of allaying public unrest—
to have these changes made.
The people had shaken Parliament. But then came the European
war and a khaki general election. In the change and turmoil the military
man has again, apparently, taken Parliament in tow, for the Defence
Amendment Act brought in by the new Labor Government contains not
a line in fulfilment of the promises. All that lias been done, we belie\ e,
is to make some trifling change in the regulations.*
But Tom Roberts has won. Whatever Parliament will do, the
People will not forget what it undertook to do when the tyranny per-
petrated in its name was made public. The People will ask, as we ask
again: Can, and will, Parliament protect the citizen from the heartless
interpretation of military necessity? And, further, the People will
demand that as Parliament cannot control the compulsory system it shall
blot it out by repealing the conscriptive principle.
* Thanks to the kindness of Mr. Higgs, M.H.R., I succeeded in obtaining from
the Defence Department a few weeks after the above was written a copy of the
following, coming into operation on April 23rd “as a provisional regulation
After Regulation 30 (B) add new Regulation 30 (C)i—-
‘‘3o (C) Every person liable to training under Part XII. of the Act, who,
having been committed by a Court to the custody of any prescribed authority,
and having been detained in any prescribed institution or place—
(a) Refuses or fails to comply with the Regulations or orders governing
that institution or place, or . , ,
(b) Refuses to perform any drill, training, or other duty required of
(c) Disobeys or neglects to obey the orders of any officer or soldier placed
in authority over him; . . 0
shall be guilty of an offence, and shall, on conviction by a Court of Summary
Jurisdiction be liable to suffer one of the following penalties namely
(a) Detention, that is to say, confinement in military detention rooms tor
a period not exceeding twenty days; .. . . ..
(b) Confinement in the custody of the prescribed authority for a further
The new I,e regulation eX DOEs” NOT * ABOLISH SOLITARY CONFINEMENT.
Its number in the new book of regulations, issued, July 28th, 1916. 13 380.
The nhrase “detention rooms’’ is merely flowery phraseology. have NOT
been Abolished. Even the one real concssion to ci^l fre e d om eeEN^ENDERED
OF^TH&t
thfsFmatter sll G. The reader should also note that there is no mention
regulation (see Page 24) being repealed. So apparently the officers
have the optfon causing it when they think desirable On full consideration Ido not
see that the new regulation FORBIDS anything.—J.F.H. (1919).


CHAPTER XXIX.
Conscription in New Zealand.
“What they attempted to do in New Zealand was nothing, and they did it
most successfully. I have it from one of the highest authorities there that although
Parliament passed a law, that law is not being carried out, and the result is that
the Dominion is drifting into a system which, as Senator Pearce has said, is very
much of a voluntary system.’’—Senator Millen, Australian Minister of Defence in
the Australian Parliament, 19th June, 1914 (Hansard, p. 1929).
In the New Zealand Parliament: —
Mr. Isitt: What will they do at the camps? (the detention camps.)
Mr. Allen (Minister of Defence): They will have to do ordinary
drill and training.
Mr. Isitt: If they.won’t do it?
Mr. Allen: Then "they will have to stay there until they do it.*
■ —Wellington “Dominion,” 12th October, 1912.
New Zealand was swept into the conscriptionists ’ net a little while
before Australia was caught. Although the then Prime Minister, Sir
Joseph Ward, stated before he went to London that the people did ryot
want such a scheme and would not tolerate it, he came back with the
Conscription Bill in his pocket and forced it through Parliament at
the tail end of a session. By an easy arrangement with his political
‘ ‘ opponents, ’ ’ his own and the Opposition party daily papers immediately
supported conscription —calling it, of course, national service or universal
training. The churches were bribed by chaplaincies and the offer of
denominational and church companies of cadets, and well-to-do parents
by the offer of drill for “college boys” at their schools, largely in school
hours, under their own masters.
The three big institutions of privilege and respectability —Parlia-
ment, Press, and Pulpit—were on the side of conscription. The people,
who were never consulted, waited to see what w’ould happen, and
wondered whether or not this blessed “national service” were the same
thing as the long-cursed conscription of benighted European militarism.
In its broad principles the New Zealand Defence Act is similar to
that of Australia; it differs only in detail.
We will first set out the powers of the Act and its Regulations, and
then tell of the attempt to break it down, and how at the time of our
writing, 1915, the agitation has succeeded in rendering the Act powerless
to enforce the compulsion.
All male inhabitants between the ages of 14 and 25 must “apply
in writing to the prescribed officer to be registered” in the year in
which they reach the age of 14. Section 45.)*
“Provided that if any such person is enrolled on the roll of any
school, such enrolment shall be accepted in lieu of registration.!
*Tlre Acts covering New Zealand conscription are the Defence Act, 1909, the
principal Act. the Defence Amendment Act. 1910, and the Defence Amendment Act,
1912. Where not otherwise stated, the reference is to the principal Act.
fThe dangerous interlocking of schools and army is seen here. It should he
remembered, too, that in New Zealand the Minister of Defence also holds (1915)
the office of Minister of Education.


From 14 to 18 the conscript is a Senior Cadet and has to perform
six whole-day drills, 12 half-day drills, and 24 night drills each year.
(Section 40.)
From 18 to 25 he is in the “General Training Section,” of which
the training “shall be as prescribed.” (Section 41) (2).
From 25 to 30 he is a “reserve” conscript, and must do “two
muster parades in each year.” (Section 42.)
The punishments for refusing service are many. Refusing any
information relating to registration may cost a parent, schoolmaster, or
friend of the lad £5. (Section 53.) For refusing to register the fine
is £5. (Section 51.) Refusal to take the oath of military obedience
can cost a lad of fourteen £5. (Section 50.) The form of the oath is
as follows: —
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.
“I A. 8., do sincerely promise and swear that I will be faithful
and bear true allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs
and successors, and that I will faithfully serve in the New Zealand
Military Forces, according to my liability under the Defence Act,
and that I will observe and obey all orders of His Majesty, his
heirs and successors, and of the generals and officers set over me,
until I shall be lawfully discharged. So help me, God.”
If he refuses to pay the fine imposed, a garnishee order can be
issued on the lad’s employers, who must then pay a propoition of the
boy’s weekly wage to the police until the fine is paid off. (Section 11
of 1912 Act.)
If, as was the practice of the Fassive Resisters, the lad leaves his
work to escape the garnishee, he can be arrested and committed to
military custody, in barracks or fort, for 28 days (Section 2, 1912 Act),
and for refusing to drill, or be ‘ ‘ subject to military discipline while
in detention, can be sentenced to a further 28 days’ imprisonment for
each offence (Section 8, 1912 Act); and the refusal of each separate
order or drill can be reckoned a separate offence.
In addition to fines and military imprisonment, the lad who objects
to become a conscript can be “deprived of civil right for any period
not exceeding ten years” (Section 56 (1), 1912 Act), and while so
deprived he cannot be appointed to any office or employment in the
Public Service, and shall have his vote taken away. (Section 36 (2),
1912 Act.)*
That is what it takes to make a willing conscript in New Zealand.
And when he becomes a conscript he is controlled by similar military
regulations to those which control his Australian comrade. lie may not
write to the press without permission, nor s take part in public discussion
relating to any orders, regulations, or instructions issued by his superiors.
(Regulations 206-7, p. 37.) t
*This infliction in time of peace of a penalty usually inflicted f °* t ( F ea ( ?°3 ab }®
offences in time of war (i.e., as those of the Cape Colony Dutch in 1899-1902) is
an indication of the way in which, in this age of frenzied militarism, peace-
conditions are becoming less and less peacelike, and peace itself becoming merely
an armed is to “Regulations for the Military Forces of the Dominion of
New Zealand. 1913.” Published by authority: by John Mackay, Government
Printer, in 1914.


When he changes his place of address “he must inform his Company
‘Commander ’’ (Regulation 188, p. 35), and before he leaves the country
he “WILL OBTAIN PERMISSION FROM HIS COMMANDING
OFFICER.” (Regulation 449, p. 63.)
With this heavy club at his disposal, we will see in the next chapter
how the military tried to crush the boys of New Zealand.


CHAPTER XXX.
Towards Breaking Down of Conscription in
New Zealand.
“It soon became evident that many of the boys resented this imposition. They
had the support of a considerable number of the most intelligent persons in the
community. The Society of Friends was prompt and emphatic in applying its well-
known peace testimony to the new situation. Labor and Socialist organisations also
declared themselves strongly against the conscript principle. These elements'
formed the nucleus of the resistance, and they were joined by some of the
ministers of religion, teachers, and professional men.
“Many of the boys who had been imprisoned formed a Passive Resisters’
Union, which now numbers in Christchurch alone four hundred and fifty youths,
all pledged to resist compulsory training. Those who have worn the broad-arrow,
picked oakum, and had their finger-prints taken, are looked up to by their fellows
as leaders and heroes. They organise meetings, address large crowds in the streets,
and circularise members of Parliament.’’ —Colonial Observer in “A Blot on the
Empire: Conscription in New Zealand.’’
“Something should be done to prevent the courts being flooded with Defence
prosecutions to the serious embarrassment of the ordinary business If there
is to be this weekly flood of prosecutions, the Justice Department should provide an
extra magistrate for the purpose of hearing them, thus allowing the hearing of
ordinary cases to proceed.’’—“New Zealand Times,’’ Wellington, 19th October,
1912.
The conscript system was put into operation late in 1910. At that
time there was practically no anti-militarist organisation in existence
to combat this militarist aggression. Parliament, press, and pulpit
satisfied with conscription: the people —silent, waiting. Posters appeared
at all the railway stations and post-offices describing the “Universal
Obligation for Military Training ” and ending with the statement that
failure to register involved a penalty of £5. This applied, then, to all
lads and young men from 14 to 21.*
At once anti-militarist organisations sprang into existence, as those
whose sons were liable saw that the State was going to claim the
European blood-tax. At Christchurch the National Free Council and
the Anti-Militarist League, after a stormy beginning, settled down to a
very capable and vigorous opposition to conscription. Leagues were
formed in other centres, and within a few months the Dominion was
ablaze.
The young men who were liable to come under the training organised
themselves as the Passive Resisters’ Union. Their earnestness, audacity,
and ability deserve the highest praise. They held large public meetings;
printed and distributed literature; gave financial assistance, where
needed, to the families of lads who were gaoled; bought a printing press
and published their own monthly paper, “The Repeal.’’
The military authorities could not ignore their opposition, so they
tried to break it. The leaders were arrested and sent to gaol; those
outside organised large protest meetings. When the prisoners were
released, they, too, held meetings describing their treatment in gaol.t
*The 1912 Amending Act extended the period of training to 25.
flVhen the leaders of one union were released after their first imprisonment in
gaol, and reported the kindness of one of the warders to them while in gaol, the
union agreed unanimously to send him a present of an easy chair on his approach-
ing marriage. This was done, and the union holds the warder’s letter appreciating:
their compliment and friendship.


The New Zealand (Socialist Party gave them splendid moral sup-
port. The ‘‘Maoriland Worker,” the Labor paper of the Dominion,
published a Roll of Honor of the lads who had been imprisoned.
Not content with imprisoning the lads for refusing to drill, the
military authorities next used the police to try and prevent anti-militarist
propaganda. In Christchurch a strong anti-militarist bootmaker, Mr. H.
Reynolds, cut out-and pasted in his window the “Maoriland Worker”
Roll of Honor. He was charged, and convicted by T. A. B. Bailey, S.M.,
on the evidence of a military officer, of publishing a paper without an
imprint. He was fined £5, and went to gaol for a fortnight’s hard
labor.
They next tried to break up the Passive Resisters’ Union’s open-air
meetings, and the lads were charged with obstructing traffic. They were
fined, but went to gaol. Labor men and Socialists came to their help,
and one week six men, including three City Councillors, were charged
with obstructing traffic at the Clock Tower, Christchurch. They were
all fined. Three of them—Mr. E. J. Howard, President of the New
Zealand Socialist Party; Mr. Fred. Cooke, now Vice-President of the
Social Democratic Party; and Mr. P. C. Webb, now Labor M.P. for
Grey—went to gaol.
Cutlibert Leo Beary, an apprentice at the Government Railway
Workshops, helped take up a collection at an opcyi-air meeting. He
was charged with being an ‘ ‘ idle and dissolute person soliciting alms. ’ ’
His 500 workmates employed a solicitor to defend Beary, and even T.
A. B. Bailey, S.M., had to ignore such a distortion of the letter of the
law.
Having stopped the anti-militarist meetings at the Clock Tower,
they tried to follow up their advantage.. Mr. John P. F. Fletcher, of
England, who spent a year in assisting the anti-militarist cause in the
Dominion, commenced open-air meetings in, Lawson-street, Christchurch.
At his first meeting he was warned by the police that he would be
charged if he went there again, and on his doing so he was charged
with obstructing traffic. Although two City Councillors (one of whom
has since been elected to Parliament) and two Parliamentary candidates
and others gave evidence that Lawson-street was a recognised place for
holding open-air meetings, and that they themselves had spoken there
many times, and though it was proved that the Salvation Army was
holding its meeting under identical conditions within fifty yards of the
anti-militarist meeting, without interference by the police, Mr. Fletcher
was fined. refused to pay the fine and served seven days in Lyttelton
Gaol, with hard labor.
Mr. Robert Semple, National Organiser of the New Zealand Federa-
tion of Labor, refused to give a military officer particulars of his sou ’»
age. Result: Gaol.
The Passive Resisters held a series of meetings in the main street
of a small country town, Rangiora. The local militarists in the town
•council got a by-law passed prohibiting meetings there. The lads, know-
ing this, went again, and Reginald Williams and Harold Denton were
gaoled for a month each.


But for all this they could not get the lads to drill, nor could they
stop their propaganda nor break down their organisation.
They had threatened, but that did not answer; they fined, but the,
fines were not paid; they imprisoned, but the lads boasted of their im-
prisonment. One thing remained to be done to these peace rebels: Get
them into a fortress, securely under control, and “then we will break
them.” They tried it. Parliament gave them the power in the Defence'
Amendment Act 1912. They tried it, and failed again. In the next
chapter we give particulars of how it came about. And the military
authorities had to confess themselves beaten.*
The people, assisted by the organised labor power of the Dominion,
when they understood the tyranny that was being practised, took the
power from the tyrants, and New Zealand conscription now hobbles
around with cut sinews, t
To realise the wide opposition to compulsory military training, look
at the prosecutions. In three years they amounted to 10,245. Notice,
too, how they increase each year out of all proportion to the increase
in the number of the trainees: —t
. 1911 28
1912 3,187
1913 7,930
•
Total 10,245
In addition to those who are known to the military authorities to
be evading drills, there are, as in Australia, many thousands of lads
who are unregistered and untraced. Special rewards are being offered
to the police for those they bring in, and £2OO was put on the 1914
Estimates for this purpose.
A Parliamentary Return was produced on September 3rd, 1913, show-
ing that at least 13,153 lads had not enrolled. On that occasion mem-
bers of Parliament who themselves supported conscription were com-
pelled to complain.
The late Mr. Laurenson (Lyttelton) said: —“We know that such
a scheme as this in a British community, unless it meets with the
unanimous acquiescence of the people of the country, is foredoomed
to failure. If the scheme is going to meet with the approval of
the country, let us put it through. If, on the other hand, there is
a fairly large minority of the people —and evidently, from the
evidence put before us, there is a fairly large minority—opposed to
*Giving evidence before the Parliamentary Commitee formed to consider the
matter of punishment and alternative service under the Defence Acts, Colonel
Heard, Acting Commandant of the New Zealand Forces, on 29th October 1913, made
the following statements: —
The Chairman (91) —At any rate I suppose you have come fro the conclusion
that the present state .of affairs is absolutely unsatisfactory?—Absolutely unsatis-
factory and unworkable.
(93) That is, the military authorities have to undertake the detention without
any powers?—Yes, which is an imposibility; we cannot do it.
fSince this was written War Regulations have placed New Zealand more at the
mercy of the military man and the exploiter than any other so-called self-governing
British community. It is not yet possible to penetrate the Great Silence established
by the New Zealand censorship and autocratic regulations and to find out whether or
no the officers in charge of the compulsory trainees have got back the powers taken
from them in 1913. Very probably they have. —J.F.H. (1919).
JFrom the police returns of prosecutions in the New Zealand official Year Book,
1914 (p. 1914).


the scheme, let us recognise the fact and revert to a system which
I am coming to believe would be better than the present system.”
Mr. G. W. Russell (Avon), in the same debate, said:—“To a large
extent the scheme has broken down.”
While the Minister of Defence, in reply, showed the true inwardness
of “military necessity.” He said:—
“I come now to the question of the summonses, and let me put
that matter straight. lam coming to the conclusion —and Ido not
want to come to this conclusion—that THE LESS ONE GIVES TO
THE HOUSE IN THE WAY OF INFORMATION THE BETTER,
because honorable members will not use it fairly. ’ ’*
Honorable Members: Oh!
—New Zealand Hansard.
This is the way in which a German or Russian War Minister would
answer a Socialist anti-militarist enquiry in the Reichstag or Duma.
The wonder is that the caretakers of our boasted British freedom endure
such arrogance. Our politicians have travelled much nearer to Zabern
than they realise. Nothing so much proves it as their sheep-like passivity
in the face of this military high-handedness.
*The reader should note that it was not War Time when this astoundingly
arrogant answer was given.—J.F.H. (1919).


CHAPTER XXXI.
Some Happenings at Ripa Island.
“The boys were handed over to two officers of the Permanent Artillery, and
walked to the wharf (at Lyttelton) escorted by artillerymen with fixed bayonets.
As the launch left the wharf for Ripa Island, the waterside workers and others
assembled on the wharf cheered the offenders.’’—“Lyttelton' Times’’ (13th June,
1913).
Placed side by side, the Australian Defence Act, the New Zealand
Defence Act, and the original—as distinct from the Boer-altered —South
African Defence Act are, in their clauses and penalties, as alike to one
another as peas in a pod. Whatever Government has set them up,
whether Senator Pearce, Colonel Allen, or General Smuts acted as god-
father at the font, the parent of the child was the National Service
League of London. The merest glance at the compulsory clauses of the
three Acts shows the common parentage. . Leaving that metaphor, we
may say the same insidiously clever head has drafted all three, even if
different hands held the drafter’s pen.
As soon as conscription was introduced in New Zealand a strong
union sprang up among the more serious and earnest-minded lads who
were liable to drill. In Christchurch they issued the following manifesto,
which was widely distributed: —
THE PASSIVE RESISTERS.
WHY WE WILL NOT OBEY THE DEFENCE ACT.
Because it is un-British and iniquitous in that it deprives us of
our liberty.
Because it is not for the defence of New Zealand. If it was it
would have been started in New Zealand by New Zealanders, instead
of which it has been originated by the National Service League of
England, which is a body composed of the capitalistic and exploiting
* classes, whose interest it is to keep the worker in subjection. This
body, through our treacherous politicians, foisted tins miscalled
Defence Act upon us without the consent of our people. They have
already reaped the reward of their treachery by being ousted from
office (Sir Joseph Ward’s Government).
Because we are free-born, and in spite of all the attempts of the
capitalistic press, the militarist parsons, and other toadies to
Runkeyism to force the fetters of conscription on us, we will not
tolerate serfdom.
Because there are thousands of lads, who have as yet no voice
or vote in the country, who will not submit to tyranny and who need
our assistance against the enemies of the working classes.
We will support these lads to our last breath. Will you join us
and stand solidly with us against tyranny and oppression?
On behalf of the Christchurch Union—
H. FOOTE. C. L. BEARY.*
F. HOOPER. W. J. HOOPER.*
J. N. HAR-LE. A. DUCKMANTON.*
G. GREEN. R. WILLIAMS.*
E- EDWARDS.* W. GATES.*
f. McCullough. j. k. worrall.*
*Gaoled.


Wholesale prosecutions were instituted, heavy fines were levied, and
scores of lads were thrown into gaol. The Roll of Honor in the
“Maoriland Worker’ ’ in June, 1913, contained the names of between
90 and 100 youths who had spent their time picking oakum.
The Military Board, noticing that hard labor in gaols could not
break down these lads, and learning that military detention was being
used in Australia, decided to copy the Australian plan and empower the
magistrates to hand over the convicted offenders to the military arm, to
see whether it could not break them. In following Senator Pearce’s
methods they forgot to follow his wiliness and his step-by-step procedure.
Consequently, by their high-handed foolishness in arresting eight of the
leading members of the Christchurch Passive Resisters’ Union and im-
prisoning them on Ripa Island, the Military Board came within an ace
of bringing the whole fabric of conscription down about their ears.
Seldom have an apparently triumphant military clique, with Parlia-
ment, press, and pulpit at their back, received such a bitter check; and
the check has been largely the result of the splendid stand of the brave
lads themselves.
Organised Labor in New Zealand gave its verdict on conscription
about the same time. The Unity Labor Congress of July, 1913, the
largest Labor Congress ever held in the Dominion, demanded the abolition
of conscription by the overwhelming vote of 192 to 44.
Now to describe the happenings on Ripa Island, a small, fortified
island on the south side of Lyttelton Harbor.
About the middle of June, 1913, and just after the substitution of
military fortresses for civil prisons as a place of detention for objectors
to conscription, a party of eight members of the Passive Resisters ’ Union
all of whom had previously been gaoled, some more than once—were
arrested and taken to Ripa Island fortress, that they might perform the
personal service demanded of them by the Defence Act.
Here they refused to drill or do any military work. The officers
moved hesitatingly, and matters did not become serious till Wednesday
morning, June 18th, when the lads, being asked to clean one of the large
guns, refused. A little later some coal from Lyttelton arrived at the
island wharf in a lighter, w r hich the lads were ordered to unload. They
refused, on the grounds that their friends the waterside workers were
needing work, and they were not going to unload, under military orders,
-coal that should have been unloaded by workers at union rates. A
military court followed, at which they were charged with insubordination.
Reginald Williams, one of the leading spirits of the Passive Resisters’
Union, has written a full account of these stirring events, and we take
the following account from the Passive Resisters’ Union’s paper, “The
Repeal
“We were taken,’’ says Williams, “to the office —one at a time —
and charged with insubordination. The lieutenant was judge, the
sergeant-major informer, and a bombardier was a witness. All of
us, including the cook’s assistant, who had joined us, were sentenced
to solitary confinement with half-rations. ’ Our blankets and mat-
tresses were taken away from us during the day. The half-rations
consisted of a slice of bread and a half-pint mug'of tea for breakfast


and tea, and for dinner a small piece of meat and two potatoes. On*
Friday morning the lieutenant visited us and told us that he would
allow us to return to our old conditions in the barrack-room if we
would consent to work. He added that he would not try to give-
ns work that was objectionable to our principles. When I com-
plained to him about the small amount of food that we were receiv-
ing he turned to the sergeant-major and remarked: ‘Send for a-
doctor as soon as you see any of them beginning to go down. ’
‘‘ On Friday afternoon we succeeded in establishing communica-
tions with each other, and the strike was called oft'. We were then
released from our cells, and, armed with sickles, rakes, etc., we went
on a grasscutting expedition on the top of the fort, and returned
to our old conditions on full rations.
“On Saturday morning, 21st June, we were mustered into the
barrack-room, and the lieutenant addressed us. * Having explained
that there was not a great deal of ordinary work to do on the
island, he stated that when that ended he would want us to clean
guns, etc., but (and I now quote his exact words) ‘he would not
compel us to do this if it was against our principles, as he wished
to treat us like men,’ and he also said: ‘Of course, I shall not be
so mean as to put you on half-rations when the work runs out, but
will have to lock you up in the barrack-room during working hours
if you do not care to clean armaments. ’ Little knowing what was
to follow, these remarks pleased us immensely.
“For a week everything went smoothly. Late, on Wednesday
night, June 25th, five West Coast boys arrived. At first they were
kept quite separate from us, but when it was found out that they
were equally obstinate with regard to drill they joined us in the
barrack-room.*
‘ ‘ Two of our boys now assisted the cook, two more acted -as
orderlies, one acted as orderly in the soldiers ’ kitchen, two others
cleaned out the washhouse, lavatories, etc., and the remainder were
employed trimming the grass and ice-plant on the fort.
“Shortly after 1 o’clock on Monday the door of the barrack-room
was unlocked, and Bombardier Moir, who was the senior officer on
the island, came in, accompanied by three soldiers. He explained
that the work had run out and now he must ask us to clean guns.
We were asked individually if we were prepared to do this work,
and for answer he received an emphatic NO. The man, who
was evidently acting on telephoned instructions from Lieutenant
Macdonald on the other side of the harbor, pleaded hard with us
and left the room, saying: ‘Well, boys, I can’t help it.’ We knew
now that the crisis had arrived, and we discussed hurriedly what
course was best to take. A hunger-strike was suggested and put
to the vote. Eight voted for it, four against, and one did not
vote.
‘ ‘ This decided the matter. At about 3.15 p.m. Bombardier Moir
and the other soldiers again came in, and this time we were asked
if we would drill find learn semaphore signalling. Again we gave
a negative answer. An attempt was going to be made to force us
to drill, but we were determined that it should fail. Force would
*These “West Coast boys” were young miners. Their workmates supported
them in their opposition to conscription, and the Miners’ Union had raised a levy
of a shilling per week to keep the lads, and assist their families, when they left
work to avoid the garnishee of their wages to pay the fines. They had been living
in the bush for some months when a Parliamentary by-election took place, and
these five lads came down to help the Labor candidate (Mr. P. C. Webb). They
were all members of his election committee, but a few days later they were arrested
and taken right across the country to Ripa Island. Many other lads against whom
similar warrants were out were not taken, but then they were not working for the
Labor, anti-conscriptionist candidate. A pretty bit of electioneering. Mr. Webb
was returned by a good majority.


have no more effect upon us than coaxing had previously. We had
been offered a forty-eight hours’ holiday off, in Christchurch, if
we would drill. We had refused. Now we were going to be slowly
starved into submission on half-rations, but we would beat them:
we would starve ourselves, and so bring about a: elimax quickly.
“The lieutenant had deceived us;, he had lied to us; he had shown
us w r hat the military code of honor stood for. "W© would show him
and the whole pack of military bloodhounds that we were prepared'
to die, if necessary, for the cause we cherish.
(Continued in Next Chapter.)
Their story of their sufferings in.Ripa Island Fort was believed by the great
majority of the fellow-countrymen of these boys, and profoundly impressed the
Labor Unions. A militarist bigot will say it was all boys’ yarns, and in his usual
high falutin way will proceed to declare that the moral atmosphere of the glorious
British Empire, that grand inheritance on which the sun never sets, prevents the
occurrence of such things, and that our noble British blood and pride of race
renders their perpetration absolutely impossible! Those who hold the “impos-
sibility” theory as to the 1913 happenings on Ripa Island are referred to the report
published by the Government Special Commission on the treatment during the latter
part of the Great War of conscientious objectors to military service. The horrors
which Commissioner Hewitt tells us DID HAPPEN at Wanganui Barracks should
pretty well discredit the “impossibility” theory. Under conscription no brutality
is impossible. For a brief account of,the Wanganui atrocities Australians should,
see the “Australian Worker,” January 9, 1919, p. 7. —J.F.H. (1919).


CHAPTER XXXII.
Reginald Williams’ Narrative.
“Wednesday, 29th October, 1913.—Colonel Heard, Acting Commandant for
New Zealand, examined.
Mr. Isitt (93) —I take it you are of opinion that we want not so much to deal
out justice to these lads who have got these foolish notions as to adopt some
method that will save the Territorial system?—.Yes; but I do not quite understand
what you mean.
(93) My point is this: our great aim is to get some way out of this difficulty
that will save the Territorial system and prevent an agitation that will imperil it,
and if we can get an alternative that is just sufficiently severe to reduce the
objectors to a minimum we shall have served our main purpose?—Yes.
(97) . . . .Do you not think that in all probability if these men were well
handled the conscientious objector would cave in?—Yes. The only thing is this,
that you have to deal with men of especial quality. For instance, what would you
do supposing you got Worrall and Williams, and you forcibly took them to one of
these camps and they absolutely refused to do anything, and upset everybody else?
(98) I would not let them do that. I would shut them up by themselves. They
could be kept from associating with the others? —It is a difficult thing in a camp.
The only thing you could do with these young men would be to put them in a
separate camp by themselves. Well, that would give a lot of trouble. I think you
will find —and I think it is quite right, too—that young men of that description
want special and perhaps severe treatment, because, mind you, their influence is so
bad and their “cussedness’’ of such descnption that you cannot let them slide;
they are simply evading service, and they will boast about it. They will write
about it in that publication of theirs and boast about it all round the country, and
it will have a bad effect.
—Minutes of Evidence before the Joint Defence Legislation Committee on the
matters of conscientious objectors, alternative service, punishment, and
military camps, 11th December, 1913, New Zealand (p. 7).
“As there were only seven separate cells in which to confine us,
two were put in each of six of them, and I was put alone in the
seventh. Hooper and Robson were confined in the next apartment
to me, and I was able to talk to them through the wall.
‘ ‘ That evening half-rations, consisting of a slice of bread and a
mug of tea, were brought round to each and were refused by ten
out of the thirteen of us. The names of those who refused were:—
“West Coast. —Jim Nuttall, Bill Robson, Bob McTaggart, Jack
McTaggart, Henry Gut-hardt.
“Canterbury.—Walter Hooper, Jim Worrall, Ted Edwards, Tom
Nuttall, Reg. Williams.
“We had no lights in our cells, and our blankets were not brought
to us until about 7 o ’clock, and they were taken away again in
the morning.*
“The miserable breakfast was again refused by the same ten
hunger-strikers. About 11 o’clock the lieutenant visited each of
. us, and repeated the remarks about the shortage of work. He was
received by a storm of rage as he visited each prisoner. He was
asked to explain how it was that there was no work for the orderlies,
cooks, and .cleaners, and why he had broken his word and tried to
feed us on cats’ rations. He told me that he was going to bring
us before a magistrate, to which I replied: ‘I am glad of that; it
will give us a chance of exposing you, and you want it. ’ He slunk
away then and said no more.
“We refused dinner when it was brought round, and it was
shortly after this that Robson collapsed in the cell next to mine.
He was soon vomiting, bringing up bile and blood. Hooper and
myself then banged on* the doors till help arrived. Robson could
hardly stand, and had to be supported by two soldiers. He shook
hands with Hooper before he went, saying: ‘Stick to your principles,
Wally.’ A doctor was rung up, and when he arrived by the launch
he was also called to attend Bob McTaggart, who was suffering from
the intense cold, having nothing to sit down upon or lie upon, except
the iron bedstead with which his cell was fitted. The doctor pre-
*Tliis was in July, mid-winter, and very cold.


scribed for Robson, and declared that McTaggart was sufferino-
from chill and bronchitis. These facts should be remembered, in
view r of . what took place the following morning. The doctor also
condemned the solitary cells, in which w r e were confined, as there-
was no ventilation, all the windows being barred or screwed down
tight. At his orders all the bars were removed and the windows
opened.
Tea on Tuesday night was refused. Tuesday night was a cold,
wet night, and a bad one for all of us, but we had braced ourselves
for worse.
“Breakfast on Wednesday morning met with the same fate as
the preceding meals, and most of us were feeling extremely peckish,,
but as solid and determined as ever. At about 11.30 on Wednesday
morning the launch arrived, and we were surprised at the passengers
that it disgorged. Besides one or two soldiers, there were Lieutenant
Macdonald, a sergeant of police, T. A. B. Bailev, S.M., two doctors,
a court clerk, and two reporters. Immediately after this party
arrived we were unlocked and taken in to take part in one of the-
most hideous and grotesque scenes ever enacted in this country.
‘ ‘ The officers ’ kitchen had been transformed into a court. At a
table sat our old acquaintance, T. A. B. Bailey, S.M. At his side
was the clerk of the courts; near by stood the police officer; at a
table opposite sat the two reporters and another old acquaintance
of mine, Dr. Newell, of Lyttelton Gaol, who had been brought to
give evidence to the fact that the meagre half-rations contained
sufficient nourishment for growing young men. Weak, haggard, and
looking considerably worse for our forty-eight hours’ fast in this
cold place, twelve of us were filed into the room. There were rifles
hanging round the walls, and these helped to give an air of military
authority to the scene, as also did the lieutenant in uniform. At
this moment Sergeant-Major Conley came into the room and asked
if Robson was to be brought in. “Yes,” replied Macdonald. ‘But
he can’t walk,’ protested the sergeant-major. The lieutenant lost
his temper and said, ‘Bring him >in. Use any force you like!’ A
few minutes later Robson was carried in, unconscious, between two
soldiers. Almost before he was inside the door, Dr. Newell jumped
to his feet and yelled, ‘That man is malingering, your worship.’ This
was more than we could stand, and shouts of ‘Shame,’ ‘Tyranny,’
etc., filled the air, in spite of the cries of ‘Silence! ’ from the police-
men.
“A certain amount of quietness having been obtained, a loud
voice exclaimed: ‘The Magistrate’s Court is now open.’ Yes; it was.
But was there ever such a weird scene? The very clock on the wall
had stopped!
‘‘Our names were called, and we were charged with refusing £0
drill and clean armaments. In order that we could say all that
we wanted to, we pleaded not guilty. Worrall demanded an adjourn-
ment of the court, in order that we could get a lawyer, but this
request was refused, and we were told that we had no case.*
“But we had a case. Bombardier Moir and three other soldiers
were then called, and gave evidence to the effed* that we had been
requested to drill and that we had refused. .
‘ ‘ When the lieutenant was called to give evidence the storm
broke. Tom Nuttall had the first turn at him, and asked him if
he remembered his promise concerning drill, and he denied it. As
*But when Robson’s adjourned case was brought before the court at Lyttelton,
to which the public were admitted and' Robson was defended by Mr. Cassidy, Mr.
Bishop, the Senior Stipendiary Magistrate, dismissed the case because Lieutenant
Macdonald could not produce evidence that any regulations dealing with imprison-
ment on Ripa Island had been gazetted. These regulations were NOT produced
at the “closed” court on Ripa Island.


he said this, cries of ‘ Liar ! ’ and other sounds of exclamation filled
the air. Jim Worrall next attacked the ‘Server of Two Kings,’*
cross-examining him with extreme ferocity upon the questions of
the rations and several other grievances; but when Macdonald could
not cover up his guilt with lies, Magistrate Bailey came to the rescue
by saying that matters of food and poor ventilation had nothing
to do with the charge that was laid against us. In answer to a
question of mine, Macdonald said he did not remember having
promised not to give us work that was contrary to our principles,
and he seemed to object strongly to being told that he had a weak
memory. ,
“Jack McTaggart next exploded in righteous indignation upon
the wretched witness, who was growing pale with rage. This,
however, did not suit the magistrate, and McTaggart, whose lucid
♦exposition of our grievances had too much bitter truth in it to be
allowed, was sharply pulled up.
“Walter Hooper, when asked if he wished to ask any questions,
replied angrily it was not much use asking that man any questions.
“Jim Nuttall asked the magistrate what power he had of bringing
*the lieutenant to justice for not fulfilling the regulations, but he
got rib answer.
“After this there was a general attack made upon the magistrate
:and the lieutenant. Worrall threw his Sunday morning text back
at Macdonald, viz., ‘Honor thy father and thy mother,’ and added
that we were being treated like dogs for doing so.*
“At this point Bailey interjected that he thought that text meant
that we should honor and obey all persons set in authority over us.
At this point I felt it my duty to tell Bailey that he was twisting
ithe Bible as he was twisting the law.
“In the midst of this we were each sentenced to seven days’
extra detention, except Robson, whose case was adjourned for seven
days. Before we could give further vent to our feelings, Lieutenant
Macdonald, who was in a towering rage, shouted: ‘Remove those
men, sergeant-major! ’ and we were hustled out of the room.
‘ ‘ Once outside the chamber of horrors, we again got going and
gave three hearty cheers for Bill Robson, who was being carried
back to his bunk in the barrack-room. Then came three more cheers
for the Passive Resisters’ Union, followed by three blood-curdling
hoots for the benefit of Lieutenant Donald Macdonald, R.N.Z.A. A
similar honor was bestowed on T. A. B. Bailey, S.M. ’ ’
That afternoon the lads were promised full rations, their blankets
■during the day while they were in cells, and meals together in the
barrack-room. So the hunger-strike was called off after a fast of fifty-
two hours.
From their fortress prison the lads sent out this manifesto: —
“TO THE PASSIVE RESISTERS OF NEW ZEALAND.
“We, the undersigned prisoners in military detention on Ripa
Island, wish to take this opportunity of sending out a word of
encouragement to our comrades still at liberty. We are winning, and
winning.well. Our captors have failed to make us fall into their
devilish traps. Solitary confinement and reduced rations have been
tried and have proved useless; coaxing and bribery have met with
the same fate. We are determined and united; we are pledged to
uphold with our last breath the honor of our cause. What our
ultimate fate will be we do not know; but this we do know —that
*The previous Sunday -the lieutenant had conducted a Bible-class to which three
of his prisoners went; he then spoke of the text, “Honor thy father and thy
smother,’’ and of “■serving two kings.”


-traitors and coercionists are up against a problem that nothing but
death can solve. To you, our comrades, we say: Stand firm: believe
no lies and faked reports that may be circulated with the purpose
of weakening confidence in the stand that we are making or with
the purpose of causing dissension in the ranks of the fighters for
freedom and justice.
‘ ‘ (Signed)—
“Reg. Williams. “Edward jiannam.
“.L E. Nuttall. “Wm. J. Robson.
“Robert McTaggart. “Jno. McTaggart.
“W. J. Hooper. “J. Coppersmith.
“H. Guthardt. “ Thos. Nuttall.
“Jas. K. Worrall. “Edward Edwards.’’
“H. W. Thackwell.
Piovidentially there was sitting at Wellington that very week the
great Unity Labor Congress, attended by delegates from all the trades
unions and labor organisations in the Dominion.
On Friday, July 4th, when news' of the treatment of the lads reached
the Congiess by means of a letter from the prisoners, the sensation was
immense and indignation unbounded. The Congress was at once
adjourned to discuss the matter, and it was decided unanimously to go
in a body to the Prime Minister to put, if not the fear of God, the fear
of man into him. That night the 400 delegates walked in procession
down to Parliament House. While most of the delegates stood on the
pavement outside, one of the leading members of the deputation addressed
these words to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence:—
‘ ‘ The men who are out on the walk there ate out to report definitely
that the organised workers of New Zealand, the authorised spokes-
men of Labor, whose utterances are approved by Labor organisations,
are going to support these boys. These boys have burnt no buildings,
they have broken no windows, they have destroyed no property, they
have threatened no lives. They must either sacrifice their conscience
or refuse obedience and take the consequences; and passive resist-
ance of that kind, though it may kill the man that does it, kills
the institution that tolerates it.”
This petition in boots met the Prime Minister at 8 o ’clock on Friday
night. At 10 o’clock on Saturday morning Mr. Massey’s Cabinet met,
and reported their decision in a letter to the Chairman of the Congress
which was read out that same day, that in future lads in military deten-
tion whose consciences prevented would not be required to do military
work, nor would they be punished for refusing to do such work. By
this decision conscription in New Zealand was hamstrung.
Over 2,500 persons crowded the Coliseum Theatre at Christchurch to
cheer the victorious lads on their release. The Dominion seethed with
anti-militarist agitation. Great meetings were held at Auckland (1,000
present), Wellington (1,200 present), and elsewhere, at which cheers were
given for the lads and for the way they had made the military authorities
back down. As one of the lads said, the one place in New Zealand where
.you would not be punished for refusing to drill was Ripa Island. For
reports of these meetings the reader is referred not to the capitalist
jingo daily press—which religiously ignores or distorts such phe-
nomena—but to the “Maoriland Worker,” the great Labor paper of the
Dominion.


CHAPTER XXXIII.
Conclusion.
‘ 'I have spent some years in Germany and seen the Prussian system working,
and have come hack with the conviction that there is no other threatening
modern civilization to be compared to the evil of conscription. It strangles liberty.
It stSes all independence of thought. It stereotypes the rule of the classes over
the masses. It reintroduces all the evils of the feudal system without any of its;
benefits. It makes for arrogance and pride of purse and contempt of man for man.
It directs a whole nation’s energies, a whole nation] s intelligence, a who.e nation s
hones and fears and aspirations into evil channels, into greed and lust of conquest,
into disregard of honor, into deification of brute force, into fke sowing up of
materialism as man’s sole god. It deliberately turns the eyes of .ne nation back
to barbarSm It exalts brutality into a duty, excuses savagery and cruelty as
justifiable expedients. It holds up humaneness to ridicule; it turns men into beasts.
Militarism is militarism all the world over. —Jerome K. Jerome.
“Whoso hath felt the Spirit of the Highest
Cannot confound nor doubt Him nor deny:
Yea, with one voice, O world, tho’ thou deniest,
Stand thou on that side, for on this Myers
“These things shall be, a loftier race
Than e’er the world hath known, shall rise
With flame of freedom in their souls,
And light of knowledge eyes.
Nation with nation, land with land,
Unarmed, shall live as comrades free:
In every heart and brain shall throb
The pulse of one fraternity.’’ ,
F —J. Addington Symonds.
In the previous pages we have described the great and ever-growing
opposition of the boys and youths of Australia and New Zealand to
compulsory military training. We have brought our account of that
matter down to the time of the outbreak of the great European war, and
have called attention to the fact—proved from figures of the Australian
Defence Department —that to secure a strength of 123,000 lads and
men it has been necessary to prosecute within two years in nearly 28,000
cases, and, besides fining about twenty thousand, to imprison in military
places nearly six thousand trainees. We have pointed out the significance
of the fact that more than half of the prosecutions, and ALL, except 287,
of the imprisonments, fall within the last year, the military year ending
June 30th, 1914. If, in the face of these'figures, a man declares that
Australian conscription is growing in popularity, he must either be a
lunatic or a liar.
We have briefly described the attack on the system by its own sup-
porters, from the standpoint of finance. We saw that to carry out the
scheme involves a huge annual expenditure of dangerous dimensions. And
we have shown the growing. opposition of the Trades Unions and
Political Labor Leagues of the Commonwealth. We have referred to
the uncompromising attitude of the Australian Miners’ Association, and
the intense and growing fear shown at Labor Conferences that the Act
is making a machine that can be used to crush Australian* Trades
Unionism as Botha used the South African conscript to bring about his
famous deportation coup. We have given in full, as an appendix, the
*The South African citizen conscript army was mobilised and used to relieve
the permanent soldiers who were then free to attack the Johannesburg Trades Hall
and capture the strike leaders.


resolutions passed by the important State Labor Conferences of Western
Austialia and \ ictoria. We have noted that these show not only a
growing dislike and suspicion of the Act, but—by insisting on the soldier
being able to choose his own officers and keep his rifle by his domestic
health manifest a desire to strike at the root of military control as
usually understood.
The Aew Zealand Act, as we have seen, is in an even worse plight.
We described it as having been heavily shaken by the resolutions of
the Unity Labor Congress and by the promises exacted by that Congress
from the Conservative Premier, Mr. Massey—promises that, if carried
out, left the officers powerless to compel the trainees to drill while in
military prisons.
In both countries conscription was, and is, faced with the same three
tremendous difficulties:—
1. The ruinous expense.
2. The amazing and baffling increase in prosecutions and military
imprisonments. {
3. The growing hostility of Labor to military law and methods.
This, then, was the position at the beginning of the world-war. That
catastrophe has thrown the whole question of compulsory military train-
ing of boys into the shade. The press now contains few or. no facts
about the compulsory system; but from what press news there has been,
and from what we can learn, it is clear that the conscript trainees are
attending drill no better than before the war; they are, probably, attend-
ing much worse.
What, then, is the future of Australian conscription? We say with-
out hesitation that the answer lies with the Australian Trades Unionist.
And on this matter we would have a word with him.
For many years, to Australia’s incredible gain, Trades Unionism
has —whether the Labor Party were in office or not—been the chief social
factor in the shaping of the conditions of Australian life. Because it
has stood for a living wrnge, and because it has kept capital from running
large, as its custom is elsewhere, it has made life in Australia many
times more tolerable for the worker than it is in America, England, or
on the Continent of Europe.
But the Unions have not yet come into line on the greater and nobler
ideal of Intel nationalism. Rather have they allowed their Parliamentarv
leaders to guide them into a dark, narrow nationalism of fear and dis-
trust. Many unionists have not yet realised the meaning of Australian
conscription, for many still think that the compulsory principle can be
maintained without wholesale prosecutions, military law, court-martial,
and the severities of the solitary cell and starvation diet. The glamor
of his fine phrases is not yet dispelled, but at the time of .writing the
Labor Minister of Defence is the most unpopular man in his party, t
t H e is no longer in the Labor Party and seems to be universally execrated
among Labontes.—J.F.H. (1919).
Labor resolutions appear in larger type in the same appendix.—J.P.H.
tAt the time this book was written (Easter, 1915) there had already been
besides the thousands of military imprisonments, considerably over 20 000 cases of
lining in Australia alone.—J.P.H. (1919).


Every day brings nearer the inevitable moment when Australian
Unionism must either submit to be throttled or abandon the imperialist
and conscriptionist for the international standpoint. It cannot have bot i
a monster military and naval establishment and at the same time free
and effective unionism. The principles of the organisation of these two
systems, both of which are aiming at virtual universality, are
entirely contradictory and irreconcilable. Both of them cannot live in
the same country. .
For Trades Unionism to be successful, it must be universal it sliou (
include ALL the workers. Now in its ideal, and very largely m its prac-
tice it is a UNION BY AGREEMENT. It has the broad basis ot
equity and of opportunity to ri ß e to the top THROUGH THE
CONFIDENCE OF THE MAJORITY BELOW. Free discussion is its
life-blood On the other hand, a Conscript Army—also universal—is
based not upon agreement, but upon COERCION AND SUBORDINA-
TION. A man mounts the steps of the subordination ladder not by
the votes of those below him, but by the wishes of those above him.
The man ax the top gives tne order; and that order, whether good or
bad wise or foolish, popular or unpopular, must be obeyed. Disobedience
and’criticism are regarded as the worst of crimes; in peace-time it means
the solitary cell; in war-time, death.
The next twenty years will decide whether a purified Trades
Unionism or a still further debased Militarism will fashion the laws of
the world. The one stands for freedom; the other for servitude.
The Australian Parliamentary Labor Party—with its present leaders
and narrow, i.e., national ideals-has achieved for the masses all it can
achieve. It has mortgaged its future to the Imperialist clique m
London. Unless the rank and file break away from the leaders, it will
never again speak with the strong, manly voice of the son of toil.t
But even if Parliamentarians abdicate, we do not believe that Austra-
lian Trades Unionism will give way to “military necessity.” All through
the last three years there has been a murmuring, growing ever more loud,
against the high-handed action of the party leaders on defence matters
Soon there will be a sullen roar of waters bursting through dykes, and
those misleaders who have prated about citizen soldiers, a nation m
arms, and the blessings of empire, and who have sold themselves to the
London financiers and the National Service League in England will lie
swept away into obscurity like helpless driftwood.
*****
We are aware that Freedom is not the highest attainment in life.
But there are few higher. Certainly, Liberty is no sordid or ‘ ‘ secular
cry: Mazzini, Tolstoi, and Bright—each in his own way—have shown
.h»< monv of these hireling wolves at the time of the Overseas Conscrip-
tion Referendum of 1916, so this stricture on the Labor Party is no longer altoge .er
correct. written a great change for the better has come over Austra-
lasian unionism The narrow (parochial and national) outlook in all the grea
unions seems to have given place to wide humanitarian industrialism.-J.F.H.
<1919).


anaoikind how freedom appeals to the religious nature. But in this book
we have discussed Conscription mainly from the freedom or human
liberty standpoint, because one is told that this curse is a military neces-
sity, to be tolerated because it is the only wav to save our freedom.
We think all impartial readers will admit that the conscription embodied
in these Australasian Acts does not defend liberty, but destroys it.
But we ourselves go further than merely oppose compulsion, and we
want to make our position plain to our readers before concluding. If
the battle against the sway of the world is to be a winning one, those
who tight it must take their stand on the higher ground of human
brotherhood. The awful iniquity of militarism threatens to blast the
human race. To break down the idol of Moloch, we peace-folk must
give up mere talking and get to action. We must follow' the example
of these Australian and New Zealand lads and personally refuse either
to light, drill, or discharge any military duty, come what may. We must
go further; we must cease to deify that popular idol, Parliament —
with its claim of divine right for its laws; must cease our belief in a
•corrupt party-press, and ignore the proferred guidance of a limping
•church. Nor must our role be merely the passive one of personally
refusing to drill and of refusing to take the sword against our brother
band. We must just as ACTIVELY SPREAD Christ ’s teaching in the
matter of war as William Lloyd Garrison did in the matter of slavery;
quietism has twiddled its thumbs among us long enough; we should
•actively dissuade men from becoming soldiers.
The cause of peace and internationalism calls for personal service,
and not mere lip homage; for human service, not mere national service.
MAN OWES BET LIMITED ALLEGIANCE TO THE STATE; HIS
ALLEGIANCE TO GOD AND HUMANITY IS UNLIMITED. Till the
greater allegiance is better realised, it were well to cease to emphasise
“the less. The State is but the scaffolding of Humanity: make anything
more of it, and the outcome is spiritual death; a militarised, blighted
world.
* * * * *
Nearly two thousand years ago a strange Carpenter, full of revolu-
tionary ideals and ‘ ‘ brainless theories, ’ ’ a dreamer of dreams, a friend
•of the lowly, a lover of little children —taught that all men were brothers,
lie taught that love, and not brute force, w'as God’s great fundamental.
He would not set up—as his peasant followers hoped —a kingdom founded
on the sword. They had followed him, eagerly, those common people,
when He spoke of His Kingdom, and when He stripped the garments of
Lair-seeming from their ecclesiastical oppressors; disheartened and dis-
appointed, all but a few left Him when they found that His w'as not
“the kingdom they anticipated. And the great ones of His country —those
whom He had denounced —sought for ways to destroy Him.
Universal brotherhood was to them an abominable thing. Did it not
•embrace the accursed Gentiles? Did it not subvert Moses and the Law ?
Woftld it not overthrow their own position and power? AVhat use had


they for this reviler of dignitaries, this pro-Samaritan and pro-Gentile?
Away with Him from the earth; it was not tit that he should live.
So they raised a hue and cry about his going to destroy their precious
temple; they stirred up the city hoodlums; they mobbed the weak but
well-meaning Roman Governor till he handed back to them their victim.
Then they caused the Great Agitator to be fastened by ropes and
nails to that wooden frame —the death place of slaves and rejoiced
thereat, because they loved the darkness. They crucified Him between
two petty thieves. And the Great Thieves passed by Him wagging their
heads and went home to their dinners with the feeling that the business
was well settled and that fellow, at any rate, would give no further
trouble.
The slaves ’ gallows has become the centre of the gaze of generations
of men. Prom it has spread the great religion of love and sacrifice.
Millions of men to-day profess to honor the Cross. Over the Seine, over
the Thames, over the Neva, over the Spree, towers aloft that symbol.
Would that the teachings it represents stood thus raised to view.
King-craft, priest-craft, deacon-craft, diplomat-craft, state-craft pre-
vail with us; and in their hands the strife of nations and the sway of
the sword has flourished like a green bay-tree.
*****
We, to-day, must make no compromise. It was during the first two
centuries that Christianity triumphed. When it could not compromise,
but could suffer, it was heeded. To face death sweetly and calmly was
seen by the onlookers in the arena to be even more manly than facing
it angrily and heedlessly in battle. And if it copies to dying, are not
Goodwill, Humanity, and Christ better reasons for giving up our lives
than King, Country, and Empire!
Instead of allowing themselves to be sucked into the maelstrom ot
homicide, Christ’s followers must KNOW NO NATION. Whether we call
ourselves Roman Catholics, Protestants, or Greek Church Christians; or
whether Rationalists, Agnostics, or Humanitarians, we must join hands
and hearts with anti-militarists of all nations and form an international
brotherhood in the name of Christ, unitedly ready to endure the worst
the neo-pagan Governments can inflict upon us.
It is better to die than obey The Beast that now sits on all thrones
and dominates all Parliaments. Great is the power of The Beast, as
the early Christians felt nineteen centuries ago; but the might of our
God is greater, and it works THROUGH US.
—May, 1915.


APPENDICES.
Owly part of one of the following rather lengthy appen-
dices, namely, the small-print portion of D., formed part of
the book as written by my friend and myself in 1915. The
rest of the matter in them has been put together recently,
mainly in 1919, by myself alone, while preparing the book for
publication.
J.F.H.
APPENDIX A.
THE OLD AND NEW NUMBERING OF REGULATIONS, &e.
Regulation 225 appears as 459
“ 226 “ 460
233 and 234 ‘ ‘ ........ 488
‘‘ 236 ....... “ 494
237 “ 495
“ 240 “ 498
“ 259 “ 515
“ 261 “ 517
“ 262 “ 518
“ 263 “ 519
“ 264 “ 520
265 ‘ ‘ .... 521 and 522
“ 297 a “ 560
“ 341 “ 609
Standing Order 106 “ 470
“ “ H 5 ....... “ 471
11 “ 116 “ 472
Regulations 296 and 298 roughly correspond to 558 and 562
273 appears enlarged and altered for the
worse in 535
“ 316 roughly corresponds to .. .. 577, 581-4
APPENDIX B.
TEN GROSS MIS-STATEMENTS
Frequently made by Militarists to reconcile tli£ public to
Compulsory Military Training.
T. That the Citizen Soldier cannot be court-martialled.
11. That “you are under military law only when you are in
uniform.”
HI. That the Citizen Trainee cannot be sent abroad unless
he consents.
IV. That our Defence Act contains no death penalty.
V. That our Citizen Soldiers cannot be imprisoned for
military offences more than 30 days in a year.


VI. That cadets are called upon to sacrifice only 64 hours;
of their time each year.
VII. That the Citizen Soldier can be kept under arrest for
a few hours only, beyond the time his company is
under arms.
VIII. That there is a conscience clause to meet the case of
those who object to the training on conscientious
grounds.
IX. That the Junior Cadet is not under military law.
X. That officers cannot compel attendance at parade
without recourse to a magistrate.
EVERY SINGLE ONE OF THE ABOVE STATE-
MENTS IS FALSE.
Let us take them in turn: — . Tl . . .
I. —Few persons any longer believe that the Citizen, Soldiei is im-
mune from court-martial. However, at the time of the introduction of
the compulsory system militarists, to deceive the public, contended that
the words “tried and punished, either by court-martial or by a civil
court” 1 Act Section 102), gave the trainee the option. Events have
Zw„ that the form of trial is at the OPTION OF THE OFFICERS,
that the speakers and writers of the Australian Freedom League were
correct in their interpretation of the Act. False statement No. Ino
longer cuts any ice and is now seldom heard. It was, however, a very
serviceable lie in its day. ~ ... ooa
11. “Onlv under military law when m uniform. Regulation 22t>
(.new number,'46o) says that the Citizen Soldier “shall be subject to-
militarv law when ON DUTY or in uniform.”
Reo-ulation 240 (new number, 498) says:—“ln this paragraph and
other paragraphs of these Regulations on the subject of discipline, a
member of the Citizen Forces shall be considered to have been on
dut v,’ although not in uniform, IN RESPECT TO ANY ACT DONE
OR OMITTED TO BE DONE BY HIM IN A MILITARY CAI ACITi ,
OR WITH INTENTIONAL REFERENCE ON HIS PART TO HIS
MILITARY CAPACITY.” [So a youth’s speaking about his drill to
his parents bv the domestic hearth‘puts him on duty and within the
grip of military law.] Regulation 498, in the new book of Regula-
lations issued July 28th, 1916, repeating what had already appeared m
the Universal Training Regulations, Part Y. (in the green paper cover
series), savs that members of the Military Forces “shall be considered
to be on duty at any time when in uniform, also DURING THE WHOLE
PERIOD OF THEIR ATTENDANCE AT ANY GONTINLOUS
TRAINING.” [So, should the period of training in*the future become
a matter of vears, the conscript will be “on duty,” so far as discipline
goes, the whole time.] . . „ ;
Space prevents my following out this interesting matter any further,
but, in conclusion, note that something much like military law may
extend even in time of peace, to folk who are not trainees, on duty
or in uniform, for Section 63, Sub-section (1) of the ACT ITSELF says
that the Governor-General may
“authorise the employment of persons in a civil capacity for any
purpose in connection with the Defence 1 orce or in AN Y 1 ACTOR
established in pursuance of this Act,”
while Sub-section (2) withdraws such from the protection of the Com-
monwealth Public Service Act and enacts that these employes shall be
< < SUBJECT TO SUCH CONDITIONS AS ARE PRESCRIBED. ’ ’ [Sec-
tion 4 of the Act tells me that “prescribed” means prescribed by this


Act, i.e., the Defence Act; also that “this Act” includes all regulations
made under this Act. What, then, becomes of “civil capacity”?]
One can sniff unpleasant possibilities here. Will the thousands of
working men in our dockyards, arsenals, and other military estab-
lishments wake up one of these fine mornings to discover that they have
become INDUSTRIAL CONSCRIPTS, owing to overnight regulations
framed by the Military Board?
111. —The public is so completely satisfied that the Defence Act does
not allow the compulsory trainees to be sent overseas, unless they consent,
that I am aware that I seem butting up against granite in traversing this
statement. But here are my reasons, and lam confident also that the
future issue of events taking place under the Act will absolutely justify
my forecast that, failing the adoption of Overseas Conscription bv Act
or Referendum, a Government will use the present contents of the
Defence Act to bring about an Australian contribution to a Pan-Britannic
Conscript Militia, for the Act can be used in the following way:—
Section 49 does not say that no member of the Defence Forces
shall be required to serve beyond the limits of the Commonwealth,
unless he voluntarily agrees; it says “members of the Defence Force
who are members of the MILITARY Forces shall not be required,
etc.” The NAVAL trainees are plainly excepted.
Now, any adult male of the training age who is medically fit is
liable to be forced to become a NAVAL trainee, for Section 143, Sub-
section (2), speaking of the allotting of trainees to the two arms
of the service, says, in clear, unmistakable words, that ‘‘ of all
persons liable to be trained, SUCH A NUMBER AS ARE
REQUIRED shall first be allotted for training in the naval forces.
No limit is set. The Naval Arm has first claim to as many as
it wants. Should the Government of the day desire it, the bulk
of our trainees could be drafted into the navy.
As naval trainees, they can be trained on an Australian ship
stationed anywhere in the world, and they can, under certain con-
ditions, be placed under the [British] Naval Discipline Act; with
the consent of the Governor-General they themselves and the ship
they are on can be transferred to the command of any British
admiral, no matter where he is or what he is doing. So our naval
trainees can be used as bluejackets or marines to garrison or perform
similar duties at (say) Gibraltar, Malta, or Hongkong.
If the reader will take the trouble to send eighteenpence to the
Federal Government Printer, Melbourne, for a copy of the AUS-
TRALIAN NAVAL ACT, he will easily find in it the clauses making
all this possible. He will also cease mocking at the men who in 1912-1914
wrote the pamphlets of the Australian Freedom League and give up
calling them “bush .lawyers.” He will be angry at his own folly in
letting a pack of politicians pull the wool over his eyes and persuade
him that the compulsory trainee cannot be forced to serve outside Aus-
tralia. [lt was impolitic for the Government to use these latent powers
in 1916; it would have prematurely stripped the camouflage from our
compulsory system and shown it to be, in a most extreme way, very real
conscription. Besides, the great war was calling not for marines and
bluejackets so much as-for land troops for the front. Hence the recourse
to a referendum to sanction the compulsory sending overseas of the
latter sort. The Government’s request was voted down in 1916, and
again in 1917.]
IV. —That there is no Death Penalty in the Australian Defence Act
is altogether false. Clause 98 expressly excepts several offences, includ-
ing MUTINY and DESERTION. Under Active Service Conditions [i.e.,
War, Domestic Violence, and so on] all members of the Australian Force
[not merely A.I.F. men, but ALL members] may be punished according
to the penalties prescribed by the Bi’itish Army Act. (See also what is
written in Appendix E.)


V. —It was probably the intention of Parliament, when it amended
the Act in 1914, to ensure that the compulsory trainee should not be
imprisoned more than 30 days in a single year. But note how those
who pretended to be yielding a great deal so cast the new clause (135 B)
that it affords no protection against prolonged imprisonment. The clause
runs: —Notwithstanding anything contained in the next two preceding
sections, the total duration of the confinement of a person IN RESPECT
OF
OFFENCES committed in any one year against Sub-section (1)
of Section 135, or Paragraph (a) of Sub-section (IA) of
that Section;
OR OF COSTS awarded in proceedings for such offences,
shall not exceed thirty days.
The casual reader is inclined to jump at the conclusion that great
concessions have been made here. If interested, he will turn up his Act
and note that the offences referred to are the general one of “failing
to render the personal service required” and the special one, “failing
to attend, without lawful excuse, a compulsory drill.”
The clause sets a limit to imprisonment for these offences only; and
with regard to these it does not say that infringement of them shall
not bring a man more than 30 days’ gaol or detention in a year, but
that “for any of these offences COMMITTED in any one year,, etc.,
etc. ’ ’
So a man who has been found to be‘short of drills in, say, five back
years could in 1919, for anything that this clause says to prevent it,
receive 150 days’ imprisonment. A conscientious objector, let alone or
unnoticed since the inception of the training in 1911, might likewise
receive, in separate terms all served in 1919, no less than 240 days.
Let us consider the clause still more carefully. It says “confinement
of a person in respect of ... . COSTS.” It does not say “in
respect of .... A FINE.” A trainee “failing to render the
personal service required” can, therefore, be fined the maximum (i.e.,
one hundred pounds) that Clause 135 allows, and if he does not pay the
fine inflicted by the magistrate who has sentenced him he will get a
common civil penalty for defaulting in a fine of £lOO, namely, A YEAR’S
IMPRISONMENT. '
So, even where it seems to protect, this new clause affords little
protection. It has no concern with offences it does not mention, i.e., the
great bulk of offences. Consequently a man standing out on prin-
ciple against the system can get a term of imprisonment for “refusing
to submit to the prescribed medical examination,” or for breaking the
regulations of the place where he is undergoing military detention, and
so on. And should the spring of definite “offences” dry up, the
officers, if they consider that the delinquent has not had enough of it,
can have recourse to that ark of refuge for the perplexed military man,
the drag-net of Paragraph xliii. of Regulation 494. For surely a man
who refuses to come under military law at all and ignores the whole
business cannot be deemed by an officer to be not guilty ‘ 1 of any act,
conduct, disorder, or NEGLECT, to the prejudice of good order and
military discipline.” ■ .
So don’t let us trouble the magistrates this time. At him with the
court-martial if he is over 18, and let him have “three months’ hard”
for his Merry Christmas and Happy New Year!
But I need not labor the point further. Events are showing the
utter worthlessness of new clause 1358. Citizen Trainees in 1914-18
WERE kept in detention for long periods. In spite of the lack of
publicity anent defence matters arising from war conditions, several cases
have come to my knowledge. Should my friend and myself issue a later
edition of this book, to answer any attempted refutation of its contents,
we will then probably be able to' set forth the facts in detail concerning
these cases.


patriotic parson ?•** • With when the
feelings towards alleged sh'frkeis fir not dHl]Tng.' eVlng ' their virtuous
onlv^d^hours 1 / 8 ]f e t 0 "7 the cadet sacrifices
be limited to the minimum (one honrf ' U ’ 6V - en lf lts actual duration
up of the whole even g and in n,. , ’ IT man * v cases the giving
Of it. The lad may b“'ne™?t“e7ull of * **** P**
■centre. He mav, if ] U ckv tret 1 + llllles from lus training
country lad and poor he 7 trai “ or tram i but if he is a
himself through a strenuous evening f°ii!! Se - * <,Shailks ’ mar e” and drag
for his employer. As so much is sThl 1 ♦'fi 8 ( \ ay of exh austing work
• make, „po‘„ (he cadet let us look at he c ' 81,81,1 < ' a ' l that «" Act
It says:— °° K at tae clause concerned (No. 127).
day^f e june C 1 traiaia g be in each year ending the thirtieth
12 half-day drills, and 24 night drills ” h"!' four f whole-day drills,
the Senior Cadets the duration a T\ 80 stl l ,ulates that “in
LESS THAN four hours, of a Llf day LESS THAN't
hours, and of a night drill NOT LESS THAN one horn- ”
■out bthe future, with-
of the four days called whole davs and fortwS 1 ' 01 * Cadet „ for the whole
•day” drills,” and should the “Jven?nJ?v \ * h ° Urs of the 12 “half-
of three hours, then 24 periods of tlfmo estimated as a period (say)
Pooling these times, the Board should it nt k° uraeack could be claimed,
damps, can seize the lad for 312 hours that is fm'ta*? 4 ' ‘° hola , Cadet
All this is latent in our wouSeS DeLSe Act
other surprises as well. AC L and a great many
Citizen Soldier fro^beL^kep^L^letentlon 11 } 011 r Act , P revents the
a few hours beyond the timehis f T ofllCer for more thaa
refers to ARREST ANI) DETENTION PRIOR TO TRIAL Sectlon
the officers taking unlimited time +T , lO TRIAL. It prevents
“■» ri'.v, tf) fvfht t" W *7
words TRIFI)' 1 “ Sr *
. d "* i " ‘
a trivial matter. So we ln “ I<b '" wl " <*»*• *“>
or \iiilitary X"ef any naval
iilgssfig
ttaetir atated S"h?CuTze^So?!, «!jzen &«)“ jj d£
the Militia Regulations except where *' 8 purposes under
emprirer how trivial arc the modifications* ‘al are herein previded”" * he
m ..,e sek


binds the Citizen Soldier, unless the contrary is specifically stated there
or elsewhere in the Act or Regulations.
The Militia Regulation, whose new number is 515, refers to Section
113 of the Act and concerns liberation pending trial. Its first paragraph
runs: —
(1) The Provisions of Section 113 of the Act, limiting the
duration of the arrest or custody of a member of the Militia Forces
and allowing him to resume civilian attire, shall be obeyed in the
manner most suited to the circumstances, and such member shall be
deemed in open arrest until his case is disposed of.
The next Regulation but one, i.e., 517, goes on: —
“A member of the Militia Forces who has been released from
arrest in the manner referred to in Regulation 515 should, if re-
manded for trial by court-martial, be summoned to attend, and if
he fails to attend, may be taken under a warrant issued under Sec-
tion 114 of the Act and detained thereunder till his case has been
disposed of. The refusal of such member to attend shall be deemed
to be as absconding or deserting within Section 114 of the Act. ”
[ln Section 114 of the Act the warrant mentioned is not a civil
warrant, but “ANY WARRANT UNDER THE HAND OF ANY
OFFICER AUTHORISED BY THE REGULATIONS, ’’]
We quote here several kindred Regulations from the same book (the
one bearing Government Printer’s reference mark, C. 9801).
No. 518. —When any member of the Military Forces has been
ordered to pay any penalty or fine for any offence against the Act
and Regulations, bv order of a civil court, or by sentences of court-
martial, or by award of a Commanding Officer, and no pay is avail-
able from which such amount-can be stopped, and such member
neglects or refuses to pay such penalty or fine, or absents himself
so as not to earn pay to such amount, the failure on the part of
such member snail be an offence and liable to punishment under
Paragraph (liv.) of Regulation 494.
[Memo. —Par (liv.) was not in the old Book of Regulations.]
All through the various steps in the ordinary charging,
arresting, trying, and punishing of any “member of the force’ 7
the military authorities may use or may not use the civil court ?
the option lies entirely with them.
If the reader still has lingering delusions that the officers
are compelled to use civil courts in disciplining the citizen
soldier, let him read carefully Division 4 (“Investigation of
Charges”) in this Book of Regulations. There is not one
syllable necessitating transfer of a case to a civil court against
the officer’s wishes.
Here is the place to call attention to the fact that a court-martial
can inflict upon any person subject to military law, and therefore on
the Citizen Soldier, heavy penalties for what may be very slight offences.
Thus, taking in conjunction Regulations 494 and 495 (“Offences not on
Active Service”), which occupy several pages:—
“When not on Active Service, every person subject to military
law who is guilty of ... . neglecting to obey any Regula-
tion . . , . OR fails to appear at the place of parade . . . . OR
loses bv neglect his .... clothing .... OR is ‘ guilty
of ANY act, conduct, disorder, or NEGLECT, to the prejudice of
good order and military discipline’ .... OR ‘neglects or
refuses to pay any penalty or fine for an offence against the Act
and Regulations by order* of a civil court, by sentence of court-
martial, or by award of a Commanding Oftieei” . - .


OR is guilty of neglect of duty .... shall, on convic-
tion by court-martial, or by a civil court, be liable to
imprisonment with or without hard labor, for a term not
exceeding three months'.’ 7
If a !l y the al)ove Y er . v nebulous offences are committed while-
strvmg the three months in the military place, the offender can get
another three months, and the officers can keep the ball rolling just as-
Zf CANVrafeY CHOOSE ay *“ d ° a ° “» 1 * «»*
Let us quote again Section 100 of the Act:—No proceed-
mgs of any court-martial constituted or appointed under this
Act shall be set aside or deemed void for want of form, or be
removed by certiorari or otherwise into ANY CIVIL COURT.
The sacred person of the British subject—to use the phrase of our
patriotic orators becomes, under our present system, just so many pounds
avoirdupois of conscript carcase, on which the interpreters of “military
necessity” can work as they list. y
, HI- It is often said that the Australian Defence Act does not
trample on the rights of conscience, inasmuch as it contains a Conscience
Clause.
• ie * s: Tlmre is not a line in the Act to exempt from military
training those who object to it on conscience grounds. ALL WHO ABK
OF THE AGE AND ELIGIBLE MUST TRAIN. The sib-secHon co£
coining conscientious objectors in Section 61 concerns war-time service
only. Even then exemption from non-combatant duties is definitely
refused. The sub-section grants a sort of exemption to
‘ ‘ Persons who satisfy the prescribed authority that their con-
scientious beliefs do not allow them to bear arms” .... but
a proviso at the end of the Section says that “the exemption shall
not extend to duties- of a non-combatant nature. ’ ’
Aow, many of those who hold that war is morally wrong, whether
t 10 ;' ! ,ase their case on Christian or on general humanitarian grounds,
feel that, if war is wrong, then to form part of a war-machine, either
m Peace or war, is wrong. Such must face the alternatives, if our com-
pulsory training stands, of being prepared to endure ferocious ill-treat-
ment* at the hands of those who are responsible for the carrying out of
the training, or else to deny their conscience and commit moral suicide.
I eisonalh, I am truly glad there is no conscience clause exempting-
objectors from training. For such a clause, owing to the impossibility
of the “prescribed authority” [or any human authority] inspecting a
man s conscience, as it sets a doctor to inspect his body, must become
aHI ML! GS RETREAT. Hundreds of shirkers would avail themselves
of the exemption; for who knowetli the heart of man, save his Maker t
Consciences cannot be SHOWN to a prescribed official, as one shows one’s
railway pass. To exempt members of a particular religious sect, and
to deny exemption to non-religious people who may be equally sincere
would be monstrous injustice; no really religious sect would welcome
such protection. Any attempt to protect conscience .by a conscience-
clause in the Act will assuredly become SPEEDILY'DISCREDITED
ANI) DISCARDED. Only in its early stages does conscription keep up
the farce of conceding a conscience clause. Such procedure helps to
make kindly, philanthropic folk believe that things will not be, after
*The ferocity will be in direct proportion to the amount and the earnestness
ot the passive resistance movement. The wrath of the authorities will be according
to the measure of their fear. Thus it was in ancient Rome two thousand years a°'o
Ihe Early Christians were assailed with boundless ferocity not because new religions
"were unwelcome at Rome a new god or . goddess from the East or elsewhere kept
arriving every day—but because the Sermon on the Mount, which the Early Church
believed in and the Modern Church does not, is a challenge to the militarist state-
and to the economic foundations of a society based upon the competitive system.


all so bad for the sincere objector; it causes tender-hearted people to
withdraw their opposition to the establishment of a training machine
whose only god is Military Necessity, and to which Human Suffering,
Human Rights, and Divine Laws are but as dust in the balance. Real lor
sham provisos to protect conscience from military law thus RENDER
EASIER THE SETTING UP OF THESE CONSCRIPT SYSTEMS, which
have all but engulfed the entire civilised world. By no “exemption”
can Australia save the sincere objector from having to confiont the
breaking-in processes of the silent cell, starvation diet, and peihaps
worse; it must choose between abandoning Compulsory Military Training
and waging war on freedom of conscience. _
XX. It is entirely misleading to say that the Junior Cadet is not
under military law. So far as the wording of the Act itself goes, he stands
to military law in exactly the same position as the Senior Cadet. Both
are spoken of as “under the orders of” the Naval or Military Com-
mandant of their district. It is nowhere clearly stated in the Act whether
or not the Cadet is a “member of the force.” This omission is probably
Intentional. To have definitely stated that he was would have raised
a cry of indignation in 1911, when the training was m its infancy. To
have stated he was not would have frustrated the schemes ot our mili-
tarists for the “bringing under” of Australian lads. By leaving the
point undecided thev make it possible for the Board to issue cautiously,
from time to time, Regulations [as to his status] which, as the Statute is
indefinite in the matter, cannot be “inconsistent with this Act (see
Act, Section 124) and therefore invalid. _ ~ Q .
The Board HAVE issued Regulations explaining that the Senior
Cadet is under military law, in all respects save that their Regula-
tions prevent his being eourt-martialled. As to the Junior Cadet, they
have not vet shown their hand so fully. But he can be imprisoned lor
months in a militarv fortress, for his is punishable in the manner laid
,l nw n in Clause 1.15 of the Act if his military offence is “serious (Junior
Set Re«nl»Tio„ 7°). The truth is THAT THE JUNIOR CADET IS
UNDER MILITARY LAW, but that the Board have not yet made it
.plain to what extent they lay claim to their victim. (But see our
Uh‘inter 111 1 Without asking Parliament to alter one word in the
Defence Ictitself, they can PI?T THE FULL MILITARY GRIP UPON
HIM and yet not act in a way “inconsistent with this Act, and, theie
fore illegal Truly a blessed and beneficent Statute!
X.—That the officers need not employ the civil magistrate to enforce
attendance of Citizen Soldiers at parade is shown in Appendix G.
APPENDIX C.
SENIOR CADET REGULATIONS (Page 47-8).
4a. (1) If an area officer lias reason to believe that any person liable
to training lias not been registered under Section 142 ot the Act, he may
•serve upon him, and also upon his parent or guardian, a notice calling
noon him his parent or guardian, to furnish, within one month ot the
date of the notice specified therein, answers to a series of questions foi
the purpose of ascertaining the particulars necessary for registration as
set out In the registration form prescribed by Universal Training, Regula-
tloU (2) If within the time above specified, the person liable, his parent
or guardian does not furnish answers to the prescribed questions, then the
area officer mav, from the best information available, provisionally
register the person and serve notice of registration upon him, and unless
within a period of fourteen days after the date on which the notice of
’registration is served upon him, the person liable, Ins parent or guardian,


shows to the satisfaction of the area officer that tlw particulars ore not
correct, and affords the necessary correct information, the registration
and the particulars entered by the area officer shall be absolutely con
t usive as against the person liable, his parent or guardian.
.Y ' P Oll the expiration of the second period, the- person liable ta
tiainmg shall be allotted to his proper area, and subject to Section 126
° \ WI )e re( l uired to undergo training in that area.
/ \ f a persol ? 80 aP °tted fails to attend a compulsory drill or to
render the personal service required by the Act he may be proceeded?
against in accordance with Section 135 of the Act -V P
[This regulation was gazetted a few days after the Quaker William
son. 1 ] 6 , S<?rVed a fortlUght in Adelaide gaolvfor refusing to register his
APPENDIX. D.
NEW ZEALAND SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY
democratically organised.' with'’st Swages wMle "on 'dot v°" u V u' U ? t lf r bas [ s >-
as S N “- aas
Üb.r Party, h e ld i„,
ing the Defence Act and a , ,p^H PP tJ , e , d t( J oonslder Proposals for amend-
resolutions • ’ ’ 88 a result - the Conference passed the following
r. 4 Ai Sfcrsj r *" ks °'*——*
sssi
fh^h b l„r«r,ff'.tv?°r‘. r rnr " , " , " <1 "' ‘“•'■'‘"■ ed o >“• «£*
and ii dSflf S *‘” td *> r ”■»»»*«■
to nJhiiyW* rlf, 4 et be ani ? n ded to ]>rovide that any person shall have full power
outTo hi£ by the mirUaVlulhorTtieT Cern,n * 8 “ y treatment that ma >’ be meted
, tf j , In tim ® s of Peace no infringement of the Defence Act or regulations shall
l.r .”S?M to“SS3 r 2,‘V"Jmi“ZAs"' the d,C ” l ™ .half
«h« .StaXStSil dt,p"r ed *° «“>"«
r , That the terms of the oath of allegiance be brought before the Interstate
pZeZT “ ° rdel ' that the rights of the militar >’ trainees be more clea?ly
November, St l9l3 C ° nfereilCe ° f Trades and Labor Councils held at Adelaide, 12tli
The following resolution was carried:—
That A 1 ? e C^/ej lo6 A ct be amended so as to clearly set forth that the obiect of
service 6 ;® defence for ce based on universal compulsory military training and
♦!’ 18 /° r tbe P ur P ( ! Be of defending the Commonwealth against foreign aggression
and, therefore, in no circumstances, should any person so- enrolled be “oipSled to


• * fallow Australian citizen, notwithstanding anything contained
in orTn any other condition of compulsory service.
LABOR AND THE DEFENCE ACT.
Report of . Specie! Committee o< the Metrop.ii.en Council of the Went
Australian Labor Federation, Perth, 1915.
The following resolution was csrriea. unless an army be of democratic
•‘That this Committee declares „ntr 0 l it mavpossibly become a menace to
constitution and subject J to inasmuch as the armies of Europe, which
the safety of the working-class movement, » two forms of abuse. '
iire “I' °(a) e8 'Fhey alTuseTto overawe and even shoot down strikers in times of
industrial struggle; , . . . „,;iitarv service, mav at any time be
(b) o n^P-aHi^. wift tQ the
2. That while this ®*^ c t ft considers the following provisions are
needed tS bring "the Act into harmony with the aspirations of the Austra ,a
enl J The r Committee r&^mj^^^t^t > j^^yrfed^lAh^Sobart
'Serene the use of the Citizen Forces in times of industrial dis-
tlirbasnCeSEvery member of the f mude
SeTe'ehown shall include proof of conviction of crime or menta
.deficiency by duly constituted civil authority. d b d from the ranks, but
6 C *That all officers shall be appointedgrades unless he shall previously
no person shall be qualified fo qualifying for such grades.
?r.inin« be raised to the age of 16
- y “ r B. A maximum number of drill. °> *
Anv trainee who shall have c “ in P e . ~rovided that, on passing an examination in
Sri™ iS .. .n S an.! tempted from
,ur,h 9 * , ' , K? i ?r E .;! i ?. e oTc d .ssSin pr ln roL w te h s." u ssJwilli arSi”."™'.?
in remote districts or illness or other bona fine make up loft time should be
inefficient owln, .. 1- «»• •»"»«■• »*»
Of the above reasons continuous camps) be held on Saturday mornings,
and no'deduction of pay theref^ r d h ? o a "° o have full power
11 That the Act be amended to provide tnat g » yi ievance concerning any
to ventilate on the platform and the* military authorities,
trpatment that may he meted out to nim Defence Act or regulations shall
12. In times of peace no time G f wa r. the decision of court-martial
afways 6 to b be f Subject to appeal Attention to the fact that the oath of allegiance
13 We desire to draw public citizenforces; and, whereas many
ic not compulsory on members f\%\a to be the case, we consider that
persons "huvetakeu tie ou.h «•“ “•
irulrf ‘“ V ‘f “ T L’e" d« P” “»»•«,' L.b.r
mo t k h e e ®
T “f,tu9l7 so™ APS— lab™
Adelaide “Daily Herald,” B ®P*°“ l e {. Conference Mr. M. Murphy, of
At the 1918 South Ausi'Ralian recommend(l tion [to
the Australian M l^ l< L A or Conference] that the compulsory douses
the coming Perth ~ Ih mot i o n teas seconded by Mr. A. Hoare
of the Defence Act he aeieuu.
and carried. , Unions thus recommended the Perth
cjjzjx 'jsxs&s — «-** the par,y ~morm


te,e ™ ,al labor ««■ j**™*», «
Amt^ialllZi kl pany! erenee *”* *•*>•» »/ «*
terms!-— k 1$ °* newly ' ado V ted platform teas adopted in the following
19. Amendment of the Defence Act to secure
(a) No military training for persons not entitled to vote.
(b) Compulsory training between earliest voting age and four years
Employes to be trained in employers’ time, and
\it bout deduction of wages. Payment of standard wages for
time spent in camp. s
<c) Obligation of training to be enforced in civil courts only.
<d) Proceedings of courts-martial to be public, with right of appeal
to civil court. . ’ 6
' '(e) No Penalties to be imposed except in pursuance of explicit enact-
ments of Commonwealth Parliament 1
<f) Intended regulations to be publicly advertised, and regulations
veto 3 ' 6 110 6ffeCt fl before both H o»ses, either of which may
(g) Limitation of professional soldiers to necessary instruction and
administrative and working staff.
<(h) Abolition of military oaths.
(i) Abolition of distinction between commissioned and non-commis-
sioned officers.
(j) Recognition of principle of election of qualified candidates as
officers.
(k) Salute and other useless discipline to be abolished.
(l) No employment of or interference by soldiers in industrial
disputes. Punishment of Ministers and other persons responsible
* for .breach of this provision.
{in) Citizens on completion of training to retain arms delivered to
them during training.
(n) Persons under voting age not to be called up in time of war.
(io) Proclamation of compulsory service to contain an express declara-
tion of the immediate peril of Australia, and to be laid within
. 14 days before both Houses, either of which may disallow the
calling up.
(p) Defence Acts to require annual renewal, as in England
(q) No raising of forces for service outside the Commonwealth or
participation or promise of participation in any future overseas
war, except by a decision of the people.
(r) No conscientious objectors to be put to any kind of combatant
training or service.
State of \ ictoria Labor Conference, 1917:
Mr. Mulvogue moved the resolution from the Clerks, Amalgamated
Carpenters, Builders’ Laborers, Grocers, Jika Jika Electorate, Council, North
Pitzroy, Bendigo West, Fitzroy, Malvern, Abbotsford and Clifton Hill
branches: —
‘‘Alteration of Labor Party's platform regarding militarism — (a)
1 hat compulsory military training be abolished from the platform of
The Labor Party; (b) that the compulsory training clauses be deleted
from the Defence Act.”
Mr. Mulvogue said that he had children growing up, and he objected to
them being conscripted for. purposes of militarism. The spirit of children
brought up under military rule was broken by continuous deference whilst
their young minds were piled with false ideas as to war. Labor was against
all ivars, and, if the movement were international in character, then surely
those present did not want to agree to see their children thus trained up.


Mr. W. E. Turner, in seconding the motion, said that the great argument
which had been used hitherto was that it was essential that men should be
trained to defend our own country, but men with only a few weeks’ training
from here had gone overseas and opened the eyes of the world as to what
could be accomplished. He agreed with a good deal of what Mr. Mulvogue
had said as to the ill-effects militarism had on immature minds of children.
The motion, as proposed by Mr. Mulvogue, was carried by 112 votes
to 52.
Mr. Carey: Docs that vote affect the platform of the Federal Labor
Party ?
The President: It is not an alteration. It is a recommendation from
this Conference to the Interstate Conference.
Mr. Meehan: Will the six delegates from Victoria to the Interstate.
Conference be bound to vote for the motion that has been carried?
The President: I cannot rule, as there is no direction on the subject.
Mr. M. A. Grant moved, and it was seconded by Mr. P..J. Loughnan and
carried :—
“That the six Victorian delegates to the Interstate Conference be.
directed to vote for the motion which had been decided.’’
—From the “Labor Call,’’ August 2, 1917.
The Annual Labor Conferences of at least two other Australia!*
States have demanded the repeal of the Compulsory Clauses, but I have*
not copies of these resolutions available.—J.F.H.


APPENDIX E.
There is much justification for the uneasiness of the Labor Unions
as to the possibilities connected with the future use of Citizen Soldiers
against their own countrymen.
The words added in 1914 to Section 51 of the Act (see Chapter XIV.
of this book), words forbidding the use of the compulsory trainee in
connection witlr an industrial dispute, are clearly IN CONFLICT WITH
THE CONSTITL TION Ol AUSTRALIA, which pledges the Common-
wealth Government to use all its might to help any Australian State
Government to suppress domestic violence.
A reactionary Government, secure in a favorable backing by the
High Court that interprets the Constitution, will assuredly not hesitate
to use the Citizen 1 orces to meet real or ALL*EGED domestic violence.
It is well, therefore, to consider precisely the position of the Citizen
Soldier when called out to suppress a meeting, break up a demonstration,
oi scatter a procession that the Government of the day may deem riotous
or seditious. A-vicious Government can easily supply the demonstration
with a few riotous persons, in the form of agents-provocateurs paid by
secret service money.
1 o return to our Citizen Soldier. If he has not already been placed
under military oath in the course of his training, the first step will be
to swear him in. By Section 37 of the Act “every person enlisting in
the Active Military Forces as a soldier shall take," before an officer or
a Justice of the Peace, the oath set forth in the Third Schedule.' ’
Section 4 of the Act defines Active Forces as irlcluding all parts of the
Defence I orces other than the Reserve. So even before calling out, or
at the latest, immediately afterwards, the Citizen Soldier would be
under military oath.
Our soldier has been called out to suppress what a Government of
the day has induced the Governor-General to declare “Domestic
Violence.” He passes into, therefore, ACTIVE SERVICE CONDITIONS
He also PASSES AUTOMATICALLY UNDER THE CONTROL OF
THE BRITISH ARM\ ACT, save so far as it'is “inconsistent with”
the Australian Defence Act (Section 55).
He has taken an oath (whether sworn in under the Third Schedule
Oath or the other one given in the Act. i.e., the Second Schedule Oath)
containing these words: “I will resist His Majesty’s enemies and cause
His Majesty’s peace to be kept and maintained.”
Now the British Army Act defines King’s enemy thus: —The expres-
sion “enemy” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters,
and pirates.—(Section 190, Sub-Section 20.)
Weapon or no weapon, a reactionary Executive might consider
any person aggressively demonstrating in a way distasteful
to itself as riotous, and the soldier is not in a position to argue points
of law with a superior officer. But, as above suggested, the rioting, if
not actually in the procession or meeting, can be put there by an
unscrupulous Government at, the cost of a few pounds.
The Citizen Soldier is marched to the spot and ordered to shoot, or
bayonet, or grenade, as the case may be. If he and his fellows unitedly
refuse, they become GUILTY OF MUTINY under the British Army Act,
and MAI BE SHOT FOR MUTINY. The Australian Act (Section 98)
expressly sanctions the Death Penalty for Mutiny. An amendment of
the Act preventing the use in Australia of the British Army Act would
not prevent this, for special enabling Australian regulations based on
Section 98 of .the Act could be gazetted a few hours before being used.
A regulation becomes law directly it is gazetted.
It is exceedingly unlikely that a well-drilled Citizen Soldier will
disobey; such is the effect Of military discipline made perfect that citizen
soldiers have frequently been used with fatal effect upon working-men’s
gatherings, even in democratic Switzerland.


The Labor distrust as to future domestic use of compulsory service
is certainly justified. Our own ultimate objection to it is that in its
developed form it enables the State, whether Labor-controlled or
Capitalist-controlled, to say to individual Man: “Shoot your fellow-man,
or be shot yourself. ’ ’
When the public is allowed to know more of what has been happen-
ing in Defence matters during the past five years it will probably learn
that there has been, in spite of Attorney-General Hughes’ pronouncement
some years ago to the effect that the Act did not compel the compulsory
trainee to take the oath,. considerable tendering of military oaths to
citizen soldiers. It is my opinion that tens of thousands of our citizen
trainees are already bound by a military oath.
The public has a right to know what lias been done and which
oath has been taken; whether that known as “the Oath in the Second
Schedule” or the one known as “the Oath in the Third Schedule.” The
latter contains a time limit, but the other does not.
The Second Schedule Oath runs: —
“I swear that I will well and truly serve Our Sovereign Lord the
King as a member of the Reserve Forces of the Commonwealth of
Australia, and that I will resist His Majesty’s enemies and cause
His Majesty’s peace to be kept and maintained, and that I will in
all matters appertaining to my service faithfully discharge my duty
according to law. So help me God. ’ ’
Section 32A of the Act defines Reserve Forces thus: —
(3) The Military Reserve Forces shall consist of Citizen Forces,
and shall include the officers shown on the Reserve of Officers’ List,
the members of Rifle Clubs who are allotted to the Military Reserve
Forces, and ALL THOSE LIABLE TO SERVE IN TIME OF WAR
UNDER SECTION 59 OF THIS ACT WHO ARE NOT INCLUDED
IN THE ACTIVE FORCES.
So till he is 60 years old, at any rate, any man who has been sworn
in under the Second Schedule Oath is bound by it, and is to any extent
under military law.
Such a man, if called up by the Military Board an such an emergency
as the Government of the day may consider a time of “DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE,” must, if ordered, shoot, or bayonet, or use grenades or
flame-throwers or chlorine upon his fellow-countrymen; if he does not he
is a MUTINEER. (Read in this connection the part of Appendix B that
concerns the Death Penalty.)
APPENDIX F.
SHAMEFUL TREATMENT OF VIVIAN YEO.
It was to be expected that the authorities would continue to harass
the Yeo family, of Broken Hill. But, even with the Military Censorship
to watch the 'press and with the War Precautions Act making difficult
and dangerous any criticism of the Defence Department, most people
will be surprised to learn what happened to the older brother, \ man
Yeo, about the middle of the year 1918. . .
This lad had for some while resided outside a training area, and
had thus for a while been unmolested. On his return to Broken Hill,
Lieutenant Davey was'soon upon his tracks, and a warrant was made
out against him on May 6th. He was arrested, without harshness, by
a fair and considerate constable, and went quietly with him, to be
handed over to the military.


When asked subsequently by the youth’s father whether he con-
'sidered tine youth in any way a desperate fellow, or one likely to require
handcuffs, the policeman had laughed at the idea.
He was taken away from Broken Hill that evening by the express.
To bid him good-bye the father went to the railway station. He found, to
his indigation, that his son HAD BEEN HANDCUFFED. The decently
nurtured youth felt it very keenly and exclaimed, holding up his hands:
“Look, Dad! They are treating me as a common criminal.”
The handcuffs had been APPLIED BY A MILITARY OFFICER,
and not by the civil police. There w 7 as no shadow of an excuse for
their use. To brand a decent lad as a COMMON CRIMINAL the military
made him TRAVEL MANACLED all the w'av to Adelaide and on to
Fort Glanville.
The father communicated with Mr. Considine, M.P., who on his way
-to Broken Hill on June 20th called at Fort Glanville and, on making
inquiries, was told by an officer that the boy was handcuffed on the
journey “because he w T as reported to be a desperate character.” At
Fort Glanville Mr. Considine found Yeo chopping wood, and remarked
that if he were a desperate character he wondered that they trusted
him with an axe. The reply was that they had found him quite other-
wise.
The lad is well known in Broken Hill as a quiet, self-restrained
fellow, and the constable who arrested him told his father that, witli-
-out any resistance or scuffling, Vivian Yeo had been taken by him
to the town police station in such a way that no one would have known
that he was in charge.
Yet some militarv bounder handcuffed the lad and MADE HIM
‘TRAVEL AS A FELON.
APPENDIX G.
COMPELLING ATTENDANCE AT PARADE.
THE MAGISTRATE SCRAPPED.
(Reprint of an article written by me in 1917 and printed in the
‘“Australian Worker” in 1918.)
The politicians w’lio six years ago set going the scheme of Com-
pulsory Military Training were loud in their protestations that the
-disciplinary arrangements were such that the civil law would remain
paramount, that the citizen trainee could not be even lightly piinished
-by his officers without some civil process, that the law courts cheeked
the military at every turn, and that ONLY THE MAGISTRATE WOULD
BE ALLOWED TO COMPEL CITIZEN SOLDIER ATTENDANCE AT
DRILL.
The supporters of the system confidently pointed to (old) Regulation
297 A to convince us that not even paltry fines levied by Commanding
"Officers for petty offences could be collected without process in a Court
of Summary Civil Jurisdiction. It was boldly and frequently asserted
that the officers could not move hand or foot, in tin? matter of punish-
ment, without the magistrate. Those who wrote the Freedom League’s
pamphlets on the Act were scouted as bush lawyers, and for a while
"the public were content to believe that the Act had been so drafted
as to render militarism impossible in Australia.
Just before the great war, namely, in June, 1914, the public got a
preliminary shock .that set many thinking who, till then, were inclir'ed
to take the Act on trust just because Mr. Hughes and Senator Pearce
recommended it. This awakening was due to the scandal caused by the
rtreatment by the officers at Queenscliff Fort, Victoria, of Thomas Roberts,
;a Quaker lad of sixteen years of age. Coming on top of similar cases,


such as that of Harry Flintoff, it revealed the fact that when the magis-
trate had handed over the trainee to the military the officers at the
military place HAD POWER to inflict solitary confinement in (jells and
penal diet, and that they WERE USING THAT POWER, even upon
bovs of tender years.
To the great outcry in Parliament the June Hansards for 1914 bear
witness. Especially emphatic were the criticisms of Representative
Higgs and of Senator Rae. A mountain of reform was promised, to wit,
an amendment of the Act: a mere mouset was produced, namely, a new
Regulation, i.e., the one now numbered 385 in the Defence Department’s
publication C. 9801, and numbered 122 A in the Statutory Rule dated
December 22nd, 1915. This seemed to ensure that the trainee who, after
being handed over to the military,* was alleged to be refusing to obey
orders, should be sent back to the magistrate for HIM to inflict an
additional sentence. Moreover, as a consolation to those. innocent of
the wavs of the Department, the sour-looking word “cells’’ had given
place to the pretty, smiling phrase “detention rooms,’’ which invited
the public to believe that the abolition of solitary confinement was
intended.
Those who had studied the Act realised at once that the people
had once again been hoodwinked, and that the new Regulation was
merely a blind. For it could be rendered superfluous simply by the
issue of another Regulation dispensing, in the case of trainees not
attending parades, with even the PRELIMI^N civil trial.
This, however, would be a big, bold step; but the great war occupy-
ing the thoughts and absorbing the energies of the public, gave those
who are BENT UPON THE CONQUEST OF THEIR OWN PEOPLE
just the opportunity required. By a few r strokes, of the pen, by the
insertion of a score" or so of words in one Regulation and of less than
a line in another, THE OFFICERS CAN ENFORCE ATTENDANCE
AT DRILL OF ADULT TRAINEES, without reference to any magis-
trate. The latter still remains to “protect” the cadet; but in this
connection let us remember that it is a Regulation, and NOT. THE ACT
ITSELF, that concedes to a boy under 18 immunity from court-martial.
If the Citizen Soldier is still being taken before a magistrate it is because
the officers are waiting to let their new powers mature a little before
using them. The indications are that they are already being used.
Your attention is called to the details of the way in which this
monstrous thing has been done. It shows how the militaiv can juggle
the Regulations'so as to Circumvent distasteful Parliamentary action.
Old Commonwealth Military Regulation 236 (now' numbered 494)
contains about sixty paragraphs of small print! These set forth what,
when a man is not on Active Service, constitutes a military offence
punishable by the penalties stated in the succeeding Regulation. It is
a maze and jungle of words telling w 7 hat a soldier may not do. Into
this gigantic Regulation, as it appears in the Book of Regulations
gazetted on the “twenty-eighth day of July, one thousand nine hundred
and sixteen,” the authorities have slipped a few words which not one
reader in a thousand would notice unless op the lookout foi changes.
The fresh little paragraph (No. liv.) runs:—
“Neglects or refuses to pay any penalty or fine for an offence
against the Act and Regulations by order of a civil court,
fThe last line of new regulation 697 provides that ‘‘no senior cadet” shall
receive solitary confinement: the punishment may still be given to lads over 18.
*The regulation is given in-full by me on page 104. Unless the old regulation
under which the solitary confinement was inflicted has been repealed (and I can
find no evidence that it has been) it is doubtful whether there is any substance at
all in this new one except camouflage. If it be obligatory, however, for the officers
to proceed by the method privided by this new rule —and I do not find any indica-
tion of this—such obligation would only ,apply to those cases where men had come
into their hands by the order of a magistrate, and not to cases where the trainee
finds himself in a military prison owing to- a court-martial sentence.


by sentence of court-martial, or by award of a commanding
officer. ’ ’
Now note the next Regulation in the book, our old friend 237, now
numbered 495. This allows, as readers of the Freedom League ’s litera-
ture will remember, the infliction of as much as THREE MONTHS ’
HARD LABOR for any of the offences, great and small, detailed in
the previous section. NON-PAYMENT OF FINES MAY THEREFORE
NOW BE SEVERELY PUNISHED BY COURT-MARTIAL SENTENCE.
Hence there is no need to collect the fine by process through a civil court,
as indicated in (old) Regulation 297 A.
Haying successfully manoeuvred round and turned the flank of Civil
Piotection by arranging that any fine inflicted by a Commanding Officer
foi an offence upon parade would have to be paid,* or else big things
would happen, the military authorities’ next step was to extend the
list of offences which the Commanding Officer is allowed summarily to
punish by INCLUDING CITIZEN SOLDIERS’ ABSENCE FROM
PARADE.
Old Regulation 273 (the foundation of the present Regulation 535)
stated the extent of this summary power to punish: it did so by referring
to ceitain numbered paragraphs. Regulation 535 consists, therefore,
largely of a string of numbers —Arabic numbers, Roman numbers, num-
bers with brackets, numbers without brackets! In the heart of this
figure-jungle one discovers these queer symbols:—
‘ ‘ 135 (IA) (a), 135 (IA) (b).”
This is not Algebra; neither is it mediaeval necromancy; but it is
THE MODERN BLACK ART, to wit, LEGISLATION BY REFERENCE.
Being interpreted, the first half of it means that in future the officer
need not bother the magistrate to compel attendance. For Section 135,
Sub-section IA (a) of the Act says that every person who, being liable
to training, fails, without lawful excuse, to attend a compulsory drill
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
five pounds;t so the mysterious symbols mean that the officer, and not
the magistrate, will decide whether or not the excuse is a lawful one.
Thus it has now come about that if a man liable to train as a
Citizen Soldier fails to appear at parade, whether from conscientious
objection to training or because of serious ill-health, or because of
death in the family, or owing to accident, or owing to unusually urgent
calls of business, he can be fined five pounds for each drill missed, if a
■popinjay in officer’s .uniform chooses to fine him. Are we not
right in calling this sort of thing PRUSSIANISM, NAKED AND
UNASHAMED?
If the man does not pay, or cannot pay, the Commanding Officer
refers the case to court-martial: as a case 'of INSUBORDINATION,
refusal to do as told, namely, to pay the fine. In virtue of the new
paragraph (liv.) of Regulation 494, taken with Regulation 495, the
man gets CLlNK—three months’ hard if the C.M. officers wish.
If on his release the man again fails to appear at drill —as a man
seriously ill or one refusing on principle would naturally do —he is fined
a fresh fiver by liis officer, refuses to pay, is again sent before a C.M.,
and gets more clink; and then again and still again. For remember
that the Act is so drafted that until the military have done with him
he is dead to civil law. (See Act, Section 100.)
Nor will Section 1358, inserted in the Act in 1914 as a sop to allay
fit may be argued that even before the drafting of new par. (liv.) above-
mentioned, the penalty could have been enforced by using the ‘‘drag-net’’ para-
ghaph in the regulation that detail# ‘‘offences.’’ To have had recourse to this
drag-net ’ for the purpose of collecting citizen soldiers’, fines would probably have
raised the whole question of the dangerous nebulosity involved in it—a result by
no means desired by the Military Board. Hence the new definite par. liv. specially
mentioning fines.
tßegulation 558 might prevent a greater fine than two pounds, but the amount
of fine does not affect the argument here.


agitation, help him one iota. Its check applies only to punishments,
given for evading personal service, failing to attend drill, etc. Now
remember that the three months’ hard labor will not be given by the-
court-martial for evading service, but for REFUSING TO PAY WHEN
TOLD The charge will be entered on the ‘ ‘ crime sheet ’ ’ for the court-
martial, not as one for “EVADING SERVICE” or “MISSING A
DRILL ” but as “REFUSING TO OBEY.”
So, no matter how ill the man may be, no matter how sound his
objection to military training, no matter how unavoidable the accident
that kept him from drill, no matter how ruinous to his business drilling
on that particular day or days may have been, if the thing in uniform
decides to fine him, tlien fined he is; and if he does not pay, and repeats
the “offence ” they CAN TAKE HIM IN HAND AND BREAK HIM.
All this may occur in TIME OF PEACE and in “FREE”
AUSTRALIA. '
PARLIAMENT CAN PROTECT OUR TRAINEES FROM THE
ABUSES OF MILITARY LAW ONLY BY REPEALING THE
COMPULSORY CLAUSES.
In future, however good the trainee’s reason may be for missing
a parade or however sound his reasons for not drilling at all, the officers -
themselves will decide the merits of the plea, for the civil authority
has been thrown on the scrapheap.
This is PRUSSIANISM, NAKED AND UNASHAMED. It has
been brought about bv our stay-at-home warriors, while the eyes and
attention of the public have been fixed upon the doings of our brave
men at the front. ■ , , , ,
Fellow-Australians! You had better take the trouble to understand
how this has been done, and to realise that IT REALLY HAS BEEN
DONE, or in a short while it will have become the CUSTOM to dispense
with the magistrate, and a truly Prussian method of dealing with the
trainee will become the usual thing.
If you will not bother your head and “get the hang” of these-
changes', you will bitterly repent it later on, when your son or younger
brother suffers brutal injustice. .
The magistrate’s examination of military cases is often hasty and
perfunctory, BUT IT ENSURES PUBLICITY, unless War-time Regu-
lations prevent. The new plan, like the pestilence, will WALK IN
DARKNESS.
APPENDIX H.
THE RESERVIST.
I am altogether unable to express an opinion as to the relation that
exists between the Reservist and Military Law. A man who lias taken
a definite step, such as enrolling in the Reserve and taking the
appropriate oath, has placed himself under military law, directly a
gazetted regulation definitely claims him. Beyond that it is difficult
t 0 point: Is the ex-trainee, the citizen soldier, when he reaches
26, compelled to take some enrolment step or oath* (if not already taken
during his training) definitely linking him up with military law for all
his active manhood f Section 42 of the Act uses the words “MAY be
enrolled,” and this might be taken as meaning that the ex-trainee need
not lie enrolled unless he wishes. But do not the words “obtains his
*A question should he asked in Parliament for a set of returns from the
Minister of Defence showing the number of citizen trainees who have taken a
military oath; also which oath; and why tendered. This oath question is a big
one.


discharge’’ rather suggest that this Section refers to the Permanent
Soldier, the professional, enlisting for a term of years, and that it does
not refer to the Citizen Soldier at all?
If, as it seems to me, the Act has left the status of the ex-trainee
w-ith regard to military law' an undefined matter, it is probably an inten-
tional omission (see remarks in Appendix B of this book on the status
of Cadets). No regulation that the Military Board draft on the
question w'ill be "not consistent with this Act” and, therefore, invalid.
This gives the Board a free hand.
Working-men readers will remember that at the time of the French
transport strike the drivers, shunters, and guards, though long past the
training age, found out, to their cost, that they WERE reservists and
under military law. As recalled conscripts, they had to act as strike-
breakers to their own strike!
As we show in many places, our conscription [save for length
of training and the clause preventing compulsory sending overseas of
men w r hile in the military arm of the service] runs on all fours with the
worst forms of Continental Conscription. . If the regulations re our ex-
trainees are not yet gazetted, they can be at any time a Government
wishes—Section 52a, Sub-section 3, of the Act supplies the necessary
dovetailing material!
APPENDIX I.
SECRET REGULATIONS.
The reader may query: Is it possible for military regulations to exist
without the public knowing of them? Is not such a thing as a secret
regulation an utter impossibility?
It is true that a regulation is not law till it is gazetted (Act, Section
124, Sub-section 2); but this does not ENSURE publicity. For the
WORDING of a regulation is not gazetted, but only some title, number,
or other reference. Only the most determined vigilant will take the
bother to w T rite to the Government Printer and send the purchase money
for a copy. He has no guarantee that he is getting the whole of what lie
is seeking for. Regulations not infrequently refer by number to other
regulations: these, too, the inquirer has to track down and get copies of.
Then, again, some regulations, such as No. 575, make applicable to the
Australian trainee large parts of intricate books of British regulations.
So the pit is bottomless, except to a man with abundant leisure and some
familiarity with law's and the way their appendage matter is related to
them.
That virtually secret regulations bearing on discipline do exist was
showm at the time of the Federal Parliament discussion on the case of
Thomas Roberts’ solitary confinement. (See ppge 24 of this book.)


APPENDIX J.
PROSECUTIONS AND IMPRISONMENTS.
It is impossible to bring up to date the position in regard to these,
as it is now over three years since the Military Department discontinued
its practide of publishing returns. Their latest figures were the follow-
ing, summarising the prosecutions for the military vear ending June 30th,
1915:
SUMMARY OF PROSECUTIONS UNDER THE DEFENCE ACT
TO 30th JUNE, 1915.
No. of Yearly No. of Total Number
Prosecutions average Prosecutions prosecu- liable for
Military District. for 3 years for first for year tions to training
ending 3 years. ending June 30, (estimated).
30/6/’l4. 30/6/15. 1915.
1. Queensland 2,671 890 364 3,035 19,165
2. New South Wales .. 11,082 3,694 2,982 14,064 50,595
3. Victoria 8,086 2,695 2,040 10,126 43,559
4. South Australia .. . . 2,699 899 247 2.946 14,006
5. Western Australia . . 1,749 583 211 1,960 7,164
<>. Tasmania . . ..... . . 1,462 487 349 1,811 4,784
Total for Commonwealth 27,749 9,248 6,193 33,942 139,273
In the first three years the average number of prosecutions per year
was 9,248. For the year 1914-15 there were still 6,193 prosecutions, in
spite of the war fervor and general interest in military matters. There
was a wholesale dropping of compulsory trainee drills in the early part
of the great war, as the officers were wanted for other purposes. For
an entire quarter, readers will remember, there was no senior cadet
drill throughout the whole of Australia. How far exactly
things were allowed to slide I cannot say, owing to the way the war
conditions affected publicity. Considering the great cancelling or aban-
donment of drills that DID take place, there is little comfort for the
supporters of the system in the number of total prosecutions having been
only two-thirds of the average of the three previous years.
And their case becomes much worse when we turn to the figures
concerning the drastic punishment of military detention in fortresses
and other military places:—
NUMBER OF COMMITMENTS TO CONTINUOUS DETENTION.
For 3 years ending 30th June, 1914 . . . . 5,732
For 3 months ending 30/9/’l4 234
For 3 month's ending 31/12/’l4 258
For 3 months ending 31/3/’ls 869 latest figures.
7,093
For the first three years of the training these averaged 159 per
month. For the year 1914-15, as far as the military returns go, the
monthly average was 151 per month. For the last three months covered
by these official figures ,these detentions had mounted to 290 PER
MONTH. It was high time to turn off the publicity tap!
One wonders how many thousands of Australian lads may have lain
in fortresses, dead to civil law, during the Great Silence which, owing
to the military censorship, lay upon the land during the European war.
While reflecting upon these departmental returns a question which
may be expressed in various ways obstinately forces itself even upon the
most militarist reader. What have the Military Board to show us in
return for all the millions spent upon child conscription? What is the
total strength of compulsory trainees at the present moment, after these


fn a fJr?fnS r ?b! C A tin *’ v”* I**’ 1 **’ im P ri soning? Is compulsion succeeding
m xotcing the Australian youth to drill? B
this , h TI- not ine , ludi ng the lads who are ordered to enrol
f 7 n d February— eleven quotas of lads who have passed into
ISQs mo' io?n eS 1 e o^' e known as the 1894, 1895, 1896, 1897,
th! S v,!.f 9 nf !i! 0 ’ 90^. 1903 ’ and 1904 quotas—being named after
■ e . eai „ ot then birth. The first four quotas began training in the
middle of ma’ the i 1898 <lU °L a in the middle of 1912 » the 1899 in the
middle of 191 s a Th S ° °“’ The * 19 ,° 4 quota be^an its training in the
middle of 1918. The semqr quota lads are not yet 26 and so should,
vei°r on l A df* 1 - 1 be m training.* The average number of
nut ft aC one dunng year of the last decade or so may be
put at about 43,000, or somewhat higher. (See Knibbs’ Year Book.)
i mon 1 L™? • l i Ua,b T' ves in other words, nearly half a
million exclusive of Junior Cadets. After deducting from this number
(1) imbeciles, a tiny fractional percentage; »
(2) Medically unfit, a very small percentage, as the medical tests
~ are not at all strict, especially that of senior cadets;
(.5) Lads residing more than five miles from a training centre;
(4) Compulsory trainees who have joined the A.I.F. and are still
living;
( 5 ) 1 f L v l ] ll f ° rmerly belon g in g to these quotas who are no longer
we arrive at the number which should be now in training as senior cadets
or citizen soldiers.
The public has a right to demand to be informed how many should be
deducted from the 473,000 for each of these five causes; and thus to be
in a position by subtraction to arrive at the total that should be in
training. If, as I forecast, the Military Board cannot report even as
many as 200,000 at present training as senior cadets and citizen soldiers,
the scheme is a ghastly failure.
„ s Rp*sprvp S re S* the Board has chosen to regard the 1894 and 1895 quotas
be putting rn "i l eir drnis e ollthey ,, are g, 26 n them Sh ° Uld ' aCCOrding the Act,
PUBLISHER’S POSTSCRIPT.
It is not my intention to be drawn into any newspaper
controversy either about what is contained in this book, of
v hich I am a joint-author, or about the notes and appendix
matter I have added to it. My friend and collaborator, John
P. Fletcher, is at present serving, as a conscientious objector
under the English Military Service Act, a term of two years’
imprisonment inflicted upon him by a court-martial. On his
release any criticisms of this book will receive from us the
attention they deserve.
Printed by the
Co-operative Printing and Publishing Company of South Australia, Limited
117 Grenfell Street, Adelaide'.






