

///?//
Nip
°ZO-£3Q
fICIS
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF LIBRARIANS
CONSTITUTION
Adopted at a meeting of Foundation Members of
the Institute, at Canberra, August 21, 1957»
SYDNEY, 1938.


CONSTITUTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF LIBRARIANS.
NAME and OBJECTS
Name
2. Objects
MEMBERSHIP
Members; Student Associates;
Honorary Members.
Admission to Membership
Roll of Members
Resignation of Members
Expulsion of Members
ORGANIZATION
Council
Executive
Committees
Election of Councillors
Election of Officers
Tenure of Office
Me e tings of C ouncil
Quorum and delegation
Postal Voting
Annual Report.
FINANCE
18, Subscriptions
19, Levies
20. Audit.
21. . Funds
22. Dissolution of Institute
MEETINGS
23. Annual Meetings
24. Special Meetings
BRANCHES
25. Constitution
26. Names
27. Affiliations
28, Reports
AMENDMENTS AND BY-LAWS
29 • Amendments
30. By-laws
APPENDIX
List of Foundation Members
4.
5.
6.


CONSTITUTION OP THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF LIBRARIANS.
NAME
and OBJECTS
Name.
The name of the Institute shall be the Australian Institute of Librarians.
Objects e
The objects of the institute shall be to unite persons engaged in library work, and to
improve the standard of librariansbip and the status of the library profession in Aus-
tralia.
MEMBERSHIP
The Institute shall consist of (a) Members;
(b) Student Associates;
(c) Honorary Members.
(a) Members comprise
(i) All persons vho were members on the 21st day of August,
1937 > and vho shall thereby be deemed to be Foundation M<
bers; and whose names appear in the Appendix to this Con-
stitution;
(ii) Persons vho in the opinion of a three-fourths majority of
the Council in Australia at the time are qualified by Spe-
cial training and experience for the profession of librar-
ians hip and vho are elected in the manner hereinafter pre-
scribed.
(b) Student Associates comprise
Persons vho in the opinion of a three-fourths majority of
the Council in Australia at the time are in training for the
profession of librariansbip in a library or a library school
approved by the Council, and vho are elected in the manner
hereinafter prescribed.
(e) Honorary Members comprise


Parsons not otherwise eligible who are elected because of note-
worthy service in promoting the objects of the Institute and who
are elected in the Banner hereinafter prescribed.
Honorary Members and Student Associates nay attend aeetings of the Institute and its branches
and take part in the discussions, but shall have no vote, and say not be elected to the Coun»
oil or to any Office of the Institute or its branches, and nay not nominate candidates for
membership.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the expression 'member' or
'members' wherever used in succeeding clauses of this Constitution shall include Student
Associates and Honorary Members and the expression 'membership' shall have a meaning corres-
ponding to that of 'member'.
Admission to Membership.
(i) Every candidate for membership shall be proposed by two financial members, who
shall sign a statement of his qualifications on the prescribed form.
(ii) Members and Student Associates shall be elected by a three-fourths majority
vote, and Honorary Members by a unanimous vote, of the Council in Australia at
the time.
Roll of Members
5. There shall be kept a Roll of Members of the Institute.
Resignation of Members
6. Any Member desiring to resign from membership of the Institute shall give three months'
notice of such intention in writing to the General Secretary or to the Branch Secretary«
Expulsion of Members
7. Any Member who is judged guilty of any action prejudicial to the interests of the Instit-
ute or of any conduct unbecoming his practice of librarianship may be expelled by the
unanimous decision of the Councillors in Australia at the time. Should such Member be
a Councillor he shall not be eligible to vote.
ORGANIZATION
Council
8. The affairs of the Institute shall be directed and managed, subject to the Constitution
and By-laws, by a Council consisting of


a President,
a Vice-President, a General Treasurer, and a General Secretary
(ii) Councillors
all of whom shall be elected as hereinafter prescribed; and also
(iii) the Immediate Past-President, if he be a member and is willing so to act.
If any branch has failed to elect a councillor or councillors as required by
this Constitution the members of the Council comprising the executive and such Councillors
have been elected by branches shall act as and have all the powers of a Council.
If within a period of two months after the adoption of this Constitution any
branch has failed to elect a Councillor or Councillors as required by this Constitution, the
members of the Council comprising the executive and such Councillors as have been elected
by branches shall act as and have all the powers of a Council.
executive
(i) The President, the Immediate Past-President, the Vice-President, the General Trea-
surer, and the General Secretary, together shall be the Executive, and shall be
known as the Officers.of the Institute. Each Officer shall perform the duties
usually associated with his office.
(ii) The librarians assembled at the inaugural meeting shall elect a provisional Execut-
ive, who shall be empowered to carry on the affairs of the Institute until the
election of the first Executiveo The provisional Executive shall proceed with
such election as soon as practicable after the inaugural meeting.
Committees
10. (i) The Council ( may appoint a Committee or Committees to act on its behalf in an exec-
utive capacity in matters the Council deems urgent.
(ii) The Council may appoint standing or temporary committees to inquire into and report
upon such matters as the Council may decide.
(iii) The President and Vice-President shall be ex-officio members of all such committees
Election of Councillors
11. Councillors shall be elected as follows
(i) Branches with 12 or fewer financial Members shall elect one Councillor only;
(ii) Branches with 13 or more financial Members shall elect two Councillors;


(iii) Any person who has been elected, or who has been proposed, as a Councillor shall
also be eligible for election as an Officer. In the event of his election to such
Office, another Councillor shall be elected in his stead within one aonth of such
election.
(iv) There shall be an annual election of Councillors and notice of such election shall
be in the hands of the General Secretary not less than fourteen days prior to the
date of the annual meeting of the Institute.
(v) The first Council of the Institute shall be elected by Foundation Members only to
whom voting papers shall be sent by the Provisional Executive. Such voting pap-
ers shall be returned within one week of receipt thereof to the Provisional
Executive who shall act as scrutineers and the result of the election shall be
declared by the Chairman of the Provisional Executive and notified to each found-
ation member, and upon such declaration by the Chairman the first executive shall
be deemed to have been elected.
(vi) Every Officer and Councillor must be a financial Member of the Institute.
Election of Officers
(i) The President, the Yice-President, the General Treasurer, and the General Secret"
ary shall be elected annually at the Annual Meeting of the Institute. Election
shall be by ballot. Toting papers shall be sent to each financial member three
weeks before the Annual General Meeting and there shall be provision for postal
and absentee voting. In the event of any of these offices becoming vacant through
any cause such vacancy shall be filled by the Council until the next Annual
Meeting.
(ii) The Honorary Auditors, if present, shall act as scrutineers
(iii) Candidates for election shall be nominated by not less than two financial Members
six weeks before the Annual Meeting..
(iv) Financial Members shall he those whose subscription is not twelve months in ar-
rears at the date of the election.
(v) The first Executive shall be elected by Foundation Members onlv.
Tenure of Office
(i) Ho person shall hold the office of President more than two years consecutively.
All other retiring officers shall be eligible for re-election without limit.
(ii) The existing Executive shall in all eases continue in .office until after the com-
pletion ©f the Annual Meeting in which their successors shall be elected.
Meetings of Council
Meetings of the Council may be called by the President at such times and places as he
may designate, and shall be called by him upon request of a majority of the Council, pro-
vided that such majority shall include representatives of not less than two branches®


too ran
Delegation
15» (i) Subject to the provision of sub-section (ii) of this Clause, five members of the
Council shall constitute a quorum* Provided that a Branch may appoint a dele-
gate in lieu of any Councillor elected by it who is unable to be present, and
such delegate shall be permitted to take part in the business of the meetings as
though he were a Councillor*
Any such delegate must be a financial Member of the Institute, but need not
be a Member of the Branch appointing him*
(ii) Any individual may be appointed as delegate by more than one Branch, and shall
have a vote for each Branch he represents; but in all cases where delegates
have been so appointed and take part in a meeting, there shall be not less than
four members of the Council present*
Postal Voting
16. The President shall have power to refer any matter to the Members of the Council separ-
ately for their vote by post, and after twenty-one days from the one on which the matter
Is posted the votes in the hands of the Secretary shall be counted and shall have the
same effect as votes given at a meeting*
.nnual Report
17° The Council shall once in each year prepare a general report of the proceedings for
that year, and shall distribute it to Members and submit it to the Annual Meeting of
the Institute.
P ISA SC 2
Subscriptions.
18* The annual subscription fee for each member in receipt of a salary of €5OO or over per
annum shall be one pound, for each member in receipt of a salary of £2OO and less than
£5OO ten shillings; for Members in receipt of less than £2OO per annum and for Student
Associates five shillings, payable in advance to the Treasurer of the Branch of the
State or Territory in which such Member resides* Such fees shall be'remitted by the
Treasurer to the General Treasurer within three calendar months of their receipt, sub-
ject to the deduction of one- third of the amount for the expenses of the Branch. If
any Branch shall withdraw from the Institute all moneys held by it shall be at once re-
mitted to the General Treasurer. The financial year of the Institute shall begin on
Ist July in each year* The first subscription shall be for the period ending June
1338.


levies
I?. For any special service found necessary to further the objects of the Institute the
Council is empowered to sake such levy njDon each Member'as the Council shall determine..
Provided that such levy shall be agreed to by a three-fourths majority of the Council in
Australia at the time„ Provided further that if within the space of one month after the
notification of the intention to make such a levy, objection be lodged by a majority of
the Members in not less than two branches a referendum of the* Members shall be taken to
determine the issue until which time it shall not be acted upon.
Audit
20 . (i) Two honorary auditors shall be elected at the Annual Meeting. In the event of a
position of auditor becoming vacant through any cause such vacancy shall be filled
by the Council until the next annual meeting.
(ii) Members of the Council or candidates for election to the Council shall not be el-
igible as auditors, nor shall they be eligible to nominate candidates for the pos-
ition of auditoro
(iii) Each year a statement of accounts duly certified by the auditors shall be attached
to the annual report and shall be submitted to the Annual Meeting of the Institute
and distributed to its members.
(iv) The first executive shall elect the first auditors.
funds
210 If it be decided at any time to dissolve the Institute, the President and General Trea-
surer at the tine shall be deemed to be trustees of the funds of the Institute, and
such funds shall be either held in trust or distributed as these trustees shall decide.
Dissolution of Institute
22. The Institute shall not be dissolved so long as two branches continue in active opera-
. tion.
MS£TI s a s .
Annual Meetings
23. There shall be an annual General Meeting of Members of the Institute at such time and
place as shall be decided at the preceding Annual Meeting, or as may be otherwise de-
termined by Council. Ten financial members shall constitute a quorum.


Special Meetings
24* Special meetings of Members of the Institute may be called by the President at his dis-
cretion? and shall be called by the General Secretary at the request of two or more
Branches* At least one month's notice of the place of meeting shall be given? and
only the business specified in the agenda shall be transactedo Ten financial members
shall constitute a quorum*
BRANCH SS
Constitution
25» The Members of the Institute in each State and Territory shall constitute a Branch of
the Institute* Sahh such Branch shall have power to make its own constitution and
by-laws subject to the approval of the Council? shall elect its own officers,-, and shall
conduct its affairs in a manner compatible with the Constitution and By-laws of the
Institute*
Names
26* The Branches of the Institute shall be known as "The Australian Institute of Librarians?
Sew South Wales Branch?" or as the case may be*
Affiliations
27* Subject to the approval of the Council? each Branch of the Institute shall be permitted
to affiliate with any body in its own State or Territory*
Reports
28* The Secretary of each Branch shall forward to the General Secretary of the Institute?
and to the Secretary of each ©f the other Branches, on the 31st day of January and
July of each year or within a reasonable time thereafter? a progress report of the
activities of such Branch during the preceding six months*
AMENDMENTS A ID BY-LAWS
Amendments
29* This Constitution may be amended by a two thirds majority of the Members present or vot-
ing at a General Meeting? provided that notice of any proposed amendment shall have been
sent to each member at least one month before the day of the meeting, and that provision
is made for postal and absentee voting*


fixdaas
30 0 The Council shall have power to make By-laws and to suspend, amend or revoke By-laws
already made. Provided that every such By-law shall assist in the furtherance of the
objects of the Institute and that it shall not take effect or be suspended, amended or
revoked until such action shall have been sanctioned by two-thirds of the Members pre-
sent, or voting, on the question at the next general meetings
APPEHDII
Foundation Members, by Branches
The name of the librarian in charge of each library is given first, followed by the names of
other Foundation Members from the same library in alphabetical order..
Public Library of Sew South Wales (Coatdo
FEDERAL CAPITAL TERRITORY
Gallagher, E.L.M,
Hancock, I.
Commonwealth National Library
Binns, K. (Mr.)
Fitzhardinge, L.T* M
Jones, P.kMander
Jopling, M.iii
Foley, L.M. (Miss)
Hall, E.B. (Mr.)
Kibble, S.B
Lafferty, M.M.
Lane, O.M.
Key, L.C. St.A. "
Lyng, S.S. "
White, H.L.
Leeson, I.
Mackay, H.E.
Melville, D.O.
Metcalfe, J.f.
Palmer, M.H,
Parsons, I.M.
Pentelow, S.T.O.
Prepsting, M.G.E,
Sherrie, H.
Library. C*wealth Bureau of Census
and Statistics;-
(Hiss)
Whitelaw, D.J
HEW SOOTH WALES
Public Library of Hew South Wales;-
Ifould, W.H. (Mr.)
Sims, E.A.
Small, E.E.
Armstrong, H. (Miss)
Arnot, J.F. "
Turkingten, A.M.
Whyte', J.H.
Barrington, M.
Begg, J.M.
Willis, F.C.
Wright, H.
Berties, Z.E. s
Clapham, E.M. "
Cocks, M.E.J.
Sydney Municipal Library;
Cuthbert, *,I. (Mrs.)
Doyle, B.T, (Mr.)
Flower, E.M. (Hiss)
Bertie, C.H.
Bell, F.L.S.
Bennett, J.L.
(Mr.)


Sydney Municipal Libra:
Flannery, J. V.
Colonial Sugar Refini
Levick, 8.8.
Coapaa:
(Mr.)
(Miss)
(■r.)
Flynn, O,M
Newcastle School of Artss-
Lambert, ELK,
Lyall, H.
McDonald* Ro J*
(Hr.)
Lyons, J
SOOTH AUSTRALIA.
Thom, D.E,
Weeks, J.H
Pnblic Library of South Australia;-
Purnell, H.R. (
(Mr.)
Green, H.Mo
Blackst, K.B.
Brideson, H.C.
Gunthorpe, S.Q.
Hannaford, C,H«
Keyes, H. J.
Burrow, K.W,
Dinley, E.M,
Hewitt, M.Co
Lewis,
Stanley, E.
Steel, EoV.
Taylor, A.V.
Thompson, M.M,
Wines, B.P.
Lanyon, S.W,
Miles, A:
Pitt, Q.H.
Stapleton, J.L.
Whiting, G.T.
University of Adelaide;-
(Mr.)
Parliamentary Library
Covan, f.A.
Deegan, M.E.
Rogers, S.C.
Sorrell, M.f
Guinn, J.J.
0 6 3rien, J.J.
Ryan, D.V,
(Hr.)
(Miss)
Whits, A.J
Parliamentary Library of South Australia
Guinton, W.G. (Mr.)
Teachers* College;-
(Mr.)
(Mias)
Irvine, G.K.
Booker,
Harris, H. I«
Advertiser newspapers Ltd.;
(Mr.)
Young, R.B.
Statistician's Departments
Robb, H.H.S.
VICTORIA.
(Mrs.)
Public Library of Victoria;-
Pitts E,Ho
Technical College;-
Vella, E.A.W*
Radford, Wo
(Mr.)
(Miss)
Astley, H.S
Baud, W.C.
Cannam, D.W.I.
Cooke, T.F.
Lustralian Gas Light Compan:
Fraser, M.A.
(Miss)
Foxcroft, A.B.
Fraser, 1.A.®,.
Garrett, P.V.L.
(Miss)
(Mr.)
Australian Museum:-
Rainbow, W«Ao
(Mr.)
Kealy, T.A,


Public Library of Victoria (Con.)
TASMANIA.
Lodevyokg; E.A. (Mr.)
McCallum, C,A. "
Tasmanian Public Library» Hobart
Collier, J.D.A. (Mr.)
McGlade, W.M.
Mair, I.A.
Bailey, E.B. (Hiss)
O'Connor, M.B.
Perry, E.B.
Fulton, M.B. »
John, E.B. (Mr,)
Masters, T.F. (Hiss)
Perry, F.J, (Mr
Ryan, H.B.
Launceston Public Library
Forward, J.R.
(Mr,)
Armstrong, £. Latf,
Boys, R.Do
Dnlwersity of Tasmania Library. Hobart
Miller, E.M. (Prof,)
University of Melbourne
Scott, Lo
WESTERS AUSTRALIA.
Foote, W,J,
McDonald, A.L.G.
Ramsden, B.M.
Public Library of Western Australian
Battye, J.S. (Mr.)
Parliamentary Library
Frazer, E.L.
Price, E.R. *
Wright, R.P. w
Bell, H.O.
Brennan, F.T,
McDonald, I.J.
University of Western Australian
Wood, M.E, (Mi
(Miss)
(Mrs o)
(Miss)
Child, So Mo
Council for Scientific & Industrial Research
Edmiston, H.K.
Archer, M.E.L
Hulae, M.I.
Kent, A.L.
aUEEHSLAHB.
Public Library:*■
(Hr.)
Prahran Public Librar:
McHieken, A.E,
Brown, W.H.
Gregory, H.A.
Ingamells, F.H.
McCallum, J.
Geological Surveys
(Mrs.)
Collins, KoM.
(retired)
Ballarat Mechanics* lastitate;°»
Batten, H.G. (Mro)
Defence Department Library
(Mr.)
Peacock, R.K.
Presbyterian Ladies* College:
(Mrs.)
Taylor, F.
