

The Australian Party
CONSTITUTION
AND
Standing Orders
Adopted by the
Ist Annual Convention
SYDNEY
22nd, 23rd, 24th and 26th APRIL, 1930
THE AUSTRALIAN PARTY
32 CASTLEREAGH ST.
SYDNEY
B 2637
W. F. JACKSON,
Hon. Secretary.




CONSTITUTION
and
STANDING ORDERS




CONSTITUTION AND RULES.
NAME.
1. The name of the Organisation shall be “The Australian
Party.”
OBJECTS.
2. The objects of the Australian Party shall be to advocate
and sustain the fundamental principles upon which the Party is
based; to give effect to the policy of the Party; and to carry
out organising and propaganda work in the interests of the
Party.
3. To secure the return to Parliament of candidates pre-
pared to support legislation which will give effect to the
principles of the Party platform.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.
4. The fundamental principles of the Party shall be: —
(a) The advancement of Australia as a Nation within
the British Commonwealth of Nations.
(b) The maintenance in its integrity of the White Aus-
tralia policy.
(c) The maintenance of the Australian standard of living.
(d) The maintenance and encouragement of the policy
of Protection, and its application to primary and
secondary industries in all necessary directions.
(e) The amendment of the Constitution to give the Com-
monwealth Parliament full powers to deal with all
National matters.
(f) The settlement of industrial disputes by simplified
machinery, Boards of Conciliation and Arbitration to
be established under the extended Legislative powers
of the Federal Parliament.
(g) Effective defence for Australia.
(h) The organisation and development of the national
resources of Australia and the ensuring of absolute
free trade within the Commonwealth.


5. The fundamental principles of the Party shall be ac-
cepted by all members, and can only he altered as set out here-
under :
(a) If a resolution, of which at least three months’ notice
shall have been given to the Executive and to the
Branches, setting out clearly the scope of the pro-
posed alteration, shall be supported by a majority of
all the delegates entitled to attend the Annual Con-
vention ;
and
(b) If at a Conference specially summoned for the pur-
pose not less than three months nor more than six
months after such Annual Convention, a three-fourths
majority of the delegates entitled to attend the
Special Conference also approves, the proposed altera-
tion shall, subject to endorsement in the manner
herein prescribed by the Organisation in the majority
of the States, take effect in the terms of the
originating resolution.
GENERAL PLATFORM.
6. The General platform shall be determined by the Annual
Convention of the Party, and shall stand unless amended o>*
added to by any Special or Annual Convention.
FIGHTING PLATFORM.
7. The Executive and the Leader of the Party shall prepare
the lighting platform of the Party, which shall be subject to
the approval of the State Council.
MEMBERSHIP.
8. Any person qualified to become an elector of the Com-
monwealth or State shall be eligible for membership, provided
he, or she, accepts the Constitution and Platform of the Party,
and has paid a minimum annual subscription of one shilling,
and is not a member of any other political organisation, unless
such membership arises through the affiliation of an organisa-
tion of which such person is a member with any other political
organisation.
9. Any person between the ages of 16 and 21 years may
become an associate member of the Party, subject to provision
of liule 8, on payment of an annual subscription of one shilling,


but such associate member, unless elected as an office-bearer or
delegate of a Branch by a majority of the adult members of the
Branch, shall not be eligible to vote at any meeting of the
Party nor to hold any office. No minor shall endorse the nomi-
nation of a Parliamentary candidate.
10. The membership year shall be from January to Decem-
ber.
11. Membership cards, numbered consecutively each year,
shall be issued annually to all members through the Secretaries
of Branches.
12. Any member, after having received due notice and par-
ticulars of any charge pertinent to his or her membership of the
Party, laid against him or her (which must also be supplied to
the Central Executive), and, after having had an opportunity of
being heard, in his or her own defence, may be expelled by
resolution of 75% of the members of the Branch at a meeting
specially called to deal with the matter; but if expelled, he or
she shall have the right to appeal to the Central Executive within
one calendar month after notice in writing of his or her expul-
sion shall have been posted in a prepaid letter addressed to him
or her at his or her last known place of abode. The decision
of the Central Executive shall be final.
13. Any person on ceasing to be a member of the Party shall
forfeit any claim or claims upon the Organisation and the
Branch of which he or she was a former member to which he
or she may have been entitled.
FEDERAL AND STATE CONTROL.
14. Each State Organisation shall, subject to the Constitu-
tion, direct and control the movement within the State, and be
entitled to send six (6) delegates to the Federal Conference.
Such Conference shall (a) control, direct, and decide all Federal
matters, including the Federal Platform; (b) interpret the Con-
stitution in the event of any doubt or difference arising between
States concerning any matter in this Constitution.
15. The supreme body in each State shall be the Annual
Convention, or Special Convention of delegates representing all
Branches in that State, as provided by the Constitution.
STATE ANNUAL CONVENTION.
Id. There shall be a State Annual Convention, which shall
be the Annual General Meeting of the Organisation. It shall
meet during Eastertime, at such place and time as the State
Council shall determine.


17. State Convention business shall be such as the State
Council and Central Executive may bring forward, together with
all other matters placed upon the business sheet by Branches
in accordance with these Rules. The Central Executive shall
determine the order of business at the Convention.
18. Not less than 50 days’ notice of any Convention shall be
given by circular to the Secretaries of the respective Branches
of the Organisation,
19. All notices of motion, and all other questions to be sub-
mitted for consideration at the State Convention, must be in
the hands of the General Secretary 30 days prior to the opening
of the Convention.
20. Urgent matters, of which notice has not been given,
may be submitted, provided that not less than three-fifths of
those present first agree to consider them.
21. The Annual Convention shall elect a President, Deputy-
President, three Vice-Presidents, Hon. Secretary, Hon. Treasurer,
and ten (10) male members of the State Council as hereinafter
provided. The seniority of the Vice-Presidents shall be deter-
mined by the voting. The voting for these elections shall be
by ballot.
22. Each Branch shall be entitled to send two delegates to
the State Annual Convention. These representatives, together
with the members of the Party Executive, and four members
from the Women’s General Committee, shall be the members
of the Annual or Special Convention.
23. All delegates shall be bona-fide members of the Party,
and shall be certified in writing by the Secretary of the Branch
they represent. Country Branches may be represented by a
member of a metropolitan Branch. No member shall represent
more than one Branch.
24. Special Conventions of delegates may be convened by
the State Council or the Central Executive at any time.
25. The President shall preside at the Annual Convention
and all Special Conventions, and in his absence the chair shall
be taken by the Depxity-President, and in his absence a Vice-
President in order of seniority. If no Vice-President is available
or willing to act, a Chairman shall be elected by Convention.
2G. At the Annual or Special Convention thirty-five mem-
bers shall form a quorum.


STATE COUNCIL.
27* The management of the Party shall be vested in a State
Council, which shall consist of: —
(a) A President.
(b) A Deputy-President.
(c) Three Vice-Presidents.
(d) Hon. Secretary.
(e) Hon. Treasurer.
(f) Ten men and ten women, to include three men and
three women to represent the area outside the boun-
daries of the County of Cumberland who are bona-
fide members of the Party.
(g) Three members of the Federal Parliamentary Party
and five members of the State Parliamentary Party,
to be elected by the members of the respective parties.
(h) One representative from each Branch in the State,
to be elected by the Branch.
(i) One representative from the Speakers’ Association.
28. Subject to this Constitution, all elected members of the
State Council shall hold office until the Annual Convention next
after their election, and shall be eligible for re-election unless
otherwise disqualified. All members of the State Council shall
be members of the Party.
29. The State Council shall, subject to the Constitution,
supervise and control all the activities and affairs of the Organi-
sation and its Branches, and shall have full power to act in all
circumstances as it may decide is expedient.
30. The State Council shall meet immediately after the
State Annual Convention. Thirty (30) members shall constitute
a quorum for all State Council Meetings. At all meetings of the
State Council the President shall be Chairman; in his absence the
Deputy-President, or the Vice-Presidents, in order of seniority,
may preside. If neither Deputy-President nor Vice-Presidents
are present, the meeting shall elect a Chairman. The Chairman
shall have a casting vote only. State Council shall fix the time
and place of meetings, and shall make standing orders to con-
trol procedure. The Executive may summon Special Meetings
of the State Council as it deems necessary.
31. Every member of the State Council present at any
meeting thereof shall sign the attendance book, which shall be
for all purposes the official record of attendance. Any member
of the State Council, or of any Committee appointed by the
State Council, absenting himself or herself from three consecu-


tive meetings of the State Council or of such Committee without
a reasonable excuse shall be deemed to have vacated his seat.
Any vacancies occurring on the State Council among those who
were appointed under Clause 26 (f) shall be filled by the next
in order of preference on the original ballot under Clause 26
(f). Any other vacancy shall be filled by the same authority
as originally constituted the body. Branches shall have the
right to appoint alternate delegates if the delegates appointed
are not able to attend.
TRUSTEES.
32. The State Council shall appoint three (3) Trustees, who
shall hold office until resignation or removal from office by a
resolution adopted by a majority of the Council present at a
properly convened meeting. The Executive shall from time to
time transfer to the Trustees moneys and property to be used
by them in the interests of the Party as the Executive may in
writing direct.
33. The Trustees shall at least once in every six months,
or when requested by the Executive, submit to the State Council
a written report covering the whole of their transactions from
the date of their last written report.
committe'es.
34. The State Council shall elect from among its members
at the first meeting of each year a Finance Committee, an
Organising Committee, a Publicity and Propaganda Committee,
and such other Committees as may from time to time be con-
sidered necessary, each Committee to consist of not less than
five members. Each Committee shall elect its own Chairman.
The President, Deputy-President, Vice-Presidents, Hon. Trea-
surer, and Hon. Secretary shall be members, ex-officio, of all
Committees. Each Committee shall submit a report of meetings
to the State Council.
35. The Finance Committee shall undertake the work of
raising funds and attend to financial business generally. It
shall prepare for submission to the State Council a quarterly
financial report, duly certified by a qualified Auditor appointed
by the State Council.
36. The Hon. Treasurer shall make payments only on the
authority of the Executive Committee, and shall see that proper
accounts are kept by the officers of the Party, and proper bank-
ing arrangements made.
37. The Organising Committee shall attend to the organising
and maintenance of Branches and Electoral Organising Com-
mittees, and carry on propaganda work generally.


38. The Publicity and Propaganda Committee shall prepare
educational literature and supervise general publicity.
39. There shall be formed from the women members of all
Branches a Women’s General Committee, consisting of two
delegates from each Branch, responsible to the State Council.
Such Committee shall co-operate with all the other Committees
provided for in this Constitution, and shall have the power to
Co-opt. The Women’s General Committee shall elect its
own office-bearers, and shall hold its first Annual Meeting within
four weeks from the closing of this Convention for that purpose
and for the purpose also of electing from amongst its members
ten representatives to the State Council, as provided in Clause
27 (f).
40. Each of the foregoing Committees may make rules to
determine the procedure at its meeting.
THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE.
41. The Central Executive shall consist of the President,
Deputy-President, three Vice-Presidents, Hon. Secretary, Hon.
Treasurer, and the Chairman of the Finance, Organising,
Women’s, and Publicity and Propaganda Committees, together
with five members of the State Council elected by the State
Council.
42. The Central Executive shall meet at least once in every
four weeks, and shall give effect to the decisions of the State
Council, determine the action to be taken in respect of any
matters during the intervals between meetings of the State
Council, report to the State Council the action taken, and exer-
cise plenary powers in any emergency that may arise. Eight
shall form a quorum at meetings of the Executive.
43. The Central Executive shall be empowered to do all
such acts and things, not inconsistent with these Rules, as may
be conducive to the welfare or advancement of the Party.
44. The President, the Deputy-President, and the Vice-
Presidents shall each have the power to direct the calling of a
meeting of the Executive at any time, as business may require.
BRANCHES.
40. Branches may be formed in each electorate, and in
organising areas to be defined by the Organising Committee. A
minimum of ten members shall constitute a Branch.


4G. The objects of the Branches shall he: —
(a) To advocate the principles and platform of the Party,
and to co-operate with the State Council in furthering
its objects.
(b) To work for the return of the Party’s candidates to
Parliament, and for this purpose to thoroughly orga-
nise the area where established.
47. Persons qualified for membership shall join a Branch
within the electorate or organising area in which they reside,
provided that this shall not apply co existing Branches composed
of persons residing in two adjoining State electorates, and that
the Executive . may hereafter authorise the formation of
Branches as above where the circumstances make it desirable.
Provided that where a person is resident in an area where no
Branch exists he shall be eligible for membership in the Branch
nearest to his place of residence. No member of the Australian
Party can become a member of more than one Branch.
48. Women electors may form separate Branches in accord-
ance with these Rules and subject to the consent of the
Organising Committee.
49. Each Branch shall hold its first Annual Meeting under
this Constitution within four weeks after the closing of the
Convention, and at such meeting shall elect a President, three
Vice-Presidents, Hon. Treasurer, and Hon. Secretary, who shall,
with the other members elected at the same time, form the
Executive Committee. The Branch shall also at such Annual
Meeting elect two delegates to the Electorate Organising Com-
mitee, one delegate to the State Council, and two delegates
to the Women’s Committee. The Hon. Secretary shall forward
to the General Secretary the names and addresses of all officers
and members of Committee immediately after their election by
the Branch.
50. The subsequent Annual Meetings of the Branches shall
be held in the months of February. At such meetings the Hon.
Treasurer shall submit an audited financial statement, and the
Executive shall present a report. Election of officers and dele-
gates shall take place. All officers and delegates must be finan-
cial members of the Party.
51. Any member of the Branch Executive absenting him-
self or herself from three consecutive meetings without leave
shall be deemed to have vacated his seat. Vacancies shall be
filled by the members at a Branch Meeting.
52. Branches and Branch Executive shall meet at least once
a month, and at such other times as the Executive may decide.
The quorum at Brdnch Meetings and at Branch Executive Meet-
ings shall be determined by the Branch.


53. The Branch Executive shall within 14 days after the
receipt of a requisition in writing by not less than 15 members
of a Branch convene a Special General Meeting of the Branch.
If the Committee fail to convene such meeting within such time,
the requisitionists may convene such meeting.
54. Each Branch shall each year pay to the Hon. Treasurer
of the Party a sum of two guineas, without which it shall not
be entitled to representation at the Annual Convention.
55. Meetings of the Branch shall he called in such manner
as the Branch Executive may determine,
56. The Hon. Secretary and Hon. Treasurer shall on demand
made by the Executive of "a Branch or by the Central Executive
of the Party hand over forthwith to the President of the Branch
or to the Central Executive of the Party all books, documents,
or funds in their possession relating to the Branch. Should
a Branch become defunct, all books and records shall be handed
to the General Secretary of the Party.
57. Membership receipt books, duly numbered, shall be
issued by the Branch Secretary to the members of the Branch
Executive only.
58. The Hon. Secretary shall take charge of all documents
and records, and shall keep minutes of all proceedings and attend
to all correspondence. He shall hand over to the Treasurer
all monies received by him and discharge such other duties
as the Branch Executive directs. He shall keep a roll book,
containing the names and addresses of all members.
59. The Hon. Treasurer shall receive all monies and de-
posit same in the bank, approved by the Branch Executive, and
shall pay all accounts authorised by the Branch Executive.
Cheques drawn on the account of the Branch shall be signed
as directed by the Branch Executive. He shall present to the
Annual Meeting a duly audited statement of receipts and expen-
diture.
60. A copy of the annual statement of receipts and expen-
diture certified to by the President and Secretary of the Branch
shall be forwarded to the General Secretary.
61. Any question or matter in dispute within any Branch
or between any two or more Branches shall be determined by
the Central Executive when necessary.
ELECTORATE ORGANISING COMMITTEE.
62. In each electorate where there are Branches, an Elec-
torate Organising Committee shall be formed, consisting of
two or more delegates from each Branch; each Branch to have
equal representation. The Committee shall assist the Branches,
co-ordinate their work, and organise the election campaign in


the interests of the Party candidates. In electorates where
only one Branch exists, the Branch shall undertake the func-
tions of the Electorate Organising Committee.
63. The Electorate Organising Committee shall elect a
President, Hon. Secretary and Hon. Treasurer, and such other
officers as may be required. It shall have power to appoint
an Organiser for the electorate.
64. The expenses of the Electorate Organising Committee
shall be met by the Branches in proportion to their membership.
CANDIDATES.
65. Any candidate for Parliamentary election desirous of
submitting his name as a representative of the Australian Party
must have been a bona-fide financial member of a Branch with-
in any electorate area for a period of at least three months
prior to the date upon which he submits his nomination to the
Party.
06. Each candidate must be nominated by at least 25 per
cent, of the members of the Party within the electorate which
he desires to contest, and such members must have been finan-
cial members of a Branch in that'electorate for at least three
months prior to the date on which the candidate’s nomination
is lodged. No member shall sign more than one nomination
paper.
67. The names and qualifications of all candidates desiring
to contest any elecorate shall be considered by the Electorate
Organising Committee of that electorate, which shall meet to
consider the qualifications of candidates, and shall subsequent-
ly report the result of its deliberations to the members of the
Branches for their guidance/
68. When more than one candidate submits his name as
a representative of the Party, the candidates shall address a
specially summoned meeting, or meetings, of the members of all
the Branches of the Party in the electorate, and a ballot of
such members shall be taken to determine their order of prefer-
ence. The result of the ballot shall then be communicated to
all the Branches. The Electorate Organising Committee shall
summon the meeting, or meetings, called for the purposes indi-
cated, and shall supervise the taking of the ballot. Only finan-
cial members of three months’ standing in the Branches shall
participate in this ballot.
69. Provided that if the Executive is satisfied that the en-
forcement of Buies 65, 66, 67, 68 is prejudicial to the best
interests of the Party, it may make a recommendation to the
State Council which shall decide the question.


70. Prior to the date of nomination of candidates, the Elec-
torate Organising Committee shall arrange for the calling of
a meeting, or meetings, of members of the Party within the
electorate for the purpose of hearing the various candidates.
71. Nominations shall he on the forms provided by the Party
Executive, and such forms shall not be issued before tbe opera-
tion of Clause 70.
72. In an electorate where no Branch of the Party exists
or no candidates are endorsed by the Branch, the Executive, in
conjunction with the Council, shall endorse a candidate or
candidates.
73. The Secretary of each Branch shall every three months
from the date of the conclusion of the first Annual Conven-
tion forward to the Secretary of the Central Executive a com-
plete list of financial members of the Branch; such list to
include the full names and addresses of the Branch members
and the dates they were admitted to membership. The Secre-
tary of the Central Executive shall cause to be entered such
names and addresses in an official general membership roll.
SENATE CANDIDATES.
74. Nominations from candidates to contest elections to be
called by the Central Executive. Nominations to be considered
and endorsed by the State Council.
ALTERATION OF CONSTITUTION.
75. This Constitution may be altered or amended only by
the Annual General Convention or by a Special General Con-
vention called for the specific purpose of such alteration or
amendments.
STANDING ORDERS.
For the proper conduct of all business of the Annual and
Special Conventions and all meetings of the Party, the follow-
ing form of procedure shall be adopted:—
MEMBER TO SPEAK STANDING.
1. Any member desiring to speak shall, standing, address
the chairman respectfully in polite, moderate language relevant
to the subject under consideration.


NO MEMBER TO SPEAK MORE THAN ONCE.
2. No member may speak more than once to a question
before the meeting, except in explanation or reply, and the
chairman may, without waiting for the interposition of the
meeting, call any member to order. Should a motion or amend-
ment be only formally seconded and should there be opposition,
the member seconding shall have prior right over other speakers.
EXPLANATION.
3. A member who has spoken to a question may again
be heard, to explain himself or herself in regard to some
material part of his or her speech, but shall not introduce any
new matter or interrupt any member in possession of the chair.
REPLY.
4. A reply of 3 minutes shall be allowed to the member
only who has made a substantiative motion to the meeting.
OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE TO BE AVOIDED.
5. No member shall use offensive or unbecoming words
towards any other person at the meeting.
TIME ALLOWED.
6. No one motion shall be debated for longer than 30 min-
utes, including mover’s reply, unless with the consent of meet-
ing. The mover of a motion shall not occupy more than eight
(8) minutes, nor any other speaker more than five (5). The
meeting, by resolution, may grant extension of time to any
speaker, and may also restrict the time to any limit.
DIGRESSIONS, IMPUTATIONS, AND REFLECTIONS.
7. No speaker shall digress from the subject matter under
discussion, and imputations of improper motives, and all per-
sonal reflections on members of the Organisation, shall be deem-
ed disorderly.
WHEN THE CHAIRMAN RISES.
8. Whenever the chairman rises during debate, the person
then speaking shall sit down, and silence shall be observed, so
that the chairman may be heard without interruption.


INTERRUPTION NOT ALLOWED.
9. No person shall interrupt another while speaking, except
on a point of order,
POINTS OF ORDER.
10. Any person, during the debate, may raise a point of
order, when the speaker called to order shall sit down. The
person rising to order shall state concisely within 2 minutes
the point of order, to which the speaker against whom the
point is raised shall have 2 minutes’ right of reply, when the
chairman, without further discussion, shall give his ruling; and,
subject to that ruling, the person speaking when the point of
order was raised allowed to proceed.
MOTIONS OF DISSENT.
11. It shall be competent for any member to make a motion
of dissent from the chairman’s ruling. The mover of the motion
of dissent shall concisely explain his or her motion, and address
the vice-chairman, who shall control the debate on the motion
of dissent. The seconder of the motion and the chairman, in
explanation only, shall speak to the motion, which the vice-
chairman shall put to the meeting. If carried, the ruling be-
comes upset; if lost, upheld.
12. A member may at any stage of the debate, unless some
other member has the f10e.,, move the adjournment of the de-
bate. And if the motion be resolved in the negative, the mover
and seconder shall not be allowed to again speak on the sub-
ject under debate. No member shall move the adjournment at
the end of his or her speech. If the motion be resolved in the
affirmative, the mover shall have the right of resuming the
debate at the ensuing meeting.
DEBATE.
13. The mover of a motion or amendment shall clearly
state the motion or amendment on rising, and before commenc-
ing to debate the question. Unless a motion be opposed, there
shall be no debate, other than the mover and seconder.
CLOSURE.
14. At any time during the debate, unless some other mem-
ber has the floor, any member may move without notice “That
the question be now put,” and such motion being duly seconded,
shall then be put without debate. If carried, the question shall
be put to the vote; if lost, the debate shall proceed. A member
may move at any time “That the speaker be no longer heard.”


AMENDMENTS.
15. (a) An amendment may be moved on any original mo-
tion and any further amendment indicated. The chairman shall
put the amendment to the meeting first, and if carried, shall
be declared to embody the decision of the meeting, superseding
the motion. If the amendment be lost, then the indk'ted
amendment shall be discussed, and, being put, if carried, shall
supersede the motion. If both the amendment and indicated
amendment be lost, the original motion shall be put to the
meeting.
(b) The chairman shall receive no amendment which is a
direct negative, or which does not preserve the substance of
the original motion.
POWER TO REMOVE.
16. The chairman shall have power to order the removal
from the meeting of any person acting contrary to these stand-
ing orders.
PARLIAMENTARY RULE.
17. All matters not covered by these Rules of procedure
shall be determined according to tbe practice of Parliament.




Printed by LEVICK &■ SONS
Printers
3la Pitt Street, Sydney
