



DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY.
CONSOLIDATED NAVY ORDERS.
1911-1920.
By Authority :
A I.BBRT J. MUILITT, GOTKBSMBSI PRINTER, MBLBOIiKSE.
C. 18558.




The Navy Orders for 1911-1920 inclusive have been consolidated,
and are issued herewith for information and guidance. All Orders
of a temporary nature which have been sufficiently promulgated or have
become inoperative have been omitted.
2. Those Navy Orders which have been embodied in the Naval
Forces Regulations (Statutory Rules No. 1, 1921) have not been included
herein, but reference is made to that Article of the Statutory Rules,
to be consulted.
3. The instructions contained herein should be referred to as
Consolidated Navy Orders, Article —, clause .
By Command of the Naval Board
To the Commodore Commanding and Commanding Officers of H.M.A.
Ships, Officers in Charge of H.M.A. Naval Establishments, and
others concerned.


CONTENTS.
Articles.
Section I. General Instructions .. .. .. .. .. 1-34
~ 11. Flags, Salutes, Ceremonies and Distinctions .. .. 35-54
~ 111. Divine Service and Instructions to Chaplains .. .. 55-59
~ IV. Hydrographical and Navigational .. .. .. 60-64
~ I'. Discipline, Badges, and Service Certificates .. . . 65-84
„ VI. Stores and Store Accounts .. .. .. .. 85-104
„ VII. Mails, Correspondence, and Returns .. .. .. 105-119
„ VIII. H.M.A. Ships—Refits and Maintenance of .. .. 120-134
~ IX. Supplies of Fuel, Water, and Lubricating Oil .. .. 135-149
.. X. Officers—Entry, Examinations, Advancement, &c. .. 150-.169
~ XI. Petty Officers and Men—Entry, Examinations, Advance-
ment, &c. .. .. . . .. .. 170-215
~ XII. Ordnance, Torpedoes, and Mines .. .. .. 216-234
„ XIII. Medical .. .. .. .. .. .. 235-248
~ XIV. Financial and Pay generally .. .. .. .. 249-275
„ XV. Uniform and Clothing . . .. .. .. 276-296
XVI, Victualling .. .. _ ..297-309
~ XVII. Leave and Travelling .. . . .. .. 310-331
„ XVIII. Returns .. . . .. .. .. .. 332-339
~ XIX. Miscellaneous Information . . .. .. .. 340-348
Appendix I. —Telegraphic Addresses.
„ II. —Instructions in regard to the issue of Official
Naval Railway Warrants.


SECTION I.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
Article.
1. Powers and Functions of the Naval Board.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Article 6.
2. The Limits of the Naval Station of the Commonwealth
of Australia.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Article 26.
3. Reports of Movements of H.M. and H.M.A. Ships.
Instructions for reporting the movements of H.M.A.
Ships are contained in Naval Forces Regulations,
Articles 27, to 34.
2. With reference to Article 31(i) of the Regulations
quoted, the next port of call should be stated in the tele-
gram sent to the Navy Office.
3. Pending the issue of Admiralty printed Orders on
the subject, District and Sub-District Naval Officers are
to report to Navy Office by telegram the arrivals and
departures of ships of the Royal Navy.
4. Telegrams reporting movements should state to
whom the report is telegraphed —vide Art. 61, paragraph
1., of S.P. 2051, Coding Instructions, 1920.
4. Rank and Command. •
Bee Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 35 to 38.
5. Formation of Combinations of Persons.
Attention is drawn to Article 11 of the King’s Regu-
lations and Admiralty Instructions relative to this
matter. It is impressed upon Officers and Men that
paragraph 7 of the Article referred to is to be strictly
observed when they are considering the question of
joining Clubs, Societies, or Associations
6. Communicating Naval Information to the Press.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Article 135.
7. Orders affecting Permanent Naval Forces.
Any matter affecting the Permanent Naval Forces
(Sea-going), not referred to in Navy Orders or Statutory
Rules as issued from time to time, nor in the Financial
Regulations (Sea-going) and Naval Account Regulations,
is to be dealt with as nearly as possible in accordance with


the King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions. The
latter, however, shall constitute no authority for expendi-
ture.
(Vide also Articles 7 and 137 Naval Forces Regula-
tions.)
Naval Officers desirous of Interviewing Members of the
Naval Board—Procedure to be Followed.
No Naval Officer actively serving in the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy is to call at the Navy Office to see Members
of the Board unless he has previously received the per-
mission of the Board, through his Commanding Officer,
to do so. In every case the reason for the request for the
interview is to be stated when applying for permission.
2. Any Officer who desires to pay a private call on
any Member of the Board should do so at the private
residence of the Member.
Requests, &c., to be Forwarded through Proper
Channels.
Attention is directed to the following extract from
Article 12 of the King’s Regulations and Admiralty
Instructions, any infraction of which will be treated as
a disciplinary offence: —
“No person in the Fleet is to enter into direct
communication with any Service or Department of
the State, or with any subordinate officer of such
Service or Department, at home or abroad, on sub-
jects connected with the Naval Service, or with his
particular duties or present or future employment,
unless authorized to do so by the Regulations of
the Service or superior authority; and all communi-
cations on such subjects are to be made through
the proper channels .... in order that such
steps may be taken therein as may be necessary.”
2. “ Commanding Officers are responsible for the
propriety of all applications, &c., forwarded by
them, and it is their duty to investigate thoroughly
the circumstances, the conditions, and the reason-
ableness of any applications made to them before
forwarding them.
(Vide also Article 128, Naval Forces Regulations.)
Encouragement to Personnel to Pass for Higher
Rating.
The attention of Commanding Officers is drawn to the
importance of encouraging ratings in all branches to
pass for higher rating. The advantages and prospects
of advancement should be explained and every effort
made to stimulate proficiency with this object in view.


Article.
11. Classification of Ships in Commission.
The following is the nomenclature adopted for the
description of the various categories of commission in
which H.M.A. Ships are maintained; —
The term “in full commission ” is reserved for
ships and vessels which carry “ full complements ”
in time of peace.
The term “ in active commission ” is applied to all
ships and vessels not “in full commission,” but
carrying active complements,” which can be corn-
completed to “ full complements ” without the issue
of a proclamation calling out the reserves.
The terms “ in reserve commission ” is applied to
all ships and vessels whose mobilization in time of
war or emergency involves the issue of a proclama-
tion calling out the reserves.
12. Visits of Naval Reserves to H.M.A. Ships.
Officers commanding H.M.A. Ships when visiting any
of the ports at which there is a District Naval Officer or
a Sub-District Naval Officer are to arrange with such
Officer for special facilities to be given for members of
the Naval Reserve, in uniform, to visit their ships on one
or more days during the ship’s stay in port.
13. Calculation of a Year.
For the purposes of increments of pay, allowances,
award of Good Conduct Badges, &c., to Officers and Men
of the Royal Australian Navy, a “Year” shall he calcu-
lated according to the calendar, e.g., a person rated
Petty Officer on Ist October, 1915, would become eligible
for pay as Petty Officer over three years from Ist
October, 1918, not 30th iSeptemher, 1918.
14. Damage done by H.M.A. Ships or Boats, &c.
On every occasion of damage being done by H.M.A.
ships, boats, or other services, the procedure required by
Article 673 of the King’s Regulations and Admiralty
Instructions is to be followed, as far as applicable to
such cases.
2. Where damage is done to a pier, wharf, vessel,
or structure, an immediate report is invariably to be
made. A survey of the damage done should be made by
competent Officers, and an estimate of the cost of the
necessary repairs arrived at, but without anything being
done that might Ibe construed into an admission of
liability until the decision of the Naval Board has been
received.


Article.
15. Notification to Health Authorities of Arrival of Men-
of-War.
Whenever possible District and Sub-District Naval
Officers are to give short notice of the arrival of any of
H.M.A. Ships or other Men-of-War to the Health
Authorities at their respective ports, with a view to
enabling these Officers to carry out the duties of the
Quarantine Service.
2. Ho interruption or delay to Naval work or duty
should be occasioned by this Service, and instructions to
this effect have been issued to Health Officers.
16. Death.
The death of an Officer, man, or boy, together with the
date, place, and cause of death, and, in the case of a man
or boy, the rating and official number is to be reported
immediately by telegram to the Navy Office.
Care should be taken that, when the nearest known
relative or friend of deceased is resident in Australia,
the death is communicated to them at once by the Com-
manding Officer; but when the nearest known relative
or friend is residing outside the Commonwealth, this
will be done by the Navy Office, the name and address
of such person being stated in the telegraphic report of
death.
In all cases, Form A. 5.1121 should be forwarded to
the Navy Office in confirmation of the telegraphic
report.
17. Marriage of Officers.
With reference to the notification of marriage of
Officers, the provisions of Article 418, King’s Regulations
and Admiralty Instructions, are to apply to the R.A.N..
Navy Office being substituted for Admiralty where
necessary.
18. Photographing of H.M.A. Ships.
The following general regulations as to the photo-
graphing of H.M.A. Ships and Naval Establishments
have been framed for the guidance of Officers who may-
have to deal with applications for permission to take
such photographs:—
(a) As a rule, no objection will be raised to bond fide
photographers, whether amateur or professional,
taking photographs of any of H.M.A. Ships
afloat, provided the apparatus is kept at a dis-
tance away, at least equal to the length of the
ship, and a telephoto lens is not used.
( b ) No photographs may be taken on board H.M.A.
Ships without the express permission of the
Commanding Officer.


Article.
(c) No photograph is permitted to be taken of any of
H.M.A. Ships whilst lying in any dock or along-
side any wharf or jetty.
( d ) No photograph may be taken in any of the Com-
monwealth Dockyards or other Naval Estab-
lishments without special permission of the
Naval Board.
(e) Permission to photograph particular ships may
he withheld, either absolutely or conditionally,
at the discretion of the Naval Board, should
the interests of the public safety require it.
(/) If for any reason relaxation of these conditions
should be desired on any particular occasion,
application for the requisHe special permission
should be made to the Senior Naval Officer
present, who is responsible that no such relaxa-
tion lessens the effects designed by these
regulations.
( g ) Photographers not conforming strictly to these
conditions incur the risk of being proceeded
against under the Official Crimes Act.
19. Appointment of Commodore Superintendent and Senior
Naval Officer, Sydney.
The following Naval Establishments will be perma-
nently under the Orders of the Commodore Superin-
tendent and Senior Naval Officer, Sydney:—
The Royal Australian Naval College (and
Tenders).
11.M.A.5. Tingira.
H.M.A.S. Penguin.
The Naval Yard, Garden Island (and Detention
Quarters).
The Royal Edward Victualling Yatd, Darling
Island.
The Naval Ordnance Depot, Spectacle Island, &e.
2. The Commodore Superintendent is also (for the
present) authorized to issue orders to the Naval Dock-
yard at Cockatoo Island in case of emergency, the Com-
modore to decide when emergency has arisen.
3. When the Senior Naval Officer present, the Com-
modore will have the powers laid down for the ‘‘ Senior
Naval Officer present ” in regard to any of H.M.A. Ships
that may be at Sydney, and also in regard to the District
Naval Officer and the Naval Reserve.
4. The District Naval Officer, New South Wales, and
the Commanding Officer, Royal Australian Naval
College, Jervis Bay, are to keep the Commodore in-
formed of all important matters affecting their com-
mands.


Article.
20. Captain (S) —Duties.
The provisions of Admiralty Weekly Order 2326/1919
—promulgating the duties of Commodore (S) —are
to be adopted in the Royal Australian ’Navy in so far as
they are applicable to the Captain (*S) and the R.A.N.
Submarine Service.
2. The Captain (S) will be in separate and direct
communication with the Naval Board on all matters
relating to the Submarine Service, except when the
Flotilla is attached to the Fleet for actual manoeuvring
purposes, in which case he will forward communications
through the Flag Officer Commanding or Senior Officer
present.
21. Pollution of Port Jackson by H.M.A. Ships.
Attention is called to Sydney Port Order No. 12, which
is to be strictly complied with.
2. The Commodore -Superintendent and Senior Naval
Officer,. Sydney, is responsible that adequate arrange-
ments are made for the removal and destruction of all
refuse and debris from Ships alongside Garden Island
and from all Ships in reserve, and is to issue the neces-
sary orders to reduce, as far as possible, the leakage of oil
into the harbor when Ships are oiling alongside.
3. Commanding Officers of Ships in commission are
to cause all refuse and debris which cannot be destroyed
on board to be placed in the ash-boats or floats obtained
from Garderi' Island, and, when -Ships are oiling, are to
see that all possible precautions are taken to prevent oil
escaping overboard. This is especially necessary when
connecting and disconnecting hoses.
4. Ships lying alongside at Cockatoo Island are to
make the necessary arangements for the removal or
destruction of refuse with the General Manager, Cockatoo
Dockyard.
22. Auxiliary Forces Regulations.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 96-126.
23. District Naval Officers acting as Senior Naval Officers.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Article 43.
24. Port Divisions.
Melbourne, Sydney, and Fremantle are accepted as
Port Divisions for members of the Royal Australian
Navy.
2. On entry, ratings may elect one of these ports
as their Port Division. They will belong to that Port
Division during the whole of their period of service,
unless for sufficient reasons they may be allowed to
transfer to another, for which Naval Board approval
must be obtained.


Article.
3. Any alterations to Port Divisions must be shown on
return A.S. 184, noted on service certificate, and recorded
in quarterly ledger.
r
25. R.A.N. Welfare Committee—Appointment of.
The Naval Board have decided that it is desirable to
make permanent arrangements for bringing to notice
from time to time matters affecting the well-being of
the Petty Officers and Men of the Fleet.
2. For this purpose the Naval Board, at stated times,
will call upon the Commodore Commanding H.M.A.
Fleet to arrange for the election of representatives from
the various branches of the Fleet. H.M.A. Ships and
EstabTshments under the command of the Commodore
Superintendent, Sydney, will be included with the sea-
going Fleet for the purpose of such election.
The Commanding Officer of Flinders Naval Depot
will be called on to arrange for representatives from
H.M.A. Ships and Establishments in Victoria.
3. The machinery will take the form of a Joint Con-
ference of Officers, Petty Officers, and Men —the Officers
being selected as a Committee by the Naval Board, the
Petty Officers and Men being elected as representatives
by the various branches.
4. The Petty Officers’ and Men’s representatives will
sit in an advisory capacity, attached to the Committee.
5. The questions put forward by each class will be
considered jointly by representatives of all the classes.
6. Subject to the foregoing, the C6mmittee will be
authorized to receive and discuss representations as to
Service conditions in respect of—
Promotions,
Accommodation,
Messing and Canteen arrangements,
Uniform and Clothing arrangements,
Deferred Pay,
Term of engagement,
Pay and Allowances,
and similar matters affecting the general interests of the
Service.
7. The Committee will not be authorized to receive or
discuss representations as to —
Matters of policy—such as the employment,
distribution, or training of the Fleet,
Matters of discipline—or the general arrange-
ment of duties in the 'Service,
Individual claims, or individual grievances, of
any kind,
Matters affecting individual iShips or Establish
ments.


Article.
8. Special attention is drawn to the fact that these
Conferences are not to be regarded as providing an alter-
native channel for the presentation of individual claims
or grievances, which are to he put forward as directed
by Articles 8 and 9of the King’s Regulations. Nor are
the Conferences to he regarded as in any way diminishing
the responsibility of the Captain for the discipline and
well-being of the Officers and Men serving under his com-
mand. The object is to give recognised opportunities for
the discussion of questions affecting the general interests
of the Men, and to bring to the notice of the Board any
conditions which, in the opinion of Officers and Men.
require, and are capable of, improvement.
26. Claims for Salvage—H.M.A. Ships.
Commanding Officers of H.M.A. Ships are to make
themselves thoroughly acquainted with sections 557 to
568 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1894, which applies
to H.M.A. Ships in the same way as to H.M. Ships.
The procedure laid down in Chapter LI. of the King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions must he strictly
observed in all cases when H.M.A. Ships are engaged in
the salvage of merchant ships.
2. Arrangements have been made in regard to obtain-
ing Admiralty sanction for making salvage claims in
regard to H.M.A. Ships. Such ships, if employed on
the Australian Station, are to forward the reports
required by clauses 4 and 5 of Article 1889, K.R. and
A. 1., to Navy Office. Ships employed on other stations
are to forward these reports to Commander-in-Chief, for
the Admiralty.
27. Illicit Use of Wireless Telegraphy.
It has come to notice that illicit wireless messages
have from time to time been sent from H.M.A. Ships by
Wireless Operators. The Naval Board wish to bring
this matter to the notice of all Commanding Officers,
who are to make every effort to trace offenders.
2. It has also come to notice that unauthorized
persons have been permitted to enter the Wireless Rooms
of H.M.A. Ships when these ships are open to inspection
by the public. The Naval Board consider this in a
very serious light, particularly in view of the obligations
of the Rpyal Australian Navy to the Admiralty to keep
secret particulars of all Wireless Telegraph installations.
Further, it is contrary to the orders of the Naval Board,
and Commanding Officers are to take steps to see that
all orders in this respect are carried out.


Article.
28. H.M.A. Ships—Drawings for.
When drawings of any description belonging to ships
become damaged or defaced, rendering them unsuitable
for further use, they are to be returned to the Ravy
Office, where they will be destroyed and new copies
issued.
29. Recruiting for the R.A.N.
The Director of Kaval Reserves and .Naval Reserve
Mobilization, under the direction of the Kaval Board,
is charged with the control of recruiting for the Royal
Australian Navy, and all correspondence in connexion
with recruiting should be addressed to that Officer.
2. The address of the D.N/R.M. is;—
Normanby Chambers,
Little Collins-street,
Melbourne.
30. Notification of Change of Religion.
Alterations in respect of change of religion approved
in accordance with Article 830, clause 4, of the King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions, should be
noted in the ship’s quarterly ledger.
2. Changes in religion in the case of Officers should
also be recorded as above.
31. Employment of Returned Sailors and Soldiers.
The following extract from Commonwealth Statutory
Rule Mo. 196 of 1918 in regard to preferential treat-
ment of applicants for temporary employment under
the Commonwealth Public Service Regulations is pro-
mulgated for information.
Preference will be given in the following order: —
(a) Persons who are married and who have served
with satisfactory record in any Expedi-
tionary Force raised under the provisions of
the Defence Act 1903-1917 for service out-
side Australia.
(h) Persons who are unmarried and who have
served with satisfactory record in any Ex-
peditionary Force raised under the provisions
of the Defence Act 1903-1917 for service
outside Australia.
(o) Widows of deceased members of any such
Force who died on active service.
( d ) Unmarried daughters of such deceased mem-
bers who wore dependent upon the earnings
of those members at any time during the
period of twelve months prior to their
enlistment.


(e) Widowed mothers of such deceased members
who were dependent upon the earnings of
those members at any time during the period
of twelve months prior to their enlistment.
(7) Unmarried sisters of such deceased members
who were dependent upon the earnings of
those members at any time during the period
of twelve months prior to their enlistment.
(g) Persons who are qualified by examination for
permanent appointment.
(h) Persons who are members of a trades union
or industrial organization, other things being
equal.
32. Employment of ex-Service Eatings in H.M.A. Naval
Establishments.
A roster of applicants from the sea-going forces for
employment in a Civil capacity on completion of their
engagement in the Royal Australian Navy, or on being
invalided from the same, is to be maintained by the
General Manager at the Commonwealth Naval Dock-
yard at Cockatoo, and by the Commodore Superintendent
of H.M.A. Naval Yard at Garden Island.
2. Preference of emjrloyment is to be given to mem-
bers of the sea-going forces discharged, with good
character, by invaliding or by the operation of the age
clause in regard to sea-going service, i.e., on or after
the age of forty.
3. Applications by ratings should be forwarded by
Commanding Officers, with their recommendations, cer-
tified copy of Certificate of Service, and, where ap-
plicable, of Professional History Sheet, direct to the
Officers named, to arrive not sooner than three months
prior to discharge from the E.A.N.
4. Ratings who take their discharge prior to the
compulsory retiring age will also receive preference of
employment in H.M.A. Naval Establishments, but their
claims will be considered after those of the ratings
referred to in the previous paragraphs. Such ap-
plicants should apply in person, with their Certificates
of Sendee, to the Officers mentioned in paragraph 3.
33. Functions of the Director of Naval Reserves and
Naval Eeserve Mobilization, and of District and Sub-
District Naval Officers.
The Director of Naval Reserves and Naval Reserve
Mobilization will, subject to the control of the Naval
Board, be "barged with the administration of all matters
relating to the Citizen Naval Porees.
2. On all matters connected with the training, &c., of
the Citizen Naval Forces, District Naval Officers and
other Naval Officers employed with those Forces are to


Article.
act under the Instructions of the Director of Naval
Reserves.
3. In addition to the duties of entering, organizing,
and training the Naval Reserves allotted to their Dis-
tricts, each District Naval Officer is (under the
D.N.R.M.), and within his own District, to carry out
the following duties, utilizing the Sub-District Naval
Officers and their Staffs as necessary.
(a) Recruiting for the Permanent Forces.
(b) General responsibility as far as Naval interests
are concerned, for the coast-line within his
District, including the arrangements for
rendering the Signal Station service efficient
for Naval purposes in case of war.
4. D.N.O.’s, and S.D.N.O.’s are also to render any
assistance required to H.M.A. Ships visiting the ports
in their District or Sub-District.
34. D.N.O.’s, S.D.N.O.’s, &c., to be Borne on Ship’s Books.
District Naval Officers and their Assistants, Sub-
District Naval Officers, and all Chief Petty Officer and
Petty Officer Instructors, Storekeepers, Armourers, Mes-
sengers, General Workmen and Storemen, are to be borne
on the books of one of ELM.A. Ships.
2. Those belonging to the Brisbane and Sydney Dis-
tricts are to be borne on the books of Penguin , those
belonging to other Districts on the books of Cerberus.
3. Their names and ranks or ratings only need be
entered (on List 13 (a) Sydney District, 13 (b) Port
Melbourne District, &c.), but all alterations in name,
ranks, or ratings, dates of discharge, are to be com-
municated by the District Naval Officer to the ship
concerned. Records of service and pay accounts are to
continue to be kept in each D.N.O.’s office.
4. Matters of discipline, pay, &c., are to be dealt with
by N.D.O.s as hitherto.


SECTION II.
FLAGS, SALUTES, CEREMONIES, AND DISTINCTIONS
Article.
35. Flag and Status of the Naval Board.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Article 23.
36. Flags to be Flown by H.M.A. Ships.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 170-171.
37. Flags to be Flown by Naval Establishments on Shore
and by Boats attached thereto.
On all Naval Establishments on shore which are
under the command of an Officer of the Naval Forces
on full pay, e.g.. Royal Australian Naval Reserve Drill
Halls, Naval Staff Offices,* &c., are to fly the White
Ensign.
2. On all occasions when boats of H.M. ships would
fly the White Ensign, or White Ensign and Pendant,
boats attached to the above-described establishments em-
ployed on similar duty are to fly the same.
38. Saluting Flag.
The Commonwealth Ensign is to be the Saluting Flag
at all reviews and ceremonial parades on shore.
2. The Union Jack is also to be flown at the saluting
point on all occasions when representatives of His
Majesty the King review the Commonwealth Forces.
39. Death of Distinguished Personages—Half-masting of
Flags.
In the event of the death of any Royal or otherwise
distinguished personage, or on any special local occasion,
it will be unnecessary to apply to the Navy Office for
instructions as to ceremonies to be observed, as it may
be assumed that if His Majesty’s pleasure has been
signified orders will be issued, but not otherwise. In
default of any specific directions on the subject from
the Naval Board, a Senior Officer may act —
(a) In unison with the procedure which may be
adopted by the Commanding Officer of any
ship of war present of the nation to which
the deceased person may have belonged;
(b) In concert with the military authorities at a
place where there is a British garrison;
(c) In unison with the wishes of the Governor, in
the case of a special occasion, connected
with the Dominion, State, or Colony.
In all these cases, the procedure to be adopted is at
the discretion of the Senior Officer.


Article.
'2. His Majesty the King has signified his pleasure,
in order that a uniform practice should obtain in all
parts of the Empire, that, in regard to the death of a
foreign Sovereign, flags are to he flown at half-mast
on the day of the Sovereign’s death, and also on that
of the funeral. The national flag of the foreign Sove-
reign is also to be flown on these occasions at half-mast.
(See also Haval Forces Regulations, Articles 164-165.)
40. Dressing Ship on British Anniversary Days.
With reference to Article 49, King’s Regulations and
Admiralty Instructions, lI.M. Australian Ships, when
in port, are to be dressed with flags over-all on the fol-
lowing dates -
His Majesty’s Birthday .. 3rd June.
Anniversary of His Majesty’s
Accession . . .. .. 6th May.
Anniversary of His Majesty’s
Coronation . . . . . . 22nd June.
Her Majesty’s Birthday . . 26th May.
Queen Alexandra’s Birthday . . Ist December.
Prince of Wales’ Birthday .. 23rd Juno.
41. Dressing Ship on Local Anniversary Days.
H.M.A. Ships, when at one of the ports of the par-
ticular State -whose Anniversary Day it is, are to be
dressed with flags over all, from 8 a.m. until sunset.
The following are the dates of the anniversary days:—
Hew South Wales, 26th January.
Victoria, 26th January.
Tasmania, 26th January.
Western Australia, Ist June.
Queensland, 10th December.
South Australia, 28th December.
Hew Zealand—
Dominion Day, 26th September.
Wellington, 22nd January.
Auckland, 29th January.
2. Commonwealth Day, Ist January, is to be simi-
larly observed in all ports of the Commonwealth.
3. Should the anniversary be celebrated on any other
date ( e.g ., when the date falls on a Sunday), the local
practice is to be followed.
42. Salutes on British Anniversaries.
In regard to Salutes on British Anniversaries, it is
to be noted that, when an Anniversary falls on a Sunday,
(Ships are to he dressed and salutes fired on the follow-
ing day.


Military
District.
Salutes to Foreign Men-of-War.
Other Salutes.
1st
Queen’s Park, Brisbane,
Queen’s Park, Brisbane;
Barrack Square, Thurs-
Barrack Square, Thurs-
day Island
day Island
2nd
South Head, Sydney
Government Domain,
Sydney
3rd
Port Gellibrand, Williams-
Government Domain,
town
Melbourne
4th
Fort Largs
Parade Ground, Adelaide
Sth
Artillery Barracks, Fre-
Esplanade, near Law Courts,
mantle
Perth
6th
Queen’s Battery, Hobart..
Queen’s Battery, Hobart
Article.
43. Salutes to Foreign Men of War.
Notification of the arrival of foreign men-of-war is
to be made to the Military Commander of the District
concerned except in the ease of Thursday Island, where
the 0.C., E.A.G.A., is to be notified.
The D.N.O. (or 5.D.N.0.) will be responsible for
advising the officer of the saluting battery of the arrival
of vessels, and the Military Authorities will be re-
sponsible for returning the salute.
The Saluting ports are —
Fremantle, Adelaide, Melbourne, Hobart, Sydney.
Brisbane, and Thursday Island.
The following is a list of stations at which salutes are
authorized to be fired by the Military Forces: —
44. Naval Guards of Honour.
With reference to Articles 166-169, Naval Forces
Regulations, Naval Guards of Honour will, as a general
rule, only be provided on Naval occasions.
2. Naval Guards of Honour will not, as a rule, attend
at the opening of the Federal and State Parliaments, as
a Military Guard will be provided on these occasions.
45. Official Calls.
Commanding Officers of H.M.A. Ships are to pav
the following official calls, for which cab or carriage
hire will be allowed: —
On His Excellency the Governor-General—
By a Commanding Officer on first arrival at the
Federal Capital after assuming command.
On His Excellency the Governor of each State—
By a Commanding Officer on his first visit after
assuming command, and thereafter to be limited
to one official call per annum, except in the case
of a second call at the State Capital after an
absence of six months or more.
On Premiers, Chief Justices, Lords Mayor, and
Mayqys of each State Capital—


Article.
By the Commanding Officer on his first visit after
assuming command; to be limited to one visit
uer annum.
46. Visits of Ceremony, etc., at Port Melbourne.
The following orders govern visits of ceremony at
Port Melbourne
The Secretary, Navy Office, Melbourne, will com-
municate the expected date and time of arrival of all
war vessels to the District Naval Officer, Victoria,
and to the Commanding Officer of the Naval Depot
at Williamstown. The latter will make the neces-
sary arrangements in regard to visits of ceremony
as laid down in K.E. and A.I. Art. 96 and in ac-
cordance with the customs, of the service.
The C.O. Depot is to report by telephone to the
Naval Board the actual approach and arrival of
all men-of-war and other vessels of importance.
2. With reference to Article 96, paragraph b,
“ The Officer in chief command ” will be the Naval
Board, except when the flag of the Flag Officer com-
manding the Fleet is flying in Hobson’s Bay, in
which case the Flag Officer Commanding will, for
the purposes of visits of ceremony, be “ The Officer
in chief command.”
3. The Officer of the Guard will be detailed by
the C.O. Depot, or the Senior Officer of H.M.A.
Ships present, should the latter be senior to the C.O.
Depot.
4. Before the arrival of a foreign man-of-war, the
Senior Officer of H.M.A. Ships at Port Melbourne
(or, in the absence of such Senior Officer, the O.C.
Naval Depot) will inquire by signal from Navy
Office at what time it is desired that the official
call (K.E. and A. 1., Article 96, paragraph b ) should
be paid and returned, and whether there are any
special orders for the Officer of the Guard. He is
also to arrange by telephone with the D.N.0., Vic-
toria, as to the time the latter desires his offi-
cial call paid and returned (K.E. and A. 1., Article
96, paragraph d).
5. The Officer of the Guard is to be instructed
in accordance with the above, and is to inform the
Officer Commanding the arriving ship, on boarding,
that- the Naval Board will be pleased to receive and
return visits of ceremony. He will give informa-
tion as to the position of the Navy Office, the
D.N.O.’s office, Port Melbourne, and the facilities
for reaching these. He will explain the rank and
status of the D.N.O.
6. Should a Captain’s command, E.A.N., be in
Hobson’s Bay, and a foreign man-of-war arrive com-
manded by an Officer of lower rank than Captain,


the Naval Board may direct that the visits of cere-
mony bo carried out reciprocally between these Offi-
cers.
7. If the flag of the Flag Officer commanding he
flying at Port Melbourne, or under the conditions of
paragraph 6, special arrangement will be made, if
necessary, for a visit to the Naval Board.
47. Ceremonial Parades of the Commonwealth Naval Forces.
(I.) Special Pakades.
Should an occasion arise when it is considered advis-
able by the Senior Naval Officer present to hold any
special parade of a body of the Naval Forces (either by
themselves or in co-operation with the Military Forces),
such as on the birthday of Ilis Majesty the King, or
similar national event, early intimation is, if practicable,
to he sent to the Navy Office in order that steps may be
taken to ascertain the wishes of His Excellency the Go-
vernor-General in regard to taking the salute at the
parade.
2. His Excellency the Governor-General will usually
on these occasions take the salute if it is convenient to
him. In the event of His Excellency the Governor-
General being desirous that the Governor of a State
should take the salute, His Excellency will address an
invitation to the State Governor concerned.
3. If there should be simultaneous parades in any Dis-
trict, or if it be deemed inconvenient for the State Go-
vernor to take the salute, the salute will be taken ai
His Excellency the command by the
senior Naval Officer present.
4. When the State Governor’s acceptance of the in-
vitation mentioned in paragraph 2 has been notified to
the Governor-General, the Senior Naval Officer present
will be informed, and is then to cause an announcement
to he published in the local press in the following
terms: —
“ His Excellency the Governor of
by request of His Excellency the Governor-General,
will take the salute at a parade of the Naval Forces
to be held at on .”
When the salute is to be taken by the Senior Naval
Officer under paragraph 3, the announcement should
read:—
“ (insert rank and name of Officer)
by command of His Excellency the Governor-
General, will take the salute at a parade to he held
at on .”
5. No arrangements for taking the salute on occasions
such as those referred to above are to be made until ex-
plicit instructions have been issued by the Naval Board.


Article.
(II.) Presentation of Decorations.
His Excellency the Governor-General has decided that
the presentation of all Naval decorations and awards
shall be made under the following procedure:—
(a) His Excellency the Governor-General will pre-
sent medals and decorations at a parade of
the Naval Forces, and in the absence of His
Excellency the Governor-General, and unless
His Excellency has invited the Governor of a
State to act, the medals will be presented on
parade, at His Excellency the Governor-
General’s command, by the Senior Naval
Officer present.
(b) In the case of presentation to a next-of-kin who
is unable to attend a public parade, the medal
or decoration shall be presented by a Naval
Officer. No notice regarding such presenta-
tion should appear in ihe press.
(c) In the event of His Excellency the Governor-
General being desirous that the Governor of
a State should present medals, an invitation
to do so will be addressed by the Governor-
General to the Governor. When the Gover-
nor’s acceptance of this invitation has been
notified by the Governor-General, the Naval
Hoard will cause an announcement to be pub-
lished in the press in the following terms; —
“ His Excellency the Governor of
, by request of His Excellency the
Governor-General, will present medals at
a parade to be held at
on •”
When the presentation is to be made by a
Naval Officer, the announcement should
read:—
“ (insert rank and name of
Officer), by command of His Excellency
the Governor-General, will present medals
at a parade to be held at
on ."
2. Parades for the presentation of medals will be held
at the Capital Cities of each State, and all recipients re-
siding in the State should be notified and requested to
attend. Smaller parades may occasionally be held in
provincial centres, on which occasions a Senior Naval
Officer will, at His Excellency the Governor-General’s
command, present the medals.
3. When a sufficient number of medals and decorations
have accumulated in any Ship or Establishment, or


in any District (as regards the Citizen Naval Forces and
discharged seamen), the Navy Office is to be informed,
when arrangements will be made for presentation in
accordance with the above instructions.
Note.— The above instructions refer, for the present,
to war medals and decorations, the presentation of other
medals, e.g., Long Service and (rood Conduct Medals, is
to continue to be carried out in accordance with the
custom of the Service.
48. Playing of the National Anthem when the Governors-
General of the Dominion of Canada, the Com-
monwealth of Australia, the Dominion of New
Zealand, and the Union of South Africa are received
on board His Majesty’s Ships.
The National Anthem (“God Save the King”) will
be played when the Governors j General of the Dominion
of Canada, the Commonwealth of Australia, the Do-
minion of New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa
are received on board one of His Majesty’s Ships within
their respective jurisdictions. This is in addition to the
occasion referred to in The King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions, Article 131, Clause 2.
49. Naval Arrangements for the Reception and Departure
of His Excellency the Governor-General at a Place
where Naval Authorities are Stationed.
The following arrangements are to be closely observed
for the reception and departure of His Excellency the
Governor-General on arrival at or departure from a place
where Naval Officers are stationed:—
If His Excellency is travelling by land, the re-
spective Senior Naval Officers are to attend at the
Railway Station, both at the place of arrival
and departure. In case the Senior Naval Officer
is unable to be present, he is to detail the
next Senior Naval Officer in the port to represent
him. In Melbourne, this duty is to be carried out
by the Naval A.D.C. to the Governor-General or
other Officer detailed by the Naval Board.
If His Excellency is travelling by sea, the respec-
tive Senior Naval Officers of the port will repair on
board the vessel, both at the place of arrival
and departure, and a Naval Guard of Honour
is, when possible, to be paraded when His Excel-
lency lands or embarks. If flying bis flag in the
ship, a salute is to be fired by any saluting ship
present in accordance with the Regulations.


Article.
2. The following special arrangements are to he ob-
served, in addition, at Sydney:—
When His Excellency is taking up residence at
Admiralty House, the Commodore-Superintendent is
responsible that Admiralty House is in every way
ready for occupation, and an Officer is to attend
there to turn over to the A.D.C.-in-Waiting,
and an Officer is also to attend to take over from the
A.D.C.-in-Waiting on departure of His Excellency.
A Nhval Guard of four men under a Petty Officer
is to he detailed for sentry duty at Admiralty House
while His Excellency is in residence.
The ISTaval barge and boat’s crew are to he placed
at His Excellency’s disposal during his visit.
3. The foregoing does not apply to unofficial journeys
within a State.
ISTotb.— Senior Haval Officers afloat are to conform to
the Regulations as laid down in King’s Regulations and
Admiralty Instructions.
(Vide also Article 340.)
50. Calling Arrangements for H.M.A. Ships Visiting
Yokohama.
1. Calls on the Diplomatic Coeps.
All Officers in Command of Squadrons or Ships, down
to and including Officers of the rank of Captain, will, as
soon as the exigencies of the service upon which they are
engaged permit, proceed to Tokio to call upon their own
Representative, at whose Chancery they will leave cards
for every Head of Mission present in Tokio.
The Chancery will send the cards to the officials con-
cerned, who will return them in the same way.
When this has been done, all visits between the visiting
Haval Officer and the Diplomatic Corps shall be con-
sidered as paid and returned.
2. Audience of His Majesty, Visits to Impeeial
Peinces, and Calls on Japanese Civil Officials.
If the visiting Kaval Officer be of the rank of Admiral
or Commodore, and it is his first visit to Japan, his Re-
presentative will request for him an audience of His Im-
perial Japanese Majesty, and will also arrange for him
to write his name (and those of the Officers Commanding
the ships under his orders) in the books of the Crown
Prince, and of those Princes of the Blood who usually
give audiences to Diplomatic officials and other foreign-
ers. When this has been done, the visiting Officer will
leave cards at his Representative’s Chancery for trans-
mission to the following:—-The Prime Minister, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, tfie Minister of the House-
hold, the Grand Master of the Ceremonies, and the
Mayor of Tokio.


Article.
These officials will send their cards in return to the
same Chancery, and when this has been done, the calls
will be considered as paid and returned.
3. Calls on the Navy Department.
If the visiting Naval Officer be of the rank of
Admiral, or Commodore, or a Captain (Senior Officer
of two or more ships), or a Commander (Senior Officer
of three or more ships), the Naval Attache (or if there
be no Naval Attache, then one of the members) of the
Mission of the country to which the visiting Officer
belongs, will arrange with the Navy Department of the
visiting Officer to call on the Minister of Marine.
At the time of this visit, the visiting Officer will leave
cards with the A.D.C. to the Minister of Marine for
the following:—The Vice-Minister of Marine, the Chief
of the General Staff, and the of the General
Staff.
The A.D.C. will, in exchange, hand to the visiting
Officer- the cards of these Officers.
4. Calls to be made by Officers below the rank
of Captain.
In the case of Officers below the rank of Captain,
they will call upon their own Representative only, and
not upon any other Ambassador, Minister, or (except
as provided for in Section 3) upon the Navy
Department.
5. Officials to be called upon at Yokohama.
The officials who have to be called upon by all Com-
manding Officers, whenever they visit the Port of
Yokohama, are as follows: —The Governor of Kan-
agawa Ken (by arrangement with the visiting Officer’s
Consular Representative), and in the case of Officers
of the rank of Captain, R.N., and below, the Mayor of
Yokohama.
6. Dress.
The dress for all the above-mentioned calls is;—
Proek Coat and Sword (no epaulettes).
51.
52.
53.
54.


SECTION III.
DIVINE SERVICE AND INSTRUCTIONS TO
CHAPLAINS.
Art We.
55. Divine Service.
The Ship’s Company is not to he employed on Sun-
days on any work or duty other than that which may be
strictly necessary for the public service.
2. Divine service is to be performed every Sunday
according to the manner and forms adopted for the
Royal Australian Navy; if the duties of the ship and
state of the weather do not absolutely prevent it, a
sermon is to he preached, unless otherwise directed by
the Senior Officer present. The Captain and all Officers
and Men not on duty are expected to attend this service,
unless permission to be absent has been formally obtained
on the ground of religious scruples.
3. On every week day after morning quarters or
divisions, short prayers from the same order of service
are to be read.
4. The Senior Officer present is to make arrangements
for Officers and Men of Ships in which no Chaplain is
borne to attend Divine service on Sundays, either by the
service being conducted by a Chaplain belonging to
another Ship present or by attendance on board Ships or
at Naval Shore Establishments in which Chaplains are
borne. In arranging the hours and Ships in which Divine
service shall be performed, Officers and Men should be
brought together in large congregations rather than that
numerous services should be held at less convenient
hours.
5. Similar arrangements are to be made in regard to
Divine service for Roman Catholics when a Roman
iCatholic Chaplain is present in any of H.M.A. Ships or
Establishments. Roman Catholics are not to be required
to attend the Divine service referred to in the foregoing
paragraphs.
56. Duties of Naval Chaplains.
The Chaplain is.to conduct the daily morning prayers,
and to perform the duties of the Lord’s Day, whether in
his own ship or in any other to which he may be
appointed by the Senior Officer, with due solemnity,
and in such a manner that his hearers may be impressed
with devotion; he will be careful to adapt his sermons to
their capacity and situation in life, so that his teaching
may be at once intelligible and beneficial.
2. The Protestant Chaplain shall conduct public
worship according to the manner and forms adopted for
the Royal Australian Navy, hut may, at times approved
by the Captain, hold voluntary services according to the


manner and forms of the church of which he is a
minister. The Roman Catholic Chaplain shall conduct
public worship according to the manner and forms of
the Roman Catholic Church as prescribed for the Royal
Australian Navy by the head of the Roman Catholic
Church at the Federal Capital, representing the Roman
Catholic Church in Australia.
3. The Chaplain shall facilitate, as far as possible, the
performance of Divine service by ministers of churches
other than his own, who may be permitted by the Cap-
tain to visit the ship for that purpose. iSpecial facilities
should be given to Chaplains belonging to other ships
or establishments of the Royal Australian Navy.
i. He is to give religious instruction, at such times as
the Captain may order, to all men and boys who may
voluntarily attend.
5. He is to visit the sick on board frequently, unless
their condition renders such visits inadvisable.
He is also to visit the sick, and others who may require
spiritual assistance, on board other ships or in hospitals,
or elsewhere on shore, where there is no Chaplain.
6. He is to supervise and report upon the work of the
Naval Schoolmaster, if one is borne.
If no Schoolmaster or Instructor-Lieutenant is borne,
he is to arrange for the instruction of such persons in the
Navy as are deficient in reading, writing, arithmetic,
and geography. He shall report, in writing, to the
Captain at the end of each quarter the character of the
instruction given, the number of hours of instruction,
and the progress made by each person.
He is to supervise the Ship’s Library, making such
suggestions as he considers necessary for its improve-
ment.
Should a Naval Instructor be borne, the above duties
devolve upon this officer, and the Chaplain has therefore
no educational responsibilities in this direction.
7. At quarters he shall report to the Commanding
Officer. His duty in battle is to aid the wounded, and
his station at quarters for battle and for inspection shall
be as the Captain may direct.
8. He shall render an annual report to the Secretary,
Navy Office, through his Captain, as to the official
services performed by him, with any remarks or recom-
mendations he may wish to make.
9. A Chaplain, while serving in one of H.M.A. Ships
or Establishments is not to undertake duty on shore for
which payment is received; but he may assist occasion-
ally, without remuneration, in churches on shore, at such
times as may not interfere with his duties in the Fleet.
10. Chaplains shall not hold any Naval rank, but
shall retain, when afloat, the position to which their
office would entitle them on shore.


Article.
57. Conduct of Religious Services on Board H.M.A Ships
when no Chaplain is Borne.
When one of H.M.A. Ships, in which no Chaplain is
borne, is present at a port where a Haval Reserve Chap-
lain (Protestant) has been appointed, and no Chaplain,
R.A.H., is available, arrangements are, if possible, to he
made for the Haval Reserve Chaplain to conduct service
on hoard each Sunday. Railing this, the Commanding
Officer is to conduct the service.
2. In the event of there being more than one Haval
Reserve Chaplain present at the port, arrangements
should he made for the Chaplains of the different Pro-
testant denominations to conduct service in turn.
3. As a general rule, Roman Catholics should be landed
for service, the Roman Catholic Chaplain, R.A.H.R., if
any, being consulted beforehand, unless the ship carry-
ing the Roman Catholic Chaplain, R.A.H., is present,
when that officer will make all necessary arrangements.
4. Arrangements for the spiritual welfare of Officers
and Men serving in the Destroyers and .Submarines are
to be made by their parent ship or the Senior Officer
present if away from the parent ship.
58. Services for Protestants at Garden Island.
In the event of the Chaplain of H.M.A.S. Penguin
being absent, or when none is borne, the following
arrangements are to be made: —•
(1) When a ship carrying a Chaplain is along-
side Garden Island, the Chaplain of that ship is to
perform the above-mentioned services, and attend
on jthe sick and on the men in detention barracks.
(2) When there is no ship alongside carrying a
Chaplain, the .Commodore Superintendent should
arrange that the services are taken by a Chaplain,
R.A.H.R., of one of the Protestant denominations.
(3) The Senior Haval Officer present should
arrange that ships present in the port not carrying
Chaplains send their men to attend service at
Garden Island, unless it is more convenient for
them to attend service on board a ship carrying a
Chaplain.
(4) R.A.H.R. Chaplains should also attend on
the sick, &c., of their own denominations present on
board ships not carrying Chaplains and at Garden
Island.
(5) The services mentioned in paragraph (3)
should be arranged by the Commodore Superinten-
dent to be taken by the ministers of the various
denominations roughly in the proportion to the
number of men coming under their charge (see
para. 4).
59.


Form.
Return.
Instructions as to Rendering.
A.S. 321b
Copy of Log . .
Monthly to Commodore Commanding
H.M.A. Fleet. Finally to Navy
Office. Ships not under the orders
of the Commodore Commanding,
direct to Navy Office (Vide also
Article 114)
A.S. 379
Chronometer
Return
Annually on 31st December and on
supersession of Navigating Officer.
To be rendered direct to Hydro-
grapher, R.A.N., together with
supply and receipt notes for the
period covered. Hydrographer,
E.A.N., will make an abstract from
all the annual returns showing list
of all Chronometers and Watches
in the Fleet, filing one copy, and
forwarding one to Hydrographer,
Admiralty
A.S. 374a
Deviation of
Compass
Two copies annually on 31st De-
cember to Hydrographer, B.A.N.
One copy will be sent to Hydro-
grapher, Admiralty, and one
retained for reference
SECTION IV.
HYDROGRAPHICAL AND NAVIGATIONAL.
Hydrographical Department of the Royal Australian
Navy.
The Hydrographical Department of the Royal Austra-
lian Navy is at the Navy Office, and is the Distributing
Centre for Hydrographic information.
2. Charts, Notices to Mariners, and Hydrographic
Documents from the Admiralty will he sent to the
Hydrographic Department, Melbourne, and distributed
to ships from there. In the event of a ship or ships
temporarily leaving the Australian Station, the Hydro-
grapher, Admiralty, will be informed by cablegram,
and requested to send Charts and Notices to Mariners
direct to such ship or ships.
3. The Hydrographer, E.A.N., is authorized to com-
municate direct with the Hydrographer, Admiralty, and
with all local authorities in Australia, on ordinary mat-
ters of routine. Any communications involving a matter
of policy or change of routine, or incurring expense not
on estimates, are to be sent through the Naval Board
for approval and transmission.
4. The policy of replacement of Chart Sets will be
similar to that of the Hydrographic Department, Ad-
miralty.
5. A number of Charts is held beyond complete seta.
6. The Hydrographer, E.A.N., is responsible for the
replacement of all Chart Sets.
7. The periodical returns on hydrographical matters
required to be sent in by Ships should be rendered as
follows: —


Form.
Return.
Instructions as to Rendering.
a 38i ..
Compass Jour-
nal
As per Article 1024, King’s Regu-
lations, except that it should be
sent to the Hydrographer, R.A.N.,
who will forward it to Admiralty
(Compass Branch)
A.S. 385
Result of Ob-
servations for
Variation
ashore
Direct to Hydrographer, R.A.N.,
who will forward to Hydrographer,
Admiralty
A.S. 380
Remark Book
Certificates of
Transfer of
Chart Sets
Annually, and on supersession of
Navigating Officer, to Hydro-
grapher, R.A.N., who will forward
to Hydrographer, Admiralty,
calling attention to any book
containing information of unusual
interest, or showing special zeal
and diligence in its preparation, the
Naval Board being also informed
When Chart Sets are returned to
Hydrographer, R.A.N., these need
not be rendered. When transac-
tions take place between ships, a
Certificate of Transfer is to be
sent to Hydrographer, R.A.N,, who
, will keep Hydrographer, Admiralty,
informed of the position of all
Chart Sets on the Station an-
nually, and of any change
S. 122
Account of
Receipt and
Expenditure
of Compasses,
&c.
On supersession of Navigating Officer,
and on paying off, direct to Director
of Naval Stores, Navy Office, Mel-
bourne
A.S. 378
Hydrographic
Note
To be rendered by all ships. On
copy direct to Hydrographer.
Admiralty, one copy to C.C.A.F. for
circulation to ships under his orders,
returning to Hydrographer, R.A.N.,
and one copy direct to Hydro-
grapher, R.A.N., for circulation to
ships not under the orders of
C.C.A.F., and to S.N.O., New Zea-
land, being finally returned to
Hydrographer, R.A.N. Each copy
is to be complete with tracing (if
required), and a notation is to be
made on each copy, stating that
the other two copies have been sent
direct to the other two addresses in
accordance with this order
A.S. 377
Hydrographical
Report
Supply and
Receipt Notes
for Chart Sets
Quarterly to Hydrographer, R.A.N.
To Hydrographer, R.A.N., on pay-
ing off, or on supersession of
Navigating Officer
Article.
61. Damaged Chronometers or Watches.
Damaged chronometers or watches will not be accepted
by the Hydrographic Department unless accompanied
by a copy of the report, which must be rendered to the
Navy Office, for Hydrographer, E.A.H., in all cases of


damage, in accordance with Article 1010, paragraph 6,
of the King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions.
62. H.M.A.S. “ Cerberus,” Moorings and Buoy.
H.M.A. Ships mooring alongside Cerberus huoy should
cast off the 1-in. picking-up ■ chain from the top of
the buoy, and heave in on this chain until the heavy
cable shows above the water, when her own cable can
bo attached thereto.
2. The buoy will at all times keep its position ahead
of the vessel, and cannot be shifted. No ship must
make fast to it.
3. The mooring is marked by a red buoy, the posi-
tion of which by transit marks is—Ist, the seaward
edge of the black painted dolphin at the river entrance
on with the Newport chimney; 2nd, the seaward end
of the Railway Pier, Williamstown, on with the Time
Ball Tower, and situate 2,300 feet in an east three-
quarter south direction from the red, painted dolphin at
the entrance to the river.
63. “ Measured Distances ” on the Australian Coast.
A measured mile has been established on the eastern
shore of Port Phillip. Two beacons, each consisting
of three piles, have been erected in 20 feet of water.
The beacons lie a mile apart south-east and north-west,
the south-eastern being S. 38 deg. W. 400 yards from
Rickett’s Point, and the north-western being S. 55 deg.
W. 500 yards from Quiet Corner. The front and rear
(Shore) beacons which come into line on a bearing
from seaward of X. 48 deg. E. rnag., and mark the
extremities of the mile, are each surmounted by a
triangle painted white, those on shore being inverted
and so arranged that their vertices appear to make con-
tact with those in front when running the course which
bears S. 42 deg. E. mag., about miles from the shore
in 9 fathoms of water.
(Note. —The N.W. beacon serves the purpose of
the red buoy (now removed) which formerly marked
the L.W. rock off Quiet Corner).
2. A measured mile has also been established on the
coast of New South Wales. Beacons have been erected
on points on either side of Maroubra Bay. The front
beacons are white with triangular top marks; the rear
beacons being white posts with rectangular bottom marks
painted red with white stripes.
A 5-mile measured distance has been established be-
tween the northernmost of these beacons and two beacons
of a similar construction and colour erected on Cape
Baily.
3. When running trials on “ measured distances,”
H.M.A. ships are to fly the special flag A of the
International Code at the masthead, vide page XIV.
of the International Code of Signals.


Article.
64. Difficulties Experienced at Broome.
The following is an extract from a recent Letter of
Proceedings:—
“ Great difficulty was experienced at Broome in
landing and bringing back liberty men; not only
was the tide adverse at usual times of landing, but
easterly half-gales were blowing all the time. Owing
to the wind being against the tide, difficulty was
experienced in turning the ship to go out of
harbour.”


SECTION V.
Article.
DISCIPLINE, BADGES, SERVICE CERTIFICATES, ETC-
65. Naval Discipline Act —Application to R.A.N.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 5-8.
66. King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions —
Application to R.A.N.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 7,8, and 137.
67. Port Phillip —Senior Officer for Disciplinary Purposes.
In Port Phillip, when the Officer Commanding the
Squadron is not present, the Naval Board is to he
considered the Senior Officer present for disciplinary
purposes; warrants requiring the approval of the
Senior Officer, applications for Courts Marital, or re-
ports on subjects likely to involve disciplinary actio?,
are to be forwarded direct to the Navy Office, by any of
11.M.A. Ships present, including those under the orders
of the Officer commanding the Squadron.
63. Relations with Civil Power.
In regard to the apprehension of, or service of writ?
upon, persons serving on board H.M.A. ships, the Go-
vernments of the various States have agreed to follow
the procedure laid down in Article 811, King’s Regu-
lations. Service of writs will be effected personally on
tlje offender notwithstanding any law which may pro-
vide that service on the Commanding Officer may be
deemed sufficient.
2. In all dealings with the Civil Authorities, Com-
manding Officers are to be guided by the instructions
contained in Articles 811, 812 and 813 King’s Regula-
tions, and in case of doubt or of any dispute with the
Civil Authorities they are to take immediate steps to
communicate the facts direct to the Naval Board by
telegraph.
3. The Governments of all States have further agreed
to the necessary steps being taken by the Police Authori-
ties of the larger seaports to acquaint at once the Com-
manding Officer of any of H.M.A. ships in port of the
arrest of any member of his ship’s company for a civil
offence.
69. Naval Detention Quarters, Sydney.
Before issuing the Imprisonment Warrant for deten-
tion in the Naval Detention Quarters, Sydney, Com-
manding Officers of H.M.A. Ships are to ascertain that
accommodation is available and obtain the approval of
the Commodore Superintendent and Senior Naval Officer
at Sydney. The punishment Warrant is also to be sub-


Article.
mitted to the Senior Naval Officer present for approval
in accordance with Article 770 King’s Regulations and
Admiralty Instructions.
2. In the case of the punishment or detention being
awarded to a man .when his ship is away from Sydney,
instructions as to place of detention are to be asked
for from the Navy Office, by telegraph if necessary.
70. Arrest of Absentees and Deserters by Naval Officers or
Men.
The attention of Officers, Petty Officers, and Men is
called to the provisions of Section 114 of the Defence
Act, under which • they are authorized to arrest any
person they recognise as being an absentee or deserter,
and it is their duty to give into the custody of the police
any person they may so recognise at any time, whether
they themselves are on duty or on leave.
2. In any case where they do not take steps for the
arrest of any such absentee or deserter, they render
themselves liable to the penalty provided in section 77
(c) of the Defence. Act.
71. Warrants for Arrest of Absentees or Deserters.
For the arrest of absentees or deserters, a separate
Warrant is to be issued in respect of each man.
2. Warrants are, in all cases, to be forwarded to the
Chief of Police in each State.
3. All persons to whom warrants have been issued
are to bo notified in writing when the rating named
thereon has been arrested or has returned to duty.
fife
72. Conduct Cards of Petty Officers and Men.
A Conduct Card is to be prepared for every Petty
Officer and Man who is aw T arded a punishment, or who,
on joining a ship, is not in the Ist Class for Conduct
and Ist Class for Leave. Conduct Cards need not be
prepared for other Petty Officers and Men.
2. The Conduct Card is to contain a record of all
Offences and Punishments, and changes of class for
Conduct and Leave, during the period of service in a
ship.
3. Should a Petty Officer or Man be lent temporarily
from one ship to another the Conduct Card (if any)
is to accompany him. On final discharge from one ship
to another, or from the Service, the Conduct Card is
to be forwarded to the Navy Office, where it will be
retained on record for two years.
C. 18358.—2


Article.
4. Boxes, fitted with lock and key, are to be made by
Ship’s Artificers, in which Conduct Cards are to be
kept. These boxes are to be taken on charge in the
Carpenter’s Permanent Store Account.
5. The directions contained in Article 826 King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions, except as
modified herein, are to be considered as applying to
these Conduct Cards.
73. Defence Prosecutions.
In connexion with issue of Summonses in Prosecu-
tions under the Kaval Defence Act, it is not neces-
sary for the Summons to be signed by a Police Magis-
trate. All Summonses are to be issued before an ordi-
nary Justice of the Peace.
74. Service Certificates—Annual Assessments for Character
and Ability.
In selecting ratings for advancement, Officers re-
sponsible are principally guided by the assessments for
character and ability on the Service Certificates of
ratings so recommended, as it is considered that ex-
aminations for advancement are but little help in dis-
closing a man’s general character and zeal in the per-
formance of his duties.
2. Every endeavour should be made to select for ad-
vancement the rating who is considered to be best
fitted for the higher rating, and the attention of Com-
manding Officers and all concerned is drawn to the
need for great care to be exercised when making the
necessary notations on Service Certificates. It should
be borne in mind that the full value of these awards, as
laid down in Article 831, King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions, will be assumed to be intended.
3. Cases frequently occur of Officers, who a month
previously assess*! a man’s ability as “ Satisfactory,”
applying for the rating to be disrated or discharged on
the grounds of incompetence, or, on the other hand,
his promotion may be urged.
4. It is therefore necessary for the benefit of the
whole service that, when making these assessments, the
officers concerned should not err either by being too
generous to the men under their command in this re-
spect, or by discouraging deserving men by insufficient
assessments. (Vide also Article 83.)
75. Assessment of Character and Ability of Ordinary
Seamen, 2nd Class, &c.
The character and ability of Ordinary Seamen, 2nd
Class, Ordinary Signalman, 2nd Class, and Ordinary
Telegraphists, 2nd Class, are to bo assessed on the day
before they attain the age of eighteen, and not on the
31st December of each previous year.


Article.
76. Good Conduct Badges—Time in A.I.F. to Count.
In case? where Kaval Board approval is given for
ratings to count time served in the Australian Imperial
Force towards the award of Good Conduct Badges in
the Royal Australian Navy, the first Good Conduct
Badge may be granted on entry to those who have the
necessary qualifying badge time, and to others as they
become eligible, notwithstanding the fact that_ a man,
when otherwise eligible, may be holding a non-badge
rating, such as Stoker 2nd class.
77. Good Conduct Badges—Ordinary Seamen, 2nd Class.
Qualifying Service for award of Good Conduct
Badge? is to count from the date of attaining the age
of eighteen years.
78. Correspondence for Deserters.
It has been observed that it is the practice in some
Ships to return letters, &c., for ratings who have deserted
from the Naval Service with the notation “ Deserted ”
marked on the envelope, thus giving unnecessary pub-
licity to the fact of a rating’s desertion, to the humilia-
tion of parents, relatives, eke.
2. This practice is undesirable, and is to be dis-
continued.
79. Gunnery and Torpedo History Sheets.
Attention is drawn to Article 833 King’s Regulations
and Admiralty Instructions relative to providing a
Gunnery and Torpedo History Sheet (Form A.S. 1245)
for each seaman when he is first rated Able Seaman,
and also to the instructions relative to acting Gunnery
Ratings contained thereon and those contained in
Chapter 111., Gunnery Manual, Volume 111.
80. Non-Substantive Rating to be noted on Service
Certificate.
On discharge of a rating to “ Shore ” the Non-substan-
tive rating held by him is to be noted in brackets under
the Substantive Rating in the column headed “ Rating.”
81. Statement of Services in R.A.N.
Attention is called to the necessity when forwarding
for transmission to the Admiralty the usual statement
of service of R.N. ratings in the R.A.N., for the Ad-
miralty official number to be inserted on the copy of
certificate in all cases, in addition to the R.A.N. num-
ber, and for care generally to be exercised in the pre-
paration of certified copies of certificates.


Disposal of Service Certificates of Ratings Sent to Civil
Gaols for Imprisonment and Discharge at Expira-
tion of Sentence.
With regard to the disposal of Service Certificates of
ratings sent to Civil Gaols for imprisonment, and who
will not return to the Service at the completion of their
sentences, it has been decided that the procedure indi-
cated in Article 1616, paragraph 3, King’s Regulations
and Admiralty Instructions (Addenda 1918), shall
not he followed in the Royal Australian Kavy. The
Service Certificates of such offenders are to he forwarded
to the Governor of the Gaol, with pay dire, to be handed
to the men on their discharge from the Gaol.
Provisional Half-yearly Assessment of Ability of
Ratings.
The ability' of every rating serving in the it.A.X, is to
be provisionally assessed on 30th June in each year.
The utmost care is to he taken in this provisional assess-
ment, just as is the case at the end of the year, and the
assessment is to be noted in pencil on the rating’s Service
Certificate.
2. Should it be intended to reduce the assessment of
ability of any rating below that last recorded on his
Service Certificate, the rating concerned is to be brought
before his Commanding Officer and informed of the fact.
This instruction will apply to a provisional assessment,
whether on discharge from one ship to another or on
30th June, and to the final assessment at the end of the
year.
3. The object of the provisional assessment of ability
on 30th June in each year, is, primarily, to afford each
rating, whose ability is, in the opinion of his Command-
ing Officer, deteriorating, an opportunity for making
special endeavour to improve prior to the final assess-
ment at the end of the year.
Service Certificates.
ISTew Service Certificates are to be issued for all ratings
entered in the R.A.K. who are R.K. Pensioners or Royal
Fleet Reserve Men.
2. For purpose of reference the R.JST. Service Certi-
ficate is, in each case, to he kept attached to the R.A.N.
Certificate.


SECTION VI.
STORES AND STORE ACCOUNTS.
Article.
85. Naval Store Accounting.
The system of Naval Store Accounting, as laid down
in Chapters XLYI. and XLVIL of King’s Regulations
and Admiralty Instructions, and as contained in the
“ Memorandum of Instructions for the Guidance of
Officers in Accounting for Naval Stores ” (Form
5.117 E), has been adopted generally for H.M.A. Ships,
and accounts and returns are to be forwarded to the
Director of Naval Stores at the periods set out in Tables
XXVI., XXVIII. of the latter.
Commanding Officers H.M.A. Ships should take the
necessary steps to insure that these instructions shall be
properly carried out.
The above does not apply to H.M.A.S. Cerberus, for
which separate instructions have been issued.
86. Demands for Stores, Etc.
Ships are to make timely demands for all stores, pro-
visions, and clothing.
2. All demands are to show the latest possible date by
which the stores will require to arrive at a definite
destination, so that the necessary arrangements for
freight, &c., may be made by the Officer on whom the
stores are demanded.
3. Demands should be forwarded so that the Officer
supplying the stores may have sufficient time, at least
fourteen days, to have the stores packed for shipment,
and make necessary arrangements as to freight, &c.
4. Should the ship demanding the stores be called
away unexpectedly from the destination stated on demand
before the stores are due to arrive, the Commanding
Officer is to leave directions as to their disposal.
5. Ships are not to demand stores by telegraph except
in cases of emergency which could not have been fore-
seen, and the usual demands are invariably to follow;
the date of the telegram being quoted thereon.—
(N.13/4419.)
6. Demands for stores required by H.M.A. Ships from
Naval Establishments are to be prepared in quadrupli-
cate on the proper Forms, and forwarded to the Naval
Store Officer, Victualling Store Officer, or Naval
Ordnance Officer, as the ease may be.
7. In cases where the stores will have to be sent by
freight, care is to be taken to give the exact address of
the Officer to whom the stores should be consigned.
87. Purchase of Naval Stores.
Officers Commanding H.M.A. Ships are to forward to
the Director of Naval Stores, Navy Office, Melbourne, a


Article.
letter of advice (Form 5.133), as laid down in Article
1777, King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions,
whenever coal or any other Kaval stores are purchased.
88. Surveys on Stores.
It is to he arranged that only one survey and return
of each description of store takes place on a ship’s arrival
at Sydney, and one to complete before leaving, if
necessary.
89. Misappropriation of Public Moneys or Stores.
In the event of loss of public moneys, or of stores, or
materials of any description belonging to the Govern-
ment being known, or believed, to be due to theft, a
report is to be made to the Kaval Board as soon as pos-
sible after the discovery of the loss, with a full state-
ment of the circumstances, and precise information on
the following points is to be furnished: —
(a) The circumstances in which the moneys or
articles were stolen, or believed to have been
stolen.
( b ) In whose custody the moneys or articles were at
the time of the actual or supposed theft.
(c) Whether any inquiry was held, and with what
result.
( d ) What steps have been taken to recover the moneys
or articles.
The Kaval Board will then decide whether a prosecution
is to take place.
80. Receipts for Packages, and Indorsement of Bills of
lading.
Officers responsible, or their representatives, are to
examine carefully before taking delivery, all packages
containing stores received from H.M.A. ISTaval Estab-
lishments, or elsewhere, in order that any instances of
tampering with packages in transit may be detected
before receipts are given for the packages.
2. Should the packages bear signs of having been
tampered with, they should be opened, in presence of a
representative of the shipping company, and the con-
tents checked before removal from the wharf.
3. When it is necessary to give receipts for packages
delivered by shipping companies, railways, &c., which
cannot be immediately opened up and inspected, the
receipt is to be stamped with the words, “ Package exter-
nally in good condition; condition of contents unknown.”


Article.
4. When stores are received by freight from H.M.A.
Naval Establishments, a copy of the bill of lading is to
be indorsed by the consignee as follows;
“ Received the within packages and/or loose
articles in good order and condition, except [here
should follow a list of packages not delivered,
shortages, or breakages, in damaged packages, or
in packages which show signs of having been opened
in transit.”]
‘‘ (Signed) "
5. The counter-signature of the local agents of the
shipping company should then be obtained on the copy
of the bill of lading, with a certificate, in the event of
settlement not being effected by the consignee, that the
claim has not been paid at port of destination, and the
completed document forwarded to the consignor.
6. This procedure will enable claims for losses to be
settled promptly at the port of shipment without further
reference to the port of destination, which is now
frequently necessary.
7. When shortages or breakages are found, which could
not be detected in the handling or by external examina-
tion of the packages, they should not be included in the
indorsement of the bill of lading, but reported separately
by letter.


86 1918 91. — PERCENTAGE CHARGE ON STORES AND
MATERIAL ISSUED FROM
H.M.A. SHIPS OR NAVAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
S' ,S. 18/980)
Naval and Victualling Stores.
Coal and Oil Fuel.
151/1919
XV. 19/569)
1
Extra
On all Supplies of
On all Supplies
On Supplies of Stores purchased in Australia.
From Stocks.
Supplied
direct
Labour,
Stores imported from
of Stores
Not
Ex
i.e. t
Admiralty Yards,
imported from
obtained
Packing
—
excepting
Articles under
Admiralty
Yards under
from
Admiralty
Supplied direct by
on
by Con-
tractors,
Collier
Stores for
Shipment,
Heading “ D.”
Heading “ D ”
in Rate Book.
Yards.
direct Charge.
Coal.
Fuel.
direct
Tank
Tallying
Charge.
Steamer.
&c.
Naval
Victualling
Naval
Victualling
Naval
Victualling
Naval
Victualling
Stores.
Stores.
Stores.
Stores.
Stores.
Stores.
Stores.
Stores.
To Admiralty
Rate
Rate Book,
Nil
Actual
The rate
at which
Nil
Actual
Actual
Establishments
Book,
plus 55%
Cost,
plus 5%
the Stock issued
cost,
cost,
or ships
plus 45%
could be
replaced
plus 6%
plus 15%
To Admiralty
Rate Book,
Actual
Nil
Actual
Victualling
plus 5%,
cost (in-
cost,
Yards
plus
freight
eluding
freight),
plus 21%
To R.N. ships of
plus 2J%
Rate Book,
Actual
Nil
Actual
war
plus 6%,
plus
freight
cost (in-
cluding
freight),
plus 5%
cost,
plus 5%
To Common-
Kate
Rato Book,
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
wealth Govern-
Book,
plus 5%,
plus 65%,
cost (in-
cost,
cost.
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
plus
cost,
ment Line of
plus 45%
plus
plus 10%
eluding
plus 2J%
plus 5%
plus 10%
plus 5%
plus 10%
plus 5%
plus 1 %
plus 15%
Steamers
plus 10%
freight,
freight),
5%
To Common-
plus 5%
plus 5%
Hate
Rate Book,
Rate Book,
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
wealth and
Book,
plus 5%,
plus 55%,
cost (in-
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost.
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
State Govern-
plus
plus
plus 10%
eluding
plus 5%
plus 5%
plus 10%
plus 5%
plus 10%
plus 5%
plus 1 %
plus
plus 15%
ment Depart-
45%,
plus 10%
freight,
freight),
5%
ments
plus 5 %
plus 5%
To Contractors
Rate Book,
Actual
Nil
Actual
(for making up
plus 5%,
cost (in-
cost
uniform cloth-
plus
eluding-
ing, &c.)
freight
freight)
To private indi-
Rate
Rate Book,
Rate Book,
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
viduals (where
Book,
plus 5%,
plus 55%,
cost (in-
cost,
cost,
plus 10%
cost,
cost,
plus 10%
cost,
cost,
cost,
approved in
plus
plus
plus 15%
eluding
plus 15%
plus 20%
plus 2%
plus
plus 20%
special circum-
45%,
plus 15%
freight.
freight),
10%
stances)
plus 10%
plus 10%
To Foreign Go-
Rate
Rate Book,
Rate Book,
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
vern ments
Book,
plus 5%,
plus 55%,
cost (in-
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
cost,
plus 5%
cost,
plus 1 %
cost,
plus
cost
plus
plus
plus 15%
eluding
plus 5%
plus 5%
plus 15%
plus 5%
plus 10%
plus 15%
45%,
plus 15%
freight ,
freight),
5%
plus 5%
plus 5%
• To Allied Governments, the rate at which the Stock issued could be replaced.
In no case is the price charged for su
pplies to be lower than that which obtains locally, excepting for supplies to
th© Admiralty Establishments
or Ships, of stores imported from Admiralty yards.


Article.
82. Notification of Shipments of Stores.
Attention of Commanding Officers of H.M.A, Ships
and Naval Establishments is drawn to the necessity, when
possible, of supplying information as to the shipment of
stores to H.M.A. Naval Establishments at least one mail
previous to the stores being forwarded. This is especially
necessary in the case of explosives consigned to the Naval
Ordnance flDepot, Spectacle Island, as the shipping com-
panies require all explosives removed immediately the
ship arrives in port, and great inconvenience is caused
by the absence of the necessary information which is
required by the Customs Department before the stores
can be cleared.
93. Certificate of Destruction of Stores.
In all eases where approval has been given for
obsolete and unserviceable stores to be destroyed, a
certificate is to be given by a responsible Officer when
action has been taken, stating that the stores have been
so dealt with.
This certificate is then to be attached, and filed with
the vouchers writing off the stores.
94. Mess linen, Bedding, &c., for H.M.A. Ships.
All bedding, mess linen, &c., for H.M.A. Ships are to
be issued as provided for Ships in the Eoyal Navy.
Towels and sheets are not to be issued to Officers of
H.M.A. Ships or Naval Establishments at Government
expense.
95. Eeturn of Condemned Stores and Empty Packages.
Condemned stores and empty packages, &c., are not
to be returned to any of H.M.A. Naval Establishments
at Sydney in hired lighters, unless by previous arrange-
ment with the General Manager, Garden Island;
Victualling Store Officer, Eoyal Edward Victualling
Yard, Darling Island; or the Naval Ordnance. Officer,
Spectacle Island. The cost of conveyance by this means
is generally much greater than the value of the articles.
96. Procedure of Dealing with Stores when Ships are Paid
Off, &c.
The procedure for dealing with stores and fixtures
when a ship is ordered to be paid off is to be as directed
by Article 1117, King’s Eegulations and Admiralty
Instructions, paragraphs 1,2, and 3, except that the
latter portion of paragraph 2 ( c) , which reads: “or if
necessary placed in a suitable lay-apart store in charge
of the ship’s store officers,” is to be disregarded for the
present, there being no lay-apart store at Garden Island
available.


Article.
2. The following procedure is to be observed in lieu
of that laid down in Article 1117 (2c) of King’s Eegu-
lations and Admiralty Instructions: —
“ All serviceable stores are to be kept on board the
ship, and store officers will be held strictly responsible
for them. Special precautions are to be taken for safe-
guarding valuable stores, all removable articles not in
use being locked up in store rooms when|this can be con-
veniently done, or, if necessary, such articles as stop
watches, binoculars, telescopes, &e., may be returned to
the Naval Store Officer for custody only, in which case
the articles are to be packed in suitable cases and duly
sealed and marked before being returned.”
3. Navy Order No. 39/20 is hereby cancelled.
97. Economy in Expenditure.
In view of the financial position and of the necessity
for rigid economy, the Minister for the Navy has
directed that every possible effort must be made to reduce
expenditure to the lowest possible limit consistent with
efficiency.
2. The Naval Board, therefore, direct that all respon-
sible officers, Naval and Civil, enforce strict economy in
the expenditure of public money or stores, and also
direct that careful attention is to be given to this matter
by every Officer concerned.
3. Every possible care is to be taken of Government
furniture provided for official quarters, and any unneces-
sary expense in this connexion will entail raising the
present rate of percentage.
98. Flags Not to be lent.
Flags are not on any account to be lent without the
sanction of the Naval Board.
2. Persons asking for the loan of flags are to be
informed that the Naval Board have found it necessary
to discontinue the loan of Government flags for decora-
tive purposes, it being practicable to obtain such articles
frqm the private trade.
99. Typewriters—Supply of.
The supply of typewriters will be arranged for by the
Commonwealth Stores Supply and Tender Board.'
2. Requirements of the various services should be
demanded from the following Officers, who will requisi-
tion supplies from the Board:—
Naval Store Officer, Sydney—Requirements of
Naval Establishments (excepting Cockatoo Island)
in New South Wales and Queensland, also of
H.M.A. Ships.
Store Officer, Cockatoo Island, Sydney—Require-
ments of Cockatoo Island.


Article.
Naval Store Officer, Williamstown—Require-
ments of all Naval Establishments in Victoria
(excepting Navy Office and Branches), Tasmania,
South Australia, and Western Australia.
3. The hire of typewriters has also been arranged for.
Typewriters are not to be obtained on hire without the
authority of the representative of the Board in the State
concerned. Demand should therefore be made on the
officers mentioned for machines required to be hired.
4. The following particulars of machines at present
on hire are to be forwarded to the officer authorized to
requisition supplies, without delay;—
(1) Type and size of machine.
(2) Rate of hire.
(3) Date from which hire commenced.
(4) Whether machines are permanently required,
and, if not, how T long it is desired that hiring
should continue.
100. Naval Store and Naval Ordnance Ship’s Accounts
forwarded to Navy Office.
When rendering the above accounts to the Navy
Office, Melbourne, accounting officers should address
them to the Director of Naval Stores and Director of
Naval Ordnance respectively.
A letter of advice (Form A.S. 558) is to be sent to
the above enumerating the accounts forwarded.
101. Return of Surplus Books, Forms, &c.
All surplus books of reference, unused forms, &c., not (
required on board ELM.A. Ships and at H.M.A. Naval
Establishments should be returned to the Naval Store
Officer at the Naval Depot, at Williamstown.
102. Naval Stores and Naval Ordnance Stores —Transfer
from one Ship to another. (
In cases of transfers of Naval Stores from one ship
to another a receipted copy of the transfer voucher
(Form A.S. 549) is to be forwarded to the Director
of Naval Stores, Navy Office, Melbourne, by the
ship supplying the stores, as soon as possible after
each transaction. This procedure is to he brought into
force as from the Ist July, 1920, and copies of transfer
vouchers (A.S. 549) relating to transactions from that
date to the date of this order are to be transmitted by
ships as early as practicable.
2. A similar procedure is to be followed in respect to
Naval Ordnance and Whitehead Torpedo Stores, except-
ing that a receipted voucher (Form S. 1401 and Form
S. 312 respectively) is to be forwarded to the Director
of Ordnance, Torpedoes and Mines, Navy Office, Mel-
bourne.


Article.
103. Supply of Loan, &c., Tools in H.M.A. Ships.
Torpedo Eatings.
The undermentioned tools will be issued to Torpedo
Eatings on joining their first ship after qualifying for
the rating shown, and the issue will be noted on the man’s
Torpedo History Sheet.
2. The tools will be the man’s personal property, and,
when worn out, they will be surveyed by the Torpedo
Officer of the ship in which the man is serving, and new*
tools will be issued in lieu.
3. In the event of loss of any such tools, the man re-
sponsible is to be charged their value, and others will
be issued in lieu.
4. On leaving the Service, the tools will become the
property of the rating except in the case of a man who
is discharged on account of misconduct, in -which case,
recovery of the tools, or their value, is to be made.
Particulars of Tools.
1 Turnserew, Bin. flat blade with i-iu. tip and
wooden handle.
On qualifying for S.T. —
1 pair of pliers, side cutting (similar to pattern
823, pliers, side cutting, large, but in a 6-in.
size).
1 wooden bottomed canvas bag, 12 in. x 4 in. base,
standing 8 in. high, to carry above tools,
fuses, earth lamp, &e.
1 pliers, quick grip, small, to take up to §-in.
nut, pattern 825.
On qualifying for L.T.O. —
1 foot print wrench, 5f in., pattern 1.
Artisan Eatings.
3. The additional tools enumerated below will be
added to Ships’ Establishments of Stores for use of
Plumbers and Shipwrights, and will be kept on charge
of the Commissioned Shipwright, who will loan them,
as he thinks fit, to ratings under his orders. These
tools will not be the property of the ratings. When
worn out they will be surveyed and new ones demanded
to maintain stocks.
Plumbers’ stocks and dies,
sizes 2 in. to J in., for
piping.
Plumbers’ cutters.
1 set per ship Plumbers’ vise.
Plumbers’ Stilsen wrench.
Plumbers’ foot print wrench.
Brazing lamp, metal pot and
ladle.


Article.
Ships carrying five
or more E.As.
Ships carrying less
than five E.As.
Spring dividers to take B" ..
2
i
Spring dividers to take 6" . .
2
i
Feeler gauges
2 sets
1 set
Spring callipers (outside), to take 3"
2
1
Spring callipers (outside), to take 6"
2
1
Spring callipers (inside), to take 3" ..
2
1
Spring callipers (inside), to take 6" ..
2
1
Whitworth thread gauge ..
i
1
Whitworth chaser set of threads, 10
to 40 ..
i
Knurling tool, improved pattern
i
1
Micrometer gauge, 0" to 1"
i
1
Micrometer gauge, 1" to 2"
i
1
Spring vise, parallel jaw, 4" (for work
on search-light projectors)
i
I
Surface plate
x
1
Scribing block .. ..
i
1
Sensitive drilling machine to take
drills up to f" ..
i
Article.
Brace and sets of bits for wood,
1 for every 4 or part | in. to 1 in. (long),
of 4 shipwrights) Hand, rip and tenon saws,
borne on complement Jack plane, smoothing plane,
bead planes (i in. and f in.).
Adze, axe, 8-lb. maul.
To each ship carrying! 2 shipwright’s’canvas tool bags,
more than 4 ship-| 3 ft. in length, for .carrying
wrights . . .. I tools when away from ship.
Electrical Artificers.
6. The following tools have been added to the Gun-
ners’ Naval Store Establishment, for the use of Elec-
trical Artificers—
104.


SECTION VII.
MAILS, CORRESPONDENCE, AND RETURNS.
Article.
105. Mails.
I. Letters Posted in the United Kingdom.
The General Post Office, London, collects all letters
posted in the United Kingdom for H.M.A. Ships, and
seals the letters for each ship in separate bags, which'
are despatched with the Australian mail, addressed to
c/o Postmaster, Fremantle, Western Australia, who
is informed bj the Navy Office of the ports to which the
bags are to be forwarded, and who arranges for the imme-
diate re-shipment of the mails as required.
2. Mails for the following ships are forwarded
direct from London to the ports named—H.M.A.S.
Penguin, Sydney; H.M.A.S. Tingira, Sydney; and
H.M.A.S. Cerberus, Williamstown, via Melbourne.
3. A letter bill and list of registered letters is
enclosed in each mail bag. Registered letters are to
be recorded in a book kept by the Commanding Officer
for the purpose, and the receipt of the addressee ob-
tained therein.
4. Letters upon which any charge is to be levied by
the Postal Department will be fastened together, with
a statement attached giving the number of insufficiently
prepaid letters, and the total amount of the charges
thereon, and will be enclosed in a bag for each ship.
All such charges are to be collected by the Accountant
Officer of the ship, who is to remit quarterly the total
sum so collected to the Deputy Postmaster-General,
General Post Office, Melbourne, accompanied by the
statements referred to.
11. Letters Posted in Australia.
5. Letters for H.M.A. Ships posted within the Conn
monwealth will be forwarded, in the first instance, to
the General Post Office of the capital of the State in
which the letter is posted.
6. The General Post Office of each capital will be
kept informed by the Kavy Office, Melbourne, of the
place to which letters for each ship are to be forwarded.
In the absence of definite information, all letters will
bo forwarded to the General Post Office, Melbourne, to
be retained until definite information is available.
(Kote. —This will be necessary only when any of H.M.A.
Ships is cruising under an indefinite programme, or out-
side the limits of Australian waters).
7. Each ship is to detail a Petty Officer to act as
post-office orderly, who is to be sent to the post-office at
such times as may be arranged between the Command-
ing Officer of the ship and the Postmaster of the Port,


Article
to receive all letters for the ship. If practicable, the
postmaster will place all letters in a bag, and seal it
ready for the post-office, orderly to remove at the ar-
ranged times.
8. All registered letters will be fastened together and
placed in the bag, accompanied by a detailed list of
the same, which, on arrival on board, the Commanding
Officer is to sign and forward immediately to the Post-
master. The receipt of the Commanding Officer will
be accepted by any Postmaster as a clearance in regard
to registered letters contained on the list addressed to
any person in the ship, but in ease of “ Avis de Recep-
tion ” correspondence, the receipt of the addressee musr
be obtained on the prescribed form, which, on com-
pletion, must be returned to the Postmaster. Should
it happen that any person to whom a registered letter
is addressed has left the ship, and it is necessary to
forward the letter to him through the post, the letter
is to be re-addressed and returned to the Postmaster in
a sealed hag, accompanied by the list of registered
letters referred to above, on which the Commanding
Officer is to note in red ink against the entry relating
to the package that it has been re-addressed and re-
turned. The list and the returned registered letter, in
this case, is to he returned to the Postmaster by the
hand of the post-office orderly.
9. In regard to letters on which any charge is levied
by the post-office, such as postage insufficiently prepaid,
these letters will be fastened together, with a list of
the charges for each letter, and placed in the bag for the
ship. These charges are to be collected by the Accountant
Officer, who is to remit quarterly to the Secretary, Gene-
ral Post Office, Melbourne, the total sum so collected, ac-
companied by the lists referred to.
10. In the event of an addressee refusing to pay the
charge, the letter is not to be delivered to him, but is
to be forwarded to the Secretary, General Post Office,
Melbourne, accompanied by a report, and a notation
that this has been done is to be made against the entry
on the list relating to that letter.
111. Lettees from Countries other than the
United Kingdom and the Commonwealth
of Australia.
11. All letters addressed to 11.M.A. Ships from any
place outside the Commonwealth (except those from the
United Kingdom enclosed in special bags) will, on
arrival in Australia, be dealt with in exactly the same
way as if posted within the Commonwealth, i.e., under
Section 11.


IV. Parcels by Parcels Post.
12. Persons serving in H.M.A. Ships to whom parcels
are addressed must make their own arrangements for
obtaining the parcels from the post-office, and in clear-
ing through the Customs parcels from places outside the
Commonwealth.
13. If a notification from the post-office that a parcel
is awaiting removal is received on board addressed to
a person who has left the ship, the Commanding Officer
is to return the notification to the post-office indorsed
with a note to that effect, and the address to which the
parcel should be forwarded.
14. Arrangements have been made with the post-
office for parcels for H.M.A. Ships to be forwarded, if
possible, to the post town to which letters are forwarded
under Section IT. above.
Y. General.
10. All letters posted in H.M.A. Ships while within
the waters of the Commonwealth are to have the post-
age prepaid by means of Commonwealth postage stamps,
and Accountant Officers are to obtain postage stamps
for sale to the ships’ companies for this purpose. Ships
outside Commonwealth waters may take advantage of
the usual arrangement whereby bags are made up on
board H.M. Ships and delivered to the mail officer on
board any mail ship. In such cases postage should be
prepaid by means of the postage stamps of the country
to which the bag is addressed, e.g., separate bags should
be made containing letters for the United Kingdom
(bearing English postage stamps), and for Australia
(bearing Commonwealth stamps), otherwise letters must
be posted in the ordinary way through the post-office
of the country in which the ship happens to be. K.B.—
Parcels must not be enclosed in these bags, but must be
posted on shore.
16. Ships are to report by telegraph to the Havy
Office changes of postal address, giving as long notice as
possible, so as to avoid letters being forwarded to arrive
at a place after the ship has left.
17. On leaving a port Commanding Officers are to
leave definite notice with the Postmaster as to where
any letters are to he forwarded that may arrive after
the ship has left, otherwise such letters will be forwarded
to the General Post Office of the State as arranged in
Section IT., paragraph 5.
Letter Bills from H.M.A. Ships.
In each bag of mail despatched from II M.A. Ships,
a memorandum giving particulars under the following
headings is to be enclosed. The memorandum must be
tied on the outside of the letter bundle, so that it may be
readily located by the Postal Officer who opens the bag.


Article.
Pro Forma.
Mail despatched from H.M.A. Ship
on (date) to..
Is Registered mail enclosed?
If Registered mail enclosed, state —
(a) Number of bags or packets in which regis-
tered mail is made up
(b) Humber of postal articles comprised in regis-
tered mail
Signature of Officer despatching mail.
107. Daily Mail Notices.
Daily Mail Notices are received at the following
Naval Offices, and are available for the Senior Naval
Officer of any of H.M.A. Ships in port; —
H.M.A. Naval Establishments, Garden Island.
Sydney.
H.M.A. Naval Depot, Williamstown.
Naval Staff Office, Brisbane.
Naval Staff Office, Port Adelaide.
Naval Staff Office, Fremantle.
Naval Staff Office, Hobart.
108. Re direction of letters.
Attention is called to the necessity for the careful
re-direction of letters and parcels for Petty Officers and
Men who have left H.M.A. Ships.
Considerable anxiety as well as inconvenience is fre-
quently caused by letters for men who have left H.M.A.
Ships being returned to their senders. Special arrange-
ments are to be made in H.M.A. Ships for re-direction
of such letters.
109. Important Documents sent through the Post.
Instances have occurred in which letters and bulky
papers sent through the post have been received with
the envelopes or outside covers burst open, or in such
a mutilated condition as to allow of the extraction of
their contents without further opening.
2. Care is therefore to be taken to see that important
documents or papers of a bulky nature intended for
transmission through the post are enclosed in envelopes
or covers of suitable strength.
110. Communications to and from Navy Office.
All Orders, &c., for the Naval Forces will be issued
by the Naval Board through the Secretary, and are to
be obeyed accordingly.


Article.
2. The following officers are authorized to sign Naval
Board communications on behalf of the Secretary, by
command of the Naval Board:—
(a) The Acting. Secretary, Paymaster Captain A.
M. Treacy, 0.8. E., R.A.N.
( h ) The Assistant Secretary for Personnel, Pay-
master Commander Charles A. Parker,
E.A.N.
(c) The Chief Clerk, Mr. George Sharp.
( d ) Acting Paymaster Lieutenant-Commander
Charles H. Spurgeon, 0.8. E., E.A.N.
3. All official communications are for the information
or consideration of the Naval Board, and are to be
addressed as follows:
“From the Commanding Officer, LLM.A.S. (or the
District Naval Officer, &c.).
“ To the Secretary, Navy Office, Melbourne.”
“Submitted for the information (or consideration)
of the Naval Board” (then as necessary).
4. The following Directors of Departments in the
Navy Office are authorized to communicate direct with
Commanding Officers and District Naval Officers on
matters of routine within their own Departments not
involving the decision of the Naval Board. Similarly
Commanding Officers and District Naval Officers may
communicate direct with these Directors, but all other
communications must be addressed as in paragraph 3: —
Director of Navy Accounts.
Director of Naval Ordnance, Torpedoes, and
Mines.
Director of Naval Stores and Victualling.
Director of Naval Medical Services.
Director of Naval Reserves and Naval Reserve
Mobilization.
5. All communications to the Navy Office (except
acknowledgments of Appointments, &c.) are to be in
duplicate, typewritten when practicable. They should
be numbered consecutively, commencing with No. 1 on
.Ist January in each year.
6. Letters and telegrams are to be fully prepaid with
postage stamps perforated “ 0.5.,” supplies of which
are to be obtained by Accountant Officers of LLM.A.
Ships by purchase from the Deputy Postmaster-
Generals in the various States.
111. General Instructions for Conducting Correspondence.
Articles 1865 and 1866 of the King’s Regulations and
Admiralty Instructions are to be followed generally,
except where at variance with the rules given below
or the Orders of the Naval Board. Particular atten-
tion is directed to Article 1866 ( d ) and (/).


Article
2. The following general rules for correspondence are
to be strictly observed:—
(a) Official correspondence is to be written on fools-
cap paper, with one-quarter margin; one
side only of the paper to be used, and a space
of at least 2 inches from the top of the first
page is to be left blank for record stamps.
(Note. —During the present shortage of
paper quarto sheets may be used for short
letters which have not to he passed on).
(i) Letters, reports, and memoranda, other than
ordinary minutes, and accompanying plans
or schedules are to bear the signature, and
where necessary, the official designation of
the Officer responsible for them, and the date.
In the absence of such Officer, documents
may be signed by the Officer deputed to act
for him, the rank of the Officer signing
being shown, adding “ for Captain,” “ for
Commander,” or “ for Lieutenant,” as the
case may be, and the reason for such absence,
e.g., “ Sick,” “On Leave,” “On Duty.”
Autograph stamps are not to he used in any
circumstances, but stamps with the Officer’s
name in ordinary type may be used on dupli-
cate letters, &c., e.g. “ (Sgd.) A. B. Jones.”
On documents, however, required to he
rendered in duplicate for account purposes,
&c., the actual signature is to be affixed. In
the case of memoranda, the address is to he
at the beginning of the communication, but
in letters the address is to be at the bottom
left-hand corner of the first page.
(c) When papers are minuted, the first minute is
to follow where the original letter or memo-
randum ends, and the person who writes it
is to mark, in red ink when possible, the
original communication “No. 1,” and his
own minute thereon “ No. 2.” Each suc-
ceeding minute is to follow immediately that
which by date precedes it, and to be num-
bered in sequence.
(d) No commencement or continuation is to be made
on vacant spaces between previous memo-
randa or in the margin. A fresh half-sheet
of foolscap is to be added, when required, for
the commencement or continuation of a
memorandum.
( e ) Files are to be built up from the original paper
by attaching each subsequent paper above
the preceding one, the one most recently re-


ceived or minuted being thus always on the
top of the file. Under no circumstances is
a sheet to have the corner turned up,, or to
be folded over.
(/) In addition to the registration number, each
letter in reply is, in its introduction, to
convey sufficient information to connect it
with the original communication.
(g) Each communication is to be restricted to one
subject only.
( [h ) In letters containing several paragraphs, each
paragraph is to be numbered consecutively.
(f) The subject under discussion is to be inserted at
the head of every letter.
(;) When quoting dates the name of the mouth is
to be used instead of the words “ ultimo,”
“ instant,” “ idem,” and “ proximo.”
112. Service Certificates to Accompany Applications from
Ratings.
All applications, requests, &c., in connexion with
ratings, which are submitted for the consideration and
approval of the A aval Board, are to be accompanied
by Service Certificates.
2. In the case of H.M.A. Ships absent from Austra-
lian waters, certified copies only of Service Certificates are
to be forwarded, except in those instances wffiere it is con-
sidered that a perusal of the original certificate would
facilitate a decision being arrived at.
3. Applications in connexion with Royal Xavy
ratings, which from their nature will probably require
to be transmitted to the Admiralty for consideration, are
to be accompanied by certified copies of Certificates of
Service instead of originals.
113. Navy Orders and Admiralty Printed Matter.
Commanding Officers of Ships and Establishments
are responsible that all printed orders and instructions
are complied with in their own commands in so far as
such orders affect their commands; they are also respon-
sible that orders are made known to all persons con-
cerned.
2. All reports and periodical returns referred to in
various Admiralty Orders and other printed publica-
tions are to be rendered to the Navy Office instead of
to the Admiralty.


114. Transmission of Ship’s Log, Engine-room Registers,
&c.
At the end of each calendar month the Navigating
Officer is to transmit, through the Commanding Officer,
to the Navy Office, a complete copy of the Log Book for
the period, signed by himself. The Navigating Officer
is to deliver the original Log Book, signed by himself,
to the Captain when it is filled up, for transmisison to
the Commodore Commanding in the case of ships under
his orders, and, in the case of other ships, to the Naval
Store Officer, Flinders Naval Depot, for custody as a
permanent record.
2. The Engineer Officer will keep the Engine-room
Register, filling up the several columns daily, and care-
fully follow the directions given in the book. On com-
pletion it is to be delivered to the Captain for trans-
mission to the Commodore Commanding in the case of
ships under his orders, and in the case of other
ships to the Navy Office for examination. The Register
should be despatched not later than the 7th day of the
first month of each quarter.
3. While the ship is in commission the Captain’s
Ship’s Book is to be kept under the immediate super-
vision of the Officer in command as directed therein.
Copies of all returns placed in the Ship’s Book are to
be forwarded to the Navy Office. On paying off the
Book is to be completed and forwarded to the Navy
Office.
4. The King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instruc-
tions are to be complied with generally as regard logs,
registers, and other ship’s books.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.


Article.
SECTION VIII.
H.M.A. SHIPS-REFITS AND MAINTENANCE OF
120. Alterations and Additions, Defects, Work Done by
Ship’s Staff, &c.
I. Alterations and Additions.
1. The 'Commanding Officer is not to make, or permit
to be made, except in cases of absolute necessity, any
alterations or additions whatever to the ship’s hull,
machinery, decks, cabins, store-rooms, or other external
or internal fittings or arrangements. If such a necessity
arises, a report of the steps taken is to be sent to the
Naval Board.
2. Any “ proposed ” alterations or additions in
H.M.A. Ships, under the C.C.A.F., which experience
suggests as being desirable in all ships of a similar class,
are to be reported by letter (in triplicate) to the Naval
Board, through the C.C.A.F. and Commodore Superin-
tendent.
The C.C.A.F. will consider such proposals with a view
to the sea-going and fighting efficiency of ships, whilst
the Commodore Superintendent will review the pro-
posals on the following lines : —-
(a) Practicability.
(b) Stability and strength of ship.
( c ) Resources of dockyard in carrying out proposals.
(d) Cost, time, and labour required.
■Reports and recommendations from the Officers men-
tioned are to accompany the. lists sent to the Naval
Board.
Ships not under the command of the C.C.A.F. are to
forward lists direct through the Commodore Superin-
tendent.
In all cases the original copy should be typed in
hectograph, and the items are to be numbered consecu-
tively from the date of ship being first commissioned.
At the same time, sketches of the proposed arrangements
are to accompany each report.


Ship.
Commodore Commanding Australian Fleet (Neces-
sity, &c.)
(If ship is under the command of the C.C.A.F.)
Commodore Superintendent, Garden Island (Prac-
| ticability, Cost, Time,
] Stability, (Structural
| Strength, Resources.)
Naval Board (For decision).
1
1 . 1
Commodore Commanding Commodore Superintendent
Australian Fleet. Garden Island.
(For Ship). (For guidance).
Article.
Briefly, the procedure for forwarding lists of altera-
tions and additions will he as follows: —
It is to he distinctly understood that no “ proposed ”
alterations or additions are to he taken in hand without
the approval of the Naval Board, and they are not to he
included as items in a defect list. It is not sufficient to
quote C.1.0.’5, C.M.O.’s, &c., as authority for “Approval.”
The items are to be numbered and grouped under the
headings;—Hull, Machinery, Gunnery, Torpedo and
Electrical, and General, in separate lists, which are to be
forwarded with a covering letter containing a schedule
of enclosures.
3. In forwarding proposals for alterations and addi-
tions, it should be stated whether it is proposed that the
work involved can be carried out by ship’s artificers, and,
in such case?, a demand for the necessary materials
should accompany the report and the work carried out
by the ship’s artificers. If, for any reason, the ship
cannot do the work, the reason is to be stated.
4. Lists of any outstanding alterations and additions
which have been approved, but not yet carried out, whole
or in part, are to be forwarded to the Navy Office at the
same time as the defect list.
•5. In forwarding lists of alterations and additions,
proposals previously made are to be shown separately
from new proposals, and the dates of the former pro-
posals, with the numbers of items in the original sub-
missions, are to be quoted.
6. Should any ‘‘ approved ” alterations and additions
be made in the machinery wdiile the ship is in commis-
sion or undergoing repairs, explanatory sketches are to
be inserted in the sketch-book, and a notification of such
changes made in the Engineer Officer’s note-book. (See
Articles 4, 20, and 22, Steam Manual.)


Article.
(Similarly, when any * approved ” work is carried out
which entails an alteration to the arrangement plans of
a ship, a sketch showing the modification is to be for-
warded to the Wavy Office, in order that the plans may
be kept up to date.
7. Under no circumstances is any work to he carried
out which in any way adds to the weight of a ship with-
out full approval being obtained from the Waval Board.
If the proposal involves an addition of weight, it is to
be stated if this can be compensated for by removing a
corresponding weight.
8. Lists of alterations and additions approved by the
Waval Board should arrive at the refitting dockyard for
guidance in time to be considered at the conference, as
the date of completion may be influenced by the amount
of work they involve.
9. On the completion of alterations and additions a
statement is to be forwarded to the Waval Board, giving
the draughts forward and aft and condition of the
vessel in question, also the altered position of the centre
of gravity duo to the extra weight.
LI. Defect Lists.
1. Defect lists from all H.M.A. Ships are to be sent
to the Wavy Office for approval as soon as possible after
they have been examined by the necessary Dockyard
Officers at a conference.
'The following is the procedure for forwarding defect
lists from H.M.A. Ships:—
'Ships under the 'Command of the C.C.A.F. are to send
defect lists to the C.C.A.F. for approval. He is to
strictly scrutinize them and delete all unnecessary items.
Defect lists are then to be forwarded to the dockyard,
and it should be arranged that these arrive at least two
weeks before a ship is taken in hand.
As soon as possible after a ship’s arrival, a conference
of ship’s officers, dockyard officials, and officers of staff
of Commodore Commanding, under the presidency of
the 'Commodore Superintendent, is to be held, at the
conclusion of which the defect list is to he sent to the
Waval Board for approval. It is considered that a
defect list should reach the Wavy Office for approval
within four days of the conference, which would enable
the Waval Board to cancel by telegraph any items they
may consider necessary.
'Ships not under the command of the CjC.A.F. are to
send their defect lists to the Commodore Superin-
tendent and Senior Waval Officer, Garden Island, Sydney,
for scrutiny by the Dockyard Officers before a refit
begins, and the same procedure of forwarding defect lists
to the Wavy Office, after a conference, is then to follow.


Article.
Copies of these defect lists, as approved by the QSTaval
Board, will then he sent immediately to —
(a) The ship in question;
(b) The dockyard at which the refit is to take place;
and
(c) The C.iC.A.F., if the ship in question is under his
command.
2. The Commodore Superintendent is to forward to
the Naval IJpard, through the C.C.A.F., a report stating
whether, in his opinion, any of the defects forwarded by
ships under the command of the C.C.A.F. should have
been allotted to he made good by ship’s artificers. The
C.C.A.F. is to signify his concurrence or otherwise.
A similar procedure is to he carried out with defect
lists of ships not under the command of the C.C.A.F.,
except that for C.C.A.F. read C.O. of the ship forward-
ing the defect list.
3. When ships are in hand for docking only, at half-
yearly periods, it will he necessary to restrict the opera-
tions to docking, re-coating ship’s bottom, and the
examination of such under-water fittings as are known
to be defective. The six-monthly docking is not to be
made the opportunity for sending in defect lists for work
other than that immediately concerned with the above.
4. In the case of ships requiring repairs, &c., at Wil-
liamstown, defect lists, as approved by the Naval Board,
will be sent to the Commanding Officer, Cerberus, who
will report to the Naval Board what work can be under-
taken at the Naval Depot, and what can be carried out
at the State Dockyard, giving estimated costs.
5. Commanding Officers are informed that, with refer-
ence to lists of defects, only items for specific repairs,
&c., should appear in the lists. Such items as “ require
repair or renewal as necessary,” “ to be examined and
refitted as necessary,” and “ etcetera,” are not to appear
in defect lists.
6. In the case of any fittings requiring special pre-
paration, all the necessary details are to be sent with the
defect list, and accurate and fully dimensioned sketches
—with templates, gauges, or patterns of any parts requir-
ing renewal—should accompany the lists, so that castings
and forgings can he put in hand.
7. The practice, which has become general, of sending
in a defect list on every occasion of a ship visiting
Sydney is to he discontinued. Only urgent defects which
definitely affect the fighting or sea-going efficiency of a
ship, and which cannot he undertaken by the ship’s staff,
are to he taken in hand by the dockyard, with the’con-
currence of the Commodore Superintendent, on occasions
other than when the ship is due for refit according to


Article.
programme. Full reasons for these defects, with ex-
planatory sketches, if necessary, must he sent to the
Naval Board by the Commodore Superintendent for
Board approval before the work commences.
8. iWhen making out a list of defects, any defects
which can he undertaken by the ship’s staff are not to be
included in the list.
9. In order to avoid duplication of labour in dealing
with lists of defects in H.M.A. the pink lists,
(Form 5.340) should contain all items of work which,
in the opinion of the Commanding Officer, cannot be
deferred without loss of fighting and sea-going efficiency.
10. On each occasion of one of 11.M.A. Ships—except
T.BD.’s and smaller craft —proceeding to a dockyard to
refit, a list of items of work not included in the defect
list is to accompany the defect list, showing the neces-
sary work on which the ship’s staff will he occupied
during the tirfte available, in order that the dockyard
officers may be made fully aware of the extent of the
employment of the ship’s staff, and to enable the amount
of dockyard assistance to he arranged, so as to insure the
completion of all known defects within the time available.
11. The length of a refit will be one month —under
normal circumstances, and ships under the command of
the C.C.A.F. will refit according to a programme sub-
mitted by him and approved by the Naval Board. Time
spent in storing, fueling, ammunitioning, &c., is not in-
cluded in the month allowed for the refit, but as much as
possible should be done in that month, provided the work
of the dockyard is not interfered with.
A refitting programme will be arranged by the Naval
Board for all ships not under the command of the
C.C.A.F.
12. Engineer officers of Destroyers forming part of a
flotilla are to render weekly defect lists, through the
Commander (D), to the Engineer Commander (D), who
is to scrutinize them carefully and eliminate any item
that could be done by the Destroyers’ staff. If necessary,
the Commander (D) is to detail assistance from other
vessels of the flotilla.
13. Departmental officers of ships other than T.BjD.’s
and smaller craft are to keep a record of defects and
journal of work (i 5.342) up to date, and are also to keep
an artisans’ daily record of work book (D. 192), in which
are to be entered the hours worked and the precise nature
of the work performed by each artisan.
14. Special attention is directed to the necessity for
the keeping of the following books:—
The journal of work and record of defects;
The record of work book.


Article.
The Commanding Officer is responsible that these books
are carefully kept, and that the heads of Departments do
not allow defects that can he undertaken by the ship’s
staff to accumulate..
When the ship is about to be taken in hand for refit,
these books are to be produced at the conference referred
to in section IY., paragraph 1, and will be carefully
considered in relation to the apportionment of work.
111. Supplementary Defect Lists.
1. Should any defects develop, which cannot be under-
taken by the ship’s staff, subsequent to the transmission
of the main defect list, a supplementary list is to be sent
direct to the ISTavy Office, through the Commodore
Superintendent, for approval. Such a list is to be
strictly confined to items of work which could not be
foreseen at the time of the first report. A letter from
the Commanding Officer of the ship, stating the reason
for each defect, is to accompany the supplementary
defect list.
2. Defects, which are discovered in opening up the
ship during a refit, and which must be made good for
reasons of sea-going and fighting efficiency, may be taken
in hand at once by the. dockyard, with the consent of the
Commodore Superintendent. Full reasons for these
defects, with explanatory sketches, must be sent to the
Navy Office by the Commodore Superintendent.
IY. Inspection of Defects—Conference.
1. When ships in commission are taken in hand by
Garden Island Dockyard for annual or periodical refits,
an inspection of such defects will be carried out on board
the ship by dockyard officers.
A conference will then be held, the Commodore Super-
intendent presiding; those attending being the Ship’s
Commanding Officer and specialist officers, and, if the
C.C.A.F. desires it, the specialist officers of his staff, and
the dockyard officers concerned, at which the exact pro-
cedure of the refit and the shares of work to be appor-
tioned to the ship’s staff and dockyard respectively will
be determined..
The date of completion of the refit will also be decided
at the conference, taking into consideration the question
of ‘‘ approved ” alterations and additions.
The Naval Board and the C.C.A.F. are to be kept
informed of the dates when ships under refit are to be
ready for sea. ,
2. When ships in commission are taken in hand by
Cockatoo Island Dockyard for annual or periodical refits,
the above procedure is to be followed; but, in addition,
the Engineer Manager of Garden Island will attend the


Article.
conference and be responsible, as overseer, for the work,
which will be carried out under the Commodore Superin-
tendent’s supervision.
Y. Refits —Estimates for Defects, Alterations,
Additions, etc.
Estimates will be dispensed with in future, but it is to
be clearly understood that the dockyard is to exercise the
greatest economy as regards all defects. At the conclu-
sion of a refit a detailed list of expenditure is to be for-
warded to the Naval Board for consideration.
121. Docking at Commonwealth Government Dockyard,
Williamstown.
Commanding Officers are notified that when approval
has been given to the docking of H.M.A. Ships at the
Government Dockyard, Williamstown, a communication
should be made to the Harbor Master of Port Phillip
stating the time of docking. This communication can
be made by signal through the Naval Depot, Williams-
town.
2. The Harbor Master will arrange that the Assistant
Harbor Master, if available, will engage the necessary
tugs, and will attend on board the ship to be docked, in
order to assist the Commanding Officer by his local
knowledge.
3. Tf the Assistant Harbor Master is unable to be
present at the time of docking, the Harbor Master will
arrange for a pilot and direct him to engage the neces-
sary tugs.
122. Engineer Officers of Vessels Building at Cockatoo
Island.
Engineer Officers appointed to vessels building at a
Naval Yard are to be considered as representing the
interests of the Sea-going Service.
2. Any question affecting their Department is to be
referred to them by the Yard Authorities, con-
versely, they should refer questions to the Yard Authori-
ties for discussion, if necessary, before forwarding the
matter to the Naval Board.
3. In the event of non-concurrence, after reconsidera-
tion by the Yard Authorities, the matter is to be sub-
mitted by the Engineer Officer to the Navy Office,
through the Commodore Superintendent, Sydney, with
any remarks the latter may think fit to make.
4. The Engineer Officer should have access to any
specifications or terms of contract for supply of main
and auxiliary machinery and boilers.


Article
123. Arrest of Corrosion of Steel Work.
In all cases where structural work shows signs of
undue rusting, pitting, or corrosion, two coats of Wailes,
Dove’s Bitumastie Solution are to be applied. The
following instructions are to be observed in the applica-
tion of the solution, viz.
(i) The solution is of a brilliant black colour, and is
to substitute all ordinary oil paint which would
otherwise be applied, directly on the steel.
(ii) The surfaces of the steel are to be thoroughly
scaled, cleaned, and dried before the solution is
applied.
(iii) When the surfaces are quite dry, one coat of the
solution is to be applied cold by brush in a
similar manner to ordinary paint.
(iv) As as the first coat has set, a second coating
is to be applied in the same manner as the first.
(v) Ventilation should be arranged for when the
solution is being applied in very confined spaces,
and care must be taken not to bring it in con-
tact with lamps or lights.
(vi) It is very important that the solution be well
stirred through the bung hole of the cask while
being used, and the bung or cork must not be
left out.
2. Attention is directed to the effect of corrosion on the
steel shells of* vessels, especially in Queensland waters,
and Commanding Officers are therefore, wherever pos-
sible, to avoid mooring H.M.A. Ships alongside wharfs
constructed of wooden piling and sheathed with muntz
metal or copper, as the galvanic action set up therefrom
has a considerably deteriorating effect on the steel shells
of the vessels.
124. Motor Boats —Prevention of Eire.
Lamps. —-Ho lamps other than electric lamps are to he
used in the engine-room. All boats which are not
already fitted with electric light, and which may be
required for night duties, and all new boats, are each to
be provided with one portable accumulator lantern for
lighting the engine-room, and one spare accumulator for
same.
Fuel Tank. —The fuel tank is to he filled during day-
light hours only. When filling from petrol or kerosene
tins, a McKnight filler is to be utilized, in order to avoid
spilling.


Article.
A copper piercer, of suitable dimensions for tbs
McKnight filler is to be used for opening tbe tins.
Bilges.- —Tbe bilges are to be kept dry, to prevent tbe
possibility of any petrol spilled in the engine-room being
carried into any other compartment.
Flooring Boards. —Flooring boards in the engine-
room are to be made portable, and of sufficiently small
dimensions to enable them to be quickly removed. They
are to be painted all over.
Fire Extinguisher. —A Merryweather C.T.C. band
fire pump, and a supply of sand, are to be kept in the
engine-room in readily accessible positions.
The following items are also to be stocked at each
boat’s head-quarters for use when refilling fire extin-
guishers ; —-
3 Vo. Valves.
1 Vo. Pump, 125 lbs. pressure.
2 Vo. Quart tins of “ Electrene ” (spare).
Remarks. —It has been found by experiment that
petrol burning in bulk cannot be extinguished. However,
if the spirit is spilled over wood, and set on fire, it is
easily extinguished by the aid of an extinguisher or sand,
or both, if applied before a large quantity of oil is
allowed to accumulate.
Demands. —H.M.A. Ships and Establishments should
demand from the Vaval Store Officer, Williamstown,
any of the articles mentioned above that may be required.
125. Engines of Motor Boats carried in Ships—Working
and Care of, &c.
A course of instruction in tbe working, care, and
elements of design of these engines should be given in
each Ship by a Commissioned Engineer Officer.
2. Junior Officers should be instructed as necessary.
E.R.A.’s detailed to repair and adjust the machinery,
and as many others as convenient, should be instructed;
also a sufficient number of Stoker Petty Officers and
Leading Stokers to provide the engine-drivers and their
necessary reliefs. Special attention should be given to
instructing all ratings in the electrical portions of the
equipment, and with the lower ratings the instruction
should start with the elementary electrical principles
Involved.
3. The handling of the engines should be demon-
strated, and the method of avoiding and detecting faults
(especially electrical) should be dealt with.


Article.
4. Suitable standing orders should be framed for each
boat on the lines of the following, for motor launch
gines, viz.:—
I. The E.R.A. and Stoker Petty Officer, or Lead-
ing Stoker in charge of a boat, are to proceed to the
boat each morning, one hour before it is required,
and carry out the following routine under the direc-
tion of the Engineer Officer in Charge:—
(a) Clean all sparking plugs, and be careful to
make joints tight when replacing.
( h) Examine, clean, and tighten up all electrical
connexions. All contacts to be kept bright.
(c) Examine and clean fuel filter.
( d ) Fill fuel tank.
(e) Charge crank chambers with oil to correct
level.
(/) See clutch-box half filled with oil, and lubri-
cators to clutch correct.
( g ) Inspect tappets and see that the be-
tween valve stem and top of tappet rods,
when valves are down on their seats, is
20-I,oooth inches. See that lock-nuts on
tappets are screwed down and jammed
tight.
( h ) Lubricate all outside working parts, such as
the governor. Do not oil the magneto.
( i ) A report is then to be made to the Engineer
Officer in Charge, who will carry out the
following test; —
The engine started irp and given a teat
run on each system of ignition at full
speed, without load. The engines should
respond readily to the throttle and spark-
lever without sluggishness or “ popping
back.” The firing of each cylinder
should be tested by opening the half-
compression cocks, and each cylinder
should be run separately on “ earthing ”
the other cylinder sparking plug. The
'Engineer Officer should then report boat
ready to the Officer of the Watch and
the Senior Engineer.
11. The E.R.A. of the boat, under the direction of
the Engineer Officer in Charge, is to carry out the
following inspections each day when the boat has
finished running, viz.:—
(a) Examine and clean H.T. brushes of mag-
neto. The magneto is to be removed and
thoroughly cleaned if there are signs of oil
or water on it. The magneto is only to be
lubricated once a month with one or two
drops of oil.


Article.
(fc) Examine magneto contact breaker; see that
tbe gap is correctly adjusted by the feeler
on tbe magneto spanner to 17-I,oooth
inches.
(c) Examine and clean “wipe-contact” at fore
end of engine, and lubricate according to
type fitted.
( d ) Test accumulators with voltmeter, and have
them re-charged frequently.
(e) Examine and clean platinum trembler points,
and test by turning engine to correct posi-
tion and hearing tremble.
(/) See that the spark-gap on all plugs is ad-
justed to 17-I,oooth inches.
( g ) See that tbe tappets are all correctly ad-
justed and nuts jammed, and that valve
stems are free, and closely follow tappet
rods down when engines are turned.
111. Any failure of the motor boat’s engines when
running is immediately to be reported to the Engi-
neer Officer in Charge (or the Engineer Officer of
the day, if the former is not available), who will
proceed to the boat with the E.R.A. and locate the
fault.
XV. An engine log should be kept for the motor
launch, and the following records should be written
up daily by the Engineer Officer in Charge, and
initialed by him :
(a) Hours running.
(b) Consumption of fuel.
(c) Repairs, adjustments, and examinations
carried out.
(cl) Charging of secondary batteries.
(e) Any failure, and how caused and remedied.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.


Article.
SECTION IX.
SUPPLY OF FUEL, WATER, AND LUBRICATING OIL.
135. Urgent Necessity for Economy in Consumption of Fuel.
The necessity for strict and all-round economy in
consumption of fuel of every description is imperative.
This is to be urgently impressed upon all concerned.
2. Except in cases where specific orders to the con-
trary are given, all passages are to he carried out at
most economical speed. Should any circumstances
arise which necessitate an increase in speed, a report
in writing, giving the reason, is to be forwarded to the
Navy Office as soon as possible.
3. Great attention is to be paid to the switching off
of all unnecessary lights in such places as storerooms,
engine-room departments, lavatories, mess decks, cabins,
offices, &c. A very large number of lights which are
ordinarily kept alight constantly can be dispensed with,
and are only to be switched on as necessity arises.
4. The use of auxiliary machinery in harbor is to
be restricted, as far as possible, to the bare require-
ments, and steam on capstan engine, boat hoist, &c.,
only used when absolutely necessary, and then only for
as short a time as possible.
5. Care is always to be taken that when orders for
steam to be ready on main engines are given, this time
is the actual time of ship getting under way, whenever
it is at all possible to gauge this. Waiting about with
steam ready means a large waste of fuel.
6. It is essential that as much notice as possible is
given of the time steam on will be required. Work can
then be undertaken which it might not be feasible to
carry out if the notice is short.
7. As far as possible, fresh water should be- obtained
from the shore when procurable. Water made *on
board per ton of fuel averages, say, 12 tons per ton.
Price of fuel is 70s. to 80s. a ton; price of water made
per ton is therefore ss. lOd. to 6s. Bd. in fuel alone, not
allowing for wear and tear, &c„ and if price of shore
water is less than this, it would he more economical to
use it when possible.
8. As reasonable economy in the use of fresh water
(i.e., for washing, bathing, cooking, &c.) entails con-
siderable saving in fuel when distilling is necessary,
every effort is to he made to economize the use of fresh
water within reasonable limits on such occasions. In
this respect, the former practice of always collecting
rain water for washing purposes is to be borne in mind,
and reverted to when possible.
C. 18558.—3


9. Ships are to ascertain, by experiment, the least
number of boilers and burners it is possible to use under
ordinary harbor conditions. Considerable economy bas
often resulted from the experience thus gained.
136. Supply of Coal to H.M.A. Fleet.
No Coal Fuel is to be supplied to any H.M.A. Ship
without Naval Board approval having first been obtained.
.Requisitions, as necessary, should be submitted for ap-
proval in the usual manner.
Only in cases of extreme urgency may approval be
anticipated.
137. Procedure to be followed by H.M.A. Ships when Oiling
from Fleet Oilers.
In order to avoid disagreements between Ships’
Officers and Masters of Fleet Oilers as to the exact
quantity of fuel oil which has been received and dis-
charged, the following procedure is to be carried out: —
In the Fleet Oiler.
(«) The representatives of the Engineer Officer of
the ship fuelling and of the Master of the
Fleet Oiler are to sound all the Oiler’s tanks
before and again after oiling, taking care
that all pipes have emptied themselves back
into the tanks.
(fc) The Master’s representative is to produce his
calibration tables and satisfy the Engineer
Officer’s representative as to the number of
gallons of fuel oil which is equivalent to the
difference in soundings.
(c) The Master is to provide the Engineer Officer’s
representative with the specific gravity of
the oil vn order that the latter may work
out the number of tons supplied. The specific
gravity is to be checked whilst fuelling is
proceeding.
In H.M.A. Ships Fuelling.
(a) The Engineer Officer is to have all his tanks
sounded before and after oiling, a minimum
number of tanks being kept in use. These
should be filled last, soundings being taken
immediately before starting filling.
( i ) The Engineer Officer is to calculate closely the
amount received, making the necessary ad-
justments for the difference between the
specific gravity of the fuel oil received and
that to which his tanks are calibrated.


Article.
138. Method of Ascertaining Quantity of Oil Fuel Supplied
to Ships, &c.
Considerable difficulty has been experienced in con-
nexion with the settlement of accounts for oil fuel
supplied to H.M.A. Ships owing to the contractors
having claimed on their measurement for the quantity
of oil fuel delivered, and not on that certified by
Officers as having been received.
2. Officers of H.M.A. Ships are in future to inspect
contractors’ tanks —in the presence of their representa-
tive —whether ashore or afloat, before and after delivery
of oil fuel, with a view to arriving at a comparison of the
quantity of oil received as recorded by the contractors’
tanks as against that shown by H.M.A. Ships’ measure-
ments.
3. In cases where an agreement cannot be arrived at
as to 'the quantity actually delivered, officers of H.M.A.
Ships should, besides stating the quantity delivered as
per H.M.A. Ships’ measurements, indorse the receipt
given as follows;
“ The quantity claimed for by contractors is in
accordance with measurements of their tanks, which
were inspected before and after delivery.”
139. Receipts and Issue of Oil Fuel by Oil Lighters.
District Naval Officers and Sub-District Naval
Officers concerned or Officers under whose orders oil
lighters are placed, are to cause proper account of the
receipt and issue of oil fuel to be kept at their offices
in respect to oil lighters which may be stationed at their
ports from time to time.
Properly acquitted supporting vouchers are to be
obtained and retained until such time as the account
may be called for.
In connexion with vouchers for oil fuel supplied to
Oil Lighters attention is drawn to Navy Order No.
7/1918.
2. On all occasions when Oil Fuel is received or is
issued from Oil Lighters Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4, Form
A.D. 785 is to be completed and forwarded to the
Director of Naval Stores, Navy Office, Melbourne.
Form referred to may be obtained on demand from
Naval Store Officer, Garden Island, Sydney.
3. A case has come under notice where a receipt was
given for oil fuel supplied to an oil lighter from an oil
ship without reference being made to the caretaker in
charge as to whether the quantity was correct.
The Naval Board direct that in future the caretaker is
to verify the quantities received.
4. All concerned are to take notice that on no account
is oil fuel to be stored in the expansion trunks of
lighters.


Article.
5. Should any shortage, which ‘cannot satisfactorily
be accounted for, occur in the stock of liquid fuel of oil
lighters, the responsible Officer under whose orders the
particular lighter concerned is, will be held financially
responsible for the shortage.
140. Report of Coal and Oil on Board.
A weekly report is to be forwarded every Monday
forenoon to the Mavy Office by H.M.A. Ships when
within the limits of the Australian Maval Station —by
telegram if in harbor, and by wireless if at sea —giving,
the following information ;
(a) Coal expended during the week.
( b ) Coal remaining on board.
(c) Tons of oil fuel expended.
(d) Tons of oil fuel remaining on board.
Mote. —Coal and oil fuel should be given to the nearest
ton.
The expenditure is to be calculated to Saturday mid-
night.
It is not necessary to telegraph the words “ Coal
expended,” &c., but merely to state “ Weekly report,”
and precede the figures by (a), (5), (c), (d).
141. Coaling Returns.
Commanding Officers of H.M.A. Ships are to see that
on every occasion of coaling, Form A. 5.229 is completed
and rendered as provided in King’s Regulations, Article
929, Clause 3.
142. Lubricating Oils.
Officers commanding H.M.A. Ships and Establish-
ments are to note that the following classes of lubricat-
ing oils are to be demanded for the purposes shown
hereunder;—-
(i) Mineral, lubricating, ordinary—For ships with
reciprocating engines at ordinary speeds, and
for auxiliary machinery in all classes.
(ii) Mineral, special—For ships with reciprocating
engines at high powers, and for electric
motors.
(iii) Olive —For ships with reciprocating engines,
for powers of four-fifths (4/sths) and above
only.
(iv) Turbine Oil, Vacuum Oil Mo. 2—For turbines
only.
(v) Mineral, heavy, filtered—For piston rods, &c.
(vi) Oil, petroleum, Russian, lubricating—For
cleaning and lubricating small-arms and
machine guns.
(vii) Oil, sperm —For torpedoes and for air com-
pressors.
(viii) Oil, lubricating, axiom, cylinder—For heater
torpedoes.


A rticle.
The quantities of oils are to be demanded; in accord-
ance with establishment, with the exception that special
mineral is to be substituted for olive for electric motors,
mineral is to be substituted for olive for lubricating
working parts of guns, and sperm oil to be substituted
for olive for cleaning and preserving guns.
143. Lubrication of Stern Tubes in Torpedo Boat Destroyers.
The impermeators, fitted in connexion with stern
tubes for lubricating propeller shafts, are to be used
sufficiently to keep the tubes plentifully supplied with
oil, both when in harbor and at sea.
2. Entries are to be made in the Engine Room Register
fully recording their use.
144. Oil Fuel Tanks—Precautions against Choking of
Strainers.
The .provisions of Admiralty Weekly Order No
921/20, which reads as follows, are to be observed by all
concerned:—
“ Cotton waste is not to be used for cleaning and
drying out oil-fuel tanks, owing to the
liability of the strainers to become choked by
cotton threads and fluff, thus preventing free
suction to the pumps. Oakum, old bunt-
ing or old towelling should be used for this
purpose.
When oil-fuel tanks are opened out for examination
and cleaning, particular attention should be
given to the strainers fitted to the suction
valves, and it should be ascertained before
closing the tanks that the orifices of these
strainers are clear.”
145. Oil Mot to be Discharged into a Harbor.
Commanding Officers of H.M.A. Ships are to ensure
that refuse oil is not discharged into the waters of a port,
and care is to bfe taken that there is no overflow when
taking in oil fuel.
146. Electric Lighting in Bunkers.
Owing to the highly inflammable and easily ignitable
qualities of Westport Coal, as now used in ships of
Royal Australian Navy, the attention of Officers is
directed to Article 514, Claiise 5, of Steam Manual 1910.
The instructions contained therein are to be strictly com-
plied with.
A case has actually occurred in one of the ships of the
Royal Australian Navy, in which the glass shade of a
wandering lead was broken, and the naked hulb of the
lamp came in contact with Westport coal dust, which
became ignited, thus causing a bunker fire.


Article.
147. Inspector of Coal—Appointment of, and Duties.
The -Inspector of Coal, Navy Department, will carry
out his duties under the direct orders of the Naval Board,
and every facility is to be granted him in all H.M.A.
Ships and Establishments.
148. Oil Lighters—Reports of Receipts and Deliveries of
Oil Fuel.
The following advice is to be telegraphed by District
Naval Officers and Sub-District Naval Officers In all
States (excepting New South Wales) where Oil Lighters
are stationed, to the Director of Naval Stores, Navy
Office, Melbourne:—
(1) Quantity of Oil Fuel taken from Oil Lighters
from time to time, and the quantity remain-
ing.
(2) Name of vessel obtaining supply.
(3) Quantity of Oil Fuel received from Oil Tankers
at any time, and the total quantity then in
Lighter. (D.S. 17/1148.)
149. Issue of Liquid Fuel.
Until further orders, Liquid Fuel is not to be sup-
plied to cruisers, destroyers, or submarines without
Naval Board approval having first been obtained.
(D.S. 20/417.)


SECTION X.
OFFICERS-ENTRY, PROMOTION, EXAMINATIONS,
ETC.
Article.
150. Officers, Entry and Promotion.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 44-91.
44-52 General.
53-55 Engineer Officers.
56-58 Chaplains.
59-60 Naval Instructors.
61-85 Medical Officers.
86-90 Medical Officers (Dental).
91 Warrant Officers.
151. Officers Entered from the Retired List of the Royal
Navy.
In order to comply with the Naval Agreement of 1911
between the Imperial and Commonwealth Governments,
Officers entered in the Royal Australian Navy from?
the Retired List of the Royal Navy will hold in the
Royal Australian Navy the rank and seniority in
that rank last held by them on the Active List of the
Royal Navy, except that where a step or steps in rank
on the Retired List has or have been granted by virtue
of and in strict seniority, such rank and seniority shall
be granted instead of the rank and seniority last held on
the Active List, subject to the condition that Captains
retired from that rank, if advanced to retired Flag
rank, shall in no case take command over an Officer who
has retired from the Active List of Flag Officers.
2. The above rule will not affect the rate of pay of
the Officers concerned, which will be according to the
actual period of service on the Active List, whether in
the Royal Navy or Royal Australian Navy, and Officers
will not be'entitled to the periodical increments until
they have completed the periods required on the Active
List.
152. Officers Lent from the Royal Navy.
Officers lent from the Royal Navy to the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy will commence to count service in the
latter on the day following that on which they last
receive pay from Royal Navy Funds.
As a general rule, time occupied on passage to and
from Australia will not count as portion of the term for
which an Officer may be lent, i.e., in the case of an
Officer appointed to the Royal Australian Navy for a
period of three years, who left England on the Ist
January, 1918, his relief would leave England on, or
about, the Ist January, 1921.


Article.
153. Promotion whilst on Loan from Royal Navy.
Where an Officer, Petty Officer, or Man serving in the
Royal Australian Navy on loan from the Royal Navy is
promoted by the Admiralty, and is appointed forthwith
to a ship of the Royal Navy, promotion in the Royal
Australian Navy will not be made. Pay and allowances,
in such cases, will be continued at the Royal Australian
Navy rates for the rank or rating held prior to
Admiralty promotion until final discharge from the
Royal Australian Navy. Pay and allow T ances of the
higher rank or rating at Admiralty rates will commence
from the day following discharge from the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy, and not from the date of promotion, and
no allowance will be made on account of any difference
between Royal Australian Navy rates for the lower
rank or rating and the Admiralty rate for the higher
rank or rating for the period between the date of pro-
motion and date of discharge from the Royal Australian
N avy.
2. In cases where Admiralty promotion does not
involve immediate return to the Royal Navy, but an
Officer remains in the Royal Australian Navy with the
intention of completing his engagement with the Com-
monwealth, he will be promoted in the Royal Australian
Navy with his proper seniority, and will receive pay
and allowances in the higher rank as from the date he is
re-appointed to one of H.M.A. Ships in his new rank.
In similar circumstances, Petty Officers and Men will
receive pay and allowances of their new rating as from
the date of their advancement.
154. Officers Sent to United Kingdom for Instruction.
Commissioned and Warrant Officers who are sent to
the United Kingdom to undergo Courses of Instruction
and Training are required to keep a diary of their
employment while in the United Kingdom, and to for-
ward to the Secretary, Navy Office, Melbourne (through
the Naval Representative), for the information of the
Naval Board, a monthly extract from their diary of the
• entries made therein.
155. Submarine Service —Selection and Training of Officers.
The following procedure will be observed with regard
to the selection and training of Officers for the Sub-
marine Service.
2. When volunteers are required, applications will be
called for by Navy Order. The names of volunteers,
which should be accompanied by certificates of medical
fitness, will be placed on the Roster kept by the Captain
(S) who will inform the Naval Board of the Officers
selected and the dates they will be required.


Article.
3. Officers will then be appointed to H.M.A.S.
Platypus, “ Additional for Training in Submarines.”
They will undergo a course of instruction lasting three
months, and will then be examined as to fitness. Those
Officers who pass the test will be detailed by the Captain
(S) for individual Submarines, and a recommendation
made to the Xaval Board that they should be appointed
to H.M.A.S. Platypus for Submarines. Any Officer
who fails to pass or proves to he otherwise unsuitable
for the Submarine Service will be re-appointed to the
General Service.
4. Officers will not receive Submarine pay whilst
under instruction, except for the days on which they
actually go to sea in a Submarine.
156. Resignations—Commissions to Accompany.
Whenever a Commissioned or Warrant Officer of the
Xaval Forces (Permanent or Citizen) tenders his
resignation, his Commission or Warrant must accom-
pany his letter of resignation. If his resignation is
accepted, the Commission or Warrant will be retained in
the Department of the Navy; if not accepted, or if the
Officer is placed on the Retired List, it will be returned
to him.
157. Examinations for Command of a Torpedo Boat
Destroyer.
As the vessels of the Royal Australian Xavy work in
low latitudes and are liable for detached service, the
“ Law of Storms ” is to be included in the syllabus
laid down in Appendix X., Part IV., King’s Regula-
tions and Admiralty Instructions, for Officers of the
Royal Australian Xavy qualifying in Navigation for
the command of Torpedo Boat Destroyers.
Such Officers must have a practical working know-
ledge of the law of storms and of the handling of such
vessels necessary before and during these circular storms.
158. Examinations in Foreign languages and Naval
History.
Officers of the Royal Xavy, lent for service in the
Royal Australian Xavy, are eligible to enter for the
examinations in Foreign Languages and Xaval History.
2. Officers of the Royal Australian Xavy may also
enter for these examinations under the same conditions
as Officers of the Royal Xavy.
3. In regard to Officers of the Royal Australian
Xavy, they will be grouped parallel to Officers of the
Royal Xavy as regards prizes, medals, or certificates;
duplicate prizes, &e., being awarded to any Officers
qualifying for them, at the expense of the Common-
wealth Government.


Article.
159. Retention of Rank by Temporary Officers on Demobili-
zation.
The provisions of Admiralty Weekly Order 3214/1919,
in regard to the retention of rank by Temporary R.N.,
R.M., R.N.R., and R.N.Y.R. Officers on demobilization
have been adopted, where practicable, for Temporary
Officers of the R.A.IST. and R.A.N.R. on being de-
mobilized.
160. Examination for Rank of Engineer Lieutenant-
Commander.
With reference to Article 280, King’s Regulations
and Admiralty Instructions, an Engineer Lieutenant of
the Royal Australian Navy, with previous experience in
the Merchant Service, may present himself for examina-
tion for the rank of Engineer Lieutenant Commander
provided—•
(a) He has completed four years’ combined service
as Certificated Engineer in the Merchant
Service and Engineer Officer in the Royal
Australian Navy, of which at least two years
has been in the rank of Engineer Lieutenant;
(b) He has not less than three years’ service as
watchkeeper in sea-going ships;
(c) He is recommended by his Commanding Officer.
2. The examination is to be conducted by two Engi-
neer Commanders in the presence of a Captain or Com-
mander.
Qualifications to be those laid down in K.R. and A. 1.,
App. X., Part VI., par. 2.
161. Medical Officers —Provisional Examination for Pro-
motion.
The provisions of Admiralty Weekly Order No.
(except as regards paragraph 6) relative to
the provisional examination of Medical Officers, has
been adopted in the Royal Australian Navy.
162. Training of R.N.R. Officers (Imperial) on Board
H.M.A. Ships.
Royal Naval Reserve (Imperial) Officers of the
Military Branch will be permitted to undergo their
periodical training in H.M. Australian Ships under the
conditions laid down in Article 41, clause 2, R.N.R.
Regulations (Officers).
Before giving permission for a Royal Naval Reserve
Officer to be received in one of H.M.A. Ships, the
Senior Officer is to satisfy himself on the following
points;—
(a) That the applicant is an officer on the active
list of the Royal Naval Reserve (by consult-
ing the Navy List, and requiring him to
produce his training-book (R.Y.02).


Article.
( i ) That the applicant has training due, by com-
paring the entries in his training-hook with
' the scale of training laid down in Article
40 R.N.R. Regulations (Officers).
(c) That the nature of his employment has pre-
vented him from performing his training in
the United Kingdom.
In case of doubt, the officer should not be received until
his application (which must be accompanied by his
training-book) has been referred to the Navy Office,
and the approval of the Naval Board received.
2. Royal Naval Reserve Officers undergoing training
in H.M.A. Ships are to be borne on ship’s books, on a
special list of the ledger, for pay at the rates laid down
in Article 90, R.N.R. Regulations (Officers) (see Quar-
terly Navy List for latest rates of pay) ; ration allow-
ance at Australian rates as provided in Financial and
Allowance Regulations for sea-going ships is to be paid
to the mess on their account. The total sum paid to
these officers on account of pay, messing allowances, and
ration allowance will be recovered from the. Admiralty,
and a statement is to be forwarded to the Navy Office
immediately after one of these officers is discharged
from training, giving details of the amount to be
recovered.
3. On termination of training, the confidential re-
ports, as required by Article 41, clause 3, R.N.R. Regu-
lations (Officers), are to be forwarded to the Navy Office
for transmission to the Admiralty.
4. The courses of training for officers of the Military
Branch, as laid down in Appendix A., R.N.R., Regula-
tions (Officers), are to be adhered to as nearly as pos-
sible, but it is to be understood that these officers will
be required to take their part in' 1 the general exercises
of the ship in which they are borne.
5. With reference to Articles 94, 160, and 162, R.N.R.
Regulations (Officers), R.N.R. Officers should be in-
formed that they will have no claim on Commonwealth
funds on account of death or injury while performing
their periodical training in H.M.A. Ships. The
Admiralty undertakes this liability.
163. Mate, Mate (W/T), and Mate (E), R.A.N.—Pro-
motion to.
Candidates for promotion to the rank of Mate,
Mate (W/T), and Mate (E) in the Royal Australian
Navy will be selected from Warrant Officers and
Petty Officers under the same conditions as govern
such promotions in the Royal Navy. The Regu-
lations contained in Appendix X., Part ll.a and


Part V., King’s Regulations and Admiralty In-
structions, as modified by Admiralty Weekly Order
NA. 1150/1920, have been adopted in the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy. The Selection Committee to interview
candidates will sit at Sydney about Ist May in each
year, the definite date being arranged by the Commodore
Commanding H.M.A. Fleet.
2. Candidates from H.M.A. Ships and Establish-
ments not under the orders of the Commodore Com-
manding H.M.A. Fleet will appear before the same
Selection Committee as candidates from the Fleet. All
recommendations for such candidates should be for-
warded to the Commodore Commanding so as to reach
him not later than Ist April in each year.
164. Warrant Officers—Qualification in Navigation.
The provisions of Admiralty Weekly Order -No.
806/1920, are being followed in the Royal Australian
Navy.
165. Conditions of Service of Schoolmasters —New System.
I. SCHOOLMASTER CANDIDATE.
Schoolmasters will be entered direct from the shore.
2. Candidates must hold a Trained Teacher’s Certi-
ficate of a standard not less than that of the Trained
Teachers’ Certificate, 3rd Class, of the Education De-
partment of New South Wales.
3. They must be over twenty-one years of age, and
be physically fit.
4. They will be regarded as on probation for twelve
months from date of entry, during which period they
will be liable to be discharged at any time if found
unsuitable.
5. They will, _as “ Schoolmaster Candidates,” hold
the relative rank of Acting Warrant Officer.
6. An outfit gratuity of a total amount of £4O will
be payable, £2O being granted on entry, and the balance
when the Officer has completed his period of' service as
Probationary Schoolmaster and has been confirmed as
Schoolmaster.
7. On entry, candidates will undergo a course of in-
struction as follows; —
(i) Instruction in Service applications of prac-
tical mathematics and in the elementary
theory of the Steam Engine and the Internal
Combustion Engine.
(ii) Instruction in Fire and Torpedo Control, and
other subjects to fit them for Action Stations.
(iii) Information in regard to Service ways and
customs, ranks, ratings, and their dis-
tinguishing marks; a brief survey of Naval


Article.
History; records of famous ships; Service
technical terms; and an explanation of the
need and pride of discipline in a military
service.
8. An examination will be held at the end of six
weeks. Candidates who fail to pass will continue their
work in this course, and take a final examination at the
end of a further six weeks’ instruction. Those who fail
to pass this final examination will he discharged to
the shore.
9. Candidates who pass either of the examinations
referred to in paragraph 8 will be advanced to “ Pro-
bationary Schoolmaster ” forthwith from the date of
the examination at which they obtained the standard
required.
11. Probationary Schoolmaster (Relative Rank of
Acting Warrant Officer).
As far as is practicable, Probationary Schoolmasteis
will be appointed to Sea-going Ships as “ additional ”
to work under an experienced Schoolmaster.
2. They will be reported on by their Commanding
Officers on the completion of five months’ service as
to their fitness for confirmation as “ Schoolmasters.”
3. Schoolmasters, not recommended for confirmation
on the completion of five months’ service afloat, will
be reported on again at the completion of a further
period of four months. If still regarded as unsatis-
factory, they will be discharged to the shore, unless, at
the discretion of the Naval Board, they be allowed
the option of a further period of probation not exceed-
ing three months.
4. Seniority as Schoolmaster, when confirmed in the
rank, will be reckoned as from the date of
to “ Probationary Schoolmaster.”
5. The remainder of the outfit gratuity will be
granted on confirmation.
111. Schoolmaster (Relative Rank of Warrant
Officer).
All Schoolmasters will be required to take a short
revision course at about the completion of seven, thir-
teen, and nineteen years’ service from the date from
which seniority as Schoolmaster is reckoned.
2. Classes for this purpose will be held yearly, if
necessary; they will last one month, and be conducted
approximately on the lines of the State Teachers’
Summer Schools.
3. A reasonable examination will be held on com-
pletion of the revision course in the subjects of the
course. Schoolmasters who fail to reach a satisfactory


Article.
standard in this examination will not be eligible for
further increments of pay, or for advancement to the
relative rank of Commissioned Warrant Officer, having
regard to the fact that they will he available only for
minor appointments.
4. Schoolmasters who fail to reach the required
standard on the completion of a re-qualifying course,
will be allowed to take the course a second time after
an interval of not less than twelve months.
5. The results of all examinations should be reported
to the Wavy Officer.
IV. Schoolmaster (Relative Rank of Commissioned
Warrant Officer).
Schoolmasters will be advanced “ automatically ” to
the relative rank of Commissioned Warrant Officer on
the completion of twenty years’ service, provided they
are recommended, and have reached a satisfactory
standard in each of the three revision courses.
2. It is to be clearly understood that, as the School-
master Branch are entered as Acting Warrant Officers,
and no longer serve as ratings, the rule in other branches
which -allows of automatic promotion to Commissioned
Warrant Rank after ten years’ service in Warrant
Rank, subject to satisfactory record, does not apply to
this Branch.
V. Advanced Course.
Schoolmasters who hold a 3rd Class Certificate, or
its equivalent, and who reach the necessary standard
in the first revision course —or subsequently in special
cases—may, if recommended, be sent to the Wow South
Wales Training College for a one year’s course, with a
view to their obtaining a 2nd Class Teacher’s Certificate.
2. All Schoolmasters who hold a 2nd Class Teacher’s
Certificate (Wew South Wales), or its equivalent, will
have their names distinguished by the mark (X) in the
list of Schoolmasters.
3. All Schoolmasters who hold a 2nd Class Teacher’s
Certificate (Xew South Wales), or its equivalent, and
are recommended for early advancement as having
shown marked ability, both as Teacher and in organiz-
ing the work of their ship, and who reach the neces-
sary standard in the first Tevision course —or subse-
quently in special cases —will be eligible for an advanced
course of instruction.
4. The course will include;—■
(i) More advanced instruction in technical sub-
jects, and in their application to the special
work of the Gunnery, Torpedo, navigation,
and Wireless Telegraphy Schools, and of
the Air and Submarine Services.


Article.
(ii) General information as to the qualifications
required for the various higher ratings and
warrant ranks.
(iii) Lectures on the training and development of
the mind.
(iv) Information in regard to the duties of the
Head Schoolmaster in a Squadron.
5. The course will last twenty-two weeks.
6. Those who complete the course and examination
satisfactorily will have their names distinguished by a
(f) in the list of Schoolmasters, and will be eligible
for appointments on the “ Special List.”
VI. “ Special List ” of Higher Appointments.
A list, to be known as the “ Special List,” has been
prepared of those appointments carry special re-
sponsibilities or call for technical knowledge of an
advanced character.
2. Schoolmasters who have passed the Advanced
Course and are appointed to positions on this “ Special
List ” or are appointed acting temporarily to such a
post by the Senior Officer, will receive additional
remuneration of Is. per day. This allowance will be
payable under the same conditions as specialist allow-
ances {vide Article 1407, King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions.
VII. Staff fob Okganization and Supekvision.
In order that there may.be made available a staff
of Schoolmasters to fill positions equivalent to those of
“ Headmaster ” and of “ Senior Assistant,” and that
these may be given the status requisite for their special
duties, it has been decided to institute two higher
grades, to be termed “ Headmaster ” and “ Senior
Master,” to be confined to a limited number who have
been selected by a gradual process of elimination as
specially fitted for these responsible positions. Officers
of these grades will hold the relative ranks of Lieutenant
and Commissioned Warrant Officer respectively.
Senior Master.
2. The number of Senior Masters will not exceed, in
the normal course, 25 per cent, of the total number of
active service Officers of the Schoolmaster Branch.
Subject to this limit, the establishment will be deter-
mined by the number of appointments in which the
services of a Senior Master are required.
3. In the Schoolmaster Branch, Senior Masters will
rank above all “ Schoolmasters.”
4. Appointments as Senior Masters will be made only
into vacancies, and will be by selection from among
those Schoolmasters who have passed the Advanced


Article.
Course, have completed one year’s satisfactory employ-
ment in a “ Special List ” appointment, and are recom-
mended as possessing the special qualities requisite for
a supervising appointment.
5. Senior Masters will he considered as “ Acting ”
for the first twelve months of their service in that grade.
YIII. Headmaster (Active List).
Senior Masters with not less than three years’ service
as such will be eligible for promotion to Headmaster
on the Active List.
2. The number of Headmasters on the Active List
will not exceed in the normal course 8 per cent, of the
total number of Active Service Officers of the School-
master Branch. Subject to this limit, the actual num-
ber at any tijjie will be determined by the number of
appointments in which the services of a Schoolmaster
of this rank are required.
3. Promotions will be made by selection as vacancies
occur.
IX. Retirement.
The conditions of retirement of Officers of the School-
master Branch will be the same as for other Warrant
Officers.
X. Uniform.
The Schoolmaster Branch will wear the uniform of
Officers of their respective relative ranks, as laid down
in A.W.O. 3502/18, wdth distinction cloth of light blue.
166.
167.
168.
168.


SECTION XI.
PETTY OFFICERS AND MEN-ENTRY, TRAINING,
ADVANCEMENT, ETC.
Article.
170. Entry and Engagement in R.A.N.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Articles 92-95.
2. The entry, drafting, and advancement of Petty
Officers and Men are to be governed by the King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions, except in those
cases where special regulations are made for the Royal
Australian Navy.
171. Qualifications for Increase of Pay.
The provisions of the King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions as to the qualifications necessary
before an increase of pay can be made are to be followed
as regards all ratings of the Royal Australian Navy.
Where the necessary examining officers are not avail-
able, or where facilities do not exist to enable ratings
to obtain the required qualifications, such cases are to
be referred to the Naval Board.
172. Advancement after Examination.
Communications have been received at the Navy
Office, from which it appears that the general opinion
among ratings of the Royal Australian Navy is that
wdien they qualify for Warrant rank or any higher
rating promotion to -such higher rank or rating takes
place immediately. Such is not the case. All pro-
motions are dependent upon vacancies, recommendations,
&c., and the attention of all ratings should be drawn to
this fact.
173. Recommendations for Promotion.
Attention is drawn to the necessity for correctly
rendering the return A.S. 507, in accordance with the
instructions printed on the form, and Article 378, K.R.
and A.I.
2. In cases where ratings have been recommended,
and the recommendation subsequently withdrawn, a
report stating the reason for such withdrawal is to
accompany the return following that on which the
rating was recommended.
174. Advancement —Permanent Forces (Sea-going).
The rules governing the advancement of Ratings are
to be as laid down in the King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions, except that—
(a) Where the authority to give the rating is
noted as “ Admiralty ” or “ Commodore of
the Depot ” the words “ The Naval Board ”
are to be substituted.


Article.
( b ) Where the qualifications laid down can only
he obtained by a course in one of the Royal
Xaval Training establishments in England,
the ISTaval Board may substitute an examina-
tion to be carried out in Australia.
2. Advancements to fill vacancies that occur in the
complements of Ships and Establishments, may be
authorized by Commanding Officers in all cases (except
the Artisan Ratings specified in Article 386 King’s
Regulations), in which such Officers are given this
authority under the King’s Regulations and Admiralty
Instructions, Appendix XY.; but the Xaval Board is
to be informed of all advancements as made.
3. Only men who have passed the prescribed examina-
tions necessary, and are duly qualified in all respects for
higher ratings, are to be included in return A.S. 507.
175. Advancement of Royal Navy Ratings Lent to R.A.N.
The names of Active Service ratings lent from the
Royal Navy to the Royal Australian Xavy are retained
on the promotion rosters of their Port Division at
Home, and they will be advanced in the ordinary course
on reaching their turn on these rosters, if qualified and
recommended.
2. Active Service ratings lent from the Royal Xavy
who have passed, and are and recommended
for advancement, should be included on Quarterly
Return A.S. 507.
3. With reference to the question of the advancement
of Active Service Ratings lent from the Royal Xavy
to the Royal Australian Xavy to meet Royal Australian
Xaval demands, in cases where such ratings belong to
a class in which the authority to grant the higher
rating is the Commodore of a Home Depot (i.e., ratings
promoted from Home Port Division Rosters) any ad-
vancements made in these classes on the authority of the
Xaval Board can only be regarded as local. In the
event of their turn not having arrived for advancement
on the Home Depot Rosters prior to completing their
period of engagement in the Royal Australian Xavy,
the ratings so concerned must revert to their Royal
Xavy rating on return to that Service.
4. Where a rating is advanced to a higher rating to
fill an actual vacancy in the complement, and the
authority to grant such rating is the Captain, no rever-
sion takes place on return to Royal Xavy.
176. Candidates for Entry in R.A.N.—Return of Personal
References.
Commanding Officers of all H.M.A. Ships and
Establishments in which men are enrolled for service
in the Royal Australian Xavy are to see that references,


Article
trade diplomas, birth certificates, and any other docu-
ments furnished by candidates are returned to their
owners as soon as finished with, and not retained in the
Service Certificates of men concerned.
Several applications for documents as above, have
been received from time to time, and, in some cases, no
trace of them could be found, although there is no doubt
that such documents were furnished by applicants when
joining the Royal Australian Navy.
177. Transfers from Eoyal Navy to E.A.N.
In cases where Able Seamen and Stokers are desirous
of transferring from the Royal Navy to the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy at the termination of their first con-
tinuous service engagement, it is to be understood that,
as a general rule, such transfers will not be approved
unless the men have passed and are recommended for
advancement to the rating of Leading Seaman or Lead-
ing Stoker respectively.
178. Seniority on Transfer from Eoyal Navy.
Petty Officers and men who transfer directly from
the Royal Navy to the Royal Australian Navy will be
entered in the latter service with the rating and
seniority held by them in the former. A similar pro-
cedure will be followed in the cases of men lent from
the Royal Navy to the Royal Australian Navy.
179. Drafting of Ratings.
The Commanding Officer of Flinders Naval Depot is
held responsible to the Naval Board for the proper
drafting of all ratings and for the correctness and the
proper working of the particular rosters.
2. On all questions of drafting, reference is to be
made direct to the Commanding Officer, Flinders Naval
Depot, and the Na»al Board is only to be referred to
where there is any doubt or difficulty.
3. Monthly Returns of Numbers Borne, &c., on Form
A.S. 162, are to be rendered to the Secretary, Navy
Office, Melbourne.
180. Transfer of Ratings from Ship to Ship.
A case having been brought to notice in which a
rating was discharged from the complement of one of
H.M.A. Ships as “ undesirable for service in a small
ship,” without approval of superior authority having
been first obtained, the attention of all Commanding
Officers is called to the Instructions contained in Article
597 of the King’s Regulations. It is to be understood
that ratings are not to be transferred from Ship to Ship
without the authority of a Superior Officer, or by draft
order from the Commanding Officer, H.M.A.S.
Cerberus.


Article.
181. Re-engagement of R.N. Ratings to Complete Time for
Pension.
The time served in the R.A.N. by ratings lent from
the E.N. will count towards completion of E.N. engage-
ment, but in the event of a man’s first E.IST. engagement
expiring prior to the completion of his R.A.N. engage-
ment, should he wish to complete time for pension in
the E.IST., he must re-engage on the date of expiration
of his first period in the R.N., and not wait until com-
pletion of his R.A.N. engagement.
2. Applications for E.N. ratings to re-engage in the
Eoyal Navy to complete time for pension are, provided
such ratings have an unbroken continuity of service in
the E.N. and R.A.N., to be forwarded to the Naval
Board for transmission to the Admiralty for considera-
tion. Copies of Certificates of Service are to accom-
pany such applications.
3. The re-engagement papers (Form ,S. 55) of R.N.
ratings serving in the E.A.IST., on re-engaging to com-
plete time for pension, should be forwarded, under
cover of a separate Form S. 52, in all cases to the Navy
Office direct, for notation and transmission to the
Admiralty.
182. Discharge from the Service.
No Petty Officer, Man or Boy is to be discharged
from the, Service without the approval of the Naval
Board, except that, in the case of ships under the orders
of the Flag Officer Commanding, the Flag Officer may
authorize the discharge of Eoyal Australian Naval
ratings “ time expired ” without reference to the Naval
Board.
In case of men reported unfit for service by a Medical
Board, the Report of Survey ir? to be submitted to the
Naval Board.
2. The Commodore Superintendent, Sydney, is autho-
rized to discharge Royal Australian Naval ratings
“ time expired ” in respect to H.M.A., Ships and Estab-
lishments under his orders.
183. Medical Examination Prior to Re-enrolment.
No ratings are to be re-eurolled on completion of
their terms of engagement in the R.A.N. unless they are
found, on examination by a Naval Medical Officer, to
be physically fit for further Naval Service. The
Medical Officers’ certificate is to be indorsed on the re-
engagement form.
184. Entry of Royal Navy Pensioner or Reserve Ratings.
Printed agreement forms are to be completed and
signed in triplicate for all R.N. pensioners or R.F.E.


Article.
ratings enrolled in the R.A.N., the original and dupli-
cate copies being forwarded to Navy Office, and the
triplicate copy being attached to the man’s service
certificate.
These ratings are also required to sign the usual
engagement form, which should be forwarded into office
(attached to the signed agreement form as above) with
Monthly Return A.S. 52.
185. Enrolment in the Royal Fleet Reserve —Royal Navy
Ratings.
Eoyal Navy or Eoyal Fleet Eeserve ratings loaned to
the Eoyal Australian Navy are not permitted by the
Admiralty to enrol or remain in the Eoyal Fleet Re-
serve while attached to the Royal Australian Navy.
Such ratings will only be enrolled or re-enrolled in the
Eoyal Fleet Reserve on return to England on completion
of Commonwealth engagement
2. In order that all time served in the Eoyal Aus-
tralian Navy shall count for Eoyal Fleet Reserve Age
Pension or Gratuity, a charge for Pension Liability shall
be made against Deferred Pay;
3. Eatings may, however, renounce, in writing, their
claim to Royal Fleet Eeserve Pension or Gratuity, and
in such cases no charge for Pension Liability will be
made against Deferred Pay.
4. Eatings who are permitted by the Admiralty to re-
join the Eoyal Fleet Reserve, after having renounced
their claims, will be required to pay to the Admiralty
Pension contributions not deducted from Deferred Pay.
5. In cases where Eoyal Fleet Reservists are trans-
ferred to other positions (Naval), i.e., E.A.N.R. Staff,
where Deferred Pay is not credited, time served in such
positions will not he allowed to count for Royal Fleet
Reserve Pension or (Gratuity unless the Pension Con-
tribution due to the Admiralty is paid by the men
concerned. Where Royal Fleet Reservists desire to
count time served in positions carrying consolidated
pay towards Eoyal Fleet Reserve Pension or Gratuity,
the Director of Navy Accounts should be advised to
enable arrangements to be made to collect the Pension
(Contribution.
6. No arrangements will be made by the Admiralty for
Eoyal Fleet Reserve drill to he performed in Australia.
In view of this, time served in civil life in Australia
cannot count as qualifying service for Royal Fleet
Reserve.
186. Ratings for the Training Service.
A notification, “ E.T.S.” (Recommended for Train-
ing Service) is to be inserted in the “ Remarks ” column
of Eeturn A.S. 184 against the name of any rating who
is recommended for the Training Service.


Article.
2. In this connexion, the attention of Commanding
Officers of iShips and Establishments is drawn to column
15 of Return A. 5.507 —Quarterly Return of Ratings
Passed, Qualified, and Recommended for Advancement.
187. Instruction of Engine-room Ratings.
With a view to engine-room ratings becoming qualified
for the efficient performance of their duties, arrange-
ments are to be made for the instruction of Engine-room
Artificers, 4th Class, and Stoker ratings, during their
watches on board, in the care, maintenance, and running
of the various engines and apparatus on which they are
liable to be employed, such as capstan gear, steering
engine, evaporators, pumping, flooding, and draining
ship, magazine cooling, steam-boats, &c. The Engineer
Officers of Divisions are to examine the above ratings
monthly or bi-monthly. Hote-books should be provided,
and these are to be produced to the Officers of Divisions
when required.
2. Engine-room Artificers are to be regularly exercised
in “ taking charge” of men.
3. In assessing the award for ability, the above matters
are to be taken into consideration.
4. In the examination of Acting Engine-room Arti-
ficers for confirmation, it will be expected that they shall
have taken full advantage of the instruction referred to
above, and that they are able to “ take charge.”
5. Hote-books will be supplied to 11.M.A. Ships with-
out demand.
188. Instruction of Ratings in Anti-Submarine Look-out
Duties.
Instruction of boys and young ordinary seamen in
Anti-Submarine Look-out duties will be carried out in
the Destroyer employed with the Submarine Flotilla as
opportunity offers, and as ratings are available from
H.M.A. Ships present at the port of Melbourne or at
Westernport.
2. When ships present at the ports of Melbourne and
Westernport desire to send ratings for this instruction,
arrangements should be made .direct with the Captain
(S), H.M.A.S. Platypus.
3. Training classes will, as a rule, not exceed ten
ratings in number.
4. On completion of the Course of Instruction, a
notation should be made on the Gunnery or Torpedo
History Sheets of those ratings who show marked apti-
tude for quickly sighting and passing accurate bearings
of periscopes.


Article
189. Advancement of Boys to Man’s Rating.
With, reference to the adoption in the Royal Australian
Navy of the provisions of Admiralty Monthly Order
598, of 1919, relative to the advancement of boys to
man’s rating, it has been decided to institute the follow-
ing modifications in the Regulations contained in this
Monthly Order;—
(a) The provisions of Admiralty Monthly Order 59S
are to be applied wherever necessary to 2nd
class Ordinary rates as well as to boys.
(b) Paragraph 3—(Boys and Ordinary Seamen, 2nd
class and equivalent ratings, R.A.N., may
present themselves for the qualifying examina-
tion between the ages of sixteen years and nine
months and eighteen years, and may be advanced
to the Ordinary rate at seventeen, or at any age
between seventeen and eighteen, instead of at
the ages shown in paragraph 3 of Admiralty
Monthly Order No. 598/1919, subject to the
following conditions:—
(i) Only boys recommended as ‘‘ Superior”
are to be rated at seventeen years.
(ii) Roys not rated under (i) who have been
assessed as ‘‘ Superior ” for the last
three months may be brought up for
rating at periods of three months, i.e.,
at the ages of 17-i, 17-|, and 17|. A
boy not rated at seventeen years and
nine months is to remain a boy until
attaining the age of eighteen years.
(iii) A boy, though he has passed the educa-
tional test, enabling him to be rated
Ordinary Seaman at seventen years
and six months, should not be so rated
unless he has been rated Ordinary
'Seaman, 2nd Class, on attaining the
age of seventeen years and three
months.
( c ) The following is to be substituted for clause 2of
paragraph 11 of Monthly Order 598
“ These boys are to be rated Ordinary Sea-
men, 2nd Class, on leaving the Training
Establishment, or on attaining the age of six-
teen years, subject to the approval of their
Commanding Officer, should they have left
the Training 'Ship younger. A notation is
to accompany their papers, showing they
have been specially selected for advancement.
They are to be advanced to Ordinary Seamen
without further examination on attaining the
age of seventeen, provided they are considered
fit for the rating by the Commanding Officer
under whom they are then serving.”


Article.
190. Ordinary Seamen, 2nd Class—Disciplinary Regula-
tions for.
Ordinary Seamen, 2nd Class, are to be granted
Youths’ privileges, i.e., 10 p.m. leave in harbor, &c., sub-
ject to the removal of all or any of these privileges for
any period up to thirty days as a punishment for mis-
behaviour.
2. Ordinary Seamen, 2nd Class, may be punished for
drunkenness or general misbehaviour by the suspension
of all privileges, and be disrated to Boy, Ist Class, sum-
marily.
181. Entry of Officers’ Stewards and Cooks.
When vacancies exist in the complements of H.M.A.
Ships for Officers’ Stewards or Officers’ Cooks, Com-
manding Officers should make application to IT.M.A.S.
Cerberus to ascertain whether any of these ratings arc
available for draft from the Depot.
If none are available from the Depot, Commanding
Officers may enter suitable candidates to fill the
vacancies.
2. (Officers’ Stewards and Cooks are to be entered on
probation for a period of six -weeks. They may then he
confirmed in rating if in all respects considered suitable
by the Commanding Officer of the (Ship or Establishment
in which serving.
3. If any probationary rating is not recommended for
confirmation at the expiration of the above period, the
facts are to he reported to the Yaval Board, with a
view to his discharge to the shore.
192. Advancement of Officers’ Stewards and Cooks.
Advancements of Officers’ Stewards and Cooks will be
made, from roster, by the Commanding Officer, Flinders
Yaval Depot.
2. Advancements by Commanding Officers in vacan-
cies arising in ships are to be to the acting rating only,
and will eease on leaving the ship, or earlier, in the event
of the vacancy being filled, or at any time, as may be
decided by the Commanding Officer.
3. To be eligible for permanent advancement to the
next grade, Officers’ Stewards and Cooks, 3rd and 2nd
Class, will be required to serve a minimum period of four
years in each grade. The number of Chief Petty Officer
ratings will be increased in due course, as requisite to
insure fair prospects to these ratings.
4. Attention is drawn to the necessity for recommenda-
tion of Officers’ Stewards and Cooks on Returns A. 5.507.
(Vide also Article 206.)


Article,
193. Examination of Cook Eatings.
In the School of Cookery, established at Flinders
Xaval Depot, the following procedure in connexion with
the examination of Cook ratings is to be carried out: —
(a) The Commanding Officers of all H.M.A. Ships
and establishments are to arrange with the Com-
manding Officer, H.M.A.S. Cerberus, for the
relief of all Cook ratings due for examination
for higher rating.
( b) These ratings will undergo in Depot such short
courses as are considered desirable before
examination.
(c) After these courses, ratings will be examined by
the Instructor in Cookery and the Accountant
Officer, H.M.AjS. Cerberus.
2. Probationary Assistant Cooks and Assistant Cooks
will be examined six weeks after entry as to their apti-
tude for cooking work.
3. All higher cook ratings will be required to comply
with the tests laid down in the Handbook of ISTaval
Cookery, and to have the requisite knowledge of bread-
making, prior to advancement.
194. Qualifying Service before Examination for leading
Seaman.
It has been decided to modify the regulations regard-
ing period of qualifying service required before examina-
tion for rating of Leading Seaman as laid down in
Appendix XV. of King’s Regulations, in order to allow
an Able Seaman to pass for Leading Seaman after one
year’s service as Able Seaman, but not to be rated until
he has served two years in the later rating. It is under-
stood, however, that there is to be no lowering of the
present standard.
2. Until further orders, Able Seamen serving in sea-
going ships, who have passed, and are thoroughly recom-
mended, may be advanced to Acting Leading Seaman to
fill vacancies in complement, notwithstanding they have
not completed two years’ service.
195. Physical Training Instructors.
A half-yearly return is to be rendered to the Com-
manding Officer, H.M.A.S. Cerberus, from all H.M.A.
Ships, containing a list of Petty Officers and Leading
Seamen who are volunteers, and are recommended to
qualify as physical training instructors. The return is
to be rendered on Ist January and Ist July in each
year.
■2. A copy of the Service Certificate of each volunteer,
when recommended for the first time, is to accompany
each return.
3. Candidates must have the qualifications required
by Article 400, clause 2, King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions.


Article.
4. Eatings selected to qualify for physical training
instructors will be required to execute a fresh engage-
ment for five years’ service in the Royal Australian
Navy from the date of commencing the qualifying
course.
196. Victualling Eatings—Examination and Instruction.
Questions connected with the issue of rum and of
marine clothing are not to be put to candidates of the
Victualling Branch belonging to the Royal Australian
Navy being examined for higher rating, but it is essen-
tial that such candidates should possess in the higher
grades a thorough practical knowledge of the system of
general messing in force.
2. Royal Naval ratings on temporary loan should,
however, bo examined in the exact subjects laid down in
Appendix XV. of the King’s Regulations and Admiralty
Instructions (Addenda).
3. Attention is called to the necessity for Junior
Victualling Ratings receiving practical experience in
General Mess duties, and where ratings are continuously
employed on one section of work, such- as clothing, &c.,
arrangements should be made for them to be given
instruction in other sections.
197. Promotion of Butcher, Class 111. and Class 11.
Advancement of Butcher, Class 111. and Class 11., will
be automatic on the following lines: —
For Butcher, 2nd Class—( a ) Three years’ service
as Butcher, 3rd Class, provided that during the last
two years’ service his character has Been V.G., and
he is recommended for advancement ; ( b ) Authority
to give rating, Captain of Ship.
For Butcher, Ist Class—As at (a) and ( b ), ex-
cept that for Butcher, 3rd Class, read Butcher, 2nd
Class.
198. Educational Tests.
The provisions of Admiralty Monthly Orders 4015
and 4016 of 1918, and 596 and 598 of 1919, have been
adopted in the Royal Australian Navy.
2. Papers for the Higher Educational Test will be sup-
plied by the Admiralty. Commanding Officers are to
report to the Navy Office, on Ist July and Ist January
of each year, the number of candidates desiring to attend
the examination to be held in October and April respec-
tively. The worked papers will be forwarded to the
Naval Representative for transmission to the Admiralty.
3. In regard to Admiralty Monthly Order 598 of
1919, these examination papers will be prepared and
marked locally. Numbers of Boys and Ordinary Sea- ,
men, 2nd class, wishing to sit at this examination, are to
be communicated to the Navy Office on the Ist day of
the month preceding the month in which the examina-
tion is held.


Article-
-199. Examination of leading Seamen for Eating of Petty
Officer.
With regard to Appendix XV. 33 (B), King’s Regu-
lations and Admiralty Instructions, the Naval Board has
decided, as a temporary measure, that Leading Seamen
desirous of presenting themselves for professional ex-
amination for the rating of Petty Officer may be per-
mitted to be examined three months prior to the com-
pletion of twelve months’ service as a Leading Seaman
in a sea-going ship.
200. Advancement of Stokers to Acting leading Stokers.
With reference to Appendix XV., Part 1, No. 55 (B)
King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions, Volume
11., the Naval Board have approved of the clause con-
tained therein, to the effect that iStokers who are within
two years of the completion of the R.A.N. engagement,
are not eligible for the rating of Acting Leading Stoker
unless they re-engage, being temporarily suspended until
further orders, in so far as it relates to R.A.N. ratings
only.
2. Ratings who are within two years of the comple-
tion of their engagement, and are advanced to the rating
of Acting Leading Stoker without re-engaging will not,
however, he eligible for the three months’ mechanical
training course until they re-engage for a further period.
201. Advancement of Leading Stoker Eatings.
Leading Stokers who desire to qualify, and are recom-
mended by the 'Commanding Officer of their ship for
advancement to the rating of Stoker Petty Officer, will
he required to undergo a three months’ course of instruc-
tion at Plinders Naval Depot.
2. All Leading Stokers rated Acting Stoker Petty
Officer under the conditions of paragraph 4, and all
Leading ,Stokers, otherwise qualified and recommended
for advancement to the rating of Stoker Petty Officer,
are to be included in the Quarterly Return (A. 5.507)
of ratings recommended for advancement. A roster of
these ratings is to be kept at Flinders Naval Depot,
and these ratings will be withdrawn from their ships,
according to the roster, for the Mechanical Course
from time to time as accommodation is available.
3. The Mechanical Course will he as follows:
General Instruction.
Weeks.
Working at bench with hammer, chisel, and
file .. .. . . .. 2
Replace gauge glasses, pack and adjust
minor glands, break and remake easy
steam joints and joints of boiler doors .. 1
Use of sledge hammer, soldering iron, and
ratchet brace .. .. .. 1
4


And in addition —
Fitter and Turner.
A further three weeks at bench work, in
addition to above two weeks .. . . 3
The remaining five weeks at lathes and
machines . . . . . . . . 5
8
Boilermaker and Smith.
Light flanging, riveting, and caulking, re-
moving and renewing boiler tubes, drill-
ing holes for boiler test-tapping, and
plugging same with screwed rivets, water
tost of boilers .. . . .. 4
Build brick arch and lino up sides of fur-
naces . . . . . . . . 1
General work at forge, including making
and tempering chisels, and welding up
the Tj-in. round bar . . . . 3
8
Coppersmith.
Make small length of 4-in. copper pipe from
sheet, fit branch at right angles, braze on
flanges, make copper hand-lamp, make a
tin oil-feeder, sweat liners on brasses, re-
metal small bearings . . . . 8
Moulder-
Simple moulding, including articles with
core, e.g., elbow with flanges, small valve
box, &c., rig up pot furnace from ship’s
appliances . . . . . . . . 8
While going through the above practical course the
men will receive one hour’s lecture a week in explana-
tion of the subjects of the Stoker’s Manual, and of the
appliances in use in their workshops.
Evening classes will be held on two nights a week for
instruction in steam and engineering subjects. Men
who are backward in ordinary school work (reading,
writing, and the first four rules of arithmetic) will be
given opportunities of improving their knowledge. An
advanced class will be held on one night a week. The
examination will consist of tests in all the above sub-
jects.
4. As a temporary measure, Leading Stokers who have
not been through the Mechanical Course, but who possess
all the other qualifications, may be rated Acting Stoker
Petty Officers to fill vacancies existing in the comple-
ments of H.M.A. Ships. These ratings will be with-
drawn in their turn to undergo the Mechanical Course,
and, if they qualify, they will be confirmed in the rating
of Stoker Petty Officer, but if they fail they will revert
to the rating of Leading Stoker.


Article.
202. Examination of Engine-room Artificers for Promotion.
In order that the procedure laid down in Article 307
and Appendix X, Part XIII. of K.R. and A.I. may be
carried out, applications from E.R.A’s. lent from R.X.
who are qualified and are desirous of being examined
for the rank of Artificer Engineer are to he forwarded
in time to reach the Xavy Office by Ist June in each
year.
2. On receipt of the examination papers from the
Admiralty, the necessary arrangements will he made- for
conducting the examination; any case, in which an
E.R.A. who is a candidate for examination, is trans-
ferred from one ship to another after his application
has been forwarded is to be reported immediately to
Xavy Office.
3. The examination will he conducted by two Engineer
Commanders, or one Engineer Commander and one
Engineer LieutenanCCommander.
4. This will also apply to the examination of Engine-
room Artificers of the Royal Australian Xavy.
203. Examination for Acting Electrical Artificer, 4th Class.
Candidates for the rating of Acting Electrical Arti-
ficer, 4th Class, are to be examined at the Torpedo
School, Flinders Xaval Depot.
2. In the case of ratings at Sydney or other distant
ports, a preliminary test of the candidate’s ability as a
fitter and turner or instrument maker should be held
locally in order to determine whether the expense of
sending him to Melbourne is justified by the probability
of his passing the examination.
204. Examinations by Engineer Commander (S) H.M.A.S.
“ Platypus
The abovenamed Officer is authorized to carry out
such examinations of R.X. and R.A.X. ratings as En-
gineer Commanders (D) are permitted to conduct, viclp
Appendix XV., Volume 11., King’s Regulations and
Admiralty Instructions.
205. Royal Australian Fleet Reserve.
Regulations regarding the above are contained in a
handbook entitled “ Regulations for the Government of
the Royal Australian Fleet Reserve 1920.”
206. Instruction and Advancement of Officers’ Cooks.
Except for bread-making, Officers’ Cooks are to
undergo similar courses of Instruction in the Cookery
School in Cerberus 111. to those laid down in King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions for Ships’ Cook
ratings. For that purpose the Drafting Officer is to
arrange that Officers’ Cooks are discharged to Cerberus
111. from time to time in numbers that can be con-
veniently spared from the Fleet.


2. 'Generally the instructions governing examinations
for Ships’ Cook ratings are to apply, and the case of an
Officers’ Cook who fails to pass the necessary examina-
tion on his second attempt is to be specially reported to
the Naval Board for decision as to his retention in
the Service.
3. If otherwise qualified, and recommended, as laid
down in Article 192, Officers’ Cooks may he advanced
to the acting higher rating until facilities can be
afforded for instruction and examination in the Cookery
School. On passing the required examination, success-
ful candidates holding the acting rating are to he con-
firmed from the date of receiving the acting rating.
207. Superintendent of Training in the Royal Australian
Navy.
The Superintendent of Training in the Eoyal Aus-
tralian Navy will generally supervise the training in the
following Ships and Shore Establishments: —
H.M.A.S. Australia.
H.M.A.S. Sydney.
H.M.A.S. Tingira.
H.M.A. Naval Depot, Williamstown and Flinders
Naval Depot.
2. All correspondence on matters connected with the
training of ratings is to be sent by the Commanding
Officers of the Ships and Establishments quoted in para-
graph 1, direct to the Superintendent of Training,
addressed to Flinders Naval Depot, Crib Point, Western
Port.
3. Correspondence on matters of importance, requir-
ing the approval or consideration of the Naval Board,
is to be prepared in duplicate, the original being sent
to the Secretary, Department of the Navy, and the
duplicate to the Superintendent of Training.
4. Correspondence to and from the above-named
Ships and Establishments, which does not relate to
training, is to be dealt with as previously.
20S.
209.
210.
211.
212.
213.
214.
215.


SECTION XII.
ORDNANCE, TORPEDOES, AND MINES.
Article.
216. Orders to Regulate the Care of Warlike Stores, Guns,
etc., in the Royal Australian Navy.
Section 1.
The Assistant Inspector of Naval .Ordnance will be
responsible under the Commodore Superintendent and
Senior Naval Officer, Sydney, to the Naval Board for
the following, viz.—
Examination of Guns.
Tests, examination and proof of warlike stores so
far as they can he carried out in Australia.
2. He will be responsible to the Naval Board—
(a) That the regulations with regard to the ex-
amination of warlike stores are carried out
in the Royal Australian Navy.
( b ) That the returns in connexion with guns and
wmrlike stores as ordered by those Regula-
tions are correctly rendered.
(c) For the continuous inspection, on behalf of
the Naval Board of the arrangements made
by the Naval Ordnance Officer for the safe
keeping of ammunition and . explosives in
the Ordnance Depot.
He is to report to the D.O.T.M. on the first of each
quarter that all returns dealing with inspection have
been rendered, or if any are overdue. Whenever it may
be necessary, to call for, or hasten, a return ‘of this
nature, he is to communicate direct with the ship or
establishment concerned by form.
3. Routine communications between the A.1.N.0. and
ships or establishments may pass directly, but more im-
portant communications are to pass through the Com-
modore Superintendent and Senior Naval Officer, Syd-
ney, to the Secretary, Navy Office, Melbourne.
4. The A.1.N.0. will only provisionally condemn
guns unless the case is a very decided one. In all
doubtful cases, and also when the gun may be repair-
able, a full report is to be made to the D.0.T.M., and
the Admiralty will be asked for an opinion. In such
cases the A.1.N.0. must be prepared to forward impres-
sions, &c., to England.
5. Any questions which may arise concerning ammu-
nition, explosives, or other warlike stores, which are not
covered by the Regulations are to be referred to the
D.0.T.M., who will ask for the assistance of the Chemi-
cal Adviser (Defence Department), or of the Admiralty
when considered desirable. This is not to prevent the
A.1.N.0. taking immediate action when he considers it
desirable to do so.


Returns to be Rendered by Ships.
Form.
When to be Rendered.
Authority.
To whom to be
Rendered.
S. 1429, Report
Every six months in March and
Naval Cordite Regu-
Naval Ord-
of Inspection
September
lations, 1917 (re-
nance
of Cordite
(heat test)
(Periodical
heat test of
cordite)
printed with
Amendments,
1919)
Depot
(a) When each cordite lot of
Mark I. and M.D. cordite
on its becoming 3 years, 6
years, and 9 years old, and
after it is 9 years of age
annually
{ b ) When any cordite older
than 5 years has been at
any time exposed to a tem-
perature of or above 90° F.
for 56 consecutive days or
more or when cordite of any
age has been exposed to a
temperature of or above
100° F. for 28 consecutive
days or more, a sample of
each lot affected is to be
landed (see Appendix III.
of the Cordite Regulations
for age of lots).
(c) When specially ordered
S. 1140, Exami-
After ship has been in commis-
Naval Magazine
nation of Shell
H.E.
sion two years
Regs., 1919, Art.
232 and 233
S. 1145, Proof of
H.E. Shells
Annually
Naval Magazine
Regs., 1919, Art.
233
y, 1404, -Exami-
nation of Guns
(a) After prescribed series
Instructions for
Armourers, 1915,
page 130
(6) After accident to gun
(c) Paying off or recommission-
ing
”
A.S. 298, Miss-
( d ) If not examined or inspected
during previous three years
„
”
As requisite ..
Naval Magazines
Naval Ord-
fires
Regs. 1919, Art.
199
nance
Depot (for
special ex-
amination)
Section la.
6. These orders will be corrected as necessary by
periodical orders such as Gunnery and Torpedo Orders.
&c. The A.1.N.0. is to forward to the Navy Office on
Ist January in each year all the necessary corrections
to these orders, which will then be issued.
Note.—Complete examination of all explosives on board is to be made, including filled shells and
warheads, except warheads in submarines:—
(«) Battleships, battle cruisers, cruisers, special light cruisers, and other vessels-not included under
(6), (c), and 00- —Every four years.
(6) Leaders, torpedo boat destroyers, torpedo boats.— Every two years.
(c) Submarines.—Every six months.
('■/) Vessels which carry no gun ammunition. —Every year.
Warheads in submarines are to be landed at a Xaval Ordnance Depst every two years.


Section Ib.
Table Showing Examination of Ammunition and Ordnance.
Description.
Date of Examination.
Form, and from
Whom Rendered.
Disposal of Forms.
Heat and silvered vessel
tests of cordite from
ships(a)
Continuous
S. 1429, in quad-
ruplicate ships
1 for N.O. Depot
1 for D.O.T.M.
1 for D.A.S.
(through Sec-
retary, Dept,
of the Navy)
1 for Ship
Heat and silvered vessel
tests of cordite in
store (a)
0. 27 in tripli-
cate, N.O.
Depot
1 for N.O. Depot
I for D.O.T.M.
1 for D.A.S.
(through Sec-
retary, Dept,
of Navy)
Report of inspection of dry
gun-cotton in store (6)
Annually (February)
0.31, N.O. Depot
Kept in N.O.
Depot
Report of filled H.E. shell,
landed from ships, in-
Annually ..
S. 1146, in dupli-
cate Ships
1 for N.O. Depot
1 for Ship
eluding moisture tests
of exploders (c) ( d)
Report of proof of filled
Shells sent to Wool-
S. 1145 in trip-
2 tor Chief In-
H.E. shell from Ships
wich for firing proof.
J % annually of
each nature 4 • 1"
and upwards
licate Ships
spector, Wool-
wich, one of
these being
finally re-
turned to
Depot for Ship
1 for N. 0. Depot
Report of inspection of
Cartridges.
Annually (April)
G. 803 N.O.
Depot
Kept in N.O,
Depot
Impulse Torpedo in Store (d)
Report of examination of
Gunpowder in Store (d)
Annually (April)
G. 864 N.O.
Depot
Kept in N.O.
Depot
Remove plugs G.C., Tor-
pedo charges, instore (d)
Quarterly (January,
April, July, October
No forms
Entered in Re-
cord Book
Torpedo and Electrical
Stores, in Store (^)
Annually (June)
0. 38 N.O.
Depot
Kept in N. (K
Depot
Fireworks, rockets, primers,
lights, &c., in Store ( d )
Annually (August) ..
G. 848 N.O.
Depot
”
Verev’s lights, lights long,
,, ,,
,, ,,
&c., in Store (d)
Fuzes, T. and P., and Fuzes
perc. base in Store ( d )
„
G. 841 N.O.
Depot
G. 848 N.O.
Depot
>>.
Tubes, electric, &c., in
Store (d)
”
»
Detonators, electric, No. 9,
&c., in Store ( d )
”
Report of inspection of
Wet Guncotton in
Annually (November)
0. 30 N.O.
Depot
...
Store {d)
Report of inspection of
M.G. and S.A. Ammuni-
Annually (October)..
G. 803 N.O.
Depot
-
tion in Store ( d )
Report of Inspection of
Powder-filled Shell in
Store ( h ), ( d )
Annually (June)
0. 28, N.O.
Depot
Blank Cartridges in Store
(d)
Annually (April)
G. 900, N.O.
Depot
”
Fuzes, 1).A., Impact, sent
from Ships to Dep6t for
Proof and Dep6t Stock
Annually (May)
C. 841 in dupli-
cate N.O.
Depot
(all tested at Depot)
C. 18558. —4


Table Showing Examination of Ammunition , &c. —continued.
Description.
Date of Examination.
Form, and from
Whom Rendered.
Disposal of Forms.
Report of Inspection of
Filled H.E. Shells in
Store (6), (c), ( d )
Annually (June)
O. 28, N.O.
Depot
Kept in N.O.
Depot
Depth Charges in Store ..
Mines
At monthly intervals
for removal of any
Amatol “ ooze,”
and examination
of india-rubber
ring of filling hole
Air escape plugs
removed every
month
Authority.—
Addendum
No. 2 to The
Handbook of
Depth
Charges, A.
36, Sect. 25,
page 17
C.M.O. 223/1920
Entered in
Depot Record
Book, and
annually in
Form O.A. 123
October, 1&19
Depth Charge Pistols
Every three months
Authority.—
Handbook of
Depth
Charges
Refit (5), page
39
Entered in
Depot Record
Book
Examination of Guns in
Ships (d)
After prescribed series
of rounds
Ships paying off or
recommissioning
When breech mechan-
ism of gun requires
repair or adjust-
ments or gun re-
quires examination
from any cause
S. 1404, Ships
Kept in N.O.
DepH, Memos,
of examination
filled in and
returned to
ships
Inspection of Guns
If not examined or
inspected during
previous three
years
Ships refitting
Annual inspection of
guns in store and
vessels in reserve
No forms
>» >>
Memos, marked
up
Notes.
(а) Forms S. 1429 and 0 27, Heat and Silvered Vessel Tests of Cordite, will continue
to be sent to the Director of Armament Supply, Admiralty, for information, in order that
universal action may be taken at all Depots.
(б) In the event of any shells being found unserviceable, they will be returned to
Woolwich, except, as in note (c).
(c) When H.E. shells are found to be unserviceable, the procedure ordered by Army
Ordnance Regulations Part 11., 1914 (reprint, 1916), para. 501, is to be followed, viz. :
The shell is to be drowned in deep water if fuze hole plug is damaged, otherwise the shell
is to be returned plugged to Chief Inspector, Woolwich.
( d ) When the report of inspection, &c., is entirely satisfactory, no further action is
necessary, and the records are to be retained in Naval Ordnance Depot. When not
entirely satisfactory, the report is to be forwarded in all cases to the Secretary,
Department of the Navy, with remarks of the A.1.N.0. and suggestions as to action.


Article.
Section 11.
General Duties of Naval Ordnance Officer.
The Naval Ordnance Office under the Commodore
Superintendent and Senior Naval Officer, Sydney, is in
charge of the Naval Ordnance Depot, Spectacle Island,
Sydney. Ho is generally responsible for the upkeep of
guns, ammunition, and other Naval Ordnance Stores
necessary for the ships and depots of the Royal Austra-
lian Navy. He is responsible that the Magaziift and
other Regulations with regard to the safe keeping of
ammunition and explosives are carried out in the Ord-
nance Depot.
2. He is responsible to the Commodore Superintendent
and Senior Naval Officer for the following:—
(a) The general control of the Depot as far as the
discipline of the naval ratings and police is
concerned;
fib) that the fire arrangements are efficient, and
that fire drill is frequently exercised;
(c) the general supervision of the working staff,
and the carrying out of all orders resulting
from the test of ammunition and explosives
by the A.1.N.0.
3. He is to arrange each month that the necessary
number of hands are told off for carrying out the ex-
aminations laid down for that month.
4. In the absence of the A.1.N.0. he is to arrange
for, and carry out, the annual and other examinations,
if necessary asking for the assistance of a specialist
officer from the Fleet. On no account is the exami-
nation of any stores for any year to be omitted unless
the omission is authorized by the
D.O.T.M.
Section lla.
Instructions Regarding Naval Ordnance Stores.
The N. 0.0. will furnish quarterly statements of
explosives to the Naval Board, and on the Ist April in
each year he will submit demands for Naval Ordnance
Stores and ammunition to cover requirements up to
30th June of the next year but one.
2. In order that the necessary stores for the Naval Re-
serves may be obtained from England, the D.N.R.M. is
to forward to the N. 0.0., by the Ist February in each
year, a complete list of those which have to be demanded
from England. Small arms ammunition for the Naval
Reserves, and for the Naval Depot, Flinders (except
.22 inch, which is to be demanded from the Naval Ord-
nance Officer), is to be demanded direct from the Mili-
tary Department, as at present.
3. In all demands for Naval Ordnance Stores allowed
by establishment, the columns “ Established Proportion”
and “Remaining” are to be filled in. Proper forms,


Article.
which can be obtained from the Naval Store Depart-
ment as required should be used. Depots and Naval
Reserve Districts are to forward with their annual de-
mands a statement of quantities, condition, and storage
of Naval Ordnance Stores, together with any remarks
thereon.
4. Demands for Naval Ordnance Stores not allowed
by establishment are to he marked “ Special,” and sub-
mitted to the Senior Naval Officer. The reasons for
demanding are to be inserted.
5. Ships leaving Sydney for lengthy or indefinite
periods are to demand sufficient practice ammunition to
cover the time they will probably be away, as transport
for ammunition is difficult to obtain.
Section 111.
Instructions regarding Gun Mountings and Torpedo
Tubes in reserve at Sydney.
Gun mountings and 'torpedo tubes in reserve at
Garden Island, Sydney, will be on the accounting charge
of the Naval Engineer Officer, Garden Island.
2. The Naval Engineer Officer will be responsible for
the maintenance, adjustment, repair, modification, &c.,
of these gun mountings and torpedo tubes.
217. Instructions Regarding Cordite in H.M.A. Ships.
Commanding Officers are to take special care to in-
sure that the regulations as to the stowage, examina-
tion, &c., of ammunition on hoard ships of war, as laid
down by the Admiralty, are complied -with. The
Admiralty orders on this subject supplied to Command-
ing Officers are to be carefully studied.
2. Samples of cordite on board H.M.A. Ships and
at Naval Bases are to be forwarded periodically, in ac-
cordance with Admiralty procedure as laid down from
time to time, to the Naval Ordnance Officer, Spectacle
Island, Sydney,‘for examination.
3. On the 31st March and 30th September in each
year a statement is to be rendered showing the stocks of
all cordite cartridges (down to 2 pdr. inclusive) which
are on hand. It should be borne in mind by the officers
concerned that—
(a) these instructions apply to all H.M.A. Ships
(including Patrol Vessels, &c.) and Naval
Shore Establishments, except the Naval
Ordnance Depot, Spectacle Island, Sydney.
(b) the returns (Form A.5.1147z) are to show the
following particulars, viz., “ Lot Number,”
“ Size,” “ Date of manufacture,” Date re-
ceived on board, &c.,” “Quantity on
charge,’’ “Remarks” (the expenditure since
last half-yearly return being noted in the
“Remarks” column).


Article.
(c) The Lot Numbers of the cordite cylinders in
Q.F. cartridges are also to be reported.
( d ) A separate return is to be forwarded for each
type of gun.
( e ) The returns are to be rendered in duplicate,
one copy being sent to the Secretary, De-
partment of the Navy, Melbourne, and the
other to the Naval Ordnance Officer, Sydney.
4. Special attention is to be paid to the instructions
contained in the “Naval Magazine Regulations,’’ and
“Naval Cordite Regulations.”
Fired Cartridge Cases.
All fired Q.F. and 1-incb electric cartridge cases are
to be returned to the Naval Ordnance Depot, Sydney.
2. Small Arm Machine Gun fired cases are to be dis-
posed of locally, periodical sales being held by the
D.N.O.’s of all Districts except Sydney, where the cases
will be returned to the Naval Ordnance Depot, Sydney,
for inclusion in the local auction sales.
218. Ammunition Expenditure —Returns.
The undermentioned returns of expenditure are to be
rendered quarterly by all H.M.A. Ships, viz.;—
(a) and Shell (down to 2 pdr. inclu-
sive) .
( b ) Lights and Grenades.
2. In the case of projectiles the report should state
the number of each description expended, i.e., A.P.C.,
G.P.C., H.E., Practice, &c., and in reporting high explo-
sive shell, lyddite shell and trotyl shell, &c., are to be
shown separately.
3. It is important that B.L. and Q.F. ammunition
should be kept separate and that the mark of the guns,
weight of the charge or projectile, and description of the
driving band should be given where these particulars
are necessary to insure identification of the ammunition
expended.
Examples are given below—•
B.L. 6-inoh Mark XII gun .. Charges 27 2/16 lbs. or 18 2/3 lbs
Shells, C.P.C., C.N.B. (4 cal.), or
Shot Practice C.N.B. (4 cal.)
B.L. 6-inch Mark XI gun .. Shells, C.P.C., C.N.8., (4 cal.) or
Common Lyddite T.N.T.,
C.N.B. (4 cal.)
B.L. Mark VII gun .. Charges, 9 lbs , 5 15/16 ozs., or
6 9/16 lbs.
Shells, Heavy Common Lyddite
or Practice Shot.
Q.F. 4—inch Mark 111 gun .. Shells, C.P. Light.
Q.F. 4-inch Mark IV gun .. Shells, C.P. Heavy
Q.F. 12 pdr. 12 cwt. gun .. Charges, 2 lbs., or 13 14/16 ozs.
(reduced charge).


Form.
So. of Copies.
Rendered to.
S.305
2
The Secretary,
307
i
Navy Office,
308m.
2
Melbourne.
308m.
2
308f.
2
—I
Article
4. These returns are to be rendered in duplicate, one
copy being forwarded to the Secretary, Navy Office,
Melbourne, and the other to the Naval Ordnance Officer.
Spectacle Island, Sydney.
219. Annual Analysis of Torpedo Firings and Paravane
Practices in the R.A.N.
With regard to Admiralty Confidential Interim
Orders 843 and 844 of 1919, and 237 of 1920, the Naval
Board have decided that the annual analysis of
head Torpedo running and Paravane practices from
H.M.A. Ships is to be compiled by the R.A.N. Torpedo
School. Copies of the report will be published and cir-
culated to H.M.A. Ships, a copy also being sent to
H.M.S. Vefnon for information.
2. Forms in connexion with the above returns are to
be rendered as follows, viz.;—-
220. Stations where Explosives are Stored.
An annual return is to be furnished to the Inspector
of Warlike Stores, R.A.N. Ordnance Depot, Spectacle
Island, Sydney, by all District Naval Officers and
Officers commanding H.M.A. Naval Establishments, giv-
ing the following particulars:—
(a) List of all stations where explosives of any de-
scription are stored (other than Naval Ord-
nance Depot, Spectacle Island), giving the de-
scription of the magazine, &c.
( b ) The conditions under which explosives are stored,
e.g., whether different kinds of explosives are
stored in the same magazines.
(c) What steps are taken to insure safety of explo-
sives and their good condition.
(d) What tests and examinations have been made.
221. Expenditure of Naval Ordnance and Torpedo Stores.
On checking Naval Ordnance Store Accounts which
have been rendered to Navy Office from H.M.A. Ships,
it has been found that, in many instances, stores (other
than those denoted by (S)) have been written off charge


Vessel.
Number Allowed.
Guns.
I
Double
Mountings
Field
Mountings.
Australia
Melbourne
Sydney
Brisbane
Adelaide
Encounter
Marguerite
Mallow
Geranium
Anzac
Stalwart
Success
Swordsman
Tasmania
Tattoo
Huon
Torrens
Swan
Parramatta
Warrego
Yarra
“ J ” Class Submarines (6)
Protector (Gunnery School Tender)
Gunnery School
To be maintained as “ Reserve ”
10
|>8 each
4
*2 each
>4 each
|*2 each
I each
2
2
4
5
4 each
2
1 each
2 each
1 each
1
1
2
4 each
Article
in the ledger but not entered in the Gunner’s Expense
Book which is provided for this purpose. In this con-
nexion, the attention of Accounting Officers should be
drawn to the instructions contained in Form 5.1418.
2. With regard to the Whitehead Torpedo Store Ac-
counts, the expenditure of all Whitehead Torpedo Store's
(other than small stores denoted by (S) in ledger) is
to be recorded in the pages provided for this purpose n
the end of the ledger (5.1423 b).
222. Temperatures in Ship’s Magazines.
The instructions contained in Article 146 (2) of the
Haval Magazine Regulations, 1919, are applicable to
H.M.A. Sloops and Gunboats, and monthly returns of
magazine temperatures are to be rendered by the ships
concerned.
2. Returns are to be rendered in duplicate.
223. Lewis Guns—Establishment.
The following is the establishment of .303-inch Lewis
guns and mountings for H.M.A. Ships, &c.:—-


Vessel.
Numbers Allowed.
Guns.
Cone
Mountings.
Beef Block
Mountings.
Field
Stands.
Tripods.
Australia
4
4
o
Adelaide,
2
2
2
Brisbane
2
2
2
Sydn y
2
2
2
Melbourne
2
2
2
Encounter
2
2
2
Anzac ..
i
i
i
Stalwart
i
i
i
Success
i
i
i
Swordsman
i
i
i
Tasmania
i
i
i
Tattoo ..
i
i
i
Huon ..
i
i
i
Torrens
i
i
i
Swan ..
i
i
i
Parramatta
i
i
i
Y arra ..
i
i
i
Warrego
Protector (Gun-
nery School
i
i
i
Tender)
i
1
Tingira
i
1
Gunnery School
2
2
2
In Reserve
4
4
4
Article
224. Maxim Guns —Establishment.
The following is the establishment of .303-inch Maxim
guns, cone mountings, beef-block mountings, field stands
and tripods, for H.M.A. Ships, &c.
225. Small Arms Ammunition.
Approval has been given by the Military Board for
the issue from Ordnance Stores of such supplies of
small arm ammunition as may be required by the Naval
Forces of tbe Commonwealth, on payment of the full
rate published periodically in Military Orders.
2. A charge will be made by the Military Department
for all chargers, .303-inch cartridges, issued, in addition
to the usual charge for the ammunition.
3. Empty serviceable chargers are to be returned to
the Military Department, when credit will be given.
4. H.M.A. Ships, Establishments, R.A.N.B. Depots,
&c„ are to render to the Naval Ordnance Officer,
Sydney, on the 31st March and 30th September in each
year a return showing the stock of all Small Arm and
Machine Gun ammunition on hand.
5. The manufacturer’s initials, batch, or lot number
(if any), date of manufacture, and quantity of each,
should be reported.
6. In order to dispose of surplus stocks of Small Arm
ammunition at Spectacle Island, Sydney, H.M.A.S.
Cerberus and all District Naval Officers are to obtain
their supplies of .303-inch cartridges (ball and blank)
from that establishment until further orders.


Place.
Length of Course for Men Qualifying
for (in days).
Ord. Art.
Arm.
Mate.
Armrs.
Chf.
Arms.
R.A. Naval Ordnance Depot,
fc
Spectacle Island, Sydney ..
10
10
10
10
S.A. Factorj, Lithgow
5
5
5
5
Article.
226. Gun Trials—Procedure.
The Gunnery Trials of new ships building in Aus-
tralia, including preliminary inspection, equipment,
trials, &c., are to be conducted by the Gunnery School,
H.M.A.S. Cerberus.
2. The Gunnery School will be entirely responsible
for preparing the necessary lists of stores required for
the trials and for forwarding the same when required
by the Commodore Superintendent, Garden Island.
3. The Ordnance Department of the Navy Office will
be represented at all these trials.
227. Gun Trials —Reports of.
Reports of Gun Trials are to be distributed as fol-
lows :
(a) To the Naval Board Report in dupli-
cate.
( b ) To the Commodore Com- Copy of report in
manding, H.M.A. Fleet duplicate for in-
(in the case of Ships formation,
under his orders)
or to
the Senior Officer of
Flotilla of group where
applicable.
(c) To Ship direct if not dealt One copy of report
with under (6). for information.
( d ) To the Commodore Super- One copy of report
intendent, Sydney, if for information,
carried out by the Gun-
nery School, Williams-
town, and to the Gun-
nery School if carried
out at Sydney.
228. Courses of Instruction for Armourer Ratings Qualify-
ing for Higher Ratings and Ordnance Artificers.
Syllabus of Instruction, Spectacle Island.
(i) Description of implements for taking impressions
of bores of guns, taking impressions, and instruction
on impressions of past defects in bores and chambers
of guns, and causes of same.


Article
(ii) Measuring of bores of guns, and reading of
micrometer.
(iii) Decoppering of bores of guns by various
methods approved by authority of Royal Gun Factory,
Woolwich.
(iv) Instruction in the usp of various gauges used in
the service for measurement of: —Protrusion, firing hole
bush, obturator and obturator seating, testing blow of
striker, eccentricity, vent chamber, crusher gauges, and
the various condemning limits.
(v ) Instruction in the preservation and repair of
ordnance, and defects that would cause provisional con-
demnation.
(vi) Testing of clinometer planes with axis of bore
and instruction in the use of clinometers.
(vii) Instruction in lapping and milling machines.
(viii) Instruction in permissible wear and scoring of
guns; where to look for defects —such as choke and con-
traction of bores.
(ix) Method of repairing damaged chambers of Q.F.
guns through gas scoring due to split cylinders.
General.
Instruction in stripping of breech mechanism, locks
and box slides is given during the Gunnery School
Course, and for power-worked guns, in H.M.A.S.
Australia. Hot more than five ratings are to be sent
at any one time. The Chief Armourer at the Ordnance
Depot will assist in the instruction.
Courses of Instruction at the Small Arms
Factory, Lithqow.
This course shall be such as to give the rating a
thorough knowledge of the manufacture of the rifle, the
methods of testing, and the sighting, &c. While
undergoing the course of instruction the class will be
under the charge of the Chief Armourer Instructor who,
with the ratings forming the class, is to be placed on
lodging and victualling allowances.
229. Warheads—Examination of.
All the Warheads in a “C ” Glass Cruiser of the East
Indies Squadron have seen found to be distorted and
expanded near the base to such an extent as to render
it impossible to load the torpedo tubes.
2. Gauging of all torpedo warheads is to take place
every six months when the tests in accordance with
Naval Magazine Regulations 1919, Article 218, are
being carried out.
3. The plate gauge supplied to Ships if passed over
the head will be sufficient to indicate whether distortion
has taken place.


Article.
4. A full report is to be rendered if distortion is ob-
served, with an expression of opinion as to tbe probable
cause. Tbe report should be accompanied by a state-
ment of tbe maximum and average temperatures of tbe
warhead magazine.
5. Tbe provisions of Admiralty C.M.0., No. 259/1920
are to apply to the R.A.N., with the exception of para-
graph 4.
6. The Inspector of Warlike Sto’res, Spectacle Island,
Sydney, will be responsible for the condition of War-
heads, and will obtain such assistance as is required by
requisition on the Torpedo Depot, Garden Island.


SECTION XIII.
MEDICAL.
Article
235. Medical and Dental Instructions.
Consolidated Navy Orders dealing with the above are
contained in a separate pamphlet entitled. “ Medical
Instructions for the Seagoing Forces,” and is issued to
all Medical Officers.
236. Quarantine Regulations on Arriving at Australian
Ports.
Attention is called to the necessity for strict com-
pliance with the Commonwealth Quarantine Regula-
tions.
2. On first entering a port of the Commonwealth
from oversea, that is to say, from any place other than
New Zealand and Fiji, it is incumbent upon the ship
to obtain pratique before proceeding into harbor and
anchoring.
3. The Quarantine Officer will board the ship, make
the necessary inquiries from the Medical Officer, and
grant pratique if the written report signed by the Com-
manding Officer and the Medical Officer is considered
satisfactory. In the case of ships in company, the
■Senior Officer’s ship only will be boarded.
4. This regulation applies only to vessels carrying a
Medical Officer. In other eases an inspection by the
Health Officer will be necessary.
237. Medical Examination of Persons for Service in the
Tropics.
All persons appropriated for duty in the tropics are
to be specially medically examined as to their fitness for
such service. ,
2. Medical Officers examining drafts are to be par-
ticularly careful that persons are dentally as well as
otherwise medically fit. If dental treatment is required,
it must bo carried out before the person is drafted.
3. This procedure also applies to members of the
R.A.N. Auxiliary Services.
238. Medical Surveys—Recommendations for Compensation.
With regard to medical surveys of Officers and Men,
cases have occurred where Medical Boards, in recom-
mending the discharge of Officers and Men to the shore
“ invalided,” for disabilities which are not attributable
to the Service, have recommended that compensation
(in some cases the maximum) be paid.
2. Officers and Mea medically surveyed with a view
to ‘‘ invaliding ” are only to be recommended for com-
pensation when the disability for which they are sur-
veyed is clearly attributable to, or aggravated by, the


Article
Service, and a complete history of the case and descrip-
tion of the disability must accompany the report of the
Hoard of Survey into office.
339. Medical Surveys—Disposal of Unserviceable Cases.
Officers and Men, on being medically surveyed in
H.M.A. Ships and found unserviceable, are to be dis-
charged to H.M.A.S. Cerberus or H.M.A.S. Penguin for
final disposal. For the purpose of medical returns,
those cases should be shown as discharged to ‘‘ Other
Ships,” and not as “ Invalided.”
2. A nominal list of such cases, giving the nature of
disability, date of survey, and the name of the Depot to
which they have been discharged, should be included in
the ISTosological Return.
240. Ratings in Hospital on Ship Sailing.
Officers, Petty Officers, and Men attached to sea-going
ships, if in hospital when their ship is about to sail, are
to be transferred to the books of H.M.A.S. Cerberus or
Penguin, whichever Depot is nearer the hospital in
question.
2. The Transfer List forwarded to H.M.A.S. Cerberus
or Penguin showing the state of account at the date of
discharge, should contain a notation in the body of the
form indicating the date on which the Officer or Man
was first discharged to hospital, nature of illness, &c.,
and should be accompanied by the Service Certificate of
a rating.
3. At ports other than Melbourne or Sydney, the Dis-
trict Haval Officer should be advised, and requested to
make necessary arrangements (when the hospital autho-
rities certify that the patient is fit to travel) for passage
direct to the Depot Ship in which the patient is borne
for pay, for disposal. The District Haval Officer should
also acquaint the Commanding Officer of the Depot of
the actual date of discharge from hospital.
4. At those ports where no District Haval Officer
exists, the Havy Office should be informed by telegram,
whenever the patient is left in hospital on sailing.
5. The Principal Medical Officer of the hospital
should also be advised by the ship to address any com-
munications regarding the patient and claim for hos-
pital charges to the District Haval Officer, except in
Victoria and Hew South Wales, where he should be
requested to communicate with H.M.AjS. Cerberus or
Penguin.
6. Payment of all claims for hospital expenses should
be made by the ship or Depot in which the patient is
borne for pay at the date of discharge from hospital.
If the patient is discharged direct to his ship by the
hospital authorities, special steps should be taken by the


Accountant Officer to settle the claim before lie leaves
port. If the patient is transferred to a Depot whilst in
hospital, the hospital claim will he settled by the Depot.
District Naval Officers should forward any claims • re-
ceived by them accordingly.
7. The Commodore Superintendent, Sydney, the Com-
manding Officer, H.M.AjS. Cerberus, and respective
District ISTaval Officers, are to arrange that they are
kept informed of the progress made by patients in hos-
pital belonging to ships absent from the port.
Medical Attendance.
In the event of ranks or ratings being forwarded by
H.M.A. Ships to District or (Sub-District Naval Medi-
cal Officers for medical examination or attendance,
written authority in the following form is to be for-
warded to the Medical Officer, a duplicate being pre-
pared and forwarded to the Commanding Officer,
H.M.A.S. Penguin, Commanding Officer, H.M.A.S.
Cerberus, or District Naval Officer in other States, as
the case may be, with a request that settlement of claim
be arranged.
Form of Authority for Attendance of Ranks and Ratings
on District or Sub-District Naval Medical Officers.
No
H.M.AJS
To
D1.M.0.
The bearer has been instructed to report
to you for medical (examination/treatment).
Commanding Officer.
Mote. —This authority should be attached to claim
and rendered to
Deduction of Pay for Periods in Hospital.
Garden Island Sick Quarters are to be regarded as a
“Naval Hospital” in so far as the placing of men on
half pay under the Naval Financial Eegulations and
Instructions is concerned in cases of venereal disease.
Field Service Chest.
The Field Service Chest and its contents are only to
be used on actual service with landing parties, and when
so used a report is to be sent to Navy Office stating the
service on which it was employed. The chest is to be
taken on charge as Field (Service Chest complete, and is
to-be returned to Store for refitting every three years.


Article
244. Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney.
The following By-law for the Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital, Sydney, is promulgated for the information of
Naval Medical Officers;—
“ Medical Officers of His Majesty’s Ships, while
on the Australian ISTaval Station, shall be Honorary
Consulting Medical officers to ISTaval patients at the
Hospital.”
■2. Naval Medical Officers may avail themselves of
this privilege if they so desire.
245. Medical History Sheets.
With regard to the instructions contained in Article
1310, K.R. and A. 1., relative to the preparation and
safe custody of Medical History Sheets of Ratings, the
Board direct that, in future, the Medical Officer of a
Ship or Establishment is to be responsible for the
keeping of the Medical History Sheets, and for their
direct transmission, under cover, to the Medical Officer
of the Ship to which ratings are drafted, or to the Navy
Office in cases of'men discharged from the Service.
246. Dental Treatment at Hobart.
When Ships are present at Hobart, Officers and Men
who require dental treatment should be sent to the under-
mentioned gentlemen, with whom arrangements have
been made for the performance of dental work to the
Fleet, at charges of 2s. 6d. for extractions, and 7s. 6d.
for amalgam fillings :
Mr. H. B. Henley,
A.M.P. Chambers,
23 Elizaheth-street,
Hobart, Tasmania.
Mr. F. W. Horrocks,
A.M.P. Chambers,
23 Elizaheth-street,
Hobart, Tasmania.
2. The work should he distributed equally between the
above-named gentlemen, who have been informed that no
work should be carried out for Officers and Men at Go-
vernment expense unless the patient produces a voucher
signed by the Medical Officer of the ship to which he
belongs.
3. Medical Officers will be responsible for the correct
keeping of Dental History Sheets, and other dental re-
cords of work carried out.


Article.
247. Dental Treatment of Officers and Men Lent from the
Royal Navy.
Officers and Men lent from the Royal Navy are to
receive the same dental treatment as members of the
Permanent Naval Forces. Whatever treatment, den-
tures, &c., would be supplied at Government expense
to members of the Royal Australian Navy, shall also
be supplied to members of the Royal Navy on loan.
248. Supply of Glasses to Officers and Men of the Royal
Australian Navy.
Medical Officers of Ships and Establishments are not
to order Glasses to be supplied to Officers and Men
found to be suffering from defective vision, but are to
cause such persons to be brought forward for Medical
Survey.
2. Glasses will only be supplied at Sendee expense
when recommended by a Board of Survey and approved
by the Naval Board.


SECTION XIV.
FINANCIAL AND PAY.
Article
249. Cash, Pay, and Pay Accounts.
Regulations in regard to Cash Duties, Pay, and Pay
Accounts are contained in the iSTaval Account Regula-
tions and ISTaval Financial Regulations and Instruc-
tions.
250. Advances to H.M.A. Ships.
When funds are required by H.M.A. Ships, the Com-
manding Officer of the §hip is to advise the Command-
ing Officer of the Establishment from which he desires
an advance, as early as possible, by signal, of the
estimated amount of his requirements, in order that
necessary arrangements may he made with the bank.
251. Deferred Pay—Payment of.
Notation of Payment on Service Certificates. —When
payment of Deferred Pay is made, a notation is to be
inserted and signed by the Paying Officer, on page 2 of
the rating’s Service Certificate, in the space provided
for “ Other Grants.”
2. Such notation is to show date, amount, and nature
of payment, i.e., whether in respect to amount due on
termination of three, five, or seven years’ engagement,
or on discharge, &c.
3. Service Certificates are to be examined as to pre-
vious payments, before payments of deferred pay are
made.
4. Payment of Deferred Pay Due on Expiration of
Engagements. —Ratings whose engagements expire dur-
ing the currency of a quarter-will be paid Deferred Pay
up to the last day of the preceding quarter. The
balance remaining due will remain as a credit, and be
paid with next payment of Deferred Pay.
5. A list is to be furnished to the Director of Ravy
Accounts on the first day of each quarter, containing
names of ratings whose engagements will expire during
the quarter, specifying those who desire payment of
their Deferred Pay.


Vrtiele.
6. When forwarding applications for payment of De-
ferred pay due on expiration of engagements, a state-
ment giving the following information is to accompany
the application into office-:
(i) (a) Promotions . . J Date of promotion or dis-
(b) Disratings .. I rating, as the case may be,
I indicating rating to which
I promoted or disrated.
(ii) Badges . . .. Date of award, restoration,
or deprivation, and
whether Ist, 2nd, or 3rd.
(iii) Time forfeited .. Particulars of time forfeited
affecting Deferred Pay
only, such as time served
in cells, detention, civil
prison, waiting trial, &c.
(iv) Royal Naval Ser- Whether A.S.R. Ist or 2nd
vice, &c. (in re- engagement, and date of
spect of E.N. commencement of same,
Eatings only) N.C.S. pensioner, R.F.R.,
class A or B, or ex-R-IST.
rating.
Certificates of Service need not he forwarded to this
office with such applications, as the above statements
contain all the information desired.
7. Statements need only be supplied for such periods
in respect of which Ships’ Ledgers have not been re-
ceived in Navy Office, and in which such information
is essential to enable Deferred Pay claim to be dealt
with. Where the application for Deferred Pay is in
respect of an engagement expiring during current
quarter, the information to be supplied under (i), (ii),
and (iii) above can generally be limited to a period of
about six months preceding date of expiration of such
engagement.
8. Every possible care is to be taken in the prepara-
tion of these statements, as stoppages from Deferred
Pay for Pension Liability to the Admiralty are de-
pendent thereon.
9. The foregoing does not apply to ratings intending
to take their discharge on the expiration of their
engagements. In these cases the full amount of Deferred
Pay will be paid up to the actual date of discharge, on
receipt of information as to discharge and of Form A.S.
1031z—-(Statement of Account on'Final Discharge).
10. The payment of Deferred Pay up to the end of
the preceding quarter will also apply to Officers other
than those being discharged.
11. All applications for Deferred Pay are to be ad-
dressed direct to the Director of Navy Accounts.


Article.
252. Payment of Commonwealth Income Tax.
With regard to the payment of Commonwealth In-
come Tax by Officers and men of the Royal Australian
Havy, it is notified for general information that Officers
and men are liable for payment of tax, except in respect
of income from personal exertion earned whilst serving
on board sea-going ships of H.M. and/or H.M.A. Fleet,
or whilst serving ashore outside Australia.
2. The exemption from tax commences from the date
when an Officer or man joins a vessel for sea service
or leaves Australia. If an Officer or man should serve
on a sea-going ship, or abroad, in this way for, say,
the first three months of the year and then serve on
shore or in harbor ships in Australia for six months or
less, and for the remainder of the year again serve on
a sea-going vessel of the Fleet or abroad, he would be
exempt in respect of his income from personal exertion
during the period of sea service or service abroad. He
would not be exempt for the period served ashore or
in harbor ships in Australia.
253. State Income Tax, Victoria.
It is notified for information that advice has been
received from the Victorian Commissioner of Taxes
to the effect that, as regards the State of Victoria, the
value of quarters provided for Officers and men of the
Royal Australian Havy need not be included in their
returns as income for taxation.
254. Payments to Wives, Relatives, or Agents.
Applications forwarded to Havy Office requesting
that any amount due to an Officer or Man may be
paid to his wife, mother, or other agent must in all
cases be accompanied by the written request of the
Officer or Man concerned, and the signature be witnessed
by a responsible Officer.
2. The written order should bo as explicit as possible,
and where the actual amount authorized is not shown,
the order must give full details of the payment re-
quired, so that the intention of the Officer or Man may
be clearly seen. If, for example, it is desired that all
Deferred Pay should be paid over, the order should
read “ accumulated deferred pay due to me at the ter-
mination of my seven years’ engagement on 31 si
December, 1920.”
255. Remittances by Officers and Men.
(a) Conditions governing Remittances:—Officers and
Men are to be allowed to remit once a month. Sup-
plementary remittances may be permitted once a month
when necessary for the payment of mess debts. The
amounts are to be lodged with the Accountant Officer,
who is to debit himself therewith in his Cash Account,


and as a rule they are not to be allowed to exceed the
sum received or due to the remitter on account of pay
and allowances during or for the month, except in the
case of remittances in payment of accounts due from
Messes, which are to he distinguished on the remittance
lists (Form A.S. 66). Should, however, some excep-
tional cause render it desirable, in the opinion of the
Captain, that a remitter should he allowed to remit a
sum in excess of his pay and allowances, a report of
the circumstances attending the deviation from the rule
is to accompany the list on which the remittance is
shown.
The system of remittances should not he used by
Officers or Men in cases where the declaration of an
allotment will meet requirements, hut should be used
only for occasional payments. The system, of allot-
ments must be availed of in all cases where regular
payments are desired.
Remittances are not to be made when ships are in
port, and facilities exist for Officers and Men to make
their own arrangements for remitting money.
( i ) Remittance Lists: —Form A.S. 66 is to be used
for all sums deposited for remittees. Separate lists are
to be prepared for remittances desired to be paid in the
United Kingdom, the different States of the Common-
wealth, and in H.M.A. Ships. Particular care should
be taken that all entries on lists are clearly and legibly
made. No erasures are to be made on lists, but any
necessary corrections are to appear in ink and are to
be attested by the Accountant Officer. All persons re-
mitting must sign their names on the lists as authority
for the payment on their account of the sums named,
and as proof that the Christian names, surnames, and
addresses of the remittees are correctly shown. When
remittances are in favour of married women, their own
Christian names must be inserted. Lists are to be
transmitted in duplicate, but the signature of the re-
mitter need not appear on the duplicate list. The
Captain is to satisfy himself before approving Re-
mittance Lists, that the total amount shown thereon as
remitted corresponds with the entry in the Cash Book.
The Lists are to be totalled in words as well as in
figures, and in all cases are to be transmitted by the
quickest route as soon as possible after completion to
the Director of Navy Accounts, who will make necessary
arrangements for payment, whether in Australia or
abroad. Lists should not be forwarded direct to the
Kaval Representative, London.
256. Remittances to Meet Payment of Ship’s Official
Accounts.
Where it is necessary for special reasons for H.M.A.
Ships to make remittances to meet payment of ship’s
official accounts, bank drafts should be obtained from


Article.
the Commonwealth Bank in all cases where a branch
of the bank exists. No charge will be made by the
Commonwealth Bank to the Accountant Officer when
obtaining a draft for transmission of public money;
payment of exchange, in such cases, being made by the
Treasury.
257. Subscriptions and Collections in Government Depart-
ments.
Collections, &c., in Government Departments are not
to be permitted except in the following cases: —
(а) For the purpose of making a presentation to
an Officer or employee on occasions such as
his marriage or retirement from the Service.
(б) In any case of special hardship on behalf of the
dependants of a deceased Officer or employee
or on behalf of an officer or employee who
has been incapacitated for duty for a pro-
longed period owing to ill-health.
2. The question as to whether collections shall be
permitted or not is left to the discretion of the General
Manager or Officer-in-Charge of the Naval Establish-
ment concerned. Doubtful cases should be submitted
for the consideration of the Naval Board.
258. Applications for Long Service Pensions.
Commanding Officers of H.M.A. Ships are to forward
direct to the Accountant-General of the Navy, London,
on Form S. 409, applications - for Long Service Pension
from R.N. ratings who are lent to the E.A.N. A cer-
tified copy of the rating’s service certificate is to ac-
company tho application form. A duplicate copy of the
latter is to be transmitted to the Navy Office.
259. Retired Pay or Pensions of Officers Retiring from the
Royal Navy.
With reference to the question of retired pay or
pensions of Naval Officers who may retire from the
Royal Navy while serving in the Royal Australian
Navy, advice has been received from the Admiralty that
an Officer severing his connexion with the Royal Navy
at his own request, can, under no circumstances, be
granted a pension from Imperial Funds unless he is
■eligible for optional ■ retirement under Naval
Regulations.
260. Royal Fleet Reserve Age Pension.
Applications for Royal Fleet Reserve Pension by
Royal Navy ratings are to be accompanied by a state-
ment of service in Royal Australian Navy from date
of discharge from Royal Navy to date of application.


Article.
261. Payment of Rail and Travelling Allowance to R.N.
Pensioners in Australia Called up for Medical
Re-survey.
In any case where authority has been given to call
up Royal ISTavy Pensioners in Australia for medical
survey, the necessary railway warrant may be issued
and travelling allowance paid at E.A.ISr. scale rates,
expenditure being charged to “ Trust Fund Admiralty
Account,” and the authority of this Navy Order quoted.
262. Stoppage of Allotments when the last Day of the
Month Falls on a Saturday or Public Holiday.
Except in urgent circumstances, the provisions of
Naval Account Regulation No. 37 (7) should be ob-
served in stopping or altering allotments and one month’s
notice given.
2. When the last day of a month falls on a Saturday
or Public Holiday, payments of monthly allotments are
made on the preceding week-day similarly to the pay-
ment of Ship’s Company under Naval Account Regula-
tion 26. In notifying stoppage of allotments in urgent
cases this fact should be taken into consideration and
sufficient notice given to the Director of Navy Accounts
to enable stoppages to be effected before the week-day
preceding the last day of the month.
263. Stoppage of Allotments by Telegram or Cable.
When allotments are stopped by cablegram or tele-
gram., the reason for stoppage is always to be given.
This information is necessary in order that inquiries
from allottees regarding the stoppage may be satis-
factorily answered.
264. Pay for Long Service and Good Conduct Medal
or Radge.
Pay for Long Service and Good Conduct Medal or
Good Conduct Badge shall be payable from the date on
which the rating became entitled to the award of the
Medal or Badge.
2. No pay is, however, to be credited to a rating on
account of a Long Service and Good Conduct Medal or
Badge until the Medal or Badge has been actually
granted.
265. Pay Documents of Deserters, and Men Left in
Hospital.
The Pay Documents of all Deserters are to be sent to
the Commanding Officer, Flinders Naval Depot.
2. In the case of men marked “ R.Q.,” or who are
left in Hospital on sick leave, &c., on sailing from Mel-
bourne the same order is to apply.


Article
3. In the case of men in,Hospital, &e., the probable
date of return to duty is to he inserted on the Transfer
List.
266. Counting of Time for Increases of Pay after 3 and
6 Years Man’s Time, &c.
The instructions contained in Admiralty Monthly
Order 2748 of 1919 are to be adopted in the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy as far as such are applicable.
267. Increments of Persons on Consolidated Pay.
Payment of increments to persons in receipt of con-
solidated rates of pay is in all cases subject to the
approval of the Treasurer, and to the necessary funds
being made available by Parliament,
2. The general practice is for the Treasurer early
in the financial year to issue advice that increments may
be paid where the same does not increase salary beyond
£245 per annum.
3. Authority for payment of increments beyond this
amount is withheld until the Estimates of Expenditure l
have been passed by Parliament.
4. The date on which financial authority for pay-
ment of increments is issued is necessarily dependent
upon the above.
5. It is not necessary for Naval Establishments and
others concerned to communicate with the Navy Office
in the matter of payment of increments. Finance
Authorities, authorizing payment, will be issued im-
mediately on receipt of Treasury approval.
268. Increments of Pay (Sea-going Forces).
To obviate the necessity for separate submissions in
each case, a list is to be furnished quarterly of Officers
of the Permanent Sea-going Forces or of the R.A.N.
Reserve (Sea-going) who are entitled to receive incre-
ments of pay during the ensuing three months.
2. In such cases the necessary authority will be issued
from Navy Office without further application.
3. In cases where temporary Officers of the R.A.N.
Reserve are “ acting ” in higher rank, the minimum
rate of pay only of the higher rank in which acting is
payable, as laid down in second paragraph of Article 4,
clause 10, of the Naval Financial Regulations and
Instructions.
269. Non-Substantive Rating of Tailor.
The non-substantive rating of Tailor is open to Sea-
men. Tailors may be borne in each ship, according to
the following scale: —
In ships with complement of over 500 .. 2 No.
In ships with complement of 500 and
less (where a Tailor is necessary) .. 1 No.


Article
2. Seamen (below the rating of Petty Officer) em-
ployed as Tailors in Ships in which the rating is allowed
in the complement are to receive an allowance of 4d.
per day in addition to their Pay and other Allowances,
but no Seaman is to be allowed to hold the rating of
Tailor concurrently with a Gunnery or Torpedo rating
higher than that of Seaman Gunner or Seaman Torpedo-
man. It is important that the men selected for em-
ployment in this capacity should possess a competent
knowledge of Tailoring work.
3. The duty of the Tailors will be to alter, when
necessary, the stock garments on issue to fit the indi-
vidual ; also to make up “ outsizes ” which cannot be
supplied from stock. These are Service alterations, and
are to be carried out free of charge to the men.
4. The Tailors will, when their Service work per-
mits, be also available for carrying out alterations and
repairs, &c., to garments at the men’s own expense.
These will be in the nature of private transactions, but
it has been decided, in order to insure uniformity in the
charges made by the Tailors in the Fleet generally, to
lay down a fixed scale of charges which are authorized
to be made for this description of work, viz.:—
0
Serge trousers, patching .. .. .. 9d.
Duck trousers, patching .. .. . . sd.
Serge jumpers, patching .. .. .. 9d.
Serge jumper, converting jumper with cuff
into jumper without cuff . . .. 9d.
Flannels, patching . . . . . . Bd.
Flannels, binding .. . . . . 3d.
Duck jumper, patching .. . . .. sd.
5. These embrace the more general items of work, and
the prices quoted are inclusive of materials and all
charges. The rates for other miscellaneous repairs are
to be by arrangement between the Tailors and the men.
The above scale of charges is to be posted up in a con-
venient place so as to be readily accessible to the Ships’
Company.
6. The Tailoring Staff is to be under the direct super-
vision of the Paymaster, who is to satisfy himself that
the quality of the work is satisfactory, that the work is
taken in hand in the order received, and that the charges
which they make for private repairs, &c., do not exceed
the authorized scale. Definite accommodation is to be
assigned to them for their work, and sewing machines,
one for each Tailor, will be supplied by the Govern-
ment. Demands for sewing machines should be made
upon the Victualling Yards, and the machines are to
be taken on charge in the Paymaster’s Implement Ac-
count.


Article.
7. The Paymaster is to supply to the Tailor from
time to time, as necessary, the quantities of serge and
duck, &c„ required for altering (or making up) the uni-
form on first issue to the men, and the quantities of
material so expended are to he credited in the Clothing
Account under that heading, being supported by a cer-
tificate signed by the Paymaster and approved by the
Commanding Officer that they have been actually ex-
pended for the Service and are fair and reasonable. The
cost of cottons, threads, buttons, linings, &c. (not
stocked by the Paymaster), which may be used for Ser-
vice work, should be claimed quarterly by the Tailor
and paid as a charge to Clothing Vote direct, provided
that the Paymaster is satisfied that the claim is a rea-
sonable one, a certificate to this effect being given on
the voucher of payment. Supporting vouchers for
amounts claimed must be produced.
8. As regards the materials required by the Tailor for
his private work, i.e., for carrying out repairs to the
men’s own clothes (vide paragraph 4), these may be
supplied to him by the Paymaster, on repayment at
issuing prices, every care being taken to insure that the
quantities issued are not greater than are required for
the purpose.
9. Blue cloth, blue jean, serge, drill, duck, and flannel
(all without materials) will be stocked by the Pay-
masters {vide paragraphs 7 and 8) and for supply on
repayment to Chief Petty Officers (Class I.) and Petty
Officers and Men not dressed as Seamen (Class HI.),
but care is to be taken that the quantities so issued are
not greater than the reasonable requirements of the per-
sons taking up the supply.
270. Pay Documents of Officers and Men Proceeding to
United Kingdom.
Officers and Men proceeding to the United Kingdom
should in all cases be discharged to the Books of
H.M.A.S. Cerberus for passage. Pay documents are
to be dealt with in the following manner:—
In cases where Officers and Men in special cir-
cumstances ' take passage direct to London Kaval
Depot from H.M.A. Ship in which serving, and
not from H.M.A.S. Cerberus, the former Ship
shall prepare Transfer List in duplicate—one copy
is to be forwarded to the ISTaval Representative
without fail by the same vessel in which the Officer
or Man is travelling. The second copy is to be
forwarded to H.M.A.S. Cerberus, with a note there-
on of date of despatch of original, to Haval Repre-
sentative, and Ship by which Officer or Man is
sailing.
2. On receipt of duplicate Transfer List in
H.M.A.S. Cerberus, the Officer or Man is to be


entered on Cerberus ledger for passage, and the
state of his account shown in Cerberus, and dupli-
cate Transfer List forwarded without delay to
Naval Representative. Officers or Men received in
H.M.A. Depot, London, from Ships other than
Cerberus, are to he treated as “ Received from
H.M.A.S. Cerberus
3. The Transfer List of Officers and Men trans-
ferred direct from Cerberus to H.M.A. Dbpot,
London, are to he forwarded by the vessel in which
the Officer or Man takes passage.
271. Royal Navy Ranks and Ratings Lent Temporarily to
the Royal Australian Navy and Discharged on
Termination of Engagement.
The following directions are to be followed when an
Officer or Man, whose period of service in the Royal
Australian Havy has terminated, is returning to the
Royal Xavy or is taking his discharge to the shore: —
Form A.S. 1031 z, showing full particulars of
his pay, deferred pay, &c., accounts on the current
quarterly ledger is, in every case, to be forwarded
without, delay direct to the Director of Wavy
Accounts.
Additional information as hereunder is to he in-
serted in column 5 in the case of each rating: —
Whether he is—
(a) An Active Service Rating, and if in his
first engagement, completing time for
pension, non-continuous service, or has
completed any of those engagements;
(b) Royal Fleet Reserve Rating, and to which
class he belongs; or
(c) Pensioner, or ex-Royal Havy Rating.
Class A of Royal Fleet Reserve consists of those
ratings who have completed time for pension in the
Royal Navy and have engaged to serve in the Royal
Fleet Reserve.
Class B consists of those ratings who have com-
pleted twelve years or more "Active Service, hut
have not completed time for pension, and have
engaged to serve in the Royal Fleet Reserve.
272. Admiralty Payments.
The practice of forwarding duplicate cash vouchers
for payments made on behalf of the Admiralty
chargeable to “ Trust Fund—Admiralty Account ” is to
be discontinued. Original voucher only need in future
be foinvarded.
In the case of payments of Imperial Pensions, Ad-
miralty Form A.G. 655, “Declaration and Form of Life
Certificate,” should be completed and acquitted as


Article
heretofore, for transmission to the Admiralty, accom-
panied by Form A.S. 22a (N.A. 4, for Establishments),
duly acquitted.
The foregoing refers to cash payments only. Ad-
justments by Transfer Account, affecting 44 Trust Fund
—Admiralty Account ”, should be accompanied by
duplicate certified statements where necessary, as hereto.
273. Form A.S. 46—Accounts of Men Discharged to Shore
44 D.D.” or 44 RUN
Upon the realization of the clothes and effects of men
discharged to shore 44 D.D.” or 44 Run ”, Form A.S. 46
is to be rendered without delay to the Director of Navy
Accounts.
The rendering of Form A.S. 46 does not dispense with
the transmission of Form A.S. 1031 z, which must be
rendered in all cases.
In the ease of men discharged to shore or 44 D.D. ”
the net sum realized from the sale may be credited to
the ratings account in 44 Other Credits ” column, and
the words 44 Sale of Effects ” entered in the 44 Descrip-
tion ” column of the ledger.
Under no circumstances, however, should a deserter’s
account be so credited.
When charging the accounts of purchasers, it is par-
ticularly necessary that the letters 44 D.D.M.E.” or
44 D.M.E.” be utilized to .designate charges for dead or
discharged men’s effects, and 44 E.M.E.” those for
deserters; the totals of each class being shown separately
on the folios, and also the summary of the ledger.
The above form is to be completed and forwarded to
the Director of Navy Accounts in respect of all men
discharged, dead, or run, and in all eases of men whose
effects have been sold to meet clothing debt on dis-
charge.
274. Adjustment of Accounts of Deserters.
The ledger accounts of deserters from the Royal
Australian Navy are to be adjusted to include credits
of pay, both active and deferred, and clothing gratuity,
for the actual date of desertion, notwithstanding that
desertion may have occurred in the fore or afternoon of
that day.
The method of adjusting the victualling is to be con-
tinued as heretofore, fixed by the time of desertion, i.e.,
before or after noon, vide King’s Regulations and Ad-
miralty Instructions, Article 1684.
The date of desertion as shown on the quarterly ledger
must, in all cases, coincide with that inserted on page 2
of the Certificate of Service.


Article.
275. Authorities for and Proposals in Regard to Expendi-
ture —Establishments and Offices.
In order that expenditure may not be incurred for
which necessary financial provision has not been made,
and to insure that financial and accountancy require-
ments are fully complied with, all financial instructions,
approvals, or other decisions involving expenditure,
issued by the Naval Board to Naval Establishments and
Offices, will be given a Finance Authority number before
issue from Navy Office. In the event of such a number
not being quoted in Navy Office communications, same
should immediately be applied for.
Expenditure requiring Naval Board approval, i.e.,
expenditure not covered by existing Eegulations and
Authorities for expenditure held by Officers in Charge,
must not be incurred until Finance Authority is received,
and all payments made under such approval must show
Finance Authority number on face of account.
All submissions to the Naval Board, or proposals in-
volving expenditure, must contain definite statements
as to the estimated cost and the availability of funds.
If the local Certifying Officer has sufficient funds to
meet the expenditure under the correct item of appro-
priation, after allowing for all anticipated requirements,
it should be stated that “Funds (£ ) are available
locally under Div ”, and this should be
noted provisionally by the Certifying Officer as a com-
mitment, pending decision.
Where funds are not available, it should be stated
that “No funds are available at this Establishment to
meet this expenditure.”
In submitting requisitions for stores to the Officer
authorized to approve requisitions, similar procedure to
that outlined in paragraph 3 should be followed, and
indorsement made accordingly on requisition. Stores
must not be purchased until an indorsement that funds
are available has been made.
In the case of Shore appointments, promotions, in-
creases in pay, special rates of pay, and allowances, &c.,
which require Naval Board approval, Finance Autho-
rity must be obtained before payment is made. Pay-
ment must not be made in the absence of Finance
Authority in respect of appointments and promotions
notified in Government Gazette, unless the Certifying
Officer can certify that vacancy exists, and that neces-
sary funds have been appropriated.
When forwarding submissions or accounts into office
for approval to payment, the remarks or recommenda-
tions of the Officer forwarding should in all cases be
furnished, and it should be made clear why the matter


Article.
has not been dealt with under local authority. If deci-
sion of Naval Board is necessary under Regulations,
reference to Regulations should be given. If doubt
exists regarding the liability of the Department or the
reasonableness of charges, or whether account should not
be dealt with by another Establishment or Ship, &c.,
the facts should be made quite dear in submission.
It should be noted that Finance Authorities do not
authorize expenditure additional to the Appropriation
Authority issued by the Director of Navy Accounts,
unless it is definitely stated, in the Finance Authority,
that Appropriation Authority may be considered issued.
Should funds not be available to meet any expenditure
authorized by Finance Authority, application for same
should be made to the Director of Navy Accounts on
Form “ B ” in accordance with Circular Letter 64E,
of 1917.


SECTION XV.
UNIFORM AND CLOTHING.
Article.
276. Dress to be Worn by Officers Attending Official Balls.
Officers attending official balls (including mayoral
balls) are to wear uniform.
277. Officers’ Uniform—Use of Diagonal Serge.
1 Owing to the difficulty in obtaining blue superfine
cloth, and the greatly enhanced price of same, Service
Pattern Blue Diagonal Serge may be used for making
up Undress Uniform (No. 5).
278. Uniform—Men.
The following alterations and additions to Uniform
prescribed for Petty Officers and Men have been
approved:—
1. ISTew-entry Stokers are to be provided with two
pairs of boots as jmrt of their free kit.
2. Classes I. and 111. ratings—
(«) Present polo pattern stiff white linen collar is
to be optional. Ordinary double collar,
height 1-i inches to 2 inches, may he worn in
lieu.
(b) Bow tie is to he abolished.
(c) White drill trousers are to he substituted for
white duck.
279. Wearing of Medals and Decorations by Ratings when
in No. 1 Dress.
The following temporary instructions, regarding the
wearing of medals and decorations by ratings when in
No. 1 Dress, are promulgated for information and
guidance:—
(1) Decorations, such as Conspicuous Gallantry
Medal, Distinguished Service Medal, &c.,
are to be worn by men to whom they have
been awarded.
(2) Medals may be worn, but when Medals or
Decorations are worn, the wearing of ribands
for Medals which have not yet been received
is optional. In this case, if ribands are
worn, the length of the riband should be the
same as if the Medal were attached.
(3) Medal ribands only may be worn if so desired.


Article.
280. Issue on Loan of Blue Combination Suits.
Blue combination suits may be issued on loan to men
working in double bottoms. The quantity allowed is
the number actually required for the men employed on
this service, and Accountant Officers are to obtain the
necessary stocks accordingly.
281. Substitution of Diagonal Serge for Blue Cloth Suits
for Classes I. and 111. Ratings.
It has been decided to substitute the Diagonal Sferge
for Blue Cloth for suits of Classes I. and 111. ratings.
Royal Aaval Active Service ratings on loan are to
have the option of wearing Blue Cloth suits.
282. Outfits for Officers’ Stewards.
Officers’ Stewards are to be supplied gratuitously with
the following outfit for waiting:—
3 fine white duck (or drill) tunics, with blue jean
collars and cuffs.
3 pairs of white cotton gloves.
2. The following procedure is to be adopted for
issue;—
A first issue, at the rate of 3 tunics and 3 pairs
of gloves for each Officer’s Steward allowed on the
complement, is to be made to the President of the
Mess, for use of Stewards detailed for waiting at
tables.
Replacements are to be made as items are worn
out, but are not to exceed the rate of 3 tunics and
3 pairs of gloves per annum for each Officer’s
Steward on the complement.
283. Plain Clothes —Wearing by Petty Officers and Men.
Petty Officers and Leading Ratings, and men in posses-
sion of Good Conduct Badges, have the privilege of wear-
ing plain clothes on shore when on leave in tbeir Home
Ports, and in the Capitals of the various States.
This privilege is also extended to all men on long
leave.
All ratings must, however, be in uniform on quitting
their ships to proceed on leave, and must also return in
uniform from leave.
284. Hat Ribbons —Free Issue of.
Two Hat Ribbons are to be supplied, free of charge,
to every man on joining a Ship or Establishment when an
alteration in the name of the Hat Ribbon is necessary.


Article.
285. Retention of Kit on Discharge.
Eatings may be allowed to retain the whole of their
kit on final discharge (except those discharged for mis-
conduct).
2. Uniform may be worn for the period of full pay
leave, but not subsequently, except on suoh special or
national occasions as may be specifically approved by
the Naval Board.
286. Compensation for Loss of Clothing.
When gratuitous issues of clothing, uniform, &c., are
made to members of the E.A.N. to replace articles of
clothing, &c., lost, the total value of such issues should
be shown in the Ship’s Ledger, in the column, “ Particu-
lars of Free Kit Issued to Eatings under Eegulations
and Gratuitous Issues.”
2. A notation should be made in the Bhip’s Ledger,
clearly indicating the. reason for such issues, and
authority for same.
3. Gratuitous issues of clothing, &c., made as com-
pensation for loss should be shown separately in ratings’
accounts, and separate total shown in ledger and
summary.
287. New Pattern Boots and Shoes.
The following new pattern Boots and Shoes have been
adopted in the Eoyal Australian Navy:—
Heavy Marching Boot—Compulsory Kit.
Light Black 800t — Optional Kit.
Black Leather (Derby) Shoe—Optional Kit.
Black Leather Slipper—Optional Kit.
2. No further purchases of the present pattern Sen
Service Boot and Brown Canvas Shoe will be made on
exhaustion of existing stocks. The Gymnastic Shoe
will be retained as an article of optional kit.
3. The Heavy Marching Boot will also be supplied for
issue to members of the E.A.N. Eeserve. The other
articles mentioned are not to be demanded by District
Naval Officers, except that the Light Boot may be de-
manded for issue on repayment, in accordance with
Eegulations, to members of the E.A.N.E. Staff.
288. Officers’ Uniform —Demand from England.
Demands for Officers’ Uniform required from England
should be forwarded to the Navy Office not later than
31st March and 30th September of each year.


Article.
289. Issue of Bedding.
Issues of bedding are to be made in accordance with
the subjoined instructions:—
(A) —Ratings who were Serving on 31st December,
1920.
(1) The following articles of Loan Bedding, viz.:
—1 Blanket, 1 Bed, and 2 Bed Covers, in the posses-
sion of each rating, are to become his personal pro-
perty.
(2) The life of all such bedding now on issue has
been assessed at three years.
(3) If a rating’s engagement expires subsequent to
31st December, 1923, a bedding gratuity of ss. per
annum is to be paid for each year or part of a' year
of his engagement subsequent to that date, and the
bedding is to become the property of the individual.
(4) If a rating’s engagement expires prior to Ist
January, 1924, a eharge is to be made at the rate of
os. per annum for each year or part of a year of the
period intervening between the date of expiration of
engagement and 31st December, 1923, and the bed-
ding is to become the property of the individual.
(5) The foregoing regulations are to apply to all
U.X. ratings who arc using loan bedding in the
E.A.IST.
(6) Where any rating now serving is in possession
of any article of bedding, the life of which is con-
sidered to be less than three years, the Commanding
Officer may authorize such article to be replaced from
used stocks on board.
(7) All credits and charges under clauses (3) and
(4) are to be made in Ships’ Ledgers for quarter
ending 31st March, 1921, under “ Other Credits ” and
“ Other Charges ” respectively.
(8) From Ist January, 1921, the articles of bedding
mentioned in clause (1) will be added to the compulsory
kit of all ratings, and provision for maintenance of same
will be included in the revised daily Kit Upkeep Allow-
ance. Ko further gratuitous issues of bedding will there-
fore be made during service in the R.A.fST., owing to pro-
vision having been made in the Kit Upkeep Allowance for
necessary replacements.
(B) —Entries—Re-engagements on and after
Ist January, 1921.
(1) All entries made on and after Ist January, 1921,
are to receive a gratuitous issue of new bedding on join-
ing.
(2) As provision for maintenance of bedding has been
made in the revised Kit Upkeep Allowance, mo further
gratuitous issues will be made during service in the
R.A.K.
C. 18558.—5


Article.
(C) — General Instructions.
(1) The procedure set out in sections (A) and (B)
will completely abolish the issue of loan bedding to
R.A.H. ratings, except as shown in clauses (2) and (4)
below. A sufficient number of spare sets of loan bedding
is to be kept on board for emergency purposes.
(2) Hammocks, clews, lashings, and kit bag's are to be
issued on loan as hitherto. Free replacements of articles
worn out by fair wear and tear will be made as requisite,
and losses will be charged in the usual Service manner
at full, three-quarter, half, or one-quarter rates, accord-
ing to the period in use.
(3) R.H. ratings on loan to the R.A.N. will in future
bring their own bedding with them. As provision for
maintenance will be included in the Kit Upkeep Allow-
ance, no hardship is therefore imposed on such ratings.
(4) Recovered deserters, who were issued with gratui-
tous bedding on first entry, are to be charged the full
value of further articles of bedding required after re-
covery, if they are to be retained in the Service: other-
wise loan bedding may be issued.
(5) All future stocks of bedding carried in H.M.A.
Ships and Establishments for gratuitous issue to new
entries, and for issue on repayment, will be new. Before
returning present used stocks to the Royal Edward Vic-
tualling Yard, the opportunity may be given to Ships’
Companies for such used articles to be issued on repay-
ment at half rates. All such bedding eventually returned
to the Victualling Yard will be sold by public auction in
due course, or otherwise disposed of as may be directed
by the Naval Board.
(6) The half rates referred to in the preceding clause
arc to be based on the Clothing Price List in force im-
mediately prior to Ist January, 1921.
(7) One Bed, 1 Blanket, and 2 Bed Covers are to be
added to the compulsory kit of all ratings.
290. Loan Bedding Returned to Store.
The names of all ratings discharged to the shore direct
from H.M.A. Ships are to be shown on Form A.S. 79 (z)
forwarded as an enclosure to the Clothing Account. The
articles of loan bedding returned should he clearly re-
corded in the case of each individual.
2. The names of all deserters should also be entered,
showing the disposal of bedding of each rating.
3. On no account should bulk quantities be recorded
with the notation “ Received from the Master-at-Arms ”.
Entries covering each, individual are essential for check-
ing purposes, and it is to be stated if the value of defi-
ciencies were recovered.


Oilskin Suits.
Sea Boots.
Watch Co i
No.
Prs.
No.
Battle Cruiser
80 .
. 20
.. 16
Light Cruiser
.. 40
. 20
.. 20
Torpedo Boat Destroyers—
Article.
291. Oilskin Suits for the Use of Men Employed in Cleaning
and Repairing Oil Fuel Tanks.
The Naval Board having had under their considera-
tion the question of providing suitable protection for the
clothing of men employed in cleaning and examining oil
fuel tanks in H.M.A. Ships fitted to burn oil fuel, have
approved of the introduction of oilskin combination suits
(patterns 7 to 9) for this purpose.
2. A statement of the establishments which have been
decided upon for the various classes of vessels concerned
is shown below:—
Establishment of Oilskin Combination Suits for
use in cleaning and examining Oil Fuel Tanks in
ships fitted t& burn oil fuel.
Cruisers. No.
31,000 h.p. and over .. . . 24
30,999 h.p. to 10,000 h.p. . . 20
9,999 h.p. to 5,100 h.p. .. 12
5,099 h.p. and under .. . . . . 8
Torpedo Boat Destroyers.
All classes .. .. .. 6
292. Oilskin Suits, Sea Boots, and Watch Coats.
Oilskin suits ( i.e., jackets, trousers, and sou’-westers),
sea boots, and watch coats may be issued on loan under
the following circumstances:—
Oilskin Suits —For wear by boats’ crews, by men
employed on anchor work, and by other men
who are subjected by the nature of their duties
to exceptional exposure.
Sea Boots —Ditto.
Watch Coats —For wear in inclement weather by
watchkeepcrs, and by other men who are sub-
jected by the nature of their duties to excep-
tional exposure.
2. Proper accommodation is to be provided for the
careful stowage of the articles, and especially is this
necessary in the ca.se of oilskins, which are required to
be free to the air to avoid deterioration and the risk
of spontaneous combustion. A wired-in space, fitted
with hanging-up appliances, is considered to be the mos*
suitable method of stowage.
3. The following are the established allowances fc 1 *
H.M.A. Ships;—
Oilskin 'Suits—One for every two persons in the
complement, except in those cases when the
deck complement exceeds 50 per cent, of total
complement, when the allowance is to be one
for each person in the deck complement.


Article.
Sea Boots —Six pairs—to apply to Australian
and tropical stations only. In the event of
service in cold climates, allowance to he as for
oilskin suits.
Watch Coats—Four.
293. Working Suits.
Gratuitous issue of material for making up Working
Suits may he made as follows: —
(а) Engineer Officers. —Twelve yards of Brown
Jean are allowed annually for each En-
gineer Officer and Warrant Electrician. The
quantity of material representing this allow-
ance for the number, of Engineer Officers
borne is to be issued in bulk by the Ac-
countant Officer on the commissioning or re-
commissioning of the ship, and annually
thereafter in the same manner during the
commission. It will be left to the En-
gineer Officers concerned to arrange for the
proper distribution of the individual allow-
ances. Officers transferred from one ship
to another will take their Working • Suits
with them.
A nominal list of the Officers will not be
required to be forwarded with the Store Ac-
counts, the supply in bulk being supported
by the receipt of the Senior Engineer Officer.
(б) Sub-Lieutenants. —Six yards of Brown Jean
(sufficient to make one suit) are allowed to
■each Sub-Lieutenant at the commencement
of his training in the Engine Room Depart-
ment.
A nominal list is to he prepared in dupli-
cate by the Accountant Officer, and the
duplicate list forwarded into Office in sup-
port of the credit in the Store Accounts.
(c) Midshi-pmen under Training. —Twelve yards
of Brown Jean are allowed to each Midship-
man at the commencement of his Engine
Room and Stokehold Training. A nominal
list is to be prepared, in duplicate, by the
Accountant Officer, and the duplicate list
forwarded into Office in support of the credit
in the Store Accounts.
(and) Gunners and other Warrant Officers. —Twelve
yards of Brown Jean are allowed annually
for each Commissioned Guuner, Commis-
sioned Gunner (T.), Gunner, Gunner (T.),
Commissioned and Warrant Armourer,
and Commissioned and Warrant Shipwright
when afloat, in view of the nature of their
duties. Tim issue is to be made on the gene-
ral lines indicated above.


Article.
2. This order does not give any claim to other classes
of Officers for a similar gratuitous issue of clothing
material for working suits.
294. Establishment of Loan Clothing for Submarines.
The following Establishment of Loan Clothing has
been approved for “ J ” Class Submarines in the Royal
Australian Navy:—
Oilskins, Jackets . . 12 No. for each Submarine
„ Trousers .. 12 Prs. for each Submarine
„ South - westers 12 JSTo. for each Submarine
Duffel Jackets .. 15 No. for each Submarine
*Haversacks, canvas .. 40 No. for each Submarine
Sea Boots . . 45 Prs. for each Submarine
Frocks, woollen . . 90 No. for each Submarine
Stockings, woollen . . 90 Prs. for each Submarine
Combination Suits,
bluette .. .. 34 No. for each Submarine
f Overall Suits, acid-
resisting .. . . 12 No. for Flotilla
*ln addition to these quantities, 10 per cent, is allowed to
Submarine Depot as spare.
/Tentative allowance pending further report.
Teaining Classes.
Sea Boots . . . . 1 Pr. per man
Frocks, woollen . . 1 No. per man
Combination Suita, bluette .. 1 No. per man
2. For the present “J ” Class Flotilla, allowance
should be made for each Submarine and for one spare
crew additional, and for a Training Class of 40 ratings.
295. Gymnastic Clothing.
Physical and Recreational Training Instructors are
entitled to the gratuitous supply of the following gym-
nastic clothing:—
Instructors on the Staff of the School of Physical
Training (II.M.AjS. Cerberus)
1 pair serge trousers. . . . l aTimmllv
4 No. singlets .. . . J a
2 No. elastic belts .. ..1 on qualifying or
2 No. white sweaters .. I re-qualifying.
Instructors not on the Staff of the School—
-2 pairs serge trousers .. 1
6 No. singlets . . .. I on qualifying or
2 No. elastic
2 No. white sweaters ..J
2. In the event of a man being appointed an In-
structor on the Staff of the School in a year in which he
has qualified or re-qualified, the free issue he has already
received is to be taken into account before any further
issue is made to him.


Gymnasium Shoes.
On board H.M.A. Ships, Gymnasium Shoes are to be
issued on repayment to ratings qualifying for Instructors
in Physical Training, and twenty-four pairs should be
rendered available for loan to classes undergoing special
courses of Physical Training.
2. At Tiaval Depots, sixty pairs are to be rendered
available for loan to classes carrying out physical drill.


SECTION XVI.
VICTUALLING.
Article.
297. Purchase of Provisions and Accounting for Same.
The direction contained in Admiralty Monthly Order
No. 322 of 1916 is not applicable to H.M.A. Ships, as,
for examination purposes in office, the system of General
Messing requires the established forms to be rendered
completed in detail for each day’s transactions. The
money columns in Daily General Mess Statement, Daily
Abstract of Issues, and Provision Account must invari-
ably be completed. An inspection of accounts in office
shows that these columns of the two latter forms have
been frequently disregarded, and in other cases the
Subsidiary Accounts, which should accompany the Pro-
vision Account, have been retained on board in error.
2. Revised form A.S. 72z, Daily Statement of General
Mess, is chiefly a subsidiary account of Daily Abstract
of all Issues. Other details included in A.S. 72z are for
general reference, and are to be transferred to the Pro-
vision Account (now being revised) where requisite.
The Daily Abstract is to be completed in every respect
in accordance with the present established form.
3. On examination of future provision accounts in
office, the Naval Board will, where it appears that due
discretion has not been exercised by the Accountant
Officer in the cost of purchase of articles for which fixed
rates are applicable, direct that the excess cost over the
issuing value, be charged against the credit or debit
balance of the General Mess Account at the time of the
examination, in addition to taking any other action that
the circumstances may warrant. It will frequently
happen in actual practice that the purchase of suitable
substitute articles will be as satisfactory and less expen-
sive, and the Accountant Officer is to keep this in view,
more especially when ships are operating beyond Aus-
tralian waters.
4. No general practice appears to be followed in ships
in regard to extra issues authorized under the King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions. Article 1690,
clauses Ito 5, are to govern all such future issues. Any
extra issues necessary, other than for the ordinary meals
and on the hands turning out in the morning, are not to
be charged against the messing allowance, but are
to be included in the Provision Account, and credit
taken for same at the end of each quarter or period of
account.
298. Contract for Condensed Milk.
The contract for condensed milk of Bacchus Marsh
Concentrated Milk Company Limited brand provides for
the replacement by contractors of all quantities that may


Article.
be condemned on board H.M.A. Ships within a period
of two years from date of delivery at Royal Edward
Victualling Yard.
2. In the event of it being necessary to condemn any
of the milk, quarterly certificates, covering quantities
condemned —approved by Commanding Officer —should
be forwarded to the Victualling Store Officer in order
that necessary steps may be taken to raise a claim against
contractor.
299. Return of Lime Juice Bottles.
If wune bottles now used for packing lime juice can
be kept on board without serious inconvenience, they
should be returned by free freight to Royal Edward
Victualling Yard, (Sydney.
2. Steps should be taken to cheek the practice of
forcing the corks into the bottles instead of extracting
them. The subsequent removal of the corks from the
bottles causes considerable trouble and expense.
300. Condemnations of Fresh Provisions.
1 The attention of Commanding Officers and Accountant
Officers is drawn to the frequent condemnations of fresh
provisions in H.M.A. Ships and Establishments, which
indicate that a certain laxity prevails, often terminating
in substantial losses to the Crown, which could have
been avoided.
2. When Ships are in harbor, orders for fresh pro-
visions are to be so regulated that the minimum risk of
loss is involved. If ordinary care is taken, only in very
special cases should it be found necessary to condemn
provisions during these periods.
3. When sea-stocks are being ordered, strict attention
should be given to the normal period for which each
article will remain wholesome. Although it is desired
that every effort should be made to obtain adequate
• sea-stocks of fresh provisions, precautions should be
taken to guard against any possible losses due to de-
terioration.
4. The foregoing instructions apply equally to all
H.M.A. Ships. and Establishments, but more particu-
larly is it desired to bring them to the attention of Com-
manding Officers of vessels in which no Accountant
Officer is borne.
301. Reports of Survey on Provisions.
The attention of Accountant Officers is drawn to para-
graph 1 of the “ Instructions for Rendering Reports of
Survey (Eorm AjS.33O) on Stores Damaged, Defective,
or Decayed.”
2. It is necessary that these forms should be trans-
mitted to the Director of Victualling, ISTavy Office, as
early as possible, in order that authority may be obtained
to write off charge stores so condemned.


A rtioie.
3. In each case the original value of the stores should
be shown.
302. Seamen’s Mess Utensils.
‘Seamen’s mess utensils are to be mustered at least
every three months to insure that breakages are replaced,
and more particularly to insure that an adequate supply
is constantly in all messes to meet requirements, as suit-
able and adequate mess utensils are essential to a reason-
able standard of comfort.
2. It is pointed out that excess breakages, due to stress
of weather or circumstances other than neglect, may, at
the Captain’s discretion, be replaced free of charge to
the messes, and the Kaval Board, whilst expecting
recovery to be made in cases of neglect, draw attention
to the fact that it is the Accountant Officer’s duty to
bring to the notice of the Commanding Officer any action
that is desirable for the comfort of the lower deck in
connexion with victualling arrangements. Attention is
drawn to .Financial Regulation 68 in connexion with this
matter.
3. The following alterations to the present scale of
Seamen’s Mess U tensils have been approved : —■
(i) Add-
Cups, egg, enamelled . . 1 for each person
Mug, earthenware . . 1 for each person
Plate, dinner, earthen-
ware . . 1 for each person
Spoon, tea .. 1 for each person
(ii) The present pattern seamen’s plate to be
utilized for soup or sweets.
(iii) When stocks are available, future supplies of
meat dishes for serving purposes only will be
of enamelware, and will be fitted with metal
covers, to keep the- food hot after leaving the
galley.
(iv) When present stocks are exhausted, future
supplies of knives will be metal-handled.
303. Warrant Officers’ Mess Traps.
It has been approved to add the following articles to
the establishment of Warrant Officers’ mess traps: —
Forks, fish, carving; knives, fish, carving—l set
to each ship.
Knives, fish, eating—Two (2) for each Warrant
Officer borne.
304. Victualling of Officers’ Stewards and Cooks.
Officers’ Stewards and Cooks are to be victualled in
their own messes, as part of the General Mess, and not
in Officers’ Messes.


Article.
305. Shipment of Dutiable Stores to H.M.A. Ships.
Stores, subject to Customs control, may be forwarded
from Australian ports, under bond, per merchant ves-
sels as ordinary cargo to any of H.M.A. Ships when out-
side the territorial waters of the Commonwealth, on
condition that, immediately on return of the Ship to
Australian waters, any unused portion of the stores
are placed under seal and remain so until the Ship
again departs from the Australian coast, or alternatively,
if it is desired to use any of these stores in an Aus-
tralian port, application shall first be made to the
Collector of Customs, who will depute an Officer to
issue the required quantity, upon which duty will sub-
sequently be paid by the ship, or mess, or Officer con-
cerned.
2. In cases where H.M.A. Ships sail direct from an
Australian port to an oversea destination, such stores
may be placed on board under seal for use outside terri-
torial waters. On return, any of the stores which may
be unused are to be dealt with as in paragraph 1.
3. Commanding Officers are to insure that the above
conditions are strictly observed in all cases where ad-
vantage is taken of these privileges. Any departure
from these conditions will render the concessions liable
to be withdrawn.
306. Instructions as to Purchases of Provisions.
1. With a view to facilitating the execution of recent
Havy Orders regarding victualling, and with the object
of affording protection to Accountant Officers in obtain-
ing supplies when not procurable from the victualling
yard or Admiralty Depots, and where contracts do not
already exist, the present Form A.5.1046z has been re-
vised and divided as follows:
Form A.S.lo46x—Meat Supplies.
Form A.S.lo46y—Other Provisions.
2. Form A.5.1046x is to be used when supplies of
meat, &c., are required, and, although all the principal
items have been provided for, can on occasion be ampli-
fied by Accountant Officers by the inclusion of such items
as sausages (various), brawns, pressed spiced meats, &e.
As a general direction, tinned provisions are only to be
obtained from ISTaval victualling establishments, but
should it be necessary, under exceptional circumstances,
to obtain supplies elsewhere, it is to bo noted that such
items can, as a rule, he more favorably purchased from
specialists in their manufacture than from firms which
handle a variety of goods. Advantage should be taken
of the ability of specializing firms to supply, and it is
advisable that all purchases should be made as near to
the original source of supply as possible, with the con-
sequent elimination of intervening expenses.


Article.
3. Form A.5.1046t is to be used in obtaining tenders
for the supply of all other victualling stores, and may
also be used in the case of the special articles named
in paragraph 2. The list of items required is to be
filled in by the Accountant Officer and, where special
brands, grades, or varieties are required, and where such
special brands, grades, and varieties ought to be obtain-
able, the column headed “ Description,” should also be
filled in. In the case of both forms, whenever possible,
the column headed “ Approximate Quantity ” must be
filled in, as an indication of requirements will generally
have considerable bearing on the prices quoted.
4. (i) In cases where the Accountant Officer does not
call for tenders for articles of a specific brand, grade, or
variety, but leaves the firm tendering to insert descrip-
tions according to stacks, protection is afforded by the
fact that Australian proprietary articles, e.g., IXL
jams, Empire cocoa, &c., must conform to one or other
of the Pure Food and Drugs Acts; and comparison of
the merits of such tenders can be made from knowledge
of the different trade brands.
(ii) The respective merits of proprietary articles of
origin other than Australian can only be determined by
knowledge of trade brands or by comparison of samples.
Various grades of dried fruits, Australian, are distin-
guished as One Crown, Two Crown, Three Crown, Four
Crown, or Five Crown, and fruits of the same variety,
and similar grade, can generally be taken as being iden-
tical in quality during any one season. This method of
grading, however, does not apply to evaporated apples,
which ought to be purchased from sample. “ Latest
pack” should always be stipulated in calling for tenders
for the supply of dried fruits, and “ split ” (i.e. with
stone removed) apricots, nectarines, and peaches are
always more satisfactory and economical than othctr
varieties.
(iii) Butter can always be purchased according to
Government grade, and sometimes at less than regulated
prices; grade certificate can always be demanded (Ist
grade 92 points, 2nd grade under 92 points). Cheese
should be described as of “ Prime Quality,” and price
should be regulated, according to the market, by size,
and whether it is “ new,” “ semi-matured,” or “ ma-
tured.”
(iv) In this connexion it should be noted that acidity
in cheese, which is distinctly prejudicial to its keeping
qualities, can most easily he detected by tasting samples
taken from the ends. The name of the factory produc-
ing cheese is a good guide as to quality. This remark
applies also to hams and bacon, which ought to be de-
scribed as “ Prime Factory,” and should not exceed 15
lbs. each and 50 lbs. per side respectively. It will be


Article.
found that, in practically all eases, the most economical
manner in which to purchase bacon is in sides; middles
can he used aS rashers, and shoulders and hams boiled.
In purchasing eggs, new-laid ” or “ Suburban new-
laid ” should be stipulated unless a cheaper variety is
required for cooking purposes; eggs required to keep
over a long period should be infertile. In point of size
the recognised standard weight of the best grade is a
minimum of 15 lbs. per 120, or an average of 2 oz. each
egg. Cases with cardboard partitions provide a satis-
factory method of carrying sea-stocks of eggs in a cool
chamber. If cool space is not available, a good plan is
to have sea-stocks of eggs packed in salt (ends up). In
this manner they easily keep wholesome for about one
month. The salt should he used for cooking purposes.
(v) The purchase of cereals, beans (butter and hari-
cot), barley (pearl), oatmeal, peas (split and green),
lentils, rice, tapioca, semolina, &c., should, if purchased
under exceptional circumstances when supply from a
Haval victualling establishment is not procurable al-
ways be effected from sample, and cars should be exer-
cised on receipt to make certain that bulk is equal to
sample and entirely free from any sign of weevil. A
sample of such goods as coffee, coffee and chicory, mus-
tard (if of local manufacture) macaroni, pepper, tea,
vinegar, &c., should also he examined unless a known
proprietary brand is quoted. In calling for tenders for
coffee and chicory the required percentage of each
should be stipulated.
(vi) In the case of fresh fruits and vegetables the
only general guidance which can he accepted is the
available supply on the market, hut samples can always
be obtained and certain conditions laid down. Fruits
and vegetables in general must be fresh and sound; ca-
pacity of all eases—bushel, half-bushel, &c. —should be
stated. Apples, eating, should he 2 inches to 2J inches,
and net weight and number of contents of case should
be set out. A bushel case of oranges of good average
size should contain 8-9 dozen. Humber per case of
lemons, mandarines, passion fruit, and pears should
always be required. Melons and pineapples are usually
sold per dozen. Het weight of contents of cases of all
other soft and stone fruits should be stated—also net
weight of contents of all cases of cooking apples and
cooking pears (in the case of which, size, so long as they
are not too small, is immaterial), quinces, and other
cooking fruit. When bananas are quoted per bunch or
per case the respective numbers, in addition to the
variety and country of origin, should he required. In
calling for tenders for the supply of fruits, and particu-
larly of eating apples, the description “best quality” is
insufficient, as there may be on the market at the same
time several varieties which could equally well, and


Article.
with equal accuracy, be described as of “ best quality/’
but which, from varying plentitude of supply, command
different prices. If the different varieties are unknown
to the Accountant Officer it is advisable that space should
be left for insertion by the tenderer of prices of the
varieties available.
(vii) The usual custom of many ports to sell veget-
ables per dozen or per dozen bunches can usually be over-
come, and ■whenever possible vegetables should be pur-
chased by weight. Stipulation should be made that all
root vegetables, such as carrots, beetroot, parsnips, tur-
nips, &c., be “ topped,” since tops are of practically no
value, and are prejudicial to the keeping qualities of the
vegetables. If desired for use as a vegetable it can
always be stipulated that turnip tops he delivered in
separate bags. Rhubarb should also be trimmed. As
far as is possible, all green and root vegetables should
be obtained in bags, since the saving of waste and con-
dition in handling will more than off-set the additional
cost, if any, provision being made that bags be returned
to the supplier.
(viii) It is to be stipulated that outside leaves of
cabbages be removed before weighing. Especially for
sea stocks the keeping qualities of potatoes should be the
prime consideration, and it will bo found that good keep-
ing are generally good eating potatoes. When obtain-
able, Tasmanian potatoes in general will be found to be
the most dependable, and of those “ Brownells ” and
“ Up-to-dates ” are probably the best. Smooth-skin
round or oval potatoes (i.e., with no deep-sunken eyes)
are the most economical when pared either by machine
or by hand. Opinions will be found to differ on the
question of whether to pack in bags or in cases any sup-
plies of potatoes required to be kept for lengthy periods,
but in both cases the original essentials of good condi-
tion on receipt, stowage where good ventilation can be
secured, and avoidance of stowage to too great a height
are the same, and, if these essentials are observed, the
more costly method of packing has little, if anything, to
be said for it, as against packing in bags. These three
essentials are, in fact, of prime importance in the keep-
ing of stocks of any variety of vegetables where cool
storage is not available.
5. To insure orders to contractors being given in a
uniform manner, and to provide. Accountant, Officers with
a complete and readily available record of such orders, a
•form of contractor’s order-book (A.5.1046z) is being
compiled.
6. Generally speaking, it is important to obtain
tenders for all goods from the person nearest to the
original producer, and to eliminate, whenever possible,
the general dealer, shipping provider, or merchant who


Article.
is prepared to procure supplies of all requirements. It
will be found that firms which specialize in the manu-
facture and supply of particular items will show more
appreciation of, and attention to, business which is
offered to them direct than to that which comes to them
through a dealer, and that the price will almost invari-
ably be less. When dealers are able to offer markedly
low prices in certain items of a tender it may be taken
for granted that they have covered themselves well in
the other prices quoted, or that the quality of the article,
in which they have no such personal interest as the
manufacturer or direct selling agent, is not such as is
obtainable elsewhere.
7. A list showing the names of the firms at the chief
Australian ports which specialize in the articles referred
to will be forwarded to all sea-going vessels in due course.
307. Packages Supplied with Victualling Stores.
Cases have come under notice where payment has been
made for contractors’ packages, such as bread bags, but-
ter boxes, &c., which have been retained on board H.M.A.
Ships and at Shore Establishments without their dis-
posal being properly accounted for.
2. In view of the present high cost of packages, every
endeavour should be made to avoid unnecessary expense
in this direction, and arrangements should be made, as
far as practicable, for the earliest possible return of all
packages for which contractors are entitled to claim pay-
ment.
3. All contractors’ packages which it is necessary to
retain, and for which payment is made, are to be taken
on charge, and credit obtained for articles subsequently
returned. Bags and other accountable packages included
in the value of purchased articles are also to be taken
on charge (vide King’s Regulations and Admiralty In-
structions, Articles 1729 and 1775).
4. All accountable cases are to be carefully opened and
preserved in a fit state for return to the Victualling Yard
for further use. The binding should be cut at each
corner, the lid removed with nail extractors, and replaced
when the case has been emptied. Kail extractors may
be obtained on demand from the Royal Edward Victual-
ling Yard.
5. Freight charges should not be incurred in the return
of packages to contractors or, unless by arrangement with
the Victualling Store Officer, to the Victualling Yard.
308. Victualling Arrangements.
The Naval Board consider that a saving, as well as
greater convenience to the Ship’s Company, would be
effected in H.M.A. Ships if, where practicable, all cooked
meat were carved in the galley, as practised in the Mer-
cantile Marine.


Article.
Issuing Price.
Remarks.
Fresh Provisions —
s. d.
Beef—Fresh, chilled, or frozen
0 7J per lb.
Fore and hind
quarters to he
obtained in equal
quantities, or
alternately
Rolled Ribs
0 9
Topsides and thick flanks
0 8
Corned Beef
0 8,
Corned Pork
0 10
Article.
2. The Board desire that this matter may be considered
and tried, in view of the absence of time_ and carving
facilities in the messes and of the desirability of the in-
dividual getting his food properly hot.
3. By this plan, waste would be eliminated, and money
would be available for purchase of other provisions and
condiments, &c. It is estimated that by using bones for
soup, &c., and the elimination of waste, a considerable
saving is possible in the meat used, with considerable
benefit to the Ships’ Companies in other directions.
Watchkeepers and others on special duty, &c., would
take their own dinners in lieu of returning the joint cold,
as under present arrangements.
4. The Naval Board desire a report from all Ships on
Ist July, 1919, as to the extent to which trial of the fore-
going has been found practicable, and will assist as
follows: —
(a) In Ships with over 450 victualled —Two addi-
tional 2nd or 3rd Cooks’ Mates will be
drafted as permanent supernumeraries for
training, during trial.
( b ) In Ships victualling from 250 to 300—One
ditto ditto.
5. In Ships with loss than 200 victualled the Naval
Board desire that Comrnand’ng Officers will arrange for
assistance when necessary, and that, where necessary and
practicable, collapsible benches for carving may be pro-
vided in all Ships, the work being performed by Ships’
Artificers.
309. Victualling —General Mess Eate and Fixed Issuing
Prices.
The Naval Board direct that, in accordance with the
provisions of Regulation 70 of the Financial and Allow-
ance Regulations (Sea-going) for the Permanent Sea-
going Forces, all Ships (except T.B. Destroyers) are to
be messed at the uniform rate of 2s. per day as from Ist
November, 1920.
2. The following are to be the fixed issuing rates for
Provisions that are to be charged to General and Repay-
ment Mosses from that date, and until further orders: —


Article.
Issuing 'Price
| Remarks.
Fre - h Prov isio.n s — cmtmued
d. ]
Mutton
i (J
7 per Hi.
1 Vo be obtained in
1 carcasses
Mutton Chops
! o
8 ,, !
Veal
1 0
8',
: (Name as tor Beef)
Bread
! 0
i
n ..
Ships with bakeries
i tc charge bread
! at same rate
Potatoes
1 0
U - I
Onions
■ 0
u
Cabbage
0
It .. i
Mixed Vegetables (including (
'ai roU.
; o
u ■. !
Marrows, Pumpkins, and Hwede
i
1
1
Dairy Pkoihti;-—
i'
Bacon
; i
6 per lb.
( In sides complete
Butter
Kggs
2
| 1
0
6 per dozen
Tinned Provision's —
Preserved Meat
j i
2 per lb.
Preserved Rabbit
i 0
8
Assorted Tinned Fruits . .
i
0 per 2-lb. tin
Tinned Tomatoes
i
0 „ 1
Dry and other Provmoss —
Flour
i 0
1 } per lb.
Biscuits, Cabin
0
6
Milk, tinned
0
8 per l2-o/. tin
♦Sugar
0
6 per lb.
Tea
1
6
Coffee
1
8
Suet, tinned
I
1
Peas, split . .
0
2\
Peas, blue
0
31
Beans, dried
0
4
Rice
0
0
Mustard
2
9
Pepper
1
4
Salt
0
1
Vinegar
0
1 per pint
Chocolate
1
4 per Hi.
Currants
0
7
Raisins
0
6* »
Sultanas
0
8
Jams, assorted
1
3 per nom. 2-lb.
tin
Marmalade ..
1
3
Sauce, Tomato
0
6 per nom. pint
bottle
Sauce, Worcester
0
5|
Golden Syrup
0
4 per lb.
Mixed Pickles
0
8.1- per lb. bottle
All other articles
To be charged at
prices shown on
Victuallins; Yard
Supply N otes or
at cost prices,
whichever are
applicable
Fixed Issuing Prices — continued.


SECTION XVII.
LEAVE AND TRAVELLING ARRANGEMENTS.
Article.
310. Leave of Absence to Officers.
No Officer is to be absent from his ship or place of
duty longer than forty-eight hours, nor from the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the port at which his ship may
be lying, without receiving the approval of the Senior
Naval Officer present on Form A. 5.539.
2. The Senior Naval Officer present may, provided
the Service will admit of it without inconvenience,
grant to Officers of ships present under his orders leave
of absence not exceeding four days. These periods will
not count against the annual amount of leave allowed.
3. All applications for leave of absence exceeding four
days from Officers not serving in ships under the orders
of the Flag Officer Commanding are to be submitted on
Form A. 5.539 for consideration of the Naval Board,
and should reach the Navy Office at least four days prior
to the date on which the leave is to commence.
Should no acknowledgment be received before the
date of commencement it is to be assumed that leave is
approved. This does not apply in regard to applications
of leave from Commanding Officers.
In cases of ships away from Melbourne, the request
may, when circumstances warrant, be submitted by tele-
graph.
4. Applications for leave exceeding four days from
Officers serving in ships under the orders of the Flag
Officer Commanding are to be submitted to the Flag
Officer Commanding, who is authorized to approve of
them subject to the annual allowance not being exceeded.
When owing to absence of Flag on a cruise this course
would entail serious delay, the application may be sent
direct to the Navy Office, who will inform the Flag
Officer Commanding of action taken.
5. All applications for leave, or for extension of leave,
are to be made by Officers through their Commanding
Officers.
6. All Officers on leave are to keep their Command-
ing Officers informed of their movements in case the
exigencies of the Service should require their recall by
telegraph or by letter.
7. No Officer is to be granted leave to join at another
port than that from which he takes his leave without
the approval of the Naval Board.
8. Applications from Officers in command for leave
exceeding four days are invariably to be forwarded for
the consideration of the Naval Board.


Article.
9. The scale of annual leave which applies also to the
R.A.ISr.R. Staff, is laid down in Naval Forces Regula-
tions, Article 140.
10. The leave year is to be considered as from Ist
January to 31st December, except for the R.A.N.R.
Staff, which is to be considered as from Ist February to
31st January. Leave may be granted pro rata for any
period of service less than the whole year.
11. Attention is drawn to Naval Forces Regulations,
Articles 140-145.
311. Leave to Officers and Men Lent to R.A.N.
See Naval Forces Regulations, Article 142.
312. Foreign Service Leave of R.N. Ratings Lent —Notation
on Conduct Sheet.
On discharge of a R.N rating from one of H.M.A.
Ships or Establishments to another, a notation should be
made on his Conduct Sheet of the number of days’
Foreign Service Leave due to him up to the date of such
discharge.
2. This notation is to be initialed by the rating as
indication that he is aware of the amount of leave due
to him to date, and accepts the accuracy of the notation.
3. It is not sufficient to note on the Conduct Sheet
the number of days’ leave taken in the Ship or Estab-
lishment concerned.
4. It is especially essential that the notation of
Foreign Service Leave due should he made, and initialed
by the rating, in the case of men discharged to Penguin
or Cerberus for passage to England.
313. Leave on Discharge to Shore.
It is not the intention of the Naval Board that, when
men are discharged at own request, their engagement
having expired, they should forfeit any of their foreign
service leave in consequence of being discharged partly
at their own request. Ratings discharged, however, at
own request prior to completion of engagement, take
their discharge on the understanding that they forfeit
leave.
314. Travelling Expenses in Connexion with Recall from
Leave.
Expenses will not he allowed ill connexion with the
journey to the ship on recall, except so far as they may
be incurred in consequence of the ship having in the
meantime proceeded to sea or to another port.


Article.
2. If, after recajf from long leave, an Officer or Man
is allowed to complete the leave originally granted,
travelling allowance and expenses necessarily incurred
in proceeding again on leave, and in returning finally
to his ship (exclusive of charges for excess luggage)
will be paid, subject to the proviso that the Public Funds
will not bear any expense in excess of the cost of
travelling between the port at which the ship was lying
at the time of his recall and the place where he was
spending his leave when he received the order to return.
This concession shall not apply in the following
cases:—
(i) Where the unexpired portion of the leave
subsequent to recall will not admit of at
least twenty-four hours being spent at their
destination;
(ii) whore additional leave is granted in excess
of four days over the unexpired period of
leave originally granted; and
(iii) where Officers and Men are aware, before
proceeding on leave, that it is probable
they will be recalled.
3. Railway warrants are to be furnished to Officers
and Men entitled when proceeding to complete unex-
pired leave after recall, and returning to their ships.
4. Officers and Men are not to be recalled from leave
unless circumstances have arisen which render this
course absolutely necessary. All cases will be examined
in Office, and a special report, with full explanation of
the circumstances, is to be made at the time to the
Senior Officer, who is to transmit the statement, with
his observations thereon, to the Secretary, Navy Office,
Melbourne. This information should include:—
(a) Amount of leave originally granted.
( h ) Date of its commencement.
(c) Date of recall.
(d) Place at which leave was being spent.
(e) Date of return to leave.
(/) Amount of leave then granted.
5. No expenses will be allowed in connexion with re-
call from short leave, i.e., when the leave originally
granted was for less than four days.
6. In the case of an Officer proceeding to take up a
new appointment from leave, or in other cases where
an Officer would be eligible for travelling expenses in
proceeding in the execution of some duty, expenses, in
accordance with Regulations, may be allowed within
the estimated cost of a direct journey from ship to ship.
The claim must be supported by a statement showing the
actual expenses incurred in travelling from place of
leave, and by supporting receipts for each item in excess
of ss.


Article.
7. The words “ Travelling expenses ” cover—
(a) travelling allowances as prescribed in the
Naval Financial Regulations and Instruc-
tions,
(b) cost of conveyance by rail, coach, or steamer,
and
(c) other authorized expenditure, e.g., cab fares.
freight charges on Service baggage, &c.
315. Sick leave to Temporary Clerks.
It is notified for general information that the number
of single-day absences which may be granted to Tem-
porary Clerks without production of a medical certificate
shall not exceed three in any twelve months.
316. leave to Civilian Officers to Attend Examinations.
Permanent civilian Officers of the Navy Department,
or Temporary Clerks, who are returned sailors or sol-
diers, desirous of attending educational examinations
held under the Public Service Regulations, or in con-
nexion with the Navy Department, may be granted
leave with pay not exceeding five days per annum on
production of evidence that Officers are attending such
examinations.
2. Any leave so granted exceeding five days per
annum shall, at the option of the Officer concerned, be
without pay, or may be deducted from the Officer’s next
annual leave.
317. Sick Leave—Permanent Civilian Officers.
Public Service Regulation 77 (1) provides that a]l|)li-
cations for sick leave shall be supported by a medical
certificate, except in tbe case of single-day absences not
exceeding three in any twelve months. In order that a
uniform practice may be followed throughout the De-
partment, it has been decided that “ any twelve months
is to commence with the first single-day absence. For
example, if an Officer’s first single-day absence under
Regulation 77 (1) was on Ist May, 1919, be would be
eligible during the succeeding twelve months for ab-
sence without production of a medical certificate on two
single days. From Ist May, 1920, any previous ab-
sence should be disregarded, and a fresh period of “ any
twelve months ” would commence from the date of the
first single-day absence subsequent to 30th April, 1920.
2. An Officer or employee who becomes ill while absent
on recreation leave cannot be granted sick leave until
after the date on which his recreation leave expires.
This decision applies both to permanent and temporary
staff.


Article.
318. Passages of Wives and Families of Officers Lent from
the Royal Navy.
Officers appointed for service in the Eoyal Aus-
tralian Navy for three years will be granted passage of
wife and family to Australia. After completion of
three years’ service with the Royal Australian Navy a re-
turn passage will be granted for wife and family.
2. If, through reasons beyond an Officer’s control, his
service with the Eoyal Australian Navy is terminated be-
fore expiration of the three years, the Commonwealth
do not hold themselves responsible for the return pas-
sage of wife and family, but, on application being made,
the whole or a portion of the return passage may be
granted, after taking into consideration the circum-
stances attending the withdrawal of the Officer from
the Eoyal Australian Navy.
3. Should private reasons necessitate the return of
an Officer’s wife and family prior to the completion of
the three years’ service, the money for this passage will
not, as a general rule, be paid until this period has been
completed; a portion, however, may be advanced on
application being made, the amount being dependent on
length of service of Officer in the Commonwealth Ser-
vice.
4. Should an Officer’s service with the Commonwealth
be terminated owing to his misconduct or unsatisfactory
service, or should an Officer voluntarily withdraw from
the Royal Australian Navy prior to the completion of
the period for which lent, the Commonwealth do not
hold themselves liable for a return passage for the
Officer’s wife and family.
5. In regard to the passage to England of wives of
Officers who have married during the period of their
service in the Royal Australian Navy, the liability for
passage at Commonwealth expense is limited to a return
passage for the Officer himself; i.e., a return passage
will bo provided only for tbe wife and family of an
Officer who was married at the time of his engagement
with the Commonwealth Government, and whose passage
from England to Australia was provided at Common-
wealth expense.
6. The definition of “ Children ” laid down in Article
1526 of King’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions
has been adopted, viz.:—
(a) Sons under the age of sixteen years at the date
of commencement of the passage whether
outwards or homewards.
(b) Unmarried daughters dependent on and resid-
ing with their fathers.
(c) Sons over sixteen years of age who, by reason
of physical or mental infirmity are neces-
sarily dependent on their parents.


Article.
Steamer, rail, or other fares of adopted children are
not allowable except under special circumstances, with
the approval of the Naval Board.
7. The appointment on loan of Junior Officers from
the Royal Navy will generally be only for a term of
two years. Passages for wives and families will not,
under such circumstances, be provided.
319. Reversion to Royal Navy before Expiration of Period
of Loan to R.A.N.
An Officer who at his own request reverts to the
Royal Navy before the expiration of the period of his
loan to the Royal Australian Navy will be required, to
defray all expense incurred in connexion with the pas-
sage to Australia of his relief, and his own passage to
England, unless very strong reasons are put forward
why such charges should not bo made.
320. Free Travelling Warrants—lssue of.
Members of the Permanent Sea-going Forces whose
homes are west of Adelaide or north of Brisbane will,
on proceeding on Christmas leave from Sydney or Mel-
bourne, be given Naval railway warrants, chargeable to
the Navy Department at official rates, for the journey
between Adelaide or Brisbane and their homes. (The
member himself will obtain ticket as far as Adelaide or
Brisbane.)
2. Ratings discharged (a) Time expired; (b) For
misconduct; (e) Invalided; (d) Demobilized, will be
granted railway or steamer warrants; chargeable to
the Navy Department at official rates, to actual place
from whence they were originally recruited within the
Commonwealth, or to Port Division, as they may elect.
(Railways are to be used whenever possible.) Ratings
discharged at their own request whose engagements have
not expired must defray cost of passage themselves.
3. For instructions, redative to the issue of railway
warrants see Appendix 11.
321. Western Australia—Ranks and Ratings Proceeding to.
In order that no delay may occur in returning ranks
and ratings to their ships from Western Australia, the
following procedure is to be adopted in 11.M.A Ships
and Establishments: —
(a) Ranks and ratings .should be instructed to re-
port to the District Naval Officer, Fremantle,
immediately on arrival at that port.
( b ) A statement signed by the Commanding Offi-
cer should be forwarded to the District
Naval Officer at the same time as the rank
or rating proceeds on leave, showing the
name, rank or rating, official number, par-
ticulars of leave granted, address on leave,
and concession to which the rank or rating
is entitled on return passage.


Company.
Concession Allowed.
Adelaide Steam-ship Co. Ltd.
Australasian United Steam Navigation Co.
Ltd.
Australian Steam-ships Ltd.
Huddart, Parker Ltd.
Mollwraith, McEacham, and Co. Pty. Ltd. ..
Melbourne Steam-ship Co. Ltd.
Union Steam-ship Co. of N.Z. Ltd.
Orient Line of Royal Mail Steamers
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation
Co.
1 15 per cent, reduc-
tion on Inter-
State, Common-
1 wealth, and New
( Zealand saloon
and steerage fares
with exceptions as
hereunder
5 per cent, off fares
y between Austra-
J ban ports
Exceptions —
Steerage fare between Sydney and Melbourne and
vice versa.
Steerage fare between Melbourne and Adelaide and
vice versa.
Article.
(c) All arrangements for the return passage from
Western Australia to eastern States are to be
left to the District A aval Officer, Fremantle.
322. Steam-ship Concession Rates when Travelling on Duty.
The undermentioned steam-ship companies have
agreed to grant to Officers and Men of the Permanent
Naval Forces travelling on duty from Western Aus-
tralia to the eastern States a concession at the rate of
twenty (20) per cent, off first, second, and third-class
fares:—
Huddart Parker Limited.
Australian Steam-ships Limited.
Adelaide Steam-ship Company Limited.
Australasian United Steam Navigation Company
Limited.
Mcllwraith, McEacharn’s Line Proprietary
Limited.
Melbourne Steam-ship Company Limited.
Passage Orders drawn on the above companies are to
be indorsed in red with the words “ Entitled to reduc-
tion of 20 per cent.”
323. Steam-ship Concession Rates when Travelling on
leave.
The under-mentioned steam-ship companies have
agreed to grant concessions on the ordinary passenger
rates to members of the Permanent Naval Forces when
travelling on leave of seven days or over, on produc-
tion—
(a) by an Officer —of a certificate of identification
signed by the Commanding Officer;
(b) by a Man —of his leave ticket.


Article.
Steerage fare between Sydney and Brisbane and
vice versa.
Steerage fare between Melbourne and Launceston and
vice versa.
Steerage fare between Melbourne and North-west
Coast of Tasmania and vice versa.
2. The certificate in the case of Officers is to be made
out in the following form:—
I certify that the bearer (insert name and rank) is
an Officer of the Royal Australian Navy.
Commanding Officer,
I-I.M.A.S
at
Date. ./. ./. .
324. Launceston—Passenger Tax.
For the purpose of effecting Harbor improvements,
the Launceston Marine Board has passed a by-law levy-
ing a toll of 2s. per head on passengers from or to places
outside Tasmania landing at or embarking from Laun-
ceston.
The Crown Solicitor has given his opinion that the
by-law does not authorize the collection of the toll from
members of the Defence Forces travelling on duty (which
includes members of the Permanent Naval Forces and
of the Citizen Forces), as section 70 of the Defence Act
would exempt them from payment.
• The Crown Solicitor also advised that, although the
Department is not legally liable for these tolls, amounts
already paid could not be recovered from the steam-ship
companies, nor could the companies recover such amount
from the Launceston Marine Board.
In view of the above opinion payment of this tax
should not in future be made, and travelling warrants
chargeable to the Department issued for steamer fares
to or from Launceston should bear the following nota-
tion legibly made, on the face of the warrant; —
“ Launceston passenger tax not payable.”
325. Officers Travelling Overseas on Duty.
In special cases where Naval, Board approval is given
under the provisions of Article 16, clause 10, of the
Naval Financial Regulations and Instructions, for
Officers travelling overseas on duty to receive the
passage money and make their own arrangements for
passage, e.g., from United Kingdom to Australia or vice
versa, such Officers should, except where otherwise
approved, travel by the cheapest and most direct route.
If. in special circumstances, approval to travel by
another route is given at an Officer’s own request, the
additional expense thus incurred must he borne by him.


Article.
326. Service Baggage—Conveyance of.
See Article 22, clause 4, of the Kaval Financial
Regulations and Instructions.
2. Reimbursement of cash payments made by Officers
or Ratings will not be allowed in future.
3. Cartage of luggage at Sydney is to be arranged
through the Accountant Officer, H.M.A.S. Penguin,
with the Service Contractor at Sydney, and payments
made to private contractors will not be reimbursed in
future.
327. Officers and Men Taking Passage in Merchant Ships.
It has come to notice that the procedure laid down in
Form 5.214 has not been followed in cases where Officers
and Men have been discharged for passage in mer-
chant ships, and as a result they have not been borne on
ship’s books during passage. Attention is therefore
directed to Articles 1518, clause 2, 1530, 1594, clause 3,
King’s Regulations, and the instructions on Form 5.214,
which are to he strictly observed.
2. Attention is also called to Article 824, clause 4, in
regard to granting Officers certificates for time on pas-
sage. The ISTaval Representative is to give certificates
in regard to Officers being entered on books of London
Depot, which depot is to bo known as “ Cerberus II.”
3. Cases have come to notice in which the pay accounts
of Officers and Men discharged for passage has been ex-
tended beyond the date on which they are actually dis-
charged from the ship. This irregularity is not to be
continued; pay is to be calculated to date of discharge,
and any advance made in excess of credit at date of dis-
charge is to be shown on Transfer List as a debt trans-
ferred.
328. Kailway Travelling—Ratings Returning from Leave.
When periodical leave is granted, and it is known
that at the expiration thereof a number of ratings will
be returning from another State on the same day, due
notice should be telegraphed by Commanding Officers to
the Stationmaster at the Station of departure, warning
him of the approximate number of ratings that are due to
return on that day, in order that adequate provision
may bs made by the Railway Authorities.
329. Accommodation for Liberty Men on Short Leave from
11.M.A. Ships.
With reference to Admiralty Circular Letter, Ko. 31
(15T.11829/12), dated 4th September, 1-912, relative to
accommodation on shore for Liberty men on short leave
from H.M. Ships, it has been decided that the scheme
therein shall be applied, as far as practicable, to the
Royal Australian Wavy and Ports in Australia.


Article.
2. At places where District or Sub-District Naval
Offices are established, the Officers and Petty Officers of
the Administrative and Instructional Staff are to under-
take the duties defined in paragraph 4 of the Admiralty
Circular Letter which are performed by the Coast Guard
in the United Kingdom, with any voluntary assistance
of Officers and Men of the R.A.N.R. that the latter
may be willing to afford.
3. Commanding Officers of H.M.A. Ships about to
visit one of these ports, are to communicate as necessary
with the District Naval Officer or Sub-District Naval
Officer, so that the accommodation registers may be
ready for use on their arrival. At other ports Com-
manding Officers are to carry out the arrangements as
detailed in paragraph 3 of the Admiralty Circular
Letter.
330. Accumulated Leave Due on Transfer from Sea-going
Forces, R.A.N., to the R.A.N.R. Staff.
Members of the Royal Australian Navy (Sea-going)
who, on appointment to the R.A.N.R. Staff, are per-
mitted to carry forward leave not taken prior to transfer,
will be granted such leave at the R.A.N.R. Staff rates
of pay, and not at the sea-going rates of pay.
331. Naval Ratings Travelling on Duty.
When parties of Naval Ratings are travelling by
train on duty, a Petty Officer, Leading Rate or Badge
Rating, should invariably be detailed for each compart-
ment. It should be the duty of this Rating to record
the names of each Rating occupying the compartment,
and to report, on arrival at destination, whether any
damage has been done, and, if so, by whom.


Date to be Rendered.
Nature of Return.
1st January and 30th June
Form A.S. 184—In 3 sections, viz:—
(in triplicate)
(1) Pensioners, specifying whether R.F.R.,
Class A.
(2) Royal Fleet Reserve, Class B.
(3) Active Service Ratings lent.
This Return should include all the above
home at end>of half-year, and should show
any alterations in rating since date of first
being lent to R.A.N.
The R.A.NT. engagement should also be
noted in the case of Active Service ratings
lent.
1st January and 30th June
S. 195 —Half-yearly Return of sick berth
ratings belonging to the division. (Separate
return for each Port Division.)
1st January and 30th June
S, 507 — Half-yearly return of all seaman,
signalman and engine-room artificer ratings
belonging to the division, who, having
passed, are qualified, and also recommended
for advancement. (Separate return for
each Port Division.)
1st January and 30th June
S. 507a —Half-yearly return of all writer,
ship’s steward, ship’s cook, ship’s police,
telegraphist and artisan ratings belonging
to the division. (Separate return for each
Port Division.)
15th of each month
Return of entry, discharge, alteration in rat-
ing, &c„ of pensioner, Royal Fleet Reserve
and Active Service ratings lent. (Form
A.S. 165 may be utilized for this.)
SECTION XVIII.
RETURNS.
Article.
332. Monthly Return of State and Condition'.
A return, on Form A.S. 166(z), is to be rendered on
the Ist of each month by all H.M.A. Ships and Vessels in
Commission, including torpedo craft, whether tenders
or otherwise. The return is to show the condition of
stores, &e,, and other particulars required by the form,
up to the last day of the preceding month. Any special
remarks which the Commanding Officer may desire to
make are to be inserted on the back of the form.
333. Returns in Connexion with Pensioners and Others Lent
from Royal Navy.
The following returns in connexion with pensioners,
Royal Fleet Reserve men, and Active Service ratings
lent from the Royal Navy, are to be rendered direct to
the Naval Representative, Australia House, Strand,
London, W.C., as stated: —


Article.
2. Royal Navy ratings to be distinguished in all
Returns as follows:
Active Service ratings lent from the
Royal Navy . . . . . . A.S.R.
Pensioners from Royal Navy . . P.R.N.
Royal Fleet Reserve Men . . .. R.F.R.
All other ratings . . .. . . R.A.N.
334. R.N. Ratings on Loan to R.A.N.—Dates of Expiration
of R.A.N. Engagements.
A return of all R.N. ratings on loan, whose period of
loan to the R.A.N. expires during the ensuing six
months, is to he rendered quarterly on 31st March, 30th
June, 30th September, and 31st December, to the Com-
manding Officer, Flinders Naval Depot, specifying:—
(a) Name, rating, and non-subs'tantive rating.
(b) Dates on which agreements expire.
(c) Those desirous of reverting to the Royal
N avy.
(d) Those Volunteering for further service in
the Royal Australian Navy, and period of
such extension.
335. Quarterly Return of Small Boats in Service.
A return of small boats, both old and now, in the
R.A.N. Service is to be rendered, quarterly, on the dates
marked on the returns, by 11.M.A. Ships and Establish-
ments on Form A.D. 5642.
2. When a new boat is added to any Ship or Estab-
lishment, the following particulars are to be furnished in
addition to the information required on the form,: —
(a) Weurht, fully equipped;
( b ) Cost ;
(c) Name oT builder;
( d ) Date when built.
3. In the event of a boat being lost or sold, particu-
lars are to be noted in the Quarterly Return.
4. A registered number will be allotted to each boat
by the Navy Office, and this number is to he cut deep on
top of the foremost thwart in square figures 2| inches
high.
5. The Quarterly Returns, being hound in book form
at the Navy Office, are not to be folded.
6. Attention is drawn to the fact that each column
of the return must be completed.
336. Return of Men with Knowledge of Foreign Languages.
Commanding Officers are to furnish returns, on Ist
January of each year, to the C. 0., H.M.A.S. Cerberus,
showing ratings borne who possess a knowledge of foreign
languages.
This information is not to be noted on Service Cer-


Article,
337. Rendering of Return A.S. 162—Monthly Return of
Numbers Borne, Vacancies, and Supernumeraries.
The above return is to be prepared in duplicate, one
copy being forwarded to the Secretary, Navy Office,
Melbourne; and the other direct to the Commanding
Officer, Flinders Naval Depot.
338. Half-yearly Return of Ratings Recommended for
Advancement.
With regard to the half-yearly return rendered to the
Navy Office, of ratings recommended for advancement,
in future only those ratings who are fully qualified for
the rank or rating for which they are recommended
should be included in the return.
339. Return of Men Recommended to Qualify for Higher
Non-Substantive Rating.
If R.N. ratings are included in the Return of Men
Recommended to Qualify for Higher Non-Substantive
Rating (A.S. 1303), the date of commencement and
period of engagement of such ratings in the Royal Navy
should be shown in the Remarks Column.
2. Particulars of R.A.N. Engagement should be shown
in columns 6 and 7.


SECTION XIX.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Article.
340. Admiralty House, Sydney.
The following arrangements in connexion with
Admiralty House, Sydney, and supply of Barge Crew,
have been approved, and are to be considered supple-
mentary to those contained in Article 49: —
(1) Superintending Civil Engineer, Sydney,
under the Director of Naval Works, is to inspect the
house quarterly, execute any repairs found necessary,
and report to the Commodore Superintendent.
Sydney, that the house is ready for occupation.
(2) Guard. —Cuard and cook to be supplied by
Garden Island Depot. If ratings are not available
at Garden Island from any cause, arrangements
will be made, if sufficient notice is given to the
Navy Office by the Commodore Superintendent, for
these ratings to be supplied by Cerberus. All must
be reliable men of V.G. character.
(3) Barge Crew. —Two crews to be provided,
one by Garden Island Depot, and one by Cerberus.
Each crew to consist of men of V.G. character,
under a reliable Chief Petty Officer as Coxswain.
Crew from Cerberus will be sent to Sydney as soon
as information is received that His Excellency pro-
poses to proceed to Sydney.
(4) Caretaker. —The Commodore Superintendent
is to insure that the man detailed for carrying out
this duty is of good character, and competent, and
likely to give satisfaction to His Excellency the
Governor-Oeneral.
341. Requisitions on the Department of Home Affairs.
District Naval Officers, when forwarding requisitions
for work to be carried out by the Department of Home
Affairs, are to see that these are made out in strict
compliance with the instructions contained in the Public
Works Regulations, and they should also take steps to
insure that particulars of the service required are fully
set forth on the requisition. Unless this is done further
inquiry and consequent delay are entailed.
_2. The attention of District Naval Officers is specially
directed to the undermentioned sections of the Public
Works Regulations referring to Requisitions:—
Section 5, Sub-section 1., clauses 28-33, Classifi-
cation ;
Section 6, Sub-section 1., clauses 49-52, General
Instructions;
Section 6, Sub-section 11., clause 53, “ Ordinary ’’
Requisitions.
Section 6, Sub-section VI., clause 61, “New
Works ” Requisitions.


159
3. Requisitions for new works are, in all circum-
stances, to be submitted to the Wavy Office (through the
D.W.R.M. in the case of D.W.O.’s), and are to contain
the fullest information obtainable regarding the site,
probable cost, dimensions, &c., of the “ new work ”.
342. The Thomas G-erald Grice Scholarship.
A scholarship known as the Thomas Gerald Grice
Scholarship has been founded by Sir John Grice, in
memory of his son, Thomas Gerald Grice, who was killed
in action in France on 15th June, 1916.
2. The scholarship covers all school fees, both tuition
and boarding, together with fixed charges, and is open
to the sons (who shall in all respects conform to the
school rules) of Commissioned Officers of the British or
Australian Army or Wavy who have been killed or died
on active service in the present war.
3. The scholarship is tenable at the Geelong Church
of England Grammar School, Corio, Victoria, for a
p>eriod of three years, subject to the satisfactory conduct
and progress of the scholar, of which conduct and pro-
gress the headmaster shall be the sole judge.
4. Should the Council of the School, on the head-
master’s report, deem the conduct of, or the progress
made by, any scholar unsatisfactory, the Council will
immediately terminate the scholarship.
5. The scholarship will be awarded by the Council
of the school, after examination, and on the report of
the headmaster, and unless, in his opinion, a candidate
has shown himself possessed of sufficient merit, the
scholarship for that year will not be awarded.
6. Subject to clause 5, one scholarship will be awarded
annually so long as the funds allow.
7. If in any year there should be no successful candi-
date, two scholarships may, at the discretion of the
Council, and on the recommendation of the headmaster,
be awarded the following year.
8. Candidates for the scholarship must be under four-
teen years of age on the first day of July of the year
in which they compete. Allowance will be made for
age. Successful candidates will be required to furnish
a certificate of birth before entering the school.
9. The examination will be held in Wovember of each
year. The scholarship will become tenable at the
beginning of the following year, i.e., in February.
343. Steam Disinfector at Sydney.
A steam disinfector for disinfecting clothes and bed-
ding has been erected at Garden Island, Sydney, for the
use of H.M.A. Fleet.


Article.
344. Application of the Commonwealth Electoral Act to the
R.A.N.
The Commonwealth. Electoral Act 1918 provides
that—
“ All persons who are or have been members of
the Forces within the meaning of the Common-
wealth Electoral ( War-Time ) Act 1917, and who—
(a) have lived in Australia for six months
continuously; and
( b ) are natural-born or naturalized subjects
of the King;
shall be entitled to enrolment, subject to the pro-
visions of Part VII. of this Act. The provision
shall have effect only during the continuance of
the present state of war, and for a period of three
years thereafter.”
The following H.M.A. Ships are regarded as Vic-
torian for electoral purposes:—H.M.A.S. Melbourne,
Encounter, Warrego, Yarra, Parramatta, Huon, Swan,
Torrens, Cerberus, and tenders.
2. The following H.M.A. Ships are regarded as be-
longing to Hew South Wales for electoral purposes;—
H.M.A.S. Australia, Sydney, Brisbane, Ursa, Platypus,
and Submarines, Tingira, and Penguin, and tenders.
3. A supply of Electoral Claim Forms for the pur-
pose of insuring such enrolment in the case of any
members of the Forces who are under the age of twenty -
one years, and a supply of ordinary Electoral Claim
Forms for any member over the age of twenty-one years
who has not already enrolled, have been received from
the Commonwealth Electoral Officer of the State of Vic-
toria, and these can be obtained by Ships classified as
Victorian on application to the ISTavy Office.
4; Forms for Ships classified as “ Hew South Wales ”
should be obtained direct from the Commonwealth Elec-
toral Officer, Sydney.
5. “ A member of the Forces ”, within the meaning
of the Commonwealth Electoral ( War-Time ) Act 1917,
is a person who is or has been a member of the Com-
monwealth Haval or Military Forces enlisted or ap-
pointed for active service outside Australia, or on a
ship of war, and a person engaged as a munition or
other worker under agreement with the Commonwealth
Government for service outside Australia, and includes
a person who is or has been a member of the Army
Medical Corps Hursing Service, who is accepted or
appointed by the Director-General of Medical Services
for service outside Australia.
6. The contents of this Havy Order should be brought
to the notice of all Officers and Men.


Article.
345. Establishment of an Australian National War
Museum.
Following the example of the Imperial Government,
the Commonwealth Government has decided to establish
an Australian National War Museum. A Committee of
the Cabinet has been appointed to supervise the inaugu-
ration of the War Museum, in conjunction with Sir
Henry Weedon, Chairman of the Melbourne Exhibition
Trustees. Arrangements have been made for the war
trophies, pictures, &c., available to be exhibited to the
public at the Melbourne Exhibition Building, pending
their transfer at a later date to a permanent location.
2. Commanding Officers and others concerned are re-
quested to make this known to the Officers and Men
under their command, who should* he encouraged to
donate relics of interest to the War Museum. Notifica-
tion of all relics, &c., donated should be given to the
Navy Office, Melbourne, when instructions will he issued
as to disposal.
346. Australasian Medal of the Royal Humane Society.
The Admiralty have approved of the provisions of
Chapter 11., section XVII., paragraph 161, of King’s
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions, relative to the
wearing of medals and clasps awarded to Officers and
Men by the Royal Humane Society, being made appli-
cable to members of the Royal Australian Navy in con-
nexion with the Australasian Medal of the Royal
Humane Society.
347. Public Holidays.
In connexion with the holidays to be observed by the
Navy Department in the capital cities of the various-
States, it has been decided to fall into line with the
practice established in other Commonwealth Depart-
ments.
2. A maximum of twelve paid holidays per annum
may be observed, viz., eight days as prescribed in section
72 of the Public Service Act, and four other days (to be
determined). (It is not, however, obligatory to grant
the full four days in every State, vide paragraph 4
hereof.)
3. In addition, therefore, to the eight days prescribed
by the Public Service Act, viz., Ist day of January,
26th day of January, Good Friday, and the following
Saturday and Monday, the anniversary of the birth of
the Sovereign, Christmas Day, and the following day, or
any day proclaimed by the Governor-General or required
by any Act to be observed in lieu of any of the said
C. 18558.—6


Article.
days, the following days are approved as holidays in
future:—•
Sydney—
Anzac Day (26th April).
Prince of Wales’ Birthday.
Eight Hours’ Day.
Day following foxing Day.
Melbourne—
Anzae Day (26th April).
Eight Hours’ Day.
Melbourne Cup Day.
Day following Boxing Day.
Brisbane—
Anzac Day (26th April).
Eight Hours’ Day.
Exhibition Day.
Day following Boxing Day.
Adelaide—
Anzac Day (26th April).
King’s Accession Day.
Eight Hours’ Day.
Proclamation Day.
Perth—
Anzac Day (26th April).
Eoyal Agricultural Show Day.
Proclamation Day.
Day following Boxing Day.
Hobart —
Anzac Day (26th April).
Hobart Cup Day.
First Monday in November.
Day following Boxing Day.
4. In regard to Sydney, three days, i.e.. Prince of
Wales’ Birthday, Eight Hours’ Day, and Bank Holiday,
are proclaimed as public holidays, besides the prescribed
holidays, and, of these, the two first-named have been
approved as holidays. As Bank Holiday is not observed
by the business community and the general public, it has
been decided that it shall not be observed by Common-
wealth Departments.
5. Holiday Puyment. —Where the exigencies of the
Service require the attendance of Officers on a paid
holiday, payment may be, made, in accordance with
Regulations, of double time, but not double time in addi-
tion to the ordinary pay for holidays.
6. Recreation Lmve. —Paid holidays indicated above
are to be excluded from the period of leave when the
leave granted is exclusive of Sundays and holidays.


Article.
Naval Establishments.
7. Tlie above does not, so far as hourly-paid em-
ployees, other than hourly-paid office staff at Naval
Establishments, are concerned, set aside Regulation 40
(1) of Naval Establishment Regulations, which limits
the number of paid holidays to nine, being the eight
statutory holidays and Eight Hours’ Day.
(ii) Persons paid on a salaried basis and hourly-paid
office staff at Naval Establishments are, however, to be
dealt with in accordance with this Navy Order, and are
entitled, therefore, to the additional paid holidays
indicated. (Necessary amendment of Naval Establish-
ment Regulations will be made in due course.)
8. Closing Naval Establishments. —ln the event of it
being considered desirable to close Naval Establish-
ments in Sydney on any proclaimed State holiday other
than the days specified above, the Commodore Superin-
tendent will ascertain what action is being taken in other
Commonwealth Departments in Sydney, and submit the
same with his recommendations for the approval of the
Naval Board prior to issuing instructions.
348. Wills of Petty Officers and Men of the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy.
The attention of all Petty Officers and Men is to be
directed to the desirability of their making a Will,
which is particularly necessary in the case of the Royal
Australian Navy, on account of every man having a
sum in deferred pay due to him, and other sums, of
which he may have no present knowledge, e.g., Prize
Money may also become due to him. The Will should,
in all cases, be made on Eorm 5.545, or a copy thereof.
2. It is pointed out to married men especially that,
in case of their dying without having made a Will, the
law in regard to the distribution of the estate of an
intestate allows of only a part of his property being paid
to his widow, and it may happen that a part will have
to be paid to a distant relative. Further, the adminis-
tration of an estate where there is no Will is often very
much delayed, and while the necessary legal action is
being taken no part of the property can be paid to
dependants; thus they may become destitute during this
delay.
3. Further, for obvious reasons, it is desirable that
the Will, when executed, should not be retained on
board the ship in which the man is serving.
4. In the case of Petty Officers and Men belonging to
the Royal Australian Navy, arrangements will be made
for the safe custody, at Navy Office, of Wills. Com-
manding Officers should see that Wills are properly com-
pleted. They must be handwritten—not typewritten —
and there should be no alterations in the script. If any


Article.
deletions or alterations are made, such must be initialed
by testator and both witnesses at the time of signing the
Will, which should be enclosed in a sealed envelope,
indorsed with the full name and official number of the
testator. A receipt is to be given to the testator, and the
Wills forwarded by registered post, from time to time,
to Navy Office; a further receipt will be forwarded by
the Secretary to the Department of the Navy.
5. In the case of Petty Officers and Men on loan from
the Royal Navy, the procedure laid down in King’s
Regulations is to be carried out, and the Wills forwarded
to the “ Inspector of Seamen’s Wills, Admiralty, Lon-
don.” The Navy Office should at the same time be
advised of the names of Petty Officers and Men whose
Wills have been so forwarded.
6. While urging the desirability of conforming to the
above, Commanding Officers should avoid giving the
impression that this is obligatory, or that Wills neces-
sarily should be deposited at Navy Office. The testator
is quite free to adopt any other form of safe custody,
e.g., with his solicitors or relatives, that he may prefer.
349. Boilers in Naval Shore Establishments.
All boilers in Naval Establishments are to be regu-
larly and promptly inspected, tested, and cleaned.
2. Boilers which have been in use for two years or
more are to be tested by water pressure once a year;
but it is to be distinctly understood that the Manager
of the Engineering Department, or Chief Engineer, is
responsible for the efficiency of boilers, as they are at
liberty to water test more often than once in twelve
months in any cases in which they think it is desirable
to do so. Boilers are always to be water tested after
a repair. The water-pressure tests are to be similar
to those carried out in ships.
3. All boilers are to be stripped of lagging, drill
tested, and thoroughly examined after being at work
five years, and at two-yearly intervals afterwards.
4. The inside and the outside of the boilers should be
carefully inspected by an experienced boilermaker when
the time for testing them arrives, and the test is to be
witnessed by an Engineer Officer and the Foreman of
Boilermakers. In cases where there is not a Foreman
of Boilermakers, a qualified Inspector or Chargeman
is to be present at the test.
5. Boilers are to be cleaned internally and externally
as may be necessary, and as the exigencies of the Service
will permit. As the economy of fuel and the durability,
and even the safety, of the boilers depend so much on
their being kept clean, this duty should be regularly and
carefully attended to.


6. In any case where the water is of such a nature as
to deposit an inconvenient amount of incrustation, an
approved boiler composition may be used.
7. The safety valves, pressure and water gauges, and
feed apparatus of boilers are always to be kept in effi-
cient working order.
8. A certificate by the Manager of Engineering De-
partment, or Chief Engineer, is to be forwarded to the
Naval Board in the first week -in January of each year,
that the boilers in the Establishment have been properly
examined and tested in accordance with these directions,
and that the particulars of the examination and tests
of the several boilers have been duly recorded in the
book kept for the purpose.
9. A book is to be kept in which the following par-
ticulars respecting the boilers are to be entered: —
Situation of boiler and purpose for which it is
used.
Description of boiler.
Where and by whom made.
Date when it was new.
Date when it was repaired, and nature .of repairs.
Working steam pressure.
Humber and description of safety valves.
Date of water test.
Date of drill test.
Pressure to which the boiler was tested.
Signature of officer who witnessed the test.
Remarks as to the condition of the boiler at that
time.
Date when the boiler was cleaned.
General remarks.


APPENDIX I.
LIST OF REGISTERED TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSES.
Postal Address: Telegraphic Address:
The Secretary, Xavy Office, Melbourne Xavy, Melbourne.
The Director of Naval Reserves and
Mobilization, Xormanhy Chambers,
430 Little Collins-street, Melbourne Navrea, Melbourne.
The Commodore Superintendent,
Naval Establishments, Sydney .. (Harden. Sydney.
The Commanding Officer, Royal Aus-
tralian Naval College, Captain's
Point, Jervis Bay, via Nowra,
N.S.W. .. .. .. Naval College, Jervis Bay.
The Commanding Officer, Flinders
Naval Depot, Crib Point, Victoria Naval Depot, Crib Point.
The Commanding Officer, H.M.A.S.
Tingira, Hose Bay, Sydney . . Tingira, Rose Bay, Sydney.
The District Naval Officer, Naval
Staff Office, Edgecliff, Sydney . . Naval Office, Edgecliff.
The District Naval Officer, Naval
Staff Office, via Port Adelaide,
Birkenhead (S.A.) .. .. Naval Office, Port Adelaide.
The District Naval Officer, Naval
Staff Office, Bay-street, Port Mel-
bourne . . . . .. Naval Office, Port Melbourne.
The District Naval Officer, Naval
Staff Office, Brisbane . . . . Naval Office, Brisbane.
The District Naval Officer, Naval
Staff Office, Fremantle .. .. Naval Office, Fremantle.
The District Naval Officer, Naval
Staff Office, Hobart . . .. Naval Office, Hobart.
The Senior Naval Officer ~ .. Britannia (all ports).
The Naval Store Officer, Garden
Island, Sydney . . . . . . Iceberg, Sydney.
The Naval Store Officer, Naval Depot,
Williamstown . . .. .. Naval Stores, Williamstown.
The Victualling Store Officer.
Royal Edward Victualling Yard,
Darling Island, Pyrmont, Sydney.. Victual, Sydney.
APPENDIX II.
INSTRUCTIONS IN REGARD TO THE ISSUE OF OFFICIAL
NAVAL RAILWAY WARRANTS.
The following detailed arrangements are to be observed as a
standing order in the issue of Railway Warrants chargeable to the
Navy Department under Peace arrangements: —
General,
1. The following Officers, or such Officers as they may depute, will
authorize the issue of railway warrants, and will be responsible that


Ship, Establishment, &c.
Officer authorized to issue Warrants.
H.M.A. Ships (including Harbor
Ships and R.A.N. College)
H.M.A. Naval Establishments, in-
cluding Commonwealth Dockyard,
Cockatoo Island, and R.A.N. Wire-
less W'orkshops.
R.A.N. Reserve
Personal Warrant Books
Commanding Officer.
Commodore Superintendent.
General Managers.
District Naval Officers and
Sub-District Naval Officers.
Officers to whom the books
are issued.
the person to whom the warrant is issued is travelling on duty, or
is entitled to the warrant under the specific instructions of the Naval
Board.
Any person deputed to sign warrants should sign “ for Command-
ing Officer,” or, as the case may be, and add, after his signature,
the rank or position held. The person deputed to sign should not
be of a lower rank than Lieutenant, except in special circumstances,
of which the Director of Navy Accounts should be advised at the
time the warrant is issued.
3. Officers authorized to issue railway warrants should note that
railway warrants are in the nature of cheques drawn on the Depart-
ment of the Navy, and that such warrants should therefore be pre-
pared and issued with every regard to the prevention of unauthorized
use, and to insuring that accounts can be readily cheeked and passed
for payment.
4. The approved form of warrant issued for use in H.M.A. Ships
and Naval Establishments must be used in all eases, except where
special forms of warrant are required.
5. Warrants must show clearly the place or ship of issue, and
also the name and rank or rating of the person travelling. When
duty warrants are issued to civilians not holding an honorary or
relative rank, the word “ civilian ” is to be entered in the place pro-
vided for rank or rating.
6. The certificate on the back of the warrant (whether chargeable
to the Department or the individual) is to be completed, in all oases,
and should clearly state the reason for issue of the warrant, such as
“ Taking up appointment to H.M.A.S. Cerberus,” &c., to enable
charges to be correctly allocated.
7. In the case of Naval Establishments or Naval Staff Offices, the
address of the Accountant, or Accounts Officer, to whom claim for
payment is to be rendered must be clearly shown on all railway
warrants issued which are chargeable to the Department.
8. Warrants chargeable against the Department should bear no
indorsement whatever on the face, except in ease of the Christmas
vacation warrants in H.M A.S. Tingira.
9. Every alteration made in a warrant should be initialed by the
person signing the warrant.
10. The conditions as to issue of railway warrants of State Rail-
ways apply also to the Commonwealth Railways.
11. Before a warrant is prepared for any journey within a State,
action should be taken to ascertain whether a single or return ticket
is issuable.
12. Facsimile signature stamps or carbon copies of signature must
not in any circumstances appear on warrants in lieu of a written
signature.
13. Warrant-books, when not in use, are to be kept under lock and
key.
Appbxdix ll.— continued.


14. Arrangements for issue of all warrants required for the for-
ward, return, or other journeys, should be made by the Office to
which the person travelling is attached, and it should not he neces-
sary, except in special circumstances, for warrants to he applied for
from other Establishments.
15. Where* warrants are, however, so issued, the footnote showing
where account is to be rendered should be altered to show the Office
to which the person is attached. Accounts should not be passed
by Certifying Officers for fares of persons attached to another Estab-
lishment for pay, &e.
Personal Warrant Books.
16. These books are issued to certain officers in Shore Establish-
ments, for their exclusive use when travelling on duty. Warrants
should not be issued from these books to any other person, except
in cases of emergency, when it is not possible to obtain the usual
duty warrant from a Staff Office, or other Naval Establishment.
Where it is necessary to issue a warrant to another person, the full
name and rank and nature of the duty' to be stated in all such oases.
17. All warrants should show in detail the reasons for travelling,
so that the charges may be correctly allocated to the proper Naval
Votes.
Special Instructions in Regard to Issue of Warrants.
18.
Journey. ■ Warrants to he Issued.
(а) Beyond the limits of one Two separate warrants, one for for-
State. ward and one for return journey.
(See below for journey's com- The original of each warrant to be
mencing in South Aus- completed and issued to the person
tralia.) travelling.
Note.— Return tickets are issued
only between Victoria and South
Australia, and warrants for such
journey's should be prepared ac-
cordingly.
(б) New South Wales The original and duplicate of warrant
(Journeys within the to be completed and issued to the
State). person travelling.
(c) South Australia. For all journeys commencing in South
Australia, a special form of war-
rant, obtainable from Navy' Office,
Melbourne, or District Naval Staff
Office, Birkenhead, is to be used.
The original and duplicate of war-
rant to be issued to the person
travelling.
The District Naval Officer, Birken-
head, will issue necessary warrants
for journeys commencing in South
Australia on receipt of advice in
writing.
For journeys to or through, but com-
mencing outside, South Australia,
the ordinary form of Naval War-
rant is to be issued.
(d) Victoria, Queensland, The original portion of the warrant
Western Australia, and only' is to be issued to the person
Tasmania. travelling. The duplicate portion
(Journeys within the State). to be cancelled and remain in
Warrant Book.
Appendix ll.— continued.


19. Passages beyond the limits of a State can be arranged on a
warrant only for a journey—
(a) between two or more Capital Cities;
( h) between two towns on the Inter-State route; or
(c) between a Capital City and town on the Inter-State route.
If portion of the journey has to be made on a line other than the
Inter-State line, a separate warrant for this portion of the journey
is required, e.g., a person travelling from Brisbane to Adelaide
requires only one warrant. A person travelling from R.A.N. College
to join H.M.A.S. Cerberus at Williamstown should be provided with
three warrants for the following portions of the journey:—Nowra
to Sydney, Sydney to Melbourne, and Melbourne to Williamstown.
Tran scon tin ental Lin e.
20. All warrants issued, in future, for journeys over the Trans-
continental Railway between Port Augusta and Kalgooriie are to
be prepared to include both sleeping berth and meal ticket, entitling
the to meals on the train. The words “ and meal ticket—
Transcontinental Railway ” should be inserted on the warrant after
the words “ sleeping berth.” These charges are payable by the
Department only in those cases where the cost of fare is paid by the
Department.
21. The present price of meal tickets is as follows:
Meal Tickets —Port Augustn-Kalgoorlie Train.
Price.
s. d.
Ist Class —Adult . • .. 13 6
2nd Class —Adult .. .. .. 11 0
Ist Class —Child over 3 years and under 14 years
of age .. . . . . 8 (i
2nd Class —Child over 3 years and under 14 years
of age .. , . . . ..76
22. No authority for concession in the cost of rail ticket will apply
in any way to the meal ticket.
23. In view of the cost of transport by rail of heavy baggage,
advantage is to be taken of forwarding same by sea between Western
Australia and the eastern States wTien opportunity offers within a
reasonable time.
24. Recovery of cost of tickets issued on railway warrants for
persons travelling on duty on the Commonwealth Transcontinental
Railway will be made as follow's:
(a) Tickets issued in Victoria, South Australia, or Western
Australia, will be claimed for by the State Railway
Department concerned, e.g., through tickets issued in
Melbourne for journey Melbourne to Fremantle will be
claimed by the Victorian Railway Department.
(ft) In cases w'here tickets are issued for a journey solely
on the Transcontinental Railway’, arrangements may
be made with the Commonwealth Railw'ays to settle
claims.
Special.
25. Members of ships’ rifle teams, not exceeding ten (10) in num-
ber, and a Captain, may be issued duty warrants to attend practice
at rifle ranges, where such ranges are not more than 30 miles dis-
tant from the port wdiere the ship is lying.
Only one fare per month for a team of ten men and a Captain is
allowed under this authority’.
Appendix ll.— continued.


26. In the case of a member of the Royal Australian Navy having
lost his railway ticket, or not having sufficient money to purchase
a ticket to enable him to rejoin his ship, a warrant, chargeable at
full rates, may’ be issued to him on personal application (under the
conditions shown in paragraph 32) by the Commanding Officer of
one of H.M.A. Ships, or by a District or Sub-District Naval Officer.
If a man is, however, in possession of his concession warrant, but
has not sufficient money, he should, similarly apply to a District
Naval Officer or Sub-District Naval Officer for sufficient money for
the purchase of his ticket at the concession rates. Officers who issue
warrants or make advances of cash in these circumstances, are to
give immediate notice thereof to the Commanding Officer of the ship
to which the man belongs, in order that the cost of the warrant or
advance in cash may be duly charged against the man’s pay in the
ledger, the amount of which is to be entered in the “ Other Charges ”
column, details being given. The Director of Navy Accounts should
also be advised of all such issues.
27. In order to guard against improper use of the arrangement
under paragraph 26, the following rules are to be made generally
known among Petty Officers and men serving on board H.M.A.
Ships:—■
(a) If a Petty Officer or Man should have also lost his liberty
ticket, he must apply for a warrant in sufficient time
to enable inquiry to be made as to the facts of his case.
(b) In no circumstances will a Petty Officer or Man be
granted a warrant or advance in cash unless he applies
personally in uniform.
{o) When an applicant cannot substantiate his statements by
the production of his liberty ticket or other document,
inquiry (by telegraph, if necessary) will be made of
his ship or depot before a warrant is issued or ad-
vance of cash made, and he will be required to bear
the expense of such inquiry.
28. Officers and Men proceeding to complete unexpired leave after
recall are entitled, under Article 21, clause 4, of Naval Financial
Regulations and Instructions, to railw-ay warrants for both the
forward and return journeys, but shall not be eligible for such
railway' warrants at Government expense nor any other expenses
in the following cases: —
(i) Where the unexpired portion of the leave subsequent to
recall will not admit of at least twenty-four hours being
spent at their destination;
(ii) Where additional leave is granted in excess of four days
over the unexpired period of leave originally granted:
and
(iii) Where Officers and Men are aware, before proceeding on
leave, that it is probable they' will be recalled.
29. Ratings desiring to avail themselves of first-class accommo-
dation are required to pay the difference between second and first
class fare. In such cases, first-class travelling warrants are not to be
issued by' ships.
30. As the Railway Department require at least twenty-one days’
notice to book passages from Western Australia to eastern States
by the Transcontinental Railway, and much difficulty has been
experienced in securing passages to enable Naval ratings to return
on expiration of their leave, the District Naval Officer at Fremantle
is, whenever possible, to be advised, twenty-one days in advance, of
date and place of expiration of any leave’granted' (19/260.)
31. When an Officer is unable to travel on the date for which a
railway ticket has been obtained, and in order that credit may be
obtained from the Railway Department, steps should be taken to
cancel Sleeping Berth tickets at least two hours before the time of
the departure of the train.
Appendix ll. — continued.


32. The tickets for the rail journey (and also Sleeping- Berth
tickets if it were not possible to have them cancelled as stated in
paragraph 31) should be forwarded immediately to the Accountant
Officer of the Establishment from which the warrants were issued,
who will make the necessary arrangements for the Department to
obtain a refund of the cost of same.
33. In the case of the Central Administration and H.M.A. Ships
unused tickets on Australian railways should lie forwarded to the
Director of Navy Accounts.
34. To prevent the possibility of overlapping payments. Certifying
Officers should not certify accounts for payment of daily rates of
travelling allowances to persons attached to another district, unless
Finance Authority has been received.
35. Should a person attached to another district require an ad-
vance on account of travelling expenses, the approval of the Officer
in Charge of the District to which the member is attached should
first be obtained. Payments made under such approval should be
immediately notified to the office to which the officer is permanently
attached, and the number of voucher and cash account in which
brought to account advised.
Appendix ll.— continued.




Consolidated Navy Orders, 1911-1920.
INDEX.
A.
Article.
Ability of ratings: provisional assessment . . . . . . . . 8:1
Absence: Leave of—(to Officers .. .. .. • • ..310
Absentees and Deserters; Arrest of .. .. ..70
Accommodation: Liberty-men on Shore . . . . • • ■ ■ 320
Accounting: Naval Store ... . . . . • • ■ ■ . . 85
Accounts: Gash and Pay . . . . . . . . . • • ■ 249
Admiralty; Payments .. .. .. ■ ■ ■■ 272
Printed Matter and Navy Orders . . . . . . . . 113
Advancement/s: After Examination .. .. .. .. .. 172
Boys to Man’s rating . . . . . . . . 180
Leading Stokers .. . . . • .. • ■ 201
Officers, Stewards, and Cooks . . .. . . .. 192
Permanent Forces (Sea-going) .. .. .. ..174
Recommendations for . . . . ■ ■ . . 338
Royal Navy Ratings lent to R.A.N. . . 175
Stokers to Acting Leading Stokers . . . . . . 200
Advances to H.M.A. Ships . . . . . . . . 250
A.1.F.: Time to count for Good Conduct Badges . . . . . . . . 7fi
Allotments: Stoppage .. .. .. .. .. • ■ 202
Stoppage by Telegram or Cable . . . . . . 203
Alterations and Additions: Defects, &c. . . . . . . . . . . 120
Ammunition: Return of expenditure .. ~ .. ..218
Small Arms . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Anniversaries: British, Dressing Ship . . .... . . . . 40
British, Salutes on . . . . . . . . . . 42
Local, Dressing Ships . . .. . . . . . . 41
Armourer Ratings: Qualifying course for higher rating .. .. .. 228
Arrival of Men-o’-war, Notification to Health Authorities . . . . 15
Attendance, Medical .. . . . . . ■ . . . ■ ■ ■ 241
Auxiliary Forces Regulations . . . . . . . . ■ ■ 22
B.
Badges, Good Conduct: Ordinary Seaman. 2nd Class . . . . 77
Pay for .. .. 264
Time in A.I.F. to count . . . • 70
Baggage, Service: Conveyance of .. .. ' . . . . • ■ 326
Bedding: Mess Linen, &c., for H.M.A. Ships .. .. .. ..94
Issue of .. .. . . . . .. . . • ■ 289
Loan, Returned to Store .. .. .. . . • • 290
Bills of Lading, Indorsement of . . . . . . . . ■ • ■ ■ 90
Boats or Ships: Damage done by . . . . . ■ . . 14
Boilers; In Naval Shore Establishments ~ .. .. ■■ •• 349
Books, Forms, &e., Return of Surplus . . . . . . ■ ■ ■ ■ 191
Boots and Shoes, New Pattern . . . . .. .. 287
Bottles, Lime Juice, Return . . ' . . . . 299
Boys, Advancement to Man’s rating .. • • 189


Article.
Broome, Difficulties at , . . . . . . . • ■ • ■ • • 64
Bunkers, Electric Lighting, &c. .. . . . . ■ • 146
Butcher, Class 111. and IT.; Promotion .. ~ .. •• 197
C.
Calls, Official . . . . . . . * . . . . • ■ . - 45
Captain (S), Duties . . . . . . . . . ■ . . 20
Cash, Pay, and Accounts .. . . .. ■ ■ 240
Cerberus, H.M.A.S., Moorings and Buoy . . . . . . . . . . 62
Ceremonial Parades, Naval .. .. ~ .. .. 47
Ceremony at Port Melbourne, Visits of . . . . . . . . 46
Certificates (Service) .. .. .. .. .. ..84
Assessment of Character and Ability . . . . 74
Non-Sub. Eatings to he Noted .. . . . . . . 80
Ratings in Civil Gaol (Disposal) ~ .. .. ..82
To accompany applications . . . . . . 112
Chaplain, duties . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Religious Service when none borne .. .. .. .. 57
Chest, Field Service .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
Chronometers or Watches, Damaged . . . . . . 61
Clerks, Temporary, Sick Leave . . . . . . . . . . 315
Civil Power, Relations with .. , . . . . . . . 68
Civilian Officers, Leave to Attend Examinations .. . .. .. 316
Sick Leave .. .. . . . . . . . . 317
Clothing, Compensation for Loss of . . . , .. . . . . 286
Gymnastic .. . . .. . , .. . . . . 295
Loan, Establishment for Submarines . . . . . . . . 294
Coal and Oil Fuel, Report of Amount on Board . . . . . . . . 140
Supply to Fleet . . .. . . . . . . 136
Inspection of . . .. . , . . .. . . 147
Coaling Returns .. .. . . .. .. .. 141
Cockatoo Island, Engineer Officers of vessels building at . . . . . . 122
Collections and Subscriptions in Government Departments . . . . 257
Combination Suits, Blue. Issue on Loan . , . . . . 280
Combination of Persons, Formation of . . , . . . . . 5
Command of T.B.Ds., Examination for . . . . . . . . . . 157
and Rank .. .. . . . . .. . . 4
Commission, Classification of Ships in . . . . . . . . . . 11
Commissions, to accompany Resignations . . . . . . . . 156
Committee, R.A.N, Welfare .. . . . . . . . . 25
Commodore Superintendent and 5.N.0.. Sydney. Appointment of . . . . 19
Communications to and from Navy Office .. ..110
Conduct Cards .. .. .. ... .. .. ..72
Contract, for Condensed Milk . . . . . . . . 298
Cook Ratings, Examination of . . . . . . . . 193
Cooks (Officers’) Advancement of .. .. .. .. .. 192
Entry of . . ' . . . . . . . . 191
Instructions and Advancement . . . . 206
Victualling . . . . .. . . , . . . 304
Cordite, in H.M.A. Ships,, Instructions regarding . . . . . . 217
Correspondence, Deserter's .. . . . . . . 7S
General Instructions for Conducting .. ..11l
D.
Damage, Caused by H.M.A. Ships or Boats . . . . . . 14
Deaths . . . . .. . . . . .. . . ..10
Accounts of Men '‘Discharged Dead" .. .. ~. 273
Half-masting of Flags . . . . . . . . . . 39
Decorations, Wearing with Number One Dress . . . . . . , . 279
Defects, Alterations and Additions, &c. . . . . . . . . . . 120
Defence Prosecutions . . . . . . . . . . 73
Deferred Pay. Payment of .. .. , .. .. .. 251
Demands for Stores . . . . .... . . . . 86
Index — continued.


Article,
Dental, Instructions . . . . . . . , . . . . . . 235
Treatment at Hobart . . . . . . . . . . 246
Treatment of Persons Lent from R.N. .. .. .. .. 247
Deserters, Accounts of .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 273
Adjustment of Accounts . . . . . . 274
Arrest of . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Correspondence for , . . , . . .. . . . , 78
Pay Documents of . . . . . . . . . . 205
Warrants for Arrest . . . . . . . . ■. . . . 71
Detention Quarters, Sydney . . . . . . .. . . 69
Director of Naval Reserves and Mobilisation . . . . . . 33
Discharge, from the Service .. .. .. .. .. 182
Discipline, Application to R.A.N. of N.l), Act . . . . 65
Ordinary Seaman, 2nd Class . . . . . . . . 190
Senior Officer at Port Phillip . . . . . 67
Distances, Measured, on the Australian Coast .. .. .. 63
District Naval Officers, Acting as S.N.Os. .. .. .. 34
Borne on Ship’s Books . . . . 34
Functions of . . . . . . . . 33
Divine Service .. . . . . . . . . . . 55
Divisions, Port . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Docking at Williamstown . . . . . . . . 121
Documents, Important, sending through post . . .. .. .. 109
Drafting of Ratings . . . . . . . . 179
Drawings for H.M.A. Ships . . . . . . . . . . 28
Dress for Officers, attending Balls .. .. .. ~ . . 276
Dressing Ship, on Anniversary Day, British . . . . .. 40
Local . . . . 41
E.
Educational Tests . . . . . . .. . . . , . . 108,
Electoral Act, Commonwealth Application to R.A.N. . . . . .. 344
Electric Lighting, in Bunkers .. . . .. . . , . 146
Electrical Artificer, 4th Class, Acting, Examination for .. .. 203
Employment, Ex-service, Eatings in 'Naval Establishments . . 32
Returned Soldiers and Sailors . . . . . . 31
Engine-room, Artificers, Examination for Promotion . . . . . . 202
Ratings, Instruction . . . . . . . . 187
Registers, Transmission of .. .. .. ..114
Engineer-Lieutenant-Conimander, Examination for . . . . , . 160
Entry, And Engagement in R.A.N. .. ~ .. ..170
And Promotion of Officers . . , . . . . . 150
In R.A.N.,i Return of References . . . . 176
Officers, Stewards, and Cooks . . . . . . . . . . 191
Royal Navy Pensioners or Reserve Ratings .. .. .. 184
Establishments, Naval Shore, Boilers in .. .. . . . . 349
Examinations, Advancement after .. .. .. .. .. 172
By Engineer-Commander (S), H.M.A.S. Platypus .. .. 204
Cook Ratings . . . . . . .. . . 193
For Acting Electrical Artificer, 4th Class . . . . 203
For Command of T.B.D. . , . . 157
For Leading Seaman . . .. . . . . . . 194
Foreign Languages and Naval History . . . . 158
Leading Seaman for Petty Officer . . . . ■ ■ 199
Leave to Civilian Officers to Attend . . ■ • 310
Medical, Prior to Ee-enrolment .. .. - • 103
Victualling Eatings . . . . .. ■ ■ • • 196
Expenditure, Authorities for . . . . . . . . 275
Economy in ~ . . . . ... . ■ .. 97
Explosives, Stations where stored .. .. • • • • ■ • 220
Index— continued.


r.
. ,IIV If’.
Field Service Chest .. . . . . .. • • • ■ ■ ■ 243
Fire in Motor Boats, Prevention . . . . . . . . . ■ 124
Flag/s Flown by H.M.A. Ships .. .. .. .. .. ..36
Flown by Naval Establishments and Attached Boats . . .. 37
Half-masting on Deaths . . .. . . .. . . 39
Lending of . . .. .. . . .. .. 98
Navy Board .. . . . . . . . . .. 35
Saluting .. .. .. .. . . .. 38
Foreign Men-of-War, Salutes for . . .. . . . . .. 43
Forms, Books, &c., Return of Surplus *. .. .. .. ■. 101
Fuel, Coal and Oil,, Supply to Fleet . . .. . . . . . ■ 136
Discharging Oil into a Harbor .. .. .. .. . . 145
Necessity for Economy of Consumption . . . . . . . . 135
G.
Gaol, Civil, Service Certificates of Eatings in . . . . . . 82
Garden Island, Service for Protestants at .. . . ■ ■ 58
General Mess Rate, and Fixed Issuing Prices .. . . . . • ■ 309
Glasses, Supply for Officers and Men .. . . . . . . 248
Good Conduct Badges, Ord. Smn. 2 el., . . . . . . • . 77
Time in A.I.F. to Count . . . . . . . • 76
Government Departments, Subscriptions and Collections .. .. . . 257
Governor-General, Playing of National Anthem . . . . . . . . 48
Reception and Departure of .. .. .. . . 49
Guards of Honour, Naval . . . . . . ■ . • . 44
Gunnery, Gun Trials, Procedure . . . . . . .. • • 226
„ „ Reports of .. .. .. . . . . 227
History Sheets .. .... .. .. 79
. Lewis Guns, Establishment . . . . . . . . . • 223
Maxim Guns,. Establishment .. . . . . . . . ■ 224
Warlike Stores and Guns, Care of .. .. .. .. 216
Gymnastic Clothing . . . . . , . . . . . . . . 295
Gymnasium Shoes . . . . ... . . . . . . .. 296
H.
Health Authorities. Arrival of H.M.A. Ships . . . . . . 15
History, Naval, Examinations in . . . . . . • • • • 158
Sheets, Gunnery and Torpedo . . . . . . . . 79
Hobart. Dental Treatment at . . . . . . . . . ■ 246
Holidays, Public .. . . . , .. . . .. . . 347
Hospitals, Deductions of Pay . , .. . . . . . . • • 242
Pay Documents of Men in . . . . . . . . 265
Ratings Left, on Ship Sailing .. . . .. .. 240
Royal Prince Alfred, Sydney .. . . . . .. . . 244
Hydrographical Department, of the R.A.N. . . . . . . 60
I.
Information, Communicating to Press . . . . . . , . . . 6
Income Tax, Commonwealth . , .. . . . . . . . . 252
Victoria . . . . . . .. . . . . .. 253
Inspection, Coal .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 147
K.
King's Regulations,, Application to R.A.N. . . . . . . 66
Kit, Retention on Discharge .. .. ~ .. .. . . 285
I nt> ex — continued.


L.
Article.
Languages, Foreign, Examination in . . . . . . . . 158
Launceston, Passenger Tax . . . . . . . . . . .. 324
Leading Seaman, Examination for .. . . .. . . . . 194
Examination for Petty Officer . . . . . . 199
Leading Stokers, Advancement of . . . . . . . . 201
Leave, Accommodation of Liberty lien on Shore .. . . 329
Accumulated, on Transfer to E.A.N.E. Sta;T .. . . .. 330
Civilian Officers Attending Examinations , . , . . . . . 310
Foreign Service, to E.N. Eatings ~ , . . . . . . . 312
Officers . . .. . . . . . . . . 310
Officers and Men Lent .. . . . . . . . . . . 311
On Discharge to Shore . . . . .. . . . . . . 313
Railway Travelling .. .. . . .. . . .. 328
Sick, Permanent Civilian Officers .. . , . . . . 317
Sick, Temporary Clerks .. .. . . . . . . 315
Steam-ship Concession Rates . . .. .. .. . . 323
Travelling Expenses on Recall , . . . . . . . . . 314
Letter Bills from H.M.A. Ships .. . . .. 108
Letters, Re-direction of .. .. .. .. .. . . 108
Lewis Guns, Establishment .. . . . . . . . . 223
Lime Juice Bottles, Return ... . . . . .. . . 299
Log, Transmission of .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
Long Service Pensions, Applications for . . .. , . .. .. 258
Lubricating Oils . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 142
Lubrication, Stern Tubes of T.B.Ds. .. .. . . . . . . 143
M.
Magazine Temperatures .. .. .. .. .. .. 222
Mail Notices, Daily .. .. ' .. .. .. .. .. 107
Mails .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 105
Marriage, Officers .. .. .. . . .. .. ..17
Mate, Mate (W/T), Mate (E), Promotion to .. .. .. 163
Maxim Guns, Establishment .. .. . . . . . . . . 224
Medal/s, Pay for Long Service and Good Conduct .. .. .. 264
Royal Humane Society’s (Australasian; .. .. .. 340
Wearing with No. 1 Dress ~ .. . . .. .. 279
Medical, Attendance .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 241
History Sheets .. .. .. .. ~ .. 245
Instructions .. .. . . .. .. . . . . 235
Officers, Provisional Examination for Promotion . . .. 161
Examination Prior to Re-enrolment . . . , . . 183"
Examination for Service in Tropics . . . . . , . . 237
Surveys, Disposal of Unserviceable Cases . . . . . . 23!)
Surveys, Recommendations for Compensation . , . . .. 238
Melbourne, Port, Visits of Ceremony at .. ~ .. 46
Merchant Ships, Passage in .. .. .. ~ .. .. 327
Mess, Linen, Bedding, &c., for H.M.A. Ships , . . . . . 94
Utensils, Seamen’s .. .. ~ .. .. .. 302
Traps, Warrant Officers .. .. . . .. ~ ~ 303
Milk, Condensed, Contract for .. .. .. .. .. 298
Moneys or Stores, Misappropriation .. .. ~ 89
Motor Boats, Care of Engines, &c. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Prevention of Fire .. . .. .. .. 124
Movements of Ships, Reports of .. .. .. 3
Museum, Australian National War ~ .. . .. .. 345
N.
National Anthem, Playing for Governor-General, &c. .. .. 48
Naval Board, Flag and Status .. .. .. .. .. 35
Powers and Functions . . . . .. .. . . 1
Procedure when Interviewing Members .. .. .. 8
C. 18668.—7
Index— continued.


Article
Naval Establishments, Employment of Ex-Service Eatings . . . . 32
Flags to be Flown . . . . . . 37
Naval Forces, Ceremonial Parades . . . . • . . . 47
Orders Affecting . . . . ~t
Naval Guards of Honour .. . . . . . ■ 44
Naval Station of the Commonwealth, Limits . . . . . . . . 2
Navigation, Qualification in—Warrant Officers . . . . . . . . 104
Navy Office, Communications to and from . . . . . . 110
Navy Orders and Admiralty Printed Matter . . ■■ •• 113
Non-substantive Hating, Notation on Service Certificate . . . . 80
O.
Officer/s Dress for Attending Official Balls .. .. .. .. 276
Entered from Active List,, R.N. .. .. .. .. ..151
Entry and Promotion .. . . .. . . . . . . 150
For Submarine Service . . . . .... . . 155
Instructions in United Kingdom . . . . . . . . 150
Leave of Absence .. .. .. .. .. ..310
Lent from Koval Navy . . . . . . , . 152
Marriage . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Medical, Examination for Promotion . . . . . . . . 101
Procedure when Interviewing Members of the Naval Board . . 8
i’.N.K. (Imperial) Training .. .. .. .. .. 162
Temporary, Rank and Demobilization . . . . . . . . 150
Travelling Overseas on Duty . . . . . . . . 325
Warrant, Qualification in Navigation . . . . . . . . 164
Officers’ Uniform (see under Uniform).
Official Calls . . . . . . . . ’ . . . . . . 45
Oil Fuel, Discharge into Harbor . . . . . . 145
Not to be Supplied to Ships without Board Approval . . .. 149
Receipt and Issue by Oil Lighters . . . . . . . . 130
Report of Amount on Board . . . . . . . . . . 140
Suppliod to Ships, Method of Ascertaining Quantity of . . 138, 148
Supply to H.M.A. Ships from Fleet Oilers, Procedure to be followed 137
Supply to Fleet . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
Oil Fuel Tanks, Choking of Strainers, Precautions Against . . . . 144
Lighters, Reports of Receipts and Deliveries of Oil Fuel . . .. 148
Oils, Lubricating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Oilskin Suits, Sea-boots, and Watch-coats . . . . . . . 292
Supply for Use in Oil Fuel Tanks .. .. .. 291
Orders Affecting Naval Forces . . . . . . . . . . .. 7
Ordinary Seaman, 2nd Class, Assessment of Character and Ability . . 75
Disciplinary Regulations . , . . 190
G-ood Conduct Badges . . . . .. 77
Ordnance, Artificers, Qualifying Course for Higher Rating . . .. 228
Store Accounts, forwarding to Naty Office . . .. 100
Stores Expenditure . . . . . , .. . , . . 221
Stores, Transfer, from Ship to Ship . . . . . . .. 102
P.
Packages, Receipts for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 90
Return of Empties .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
Supplied with Victualling Stores . . . . . . ~ 307
Parades, Ceremonial,, by Naval Forces . . . . . , . . .. 47
Paravanes, Annual Analysis of Practices , . . . . . ~ 219
Passages, in Merchant Ships .. .. .. .. .. .. 327
Wives, &c., of Officers Lent . . . . . . . . . ■ 318
I ndex — co nlinued.


Article.
Pay, Cash and Pay Accounts . . .. . . . . .. . . 249
Deductions for Periods in Hospital . . . . . . . . 242
Deferred, Payment of . . . . . . . . . . 251
Documents of Deserters and Men Left in Hospital . . . . 2(io
Documents of Persons Proceeding to I'nited Kingdom . . . . 270
For Long (service, and (4. C. Medal, or Badge . . . . 204
Increased . . . . . . . . . . • • 171
Increase after 3 and (1 Years’ Man’s Time . . . . . . . . 200
Increments (Consolidated) . . , . . . . . . . 207
Increments (Sea-going) .. .. .. .. .. .. 208
Paying Off, Stores . . . . . . . . . . 9(5
Payments. Admiralty . . . . . . . . 272
To Wives, llelatives. or Agents . . . . . . . . 254
Pension, Royal Fleet Reserve Age . . . . . . 260
Long Service, Application for . . . . . . . . 258
lle-engagement of R.N Ratings to Complete Time , . 181
Or Retired Pay to Officers Retiring from the HA. . . 259
Pensioners, R.N., Payment when called up for Medical Re-survey . . 261
Percentage, Charge on Stores, &c., Issued from H.M.A. Ships or Establish-
ments . • • • •• • ■ . . .. . . 91
Personnel, Encouragement to Pass for Higher Ratings .. .. .. 10
Persons. Formation or Combination of
Petty Officer, Examination of Leading Seaman for , . . . . . 199
Photographing, of H.M.A. Ships . . . . , . 18
Physical Training Instructors . . . . . . 195
Plain Clothes, Wearing by Petty Officers and Men . . . . . . 283
Platypus, H.M.A.S., Examinations by Kngineer-Cornmr. (S.) .. .. 204
Port Divisions . . . . . . . . 24
Port Jackson, Pollution of, by H.M.A. Ships . . . . . . .. 21
Port Phillip, Senior Officer for Disciplinary purposes . . . . 67
Post, Important Documents sent through . . . . . . 109
Press, Communicating (Naval Information to . . . . . . . . 6
Prosecutions, Defence . . . . . . . , . , . . 73
Protestants, Service for, at Garden Island . . , . . . 58
Provisions, Purchase of and Accounting for . . . . . . ' . . 207
Fixed Issuing Prices . . . . . . . . . . 309
Instructions as to purchase . . . , . . . . . . 306
of Surveys on , . . . . . ... . . 301
Condemnation of Fresh . . . . . . . . . . 300
Purchase of Naval Stores .. .. .. ~ .. 87
Promotion and Entry of Officers . . . . . . . . . , 150
Butcher Class 2 & 3 . . . . . . . . . . 197
Examination of Engine-room Artificers for . , . . 202
Mate, Mate (W/T) and Mate (E), R.A.N .. 163
Recommendations for .. . . . . . . . . . . 173
"Whilst on Loan from Royal Navy .. .. .. ..15.3
Public Holidays ~ .. . . . . . , . , . . 347
Q.
Quarantine Regulations, Australian Ports . . . . , . . . 23(5
R.
Railway/s, Instructions re Issue of Warrants . . . . . . App. 11.
Men Returning from Leave . . . . ■ ■ 328
R.A.N., Advancement of R.N. Ratings Lent . . . . • • . . 175
Application of Commonwealth Electoral Act , . .. . ■ 344
Application of K.R. & A.T. .. .. .. ■■ ..66
Application of Naval Discipline Act . . . . ■ . 65
Candidates for, Return of Personal References .. ■. .. 176
I n hex — continued.


Article.
R.A.N. — continued.
Entry and Engagement . . .. .. .. .. 170
Recruiting for .. .. . . .. • .. ~ 29
Statement of Services in .. .. .. .. 81
Superintendent of Training . . .. .. . . 20
Termination of Engagement of Ratings Lent .. . . .. 271
Transfer from Royal Navy ... .. . . . . .. 177
Rank and Command ■ .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 4
Rating/s, Drafting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 179
Encouragement to Pass for Higher .. .. .. .. 10
Service Certificates to Accompany Applications .. .. 112
Transfer from Ship to Ship .. .. .. .. .. 180
Receipts for Packages, &c. .. .. .. .. .. ... 90
Recruiting for the R.A.N. .. . . .. ~ . . 29
Regulations for Auxiliary Forces .. .. .... .. 22
Religion, Notification of Change of .. .. .. .. .. 30
Religious Services when Chaplain not Borne .. .. .. .. 57
Remittances, by Officers and Men .. .. .. .. .. 255
To Meet Ships’ Accounts . . . . ~ .. 256
Reports of Movements of Ships . . .. .. . . . . .. 3"
Requests, forwarding through proper channels .. . . .. .. 9
Requisitions on the Department of Home Affiarg .. .. .. .. 341
Reserves, Visits to H.M.A, Ships .. .. .. .. .. 12
Resignations, Commissions to Accompany .. .. ' . . .. 156
Retired Pay, Royal Navy . . . , .. .. ... . . 259
Returned Sailors and Soldiers, Employment .. .. .. ~ 31
Returns, Ammunition Expended .. .. .. .. ..218
Coaling . . .. . . .. .. . . .. 141
Foreign Languages, knowledge of .. . . .. .. 336
Numbers Borne, Vacancies, &c. .. . . . . .. 337
Pensioners and Others Lent .. .. .. .. .. 333
Recommendations for Advancement . . . . .. . . 338
Recommendations for Higher Non-Sub. Rating .. . . . . 339
Royal Navy Eatings on Loan . . . . " . . . . ~ 334
Small Boats in Service . , . . . . . . , . 335
State and Condition .. .. .. .. .. .. 332
Ribbons, Hat, Free Issue of .. .. ~ ~ .. ~ 284
Royal Australian Fleet Reserve . . . . .. .. .. 205
Royal Australian Navy, Reserve Staff, Leave on Transfer to .. . . 330
Royal Fleet Reserve, Age Pension .. .. .. .. .. 260
Royal Navy, Advancement of Ratings . . .. .. .. ,175
Dental Treatment of Persons Lent .. .. . . . . 247
Enrolment of Eatings in R.F.E. .. .. .. ... 185
Foreign Service Leave to Men Lent . . . . . . 312
Leave to Persons Lent .. .. .. ~ ... 311
Officers Entered from Retired List .. .. ~ .. 151
Officers Lent fjpm .. .. .. .. .. .. 152
Passages of Wives, &c., of Officers Lent . . .. . . 318
Pensioners Called Up for Medical Re-survey .. .. 261
Pensioner or Reserve Ratings,; Entry . . .. .. 184
Promotion whilst on Loan .. .. .. .. 153
Re-engagement of—to complete time for Penqjon .. .. 181
Retired Pay,, &c., to Officers . . . . .. . . 259
Reversion before Expiration of Loan .. .. ~ 319
Seniority on Transfer from ~ .. ~ ~ 173
Termination of Engagement of Ratings Lent . . . . 177
Transfer to R.A.N., from .. .. .. .. 177
S.
(S) Captain, Duties .. ~ .. .. .. ..20
Sailing, Ratings in Hospital on .. .. .. ... 240
Salutes, on British Anniversaries .. -.. .. .. 42
To Foreign Men-o’-War . ; . .. ' ’ !! 43
Index — continued.


Article.
Saluting Flag . . . . .. . . .. 38
Salvage, Claims by H.M.A. Ships . . . . . . . . 26
Scholarship, Thomas Gerald Grice . . . . . . . . . . 342
Schoolmasters, Condition of Service, New System ~ . . , . 165
Senior Officer, D.N.0., Acting as Senior Naval Officer . . . . 23
For Discipline at Port Phillip , . . . . . 67
Serge, Diagonal, Substitution for Blue Cloth . . . . . . .. 281
Service Certificates .. ~ . . . . .. . . 84
Assessments for Character and Ability . . .. 74
Non-substantive Rating to be noted . . . . 80
Ratings Sent to Civil Gaol . . . . . . 82
To Accompany Applications . . . . . . 112
Services in R.A.N., 'Statement of . . . , . , . , 81
Ships, H.M.A.,, Claims for Salvage . . . . . . .. 26
Classification in Commission . . . . , . . . 11
Damage done by .. .. .. .. 14
Drawings for . . .. .. . . . . 28
Flags to be Flown . . . . . . . . 36
Naval Peserves, Visits of .. .. .. .. 12
Photography . . . . . . . . . . 18
Pollution of Port Jackson . . .. . , 21
Reports of Movements . . . . . . . . . . 3
Training of R.N.R. Officers, Imperial, on Board . . . . 162
Shoes and Boots, New Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
Gymnasium .. . . .. . . .. . . . . 290
Sick Leave, Permanent Civilian Officers . . . . . . . . .. 317
Temporary Clerks . . . . . . . , . . . . 315
Small Arms Ammunition . . . . . . . . . . 225
Steam-ship Concession Rates, Travelling on Duty . . . . . . 322
Travelling on Leave . . . . . . 323
Steel Work, Arrest of Corrosion . . . . . . . . . . 123
Stewards, Officers, Outfit for .. .. . . . . .. . . 282
and Cooks, Officers’, Advancement . . .. . . .. 192
Entry . . , . . . . . 191
Victualling .. . . . . . . 303
Stokers, Advancement to Leading Stoker .. . . . . . . 200
Store/s, Accounting . . .. .. .. . . . . 85
Accounts,, Forwarding to Navy Office . . . . . . . . 100
Certificates of Destruction . . . . . . , . 93
Demands . . .. . . . . . . . , 86
Dutiable, Shipment of .. .. .. .. .. 304
Misappropriation . . . . . , . . .. •89
Naval and Naval Ordnance, Transfer of ... ~ .. .. 102
Notification of Shipment . . . . .. . . 92
Percentage Charges ... . . . . . . . . 91
Procedure on Paying Off . . . . . . 96
Purchase of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 87
Return of Condemned and Empties . , . . 95
Surveys on .. .. . . . . , , ~ 88
Transfer from one Ship to another , . . . . . .. 102
Victualling, Packages Supplied with . . .. .. .. 307
Strainers of Oil Fuel Tanks, Choking . . . . . . . , . . 144
Submarine/s, Establishment of Loan Clothing .. ~ . . .. 294
Instruction in Anti-Submarine Look-out Duties . . .. 188
Selection and Training of Officers . . . . . . . . 155
Subscriptions and Collections in Government Departments .. .. 257
Suits, Blue Cloth, Substitution of Diagonal Serge . . . . . - 282
Blue, Combination, Issue on Loan . . . . . . . . . . 280
Working .. . . .. ~ . . . . . . . . 293
Surveys, Medical, Disposal of Unserviceable Cases . . .. .. 239
Recommendations for Compensation . . .. . . 238
Index — continued.


Article.
Surveys on Provisions, Reports of . . . . . . . . ■ . 301
Sydney, Admiralty House . . . . . . . . . . . • 340
Commodore Superintendent and S.N.O. .. .. .. 19
Naval Detention Quarters , , . . . . 09
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital . . . . . . . . 244
Steam Disinfector . . . . . . . . . . . . 34(J
T.
Tailor, Non-Sub-ratiug , . . . , . . . . , , . 2fi9
Telegraphic Addresses, List of Registered . . . . . . App. T.
Temperatures in Ships’ Magazines . . . , . . . . 222
Tools, &c., Supply on Loan .. . . . . . . . . . . 103
Torpedo Boat Destroyers, Examination for Command of . . . . . . 137
Lubrication of Stern Tubes . . 143
Torpedo and Gunnery History Sheets . . . . . . . . . . 79
Torpedo Firing, Annual Analysis of .. .. .. ..219
Training Service, Ratings for . . . . ... . . 18(5
Training, Superintendent of, in R.A.N. . . . . . . . . . . 207
Torpedo Stores and Naval Ordnance, Expenditure of . . . . 221
Typewriters, Supply of . . . , . . . . . . . . 99
Travelling, Expenses on Recall from Leave . . . . . . . . 314
On Duty (Ratings) .. .. ~ .. 331
Overseas, on Duty (Officers) . . . . . . . . . , 325
Railway, Return from Leave (Men) . . . . . , 328
Steam-ship Concession Rates (Duty) . . . . . . 322
Steam-ship Concession Rates ( Leave) . . . . . . 323
Warrants, Free Issue . . . , . , , , . , 320
U.
Uniform, Men , . , . . . , . , . , . . . . . 278
Officers, Use of Diagonal Serge .. .. .. ~ 277
Officers, Demands from England . . . . . . . . 288
United Kingdom, Officers Sent for Instruction . . . . . . . . 154
Pay Documents of Persons Proceeding to . . 270
y.
Victualling Arrangements .. .. .. ~ .. .. 308
General Mess Rate and Fixed Issuing Prices . . . . . . 309
Officers, Stewards, and Cooks : . . . . . .. 304
Ratings. Examinations and Instructions . . . . . . I()g
Stores, Packages Supplied with . . , , . , . . 307
W.
Warheads,; Examination of . . . , . , . , . . 220
Warlike Stores, Guns, &c., Care of . , . . . . ~ . . 216
Warrant Officers, Qualification in Navigation .. ..164
Mess Traps . . .. . . . . , . , , 303
Warrants, Arrest of Deserters . . . . ’ , , 7]
Issue of Free Travelling . . , . . . 320
Railway—lnstructions re Issue . . . . . . App. 11.
Watches, Damaged . . . , , , gj
Welfare Committee, R.A.N. —Appointment of .. . . ~ 25
Index— continued.


Articl
Western Australia,. Ranks and Ratings Proceeding to . . . . . . 32]
Williamatown, Docking at Government Dock-yard , , . . . . 12]
Wills, of Petty Officers and Men . . . . . . .. .. . . 34!
W/T, Illicit Use of . . . . . . .. . . . . 21
Y.
Year, Calculation of .. .. .. .. .. ..13
Yokohama, Coaling Arrangements for Ships Visiting . . . . 6C
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia
by Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
Index— continued.
