

CONSIDERATIONS
ON
THE IMPORTATION
OF
FOREIGN CORN;
Arising out of the Proceedings, at a Meeting of the Heritors of Fife
shire, proposing to petition the Legislature for further Restriction,
as published in the Courier Newspaper of the 10th Dec. 1813:
COMPRISING
A Review of the usual Arguments adopted by Agriculturists, in
support of this Measure;
SHEWING,
That the present high Price of every thing has been caused by the
excessive Increase of the Rent of Land, and a Circulating Taxa-
tion. That the proposed Encouragement to Agriculture, in
the Legislative Support of yet higher Prices, is delusive;
and will be wrested to the further increase of Rent,
in the same manner as have been the High Prices,
to which the Country has already submitted;
That the High Prices of Things, in no way result from Paper Currency:
Also exhibiting the true cause of the Rise in the Price of Gold and
Silver in Britain; and thereby shewing, that it is independent
of the circulation of Bank-Notes,
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR;
AND SOLD BY MESSRS. OTKIDGE & SON, 134, STRAND.
1814.


London t Printed by B. McMillan,
Bcw Street, Co/cnt Garden.


Considerations on certain Resolutions at a Meeting
of the Heritors of Fifes hire, of which General
WEMYS was President, as published in the Cou-
rier Newspaper of the 10 th December, 1813.
THESE Resolutions, comprised in fifteen
Articles, which it is proposed to examine in
the order in which they stand, are stated to
have been moved by Sir John Anstruther. After
which it appears to have been further resolved,
that they should be the foundation of a Petition
to Parliament, and a Committee appointed to
prepare such accordingly; also that they should
be communicated to the Conveners of the other
Scotch Counties, and a correspondence com-
menced with them ; and the Committee further
authorised to communicate with the Commit-
tees of the other Counties, at Edinburgh.
We may therefore view these Resolutions as
the public annunciation of the general co-ope-
ration of the wholg Landed Interests of Scot-
land to support the high price of corn; and
thereby that excessive increase of the Rent of
Land, which has been effected during the last
20 or 30 years throughout the whole kingdom.
In this view they carry with them an import-
B


ance calling on the commercial, manufactur-
ing, and monied classes, to give a timely atten-
tion to them.
Resolution. —That the measure pro-
posed to Parliament at the conclusion of the
last Session, for the amendment of the Corn
Laws, is of vital importance to the State, and
has equally for its object the ultimate advan-
tage of the commercial, manufacturing, and
agricultural interests.”
On this Resolution, it may be sufficient to
acknowledge the fact of the importance of the
measure to which it alludes: referring to our
further examination of it, how far this import-
ance may not rather rest on its rejection, than
pn its adoption by the Legislature. And this,
in fact, not less essentially to the agricultural
interests, than to the commercial and manufac-
turing.
2nd Resolution. —That it is of the first
consequence to every country, to be indepen-
dent of other countries in its supply of food.”
That the proposition contained in this Reso-
lution is highly desirable, must be at once ad-
mitted. One fact, however, occurs to oppose
the strong statement of its being of the first
consequence. Holland, in the zenith of its com-
mercial prosperity, imported nearly its whole


consumption of corn, without the result of any
inconvenience.
3rd Resolution.— e( That it appears from re-
turns presented to the House of Commons, that
during the last 21 years, upwards of 58 mil-
lions sterling has been paid to foreign countries
for corn imported into Great Britain.”
The advocates of any measure are apt to en-
deavour to uphold it by extreme cases. This
high sum of 58 millions, averages less than
three millions a year for the 21 years; an amount
which those acquainted with the magnitude of
our manufactured exports, may be induced to
view of less importance than conceived by the
movers of these Resolutions ; and to question,
how far the commercial returns obtained by the
appropriation of the portion of our national ca-
pital and labour, enabling us to make these
manufactured exports, may not merely have
countervailed, but further, have greatly pre-
ponderated over the profit that could have been
derived from their direct application to agri-
culture.
It is too to be recollected, that during all
this period we have had to support a state of
warfare, great beyond all former example.
Consideration must be made for the unavoid-
able waste in providing for such numerous Ar-
mies and Navies as we have maintained, and the
b 2


increased consumption of the soldiers and sai-
lors composing them, with that of their fami-
lies; and of all the artificers and others in the
pay of the public, beyond what it would have
been in their natural and individual callings.
The excess occasioned by these circumstances
has probably made up no inconsiderable part
of these three millions of annual average im-
portation, With the restoration of peace, this
increased demand will cease,
4th Resolution. — <c That the balance against
this country for an article of the first neces-
sity, must have diminished the capital which
would have been invested in the improvement
of land, lessened the internal resources of
the country, and tended to the increased culti-
vation of Foreign States, at a loss of similar
extent of cultivation and improvement to Great
Britain. ”
With respect to the first part of this Reso-
lution, as relating to diminished capital by this
importation, it must suggest itself, that the
capital and industry of the country would not
have flowed preferably into the channels of com-
merce and manufacture, if they had not there
found a more beneficial employment: and that
the interference therefore of the Legislature to
divert them from those channels selected by the
always better judgment of individual practical


experience, is to be deprecated. The return
made to this country for the exports of our ma-
nufactures and colonial produce ( for such colo-
nial produce is always purchased by the previ-
ous export of other manufactures) must exceed
that profit that would have arisen from the di-
rect application of the same capital and labour
to agriculture. And consequently the balance,
instead of being against, has been more favour-
able to us; instead of having diminished, has
increased the general wealth of the country,
and accordingly that capital available for land.
It must be seen to have augmented, not lessened
the internal resources of this country. That
our importations tend to increase the cultiva-
tion of foreign countries, so far as stated to be
at the expense or loss of a similar extent of
cultivation and improvement to Great Britain,
must therefore also be seen to be further erro-
neous.
In our intercourse with Foreign Nations, the
benefit they may derive from it should be the
source of congratulation to ourselves. And
this not only in a spirit of philanthropy, but
equally so in the true knowledge of our own inte-
rests ; for it must be apparent, that the greater
and richer they are, so also must be more ad-
vantageous to ourselves our communications
with them.
If we desire Foreigners to purchase our raa


nufactures, in what are they to make us a re-
turn? We do not wish it in other manufac-
tures. In what then must we receive it, if
not in the gruff produce of their soil ? They
have not all mines of gold and silver, any
more than ourselves. If we close our markets
against all other commodities excepting gold
'and silver only, those who have them not, must
cease to take our manufactures, having nothing
to give us in exchange, which we will accept;
or they must seek to obtain gold and silver by
their own trade with those countries which pro-
duce them. If the countries producing gold
and silver ; if South America requires not the
corn of Germany, Germany then, to obtain its
gold and silver, must establish within itself
some.manufactures which South America may
want, with which to make the exchange. In
doing so, these manufactures must come in
competition with, and in as much as they suc-
ceed, exclude from the markets of South Ame-
rica those goods now supplied by England,
either directly or indirectly through Spain and
Portugal.
The dark daysmre passed, which had ima-
gined gold and silver to mark the advantage or
disadvantage of our foreign interchanges.
Gold and silver are now known to be mere arti-
cles of merchandise, which, like other mer-
chandise, come and go according to the de


mand for them, in the natural flow of com-
merce. The blind conception,, that if in a
trade between two countries, it was beneficial
to one, it must therefore be in as much disad-
vantageous to the other, no longer misleads;
at least in Britain. We have become sensible
that all commerce, although perhaps in some
instances more beneficial to one country than to
the other, is, however, necessarily beneficial
to both. Climate, soil, a more perfect skill,
or other accidental circumstances, may give to
one country advantages which another cannot,
or does not possess. Their exchanges must
consequently be mutually beneficial. If two
countries can exchange cne with the other any
articles, whether of manufacture, or raw ma-
terial, or sustenance (which last is in fact the
greatest of all raw materials, and together with
all other raw material, only a lower order or
primary kind of manufacture, or product of
labour applied to the soil), for other articles,
whether of manufacture, raw material or sus-
tenance, which have relatively been produced
with less labor and capital, the mutual advan-
tage must be evident. If England exchanges
with Germany a piece of cotton cloth, which has
been made with the labor of ten persons, for ten
days, (allowance being made for the value of
the cotton wool imported), for a quantity of
iron or wheat, which could not have been pro


diiced in England, but with the labor of dou-
ble the number of persons for the same time, it
must be evident, that England is more advan-
taged than she could have been in the applica-
tion of her own double labor to its production:
and consequently, that English capital must be
augmented by the exchange, beyond what it
would have been by the direct application of its
labor and means to the production of the iron
of wheats Also, if on the other hand, Ger-
many could produce with the ten days’ labor
of the ten persons, the iron or wheat she ex-
changes for the piece of cotton cloth, which,
although made in England with the ten days’
labour of the ten persons, could not have been
made in Germany but with double the labor
and capital, or at double the price of them,
Germany too is in this manner advantaged.
Also, if one of two countries, equally capable
of producing the same things by means of the
same labor and capital,, should however be able
tor direct that labor and capital to more ad-
vantageous pursuits, the advantage to that
country in so doing must be not less apparent,
although it should thereby be obliged to re-
ceive from the other country the things which
it .could otherwise have produced within itself.
Supposing England and Germany both capable
of producing the iron and wheat at the same
expanse of labor and capital, yet if England


at the same time can by superior ingenuity,
convert this labor and capital to the manufac-
ture of cotton cloth, producing a quantity of
it greatly beyond what Germany may be able
to produce by the similar application of its
labor and capital, then must both countries
still be benefited by the exchange. Germany
in this case obtaining the cotton cloth at a
cheaper rate than that at which, relatively to
the iron or wheat, it could have been made foe
in Germany; yet sufficiently above that of the
labor and capital required for its production
in England, by means of superior ingenuity, to
make the exchange also advantageous to Eng-
land. Germany obtains more cotton cloth than
it could have fabricated for itself, by means of
the same labor and capital employed in the
production of the corn or iron. England ob-
tains more corn or iron than it could have pro-
duced for itself by means of the same labor
and capital employed in the fabrication of the
cotton cloth. Exchanges of this sort constitute
the basis of commerce. Uninfluenced by duties
or customs, the money price of any commodity
always represents the just value of the labor and
capital required in its production : and it can*
not be supposed, that nations will be disposed
to continue a trade, that is not attended with
some advantage on both sides. The individual
interests of the fair trader are always identified


with those of the community to which he be-
longs. In trade we must give and take ; and if
we wish Germany or any other country to re-
ceive the products of our industry, we must
also take something in return, which Germany,
and German, or other merchants, must find an
interest in exchanging with us.
Restraint upon any other species of raw ma-
terial, is quickty understood to be destructive
of our manufactures. Ought it not also to be
perceived, that restraint upon this kind of raw
material, the sustenance of the artificer, must
be equally ruinous to his industry? Our mer-
chants must have some returns for those things
they export to foreign countries ; 6r they must
cease to export them. The ruinous effect of the
return upon us of foreign manufactures in ex-
change for our own, must be obvious. In what
then may it be proposed that this return shall
be made, according to the present extent of our
exports? It must be seen, that to oblige Ger-
many and the other nations of Europe to pay us
gold and silver only, must operate to compel im-
mediately their similar industry to the rivalry
and diminution ot our own ; thus destroying or
diminishing the home market furnished by our
manufacturing population for the products of
land, and thereby, instead of drawing capital to
our own agriculture, as assumed in this Resolu-
tion, on the contrary, by lessening the actual


encouragement of good markets, produce a re-
sult diametrical!}- opposite.
sth Resolution.— ec That theHbalance paid to
other countries in return for imported cortij
must have affected the exchange with foreign
nations, and embarrassed our commercial trans-
actions. 5 ’
The considerations offered in respect of the
preceding Resolution, comprise in substance
w hat deserves our attention in respect of the pre-
sent. It surmises, that if the capital and in-
dustry of the countries which created those
manufactures we have exported to Germany and
other countries, had,, instead, been employed
in our own agriculture, we should not then have
had occasion for that corn which we have im-
ported. But if this capital and industry had
been so employed, whence should we have pro-
duced the manufactures we have exported ? It
must be evident those manufactures would not
have been produced. This brings the question
to, which may hawe been the most advantageous
employment of this portion of the national capi-
tal and industry ? Whether employed in our
own agriculture, with a view to the export of
corn and other gruff produce of the land; or
employed in manufactures, and thereby main-
taining those numerous artificers and their fa-
milies, \vhose consumption it is that constitutes
c 2


the present heme market for this corn and other
produce of the land, and without whom, as no
such home market would exist, it could conse-
quently be Only disposed of by exportation. It
must readily occur to every Landholder, that
no exportation price he can expect, would sup-
port the present high rent of land. If it were
possible that the Landed Interests would be con-
tent to lower their rents, so as to enable the
British farmer to look to foreign markets, as in
1688 and 1700; to the similar state of the coun-
try in which years (when, if we exported some
corn, we also imported to a considerable and
perhaps greater amount of manufactured goods
from France, Holland, Germany, and other
places) it is the avowed object of these Reso-
lutions to bring us back: yet it must be seen,
that from the bulky nature of corn, it could not
hear the charge of distant Voyages, and that
therefore the export of it could not extend be-
yond the nearest foreign countries; and even
then, to be sold to a disadvantage against the
natural produce of those countries, because in
the same manner as foreign corn has to encoun-
ter the disadvantage of freight and risk in be-
ing brought to England, so British corn in this
case must be subject to the similar charge of
its transport to those countries, to be deducted
from the price that might be obtained for it.
Whereas manufactures, compressing great va-


lue in small bulk, are capable of repaying the
expense of the most distant voyages, and enable
us to extend our trade to the furthest quarters
of the world. More mature reflection should
awaken the Landed Interests to the sense, that in
proportion to the flourishing state of our ma-
nufactures, must be the best possible market,
that is, the home market for the produce of their
lands; and that in urging their rents so as to
raise the price of subsistence above that rate
which our manufacturing classes are able to pay,
according to the price foreigners are content to
pay for our manufactures, instead of making
them at home for themselves, they are destroy-
ing these classes, and with them the market
they constitute.
The question of our foreign exchange there-
fore does not rest, as implied in this Resolu-
tion, upon the effect stated to be produced by
our import of corn, but upon the balance there
may be between it, together with all our other
imports ; and the export of our manufactures,
with all our other exports, including the re-
exportation of foreign and colonial produce
necessarily first obtained from other foreign
countries and our colonies, in exchange for
other manufactures and exports.
6th Resolution. —That the only permanent
and effectual mode of reducing the price of


grain, is to bold out to the cultivator of land,
an inducement to increase cultivation.”
At the first glance of this Resolution,, it maj
seem incapable of objection. It is to be con-
sidered,, however, whether there may not be
some existing impediments, the removal of
which would act more forcibly than any fresh
inducement, and which impediments, if not pro-
perly understood, may be liable to gain strength
from the intended new inducement, so as per-
haps to more than countervail it. The exami-
nation of these points will occur in the conside-
ration of the subsequent Resolutions.
llh Resolution . —“ That the only mode of
inducing the cultivator of land to increase the
quantity of corn sown, is to secure him from
foreign competition. A competition which
withdraws capital from this country for the im-
provement of Foreign States, damps the agricul-
tural exertion of the farmer, from the uncer-
tainty in which he is placed as to the supply of
the market, and renders us dependant upon
others for an article w ith which we cannot dis-
pense.”
The first part of this Resolution, viz. “That
the only mode of inducing the cultivator of
land to increase the quantity of corn sown, is
to secure him from foreign competition,” as-
sumes that such arc the existing difficulties or


impediments, that they cannot be overcome by
any other means; and that they arc in them-
selves incapable of remedy. It seems strange,
that so comprehensive an assumption should not
have been introduced by some demonstration
or allusion to the nature of these difficulties or
impediments, which we must suppose the au-
thors of these Resolutions to have well con-
templated. Not being’ thus set forth, we are
driven to the necessity of gathering them else-
where, in the usual arguments of the other ge-
neral advocates of this measure of restriction on
the import of foreign corn. As such, they may
be stated to be, the general increase in the
price of labor and of all things, or the change
in the value of money; increased taxes; and
the increased rent of land.
In proceeding to the consideration of these
points, it must immediately occur, that the in-
creased price of labor, and generally of all
things, or change in the value of money, has
arisen out of, and been caused by the other
circumstances of increased taxes, and of the
increase of the rent of land : but as the propor-
tions relatively to each other, in which these
last have operated, and the extent in which the
taxes themselves have also been caused by the
increase of the rent of land, is not perhaps so
universally understood, it may not be misplaced
to go into some details in this inquiry.


All taxes necessarily fall in the end on rea-
lized capital. Some direct taxes, such as the
Legacy Duty and the Property Tax as regard-
ing realized property, must be seen to do so
immediately. In these, nothing more is paid
than what passes at once into the Public Trea-
sury; and they accordingly produce no other
effect than the loss to the parties paying them,
in the exact amount received by Government.
It is otherwise, however, with respect to indi-
rect taxes, such as Excise or Custom duties on
articles of general consumption, and indeed
with respect to most, if not all, methods of in-
direct taxation.
In different stages of society, the laborious
orders may earn a something more or less libe-
ral support; but emulation and competition
always prevent their obtaining beyond a fair
maintenance, according to the circumstances
of the community and their station in it. They
cannot do with less than this ; and, conse-
quently, under whatever delusive form the taxes
of the country may be made in appearance to
bear on them, these are, however, always
shifted by them from one to another, till they
at last fix on the capitalist. Nor is this gene-
ral effect confined to the lower orders: the phy-
sician, the lawyer, and other liberal profes-
sions ; the manufacturer and the trader, by re-
tail or wholesale, are all included in it. None


of these derive from their exertion and talents
more than their just remuneration. Extraor-
dinary profits occasionally flowing into anyone
brand], induce so many new adventurers to
enter into it, that it soon finds its due level;
and when overloaded, the consequent failures
deter from its pursuit, till the employment it
offers, approaches to the proportion of those it
is capable of maintaining in that sphere adapted
to the occupation. Extraordinary success in
any particular trade never lasts long; compe-
tition soon reducing its gains to a reasonable
recompense for the trouble, skill, and risk
with which it is carried on. All these classes
arc, therefore, as well as the lower orders,
equally obliged to add their taxes to the price
of their talents and industry,, or to the pro-
fits they take -on,the articles of their trade.
One. cannot, afford, more than another to pay
any new tax out of his.old gains; and concur-
rence equally.prevents, every one from making
an undue advance. Individual exceptions may
sometimes arise to these observations; but they
are merely exceptions, and not of sufficient
weight to merit attention in the general view.
Further, neither can these classes afford to
charge again the mere tax only, but are obliged
to add a profit on it similar to the profit on
their goods, on account of the additional capi-
tal it employs and risks. This being done
i>


successively by each person through whose
hands the goods pass, the ratio of the in-
creased price of them in the accumulating
progress of profit on the tax, and profit on
the previous profit on the tax,, as well as on the
goods, may be double ; and in the action and
reaction of numerous taxes of this description
on themselves and on each other, perhaps often
quadruple, and sometimes tenfold the amount
of the tax itself.
As well as absolute Excise or Custom duties
on articles of general consumption, nearly all
the rest of our taxes, perhaps with the excep-
tion of the two above named, the Legacy Tax
and the Property Tax as affecting realized ca-
pital, have only more or less this same ope-
ration, as they take effect a little nearer or a
little more remote from the original sources of
industry. The Property Tax, as affecting the
gains of trade, the tradesman’s eighteen pence
in the pound on the rent of the premises he
occupies, the farmer’s similar eighteen pence
in the pound on the rent of his farm, all li-
cences to particular trades, duties on servants
employed in trade, duties on horses, carriages,
&c. used in agriculture or trade, and even
duties or taxes on many seeming luxuries, ne-
cessary to support the appearance or comfort
of some professions and stations, are all neces-
sarily charged again in the profits of the par


ties by whom they were immediately paid., or
rather advanced only in the first instance. .
It must be seen, therefore, that part of the
price of whatever we consume is made up of
these taxes; and this even when the article
may not in itself be directly and ostensibly
taxed.
The example of the tax on leather, will per-
haps convey an adequate idea of the progress of
a tax on an article of general consumption.
Paid by the tanner, he adds the amount of the
tax to the price of the material, and takes his
profit on the whole. It consequently passes to
the leather-seller’s hands charged not only with
the tax on it paid by the tanner, but also with
the tanner’s profit on the tax. From the lea-
ther-seller it'passes to the shoemaker, further
charged with the leather-seller’s profit on the
tanner’s profit on the tax, as well as the tax it-
self. All which are again charged by the shoe-
maker to his customers, with his own further
profit on the whole. It passes indeed, through
more hands than have been enumerated, each
of which successively takes his profits. So far
as to the tax, and its immediate accumulations
in the price of our shoes. , But its effects by
no means stop here. In our climate, and ac-
cording to our usages, shoes are little less an
article of necessity than our absolute suste-
nance : they are at least in general use by the
D %


poor and laborious, as well as by the rich and
idle. The price of the laborer’s or trader’s
shoes being in this manner advanced to them,
they are obliged to advance the price of their
labor or their profits,, that they may be able to
pay it. The price of wool, therefore, as it
passes from the hands of the wool-comber, must
be advanced by him, to cover the additional
price of the shoes he has worn while preparing
it: the same to the spinner, to the weaver, and
to every other hand through which it passes,
and to the tailor till it is made into a coat, in
the price of which, the consumer necessarily
pays the additional price of the shoes of all the
persons who have been employed in every part
of its preparation. Accordingly the wearer of
the coat pays this tax on leather in the price
both of his shoes, and of his coat. Let us sup-
pose him a hatter, who again charges it in the
price of his hats. The stocking manufacturers
consequently pay it in the price of their shoes,
coats and hats; and charging it in the price of
their stockings, the linen-manufacturers pay it
in the price of their shoes, coats, hats, and
stockings; and who charging it again in the
price of their linens, it proceeds in apparently
almost endless reciprocation and
tion, yet gradually" reaching at every point to-
wards the capitalist, in whose power alone it is
to pay it without again charging it to others.


It will be understood that many traders, pro-
fessional men, and even some who live by their
absolute labor, may be, and are in general par-
tially capitalists, and according to the extent of
their capital, necessarily make good without
retribution their due proportion of the public
burdens. Gain of trade or other earnings, be-
ing properly only that excess of profit over and
above what the capital employed would have
yielded in any other way without risk or trou-
ble th the proprietor, as if laid out in land,
houses, lent on mortgage, or placed in the pub-
lic funds ; that is to say generally, what is ob-
tained over and above five per cent. No trader
with a borrowed capital, and having the inte-
rest of it to pay, can by competition oblige
the trader with a capital of his own to reduce
his gains. The latter therefore, is able to
pay a proportion of his taxes without retribu-
tion or charging them again on his profits, ac-
cording to his capital; and will be found to
do so.
The result of our numerous duties on articles
of general consumption and other indirect taxes,
all acting on each other in accumulative colli-
sion, will be more readily conceived than cal-
culated. This effect, from the duties on coals,
soap, candles, salt, and on other like articles
of the first necessity, must be powerfully felt.
With this view before us, of the manner and


extent in which this method of taxation ope-
rates, in shewing itself as a part of, and en-
hancing the general prices of ail things, not
merely to the amount of the tax, but also in
such great excess, we will now proceed to the
consideration of the yet more extensive action
of every increase of the rent of land.
It must be immediately apparent, that there
can be no difference either to the individual
farmer, or to the community at large, between
a general and excessive land-tax levied by the
government, or an equally excessive increase of
rent by the land-owner ; that one equally with
the other obliges the farmer to sell his produce
at an increased price, thereby raising the price
of the first necessaries of life. And it must be
in the same manner evident, that with the in-
creased price of subsistence, the price of labor
must advance: nor is it material to the present
question, whether this may be effected by a
direct increase of wages, or eked out by parish
allowances. It is, indeed, in the latter case
more unjust, because calling on those, in the
form of a parish rate, to make up the wages
and maintenance of that labor in which they
have had no profit. It is also further unjust,
because parish rates falling largely on houses in
towns, the proprietors of winds may have had
no part in that general increase of the rent of
land, which by increasing the price of subsist


ence has created the necessity of these heavy
parish rates; so that their parish rates are in
as much, virtually only an indirect mode of
taxation on them by the proprietors of agricul-
tural land.
The nature of the accumulative progress on an
article of general consumption, has been shewn
in the instance of the tax on leather, in the
profit on the tax, as well as on the profit of the
leather itself, taken in each successive hand.
If such is the operation of a tax only once paid,
how much greater must not be the effect of an
increased price of labor, caused by the in-
creased price of subsistence arising out of the
increased rent of land, not only paid by the
tanner in the increase of wages to his workmen,
but also by the leather-seller in the increase of
wages to his workmen, and so on progressively
through every stage not only with accumulation
on the previous charge; but further as a new
charge in this increase of wages in each succes-
sive hand, and all advancing in a similar series
of accumulation ?
Contemplating the increase which has been
made in the rent of land, together with the
manner in which so great a proportion of our
public burdens are levied, both in the same
manner reaching us in the form of increased
prices, we must be sensible of the sufficiency
of such powerful causes to have wrought the


change in the value of money complained of,
without allowing ourselves to be hoodwinked
by the sophistry of any theoretic assumptions.
Viewing that compound increase these co-ope-
rating causes acquire in their course, it must
be matter of surprise only, that their effect has
not been greater. Some distinct observations on
money and paper currency given in the sequel,
it is conceived, will satisfactorily demonstrate
the fallacy of the supposition very prevalent
among the lower classes, and even entertained
by many well informed men, that the present
high prices of things have been the consequence
of our too extended paper currency, or, as it is
sometimes expressed, the too great abundance
of money.
At present we will continue our consideration
of the two self-evident sources of the evil. It
will not be denied, that in the course of these
last 30 or 40 years, or since 1765, a period that
will be found referred to in an after Resolution,
that the average increase of the rent of land, in
one situation w ith another throughout the king-
dom, has been after a rate of 20 shillings an
acre, and upwards : that is to say, that lands
which used to let at 10 or 15 shillings an acre,
now let at 30 and 35 shillings, and so on pro-
gressively or with a greater increase. Let us
suppose a farm of 400 acres, and Ihe mere in-
crease of rent accordingly 400 Z. The taxes, in


elusive of the farmer’s property-tax, and of
every other tax payable by the farmer on a farm
of this extent, taken in the same manner in one
situation with another throughout the country,
the land at a medium quality, or about 40 shil-
lings the acre, will be found to average some-
where between 80/, and 100/.; probably about
90/.: but not to under-rate, we will assume
them at 100/.
Thus it appears, that the mere increase of the
rent of land is four-fold the amount of taxes.
But it is to be recollected this is the whole
amount of taxes, which we are comparing not
with the whole amount of rent, but only with
the increase of it since the period referred to :
whereas such part of these taxes as existed pre-
viously, ought to be deducted. However, we
will pass by this consideration. Assuming then
the increase of rent to have been as 400/. to
taxes 100/., or as four to one, it must be seen
that whatever the increased price the farmer
has been obliged to demand for his corn, cattle,
and the other produce of his laud, it has been
proportionately four parts by increase of rent,
and one part by taxes: that is to say, that if
the price of the bushel of. wheat in 1765 was
ss. and supposing it now 12s. 6ji, being an in-
crease of 7s. 6d. then four parts in five of this
increase of price, or 65., have been occasioned by
the increase of rent; and is. 6<7. only by taxes.
E


Or in such proportion of whatever may have
been the increase of the price of the bushel of
wheat; and in the same manner of butcher’s
meat, and all other articles of subsistence, or
other products of land. But this is not all.
The present price of the loaf of bread is noto-
riously three-fold what it was about 1765.
Many other things, however, not having risen
in equal proportion to bread, we will assume
as a general average increase of prices, in-
cluding that of labor, that they have doubled.
Accordingly the public expenses in carrying on
the war, and therefore the taxes necessary to meet
them, have been also double what they other-
wise would have been; or one half of them
would have sufficed. Whatever may be the ratio
nfthis excess of our taxes, it must be chargeable
to the causes that have produced it; that is, to
the increase of rent and to taxes, each in the
due proportion in which they have operated.
For the reaction of taxes on themselves is to be
here considered: all additional taxes on con-
sumption necessarily advancing directly the
price of the articles on which they are levied,
and further, as has been explained, indirectly
of every thing else, rendering thereby the na-
tional expenses greater, and consequently indu-
cing the necessity of still greater taxation. It
has been shewn that where the increase of rent;
has been 4007., the amount of taxes does not ex


ceed 100/., or that they are in proportion to
their joint amount, the former four parts in
five to the latter one part in five. Taking
them in this proportion, the account will stand,
that the taxes being 100 Z. the half of which is
50Z. four parts in five of this last being 40Z. is to
be deducted from the total taxes 100 Z. reducing
them to 60Z. And the same being added to the
increase of rent, as caused by, and therefore
virtually a part of it, makes it amount to 4401.
Giving a proportion of 440 Z. increase of rent and
only 60Z. taxes: or as nearly seven parts in eight
to the account of increase of rent, and one part
in eight to that of taxes. Consequently the in-
crease in the prices of ail things to which we have
been subjected, or the change which has been
made in the value of money, has been caused in
the proportion of nearly seven parts in eight by
the increase of the rent of land, and only one
eighth part by national taxation. Taking the
loaf of bread at fourpence in 1765, and at the
present day at one shilling, this increase of price
has been caused seven pence by the increase of
rent of land, and one penny by taxes.
Loaf of bread in 1765, ......... £0 0 4
Increase of rent of land, 0 0 7
Taxes, 0 0 I
Present price of the loaf of bread, £0 1 0
E %


It will be said that the increase of rent has
been gradual, and that the above calculation
rests wholly on its present height. But so also
have the taxes been gradual, which are equally
taken at their present height. Besides, it is the
whole amount of taxes against the mere increase
of rent. It will also be said that we have
many other taxes which, not falling on agricul-
ture or cn immediate subsistence, therefore do
not affect the price of labor, or only in a very
slight degree, but which add none the less very
considerably to the price of the articles on
which they are laid. Articles of this sort, how-
ever, constitute a very small comparative part
of the public expenses of the country. Many
other objections will doubtless be made to this
kind of calculation; and it must be liable to
some deductions. It is to be observed, however,
that it is also open to some considerable addi-
tions. It must bt seen that the average increase
of rent has been under-rated, and that it ought
more properly to have been taken at twenty-
five shillings an acre, and upwards, instead of
at twenty shillings; also, that the comparative
taxes have been over-rated, when stated at 100 k
They are probably a good deal over-rated, be-
yond what is faithfully paid.
Whatever may be the extent and relative
proportion in which the change in the value of
money has arisen from these two great causes, the


increase of rent and taxes, we may consider it
as an occurrence that will participate in any mi-
tigation they may themselves be susceptible of.
Viewing the nature of our landed tenures, it
must be perceived that any hope of relief by a
relaxation and transfer to other property, of the
taxes on agriculture, would be only converted
by the Landed Proprietors to their own partial
advantage; availing themselves of the intended
relief to the farmer, to load him immediately
with so much additional rent. Reasoning, that
if he had previously been able to pay these taxes
together with his rent, so now being relieved
from them, he must be able to pay an equiva-
lent increase of rent. The result therefore
would not be to enable the farmer to sell his
grain and other produce at a reduced price,
but that the community at large would still con-
tinue to be charged the same price for its sub-
sistence; and at the same time become further
subjected to another tax, in order to replace the
present taxes on agriculture thus repealed with
a view to its relief, but perverted by the land-
owner to the further increase of his rent. Nor,
does this reasoning apply merely to the direct
taxes on agriculture, but also to all those other
indirect taxes by which it may be affected, as
contributing with the increased rent of land to
raise the price of labor. If it were yet farther
possible by the repeal of any of these taxes.


to lower again the price of labor even to its
former standard; it would only be an advantage
seized upon by the land-owners, arguing as in
the case of the repeal of the direct taxes, that
if thef farmer had before been able to pay his
rent together with the higher rate of labor,
now obtaining labor at a cheaper rate, he must
be able to bear the difference in addition to his
rent. But it must be seen that any reduction
of the price of labor, is incompatible with a
high rent, and consequent price of subsistence*
If the above suggestions be just, it must fol-
low, that in the same manner as any direct tax
on land or agriculture is openly a hindrance or
deduction from that rent which would otherwise
he exacted by the land-owner : so only more
covertly do all our other taxes terminate in the
same effect. Those persons therefore, if any
there are, who look forward to the ultimate
liquidation of the national debt and their release
from the taxes it compels, would yet be disap-
pointed in any relief they should teach them-
selves to expect in consequence : for the result
would he only, that the land-owners by means
of their increasing rents, would further make
the other classes of the community pay an in-
creased price for their subsistence equivalent to
the repealed taxes. This precisely in the de-
gree the Landed Interests may be able to per-
suade the Legislature to give them scope in the


prohibition or ,restriction of foreign grain, leav-
ing them accordingly so far masters of the price
of that of British growth. It is indeed some-
times pretended, that it is not the amount of rent
that fixes the price of provisions, but the mar-
ket price of provisions which regulates the rent.
This, however, is a mere delusion. Such a
rule may indeed hold with respect to commodi-
ties that may be produced ad libitum, and being
at the same time such as admit of an option in
the consumption. Such may be brass buttons
and cotton cloth, in respect of which every man
may limit himself according to his means and
pleasure, while the manufacture of them may
be carried to any extent of demand. But this
cannot be the case with things of such first ne-
cessity as constitute our absolute sustenance.
With these we cannot dispense beyond a certain
degree, and must therefore pay the price de-
manded. No competition in any trade can go
so far as to make those who carry it on, take a
less profit than covers their rent, taxes and all
outgoings; nor to attempt to sell a commodity
charged with a tax or stamp, at the same price
they could and v/ould do without it. lathe
same manner all farmers being pretty nearly
equally high rented relatively to the quality
and advantages of their farms, one cannot af-
ford to undersell another. It were as well to
pretend that the malt tax made no difference in


the price of beer, as to attempt to establish that
the rent of land does not fix the price of sub-
sistence. If the land-owners themselves were
not sensible of this fact, why then this applica-
tion to the Legislature against the competition
of foreign corn > Is it not in the sense they en-
tertain, that it is this foreign competition which
alone limits their power ?
It may be a bold view of the question, but
seems warranted, that how'ever heavy our taxes
in a long course of rapidly succeeding wars,
yet they are no more than equivalent to w r hat,
in a similar course of uninterrupted peace and
of the greatest public economy, the other classes
of Society would have been equally subjected to
by the land-holders, in the price of their sub-
sistence. This supposing they should have
been able to have obtained from the Legislature
such a restriction on foreign corn, as to have
placed the price of our ow n sufficiently in their
pow er to have gone this length. If the only
rule of the rent of land is to be the ability of
the other classes to support it, then is all other
wealth, every species of industry, merely sub-
servient to the rapacity of the land-owners._
What then to the other classes of the country
can be peace or w ar, order or profusion in the
public expenditure, compared with the object
of a free competition of foreign corn in our
markets, constituting the only practicable coun


teraction of this greedy grasp and subversion of
every other kind of property ? Great as has
been the increase of the rent of land, it has
been this competition alone that has kept it
from having been yet more excessive.
It will not be pretended*;, that any
tion in the breasts of the land-owners have with-
held them, or that they are not disposed to raise
their rents even beyond the ability of the com-
munity at large/ when we behold one half of it
in the form of parish paupers reduced to beg-
gary, want, and the charity of the other half.
For it is no longer the helpless alone, but the
hard-working artificer, and indefatigable la-
borer, who have become scarcely less the ob-
jects of our poor-laws. The first fit of sickness,
a transient want of work; or what was once the
poor man’s blessing* $ large family, bring them
on the parish. They may be reproached with
a departure from that honest pride which set
their forefathers above this humiliation. But
it is that their wages have not risen, and the
impossibility that they should be so raised as to
be equal to the rise which has taken place in
the price of their subsistence, without a very
extensive interruption to the general industry
of the country, that drives them on to the hu-
miliation of parish-relief. We must all be
conscious that no ordinary laborer with his
wife, both in good health, and in the prime of
F


life, can do more than maintain themselves and
their children. The aged parent, who used to
rely for the support of his old age on his chil-
dren’s exertions, is now left to the parish.
When a Justice of the Peace signs his order to
the overseer of a neighbouring parish, to ex-
tend relief to some poor family, can he pretend
to be ignorant that it is the rack-rent at which
he has let his lands, obliging the farmer to sell
his produce at a rate, which the laborious poor
can no longer afford to pay, that has caused the
necessity of this order ? When ray Lord and
my Lady Bountiful are ostentatiously subscrib-
ing their five and their ten guineas to their
soup-shops, can they pretend to be ignorant
that it is the increased rack-rent of their lands,
quadrupled within memory, that has deprived
the poor of a better and more sufficient diet, at
the price of their honest industry? Are we to
believe it charity, or some sneaking sense of the
impolicy of driving the poor to the desperation
of right-out starvation., that induces this appa-
rent mitigation with one hand, while with the
other they are aggravating the evil in theever-
unsatisfied demand of increasing rents ? Must
not every tradesman in the kingdom feel, with
the increased expenses of his own family, that
also ip his annually increasing poor-rates, he is
only further called upon to enable some of his
poorer townsmen to make up .that price of their


sustenance, necessary to satisfy the increasing
rent of land ? When the poor woman laments
the small size and light weight of her sixpenny
loaf, and begs private alms, that she may be
enabled to add something to it to satisfy her
hungry family, must there not be an invincible
disposition to refer her for relief to those whose
fortunes and luxuries have been raised on the
small size and light weight of her loaf? Must
not every man feel in his acts of private charity,
that more than half of whatever he gives, is thus
perverted from the relief of the object of his
consideration, to make up the increased rent of
land ? Must not most of us feel, that of fcvery
pound and every shilling we assign to the aid
and comfort of age or infirmity, more than one
half is thus wrested from our intention, to con-
tribute to the fortune of some one already
richer than ourselves ?
It is an unfortunate misapprehension of the
intelligence of even the lowest orders in Eng-
land, if it is imagined, that with the rapid in-
crease of the rent of land under their observa-
tion, in many instances forty shillings an acre
and upwards, while the whole taxes on it do
not exceed four or five shillings ah acre, they
do not know how to apportion accordingly the
oppressions to which they are submitted, to
their proper sources.
It is not unusual to hear it maintained, that
f 2


unless by the exclusion of foreign corn/ the
price of our own is kept up, the farmer must
be ruined ; and that the ruin of the farmer
must be followed by the ruin of the trades-
man, who is supported by the farmer’s custom.
A reduction of rent must, however, be the
same thing to the farmer, and equally avert
from Jiira this threatened ruin. But then it is
said the land-owner’s income would be re-
duced, and being obliged to contract his ex-
penses, the tradesmen with whom he deals los-
ing so much of their profits from his diminished
custom, will not be able to continue to pay
their taxes, and that a general bankruptcy of
the country must ensue. What is this, but in
other words to pretend that the draper, the
grocer, and the ironmonger, would find an ad-
vantage in making a present of an hundred
pounds to any country gentleman or farmer in
their neighbourhood, on condition that it should
l>e spent at their shops ? For it must be evi-
dent, that if the present high rent of land is
to be maintained by the high price of subsist-
ence, and the consequent high price of every
thing else, to be paid by the draper, the gro-
cer, and the ironmonger, the money is in this
manner first drawn from them to he afterwards
spent in their shops.
Some cases of individual hardship must
doubtless arise, in the instances of farmers who


may have lately taken leases at high rents. But
this seems to be in the very nature of the far-
mer’s station; He stands between his landlord
and the public. His landlord will make him
pay the utmost rent, and he will make the
public pay the utmost price for their provi-
sions. It can be only through his inability to
obtain his prices, that his landlord can be com-
pelled to a reduction of rent. The only prac-
ticable means by which the public can compel
the farmer to a reduction of his prices,, must be
seen to be in the competition of foreign corn.
An apprehension is sometimes entertained,
and this by persons of deep thought, that it is
only in consequence of the change in the value
of money, that the country is enabled to sup-
port its present taxes. It would certainly hap-
pen, that with sucb a reduction of the rent of
land as should materially reduce the price of
commodities, the same rate of taxes being still
to be borne, must be relatively heavier. But it
would be indeed sanguine, to alarm ourselves at
the expectation of any such reduction of prices,
as to become an important consideration in this
respect. Besides, it must be evident, that
with a general reduction of prices, the public
expenses would also be diminished; and conse-
quently the taxes supporting them be also open
to reduction. Our National Debt, indeed, must
remain a permanent charge, till liquidated in


the progress of the Sinking Fund. But the con-
sideration must here present itself, of the diffe-
rent ability of the country to maintain and ex-
tend the exportation of its multifarious indus-
try at the present high rate, or further increase
of the prices of subsistence and of labor ; or of
the extent to which this exportation may be ex-
pected to be carried by a reduction of them.
And accordingly, must be also viewed, that
with the general increased wealth and resources
of the country, greater numbers being enabled
to participate in the public burdens, must make
them fall propertionably lighter on all indivi-
dually.
With the restoration of peace and of its an-
cient governments, audits former administra-
tions of justice, the industry of the Continent
will revive, and we must be prepared for a
competition which its disasters and oppression
have of late prevented. As our manufacturers
and merchants will have this competition to
meet, the impossibility of their doing so for
any time must be evident, without something
like an approach to an equal rate of subsist-
ence. To maintain a competition in the sale
price of their goods, our manufacturers must
also be admitted to something like a competi-
tion in the cheapness of their own support.
Without this, neither our established capital,
nor oar machinery, will Ipng enable us to parry


on the contest; hut may be expected themselves
to lead the emigration, at the, first moment of
security, of more than one branch of our most
profitable industry.
It is not uncommon to hear a land-owner,
when raising a rent, make a sort of justifica-*
tion, that he is only doing so to meet.the in-,
creasing expenses of the times; or that he is
only doing as all other men are doing, in mak-
ing the most of his property. But it, may be
asked, with what justice is the lauded capital-
ist to increase the rent of his land on this pre-
tence, any more than the monied capitalist to
increase the rate of interest of his money?
Whatever the taxes, the monied capitalist pays
his due proportion of them without any power
of retribution, and with what justiqe ( can the
landed capitalist pretend that he is to indem-
nify himself, by the raising his rents,,for these
very taxes incurred as much for the defence of
his land, as of the other property of the coun- f
try ? On what plea is every new tax, to be
met by him, as a new pretence for raising his
rent so many shillings an acre ; or his other in-
creasing expenses in the increased of
every thing, caused so chiefly byjiis already
increased rent, to be met by ith its fur-
ther increase ? We have only io cast our eyes,
on any side, on the owner of a landed estate,
and inquire what it yielded him or his ancestors


in 17fi5, and what he draws from it now; and
however great the taxes since that time, and
the change in the value of money, we must be
sensible he has not merely kept pace with the
times, but gone greatly beyond them. What
is this, thus indemnifying himself by the rise
of his rents, and the consequent price of sub-
sistence, if it has not been a virtual evasion and
shirking of his own due proportion of the pub-
lic burdens, throwing it on the shoulders of the
other classes of society ? And, further, inas-
much as he has gone beyond this point, that
not content with merely evading his fair contri-
bution, he has been fattening in the midst of
the general distress; availing himself of the
very times, when all other property has so
cheerfully been yielded in support of our salva-
tion from an overwhelming foe, to inflict a
scarcely less grievous wound, in having ac-
tually reduced one half of his fellow country-
men to the huniiliatibiis of parish-poor.
That he is only making the most of his pro-
perty like other men, is also a fallacious state-
ment. Any comparison between the rent of land
and the profits of trade, would be misplaced,
because these' last are subject to a risk which
Vhe first is not. The just comparison is be-
tween the rent of land and interest of money,
each yielding to their proprietors an income
without any exertion of their own. The inte


rest of money being restrained to five per cent.,
the proprietor can derive no greater profit from
it: while the land-owner has raised his rent
beyond all proportion.
This Resolution goes on to say,.“ a competi-
tion which withdraws capital from this country,
for the improvement of Foreign States, damps
the agricultural exertion of the farmer, from the
uncertainty in which he is placed as to the sup-
ply of the market, and renders us dependent on
others for an article with which we cannot dis-
pense/’ The first part, “that this competi-
tion withdraws capital from this country,” has
already been shewn to be erroneous, if it is ad-
mitted that we have carried on a more bene-
ficial trade through the medium of our manu-
factures; and in the fabrication of which a
greater quantity of corn was consumed by the
workmen and their families, and brought a
better return, than could have been obtained by
its direct exportation. British capital has there-
fore been increased not diminished, as implied in
the stating it to be withdrawn from the coun-
try for the improvement of Foreign States.
That Foreign States also derive a benefit from
this interchange of their industry for ours must
be supposed, or they would decline continuing
it. It has already been shewn how trade may be
beneficial to both countries between which it is
G


carried on; and that in fact it always is so, or
ceases.
If the agricultural exertions of the farmer
are really in any degree damped by the uncer-
tainty of the market, it appears, however, to be
attended with some counterpoise in his favor.
The uncertainty of the price he may be able to
obtain for his produce, rendering also uncertain
the exact limit of that utmost rent which he
can afford to pay, acts as a sort of protection to
him against his landlord. But the effect of the
competition of foreign corn to produce any un-
certainty in the market, seems to he at least
questionable. In all other cases, the greater
the competition, the better assured is the stea-
diness of the price of the commodity. So far
from creating an uncertainty, it should rather
seem that competition holds out the best assur-
ance of the price always being within certain
limits. The supply of corn, the staple commo-
dity of the land, is an object of too great ex-
tent not to be generally known throughout the
country. It is not as the supply of a few drugs,
the nature and production of which, and their
probable demand, being confined to the know-
ledge of a few individuals only, may be made a
secret speculation. Imported corn is not ob-
tained for the mere fetching. It bears a fair
price in the countries whence it is brought.


And the merchant importer must view with at-
tention, the probable result of our own growth
before he can venture to direct his foreign pur-
chase. If the culture of the land pf the coun-
try is committed to individual discretion, not
less may be committed to similar individ.ua!
discretion, that supply the market is likely to
demand or bear from foreign sources. The in-
dividual judgment of the merchant importer is
not likely to be less sound, than that of the
cultivator.
That it renders us dependent on others for
that with which we cannot dispense,” is involv-
ed in all the general considerations how far our
agriculture is not likely to be better promoted
through the increased opulence flowing into
the country in the extension of our commerce.
We must view the magnitude of that politi-
cal elevation we have attained among nations.
Britain has now become, in a manner, the
great metropolis of the whole world. As the
wealth and greatness of towns is derived from
the interchanges of their own, and as being
the emporia of the general interchanges of the
industry of the surrounding districts ; so the
wealth and greatness of Britain is derived from
its more expanded communications throughout
the universe. We are told that on the first
carrying the turnpike roads into the distant
counties, such was the apprehension of the
g 2


Land-holders in the immediate neighborhood
of London, that they petitioned against the
measure, on the grounds of the injury to their
estates, by promoting such a concurrence in the
supply of the London market. Yet by this
very extension of its resources has London so
increased in opulence, that its overflowings
have raised neighboring lands to a value
infinitely beyond any thing they could ever
otherwise have reached. ' Just such, may not
be viewed the present proceedings of the Land-
ed Interests, in their misapprehension and false
alarm of the more extended supplies of Bri-
tain ?
Sth Resolution. —That the object of the
measure proposed, is not to increase the price
as a premium to the Land-holder and farmer at
the expense of the other classes of society, but
to promote the investment of a greater capital
in land, by which a constant increase of corn
will take place, and the supply become steady
and independent of Foreign Nations, ultimately
tending to a diminution of the price, and se-
curing the country against those fluctuations
tyhich have in some years brought want and
beggary on the laborer and manufacturer.”
This Resolution commences with telling us
the object in view is not to increase the price
(of corn, sc, maybe understood), atthe expense


of the other classes of the community, to the
benefit of the Land-holder and farmer Will
the framers of these Resolutions then tell us at
■whose expense they intend the price shall be
increased, and to whose benefit? But it pro-
ceeds with a sort of salvo of inducing a greater
capital to be invested in agriculture, by means
of which it is to be again ultimately reduced.
It is then the proposition, by a call on the Legis-
lature for a restriction on foreign corn, so to
obtain the command over the price of our own,
that instead of reducing their plundering rents
to the relief of their farmers, they may be able
to compel the other orders of society to furnish
the capital for the belter culture of their lands.
First, may it not be asked on what plea the
owners of land pretend to have a claim thus to
force capital from the pockets of the other or-
ders, to their particular emolument? It is
true, the Resolution states only’, to induce the
investment of a greater capital in agriculture.
But some of the authors of these Resolutions
ought to have been aw are, that legislative inter-
ference is always necessarily coercive, not per-
suasive. The Resolution is .indeed so Worded,
as to seem to imply, the willing investment by
capitalists of their property in the pursuits of
agriculture. But the primary action of in-
creased prices must be seen to be of a very dif-
ferent complexion; that it is not persuading.


bill forcing from the rest of the community a
greeter proportion of their property than they
would otherwise part with, to the agricultu-
rist for their subsistence. Such legislative
interference must be therefore coercive, audits
operation to wrest forcibly from one man a
portion of bis property, and to transfer it to
another, in a way that would not otherwise
occur. But when w r e reflect on the very high
prices corn and all other provisions have now
been at for a series of years, and perceive the
rapacity with which, instead of being allowed
to act as an encouragement to agriculture, they
have only been converted to increasing rents,
how are we to allow ourselves to be persuaded,
the yet further increase of prices will not be in
the same manner only further converted to the
yet further increase of rent.
But the intention may be to draw capital to
the enclosure of waste lands. It does not seem,
however, how high prices should be of more
effect in this way, than in the improvement of
the culture of the old enclosures. They must
in the same way be open to the same perversion
to excessive rent. Is not this too an object,
that it is notorious might be readily effected,
without the imposition of these high prices ?
Let the leading parties of the Landed Interests
at once speak fairly, and say why, instead of
promoting, they have so long directly or irtdi


rectiy thwarted and opposed, a general act of
enclosure ? When we are told of high prices
to induce enclosures, and see them thus frus-
trated, what must we think of the argument
of high prices ? Must we not be inclined td
treat it as a mere juggle and pretence for the
upholding of rents? And at the same time,
must we not feel a desire to search into the mo-
tives which can have influenced opposition to a
measure of such palpable,resource ? No, man
but such=an act would produce the
rapid enclosure of every foot of land in the
kingdom that is capable of cull ere. Suspicion
ever alive, says it is a sense of this result that
has been the chief cause of all the difficulties
and embarrassments of the measure, in the ap-
prehension that such an extensive increased
culture, sending greater supplies to market to
the relief of thepubliey by reducing the gene-
ral price of subsistence, should consequently
compel some reduction of the rents of the old
enclosures. It is tr ue, special acts of enclosure
are continually obtained,, vdbere no private
views frustrating the public interests, the par-
ties can agree upon their lights, and afford the
expense. But every man who has traversed
the kingdom, must hay© remarked the -innume-
rable small commonsr and patches, each too
small to bear such.a costly mode of proceeding.


and jet often peculiarly situated for the faci-
lity of cultivation.
Let us suppose corn at five guineas a bushel.
This might indeed enable the farmer to pay a
rent of 20 or 25 guineas an acre. And would
he not immediately be called upon to pay such
a rent? High prices thus perverted at the
very threshold, can never therefore become the
sought-for encouragement to the farmer, or
tend at all to the greater investment of capital
in the improvement of land. Assuredly, when
are contemplated the actual prices we pay for
our daily food, already tripled upon us in the
course of so short a period, and so excessive
beyond the price of subsistence in any other
country, it cannot be pretended that enough
has not already been done in this sort of encou-
ragement ! The impediments to British agri-
culture are certainly not at the present day
want of markets, or want of prices. It must
be seen that this insatiate rent, which we are
yet asked to feed with higher and higher prices,
is itself the great bane of agricultural exertion.
And may it not be asked why the rent of land
should not be liable to change with time and
circumstances, like the profits of other pro-
perty ? Hardly the framers of these Resolu-
tions will pretend, that in the cruel advantages
they have availed themselves of, during a pe~


riod of unexampled Warfare aild the consequent
embarrassments of our foreign communications,
to raise their rents so oppressively, they can
have attained any legal or equitable right to be
upheld in them.
9th Resolution . —That it appears froitt
official papers, that since the year 1765, when
importation was thrown open and exportation
discouraged, the price of grain has been on the
constant rise, and our imports have uniformly
to a large amount exceeded otir exports.”
ltd oes not follow of necessity that the rise
in the price of grain, nor the excess of our im-
ports, have been occasioned by the change
made in the corn laws in 1765, They may
have arisen,- and in fdet have so arisen, from
totally diMihct occurrences. Prim& facie there
must be a presumption, that this change was
not made without cause. 7 This cause may havd
been the intention td counteract the very cir-
cumstances now complained of, and which
might then have began td be felt or foreseen.
It may have happened;, that this change in
our corn laws in 1765 may even have tended
to diminish these effects: so that they are now
less than they otherwise would have been,
although, at the same time, it has not been ca-
pable of wholly correcting them.
H


It is from about the period of 1765, that
those changes have so extensively taken effect
in the continued augmentation of the rent of
land, and in the concurrent increase of taxes on
articles of general consumption, the operation
of* which in raising the price of corn and of
every thing else, have been fully shewn in the
consideration of the 7th Resolution. With
this demonstration before us of two such other
most efficient causes, there can be no good rea-
son to affix this rise of price on the change in
the corn laws in 1765, on the mere grounds of
its subsequence.
Independent of the extension of our general in-
dustry, it is essentially from the same period or
about 1765, that we have to date the wonderful
growth of our cotton manufactures. To com-
prehend the extent of these, we have only to
cast our eyes on Manchester, Glasgow, and
the many other towns and villages which may
be said to have absolutely arisen out of this
one source. The changes which have taken
place at Birmingham, Leeds, and Sheffield,
and throughout every manufacturing district,
cannot but be also very conspicuous. That
our exports of corn should have ceased, and
that we should even have been driven to consi-
derable importation, must be so evidently attri-
butable to this immense increase of popula


tioiij as totally to defeat the charge contained
in this Resolution, of its having arisen from the
corn laws of 1765.
With a population known at this day to
amount to several millions of individuals taking
no part in agriculture, but devoted to other
arts and occupations, it should rather be mat-
ter of wonder that we are not obliged to im-
port to a greater extent; and must shew forci-
bly the advantage derived to the agricultural
interests, from the commercial successes. The
quantity of enclosed and cultivated land in
England and Wales in 1765, is commonly esti-
mated to have been about 24 millions of acres.
At present it is understood to be upwards of
30 millions: being an increase of six millions
enclosed either by particular acts of parlia-
ment, by encroachments or otherwise. To these
are to be added the often not less costly, nor
less valuable, improvements of our old enclo-
sures. How has all this been effected, but by
means of that capital first realized in our suc-
cessful mercantile and manufacturing industry?
And in the face of these things, the Landed
Interests propose to call on the Legislature to
cramp by a restriction on its means of subsist-
ence, this very mercantile and manufacturing
industry, which has already thus practically
displayed and shed its invigorating influence
over them. They tell us indeed of ultimate
h 2


reduction of prices again. But reduction in
the price of the products of the land necessa-
rily comprises a reduction of rent, and on
\yhat grounds are wc to suppose they will be
more disposed to this reduction hereafter, than
at present ? May not the mercantile and ma-
nufacturing classes rather say. Leave it to us!
Behold what we have done. We offer no theo-
ries! Ours is all practice ! We only wish to
proceed in that course which has already en-
abled us, enriching ourselves, to spread wealth
and improvement around us! What we have
done, has not only been without your concur-
rence, but further in spite of your plundering
rents, retarding and checking that wealth and
means of greater exertion, which your farmers
would otherwise have derived from the ready
home-market we created for them.
lOih Resolution. That the scope of the
measure proposed is to bring back the corn
law s to that state in which they were establish-
ed in the years 1688 and 1760, and in which
they remained down to 1765, a period during
which the average price of corn was low er and
steadier than during the periods either imme-
diately prior or subsequent, and during which
our exports uniformly exceeded our imports ;
affording an iucontestible presumption, that a
restraint upon importation and an encourage


merit of exportation had given a spring to agri-
culture,, and was followed by a growth of corn
above the wants of the people.”
To those who have considered the arguments
offered in respect of the preceding Resolutions;,
it is conceived, the fallacies contained in the
present must be apparent. It asserts as an in-
contestable presumption, that of two things
one has necessarily been created by and arisen
out of the other, merely on the grounds of
their successive occurrence. It asserts that
restraint upon importation and encouragement
to exportation, had produced a uniform excess
of export, and had given a spring to agriculture.
It may however have happened, that neither the
excess of export, nor spring stated to have been
received by agriculture, were created by this
restraint and encouragement, but that they
arose altogether from different events; This
is not a question that can be treated abstract-
edly, nor distinct from the considerations of
the relative slate of the other industry of the
country at the time, it is always to be recol-
lected, that the export or import of manufac-
tured goods of an> sort is virtually the export
or import of all the com consumed by the
workmen during their fabrication. The ex-
port of the piece of woollen cloth may be said
to be the export of all the corn used by all the
hands contributing to its preparation. In the


same manner, the import of the linen of France/
Flanders, or Holland, is the import of so much
French, Flemish, or Dutch corn. When
therefore we represent the export or import of
corn, we must also take into the account the
relative import or export of those other things,
in the production of which it was consumed.
In this view it must he seen, that considering
our great import of foreign manufactures at
the period referred to, instead of the balance
of the export of corn being really in our favor,
we indirectly imported it to a greater extent.
And in the same view it must be equally appa-
rent, that at the present time, instead of the
balance of the import being really against us,
we indirectly export in the foreign sale of our
own manufactures, a quantity of corn infinitely
exceeding our direct importation.
It must be too evident to require demon-
stration, that increasing industry, manufac-
tures and consequent population providing a
borne market for our own and other products
of land, have been greatly more beneficial to
the Landed Interests themselves, and the ad-
vance and improvement of agriculture greater
than when they were obliged to depend on a
foreign market. Dependence on a foreign
market involves, that the price of the home
market, to give rise to exportation, must be
below that of the foreign market. As far as


the Landed Interests were themselves concern-
ed, this case was indeed obviated by a bounty
of five shillings a quarter on the export: which,
the price of wheat being then about 3Bs. the
quarter, was something more than 15 per cent,
on the value of it, levied by a tax on the coun-
try at large, to be paid to the Landed Interests
to enable them to carry on this exportation.
So that the country paying them five shillings
out of 335. : the real export price they received
from foreign markets, allowing for their ex-
penses, was only SSs. These exportations were
chiefly to Holland and France; for France was
at that time, as well as Holland, what we have
since become, a great manufacturing country,
not rearing a sufficiency of grain for the sup-
port of the rapid increase of population conse-
quent upon this application of its industry.
Thus then our own Landed Interests were feeding;
the artificers of France and Holland with our
own wheat at 28s. a quarter, while the}'made
our o n artificers pay 335. That our manu-
facturers have been successful, must then as-
suredly have been in spite of our Landed lute*
rests, and of our own corn-laws at this boasted
period of exportation. And yet these are the
times and circumstances to a similarity with
which, we are fairly told, it is the scope of
the measure proposed in these Resolutions, to
bring us back.


It further merits attention, that our own
manufacturers wore not only thus made to pay
a higher price for their subsistence in our owri
market, than that at which it was also from
our own market furnished to foreign manufac-
turers, against whose productions they had to
carry on a competition; but they were further
over and above taxed for the bounty, at the
rate of 15 per cent, on the corn thus furnished
to their competitors. In this manner being
made to pay, not only a higher price for their
own subsistence, but also a part of that of
the foreign manufacturer’s. These arguments
appear to have been forcibly urged for a se-
ries of years prior to 1765, and may be consi-
dered among those which conduced to the
change of the corn-laws at that period.
When we see a public challenge like the
present, thrown out for the whole of the Scot-
tish Landed Interests to embody themselves in
array, with their Committees of Correspon-
dence ; and are aware that similar proceed-
ings are in agitation among many great Land-
holders in England and Wales, may it not he
time for meetings also among the other classes
of the community ; for counter-addresses from
the leading commercial cities and manufactur-
ing districts, and from every town in the
kingdom, for there can he none which is not
vitally interested to oppose this- modem exer


tion of feudal power ? Seemingly all-power*
ful as may be the Landed Interests, with a
cause so upheld by practical demonstration,
we cannot be without hope of attention. The
voice of sound reason will make itself heard.
The greater and the better part of the Landed
Interests themselves may appear among the
foremost, to avert a measure so eminently de-
structive of our great resources; a destruction
hi which themselves must eventually be in-
volved.
Wth Resolution. —That from the infor-
mation before Parliament in the Report of the
Select Committee on the Corn Laws, there is no
doubt, that if sufficient encouragement is held
out to the cultivator of lands, this country
possesses the means of supplying its own
wants/’
The plain statement of the ability of the
country to supply its own wants, is here made
to involve the condition of encouragement to
the cultivator. The other Resolutions shew
us, that this proposed encouragement consists
in raising yet higher the price of corn.
We have, however, the practical experience
of this description of encouragement, to an
extent, making it now somewhat difficult to
believe, either in its insufficiency, or that it
must not long since have produced, and even
i


have gone beyond the object in view, if it
were calculated ever to do so. The cause of
this failure has been already shewn to be the
perversion of it from the purposes of agricul-
lure, not to satisfy,, but to pamper the insa-
tiate appetite .of increasing rents. It is not,
therefore, further encouragement of this kind,
but the correction of the abuse of that which
has been already given, which should seem to
constitute more properly the question.
The interests of the proprietor of the soil and
of the public are not only always at variance
as to the price of its products, but also unfor-
tunately not unoften as to the quantity. In
landed tenures under a fixed money rent, the
proprietor has no immediate interest in the
quantity of produce obtained from his land,
but only that it be so managed, as to yield him
the greatest permanent rent. The public in-
terest rests wholly in the quantity of its mar-
ketable produce. To make this understood,
let us suppose four farms of 150 acres each,
laid out as our old small farms very much used
to be, in nearly equal parts of arable and grass
land. Let us also, suppose these four farms, ac-
cording to modern practice, thrown into one
great one. Every man who has attended to
the operations of the great farmer will be sen-
sible, that his object is to lay every thing down
iu grass. This be probably does to the extent


of 500 acres, keeping not more than 50 or at
most 100 acres under the plough. It must be
obvious, that in this proceeding he obtains
less from the soil, in as much as grass yields a
less return than cultivated lands. This dis-
proportion is probably not less from middling
lands, such as the greater part of the kingdom
consists of, than from 10 to 15 pounds of grain
to one pound of meat; or if under artificial
grasses or other support of cattle, also in very
great excess. But though the farmer, by thus
augmenting his grass land, obtains less produce
from the soil, he is yet able to pay the greater
rent, by the saving of the difference of la-
bor. Four farms of 150 acres each, as sup-
posed, in nearly equal parts of arable and of
grass, require probably with the farmers’own
families, servants and occasional laborers, on
an average of work and employment through-
out the year, the labor of 10 persons to each
farm, or in all 40 persons. The great farmer,
as supposed, does not probably employ 20 per-
sons. Here then is a difference of one half of
the population employed in agriculture, and
consequent deficiency of return from the land,
by the loss of their labor. But,it is said the
public has nothing to do with this point; that
it is only interested in the surplus produce sent
to market; and that the smaller farmers, con-
suming so much more themselves, 4iave a less
i 2


produce to dispose of than the great farmer,
who is thereby enabled to pay his greater rent*
There appears however to be a misapprehen-
sion in this assumption. It must be seen that
both parties have to send to market a suffi-
cient produce from the land, to pay, as well
as their rents, also their outgoings. Now, as
the outgoings upon the 40 persons employed
in the culture of the small farms must be
double the outgoings from the SO persons, so
must.therefore tSie produce sent to market from
the small farms be so much the greatest. The
immediate sustenance of the cultivators is here
supposed to be in either instance first deducted,
as consumed by them on the spot: taking into
view only the surplus marketable produce.
The outgoings surmised are therefore confined
to the clothing and other incidental expenses of
the farmers’ own families, wages to their
vants, &c. These last however upon an excess
0f.20 persons are of considerable amount, and
such as must exceed materially the difference
of rent the great farmer can ever afford to pay.
But in fact the difference in the number of per-
sons employed in these two different kinds of
farming in most parts of the kingdom, is greater
than stated, and consequently the quantity of
produce necessarily sent to market to meet
their extraordinary outgoing expenses, also
greater* The public is therefore deeply inte


rested in that system of cultivation whichyields
it the greater quantity of sustenance.
Nor can the public be said to be without an
interest in the destruction of a hard-working
yeomanry, offering a reciprocal market for the
industry of the other classes, the strength of
the country, and proud in their independence :
now very differently replaced by the lazy cot-
tager, himself reared on parish charity, and not
looking beyond the same resource for his own
offspring.
May it not be thought that the public
should here rather entertain the reasonable ex-
pectation of some legislative interference for
its protection, than to hear of Petitions that it
may be called upon to uphold and extend by
yet increasing prices, such a state of things?
It must be difficult to estimate the general
loss to the country, both of agricultural popu-
lation and surplus marketable sustenance: but
if we can give credit to the ancient accounts of
our agriculture, the enclosed and cultivated
lands of England and Wales consisted near a
century since of about 24 millions of acres, laid
down in about 13 millions grass, and 11 mil-
lions under the plough. At the present day
they are understood to comprise 30 millions;
but divided into about 20 millions grass, and
10 millions arable. Thus with six millions of
acres additional of .reclaimed lands,* we have


absolutely less arable. This presents a lamen-
table return from the Landed Interests, for
the high prices the other classes have afforded
them.
Pardon is asked for this digression, entered
into, to shew the manner in which a Land-
owner’s interest on a money rent, not always con-
sisting* in the obtaining the greatest produce
from the soil, may be consequently at variance
with that of the public. It seems also to point
to one of the fallacies by which the advantage
of this modern system of large farms is usually
defended, as drawing capital to agriculture, by
in this way inducing men of greater substance
to apply their means to it. It is the example
of the application of this desired capital to the
purpose of rent, not merely indifferent to, but
absolutely to the injury of the public interests;
not being made the means of increasing, but
absolutely of a diminution of their supplies
from the land, it is not undeserving attention,
that Germany was some time back in a similar
situation, not growing a sufficiency of corn for
its own consumption, till in 1772, Commission-
ers were appointed throughout the States, whose
report equally attributed the deficiency to have
been caused by too large farms, and too little
laird under the plough. They recommended
the increase of the latter, and soiling the cattle
in the homesteds, Germany now exports corn.


Having endeavoured to shew that it is not
the want of sufficient encouragement of prices,
but the too hasty perversion of it to rent, which
constitutes the great bane of agricultural im-
provement, it may not be misplaced to suggest
slightly other discouragements under which it
labors; and some of which may perhaps he
more susceptible of remedy.
First among these, arc always mentioned
tithes,,the tithe-owner taking the tithe of all
improvement without having contributed to it.
In this point, however, their operation seems to
be little different from an arbitrarily increasing
rent. Their more pernicious effect is-probably
in their tendency, in other respects, to promote
the increase of grass land, at the expense of the
arable.
Next maybe ranked the usual short holding
and. uncertain tenure of the farmer, neither
giving him credit to procure, nor encourage-
ment to sink that capital which he otherwise
would, in any certain assurance of remaining
long enough to recover it again. It is true,
this is sometimes obviated by leases where they
are given, but this is not very general at the
present day. At best it is only a partial re-
medy, least likely to be applied in the in-
stances most requiring it, of oppressive land-
lords. The farmer at present may be gene-
rally said to have only a six months’ holding.


being always liable to be turned out on a six
months’ notice. In this predicament, he must
be always unwilling to incur expense on the
chance of another’s profiting by it. He must
be expected to contract his efforts., that he
may not bring the land into a state to pro-
mote the increasing of his rent, or to be an in-
ducement to others to bid against him for the
holding. This is probably a discouragement
to the investment of capital in agriculture,
scarcely less than the result of continually in-
creasing rent, in the apprehension of which,
in fact, it chiefly rests. Legislative interfe-
rence might not, in this case, perhaps, be
unwisely applied to extend, with such limita-
tions as might also be satisfactory to every
liberal land-owner, some security to the far-
mer for his sufficient continuance to gather in
the advantage, or be otherwise indemnified for
his improvements. Might not this be effected
a law which should generally give to the
farmer a seven years’ holding; by making, in-
stead of a six months’ notice, a seven years* no-
tice requisite to his ejectment, while continu-
ing to pay his rent, and do what is reasonable ?
Or if peremptorily ejected, to have made good
to him his expenses incurred, with a considera-
tion for bis exertions, and for his privation of
that profit, the expectation of which induced
them. Alteration of rent, or other stipulations


being, none the less, eligible to be determined
on at any time, but not to take effect till after
seven years. Such a law should seem calcu-
lated to act with very different efficacy from
the proposed further increase of prices. It
should seem to holdout the assurance of what-
ever improvement capital can effect ; and at
the same time to permit every equitable in-
crease of rent, at a reasonable period when the
farmer may be conceived to be indemnified.
1 2th Resolution.-— ec That during the year
1812, when the trade with the Continent was
nearly closed, and when there were great dif-
ficulties in a commerce with America, from
the,obstacles thrown in the way of importa-
tion, increased agricultural efforts were made,
and during that year the corn exported exceed-
ed in;value that imported by 281,379/.”
The instance of any single year of export and
import must always lead to error. In the
case of excess of. export, it may have been
caused by the import of the previous year, or
two or three previous years, having been be-
yond the current demand, and the consequent
overloaded state of the market. In the case
of excess of import, it may have been occa-
sioned by the too great export of the preceding
years. Some seasons are also naturally more
favorable than others. It can be therefore
K.


only from an average of years that any just
conclusion can be drawn. It deserves atten-
tion, that the excess of export is here given in
value only, and not as to the quantity in quar-
ters or bushels. This is objectionable, because
the price of grain often varying much in the
course of the same year, and the export being
generally made when it is cheapest, and the
import when dearest, these different, prices
may have been such as not only to diminish,
but if the imports and exports have both been
considerable, may perhaps even totally have
countervailed the apparent balance of the lat-
•tei*; ih This not have- been the case in the
cited year 1812, the»chief exports during
which; being probably on the public account,
in supplies to our armies and navies, it may
possibly result, that the export price was
greater than the import. It remains further
to be inquired, how far the stated excess of
export was not wholly confined to the exports
on the public account, none having taken
place in the usual course of commerce. If
this latter should prove to be the case, the
Resolution tends to convey a deception, in as
much as it implies the supply of corn to have
been such as to have been the cause of this ex-
port : whereas no export would have been
made in the course of trade ; nor could have
been made at all on account of the price, ex


cepting by the Government ■to meet the exi-
gencies of a particular occasion.
Whatever may be the object of this Resolu-
tion, it is open to too many contingencies, to
call for further comment. It states,', however,
greater agricultural exertions to have been
made in 1812. Every man at all acquainted
with agriculture, will be sensible, that the
extraordinary efforts of any one year, can only
be made by bringing that land under corn,
which would not otherwise come so in the or-
dinary rotation of culture, and that it is con-
sequently an exertion made at the expense of
the next and following years. Agricultural
efforts, to be permanent, require to be con-
ducted in the regular course of husbandry
through several years of foresight and arrange-
ment,
]3th Resolution.-— tc That the fair and steady
price of corn is advantageous both to the
grower and the consumer. It holds out a fair
security for capital employed, and an induce-
ment to the still further investment in the im-
provement of land, whilst it tends to produce
an abundant and increasing supply.
1 4:th Resolution. —“ That great fluctuations
of price are injurious both to the laborer and
manufacturer, as the price of labor does not


accommodate itself to the occasional fluctua-
tion of years of scarcity, whilst it universally
tends to an assimilation with the fair and
steady price of grain.”
The latter part of the first of these two Re-
solutions, has been already sufficiently dis-
cussed. Fluctuation of price being in other
respects the burden of both, we shall avoid
repetitions by considering them together. It
has also been already questioned, how far
the steady price of grain is favorable to the
farmer, in as much as it would put him more
in the power of his landlord, who would
thereby be better able to ascertain the extreme
point of rent possible to be borne. It has too
been further shewn, that it is at variance with
ordinary experience in other instances, that
competition should have the effect of creating
an irregularity of price : but that on the con-
trary, the greater the competition in the sup-
ply of the market, so much more regular and
uniform is always the price of other commodi-
ties. No grounds are shewn in these Resolu-
tions for this different conclusion, nor does it
seem easy to comprehend whence it should be
drawn in the present case. The action of the
competition of foreign corn must be too evi-
dent to admit of argument, in keeping down
the price. The experience we have of its not
having been always able to do so, sufficiently


to be with in the reach of the laborer and ma-
nufacturer, must induce more than a presump-
tion, viewing all the charges and risks of im-
portation, and the advantages of our own cul-
tivators having the demand at their doors,
that it can never be brought to our markets
under a price, which with every considera-
tion for taxes and other extraordinary outgo-
ings, must yet exceed what, at an equitable
rent of land, should be a fair and sufficient
encouragement for its home growth.
It remains therefore to speak only, as of an
assumption, of the effects of a fluctuating price
to the laborer and manufacturer. In the na-
tural course of the price of labor it is necessa-
rily so regulated to these classes, that it may
be sufficient for their support, even in a mode-
rately hard year, and being so, ’it enables them
in better years to have some little indulgences.
It is too true, this course has been in a great
degree set aside, by our poor laws undertaking
to eke out relief to the laborious classes, and
thereby rendering thejr habitual state at all
times just removed from absolute want. What
is this, however, but the excessive rent of
land first placing the price of subsistence be-
yond their means to pay for it by their honest
industry; and then humiliating them by the
form of public charity ?
But there is another point of even yet higher


moment, in which this complaint of fluctuat-
ing prices must be considered. Instead of
great public stores or granaries, as resorted to
in some other countries, to counteract particu-
lar seasons of dearth or scarcity, it is the pri-
vate granary of the wealthy farmer or specu-
lating corn-dealer, that is the security of Bri-
tain. Great as the public prejudice against
this description of persons, and however little
actuated by any sense of public good, they are
none the less most vitally promoting it while
following their individual interests. In abun-
dant years, when grain is cheap, their object
is to purchase, to sell again in a year of scar-
city or less abundance, when the price will be
necessarily advanced. In this manner, secur-
ing to the country the superfluity of one year,
to meet the deficiency of another. It must be
seen that a steady price would destroy this re-
source, by taking away that temptation on
which the speculation rests. When it is known
that such is the usual extent of these specula-
tions, that the country has often nearly a whole
year’s stock thus secured to it over and above
its current consumption, it may be thought
that any transient inconvenience to the manu-
facturer or laborer, or to any class of society,
must be amply compensated in such an assur-
ance against all the sad misery and confusion
of absolute famine. Nor are to be disregard


ed the gradual effects of these speculations,
ever on the approach of scarcity, or as the sup-
ply in the country becomes sensibly diminished,
advancing the price; and thereby checking,
in good time, the general consumption.
Resolution. — “ That an exporting
country possesses a fund by which it can
always alleviate a year of scarcity, and bring
the supply more nearly equal to the wants of
the people.”
The inference taken in this Resolution, that
a country growing more than required for its
own consumption, possesses within itself a
source of relief in any year of scarcity, how-
ever specious, is far from founded in practical
experience. Historical facts tend to shew,
that great exporting countries are most subject
to the scourges of absolute want at,home.
And this too, while it has been relatively little
felt in those which usually depended on them.
Holland in its prosperity always imported
nearly the whole corn it required, and this
chiefly from Poland. Yet the years of distress
in Poland were scarcely perceived in Holland.
Holland always readily supplying herself in
other markets, by means of the same resources
from which she had been accustomed to supply
herself in those of Poland. It has been re-
marked that the provinces in the East Indies,


/which in the ordinary course of seasons export
grain, are those which have been most sub-
jected to famines. Bengal and the Circars are
instances of this occurrence. It may be true,
that America in the aggregate has never known
a dearth. But America is a vast Continent,
with a variety of climate and seasons, and its
comparison can be only with another Continent.
Its comparison with such a territory as Britain
must be restrained to some one of its particular
states, most of which have been at times, by
the inclemency and irregularity of seasons, se-
parately subjected to very severe distresses,
and driven to a recourse to their neighbors for
their indispensible supplies. It is further not
undeserving of remark, that although Holland
imported the chief part of its consumption, the
price of grain there was always more steady
and less liable to fluctuation than in the coun-
tries whence it was exported, preserving a me-
dium of the prices throughout all the different
countries whence it was obtained.
Thus therefore the assertions contained in
these Resolutions, that an exporting country
contains within itself a resource against years
of scarcity, and is less subject to a fluctuation
of price, are not supported by example. Sound
reasoning seems to tend also to a similar demon-
stration. An exporting country as to grain,
necessarily implies one in which its own prices


are usually below those of foreign markets,
and to which last accordingly the chief atten-
tion will always be given. Such a country
will therefore always drain itself to the utmost
it can dispense with from its own immediate
demand. Thus situated in a deficient year,
(and to such years all countries are occasion-
ally subjected), becoming suddenly thrown
upon foreign supplies, it cannot be on an
equality with a country that habitually im-
ports. The most commodious foreign markets
to which it can have recourse, must be proba-
bly those which have been accustomed to be
supplied in ordinary years from this very coun-
try ; and therefore participating in the dearth,
unable to satisfy this reverse of demand, in-
stead of supply. Another embarrassment arises
as to the commodities it proposes to barter for
this extraordinary demand. It must have on
every side to force a market, the disadvantage
and sometimes impracticability of which must
be seen by every mercantile man A country,
on the other hand, that usually imports, if it
cannot obtain what it requires in one market,
quickly repairs to another, and effects its object
at the same or nearly the same price. It should
seem therefore, that the habitual importation
of foreign grain to a certain extent, tends to
alleviation in years of scarcity, and to main-
tain the supply more equal to the wants of the
L


people: while the fund, as supposed in this
Resolution, to he possessed by an exporting
country, is a fallacious expectation, exporting
countries being necessarily accustomed to look
to and consider the foreign demand in prefer-
ence to their own; and which latter must there-
fore be liable to be distressed accordingly
through the hasty exportation, whenever the
Crops may happen to be ever so little below the
usual average.
It must be unnecessary to push further any
argument on the suggestion of the British far-
mer ever being thrown again on the foreign
markets, an occurrence no man who beholds
our rapidly increasing population can any more
seriously look forward to, than he does to the
liquidation of the National Debt. It has only
been thought right to follow it so far, because
among the specious fallacies implied in these
Resolutions.
Some General Considerations.
The calculation given in the consideration of
the 7th Resolution, may possibly be conceived
overcharged. But it seems upheld by the fol-
lowing general data, and results. England
and Wales are known to contain upwards of
SO millions of acres of enclosed and cultivated
lands; to these may be added 10 millions for


Scotland, and the same for Ireland, or for both
together 20 millions; making a total of 50 mil-
lions. It is not meant to speak of the whole
rent of land, but only of the increase of it since
1765. It will be admitted, that this has been
on an average from 20 to 25 shillings an acre.
We will say that the whole increase of rent has
been 60 millions. Our present taxes are about
the same amount. Of existed in
1765 about 10 millions. We may accordingly
assume, that the increase of taxation since that
period has been 50 millions. That all things
have doubled in price since that period will be
also admitted, so that one half of our taxes
would otherwise have sufficed. One half of
our taxes, or 25 millions, is therefore all we
should otherwise have been submitted to. The
other half, or 25 millions, is consequently
chargeable to the causes that have produced
the present high.prices; that is, to the increase
of the rent of land, and also to such taxes as
may be supposed by their reaction to have par-
ticipated, It may not be possible to estimate
accurately this part, but we must be sensible
that neither the property tax on realized pro-
perty, nor the legacy tax,' nor any other tax
falling direct on the capitalist, and. therefore
paid at once without further circulation, have
had any part in producing increasedprices. Of
this 25 millions of taxes, witb which we should


at any rate have been charged., one half are pro-
bably of this sort, so that the proportionate
increase of rent and taxes, in working the pre-
sent increased prices of things, have been as 60
millions of increase of rent, to millions of
ta’ces. That is, where any commodity has in-
creased in price seven shillings and three-pence,
then five shillings of this increase has been
caused by the increase of rent, and one shilling
and three-pence by taxes. Supposing then the
quartern loaf in 1765, to have been and that
it is now one shilling ; this gives six-pence to
the account of rent, and one penny halfpenny to
taxes./ This indeed shews a less disproportion
between increase of rent and taxes than before
assumed, but it must bo evidently a subject
incapable of correct estimate. The object pro-
posed docs not go further than to show, that
the effect of increased rent has been excessive
beyond that of taxation.
It is always in the policy of great conquering
nations, to make their conquests contribute to
their support. The commerce of Britain effects
the same result. It brings the Helds of Poland
to contribute, with those of Kent and Essex,
to the subsistence of the inhabitants of Britain.
Britain is enriched by the reciprocal inter-
changes of its industry for that of the people
of Poland and Germany, not in a less degree
than if those countries had been subjected to,


its arms. It is not meant to say, that the in-
crease of our own agricultural resources, the
improvement of our:old senclosures, and the
bringing our yet remaining wastes under cul-
ture, are not greater objects. But why are
not both to be realized ? When properly un-
derstood, so far from clashing, must not be seen
their tendency to co-operate ; or at least, that
of the greater extent of foreign resources, to
nourish and accelerate internal melioration ?
The nature of landed property, vesting in
a particular class the property of the soil,
confers on them the power of making all other
classes pay them for their subsistence. At first,
while the population is scanty and land com-
paratively abundant, the emulation to dispose
of its products compels a moderate price of
them. As society advances, and commerce and
the other arts give rise to a greater population
and consequent demand, lands become improv-
ed and wastes reclaimed in order to meet it.
But as the demand begins to surpass, or even
to approach to the supply, the land-owners be-
come more sensible of their power to fix their
own terms on it. They soon perceive their
greater profits to rest, not in the quantity of
the produce they obtain from the soil, but in
advancing the price of it. This advanced price,
instead of operating as in other arts to augment
production, is diverted to feed the increased


;*entof land.. In this state it must be seen, that
310 national land-tax, or other tax on agricul-
ture, can at all affect the community at large,
in the price of its subsistence. AH the other
orders of society are already charged the utmost
rthey can afford to pay, or other circumstances
permit their being made to pay. Whatever
national tax is laid on land, has no other action
therefore, than only to force a deduction from
the rent of the landlord. It may be further
said, that all taxes do indirectly, in this man-
ner, in the end come home to land, in as much
that, as but for these taxes, the people gene-
rally would be able to pay a higher price for
their subsistence, and would accordingly be
made to do so. That all taxes in this way,
however, come home to land, can arise only
from the landed proprietors being allowed to
set such an exorbitant price on its products, as
swallows up all other property. The counter-
action of this appears feasible only in two ways.
The one by a direct legislative interference re-
straining the price of the products of land,
which though not impossible, must be attended
with very considerable difficulties. The other,
in the competition of foreign grain in our mar-
kets.: In this competition of foreign grain, now
proposed to be petitioned against, the country
at large has, therefore, not only a mere interest
in. the immediate- price- of its subsistence,-


corresponding ability of its industry; but the
absolute question becomes involved, how far
every other species of property, shall be ingulf-
ed in this vortex of landed power ?
One further momentous reflection yet re-
mains, In other arts, the saving of labor, as
it reduces the price of the commodity, encou-
rages its greater consumption, extending fur-
ther the manufacture of it; and in the employ-
ment it gives to additional numbers, thereby
increases population. It is the great boast of
the modern improvements of agriculture to have
perfected in many instances a similar saving of
labor. But the soundness of the application of
this principle to agriculture, is at least doubt-
ful. That alone which can make the culture
of its own fields more beneficial to Britain than
those of Poland, interchanging equally with the
inhabitants of its own fields and with those of
the fields of Poland, its other arts of industry
for the productions of the soil, is the increased
strength and security of the country in so much
aditional population. Reduction of labor in
agriculture implies a reduced population sup-
ported by it. The principle is not applicable,
as in other arts, that savings of labor, by re-
ducing the price of the goods, increase the de-
mand, and thereby create additional employment.
The savings of labor do not reduce the price of
the products of land, but are the source only of


so much additional rent to the landlord. Such
additional rent as may be obtained by any sav-
ing of labor, is therefore at the expense of the
agricultural population. This presents then
another point, in w hich the increase of the rent
of land has been, in so much, established on
the absolute depopulation of the country, as
derived from that saving of labor, by means of
the extension of the grass, at the expense of the
arable lands.
A legislative view of agriculture must neces-
sarily rest upon its result towards the communi-
ty at large. In this respect it should seem
essential, that the profits of agriculture may
arise in obtaining the greatest possible produce
from the soil, and not in the increase of the
price demanded for it; and that it should also
be so conducted, as to employ and support within
itself the greatest possible number of hands.
Both these objects must be seen to depend on
the preference to tillage over grass. Might
not some limitation of the taxes on land, libe-
rating the arable and transferring the chief
burden to grass lands, tend to countervail the
present preponderant interests, which have pro-
duced such an excess of the latter?
Persons unacquainted with agriculture, may
be led to consider this increase of grass land
necessary for the supply of butcher’s meat. It
must be seen, that this is at once to suppose


the country incapable of producing both the
butcher’s meat and grain it requires. But the
advantages of tillage are not confined to the
produce of grain. It is not less successfully
applied to the increased support of cattle, by
means of its greater production of artificial
grasses, roots and other nutriment adapted for
them, than can be obtained from the richest
meadows.
Concluding Resolutions .
te That a Petition founded on these Resolu-
tions, be presented to both Houses of Parlia-
ment.”
That a Committee be appointed to prepare
the same, and that the said Committee do con-
sist of, &c. &C.”
“ That these Resolutions be published in
the Courier and Morning Chronicle of London,
and in the Edinburgh Newspapers.”
ec That the Convener be instructed to trans-
mit copies of these Resolutions to the Conveners
of the other Counties of Scotland, and to cor-
respond with them on the subject.”
ff That the Committee before named, with
such other Heritors of the County as may be
inclined to attend, be appointed to meet at
Edinburgh with such Committees of other
Counties in Scotland, to support the measure.”
M


We have here exhibited to us, the organiza-
tion assumed by the Scottish Landed Interests.
The last Resolution shews us the proposal, if
not the existence, of a Landed Scottish National
Meeting, independent of Parliament: bow far
consistent with the British Constitution, the
writer submits to those better versed in its laws,
than itself.
Paper Currency not excessive , and not the
Cause of the present High Prices of things.
Many persons incline to attribute the great
rise we have experienced in every thing, or in
other words, the change that has taken place in
the value of money, to our extended paper cur-
rency: reasoning, that as the abundance of any
commodity in the market reduces its pjpee, so
the value of money is reduced by its abundance..
In the first place, a question may be raised,
whether the extension of our paper currency is
not a good deal over-rated in the public opi-
nion. Secondly, a direct objection must occur
to this comparison of money with any real com-
modities: money not being in itself property,
but merely the representative of it. In a more
attentive view, it must be seen to be, but as the
title deed of the estate. Whoever possesses
money, possessing-with it the power of immccli


ately possessing the property of which it serves
as the conveyance, may indeed be said to possess
that property. But this is only the power to pos-
sess, not the possession. Money and property are
therefore essentially two distinct things. Gold
and silver coins carry with them an intrinsic
value of their own, and according to the metal
contained in them, are in themselves property.
The real value of this property so contained in
them, depends on the market price of the me-
tals. But if the law forbids their being melted
down, or sent abroad; and at the same time
circumscribes the value at which they shall be
current according to a certain amount of money
of account, is as much as this law can be en-
forced, it deprives them altogether of any de-
pendence on the market value of the metals, and
reduces them to the same with a bit of leather
or a bit of paper, which may equally be ren-
dered by the law, or by general adoption be-
come, current at the same amount. In this
state, gold, silver, or paper money, all alike,
serve merely for the conveyance of other pro-
perty. A man by his note of hand conveys the
property it expresses to another person. It acta
as an assignment issued on the whole of his pro-
perty, to the amount expressed. By a deed of
assignment he may convey his house to another
person> and the gold or paper money he may
receive in return, conveys to him a power to pur-
w 2


chase a ship, or any thing else. But the deed
of assignment is no property independent of the
house; nor the money paid for it independent
of the ship, or what else may be purchased with
it. (jrold and silver coins therefore, as used in
the essential character of money, no more than
paper, have any other than a representative
■yalue. Their metallic value is a distinct con-
sideration. Paper money evidently can have no
other character whatever. Consequently to
reason ou the effect of its abundance as diminish-
ing the value of property, or even ou the abun-
dance of gold and silver money in its absolute
essential character as money, must be palpably
erroneous. The use of money consists in the
facilities it gives to the exchanges of property ;
and as by its abundance its power must be in-
creased in facilitating these exchanges, the faci-
lity of which is so essential to the operations of
trade and industry, the more just conclusion
must be, that the abundance of money, whether
of paper, gold or silver, so far from enhancing,
has tended much to keep down the general prices
of things below what they otherwise would have
been. It will be seen that a much smaller pro-
portion, than is often imagined, of the currency
of any country, ever has, or ever can consist of
the precious metals.
If we go back to the period before we may
conceive mouey to have been invented, we must


suppose all exchanges of property to have been
made by the absolute barter of the commodi-
ties. Thus one man having a score of sheep,
and another an ox, and the owner of the ox
wishing for one of the sheep, must have been
necessitated to exchange his ox for the whole
score of sheep, or as many as might have been
agreed upon for its worth. Or not willing to
take more than one sheep, he must have obtain-
ed it by a promise to return another sheep at
another time, or to consider the value of it in
some future exchange of other things. Here
then begins a book-debt. It is true, they might
not in the days we are supposing, keep books,
but it was, none the less, a true debtor and
creditor account between the two individuals.
The man, however, who had let the other have
the sheep in this manner, and which latter had
become therefore his debtor, having himself
occasion for a calf from a third person; and not
being able otherwise to adjust his exchange in
order to obtain it, or otherwise wishing to trans-
fer this debt owing to him for the sheep in part
of the exchange for the calf, accordingly makes
over the debt. Here we have a debt transferred.
It only wants the forms of pen, ink, and paper,
to render it a regular bill, or draft. Accepted
by the original debtor, and endorsed over to the
third, a fourth, and successively on to other
persons, it becomes a negotiable paper money.


But in those rude days,, when they had neither
pen, ink, nor paper,, to aid them in the keeping
and transferring such accounts; and probably
also without laws to enforce the payment of
debts; mankind sought for something capable
of being rendered the general medium of ex-
change, Various appear to have been the first
essays, till at length the civilized world, as
by general accord, settled in the adoption of
gold and silver: by their scarcity sufficiently
valuable, to convey in an easily portable form
the worth of most other commodities; and
otherwise appropriate, by their capability of
minute division.
Although these metals have been thus gene-
rally adopted, they have, however, been so,
tinder very different circumstances by different
nations. In some countries, as in England, and
the rest of Europe, the Governments have inter-
fered, coining them into certain pieces of known
•fineness and weight ; prohibiting, by penal laws,
their being melted down again, or carried out
of the country; and further determining the
proportions of their currency, one to the other,
as twenty-one silver shillings to a golden gui-
nea.
The native governments of the East Indies
have only so sar interfered, as to form these
metals into coins of know n fineness and weight;
but without any penal laws against their being


melted down again, or fixing their relative va-
lue. At least if there are, or ever have been
any such laws, they are a dead letter. In con-
sequence, these coins are in no other respects
different from uncoined bullion, but as to the
facility of determining the quantity and fineness
of the metal contained in them. Their relative
value is left a matter of daily variation, accord-
ing to the prevailing demand in the market, for
one or the other. The adjustment of this, with
respect to the vast number of different coins,
of different princes and of different periods,
current in every district of India, all daily-
varying, according to the particular demand
for them, in their relative value, is made by
means of a nominal standard, or what may be
called money of account. Under the British
Governments of India, it has indeed been at-
tempted to fix the relative value of the Com-
pany’s coinage of gold and silver, but without
success; excepting partially at the immediate
seats of the governments, and in accounts in
which Europeans are concerned. The rule,
however, is generally enforced in the receipt of
the public revenue, and which appears to be
the case also by some of the Native Princes, so
far as to make their own coinage the measure
to which, in whatever, coins the payment may
be made, the value of them is adjusted. But
this dees not hold in private accounts, these


being generally settled to the nominal money;
and in respect of which, the coins of the parti-
cular district itself are constantly varying, as
well as all others. According to European
ideas, this state of coinage must be attended
with almost insuperable difficulties and incon-
venience. These, however, are not discovered
in the practice. But it gives rise to a distinct
trade, that of the money-changers, or shroffs,
who have their stalls or scats in every Bazar,
readily exchanging, for a trifling profit, all
coins according to their market value. The
money-changers in England, in former times,
seem to have exercised a similar calling. The
system possesses perhaps some advantage over
that of Europe, which by attempting to fix to
a certain standard, by virtue of their coinage,
two metals, which in their market state of bul-
lion, are always varying, necessarily opens the
door to the alternate melting down or exporta-
tion of one or the other of them, as the market
value may preponderate.
Recollecting that these metals are in them-
selves mere commodities of trade as much as
any other, not only in their natural state con-
stantly varying in value to each other, but
also to every other commodity, there seems to be
a further inconsistency in attempting to make
them by law (a law that it never has been pos-
sible to enforce in any country), to be, by vir


tue of their coinage, the unvaryingmeasure of
all other commodities. The fallacy of mea-
suring cloth by an elastic yard, would be im-
mediately apparent. Money of account, or
nominal money, having no intrinsic worth of
its own, by the market-demand for which it can
be effected, seems to present a preferable mea-
sure of value. The manner of keeping accounts
in all commercial countries, partakes essentially
of this principle, only less perceptibly, because
necessarily more indirectly, in those where it
is attempted to be counteracted or restrained
by particular laws.
The Chinese use no other but this nominal
money, currency or money of account. They
have no coined money, excepting for the most
trifling exchanges. This usage in China cer-
tainly does not arise from any want of ingenuity
to coin the metals, or from any want of commer-
cial intelligence to estimate the advantages or
disadvantages of a coinage.
Paper money, as not liable to the variations
of metallic, should seem better calculated to
accommodate itself to this money of account;
and when well managed, will always do so.
But although paper is divested of the varia-
tions of the market value of bullion, it is,
however, itself often subject to other material
variations. These may be caused by a failure
of the credit on which it has been issued, and
N


other incidents tending to its depression, it
may also be sometimes at a premium, when the
quantity in circulation may be less than the de-
mand for it, or from any peculiar circumstances
of convenience.
These instances of money of account are at
variance with the reasoning of the Earl of
Lauderdale, in his late pamphlet; and in which,
confounding it with Bank-paper, it is conceived
that Nobleman has been led to more than one
false conclusion.
But it is not to be supposed gold, silver, or
any other metallic money, in whatever man-
ner adopted, has ever in any country ab-
solutely superseded .accounts, or reckonings
of debt and credit; that is to say, paper mo-
ney, In the poverty inseparable from barba-
rism, it must have been still more difficult to
acquire even the little that might be requisite,
than the greater quantity demanded in the more
advanced stages of civilisation. If every thing
that is daily and hourly bought and sold, all
estates, merchandise, cattle, grain, houses, fur-
niture, clothes, bread, meat, and every thing,
from the first magnitude and value to the
most insignificant trifle, were to be always in-
stantly paid for in :gold and silver, it must
be perceived, that even with every considera-
tion for the quick transition of money from
hand to hand, and the number of purchases


the same pieces may effect in a very short time,
yet that all the gold and silver in the world
might not perhaps suffice for England only.
But it is not England alone, but the whole
world, which demands these metals for the same
purposes. As nations advance in civilization,
their laws become better established, enforcing
with more punctuality the performance of conr
tracts, and thereby giving greater confidence
in them. Also people become more expert in
the intricacy of accounts. From these cir-
cumstances, however greater their wealth, and
therefore the greater demand for money to ef-
fect the exchanges of it, yet they may often be
better able to dispense with gold and silver
for this purpose, than their poorer neighbors :
who perhaps less versed in the management of
account, or whose tottering governments, and
corrupt or ignorant courts of justice, pervert-
ing rather than enforcing their pretended lawx,
necessarily restrain or destroy all ’general good
faith. In such a state of things, merchants
can be little disposed to give credit to each
other, or to rely with much confidence on each
other’s bills or drafts. A similar suspicious
conduct in their dealings, must extend to all
classes. In every transaction of Sale or barter
where the absolute commodities cannot be di-
rectly exchanged against each other, gold and
n 2


silver alone can be resorted to, as the interme-
diate means.
If we attempt to trace and define paper money,
we must see that it takes its root in the very
first act of credit which one man may give to
another, The moment one man has become
debtor to another, some token of the debt will
exist. It may be the book of the creditor only.
But if we suppose the creditor to be a retail
shopkeeper, and that by the exhibition of his
books to the wholesale dealer, shewing him
what debts he has due on them, he thereby in-
duces the wholesale dealer to give him a greater
credit, it must be seen, that this mere book-
debt has already made an inchoate advance to
the operation of money. A promissory note or
draft between the parties, gives it a negotiable
form. But the little consideration of the par-
ties, or the nature of the bill or draft, payable
only after a certain time, and for an amount not
convenient for the general purposes of money,
must restrain its circulation within narrow
bounds. Bank notes next appear, made paya-
ble at the instant of demand, and issued by
bankers, whose business making them generally
well known among men of property, their notes
obtain a more ready confidence.
The experience of the writer of these sheets
docs not enable him to pronounce, but he can


not help submitting the question,, how far,
since the present extended currency of bank
notes, credits are not generally shorter, and to
less amount; and whether there may not be
fewer drafts and notes of hand in circulation,
in the ordinary transactions of business. Many
of these which would otherwise have been in
circulation, (that is, performing daily and
hourly the olhee of money, in passing from
hand to hand, representing and transferring the
power over property, to the amount they spe-
cify), being now locked up in the banker’s
chests, whose notes are only circulating instead
of them. If this should be the case, then, in
so much, is the present great currency of bank
notes only a substitute for another sort of paper
money, less convenient in its form. l lt must be
seen, that a bank note is a mere token of ac-
knowledgment of the debt of one man to ano-
ther, as much as a promissory note, or any
other bill or draft.
In the view of this point, consideration must
also be given to the great change in the value of
all things, being double at least, at the present
day, w hat it was fifty years ago ; and the simi-
lar exchanges requiring accordingly a double
representative value. Also to the real increase
of wealth, calling for further means to effect
its increasing interchanges. Allowance too
must be made for the quantity of paper cur


rency demanded tp replace the gold that used
to be in circulation, and which must now be
double the amount of such gold withdrawn,
on account of the double prices of the present
day. When due attention is paid to these cir-
cumstances., it is suggested that the former
larger and more extensive credits, and transfers*
ble paper in circulation, bore a much nearer
proportion than is generally supposed, to the
present circulation of bank notes. On these
grounds also, it is thought, any effect attribut-
ed to the greater abundance of money must be
erroneous.
Other substantial arguments are not wanting,
to still further call in question the reality of aq
increased currency beyond the demand. It
has been shewn, that the very root and lowest
order of a paper currency in a book-debt or note
of hand, implies an acknowledgment of pro-
perty given in exchange. A note of hand, like
other money, conveys the portion of property it
represents. The exact property may not be
defined, hut it acts as an assignment, to a spe*
cified amount, chargeable upon all the pror
perty of the party granting it: just as a man
borrowing on mortgage, by pledging, virtually
conveys, till he may redeem it, to the mort-
gagee, a certain interest in and portion of his
estate. In the same manner when a banker
issues his notes, it is always for a something


pledged, and therefore virtually to
him till redeemed by the return of his notes, or
some other equivalent. Attention to the neces-
sity of this pledge and virtual conveyance of
property, to the circulation of bank notes and
of all other paper currency, must shew the
fallacy of a belief prevalent in the minds of
many persons, that banks have it in their power
to create paper money, and thereby a fictitious
property to any extent. When a farmer bor-
rows a Couple of hundred pounds of a
banker, taking it in his notes, he may either
pledge, and thereby virtually convey to the
banker, by his note of hand, a corresponding
amount secured on his property generally; or
a particular rick of wheat. Whatever he
pledges, becomes the property of the banker till
the money borrowed is repaid to him, either by
the return of his notes, or other equivalent
means by which he can obtain them again. In
a similar way, in all other instances, the issue
of a bank note does not depend upon the banker’s
wish to issue it; but on the wish of somebody
else to obtain, and having at the same time
something to pledge for it. Nor is it any more
in'the power of the banker to keep it in circula-
tion, beyond the inclination or occasion of the
other parly. On application the banker re-
stores the property pledged, receiving again
his own notes, or some other banker’s notes or


equivalent securities. If his own notes are thus
returned, the transaction is closed. If other
notes or securities, as he can get no advantage
by retaining, he applies for the discharge of
them to the other bankers or parties by whom
they were issued: and who, probably having
also a similar amount of his notes, remit them
to him in exchange; or in the course of the
operations of banking, a similar amount of his
notes become otherwise speedily returned upon
him. His power to keep his notes in circula-
tion, ceases with the restoration of the pledge.
This may not indeed always happen very accu-
rately with every particular bank, (although
it commonly does so), but it must readily be
understood to be the case, taken against all
banks generally.
The demand being what regulates the quan-
tity of paper possible to be in circulation, it
should follow, that it can never be either in
excess, or insufficient.
But it is said bank notes are often issued on
fictitious securities, or on what is termed ac-
commodation paper : that is, two persons draw
on each other reciprocally and discount the
bills, or by other equivalent proceedings, the
parties perhaps possessing no property to pledge
or convey. Although it may be true, that they
really did not previously possess any property,
yet :.it. is not to be supposed, they again part


with these notes without themselves receiving
a real value for them. Such value, therefore,
constitutes still the security of the bank. It
must be seen that the genuine operation of the
bank in this instance is, that it employs these
parties, in a manner, as its agents, trusting to
their discretion in the circulation of its notes.
This is not therefore, as sometimes represented,
the creation of a fictitious property, but an
equivalent property is conveyed to the bank,
though somewhat indirectly by this system of
agency. The parties, although not before
possessed of any property, become so by means
of these notes, and arc thereby rendered capable
of a responsibility to the bank.
It may happen, that the bank may be de-
ceived in its confidence. If so, it rests on the
bank itself to make good its paper, whenever
it is returned upon it. The bank is so much
the poorer: therefore no new property is cre-
ated. Whatever may appear to be so, the
funds of the bank are proportionably diminish-
ed. It may happen, that the bank should be
so incautious as to be thereby ultimately ruin-
ed, and unable to make good its notes. This
is one of the risks of private bank paper. Who-
ever takes it, puts his confidence in the good
management and ability of those by whom it is
issued. If he is deceived he must submit to
the loss, in the same manner as a man who sells
o


hi* house or his horse to a sharper, or a bank-
rupt. It was optional with him, whether he
would take these notes, or not. The loss sus-
tained by the holder, implies that he had
parted with some property for them. No new
property was therefore created by their issue.
In the case of the Bank of England discount-
ing fictitious paper, that is, advancing its notes
on securities which should ultimately prove to
cover no property, the position is said to be-
come different: because the Bank of England
being protected by law, from the obligation to
pay in any thing but its own notes, would meet
the loss only, by a further issue of them ; and
as nothing, in this case, would appear to be
pledged or conveyed to the Bank for this second
issue, it must seem to create an artificial pro-
perty. But as in a private bank the loss reverts
on itself, so equally does it fall on the Bank of
England, under a similar want of discretion.
The security on which this second issue of notes
goes forth, in exchange for the first, is on the
general funds of the bank itself, which like a
private bank, is accordingly so much the poorer.
We trust in the Directors of the Bank of Eng-
land, that they will not often, nor materially
involve the Bank in such unfortunate transac-
tions. They are not supposed to be wanting in
circumspection. The alledged over issue of
its paper has never been attributed to such a


cause. At any rate, still no new property ap-
pears to have been created. If the power of
purchase has been obtained by others, by
means of the bank paper, the Bank being so
much the poorer, has itself so much less power
of purchase. It is, therefore, an erroneous
construction of the Bullion Report, to under-
stand it as implying that a new power of pur-
chase is created by the issue of bank notes.
It is only the conveyance of such a power from
the Bank to the parties to whom it grants its
notes. The issue of the notes is virtually no-
thing more than giving a currency, in a more
convenient form, to the securities they hold,
and which constitute their responsible funds.
The operation is similar to that of the Lottery-
office keeper, who dividing a ticket into sixteen
shares, renders it more marketable, but he
creates no new ticket. So the Bank, when it
issues an hundred notes of ten pounds each, on
the security of a treasury-bill of one thousand
pounds, gives it only a more marketable form,
but creates no new property.
The question therefore resolves itself into one
of the discretion of the Bank Directors not to
issue notes beyond the solvency of the Bank:
that is, beyond the securities vested in it, in ex-
change for them. The transfer of these secu-
rities to the Bank, in order to obtain its notes,
of itself proves the demand for them, and while
o 2


confined to this limit the issue can therefore
never be excessive. For by an excessive issue
must be understood, an issue exceeding the de-
mand, so that a greater number of notes are
thrown into circulation, than required : the
Bank at the same time not recalling, or refusing
to take back such surplus; or the return of it
being frustrated, by the Bank, in such case,
issuing in exchange only other similar paper.
Such surplus, therefore, being otherwise liable
to become a total loss to the individuals in
whose hands it may happen to be, to avept
which, they are induced to part with it below
its representative value, thus bringing the
whole paper in circulation into discredit.
It is sometimes surmised in the gross, that,
since Bank of England paper has been rendered
equivalent to a legal tender, and the Bank be-
ing at the same time the organ of the Govern-
ment for the payment of the National Debt; and
by means of its paper, equally so of all other
public outgoings. Bank of England Notes no
longer retain any essential distinction from a
direct issue of Government paper-money. It has
been shewn, that as the just equality of the
issue to the demand is regulated by, so the
solvency of the bank note is also secured upon,
the property pledged in order to obtain it.
When a treasury-note, or other government-
security is issued, they convey to thp Bank, or


to the parties to whom they are issued, a trans-
ferrable charge or mortgage upon the whole
property of the country, to the amount they
specify. The funding of these securities is a
mere matter of account, a mere change of form,
in which they none the less continue to cover,
and virtually to convey, with their transfer
from one individual to another, the power over
the property they pledged, at their issue.
Bank of England Notes, as issued on these
pledges, rest therefore on the validity of the
whole property of the country, as secured by
its laws to this purpose; and when which se-
curity may ever prove ineffectual, that on
which rests every other description of property,
must become more than dubious.
With the issue of these public pledges, effec-
tive taxes are levied for the payment, in the
mean time, of the interest or ordinary profit on
the .property thus virtually conveyed by them
to the Bank, or other parties to whom they
were issued, or to whom they may be trans-
ferred : and further, a surplus tax is applied,
through the instrumentality of the Sinking
Fund, to the ultimate operation of the similar
virtual conveyance to them, of the principal of
the property so pledged.
The security of a direct Government paper-
money, may in the same manner be said to rest
on the general property of the country. Trea


sury-notes are such. But it is incompatible
with the other cares of a great government, to
exercise the requisite circumspection, or to
give its attention to the necessary details. It
therefore confides these to the distinct establish-
ment of a great bank. It must however be
seen, that there is a material point of difference
between a treasury-note bearing interest, that
is, paying the ordinary profit of the property it
purports to convey a power over ; and what is
generally understood, by a direct Government
paper-money, being a mere token, intended, in-
deed, to convey similarly the power over a
certain extent of property, but in the mean
time failing to convey the usual profit of it.
A Government paper-money, therefore, issued
in this form, does not convey the whole of the
property it purports to represent, for it does
not convey the accruing profits of that pro-
perty; and if indefinite as to the time of its
duration, it, in fact, pledges no property at all.
This is, indeed, an attempt to create a ficti-
tious wealth. Discredit must accordingly at-
tach to it.
Bank of England Notes, it is true, not bear-
ingl interest, neither convey the profits of the
property they represent, and yet circulate with
general accord. The convenience of their form
and amount, adapting them so readily to the
purpbses of money, probably secure to them in


part this advantage; and which the same cir-
cumstances might equally be expected to give
to a direct Government paper-money. It is the
want of equal confidence in it, that constitutes
the great difference. Individuals confide in the
Bank, that it possesses, in some form or other,
the securities for the property of which it issues
its representative notes; and although they may
not be able to obtain the property on demand
from the Bank, the general sense of its suffi-
ciency makes its notes circulate, and maintains
their credit. A Country Bank, which should
be known to possess a mortgage of a hundred
thousand pounds on the landed estates in its
neighbourhood, would not be likely to see its
notes at a discredit, while it should also be
known, that their extent in circulation was
within this amount.
Gold and silver money neither convey any
accruing profit on the property they represent.
But gold and silver have themselves an intrinsic
value, and if the coins they are made into, con-
tain the exact value in bullion, which they re-
present, without any restrictive laws as to their
retention within the country, nor against the
conversion of the metal into any other form,
they are in themselves a bond fide delivery of
property, in the same manner as an equal va-
lue of bullion, or any other commodity, would
be. No possible discredit can ever attach to


coins in this state. , But if the law prohibits
their exportation, or conversion into bullion, at
the same time fixing a determinate value on
them, and it happens, (as it always does hap-
pen, from day to day, the price of bullion be-
ing variable like that of all other commodities,
according to different circumstances), that it
rises or falls, above or below the rated value of
the gold and silver coins: then, in the first case,
they must be liable to be melted down and ex-
ported, notwithstanding the prohibitory law,
individual interest being so powerful, in this
instance, to do so by them; or, in the latter
case, as they will no longer contain the full
market value they are intended to represent, the
confidence given to them on account of their
intrinsic value. M ill be only equal to that va-
lue. Their coinage and legal currency will,
however, continue to uphold them, unless the
price,of bullion should fall very much below that
of their relative representative value, in which
case they would assimilate to a gold and silver
coinage at once issued at a rate greatly above
its intrinsic value. The implied deception in
the issue of money of this, description, and the
certainty of its deficiency never being compen-
sated, must always place its credit below that
of any moderately well assured paper.
If .indeed at any time, the Bank of England
should be compelled by the Government, to


issue its notes in excess above the securities
given to it in exchange for them, the Govern-
ment being no longer able to levy effective taxes
to meet its expenses, or from other circumstan-
ces a want of confidence in the public faith
should arise; or if the Directors of the Bank
should be supposed, in any other way so to
mismanage its affairs, that it could be no longer
solvent, then, indeed. Bank-notes must be at a
discredit. The excessive issue, without secu-
rities pledged, to meet the exigencies of Govern-
ment, must be perfectly similar to the issue of
a direct Government paper-money, and subject
to all its incidents.
The credit of the Bank-note, issued on na-
tional securities, must be identified with that
of those securities. So far the credit of a Bank-
note is equal to the credit of the public funds;
and those who are contented to risk their sub-
stance in these, can have no reason for withhold-
ing their confidence in it. It is always to be
kept in mind, that although in the levy of a
tax, money is what appears to be received by
the Government, it is but the agent or repre-
sentative of what the people really pay, which
is a part of their substance. The money they
pay, w T as in their hands a power to acquire sub-
stance. By the payment of the tax, they make
over to the Government that power. What
the Government therefore collects in the tax,
jp


is the power of commanding so much substance,
which is virtually the acquisition of the sub-
stance itself. It is this substance, that is pledged
to the Bank.
It has been shewn in the foregoing pages, in
the consideration of the 7th Resolution, that
the present increased prices of all things have
been caused by the increase of the rent of
land, and by taxes, in a proportion that it may
convey no inadequate representation of, to sup*
pose the quartern loaf, as in 1765, at four-
pence ; but subjected .to two stamp duties,
such as used to be the case with our hats, and
is now on quack medicines. One of these being
a one penny stamp to the Government, levied
for national purposes; the other a sevenpenny
stamp to the Landed Interests, levied for their
particular benefit, in the increase of their rent
during the last 30 or 40 years. Having shewn
the sufficiency of these causes to the effect pro-
duced ; and now' having, it is believed, further
satisfactorily demonstrated the fallacy of attri-
buting this change in the value of money, to
our paper currency, it may not be without in-
terest to remark on the change also in the value
of gold and silver bullion, relatively to bread,,
and other commodities generally.


We may assume that in 1765 gold was at
4 1, an ounce; and that an ounce M ould then
have purchased, at the rate of fourpence a loaf,
240 loaves. At the present day, at 5/. 85. an
ounce, it will purchase, at Is. a loaf, 108 loaves.
The change in the value of gold, as to bread,
is then as 240 in the year 1765, to 108 at the
present time. It must be seen, therefore, that
it is not merely our paper which is depreciated,
but gold also; and that though we are in the
habit of speaking of gold as having risen in va-
lue, because comparing it only with our cur-
rency, yet by the criterion of bread and the ge-
neral prices of other things, it has also really
fallen, or is depreciated.
The first impression we must receive, from
the observation of the smaller quantity of bread
we now give, for the same quantity of gold ;
or what is the same thing, the greater quantity
of gold we now give for the same quantity of
bread, must be, that gold is therefore more
abundant. A comparison with the price of
corn, appears to have been a general rule
adopted in most tables and calculations, endea-
vouring to estimate the value of gold, through
the last several centuries ; and inferences to
have been formed accordingly, of its supposed
abundance or scarcity. At the present day,
the erroneous foundation of such a datum must
be apparent, it must be seen, that the quan-
p 2


tity of gold, even relatively to the demand,
cannot be assumed from a comparison of its ex-
change for corn alone, or any other one parti-
cular article ; but from the average of its ex-
change, against all things generally. It must
also be seen, that corn bears a very variable
value relatively to other things, at different pe-
riods. In the earlier stages of society, it appears
to have borne a less value relatively to manufac-
tures than afterwards, as these have become bet-
ter understood. An estimate formed on corn
alone, must therefore be deceptive ; as being
low in the first case, and high in the latter.
: But to confine our immediate attention to the
price of gold and silver in Britain, we must be
sensible, that as foreign commodities, their
price must be influenced by that of those things
we give in exchange, in order to obtain them.
Gold and silver, as the great media of foreign
commerce, are obtained by us from all coun-
tries ; and what we exchange for them, is,
therefore, what we export generally. It is not
the general industry of the country, which
constitutes our exports, but only some parti-
cular parts of it. We have assumed the price
of the ounce of gold to have been in 1765, at
the rate of 4/. of our currency, or money of
account. This supposes the general average
value, in the same manner in our currency or
money of account, of those particular coqamo


dities we exported.to obtain go]d,:l.o have been,
at,that time, at, the jsame. jrate: relatively to
the price of the general industry of the coun-
try. But.the change has been very great, in
the relative value of many things since that
period. Bread, and the other first necessaries
of life, and all those things which press most,
may he said to have tripled in price. Many
other things, however, have not risen in the
same proportion. Some even, have scarcely
risen at ail Those things which constitute
our chief exports, such as cotton goods, wool-
lens and hardware, by the improvements of
machinery, and the better ordering of labor,
have not probably risen more than 35 per
cent.; that is, taking one with another, on
the average of their prices in 1765. These being
our principal. exports, and therefore what we
exchange for gold, should seem to regulate its
price : that is to say, .whatever may have been
the change they have undergone in their rela-
tive value as to the general industry of the
country, such also should be the change in
the value of gold, obtained in exchange for
them. In 1765, the yard of broad cloth, of
the nominal value of 20s, cost, in =. fact, 60
loaves of bread, at 4 d. each. At the present
day, the similar yard of cloth, advanced to
the nomipal value of 275. costs only 27 loaves
of bread, at Is, each. This is-supposing an


advance of 35 per cent, in the price of broad
cloth, assimilating it to the rise in the price of
gold from 4 1, to 5/. Bs. an ounce. Had it,
however, /have happened, that broad cloth, in-
stead of falling from the value of 60 to 27
loaves, had fallen only to 40 loaves, the loaf
having equally advanced in our currency from
4d. to Is.; or what is the same thing, in such
case, if the yard of cloth, instead of advancing
to 275. only, had advanced to 40s. or doubled
in nominal value, then must gold also have
doubled, and have advanced from 4/. to Si. the
ounce. If the advance in the price of the
cloth had kept pace with the advance in the
price of bread, or have tripled, then must the
present price of gold also have tripled, or have
advanced to 12/. the ounce.
If the above reasoning be correct, it must
shew, that the advance in the money value of
gold, has arisen out of the same causes which
have worked the change in the money value of
those things we exchange for it. These causes
we must perceive to have been the increase of
the rent of land, aided by circulating taxes,
in their effect on the price of subsistence,
raising accordingly that of the general industry
of the country ; and which, although improve-
ment yi machinery and in manufacturing in-
telligence, has, indeed, so greatly counteracted,
in regard to most of those goods which consti


tute our exports, yet it has not been able to do
so altogether.
This presents another strong view, in which
the present high prices supporting high rents,
or high rents creating high prices, have al-
ready caused, what is commonly called, the
balance of exchange to be so unfavorable.
These Resolutions, therefore, not only aliedge
an erroneous cause, when they attribute it to
the importation of foreign grain : but the re-
medy they propose, by a restriction on this, to
be enabled to establish still higher and higher
prices, must, on the contrary, by further
raising the price of those things we export,
in exchange for gold, raise also the price of
gold; and thus render our foreign exchanges
still more disadvantageous, in their money-
estimate.
It is understood, the present object is not
merely to establish present high prices : but
assuming, that the increase of the price of grain
has averaged, at the progressive rate of one fifth
part, or advanced 20 per cent, in every twenty
years, to, lay down a rule to perpetuate this
progressive advance, by a similar progressive
restriction on the importation of foreign grain,
advancing it one-fifth, or 20 per cent, at every
period of twenty years; or proportionally after
the rate of one per cent, annually, taking effect
at shorter periodical limitations. The opera^


tion of such an extension of the evil, in th*
progressive check to industry, and in the evi-
dent sacrifice of all other properly to the pro-
fits of land, must speak for itself. Nor can it
escape attention, that it must be a proceeding
not less fraudulent towards those foreigners,
who have committed their property, on either
the public or on private securities in this coun-
try, than would be the reduction of the quan-
tity or quality of the gold in the guinea, or
silver in the shilling, below the standard esta-
blished by our laws, at the time they commit-
ted their property to us. If we are willing to
blind ourselves in such a transaction, w r e must
yet be sensible, that foreigners may see more
clearly : and the high credit of the country,
become accordingly shaken.
It is impossible not to contemplate in ima-
gination, the progress and extent our commer-
cial and manufacturing interests must in all
apparent reason have attained, if it had been
possible, that we could have proceeded on the
footing of rents and taxes, and consequent
prices, as in 1765. The yard of cloth, which
has in fact fallen in value from 60 to 21 loaves
of bread, it must be seen, in such case, would
also otherwise have fallen from twenty shillings
to nine shillings. What has been said of cloth,
will be understood as only instanced of our ex-
ports generally, The result in the increase of


these under such circumstances, and the con-
sequent encouragement to greater production,
must pass calculation. • Our national taxes
have perhaps been in great part inevitable, but
the same cannot be averred'of the increase of
the rent of land.
It is not, however, meant to imply, that the
change in the value of gold and silver may not
have been affected by external, as well as in-
ternal causes. It has been only intended to
shew the powerful action of , the latter. It
must be evident, that as foreign commodities,
they must also be liable, like tea or wine, to a
change of price in the foreign markets, whence
we obtain them : and as the advance in the
foreign price of these articles, whether arising
from scarcity of production or increased de-
mand, must be felt in England ; so must too
that of gold and silver, from similar causes.
The forced demand of these metals for the
supply of our navies and armies abroad, must
have affected their market value in Britain.
There are also reasons to think, some essentially
important external changes have taken place in
respect of them. Further, the perturbed state,
during the last twenty years, of the whole
Continent of Europe, has submitted the de-
mand for them to such sudden impulses, caus-
ing such vacillation in their foreign value,
Q


sometimes co-operating with, and at other times
counteracting the internal change in their va-
lue in Britain, that it is impossible to attach
any general inferences to the irregularity of its
progress.
If it should be asked. Where can be the re-
medy to the state of things herein depicted?
The evident answer must be. In the removal of
the causes by which it has been produced. The
apparent practicability of doing so, must be in
the free importation of grain, presenting itself
as a natural barometer for the rent of land in
Britain, according to the price our manufac-
turers and the other industrious classes can af-
ford to pay for their subsistence, with a due
reference to the price of that of their foreign
competitors. And in the transfer of as many
of our circulating taxes, as may not be so di-
rected by a distinct policy to the protection or
encouragement of particular trades and manu-
factures, to become a direct charge on landed
and monied capital; within such limits on the
latter, as not to be the means of driving it out
of the country.
Truths, so little palatable to many individual
interests and feelings, may be expected to
be admitted with reluctance; but every pro-
vident man must be prepared, that the whole
system of the political economy of the country


is rapidly approaching that state to render ne-
cessary, and the general intelligence and per-
ception of all classes fast becoming such as must
command, attention to them.
THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 55, line 4, for 335., read SSr.
82, —« 8, for itself, read himself.
London: Printed by B. M‘MilUn,
Bow Street, Co/cat Garden,


