

ferv^ppro^
CjfP a
jU-A %. b,-j y,J <:.




within the last three months, and the corn for many miles round
the town remained uncut or uncarried. A more striking in-
stance of the destroying character of this dreadful malady can-
not be imagined, than this vast extent of uncut corn rotting
on the ground, when you are told that not only there exists no
one to claim it, but no one even to carry it away without a
claim. The Governor might seize it as his own, but he could
not find people to cut it, or carry it, or thrash it out. The
very cattle have perished when tied up in the stables, because,
when the owners were dead, there was no one either to feed them
or to release them.
Under these circumstances, and hearing that the malady was
raging with equal violence at Atdliyah, on the sea-coast, and
throughout the intervening country, I determined to give up
that part of my plan, and to return immediately to Smyrna by
Ulubiirlu (the site of the ancient Apollonia), Dineir, Ishekli,
and Philadelphia; and, after a hurried journey, reached Smyrna
on the 25th August.
XI. —Considerations on the Political Geography and Geographi-
cal Nomenclature of Australia. By Captain VETCH, Royal
Engineers, F.R.S.
Political Geography. —The extent and boundaries of empires,
states, and provinces, and the still lower political divisions of the
earth’s surface, have but too generally arisen out of accidental cir-
cumstances, mere caprice, or have been determined by impure
and interested motives; so that the want of wise design and sys-
tematic arrangement in this department of politics is as manifest
as it is unfortunate: for if we consider these divisions and subdi-
visions of States to be the organs and channels of government and
links of social institutions, their defects cannot but prove highly
detrimental to the true and complete administration of the laws,
the peace and prosperity of the people.
It is indeed true that circumstances in many cases exist to pre-
vent the establishment of political divisions on principle and sys-
tem, but it must also be admitted that, in other cases, where
neither difficulties nor obstacles presented themselves, the intro-
duction of order has been equally neglected, and the omission not
unfrequently only begins to be lamented when the measure is no
longer practicable: much labour, expense, and trouble have then
to be bestowed to remedy or palliate defects which a timely or-
ganization would have entirely obviated.
In no division of the globe could a system of political geography
be introduced with so much ease, or with so many prospective ad


vantages, as in that of Australia ; and it is under the above con-
siderations that the writer would humbly submit to her Majesty’s
government the advantage of an immediate adoption of a system-
atic arrangement for that country, by establishing at once the whole
of the grand divisions into which the continent of Australia may
be most appropriately apportioned, and of laying down at the same
time the plan upon which the minor divisions and subdivisions
ought to he formed.
In approaching this subject, we have, in the first place, to Con-
sider that Australia is a continent 2500 statute miles in length,
with an averge breadth of half that quantity; that it contains an
area of 3,000,000 square statute miles, and that it is only one-
sixth part less than the whole of Europe; and, if we reckon the
population of Europe at 186,000,000, Australia may at a future
day, on_ the same scale of density, possess a population of
153,000,000.
, It is very probable that the native population of Australia has
been stationary for a great lapse of years, and that there is small’
chance of its increasing. But if we look to the activity of British
colonization, and the progress which the colonists are making in
multiplying themselves, we may, with great safety, believe that
the increase of souls will follow an equal ratio to that which has
occurred in the United States of America, or even greater; be-
cause in Australia the ground requires much less clearing, and
the obstruction from the natives is much less formidable ; there
is, therefore, nothing unreasonable in the expectation, that the
population and power of the Australians may,'in two centuries,
equal those of the United States of America of the present day.
- From the above general view it will be apparertt that such a
vast territory with a proportionate population can only he ulti-
mately well governed by the division of the whole into a number
of distinct States, and that, whether these rival communities become
entirely independent of each other, or whether they be held toge-
ther by a confederation, it will in either case he important for their
general peace and individual prosperity, that they be pretty nearly
balanced in power and natural advantages, and that in forming the
grand divisions the following points should be attended to :
; Ist, That each should possess areas nearly equal.
2nd. That each should be as compact as circumstances will
permit.
3rd. That each should possess a tract of sea-coast.
. With the above objects in view, and with the knowledge pre-
mised that Australia is of an oblong figure, twice the length of its
breadth, it will be apparent that there is only one mode of division
that will attain the required conditions. Ist. By dividing the con-
tinent longitudinally into two equal parts, and transversely into


four equal parts, from which will result eight equal grand divi-
sions ; at least such would be the case if this continent were some-
what more regular in its form. It happens, however, that its
breadth towards the eastern shore is so considerably expanded as to
offer the facility of dividing the eastern sea-board into three por-
tions as conveniently as into two, should such become, on other
considerations, a more desirable arrangement; or, in other words,
the form of the continent presents a facility of division into either
eight or nine provinces, and of affording to each the conditions
and advantages already proposed to he secured to them. But it
also happens that to one province of Australia boundaries have
been already assigned, by charter and by Act of Parliament,
which could not be materially altered without much difficulty,
and therefore rendering it necessary to endeavour to combine
what is proposed to be done with what has already been performed.
If the limits and extent of the province named South Aus-
tralia, as assigned by Act of Parliament, be assumed as fixed
conditions in a system of grand divisions of the continent, it will
not require much study of the map to show that a distribution of
the land into nine rather than eight parts will most harmonise
with the step which has been already taken.
Should it be proposed to divide the continent into a greater
number of parts than eight or nine, it could only be accomplished
by depriving some of the divisions of a sea-coast position, or other-
wise, by constructing them of a long and narrow form, and de-
parting from the compact shape so desirable for the easy and
cheap administration of government. On the other hand, should
it be proposed to make the number of divisions less than eight or
nine, it must not be overlooked that, with a division into eight
parts, each individual State would possess an average area of
375,000 square statute miles, or be of an extent one-fourth greater
than Spain and Portugal combined, and that each may possess a,
population of 19,000,000 of souls, and consequently that a greater
extent of territory and people would not be likely to ensure so
good a government, or so much happiness to the people.
If from the foregoing reasons it be admitted that, in laying
the foundations of a number of contiguous empires, careful de-
sign and systematic arrangement would tend to promote the future
welfare of the inhabitants, and that an essential part of such de-
sign and system must consist in forming the grand divisions upon
the principle above proposed, then it must also follow that the
plan should be adopted and reduced to practice ere conditions or
circumstances may arise to render the same, either impracticable
or difficult.
The accompanying sketch of a study for the grand divisions of
•Australia will serve to illustrate the author’s views and aid his


explanations. On this subject he has at present only further to
propose, that, should his views be deemed correct, not only should
the adoption of some such similar division take place, hut also
that a colony or garrison, however small, should he at once esta-
blished on some convenient part of the coast of each division.
By means of small garrisons, commanded .in some instances by
a person of no greater rank than serjeant, did Russia maintain
some possessions or settlements on the west coast of America,
although her original right to them might he somewhat question-
able.
The utility of establishing these small garrisons of even a com-
pany of soldiers, or less, would be as follows:
Ist. The taking and maintaining possession, and consequently
preventing disputes or even war with foreign powers in respect
to right.
2nd. Serving as points of refuge and refit for vessels coasting
either for trade or discovery, and these must shortly become
numerous.
3rd. The acquiring useful information concerning the natives,
and the capabilities of the country for future settlements.
4th. Constituting an organ of government, ready at any time
to give effect to what measures may be deemed necessary in the
progress of future settlements; and.
Lastly. They would be useful for advancing the geographical
knowledge of large territories at present too little known.
In the accompanying sketch of the grand divisions of Australia,
the boundaries are formed chiefly by means of meridian lines and
parallels of latitude, and these, though not the most eligible as a
frontier between hostile States, have several compensating advan-
tages ; they are easily described and precisely defined, and furnish
the means of giving the required size and shape better than
natural boundaries; and, lastly, they facilitate the system of allot-
ment of the land, which has been followed with so much advan-
tage in the United States of America.
Nevertheless, should it be found, in the progress of geographical
discovery, that natural boundaries do exist somewhat conter-
minous with those of the imaginary lines, then it would, no doubt,
be advisable to substitute the former for the latter. The only
good natural boundary with which we are at present acquainted
is perhaps that of the River Murray towards its mouth, where
it might be advantageously substituted for the meridian line
boundary at least, from the point of intersection of the two,
down to the sea.
Geographical Nomenclature. —This is a branch of geo-
graphy generally left to chance or caprice, and it will not be
easy to find any department so left which has been more abused.


It might not be worth while to take much pains for the mere
purpose of introducing a complete and faultless nomenclature.
But good taste, and even common sense, is concerned in rescuing
Australia from some barbarous and nonsensical names, which
nothing but a positive necessity should tolerate.
Wherever native names exist, and where these names may have
existed for a number of ages, it appears something like sacrilege
to disturb or change them ; such names, besides the sacredness of
antiquity, are often significant, and contain in themselves useful
information as to the migrations of the human race, and the former
connexion which existed between tribes now far separated. Thus
rivers in Australia may be found with names identical with others
in America; native names possess this advantage also, that they
are seldom vulgar or ridiculous, and they furnish a copious fund
of distinctive terms to obviate the confusion which arises to geo-
graphical nomenclature in the repetition for the hundredth time
of the rivers Thames, Trent, Tyne, &c., and it fortunately hap-
pens that in no country, however barbarous or thinly peopled, are
the great features of nature, as rivers and mountains, without
names; and the name of a river or mountain may be appropri-
ately applied also to the district in which it occurs.
That Australia is not defective in native names, and of good
sounding names, may be shown by the following random speci-
mens, the freedom having been taken of curtailing the double
letters, with which the English are so apt to encumber their
orthography of unlettered tongues, and apparently to so little
purpose:—
Monam - Downs. Anglicised Brisbane Downs.
Colait: - - a Morass. „ Dalrymple’s Marsh.
Morurabigi - a River.
Molonglo - ditto.
Paramata - a Town.
Waragamba - a River.
Keruok r a River.
Gelong - a River.
Tramo - - a Down.' „ Oxley’s Plains.
Pannara ' - a Mount. „ Maclachlam Mount.
Belubula - . a River.
Waragong - a Range of Mountains.
We may now contrast the above with the following new names•
The New Year’s Range. Tunbridge Hill.
Cockbum River. Darling River.
McQuarrie River. Reid’s Mistaken Hill.
Encounter Bay, Sir Joseph Banks’ Island,
Peaked Hill. Mount Disappointment.
Back Stairs Passage.


It Is presumed the above will suffice to show the Inexpediency
and impropriety of explorers placing their own names, or those of
their patrons, in lieu of existing names, in every way preferable;
and it would only be necessary for the ruling powers to express a
wish that the native names should be ascertained as far as pos-
sible, and adopted, to establish that line of future proceeding.
Where towns and villages are to be founded, there can be
no remedy against bad taste ; but the founders may then indulge
their fancy without interfering with names already sanctioned by
age.
The Spaniards rarely attempted to change the Indian names in
America, but contented themselves with providing a patron saint,
and prefixing his name to the towns, which prefixes are now be-
coming obsolete; and if we contrast the Indian names of Peru
and Mexico with the jargon of new and old names introduced in
the United States of America, we shall have good reason to ad-
mire the better taste of the Spaniards.
That good native names were to be found in the United States
as well as in Australia, we have only to recur to some that have
been preserved—as the Ohio, Oswega, Ticbnderaga, &c.—and to
regret that a greater number should not have been handed down
in place of the Brandy-Wine, and such like.
It is not, however, to be expected that we shall find any native
name used to designate the entire of Australia, or even of any
large portions of it, as the circumscribed knowledge and power of
the present native races cannot be supposed to reach, or to have
any motive for reaching, to so great a grouping of land.
The names of the whole continent and of its grand divisions
must, therefore, necessarily be of modern invention or application.
The whole continent long went by the name of New Holland,
until Pinkerton pointed out the absurdity of it, and Flinders sug-
gested that of Australia, which has happily come into general use.
There can be no impropriety in calling a new town New Car-
thage, or New Orleans, &c., as colonised or founded from parent
cities of those names; but the term “New” cannot with the
same propriety be applied to the face of a country, or its features.
The New Thames, or the New Tiber—the New Alps, or the
New Grampians—would not be tolerated; and, upon the same
principle. New Holland, New England, and New South Wales
have only ceased to excite the smile (from use) which New
Turkey or New Egypt would readily create.
The name Holland is descriptive of a low country, and the
term is not applicable to Australia; but the further absurdity was
embodied of naming a great continent from a small province—an
objection which applies also to the term New South Wales, an
example of a name consisting of a sentence, and implying the


necessity of designating the inhabitants by the names of New
South Welsh men and New South Welsh women.
There are two names which have arisen lately to denominate
two provinces of Australia which are hardly less objectionable
than that of New South Wales. These are South Australia and
West Australia. These names consist of two words in two dif-
ferent languages, and if put entirely into English would imply
in one case a repetition, and in the other a contradiction, viz.;
South Southland and West Southland. Surely one language and
one word might supply a better appellation than a Confusion both
of tongues and terms.
If we adopt the term Australia, as distinguishing it in its
southern position from other continents, then, according to the
usual system of classification, some other distinguishing character
ought ,to be used for the genera than that for the classes. If,
however. South Southland is a term meant to describe and dis-
tinguish a province, it will not effect its object, since the same
name will be equally descriptive of three other provinces of
Australia, and West Australia will be equally so of two of them.
The name in present use for the whole of the continent
(Australia) is admitted to be good, nor would it appear a matter
of much difficulty to supply simple and distinctive terms for the
provinces, and if any such proceeded from a quarter of authority,
no one would feel disposed to subject them to criticism, unless
involving some manifest impropriety. The case, however, is much
altered when a private individual ventures to cater for the public
taste; he must be both prepared for criticism, censure, or sar-
casm. The writer, having no predilection of his own in the
matter, would have left the task to other hands, could he have
seen any hope of its being so performed. If he, therefore, now
ventures to undertake it himself, it arises from the Consideration
that we should otherwise still remain without the means of classi-
fying the various parts of Australia; whereas by means of a system
of division, and corresponding terms, we can at once refer any
Spot of that continent to its admitted place in the system, and
which, if established for no other purpose than that of facilitating
geographical description, cannot but prove of obvious utility.
The principle followed in selecting names for the great divi-
sions has been that of doing honour to the most original discoverers
of the respective portions, but preserving, at the same time, names
which have been long attached to various parts; and if this prin-
ciple has been departed from in two instances, the inducements
for so doing will, it is hoped, be duly appreciated. Taking,
therefore, the divisions as numbered in the accompanying map*
and proceeding on the principle alluded to, the following terms
are very humbly submitted for adoption:—


I. Dampieria. In honour of the Intrepid and celebrated
navigator who, in 1688 and 1699, explored some of the coast in
this quarter, and whose name is still attached to an Archipelago,
and a tract of the shore comprised in this division.
11. — Victoria. In honour of our gracious Queen, under
whose auspices it is to be expected, the great Australian empire
will receive a form and development corresponding to its magni-
tude and prospective importance.*
111. — Tasmania. In honour of the celebrated Dutch navi-
gator, Abel Janz Tasman, who, in his second voyage in 1644,
discovered the whole of the N.W. coast from lat. 11° to lat. 18°
south.
IV— Nuytsland. In honour of Pieter Nuyts, who, in the
ship. Guide Zeepaard, in 1627, discovered, and ran along 1000
miles of the south coast, and to which his name has long been
most justly affixed.
V. — Carpentaria. Sp named from the great Northern Gulf,
said to have been so called from the Governor-General Carpen-
ter, who, in 1625, was Governor over the Dutch East India pos-
sessions.
VI. —Flindersland. In honour of Flinders the eminent
navigator, to whose enterprise and surveys we are so much in-
debted for our knowledge of the shores of Australia, and whose
name as a discoverer is especially connected with this division.
VII. —Torresia. In honour of the Spanish navigator
Torres, who discovered this portion of Australia in the year 1606,
and whose name is deservedly attached to the straits situated at
the north cape of this division.
VIII. —Cooksland. In honour of our celebrated circumna-
vigator, who, in 1770, discovered and examined a great extent of
the eastern coast, and from whom, therefore, this division may
with much propriety derive its name.
IX. —Guelpiiia. In honour of King George the Third, the
zealous and munificent patron of geographical discovery, and
under whose auspices the first settlement of the British in Aus-
tralia took place, in the year 1788. f
Before quitting the subject of Australian geography it may not
be misplaced to express regret and even surprise that so little
• The names of the navigators Edels, Vlaming, Vancouver, and D’Entrecasteaux,
claim to be recorded in the subdivision of this province, but as it would be difficult
to apply any one of them to the whole division without committing an act of injus-
tice to the others, a fit opportunity presents itself of doing honour to our august
Sovereign and Patron of the Geographical Society.
f The name of New South Wales, long associated with this quarter of Australia,
has been shown to be in many ways objectionable, and a fit occasion therefore occurs
of honouring the memory of our Third George, in whose reign possession of the
country was taken, and a new continent added to the British empire.


progress has been made in the inland discovery of a country where
the general climate is so mild, and where the native hostility is so
little formidable.
It is now half a century since the first settlement of the British
in Australia was effected, and we may still say that we know little
more than the sea-coasts. The face and features of the central
regions are still matters for conjecture, and the geographer is
still anxious to learn whether the great hiatus has to be filled up
with lofty mountains or with lakes and marshes, whether dismal
swamps or arid wastes may forbid the settlements of man, or fertile
plains and rich valleys invite his approach.
British enterprise and perseverance have explored the frozen
shores of North America amongst all the dangers, privations, and
difficulties which the extremity of cold can inflict, and the same
qualities have carried our daring travellers into the heart of the
burning and pestilential climate of Africa, in the midst of a dense,
savage, and bigoted population, while the genial climate and
thinly-peopled tracts of Australia have failed to excite the enter-
prise of discovery, when to all appearance it would be attended
with so many more prospects of success and utility.
To those who have been accustomed to traverse the vast spaces
of continental America, the undertaking of crossing Australia in
various directions would appear a matter of no great magnitude
or difficulty if furnished with the hardy horses and mules and the
well-trained muleteers of Spanish America.
But travelling with success and safety over great spaces in wild
and savage countries is an art which can only be acquired by con-
siderable practice; and the British travellers in Spanish America
must often have remarked the insufficiency or uselessness of Eu-
ropean servants in their journeys, while the natives, trained to
travel, seemed prepared for every contingency.
In contemplating the causes which may have prevented or
damped the spirit of discovery in Australia, the most important
one appears to be the want of points of appui for rest and refit-
ment, or for succour when ‘the journey is accomplished. The
traveller must have some haven in view to which to direct his
steps, and where, at the end of his tolls, he can expect safety and
repose; but if this haven, be the one he started from, then his
resources and toils will but procure half of the discovery which
might have been obtained by proceeding to a different terminus.
Settlements and points of succour are now becoming numerous
on the coast, but in a continent like Australia, without inlets of
the sea and great navigable rivers, it must be manifest that no
considerable progress can be made in a general knowledge of the
interior, until some permanent posts are there established to which
the traveller can direct his steps, either by design or in case of
need: the number of such posts nped only be three, at or near


the points marked a, b, and c, on the accompanying map, and as
a measure of facility, the post marked a might'be furnished by
the governor of the Swan River settlement, the post b by the go-
vernor of South Australia, and the post c by the governor of New
South Wales.
. These three posts established, it will be seen, from the imaginary
routes traced on the map between them and some nine points on
the, sea-coast, that the face of this continent may be very gene-
rally ascertained and traversed in many directions from sea to sea
without subjecting travellers to any greater journey than one of
about 500 miles without coming to a place of rest and succour ;
nor must it be considered that the establishment of such inland
posts with a small garrison would be so much expense incurred
for pure motives of curiosity, since much advantage must result
to the settlements on the coast from a knowledge of the natural
resources of the interior, from knowing and bridling the numbers
and power of the native's. Such posts and garrisons would also
prove useful in checking the movements of roving Europeans
disposed to lead a life of plunder and aggression, as has so un-
fortunately happened in Diemen’s Land.
The establishment of three posts in the central portion of
Australia may appear at first sight a measure attended with dif-
ficulties; but it is to be considered that the country is generally
free from thickets and dense forests, that on the contrary it is
essentially open and transitable, not only for foot and horsemen,
but also for carriages, so that the transport of a small body of
armed men in a fine climate, for a distance of 500 miles, with a
supply of provisions, could not, in any degree of probability, be
an enterprise either of difficulty or danger. The servants of the
North West Company, in a rigorous climate, would not estimate
such an undertaking highly, neither would it be so deemed in
many other parts of America.
Thirty soldiers, with a portion of settlers, might readily main-
tain themselves in provisions by means of an original stock of
cattle, sheep, and swine, in a country so peculiarly pastoral, and
might, moreover, in a short time have a superabundance for bar-
ter and profit; and where horses are so soon likely to abound, the
making communications with head-quarters could be effected
(when required) in a space of ten days or so, in favourable "sea-
sons of the year. The only precaution necessary to be taken
would be the selection of a good site for the post, and route to
it, by means of a previous exploring party.
Attention of late has been much turned to preserve the indi-
genous population from injuries by the colonists, and to draw
them gently into social and civilised habits; and if the person in
charge of such a post was a man of judgment, he might, with the
assistance of a missionary, be mainly instrumental in forwarding


these objects. On the whole, I can view the establishment of
such inland posts in no other light than a duty to all interests, —.
to the government, the colonists, the natives, and the acquisition of
geographical knowledge. Nor do I see how any considerable pro-
gress is ever to be made in inland discovery without such means.
Are we to wait till population gradually extends from the shore
to the centre ? or till some rival nation, establishing a colony on
the shore, shall push on discoveries in the interior ? All difficulty
and delay would in that case speedily vanish, and we would yield
to pride, if to no other inducement, in the performance of a duty
which science, no less than policy, demands of that nation to
whose guidance the destinies of Australia are committed.
In relation to the early history and migrations, not only of the
human, but also of the brute races, the geography of Australia
exhibits some strange anomalies, which are the more interesting
and deserving of study in proportion to the difficulty of their ex-
planation.
Of all continental land, Australia (as far as it is known) pre-
sents man the most scantily disseminated, in the lowest state of
civilization and knowledge, and the most abject in the means of
bodily comfort or enjoyment, the most deficient of all history or
tradition, and with the fewest monuments of past times; circum-
stances directly contrary to all a priori deductions from the geo-
graphical position and physical condition of the country, which—
enjoying a most favoured climate, both for the rapid increase of
the human race and the development of its best powers, and im-
mediately connected by numerous islands with China on the one
hand, and India on the other, the most anciently populous and
civilised of nations—would well have warranted the conclusion of
an ancient numerous and civilised people, in possession of all the
knowledge and arts which India and China could supply; and if,
through the accident of time, the present race had sunk into bar-
barism, that we should still find the monuments of former pros-
perity and past ages, marking the ruin of empires and revolutions
of nations. But as far as the most recent researches permit us to
speak, there is no indication during the space of four thousand
years, or since the origin of the human race, that colonies had
been established in Australia by any civilised nation until the
present epoch ; whereas Java, at little greater distance from Aus-
tralia than England is from Spain, appears to have been early
populated and civilised, as so emphatically shown by the following
statements of Sir Stamford Raffles respecting that island:—“The
numerous and interesting remains of former art and grandeur
which exist in the ruins of temples and other edifices, the abun-
dant treasures of sculpture and statuary with which some parts of
the island are covered, give evidence of a former state of religious


belief and national improvement, which are represented in
images, devices, and inscriptions.” And again —“ The grandeur
of their ancestors sounds like a fable in the mouth of the present
degenerate Javan; and it is only when it can be traced in mo-
numents which cannot be falsified, that we are led to give credit
to their traditions concerning it.”
Of such easy access to the maritime nations of South Asia, and
in the vicinity of a country so anciently peopled and civilised as
Java appears to have been, it can hardly be ascribed to accident
that Australia should have remained during the great flood of
time unvisited and uncolonised; that, amidst the pursuit of con-
quest and discoveries by some nations, and flight from oppression
by others, Australia should have continued unreclaimed from the
state of nature, a sealed and secluded land to the migrations of
man, so much nearer to the presumed cradle of his race, while
the far distant countries of Peru and Mexico offer proofs of
ancient and civilised nations.
The inference would seem to be, that in former times some
physical difficulties or conditions existed, which do not now exist,
which placed a barrier to the colonization of this continent, or
else that some convulsions of nature destroyed in this division of
the globe both the race and the works of man. These are, how-
ever, inferences which we cannot venture to adopt until the pro-
gress of inland discovery be farther advanced, for we are still
allowed to expect in the interior traces and proofs of the ancient
dominion of civilised nations.
But, on the other hand, the absence of most of the larger quad-
rupeds of Asia, and the possession of a few peculiar to itself,
rather confirms the presumption of the long seclusion of Aus-
tralia from the rest of the world.
Some have supposed that Australia Is a more recently formed
land than the other continents, but if even such a notion was ad-
mitted for the sake of argument, it could only hold good in respect
to mineral composition, while in respect to the epoch of man,
there are sufficient geological proofs of an equal antiquity with
the other divisions of the globe.
The curious problem of the long-secluded state of Australia
from the rest of the world, while apparently so easy of access,
must remain for the present matter of conjecture, though we
may justly entertain the hope that the progress of inland dis-
covery will throw considerable light on the subject. We shall
learn the present physical state of the country, and also a probable
knowledge of what that state has been during the last four thou-
sand years. We shall learn in what state the indigenes of the
interior remain—their languages, customs, and manners—what
connexion may be traced between them and the tribes of other






countries—and whether there exist any remains of a more ancient
and more enlightened people.
But while we remain in want of more decided facts on which
to ground deductions, too great care cannot he taken to preserve
the vocabularies of the various tribes, their manners, customs, and
rites, and the names of places, which. In other countries, are
sometimes significant in languages no longer spoken on the spot.
Much credit seems due to Mr. Scott Nind for his attention to
the above subjects, as exemplified in a paper communicated to
the Geographical Society,* in which he describes a law of the
natives near King George’s Sound, of so extraordinary a character,
and yet so similar to one adopted by some tribes of British
Guayana, as may well justify the temptation of placing the two
accounts together in this place for the purpose of showing the
value of such researches.
“ The whole body of the natives,” says Mr. Nind, “are divided
into two classes, j Erniung and Tern, or Taaman; and the chief
regulation is, that these classes must intermarry, that is, an
Erniung with a Taaman; those who infringe this rule are called
Turedangers, and are subject to severe punishment. The children
always follow the denomination of the mother—thus, the man
who is Erniung, will have all his children 'Taaman, his sister’s
children will be Erniung. This practice is common to all tribes
in the neighbourhood, with the exception of the Murram.”
“ The Arrawack [Arahuac] tribe of Indians, in Guayana,” says
Mr. Hillhouse,f “ consists of twenty-seven families. The cast of
blood is derived from the mother, and the family genealogy is
preserved with the greatest care, as a preservation from inces-
tuous intercourse, one family (clan) not being allowed to inter-
marry within itself. The children of a Maratakayu father can-
not therefore be Maratakayu ; but if the mother be Queyunmto,
the children are also Queyunmto, and can marry into the father’s
family, but not into the mother’s.”
It does not appear probable that a law so extraordinary, but
so well devised for the regulation of marriages, could have been
adopted accidentally by savage nations, so far apart, and in oppo-
sition to the general habits, the want of restraint, and hasty pas-
sions of man, in a barbarous state of existence, and we might
therefore infer that this institution has been derived by each of
these tribes from some people in a more advanced stage of know-
ledge than themselves; and if at any time we shall be able to
trace this custom to its source, and observe its greater extension,
these circumstances may tend much to elucidate the migrations
and connexions of the early families of man.
* Journal, vol. i. p. 37.
f Ibid. vol. ii. p. 228.
VOL. VIII.
N


XII.— Descriptive Sketch of the Islands and Coast situated at the
Entrance of the Persian Gulf. By Lieutenant WHITELOCK,
Indian Navy. Communicated by the Bombay Geographical
Society.
[As the chart of the Persian Gulf, resulting from a trigonometrical
survey by the Officers of the Indian Navy, between the years 1821 and
1829, has now been published for some years, and has been made use
of in all good modem maps of that region, it has not been thought ne-
cessary to reprint the portion of it here referred to.
This descriptive sketch will be found to be a useful supplement to a
Memoir by Lieut. Kempthorne, of the Indian Navy, in vol. v. p. 263
of the Geographical Journal; and here, perhaps, it may be permitted to
regret that —although this important survey of the Persian Gulf has been
finished more than eight years —no complete account of it, nor any
description of the coasts, has yet been published. —Ed.]
Passing two rocky islets on the Arabian shore, which are called
the Quoins, you enter the Gulf of Persia, and there are few parts
within it which present a higher claim to attention than this, for
the whole region on every side abounds in historical and classic
interest.
On the right hand, beneath a lofty mountain, called by the
Arabs Jebal Shamal,* which is seen towering far above the other
hills on the Persian shore, with its summit clad with snow, even
in the spring-season, lies the far-famed island of Hormuz; on
the other hand Larek; f and only a few miles further on, the
the town of Gamrun,-which in opulence and magnificence was
only inferior to Hormuz. Kishm,]; also, the ancient Oaracta,
and Mindu, near which took place the meeting of Alexander and
Nearchus, are situated in this vicinity.
The former renown of the island of Hormuz has often occupied
the descriptions of earlier travellers. My object in this sketch is
to describe the island as it is at present; and this, when consi-
dered with reference to its former opulence and splendour, may
not bo deemed wholly uninteresting. Hormuz is twelve miles in
circumference. Its form is nearly circular, and its appearance
from seaward is broken and rugged. The surface, entirely de-
nuded of soil, exhibits the various tints of its singular stratifica-
tion—which, with the conical shape and isolated position of the
numerous small hills' composing the island, gives the former a
highly volcanic aspect, and would induce us to attribute the origin
of the island itself to the same agency.
* Mount North. The orthography of the names of places has been reduced to
the standard adopted by the Society—(see vol. vii. p. 245).
f Or L&rij.
I Sometimes Kishm and Jism—(Niebuhr, Besch. von Arahien, p. 328). It seems
to have been anciently called Keis or Keish—(see Jihan-numa, pp. 275, 532). It
is also called Jezirah taw Hah, or Jezirah Diraz, i. e. Long Island.—(Niebuhr, 1. c.)
