

as So/
NEW SOUTH WALES » A/
OF DEPUTIES
Ycyc YK//
CONSTITUTION
NAME
1. The name of this Association shall be: THE NEW SOUTH
WALES JEWISH BOARD OF DEPUTIES.
HEAD OFFICE ADDRESS
2. The Head Office of the New South Wales Jewish Board of
Deputies which is hereafter referred to as The Board shall be at an
address situate in the City of Sydney.
AIMS AND OBJECTS
3. The aims and objects of the Board shall be
(a) To be and act as the central authority and official spokes-
man of the Jewish Community in New South Wales on lay
matters and questions.
(b) To represent and act as spokesman of the Jews resident in
New South Wales before any Government or other authority
on any lay matter or question affecting Jews in New South
Wales.
(c) To promote unity of endeavour and action within the Jewish
Community of New South Wales.
(d) To safeguard the religious, political, economic, civil and
cultural rights of Jews resident in New South Wales.
(e) To use its influence and to intervene whenever deemed
necessary and desirable in favour of Jews in other States
or countries.
(f) To alleviate the consequences of and to afford relief from
calamities affecting Jews anywhere in the world and to act
in association with other bodies for the rescue, re-settlement
and rehabilitation of Jewish victims of persecution.
(g) To encourage and where deemed necessary to take steps
in association with the Zionist Federation of Australia and
New Zealand towards the establishment in full measure of
the rights of the Jewish people in respect to Palestine under
the Balfour Declaration and the Palestine Mandate.
(h) To associate with and participate in any social, cultural,
philanthropic, charitable or other public movement.


(i) To promote understanding and goodwill between Jews and
citizens of other faiths.
(j) To take any lawful action in any matter affecting the Jewish
Community of New South Wales.
(k) To take note of and to study problems relating to the reli-
gious, social, economic and cultural life of Jews in any part
of the world and to seek, and where possible to take active
steps towards a solution of such problems.
(1) To publish and to promote the publication of newspapers,
pamphlets, periodicals and other literature and to use other
forms of publicity to carry out these aims and objects or
any of them.
(m) To administer any relief or other fund which may be received
in trust or otherwise for any of these aims and objects.
(n) To raise monies for and to apply same in carrying out
any of these aims and objects.
(o) To co-operate with any organisation having aims or objects
similar to these aims and objects.
(p) To promote and become a member of an association,
federation or union of Jewish Boards of Deputies or Jewish
Advisory Boards extending within or beyond the Common-
wealth of Australia.
CONSTITUENT BODIES
4. Any Jewish organisation having headquarters in New South
Wales may make application and be admitted as a Constituent Body
under this Constitution on proof of the following matters obtaining
at the date of the application.
(a) That it has a written Constitution reasonably adequate for
its objects.
(b) That it has at least fifty members each of the full age of
■ eighteen years and each of whom has been a member
throughout a period of not less than six months prior to
the date of the application.
(c) That its objects serve the best interests of and its activities
make a practical contribution to the welfare of Jewry.
Provided that an organisation making application after the first day
of August, 1944, may not be admitted unless it has at least twenty-
five effective members at the date of application.
5. Upon filing at the Board’s Head Office an application signed on
its behalf by its President or Secretary, each of the following organise-


/~7 IO UL(
tions shall be admitted forthwith as a Constituent Body under this
Constitution: —
Great Synagogue. Tarbuth.
Temple Emanuel. Habonim.
Central Synagogue. New South Wales Board of
Western Suburbs Synagogue. Jewish Education.
The Northern Sydney Society of Friends of the
Hebrew Congregation.
National Council of Jewish
Hebrew University. Jerusa-
lem.
Women.
N.S.W. Jewish Ex-Service
Men’s and Women’s Associa-
Young Men’s Hebrew Asso-
ciation.
World Jewish Congress
New South Wales Jewish War
(Aust. Section). ‘ Memorial.
Federation of Polish Jews in United Hebrew Fr ie n d 1 y
Australia. 0 • +
Australian Jewish Welfare Maternity Society.
WlZO*Central Council. si „ Monteflore Jewish
Central Zionist Committee Home. ~
(Zionist State Council) The Children and Youth
Union of Sydney Zionists Aliyah.
6. The organisation formed by the Jewish Ex-Service Men and
Women of New South Wales may be admitted as and be a Constituent
Body under this Constitution notwithstanding its members not being
required under its rules to pay membership fees; for the purpose of
this association membership of the organisation for a specified year
may be secured by the Returned Sailor, Soldier or Airman forwarding
an application in writing to the Secretary of the organisation and such
application may be renewed each year.
7. After application signed on its behalf by its President or Secre-
tary an organisation which is not listed under Clause may be
admitted as a Constituent Body under this Constitution if _in the
opinion of the Deputies in Session such applicant organisation has
the qualifications requisite under Clause (4).
8. An application under Clause (7) shall be made in writing and
forwarded to or lodged with the Secretary at the Boards Head Office
supported by the following:—
(a) A clear statement of the correct names of the applicant and
of its President and Secretary and of their respective
addresses.
(b) A copy of the Constitution of the applicant.
(c) A list of the names of the applicant’s financial members
and of their respective addresses, distinguishing from others
those members who are of the full age of eighteen years
also those who have been members throughout a period of
not less than six months prior to the date of the application.
(d) A payment of at least £5/5/- on account of the then current
year’s contribution.


9. An application under Clause (7) if certified by the Secretary
to be in apparent conformity with Clause (8) shall be considered and
dealt with on behalf of the Board by the Deputies in Session after
notice thereof given in accordance with Clause (47) to all Deputies
then in office and appearing on the Agenda for the meeting. If
approved of and so resolved by a two-thirds majority of the Deputies
present at the voting thereon the application shall be granted. If
neither approved nor deferred to a later meeting of the Deputies any
payment lodged shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days
from the date of the meeting, unless notice received at the Board’s
Head Office within that time of the intention of the applicant to lodge
an appeal under Clause (10).
10. Any motion appealing from a resolution of the Deputies under
Clause (9) refusing an application shall be considered and dealt with
at a subsequent meeting of the Deputies in Session after notice thereof
given in accordance with Clause (47) to all Deputies then in office
and appearing on the Agenda for the meeting. Two representatives of
the applicant accredited by it in writing may address the Deputies
prior to the appeal being decided. If so resolved by a two-thirds
majority of the Deputies present at the voting thereon the appeal
shall be allowed and the applicant admitted as a Constituent Body
either forthwith or subject to conditions.
11. As from the first day of August, 1944, any Constituent Body
admitted under Clauses (5), (6) or (7) shall continue a Constituent
Body until it resigns or its membership is terminated under Clause
(25) or it is suspended or excluded from being a Constituent Body
by resolution of the Deputies in Session after notice of intention to
move such a motion given in accordance with Clause (47) to all
Deputies then in office and appearing on the Agenda for the meeting,
or it ceases to exist. A resolution to suspend or exclude a Constituent
Body shall not be passed or recorded unless approved by a two-thirds
majority of the Deputies present at the voting thereon. Any such
resolution may provide for the suspension or exclusion to come into
effect forthwith or as from some specified date.
12. Any motion to rescind a resolution suspending or excluding a
Constituent Body shall be considered and dealt with at a subsequent
meeting of the Deputies in Session after notice of the intention to
move such a motion given in accordance with Clause (47) to all
Deputies then in office and appearing on the Agenda for the meeting.
Two representatives of the suspended or excluded Constituent Body
accredited by it in writing may address the Deputies prior to the
motion being decided. If so resolved by a two-thirds majority of the
Deputies present at the voting thereon the suspension or exclusion
may be lifted forthwith or as from some specified date.
DEPUTIES
13. A Constituent Body shall file and maintain at the Boani’si
Head Office an up-to-date record of the names of its members and
of their respective addresses. If the name of the same person shall


be found to appear as a member on the membership record of more
than one Constituent Body the name of such person shall not be
credited to any Constituent Body as an effective member thereof
until such person shall have filed with the Boards Head Office a
Notice of Allocation to one of those Constituent Bodies on whose
membership’s records the name appears. As from the filing of such
Notice the name of such person shall be allocated as an effective
member in conformity with the Notice and such person shall not
while the Notice be not withdrawn be accounted as an effective mem-
ber of any other Constituent Body for the purposes of Clause (18).
Subject however to its not becoming operative till six months after
receipt thereof at the Board’s Head Office a member may in writing
withdraw any Notice of Allocation already given and may give at
the same time or at some later date another Notice of Allocation to
become operative as from the expiration of such six months period.
14. A person shall not be eligible to be elected as a Deputy or
an Associate Deputy of a Constituent Body unless of Jewish faith
and of the full age of eighteen years.
15. A Constituent Body may at a meeting of those of its members
who for the time being are accounted to it as effective members under
Clause (13) elect one of its effective members a Delegate and upon
notification from the Constituent Body of such election received at
the Board’s Head Office the Delegate so elected by the effective mem-
bers shall be admitted by the Board as a Deputy of the Constituent
Body At the same or another meeting of its effective members a
Constituent Body may elect one of its effective members an Associate
Delegate and upon notification thereof received the Associate Delegate
so elected shall be admitted by the Board as an Associate Deputy of
the Constituent Body. A meeting of its effective members for the
purpose of electing a Delegate or any Associate Delegate under this
Clause may be held in conjunction with any meeting of the members
of the Constituent Body. More than one Deputy and one Associate
Deputy may be elected at the same meeting subject however to Clauses
(18) and (19).
16. Except in pursuance of Clause (15) no person may be admit-
ted to office as a Deputy or Associate Deputy.
17. The office of any Deputy or Associate Deputy may at any
time be terminated by the Constituent Body represented by th£
Deputy or Associate Deputy notifying the Boards Head Office m
writing that it withdraws the Deputy or Associate Deputy.
18. Representation by a Deputy or Deputies shall be allowed a
Constituent Body on the following basis;—
Having at least 50 and not more than 100 effective members—
One Deputy.
Having at least 101 and not more than 200 effective members—
Two Deputies,
Having at least 201 and not more than 300 effective members
Three Deputies


And so on the number of Deputies allowed a Constituent Body increas-
ing or decreasing upon this scale according as the number of effec-
tive members of the Constituent Body increases or decreases. Provided
that any Constituent Body the number of whose effective members
shall have been reduced by notices of allocation under Clause (13)
to less than fifty but to not less than ten shall nevertheless be entitled
to representation by one Deputy.
19. A Constituent Body having from one to three Deputies in
office shall be allowed one Associate Deputy and a Constituent Body
having more than three Deputies in office shall be allowed two Asso-
ciate Deputies. An Associate Deputy shall have the right to attend
meetings of the Deputies in Session but not to speak or vote. In the
physical absence of a 1 Deputy an Associate Deputy of the same Con-
stituent Body shall have the right to exercise throughout the meeting
the office of and to act in the stead of the absent Deputy,
20. Except as provided in Clause (42) a Deputy or Associate
Deputy shall be elected for a term of two years, commencing on a
first day of January in one year and ending on the 31st day of
December of the next succeeding year, the first of such two year
terms to commence on the Ist day of January 1946 or if elected
during the currency of a two year term the Deputy or Associate Deputy
shall be elected for the balance of such two year term.
21- After admission to office a Deputy or Associate Deputy shall
hold such office until the happening of one of the following:—
(a) He resigns or ceases to be an effective member of the Con-
stituent Body he represents;
(b) the last day of the period for which he is elected shall
have passed; provided that the Executive may on grounds
which shall appear to it to be sufficient permit the Deputy
or Deputies and the Associate Deputy or Associate Deputies
of a Constituent Body which shall have made request to
that effect to remain in office until the 31st of March next
following;
(c) notice of his withdrawal under Clause (17) shall have been
received at the Board’s Head Office;
(d) the Constituent Body he represents ceases to be a Con-
stituent Body;
(e) by a resolution passed by the Deputies in Session by a
two-thirds majority of the Deputies present at the voting
thereon his resignation shall have been requested and he has
not within fourteen days thereafter filed with the General
Secretary of the Board his resignation from office;
(f) he fails to attend two consecutive meetings of the Deputies
in Session without first obtaining leave to absent himself
therefrom or without in the opinion of the Executive having
good cause for such absenting;


(g) a resolution passed by the Deputies in Session by a
thirds majority of the Deputies present at the voting
thereon shall have declared the office of the Deputy or
Associate Deputy to be vacated.
Provided that if a Deputy or Associate Deputy shall have died or
ceased for any reason to be a Deputy or Associate Deputy the Con-
stituent Body he represented up to such death or ceasing to be a
Deputy or Associate Deputy may elect a Deputy or Associate Depu y
to hold office until the expiration of the period for which the forme
Deputy or Associate Deputy was elected.
r.ONTRIBUTIQNS BY CONSTITUENT BODIES
22 A Constituent Body shall each year pay a contribution to the
Board of the amount of £5/5/- and shall also each year pay to ffie
Board an additional amount of £5/5/- in respect of each of the Deputies
(fa excess of one Deputy) in office or entitled to be in office as
Deputies of the Constituent Body.
23. The contribution payable by a Constituent .Dody under
name (22) shall be paid on the first day of January or within fourteen
thereafter A? organisation admitted as a Constituent Body
subsequent to the first of January in any year shall within one month
admission pay to the Board for that year any amouni pay-
able as contribution in addition to that under Clause (8) An o iganisa
tion admitted as a Constituent Body subsequent to the first o
July in any year shall within one month after such admission pay
to ffie Board the amount payable as contribution in addition to
under Clause (8); provided that the amount paid under Clause ( )
and any further amount payable under this dause shaH not together
exceed one half of the total amount that would have been payable
if admission as a Constituent Body had been panted prior to the firs
July. All payments shall be made at the Board s Head Office.
24. A Constituent Body shall prior to the first of October in the
second year of each two year term certify in writing to the Head
Office of the Board over the signature of its President and Secretary
a list of the names and addresses of its financial members who a
that date are of the full age of eighteen years and have been members
throughout a period of not less than six months; also during the month
of December of the same year the names of each Deputy and Associate
Deputy elected by the Constituent Body to represent it for the two
year period commencing on the first day of January then following.
25 A Constituent Body in arrear for more than twelve months
in payment of the whole or any portion of the amount of the con-
tribution payable by it to the Board may by resolution of the Deputies
in Session be declared to have ceased to be a Constituent Body and
as from the date of the resolution the organisation named in the
resolution shall cease to be a Constituent Body; Provided that after
payment of all arrears and of the contribution for the then current
7


period and compliance in all other respects with the provisions of this
Constitution the Deputies in Session may readmit the organisation to
membership as a Constituent Body.
EXECUTIVE
26. The right to perform Executive functions on behalf of the
Board shall be vested in an Executive consisting of
(a) a President, two Vice-Presidents, an Hon. Treasurer and
an Hon. Secretary, all of whom shall be elected by the
Deputies in manner herein provided, and
(b) the Chairmen for the time being holding office as Chairmen
of Committees under the Board. Such Chairmen shall be
elected by the Deputies in manner herein provided.
27. Applications for nominations for the offices of President. Vice-
Presidents, Hon. Treasurer and Hon. Secretary of the Board for the
then current two year term shall be called for by advertisement
appearing in at least one journal circulating amongst the Jewish popu-
lation of New South Wales and appearing therein not less than
twenty-eight days prior to the day of election and each such nomina-
tion paper signed by the person proposed for the particular office and
by a proposer and seconder must reach the Head Office of the Board
not later than fourteen days prior to the day of election. Details
or the nominations for the respective offices and names of proposers
and seconders shall be advertised and appear in at least one journal
circulating amongst the Jewish population of New South Wales not
s f, ve " days prior to the day of election and same shall be
included with the notice convening the meeting at which such elec-
tion shall be held which notice shall be despatched by post to aU
Deputies then in office not later than during the seventh day prior
to the date of the meeting and in compliance with Clause (46) A
candidate defeated for a particular office at any such election may with
his consent be nominated during the meeting by a proposer and
seconder and stand for election at such meeting for any other office
and may be elected to such other office.
28 If there be no larger number of nominations received for anv
office than the number of candidates required to fill the same the
W S °£ S m Pf SOn , nominated shall be declared elected to such offi-e
but should there be more nominations received for any office than
the number of candidates required to fill such office, arf election for
appointment to such office shall be held by ballot among the D^utks
*t n bT jSwed and PreSen ' at ‘ he mMting “ d 6 Proxy’l’all
- Th | President, the Vice-Presidents, the Hon. Treasurer and
the Hon. Secretary shall each of them while holding their respective
offices reside within fifty miles from the Head Office of the Board.
th. Pr f iden l' Vice-Presidents, the Hon. Treasurer and
Se^u € y Sha ! l n °" e of them ** eligible for election to the
office of a Chairman of a Committee.


31. Subject to Clauses (29), (32) and (36) each member of the
Executive shall hold office until his successor in that office has been
duly elected. Retiring members of the Executive shall be eligible for
re-election to the same or other office on the Executive.
32. No person other than a Deputy then in office shall be eligible
to be elected a member of the Executive. Should he cease to be a
Deputy whilst a member of the Executive other than by reason of
the expiration of the period of his office as a Deputy (when Clause
31 shall apply) he shall ipso facto cease to be a member of the
Executive.
33. Should a vacancy at any time occur among the members of
the Executive such vacancy may be filled by the Deputies in Session
at the first meeting after such vacancy shall occur and any Deputy
so appointed shall hold office as provided in Clause (31). The mem-
bers of the Executive in office shall have power to act notwithstand-
ing any vacancy in the number thereof.
34. The President shall be Chairman of all meetings of the Execu-
tive and in the event of the President’s absence from any meeting of
the Executive a Vice-President and in the absence of a Vice-President
any other member of the Executive who may be appointed by the
remaining members of the Executive so to do may preside as Chair-
man over the meeting of the Executive.
35. The President may at any time convene a meeting of the
Executive. Upon request made to him by any two members of the
Executive the President shall forthwith summon a meeting of the
Executive.
36. Any member of the Executive who shall without sufficient
reason or leave of absence, absent himself from three consecutive
regular meetings of the Executive shall ipso facto cease to be a member
of the Executive and the vacancy thereby created may be filled
under Clause (33).
37. All questions at meetings of the Executive shall be decided
on a vote the majority binding the minority. In the case of an
equality of votes the President or the Chairman for the time being
shall have a second or casting vote.
38. A quorum at a meeting of the Executive shall be such a
number as the Deputies in Session shall from time to time determine.
39. True and correct minutes shall be kept of all meetings of the
Executive.
POWERS OF THE EXECUTIVE
40. The. Executive shall have the duty of making recommenda-
tions to the Deputies as in this clause indicated and also shall have
full power and authority on behalf of the Board and of the Deputies
thereof to act as in this clause indicated.


(a) To make, alter, suspend or revoke any rules governing the
procedure and conduct of all meetings, affairs and business
of the Board, provided that nothing be done repugnant to
or inconsistent with this Constitution, but in the absence
of any such rules, the ordinary rules of procedure shall
apply and any action by the Executive under this Sub-Clause
shall be reported to the next following meeting of the
Deputies in Session and such Deputies shall have the right
to over-ride or amend such action.
(b) To appoint, suspend and discharge officials, servants and
other employees, and to fix their salaries or remuneration.
(c) To recommend to the Deputies in Session the purchase or
acquisition on behalf of the Board of any property or rights
including freehold and leasehold property which the Executive
may deem necessary or useful for the Board’s purposes
and also to recommend to the Deputies in Session the
sale or disposal of any such property or rights.
(d) Subject in respect to matter coming under Sub-Clauses (g)
and (h) to the prior consent of the Deputies being first
obtained to enter into contracts and agreements in the
name of the Board, and to let and hire property, and to
appoint a member or members of the Executive to enter
into and/or to sign such contracts on behalf of the Board.
(e) To collect, get in and receive monies on behalf of the
Board and to give receipts therefor.
(f) To open and operate on a banking account or accounts in
the name of the Board, and to appoint such members of
the Executive or officials of the Board as the Executive
may by resolution determine to operate on such banking
accounts.
(g) To purchase or otherwise acquire any freehold or lease-
hold property or rights (subject to the prior consent of the
Deputies in Session). All such property or rights shall be
vested in three Trustees to be elected by the Deputies in
Session and such Trustees shall hold office as Deputies at the
time of election and shall prior to election enter into an
undertaking to execute forthwith after election a Declara-
tion of Trust in form approved by the Executive.
(h) To sell or dispose of any property or rights subject to the
prior consent of the Deputies.
(i) To recommend to the Deputies in Session the establishment
of such committees, permanent or temporary as the Execu-
tive may from time to time deem necessary to carry out
the objects of the Board.
(j) Without prejudice to the generality of Sub-Clause (i)
hereof to recommend to the Deputies in Session the appoint-
ment of Committees to perform functions hitherto exercised


by the Public Relations Committee of the New South Wales
Jewish Advisory Board, the Bureau of Jewish Affairs, the
United Emergency Committee for European Jewry and the
N.S.W. Jewish War Services Committee and those functions
of the New South Wales Jewish Advisory Board which are
within the objects of this Board.
(k) To pay or to refund to any of its members any sums neces-
sary for or expended in travelling or other expenses incur-
red on behalf of and with approval of the Executive.
(1) To recommend to the Deputies in Session the appointment
of Auditors and the fixing of their remuneration.
(m) To raise and borrow money for the Board’s purposes in such
manner and with or without such, security as shall have
been previously approved of by the Deputies in Session.
(n) Subject to any trusts affecting the same to regulate the
management of any property, concession or asset belonging
to or under control of the Board and also the application,
control, management and investment of any funds belonging
to or under control of the Board.
FIRST MEETING
41. The first meeting under this Constitution shall be convened
by the Chairman (at the date of coming into operation of this con-
stitution) of the Provisional Committee engaged in preparation of this
constitution and the other members of such Provisional Committee
shall assist the Chairman in the procedure under this and the next
two clauses hereof.
Prior to the calling of such meeting the Convening Chair-
man shall publish advertisement in compliance with Clause (27)
for the nominations for the offices of President, two Vice-Presidents,
Hon. Treasurer and Hon. Secretary of the Board. Such meeting
shall be held within three months after this Constitution coming into
force. To such meeting shall be summoned by the Convening Chair-
man each person of whose election as a Delegate or an Associate
Delegate of an organisation named in Clause (5) hereof he shall
have been notified and whose election after making reasonable enquiry
he shall consider to be made in conformity with Clause (15) hereof
or as near thereto as possible.
42. After recording attendances and declaring the meeting open
the Convening Chairman shall read out to the meeting the names and
addresses of the Delegates and Associate Delegates who have been
summoned by him to attend and are actually in attendance at the
meeting and shall call for any protest or objection by any person to
the said Delegates and Associate Delegates or any of them and if any
such protest or objection shall be made the Convener shall deal with
and dispose of the same forthwith and failing and subject to any such
protest or objection the Convening Chairman shall declare and shall


then formally admit such persons as Deputies and Associate Deputies
respectively of their respective organisations and the names of such
persons shall be entered as Deputies and Associate Deputies of their
respective organisations to hold office under this constitution for the
period commencing on the date of the meeting and ending on the
31st December, 1945.
43. The Convening Chairman shall then request the meeting to
appoint a new Chairman and if more than one person is proposed as
the new Chairman an election shall be held for the office and after
a new Chairman has been declared elected the Convening Chairman
shall hand over control to the new Chairman and the meeting shall
proceed with the election of a President, two Vice-Presidents, an Hon,
Treasurer and an Hon. Secretary of the Board, to take and hold office
from the date of the meeting and until the 31st December. 1945, and
thereafter until their successors shall be elected and if more than the
required number of persons shall have been nominated for any office
an election for such office shall be held. After making declaration
of the result of the elections the new Chairman shall hand over the
chair to the President of the Board. The meeting shall then proceed
with such other business as the meeting shall deem necessary.
44. The Deputies and Associate Deputies entered under Clause
(42) may exercise all the powers and functions of Deputies and Asso-
ciate Deputies under this constitution and such powers and functions
may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy or vacancies in their
numbers arising -from any cause and the office of each Deputy or
Associate Deputy shall be held subject to being terminated or vacated
under Clause (21).
45. Each President, Vice-President, Hon. Treasurer and Hon.
Secretary, Chairman of a Committee and Member of a Committee
elected at such first meeting or at any subsequent meeting of the
Deputies held during the period commencing at the date of such first
meeting and ending on the 31st December, 1945, may exercise all the
powers and functions which the holder of his office is entitled to exer-
cise under this Constitution, and he shall be subject to the disabilities
and other provisions attaching to such office under this constitution.
MEETINGS OF DEPUTIES
46. Not later than during the 7th day prior to the date of a meet-
ing of the Deputies a notice of such meeting together with an agenda
stating the principal items of business to come before such meeting
shall be despatched from the Head Office of the Board to each Deputy
in office by posting same through the post office in an envelope on
which postage has been prepaid and addressed to the Deputy at the
address of the Deputy last registered with the Board.
47. For any motion or business under Clauses (9), (10), (11),
(12) and (54) of this constitution the notice of the meeting and agenda
shall be despatched from the Head Office of the Board to each Deputy


not later than during the 14th day prior to the meeting and in default
of this having been done such business or motion shall not be pro-
ceeded with unless the Deputies in Session by a two-thirds majority
of the Deputies voting on a motion to that effect shall so agree.
48. All meetings of the Deputies shall be summoned by direction
of the President for the time being of the Board or the person for
the time being exercising the office of President or by direction of a
majority of the members of the Executive or by direction of any ten
Deputies. The Secretary or Acting Secretary shall sign the notice
convening the meeting on behalf of the authority directing the sum-
moning of the meeting.
The President of the Board shall preside over each meeting of
the Deputies and in his absence one of the Vice-Presidents shall
preside over the meeting and in the absence of the President and the
Vice-Presidents the meeting shall elect one of the Deputies to preside
over the meeting.
49. At the first meeting of the Deputies held in the year com-
mencing Ist January, 1946, and at the first meeting held in any sub-
sequent biennial period the Deputies in Session shall elect the Presi-
dent and other Honorary Officers in accordance with the provisions
of Clauses (27) and (28); at the same meeting the Chairmen and
Members of Committees may also be elected.
50. A quorum for a meeting of the Deputies in Session shall be
not less than two-fifths of the total number of Deputies then in office
but the Deputies in Session may increase this number from time to
time.
51. Save as in this Constitution otherwise provided all matters
acts and questions to be done determined and decided by the Deputies
or by any Committee shall be done determined and decided by a
majority of the persons present at the meeting of the Deputies or
Committee and entitled to vote thereon and the Chairman of any
such meeting shall in case of an equality of votes have a second or
casting vote.
52. Meetings of Deputies shall be held at least twelve times during
each calendar year, commencing from the date of the First Meeting
under Clause (41). Additional meetings shall be held as shall be
deemed necessary.
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS OF DEPUTIES
-53. The Deputies in Session shall subject to this Constitution
exercise a general supervisory control over the activities and adminis-
tration of the Board and its Committees and shall define the policy
of the Board and its Committees either generally or in particular
instances and any resolution of the Deputies relating to the activities
administration or policy of the Board shall be binding on the Executive
and all Committees and officers of the Board, Honorary or otherwise,
until the same shall have been altered by a further resolution of the
Deputies. In particular but without limiting the generality of the


foregoing the Deputies in Session shall exercise an exclusive jurisdic-
tion and control over the following:
(a) The appointment of a Committee and its distinguishing title.
(b) The number of the members of a Committee and the mini-
mum attendance for a quorum thereof.
(c) The election of the Chairman and the personnel of a Com-
mittee.
(d) The powers and duties and the duration of a Committee.
(e) The variation of the powers and duties of a Committee.
(f) The dissolution of a Committee.
(g) The exercise by a Committee of authority on behalf of the
Board.
(h) The extent of a delegation to a Committee and the condi-
tions and restrictions to be attached to same.
(i) The minimum intervals at which members of a Committee
shall meet and when and how often a report of its work
shall be made to the Deputies.
(j) The taking over on behalf of the Board and the carrying
out of those functions dealing with lay matters hitherto
exercised by the New South Wales Jewish Advisory Board
and of all the functions hitherto exercised by the Bureau
of Jewish Affairs, the Public Relations Committee of the
N.S.W. Jewish Advisory Board, the United Emergency Com-
mittee for European Jewry and the N.S.W. Jewish War
Services Committee, together with the assets, records and
commitments of the same or any of them.
(k) The co-operation of a Committee with other Committees
or any of them or with other organisations.
(l) The admission of an organisation as a Constituent Body and
any appeal relating thereto.
(m) The suspension or exclusion of a Constituent Body and any
rescission thereof.
(n) The termination of the membership of a Constituent Body
and its readmission.
(o) The consideration of and dealing with a report of the
administration and activities of the Executive or of a Com-
mittee.
(p) The consideration of and dealing with a motion brought
regularly before the Deputies in Session by the Executive
or a Committee or a Deputy then in office.
AMENDMENTS TO CONSTITUTION
54. No alteration addition to or modification of this constitution
shall be made or permitted unless notice in writing of intention to
propose the same shall have been given and read out at a meeting of
the Deputies in Session together with the name of the proposer and
seconder thereof and the motion for such alteration addition or modi-
fication shall have been passed at a subsequent meeting of the Deputies
in Session by a two-thirds majority of the Deputies present at the
voting thereon and such motion shall also have been confirmed by a


two-thirds majority of the Deputies present at the voting thereon at
a further meeting of the Deputies in Session held not less than two
and not more than four months after the meeting at which the motion
shall have been first passed.
Any motion to alter add to or modify this constitution so proposed
and not passed or confirmed may not be again proposed before the
Deputies in Session until after the expiration of six months from the
date of the meeting at which such motion shall have been proposed
and not passed or confirmed.
DEFINITIONS
55. (a) The words “New South Wales” wherever appearing in this
constitution shall be deemed to include the Australian
Capital Territory.
(b) For the purposes of Clauses (8) and (24) the words “finan-
cial members” shall be read in relation to the Organisation
formed by the Jewish Ex-Service Men and Women of New
South Wales as having the meaning “members.”
(c) The words “effective member” shall have the meaning
assigned to them under Clause (13).
(d) Except where the context requires a more restricted mean-
ing to be assigned to the same, words appearing in this
constitution and importing the meaning of the singular
number only shall include the plural number and words
importing the meaning of the plural number only shall
include the singular and words importing the meaning of
masculine gender only shall include the feminine. The
word “month” shall mean “calendar month” and the words
“in writing” shall mean written printed or typewritten or
partly in one or more of such forms.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTITUTION
56. This constitution shall come into operation on the first day
of August one thousand, nine hundred and forty-four.
- INDEX -
Admission of Constituent Bodies .... 7 Chairman of 26 (b), 30, 53 (c)
Aims and Objects of the Board 3 Dissolution of 53 (f)
Appeal from Refusal of Application for Election of 53 (c)
Admission as a Constituent Body 10 Powers of ..... 53 (d), (e), (g), (h)
Application for Admission as a Con- Constituent Bodies 4-12
stituent Body 4 Application for Admission 4
Arrears of Contributions 25 Appeal from Refusal of .. 10, 53 (I)
Associate Deputies 14, 15, 16, 17 Granting of 9
Number of—that may be elected Method of 8
by Constituent Body 19 Refusal of 9, 10
Right to attend Meetings 19 Contributions of ..... 8 (d), 22, 23
—See also under Deputies. hftective Members of 13
Board, Composition of 4 Record of 13, 24
Bureau of Jewish Affairs 53 (j) Membership-
By-laws 40 (a) Suspension of 11, 12, 47
Casting Vote 37, 51 Termination of 11, 25
Committees— Original Constituent Bodies ...... 5
Appointment of 53 (a), (b) Qualifications 4


3 o/- 4- S’/a2 4- 0%4-
/V S'j2-' - index
Contributions— Noth
Arrears 25 Num
by Applicants 8 (d) Quor
by Constituent Bodies 22, 23 Sumr
Constitution — Votii
Amendments to 54 Membe
Date of Coming into Force 56 Susp
Co-operation with Other Bodies .... Terrr
3 (o), 53 (k) Methoc
Definitions 55 Minute
Deputies— Motion
*««■!*« H|s Name i
Eligibility 14 NQmin .
May be only an effective member 15 M v 1 '
May be elected only by effective Notice
members 15 »
Method of Election of 15 Numbe
Number of—that may be elected by
a Constituent Body 18
Period of Service of 20
Termination of Office of 17, 21
Vacancies 44
Effective Members of Constituent „
Bodies—
Notice of Allocation 13 Object;
Election— Origin*
of Deputies 15 Ralestii
of Officers and Committees Porio ,j
27, 28, 29, 49 600
Eligibility as Deputy 14 powers
Executive— D
Officers- Publ £
Definition of 26
Election of 28 Quahfn
Eligibility 32 Quorun
Ineligibility for Office of Chair-
men of Committees 30 Record
Nominations for 27, 41 -Sti
Period of Service of 31 Refusa
Residence of 29 as
Vacancies 33
Meetings of— Repres<
Chairmanship 34 Basis
Convening of 35 Special
Leave of Absence 36 re; C
Minutes i'f re: (
Powers of 40 Cons
Quorum at 38
Voting at 37
Granting of Application for Admission Summo
as a Constituent Body 9 Suspen;
Head Office 2 tu<
Jewish Advisory Board (N.S.W.), 53 (j) Termin
Jewish Ex-Service Men’s & Women’s
Association (N.S.W.) .... 6, 55(b)
Jewish War Services Committee
(N.S.W.) 53 (j)
Meetings of Deputies— United
Chairman of 48 Eu
First 41. 42 Vacanc
Chairman of 43 Amo
Election of Executive Officers ... 43
First —of biennial term — Voting-
Election of Executive Officers and At f
Committees 49
Notice of 46, 47
Number of—annually 52
Quorum at 50
Summoning of 48
Voting at 51
Membership of Constituent Bodies—
Suspension of 11. 12. 47
Termination of 11. 25
Method of Election of Deputies 15
Minutes of Executive Meetings 39
Motions 10, 12, 47. 53 (p)
Name of Board 1
Nominations for Executive Officers. 27, 41
Notice of Allocation 13
~ „ Meetings of Deputies .. 46. 47
Number of Associate Deputies that may
be elected by Constituent
Bodies 19
~ ~ Deputies that may be
elected by Constituent
Bodies 18
„ „ Meetings of Deputies an-
nually 52
Objects of the Board 3
Original Constituent Bodies 5
Palestine 3 (g)
Period of Service of Deputies 20
,. Executive Officers 31
Powers of Executive 40
Public Relations Committee of the
N.S.W. Jewish Advisory Board, 53 (j)
Qualifications of Constituent Bodies .. 4
Quorum, at Meetings of Executive .. 38
~ ~ ~ Deputies .. 50
Record of Effective Members of Con-
stituent Bodies 13. 24
Refusal of Application for Admission
as a Constituent Body and Appeal
therefrom 9, 10
Representation on Board—
Basis of 18
Special Functions of Deputies 53
re: Committees 53 (a)-(k)
re: Constituent Bodies ... 53 (l)-(n)
Consideration of Executive and Com-
mittee Reports, 53 (o)
~ „ Motions 53 (p)
Summoning of Meetings of Deputies .. 48
Suspension of Membership of Consti-
tuent Bodies 11. 12, 47
Termination of Membership of Con-
stituent Bodies, 11, 25
„ ~ Office of Deputies .. 17
~ ~ Service ot Executive
Officers 31
United Emergency Committee for
European Jewry 53 (j)
Vacancies—
Among Deputies 44
~ Executive Officers 33
Voting—
At Meetings of Deputies 51
~ „ „ Executive 37
