

Kuomintang
Documents
The Constitution of the koumintang
Adopted by the First National Congress of the KuomintangJ January
28, 1924; first revision by the Second National Congress, January 16, 1926;
second revision by the Third National Congress, March 27, 1929; third revision
by the Extraordinary National Congress, April 1, 1938; fourth revision by the
Sixth National Congress, May 16, 1945; fifth revision by the Seventh National
Congress, October 17, 1952; sixth revision by the Eighth National Congress,
October 19, 1957; seventh revision by the Ninth National Congress, November
19, 1963.
Chapter I. General Princ iples
Article 1. The guiding principles of the
Kuomintang shall be the Three Principles of
the People 2 and the Five-Power Constitution. 3
Article 2. The Kuomintang shall be a
revolutionary and democratic political party,
charged with the historic mission of completing
the National Revolution so as to preserve and
perpetuate the Republic of China as a de-
mocracy founded on the Three Principles of
the People.
Article 3. The Kuomintang shall be com-
posed of such revolutionary youths and other
patriotic Chinese as have faith in the Three
Principles of the People, who oppose “class
struggle,” and who fight unitedly for the
interests of the nation and of the people.
Article 4. The Kuomintang shall be or-
ganized along the following basic lines: (I)
Cadres are to be elected in order to strengthen
the party organization; (2) Individual members
are to obey the organization, and the minority
is to obey the majority; (3) Free discussion is
1 Nationalist Party
2 Nationalism, Democracy, and the People’s Livelihood
3 Executive, Legislative, Control, Judicial, and Examination
1


to precede the reaching of decisions, and all
members are to obey decisions thus reached.
Article 5. The Kuomintang’s formula of
leadership shall be: (1) To inspire party com-
rades with the principles; (2) To guide political
activities with sound policies; (3) To promote
progress through analytical discussion; and (4)
To win confidence through performance.
f
Article 6. The Kuomintang’s relationship
with the government shall be to: (1) Formulate
policies in accordance with the principles; (2)
Select personnel in accordance with the policies;
(3) Control party members holding government
posts through the party organization; and (4)
Hold party members occupying government
posts responsible for carrying out the party’s
resolutions.
Article 7. The Kuomintang’s relationship
with society shall be aimed at public service
provided through members who shall learn of
the people’s hardships, reflect their views,
improve public morals and manners, and
promote mass movements.
Article 8. The Kuomintang shall build
up a system of cadres to strengthen its leader-
ship, invigorate its organization, and fulfill its
mission.
Chap ter II. Membership
Article 9. Any person who is willing to
carry out the Kuomintang’s guiding principles
and fulfill the obligations of a member, and
whose application for membership has been
duly approved in accordance with regulations,
shall become a member of the Kuomintang.
Article 10. Members of the Kuomintang
shall have the following obligations: (1) To
publicize the principles of the Kuomintang
and implement the policies; (2) To attend
party meetings, participate in activities, and
pay dues; (3) To carry out party resolutions
and observe party discipline; (4) To support
candidates nominated by the Kuomintang in
various elections; and (5) To serve the people.
Article 11. Members of the Kuomintang
shall have the right to: (1) Speak, introduce
resolutions, and vote at party meetings; (2)
Elect and recall party officers and to be elected
to party posts; (3) Participate, with the ap-
proval of the Kuomintang, in various elections
and to receive party nomination and support
as candidates; (4) Make suggestions and report
irregularities to the party organization in
accordance with regulations; and (5) Apply
for assistance and aid from the Kuomintang,
in case of unemployment or other hardship
sustained as a result of carrying out party
directives.
Article 12. With a view to strengthening
the party organization, the conduct and per-
formance of the members shall be examined
and a general review of party membership
and a general registration of party members
shall be held periodically. Pertinent regula-
tions shall be decided upon by the Central
Committee.
Article 13. Regulations governing the
selection, training, appointment, and examin-
ation of party cadres shall be decided upon
by the Central Committee.
Chapter III. Party Organizational
Article 14. The organizational structure
of the Kuomintang shall be as follows:
Level Organization
(1) National National Congress Cen-
tral Committee
(2) Provincial and Provincial and Special
Special Muni- Municipal Congress—
cipal Provincial and Special
Municipal Committee
(3) County and County and Municipal
Municipal Congress County and
Municipal Committee
(4) District District Plenary Meeting
or District Congress —Dis-
trict Committee
Sub-district Sub-district Plenary Meet-
ing—Sub-district Commit-
tee
(5) Party Cells Cell Meetings
2


Article 15. The organs of authority at
different levels of the Kuomintang shall be as
follows:
Level Organization
(1) National National Congress, or, dur-
ing its recess, the Central
Committee
(2) Provincial and Provincial and Special
Special Muni- Municipal Congress, or,
cipal during its recess, the Pro-
vincial and Special Mu-
nicipal Committee
(3) County and County and Municipal
Municipal Congress, or, during its
recess, the County or Mu-
nicipal Committee
(4) District District Plenary Meeting
or District Congress, or,
during its recess, the Dis-
trict Committee.
Sub-district Sub-district Plenary Meet-
ing, or, during its recess,
the Sub-district Committee
(5) Party Cells Cell Meetings
Article 16. General branches overseas (di-
rectly under the Central Committee) shall be
equivalent in status to Provincial branches at
home. Branches overseas (sub-branches direct-
ly under the Central Committee) shall be
equivalent in status to County branches at
home. Sub-branches overseas shall be equiva-
lent in status to District branches at home. The
organization of party branches overseas shall
be determined by the Central Committee on
the basis of actual needs.
Article 17. Regulations for setting up party
branches in areas having special conditions
shall be determined by the Central Committee.
Article 18. Regulations for setting up party
branches in Special Administrative Areas shall
be determined by the Central Committee.
Article 19. The Kuomintang may, in ac-
cordance with actual needs, set up various
party branches other than the regional ones.
Pertinent regulations shall be determined by
the Central Committee.
Article 20. The Kuomintang may, in ac-
cordance with actual needs, set up party cau-
cuses. Pertinent regulations shall be determined
by the Central Committee.
Ch apter IV. The Tsung-li
Article 21. The Kuomintang shall have
as its Tsung-li Dr. Sun Yat-sen, father of the
Three Principles of the People and the Five-
Power Constitution. 4
Article 22. Members of the Kuomintang
shall follow the instructions of the Tsung-li
and strive for the realization of the principles.
Article 23. The Tsung-li shall be the
Chairman of the National Congress.
Article 24. The Tsung-li shall be the
Chairman of the Central Executive Committee.
Article 25. The Tsung-li shall have the
right to refer to the National Congress its own
resolutions for reconsideration.
Article 26. The Tsung-li shall have the
final decision on resolutions of the Central
Executive Committee.
Chapter V. The Tsung-tsai
Article 27. The Kuomintang shall have a
Tsung-tsai, 5 to be elected by the National Con-
gress, to carry out the duties of the Tsung-li as
prescribed in Chapter IV of this Constitution.
Article 28. The Kuomintang shall have a
Deputy Tsung-tsai to assist the Tsung-tsai in
administering party affairs. The DeputyTsung-
tsai shall be nominated by the Tsung-tsai, and
approved by the National Congress.
Chapter VI. Central Party Organ
Article 29. The National Congress of the
Kuomintang shall meet once every four years.
4 Dr. Sun Yat-sen, Tsung-li (President) of the
Kuomintang, died on March 12, 1925. In Jan-
uary, 1926, the Kuomintang at its Second National
Congress adopted Dr. Sun’s last testament as a
guide to future party efforts.
5 Director General


The Central Committee may decide to
postpone the convocation of the National Con-
gress if this should be deemed necessary.
The Central Committee may convene an
extraordinary National Congress if this should
be deemed necessary or is requested by more
than half of the province-level party branches.
Article 30. The principal duties of the
National Congress shall be to; (1) Elect the
Tsung-tiai; 6 (2) Approve the Deputy Tsung-
tsai' as nominated by the Tsung-tsai; (3)
Approve members of the Central Advisory
Committee as nominated by the Tsung-tsai;
(4) Amend the party Constitution; (5) Decide
on the party platform and policies; (6) Review
the work done by the Central Committee; (7)
Discuss party and political affairs; and (8)
Elect members of the Central Committee.
Article 31. The functions of the Central
Committee shall be to: (1) Represent the party
in its external relations; (2) Implement resolu-
tions of the National Congress; (3) Discuss
and administer party and political affairs; (4)
Organize and direct party branches at various
levels; (5) Train and guide party cadres; (6)
Enforce party discipline; and (7) Raise funds
and control the party budget.
Article 32. The Central Committee shall
elect from among its own members a certain
number to form a Standing Committee to
function during the recess of the plenary session
of the Central Committee, to which it shall
be responsible.
Article 33. The plenary session of the
Central Committee shall meet once a year.
The Standing Committee may, in case of
necessity, call extraordinary sessions of the
Central Committee.
Article 34. The date of convocation of
the National Congress and important items on
the agenda shall be made known to all party
members two months in advance.
Article 35. The National Congress and the
6 President Chiang Kai-shek was elected the
Tsung-tsai in 1938.
7 Vice President Chen Cheng was elected the
Deputy Tsung-tsai in 1957.
plenary session of the Central Committee shall
meet at the seat of the Central Party Organ.
Article 36. The by-laws of the Central
Committee shall be prescribed separately.
Article 37. The Kuomintang shall have a
Central Advisory Committee, whose members
shall be nominated by the Tsung-tsai from
among senior party members known for their
outstanding achievements, and approved by the
National Congress. The duties of the Central
Advisory Committee shall be to: (1) offer
advice and suggestions on important changes
in party or political matters; (2) consider major
cases of discipline; (3) supervise the political
activities of party members to see whether they
are in conformity with the party platform and
policies; and (4) advise on such matters as may
be referred to it by the Tsung-tsai.
The Central Advisory Committee shall
discharge its duties through meetings, and its
resolutions shall be submitted to the Tsung-tsai
for approval before implementation.
Procedural regulations of the Central Ad-
visory Committee shall be prescribed separately
by the Central Committee.
Chapter VIII. Provinc ial and
County Party Organs
Article 38. The Provincial Congress of
the Kuomintang shall meet once every three
years. The County Congress of the Kuomintang
shall meet once every two years. An extraordi-
nary Provincial Congress may be held when:
(1) The Central Committee so orders; (2) The
Provincial Committee concerned deems it neces-
sary; or (3) More than half of the members
of the County Committee concerned request it.
An extraordinary County Congress may
be held when: (1) The Provincial Committee
so orders; (2) The County Committee concerned
deems it necessary; (3) More than half of the
District Committees concerned request it; or
(4) More than one-third of the party members
in the County request it.
Article 39. The duties of the Provincial
Congress shall be to: (1) Review work done
by the Provincial Committee; (2) Decide on


policies concerning party affairs in the province;
(3) Review the performance of party members
holding posts in the provincial government; (4)
Review the execution of the party platform
and policies in the province; and (5) Elect
members of the Provincial Committee.
Article 40. The functions of the Provincial
Committee shall be to: (1) Carry out orders
of the Central Committee and resolutions of
the Provincial Congress; (2) Organize local party
organs in the province and direct their activities;
(3) Assist and lead party members in extending
their social relationships and in improving local
civic projects; (4) Train and guide party cadres
at the provincial and county levels; (5) Enforce
party discipline; and (6) Raise funds and control
the party budget in the province.
Article 41. The Provincial Committee shall
have a member-in-charge to be elected by and
from among its members to attend to routine
party affairs.
Article 42. The duties of the County Con-
gress shall be to: (1) Decide on policies con-
cerning party affairs in the county; (2) To
review the work done by the County Committee;
(3) Review the performance of party members
holding county government posts; (4) Study
measures for the implementation of local
self-government and local reconstruction pro-
grams; and (5) Elect members of the County
Committee.
Article 43. The functions of the County
Committee shall be to: (I) Carry out orders
from senior party organs and resolutions of the
County Congress; (2) Organize party offices in
the County and direct their activities; (3) Assist
and lead party members in extending their
social relationships and in improving local civic
projects; (4) train and guide party cadres at
the county and district levels; (5) Assist and
lead party candidates in various elections; (6)
Enforce party discipline; and (7) Raise funds
and control the party budget in the county.
Article 44. Each County Committee shall
have a member-in-charge, to be elected by and
from among its members, to attend to routine
party affairs.
Article. 45. Convening of the Provincial
or County Congress may be postponed upon
approval by the senior party organ of a request
filed by the Provincial or County Committee
concerned.
Chapter VIII. District Sul-
district Organs. and Cells
Article 46. The District Plenary Meeting
shall be held annually. The Sub-district Plenary
Meeting shall be held every six months. The
cells shall meet at least once a month. The
District Congress may be held in place of the
District Plenary Meeting in districts covering
extensive areas or where the members are too
numerous to make a plenary meeting practical,
provided a request to this effect is approved by
the County Committee.
Article 47. The duties of the District or
Sub-district Plenary Meeting (or District Con-
gress) shall be to: (1) Decide on policies con-
cerning party affairs in the district: (2) Review
the work done by the District or Sub-district
Committee; (3) Review performance of party
members holding district government posts; (4)
Study measures for the implementation of local
self-government and local reconstruction pro-
grams; and (5) Elect members of the District
or Sub-district Committee.
Article 48. The functions of the District
or Sub-district Committee shall be to: (1) Carry
out orders of senior party organs and resolutions
of the District Plenary Meeting or District
Congress; (2) Organize party offices in the
district, direct activities of the party cells, pro-
mote social service projects and step up social
reconstruction; (3) Train and guide party
cadres in the District or Sub-district; (4) Assist
and lead party candidates in various elections;
(5) Enforce party discipline; and (6) Raise
funds and control the party budget in the
District or Sub-district.
Article 49. Members of the District or
Sub-district Committee shall elect from among
themselves an executive member to attend to
routine party affairs.
Article 50. Party cells shall be the basic
organization of the Kuomintang. Each party


cell shall consist of from three to fifteen mem-
bers.
Article 51. The functions of the party
cells shall be to: (1) Carry out orders of senior
party organs; (2) Recruit new members; (3)
Train party members in order to cultivate
party loyalty and virtue; (4) Cultivate comrade-
ship and promote mutual help and cooperation
among the party members; (5) Assign and
supervise the work of party members; (6)
Collect membership fees; (7) Publicize the
principles, platform, and policies of the Kuo-
mintang; (8) Study social conditions and pro-
mote public service projects; and (9) Study
and make recommendations on changes in
party and political affairs.
Article 52. Each party cell shall have a
leader to be elected by and from among com-
ponent members to attend to routine party
affairs.
Chapter IX. Tenure of Office
and Filling Vacancies
Article 53. The tenure of office for com-
mittee members at various levels and for party
cell leaders shall be: (1) Four years in the case
of members of the Central Committee; (2)
Three years in the case of members of the
Provincial Committee; (3) Two years in the
case of members of the County Committee;
(4) Two years in the case of members of the
District or Sub-district Committee; and (5) One
year in the case of party cell leaders.
The tenure of office for alternate commit-
tee members shall be the same as that of com-
mittee members. Should the re-election of
Committees at various levels be postponed, the
incumbent committee members shall remain in
office until new committees are elected.
Article 54. Alternate members may sit in
on committee meetings at various levels. In
case any committee members are absent, their
places may be filled, in order of seniority, by
alternate members, who may have the tempo-
rary right to vote. The number of alternate
members having the right to vote shall not
exceed one-third of the total number of com-
mittee members attending the meeting.
Article 55. Committee vacancies at various
levels shall be filled by alternate members in
order of seniority.
Chapter X. Discipline
Article 56. All party members shall faith-
fully: (1) Abide by the party Constitution; (2)
Obey party orders; (3) Implement party policies
and resolutions; (4) Safeguard party secrets;
(5) Pay membership dues regularly; (6) Adhere
to basic party organization; (7) Refrain from
attacks on party members or party organs
outside the party; (8) Abstain from acts im-
pairing party honor; (9) Refuse to join other
political parties; and (10) Resist formation of
factions or cliques within the party.
(Note: The Kuomintang is charged with the
historic mission of completing the National
Revolution. All party members should realize
that the success of the party lies in the cultiva-
tion of party virtue and the strict observance
of party discipline.)
Article 57. The Kuomintang shall exercise
supervision over its members and party organs
at various levels in the following manner: (1)
Supervision from the higher level; (2) Deli-
beration at the same level; and (3) Impeach-
ment from the lower level.
Article 58. Party members violating the
provisions of Article 56 shall be subject to:
(1) Warning; (2) Suspension of party rights;
or (3) Expulsion. All party members should
condemn those who have been expelled by
the party because of disloyalty.
Article 59. Party committees violating
party discipline shall be dissolved. If the ma-
jority of the members of a party branch violate
party discipline, the branch shall be dissolved,
and its members shall be registered anew to
determine whether they are to be retained or
expelled.
Article 60. Party organs at various levels
shall create a disciplinary committee whose
members shall be assigned by the senior party
branch. The members of the disciplinary com-
mittee shall have the responsibility of impeach


ment and investigation in cases of party dis-
cipline violations. Other party members who
have learned of such cases may refer them to
the disciplinary committee to which they be-
long or, in special cases, to the senior party
branch concerned.
Article 61. Individual members or party
organs impeached for violation of party dis-
cipline shall be investigated and if found
guilty shall be punished either by the party
branch to which they belong or by the senior
party branch concerned. The suspension of
party rights shall be enforced only upon the
resolution of the Provincial Committee, and
the expulsion of members shall be enforced
only upon the resolution of the Central Com-
mittee.
Party members thus disciplined may appeal
to party committees at higher levels, all the
way up to the National Congress, which may
resolve to restore membership to those expelled
from the party.
Procedures governing cases of impeach-
ment, investigation, appeal, penalty, and restitu-
tion of party membership and party rights
shall be determined by the Central Committee.
Chapter XI. Finace
Article 62. The financial resources of the
Kuomintang shall be drawn from membership
dues, special contributions, and profits of party-
operated enterprises.
Article 63. The amount of membership
dues shall be determined by the Central Com-
mittee. Members who are unemployed or in
a situation of financial stringency may be ex-
empted from paying dues if their cases are
reported by party cells and approved by the
senior party branches concerned.
Chapter XII. Appendix
Article 64. The right to interpret this
Constitution shall rest with the National Con-
gress or, during its recess, with the Central
Committee.
Article 65. This Constitution shall become
effective as from the date of its promulgation
by the National Congress.
