

COITSECRATIOIsr
OF THE
mSBSOI ■Eiillfi IHWiI iiiiiEi ISLAND.
[BY ONE OF THE VISITORS,
On Thursday, November 25, the Southern
Cross, a vessel of 124 tons, with auxiliary steam-
power of twenty-five horses, left Auckland at
noon, having on board, besides crew and officers,
twenty-three ladies and twenty-nine gentlemen,
invited guests to Norfolk Island to be present
at the consecration of the church erected to
the memory of that noble Christian martyr.
Bishop Patteson. On Thursday, December 2,
the Southern Cross arrived at her destination
about 7 o’closk a.m. The island looked en-
chanting from the sea. The bright green,
smooth, lawn-like grass, with the dark pints
and varied foliage of the semi-tropical trees and
shrubs—the hilly land, with graceful undula-
tions, picturesque valleys, and deep gorges,
make a beautiful picture. Here and there a
plateau of pasture land, dotted with clumps of
pines, cattle and sheep grazing on the green
sward, presented quite a park-lixe appearance.
The ship came to anchor on the north side of the
island, and lay off the landing-place called the
Cascades, where two streams of fresh water rush
from the rocks into the sea. With our glasses
we saw horsemen approaching the shore from
the hills. We did not. wait long before we
descried a whaleboat leaving the landing-place,
and soon after we recognised Bishop {Selwyn
standing in the stern, with his coat off, steering
the boat with an uar, which he handled in a way
that showed him to be an expert in the manage-
ment of boats. As he came alongside a hearty
cheer from all hands welcomed his arrival. His
crew of Pitcairners fine, handsome, active
fellows, with complexions of Spaniards, dark
hair and eyes—evoked expressions of admira-
tion from the visitors. Soon after another boat
appeared with a similar crew. The ship’s boat,
in charge of Mr. Kay, was brought into requisi-
tion also, and by 11.30 all the passengers, with
their baggage, were safely landed on the rough
jetty of rocks at the Cascades. Saddle-horses
tor the gentlemen who wished to ride, and gigs
and dog-carts for the ladies, were provided, and
a delightful walk over the hills from the
Cascades of three miles brought us to
a grand avenue of magnificent pines
leading to the Melanesian settlement.
The new church was one of the first
objects which attracted our attention, and
shortly after we found ourselves among the
houses occupied by our hospitable friends, who
gave us a warm and hearty reception. After
our respective quarters had been allotted to us
we assembled in the large schoolroom, where we
found the table spread with a generous liber-
ality, and in addition to the usual substantial
fare were yams and kumara (sweet potato)
novelties to most of us. Bright flowers de-
corated the table, and bananas, strawberries,
and peaches were in abundance. We afterwards
took a survey of the settlement, which comprises
i-lxe new church, built ef stone ; the large school-
room, eighty feet long; the old church, now
fitted up as a museum; the storehouse, carpen-
ter’s shop, blacksmith’s shop, barn, and other
offices, and nine good houses, with broad
verandahs, most of them surrounded with
gardens full of beautiful flowers and tropical
shrubs; in one of them pineapples
were growing most vigorously. All these
buildings are constructed of wood. The little
cemetery is on a hillside, where palm, fern-
trees, and bananas luxuriate; the most notice-
able object therein is the white marble cross
which marks the resting-place of the Bishop’s
beloved wife, the late Clara Selwyn, and her
little daughter Clara Violet. Mrs. Palmer and
others are buried here. This spot was visited
with feelings of deep interest, and sympathy for
the friends of the departed. We were glad to
find that the graves were not very numerous,
considering fourteen years had elapsed since the
settlement of the mission. A cricket match was
played by the island boys on ground near the
Bishop’s house, and they appeared to enjoy the
game thoroughly. We assembled again at 6.30
for dinner (tea) in the schoolroom. All our
meals were taken together “ in hall,” an excel-
lent and cheerful arrangement. At 8 o’clock we
were called to service in the church. Evening
prayers were read by the Rev. A. Baker
and the Bishop in Mota (Banks’s Island
language). A fjervine.a are rvinHnnted in Mota,
which is taught to all natives here. The
canticles and hymns were very nicely sung
by the Melanesians, and all of them appeared
to join heartily in the service; their behaviour
is most reverent, and they seem very attentive
throughout the service. The Bishop of Waiapu
preached most interesting sermon, and gave an
account of his ministry among the Kois, hill-
tribe natives of India, at Ranchi, in the Chhoca
Nagpore Mission, North Bengal, where tbe
church he ministsred in would hold 1,400
natives. The Rev. R. H. Codrington iater-
preted, and the Melanesians listened with
apparent interest.
The following morning—Friday—was spout
in a visit to Kingcown to see the Pitcairn
people and to pay our respects to their venerable
pastor, the Rev. J. H. Nobbs, aged eighty-one,
aud Mr. John Buffett, aged eighty-three, both
of whom gave many interesting anecdotes of
Pitcairn Island in their early days. In Mr.
Nobbs’s room was a portrait of Her Majesty,
Prince Albert, and four of the royal children,
presented by the Queen herself after an inter-
view with Mr. Nobbs at Osborne, Isle of Wight.
The sad memorial of criminal life in the
ruined gaol—dark solitary cells, aud other
cells used for separate confinement next
attracted our attention, and then the cemetery
was visited. Among the tombstones was one
erected to the memory of Thomas E. Biddle-
combe. Master R.N., late of H.M.S. Falcon, who
died January 19, 1867, aged 28 years. He was
one of the officers oa board the Falcon when she
was at Port Adelaide, in Sir Dominick Daly’s
time. After lunch several excursions were made
to different parts of the island, and the Revs. O.
C. Elcum, Dr. Kinder, and Philip Walsh availed
themselves of the opportunity of taking views
of the lovely scenery. At evensong Mr. Elcum
was invited to address the Melanesians. He
spoke clearly and eloquently of the temptations
to evil all are subject to, and drew a powerful
picture of those who had broken the laws of
their country, and the consequences of their
actions. He noticed the view from Mount Pitt,
which showed the remains of the convict esta-
blishment on one side and the peaceful home of
the Melanesians on the other. His sermon pleased
not only our friends of the mission, but the
visitors also. At night there was a concert in
the schoolroom. The Melanesians sang rounds
and choral songs to the tunes used commonly in
our day-schools in South Australia very prettily,
and in perfect time and tune. The Maori
clergymen sang native songs and danced, to the
delight and uproarious mirth of the company.
Mrs. Mitchell, a most accomplished vocalist.
Miss Maunsell, and Mr. Elcum, with others,
added much to the enjoyment of the evening
by exercising their vocal talents,
Saturday, December 4.—The “great success” of
to-day (as the Press would term it) was Mr.
Codrington’s picnic in a lovely spot on the cliffs
overlooking the sea at Anson’s Bay, north-west
end of the island. Among the good things
enjoyed after a long walk over hill and dale
among grand forest trees and in umbrageous
groves was some of Gilbert’s Pewsey Vale
Reisling and Jacob’s Moorooroo Shiraz. Fresh-
caught fish and the yams cooked in the native
fashion were most delicious. Mount Pitt was
our destination, the top of which is 900 feet.
After a vigorous pull we found ourselves on
the summit, when a glorious sight opened to our
view. It was a bright clear day, and we could
see all around the seagirt land. Below on the
plains in an enclosed field on Mr. Rossiter’s
farm, about two miles off, the athletic sports
were going on, and we joined our party there.
The Pitcairn men showed out very well. The
cricket ball was thrown first 103 yards—the
winner did 105 yards; a mile race was won in
five minutes, aud pole-jumping 7 5 and 8 feet.
The Fife and Drum Band of Kingtown attended,
and altogether the sports went off very well.
Mr. and Mrs. Rossiter kept open house, showing
hearty hospitality to all visitors In the even-
ing one of the two Maori priests (visitors), the
Rev. Leonard Renata, of New Zealand North,
preached to the Melanesians after pravers, using
the same text as Bishop Stuart. He spoke of
the labours of the late Bishop among the Maoris
very feelingly, and of the work being done in
the islands by the Bishop of Melanesia.
Archdeacon Maunsell assisted Mr. Codrington,
who in all cases acted as interpreter. A native
played the organ chants and hymns very well in
excellent time and tune. This night we had a
large bonfire and a good display of fireworks ; the
rackets, Catherine wheels, and Roman candles,
&c., were appreciated by tbe delighted andience
of Melanesians. N ative dances, and Maori songs
and dances in character, given during the even-
ing, excited much interest aud amusement.
Sunday, December s.—Matins were held at
the usual hour in Mota; holy communion in
English at 7 o’clock ; 10 o’clock morning service
in English, the Bishop of Melanesia extem-
poraneously preached from the 15th chapter of
St. Paul’s Epistle to Homans a soul-stirring
sermon, speaking of all the trials, the difficul-
ties, the disappointments the mission had to
contend with; the faith and patience necessary
to be exercised in carrying on the work, the
labourers in the harvest-field being sustained by
the “comfort of the Scriptures,” which gave
them hope. The clear voice, the earnest manner,
the simple manliness of the preacher reminded
me of his father, the great and gifted missionary
Bishop of New Zealand, whom I have often
heard preach. John Richardson Selwyn, Bishop
of Melanesia, is a worthy son of his able and
energetic father. At Sunday-school the Rev.
O. O. Elcum catechized a class of boys who were
to be baptized. Rev. Mr. Penny acting as inter-
preter. The result I give in his own words:
“They all seemed thoroughly in earnest, ana
their answers, though very unlike those which
English children would have given, proved that
they quite understood the responsibility they
were about to undertake. 1 shall never forget
their meditative faces (I know no other word)
as I—pointing to a little ornamental cross
which I happened to notice and put on the
table before them —asked ‘ what that meant ?’ I
began my lesson by asking them * What is a
Christian ?’ and before I had done I saw quite
well that they clearly realized nob only the
historical lessons of the Gross, but also the
obligation of those who bear that sign to follow
the Crucified in holiness and unselfishness.”
Archdeacon Maunsell, a veteran missionary,
Vdio translated the Bible into Maori, preached
from Acts xvii. 27, and his address was rich
with illustrations and metaphor, at which
be is an adept, and commanded the
attention of the congregation. Hia ability
to teach was very apparent to all. A
crowded congregation assembled for service in
the evening, when eight Melanesian boys and
one woman were baptized by Bishop Selwyn.
The first was Philip Paraks, from Ysabel, Solo-
mon Islands, a very intelligent-looking boy
between twelve and thirteen. I stood sponsor
for him. He is a scholar named for St. Bartho-
lomew’s, Norwood. Mr. Elcum stood a god-
father to Ambrose Benks, Florida, Solomon
Island, Trinity Church scholar. It was a most
interesting service, and every one seemed much
impressed. The organ was played by Mr. Bro wn,
of St. Matthew’s, Auckland. A native deacon
read the lessons. At Kingtowu large congrega-
tions assembled in the morning. Rev. A. Baker
read prayers, and administered holy communion
to a large number. Archdeacon Maunsell
preached. In the afternoon there was another
large gathering at 3.30. Rev. Frank Gould read
prayers, and Rev. Dr. Kinder preached a learned
discourse. The congregational singing was
hearty and grand.
Monday, December 6.—As it was raining the
intended Horticultural Show was postponed.
The Wentworth arrived from Fiji, and ten of
the passengers came to the mission, and as usual
were hospitably entertained. The afternoon
proved fine, and excursion parties were orga-
nized to gather ferns. At the evening service
the Rev. B. Y. Ash well preached, and gave the
result of his forty years’ experience among the
Maoris. Rev. J. Palmer interpreted. In the
evening an organ recital and sacred concert was
given, at which some Pitcairners attended. At
the conclusion social gatherings took place at
the hospitable houses of Mrs. Oolenso, Mrs.
Bice, and Mrs. Palmer, Mr. Penny, Mr. Oomins,
and Mr. Ruddock also welcoming all comers,
open house to all being the order of the day.
The parcel from the ladies at Mount Gambier
was opened by their scholar Davotlata, in the
presence of Mr. Codrington and Adelaide friends.
An expression of surprise was followed by a
smile of joy, as the toys, top, marbles, har-
monicon, &c.,came to light after the clothes had
been handed out. His comrades showed intense
interest and great sympathy with the happy
recipient of the parcel. The case of clothing,
biscuits, and lollies from the Adelaide ladies
having been opened, the blue serge jackets with
brass buttons were admired, and one boy
marched off with a grin of delight in his new
uniform. These presents were much appreciated.
Mr. Elcum’s boxes of toys, books, and musical
instruments—a rich and varied assortment—
created exclamations of wonder. Expressive
signs of joy were manifested as he distributed
his presents- He kindly gave handsome books
to the Gawler, North Adelaide, and Trinity
scholars in name of congregation.
Tuesday, December 7- —To-day was the day
fixed for the consecration of St. Barnabas
Church. The weather was delightful, and all
were astir in the mission grounds before 6
o’clock. The islanders were in gala dress, the
men in blue trousers, white shirts, and bright-
coloured neckties, while the women wore white
jackets and fancy petticoats. They all break-
fasted with the Bishop and nis guests, and then
at a quarter to 10 o’clock the Bishop and clergy
assembled in the old schoolroom to robe. Then
came the procession to the new church, the
order of which was as follows : —Clergy, Revs.
Arthur Baker, David Ruddock, Philip Walsh,
Frank Gould, O. C. Elcum, R. B. Comins, V.
Lush, Alfred Penny, B. Y. Ashwell, B. T.
Dudley, Leonard Renata (Maori priest), Edward
Wogate (native deacon, Torres Island), Dr :
Kinder (St. John’s College, Auckland), John
Palmer, Charles Bice, Kerehona Piwaka
(Maori deacon), the Venerable Archdeacon
Maunsell, R. H. Codrington, J. H. Nobbs, the
Right Reverend the Bishop of Waiapu, the
Right Reverend the Bishop of Melanesia.
Before the procession entered the church every
seat was occupied, and when the congregation
stood up there was only just space for the clergy
to walk in couples. On arriving at the altar the
Bishop of Melanesia took his seat, and the peti-
tion for consecration from the Trustees was
presented by Mr. John Henry Upton. The
Bishop, signifying his assent, rose, and with the
Bishop of Waiapu and clergy proceeded to the
east door and back, repeating the 115th Psalm.
After returning to his seat the Bishop offered
up special prayers, composed for the occasion, and
which had been printed by the Mission Press in
English and Mota. The hymns and other parts
of the service were also printed, and by this
excellent arrangement all were enabled to
follow the service for the day. At the conclu-
sion of the ten special prayers the B shop pro-
nounced the sentence of consecration. The
morning service was then held, after which
the Melanesians of both sexes left the church,
and the communion service proceeded in Eng-
lish. The sermon was preached by the Rev. B.
T. Dudley, Secretary and Treasurer of the
Mission, and incumbent of S. Sepulchre’s Church,
Auckland, the text being taken from Isaiah
liii. 11—“ He shall see of the travail of His
soul, and shall be satisfied.” The preacher
pointed out that the Almighty King was still
waiting, unsatisfied, for the full accomplishment
of the purpose for wiiich He became incarnate ;
that similarly Bishop Patteson, and those taken
from the Melanesian Mission to paradise, might
be conceived of as, in Him, waiting unsatisfied
for the gathering in of His redeemed from the
multitude of the isles; and that we also, while
thankful for each smallest token of the con-
tinued living interest and direction and blessing
of our King, of which His representation in the
east window of the chapel, His hand stretched in
perpetual blessing of the successive bands of
Melanesian worshippers who assembled there,
was a beautiful and constant reminder we too
must patiently and persistently press on in the
great work, first bringing every thought in our-
selves into captivity to the obedience of Christ,
and secondly regarding ourselves as His privi-
leged instruments for the prosecution of His
work, being stimulated by the signs of what God
had wrought that we here were permitted to see.
The offertory, which was collected by four
clergymen, amounted to £96. After the offertory
Bishop Selwyn said the following prayer of com-
memoration Most merciful God, Who dost
grant unto Thy chosen servants grace, by the
innocency of their lives and constancy of their
faith even unto death, to glorify Thee: we give
Thee hearty thanks for the life and death of
Thy servant, John Coleridge Patteson, first
Bishop of this mission, in whose memory we
now dedicate this church to Thee; and for the
examole of those who died with him: Joseph
Atkin, priest, and Stephen Taroaniara, cate-
chist of this mission; with whom through
Thine almighty comfort ‘it was well’ at the
hour of death ; we bless Thee also for the chil-
dren of this island, Edwin Nobbs and Fisher
Young, who wounded at Santa Cruz were con-
tent, ‘ doing their duty,’ to die in Thy service.
And we also glorify Thy Holy Name for those
who having served Thee in this mission have
departed in Thy faith and tear ; for George Au-
gustus, Bishop of New Zealand, Bishop of Lich-
field, our founder; for William Nihill, priest, who
died at Nengone; for Robert Simeon Jackson,
priest; for Sarah Palmer, and Clara Selwyn,
whose memories are dear and precious to us;
and for all those who coming from heathenism,
and being made Thine by baptism, have joyfully
passed through the grave and gate of death.
And while we remember these, who working
with us have left us the brightness of their
example, we also praise Thy glorious name for
the example of James Graham Goodenough,
Commodore in the Royal Navy, who seeking to
win the friendship of the people of Santa Cruz,
was, with two of his men, wounded unto death,
yet suffered not vengeance to be taken, and wit-
nessing a good confession calmly yielded up his
soul to Thee For all these, O Lord, we render
unto Thee most hearty thanks, we praise and
glorify Thee. Humbly beseeching Thee to give
us grace so to follow their good examples, that
with them we may be received into Thy eternal
and Glorious Kingdom, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.” The whole congregation
stayed to holy communion, and even then it was
a full church, all the leading families among
the Pitcairn people being present. The church
was decorated with flowers. Those round the
font were beau tit ully arranged. Flags were
also flying on lines stretched from tree to tree,
and the scene before and after service was very
gay and bustling.
{St. Barnabas Church.—The style of archi-
tecture is Gothic, and the material employed a
yellowish-brown sandstone obtained on the
island. The nave, which measures 54 by 27
feet, is divided externally into three bays by
heavy buttresses, which project to a distance of
five feet, and similar buttresses are placed be-
tween the five windows of the apse. The height
of the walls from floor to wallplate is 17 feet,
and in the chancel 19 feet. The whole of the
interior walls are dressed. The apex of the
apse is surmounted by an ornamental wrought-
iron cross seven feet high. The chancel is
formed in a semicircular apse, the cord of which
is 24 by 12 feet, and the five chancel windows
bear paintings representing the four evangelists,
with the figure of our Saviour wearing a crown
in the centre. The shafts of the windows are
of Devonshire marble, and the capitals are
beautifully carved by the Rev. R. H. Oodring-
ton, who has ably supervised the whole work.
These windows are the gift of Lady Downe
(Dowager Viscountess). The west rose window
over the door and two small foliated windows
are the gift of the late and present members of
the mission, as a memorial to those who have
been killed, viz., Fisher Young and Edwin
Nobbs, at Santa Cruz, in 1864; Rev. Joseph
Atkin and Stephen Taroaniara, at Nukapu, in
1871. The font is of Devonshire marble, red
and black, and this with the pavement of
the nave, which is of the same material,
were given by the Misses Patteson
and many personal friends of the late
Bishop in England. The school and college
friends (among them Bishop Selwyn) presented
a beautiful Devonshire marble pavement for the
steps to the altar and apse. The reredos, of
richly carved dark walnut wood in Gothic
design, with three panels inlaid with mosaic
work, gold ground, with blue and red, and the
cross in the centre compartment, was the gift
of Mr. Gibbs, of Tyntesfield. The tapestry
hangings on each side, of blue velvet, with lilies
on ground, was the work and gift of Mrs. Good-
enough, widow of Commodore Goodenough, of
H.M.S. Pearl, who lost his life in the islands.
The altar-cloth was presented by Miss Martyn.
Bishop Selwyn gave the lamps. The choir
organ, built by Henry Wilson, London, contain-
ing 500 pipes, a sweet-toned instrument, is the
gift of Miss Yonge, a worthy and generous
friend of the mission. Miss Yonge is well
known as the authoress of the “ Daisy Chain”
(written for the benefit of the mission), and
other excellent works. She has largely con-
tributed towards the fabric. To the right of
the west door, against the wall, is a brass
bearing the following inscription:—“ln memory
of John Coleridge Patteson, D.D., eldest son
of Sir John Patteson, Knight, Judge of
the Queen’s Bench, born April 1, A.D. 1827,
consecrated the first Bishop of Melanesia Feb-
ruary 24, a.d. 1861; murdered by natives of
Nukapu, in the South Pacific Ocean, on the eve
of the Feast of St. Matthew, September 20, Ad.
1871. In childhood and in youth he was chiefly
distinguished among his fellows by a rare
purity, integrity, and symplirity of character.
His natural powers of mind and body had been
slowly matured by culture, and not without
patient self-discipline, when in the early prime
of manhood he dedicated himself to life-long
missionary labour, leaving his Devonshire home
without thought of return. At first he served
under the Bishop of New Zealand, carrying the
Gospel to shores theretofore untrodden by
Europeans, and educating native youths en-
trusted to his charge under a collegiate system
conducted by himself in the faith of Christ,
and in the industrial arts of civiliz ition.
When he afterwards undertook the vast diocese
of Melanesia he seemed to be endowed with
new gifts and energies, watching over his infant
Church with pastoral care, acquiring a match-
less knowledge of native tongues, and yearly
navigating his mission-ship through perilous
seas to seek converts among the wild races,
softened by his influence, and bear home fresh
scholars to his native college on Norfolk
Island, where he renewed the studies and
interests of his English life. These apos-
tolic voyages and ministrations he carried on
with unflagging zeal for more than sixteen
years. Without rest, without regret, without
earthly reward, he displayed a calm resolu-
tion in presence of danger, an instinctive
judgment in overcoming difficulty, a tender
compassion for the sick and suffering, and a
liberal catholicity of spirit and sympathies
which not only won for him the deep reverence
and affection of his spiritual brethren and
children, but made his name beloved through
all the isles of the South Pacific, until he fell
by the hand of one who knew not what be did
in the midst of his career at the post of duty,
continuing the faithful soldier and servant of
Christ unto his life’s end.” The cost of the
church is about £5,000. Of this sum £2,000 has
been subscribed to the Memorial Fund of the
S.P.G. in London.
After the consecration in the afternoon a
service in English was he'd, when the Bishop
of Waiapu (Dr. Stuart) preached an excellent
sermon to a most |attentive congregation. In
the evening all assembled after tea to hear a
concert, after which there followed fireworks,
and then concluded the proceedings of an ever-
memorable day to all on the island.
Wednesday, December B.—After breakfast
Bishop Selwyn made a very kindly speech to
his guests, expressing a hope that they had all
enjoyed themselves. He took the opportunity
of telling them how the church had been built
under the supervision of Mr. Codrington, who
laboured hard and had many difficulties to
overcome in carrying out the design. The
Bishop of Waiapu, in a feeling speech, expressed
the thanks of the clergy and himself for the
cordial welcome given to the visitors by the
Bishop, and the generous hospitality dispensed
by all the members of the mission to their
gues'us. Ml. Hawkes also expressed -hanks on
behalf of the laity. At 11 o’clock a farewell
service was held in the church, and as the
visitors left the building many a wistful glance
was cast at the interior, associated as it was
with the recent series of happy joyous services.
Several took away flowers from the font as
a memento of the pleasant days they
had spent at the Mission Station. At 12
o clock the visitors went to the Horticultural
Show, held by the Pitcairners at Long Ridge,
about a mile and a quarter from the Mission
Station. Under a canopy of English oaks and
pines, in an open space, were exhibited on tables
the various produce of the island—sweet pota-
toes, Irish potatoes, onions, arrowroot, yams,
turnips and carrots, strawberries, cabbages,
culinary herbs, &c. The show was very credi-
table, particularly in potatoes, kumara, and
yams, and the strawberries were very fine. A
string and fife and drum band and an
harmonium were on the grounds, and quite a
grand picnic was provided. A start was then
made for the jetty at Kingtown. The jetty was
crowded, and the band played favourite airs as
the visitors embarked in boats to board the
Southern Cross, lying in the bay. There was a
hearty shaking of hands at leave-taking, and a
flutter of handkerchiefs from boats and the jetty.
We were loaded with presents of weapons and
curiosities from the Solomon and other islands,
and quite a boatload of fruit and vegetables
from the Horticultural Show was sent to us.
All being on board at 6.30 we bid adieu to the
Bishop, who had accompanied ns to the ship to
say a last farewell, and with a fair wind we
Veiled away, carrying with us the most pleasing
associations of our visit to Norfolk Island.
The first scholars of the Melanesian Mission,
sixteen boys, from the islands arrived in charge
of the Rev. John Palmer in October, 1866, and
settled three miles west of the Pitcairn Settle-
ment. The rest of the mission party lived at
St. John’s College, and afterwards at Kopima-
rama, about six miles from Auckland. A build-
ing was erected at once by Mr. Palmer, and by
April of the following year land was planted
and fenced, and preparations made to receive
the whole party with Bishop Patteson. Two
hundred acres of land were given by the Govern-
ment, and 800 bought by the mission; then
buildings were put up by Bishop Patteson, with
a chapel attached. These were a dining-hall,
houses for married Melanesians, for the clergy,
and for girls; a printing office, and carpenter's
and blacksmith’s shops. Good water was found
after sinking wells. The soil in the valleys is
rich, and good on the levels, but bad on steep
slopes. Bishop Selwyn and Rev. John Still
arrived in July, 1873. The work of the institu-
tion had been carried on since Bishop Patteson’s
death by Rev. R. H. Codrington, the Rev. John
Palmer, and Rev. Charles Bice. At present the
staff consists of Bishop Selwyn, the Revs. R.
H. Codrington, J. Palmer, C. Bice, Aiired
Penny, R. B. Comins, David Ruddock, and
Arthur Baker. There is a native priest, George
Satawia, at Mota; native deacons—Robert
Pantutun, Mota; HenryTagalana, Ava; Edwin
Sakalraw, Vanna Lava; Mano Wadrokal, Santa
Cruz; Edward Wogale, now here from Torres
Island. At Florida a teacher, Charles Sapi-
buana, is to be ordained next year. Other
teachers in the island of different grades number
about fifty. The number of Melanesians
on Norfolk Island is 160 men, 33 women, ud
6 children=l99. There are also some married
couples with children, and all except the very
young scholars are learning to read, while the
writing of many is very good. The usual daily
routine is:—Prayers, 6.45 am.; school, 8 to
9.30; work at farming till 1, dinner; school,
writing, and singing, 2 to 330 p.m,; tea, 6 ;
chapel and school, 645 to 8; bedtime, 9,40 •
half-holiday, Wednesday; whole holiday, Satur-
day. About ten can play the harmonium more
or less, and two play the organ. The teaching
is all in Mota. Mota is Sugarloaf Island, a
small island of the Banks Group, discovered
and named by Bligh in his boat' voyage after
the mutiny. There are twenty-five communi-
cants now here. The natives cultivate the soil
and grow kumaras and maize chiefly. All
work is done by scholars, except one man, who
keeps ploughs, ic. Some oats and barley are
grown, bananas, sugarcane, melons, oranges, &c.
There are seventeen horses and some cattle be-
longing to the mission. The length of time
the islanders remain at Norfolk Island depends
on circumstances; some come young and stay
ten years, with intervals at home; some come
grown up and stay two years ; some get wives
in good time, marry, and go; and some good
scholars who promise to make able teachers are
kept till they are married. It is not deemed
desirable to employ unmarried teachers gene-
rally. As a custom more than a rule all boys
go home every other year, and come back or
not according to circumstances. There are
seven South Australian scholars. I have several
specimens of writing. The impression formed
in my mind from intercourse with the Mela-
nesians and by observation is that they are
intelligent, gentle, and of affectionate disposi-
tions ; they seem obedient and qviet in their
manners (some a little shy ). They are quick to
imitate others, have a keen sense of fun, and
are mirthful as occasion arises. They behave
with propriety at meals, and are very
reverential in church at their devotions.
The young men and boys living in Mr. Codriug-
ton’s house show great affection for their
teacher, and their love is amply repaid. I be-
lieve it is the same in all the houses. I noticed
it in their intercourse with Mr. Penny and Mr.
Comins. The effect of training they are under-
going must tell most beneficially on the people
with whom they mix, on their return to the
island, in favour of civilization. The self-
restraint and good manners (independently of
religious influence) exercised by the Melane-
sians may be brought to bear good fruit among
their immediate relatives and friends.
Norfolk Island was once the abode of the
worst class of convicts. Only doubly and trebly
convicted felons were sent there from New
South Wales, and terrible are the tales told of
these desperate men in their attempts to escape
a system of prison discipline. Some of them
descrioea it as “hell upon earth,and not a few
have sacrificed their lives in trying to effect an
escape. There still stands the roofless buildings
of the large old central prison, with its walls
surrounding numerous rooms of the convict
barracks, and long rows of stone cells with their
airing yards. What a change has now taken
place! The Commissariat store is used as the
church of the Pitcairners, fitted with open seats,
and having a font, communion-table, and hand-
some pulpit made of native wood. The officers’
quarters, which were built in 1836—during the
period Major Anderson, of the 50th Regiment,
was military commandant—is now occupied
partly as a school and partly as the residence of
some families of peaceful’Pitcairn islanders.
Klngtown (named after Governor King) is now
the settlement of that interesting colony of
people who arrived at Norfolk island from
Pitcairn in June, 1856. The Rev. J. H. Nobbs
and John Buffett, both contemporaries of John
Adams, accompanied the 194 persons who landed
here. They now number 440. The houses they
occupy belonged to the convict establishment,
and were the residences of the civil com-
mandant, the chaplain, the medical, commis-
sariat, and other officers, also a number of
cottages used as dwellings for the petty officers
and guards of the gaol have become the habita-
tions of these interesting people. Several of
them now live out of the township on the
grant of land given to married people,
viz., twenty-fire acres. They cultivate the
soil and grow kumara (a sweet potato),
maizs, yams, potatoes, arrowroot, rye, and
coffee, &c. Wheat does not grow well; the
crop is liable to be spoilt with heavy rains at
unseasonable times. They are very expert
fishermen, and catch whales whenever they have
a chance. There is a large shed to hold gear,
and coppers to boil down the whale blubber at
the Cascades, and also a boiling place at King-
town. A quantity of old bones on the beach at
the Cascades show that they have met with
success at times. Oil is exported to Sydney,
and a cutter trades between Auckland and
the islands as occasion offers, taking in
a of potatoes, kumaras, and arrow-
root, principally from the latter places. The
area of the inland is between 9,000 and
10,000 acres. The highest point is Mount Pitt,
900 to 1,000 feet. From the top a perfect
panorama of the whole island can be seen.
Most parts of the interior are from 300 to 400
feet in height from the sea. Couch grass pre-
vails, but other grasses have been introduced, on
which the cattle, sheep, and horses appear to
thrive. The undergrowth or scrub consists of
wild potato and so-called tobacco plant. The
lemon, the guava, the cotton plant, with a great
variety of semi-tropical trees, grow wild very
luxuriantly, and lovely lilies are found in the
valleys. The pine is the grand tree of the
place. One of them Is no less than thirty-five
feet in circumference— Altiingia excelsa is the
botanical name, but it is generally known in
Australia as the N.I. pine. An avenue of at
least a mile and a half of these trees is a re-
markable and beautiful feature in the island.
The white oak grows here to a large size, and is
common. Nature has been very bountiful in
her gifts, as displayed by the green sward and
forest trees, the pretty dells with running
streams and luxuriant undergrowth, ferntrees
and oriental-looking shrubs. There are no
snakes or other reptiles and no wild animals
oa the island to disturb the comfort of man or
to destroy the fruits of his labour.
There are too islands near, Phillip Island and
Nepean, the first, of basaltic formation, upwards
of 900 feet high. The second, and similar one, is a
mass of coral rag, on which thousands of marine
birds breed. The height of it from the sea is
about sixty feet. The government ig very
simple. A Magistrate is elected annually by
the people. Hia name is sent to the Governor
of New South Wales, whose approval is a matter
of course. The Magistrate decides all cases
brought before him, civil or criminal, and
can fine up to £10; beyond that sum there
is an appeal to a Jury. In important cases he
presides over a Jury. The procedure of the
Court needs very little clerkship: he sends
a notice, either written or verbal, for the
defendant to attend and meet suitor on
such a day and hour at the Court (school-
room). If a man is fined for an offence,
and refuses to pay or cannot do so, he has to
work at clearing a drain or at making or repair-
ing a rtc.d. Mr. Francis Nobbs (second son of
the venerable pastor) is the present Magistrate.
He is an intelligent and superior gentleman,
and has been acting (elected annually) for the
past five years. His predecessor (Mr. Young)
was elected three years running. Happily for
all concerned, there is little need of law officers,
for the island has no public-houses, no politics,
and no post-office.
JB. Kyflin Thomas, Printer,
Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


- *
~~^Ml
